Background
Fatigue is a common symptom. In Japan, more than half of the general adult population
suffers from fatigue []. Fatigue decreases efficiency in the performance of daily activities. In
addition, fatigue is one of contributing factors for various medical conditions such as
cardiovascular diseases [], epileptic seizures [], and Karoshi (death from overwork) []. It would thus be of great interest to clarify the mechanisms underlying
fatigue and to develop efficient methods for overcoming it. However, the neural
mechanisms of fatigue are not well understood.

Fatigue is classified as physical or mental. Physical fatigue is a bodily weakness that
can occur because of repetitive muscle activity. In contrast, mental fatigue is observed
as a reduced efficiency for mental tasks []. Recently, new methods of induction and evaluation of mental fatigue have
been proposed []. In a mental-fatigue-inducing task session, participants performed 0- or
2-back test trials []. The 0-back test was used to represent a lower mental-load task, which could
be performed without use of working memory, while the 2-back test was used to represent
a higher mental-load task, which could not be performed without using working memory []. The advantage of using these tasks is in their ability to cause different
types of mental fatigue. Since mental fatigue is a multi-faceted problem [], it is of great importance to cause mental fatigue using different types of
tasks. As a fatigue evaluation mental task session, participants performed cognitive
tasks, which are computer-based mental function tasks and the participants were required
to use simple and conflict-controlling selective attention. After the 0- or 2-back test
sessions, error rates of the evaluation tasks were increased, thus demonstrating a
deterioration of the task performance. Task performances were used to assess mental
fatigue, and the reliability and validity of the evaluation tasks were satisfactory.

Although a variety of psychophysiological parameters have been used in previous research
dealing with fatigue, spontaneous electroencephalography (EEG) has been proposed as the
most promising indicator of fatigue []. The electrical activity of the brain is classified according to rhythms,
which are defined according to frequency bands, including beta, alpha, theta, and delta,
and each frequency band is associated with specific internal information processing in
the central nervous system []. Therefore, alterations of resting-state EEG power induced by mental fatigue
may provide valuable clues to identify its neural mechanisms. The aim of our study was
thus to clarify the neural underpinnings of mental fatigue using EEG.

Methods
Participants
Eighteen healthy male volunteers [30.1 ± 10.8 years of age
(mean ± SD)] were enrolled in this study. Current smokers,
participants having a history of medical illness, taking chronic medications or
supplemental vitamins, or with a body weight less than 40 kg were excluded from
the study based on our previous studies [-]. The study protocol was approved by the Ethics Committee of Osaka City
University, and all the participants provided written, informed consent.

Experimental design
After enrollment, the participants were randomly assigned to two groups in a
single-blinded, crossover fashion to perform two types of fatigue-inducing
experiments on separate days (Figure A). The time interval
between each experiment was approximately 1 week. Each experiment consisted of
four 30-min mental-fatigue-inducing task sessions and two evaluation sessions
performed just before and after the fatigue-inducing sessions (Figure B). During the evaluation session, subjects were evaluated using EEG and
electrocardiography (ECG) with their eyes closed for 1 min sitting quietly.
Subjects performed cognitive task trials for 9 min, and were then asked to rate
their subjective level of fatigue on a Visual analogue scale (VAS) from 0 (minimum)
to 100 (maximum) []. Saliva samples were collected. This study was conducted in a room at
Osaka City University Graduate School of Medicine under quiet, temperature- and
humidity-controlled conditions. For 1 day before each session, subjects
refrained from intense mental and physical activities, consumed a normal diet and
beverages (excluding caffeinated beverages), and maintained normal sleeping hours.
They had breakfast just before the session.

Experimental design (A) and procedures during experimental sessions (B).
Participants were randomly assigned to two groups in a crossover fashion to
perform two types of fatigue-inducing n-back test experiments on separate days.
The time interval between each experiment was 1 week. Each experiment
consisted of four 30-min fatigue-inducing mental task sessions and two
evaluation sessions performed just before and after the four fatigue-inducing
sessions.

Fatigue-inducing mental task sessions
Participants performed a 0-back or 2-back test for 30 min four times as
fatigue-inducing mental task sessions []. During this task, one of four letters was presented for 1 s on a
display of a personal computer every 3 s. In the 0-back test trial,
participants were asked to press the right button with their right middle finger if
the target letter (shown beside the personal computer) was presented at the center of
the screen. If any other letters appeared, they were to press the left button with
their right index finger. In the 2-back test trial, they had to judge whether the
target letter presented at the center of the screen was the same as the one that had
appeared two presentations before. If it was the same, they were to press the right
button with their right middle finger. If it was not the same, they were to press the
left button with their right index finger. They were instructed to perform the task
trials as quickly and as correctly as possible. The result of each n-back trial, that
is, a correct response or error, was continuously presented on the display of the
personal computer.

Cognitive tasks
The cognitive task presentation consisted of traffic lights (placed on a letter
corresponding to blue or red in Japanese) and traffic signs for walkers (right or
left) and turns (right or left) shown on a personal computer screen. Participants
performed Task 1 for 3 min and Task 2 for 6 min. In Task 1, participants
were told to press the right button with their right middle finger if the blue
traffic light was presented (placed on a letter corresponding to blue in Japanese)
regardless of traffic signs for walkers or turns. If the red traffic light was
presented, participants were told to press the left button with their right index
finger. In Task 2, subjects had to judge whether the target letter presented at the
center of a traffic light was blue or red. If the letter meant blue in
Japanese, regardless of the color of the traffic light or traffic signs for
walkers or turns, they were to press the right button with their right middle finger;
otherwise, they were to press the left button with their right index finger. The
Stroop trial (mismatching the color of the traffic light with the letter) and the
non-Stroop trial (matching the color of the traffic light with the letter) occurred
equally. In these tasks, each trial was presented 100 ms after pressing either
of the buttons. During the task period, blue or red trials and traffic signs for
walkers (right or left) and turns (right or left) were given randomly, and the
occurrence of each color and type of sign was equal. Subjects were instructed to
perform the task trials as quickly and as correctly as possible. The result of each
cognitive task trial, that is, a correct response or error, was continuously
presented on the display of the personal computer.

Electroencephalography
EEG was performed using an EEG system (Neurofax μ EEG-9100; Nihon Kohden
Corporation, Tokyo, Japan). Eleven electrodes (Ag/AgCl) were attached to the head
skin, from positions F3, Fz, F4, C3, Cz, C4, P3, Pz, P4, O1, and O2; and
electrooculography (EOG) was also measured to evaluate ocular artifacts. All the
electrodes were referenced to linked earlobes. Electrode impedance was maintained
below 5 kΩ during the experiment. The EEG was amplified with a 0.3-s time
constant and a 120-Hz low-pass filter, and sampled at 500 Hz. Prior to
frequency analysis, all EEG data were divided into each epoch, with a duration of
1 s. The recorded data were visually inspected and data segments containing
possible residual artifacts were eliminated. EEG larger than +50 μV were
rejected as artifact. EOG artifact was also removed by using EOG signals as
predictors of the artifact voltages at each EEG electrode. After artifact detection,
the data were subjected to a fast Fourier transform, and after averaging, the power
was determined in four frequency bands, beta (13–25 Hz), alpha
(8–13 Hz), theta (4–8 Hz), and delta (1–4 Hz),
for each participant, electrode, and epoch. The average power densities in these
frequency bands were log-transformed (ln) for normalization [].

Electrocardiography
ECG was recorded using active tracer AC301 (Global Medical Solution Inc., Tokyo,
Japan), and the ECG was analyzed using MemCalc for Windows (Global Medical Solution
Inc.). Data were analyzed offline after analogue-to-digital conversion at
250 Hz. R-R wave variability was measured as an indicator of autonomic nerve
activity. For frequency domain analyses of the R-R wave intervals, low-frequency
power (LF) was calculated as the power within the frequency range of 0.04 to
0.15 Hz, high-frequency power (HF) was calculated as that within the frequency
range of 0.15 to 0.4 Hz. LF and HF were measured in normalized units.
Normalization was performed by dividing the absolute power by the total variance then
multiplying by 100. The %HF is vagally mediated [-], but the %LF originates from a variety of sympathetic and vagal mechanisms [,]. The LF/HF ratio is considered an index of sympathetic nervous system
activity [].

Saliva sample analyses
We measured saliva cortisol level in order to examine whether the n-back test
sessions cause stress response. Saliva samples for the analysis of cortisol were
collected in a tube (Salivette; Sarstedt, Rommelsdorf, Germany) and kept on ice until
centrifuged at 1700 g for 5 min at 4°C. These supernatants were
stored at −80°C until analyzed. The assay for cortisol level was performed
by Special Reference Laboratories (SRL; Tokyo, Japan).

Statistical analyses
The paired t-test was used to evaluate the significance of differences
between the two conditions. All P values were two-tailed, and values less than 0.05
were considered to be statistically significant. Statistical analyses were performed
using the SPSS 17.0 software package (SPSS, Chicago, IL).

Results
Subjective levels of fatigue, cognitive task performances, ECG parameters and saliva
cortisol levels for the fatigue-inducing n-back test sessions are summarized in Table
. VAS scores of general and mental fatigue were significantly
increased after the 0- and 2-back test sessions. As for the cognitive task performances,
error rates of Task 2 were significantly increased after the 0- and 2-back test
sessions. As for the ECG variables, the LF/HF ratio was increased after the 2-back test
sessions although this ratio was not altered after the 0-back test sessions. Saliva
cortisol levels were not altered after the 0- or 2-back test sessions.

Measurements before and after the fatigue-inducing mental task sessions

 	0-back test	2-back test	
 	Before	After	Before	After	
VAS for fatigue	 	 	 	 	
General fatigue	15.8 ± 11.2	53.2 ± 24.2a	14.5 ± 10.4	47.8 ± 23.0a	
Mental fatigue	15.2 ± 9.9	50.9 ± 27.5a	13.2 ± 10.0	47.0 ± 26.0a	
Cognitive tasks	 	 	 	 	
Error rate of Task 1	2.4 ± 1.9	3.4 ± 3.3	2.6 ± 2.1	3.7 ± 3.7	
Error rate of Task 2	4.4 ± 3.3	6.8 ± 4.9a	5.1 ± 4.0	7.1 ± 5.2a	
ECG	 	 	 	 	
LF/HF	2.8 ± 5.2	3.7 ± 2.4	1.7 ± 1.0	4.2 ± 3.8b	
%LF (%)	32.3 ± 16.7	43.2 ± 17.8	34.8 ± 14.9	40.0 ± 23.2	
%HF (%)	32.0 ± 25.0	18.3 ± 13.6b	26.2 ± 14.1	18.2 ± 17.2	
Saliva cortisol (nmol/l)	9.4 ± 4.5	9.4 ± 4.5	8.7 ± 3.3	7.2 ± 3.3	
Data are presented as mean ± SD.

VAS, visual analogue scale; LF, low-frequency power; HF high-frequency
power.

aP &lt; 0.01,
bP &lt; 0.05, significantly different from the
corresponding values before the fatigue-inducing mental task sessions (paired
t-test).

The spontaneous EEG beta power densities before and after the fatigue-inducing mental
task sessions are shown in Figure . In the 2-back test, the beta
power density on the Pz electrode was significantly decreased after the fatigue-inducing
mental task sessions. In the 0-back test, the beta power densities were not altered on
any of the electrodes after the fatigue-inducing task sessions.

Electroencephalographic beta power densities before (open columns) and after
(closed columns) 2- (A) and 0-back (B) test sessions and Gaussian distributions
of the power densities on the Pz electrode before (solid line) and after
(dotted line) 2-back test session (C). Data are presented as mean and SD.
aP &lt; 0.05, significantly different from the
corresponding values before the fatigue-inducing sessions (paired
t-test).

The EEG alpha power densities before and after the fatigue-inducing mental task sessions
are shown in Figure . In the 2-back test, the alpha power
densities on the P3 and O2 electrodes were significantly decreased after the
fatigue-inducing mental task sessions.

Electroencephalographic alpha power densities before (open columns) and after
(closed columns) 2- (A) and 0-back (B) test sessions and Gaussian distributions
of the power densities on the P3 (C) and O2 (D) electrodes before (solid lines)
and after (dotted lines) 2-back test session. Data are presented as mean
and SD. aP &lt; 0.05, significantly different from the
corresponding values before the fatigue-inducing sessions (paired
t-test).

The EEG theta power densities before and after the fatigue-inducing mental task sessions
are shown in Figure . In the 2-back test, the theta power density
on the Fz electrode was significantly increased after the fatigue-inducing mental task
sessions. In the 0-back test, the theta power densities were not altered on any of the
electrodes after the fatigue-inducing task sessions.

Electroencephalographic theta power densities before (open columns) and after
(closed columns) 2- (A) and 0-back (B) test sessions and Gaussian distributions
of the power densities on the Fz electrode before (solid line) and after
(dotted line) 2-back test session (C). Data are presented as mean and SD.
cP &lt; 0.05, significantly different from the
corresponding values before the fatigue-inducing sessions (paired
t-test).

The theta/beta and theta/alpha ratios before and after the fatigue-inducing mental task
sessions are also evaluated. In the 2-back test, the theta/beta ratios on the Fz
(before, 1.89 ± 0.55, after, 2.26 ± 1.11;
P = 0.044), Pz (before, 1.62 ± 0.46, after,
1.97 ± 0.95; P = 0.047), and O1 (before,
1.47 ± 0.49, after, 1.75 ± 0.82;
P = 0.011) electrodes were significantly increased after the
fatigue-inducing mental task sessions, although the theta/alpha ratio did not show any
alterations. In the 0-back test, the theta/beta and theta/alpha ratios were not altered
on any of the electrodes after the fatigue-inducing task sessions.

Finally, the EEG delta power densities before and after the fatigue-inducing mental task
sessions are shown in Figure . In the 0- and 2-back tests, the
delta power densities were not altered on any of the electrodes after the
fatigue-inducing task sessions.

Electroencephalographic delta power densities before (open columns) and after
(closed columns) 2- (A) and 0-back (B) test sessions. Data are presented as
mean and SD.

Discussion
We found that in the 2-back test, the beta power density on the Pz electrode and the
alpha power densities on the P3 and O2 electrodes were decreased, and the theta power
density on the Cz electrode was increased after the fatigue-inducing mental task
sessions, while in the 0-back test, no electrodes were altered after the
fatigue-inducing sessions.

To confirm that the participants were actually fatigued as a result of performing n-back
test trials, they performed cognitive task trials and rated their subjective level of
fatigue just before and after the n-back test sessions. After the n-back test sessions,
error rates of Tasks 2 were increased (Table ). These findings
are consistent with those of our previous studies [,]. In addition, the VAS scores for general and mental fatigue were increased
after the sessions (Table ). These findings demonstrate that the
participants were markedly fatigued after the n-back test sessions, and also demonstrate
the validity of using the n-back test sessions as fatigue-inducing. No alterations of
the saliva cortisol levels demonstrate that the n-back test sessions induced fatigue
without or minimum influence of stress or stress response.

The theta power density on the Fz electrode was increased after 2-back task sessions.
This finding is consistent with the results of the previous studies, in which fatigue
was caused by performing a monotonous simulation driving task [] or Stroop neuropsychological test [] for 90 min without any break: In these studies, the theta power density
on the frontal EEG electrode site was increased after the mental fatigue-inducing task
trials. It has been reported that the theta power density is positively related to
sleepiness [,]. Thus, alteration of the theta power density in our study may be caused by
sleepiness. In fact, the subjective level of sleepiness was increased after the
fatigue-inducing mental task sessions (data not shown). Since sleep is one of the most
efficient strategies to recover from fatigue, the sleepiness caused by mental fatigue
may reflect internal processes designed to meet the demand to recover from mental
fatigue. Alternatively, since theta oscillations arising from predominantly
fronto-central sources are increased by working memory load [,], alteration of the theta power density may be caused just by working memory
load caused by performing 30-min 2-back test trials.

In the 2-back test, the beta power density on the Pz electrode and the alpha power
densities on the P3 and O2 electrodes were decreased after the fatigue-inducing mental
task sessions. Our results of the decreased beta and alpha power densities are
consistent with the results of previous studies: The beta power density was decreased by
performing a monotonous simulation driving task for 90 min without break []; while the alpha power density was decreased by keeping awake and active
overnight []. While local synchronization in the brain during information processing
evolved in the gamma frequency range, synchronization between neighboring cortices
during multi-modal information processing evolved in the beta frequency range, and long
range interactions during high-level information processing such as visuospatial
attention evolved in the alpha frequency range []. Since multi-modal and high-level information processing are associated with
the beta and alpha power densities, respectively, decreased beta and alpha power
densities under conditions of mental fatigue indicate deterioration of multi-modal and
high-level information processing in the central nervous system. Our results for the
cognitive tasks (Table ) support this speculation.

Different types of mental fatigue produced different styles of the alterations of the
EEG variables: in the 2-back test, the beta power density on the Pz electrode and the
alpha power densities on the P3 and O2 electrodes were decreased, and the theta power
density on the Fz electrode was increased. In the 0-back test,no electrodes were altered
after the fatigue-inducing sessions. The 0-back test was used to represent a lower
mental-load task, which could be performed without working memory use, while the 2-back
test was used to represent a higher mental-load task, which could not be performed
without working memory use []. Most of the locations that showed changes of beta and alpha power densities
are located close to the visual areas (P3, Pz, and O2) in the 2-back test. Higher mental
load to perform 2-back test may need more visual memory and implies more visual work in
different visual areas to develop the fatigue-related alterations of EEG power densities
in the posterior areas related to visual processing. Higher mental load thus may trigger
processes designed to bring about deterioration of multi-modal and high-level
information processing, while lower mental load may induce fewer alterations.

In addition to EEG, different types of mental fatigue produced different styles of the
alterations of the ECG variables. The LF/HF ratio was increased after the 2-back test
sessions although this ratio was not altered after the 0-back test sessions. Since
increased LF/HF ratio during mental fatigue-inducing task session was reported to be
associated with the mental effort or motivation [], the different results of the LF/HF ratio between the 0- and 2-back test
sessions might result from the difference of the mental effort or motivation between the
sessions. The brain network, including the prefrontal cortex (PFC) and anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC), has been shown to play an important role in the regulation of
autonomic nervous activities []. Abnormalities in these brain regions have been shown to be associated with
fatigue [,]. Because impaired selective attention assessed by increased error rates in
cognitive task trials were observed after the fatigue-inducing mental task sessions, and
the selective attention process activates the PFC and ACC [-], the higher mental load required for the 2-back test sessions might introduce
temporary dysfunctions in the PFC and ACC to cause decreased parasympathetic and
increased sympathetic activities, while lower mental load necessary for performing the
0-back test sessions might induce fewer alterations of the ECG variables.

Limitations
While the results of the present study are suggestive of causal relationships between
information load and mental fatigue, only a limited number of participants were
tested. The ratio of fatigue was similar between men and women in the society []. However, it is not clear whether the findings in our study can be
considered to be the same in women. To generalize our results, studies involving a
larger number of participants will be needed.

Conclusions
We identified mental fatigue-related changes in spontaneous EEG variables. In the 2-back
test, the beta power density on the Pz electrode and the alpha power densities on the P3
and O2 electrodes were decreased, and the theta power density on the Cz electrode was
increased after the fatigue-inducing mental task sessions, while in the 0-back test, no
electrodes were altered after the fatigue-inducing sessions. Our findings provide new
perspectives on the neural mechanisms underlying mental fatigue.

Abbreviations
ACC: Anterior cingulate cortex; ECG: Electrocardiography; EEG: Electroencephalography;
HF: High-frequency power LF, low-frequency power; PFC: Prefrontal cortex; VAS: Visual
analogue scale.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
MT took part in planning and designing the experiment, collected the data, performed the
data analyses and drafted the manuscript. YS, AI, MF, and EK took part in planning and
designing the experiment, collected the data, and performed the data analyses. YW took
part in the planning and designing the experiment and helped drafting the manuscript.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgements
We thank Forte Science Communications for editorial help with the manuscript. This
work was supported in part by the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare of the Japan
and by the Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research B (KAKENHI: 23300241) from Ministry
of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) of Japan and by the
grant from Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare of Japan. The funders had no roles
in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of
the manuscript.

