INTRODUCTION
The TRPA1 [TRP (transient receptor potential) ankyrin 1] channel is an important
                constituent of the transduction apparatus through which pro-algesic agents, such as
                AITC (allyl isothiocyanate), various products of oxidative stress, deep cooling or
                mechanical stimuli depolarize sensory nerve endings to elicit pain. In addition to a
                range of pungent chemicals that either bind to (e.g. cannabinoids, icilin, eugenol,
                carvacrol and thymol) or covalently interact with (e.g. cinnamaldehyde and acrolein)
                TRPA1, this polymodal non-selective cation channel can also be activated by highly
                depolarizing voltages (&gt;+100 mV) and Ca2+ ions that enter
                through the channel and bind to its N-terminus [–]. Depending on
                the permeating Ca2+, TRPA1 dynamically controls its own critical
                properties such as unitary conductance, ion selectivity and open channel probability
                    []. An increase in intracellular
                calcium ([Ca2+]i) not only directly modulates TRPA1 activity,
                but also recruits cellular Ca2+-dependent signalling cascades which
                further regulate the channel. Of these, the activation of PLC (phospholipase C),
                resulting in a decrease in the membrane PIP2 (phosphatidylinositol
                4,5-bisphosphate) is of particular interest, because this signalling lipid may act
                as an important physiological regulator of TRPA1 in sensory neurons [,,].

The negatively charged ligands, such as phosphoinositides or inorganic
                polyphosphates, regulate TRPA1 from the cytoplasmic side [,,–], probably through an interaction with as yet unidentified positively
                charged domain(s). Based on their analogy to voltage-gated potassium channels [KCNQ,
                    Kir (inwardly rectifying)] and various ion channels of the TRP family
                [TRPV1 (TRP vanilloid), TRPM4 (TRP melastatin 4), TRPM8], the favourite candidates
                for the interaction of the TRPA1 channel with negatively charged molecules are the
                membrane-proximal clusters of positively charged residues on the cytoplasmic
                C-termini, near to but also further away from the sixth transmembrane domain (for
                reviews, see [,,]). Such a
                polybasic region may be able to specifically recognize negatively charged
                phospholipids, but might also act as a sensor for changes in transmembrane voltage.
                TRPA1 is a voltage-gated ion channel with an estimated apparent number of gating
                charges of approx. 0.4 []. Compared with
                voltage-gated potassium channels, the voltage-dependence of TRPA1 is very weak and
                its putative voltage-sensing domain probably lies outside the conventionally
                considered fourth transmembrane segment (S4) because it does not contain any charged
                residues at all. Thus, in addition to the PIP2-interacting domain(s), the
                location of the voltage-sensing domain also remains enigmatic and awaits
                determination.

In the present study, we set out to screen for sites that have the highest
                probability of being involved in the above processes. We individually altered the
                charge character of 27 basic residues along the C-terminal tail of human TRPA1 and
                examined the membrane current responses to voltage, AITC or a combination of the
                two. We have identified several significant regions within the C-terminus in which
                positively charged amino acids confer both chemical and voltage sensitivity to TRPA1
                channels.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Expression and constructs of the human TRPA1 channel
HEK-293T cells [human embryonic kidney-293 cells expressing the large T-antigen
                    of SV40 (simian virus 40)] were cultured in OPTI-MEM I medium (Life
                    Technologies) supplemented with 5% FBS (fetal bovine serum) as described
                    previously [,]. Cells were transiently co-transfected with
                    300–400 ng of cDNA plasmid encoding wild-type or mutant
                    human TRPA1 (wild-type in the pCMV6-XL4 vector, OriGene) and with
                    300 ng of GFP (green fluorescent protein) plasmid (TaKaRa) per
                    1.6-mm-diameter dish using the Magnet-assisted Transfection (IBA GmbH) method.
                    Cells were used 24–48 h after transfection. At least two
                    independent transfections were used for each experimental group. The wild-type
                    channel was regularly tested in the same batch as the mutants. The mutants were
                    generated by PCR using the QuikChange® XL Site-Directed Mutagenesis
                    Kit (Stratagene) and confirmed by DNA sequencing (ABI PRISM 3100, Applied
                    Biosystems).

Electrophysiology
Whole-cell membrane currents were recorded by employing an Axopatch 200B
                    amplifier and pCLAMP 10 software (Molecular Devices). Patch electrodes were
                    pulled from a glass tube with a 1.65 mm outer diameter. The tip of
                    the pipette was heat-polished and its resistance was
                    3–5 MΩ. Series resistance was compensated by at
                    least 70% in all recordings. Experiments were performed at room temperature
                    (23–25 °C). Only one recording was performed on
                    any one coverslip of cells to ensure that recordings were made from cells not
                    previously exposed to chemical stimuli. Voltage-dependent gating parameters were
                    estimated from steady-state current–voltage
                        (I–V) relationships obtained at
                    the end of 60 or 100 ms voltage steps by fitting the conductance
                        G=I/(V−Vrev)
                    as a function of the test potential V to the Boltzmann
                    equation:  where z is the apparent number of gating
                    charges, V1/2 is the half-activation voltage,
                        Gmin and Gmax are
                    the minimum and maximum whole-cell conductance, Vrev
                    is the reversal potential, and F is Faraday's constant,
                        R is the gas constant, and T is
                    temperature.

A system for rapid superfusion of the cultured cells was used for drug
                    application []. The extracellular
                    control solution contained 160 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl,
                    1 mM CaCl2, 2 mM MgCl2,
                    10 mM Hepes and 10 mM glucose, adjusted to
                    pH 7.3 and 320 mOsm. In whole-cell patch-clamp experiments, the
                    pipette solution contained 125 mM Cs-gluconate, 15 mM
                    CsCl, 5 mM EGTA, 10 mM Hepes, 0.5 mM
                    CaCl2 and 2 mM MgATP, pH 7.3, 286 mOsm. AITC
                    solution was prepared from a 0.01 M stock solution in water stored at
                    −20 °C. All chemicals were purchased from
                    Sigma–Aldrich.

Statistical analysis
All data were analysed using pCLAMP 10 (Molecular Devices), and curve fitting and
                    statistical analyses were done in SigmaPlot 10 (Systat Software). Statistical
                    significance was determined by Student's t-test or ANOVA;
                    differences were considered significant at P&lt;0.05,
                    if not stated otherwise. For statistical analysis of amplitude data, a
                    logarithmic transformation was used to achieve normal distribution.
                    Conductance–voltage
                    (G–V) relationships were obtained
                    from steady-state whole-cell currents measured at the end of voltage steps from
                    −80 to +200 mV in increments of +20 mV. All data is presented as
                    means±S.E.M.

RESULTS
Mutations within the C-terminal region identify the residues involved in
                    AITC-induced activation of TRPA1
We individually neutralized all 27 positively charged amino acid residues within
                    the C-terminus of human TRPA1 and characterized the phenotypes of mutants using
                    whole-cell patch-clamp recordings from transiently transfected HEK-293T cells.
                    The primary and putative secondary structure of this region and the residues
                    chosen for mutagenesis are depicted in . The C-terminus was predicted to contain two long (H1:
                        Ile964–Lys989, H4:
                        Leu1040–Lys1071) and four short
                    α-helices (H2: Trp993–Val998, H3:
                        Leu1016–Phe1022, H5:
                        Asp1089–Gln1095, H6:
                        Trp1103–Lys1111). We have reported
                    previously that mutations in the predicted inner vestibule of the TRPA1 channel
                    had strong effects on several aspects of channel functioning, including changes
                    in the voltage-dependent activation/deactivation kinetics and a significant
                    increase in the current variance at depolarizing potentials []. We then proposed that the pore-forming
                    S6 helix of TRPA1 may extend to the cytoplasmic region so that the proximal
                    portion of the C-terminus, putatively located near the inner mouth of the pore,
                    might directly participate in the regulation of the channel gating or permeation
                    properties. To consider this issue further, we also introduced mutations other
                    than alanine at the most proximal residues: K969E, K969I, K969R, R975E, R975W,
                    K989N and K989E.

Scanning mutagenesis of the C-terminus of the human TRPA1 channel
(A) Putative secondary structure of the human TRPA1 channel
                            subunit with six transmembrane domains and single-letter coded amino
                            acid sequence of the C-terminus. α-helices are shown as
                            cylinders. Positively charged amino acids are indicated (shaded in black
                            or grey). The residues that were found to affect the function of TRPA1
                            when mutated are indicated by bold white letters on black squares.
                                (B) Sequence comparison of the C-terminus of human
                            TRPA1 (hTRPA1; GenBank® accession number NM_007332) with that
                            of mouse (mTRPA1; NM_177781) and rat (rTRPA1; NM_207608) TRPA1.
                            Secondary structure was determined using consensus of four prediction
                            servers (PredictProtein, jPRED, APSSP2 and YASSPP). The structure was
                            assigned if at least three of four servers predict to the residuum the
                            same structure with an expected average accuracy over 80% or reliability
                            over 5. On the basis of these conditions, the C-terminus is predicted to
                            contain two long and four short helices:
                                Ile964–Lys989 (H1),
                                Trp993–Val998 (H2),
                                Leu1016–Phe1022 (H3),
                                Leu1040–Lys1071 (H4),
                                Asp1089–Gln1095 (H5) and
                                Trp1103–Lys1111 (H6).

The functionality of all mutants was initially established by recording
                    whole-cell currents at a holding potential of −70 mV in
                    response to a supersaturating concentration of AITC
                    (200 μM), applied for 20–30 s in the
                    presence of extracellular Ca2+ (1 mM), and by measuring
                    the amplitudes of the currents at the peak (A). The period of exposure to AITC was prolonged in those constructs
                    that exhibited slower or incomplete activation kinetics (B). As described previously [,,], the AITC-induced responses mediated
                    through wild-type TRPA1 channels were multiphasic with an initial gradually
                    increasing phase followed by a steeper (Ca2+-dependent) secondary
                    phase that occurred 10–20 s after AITC was applied to the
                    cell for the first time. The steep secondary phase of activation was typically
                    followed by an apparent decline in maximal current amplitude
                        (T50~18 s), elsewhere
                    referred to as channel inactivation [,]. Despite a high degree
                    of cell-to-cell variability in TRPA1 expression and in the magnitudes of
                    AITC-evoked currents within each experimental group, we were able to detect a
                    statistically significant reduction in responsiveness to AITC in ten alanine
                    residue mutants (P&lt;0.01; C). Three mutation-affected residues were located in
                    the predicted region of the proximal long canonical α-helix H1:
                        Lys969, Arg975 and Lys989. Four residues,
                        Lys1046, Lys1048, Lys1052 and
                    Lys1071, were identified within the range of the helix H4 (). Mutations K1048A and K1052A did
                    not produce measurable currents in response to AITC at a holding potential of
                    −70 mV and did not exhibit voltage-dependent currents (up to +200 mV
                    in the absence or presence of AITC), thus preventing further evaluation (results
                    not shown). In the distal portion of the C-terminus, a significant reduction in
                    responsiveness to AITC was produced by mutations at the residue
                    Lys1009 positioned between helices H2 and H3, at Lys1092,
                    located in the predicted region of the α-helix H5, and at the residue
                        Arg1099 between helices H5 and H6.

Screen of the C-terminus of human TRPA1 for AITC sensitivity
(A and B) Examples of whole-cell currents
                            elicited by 200 μM AITC from HEK-293T cells
                            transiently transfected with (A) wild-type (WT) TRPA1 or
                                (B, panels a–m) mutant TRPA1 channels that
                            exhibited the most prominent phenotypic changes. Broken lines indicate
                            zero current level. Horizontal bars above each record indicate the
                            duration of AITC application. Holding potential −70 mV.
                                (C) Summary of scanning mutagenesis results comparing
                            sensitivity to AITC. The right histogram shows mean whole-cell currents
                            evoked by 200 μM AITC at −70 mV
                            measured at the peak for each construct. Each bar is the
                            means±S.E.M. of at least six independent cells. The left
                            histogram represents the probabilities obtained from the
                            t tests that were performed in order to determine if
                            there was a significant difference between the responses of the
                            wild-type and the individual mutants. The level of significance is
                            indicated with a broken vertical line in the left probability histogram.
                            Statistical significance (P&lt;0.01) is
                            indicated with asterisks in the right current histogram. The plus signs
                            indicate positions where mutations resulted in constructs lacking
                            functional expression in HEK-293T cells. The predicted secondary
                            structure is indicated in the middle as vertical thick bars
                            (α-helices H1, H2, H4–H6).

The phenotypes of AITC-induced activation of the helix H1 mutants K969A (B, panel a) and K969I (B, panel b) clearly differed from
                    K969E (B, panel c) and from
                    wild-type channels (A) in that
                    their responses were smaller and the onset of the secondary phase (if any) was
                    apparently slower. The K969E mutant did not exhibit significant changes in the
                    average amplitude of the AITC-induced currents. In contrast with the wild-type,
                    however, it lacked the first, gradually increasing activation phase (B, panel c), indicating that either
                    the gating properties of the channel are altered or permeating Ca2+
                    contributes much faster or more effectively to the potentiation of the response.
                    In helix H1, for mutants K989E (B,
                    panel g) and K989N (B, panel h),
                    the steep secondary phase only developed upon prolonged
                    (&gt;40 s) application. In K969R (B, panel d), R975A (B, panel e), K989A (B, panel f), K1071A (B,
                    panel k) and K1092A (B, panel l),
                    the secondary phase of activation was not observed within the
                    ~40 s period of AITC exposure; the responses were small
                    and tended to inactivate upon prolonged AITC stimulation. Notably, R975A
                    exhibited only small, linearly increasing inward currents accompanied by marked
                    increases in current noise, indicating that the AITC-evoked currents arose from
                    a fast opening of ion channels. Mutations R975E and R975W did not produce
                    measurable currents in response to AITC at a holding potential of −70
                    mV and did not exhibit voltage-dependent currents up to +200 mV (results not
                    shown). Thus in this initial screening we identified ten basic residues that
                    when mutated disrupted channel sensitivity to AITC, indicating that the
                    C-terminus is a critical modulatory domain of TRPA1.

Mapping residues critical for the regulation of TRPA1 by voltage
The voltage-dependent activation properties were assessed in another set of
                    experiments from the steady-state conductances at various test potentials using
                    a voltage step protocol from −80 mV up to +200 mV in steps
                    of +20 mV, measured first in the extracellular control solution, and, in those
                    mutants with altered AITC or voltage sensitivity, also in the maintained
                    presence of 200 μM AITC. In these experiments, we took
                    care to fully activate the channels and thus the voltage step protocol was
                    applied immediately at the peak amplitude of the first AITC response (A). By measuring the maximum
                    steady-state outward currents at +200 mV recorded in extracellular control
                    solution, we detected significant changes in eight alanine residue substitutions
                    at P &lt; 0.01 (B). Of these, Lys969 (A, panels b–e), Arg975 (A, panel f) and Lys989 (A, panels h–j) appeared to
                    be of major importance for the voltage-dependent activation of TRPA1, since
                    mutations at these sites exhibited phenotypes that were kinetically clearly
                    different from the wild-type. The voltage-induced currents mediated by K1009A
                    and K1071A, although significantly smaller in amplitude, were kinetically
                    indistinguishable from the wild-type channel. In contrast, the outward currents
                    mediated through R1099A were larger than those in wild-type TRPA1 (results not
                    shown).

Voltage-dependent gating of TRPA1 mutants
(A) Representative current traces in response to the
                            indicated voltage step protocol (holding potential, −70 mV;
                            voltage steps from −80 mV to +200 mV; increment +20 mV)
                            recorded in control extracellular solution (left) and in the presence of
                            200 μM AITC (right). (B) Summary of
                            mutagenesis results. Average steady-state whole-cell currents induced by
                            voltage (+200 mV). Each bar is the means±S.E.M. of at least
                            six independent cells. The predicted secondary structure is indicated in
                            the middle as vertical thick bars (α-helices H1, H2,
                            H4–H6). The left histogram represents the probabilities
                            obtained from the t tests that compared the
                            steady-state current amplitudes of the individual mutants with the
                            wild-type (WT). The level of significance is indicated with a broken
                            vertical line in the left probability histogram. Statistical
                            significance (P&lt;0.01) is indicated with
                            asterisks in the right current histogram. (C)
                            Representative whole-cell currents evoked by the voltage protocol (shown
                            in A) applied in control extracellular solution, recorded
                            in the K969E mutant. (D) Averaged
                            voltage–current relationship constructed from responses
                            obtained from eight independent recordings such as shown in
                            (C), measured at the end of the pulses (indicated above the
                            records in C). Results are means±S.E.M. NT,
                            non-transfected HEK-293T cells.

The charge-reversing mutation K969E (C and D) had strong effects on
                    three important parameters of voltage-dependent gating: (i) saturation followed
                    by a decrease in the maximum outward conductance at voltages higher than approx.
                    +140 mV; (ii) increasing the current variance at strongly (&gt;+100 mV)
                    depolarizing potentials; and (iii) slowing the decay kinetics of tail currents
                    that arise upon repolarization to −70 mV from various test
                    potentials. This phenotype was particularly remarkable, because a similar
                    pattern of responses at positive potentials was previously reported for
                    wild-type mouse TRPA1 (see the Discussion) [,].

Under control conditions, mutations R975A, K989A and K989E exhibited higher
                    outward current amplitudes (B) and
                    a stronger outward rectification than wild-type TRPA1 (rectification ratios
                        G+180 mV/G−60
                        mV; 37.5±2.2 for R975A, 18.8±2.8 for K989A and
                    28±13 for K989E compared with 11.1±3.5 for wild-type;
                        n=3–6) (A and B). Kinetically clearly
                    different phenotypes were obtained with R975A, K988A, K989A, K989E and K989N,
                    which exhibited prominent changes in the onset kinetics of their voltage-induced
                    responses (A, panels
                    f–j). Specifically, in R975A (A, panel f), the onset of the voltage-induced outward currents was
                    instantaneous upon depolarization and only very small tail currents were
                    inwardly directed upon repolarization from +200 mV to −70 mV,
                    indicating that the mutant has very fast gating kinetics or that the inward
                    movement of cations through the conduction pathway of the channel is blocked at
                    negative membrane potentials. Compared with wild-type TRPA1
                    (53.1±4.6 ms; n=5), the activation time
                    constant for outward currents measured at +200 mV, obtained by fitting a
                    monoexponential function to the current traces (τon), was
                    much faster in K988A (23.5±2.2 ms; n=4).
                    Also, in K989A, τon was 25.9±4.2 ms
                        (n=3), and this value was not significantly different from
                    that in K989E (25.1±3.6 ms; n=5;
                        P= 0.884) or K989N (32.7±0.4 ms;
                        n=3; P= 0.49), implying that the
                    functional changes caused by mutations at Lys989 are likely to be
                    steric rather than affected by charge. In the control extracellular solution
                        (D, panels a and b), the open
                    probabilities for wild-type TRPA1 were apparently below 0.5 so that values for
                    the voltage for half-maximal activation (V50) could
                    not be derived from steady-state currents [,]. In contrast, the
                    conductance–voltage
                    (G–V) relationships were shifted
                    toward less depolarizing potentials in K969A
                    (V50=107.2±7.5 mV; n=4),
                    R975A (106±14 mV; n=7) and K989A (87.2±16
                    mV; n=3), indicating an enhanced voltage-dependent activity at
                    more physiological potentials.

Effects of mutations on the AITC-modulation of voltage-dependent
                            gating
(A) Effects of 200 μM AITC on maximal
                            voltage-induced outward currents of TRPA1 mutants. Steady-state currents
                            evoked by +200 mV measured in the absence (open bars) and presence (grey
                            bars) of 200 μM AITC. (B) Outward
                            rectification properties
                                (G+180mV/G−60mV)
                            reflecting the effects of mutations on voltage-dependent gating.
                                (C) Summary of the voltage-dependent component of
                            AITC-induced gating
                                (G+180mV/G−60mV).
                                *P &lt; 0.01 compared with
                            wild-type (WT). (D) Summary of whole-cell conductances
                            obtained in the absence (left graphs) and presence of
                            200 μM AITC (right graphs) for wild-type and for
                            the indicated constructs. Under control conditions, the wild-type
                            channels and some mutants did not reach half-maximal activation at
                            voltages up to +200 mV. Each plot shows the means±SEM;
                                n=3–8.

Conductance–voltage relationships obtained in the presence of AITC
Voltage is a weak partial activator of TRPA1 that synergizes with other stimuli
                    such as AITC or Ca2+ and regulates channel opening in an allosteric
                    manner [,,,]. To further characterize the sensitivity of
                    voltage-induced activation for all mutants with altered phenotypes, we measured
                    the voltage-dependent component of gating from the
                    conductance–voltage
                    (G–V) relationships obtained in the
                    presence of 200 μM AITC, compared at positive against
                    negative membrane potentials
                        (G+180/G−60mV).
                    The G-V relationships were virtually
                    voltage-independent in wild-type TRPA1 (1.3±0,16;
                    n=6) and in K988A (1.1±0.1; n=3;
                        C and D, panels c and d). In contrast, the percentage of the
                    voltage-dependent component of AITC-induced gating
                        (G+180/G−60mV)
                    was strongly (P&lt;0.01) increased in R975A
                    (3.40±0.68; n=3), K989A (7.7±2.0;
                        n=3), K989E (8.6±2.0; n=6) and
                    K989N (3.45±0.47; n=6) (B and C, and
                        D, panels c and d). Similarly to what
                    was observed in control extracellular solution (D), K969E exhibited saturation followed by a decrease in the
                    maximum outward conductance at voltages higher than approx. +120–140
                    mV (D, panel d), which might
                    indicate that the negative charge at this position interferes with the outward
                    permeation of cations or that the mutation caused a defect in the
                    voltage-dependent gating (see Discussion for additional possibilities).

Taken together, these data point to a possible differential role for
                    Lys969, Arg975, Lys988, Lys989,
                        Lys1009, Lys1071 and Arg1099 in the
                    voltage-dependent modulation of TRPA1. Except for Lys988, mutations
                    at these residues also altered the AITC sensitivity (C). Moreover, the potentiating effects of mutations
                    at Lys989 were independent of the charge, suggesting that they might
                    arise from the removal of the long lysine side chain. Thus the changes in
                    voltage-dependent activation in this mutant are probably due to alterations in
                    channel gating rather than a direct effect on the putative voltage-transduction
                    mechanism.

DISCUSSION
In the present study, by performing the systemic neutralization of 27 positively
                charged residues within the C-terminal region of human TRPA1, we identified a
                limited number of residues that appear to be important to the allosteric regulation
                of the channel by both chemical and voltage stimuli (Lys969,
                Arg975, Lys989, Lys1009, Lys1046,
                    Lys1071, Lys1092 and Arg1099). These residues
                are therefore most likely to be involved in the transduction of the activation
                signals to the gate rather than being the primary sites for either AITC binding or
                voltage sensing. In addition, we characterized three charge-neutralizing
                ‘gain-of-function’ mutants (R975A, K988A and K989A) which
                exhibited higher sensitivity to depolarizing voltages, indicating that these
                residues may be directly involved in the voltage-dependent modulation of TRPA1.

Functional role of the most proximal helix of the C-terminus
Site-directed mutagenesis studies have previously shown that AITC activates TRPA1
                    by covalently reacting with cysteine residues in the cytoplasmic N-terminus of
                    the channel [,]. The C-terminal basic residues, mutations of which
                    significantly reduced responsiveness to AITC, thus may be part of a transduction
                    region which transmits AITC signal from the N-terminus to the gate. Those
                    residues that are structurally proximal to the sixth transmembrane domain may
                    directly participate in channel gating or contribute to the formation of the
                    permeation pathway. Also, the possibility of indirect electrostatic effects
                    (such as interaction with some negatively charged ligands) cannot be excluded
                    for any of the affected residues.

Mutation of Lys969 to glutamate produced a channel with a very
                    distinctive phenotype. This mutant did not exhibit significant changes in the
                    average amplitude of the AITC-induced currents but it lacked the first,
                    gradually increasing activation phase (B, panel c, and Supplementary Figure S1A at http://www.BiochemJ.org/bj/433/bj4330197add.htm). This might
                    indicate that either the gating properties of the channel are altered and/or
                    permeating Ca2+ contributes much faster or more effectively to the
                    potentiation of the responses. In order to distinguish further if the
                    mutation-induced changes in the functionality of K969E stem from changes in
                    gating or from alterations in the ion permeation or selectivity properties, we
                    measured the Ca2+ permeability relative to Cs+
                    (Supplementary Figure S1B). We found that the K969E mutation yielded channels
                    with unchanged permeability to Ca2+
                    (PCa/PCs=3.0±0.2; n=7,
                    compared with 3.4±0.3 for wild-type; n=6;
                    P&lt;0.05), which indicates that the K969E mutation
                    does not affect the ion permeation process and most likely does not indirectly
                    influence Ca2+-dependent gating at negative membrane potentials. Such
                    a conclusion is strengthened further by our previously reported data showing
                    that Glu966, which is located approximately one helix turn downward
                    from Lys969, is probably poorly situated within the transmembrane
                    electric field and neither sterically nor electrostatically contributes to
                    forming the ion conduction pathway [].
                    The charge-reversing mutation K969E had strong effects on voltage-dependent
                    activation; at depolarizing potentials higher than approx. +140 mV, the maximum
                    outward currents were decreased, whereas the current variance increased (C and D). In addition, various mutations at Lys969 revealed
                    that the channel does not well tolerate alanine, isoleucine or arginine at this
                    position, which might be an additional indication that Lys969 indeed
                    plays a structural role in gating. Interestingly, a similar pattern of decay of
                    responses at positive membrane potentials was previously reported for CHO
                    (Chinese-hamster ovary) cells expressing wild-type mouse TRPA1 and has been
                    attributed to channel inactivation []
                    or to ‘a time-dependent increase in open probability, overlaid by a
                    block of the ion channels by some unknown mechanism’ []. Moreover, in the latter study, very
                    similar voltage-dependent properties were seen with H2O2
                    and AITC-evoked currents in Ca2+-free solution, indicating that
                        Ca2+-dependent inactivation of TRPA1 is not the likely
                mechanism.

Possible involvement of the C-terminus in voltage-dependent activation
Mutations at Arg975, Lys988 and Lys989 directly
                    affected voltage-dependent gating under control conditions, suggesting that
                    these residues may be part of a voltage sensor. In contrast with voltage-gated
                    potassium channels, the voltage sensitivity of TRPA1 is very weak and there is
                    virtually nothing known about what parts of the channel are involved in voltage
                    sensing []. Therefore it is not clear
                    whether these three residues might be included in the electric field of the
                    membrane. The robust steady-state outward rectification and leftward shift in
                    the voltage-dependent activation observed in R975A and K989A (and, to a lesser
                    extent, also in K988A) may be the consequence of the fact that both residues are
                    situated on the same (more hydrophobic) side of the first proximal helix: the
                    neutralization of either of these residues could similarly reduce the overall
                    electrostatic effect.

The saturating concentration of agonist has been shown to reveal the
                    voltage-independent component of gating in TRPA1-related TRPV1 and TRPM8
                    channels []. By using a voltage
                    stimulus in combination with a supramaximal concentration of AITC
                    (200 μM), we hoped to distinguish between the
                    voltage-dependent and voltage-independent modes of TRPA1 activation to better
                    understand the specific role of the identified residues. In thermosensitive TRP
                    channels, chemical and thermal stimuli interact allosterically through
                    independent molecular mechanisms. In TRPV1, vanilloids interact at
                    intracellular/intramembranous regions in and adjacent to S3 and S4 [,]; a small region of the proximal part of the C-terminal domain
                    renders the TRPV1 channel heat-sensitive and this region is transplantable into
                    the cold-sensitive TRPM8 channel, whose voltage-induced responses become
                    potentiated by heat []. A strong piece
                    of evidence in favour of mechanistically distinguishable activation mechanisms
                    was also recently presented for TRPV1 and TRPV3, in which agonist- and
                    temperature-induced activations are separable from other activation mechanisms
                        [–]. However, the intrinsic mechanism by which polymodal
                    TRP channels are gated by voltage is much less clear. In another TRPA1-related
                    channel, TRPV4, the main agonist-activated intracellular gate works
                    independently of the voltage-dependent gating mechanism []. As pointed out by the authors (see Discussion in
                        []), several possible candidates
                    for the voltage-gating mechanism have to be generally considered for the family
                    of TRP-related cation channels: one of the possible models relies on a filter
                    gating mechanism, which is based on the evidence that filter region gating
                    underlies TRPV1-channel activation [,]. In this case, the
                    principle role for voltage might be the control of the direction of the driving
                    force. This seems unlikely in TRPA1 because the channel becomes
                    voltage-independent in the presence of a supersaturating concentration of AITC
                        (D). Another model of the
                    voltage-dependent gating mechanism relies on direct voltage-dependent closure of
                    the intracellular gate. Given that the activation rates upon depolarization were
                    substantially accelerated in R975A, K988A and K989A, we cannot dismiss the
                    possibility that these residues could be directly involved in the
                    voltage-dependent gating.

CONCLUSIONS
In the present study, we identified the residues within the putative C-terminal tail
                of the human TRPA1 channel that, when mutated, affect its AITC and/or voltage
                sensitivity. In most cases, the reduced magnitudes of the responses to AITC or
                voltage were not due to reduced expression levels or plasma membrane targeting,
                since: (i) simultaneous application of both stimuli revealed considerable
                differences in the relative cross-sensitization capacity among the mutants; (ii)
                several mutants were less specifically responsive to AITC or voltage, i.e. their
                current–voltage relationships were qualitatively different from that in
                the wild-type channel or their AITC-induced inward currents lacked the steep
                secondary phase of activation; and, moreover, (iii) although there was a substantial
                overlap between the AITC- and voltage-deficient mutants, several of them exhibited
                significantly opposite effects on these two modalities (e.g. R975A, R989A and
                R1099A; compare C with B). Although further mutagenesis is
                required to determine the exact nature of the identified residues, our findings
                provide strong support for the role of multiple basic residues in the recognition of
                chemical and voltage stimuli and indicate that the C-terminus is a critical
                modulatory domain for TRPA1 activation.

Online data
Supplementary data
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTION
Lucie Sura planned, performed and analysed experiments. Jan Benedikt performed
                experiments. Abdul Samad, Rudiger Ettrich and Babak Minofar performed and analysed
                experiments. Jan Teisinger planned and performed experiments. Viktorie Vlachova
                planned and analysed experiments, and wrote the paper.

FUNDING
This work was supported by the Czech Science
                Foundation [grant numbers 305/06/0319, 301/10/1159], the
                    Research Project Fund of the ASCR (Academy of Sciences
                    of the Czech Republic) [grant numbers AV0Z50110509, AV0Z60870520,
                    IAA 600110701], and by the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech
                Republic [grant numbers 1M0517,
                    LC06010, MSM6007665808, LC554].

