Volume 451 (2013), pp. 365–374

, ,  and  should have been published in colour. Colour versions of these Figures and corrected caption to  appear here.

The involvement of the polar residues in Co2+ transport
The growth activity of TmCorA with the Asn288, Thr295 and Thr299 mutated to either (A) leucine or (B) methionine was monitored in the presence of various Co2+ concentrations. A reduction in growth activity upon Co2+ concentration increase is indicative of the Co2+ transport activity of the TmCorA variant. The wild-type TmCorA (WT corA) and the empty CorA-less pBAD vector (corA-less) were used as positive and negative controls respectively. The results are the mean±S.D. of at least three independent experiments.

Exploring the Co2+ transport ability of threonine residues in the channel
The growth activity of TmCorA with the T295S, T299S or T305S mutant was monitored in the presence of various Co2+ concentrations. A reduction in growth activity upon Co2+ concentration increase is indicative of the Co2+ transport activity of the TmCorA variant. The wild-type TmCorA (WT corA) and the empty CorA-less pBAD vector (corA-less) were used as positive and negative controls respectively. The results are the means±S.D. of at least three independent experiments.

Assaying the sensitivity of the T295S mutant towards Mg2+
The growth activity of the T295S mutant was monitored in the presence of increasing Co2+ concentrations, as well as a fixed Mg2+ concentration of (A) 0 μM, (B) 5 μM, (C) 25 μM and (D) 250 μM. A reduction in growth activity upon Co2+ concentration increase is indicative of the Co2+ transport activity of the TmCorA variant. The wild-type TmCorA (WT corA) and the empty CorA-less pBAD vector (corA-less) were used as positive and negative controls respectively. The results are the means±S.D. of at least three independent experiments.

The involvement of the M1-site in the stability and activity of TmCorA
(A) The structure of the M1-site with a Co2+ (green sphere) and the co-ordinating side chains. (B) The growth activity of TmCorA with the M1-site specific mutants was monitored in the presence of various Co2+ concentrations. A reduction in growth activity upon Co2+ concentration increase (Co2+ toxicity) is indicative of the Co2+ transport activity of the TmCorA variant. The wild-type TmCorA (WT corA) and the empty CorA-less pBAD vector (corA-less) were used as positive and negative controls respectively. The results are the means±S.D. of at least three independent experiments. (C) Thermostability of TmCorA wild-type and the M-site mutants in the presence of various Co2+ concentrations. Each sample was heated at 85°C for 10 min and the presence of stable protein was analysed by SDS/PAGE followed by Coomassie Blue staining. Untreated TmCorA was used as a positive control. The protein size was verified using Seeblue® Plus2 Pre-stained Standard (Invitrogen) (L). The concentration of Co2+ used is indicated from 0 to 1000 μM.

