Has your heart ever started racing when you are sitting in a scientific meeting and an insight suddenly hits you, but there is no question and answer session? Have you ever mulled over the seed of a really interesting new idea but cannot quite see how to develop it as a research proposal? Have you ever worked long and hard on a grant application, but have a nagging feeling that there is something about the significance that a review section might not see the same way you do? If the answer is yes to any of these questions then you are in good company. These experiences are common among those early in their career trying to make a transition from trainee to faculty or from mentored researcher to independent investigator. Fortunately for you, a unique opportunity has arrived. A new online scientific forum, just launched by Wiley Open Access, will allow you to jump into the scientific fray with both feet. You might even make a splash.

Career Corner is a Wiley Open Access journal blog site linked to Wiley's newest online journal, Brain and Behavior. Its purpose is to promote intellectual exchange between clinician scientists at early stages of their careers and the larger scientific community. By serving as a forum for early career scientists to share their findings and discuss the process that led them to their research outcomes, Career Corner aims to facilitate mainstream scientific discourse while highlighting what training grants are capable of producing. Our audience is any research scientist in the early stages of career development (K-applicants, other early career award applicants, early career development grant awardees, trainees, residents, and faculty up to the associate professor level).

As editor and coordinator of Career Corner, and member of the editorial board of Brain and Behavior, I invite you to join our effort. Primary content will be updated regularly in coordination with the main journal publication, but the blog will also run as an open dialogue of scientific debate between early career scientists and their senior and junior colleagues. Career Corner will provide both a ready forum for early career scientists to comment on articles of significant interest to them and a means by which early career scientists can have their ideas critiqued by established researchers from the international community. In pursuit of the content listed below, I will be soliciting editorial board members as well as pertinent external colleagues to review contributions and to write commentaries on early career original research articles published in the main journal. Early career scientists will also be strongly encouraged to enter the scientific debate by submitting their comments on both early career articles and those of established scientists. In addition, the blog will also encourage submission onto the blog site itself nascent research ideas, methodological questions, preliminary data, and other components of research proposals for commentary and advice by our members. Information will be cross-linked between the journal website and the blog. On the journal homepage, there will be a section pointing readers to the blog, as well as links to the blog on the article page for any article that is featured in the blog. For any blog entry pertaining to an article in the journal, there will be links provided to the original journal article.

The following is a list of potential content for Career Corner. Because this is a unique enterprise among biomedical journals, we will welcome comments and suggestions from participants to help shape this forum and share in its evolution.

Planned content is as follows:
Invited commentaries about articles published in Brain and Behavior, along with blog posts of discussion between the corresponding author and other readers.

Descriptions of proposed research studies under early career awards.

Pilot data and proposed research methodology.

Trial/experiment rational with power/sample size calculations.

Hypothesis-driven approaches with literature review.

Opinions describing the need for research in a chosen direction.

Descriptions of pending applications (both basic and clinical pathways K-08 and K-23).

Ongoing doctorate/postdoctorate research descriptions.

Links to preliminary findings if individuals are interested in getting feedback about something that might lead to a Brain and Behavior full publication.

Undergraduate students may also provide a contribution with a letter of support from supervising faculty assuring quality of research environment and plans to complete/publish the project.



By establishing a single location where early career researchers can view examples of good work that is advancing the field, we anticipate enhancing the career development process for all who participate. Early careers will also be fostered by coordinating the blog with application cycles of NIH, EU, and other worldwide foundations (e.g., the Brain and Behavior Research Foundation) that fund early career investigators in neurology, neuroscience, and behavioral sciences. We look forward to your contributions, and cannot wait to see how far this enterprise can go.

