Introduction
Cranial electrotherapy stimulation (CES) is a noninvasive therapeutic device that applies pulsed, alternating microcurrent (&lt;1000 μA) transcutaneously to the head via electrodes placed on the earlobes, mastoid processes, zygomatic arches, or the maxillo-occipital junction. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) granted approval in 1979 for CES for the treatment of insomnia, depression, and anxiety, and it is commercially available for personal use. Controlled studies provide evidence that CES is effective for anxiety, headaches, fibromyalgia, smoking cessation, drug withdrawal symptoms, and (in some but not all studies) pain (see ; ; ; ; ;  for review and meta-analyses). The majority of controlled studies have evaluated the efficacy of CES for treatment of anxiety, although most were performed in nonclinical samples (; ). However, in a six-week open-label pilot study of treatment of individuals with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), CES applied to the earlobes was found to reduce symptoms of GAD, as demonstrated by a significant mean 40.4% decrease in Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale scores at endpoint compared to baseline ().

Despite empirical evidence for treatment efficacy for these syndromes, skepticism remains as to how application of microcurrent to the earlobes or scalp could effect these clinical changes, likely because of the dearth of studies of its mechanism. As brain stimulation techniques increasingly hold promise for treatment of neurological and psychiatric disorders (), better understanding of their mechanisms of action is crucial to further improve their efficacy, develop new technologies, and evaluate their safety.

It remains unclear how the electrical current from CES may alter brain activity. Forty-two to 46% of the applied CES current enters the brain, with the highest levels of current recorded in the thalamus (; ). One theory suggests that the cranial alternating current (AC) stimulation interferes with ongoing brain wave oscillations by introducing cortical noise (). In vitro studies of rat brain slices show that high-frequency (50–200 Hz) sinusoidal AC stimulation suppresses activity in cell bodies and axons (). Perhaps the most investigated effects to date of CES have come from electroencephalographic (EEG) studies, which have found recordings to be altered during and after treatment with CES. Alpha EEG waves were slowed following CES in monkeys, and this change was associated with a reduction in adverse reactions to stressful stimuli (). Applying CES at 0.5- and 100-Hz with simultaneous EEG resulted in a downward shift in mean alpha frequency, with greater effect for 100-Hz stimulation (). CES also results in a decrease in alpha band median frequency and beta band power fraction (). These changes are similar to EEG changes in trained meditators, and may be associated with a relaxed state (). Although it remains unclear if these alterations in brain wave oscillation patterns are a cause or effect of improved clinical states, pulsed current may interrupt nervous system function.

The goal of this study was to determine the immediate effects of CES stimulation on patterns of brain activity in the resting state, and on functional connectivity within intrinsic connectivity networks. This represents the first investigation of the direct effects of CES on brain activity using functional neuroimaging simultaneously with cranial stimulation. We hypothesized that CES would result in deactivation in cortical and subcortical (thalamic) regions, in line with evidence that stimulation interferes with oscillatory brain activity and is associated with reduction of brain wave frequencies (mean alpha power). We also predicted that 0.5- versus 100-Hz stimulation would result in different patterns. In addition, we hypothesized that stimulation would alter intrinsic connectivity networks such as the dorsal fronto-parietal network (FPN) () (due to evidence of improvements in attention with CES []), and the sensorimotor network (SMN) (; ) (due to evidence of clinical efficacy for pain []). We also predicted it would alter connectivity within the default mode network (DMN), as the EEG beta band (which CES 100 Hz may affect []) has been found to correlate with this network (; ).

Material and Methods
Participants
The UCLA Institutional Review Board approved the study protocol. Informed consent was obtained after the nature and possible consequences of the studies were explained.

Eleven healthy right-handed male and female participants aged 18–65 were recruited from the community. We administered the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI) () and excluded participants if they met Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV) criteria for any Axis I psychiatric disorder including active substance abuse, and any participants whom the investigator judged were suicidal. Other exclusion criteria included any neurological disorders or any medical disorders that could affect cerebral metabolism. Participants were excluded if they were taking any psychotropic medications or any other medications with psychoactive properties. Pregnant or breastfeeding women and those of childbearing potential who were not practicing a reliable form of contraception were also excluded from the study. Due to constraints of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanning, we excluded individuals who weighed greater than 280 lbs and those with implanted electronic devices or ferromagnetic materials.

CES device
We used the Alpha-Stim® 100 microcurrent and cranial electrotherapy stimulator for the experiment, provided by the manufacturer Electromedical Products, International (Mineral Wells, TX). The AlphaStim® 100 provides cranial electrical stimulation by generating bipolar asymmetric rectangular waves with a frequency of 0.5, 1.5, or 100 Hz, and a current intensity that can be adjusted continuously to provide between 10 and 600 μA (http://www.alpha-stim.com). We tested 0.5- and 100-Hz pulse frequencies, as these are most commonly used in clinical treatment. For the purpose of the experiment, the manufacturer modified the device to automatically cycle between “on” blocks of 22 sec (specifically 10 sec on, then 2 sec off, then 10 sec on, due to constraints of the device) and “off” blocks of 22 sec. The device was connected via copper wires to adhesive nonferromagnetic electrodes (1.5-cm diameter contact area) that were placed on the participants’ right and left earlobes.

Pre-MRI sensory threshold CES testing
Participants received individualized subsensory current intensities to minimize the possibility that the current could be felt consciously in the scanner. This was done in order to avoid activation patterns associated with perception of stimulation, and also conforms to the way the device is used clinically. Testing was done using a forced-choice test outside of the scanner, to ensure that the participants could not guess if the device was on or off, at greater than chance level (see Supporting Information for details).

CES safety testing in the MR environment
Prior to the experiment, we tested the use of CES in the MRI scanner to ensure safety in terms of current, voltage, and temperature, and to verify that it did not produce any artifacts or field inhomogeneities in the MR image (see Supporting Information for details).

Behavioral measurements
To assess for any changes in anxiety related to CES stimulation, participants completed the state portion of the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) () before and after the fMRI scan.

fMRI
Participants were positioned in the scanner and the electrodes were applied to their earlobes. These were connected via long copper wires to the CES device, which the investigator operated in the scanner control room. Participants were instructed to: “keep your eyes closed for the duration of the scan but try not to fall asleep. You do not have to think about anything in particular.” After the scan, they were informally questioned about whether they could feel the stimulation during the scan.

The experiment consisted of a blocked design in which six “on” blocks of 22 sec alternated with six “off” blocks of 22 sec. There was 37.5 sec of baseline prior to the “on” and “off” cycles, and 33.5 sec of baseline following it. The total duration of each experimental run was 5 min and 35 sec. Participants completed one run each of the 0.5- and 100-Hz pulse frequencies, the order of which was counterbalanced between participants. Although the investigator in the control room knew when the CES was cycling between “on” and “off” during the scan, the participants did not have any contact with him during each experimental run, and therefore could not be influenced implicitly or explicitly by the investigator's knowledge. In this way, a control condition was built into the experiment in which there were blocks when the CES was off, but the participants did not know when this was occurring.

We used a 3-Tesla Trio (Siemens) MRI scanner to evaluate BOLD contrast, using T2*-weighted echo planar imaging (EPI) gradient-echo pulse sequence (repetition time (TR) = 2.5 sec, echo time (TE) = 21 msec, flip angle = 75°, matrix = 64 × 64, field-of-view = 24 × 24 cm, in-plane voxel size 3.1 × 3.1 mm, slice thickness 3 mm, 1-mm intervening spaces, and 34 total slices). We obtained matched-bandwidth T2-weighted images for functional image registration. We also obtained higher resolution T1-weighted three-dimensional magnetic resonance images with 1-mm3 voxel size for each participant to provide detailed brain anatomy. For these, magnetization-prepared rapid gradient echo (MP-RAGE) sequences were used, with the parameters: TE = 2.26 msec, TR = 1900 msec, TI = 900 msec, flip angle = 9.00°, field-of-view = 240 × 256, matrix = 240 × 256, slice thickness = 1 mm, 176 slices.

Image processing included motion correction, skull stripping, spatial smoothing of 5-mm full-width/half-maximum Gaussian kernel, mean-based intensity normalization of all volumes by the same factor, and high-pass temporal filtering. We coregistered functional images of each participant to corresponding matched-bandwidth structural images in native space, then performed a second-stage registration to their MP-RAGE scans, and finally registered these to structural standard images, defined by the Montreal Neurological Institute averaged 152 standard brain. Registration to high-resolution and standard images was carried out using FLIRT (; ).

Statistical analysis
Voxel-wise analysis
For image analysis, we used FEAT software (FMRI Expert Analysis Tool) Version 5.98, part of the Oxford Centre for Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Brain Software Library (FSL), http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl. FMRIB's Improved Linear Model (FILM) was used for time-series statistical analysis, using local autocorrelation correction (). We thresholded Z-statistic images using clusters determined by Z &gt; 2.3 and a (corrected) cluster significance threshold of P= 0.05 ().

For the first-level (individual subject) analysis, we modeled the hemodynamic response function using a convolution of the experimental paradigms of each “on” period versus baseline with the canonical hemodynamic response function and its temporal derivative (). We analyzed the normalized data using regressors to model hemodynamic changes associated with the contrasts of “on” versus baseline for both the 0.5- and 100-Hz frequencies. For the “on” 22-sec blocks, we modeled only the two 10-sec periods that the device was actually on, and not the 2 sec intervening off period. The baseline consisted of the six “off” blocks plus the 33.5 sec of baseline at the end of the run. We tested both relative activation (modeled as “1”) and deactivation (modeled as “−1”). For the second-level (group) analysis, we combined data across participants using FLAME 1 + 2 (FMRIB's Local Analysis of Mixed Effects) (), with participant as the random factor. We additionally performed a contrast to compare activation associated with the 0.5- versus 100-Hz frequencies.

Region-of-interest (ROI) analysis
To test our hypothesis about the effect of CES on thalamic activity, we used an anatomical mask for the thalamus from the Harvard-Oxford subcortical probabilistic structural atlas supplied with FSL (50% probability mask). We calculated mean percent signal change in each region and compared “on” versus baseline using paired t-tests.

Exploratory analysis with current intensity
To investigate the relationship between stimulation current intensity and brain activation patterns, we used participants’ individualized current intensities () as a regressor in the general linear model.

“On” versus baseline block-by-block analysis
To understand the reliability of the effects on brain activity of the device being “on” versus baseline, we analyzed the percentage BOLD signal change for each “on” block individually, averaged across the regions found to be significantly deactivated from the voxel-wise analysis. To reduce bias for this secondary analysis due to nonindependence, and as an internal cross-validation, we used a leave-one-subject-out (LOSO) method () (, and see Supporting Information for methods).

Psychophysiological interaction (PPI) analysis
We investigated functional connectivity in three well-characterized resting state networks: the DMN (; ), the SMN (), and the FPN (; ). To test how CES affects these networks, we used a psychophysiological interaction (PPI) analysis (). A PPI analysis is a linear regression method that utilizes one regressor to represent the BOLD time course across the brain associated with activation of a seed region (the “physiological” regressor), one regressor that represents the brain activation associated with the device being “on” versus baseline (the “psychological” regressor), and one regressor that is the interaction of the previous two regressors. This third interaction regressor conceptually represents the regions of the brain for which there is increased functional connectivity with the seed region, specifically associated with CES being “on.”

We used a 4-mm sphere seed region in bilateral posterior cingulate gyrus (centered at Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) coordinates −14, −56, 12 and 6, −56, 16—consistent with previous studies that identified DMN [; ]). We used a seed region in bilateral postcentral gyrus (centered at MNI coordinates −29, −32, 57 and 33, −29, 56—consistent with a previous study that identified SMN []). We used a seed region in the inferior partietal lobule (IPL) (centered at MNI coordinates 50, −45, 51 and −41, −57, 51—consistent with a previous study that identified FPN []). To constrain our investigation to other nodes within each network, we used masks created from the Harvard-Oxford Cortical probabilistic atlas supplied with FSL. The DMN mask consisted of the medial prefrontal cortex, the hippocampus, and the IPL (specifically, the angular gyrus and supramarginal gyrus). The SMN mask consisted of the precentral and postcentral gyri, the supplementary motor area (SMA), and the paracingulate cortex. The FPN mask consisted of the precentral gyrus and middle frontal gyrus.

FMRI data processing was carried out using FEAT Version 5.98. Higher level analysis was carried out using OLS (ordinary least squares) simple mixed effects. We thresholded Z-statistic images using clusters determined by Z &gt; 2.0 and a (corrected) cluster significance threshold of P= 0.05 (). We used a lower statistical threshold (Z &gt; 2.0) for the PPI analysis because of the low power inherent to this type of analysis due to possible multicollinearity between the physiological and/or psychological regressors and the interaction term.

Results
Participant demographics ()
Thirteen participants were initially enrolled. One participant was disqualified because he could feel the stimulation at the lowest possible current of 10 μA. Another potential participant was unable to perform the fMRI experiment due to claustrophobia. Data were therefore collected and analyzed for eleven participants.

Behavioral data ()
Mean ratings on the STAI did not differ significantly before and after the experiment (before: 21.9 ± 3.9; after: 22.6 ± 3.1; t18= .428 P= .674). Only one participant reported awareness of any sensation during the scan; she felt a constant “sensation” on her left earlobe during the entire duration of the scan, at the location where the headphones pressed on her earlobe (but not at the electrode site).

“On” versus baseline voxel-wise analysis (,  and )
At both frequencies, participants exhibited deactivation in frontal, parietal, and posterior midline regions. A total of 0.5-Hz stimulation was associated with decreased activation in regions including the left SMA, bilateral precentral and postcentral gyri, right posterior cingulate cortex, right lateral occipital cortex, and bilateral precuneus. A total of 100-Hz stimulation was associated with decreased activation in regions including the right/left SMA, right supramarginal gyrus, right superior parietal lobule, and left superior frontal gyrus. There were no regions of increased activation for either frequency. A direct comparison of 0.5- and 100-Hz activation patterns revealed no significant differences between frequencies.

Regions of decreased brain activity as a result of cranial electrotherapy stimulation (CES) for 0.5-Hz stimulation (blue), 100-Hz stimulation (yellow), and regions of overlap between the two frequencies (green).

Regional brain deactivation (BOLD percentage signal change ± SEM) associated with 0.5- and 100-Hz “on” CES stimulation versus baseline, based on local maxima from the voxel-wise analysis.

Local maxima for regional deactivation from cranial electrotherapy stimulation (CES).

		MNI coordinates	
			
	Z score	x	y	z	
0.5 Hz	
Left supplementary motor cortex	3.73	−2	−4	56	
Right postcentral gyrus	3.66	44	−30	48	
Right precentral gyrus	3.57	42	−10	56	
Right posterior cingulate cortex	3.47	16	−40	38	
Left precentral gyrus	3.37	−24	−24	54	
Left postcentral gyrus	3.36	−40	−24	46	
Right lateral occipital cortex	3.35	18	−70	46	
Left precuneus	3.33	−2	−74	44	
Right precuneus	2.75	6	−76	50	
100 Hz	
Right/left supplementary motor cortex	3.61	0	−6	58	
Right supramarginal gyrus	3.45	46	−38	56	
Right supplementary motor cortex	3.34	8	2	64	
Right superior parietal lobule	3.32	24	−52	70	
Left superior frontal gyrus	3.32	−14	−4	70	
The block-by-block analysis, performed to understand the pattern of deactivation for each stimulation time period over the experimental run, revealed that the majority of the blocks for both 0.5 and 100 Hz demonstrated a reliable pattern of deactivation during “on” and relative activation during baseline ().

Time course of activation/deactivation block-by-block, averaged for regions for which there was overlap from all 11 participants’ leave-one-subject-out group activation maps (see ).

ROI analysis
We found no differences in mean thalamic activity when the device was “on” versus baseline for either the 0.5- or 100-Hz CES.

Current intensity regression
A voxel-wise analysis using current as a regressor revealed positive associations between current and activation for 100-Hz but not 0.5-Hz stimulation. Regions included right/left posterior cingulate cortex, left superior parietal lobule, left angular gyrus, left supramarginal gyrus, and left lateral occipital cortex (). There were no significant associations with brain deactivation in any region. This pattern for current intensity therefore differed from what was found in the “on” versus baseline analyses, suggesting that cortical deactivation may depend more on frequency than intensity of stimulation.

PPI analysis ( and )
For the DMN analysis, 100 Hz was associated with increased connectivity between the posterior cingulate cortex seed and the left planum temporale, bilateral postcentral gyrus, and bilateral anterior supramarginal gyrus ( and ). A total of 100 Hz was also associated with decreased connectivity between the posterior cingulate cortex seed and the left posterior supramarginal gyrus, the left angular gyrus, and the left superior lateral occipital cortex. A total of 0.5 Hz was not associated with any significant changes in connectivity. For the SMN, neither 100-Hz nor 0.5-Hz stimulation was associated with any significant changes in connectivity. For the FPN, there were no significant alterations of connectivity detected for either frequency.

Regions of altered connectivity with the posterior cingulate seed within the default mode network associated with 100-Hz stimulation. Regions of increased connectivity are depicted in yellow–orange and decreased connectivity are depicted in blue–light blue.

Regions of altered functional connectivity associated with CES stimulation at 100 Hz between the bilateral posterior cingulate gyrus (seed region) and other regions within the default mode network. Z scores and MNI coordinates for local maxima (x, y, z) are given.

Default mode network	
	
Region	Z score	x	y	z	
Increased connectivity	
 Left planum temporale	3.87	−52	−34	14	
 Right postcentral gyrus	3.56	66	−14	14	
 Left supramarginal gyrus, anterior	3.48	−68	−26	24	
 Left postcentral gyrus	3.4	−68	−22	24	
 Right supramarginal gyrus, anterior	2.89	58	−26	32	
Decreased connectivity	
 Left supramarginal gyrus, posterior	3.34	−42	−44	34	
 Left angular gyrus	3.18	−38	−58	40	
 Left lateral occipital cortex, superior	2.59	−48	−62	50	
Discussion
Results from this study suggest that 0.5- and 100-Hz CES causes cortical brain deactivation in midline prefrontal and parietal regions. In addition, 100-Hz stimulation significantly altered connectivity within the DMN. CES thus appears to result in similar cortical deactivation patterns for 0.5- and 100-Hz, but is associated with stronger alterations in functional connectivity for 100-Hz stimulation. Moreover, cortical deactivation patterns differed from those associated with current intensity, suggesting that cortical deactivation may depend more on frequency than intensity of stimulation.

These results may help shed light on potential mechanisms of action of CES. Previously proposed mechanisms have included changes in brain oscillation patterns, neurotransmitter and endorphin release, interruption of ongoing cortical activity, or secondary effects from peripheral nerve stimulation (). These proposed mechanisms may not be mutually exclusive. For example, the oscillating current from CES may reach the cortex where it may interrupt normal resting state cortical activity, resulting in deactivation. In doing so, CES may alter brain oscillation patterns. The observation of reduced BOLD signal associated with stimulation in the current study fits with previous EEG studies of CES that demonstrated downward shift in mean or median alpha frequency with stimulation (; ), as lower frequency brain activity has been found to be associated with lower BOLD signal in studies of simultaneous colocalized electrophysiological and fMRI recordings ( in press) and in epilepsy (). The different alterations in connectivity observed in this study with 100-Hz relative to 0.5-Hz stimulation could be related to the overlapping but somewhat differential effects of these frequencies on EEG patterns found in previous studies (). The observation that 100-Hz but not 0.5-Hz stimulation significantly affected connectivity in the DMN in this study may be related to previous observations that 100-Hz but not 0.5-Hz affects the beta band, which has been found to correlate strongly with activity in the DMN (; ).

In regards to how the current reaches the brain, because this study used earlobe electrodes, the alternating microcurrent may initially stimulate afferent branches of cranial nerves. Stimulation may initially occur at branches of the facial, glossopharyngeal, and/or the vagus nerves that originate near the electrode placement on the earlobe, then are carried to the brainstem, the thalamus, and finally the cortex.

Two different clinically effective frequencies (100 or 0.5 Hz) were associated with brain deactivation, but the amplitude of current was not. This provides additional mechanistic evidence that CES may exert its effects through interruption of normal cortical activity, possibly through the introduction of high- or low-frequency noise that interferes with certain brain oscillation patterns.

The results of this study may have several important clinical implications. Applying AC to the brain at different frequencies may alter communication between nodes of the DMN. Studies in clinical populations, including anxiety disorders and depression, have found abnormalities in these intrinsic connectivity networks (for review see []). One study found that anxiety disorder patients, when presented with threat-related words, demonstrated decreased activity in regions that overlap with the DMN including the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) and inferior parietal lobule, as well as medial prefrontal cortex and thalamus ().  found decreased functional connectivity in individuals with social anxiety disorder within the SMN and DMN (). In addition, individuals with both acute () and chronic pain () have been shown to have abnormal functional connectivity in the DMN.

How the specific effects of CES on brain deactivation and on intrinsic connectivity networks translate to impacting clinical symptoms still remains to be investigated. In patients with anxiety and those with depression, one possibility is that alterations of the DMN may have a therapeutic effect of disengaging worry- or rumination-promoting internal dialogue () and/or promoting attention to external stimuli. One way this may occur is that increasing connectivity within the DMN between the PCC and supramarginal gyrus and postcentral gyrus (as found in this study) may lead to increased integration of external sensory information (). With an improved understanding of these processes, it may be possible that CES parameters such as frequency could be tuned for individuals to therapeutically target different connections within abnormally functioning intrinsic connectivity networks.

This study has several limitations to consider. The small sample size may have resulted in insufficient power to detect smaller changes in resting brain activity. Another limitation is that we did not use a pure sham condition. Rather, we tested sensory thresholds prior to scanning to ensure that participants could not detect if the stimulation was on or off, effectively incorporating control blocks (used as “baseline”) within the experimental design, from which to compare to “on” stimulation blocks. Although we used these same individualized subsensory currents during the experiment, we did not have an accurate way of verifying if participants perceived the stimulation during the scan block by block, as this would have interrupted the “resting state” nature of the experiment. However, questioning participants after the scan revealed that only one participant reported feeling a constant (nonalternating) “sensation” on the left earlobe, which was inconsistent with the pattern of CES used in the experiment and instead likely due to the pressure of the headphone. Another limitation comes from the fact that the stimulation was brief and intermittent in this experiment, limiting the ability to extrapolate findings to changes over longer durations of treatment. In addition, since this was a nonclinical sample, anxiety levels were low before and after stimulation; this limits the ability to understand immediate effects, if any, on this symptom domain. Similar studies in clinical populations are needed to further elucidate how cortical deactivation and changes in intrinsic connectivity networks may translate to therapeutic mechanisms of action.

Conclusions
This study provides evidence that CES stimulation may result in cortical deactivation, as well as altering brain connectivity in the DMN. This suggests that relatively small perturbations in brain oscillation patterns may cause significant changes in brain activity and within intrinsic connectivity networks. Findings from this study provide evidence of the mechanism of action of CES and can serve as a guide for testing in treatment trials in clinical populations. Optimizing CES parameters for effective treatment can then be developed based on how specific brain systems and pathways may modulate clinical states such as anxiety, pain, or insomnia.

Funding provided by a grant from the Saban Family Foundation (Bystritsky). This work was also supported by a grant from the National Institute of Mental Health (5K23 MH079212—Feusner). The authors would like to thank M. Burock for his input on the study design, and E. Pierce, J. Alger, and J. Kaplan for their assistance with safety and artifact testing in the MR scanner.

Conflict of Interest
None of the authors have any conflicts of interest to report.

Supporting Information
Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article:

Figure S1. Group results from the leave-one-subject-out analyses.

Table S1. Demographic data, sensory threshold testing results, and current intensities.

Table S2. Local maxima for regions positively associated with current intensity for 100-Hz CES stimulation.

Please note: Wiley-Blackwell is not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting materials supplied by the authors. Any queries (other than missing material) should be directed to the corresponding author for the article.

