A potential crisis looms in the United States–related to the proposal for the US Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) to allow wider indications for government reimbursement for carotid angioplasty/stenting (CAS). We are writing to advise CMS to reject this proposal based on overwhelming evidence that it would have serious negative health and economic repercussions for the United States and any other country that may follow such inappropriate action. The purpose of this message is not to advise on existing CMS policy. Instead, we wish to advise that current Medicare coverage for CAS should not be extended to routine practice management of asymptomatic carotid stenosis or symptomatic carotid stenosis where the patient is considered at “low/average risk” of complications from carotid endarterectomy (CEA). We understand that, currently, CMS covers the cost of CAS for the indications listed below (the National Coverage Determination [NCD] for Percutaneous Transluminal Angioplasty [PTA] March 05, 2010):

Concurrent with carotid stent placement when furnished in accordance with the FDA-approved protocols governing Category B Investigational Device Exemption (IDE) clinical trials.

Concurrent with the placement of an FDA-approved carotid stent and an FDA-approved or -cleared embolic protection device for an FDA-approved indication when furnished in accordance with FDA-approved protocols governing postapproval studies.

Concurrent with the placement of an FDA-approved carotid stent with an FDA-approved or -cleared embolic protection device for the patients who are at high risk for CEA and who also have symptomatic carotid artery stenosis more than 70%.

Patients who are at high risk for CEA and have symptomatic carotid artery stenosis of 50–70%, in accordance with the Category B IDE clinical trials or in accordance with the NCD on carotid artery stenting postapproval studies.

Patients who are at high risk for CEA and have asymptomatic carotid artery stenosis more than 80%, in accordance with the Category B IDE clinical trials regulation or in accordance with the NCD on CAS postapproval studies.

According to the same NCD, patients at high risk for CEA are defined as having significant comorbidities and/or anatomic risk factors (i.e., recurrent stenosis and/or previous radical neck dissection), so that they would be considered poor candidates for CEA. Significant comorbid conditions include but are not limited to the following:

Congestive heart failure (CHF) class III/IV;

Left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) &lt; 30%;

Unstable angina;

Contralateral carotid occlusion;

Recent myocardial infarction (MI);

Previous CEA with recurrent stenosis;

Prior radiation treatment to the neck; and

Other conditions that were used to determine patients at high risk for CEA in the prior carotid artery stenting trials and studies, such as ARCHER, CABERNET, SAPPHIRE, BEACH, and MAVERIC II.

Over the last two to three years the available evidence to direct current best stroke-prevention management of carotid stenosis has been reviewed by a number of leading academic clinicians. Current routine practice management of carotid stenosis is based on results of randomized trials of medical (noninvasive) intervention alone versus additional CEA for patients with symptomatic (; ; ) or asymptomatic (; ; ; ) carotid stenosis. In these trials patients were randomized up to 30 years ago (1981–1994 and 1983–2003, respectively). Overall, an average annual stroke-prevention benefit of about 3.0% was measured for operated patients with moderate or severe (70–99% NASCET equivalent) symptomatic () carotid stenosis and about 0.5–1% for operated patients with moderate or severe (50–99% NASCET equivalent) asymptomatic (; ) carotid stenosis compared to patients who received medical intervention alone. More recently, trials of CAS versus CEA (without a medical intervention-only-arm) were performed demonstrating that the perioperative stroke risk is twice about as high with stenting when compared with CEA (see below). These trials were most likely designed assuming medical intervention has not changed since the randomized surgical trials, aiming to find at least an equivalent CEA stroke-prevention benefit. However, it is now clear that the stroke-prevention efficacy of medical intervention has steadily and significantly improved over the last 30 years and continues to improve (; ; ; ; ), consistent with other observed falls in risk of stroke (; ; ), heart attack, and sudden death (). Currently used benchmarks for a stroke-prevention benefit from CEA over medical intervention (a 30-day procedural risk of stroke/death of 3% for asymptomatic carotid stenosis [] or 6% for symptomatic carotid stenosis []) are outdated. Therefore, the demonstration of stroke-prevention equivalence between CAS and CEA using these benchmarks (even if this had been achieved) would be insufficient to justify a current, routine practice indication for CAS.

The inappropriateness of the recent push for widening CMS coverage for carotid stenting is particularly evident with respect to asymptomatic carotid stenosis because the randomized surgical trial stroke-prevention benefit from CEA was so small and conditional. However, the most recent standardized measurements of the average annual rate of ipsilateral stroke among patients receiving medical intervention alone approximate only 0.5% (; ; ; ). This is about three times lower than for randomized surgical trial CEA patients (), about five times lower than randomized surgical trial nonoperated patients (), three times lower than CREST stented patients (), and about half the rate of CREST CEA patients (, ; ). The push for routine practice stenting for asymptomatic carotid stenosis is based largely on the recently published CREST results (), and perhaps other clearly flawed randomized data (; ), comparing CEA with CAS (without a medical intervention-only-arm) and implications of “equivalence” with CEA (). As mentioned, such equivalence, even if supported by the data, would not be sufficient to justify a current, routine practice indication for CAS for asymptomatic carotid stenosis.

However, to add insult to injury, an equivalent stroke-prevention benefit between CAS and CEA has not been demonstrated. CAS in CREST (), large registries, and population-based studies (; ; ), has been associated with about double the peri-procedural rate of stroke or death compared to CEA. Further, in CREST, among asymptomatic patients, the rate of peri-procedural stroke/death or later ipsilateral stroke projected to four years was 4.5% for 594 patients who had CAS and 2.7% for the 587 who had CEA (67% higher, P = 0.07). This outcome measure reached statistical significance when symptomatic patients were added (6.4% vs. 4.7%, 36% higher, P = 0.03). The inclusion of higher risk symptomatic patients, and larger sample sizes, allows easier detection of statistically significant differences. Supporters of routine CAS for asymptomatic carotid stenosis have tried to use a higher incidence of peri-procedural myocardial infarction (including minor infarction) associated with CEA to justify a higher stroke/death risk with CAS (). However, this is invalid and distracting because the aim of invasive carotid intervention is to prevent stroke. Further, in CREST, at least, a larger proportion of patients who suffered peri-procedural myocardial infarction associated with CAS (compared to CEA) died during follow-up (). More importantly, procedure-associated myocardial damage would be prevented entirely if unnecessary CEA and CAS interventions were not performed in the first place. In addition, it should also be noted that CAS has higher procedural costs compared to CEA ().

The current situation regarding CEA and CAS for patients with asymptomatic stenosis in the United States is unjustified and outdated. Up to about 90–95% of these procedures are being performed for asymptomatic carotid stenosis (; ), exposing patients to unnecessary risk and causing unjustified expenditure of at least one to two billion US health care dollars each year (; ; ; ; ; ) at a time when health care costs need to be justified (). Despite no previous CMS coverage for routine practice CAS for asymptomatic carotid stenosis, rates of CAS procedures are increasing dramatically, especially among cardiologists (; ). Extending the approved indications for CAS will open the floodgates for widespread CAS and expose patients to unnecessary risk and greatly increase unjustified health expenditure ().

Broadening the indications for CAS reimbursement for symptomatic carotid stenosis is also inappropriate. The request for such broadening of reimbursement will, once again, be based on the CREST trial conclusions () and the recently published American Heart Association (AHA) Guideline (approved by 13 other organizations) (), which states that “CAS is an alternative to CEA for the treatment of symptomatic carotid stenosis…” Equivalence of the two procedures is implied (, ). Unfortunately, the actual CREST data (), most other randomized trial data (, ; ), meta-analyses (; ), and registry data (; ; ) do not justify this presumed equivalence of CAS and CEA for symptomatic carotid stenosis (; ). In symptomatic patients, CAS, overall, is associated with about double the 30-day, 120-day, 6-month, and/or 4-year risk of stroke (or death) compared to CEA. The excessive CAS procedural risk of stroke or death is particularly notable in patients over 70 years of age (), yet not confined to the oldest age groups (). CAS is also associated with a much higher peri-procedural risk of brain-imaging detected ischemic lesions than CEA () and a higher incidence of carotid restenosis (; ; ). No studies have shown CAS is better than CEA in preventing stroke in patients with symptomatic carotid stenosis and procedural costs are significantly higher with CAS (). Thus, the extension of Medicare reimbursement to routine treatment for “low” and “standard” CEA-risk patients with symptomatic carotid stenosis is not currently justified.

Thus, in summary, at this time, the evidence does not support broadening reimbursement for CAS to routine management of patients with asymptomatic carotid stenosis or patients with symptomatic carotid stenosis considered at “low or standard” risk from CEA. It is acknowledged that this situation may change in the future.

Anne Abbott's time on this project has been supported by an Australian National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) Fellowship (ID:472700).

Conflict of Interest
None.


Dr Anne L. Abbott, MD, PhD, FRACP

Baker IDI Heart &amp; Diabetes Institute and Florey Neuroscience Institutes, Melbourne, Australia

E-mail:
Anne.L.Abbott@gmail.com

A\Prof Mark A. A. Adelman, MD, USA

New York University Langone Medical Center, NY, USA

E-mail:
Mark.Adelman@nyumc.org

Prof Andrei V. Alexandrov, MD

University of Alabama Hospital, South Birmingham, AL, USA

E-mail:
avalexandrov@att.net

Prof Henry J. M. Barnett, CC, MD

University of Western Ontario, Robarts Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada

E-mail:
hjmb@bell.net

Prof Jonathan Beard, FRCS, ChM, MEd

Sheffield Vascular Institute, Northern General Hospital, Sheffield, United Kingdom

E-mail:
j.d.beard@btinternet.com

Prof Peter Bell, MD

University of Leicester and the University of Leicester Hospitals, Leicester, United Kingdom

E-mail:
peterrfbell@googlemail.com

Prof Martin Björck, MD, PhD

Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden

E-mail:
martin@bjorck.pp.se

A/Prof David Blacker, MD, FRACP

Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, Nedlands, Western Australia

E-mail:
David.Blacker@health.wa.gov.au

Prof Clifford J. Buckley, MD, FACS

Texas A&amp;M Health Sciences Center College of Medicine, Scott and White Health Care Systems and Central Texas Veterans Health Care System, USA

E-mail:
Clifford.Buckley@VA.GOV and cbuckley@swmail.sw.org

Prof Richard P. Cambria, MD

Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

E-mail:
RCAMBRIA@PARTNERS.ORG

Prof Anthony J. Comerota, MD, FACS, FACC, RVT

Jobst Vascular Institute, The Toledo Hospital, Toledo, OH, USA

E-mail:
anthony.comerotamd@promedica.org

Prof E. Sander Connolly, Jr, MD

Columbia University, NY, USA

E-mail:
esc5@columbia.edu

Prof Alun H. Davies, MA, DM, FRCS, FHEA, FEBVS, FACPh

Imperial College School of Medicine, Charing Cross Hospital, London, United Kingdom

E-mail:
a.h.davies@imperial.ac.uk

Prof Hans-Henning Eckstein, MD, PhD

Technische Universität München and Klinikum rechts der Isar der Technischen Universität München, München, Germany

E-mail:
HHEckstein@web.de

Dr R. Faruqi, MD, FACS

Stanford University, University of California and Kaiser Permanente Medical Center, CA, USA

E-mail:
Rishad.Faruqi@kp.org

Prof Gustav Fraedrich, MD

Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria

E-mail:
gustav.fraedrich@i-med.ac.at

Prof Peter Gloviczki, MD

Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA

E-mail:
gloviczki.peter@mayo.edu

Prof Graeme J. Hankey, MD, FRACP, FRCP, FRCPE

Royal Perth Hospital, Western Australia

E-mail:
gjhankey@cyllene.uwa.edu.au

Prof Robert E. Harbaugh, MD, FAANS, FACS, FAHA

Penn State Institute of the Neurosciences, Penn State University, Hershey, PA, USA

E-mail:
rharbaugh@psu.edu

Dr E. Heldenberg, MD

Assaf Harofeh Medical Center, Zerifin, Israel

E-mail:
eitanh@asaf.health.gov.il

Prof Steven J. Kittner, MD, MPH

University of Maryland School of Medicine, BA, USA

E-mail:
skittner@umaryland.edu

Dr Timothy J. Kleinig, PhD FRACP, MBBS (Hons) BA

Royal Adelaide and Lyell McEwin Hospitals, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia

E-mail:
tkleinig@hotmail.com

Prof Dimitri P. Mikhailidis, BSc, MSc, MD, FRSPH, FCP, FFPM, FRCP, FRCPath

University College London Medical School, University College London, London, United Kingdom

E-mail:
MIKHAILIDIS@aol.com and mikhailidis@hotmail.com

Prof Wesley S. Moore, MD

The David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA

E-mail:
WMoore@mednet.ucla.edu

Prof R. Naylor, MD, FRCS

Leicester Royal Infirmary, Leicester, United Kingdom

E-mail:
ross.naylor@uhl-tr.nhs.uk

Prof Andrew Nicolaides, MS, FRCS, PhD (Hon)

Imperial College, Vascular Diagnostic Centre, London, United Kingdom

E-mail:
anicolaides1@gmail.com

Dr Kosmas I. Paraskevas, MD

Klinikum Nürnberg Süd, Nürnberg, Germany

E-mail:
paraskevask@hotmail.com

Prof David M. Pelz, MD, FRCPC

University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada

E-mail:
Pelz@uwo.ca and David.Pelz@lhsc.on.ca

Prof James W. Prichard, MD

Yale Medical School, New Haven, CT, USA

E-mail:
james.prichard@yale.edu

Dr Grant Purdie, MD, FRACP

The Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Adelaide, South Australia

E-mail:
Grant.Purdie@health.sa.gov.au

Prof Jean-Baptiste Ricco, MD, PhD

University of Poitiers, France

E-mail:
jeanbaptistericco@gmail.com

Prof Thomas Riles, MD

New York University School of Medicine, NY, USA

E-mail:
Thomas.Riles@nyumc.org

Prof Peter Rothwell, MD, PhD, FRCP, FMedSci

Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, United Kingdom

E-mail:
peter.rothwell@clneuro.ox.ac.uk

Prof Peter Sandercock, MA, DM, FRCPE, FMedSci

Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom

E-mail:
Peter.sandercock@ed.ac.uk

Prof Henrik Sillesen, MD, DMSc

University of Copenhagen, Denmark

E-mail:
sillesen@mac.com

Prof J. David Spence, BA, MBA, MD, FRCPC, FAHA, FCAHS

University of Western Ontario and Robarts Research Institute, London, Ontario, Canada

E-mail:
dspence@robarts.ca

Prof Francesco Spinelli, MD

University of Messina, Messina, Italy

E-mail:
f.spinelli@mac.com

Dr Aron Tan, BM BS, FRACP

The Queen Elizabeth and Lyell McEwin Hospitals, Adelaide, South Australia

E-mail:
Aaron.Tan@health.sa.gov.au

Dr Ankur Thapar, BSc, MBBS, MRCS

Royal College of Surgeons Research Fellow, Charing Cross Hospital, London, United Kingdom

E-mail:
a.thapar09@imperial.ac.uk

Prof Frank J. Veith, MD

New York University School of Medicine, Cleveland Clinic, Lerner School of Medicine of Case Western Reserve University, Edward Hebert School of Medicine, University of the Health Sciences, NY, USA

E-mail:
fjvmd@msn.com

A/Prof Wei Zhou, MD

Stanford University and Palo Alto VA Health Care System, Stanford, CA, USA

E-mail:
weizhou@stanford.edu

Author Disclosures
Dr Anne L. Abbott's salary is sourced from a National Health and Medical Research Council Fellowship (ID 472700).

Prof Henry J. M. Barnett was PI of the North American Symptomatic Carotid Endarterectomy Trial (NASCET).

Prof Jonathon Beard is on the Steering Committee of the International Carotid Stenting Study (ICSS).

A/Prof David Blacker has received sponsorship to scientific meetings from Boehringer Ingelheim. He has previously been a member of the advisory board for NovoNorsdisk (regarding Factor VII) and receives funding for involvement in the Prevention of cerebrovascular and cardiovascular Events of ischaemic origin with teRutroban in patients with a history oF ischaemic strOke or tRansient ischaeMic attack (PERFORM) Study.

Prof Richard P. Cambria is co-PI for a future transcervical carotid stenting/flow reversal trial (ROADSTER).

Prof Anthony J. Comerota received research funding for the Jobst Vascular Institute to participate in the Carotid Revascularization Endarterectomy vs. Stenting Trial (CREST).

Prof Alun H. Davies receives funding from the Stroke Association on the evaluation of carotid plaque.

Prof Hans-Henning Eckstein is co-PI of the Stent-Supported Percutaneous Angioplasty of the Carotid Artery versus Endarterectomy (SPACE-2) Study. He was a member of the Steering Committee of the SPACE-1 Study.

Prof Gustav Fraedrich is member of the steering committee of the “Carotid Stenting Trialists Collaboration” (CSTC) and member of the steering committee of the SPACE-2-Study. He was a member of the Writing Committee of the SPACE-1 Study.

Dr Graeme J. Hankey was a member of the European Carotid Surgery Trialists’ (ECST) Collaborative Group and the North American Symptomatic Carotid Endarterectomy Trial (NASCET) Collaborators.

Prof Steven J. Kittner receives research funding from the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) and from the Medical Research Service of the Department of Veterans Affairs.

Prof Dimitris P. Mikhailidis has given talks and attended conferences sponsored by Merck, Sharp and Dohme.

Prof Wesley S. Moore is a co-PI for the CREST and member of the CREST Executive Committee.

Prof Peter Rothwell is on the Data Monitoring Committee of the SPACE-2 trial. He is Chair of the Endpoint Adjudication Committee of the Asymptomatic Carotid Artery Surgery Trial-2(ACST-2). He is on the Steering Committee of the European Carotid Surgery Trial-2 (ECST-2) and the General Anaesthetic versus Local Anaesthetic for Carotid Surgery (GALA) Trial.

Prof Peter Sandercock is the independent chair of the MRC/NIHR ACST-2 Trial.

Prof J. David Spence has received lecture fees or consulting fees from Merck, Novartis and Boehringer-Ingelheim and sponsorship to scientific meetings from Boehringer-Ingelheim. He obtains research funding from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, the Heart &amp; Stroke Foundation of Canada (Ontario) and the National Institutes of Health.

Dr Ankur Thapar receives research funding from the Stroke Association, the Royal College of Surgeons of England and the Circulation Foundation.

A/Prof Wei Zhou receives National Institute of Health, NINDS and AHA research funding for evaluating outcomes of carotid interventions.

