Introduction
Microglia are believed to derive from monocytes that invade the developing central nervous system (CNS) and persist over the adult life as resident macrophages (). A recent study using fate-mapping analysis confirmed that these glial cells derive from primitive myeloid progenitors that arise before embryonic day 8 () and that postnatal hematopoietic progenitors do not contribute to microglia homeostasis in the adult brain. These cells perform a multitude of physiological roles in normal adult CNS (; ) and are believed to perform both detrimental and beneficial actions during acute and chronic neural disorders (; ). In physiological conditions, they stochastically move their processes in several directions in a complex way and scanning for minor tissue alterations for maintaining tissue integrity (; ; ). Nevertheless, there is experimental evidence suggesting that activated microglia perform both beneficial and detrimental actions after CNS disorders including spinal cord injury (SCI), stroke, multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, prion, Parkinson, Huntington, and Alzheimer diseases (; ; ).

Why do microglia have a dual role after CNS diseases? There is not a definitive answer to this question. In this paper, we first review the dual role of microglia during acute CNS disorders. Further, we discuss the possible reasons for this duality under pathological conditions. We hypothesize that both harmful and beneficial stimuli are released upon injury into specific anatomical niches along the damaged areas triggering both beneficial and deleterious actions of microglia. Depending on the CNS-affected area and disease's etiology, both noxious and beneficial microglial phenotypes might coexist along the pathological environment. According to this notion, there are no natural populations of deleterious microglia, but is the pathological environment that determines the microglial phenotype.

The Physiological Roles of Microglia
Microglia patrol the adult CNS environment in physiological conditions
In the mature CNS, microglia adopt a highly ramified morphology under physiological conditions (). A study using confocal time-lapse analysis in hippocampal slices first has shown that microglia branches are highly dynamic structures upon activation (). Further, two-photon laser scanning microscopy allowed visualization of fluorescent resting microglia in the brain of alive animals, showing that these glial cells continuously patrol the CNS parenchyma several times a day through stochastic movements of their long and fine branches maintaining tissue integrity (; ). Under physiological conditions, there exist mechanisms assuring that microglial cells do not develop patterns of activation with undesirable consequences for CNS integrity (; ).

Neurons control microglial function by physical contact or by releasing neurotransmitters, peptides and/or growth factors including gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), glutamate, catecholamines, CD22, CCL21, fraktalkine, which act on receptors present on microglia membrane (). It has been shown that in organotypic hippocampal cultures active neurons release neurotrophins, such as neural growth factor (NGF), which control the expression of major histocompatibility class II (MHC-II) in microglia by acting, at least partially, on the p75 neurotrophin receptor (). Neuronal secretion of CD22 inhibits microglial release of pro-inflammatory cytokines by acting on CD45 receptor () and expression of CD200 may be important for controlling tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) released by these glial cells (; ). Finally, physical interaction between neuronal CD200 and CD200R present on microglia membrane likely represents an alternative way by which neurons can control microglial function (; ). Microglia also express a number of neurotransmitter receptors indicating that activity-related release of neurotransmitters by neurons contribute for microglial control in physiological conditions (). These data clearly illustrate the necessity of controlling both inflammatory and immune microglial functions in physiological conditions in order to maintain the integrity of CNS circuits.

Microglia and Adult Neurogenesis
New neurons are generated in the adult brain from neural stem/progenitor cells present in the subventricular zone (SVZ) (; ) and subgranular zone of hippocampal dentate gyrus (). Microglia seem to play an important physiological role of controlling adult neurogenesis in normal conditions (; ; ). In vitro, mouse-derived microglia release soluble factors, which contribute to migration and differentiation of neural progenitors (; ). Microglia instruct neurogenesis in adult SVZ in culture (). In adherent culture systems, there is a normal senescence and decrease in the number of progenitor cells (). This is coincident with decreased numbers of microglial cells (). Xanthosine treatment results in extended microglia lifespan, concomitant with increased neurogenic potential of SVZ-derived cells (). In this experimental condition, a MAC-1-saporin antibody, which depletes microglia, decreases neurogenic potential, while microglia-conditioned medium restores neurogenesis (). A recent in vivo study suggests that microglia contribute to hippocampal neurogenesis in adrenalectomized rats (). In this study, the number of activated microglia displaying a more ramified morphology, not full phagocytes, correlated with increased neurogenesis and number of nestin-positive cells (). Nevertheless, the role of microglia on adult neurogenesis is an open question. Experimental depletion of SVZ microglia using a Mac-1 antibody conjugated to saporin did not affect numbers and proliferation of migrating neuroblasts in the SVZ in nonpathological conditions or migration of neuroblasts after striatal stroke ().

Several other functions are performed by microglia. A detailed discussion of microglial functions can be obtained in .

Microglia Activation and Acute CNS Disorders
Morphological and molecular correlates of microglia activation
Microglia are extremely sensible to minor alterations on the CNS microenvironment, even ionic disbalance and stress (; ; ). These cells are activated in pathological conditions, which is reflected in both morphological and biochemical alterations on their structure (; ). Microglia activation involves a conspicuous change in their ramified morphology to an intermediate and amoeboid form culminating in a round morphological profile of full phagocytes (; ; ). Concomitant with morphological alterations, microglial cells change their genetic machinery and upregulate several transcription factors (for example, NF-κB), cytoplasmic and surface molecules including MHC classes I and II, complement C3, Fc, thrombin, scavenger receptors (i.e., CD36, SR-A, CD204, SR-BI), cytokine, chemokine, CD4 and CD8 receptors, toll-like receptors, and several oxidative enzymes, such as NADPH oxidase (; ; ; ; ; ; ).

An important question is which signals activate microglia in the event of tissue damage. These mechanisms are not completely clear. Nevertheless, there is experimental evidence suggesting that the release of purine nucleotides, including ATP, ADP, and UTP, by injured neurons is an important mechanism by which microglia are informed of tissue injury (; ). These nucleotides seem to act on P2Y receptors in both microglia- and astrocytes-mediating chemotactic response of microglia branches (; ). In addition, activation of connexin hemichannels in astrocytes seems to mediate amplification of the phenomenon by inducing a continuous release of purine nucleotides by these glial cells, which is fundamental for directing microglial processes to the injury site (; ).

Beneficial actions of microglia after CNS diseases
Activated microglia can be beneficial in several experimental models of CNS diseases (; ; ; ). After experimental axotomy of facial nerve, there is microglial activation inside facial motor nucleus (; ). Microglia clearly play a beneficial role contributing to reinnervation of target muscles (; ). In this experimental paradigm, a regeneration program involving microglial proliferation and activation is triggered resulting in the most conspicuous example of a neuro-protective role of microglia after nervous system damage ().

Microglia play a proregenerative role after SCI. Engraftment of cultured microglial cells into lesioned spinal cord induces axonal sprouting (). In this experimental condition, transplanted microglial cells seem to release growth factors, which contribute to axonal regeneration (). It has been proposed by Schwartz and colleagues that microglia/macrophages can be highly neuroprotective after SCI and other CNS diseases (; ; ). According to these authors, neuroprotective microglia can express markers of antigen-presenting cells, including MHC-class II and B7.2, which allow interactions with lymphocyte with subsequent release of growth factors rendering a more amenable environment for neural regeneration (; ; ).

Recent experimental evidences suggest that activated microglia may be highly neuroprotective after stroke (, ; ). Application of BV2 microglia is neuroprotective after oxygen–glucose deprivation in organotypic hippocampal slice cultures (). Using three-dimensional (3D) two-photon microscopy, these authors have shown that transplanted microglia engage in physical contact with neurons in damaged area, protecting them in the experimental circumstances. In addition, blockage of microglia activation with minocycline impairs the neuroprotection afforded (). Using transgenic mice in which selective ablation of proliferating microglia is feasible,  have shown that microglia is clearly neuroprotective after middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO). After microglial ablation, there was an increase in the number of apoptotic cells concomitant with increased proinflammatory molecules (). In this study, Mac-2+ resident microglia release the proneurogenic molecule insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1), which likely contribute to the microglia-induced neuroprotection (). Recent studies suggest that microglia may be beneficial by engulfing neutrophils () and releasing TNF-α () after ischemia. In addition, microglia may be beneficial through their phagocytic functions. Some studies suggest that phagocytosis of injured tissue is important for remodeling and may limit secondary damage following brain hemorrhage (). Recent studies suggest that microglia may shape hippocampal adult neurogenesis by clearing out apoptotic newborn cells, which illustrates the important phagocytic function of microglia ().

Recently, we have shown that there is long-lasting microglial activation with a proneurogenic phenotype in SVZ after stroke (). These glial cells release IGF-1 in late survival times after stroke, which has been confirmed by affymetrix analysis and quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (). The results indicate that long-term activation of microglia in SVZ after stroke is important for regulating the previously described long-lasting neurogenesis in SVZ ().

Detrimental actions of microglia after CNS diseases
There is clear experimental evidence suggesting that overactivated microglia may be extremely detrimental following acute neural disorders, including SCI (, ; ; ) and stroke (; ; ; ; ; ; ).

Depletion of hematogenous macrophages with clodronate induces partial hindlimb recovery and neuroprotection after acute SCI (). Microglia/macrophage activation seems to contribute to axonal damage following experimental injection of N-methyl-d-Aspartate (NMDA) () and zymosan () into the rat spinal cord. The semisynthetic tetra-cycline minocycline, an inhibitor of microglial activation, reduces secondary oligodendrocyte and axonal degeneration as well as modulates apoptosis after SCI () and cell cycle inhibition attenuates microglia-induced inflammatory response and decreases cell death after SCI (). In addition, mild hypothermic treatment reduces spinal cord motor dysfunction by decreasing microglia activation ().

Blockage of microglial activation with minocycline induces conspicuous neuroprotection in both cortex and striatum after experimental rat MCAO (). Recent studies have confirmed that minocycline has a potent neuroprotective effect after ischemia by inhibiting a cytokine-like mediator (high-mobility group box 1) in microglia (). Nevertheless, it is important to bear in mind that minocycline has other pleiotropic actions, including matrix metalloproteinases-9 (MMP-9) inhibition, PARP or NFκB, scavenging of peroxynitrite, upregulation of bcl-2, and may affect cells other than microglia (; ). Other microglial inhibitors render neuroprotection after stroke. PJ34, a potent poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitor, abolishes microglial activation and reduces hippocampal neuronal death by 84% if administered at 8 h after 10 min of global forebrain ischemia in rats (). Patients with acute stroke had a better neurological outcome with minocycline treatment (; ; ). Recent in vitro and in vivo studies suggest that the neurotoxic actions of microglia during ischemia are mediated by microglial type II metabotropic receptors, TNF-α overproduction, NF-κB activation (), and Nox-1-dependent NADPH oxidase (). In addition, it has been reported that caspase activation is an important mechanism underlying the deleterious functions of microglia ().

There are experimental evidences that microglial activation is detrimental for adult neurogenesis in different models of CNS injury (; ; ; ). Microglial activation impairs basal hippocampal adult neurogenesis induced by tissue damage associated with status epilepticus or lipopolysaccharide (LPS) infusion (). The impaired adult neuro-genesis is restored after microglial blockage using minocycline (). Minocycline or indomethacin treatment also enhances adult neurogenesis after MCAO in rodents (; ).

How to Explain the Dual Role of Microglia after CNS Diseases?
We have seen that microglia have important physiological functions on the normal CNS and a dual role after neural disorders. How to explain this apparent paradox? In the following paragraphs, based on experimental evidences, including our own data, we propose a hypothesis to explain the dual role of microglia after CNS diseases.

Microglia are fundamental components of brain innate immune system responsible for protecting neural tissue against infections (; ; ). To perform such a role, microglia monitor the CNS environment using membrane molecules called “pattern recognition receptors” (PRRs) (). These PRRs include toll-like receptors (; ), scavenger receptors (), and the complement receptor 3 Mac1 ().

During CNS infection, PRRs interact with pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) in the membrane of infectious agents, which triggers the release of pathogen-killer molecules by microglia, including hydrogen peroxide, NO, O2−, peroxynitrite, and a range of pro-inflammatory molecules such as prostaglandin E2, IL-1β, and TNF-α (; ; ; ; ). A main downstream event following pathogen recognition by microglia is the activation of NADPH-oxidase, which is a fundamental step for free radical release and other pro-inflammatory microglial actions (; ; ). This is a physiological and an appropriate response of microglia in order to eliminate pathogens and preserve tissue integrity. Nevertheless, recent studies suggest that in noninfectious diseases, such as stroke, SCI, and chronic neurodegenerative diseases, microglia might mistake noninfectious disease-associated stimuli for the ones associated with infectious diseases, activating their killing mechanisms, which normally would be used to kill pathogens, but are unintentionally used to kill neurons (; ).

It has been suggested that PRR activation underlies the mechanisms of cell demise in a number of noninfectious neural and nonneural diseases (; ; ; ; ). For example, TLR-2 mediates CNS injury in focal cerebral ischemia () and activation of TLR-4 by a specific type of heat shock protein may be an endogenous molecular pathway common to many forms of neuronal injury (). TLR4 and CD14 are the primary LPS receptors in microglia () and in several experimental circumstances LPS induces microglia activation with neurotoxic consequences (; ; ). Activation of other microglial PRRs is also involved in neurodegeneration (; ; ). These and other results suggest that noninfectious stimuli might bind microglial PRRs activating their killing mechanisms, which normally would be used to kill pathogens, but are unintentionally used to kill neurons in noninfectious CNS diseases (; ).

From the experimental data described above, it is possible to infer that microglia are beneficial neuroimmune cells that might become detrimental in pathological conditions. It is likely that during neural disorders, a mosaic of detrimental and beneficial stimuli are released by altered neurons, glia, blood vessels, and other sources into the extracellular space, and microglial cells interpret them by using their surface receptors. We hypothesize that these harmful and beneficial stimuli are released into specific anatomical niches along damaged areas triggering both beneficial and deleterious actions of microglia. Depending on the CNS-affected area and disease's etiology, both noxious and beneficial microglial phenotypes might coexist along the pathological environment. According to this notion, there are no natural populations of deleterious microglia, but is the pathological environment that determines the final microglial phenotype. We have reasons to suppose that this phenomenon occurs after stroke and other neural disorders. We will present experimental evidences to substantiate this hypothesis in the following paragraphs.

In a recent study, we have described different patterns of microglial activation over weeks after MCAO in both SVZ and striatum (). In SVZ, microglia exhibited a more ramified or intermediate morphology, signifying a downregulated inflammatory profile, whereas amoeboid or round phagocytic microglia were frequent in the periinfarct striatum (). In this study, SVZ microglia seem to be proneurogenic as they upregulate expression of IGF-1, a growth factor known to be neurogenic in different experimental conditions ().

In the striatum of the same experimental animals, activated microglia were more activated and often amoeboid and round at two weeks after MCAO (). These results suggest that microglia activation is differentially regulated in SVZ and striatum. The neurogenic niche seems to modulate microglia function toward a more neuroprotective/neurogenic phenotype. Gradients of both anti-inflammatory cytokines and growth factors inside SVZ might be involved. These results illustrate well how microglial phenotype may be influenced by the molecular constitution of different anatomical niches along the ischemic environment.

We have reasons to believe that both beneficial and detrimental microglia are present in different anatomical niches after MCAO. In an ongoing investigation, we have observed that clustered SVZ microglia were spatially associated with clusters of neuroblasts several weeks after MCAO (). In addition, we have observed zones of abnormal aggregate (clustering) of hyperactivated microglia/macrophages (round and/amoeboid cells) as well as nonoverlapping regions of microglia displaying an intermediate morphology in the ischemic striatum weeks after MCAO (). Double immunofluorescence for Iba1 (a microglia marker) and DCX (a neuroblast marker) revealed a surprising spatial correlation between these two cell populations in both SVZ and ischemic striatum. A few neuroblasts were present inside abnormal striatal microglial aggregations (), which suggest that this anatomical niche is comprised by detrimental microglia/macrophages contributing to neuroblast death or impairing their survival. Nevertheless, in the striatal regions outside aggregations, which contain microglia with a more intermediate morphology, neuroblasts were intermingled with microglia () prompting us to believe in a proneurogenic role for microglia in these anatomical niches.

Spatial correlation between activated microglia and migrating neuroblasts in the subventricular zone (SVZ) after middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO). Microglia were labeled by anti-Iba1 (green) and migrating neuroblasts by antidoublecortin (red) double immunofluorescence. Ramified microglia were spatially associated with migrating neuroblasts in early (A–C) and late survival times (D–F) after MCAO. lv, lateral ventricle; st, striatum. Scale bar = 200 μm.

Spatial correlation between activated microglia and migrating neuroblasts in the striatum after middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO). Microglia were labeled by anti-Iba1 (green) and migrating neuroblasts by antidoublecortin (red) double immunofluorescence. Aggregations (*clustering) of overactivated microglia/macrophages are present in the dorsal striatum at 2 (A–C) and 6 weeks (G–I) after MCAO. Neuroblasts were less frequent in the ischemic striatal regions containing overactivated microglia/macrophages clustering (dorsal striatum), but intermingled with moderately activated microglia in striatal regions outside microglia/macrophages clustering (ventral striatum). lv, lateral ventricle; st, striatum. Scale bar = 100 μm.

Based on the experimental evidence described, we propose that detrimental (overactivated) and beneficial (intermediately activated) microglia might be present in discrete anatomical niches along the ischemic environment. Inhibition of stroke-induced microglia clustering formation, without avoiding intermediate (more physiological) levels of microglia activation can be a promising experimental approach for future investigations.

Microglia with different phenotypes in discrete anatomical niches along the pathological environment seem to be present in other experimental conditions, including chronic neurodegenerative diseases (; ; ). Activated microglia displaying a more ramified morphological profile (not amoeboid or full phagocytes) were reported to modulate hippocampal neurogenesis in adrenalectomized rats (). Microglial/macrophages aggregates were also suggested to be neurotoxic in a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) (). In these experimental circumstances, formation of multinucleated giant cells seems to be highly detrimental. Normal appearing microglia were present in other anatomical regions displaying less tissue damage (). It is possible that microglia become multinucleate giant cells, fusing their membranes and releasing neurotoxins exacerbating tissue loss, when in aggregation. Macrophage aggregations are sites of overactivated and potentially neurotoxic microglia and a feature of several CNS diseases, including stroke, trauma, HIV infection associated dementia, and ALS (). Nevertheless, studies using a model of prion disease () have indicated that microglia can switch to a phenotype contributing to neuronal damage without morphological changes (). Thus, in some experimental models of CNS disease there is no direct correlation between morphological profile and functional phenotype.

Different stimuli acting on different microglial receptors may render different microglial phenotypes after CNS diseases. Schwartz and colleagues have shown that it is the type of stimulus that determines the microglial phenotype (; ). LPS or amyloid-β induces a detrimental microglial phenotype by inducing these cells to release great amounts of TNF-α and NO, while low doses of interferon gamma or the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-4 induces a beneficial profile in microglia manifested by release of growth factors, including brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and IGF-1 (; ). In vivo, macrophages stimulated by tissues with known regenerative capacity, for example sciatic nerve () or skin (), acquire a neuroprotective profile. In these experimental conditions, the environmental stimuli, such as growth factors, might bind to surface microglial receptors, activating intracellular biochemical pathways favoring physiological-neuroprotective actions. This has similarities to what happens in peripheral tissues, in which macrophages can be phenotypically polarized by the microenvironment to perform different functions (). In peripheral tissues, macrophages can be classified in two main groups: classically activated macrophages (M1) and alternatively activated macrophages (M2). M1 macrophages are mainly activated by interferon gamma and LPS, while M2 after exposure to IL-4, IL-13, TGF beta or glucocorticoids (). In noninfectious conditions, M2-polarized macrophages play a role in resolution of inflammation through phagocytic mechanisms and by releasing growth factors, accompanied by reduced pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion (). It is possible that specific ligands can polarize microglia to different phenotypes like in the periphery (). The presence of alternative microglia in the CNS is supported by recent investigations (; ).

The ideas discussed above suggest that a beneficial or detrimental microglial phenotype might be a direct consequence of which kind of PRRs are activated in a determined CNS disease. This idea raises a clear therapeutic implication. Which microglial receptors are activated to induce neurodegeneration? Could they be experimentally blocked on microglia? Recent studies suggest that specific blockage of PRRs (for example TLR4) and/or NADPH oxidase can be a promising therapeutic approach for acute and chronic neural disorders (; ). In addition, activation of NADPH oxidase seems to be a very important event underlying the deleterious actions of microglia and experimental inhibition of this enzyme induces significant neuro-protection (). Investigations on the intracellular biochemical pathways responsible for both detrimental and beneficial actions of microglia are needed for development of drugs, which are able to maximize microglial beneficial functions and antagonize the deleterious ones.

The ligands triggering the paradoxical actions of microglia after CNS diseases are unknown. Nevertheless, neuro-melanin, α-synuclein, fibrillar Aβ, Aβ, prion may play a detrimental role on chronic neurodegenerative diseases (). The nature of these ligands remains to be determined after acute neural disorders, such as stroke and brain/spinal cord trauma. Purine nucleotides (), anti-inflammatory cytokines (), and growth factors () might be potential candidates as beneficial ligands.

Conclusion and Future Perspectives
In this paper, we shed light on the possible reasons by which microglia can be both detrimental and beneficial after CNS diseases. We face microglia as the guardians of CNS, which contribute to maintenance of its integrity in physiological conditions. In pathological conditions, some microglial cells might be affected by the disease process becoming overactivated contributing to neuronal damage, whereas others might maintain an intermediate (more physiological) level of activation contributing to neuronal rescue and repair processes. This might be a consequence of the fact that both harmful and beneficial stimuli are released upon injury into specific anatomical niches along the damaged areas triggering both beneficial and deleterious actions of microglia. Depending on the CNS-affected area and disease's etiology, both noxious and beneficial microglial phenotypes might coexist along the pathological environment.

Further studies are necessary to characterize, both morphologically and molecularly, the different anatomical niches of microglial activation after stroke and other neural disorders. These studies must unravel the ligands that render harmful and beneficial microglial phenotypes as well as the molecules released by activated microglia in both circumstances. In addition, these new experimental studies must investigate the effects of drugs that do not completely abolish microglia activation, but rather modulate this phenomenon, for example, avoiding clustering formation without interfering with physiological (beneficial) levels of activation after CNS diseases. It is also fundamental to find out which microglia receptors are specifically activated to induce beneficial or detrimental actions after a CNS disease. Experimental manipulation of these receptors, and/or pharmacological application of their beneficial ligands, may be promising therapeutic approaches used in the future for human neural disorders.

The author thanks to Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPQ), Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES) and PROPESP UFPA for financial support and to Professor Victor Hugh Perry (CNS Inflammation Group of Southampton University) for helpful comments on the manuscript. Author is also grateful to Professor Olle Lindvall (University of Lund, Sweden) for allowing the facilities of his laboratory for MCAO experiments and immunofluorescence analysis.

Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

