Background
Poly(N-isopropyl acrylamide) (pNIPAM) is a thermoresponsive polymer that
undergoes a phase change in a physiologically relevant temperature range. Mammalian cells
can be easily cultured on pNIPAM at 37°C. When the temperature is lowered to below pNIPAM’s
lower critical solution temperature (LCST, 32°C), the polymer’s chains extend and cells
detach in intact sheets [, ]. This detachment method is preferred to enzymatic digestion or
mechanical scraping [–]. Mechanical scraping can result in broken cell sheets and destroyed
cells, while enzymatic digestion does not preserve the cell sheet, breaking it into single
cells. Temperature-dependent lift-off results in an intact cell sheet that can readily
attach to another surface. This non-destructive release of cells opens up a wide range of
applications, including the use of pNIPAM for tissue engineering, for controlling
bioadhesion and bioadsorption, and for manipulation of microorganisms. These uses are
summarized in our recent article [].

PNIPAM is one of the most commonly used stimulus-responsive polymers for research [, ]. There is
currently a great deal of research regarding the development of engineered tissues or
devices using pNIPAM [–]. Many of these devices will ultimately be used on humans. However,
there has been relatively little conclusive research regarding the extent of its
cytotoxicity or biocompatibility [–]. The International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) requires extensive testing of medical devices, with in vitro
cytotoxicity being one of the required assessments [].

It has previously been demonstrated that the NIPAM monomer is toxic []. There are conflicting opinions, however, as to whether the
polymerized form of NIPAM (pNIPAM) is toxic. One reason for this conflict is because there
are very few publications (less than 15 studies) [–, –] that explore the cytotoxicity of
pNIPAM, as compared to hundreds of publications using pNIPAM for cell-based research. None
of the studies are comprehensive. Instead, they focus on isolated cell lines (e.g., only
fibroblasts [], smooth muscle cells [], or endothelial cells []), and employ different methods of cytotoxicity testing (e.g.,
morphologic observations [], concentration
gradients [], or direct contact test []). While some of the studies examine pNIPAM without
any additives, others concern copolymers of pNIPAM [], or other forms such as hydrogels []
or nanoparticles [] that are composed not only of
pNIPAM but also of other compounds. Such compounds could contribute to the cytotoxicity, or
even be the single source of cytotoxicity of the composite product. Only a few of these
studies investigate the cytotoxicity of pure pNIPAM [–]. Of these studies, not one
investigated more than a single polymerization technique, although various polymerization
and deposition techniques are used to generate pNIPAM surfaces for cell sheet engineering.
In addition, these studies examined different forms of pNIPAM, such as hydrogels [], nanoparticles [, ], or pNIPAM in solution [, –].

It is critical to investigate the cytotoxicity of pNIPAM not only at body temperature, but
also below pNIPAM’s LCST, as temperature may affect the cytotoxicity of the polymer. Only
one of the above mentioned studies [] investigated
the cytotoxicity of pNIPAM above and below its LCST; Vihola, et al., showed that there is
lower cellular viability above the LCST of the polymer. The remaining studies yielded
contradictory results, including no significant cytotoxicity found [], different cell viability depending on cell type [], lower cell viability in the presence of lower
concentrations of pNIPAM [, , ], and lower cell
viability in the presence of higher pNIPAM concentrations []. None of these studies investigated the effects of growing cells directly on
pNIPAM-coated surfaces or the effect of pNIPAM fragments that may leach out of the surface
into the cell culture medium.

In this work, we examine the cytotoxicity of the pNIPAM monomer, pNIPAM, and pNIPAM films.
PNIPAM was synthesized using free radical polymerization (frpNIPAM), as this is one of the
most commonly used methods for the synthesis of pNIPAM for cytotoxicity studies [–, ]. Commercially available pNIPAM was also used for the
experiments (cpNIPAM). PNIPAM films were generated using vapor-phase plasma polymerization
of NIPAM (ppNIPAM), spin-coating of cpNIPAM/tetraethyl orthosilicate sol gel (spNIPAM),
spin-coating of cpNIPAM dissolved in isopropanol (cpNIPAM/IPA), and spin-coating of
frpNIPAM, also dissolved in isopropanol (frpNIPAM/IPA). These techniques alone account for
the majority of the ongoing research in this area (~90%). The cytotoxicity of NIPAM and
pNIPAM was assessed using four different cell lines: endothelial cells, epithelial cells,
smooth muscle cells, and fibroblasts. pNIPAM’s toxicity was assessed in two ways: by direct
contact with the cells and by testing pNIPAM extracts.

Materials
PNIPAM (molecular weight of ~40,000) was purchased from Polysciences, Inc. (Warrington,
PA). N-isopropyl acrylamide (99%), and diethyl ether (99.5%, extra dry)
were purchased from Acros Organics (Geel, Belgium). 2,2’-azobis(2-methylpropionitrile)
(AIBN, 98%), tetratethyl orthosilicate (TEOS), dioxane (99.8%, anhydrous), and isopropanol
were purchased from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). The 200 proof ethanol, HPLC-grade
methanol, HPLC-grade dichloromethane, HPLC-grade acetone, and hydrochloric acid (1 normal)
were purchased from Honeywell Burdick &amp; Jackson (Deer Park, TX).

Round glass cover slips (15 mm) were purchased from Ted Pella, Inc. (Redding, CA). Square
glass cover slips were purchased from Fisher Scientific (Pittsburgh, PA). The silicon chips
were obtained from Silitec (Salem, OR).

Dulbecco’s modified eagle’s medium (DMEM), minimum essential medium with alpha modification
(αMEM), and Dulbecco’s phosphate buffered saline without calcium or magnesium were purchased
from HyCLone (Logan, UT). Bovine aortic endothelial cells (BAECs) were from Genlantis (San
Diego, CA). Smooth muscle cells (CRL-1444, SMCs), fibroblasts (MC3T3-E1, 3T3s) and Vero
cells (CCL-81) were obtained from ATCC (Manassas, VA). Fetal bovine serum (FBS) and
penicillin/streptomycin were from HyCLone (Logan, UT). Minimum Essential Medium
Non-Essential Amino Acids solution (MEM NEAA) and 0.25% trypsin/EDTA were purchased from
Gibco (Grand Island, NY). CellTiter 96® AQueous One Solution Cell Proliferation Assay (MTS)
was obtained from Promega (Madison, WI). LIVE/DEAD viability kit was purchased from
Invitrogen (Grand Island, NY).

Methods
Surface preparation
For surface analysis, silicon wafers were cut into 1 cm × 1 cm squares for X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and 0.8 cm × 3 cm rectangles for goniometry. The
surfaces were cleaned in an ultrasonic cleaner from VWR International (West Chester, PA)
twice in each of the following solutions for 5 minutes: dichloromethane, acetone, and
methanol.

Glass cover slips were cleaned for 30 min with an acid wash (a 1:1 solution by volume of
methanol and hydrochloric acid), rinsed with deionized water, and dried with nitrogen.

Plasma polymerization (ppNIPAM)
Plasma polymerization was performed in a reactor chamber fabricated to our design
specifications by Scientific Glass (Albuquerque, NM) following a method previously
described []. To spark a plasma in the chamber,
two 2.5 cm copper electrodes were connected to a Dressler (Stolberg, Germany) matching
network and Cesar radio frequency (rf) power generator from Advanced Energy (Fort Collins,
CO). Argon etching (40 W, 2 min) and methane adhesion-promoting layer (80 W, 5 min) were
performed before pNIPAM deposition. During pNIPAM deposition, the power setting of the rf
generator was slowly decreased from 100 W to 0 W (100 W for 5 minutes, 10 W for 5 minutes,
5 W for 5 minutes, 1 W for 10 minutes, followed by 10 minutes at 0 W). After the samples
were removed from the reactor chamber, they were rinsed with cold deionized water to
remove any uncross-linked monomer, dried with nitrogen, placed in a Petri dish and sealed
with Parafilm under nitrogen.

Free radical polymerization of NIPAM (frpNIPAM)
Free radical polymerization of NIPAM was adapted from Vihola et al []. Briefly, the monomer (133 mmol) was dissolved in 55 mL of
dioxane. The polymerization solution was degassed with nitrogen and heated to 70°C. Once
the desired temperature was reached, the solution of initiator [AIBN (0.1%, 0.133 mmol) in
5 mL of dioxane] was added to the polymerization solution. The reaction was allowed to
proceed for 18 hours. After 18 hours, the polymerization solution was cooled to room
temperature and the polymer was precipitated into excess cold diethyl either twice. The
resulting powder was dried in a vacuum oven overnight.

SpNIPAM solution preparation
Solution preparation using sol–gel (spNIPAM) was performed following a method previously
described []. Briefly, 35 mg of pNIPAM, 5 mL of
deionized water, and 200 μL of hydrochloric acid were mixed and a weight percentage of
pNIPAM was determined. In a separate container, 250 μL of TEOS solution (1 TEOS : 3.8
ethanol : 1.1 water : 0.0005 HCl), 43 μL of deionized water, and 600 μL of ethanol were
mixed and weighted. The appropriate amount of the pNIPAM solution was added to achieve the
final weight percentage of pNIPAM of 0.35%.

SpNIPAM solution deposition
100–250 μL of the spNIPAM solution was evenly distributed onto clean glass cover slips
and Si chips placed on a spin coater, model 100 spinner from Brewer Science, Inc. (Rolla,
MO). The surfaces were spun at 2000 rpm for 60 seconds. The surfaces were stored under
nitrogen in a Parafilm covered Petri dish until used for cell culture or surface
analysis.

Deposition of FrpNIPAM/isopropanol and CpNIPAM/isopropanol
FrpNIPAM or cpNIPAM were dissolved in isopropanol to achieve 1% of pNIPAM by weight. The
solutions were the spun onto surfaces in the same manner as the spNIPAM surfaces.

Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
The NMR spectra of frpNIPAM and cpNIPAM were taken with an Avance III NMR spectrometer
(Bruker, Billerica, MA). It is a 300 MHz, standard bore, nanobay instrument. Spectra were
obtained on a 5 mm broadband/proton probe, at room temperature, using CDCl3 as a
solvent.

Size exclusion chromatography
Size exclusion chromatography (SEC) analyses were performed in chloroform with 0.5% (v/v)
triethylamine (1 mL/min) using a Waters Breeze system equipped with a 2707 autosampler, a
1515 isocratic HPLC pump and a 2414 refractive index detector. Two styragel columns
(Polymer Laboratories; 5 μm Mix-C), which were kept in a column heater at 35°C, were used
for separation. The columns were calibrated with polystyrene standards (Varian).

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
Survey spectra of the pNIPAM surfaces were taken at the National ESCA and Surface
Analysis Center (NESAC/BIO) using Kratos Axis-Ultra DLD (Manchester, UK) and Surface
Science Instruments S-probe spectrometers. Both instruments use monochromatized Al Kα
X-rays, low-energy electron flood gun for charge neutralization, and were operated in low
(10-9 Torr) pressure. The analysis area was &lt; 800 μm. Data analysis was
carried out using the appropriate analysis programs. The binding energy scales of the high
resolution spectra were calibrated by assigning the most intense C1s high resolution peak
a binding energy of 285.0 eV. A linear function was used to model the background.

Goniometry
Contact angle measurements were performed with an Advanced Goniometer model 300-UPG from
ramé-Hart Instrument Co. (Mountain Lakes, NJ) with an environmental chamber and the
DROPimage Standard program. Inverted bubble contact angles were taken in Millipore water
(18 MΩ). Angles were obtained at room temperature (21°C) and at body temperature (37°C)
using the Temp Controller model 100–500 connected to the environmental chamber.

Cell culture
For cell culture, BAECs, SMCs, and Vero cells were cultured according to previously
established protocols [] in DMEM supplemented
with 10% FBS, 1% penicillin/streptomycin. For BAECs, 1% MEM NEAA was also added. 3T3s were
cultured in αMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. Cells were
incubated at 37°C in a humid atmosphere with 5% CO2. When confluent, the cells
were washed with 0.25% trypsin/EDTA (DPBS for BAECs) and lifted from cell culture flasks
with 0.25% trypsin/EDTA.

Cytotoxicity testing
All cytotoxicity experiments (except for plating efficiency) were performed in 5% FBS
media according to ISO standards []. Media
without phenol red was used for experiments evaluated with the MTS assay, as the dye
contributes to increased background absorbance [].

Direct contact test
For the direct contact test, cells were seeded directly on spNIPAM, frpNIPAM, cpNIPAM,
and ppNIPAM surfaces (24-well TCPS plate, 20,000 cells/well) in a regular cell culture
media. Morphological observations, MTS assay, and LIVE/DEAD assay were performed after 48
and 96 hours of cell culture. The procedure for LIVE/DEAD assay was adapted from the
procedure supplied by the manufacturer []. To
create combined LIVE/DEAD solution, 1 μL of the Calcein solution (to stain live cells) and
1 μL of the ethidium solution (to stain dead cells) were added per 1 mL of DPBS.
Fluorescent images were taken on a Nikon Eclipse TS200F inverted microscope with an
epi-fluorescence attachment (Nikon Instruments, Melville, NY) and a SPOT Insight color
mosaic digital camera (Diagnostic Instruments, Sterling Heights, MI).

Preparation of extracts
Extracts from ppNIPAM, spNIPAM, cpNIPAM, and frpNIPAM were obtained at room (20°C) and
body (37°C) temperature. To make extracts, a pNIPAM surface was incubated in regular cell
culture media (surface to liquid volume ration of 1.5 cm2/mL) for 24 hours at
room and body temperature. After 24 hours, the resulting extracts were transferred to a
centrifuge tube and kept in a refrigerator for experiments with cells.

Plating efficiency
The above mentioned extracts were used for plating efficiency assay. The assay was
performed according to the method developed by Ham and Puck []. Briefly, 200 cells were seeded in a round Petri dish containing 5
mL of the extracts or 5 mL of regular cell culture media (control). Cells were left in an
incubator for an amount of time that allowed them to double ten times (that time was
determined based on the doubling time of the specific cell line). After the required
amount of time cells were fixed and stained using Carnoy’s fixative (3:1 methanol : acetic
acid by volume, 0.5% crystal violet by weight). The colonies formed on the dish were
counted and compared to the colonies formed on the control. The plating efficiency was
calculated using the following equation:

Extracts study
To perform experiments with extracts, 8000 cells were seeded per well in a 96-well plate.
After 24 hours in regular cell culture media, the media were replaced with extracts in 3
concentrations (1% extracts in regular media, 10%, and 100% extracts). MTS assay was
performed after 24 and 48 hours. For the MTS assay, 20 μL of MTS solution were added to
each well. After 3 hours of incubation at 37°C, absorbance readings were measured on a
SpectraMax M2 plate reader (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA) at 490 nm.

Concentration gradient
For concentration gradient experiments, frpNIPAM and cpNIPAM were dissolved in tissue
culture media in the concentrations of 0.1, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 mg/mL.
Cells were seeded in 96-well tissue culture polystyrene (TCPS) plates at the concentration
of 8000 cells/well. Cells were cultured in the presence of the regular cell culture media
for 24 hours. After 24 hours, the culture media was replaced with the test solution
(pNIPAM dissolved in media). Morphology observations and MTS assay were performed after 24
and 48 hours of exposure to the test solutions.

Statistical analysis
Statistically relevant data were obtained by replicating all procedures three times. Each
replication of the experiment utilized three surfaces, with each surface analyzed in three
different sites across the surface. This method was used for both surface analysis and
cell behavior studies. The results are expressed as average values ± SEM. Excel’s ANOVA
function and a student t-test were used to verify statistical relevance,
with significance established at p&lt;0.05.

Results and discussion
Polymerization and surface preparation
Free radical polymerization is one of the most commonly used methods for the synthesis of
pNIPAM for cytotoxicity studies [–, ].
Therefore, in addition to performing cytotoxicity experiments with NIPAM monomer and
commercially available pNIPAM (cpNIPAM), pNIPAM was synthesized by free radical
polymerization using AIBN. The resulting polymer (frpNIPAM) was examined using nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy to confirm successful polymerization.

Figure  shows two NMR spectra: the frpNIPAM
polymer (top, in black), and the NIPAM monomer (bottom, red). Highlighted in the box is
the region between 5.5 and 6.5 ppm, in which peaks for hydrogens adjacent to double bonded
carbons usually appear. These peaks are clearly visible in the spectrum of the monomer, as
NIPAM has 3 hydrogens adjacent to two carbons joined with a double bond (see them labeled
with a, b, and c on the inset in Figure  of the
chemical structure of NIPAM and on the NMR spectra). These peaks are, however, missing
from the NMR spectrum of the frpNIPAM. The disappearance of these peaks indicates
successful formulation of the polymer.NMR spectrum for frpNIPAM and NIPAM. Inset shows chemical structure of
the NIPAM monomer. Hydrogens bound to alkenes are indicated as “a”,
“b”, and “c” in the inset and spectrum.



To confirm polymerization of frpNIPAM, the polymer was further tested using size
exclusion chromatography. The weight-average molecular weight of frpNIPAM was found to be
104,000 (data not shown), with a polydispersity index of 1.89. FrpNIPAM has a higher
molecular weight than cpNIPAM, the other pNIPAM polymer used for testing in this study,
which is reported to have a molecular weight of approximately 40,000.

PNIPAM films were generated using vapor-phase plasma polymerization of NIPAM (ppNIPAM)
[], spin -coating of cpNIPAM/tetraethyl
orthosilicate sol gel (spNIPAM) [], spin-coating
of cpNIPAM dissolved in isopropanol (1 wt% cpNIPAM/IPA), and spin-coating of frpNIPAM,
also dissolved in isopropanol (1 wt% frpNIPAM/IPA). These techniques account for the
majority of the ongoing research in this area (estimated ~90% of number of publications).
Figure  shows schematically how the surfaces
were generated. Commercially available pNIPAM was used to make spNIPAM and cpNIPAM/IPA
surfaces. The NIPAM monomer was used to directly generate plasma polymerized surfaces
(ppNIPAM) as well as frpNIPAM, which was in turn used for generation of frpNIPAM surfaces.
Overall, four different types of pNIPAM-coated surfaces were used for the testing of
pNIPAM’s cytotoxicity (ppNIPAM, spNIPAM, cpNIPAM/IPA, and frpNIPAM/IPA), and two pNIPAM
formulations were used for concentration gradient experiments (frpNIPAM and cpNIPAM). For
more detail about ppNIPAM and spNIPAM surfaces please see our earlier publications [, , ].Overview of polymerization and surface preparation techniques used in
this manuscript.


Surface chemistry
The surface chemistry of these pNIPAM-coated surfaces was assessed by X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (XPS). Figure a shows the results of
survey and high resolution C1s spectra for all four types of surfaces. The first row of
data shows the expected values (“Theoretical”) as calculated from the stoichiometry of the
monomer. An additional column for silicon (Si) was added to the table as spNIPAM contains
Si due to the TEOS solution. In addition, since the pNIPAM was coated on Si wafers, the
presence of Si could indicate that pNIPAM films showing Si peaks are ≤50 nm thick.
PpNIPAM, cpNIPAM, and frpNIPAM surfaces have elemental composition consistent with that
predicted from the monomer structure (~75% C, 12.5% O, and 12.5% N). However, spNIPAM
surfaces’ composition differs significantly from the theoretical composition (45.7% C,
36.8% O, 2% N, and 15.5% Si). The high standard deviation of the XPS data indicates that
the spNIPAM surfaces did not have an even surface coverage. The XPS analysis revealed a
large percentage of either TEOS or underlying surface exposed (Si accounting for 15.5% of
elemental composition), which most likely resulted from pNIPAM precipitating out of the
sol gel during the deposition. FrpNIPAM surfaces also show a small percentage of surface
exposed (0.2% of Si present in the survey spectrum). Examination of the data showed that
this variation occurs from spot to spot, not from sample to sample, and most of the
surface was still covered with pNIPAM coating. For high resolution C1s spectra for all
four types of surfaces see Additional file :
Figure S1.XPS and contact angle results.a) Elemental composition of
pNIPAM-coated surfaces from XPS data analysis; b) Contact angles of
pNIPAM-coated surfaces measured at room and body temperature. N=9 with a standard
deviation of ±1, except for spNIPAM with standard deviation of ±7.



Polymer thermoresponse
The thermoresponse of the pNIPAM-coated surfaces was examined by goniometry. Inverted
bubble contact angles were taken at room temperature (20°C) and at body temperature
(37°C). Figure b shows the results of these
measurements. The controls (Si chips) did not show any thermoresponse, with both average
values at room temperature (blue) and body temperature (red) at ~45°C. In comparison,
pNIPAM-coated surfaces showed thermoresponse. Although the values differ for different
preparation techniques, all surfaces displayed thermoresponse with contact angles at body
temperature larger than those at room temperature, which is the desired result for
surfaces coated with pNIPAM []. The large
standard deviations for spNIPAM and frpNIPAM are much larger (26 and 30% for spNIPAM and
frpNIPAM respectively at body temperature) than those of ppNIPAM and cpNIPAM (13 and 19%),
indicating that spNIPAM and frpNIPAM yield substrates with more spot-to-spot variability,
confirming our XPS observations.

Cytotoxicity experiments
All four types of pNIPAM-coated surfaces were used for cytotoxicity studies with four
different cell types: bovine aortic endothelial cells (BAECs), monkey kidney epithelial
cells (Veros), rat aorta smooth muscle cells (SMCs), and fibroblasts (3T3s). In addition
to pNIPAM-coated surfaces, we also tested the NIPAM and pNIPAM powders, without tethering
them to a surface.

Cytotoxicity of the NIPAM monomer
Cytotoxicity of the monomer was tested using an MTS assay, which tests mitochondrial
activity in live cells []. Table  shows the results of cytotoxicity experiments with
the monomer. It was previously reported that the monomer shows cytotoxicity effects at
concentrations from 0.5 mg/mL, with cellular viability decreasing with increasing
concentration of the monomer []. For this study,
NIPAM was dissolved in cell culture media at the concentration of 5 mg/mL, and tested with
the above mentioned four cell types. The compound is considered cytotoxic if cellular
viability after exposure to the compound is below 70% [].MTS assay results of the cytotoxicity experiments for all four cell types
after 24 and 48 hours of exposure to the NIPAM monomer
	% Viability	
	24 hours of exposure	48 hours of exposure	
	Average	Standard deviation	Average	Standard deviation	
BAECS	38	3	18	2	
Veros	32	3	16	9	
SMCs	59	16	36	13	
3T3s	82	6	48	4	
Bold indicates viability above 70%.



All cell types showed reduced viability after 24 and 48 hours of cell culture in the
presence of the monomer solution. 3T3s showed the most resistance to the toxic effects of
NIPAM, with cell viability of slightly above 80% after 24 hours of exposure (at the
concentration of 5 mg/mL, bold in Table ). After
48 hours however, the viability of 3T3s decreased to below 70% (to 48%). The remaining
cell types had significantly lowered viability after 24 hours, and this viability
decreased even more after 48 hours of exposure. Therefore, although the monomer proved to
be cytotoxic to all tested cell types, the extent to which it is toxic to cells at the
concentration tested in this study depended on the cell type: the endothelial (BAECs) and
epithelial (Vero) cells were the most sensitive to the monomer, whereas the fibroblasts
were the most resistant.Plating efficiency results for BAEC, Vero, SMC, and 3T3 cells exposed to
the NIPAM monomer and extracts from ppNIPAM, spNIPAM, cpNIPAM, and
frpNIPAM
Type of extracts	Plating efficiency	
	BAECs	Veros	SMCs	3T3s	
NIPAM	0	0	0	0	
ppNIPAM (20°C)	98	94	95	96	
PPNIPAM (37°C)	103	93	89	91	
spNIPAM (20°C)	100	96	100	101	
spNIPAM (37°C)	105	91	93	82	
cpNIPAM (20°C)	102	94	88	97	
CPNIPAM (37°C)	102	90	91	78	
frpNIPAM (20°C0)	97	91	93	91	
frpNIPAM (37°C)	108	90	98	88	
Bold indicates extracts with decreased viability at 37°C.



Cytotoxicity of pNIPAM-coated substrates
The cytotoxicity of pNIPAM-coated surfaces was evaluated in three different ways: by
direct contact test, plating efficiency, and by an MTS assay evaluating cellular viability
after cell culture in the presence of pNIPAM extracts [, ]. Direct contact tests indicate
how cells respond to being cultured directly on pNIPAM-coated surfaces, as opposed to
plating efficiency and extracts, which test cellular response to pNIPAM in a more indirect
manner.

Direct contact testing consists of cells being cultured directly on the pNIPAM-coated
surfaces []. Briefly, cells were cultured on the
surfaces for up to 96 hours. Figure  shows cell
viabilities after 48 and 96 hours of cell culture on ppNIPAM (a), spNIPAM (b), frpNIPAM
(c), and cpNIPAM (d). The first column shows the MTS assay results for all four cell
types, after these cells were cultured on pNIPAM coated surfaces. For ppNIPAM (a),
frpNIPAM (c), and cpNIPAM (d) surfaces, all cell types showed viability of ≥70% for both
time points. SMCs and 3T3s showed significantly lower viability (below 70%) after 48 hours
of culture on spNIPAM surfaces when compared to BAECs and Veros. However, after 96 hours,
cellular viability is comparable to the other surfaces (at ~90%). It appears, that initial
attachment and proliferation of 3T3s and SMCs is hindered on spNIPAM surfaces, indicating
these cells may be more sensitive to the surface chemistry and topography differences
found using XPS and goniometry.Direct contact test results. MTS assay results (first column) for all
four cell types after cell culture for 48 and 96 hours on (a) ppNIPAM
surfaces, (b) spNIPAM surfaces, (c) frpNIPAM surfaces, and
(d) cpNIPAM surfaces. Light microscopy (second column) and LIVE/DEAD
assay results (third column) for (a) SMCs after 96 hours of culture on
ppNIPAM surfaces, (b) 3T3s after 96 hours of culture on spNIPAM
surfaces, (c) BAECs after 96 hours of culture on frpNIPAM surfaces, and
(d) Veros after 96 hours of culture on cpNIPAM surfaces. Red line
indicates the viability of 70%, below which a compound is considered to be
cytotoxic. Asterisks point to the exposed surfaces from which cells have detached
(in black). The arrow points to a sheet of detached, live cells.



Morphological observations (second column, cells shown after 96 hours) revealed cells
with normal morphology, spreading and growing to confluency on all four types of surfaces.
However, when seeded on spNIPAM surfaces, cells first appeared to attach to the exposed
glass surface, not to the pNIPAM coating. The uneven coverage on the surfaces,
precipitation of pNIPAM from the sol gel solution observed at some spots on the surfaces,
and the possibility of the presence of traces of other materials on the surface (such as
ethanol used for sol gel process) are likely to result in surfaces that do not promote
cell adhesion. Overall, there were fewer cells attached to spNIPAM surfaces after 24 hours
than to the other three types of surfaces. This could explain lower values of viability
after 48 hours. After 96 hours, cells that did attach to the surface had enough time to
divide, resulting in higher viability values.

The third column of Figure  shows the results of
a LIVE/DEAD assay on the four types of surfaces. Cells attached to the surfaces stained
green, meaning that they were alive. As the LIVE/DEAD assay requires incubation at room
temperature, most of the cells detached from the surfaces leaving exposed black pNIPAM
surfaces (indicated by the asterisks in Figure ).
This detachment was expected and desired, as it proves that these surfaces are
thermoresponsive. A detached, wrinkled sheet of BAECs can be seen in Figure  (c) (indicated with a red arrow). There were a few
red stained (dead) cells visible on some of the images taken during the test. However,
controls (uncoated glass slides) also showed a small percentage of dead cells after
staining (see Additional file : Figure S2).
There was no difference in the ratio of dead cells to live cells between the controls and
test surfaces. Therefore, it can be concluded that there were no cytotoxic effects found
for the surfaces and cell types evaluated in this experiment.

Extracts
The pNIPAM-coated surfaces were used to generate pNIPAM extracts, which were then used
for cytotoxicity testing. One of the cytotoxicity tests performed was plating efficiency.
This is a very sensitive test, as isolated cells do not have their neighbors to shield
them from potentially harmful compounds present in the cell culture media []. The controls, cells cultured in regular cell
culture without pNIPAM extracts, are under optimal conditions. If there is anything in the
pNIPAM extracts that prevents the cells from proliferating, the percent plating efficiency
would be decreased when compared to controls.

Table  shows the results of this test for all
four cell types and for all four types of surfaces. The extracts were made at two
different temperatures, 37 and 20°C, to test if the temperature has any influence on what
(if anything) leaches off the surface into the surrounding media. It is important to note
that larger amounts of polymer are expected to be found in the extracts generated at room
temperature, since the polymer films are not covalently bound to the surfaces. As
expected, no colonies were formed in the presence of 5 mg/mL of NIPAM in the media,
verifying that the NIPAM monomer is cytotoxic. The remaining extracts did not result in
significant decrease of plating efficiency for BAECs, Veros, or SMCs.

3T3s showed a slightly decreased plating efficiency for cells exposed to spNIPAM,
frpNIPAM, and cpNIPAM extracts generated at 37°C (~10%) when compared to the same extracts
generated at room temperature. This effect did not occur for ppNIPAM surfaces. This is
most likely because ppNIPAM surfaces are the only physically grafted surfaces tested in
this study, and consequently, are likely to be the most stable surfaces. Statistical
analysis revealed that there is a significant difference in plating efficiencies for
cpNIPAM surfaces between 20 and 37°C, and for spNIPAM surfaces between these two
temperatures, with lower plating efficiencies values for extracts obtained at 37°C.
SpNIPAM surfaces showed lower initial attachment for 3T3s during the direct contact test,
therefore, it is possible that it is the inhospitable surface chemistry of these surfaces
that obstructs initial cell attachment and growth. It is important to mention, that these
values are still above the 70% cytotoxicity cut off; thus, although the results are
significant, the lowered values do not render these surfaces cytotoxic.

The extracts from the pNIPAM coated surfaces were further evaluated by first growing
cells on uncoated TCPS for 24 hours with regular media, and then changing the media for
extracts. Three extracts concentrations were used: 100%, 10% (10% extracts, 90% regular
media), and 1%. Experiments on epithelial cells, smooth muscle cells, and fibroblasts did
not show any drop in cellular viability for any of the extracts concentrations or time
points. See Additional file : Figure S3,
Additional file : Figure S4, Additional file
: Figure S5 for these results. However,
BAECs consistently showed decreased cell viability for all eight types of extracts after
48 hours of exposure at the 100% concentration.

Figure  shows the results for all concentrations,
time points, and types of extracts for BAECs. It is immediately visible, after 24 hour
exposure the 1 and 10% concentrations do not affect the viability, as the viabilities are
all ~100%. The average viabilities drop slightly after 24 hours of exposure to 100%
extracts. However, as the assay results are still at or above 80%, they are still
considered not cytotoxic. Forty eight hours of exposure at 1 and 10% did not result in a
significant drop of viabilities (although the average viabilities are lower than the
corresponding viabilities after 24 hours). The only time and concentration for which the
viabilities of BAECs were lowered to about (or below 70%) was 100% extracts at 48 hours of
exposure (red box in Figure ). None of the other
cell types showed similar sensitivity (see Additional file : Figure S3, Additional file : Figure S4, Additional file : Figure S5). This result agrees with other published studies,
where endothelial cells were found to be more sensitive than epithelial cells when exposed
to cytotoxic compounds [–].MTS assay results for culture of BAECs in the presence of pNIPAM
extracts. Red line indicates viability of 70%, below which a compound is
considered to be cytotoxic. Red box indicates the only time and concentration for
which the viability of BAECs was lowered to ≤ 70% across all pNIPAM coated surfaces.
Corresponding figures for Veros, SMCs, and 3T3s can be found in supplemental
information.



Of the four surface types, spNIPAM extracts had the highest average viability at this
time point and concentration. This could possibly be explained by the uneven coverage of
spNIPAM surfaces. SpNIPAM surfaces had the most uneven coating, with a lot of underlying
surface exposed (as evidenced by the XPS measurements showed in Figure a). Therefore, they likely had the smallest amount of deposited
pNIPAM, which could result in smaller amounts of pNIPAM (and other compounds that were
involved in the deposition process) transferred to the extracts; therefore, fewer
potential toxic effects.

Concentration gradients
The higher sensitivity of BAECs was confirmed in concentration gradient experiments.
Here, frpNIPAM and cpNIPAM were dissolved in regular cell culture media in concentrations
ranging from 0.1 mg/mL to 10 mg/mL. See Additional file : Figure S6, Additional file : Figure S7, Additional file : Figure S8 for the results for the other three cell types. All
these cell types showed average viability of around 100%, with small standard deviations
for both cpNIPAM and frpNIPAM. BAECs proved to be more sensitive in this test as well.

Figure  shows the result of concentration
gradient experiments for BAECs exposed to cpNIPAM (a) and frpNIPAM (b). Cells exposed to
frpNIPAM maintained average viability of 80% for both time points. However, these
experiments yielded large standard deviations, with several values for single experiments
dropping to or below 70%. CpNIPAM had even larger effect on BAECs. Starting at about 3/4
mg/mL, the viabilities for both time points (24 and 48 hours) decreased to reach values as
low as 20% viability at the concentration of 10 mg/mL. Due to this unexpected result, this
experiment was repeated 6 times (instead of the usual 3), to confirm that there indeed is
a trend, and that the result is not due to infected cells or media. All six experiments
showed a similar trend, with the viability starting to decrease between 3 and 5 mg/mL. The
large standard deviation of the composite graph results from the differences between the
single experiments, as the viabilities did vary slightly between the runs.MTS assay results for concentration gradient experiments with BAECs (a) on
cpNIPAM/IPA surfaces, and (b) on frpNIPAM/IPA surfaces. Red line indicates
viability of 70%, below which a compound is considered to be cytotoxic.
Corresponding figures for Veros, SMCs, and 3T3s can be found in supplemental
information.



This variability is not explained by the presence of bacterial or other contaminants in
the cpNIPAM test solution, as no decrease in viability, normal growth, and proliferation
were observed in the other three cell types that were exposed to the same test solution.
NMR of cpNIPAM was performed to confirm the identity and the extent of polymerization of
this compound, which could affect the cytotoxicity. While confirming the identity of the
polymer, the NMR spectrum showed presence of small amount of the monomer. The peaks
corresponding to double bonds in the monomer were not visible on the NMR spectrum of
frpNIPAM (see Additional file : Figure S9).
The presence of small amounts of monomer could explain the results of the concentration
gradient experiment. It would also account for the variability between the six experiments
performed with cpNIPAM test solutions, as different amounts of the monomer could end up in
the wells, resulting in different cellular toxicity. Since endothelial cells appeared to
be most sensitive to the monomer, purification of the polymer before using it with this
cell type would be recommended.

Conclusions
In this work, we performed a comprehensive study of cytotoxicity of pNIPAM and
pNIPAM-coated surfaces. We used commercially available pNIPAM as well as PNIPAM synthesized
in our laboratory for the tests. These two polymers where used for the investigation of the
cytotoxicity of pNIPAM using a concentration gradient test. We also generated four different
pNIPAM-coated surfaces for the determination of the cytotoxicity of pNIPAM-coated surfaces:
ppNIPAM, spNIPAM, frpNIPAM, and cpNIPAM. These surfaces were extensively tested with
extracts and direct contact experiments. The cytotoxicity tests were performed with
endothelial, epithelial, fibroblast, and smooth muscle cells.

We found that the NIPAM monomer in pure powdered form at 0.5 mg/mL is toxic to all tested
cell types, except to fibroblasts at short term exposure. Endothelial and epithelial cells
were the most sensitive to the monomer, while fibroblasts were the most resistant. Although
initially the attachment and proliferation of fibroblast and smooth muscle cells was
hindered on spNIPAM surfaces, long term experiments proved that all pNIPAM-coated surfaces
were not cytotoxic to the four cell types evaluated in the direct contact test. Plating
efficiency values did not show cytotoxic effects, except for the monomer, which was an
expected result. Extract and concentration gradient experiments showed no cytotoxic effects
when tested with epithelial, smooth muscle, and fibroblast cells. Endothelial cells showed
increased sensitivity to extracts at the 100% concentration after 48 hour exposure.
Concentration gradient experiments showed that endothelial cells were more sensitive to
commercially available pNIPAM, which was a likely result of presence of some monomer. These
results agree with other published findings, where endothelial cells were found to be more
sensitive than epithelial cells.

Since it was discovered that cellular sensitivity to pNIPAM varies depending on cell type,
it would be recommended to perform cytotoxicity testing on cell types previously unexposed
to pNIPAM before using them with this polymer for research. Also, the purity of the polymer
is essential, as demonstrated by the concentration gradient experiments. We also found that
while cell viability on pNIPAM surfaces decreases when compared to controls, the viability
also seems to be deposition type dependent, with sol–gel-based pNIPAM surfaces being the
least biocompatible.

Electronic supplementary material
Additional file 5: Figure S5: MTS assay results for culture of 3T3s in the
presence of pNIPAM extracts. Red line indicates viability of 70%, below which a
compound is considered to be cytotoxic. (PNG 92 KB)



Additional file 1: Figure S1: High resolution C1s spectra for (a) ppNIPAM, (b)
spNIPAM, (c) frpNIPAM, and (d) cpNIPAM surfaces. (PNG 65 KB)



Additional file 2: Figure S2: LIVE/DEAD assay result for SMC, 3T3, BAEC, and Vero
cells cultured on uncoated glass slides (controls). (PNG 773 KB)



Additional file 3: Figure S3: MTS assay results for culture of SMCs in the
presence of pNIPAM extracts. Red line indicates viability of 70%, below which a
compound is considered to be cytotoxic. (PNG 98 KB)



Additional file 4: Figure S4: MTS assay results for culture of Veros in the
presence of pNIPAM extracts. Red line indicates viability of 70%, below which a
compound is considered to be cytotoxic. (PNG 93 KB)



Additional file 6: Figure S6: MTS assay results for concentration gradient
experiments with SMCs (a) on cpNIPAM/IPA surfaces, and (b) on frpNIPAM/IPA
surfaces. Red line indicates viability of 70%, below which a compound is
considered to be cytotoxic. (PNG 49 KB)



Additional file 7: Figure S7: MTS assay results for concentration gradient
experiments with Veros (a) on cpNIPAM/IPA surfaces, and (b) on frpNIPAM/IPA
surfaces. Red line indicates viability of 70%, below which a compound is
considered to be cytotoxic. (PNG 48 KB)



Additional file 8: Figure S8: MTS assay results for concentration gradient
experiments with 3T3s (a) on cpNIPAM/IPA surfaces, and (b) on frpNIPAM/IPA
surfaces. Red line indicates viability of 70%, below which a compound is
considered to be cytotoxic. (PNG 51 KB)



Additional file 9: Figure S9: NMR spectra of frpNIPAM (top, blue) and cpNIPAM
(bottom, red). Red box indicates the peaks corresponding to hydrogens attached to
double bonded carbons (indicative of the presence of monomer). (PNG 24 KB)



