Introduction
There is good evidence that cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) is highly effective for
        people with typical posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) precipitated by a range of traumas
        (National Institute of Clinical Excellence: http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/CG26) including terrorist attacks. However, PTSD is
        not the only psychological reaction to such acute traumas and there is less evidence
        regarding the effectiveness of treatment of other clinical problems commonly occurring after
        trauma either with or without PTSD.

Travel phobic symptoms were a significant consequence of the terrorist attacks on London's
        public transport system (Handley, Salkovskis, Scragg and Ehlers, in press). Such symptoms
        occurred both as part of the full syndrome of PTSD and as a separate diagnosis of Specific
        (Travel) Phobia. A similar pattern has also been noted after road traffic accidents (Ehring,
        Ehlers and Glucksman, ). However, the
        distinction between PTSD and travel phobia is not necessarily clear-cut, with considerable
        overlap of symptomatology. A key question is how well travel phobia triggered by these
        bombings responds to CBT, and to what extent treatment needs to be modified in relation to
        the distinction between Specific Phobia and PTSD.

The present paper describes the approach developed by the authors to meet the need for
        treatment following the London bombings in those people reporting clinically significant
        travel avoidance as their main clinical problem. A consecutive case series is reported.

Assessment
There appeared to be a spectrum of responses to the London bombings encompassing travel
          fears and avoidance. At initial assessment at our clinic, most patients referred primarily
          for these phobic symptoms also reported symptoms of PTSD to varying degrees (Handley et
          al., in press).

Treatment
The overlap in phobic and PTSD symptoms raises the important question of whether
          treatment should follow the principles of CBT for phobias or for PTSD. In the following
          paper the treatment protocol developed by the authors to address the travel phobia is
          described, including some elements from Cognitive Therapy for PTSD
          (Ehlers, Clark, Hackmann, McManus and Fennel, ) and the circumstances under which the full PTSD treatment protocol was
        used.

Treating travel phobia in trauma survivors: preparation for dealing with phobic fear
Formulation
Drawing on a specific recent episode of anxiety in the presence or anticipation of the
            feared transport situation, the patient and therapist developed a shared formulation of
            the processes maintaining the travel phobia based on the CBT model of maintenance of
            anxiety. A generic model of the type used to give an idiosyncratic patient model is
            shown in . Generic maintenance model of travel phobia



Psychoeducation about anxiety and anxiety responses
Threatening beliefs about the course and consequences of anxiety symptoms were explored
            and the normal symptoms and course of anxiety were discussed and explained.

Formulating and understanding safety-seeking behaviours
Socratic questioning was used to determine the function and effect of the behaviours
            individuals employed in travel situations to keep themselves safe. The patient's
            understanding of the paradoxical effect of safety-seeking behaviours in reinforcing
            threat beliefs and consequently increasing travel anxiety was facilitated through the
            use of analogies and stories. Patients were then encouraged to begin to reverse these
            behaviours within the framework of behavioural experiments.

Probabilities of feared outcome
Where patients had specific fears about being harmed by further bombings on the
            underground it was often useful to calculate the mathematical probability of this
            happening and to compare it to the patient's estimated probability.

Panic work
Panic work was completed where threat beliefs included catastrophic misinterpretations
            of the physical symptoms of anxiety. This work followed Clark's cognitive model of panic
            (Clark, ).

Exposure: stimulus discrimination and testing beliefs
A programme of exposure presented as behavioural experiments with a cognitive rationale
          was agreed with the patient, who had at this point come to entertain the belief more
          readily that avoiding their feared situations or trying to make themselves safe within
          them might actually be perpetuating their anxiety. In vivo sessions commonly took place
          over 3 hours during which patients were exposed to their feared travel situations whilst
          engaging in the cognitive-behavioural interventions described below according to their
          personalized formulations.

Stimulus discrimination
As in Cognitive Therapy for PTSD (Ehlers et al., ), stimulus discrimination is useful with individuals
            experiencing travel phobia with traumatic onset, as one of the factors maintaining the
            phobia may be images or other intrusive memories of the trauma including a
            “felt sense” of danger. First, the therapist and patient together
            identify sensory stimuli that provoke the intrusive trauma memories and negative affect,
            and second, they work together to break the link between the innocuous trigger and the
            memory.

Once identified, the link between the trigger and the memory can be extinguished by
            bringing into awareness the knowledge that they are responding to a memory, not current
            reality, and by focusing on the differences between the “then” and
            the “now”. It is often necessary to identify the triggers in vivo,
            as patients may be entirely unaware of them and may simply experience a sense of
            heightened arousal that appears to be out of the blue and out of their control.
            Similarly, in vivo discrimination training for triggers on transport is very useful.

Behavioural experiments
Threat beliefs in travel phobia can be grouped into two categories: beliefs that
            “this travel situation will harm me”, and beliefs that “my
            response to this travel situation will harm me”. Behavioural experiments
            designed to test the specific and idiosyncratic beliefs central to each patient's travel
            phobia are key to changing these beliefs and enabling them to overcome their fears.
            Carrying out these experiments in vivo with the therapist is particularly effective as
            it allows clear observation of the behaviours driven by the beliefs, which in turn makes
            it easier to identify and test the problematic cognitions.

Safety-seeking behaviours interweave
Throughout the in vivo work care was taken to notice the patients' safety-seeking
            behaviours and to encourage them to drop or reverse these behaviours.

The need to include further elements of PTSD treatment
The decision whether to include further elements of PTSD treatment in the therapy was based
        on the presenting symptoms and theoretical considerations. Following Ehlers and Clark's
          () model of PTSD it was expected that key
        indicators for the appropriateness of a PTSD treatment protocol would be:
        “nowness” of trauma memories and intensity of affect; poorly elaborated
        memory of the trauma; emotional numbing, and generalized negative meanings of the trauma.
        When the above indicators were present, treatment followed the Cognitive Therapy for
          PTSD protocol (Ehlers et al., ),
        including focused work on the trauma memory.

Development of the final protocol in the case series
 shows the treatment pathways from
          referral to final treatment protocol. Initially, the travel phobia protocol described
          above was employed to treat two individuals with travel phobia who also met ICD-10
          criteria for PTSD. However, as treatment progressed (especially during in vivo work), they
          reported more PTSD symptoms (especially re-experiencing symptoms). From then onwards,
          their treatment was informed by the Cognitive Therapy for PTSD protocol.
          For later referrals meeting these criteria, the PTSD protocol was employed as earlier
          experience had suggested this was the more appropriate treatment. Overall, the travel
          phobia protocol alone did not seem sufficient to treat the majority of patients since
          three patients in total showed an increase in PTSD symptoms during this protocol. Of the
          10 patients who completed treatment, 6 patients received Cognitive Therapy for
            PTSD and only 4 were treated using CBT for phobic avoidance alone. Overview of presentations and treatment of patients referred for travel phobia



Outcome
Treatment outcome was measured by clinical report and by using the following measures: the
        Posttraumatic Diagnostic Scale (PDS; Foa, Cashman, Jaycox and Perry, ), the Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI; Beck, Epstein, Brown and Steer,
          ), and simple self-report measures of levels
        of fear and avoidance (0–10 scales). Further measures were created to record
        phobic severity and safety-seeking behaviours employed in the feared transport situation.
        These measures are described more fully in the extended report linked to the present paper.
        The minimum score on the phobic severity scale was 0 and the maximum was 36. The minimum
        score on the safety-seeking behaviours questionnaire was 0 and the maximum was 36.

 summarizes the treatment outcome on each
        of these measures. All patients completing treatment returned to regular use of public
        transport (no remaining avoidance) and reported reduced or absent anxiety. All patients
        treated for PTSD no longer met criteria for PTSD at the end of treatment, and their symptom
        score on the PDS was in the “normal” range. One patient dropped out of
        treatment. Treatment outcomes

*did not complete treatment.

**cross over in symptom presentation and treatment modality from travel phobia to
                PTSD during treatment.

Rx: Treatment.



Conclusion
The current paper has described the treatment of a small consecutive case series of
        individuals referred for clinically significant travel phobia following the London bombings.
        The case series showed that some patients develop straightforward phobias after trauma and
        can be effectively treated with CBT for phobia.

However, some of those referred were found to meet broader symptoms of PTSD at clinical
        assessment. In others, such symptoms emerged in the course of initial treatment for travel
        phobia, most commonly when they exposed themselves to previously avoided memory triggers.
        Overall, patients with symptoms meeting ICD-10 research criteria for PTSD and/or with a high
        PDS score (more than 20) seemed to be more appropriately treated using CBT for PTSD rather
        than CBT for phobia alone. Interestingly, the same cut-off has been found to be useful in
        predicting chronic PTSD from initial PDS symptoms (Ehring, Ehlers and Glucksman, ), and as an indicator of the need for early
        intervention. Treatment tailored according to the appropriate formulation of the problem
        (i.e. CBT for PTSD or CBT for phobic avoidance alone) was effective.

Given the small sample size, these preliminary findings require validation from further
        large scale studies. However, this case series illustrates the necessity for individual case
        formulation and competence in recognizing and treating PTSD symptoms when working with
        patients with phobic avoidance following a traumatic event such as a terrorist attack.

Acknowledgements
PS received support from the NIHR Biomedical Research Centre at South London and Maudsley
        NHS Foundation Trust/Institute of Psychiatry (King's College London). AE and RH are funded
        by the Wellcome Trust (grant 0069777). The authors are grateful to Ann Hackmann and the PTSD
        group at the Centre for Anxiety Disorders and Trauma for their clinical supervision and
        support with this work.

