INTRODUCTION
The impact of anthropogenic disturbance on wildlife is a major concern in conservation biology (e.g., ; ; ). Facultative responses such as changes in behavior due to diverse anthropogenic disturbances including human presence, transportation (e.g., low-flying aircraft, motor boats), hunting, and noise have been studied in terrestrial as well as marine animals (e.g., ; ; ; ). Many of these of disturbances can be considered unpredictable labile, or transient, perturbation factors that cause a facultative response at the individual level (e.g., ; ). Numerous studies have focused on the behavioral and physiological responses as well as potential longer term consequences of such disturbances to long-lived animals like water birds during different periods in their annual routine (e.g., ; ; ; ; ). For example, noise due to low-flying aircraft caused flocks of staging snow geese to stop feeding and take flight, reducing the amount of time spent foraging, and potentially resulting in a significant energetic cost (, ).

For centuries, firework displays have been an important part of celebrations worldwide. Although generally perceived by humans as spectacular, the unexpected loud noises and bright lights fireworks produce are probably a source of disturbance for many species of domestic and wild animals. For example, studies have shown that fireworks are a major traumatic event for dogs (; ). Similarly, pyrotechnics and gas exploders are used to actively disperse wildlife and are applied worldwide as an effective measure in bird strike prevention (; ). Yet, the effects fireworks may have on wildlife are hardly known.

In many countries around the world, fireworks are lit on New Year’s Eve and national holidays; these may be huge centralized displays as well as more dispersed fireworks lit by private individuals. Numerous studies worldwide have documented the negative impact fireworks have on public health through pollution, physical injuries, auditory, and visual trauma (e.g., ; ; ; ). In the Netherlands, civilians are allowed to light their own fireworks on New Year’s Eve and do so on a massive scale in nearly all inhabited areas. It is estimated that 10.8 million kg of fireworks are ignited each year in the Netherlands (), resulting in numerous accidents. The Netherlands is a densely populated country with areas set aside for nature conservation occurring in close proximity to inhabited areas. We propose that firework displays are an anthropogenic disturbance, which can be considered an indirect labile perturbation factor (a rapid event that does not affect the animal directly; following ) for various animals. Due to the proximity between wildlife and people in the Netherlands, we expect fireworks to have an observable effect on wildlife. However, as fireworks are mainly lit at night, the effect on animals and its extent is difficult to study in general.

In this study, we used an operational weather radar to quantify the spatial and temporal extent of disturbances caused by large-scale recreational fireworks in the Netherlands on New Year’s Eve. Radar has the advantage that it is capable of detecting birds at large distances and independent of light conditions (; ). Although radar has been used extensively to study bird, bat, and insect movements (e.g., ; ; ), to the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that radar was used to quantify the immediate response of animals to human disturbance.

METHODS
Study area
As illustrated in , the radar is located close to several important fresh water lakes, grasslands, and river floodplains, which are used by thousands of wintering water birds (). We focused our quantitative analysis on the area above the wetlands and shallow lakes included in the Natura 2000 nature conservation site Oostelijke Vechtplassen (lat 52.2°N, long 5.05°E, ), located 10–18 km from the radar. Monthly winter counts in this area show that mainly wintering Greylag (Anser anser L., 6000–7000 individuals) and Greater white-fronted geese (Anser albifrons S., 2500–3000 individuals) sleep on the lake (ca. 560 birds/km2), and Wigeon (Anas penelope L., ca. 11 000 individuals) and mallards (Anas platyrhynchos L.,) roost on the lake during the day and feed in the surroundings at night ().

Study area and radar reflectivity measured on New Year’s Eve, 2008; (a) Overview of the study area in the Netherlands, including general land cover. The radar at De Bilt (lat 52.103°N, long 5.179°E) is indicated by a red dot and the blue lines and polygons show major rivers, lakes, and wetlands in the area. The lake and wetland area Oostelijke Vechtplassen (lat 52.2°N, long 5.05°E) is indicated by a red polygon. (b) Overlaid radar reflectivity (square centimeter/cubic kilometer) at 1 January 2009 00:00 LT(GMT +1). The area where the beam center exceeds 750 m altitude is shaded in gray, as birds mainly fly up to about 500 m (), not many echoes are expected outside this area. (c) Radar reflectivity (square centimeter/cubic kilometer) at 1 January 2009 00:15 LT. Red and orange areas indicate hot spots of bird activity predominantly over water bodies. Supplementary Material, Supplementary movie 1 shows the reflectivity in 5-min intervals for region shown in this figure.

Radar measurements
According to Dutch law, consumer fireworks can be sold between 29 and 31 December. Fireworks can be lit for recreational use from 31 December 10:00 to 1 January 2:00 and are typically concentrated in the first 30 min after midnight. We used an operational C-band weather radar (SELEX-SI, Neuss-Rosellen, Germany) in De Bilt, the Netherlands (lat 52.103°N, long 5.179°E, 44 m above mean sea level) to monitor echoes by flying birds at 5-min intervals, in various altitude bands within a radius of 25 km from the radar. We used data from 30 December 00:00 to 3 January 00:00 LT (Local Time, GMT +1), in the years 2007–2010 (i.e., 3 years). The method for quantifying bird movement was extensively validated on this radar in previous studies (; ; ). Bird quantification methods were identical to those described previously (), with 2 modifications needed for this study. First, the bird reflectivity estimate was based only on resolution volumes directly above the Oostelijke Vechtplassen (water body area 16 km2). Focusing our analysis on the Oostelijk Vechtplassen had the advantage that it is within the standard measurement window of the algorithm, where the radar beam is sufficiently narrow to probe the altitude profile of flying birds. Furthermore, although radar may also register reflectivity caused by fireworks in the lowest air layers (e.g., up to 100 m), we strongly limited the amount of scattering contaminations by fireworks at the lowest altitudes by confining our analysis to water bodies in a protected reserve. The second modification entailed increasing the reflectivity factor threshold, which classifies high reflectivity as precipitation clutter, from 20 to 35 dBZ to include the full range of reflectivity values due to birds during peak disturbance. We obtained a vertical profile of bird reflectivity corresponding to the mean beam height of each elevation scan at the study site (0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.5, 0.8, 1.1, 1.6, 2.1, 2.8, 3.4, 4.4, 6.2, and 8.3 km above ground level, respectively).

Estimating bird densities
Reflectivity (square centimeter/cubic kilometer) and Vertically Integrated Reflectivity (VIR, square centimeter/square kilometer) can be converted into volumetric and height-integrated bird densities respectively, by dividing by the radar cross-section (RCS, square centimeter) for the typical bird at the site (). The seasonally averaged RCS during passerine migration equals 11 cm2 (). Based on annual winter bird counts in the radar area (), we assumed that the majority of birds are large waterfowl during this period of time. Using this information, we obtained an order of magnitude estimate for the RCS of waterfowl by scaling the passerine RCS to the relatively larger body area for ducks and geese. Assuming a relative body volume of 1:10:50 for passerines:ducks:geese and assuming the body area-to-volume fraction scales as a sphere, we obtained a rough estimate for the RCS of 50 cm2 for ducks and 150 cm2 for geese, which is similar to values described in other studies (; ).

RESULTS
We detected very little bird movement right before midnight on New Year’s Eve, as shown by the low radar reflectivity in . In contrast, only several minutes after 00:00 LT, we detected massive bird movement when fireworks were lit in inhabited areas all over the country; this can be seen by the very high radar reflectivity in the full surveyed area of the radar (). We observed hot spots of activity over lakes, wetlands, and river floodplains (red areas in , Supplementary Material, Supplementary Movie 1), many of which are designated as Natura 2000 sites (; ). These sites hold large numbers of water birds which rest and forage in the area (). By examining the spatial reflectivity patterns in 5-min intervals, we observed that birds took off and dispersed from lake areas and wetlands (Supplementary Material, Supplementary Movie 1) and in some cases clearly moved away from densely populated areas (Supplementary Material, Supplementary Movies 1 and 2; note that the wind direction was from the north for this year and movement of the reflectivity peak is clearly toward the north, indicating that this is not due to reflectivity from fireworks). Measurements were impeded directly above urban areas, as well as within 10 km distance from the radar, because ground clutter was severe in these areas and no valid reflectivity measurements passed the radar signal processor’s clutter filtering.

We calculated the radar reflectivity at 5-min intervals for the air volume above the wetlands and shallow lakes included in the Natura 2000 site Oostelijke Vechtplassen (lat 52.2°N, long 5.05°E, ) and show the time series for each year in . We observed short peaks in reflectivity on the days and nights before and after New Year’s Eve; however, these did not exceed a VIR of 4000 cm2/km2 (). We observed a very abrupt and strong increase in density each year beginning on 1 January at 00:05 LT and reaching a maximum between 00:15 and 00:25 LT (). Densities then decreased and returned to base values by 01:30 LT. Peak density was highest on 1 January 2009, and the maximum VIR was 1.4 × 104 cm2/km2. Birds flew up to approximately 500 m altitude (). Flight altitudes increased rapidly during the first 15–20 min after midnight, and then slowly decreased, with the main disturbance period lasting about 45 min. The same temporal and altitude pattern was seen over other lakes and wetlands in the radar area.

Time series of bird movements over Loosdrechtse Plassen. VIR (square centimeter/square kilometer) from 30 December 00:00 to 3 January 00:00 for (a) 2007/2008, (b) 2008/2009, and (c) 2009/2010. (d) VIR (square centimeter/square kilometer) from 31 December 23:00 to 1 January 02:00 (2007/2008 green, 2008/2009 blue, and 2009/2010 red). (e) Altitude density profile from 31 December 2008 23:00 to 1 January 2009 02:00 over Oostelijke Vechtplassen. Altitude (kilometer) is shown on the y axis and time on the x axis. Colors represent measured reflectivity (square centimeter/cubic kilometer). Gray shaded areas in 2a–d indicate the time between sunset and sunrise.

DISCUSSION
Numerous studies have shown that animals change their behavior and show physiological responses to loud abrupt noises (e.g., ; , see also  for review). In this study, fireworks were a source of significant disturbance to birds, causing them to take flight directly after midnight flying up to altitudes of several hundred meters. The activity of birds closely follows the use of fireworks. In 2007 and 2008 (blue and green lines, ), a first peak in activity can be seen just after midnight with a second peak 15 min later. Considering the temporal and spatial patterns simultaneously, we attribute this to a first group of birds taking off, with a proportion of the birds dispersing out of the measurement area and then a second group of birds taking off, potentially due to a second burst of fireworks. Similarly, a study in Germany on atmospheric particle concentrations due to fireworks on New Year’s Eve showed closely matching temporal patterns of particle concentrations attributed to a first bout of fireworks, a pause due to the exchange of good wishes called “the Champagne dip,” followed by a more prolonged period of fireworks (). Directly around cities, close to where most fireworks were lit, radar reflectivity remained low compared with protected reserves, where no fireworks were lit. The contribution of fireworks measured reflectivity is therefore relatively small, and a contribution from fireworks particles advected from urban areas into the protected reserves can be safely neglected. The low spikes observed during the day, just before New Year’s Eve () could probably be attributed to smaller scale disturbance of birds when fireworks were sporadically lit. In 2007, for example, thousands of geese were visually observed at count stations flying in numerous directions ().

We estimate that 100 birds/km2 are in the air over this area at peak disturbance (assuming a RCS of 100 cm2). Using the same conversion, the red/orange hot-spot areas in  correspond to 1000 birds/km2. The Netherlands is the most important winter staging area for several species of waterfowl in Europe, with approximately 2 million geese observed during peak winter counts (). If we extrapolate this disturbance outside of the radar measurement area, we expect that hundreds of thousands of waterfowl that regularly overwinter in the Netherlands are disturbed and take flight as an immediate behavioral response to New Year’s Eve fireworks.

Birds flew up to altitudes of several hundred meters, in contrast to daily local movements, which normally occur below 100 m (; ; ). The spatiotemporal patterns indicate that individual birds flew several kilometers before settling again and may even remain in the air for more than 30 min. The immediate escape response requires birds to temporarily stop their “nonessential” activities, and birds may enter what is sometimes called an emergency life-history stage (e.g., ; ). Several of the short-term consequences of taking flight would, in this study, include the energetic cost of flight (e.g., ), disruption of sleep (e.g., ; ), resting or foraging (e.g., ; ), and a potential initial reduction in intake rates following resettlement, particularly if birds need to adjust to a new foraging site. Birds may also become disorientated during such evasive flights at night, particularly as visibility can deteriorate during extensive firework activity (; ). For example, intense smog was measured in several urban and even rural areas on New Year’s Eve 2008/2009 due to the combination of intense fireworks, mist, and low wind speeds (; ). Furthermore, disturbance may also have a negative effect on the immunocompetence of individuals (). Social cues such as flock size may also affect the magnitude of the response as shown in several studies about geese (e.g., ; ). As the majority of species measured in this study were slow-living birds, we expect a stronger emergency reaction to disturbance than might be observed for smaller fast living species, such as passerines (e.g., ; ; , ).

Although we do not expect fireworks to be directly lethal to birds, confounding factors, such as disorientation, or flying in inclement weather normally avoided could potentially result in mortality. A recent event which has attracted a great deal of media attention is the sudden and mass mortality of thousands of red-winged blackbirds that fell out of the sky in Beebe Arkansas on New Year’s Eve 2010. Similar to our study, Next Generation Weather Radar images (http://abcnews.go.com/Health/radar-images-show-startled-birds-taking-flight-arkansas/story? id=12781951) show that birds left their roosts between rain showers in several pulses on New Year’s Eve. A great deal of speculation surrounds this event, birds may have been scared into the air due to fireworks or other loud and abrupt noises, becoming disoriented and crashing into obstacles, suffering from stress, encountering inclement weather once in the air or a combination of effects and died. Without such a disturbance, the birds would probably have remained in their roost. Additional reports of birds mysteriously falling from the sky can be found in the media right around New Year’s Eve. Our study is just one example of a clear and large-scale behavioral response of birds to fireworks, a very specific form of disturbance. We believe that as awareness increases and more quantified observations are made, such events can be linked to a behavioral response of birds to loud and unpredictable noises and may not be so rare.

This study quantifies the temporal and spatial scale of immediate response of birds to fireworks; more work is clearly needed to assess the longer term consequences at the individual and population levels (e.g., ; ; ; ), especially in and around areas designated for nature conservation, such as Natura 2000 sites (). The weather radar used in this study is part of an operational weather radar network (OPERA, Operational Programme for the Exchange of weather RAdar information) () and as such can be a powerful tool for monitoring large movements (e.g., due to disturbance or migratory flights) across political boundaries and on a continental scale (; ; ). Although radar enables us to quantify the movements of birds in flight and at night, we can expect that other wildlife, not measured by the radar are also affected. Biotelemetry and field endocrinology can help further improve our understanding of individual behavioral and physiological response and the energetic cost of such disturbances in a broad range of animals (e.g., ; ; ; ), and an integration of techniques to study responses at different scales, at the individual and population level, could be even more promising ().

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary material can be found at http://www.beheco.oxfordjournals.org/.

FUNDING
BiG Grid infrastructure for e-Science (www.biggrid.nl).

Supplementary Material
Supplementary Data
Lay Summary
We thank S. Shinneman for assistance with the figures. We thank SOVON, The Dutch centre for field ornithology (www.sovon.nl) for providing winter bird count data. We thank F. Liechti and one anonymous reviewer for their helpful comments on an earlier version of this manuscript.

