1 MOTIVATION
Metabolic flux analysis with carbon labeling experiments (13C-MFA) matured as
the state-of-the-art technique to infer directly immeasurable in vivo
central metabolic reaction rates, the fluxome, by rigorous mathematical
modeling (; ). Progress in measurement techniques and
scaled-down experimentation has raised the experimental throughput and coverage to which
isotope-labeled tracers in the metabolism are quantified (). This has encouraged the usage of
13C-MFA for cell-wide analyses of complex cells such as eukaryotes, mammalian
cells or fungi (). Such
applications drastically increase the computational burden and cannot be adequately treated
with existing all-purpose software.

Built on experiences made with its successful predecessor 13CFLUX, the high-performance
software suite 13CFLUX2 is designed to overcome computational and modeling limitations to
increase the flexibility and scope of 13C-MFA. Major unique features of 13CFLUX2
are (i) tailor-made algorithms in combination with a novel code generation approach leading
to highly efficient machine code, (ii) the XML-based document format FluxML to specify
ultimate universal models and all kind of measurements, (iii) support of high-performance
computing environments, and (iv) seamless setup of user-defined processing pipelines for
serial evaluations. Moreover, the multi-platform software Omix may be used for convenient
modeling and visualization purposes (). With respect to these features, 13CFLUX2 exceeds the
functionality of existing 13C-MFA software systems, namely, Metran and FiatFlux,
as well as the 13CFLUX clones OpenFlux, C13, FIA, NMR2FLUX and influx_s (; ; ; ; ; ; ).

2 METHODS AND IMPLEMENTATION
13CFLUX2 is implemented in C++ and consists of 130 000+ lines of strictly
object-oriented, portable and validated ISO/ANSI C++ code running on Linux/Unix
platforms. The modular software suite comprises 21 modules, which make up the core
components of 13C-MFA research workflows (see ). 13CFLUX2 is equipped with a comprehensive error handling
architecture, while built-in automatic debugging, logging, assertions and stack traces do
not affect the performance of the production-level code. Several additional
Java/Perl/Python-based programs ease parsing of analysis results or performing
post-processing tasks. Overview scheme
of typical steps within the 13C-MFA workflow and related 13CFLUX2 tools
(for additional details see Supplementary Material)



2.1 FluxML document format
For the specification of metabolic and isotopic reaction networks, the XML-based document
format FluxML has been developed. Semantically similar to SBML, FluxML contains
substantial extentions for representing 13C-MFA specific concepts, i.e. the
modeling of atom mappings (an example FluxML file is available as Supplementary Material). Special focus has been laid on the formulation of
universal stoichiometric constraints, as well as flux and labeling measurements that both
can be specified in a textual or Content-MathML notation (www.w3.org/math). Besides build-in support for MS(/MS)- and
1H/13C-NMR-type measurements by convenient short notations,
specification of generic measurements is possible. More than 400 syntactical and
semantical errors are detected and indicated by expressive error/warning messages.

2.2 HPC algorithms for ultimate performance
Simulating the cells’ isotopic labeling state is the performance-critical core
procedure of 13C-MFA workflows. Cumomer- and EMU-based approaches are
numerically stable as they inhere a (quasi-) linear model structure (; ). In 13CFLUX2, an
interpreter-based network generator assembles both, the Cumomer and EMU equations from the
FluxML-based network specification. New algorithms for an on-the-fly in-depth dependency
analysis of the emerging systems enable an optimal network reduction resulting in systems
of minimal size. Advanced graph decomposition and path tracing algorithms exploit
characteristic connectivity properties of the Cumomer/EMU networks, like immanent sparsity
and isomorphism (). The resulting reduced labeling systems are translated into a cascade of
symbolic equation systems, allowing for a highly efficient numerical solution, or
alternatively, exact solutions based on arbitrary precision arithmetic. Optionally, the
symbolic equation systems can be compiled into efficient machine code. Notably, the
generation of analytical solutions is possible for large-scale network models with almost
linear run time with respect to the number of labeled species. Gradients for statistical
analyses and optimizers are derived with maximum numerical precision based on symbolic
differentiation. Sharing the same mathematical structure with the original (reduced)
systems, their numerical solution, is likewise efficiently performed. Exact derivatives
are provided optionally.

Code performance is demonstrated with an Escherichia coli network
slightly adapted from () containing 197 metabolites and 292 reactions.
S-adenosyl-l-methionine (15 carbons) contributes to almost
65% to the total 75 549 labeled species. For a typical GC/MS-type measurement
setup, Cumomer-based simulation takes 10.8 ms, whereas for the EMU variant, 2.73 ms are
measured on a 2.93 GHz XEON machine with 4 MB L2 cache running Linux 2.6. On average, we
found 13CFLUX2 to be 100 – 10 000 times faster compared with 13CFLUX.

3 FLUX ANALYSIS WORKFLOW(S) WITH 13CFLUX2
 surveys the main tasks within
13C-MFA workflows. All required ingredients including the metabolic and
isotopic network, the stoichiometric constraints, input species and the measurement
configuration are formulated in the model’s FluxML document. Subsequent to the
proofreading step, the FluxML document is validated (fmllint). A feasible
basis of the stoichiometric null space is determined with regard to the modeler’s
selection. Constraint-compliant initial values for the free fluxes are generated by
state-of-the-art samplers (sscanner, ssampler).
Sensitivity and identifiability analyses allow detecting non-identifiable fluxes to avoid
flawed parameter estimation artifacts (fwdsim –S,
multi-fwdsim). Calculation of flux maps and their statistical quality
assessment (multi-fitfluxes, mcbootstrap) relies on the powerful
optimization libraries IPOPT (www.coin-or.org/ipopt) and NAG C (www.nag.co.uk). On top of the workflow, the experimental design programs
edscanner and edopt determine most informative input
labeling species based on D-/A-/E-/M-information measures ().

All 13CFLUX2 modules support standardized stdin/stout
operations enabling seamless composition of tailor-made scalable processing workflows, e.g.
by using scripting languages or web service wrappers. For data post-processing, simulation
results are exported to HDF5/CSV formats. Resulting flux maps can be readily visualized in
the software Omix. To assist rapid application development, the symbolic equation systems
can be exported as MathML documents (e.g. for computer algebra systems) and as
MATLAB™-based fully functional labeling simulator.

4 CONCLUSIONS
13C-MFA reliably quantifies in vivo activities of cellular
carbon redistribution. The next-generation software 13CFLUX2 addresses the challenges posed
by upcoming large-scale and high-throughput applications. Therewith, 13CFLUX2 shifts
paradigms of 13C-MFA toward semi-supervised large-scale high-resolution
applications. In combination with the graphical tool Omix, 13CFLUX2 is a software suite for
both computational scientists and researchers from life science.

Supplementary Material
Supplementary Data
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank all 13FLUX2 users and participants of the Advanced Courses on
13C-based MFA for fruitful discussions and Stephan Miebach for providing
setmeasurements.

Funding: The German Research Foundation
(PhD fellowship of M.W., DFG grant WI 1705/12-1).

Conflict of Interest: none declared.

