1 INTRODUCTION
The study of bacterial and archaeal genomes has rapidly progressed from the analysis of single genomes to comparisons between hundreds and thousands. Any type of biological analyses or development of novel bioinformatic methods that uses more than a handful of genomes requires a basic but non-trivial method for obtaining, organizing and storing this genomic information. In the past, this has been a problem primarily limited to large scale data providers such as IMG (), NCBI (), GOLD () and CMR (). Although many of these centers provide genomic data in a variety of static formats such as Genbank and Fasta, these are often inadequate for complex queries. To carry out these analyses efficiently, a relational database such as MySQL (http://mysql.com) can be used to allow rapid querying across many genomes at once. Some existing data providers such as CMR allow downloading of their database files directly, but these databases are designed for large web-based infrastructures and contain numerous tables that demand a steep learning curve. Also, addition of unpublished genomes to these databases is often not supported. A well known and widely used system is the Generic Model Organism Database (GMOD) project (http://gmod.org). GMOD is an open-source project that provides a common platform for building model organism databases such as FlyBase () and WormBase (). GMOD supports a variety of options such as GBrowse () and a variety of database choices including Chado () and BioSQL (http://biosql.org). GMOD provides a comprehensive system, but for many researchers such a complex system is not needed. For example, Chado and the simpler BioSQL schemas have over 130 and 20 database tables, respectively. We propose a minimalistic system that is easy to set up, requires minimal administration for automatic updates, focusing on a lab based setting where unpublished genomes can be easily added, and allowing individual users to work with an unchanging snapshot of genomes from a given download date. To fulfill these goals, we created MicrobeDB, an open-source project that has been used in several comparative genome projects (; ) and as a backend for previously developed applications (; ).

2 FEATURES
MicrobeDB offers an easy to access, manageable and centralized database for microbial genomes. The main features of MicrobeDB are automated downloading of archaeal and bacterial genomes from NCBI, organized storage of the flat files, annotations and genomic metadata stored in a MySQL database, and a Perl API database for interacting with the data. A single script (that can be scheduled to run weekly, monthly, etc.) looks after downloading and storing new genomes, parsing and loading the data into the MySQL database, and cleaning up any old ‘versions’ that have not been saved by individual users.

2.1 Genome data source
By default all genomes available in the NCBI RefSeq database () are downloaded using the Aspera downloader (). Users can optionally choose to include incomplete genomes and/or limit to a subset of genomes at the genera or species level of their choice. In addition, users may download the data in several formats beyond the standard gbk format required by MicrobeDB such as fna, faa, gff, etc. After download, all genomes are uncompressed into their original flat files, and stored under a date stamped central directory.

2.2 Annotation extraction and storage
The second step of each update parses annotations and metadata for each genome and stores the information in a locally installed MySQL database. Information is split into different levels of ‘objects’, including Gene (e.g. accession, start position, end position, product, name, etc.), Replicon (e.g. size, number of genes, replicon type, etc.) and Genome Project (NCBI taxon id, NCBI genome project id, GC%, habitat, pathogen, etc.) (). This information is obtained from the Genbank formatted files for each genome, from metadata tables from NCBI, or derived computationally (e.g. gene counts, GC%, etc.) (). Additionally, a simplified version of the NCBI taxonomy is stored for each genome and is associated with each Genome Project object. The MicrobeDB schema is easily extended so that users can add their own custom data fields if needed (e.g. SNP positions, regulatory elements, etc.). The MySQL database can be accessed using any MySQL client or through the MicrobeDB Perl API that is supplied with MicrobeDB. The MicrobeDB Perl API provides simple querying and retrieval of information in the MySQL database from within the user's own applications without having to write actual SQL queries. In addition there are many free graphical interfaces for interacting with MySQL databases that do not require programming skills including web based such as phpMyAdmin (http://phpmyadmin.net), and local desktop clients such as MySQL Work Bench (http://www.mysql.com/products/workbench/).
Annotations stored in the MicrobeDB database

Table/object	Field descriptions	Example	
Genome project	Organism name	Pseudomonas aeruginosa LESB58	
	NCBI taxon ID	557722	
	Genome size (Mb)	6.6	
	Pathogenic in	Human	
	GC %	66.3	
	Oxygen requirements	Aerobic	
Replicon	Replicon type	Chromosome	
	Accession (RefSeq)	NC_011770	
	Replicon size (bp)	6601757	
	Number of genes	6027	
	Replicon sequence	TTTAAAGAG…	
Gene	Gene type	CDS	
	Locus ID	PLES_00001	
	Start position	483	
	End position	2027	
	Gene name	dnaA	
	Product	chromosomal replication initiation	
	DNA sequence	GTGTCCGT…	
	Protein sequence	MSVELWQQ…	
Version	Download date	2011-12-17	
	Flat file directory	/share/genomes/2011-12-17/	
	Used by	Morgan, Matthew	
aNot all fields and tables in MicrobeDB are listed.




2.3 Unpublished genomes
Unpublished genomes (those not in NCBI) can be loaded into MicrobeDB by placing their Genbank formatted files into a directory and running a single script. MicrobeDB does not support genome annotation or create Genbank files, but many programs are available for production of these files such as RAST () or ARTEMIS (). NCBI-specific metadata that is not available for unpublished genomes is simply left as blank fields in MicrobeDB without affecting functionality.

2.4 Stable versions of genomes
MicrobeDB keeps each update as a separate ‘version’. This allows users to save and work on a particular snapshot of genomes knowing that the underlying dataset remains consistent. Each MicrobeDB version has an associated download date and users can save a version until their research is complete. Old unsaved versions that are no longer needed will be automatically removed after each update is completed to save storage space.

Overall, MicrobeDB provides support for researchers that require a manageable local organization of bacterial and archaeal genomes for either large comparative genome projects or for constructing new bioinformatic applications.

Funding: This work was supported by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, Michael Smith Foundation for Health Research, Genome Canada, and Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation.

Conflict of Interest: none declared.

