1 INTRODUCTION
In cancer biology, systems pharmacology and perturbation biology, researchers designing targeted drug experiments often need to choose targeted drugs and antibodies of interest for their experimental studies. For such studies, drug- and antibody-target databases are valuable resources and are increasingly publicly available in computable formats. Unfortunately, this information is in separate databases that use mostly incompatible formats, making it difficult to integrate data across different resources. This, coupled with strict constraints on distribution of the data, hinders access to up-to-date integrated data.

Here we describe an open-source framework, PiHelper, for easy aggregation, integration and visualization of drug- and antibody-target data from multiple sources. PiHelper provides a platform-independent command-line tool to help users, with minimal configuration, import and export drug- and antibody-target information in a human- and gene-centric manner; a Java application programming interface and a REST-ful (Representational State Transfer) web service to facilitate programmatic access to the aggregated data; and a web-based UI to help users query data in a gene-centric manner and export the results as an image or undirected binary network.

We believe PiHelper will facilitate hypothesis generation and design of new experiments by enabling researchers to access and query integrated drug-target and antibody-target data from multiple resources in an automatic way.

2 COMPONENTS
2.1 Administration module
The administration module provides a command-line interface for users to import data into a database or export the aggregated data to tab-delimited format for further analysis. The importer component supports automatic fetching of background gene information, gene sets, gene-centric drug-target and antibody-target annotations from multiple resources (). Importing data from these resources is accomplished in an automatic manner through PiHelper’s admin command-line interface. The admin module contains specific data converters for each resource and frees the user from handling different file formats and merging data across resources. The user also has the option to import drug- and antibody-target data from custom tab-delimited files.
PiHelper enables integration of 10 publicly available drug-target and drug-antibody resources

Data resource	Type of data	
DrugBank ()	Drug-target	
KEGG Drug ()	Drug-target	
	Drug-target	
GDSC ()	Drug-target	
	Drug-target	
Cancer.gov http://cancer.gov	Drug-annotation	
The Human Protein Atlas ()	Antibody-target	
	Antibody-target	
	Antibody-target	
Pathway Commons ()	Gene-sets	
Note: KEGG, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes; GDSC, The Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer



Once the database is populated through the admin tool, the exporter component can be used to export all drug and antibody data to a tab-delimited text format (TSV). These files can then be used for further analysis tools, e.g. by importing the data into Cytoscape as a binary network and running graph-based queries or visualizing larger networks ().

2.2 Web-based UI
The web-based UI distributed as a part of PiHelper enables users to query antibodies and drugs in a gene-centric manner (). It also helps visualize the results as a binary network and export the final network in either scalable vector graphics (SVG), portable network graphics, GraphML or simple interaction formats. The visualization of the query results as an interactive network is accomplished through the Cytoscape Web library (). The web-based UI features automatic validation of the gene names, pre-loaded gene sets representing most of the well-known canonical pathways in the query page; details for a gene, drug, antibody or the targeting interaction upon clicking on the corresponding element within the network; and options to expand the network based on either genes or drugs in the network and to download the network for external use ().
Sample target network visualization: results showing all drug and antibody associations of EGFR and ERBB2 genes. PiHelper web UI allows exporting the network to various formats, e.g. SVG and Simple Interaction Formats



2.3 Core module
The core module provides the model Java classes and basic finder methods. The model classes consist of basic elements, such as Drug, Gene and DrugTarget, which capture drug– and antibody–gene relationships. These elements, together with their querying methods, help developers build custom applications or analysis tools that depend on drug or antibody annotation data.

Besides the Java application programming interface, the core module also includes a web service component that provides basic querying methods through REST protocols. The web service supports obtaining the results in either JavaScript Object Notation or HyperText Markup Language. The former provides flexibility for developers who prefer other programming languages than Java; the latter enables users to interact with the database via their web browser of choice.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We gratefully acknowledge Emek Demir, Özgün Babur, Anil Korkut and Nikolaus Schultz (MSKCC, cBio) for their helpful comments on the article and the framework.

Funding: This tool was developed with funding from the U.S. National Institutes of Health, National Human Genome Research Institute, grant number U41 HG006623, National Resource for Network Biology, grant number P41 GM103504, and Cancer Technology Discovery and Development Network, grant number U01 CA168409.

Conflict of Interest: none declared.

