1 INTRODUCTION
Site-directed mutagenesis followed by functional assays has enabled scientists to directly profile the functional differences among proteins that only differ by a single amino acid (; ; ). Through such experiments, one can identify sequence domains critical for specific functions and evaluate the degree of functional change induced by a mutation (). Frequently the functional outcomes of laboratory experiments have also been compared with predictions yielded by computational tools that annotate whether or not a single amino acid mutation will impact protein function. If they are successful, computational tools would offer a cost-efficient way to prioritize variants to explore in the laboratory. However, investigators have reported a wide range of success of computational tools from perfect accuracy (e.g. ) to rather poor results [e.g. &lt;60% accuracy ()]. These differences might occur due to limited sample sizes (number of mutations) investigated in individual studies that are focused on one protein or members of a protein family (e.g. ). The availability of information on over 10 000 laboratory-induced mutations provides an opportunity to (1) measure the performance of computational tools for accuracy in diagnosing laboratory mutations and (2) compare them with the performance observed for a large collection of naturally occurring human variants with and without disease implications.

Here, we report a computational analysis of 10 913 protein point mutations from 2372 proteins investigated in a variety of functional assays in the laboratory, which are available online in the UniProt resource (). Although a large number of computational tools are available, we focused our investigation on three tools: Condel, which is reported to have the highest accuracy (); PolyPhen-2, which has widespread and long-term usage in the field (); and SIFT (), which is intended to guide laboratory experiments and has also been used for diagnosing protein variation for many years.

2 METHODS
UniProt database (www.uniprot.org) is currently the largest repository of mutations of human proteins that have been experimentally induced by mutagenesis (). We used this resource to retrieve all available laboratory-induced mutations with experimental descriptions and effects in which exactly one mutation was tested for each polypeptide in order to avoid confounding evolutionary interpretations. The final dataset contained 10 913 laboratory-induced mutations from 2372 proteins ().
A frequency distribution showing the number of different mutants explored in the laboratory for 2372 human proteins, as reported in the UniProt database. The median (mean) number of mutations analyzed is 3 (4.6)



Based on the experimental outcomes, we designated all laboratory-induced mutations with any measurable effect on function in the laboratory to be lab-damaging mutations. All others were given a lab-neutral designation. In this dataset, the ratio of damaging to neutral mutations was 6:1. In a survey of the severity of functional impact of lab-damaging mutations, we found that a subset of lab-damaging mutations (42%) was reported to completely abolish the function assayed. We refer to them as lab-abolishing mutations.

Each laboratory-induced mutation was subjected to Condel, PolyPhen-2 and SIFT analyses using their respective web servers (bg.upf.edu/condel/analysis; genetics.bwh.harvard.edu/pph2 and sift.jcvi.org). These tools did not produce diagnoses (neutral or non-neutral) for some mutations, therefore we reported accuracies for a subset (in parentheses) of all laboratory-induced mutations for Condel (10 765), PolyPhen-2 (10 814) and SIFT (7172). In particular, SIFT servers failed to produce diagnosis for ∼ 35% of the laboratory-induced mutations because SIFT's pre-computed database only provides results for variants that have been reported in dbSNP () in order to increase the speed. We found that the accuracy of Condel and PolyPhen-2 for the subset of mutations with SIFT diagnosis was &lt;1% different from those obtained by using all mutations, so we presented and compared all accuracies directly.

In order to assess the degree of (evolutionary) selective pressure, we estimated the absolute evolutionary rate (r) for each position containing laboratory-induced mutations by using the approach of  where evolutionary rate is calculated using the appropriate protein sequence alignment from the UCSC Genome Browser () and a timetree of 46 species (). The evolutionary rate has the unit of the number of amino acid substitutions per site per billion years. A histogram showing the distribution of evolutionary rates for positions harboring laboratory-induced mutations is shown in . For simplicity, we divided these amino acid positions into three categories based on the estimated evolutionary rates: ultra-conserved (r = 0), well-conserved (0 &lt; r ≤ 1) and less-conserved (r &gt; 1).
The distribution of long-term evolutionary rates (r) of positions containing 10 913 laboratory mutations analyzed in this study



3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The true positive rate (non-neutral diagnosis) for lab-damaging mutations was generally high for all three methods (A). Condel provided the highest accuracy with a 92% correct diagnosis rate, whereas PolyPhen-2 and SIFT showed lower accuracies (79 and 63%, respectively). More than 95% of lab-damaging mutations received non-neutral diagnosis by at least one of the tools, and all three tools produced correct concordant diagnoses for slightly &lt;50% mutations. A similar pattern of prediction accuracy was obtained for 3969 lab-abolishing mutations, which are a subset of lab-damaging mutations (A).
Accuracy of computational tools in predicting the functional impact of laboratory-induced mutations that alter the protein function. (A) Proportion of mutations correctly diagnosed to be non-neutral by Condel, PolyPhen-2 and SIFT. The results are shown for all lab-damaging mutations (filled bars) and only those damaging mutations that abolish the protein function (open bars). (B) The cumulative frequency distribution of lab-damaging mutations that abolish (open squares) and do not abolish function (gray squares) at various levels of deleteriousness as measured by their Condel scores



The functional impact scores that measure the deleteriousness of laboratory-induced mutations produced by Condel were quite similar for lab-damaging mutations that completely abolished protein function and the remainder of lab-damaging mutations that exhibited partial protein function (B). On average they differed by 6% (0.85 and 0.79, respectively), which is small but statistically significant (two-tailed Z-test; P &lt; 0.01). Overall, computational tools performed well in diagnosing laboratory-induced mutations with function effects. In addition, these accuracies are comparable to those reported for human disease-associated variants (; ; ).

In contrast, computational tools performed poorly on the lab-neutral mutation set. Only 26, 46 and 38% of mutations were correctly diagnosed to be neutral by Condel, PolyPhen-2 and SIFT, respectively (A). All three methods produced the correct diagnosis for &lt;10% of the mutations, with only 35% laboratory-induced mutations correctly diagnosed by two or more methods (i.e. consensus approach). Therefore, computational tools are unable to aid in correctly diagnosing mutations found to have no functional impact in the laboratory, even when we used a strict rule for laboratory neutrality where only mutations with no measureable functional effects are given the lab-neutral designation. These results are rather surprising, because computational tools are known to be highly accurate in diagnosing neutral polymorphisms found in the human population (; ; ; ).
The accuracies of computational tools and evolutionary properties of mutations. (A) Fraction of lab-neutral mutations predicted correctly by Condel, PolyPhen-2 and SIFT. (B) Observed-to-expected ratios of the lab-neutral mutations (closed circles, solid line) and human population variants (open circles, dashed line) in three evolutionary conservation categories. (C) Histogram of evolutionary rates of lab-neutral mutations that were diagnosed correctly (black bars) and incorrectly (white bars) by PolyPhen-2; similar results are observed for Condel and SIFT. For panel B, 456,426 protein variants were obtained from the 1000 Genomes Project (). Relative proportions of positions in each category was estimated by considering evolutionary rates of all amino acid positions found in proteins containing at least lab-induced mutation or population variant, as appropriate. These relative proportions were then used to generate expected numbers of lab-neutral mutations in each category



We explored different possibilities to potentially explain the observed patterns. First, the laboratory mutation sets are expected to contain an overabundance of changes to alanine because of alanine scanning, which is a cost-efficient alternative to testing every possible non-native amino acid (). Indeed, nearly half of all lab-neutral mutations are changes to alanine. Therefore, we estimated the accuracy of computational tools after excluding all such mutations. This resulted in &lt;3% change in accuracy of computational tools and, thus, does not explain the observed pattern.

Second, we evaluated the accuracies of computational tools for amino acid changes caused by single base pair mutations. This is important because we found that one-third of the laboratory-induced protein mutations in our dataset were a result of multiple base pair changes in the same codon, which is not common in naturally observed variants in human populations. Amino acid differences with multiple base pair mutations have much lower (&gt;2-fold) amino acid substitution probabilities (e.g. BLOSUM62 scores) when compared with those with single base pair mutations. This fact might explain the reduced performance of computational tools that have been optimized using data from human disease-associated and neutral variants, e.g. HumVar2 (; ). The accuracies of individual computational tools differed by &lt;10% in comparisons of single- and multi-nucleotide variants. Therefore, the inclusion of amino acid mutations caused by multi-nucleotide changes does not explain the observed pattern of low prediction accuracy of computational tools.

Third, we examined the preponderance of lab-neutral mutations in ultra-, well- and less-conserved positions because we have previously found that the accuracy of PolyPhen in correctly diagnosing neutral mutations is the lowest at the most highly conserved amino acid positions (). If lab-neutral mutations were overrepresented at ultra-conserved positions, this might explain the reduced accuracy of computational tools for lab-neutral mutations as well. Indeed, there is a significant overabundance of lab-neutral mutations at highly conserved positions, which is exactly opposite of the pattern observed for human polymorphisms (; B). C clearly shows that the lab-neutral mutations found at highly conserved positions are very difficult to diagnose correctly, whereas the accuracy of diagnosis is higher for lab-neutral mutations found at fast evolving positions. The inaccuracy of computational tools in diagnosing mutations with no discernible functional change in the laboratory points to the need for high-throughput laboratory profiling to identify truly neutral mutations at evolutionarily conserved positions.

Of course, one could argue that the identification of truly neutral mutations in the laboratory is much harder than identifying damaging mutations, because the numbers of laboratory functional assays are limited by current technology and by our knowledge of all functions of a protein. This would mean that a protein mutation that is not disruptive for a known set of assayed functions would be designated a neutral status in the laboratory, although it may be disruptive to an untested function or in vivo. These possibilities can only be tested when information on in vivo assays and additional functional knowledge becomes available.

However, our analyses clearly show that the differences in successful prediction of neutral mutations in the laboratory and those observed in nature can be resolved to a large extent by taking an evolutionary-aware approach. For example, all 92 damaging mutations of the beta-globin gene (HBB) in the UniProt resource occur at ultra- and well-conserved positions, for which both Condel and PolyPhen-2 produce 100% correct diagnosis. This consistency occurs because computational tools have high rates of correct diagnosis for damaging mutations at ultra- and well-conserved positions. On the other hand, 48 lab-neutral mutations of cystathionine beta synthase proteins also occur at ultra- and well-conserved positions. They are expected to be misdiagnosed by computational tools, which is indeed the case (100% incorrect by PolyPhen-2 and Condel). Therefore, by using the evolutionary conservation of positions mutated in the laboratory, it will now be possible for scientists to better understand the reasons for the discordance between the outcomes of laboratory experiments and computational predictions. This would ultimately improve the combined use of experimental and computational techniques to survey the functional impacts of millions of protein mutations that we are expected to encounter as we acquire increasing numbers of sequences from human exomes.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Li Liu, Mia Champion, Alan Filipski and Crystal Hepp for helpful discussions and comments on an initial version of the manuscript. We are grateful to Kristyn Gerold and Maxwell Sanderford for extensive assistance with data analysis.

Funding: The US National Library of Medicine (NIH LM10834 to S.K.) and National Institute of General Medicine (NIH training grant GM071798, Brenda Hogue).

Conflict of interest: none declared.

