1 INTRODUCTION
ChIPx experiments, including ChIP-seq () and ChIP-chip (), have become a powerful tool
used by individual investigators, as well as consortium projects, such as the ENCODE () to study
transcription factor-binding sites. Each individual ChIPx experiment is non-trivial to
perform—extensive time and effort must be spent to acquire effective antibodies and
design efficient protocols to generate high-quality ChIPx data—thus, it is important
to develop methodology to help investigators to maximize the value of each individual ChIPx
experiment.

One of the primary limitations of ChIPx is it may be difficult for individual laboratories
to study TF regulation in a wide variety of biological contexts, which we define as the cell
or tissue types and associated treatments or disease conditions (see definition details in
Supplementary Method 1.1). This is largely because of the prohibitively high
labor and time costs to perform each experiment. To resolve this limitation, we investigate
whether publicly available gene expression data (PED) in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO;
) can be
used as a tool to increase the value of ChIPx experiments. Currently, &gt;600 000 gene
expression samples from a broad spectrum of biological contexts and species are deposited in
the GEO and ArrayExpress (). These data are freely available and contain rich information
complementary to ChIPx, which may be extremely useful to help study TF regulation.

In this article, we demonstrate that this is indeed the case by proposing and evaluating a
new approach, ChIP-PED. Given a TF regulatory pathway, i.e. a TF and the corresponding set
of target genes defined using ChIPx and gene expression data in one or more biological
contexts, ChIP-PED scans through a large collection of &gt;20 000 human and mouse gene
expression samples generated by hundreds of different laboratories by quickly surveying the
TF and target gene activities across &gt;2000 biological contexts to identify potentially
new connections between the TF regulatory pathway and various cell types, tissues or
diseases (). We will illustrate that the
predictions from ChIP-PED are useful and can greatly expand the scope of discoveries one can
make from ChIPx experiments. We also provide an R package for users to perform ChIP-PED
analyses on their own ChIPx and TF perturbation data. ChIP-PED overview. Gene expression profiles from TF perturbation
experiments are intersected with ChIPx experiments to obtain a set of activated and
repressed target genes. ChIP-PED then takes as input the TF and target genes and scans
through a compendium of publicly available gene expression profiles to search for
biological contexts in which the TF and target genes are enriched in activity. The
final output is a ranked table of biological contexts enriched with a regulatory
pattern of interest



ChIP-PED represents a novel conceptual approach to building computational tools for ChIPx
data analysis. Most existing tools for analyzing ChIPx data, including those for detecting
protein–DNA–binding sites (; ), discovering DNA-binding motifs (; ), correlating ChIPx with gene
expression data (; ) and so forth, focus on addressing analysis issues concerning a single or a
few related ChIPx datasets. Their discoveries are also typically restricted to the
biological context in which the ChIPx experiments are performed, and none of them
systematically integrates information from PED. PED has been shown to be invaluable in other
applications (; ), but the possibility of using PED as a tool to boost the analysis of ChIPx
data still remains largely unexplored. A number of methods do integrate large amounts of
ChIPx and gene expression data to construct gene regulatory networks, but most are primarily
used to study lower organisms (e.g. yeast; ; ). The present study is different from those
described works, as ChIP-PED focuses specifically on integrating ChIPx with large amounts of
heterogeneous data in human and mouse to improve ChIPx analyses. Instead of attempting to
construct a comprehensive gene regulatory network, the primary goal of ChIP-PED is to
produce simple testable hypotheses, such as ‘TF A is functionally active in biological
contexts X, Y and Z through target gene set S’.

2 MATERIALS AND METHODS
2.1 Data collection
ChIP-PED relies on two large compendiums of gene expression profiles, consisting of 13
182 human gene expression samples generated from Affymetrix Human U133A (GPL96) and 9643
mouse samples generated from Affymetrix Mouse 430 2.0 (GPL1261) arrays (). The gene
expression profiles were downloaded from GEO (July 2010), pre-processed and normalized
consistently using fRMA (). fRMA is designed to normalize large amount of
heterogeneous microarray samples to reduce the effect of batch on gene expression
estimates. For each probeset, we standardized the fRMA values across all microarray
samples from the same array platform to have zero mean and unit standard deviation. The
biological context of each sample was recorded and manually verified based on the sample
descriptions in GEO (see Supplementary Method 1.1 and Supplementary Fig. S1).

2.2 ChIP-PED
Given a TF and its activated and repressed target genes defined using ChIPx and gene
expression data in one or more biological contexts, ChIP-PED searches for other contexts
in which the TF is likely to be functionally active. Target genes (TG) are genes that are
both TF-bound in the ChIPx experiments and differentially expressed in corresponding gene
expression data in which the expression of the TF is perturbed. The latter are from TF
perturbation experiments comparing wild-type with TF-knockout, control with TF-knockdown
or control with TF-overexpression and so forth. Users will need to provide and analyze
their own ChIPx and TF perturbation experiments to define the input target genes.
Supplementary Method 1.2 discusses methods for generating target gene lists.
To define target genes in a particular biological context, ideally one would like to have
ChIPx and TF perturbation data from the same biological context. However, such data may
not always be available, and it is not uncommon to have ChIPx and TF perturbation data
collected from two different contexts. In that case, one can still intersect the data from
different experiments to obtain a putative target gene set assumed to contain the shared
targets.

ChIP-PED first measures the TF expression and TG activity in each microarray sample in
our PED compendiums. TF expression, ETF, is defined as a
simple average of the normalized probeset intensities, p:  where TF is the set of
probesets that measure the expression of the TF, and nTF is
the number of probesets for the TF. TG activity, ATG, is
defined as: 


Here, TG is the set of target genes of the TF,
nTG is the number of target genes,
ng is the number of probesets for a specific target gene,
g, and sg is 1 or −1 depending on
whether gene g is activated (positively regulated) or repressed
(negatively regulated), respectively. sg is included to
account for TFs that are capable of both activating and repressing different target genes.
ATG is designed to describe the regulatory activity of a
TF through its target genes, rather than measure the raw expression of the target genes.
For example, if a TF acts mainly as a repressor in a biological context in which it is
functionally active, we would observe low expression of its target genes, but high
ATG because of the multiplier
sg = −1 (Supplementary Method 1.3 and Supplementary Fig. S2A and B). Examples of the distributions of ETF and
ATG for real TF ChIPx data are shown in Supplementary Figure S3.

After measuring TF expression and TG activity, users can choose cut-offs
c1 ∼ c4 to define (i) high-TF expression
(‘ETF &gt; c1’), (ii) low-TF
expression (‘ETF &lt;
c2’), (iii) high-TG activity
(‘ATG &gt;
c3’) and (iv) low-TG activity
(‘ATG &lt;
c4’), denoted by TF+, TF−,
TG+ and TG−, respectively. By default, c1 ∼
c4 are chosen to be values corresponding to a one-sided
P-value of 0.1 based on fitted normal distributions for
ETF or ATG across all samples,
with c1 and c3 taking values above
the mean, and c2 and c4 taking
values below the mean (A). ChIP-PED can
then search for biological contexts associated with four regulatory patterns: (i)
TF+TG+, (ii) TF+TG−, (iii) TF−TG+ and (iv)
TF−TG−. The pattern TF+TG+ is of primary interest, as it focuses on
discovering new contexts in which the TF is functionally active through its target genes
(TF-active). This is because high-TF expression alone is not sufficient to imply the
existence of functional TF protein because of possible post-transcriptional and
translational regulation, but high-TG activity in addition to high-TF expression would
strongly support the presence of active TF protein. Other regulatory patterns are
discussed in more detail in the Supplementary Method 1.4. ChIP-PED plots show strong correlation between TF expression,
ETF (x-axis) and TG activity,
ATG (y-axis), for mouse
Oct4 (A) and Gata1 (C)
in 9643 Affymetrix Mouse 430 2.0 array samples and human MYC
(B) and STAT1 (D) in 13 182 Affymetrix
Human HGU133a samples. Number of TGs in each plot is shown in the parentheses. Solid
lines correspond to TF+ (c1) and TF−
(c2) ETF cut-offs and
TG+ (c3) and TG−
(c4) ATG cut-offs. Samples
from a few biological contexts with enriched TF+TG+ (in A–D),
TF−TG+ (in B) and TF+TG− (in C) functional activity are shown
in color. Also plotted in color are ‘Diff ESC, EBs’ (purple) to show the
separation between differentiated and undifferentiated ESCs in (A),
‘A673’ (purple) and ‘Ewing tumor’ (blue), both of which are
Ewing tumor samples in (B), and ‘PBMC-normal’ (orange), which fall
outside of the TF+TG+ region in contrast to infected PBMCs in (D). All
other samples are plotted in gray. ‘Cor’: Pearson correlation
coefficient between ETF and
ATG. ‘Pval’: P-values
that are empirically calculated from ETF and
ATG correlations of randomly drawn pseudo-TG sets of
the same size 10 000 times. For comparison, an example plot of a random sample of
pseudo-TGs is shown for each TF (bottom-right)



Then given a compendium of N gene expression profiles, ChIP-PED searches
among all biological contexts with at least three samples, for contexts that are
associated with the regulatory pattern of interest (e.g. TF+TG+). For each
context c, it counts (i) K, the total number of samples
in the compendium that exhibit the pattern, (ii) nC, the total
number of samples in context c, and (iii) kC,
the number of samples in context c that exhibit the pattern.
Fisher’s exact test is then applied to the quadruplet (nC, N,
kC and K) to test the association between
c and the regulatory pattern of interest (i.e. whether
kC is significantly larger than random expectation). To
account for testing multiple contexts, the P-values are adjusted using
the Bonferroni correction. The final output of ChIP-PED is a ranked table of statistically
significant biological contexts at a default Bonferroni corrected P-value
cut-off of 0.05 (Supplementary Method 1.5).

After the initial ChIP-PED analysis, ChIP-PED can perform the following analyses to
further explore each predicted context: (i) search for related contexts in the compendium
based on user-specified keyword(s), (ii) extract the ETF and
ATG values for the set of contexts found, (iii) calculate,
sort and plot the mean and standard deviation of the ETF and
ATG values for each context and (iv) perform
t-tests between all pairwise combinations of the contexts for
significant differences in mean ETF or
ATG. See Supplementary Methods 1.6–1.7 for details and Section 3.3 for an
example analysis.

2.3 ChIP-PED evaluation
We evaluated ChIP-PED by applying it to multiple TFs—Oct4, Gata1
and Jarid2 in mice and MYC, STAT1 and
ESR1 in human—using the datasets listed in Supplementary Table S1. The TF target genes were constructed by intersecting
TF-bound genes predicted from ChIPx data with differentially expressed genes [false
discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 10%] in TF perturbation data. TF-bound genes were
defined as genes with a significant peak (FDR ≤ 10%) overlapping with the
−10- to +5-kb region around the transcription start site of the gene. Details
are provided in Supplementary Method 1.2, and full target gene lists can be found in
Supplementary Tables S2–S7.

Predictions were verified by a thorough search of existing literature to identify whether
each prediction was functionally validated or suggested in previous experiments.
‘Functional’ validations required previous experimental data from the
predicted biological context demonstrating observable changes in phenotype when the
expression of the TF is perturbed or TF binding coupled with transcriptional responses to
TF binding of target genes. ‘Suggested’ predictions must be supported by other
lines of indirect evidence, such as experimentally observed high-TF protein levels in the
predicted context. All supporting references are recorded in Supplementary Tables S2–S7. We also experimentally validated a novel
ChIP-PED functional connection between MYC and Ewing sarcoma (Supplementary Method 1.8).

3 RESULTS
3.1 PED are capable of measuring TF regulatory activities in spite of data
heterogeneity
We first investigated whether it was appropriate to compare gene expression across
thousands of heterogeneous microarray samples generated by different laboratories. To this
end, we asked whether laboratory and batch effects were a significant and detrimental
source of variation (). Previous efforts have been made using our gene expression compendiums to
demonstrate that similar tissue types do cluster together (), and that it is possible to
accurately predict tissue types from a single gene expression profile in spite of the
laboratory or batch effects (). We reaffirmed these findings by observing that samples
from the same tissues from different laboratories were more similar in expression compared
with samples from different tissues from the same laboratory (Supplementary Fig. S4 and
Supplementary Method 1.9).

We then examined the correlation between TF expression (ETF)
and TG activity (ATG) for multiple TFs, including mouse
Oct4 and Gata1 and human MYC and
STAT1. We reasoned that if there were strong laboratory or batch
effects that overwhelmed the biological signal, we would observe weak to zero correlation
between ETF and ATG across the
heterogeneous samples. Instead, we found significant correlation between TF expression and
TG activity; the Pearson correlation coefficients between ETF
and ATG for Oct4, MYC, Gata1
and STAT1 were 0.679, 0.418, 0.303 and 0.699, respectively
(P &lt; 0.02; ). As
this observation holds for multiple mouse and human TFs from different microarray
platforms (GPL1261 and GPL96), our results suggest that biological variability in the
publicly available Affymetrix microarray data is stronger than the laboratory or batch
effects. This is consistent with earlier observations made by .

3.2 ChIP-PED predicts known TF-active contexts
After verifying that it is meaningful to compare ETF and
ATG across heterogeneous samples, we asked whether the
samples observed with high-TF expression and high-TG activity (TF+TG+) and the
biological contexts enriched with a TF+TG+ regulatory pattern were biologically
meaningful. In this regard, we performed and evaluated ChIP-PED analyses of six TFs: mouse
Oct4, Gata1 and Jarid2 and human
MYC, STAT1 and ESR1.

Oct4 is a master regulator in mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs). We
obtained 519 activated and 337 repressed Oct4 target genes by combining
ChIP-seq data from mouse ESCs with gene expression data from ESCs in which
Oct4 was knocked down via siRNA (Supplementary Tables S1 and S2). Using these target genes as input, Oct4 target gene
activity was plotted against Oct4 expression after excluding the PED
samples used to construct the target genes (A). We found that undifferentiated ESCs clustered together with high-TF
expression and high-TG activity. In contrast, differentiated ESCs or embryoid bodies (EBs)
had lower TF expression and TG activity. This is consistent with the self-renewal and
pluripotency role of Oct4 in ESCs and its decrease in expression when
ESCs differentiate (; ).

Of the 9643 mouse samples in the compendium, 480 were labeled as TF+TG+ using
the default cut-offs. Among them, 69.2% (332/480) were known
Oct4-expressing (+Oct4) biological
contexts—most commonly, undifferentiated ESCs (), primordial germ cells
(),
induced pluripotent stem cells () and embryonic carcinomas ()—covering 96.0% (332/346) of
all +Oct4 samples in the compendium. In all, 18.1% (87/480)
of the TF+TG+ samples were differentiating ESCs or EBs, and the remaining
12.7% (61/480) were other contexts, such as embryos, mouse embryonic fibroblasts
(MEFs) and so forth. The observation that a large proportion (30.8% =
18.1% + 12.7%) of TF+TG+ samples were biological contexts not
known to express Oct4 (-Oct4) shows the noisy nature of
PED. This makes it challenging to correctly predict whether an individual sample truly
exhibits functional TF activity. However, the primary goal of ChIP-PED is not to correctly
identify TF-active samples, but to identify TF-active biological contexts. Thus, ChIP-PED
takes advantage of the fact that each biological context has multiple samples in the PED
compendium to predict TF-active biological contexts by reporting the contexts with a
statistically significant proportion of TF+TG+ samples.

In total, ChIP-PED predicted 28 biological contexts were enriched with TF+TG+
activity at a Bonferroni-corrected P-value cut-off of 0.05 (Supplementary Table S2). Among these, 89.3% (25/28) were different
+Oct4 contexts, and 10.7% (3/28) were
-Oct4 contexts related to differentiating ESCs and EBs. The 28
statistically enriched contexts covered 47.9% (230/480) of the TF+TG+
samples. These samples were from multiple laboratories (e.g. normal undifferentiated ESCs:
11 experiments), confirming that the observed enrichment in ESCs was unlikely to be caused
by experimental artifacts or laboratory or batch effects. More importantly, ChIP-PED
filtered out most -Oct4 biological contexts: 30.8% (148/480)
TF+TG+ samples were from -Oct4 contexts, whereas only
10.7% (3/28) of the TF+TG+-enriched contexts were from
-Oct4 contexts, and among the samples of the 28
TF+TG+-enriched contexts, only 8.7% (20/230) were -Oct4
samples. Therefore, by integrating information from multiple samples, predictions made at
the context level are more accurate than at the sample level.

Next, we analyzed human MYC, a TF known to be involved in multiple
tumors (). We identified 1716 activated and 617 repressed target genes from a
compilation of eight TF perturbation datasets along with 12 ChIPx datasets (Supplementary Tables S1 and S3). The target genes were required to be differentially expressed in the
same direction in ≥50% of the TF perturbation datasets and
MYC-bound in ≥50% of the ChIPx datasets. The aim was to
identify the core MYC regulatory target genes that were cell-type
independent across multiple MYC-active contexts. As expected,
MYC regulatory activity was significantly enriched in numerous tumor
types (B and A and Supplementary Table S3): 74.7% of the 521 TF+TG+ samples
were tumors, which was significantly higher than the background percentage of 46.0%
for all 13 182 samples in the human PED compendium (one-sided P &lt;
0.001, binomial test). Among these samples, ChIP-PED predicted 33
TF+TG+-enriched biological contexts. Many of the predictions were found to be
correct, such as B-cell lymphomas, which have been shown to have functionally active MYC
protein ().

Successful predictions were also made when analyzing mouse Gata1 target
genes from erythroid contexts, mouse Jarid2 target genes from ESCs, human
STAT1 target genes from HeLaS3 cells and human ESR1
target genes from estrogen-treated MCF7 cells (Supplementary Tables S1, S4–S7). ChIP-PED found enriched Gata1 expression and
target gene activity in expected biological contexts related to erythrocyte and
megakaryocyte development, such as in fetal liver, common myeloid progenitor cells and
murine erythroleukemia cells (C; ). ChIP-PED
also predicted STAT1 functional activity in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMC) infected with hepatitis C and malaria, consistent with current knowledge of
STAT1 regulatory functions (D; ; ). Jarid2 activity, a known repressor with an essential role
in embryonic development, was enriched in expected cell types, such as undifferentiated
ESCs and induced pluripotent stem cells (Supplementary Fig. S2A; ). Finally, ChIP-PED correctly predicted ESR1
functional activity in breast cancer-related cell types, such as MCF7 cells (Supplementary Fig. S2C; ).

For the six TFs analyzed, ChIP-PED made 178 TF+TG+ predictions listed in
Supplementary Tables S2–S7 (Oct4: 28,
MYC: 33, Gata1: 37, STAT1: 12,
Jarid2: 41 and ESR1: 27). To systematically evaluate
ChIP-PED prediction accuracy, we examined all predictions through a survey of existing
literature. We found that 90 of 178 (50.6%) biological contexts predicted to be
enriched with TF+TG+ activity were functionally validated in previous
experiments (see Section 2). For example in the Oct4 analysis, 20 of the
28 predictions were functionally validated, even though 25 of the 28 predictions were
known to express Oct4 RNA (i.e. +Oct4 as described
earlier). This is because functional experiments demonstrating changes in phenotype after
perturbing Oct4 or showing TF binding with associated transcriptional
response of target genes could only be found for 20 predictions; therefore, we only
counted those 20 predictions as functionally validated. The 50.6% accuracy rate is
a conservative estimate, as the remaining predictions may not necessarily be false
positives, but instead may represent unknown/novel functional relationships. Altogether,
these results demonstrate that given the target genes of a TF defined from ChIPx and TF
perturbation data from one or a few biological contexts, ChIP-PED is capable of
discovering TF-active contexts from a broad spectrum of PED samples.

Searching through PED only for TF+ samples or only for TG+ samples, rather than
TF+ and TG+ samples, may result in substantially decreased ChIP-PED prediction
accuracy and number of functionally validated predictions. For instance, when we modified
ChIP-PED to search only for TF+ samples, we found that only 40.0% (62/155) of
the predicted TF+ contexts were functionally validated in previous experiments
compared with 50.6% (90/178) when using ChIP-PED to search for TF+ and
TG+ samples (Supplementary Tables S2–S7). Conversely, searching for only TG+
samples resulted in only 34.0% (67/197) functionally validated TG+ predictions
(Supplementary Tables S2–S7). Thus, it is useful to check both TF
expression and target gene activity of each context to identify TF+ and TG+
samples when predicting TF-active biological contexts.

TF target genes can vary from one cell type to another. If two known TF-active contexts
do not share any target genes, then ChIP-PED will not be able to predict either context
using target genes constructed from the other context. To test whether ChIP-PED can still
be effective when only a minority of the target genes are shared, we used ChIP-PED to
analyze Stat3 target genes constructed from mouse CD4+ T cells and
Th17 cells, which are both contexts in which Stat3 plays an important
regulatory role (; ). We found that ChIP-PED was able to successfully recover both CD4+ T
cells and Th17 cells when analyzing target genes defined from the other context, even
though &lt;30% of the target genes were in common (Supplementary Method 1.10, Supplementary Table S8 and
Supplementary Fig. S5).

3.3 ChIP-PED can expand the scope of possible functional discoveries
ChIP-PED would not be useful if the predicted biological contexts were always closely
related to the context in which the experimental data were generated. Our results indicate
otherwise: among the 90 of 178 (50.6%) predictions supported by previous functional
experiments, 40 (44.4%) are in contexts unrelated to the context(s) in which the
experimental data used to construct the TF target genes were obtained (Supplementary Tables S2–S7).

Furthermore, ChIP-PED can provide additional biological insights that otherwise could not
be made using standard ChIPx analyses. For example, after the initial
STAT1 ChIP-PED analysis described in Section 3.2, we found many
hepatitis C-infected PBMCs predictions from experiment GSE7123 (Supplementary Table S5 and
Supplementary Method 1.11). To examine STAT1 functional
activity in hepatitis C-infected PBMCs in more detail, we searched for all contexts in
GSE7123 and also found healthy PBMCs along with the predicted hepatitis C-infected PBMCs.
We then used ChIP-PED to compare TF expression and TG activity in each context and found
that ETF and ATG values were
significantly different between healthy and hepatitis C-infected PBMCs, with a gradual
decrease in ETF and ATG values as
patients recovered from infection (Supplementary Table S5, 
and Supplementary Fig. S6). When reviewing both of the original publications,
the STAT1 ChIPx study () and the study that generated the gene expression
profiles from hepatitis C-infected PBMCs (), we found that neither study had reported this
finding. To verify whether this observation was correct, we searched through existing
literature and found an entirely independent experiment that showed in a series of
overexpression and siRNA-mediated knock-down experiments of STAT1 in
hepatitis C virus-infected PBMCs that STAT1 protein was indispensable for
the control of hepatitis C virus expression (). Series of ChIP-PED plots depicting the gradual decrease in
STAT1 expression and target gene (TG) activity when blood samples
are successively drawn from hepatitis C-infected patients as they recover after
treatment with interferon and ribavirin from Day 1, 2, 7, 14 to 28 of recovery
(GSE7123). Gray points are all samples in the GPL96 compendium, and colored points
are the samples from the infected PBMCs in GSE7123. The x-axis is
STAT1 expression (ETF) and the
y-axis is TG activity (ATG). The mean
ETF and ATG of each
group of PBMCs are indicted at the top of each plot. Normal PBMCs (bottom right in
black) in GSE7123 fall almost entirely out of the TF+TG+ cut-offs (the
dashed lines), which suggests that only when infected with hepatitis C is
STAT1 functionally active in PBMCs



3.4 ChIP-PED can discover novel TF-active contexts
Besides verifying that ChIP-PED is able to correctly predict known TF-active biological
contexts, we also experimentally investigated whether the predictions that were not
functionally validated could possibly represent unknown TF-active biological contexts. As
a proof-of-concept, we used our ChIP-PED analysis of human MYC to
illustrate the discovery of a novel MYC-active context. Among the
enriched TF+TG+ predictions from the MYC ChIP-PED analysis, 18
of 33 (54.5%) biological contexts were not supported by functional experiments that
demonstrated MYC functional activity (Supplementary Table S3). One of the non-functionally validated contexts was
A673 cells (A), which were established
from a patient with Ewing sarcoma (). Although Ewing
tumor has been previously shown to exhibit high-MYC expression (), the
functional role of MYC protein in Ewing tumor currently remains uncharacterized. To verify
the novel prediction that MYC protein plays a functional role in Ewing tumor, we assessed
the phenotype changes of independent Ewing sarcoma cell lines on MYC
knockdown. Knocking down of MYC using shMYC in TC71 and MHH-ES Ewing
sarcoma cell lines resulted in a substantially slower proliferation rate and
tumorigenicity when compared with control cells (B and C and Supplementary Figs S7 and S8). Furthermore, xenograft of control and shMYC TC71 Ewing sarcoma cells
into immunodeficient mice (NOD/SCID/IL-2γ null) resulted in a significant decrease
in volume and weight for the MYC knockdown tumors after 6 weeks of growth
(D). Subsequent isolation of the
tumors confirmed the decrease in MYC protein by western blot analysis (E). These results strongly support the novel
prediction that the MYC protein plays a key functional role in Ewing tumor. MYC analysis and
validation. (A) MYC TF+TG+ biological
contexts (similar contexts are grouped) and the number of
MYC+TG+ samples (orange) and number of
non-MYC+TG+ samples (blue) are shown. The majority of
TF+TG+ samples are tumor types. (B) Decrease in proliferation
of TC71 cells on knockdown of MYC. Control and shMyc TC71 cells
were evaluated for changes in proliferation rates by using a cell viability reagent,
CCK-8. Two thousand cells were initially plated into individual 96 wells and
assessed daily for changes in growth and proliferation. (C) Decreased
tumorigenicity as assessed by soft-agar assay for shMyc TC71 cells. Control TC71
cells developed significant soft-agar colonies within 2–3 weeks, whereas the
shMyc cells formed only a few miniscule colonies over the same time.
(D) Graphic display of differences in tumor weight comparing control
and shMyc tumors. On average, the shMyc tumors weighed only 20% of control
tumors. Vertical error bars indicate the standard deviation of the tumor volume. The
P-value is obtained from a two-sided t-test.
(E) Western blot analysis for MYC protein, c-Myc, in control and
shMyc cells at 0 (Pre) and 6 weeks (Post). Actin is provided as a loading control.
Blot displays decrease in MYC protein levels on stable expression of shMyc in TC71
cells



When studying the 88 functionally unverified predictions across the six TFs analyzed, we
found that 51 of the 88 (58.0%) predictions were supported by other lines of
indirect evidence in existing literature, such as experimentally observed high-TF protein
level in the predicted context (Supplementary Tables S2–S7). Thus, these predictions are likely to
represent previously unknown functional predictions between each TF regulatory pathway and
context, which further demonstrates that ChIP-PED can discover known and unknown TF-active
biological contexts. In total, 141 of 178 (79.2%) TF+TG+ predictions for
the six TFs analyzed were either directly supported by functional evidence (90 of 178) or
indirectly supported in existing literature (51 of 178).

3.5 Effect of modifications to the ChIP-PED analysis
Many TFs regulate a subset of their target genes through distal enhancers. Recent tools,
such as GREAT (), have shown that by properly accounting for distal regulatory sites, one
can improve the functional analysis of TF-binding sites. In our ChIP-PED analyses, we
assigned peaks to genes if the peak overlapped with the −10- to +5-kb region
around each gene transcription start site, which may miss distal TF regulatory activity.
This in turn may affect ChIP-PED prediction accuracy. To investigate, we generated
ChIP-PED predictions for ESR1 using target genes in estrogen-treated MCF7 cells derived
from chromatin interaction analysis by paired-end tag sequencing (ChIA-PET), a method
better able to link distal regulatory sites to TF-binding targets (), and compared them with
predictions made using target genes defined by ChIP-seq using the −10- to +5-kb
window. We found that ChIA-PET-based predictions were similar to ChIP-seq–based
predictions, and the former had slightly higher functional prediction accuracy of
43.5% compared with 40.7% (Supplementary Method 1.12 and Supplementary Table S7). We also analyzed all six TFs by using multiple
annotation window sizes to annotate ChIPx peaks. Different window sizes produced
comparable prediction accuracies at the default significance cut-off. However, the
−10- to +5-kb window size produced the largest number (i.e. highest power) of
functionally validated and/or indirectly supported predictions (Supplementary Method 1.12 and Supplementary Tables S9 and S10). Thus, our results suggest that the −10- to +5-kb window
represents a reasonable choice as a default annotation region.

We also compared how well a median, rather than mean, target gene activity measure would
perform and found the predictions and prediction accuracy to be almost the same; across
all six TFs, 171 predictions were identical between the two measures accounting for
98.8% (171/173) of the median-based predictions and 96.1% (171/178) of the
mean-based predictions (Supplementary Method 1.13 and Supplementary Fig. S9). In addition, we checked whether predicted biological
contexts with more samples in the compendium were more or less accurate than predicted
contexts with fewer samples. Our results were unable to find a clear monotone relationship
between sample count for a given biological context and prediction accuracy (Supplementary Method 1.14 and Supplementary Table S11).

4 DISCUSSION
We have shown that ChIP-PED can improve the analysis of ChIPx data by integrating publicly
available gene expression data. Given a TF and its target genes, ChIP-PED examines the
expression of the TF and the activity of its target genes across an assortment of diverse
biological contexts to search for contexts with enriched regulatory activity of the TF. This
process may lead to the discovery of novel functional connections between TF regulatory
pathways and diseases, thus providing a cost effective way to expand knowledge from one
ChIPx study to other research areas.

We view ChIP-PED as an exploratory tool for fast and cost-effective hypothesis generation
and screening. In this respect, the default cut-offs that define high- or low-TF expression
or TG activity should be primarily used for initial exploration or first-pass automatic
hypothesis screening, rather than as strict optimal cut-offs that apply to all TFs. Based on
our real data analysis experience, we found it difficult to set a single consistent cut-off
that was optimal across all TFs, as TFs can vary greatly in terms of regulatory behavior
(). We, therefore, provide users with
the flexibility to choose their own cut-offs, which can be adjusted to decrease or increase
the number of predicted contexts (Supplementary Method 1.15).

ChIP-PED acts primarily as a guide to highlight biological contexts that would be good
leads for experimental investigation. As such, we do not expect all ChIP-PED predictions to
be correct nor for ChIP-PED to recover all TF-active biological contexts. This, however,
does not prevent ChIP-PED from being a useful and unique tool: our analyses have shown that
it can predict many known and new TF-active contexts with reasonable accuracy, and there
currently exists no other computational method for analyzing ChIPx data that performs a
similar task.

Although we have shown that ChIP-PED is able to capture pertinent biological information in
PED, better statistical models are still needed to address technical biases and variations
because of laboratory and batch effects. A natural extension of ChIP-PED would be to analyze
multiple TFs and their TGs together to better connect cooperative TF regulatory pathways to
cell types and diseases. Similarly, more work is also needed to understand how homologous
TFs or other TFs with similar regulatory functions impact the regulatory activity of the TF
of interest in different contexts.

Our study is not necessarily the best or only way to integrate ChIPx and PED; however, to
the best of our knowledge, this is the first systematic study of using PED to enhance ChIPx
analyses in human and mouse. We hope that ChIP-PED will inspire new computational approaches
that continue to maximize the value of ChIP-seq and ChIP-chip experiments.

Funding: National Institutes of Health
(R01HG005220 and R01HG006282 to R.A.I and
H.J.); National Institutes of Health training
(T32GM074906 to G.W.); St. Baldrick’s Career
Development Award (to J.T.Y.).

Conflict of Interest: none declared.

Supplementary Material
Supplementary Data
