Introduction
Exosomes are membrane vesicles 30–100
nm in diameter that
are released by cells and present in most, if not all, biological
fluids including blood, urine, saliva, and so forth. Exosomes are
believed to facilitate cell-to-cell communication, as there is increasing
evidence that exosomes can deliver functional cargo in the form of
proteins, mRNA, and miRNA, to recipient cells in vitro and in vivo.(−) The innate ability of exosomes to affect the phenotypes of recipient
cells by delivery of naturally incorporated cargo has excited the
drug delivery field. While there has been some success in delivering
drugs using exosomes,, there is growing evidence that
a surface targeting moiety must be present for efficient delivery.
A number of groups have recently reported that intravenously injected
exosomes quickly localize in the liver and spleen.− Conjugation
of targeting ligands, such as antibodies and peptides, to the surface
of exosomes may enable specific interactions of exosomes with target
cells. To this end, we propose the use of click chemistry to functionalize
the surface of exosomes. In addition to being used to affect exosome
biodistribution, we foresee click chemistry as an efficient tool to
label exosomes with fluorescent, radioactive, and MRI agents for precise in vivo tracking of injected exosomes.

Copper-catalyzed
azide alkyne cycloaddition (click chemistry) is
a highly efficient reaction between an alkyne and an azide that forms
a triazole linkage. Click chemistry reactions are significantly accelerated
in the presence of a Cu(I) catalyst, and proceed in a variety of solvents
including water, alcohols, and DMSO. Use
of click chemistry has grown exponentially since its introduction
in 1999 due to mild reaction conditions, easily available reagents, and most importantly, high efficiency compared
to traditional cross-linking chemistries (e.g., carbodiimide)., Use of click chemistry with biomacromolecules is especially advantageous
as there are rarely any nonaromatic double bonds for undesirable side
reactions to take place.,

In this study
we report the successful conjugation of azide-fluor
545 to exosomes chemically modified with alkyne groups. Conjugation
chemistry had no impact on the size of exosomes, nor was there any
change in the extent of exosome association with recipient cells.
A goal of this study was to determine the number of alkyne groups
cross-linked, with our methods, to exosomal proteins. Overmodification
of antibodies with small molecules has been shown to cause a decrease
in antibody binding affinities, while minimal modifications (1–5)
have resulted in little to no loss in function.− Similarly, we believe overmodification of exosomal
proteins with alkyne groups, which are necessary for click chemistry
reactions, might inhibit exosomal protein function. Because we could
not directly measure alkyne modification on exosomes, liposomes of
similar size and concentration to exosome samples were prepared with
varying concentration of terminal alkyne groups extending out from
the liposome surface. Using a standard curve of the extent of azide-fluor
545 conjugation to liposomes, we were able to estimate the extent
of alkyne modification on exosomal proteins. Due to its specificity
and efficiency, we believe that this robust technique is superior
to other approaches to exosome labeling, and could benefit the burgeoning
field of exosome research.

Results
Conjugation of Azide-Fluor
545 to Exosomes
Exosomes
used for conjugation were prepared as previously described. To ensure we were working with isolated exosomes,
4T1 exosome samples were analyzed using mass spectrometry (). Examination
of the results revealed the presence of 54 unique proteins in 4T1
exosome samples including many of the canonical markers of exosomes:
Heat Shock Proteins 70 and 90; Ras-related protein 10 (RAB-10 and
others); Annexins 1, 2, 5, and 6; Pyruvate kinase (PKM); Tyrosine
3-monooxygenase/tryptophan 5-monooxygenase activation protein (YWHAG);
and actin. A Vesiclepedia (http://microvesicles.org/) search in June 2014 revealed that each protein found, using LC/MS,
in 4T1 exosomes samples had been previously linked with exosomes.
Additionally, nearly all the proteins identified also are classified
in the UniProtKB Gene Ontology Cellular Component sections as members
of “extracellular vesicles exosomes”, adding more support
to the notion that the proteins identified were derived from exosomes
(http://www.uniprot.org/).

In order to conjugate
exosomes with azide-fluor 545, exosomes were functionalized with a
terminal alkyne group. Amine groups found on exosomal proteins or,
likely to a lesser degree, amines on the head groups on the exosomal
membrane lipid phosphatidylethanolamine, were cross-linked with the
carboxyl group of 4-pentynoic acid using carbodiimide activation.
Following the functionalization of the surface of exosomes with a
terminal alkyne, exosomes were conjugated with azide-fluor 545 using
click chemistry (Scheme ).

Modification of Exosomal
Amine Groups with a Terminal Alkyne.
Followed by conjugation of
azide-fluor 545 to exosomes using click chemistry.

Exosome Functionality Post Conjugation
To elucidate
whether cross-linking of exosomal amines to 4-pentynoic acid and subsequent
conjugation of azide-fluor 545 caused 4T1 exosomes to aggregate, the
mean size and distribution of 4T1 exosomes was measured using a NanoSight
NS300 prior to chemical modification, and after conjugation of azide-fluor
545 (Figure ). No change in the mean diameter
or size distribution was observed prior to modification (120 ±
54 nm) or after conjugation (128 ± 60 nm), suggesting the conjugation
chemistry did not perturb exosome structure.

Mean size and distribution
of 4T1 exosomes were analyzed using
a Nanosight NS300. 4T1 exosomes had a mean size of 120 ± 54 nm,
and exosomes after azide-fluor 545 conjugation had a mean size of
128 ± 60 nm.

We next set out to investigate
any changes in the ability of 4T1
exosomes to adhere/internalize with their parent cell line in vitro before and after conjugation. To compare association
of unmodified exosomes and azide-fluor 545 conjugated exosomes with
4T1 cells, 4T1 exosomes from a single preparation were split into
three sample fractions. Fraction one was labeled with the lipophilic
fluorescent marker DID and served as the unmodified control. The second
sample fraction was conjugated with azide-fluor 545, and the third
fraction was labeled with DID and conjugated with azide-fluor 545.
In order to ensure the concentration of exosomes remained equivalent
in all three sample fractions, each fraction was diluted and processed
identically, treating all three fractions as if they had been labeled
with both fluorescent probes. Exosomes from each fraction were added
to 4T1 cells cultured in a 96 well plate at a concentration of 50
μg/mL. After 4 h incubation, cells were trypsinized and placed
on ice before being analyzed using flow cytometry. The extent of adherence/internalization
for each exosome fraction with their parent cell line can be seen
in Figure . Analysis of the data suggests
that
association of exosomes with their parent cell line is unaffected
by azide-fluor 545 conjugation. The adherence/internalization profile
of unmodified exosomes labeled with DID closely resembles that of
exosomes labeled with DID and conjugated to azide-fluor 545. Similarly,
incorporation of DID into exosomes does not alter the extent of azide-fluor
545 conjugation to exosomes. The extent of adherence/internalization
of exosomes labeled with azide-fluor 545 is remarkably similar to
exosomes labeled with DID and azide-fluor 545.

Exosomes fluorescently
labeled with DID, azide-fluor 545, or both
were incubated with 4T1 cells for 4 h. Cells were analyzed using flow
cytometry for increases in fluorescence caused by adherence/internalization
of DID or azide-fluor 545 labeled exosomes. The light gray profile
in each panel represents background autofluorecence of 4T1 cells.

To further visualize the conjugation
of azide-fluor 545 to 4T1
exosomes, conjugated exosomes were incubated with 4T1 cells for 4
h. After incubation, cells were rinsed with PBS, the nucleus of cells
were fluorescently stained, and the cells were fixed before being
imaged using an OperettaTM High Content Imaging Systems instrument.
Uptake of 4T1 exosomes can be seen in Figure .

4T1 cells were incubated for 4 h with 50 μg/mL azide-fluor
545 conjugated exosomes (yellow) in panel A or with unmodified control
exosomes seen in panel B. The nuclei of cells were stained with Hoeschst
33342 (Blue). Bright field images are overlaid to visualize cell borders.

Estimating the Extent of
Exosomal Alkyne Modification
To estimate the extent of alkyne
modification to exosomal proteins,
liposomes with varying concentrations of terminal alkynes extending
from the lipid bilayer were formulated and conjugated with azide-fluor
545. A standard curve of azide-fluor 545-conjugated liposomes was
used to extrapolate the number of alkyne groups in exosome samples.
In order to make liposomes with a terminal alkyne group, the terminal
amine on the headgroup of DOPE was cross-linked with the carboxyl
group of 4-pentynoic acid using carbodiimide coupling chemistry (Scheme ). An HPLC chromatogram of modified DOPE (mDOPE)
samples revealed the presence of a new peak relative to controls (unmodified
DOPE), suggesting that DOPE modification with an alkyne group was
successfully accomplished (Figure ). Twenty-one
percent of DOPE molecules were modified with an alkyne as measured
with HPLC (See  section).

Modification of DOPE
Amine group of DOPE
was reacted
with 4-pentynoic acid using carbodiimide activation chemistry.

HPLC chromatogram of DOPE control and reacted sample containing
mDOPE. Retention time of DOPE was 15.5 min. A new peak (retention
time 22.5 min) appeared for samples cross-linked with 4-pentynoic
acid.

Liposomes were formulated with
PC:Cholesterol:DOPE/mDOPE at a mole
ratio of 1:1:1 with the DOPE/mDOPE fraction containing varying percentages
of mDOPE. Liposomes were extruded to a similar size (125 ± 20
nm) to exosome samples (120 ± 54 nm) and have equivalent particle
concentrations as measured by a NanoSight NS300 (data not shown).
Liposomes and exosomes were conjugated to azide-fluor 545 using the
same reaction conditions (Schemes  and ). For liposome samples, only mDOPE molecules on
the outer leaflet of the liposomal bilayer were available for conjugation
to azide-fluor 545, cutting the effective concentration of mDOPE roughly
in half. The extent of azide-fluor 545 conjugation to liposomes was
quantified using fluorescence. Liposomes were solubilized using Triton
X-100 to ensure azide-fluor 545 was not being quenched when conjugated
to liposomes. From a fluorescent standard curve of free azide-fluor
545, the concentration of azide-fluor 545 conjugated to liposomes,
containing varying concentration of mDOPE, could be calculated. Considering
the potential for the fluorescence of azide-fluor 545 to be quenched,
at least partially, after conjugation to exosomal proteins, absorbance
was used to calculate the concentration of azide-fluor 545 in exosome
samples. Using a logarithmic regression line fit to the data, we calculated
that a 200 μL sample containing 40 μg exosomes conjugated
with azide-fluor 545 had an alkyne group concentration of 2.06 μM
(Figure ). To estimate the number of alkyne
modifications per exosomal protein we assumed an average protein molecular
weight of 150 kDa. Our results imply that for every 150 kDa of protein,
1.5 alkyne groups modification were made.

Conjugation of Azide-Fluor
545 to Liposomes (125 ± 20 nm) Using
Click Chemistry
Use of liposomes to estimate
the extent of exosome alkyne modification.
The extent of azide-fluor 545 conjugation to liposomes (0.2 mg/mL)
with varying concentrations of terminal alkyne groups was measured
using a fluorometer. Liposomes were solubilized with Triton X-100
to ensure fluorescence of azide-fluor 545 was not being quenched.
The concentration of azide-fluor 545 conjugated to exosomes was measured
using absorbance. A logarithmic regression line fitting the data was
used to estimate the concentration of alkynes in an exosome sample.

Discussion
Click
chemistry is rapidly becoming a popular tool to functionalize
the surface of biomacromolecules, including viruses, DNA, peptides,
antibodies, liposomes, micelles, and nanoparticles with a wide variety
of conjugates.,− In this study, we have presented a novel technique that can be used
to functionalize the surface of exosomes with small molecules, large
biomacromolecules, and polymers. Functionalization of the surface
of exosomes, using click chemistry, can be foreseen to affect exosome
biodistribution through conjugation of targeting moieties, and potentially
lead to improved methods for tracking exosomes in vivo through conjugation of fluorescent, radioactive, and MRI contrast
agents. Reaction conditions, using our methods, did not alter exosome
size and function. Furthermore, using liposomes with known alkyne
concentrations, we estimated approximately 1.5 alkyne modifications
were made for every 150 kDa of exosomal protein. In order to gauge
the impact of alkyne modification on exosomal function, a comparison
can be drawn to the chemical modification of antibodies. Small molecule
modification of antibodies has been shown to have little to no effect
on antibody binding affinities when approximately five or fewer modifications
are made.− This bolsters our conclusion that exosome modification using our
methods has little to no impact on exosome functionality.

Materials and
Methods
Materials
1,2-Dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine
(DOPE: 18:1 (Δ9-Cis) was purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids
(Alabaster, AL). N-(3-(Dimethylamino)propyl)-N′-ethylcarbodiimide (EDC), N-hydroxysuccinimide
(NHS), 4-pentynoic acid, copper(II) sulfate pentahydrate, l-ascorbic acid, bathophenanthroline, Triton X-100, and sodium bicarbonate
were obtained from Sigma–Aldrich Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO).
BCA Protein Assay Reagent and HPLC grade methanol and water were purchased
from Fisher Scientific (Pittsburgh, PA). Mouse mammary carcinoma (4T1)
cells were acquired from ATCC (Manassas, VA). Roswell Park Memorial
Institute (RPMI) medium 1640, 1× phosphate buffered saline (PBS),
fetal bovine serum (FBS), trypsin, and penicillin–streptomycin
were all purchased from Mediatech, Inc. (Manassas, VA). Plasmocin
was obtained from InvivoGen (San Diego, CA). Hoechst 33342 nucleic
acid stain, and DID (1,1′-dioctadecyl-3,3,3′,3′-tetramethylindocarbocyanine
perchlorate) was obtained from Life Technologies (Carlsbad, CA). Azide-Fluor
545 was purchased from KeraFAST, Inc. (Boston, MA). Formalin was purchased
from JT Baker (Center Valley, PA). Sepharose CL-4B was purchased from
GE Healthcare (Uppsala, Sweeden). Sequencing grade trypsin was obtained
from Promega Corporation (Madison, WI).

Exosome Isolation
Exosomes were isolated from the supernatant
of 4T1 cells as previously described. Briefly, 4T1 cells lines were subcultured 3 days prior to collecting
the cell culture supernatant, allowing the cells to become 75% confluent.
4T1 cells were cultured in 5-layer BD tissue culture-treated flasks
(875 cm2). Exosomes were isolated from the supernatant
by a series of centrifugation steps: 10 min at 300g, 20 min at 20 000g, and 2 h at 120 000g. Concentrated exosomes were then washed in PBS and centrifuged
at 200 000g for 2 h on a sucrose density cushion.
The sucrose cushion consisted of three distinct layers, 12% sucrose,
30% sucrose, and 50% sucrose. Exosomes have been previously reported
to have a density ranging from 1.1 to 1.2 g/cm3.,, Subsequently, the 30% sucrose
fraction and the top of the 50% sucrose fraction were collected, washed
with PBS, and centrifuged at 120 000g for
2 h. The pelleted exosomes were resuspended in 200 μL PBS. Exosome
protein content was quantified using the BCA protein assay. All exosomes
used in this study were derived from 4T1 cells.

Mass Spectrometry
Analysis
100 μg of isolated
exosomes from 4T1 cells were digested using performic acid. A performic
acid solution was prepared in a 1:19 ratio of 30% hydrogen peroxide:formic
acid. Perfromic acid solution was warmed to 55 °C for 3 min immediately
prior to use. Three volumes of performic acid were added to the exosome
sample and incubated on ice for 3 h. The reaction was quenched using
five volumes of ice-cold double-distilled water. Samples were then
dried to completion using a speed vacuum and subsequently resuspended
in 50 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. To the sample, sequencing
grade trypsin was added in a 1:50 trypsin:protein ratio and incubated
overnight at 37 °C. The following morning the samples were thoroughly
dried using a speed vacuum and the pellet resuspended in 30 μL
of 0.1% formic acid in water. The tryptic digests was separated using
a 5–50% ACN gradient over 120 min on a C18 column (Michrocom,
Agilent). MS/MS spectra were collected using the Amazon Speed ion
ETD trap equipped with CaptiveSpray nanoBooster ionization source
(Bruker Daltonics) at the University of Colorado School of Pharmacy
Mass Spectrometry Core. Acetonitrile enriched nitrogen gas was used
as a sheath gas to increase the charge state of peptide ions and enhance
identifications. Data was processed using ProteinScape 3.1. Database
searches were performed against all mouse entries in the Swiss Prot
database using the Mascot Server using 0.6 Da peptide mass tolerance
and 0.5 Da MS/MS tolerance allowing for 1 missed cleavage and modifications
for dioxidation of methionine and trioxidation of cysteine. Identification
of proteins was considered significant if at least 2 unique peptides
were used for identification.

Alkyne Modification of
Exosomal Proteins
To 1 mL PBS
(10 mM PO43–, 137 mM NaCl, and 2.7 mM
KCl) were added n-hydroxysuccinimide (35 mg, 0.3
mmol, 1 equiv) and 4-pentynoic acid (29 mg, 0.3 mmol, 1 equiv), the
pH buffered to 7.4 with sodium bicarbonate, and the resulting solution
stirred on ice for 1 h. To the reaction mixture 1-ethyl-3-(3-carbodiimide
dimethylaminopropyl) (46 mg, 0.3 mmol, 1 equiv) was added and the
solution was stirred on ice for 1 h. Four microliters of the reaction
mixture were added to 160 μg exosomes in 150 μL PBS and
stirred for 24 h (Scheme ). Exosomes were
purified from excess reaction material using a Sepharose CL-4B column
conditioned with PBS, pH 7.4.

Alkyne Modification of
DOPE
To a 100 μL solution
of chloroform containing DOPE (2.0 mg, 2.7 μmol, 1 equiv), 4-pentynoic
acid (290 μg, 3.0 μmol, 1.1 equiv) was added, followed
by 1-ethyl-3-(3-carbodiimide dimethylaminopropyl) (620 μg, 3.2
μmol, 1.2 equiv). To facilitate the coupling of 4-pentynoic
acid to DOPE, 200 μL of methanol was added, followed by 80 μL
of ddH2O. The reaction mixture (all one phase) was mixed
using a magnetic stir bar at room temperature for 3 h. A set of control
samples were prepared without 4-pentyonic acid in parallel to reactant
samples. Reactant and control samples were subsequently dried using
a nitrogen stream and stored at −20 °C.

HPLC-UV Analysis
To measure the extent of DOPE modification
with an alkyne group, a Shimadzu analytical HPLC system (LC-20AB,
DGU-20A, CTO-20A, Sil-20A HT) equipped with SPD-20A UV–vis
detector was used (Shimadzu Scientific Instruments, Inc.; Columbia,
MD). A guard column and an Aligent Zorbax extended-C18 50 × 4.6
mm (5 μm) column (Santa Clara, CA) were installed. The column
temperature was set to 40 °C with a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min.
An isocratic method (20 min run time; 19:1 methanol/water mobile phase)
was used, and UV detection was monitored at 205 nm. A 10 μL
volume was injected for reactant samples, control samples, and DOPE
standards of known concentrations. A standard curve was used to quantify
the concentration of DOPE in reactant and control samples. The extent
of DOPE modification was quantified by subtracting the concentration
of DOPE in reactant samples from control samples. We concluded that
a decrease in DOPE in reactant samples was due to modification with
an alkyne group. Consistent with this conclusion, we observed a new
peak, not present in the DOPE control samples, in the reactant samples
(Figure ). Modified DOPE within this text
will be referred to as mDOPE.

Liposome Preparation
Liposomes were formulated by mixing
egg PC with cholesterol and DOPE/mDOPE at a 1:1:1 molar ratio in chloroform
in glass vials. Liposomes were formulated with varying molar percentages
of mDOPE (7.3%, 1.21%, 0.202%, 0.033%, 0.006%). Lipid mixtures in
glass vials were dried under nitrogen gas and placed under vacuum
to remove residual chloroform. To the glass vials containing the dried
lipids, 550 μL PBS was added and subsequently sonicated to remove
lipids from the glass vial walls. The lipid/PBS mixture was removed
and extruded through 100 nm pore size polycarbonate membranes (Avestin,
Ottawa, ON). Liposome formulations had a mean diameter of 125 ±
20 nm as measured using a Nanosight NS300 (Amesbury, Wiltshire, UK).

Click Chemistry
Click chemistry methods were adapted
from the works of Hassane et al., Zhang et al., and Kumar et al.,, To 80 μg of liposome or
80 μg of exosomes (weight based on protein content) in 150 μL
PBS, 7 μL of 0.32 M copper(II) sulfate pentahydrate, 35.5 μL
of 1.44 M l-ascorbic acid (pH buffered to 7.4 with sodium
bicarbonate), 16.4 μL of 0.27 M bathophenanthrolinedisulfonic
acid disodium salt trihydrate, and 4 μL of 8.5 mM azide-fluor
545 were added stepwise at room temperature in a 1.5 mL glass vial.
All reactants were dissolved in PBS immediately before use. Total
sample volume was 212.9 μL. The head space of each sample vial
was purged with nitrogen before mixing with a magnetic stir bar at
room temperature for 3 h. To separate liposomes and exosomes from
the reaction mixture, samples were run through a Sepharose CL-4B column
conditioned with PBS (pH 7.4) or RMPI supplemented with 10% FBS, diluting
the sample to 400 μL.

Sizing
Exosomes and liposomes were
sized using Nanoparticle
Tracking Analysis. Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis was performed on
a NanoSight NS300. Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis visualizes particles
by imaging the light scattered when exposed to the light of a laser,
and relates the rate of particle movement in liquid, due to Brownian
motion, to particle size. Exosomes were analyzed prior to and after
addition of azide-fluor 545. Briefly, 1 μg of exosomes (based
on protein weight) or liposomes was diluted in 1000 μL PBS.
Samples were run and analyzed with Nanosight NTA 2.3 software. For
analysis, samples were infused into the NanoSight NS300 at rate of
10 (arbitrary units) using a syringe pump. Data was collected for
60 s and analyzed using NanoSight NTA 2.3 software.

Fluorescent
Labeling of Exosomes
DID was used to fluorescently
label the bilayer of exosomes. Five microliters of DID at a concentration
of 64 μg/mL in ethanol was mixed with 160 μg exosomes
in 100 μL PBS for 1 h. Any unincorporated DID was removed using
a Sepharose CL-4B column conditioned with PBS, pH 7.4.

Flow Cytometry
All flow cytometry experiments were
performed on a Becton Dickinson FACScan. Briefly, 10 μg exosomes
in 200 μL cell culture media (RPMI supplemented with 10% FBS)
labeled with the membrane stain DID at 0.2% by exosome weight, azide-fluor
545, or both, were added to cells cultured in a Costar 96 well cell
culture flat bottom tissue culture plate. After 4 h incubation, cells
were rinsed with PBS, removed by trypsinization, suspended in PBS,
and put on ice. Cells were immediately analyzed by flow cytometry.
A minimum of ≥5000 events were acquired per sample. The y-axis of flow cytometry data is presented as a relative
count of cells, where each data set is fit to have equivalent maximum
peak heights in order to facilitate visual comparison between samples.
Using this type of analysis, the area under the curve does not indicate
the absolute number of cells analyzed. Manual compensation was performed
to account for fluorescent spillover between detectors.

Fluorescent
Imaging of Exosome Uptake
Fluorecent images
were taken using an Operetta High Content Imaging System instrument
(PerkinElmer; Waltham, MA). 4T1 cells were grown on a 96-well black
walled plate made by Greiner Bio-One (Monroe, NC). Five micrograms
of
exosomes in 100 μL RMPI supplemented with 10% FBS, labeled with
azide-fluor 545, were incubated with cells for 4 h. Cell media was
subsequently removed and cells were rinsed with PBS twice. Cells were
then stained with 20 μL Hoechst 33342 nucleic acid stain at
a concentration of 10 μg/mL in PBS for 15 min. Hoeschst 33342
stain was then removed and cells washed with PBS. Cells were fixed
for 10 min with 3.7% formalin followed by washing with PBS. Images
were processed on Harmony 3.5.1 software manufactured by PerkinElmer.

Exosome Absorbance
To measure the extent of azide-fluor
545 conjugation to exosomes, a UV spectrophotometer (Agilent 8453
UV–visible Spectroscopy System) was used. Absorbance was used
to measure azide-fluor 545 conjugation to exosomes, because we were
concerned that the fluorescence of azide-fluor 545 might be quenched,
at least partially, after conjugation to exosomal proteins. The molar
extinction coefficient of azide-fluor 545 (92 000 cm–1 M–1 at 545 nm) was used to calculate the molar
concentration of azide-fluor 545 in exosome samples.

Liposome Fluorescence
Fluorescence was used to measure
the extent of azide-fluor 545 conjugation to liposomes containing
varying levels of modified DOPE. Using a Fluoromax, (Photon Technology
International, Birmingham, New Jersey) with 2 nm slit widths, samples
were excited at 540 nm and emission analyzed at 560 nm. To ensure
azide-fluor 545 was not being quenched, liposomes were mixed with
Triton X at a final concentration of 0.5% and vortexed for 1 min prior
to analysis. A standard curve of free azide-fluor 545 was used to
calculate the molar concentration of azide-flour 545 in each liposome
sample.

Supporting Information Available
Proteomic
analysis of 4T1 exosomes.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc500291r_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like
to thank John Carpenter for use of
the Nanosight NS300. We would also like to thank Mike Wempe for use
of the Shimadzu analytical HPLC system. Additionally, we would like
to thank Brian Reid and the High Throughput and High Content Screening
Core at the University of Colorado Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical
Sciences for use of the Operetta High Content Imaging System instrument.
This work was supported by NIH/NIBIB grant #1RO1 EB016378 to T.J.A.
and M.W.G.

