Introduction
An inevitable consideration
regarding the use of nanoparticles
(NPs) for biomedical applications is the formation of a biological
complex around the NPs when exposed to biological fluids, cells, and
tissues. Nanoparticles, due to the nature of their surface, rapidly
adsorb surrounding proteins to form a protein complex, which is composed
of two classes of proteins based on their affinity toward the NP surface:
a class of high affinity proteins which binds tightly to NPs and a
low affinity class whose adsorption is dynamic, and these proteins
freely exchange over time., The recognition of protein
complex formation around NPs has led to an emerging concern for the
need to distinguish and understand the synthetic vs biological identity
of NPs. The acquired biological identity of NPs due to complex formation
with biological entities is what cells “see”. It is this identity which dictates the long-term
NP interactions, alters the physiological response, and determines
the fate of NPs including clearance, biodistribution, and toxicity.

Molecular identification of the biological interactome of NPs has
been shown to provide critical information about the encounter of
NPs with various biological entities during the in vivo journey., The composition of the interactome is specific
to the environment NPs interact with and can therefore report on protein
distribution changes that occur during tumorigenesis. In addition,
proteomic signatures of the biological interactome can be altered
by modifying physicochemical properties of the NPs such as size, surface
functionalization, and charge, and also the composition of the core
NPs (e.g., inorganic NPs such as gold (Au), silver (Ag), and platinum).
The tailoring of the biological interactome by NPs may provide molecular
insight into the development of tumor growth and metastasis.

The formation and characterization of protein
corona around various
NPs such as gold,, polystryrene, silica,, copolymer,, and various other compositions has
been investigated mainly to understand its role in NP clearance, biodistribution,
and toxicity. However, we hypothesize that the sequestration of proteins
around the NP surface provides an excellent opportunity to probe these
very proteins that are present in the biological milieu and responsible
for tumorigenesis. A wide variety of proteomic approaches can be employed
to identify the components of the protein corona. Hence, we believe that NP surfaces provide a unique platform
to sequester, enrich, and identify new therapeutic targets for diseases,
an idea that has been evolving recently.

AuNPs have attracted wide attention in numerous biomedical
applications
such as imaging, detection, diagnosis, and therapy because of its
biocompatibility and ease of synthesis, surface modification, and
characterization. AuNPs could therefore
be used as a model system to understand protein–NP interactions.
We had previously conducted a proof-of-concept study to show how modulation
of the protein-NP complex by engineered AuNPs (positively and negatively
charged AuNPs) could be utilized to identify new therapeutic targets
in ovarian cancer. We analyzed the protein
corona from positively charged AuNP (+AuNP) and negatively
charged AuNP (−AuNP) by mass spectroscopy from lysates
of normal and ovarian cancer cells at a single time-point of 1 h.
Among the proteins identified between cancer and normal ovarian cells,
HDGF was identified as one of the unique proteins to +AuNP
particles in the corona from ovarian cancer cells. Subsequently, we
showed that silencing HDGF by siRNA in ovarian cancer cells affects
growth and proliferation. Although differential proteomics was employed
in our study to identify cancer specific biomarkers, the true dynamic
nature of protein–NP interaction was unexplored and a stringent
bioinformatics based network analysis was lacking. Furthermore, since
gold has a high affinity to bind to −NH2 and −SH
containing functionalities, proteins captured by unmodified AuNP as
opposed to surface engineered AuNP might be different in structure
as well as in biological function.

Citrate-coated gold nanoparticles
have attracted considerable attention
recently due to its ability to bind heparin binding growth factors
like VEGF and act as anti-angiogenic agents. In this context, Tsai and co-workers have reported anti-angiogenic
properties of 13 nm AuNPs in a rat model of collagen-induced arthritis. Additionally, we recently reported that 20 nm
AuNPs possesses unique properties; they
significantly reduce tumor growth and metastasis by abrogating mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) signaling and reverse epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). AuNPs have also been tested for their toxicity in
animal models. It has been observed that smaller nanoparticles of
Au (&lt;10 nm) can cause systemic toxicity to distant organs and the
toxicity decreases with increase in size of AuNPs. Therefore, it is conceivable that molecular understanding
of protein–AuNP interaction may provide useful information
regarding the biological functions of the nanoparticle including clearance,
biodistribution, toxicity, and self-therapeutic property. We hypothesized
that those proteins specifically enriched on AuNPs may play critical
roles in the development of ovarian tumor growth and metastasis. Hence,
identification and characterization of proteins from cancer and noncancer
cells around 20 nm AuNPs and understanding their interaction with
AuNP may lead to the identification of new therapeutic targets in
ovarian cancer, and provide useful information to understand the biology
of ovarian tumor growth and metastasis. In this present paper, we
investigated in detail the dynamic parameters guiding interactions
of 20 nm unmodified AuNPs with protein lysates from cancer and noncancer
ovarian cells. We approached the task by first investigating the dynamic
and competitive nature of the NP-protein complex formation by UV–visible
spectroscopy (UV–vis), dynamic light scattering (DLS), ζ-potential
measurements, and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). We then
identified the proteins on the NP surface by tandem mass spectroscopy
(MS/MS) and probed the properties of the NP attached proteins. Finally,
we assessed the enrichment of protein on AuNP surface and used graph-theory
based algorithms to identify cancer-specific hub nodes in the biological
networks. These hub proteins could serve as possible therapeutic targets
for future investigation.

Our methodology overcomes the shortcomings
of conventional MS/MS
based analysis that are insensitive to identification of low abundance
peptides in samples with high dynamic range. It is important to mention that detection of specific proteins with
Western blot (WB) or immunoprecipitation assay (IP) only requires
a few hundred molecules, while detection of proteins at the low femtomole
range by MS requires about 1 billion molecules. Thus, a protein readily
detected by WB/IP may not be in sufficient quantities to be identified
by MS. WB/IP assays are useful to preferentially
enrich and detect known proteins. The current approach reported in
this paper is suitable for enrichment and detection of unknown proteins
because the preferential enrichment and detection is governed by the
surface properties of the NPs as opposed to abundance sensitive detection
in MS and the targeted antigen–antibody interaction in the
case of WB/IP. Furthermore, precise control over nanoparticle size
and surface properties provides greater flexibility and tunability
to this approach to preferentially enrich unknown proteins relative
to the WB or IP approach. Moreover, it is well-known that the expression
of genes does not always correlate with the proteins that they translate. Therefore, our approach could be used to compliment
microarray-based analysis such as those performed in the “The
Cancer Genomic Atlas” (TCGA) network.

Results and Discussion
Strategy
The general strategy for
our study is outlined
in Scheme . We first studied the evolution
of protein complex formation around 20 nm AuNPs and then identified
the proteins that constitute the NP-protein complex from noncancer
human ovarian surface epithelial (OSE) and human ovarian carcinoma
(A2780) cell lines. We then used this information to detect differentially
expressed cancer cell-specific proteins that might play critical roles
in ovarian cancer development, growth, and metastasis.

Work Flow
Outlining the Study to Investigate Formation of Protein–Gold
Nanoparticle (AuNPs) Complex and Use This Phenomenon to Enrich Low
Abundance Proteins from Cancer Cells
Analyses conducted are aimed
to explore the interaction of proteins on the AuNP surface and to
identify proteins that could potentially function as novel therapeutic
targets.

Time-Dependent Study of Protein–Nanoparticle
Interaction
We first determined the saturation concentration
of proteins from
A2780 cancer cell lysate for 20 nm AuNP as a first step to understand
the dynamics of protein–nanoparticle interaction. Dynamics
of protein–nanoparticle interaction cannot be evaluated if
the protein concentration used is below the saturation limit to interact
with AuNPs, as most of the proteins will bind to the available AuNP
surface under such a condition and competition of the proteins toward
the AuNP surface will be minimized. Thus, we incubated varying protein
amounts (0–400 μg) from A2780 cell lysates with 1 mL
(7.0 × 1011 particles) of 20 nm AuNPs for 6 h followed
by aggregation testing against 1% sodium chloride (NaCl) solution
to determine the saturation concentration. We monitored protein–AuNP
interactions by UV–vis spectroscopy and dynamic light scattering
(DLS) measurements. The characteristic surface plasmon resonance (SPR)
band of AuNPs gradually red-shifted with the addition of increasing
amounts of proteins with a concomitant increase in absorbance before
being stabilized around 25–50 μg of proteins (, Figure S1a). These results
suggest that the saturation concentration of proteins from A2780 cell
lysates lies between 25 and 50 μg of proteins/mL of AuNPs. These
results were further supported by addition of NaCl, where a maximum
absorbance and minimum shift in the absorption maxima of SPR band
was observed for 25–50 μg of proteins (, Figure S1b). These results were corroborated
by DLS measurement of the complexes at high salt concentration (, Figure S1c) where a minimum
perturbation of the hydrodynamic (HD) radius was observed within 25–50
μg of protein. All these results taken together suggest that
the saturation concentration of A2780 cell lysate proteins on 20 nm
AuNP is ∼50 μg/mL. All of our subsequent experiments
were therefore carried out at 200 μg of protein/mL, well above
the saturation concentration of the lysate proteins.

To understand
the evolution of protein–NP interaction over time we incubated
20 nm AuNPs with 200 μg of protein lysates from OSE (noncancerous
cells) or A2780 (ovarian cancer cells) lysates for 5 min, 15 min,
1 h, 6 h, and 24 h. The formation of a protein complex around AuNPs
at all the time points was evident from the red shifts observed by
UV–vis spectroscopic analysis (, Figure S2a). The SPR of bare gold NPs was relatively
sharp and peaked at ∼520 nm, whereas interaction of NPs with
proteins lead to a broadening of the SPR band which was accompanied
by a red shift of the maxima (λmax). It has been
previously described that corona formation involves a time evolution
of a layer of loosely attached proteins to an irreversible corona. In this context, Casals et al. have reported
the hardening of the protein corona around metal and metal oxide NPs
when the corona was allowed to evolve for 48 h. Although the SPR bands of the NP-protein complex from all
time points in our study were virtually indistinguishable when unperturbed,
the time evolution of the protein-NP complex could be clearly observed
when the protein-NP complex was centrifuged to remove unbound proteins
(, Figure S2b). NPs
incubated with the protein lysates for longer time points (6 and 24
h) displayed narrower SPR bands which reflected the stability of the
protein layer around the NPs over time ( Figure S2b). Moreover,
a gradual increase in absorbance and decrease in the shift of λmax value provided further evidence of the formation and stabilization
of the protein-NP complex.

The
time evolution of protein-NP complex was also investigated
by measuring the hydrodynamic diameter (z-average)
and charge with dynamic light scattering (DLS) and ζ-potential
measurements, respectively (Figures , ). These measurements were carried out after pelleting
the NPs and resuspending the pellet in water. The DLS measurements
showed that bare NPs possessed a hydrodynamic diameter of 30 nm, but
when incubated with the protein lysates for 5 min, the NPs displayed
a broad size distribution with z-average of 283.5
nm. Over time, significant reduction of NP size was observed; after
1 h incubation, the NPs were 72.31 nm, and by 24 h, the NPs were only
59.2 nm in size (Figure ). In terms of charge,
bare NPs had a ζ-potential of −43.3 mV. After 5 and 15
min, the ζ-potential of the NPs decreased to −29.2 and
−32.1 mV, respectively, and a further lowering to −8.40
mV was noted after 24 h (Figure ). On the
other hand, when we looked at the size and ζ-potential of the
unperturbed protein-NP complex, there was no difference in size distribution
between the time points (, Figure S3). In fact the overlapping size distribution of the NP-protein
complex at all time-points had a z-average diameter
of 42.90 nm, which compared to the 22.81 nm z-average
of NPs suggested that 20 nm may be the optimal size of the bound protein
layer around 20 nm AuNPs. These observations point to the fact that,
at shorter time points, 5 min (DLS PDI = 0.508) and 15 min (DLS PDI:
0.478), a “sticky” complex was formed around the AuNPs
which made the NPs come together after centrifugation. However, at
later time points of 6 h (DLS PDI: 0.301) and 24 h (DLS PDI: 0.278),
the complex resisted interaction with each other during centrifugation
and was comparable in size to the unpelleted NP-protein complex. This
is indicative of the stability of the complex around the NPs due to
their interaction with stabilizing proteins at these later time points.
Of note is the size of the bare NPs which stayed close to 30 nm even
after pelleting (Figure ). These results suggested
that the aggregation of the NP-complex after centrifugation at shorter
time points was therefore not due to detachment of proteins from the
NP surface, as bare NPs showed no signs of aggregation upon centrifugation.
Moreover, our data suggested that the protein-NP complex is multilayered
in nature, as proteins are relatively small in size, and hence a single
protein layer would not account for the increase in the observed NP
size. The known radii of a few standard proteins are 3.55 nm (albumin,
beef serum), 5.2 nm (catalase, beef liver), and 10.7 nm (fibrinogen,
human).

Characterization of AuNPs before and after
incubation with A2780
(human ovarian carcinoma cell line) lysates for different time points
using dynamic light scattering. Measurements were done after centrifugation
to remove unattached proteins. Different colors in the graph represent
unique sample runs. The distribution of particle diameters is represented
by intensity % along with peak diameters.

Characterization of protein-NP complex revealed that adsorption
of A2780 proteins on the AuNP surface decreases ζ-potential
of the NPs over time. Measurements were done after centrifugation
to remove unattached proteins. Charge distribution is presented along
with peak values. Different colors represent unique sample runs.

To gain more insight into the
protein-NP complex formation, we
visualized the biological layer around NPs after incubating with A2780
protein lysate for 24 h by TEM (Figure ).
The NP bound proteins around NPs was negatively stained with phosphotungstic
acid which revealed that the protein-NP complex could be asymmetrical
instead of being a uniformly distributed spherical layer around the
spherical NPs. Some insoluble precipitates of phosphotungstic acid
were also present in the TEM grid which is typical of negative staining. Additionally, the TEM image suggested that NPs
could come together to form doublets and act like a singular unit
for protein-NP complex formation. These results showcased the heterogeneity
of the protein complex formation around NPs, the cause of which is
currently under investigation.

Visualization of protein layer around
AuNPs with transmission electron
microscopy after 24 h of incubation with A2780 lysates and negative
staining with phosphotungstic acid. Measurements were done with NPs
that were pelleted and washed once with water.

Molecular Identification of Proteomic Signature around NPs Using
Tandem MS
We next sought to identify the components of the
hard bound proteins at different time points using MS/MS. Again, since
the DLS measurements demonstrated that the NP-protein complex stabilized
at longer time points and did not undergo significant aggregation
after centrifugation, the NP-protein complexes were purified by centrifugation
followed by a single wash with water before analyzing them with mass
spectrometry. To assess the reproducibility of the identification
process, the NP bound protein was reduced and trypsin digested and
injected into the mass spectrometer in triplicate for independent
identifications. Venn diagrams to depict the detected proteins demonstrated
a robust reproducibility with an average of 78% of proteins being
repeatedly identified in all three replicates (, Figures S4, S5). Only proteins identified
in all three replicates were included for further analysis. Using
this identical workflow we identified the proteins from both OSE and
A2780 lysates. A total of 285 proteins were reproducibly detected
from OSE cell lysate and 219 proteins were detected from A2780 lysate.
These protein groups were most likely abundant proteins and served
as a detectable lysate pool to compare the differential property of
the attached proteins and to assess the enrichment of proteins on
the NP surface (proteins undetected after mass spectrometry analysis
of lysates). With the protein complex components being identified,
we compared the composition at different time points (Figure a). Only 213 (35.4%) OSE proteins and 129 (15.1%)
A2780 proteins were common to all time points. These proteins perhaps
form a subset of the hard NP-protein complex as they are not displaced
from the NP surface once initially bound. On the other hand, proteins
detected preferentially at 5 and 15 min were possibly the soft bound
proteins, as at these time points, there were more total and unique
proteins compared to the complex at 1, 6, and 24 h. For example, at
5 and 15 min, the number of reproducible proteins derived from A2780
lysates was 518 and 507, respectively, while at 24 h only 298 proteins
were reproducibly detected (, Figure S4). Also, at 5 and 15 min the number of unique proteins
in the protein-NP complex from A2780 were 135 and 158 compared to
only 26 unique proteins that were detected at 24 and 6 h (Figure a). When we compared the proteins detected at different
times, we observed that there was dynamic association and dissociation
of proteins that occurred on the NP surface over time (Figure b). A block of proteins was present at all the time
points while other proteins were associated at a few time points and
dissociated from the surface at later time points. Some proteins rapidly
associated and dissociated repeatedly in the monitored 24 h time period.
The evidence for multiple association and dissociation events on the
AuNP surface was intriguing, and our global examination of the adsorption
of the protein over time demonstrated the truly dynamic nature of
protein–NP interaction and complex formation. At later time
points, however, there was less exchange of proteins on the surface,
perhaps because a stable protein layer had resulted around the AuNPs
at these time points. This pointed out the importance of studying
the evolution of the NP-protein complex formation and emphasized its
temporal context. Also included in Figure b are the lysate pools (Lys), and the comparison illustrated that
not all proteins present in the complex could be detected from the
lysate pool. These proteins were most likely detected because of their
enrichment on the NP surface which signifies the importance of this
approach to identify new molecular targets which would otherwise not
have been detected due to low abundance.

Dynamic time dependent
changes in composition of protein-NP complex
derived from OSE and A2780 lysates. (a) Venn diagram comparing proteins
identified in the protein-NP complex at different time points. (b)
Detection maps show the presence (black) or absence (white) of proteins
and hence provide a global illustration of dynamic protein exchanges
occurring on the surface of AuNPs over time. Protein IDs on the Y-axis are arbitrary assignments. Proteins detected from
the respective lysate pools are included for comparison.

Effect of Molecular Weights, Isoelectric
Points, and Shared
Domains of Proteins on NP–protein Interaction
To understand
the interaction of proteins and AuNPs, we examined various characteristics
of the detected proteins that were attached to the AuNPs. Proteins
that are bound to NPs at multiple time points had a significantly
higher mean theoretical isoelectric points (pI) (7.5, 7.5, 7.7, 7.7,
and 7.7 for OSE; 7.5, 7.8, 7.0, and 7.5 for A2780) compared to the
lysate pools (6.5 for OSE; 6.3 for A2780) (Figure a,d). The proteins that were present in the NP-protein complex
at all the time points also had a similar correlation with pI, where
attached proteins had significantly higher pIs (Figure c,f). The mean pI of attached OSE and A2780 proteins was 7.7
and 7.6, respectively, whereas pI of OSE and A2780 pooled lysates
was 6.5 and 6.3. Interestingly, proteins that were bound exclusively
at 5 and 15 min had higher pIs. In the case of OSE proteins, those
attached at 5 and 15 min had an average pI of 8.3 and 8.1, and for
A2780 proteins, the pI at those time points was 7.4 and 7.6 (Figure b,e). This observation suggested that electrostatic
interaction played an important role in NP–protein interaction
at initial time points. The charge of the protein as one of the contributing
factors influencing adsorption of proteins to AuNPs was in agreement
with a previous study that reported that BSA must interact with citrate-coated
AuNPs via salt-bridges possibly between citrate and lysine residues
on the protein surface. We also examined
the molecular weights (MWs) of proteins that attached to AuNPs and
found no difference in the average MW of proteins that are attached
vs the lysate pool (, Figure S6).

Comparison of theoretical isoelectric points (pIs) of
proteins
detected in the protein-NP complex derived from OSE or A2780 lysates.
Proteins that are attached at any time point (a,d) have higher average
pI compared to respective lysate pools. Similarly, proteins that adsorb
to AuNPs exclusively at shorter time points also have higher pIs (b,e)
along with core proteins that are always present in the protein-NP
complex (c,f). Red line represents the average pI. (Tukey’s
multiple comparison test, unpaired t test *P ≤ 0.05, ** P ≤ 0.01, ***P &lt; 0.001).

We next asked whether the proteins that were attached to
the NPs
shared conserved domains which could
shed light on why some proteins adsorb onto the NP surface while others
do not. Of the many domains that were enriched, from the proteins
bound to the NP surface RRM_1, a RNA recognition motif, was enriched
in proteins from all time point complexes (Figure a). The RRM_1 a motif is approximately 90 amino acids and
encodes a central sequence of 8 aromatic and positively charged residues. This association of AuNPs with RNA or RNA related
protein machinery emerged again when we examined enrichment of biological
pathways (Figure b) and gene ontology (GO)
based functional enrichment (, Figure S7). Pathways involving ribosome, spliceosome, and gene
expression were some of the most enriched pathways along with GO terms
such as RNA binding and structural constituent of ribosome. The positive
charge of RRM_1 and the “plastic” nature of the domain
may explain the enrichment of the domain in the NP-protein complex.
Similar structural flexibility capabilities that allow RNA related
machinery to interact with RNA might be at play for interaction with
AuNPs, and hence, we see ribosome and spliceosome as one of the most
enriched pathways that the protein-NP complex proteins belong to.
This association of AuNPs with the RNA proteins might also explain
why 20 nm AuNPs inhibited proliferation of cancer cells and reversed
EMT by down-regulating transcription and secretion of multiple proteins., Also enriched on the NP surface were proteins involved in protein
folding and cytoskeleton-related processes and functions.

Analysis of
evolutionarily conserved functional domains (a) and
biological pathways (b) enriched in proteins detected at different
time points revealed that AuNPs have a high affinity to mRNA related
protein machinery. Protein domains from Pfam database and pathways
from databases KEGG (hsa*), Panther (P0*), and Reactome (REACT_*)
that are significantly enriched among one or more lists are shown.
Color of matrices indicates Bonferroni corrected P-values (P ≤ 0.05). Green indicates higher
enrichment, red indicates lower enrichment, and gray color indicates
that a given term did not reach statistical significance among the
proteins in the list. Pathway enrichment analyses were performed using
DAVID v 6.1 using default settings. Human proteome was defined as
the background. (M = min, H = hours).

Role of Macromolecular Protein Complexes on NP-Protein Complex
Formation
We next investigated whether the adsorbed proteins
were present in the NP-protein complex as a part of a macromolecular
complex and also identified complexes that were enriched on the NP
surface due to protein complex formation as an indication of biological
mechanisms including protein aggregation, three-dimensional domain swapping, or
macromolecular crowding. Figure  shows that higher complex fractions could be detected
on the NP surface from both OSE and A2780 lysates. For example, human
ribosomes have 80 proteins that form the functional complex with rRNA.
Of those, only 24% and 11% were detected in the cell lysates. Interestingly,
at shorter time points 70–81% of the components are present
in the complex, but at later time points such as at 24 h, only 66%
and 54% of the components were present. Temporal analyses of the fraction
of protein complexes present at the NP-protein complex at each time
point suggested that initially when the NP-protein complex was formed,
the NP associated with protein complexes because of specific proteins
that have high affinity for the NP surface, but over time, the complex
was selectively modified such that secondary associations to the NPs
were excluded. This was an important observation and could guide the
use of AuNPs in vivo.

Detection maps showing
fraction of proteins from a complex that
was detected at each time point. Only complexes that show at least
twice the detection (in terms of members) compared to lysate pool
and in at least four of the time points are listed. The total number
of proteins in each complex is also listed on the right.

Bioinformatics Analysis to Create Functional
Protein Network
as a Therapeutic Target Discovery Approach
We sought to utilize
the proteomic signature in the NP-protein complex to investigate the
potential use of AuNPs as a therapeutic target discovery tool. We
decided to examine the NP-protein complex at 6 and 24 h because protein
characterization and proteomic analyses demonstrated that the NP-protein
complexes were stabilized at these time points. When comparing proteins
from the NP-protein complex at these time points and proteins detected
from the pooled lysate, we identified 41 and 65 A2780-specific proteins
that were enriched on the NP surface at 6 and 24 h, respectively (Figure ). Due to their differential expression in the A2780
cell line, all of these proteins could be important for tumorigenicity.
In addition, these proteins were not detected by doing mass spectrometry
of the lysates perhaps because of their low abundance. The proteins’
affinity to the AuNPs concentrated them on the surface for detection.
Since probing individual proteins from the group is cumbersome and
fraught with subjective interpretive problems, we utilized graph-theory
based network analyses algorithms to determine the connectivity of
the proteins to each other and to identify key protein interaction
nodes. Disabling one protein (node in
the network) that interacts with many others (high connectivity) may
maximize the therapeutic potential as it is already recognized that
disrupting the function of a single protein is not sufficient to inhibit
tumor growth and metastasis., Figure  shows functional protein networks derived from cancer-specific
proteins and the proteins were ranked according to the number of connections
based on coexpression, colocalization, physical interactions, and
shared protein domains. ELF1AX, an essential eukaryotic translation
initiation factor, showed the highest degree of connectivity among
proteins enriched at 6 h. Other proteins identified with the highest
nodal connections were PPA1, a member of inorganic pyrophosphatase
family, SMNDC1, a survival motor neuron protein and PARK7, a member
of peptidase C56 family of proteins. In case of proteins enriched
at 24 h, the protein with the most connectivity was RPL12A, a ribosomal
60s subunit protein. This finding was not surprising considering the
enrichment of mRNA related protein on the NP surface. Others included
DEK, a DNA binding oncogene, DDX46, a probable ATP-dependent RNA helicase,
and GNA13, a G-protein subunit. As evidenced by other analyses, mRNA
related proteins were highly enriched on the NP surface. While proteins
such as ELF1AX and RPL10A,
both related to protein translation, may be too broad to target and
nonspecific for cancer cells (in spite of differential expression),
others such as DEK, which displays oncogenic properties and regulate
DNA damage response signaling, might
be important to study in the context of ovarian cancer.

Enrichment
of proteins on AuNP surface and network properties of
proteins adsorbed to AuNPs at 6 and 24 h (a,b). Nodes are proteins
unique to A2780 protein-NP complex at the each time point, which were
not detected in the OSE or A2780 lysate pool. The size of network
nodes indicates centrality measure derived from the functional network
at the given time points. Edge colors indicate the type of interactions:
coexpression (violet), physical interaction (green), predicted interaction
(blue), shared protein domains (yellow), or biological pathways (orange).
Interactions were derived from GeneMania; network properties were
computed using Cytoscape plugin Network Analyzer.

To validate our bioinformatics-based network analyses and
to demonstrate
the biological significance of hub proteins, we studied the protein
expression of three nodal proteins that have variable connectivity,
namely, PPA1 [Pyrophosphatase (Inorganic) 1], SMNDC1 (Survival Motor
Neuron Domain Containing 1), and PI15 (Peptidase Inhibitor 15). SMNDC1
was one of the top nodes detected at both 6 and 24 h. PPA1 and PI15,
on the other hand, were only detected at 6 h with the former displaying
multiple protein connections while the latter was limited to one.
Despite their connectivity status all three proteins were detected
with the help of NPs from A2780 cell lysates only. Furthermore, the
biological function of these selected hub proteins in ovarian cancer
is currently unknown. Functionally, PPA1 catalyzes the hydrolysis
of pyrophosphate to inorganic phosphate, which is important for the
phosphate metabolism of cells. There is only a single report indicating
a role of PPA1 in pathogenesis of gastric cancer. SMNDC1 is a nuclear protein that has been identified as
a constituent of the spliceosome complex and has been reported to
possess anti-apoptotic function together with Bcl-2. Loss of its paralog,
SMN, in spinal muscular atrophy has thus been suggested to be involved
in the pathogenesis of the disease. However,
any role of SMNDC1 in cancer has not been defined so far. PI15 belongs
to the family of trypsin inhibitors and the role of this class of
proteases in gynecological cancers have been reported, but detailed
mechanistic studies and therapeutic strategies to inhibit their function
are currently lacking. Lastly, PI15 has
been detected abundantly in human neuroblastoma and glioblastoma cell
lines. We examined expression of all
three proteins in a panel of ovarian cancer cell lines and compared
the levels with normal OSE cell line. Western blot analysis showed
relative overexpression in most ovarian cancer cells in comparison
to normal OSE cells (Figure a) which explains
their enrichment from A2780 lysates.

(a) Expression of PPA1, SMNDC1, and PI15
in various ovarian cancer
cell lines and normal OSE cells as determined through immunoblotting
analysis with actin as loading control. (b) Effect of siRNA mediated
silencing on the proliferation of A2780 cells determined by 3H-thymidine incorporation assay. (c) Immunoblot analysis to confirm
efficient knockdown of the targets. Actin is used as the loading control.

Finally, the biological significance
of these proteins in ovarian
cancer has been validated by silencing their corresponding genes using
siRNA technology and investigating the effect on cellular proliferation
using [3H]thymidine incorporation assay (Figure b). The results showed that silencing PPA1 and SMNDC1
dramatically reduced the proliferation of A2780 cells (∼80%),
whereas silencing PI15, which had a lower connectivity, had a lesser
effect (∼40%). The extent of knockdown was probed by immunoblotting
which confirmed almost complete knockdown with siRNA (Figure c). These results support our hypothesis that disrupting
key nodes with high connectivity could be a better approach for therapeutic
intervention. The proteins, PPA1 and SMNDC1, which are thus functionally
validated, have the potential to serve as novel therapeutic targets
for ovarian cancer treatment. Understanding molecular mechanisms through
which these proteins promote ovarian cancer growth will also help
to understand the biology of ovarian cancer progression and metastasis.

Conclusions
The present study strongly highlights the dynamic
and selective
nature of nanoparticle–protein interaction and complex formation
on AuNP surface. Through a suitably designed workflow, we have developed
a unique strategy to identify cancer specific low abundance proteins
and their functional networks. Current strategies for identifying
therapeutic targets rests on proteomics, protein, and DNA microarray
based-approach which are limited to identifying high abundance proteins
and dissection of specific-signaling pathways only., In contrast, our strategy overcomes the limitations therein and
uses nanoproteomics as a tool to identify low-abundance proteins which
are invisible to the standard detection techniques. Moreover, the
relevance of the constitutive pattern of proteins in the complex lies
in the potential identification of such proteins as biomarkers and
therapeutic targets for disease states, as demonstrated here in the
context of ovarian cancer. The functional diversity and hub properties
of proteins adsorbed in the complex opens further possibilities of
utilizing this platform as a discovery tool to find novel drug targets
from in vivo and in vitro models.

Experimental
Procedures
Nanoparticles and Cell Culture
Twenty nanometer citrate-coated
gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) at a concentration of 7.0 × 1011 particles/mL were obtained from Ted Pella (15705–20).
A2780 cells, human ovarian carcinoma cell line, were grown in RPMI
media supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% antibiotic. Noncancer ovarian
surface epithelium cell line, OSE, was grown in 1:1 Medium 199 and
MCDB 202 (Sigma) with 15% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% antibiotic.
Each cell line was grown to 80% confluence in culture dishes. The
dishes were washed with PBS buffer to remove FBS in the media and
lysed using RIPA (Radio-Immunoprecipitation Assay, Boston BioProducts
Inc.) or Cell Lysis buffer (Cell Signaling) containing protease inhibitor
cocktail. Protein concentrations were measured with the Biocinchoninic
Acid (BCA) assay or DC Protein Assay (Bio-Rad).

Determination
of Saturating Protein Amount for Protein-NP Complexation
NP-protein complexes were made by mixing various amounts (5, 10,
25, 50, 100, 200, and 400 μg) of A2780 protein lysates for 6
h with end-to-end mixing. UV–vis and DLS measurements were
then conducted on the complexes. After this 10% NaCl solution was
added to the complexes to give a final concentration of 1% NaCl and
allowed to mix for 15 min. UV–vis spectra and DLS measurements
were again conducted on the same NP-protein complexes. Change in absorbance,
shift in λmax, and change in Z-average
were then calculated.

Time-Dependent Study of Protein-NP Complex
Formation
200 μg of OSE or A2780 lysates were mixed
with NPs to make
a 1 mL reaction volume. The mixture was incubated at room temperature
while rotating for 5 min, 15 min, 1 h, 6 h, and 24 h for protein-NP
complex formation. The protein-bound NPs were separated from unbound
proteins by centrifugation. After the intended incubation period,
the NP protein mixture was centrifuged at 16 500 rpm for 10
min and resuspended in ddH2O.

Characterization: UV–visible
Spectrophotometry
Samples were loaded onto 96 well plates
and absorbance was recorded
in the spectral range of 400–700 nm. Measurements were conducted
either directly after incubation, or after centrifugation. The procedure
followed for each experiment is listed in the figure legends.

Characterization:
Dynamic Light Scattering and ζ-Potential
Measurement
of NP size and charge was made using Malvern Zetasizer
Nano ZS at 25 °C either directly after incubation, or after centrifugation.
Samples were loaded onto a prerinsed disposable folded capillary cell
for both DLS and ζ-potential measurements. The principle employed
by the Zetasizer Nano ZS instrument was ELS (Smoluchowski methodology
for aqueous media).

Characterization: TEM
NP protein
complex from the 24
h incubation time point was pelleted, washed, and resuspended in ddH2O and drop-coated onto copper grids. The NP-protein complex
was negatively stained using phosphotungstic acid. Images were acquired
at 80 kV.

Identification of NP-Bound Proteins: Mass Spectrometry
To identify the proteins bound to NPs, the NPs after incubation with
the lysates were pelleted and washed once with ddH2O. The
resulting pellet was used for identification of bound proteins by
nanoLC-MS/MS with hybrid orbitrap/linear ion trap mass spectrometry.
Specific methods have been previously described. Tandem mass spectra were extracted by BioWorks version
3.2. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science,
London, UK; version 2.2.04), Sequest (ThermoFinnigan, San Jose, CA;
version 27, rev. 12), and X! Tandem (www.thegpm.org; version
2006.09.15.3). X! Tandem was set up to search the Swissprot database
(699052 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme semiTrypsin. Sequest
and Mascot were set up to search the Swissprot database (699052 entries)
also assuming the digestion by trypsin. The tolerance of the searches
and the criteria for protein identification has been described before.

Determination of MW and Theoretical pI
The molecular
weight and theoretical pI of proteins were obtained using the compute
MW/pI search tool from ExPASy, a SIB Bioinformatics Resource Portal, http://www.expasy.org/. Attributes
from the longest peptide chain were amassed for analysis.

Biological
Enrichment Analysis of Proteins from MS/MS
GO term, protein-domain,
and pathway enrichment analyses were performed
using DAVID v 6.1, using default settings. The entire
human proteome was defined as the background.

Analysis of Complexes Present
in the NP-Protein Complexes
MS analysis returns a set of
detected UniProt IDs. Detection maps
(two color heat map) indicating the presence or absence of each protein
at each time point are generated. A protein is considered to be present
if at least one fragment is detected by MS that can be uniquely assigned
to it. This list of detected proteins is mapped to complexes using
the human-specific subset of the CORUM database. A complex is considered to have been detected if at least
one of its components is detected in the NP-protein complex.

Functional
Network Analysis
A list of protein at each
time point was used to query GeneMania to generate a functional network. This network was loaded to Cytoscape for network prioritization analyses. Nodes were
ranked in the network based on centrality/radiality measures using
Network Analyzer and a colored gradient
network figure was generated based on the rankings.

Immunoblotting
Analysis
Immunoblotting analysis was
carried out as reported earlier. 20 μg
of total cell lysates from various ovarian cell lines were separated
on 10% SDS-PAGE, transferred to PVDF membrane, and detected with antibodies
for PPA1 (Dilution 1:1000; MAB6557, R&amp;D Systems), SMNDC1 (Dilution
1:1000; NBP1–47302, Novus Biologicals), PI15 (Dilution 1:1000;
Clone 3B5, Sigma), and Mouse Beta-Actin antibody (Dilution 1:10000;
A2228 Sigma). HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies (Goat Anti-mouse,
sc-2031 and Goat Anti-rabbit, sc-2030; Santa Cruz Biotechnology) were
used at a dilution of 1:10000. The blots were finally visualized by
chemiluminescence detection using BioRad Clarity ECL kit.

siRNA Knockdown
A2780 cells were plated in 60 mm dishes
with 3 mL RPMI-1640 cell culture medium. Cells were transfected with
20 μL of 20 μM siRNA (SMNDC1: SASI_Hs0100210370_AS, PI15:
SASI_Hs0100197977_AS, and PPA1: SASI_Hs0100021831, Sigma-Aldrich)
along with 20 μL of HiPerfect (Qiagen) and 500 μL of Opti-MEM
(Invitrogen). Control siRNA (Qiagen) was used as a control. After
48 h, cells were collected to detect siRNA knockdown efficiency using
Western blotting.

[3H]Thymidine Incorporation Assay
for Cellular Proliferation
Post 48 h siRNA transfection,
cells were seeded (2 × 104) in 24-well plates in 1
mL of media and cultured overnight
under standard conditions. One μCi per mL of [3H]thymidine
was added and 4 h later, the cells were washed with chilled PBS, fixed
with 100% cold methanol, and collected for measurement of TCA-precipitable
radioactivity as reported earlier. Experiments
were repeated at least three separate times, with each repeat performed
in triplicate.

Supporting Information Available
Effect of
variation of protein
amount on complexation (Figure S1), time-evolution of protein-NP complex
by UV–visible spectra of evolution (Figure S2), time-evolution
of protein-NP complex by DLS measurement (Figure S3), reproducibility
studies to detect protein-NP complex formation from OSE and A2780
lysates at different time points (Figure S4,S5), Molecular weight
distribution of various detected proteins in the protein-NP complex
(Figure S6), and GO terms at different detected proteins at various
time points (Figure S7). This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc500084f_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work is supported
by NIH grants CA135011 and CA136494
to P.M.

