Introduction
Protein and peptide therapeutics play
a pivotal role in modern
medicine for the treatment and prevention of serious diseases. However,
many protein and peptide drugs suffer from short in vivo half-lives
which limit their therapeutic applications. Much recent effort has
been focused on the development of “biobetter” molecules
with extended plasma half-lives to reduce their administration frequencies
and to extend their therapeutic windows. Notably, the conjugation of biotherapeutics to poly(ethylene glycol)
(PEG) remains a widely used technique for prolonging the in vivo half-lives
of these drugs, and numerous PEGylated drugs have been clinically
approved.−

XTEN protein polymers are recombinant PEG mimetics
designed to
improve the performance of protein and peptide pharmaceuticals while
avoiding many of the disadvantages of PEG. XTENs are highly hydrophilic, unstructured polypeptides composed
entirely of alanine, glutamate, glycine, proline, serine, and threonine
residues. When recombinantly fused with XTEN, the so-called XTENylated
bioactive proteins and peptides typically exhibit 60- to 130-fold
increases, depending on the payload, in their in vivo half-lives over
their native counterparts.−

By increasing the hydrodynamic radius and providing steric
shielding
for its payloads, XTEN functions in a manner similar to PEG, but with
several key differences. While large molecular weight PEGs are polydisperse
mixtures whose coupling to payloads often results in heterogeneous
products, XTEN proteins have precise, genetically defined chemical
compositions, eliminating product heterogeneity and greatly promoting
their ease of manufacture. In addition, because PEGs are chemical
polymers that cannot be metabolized or degraded after administration,
they have been known to cause unwanted side effects such as cellular
vacuolation upon continuous treatment. In contrast, XTEN is rapidly degraded upon its internalization into
cells, and its biodegradable nature typically results in its decreased
accumulation in tissues and reduced potential for toxicity. Finally,
as XTEN has been engineered to be resistant to plasma proteases, it
can remain intact for a significant period of time while in circulation.

With these properties, the XTEN platform shows great potential
to be a superior tool for half-life extension compared with PEGylation.
Two XTEN-based products, human growth hormone-XTEN (VRS-317) and exenatide-XTEN
(VRS-859), are currently being evaluated in clinical trials. VRS-317
has been shown to have superior pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic
properties in comparison with other recombinant human growth hormone
products, with the potential for once-monthly dosing,, whereas VRS-859 has recently been reported to be effective for patients
suffering from type 2 diabetes without the occurrence of significant
adverse events (unpublished data).

An additional feature of
XTEN is its low theoretical pI of 2.6
which results in it having a net negative charge at neutral pH, enabling
it to be purified by anion exchange chromatography. XTENylated proteins
and peptides are typically characterized by enhanced solubilities
and reduced propensities for aggregation. For example, the molar solubility
of a glucagon-XTEN fusion protein was increased 60-fold over that
of the native peptide, enabling liquid formulation for the product.

To broaden the applicability of the XTEN
platform, we have also
recently explored chemical conjugation techniques to attach bioactive
payloads to XTEN, permitting the application
of our XTEN technology to a broader range of drug classes including
nonpeptide small molecules that cannot be recombinantly fused to XTEN.
Chemical conjugation techniques also enable the incorporation of multiple
copies of a drug at defined positions along the XTEN protein, circumventing
the constraint of end-to-end fusion which is required by the recombinant
format.

In this study, we demonstrate the feasibility and versatility
of
multivalent drug display through XTENylation using the anti-retroviral
peptide T-20 as a model therapeutic payload. T-20, also known as Fuzeon
or enfuvirtide, is a linear 36 amino acid synthetic peptide derived
from the C-heptad repeat region of human immunodeficiency virus type
1 (HIV-1) envelope glycoprotein (Env) transmembrane subunit gp41.
T-20 works as a potent inhibitor of viral infections by preventing
HIV-1 from fusing with and entering host cells. By interacting with the N-heptad repeat region of viral
gp41 and blocking gp41 six-helix bundle core formation, it inhibits
a critical step in virus–cell fusion and prevents the virus
from entering into uninfected cells.

As a peptide fusion inhibitor administered by subcutaneous injection,
T-20 was the first of a novel class of anti-retroviral drugs and was
approved by the US FDA in 2003. It is indicated, in combination with
other anti-retroviral pharmaceuticals, for the treatment of HIV-1
patients with multidrug resistance. Despite its therapeutic efficacy,
its market acceptance has been limited due to several shortcomings. First, T-20 has a short plasma half-life which
necessitates twice-daily injections of the drug. Second, T-20 has
extremely poor solubility in water and is supplied as a lyophilized
powder which requires an inconvenient 45 to 60 min resolubilization
step prior to administration. Injection site reactions which are often
painful occur in up to 98% of patients. In this study, we report the conjugation of one or three copies
of T-20 to XTEN in different configurations, demonstrating the versatility
of the platform and addressing many of the shortcomings of T-20 by
imparting improvements through the half-life and solubility of the
T-20-XTEN conjugates.

Results
Expression and Purification
of XTEN Protein Precursors
Maleimide–thiol chemistry
is a commonly used technique in
protein conjugation and was selected for use in this work. To evaluate
the effects of copy number and spacing on the antiviral activity of
T-20-XTEN conjugates, four versions of cysteine-containing XTENs (XTEN-1,
2, 3, 4) were designed for conjugation with maleimide-functionalized
T-20 (Figure ). Each of the XTEN precursors
was composed of 432 amino acids, with XTEN-1 containing only one cysteine
and XTEN-2, 3, 4 each containing three cysteines with different intercysteine
spacings.

Schematic representations of the constructs used in the studies.
There are four XTEN precursor molecules, and by conjugating them to
the payload T-20 or MPA, five different XTENylated proteins were synthesized.

The proteins were expressed and
purified using a modified version
of a protocol previously described for 1×Amino-XTEN864. The constructs were designed with an N-terminal
helper tag engineered to enhance XTEN expression in E. coli and a C-terminal histidine tag designed to
ensure the integrity of the C-terminus following the initial IMAC
purification step. The tags were fully cleavable by trypsin digestion
as they were separated from the XTEN sequence by arginine residues.

The proteins were first passed through an IMAC capture column following
clarification of the crude lysate. The eluates were found to be mostly
pure based on SDS-PAGE analysis with Coomassie staining, and the pools
were digested with trypsin. After confirming tag removal by MALDI-TOF
MS and inactivating any residual trypsin, the mixtures were further
purified using anion exchange chromatography (AEX), concentrated,
and then formulated into storage buffer. The formulated proteins were
characterized by SDS-PAGE with silver staining and C4 RPC, with the
products determined to be more than 90% pure. The proteins were additionally
analyzed by ESI-MS and their concentrations determined by amino acid
analysis. Size exclusion chromatography (SEC) indicated that more
than 90% of the proteins were monomeric and they exhibited a large
hydrodynamic radius exceeding that of the 160 kDa standard, in accordance
with previous observations made for XTEN proteins. Characterization results are not shown as they are discussed
in a previous publication.

Production
of T-20-XTEN Conjugates
The thiol-containing
XTEN precursors were reacted with MPA-T-20 at ambient temperature
to form the 1× and 3×T-20-XTEN conjugates. Prior to conjugation,
XTEN-1 is manifested as two peaks in C4 RPC, representing the XTEN-1
monomer and a suspected disulfide-bonded dimer at 20.2 and 21.2 min,
respectively (, Figure
S1). The hydrophobic T-20 peptide had a significantly greater retention
time at 43 min. After incubating the reaction mixture for 2 h at 25
°C, a new peak was observed at 37.2 min, which was confirmed
by ESI-MS to be the T-20-XTEN-1 conjugate (Figure ). The conversion of the XTEN-1 precursor into the conjugate
was approximately 79%, and the product peak was distinctly separated
from both the XTEN precursor and the T-20 peptide in C4 RPC. The large
scale synthesis was performed under similar conditions.

HPLC monitoring
of chemical conjugation reactions. 1: XTEN-1 and
T-20 reaction mixture at 2 h time point; 2: XTEN-2 and T-20 reaction
mixture at 8 h time point; 3: XTEN-3 and T-20 reaction mixture at
8 h time point; 4: XTEN-4 and T-20 reaction mixture at 8 h time point;
5: XTEN-1 and MPA reaction mixture at 2 h time point.

Pilot-scale syntheses were also performed for the
XTEN precursors
containing 3 cysteine residues (XTEN-2, 3, 4). Increasing the molar
excess of MPA-T-20 to the thiol-containing XTEN precursors resulted
in increased conversions to the 3×T-20-XTEN conjugates (data
not shown), but it was challenging to separate unreacted MPA-T-20
from the 3×T-20-XTEN conjugates on preparative C4 RPC because
they eluted with similar retention times. AEX chromatography was explored
as an alternative strategy for separating the 3×T-20-XTEN conjugates
from unreacted peptide, but it did not display any obvious advantages
over preparative C4 RPC in terms of resolution. To ensure the purity
of the final T-20-XTEN conjugates, the large scale syntheses were
performed in stoichiometric amounts at a molar ratio of 3:1 (MPA-T-20:XTEN).

Under these conditions, MPA-T-20 was found to be mostly consumed
after 4 h at 25 °C as no peaks were observed with a similar retention
time as the peptide control, whereas multiple new peaks appeared with
retention times ranging from 35 to 43 min (Figure ). As more copies of T-20 peptide were introduced to the XTEN
molecules, the hydrophobicity of the T-20-XTEN conjugates increased,
with a corresponding increase in their retention times. Based on peak
analysis by ESI-MS, the proteins eluting from 35.0 to 38.5 min represented
conjugates containing a single copy of T-20, those from 39.0 to 41.0
min represented conjugates containing two copies of T-20, and those
from 41.5 to 42.5 min represented conjugates containing the full three
copies of T-20. Because T-20 could be conjugated to any of the three
cysteines at different positions on the XTEN precursors, the incompletely
reacted 1× and 2×T-20-XTEN conjugates were found to manifest
as isomers appearing as multiple peaks on analytical C4 RPC. When
the 3×Thiol-XTENs were functionalized with all three copies of
T-20, only one isomeric form was possible, resulting in a single peak
for the 3×T-20-XTEN conjugate.

Biophysical Characterization
of XTENylated Peptides
The purified XTENylated peptides were
analyzed using multiple techniques
to confirm their quality. Each of the T-20-XTEN conjugates was found
to migrate as a single band by SDS-PAGE analysis (Figure A). Their apparent molecular weights fell between
60 and 80 kDa, which was greater than the calculated weights of 44.0
kDa for the 1×T-20 conjugate and 53.2 kDa for the 3×T-20
conjugates. This confirms a phenomenon which is commonly observed
for XTEN derivatives. The proteins were
found to elute as single, sharp peaks on analytical C4 RPC (Figure B). It was not possible to visualize the negative
control (XTEN-1A) via Coomassie staining, but it was confirmed to
have greater than 90% purity by C4 RPC. The molecular weights of the
five compounds were also verified by ESI-MS, with the observed masses
found to be in agreement with the calculated masses for all of the
molecules (data not shown).

Analytical characterization of the purified
XTEN conjugates. A.
SDS-PAGE gel with Coomassie staining: Lane 1, T-20-XTEN-1; Lane 2,
T-20-XTEN-2; Lane 3, T-20-XTEN-3; Lane 4, T-20-XTEN-4; Lane 5, XTEN-1A.
B. HPLC profiles: 1, T-20-XTEN-1; 2, T-20-XTEN-2; 3, T-20-XTEN-3;
4, T-20-XTEN-4; 5, XTEN-1A.

Because the proteins were formulated at concentrations exceeding
15 mg/mL, aggregation was a concern. The XTENylated peptides were
characterized by dynamic light scattering (DLS) at their formulated
concentrations (Table ). The effective radii
for the T-20-XTEN conjugates were measured to be between 2.5 and 3.5
nm, whereas XTEN-1A was shown to exhibit an effective radius of 2.0
nm. While some aggregation by intensity was observed for the 3×T-20-XTEN
conjugates, aggregation by mass was used as a more quantitative measure
as aggregated molecules are known to produce disproportionately strong
signals when measured by intensity with DLS. Based on aggregation
by mass, all the T-20-XTEN conjugates displayed negligible amounts
of aggregation in solution, indicating that they formed negligible
higher-order interactions under the selected formulation conditions.
The heat-treated BSA which was used as a positive control formed aggregates
when assayed under the same conditions.

Summary
of DLS Results for the XTEN
Conjugates
protein	stock concentration (mg/mL)	effective
radius at stock conc, (nm)	aggregation
by intensity, %	aggregation
by mass, %	
T-20-XTEN-1	13.23	2.6	0	0	
T-20-XTEN-2	18.46	2.8	25.4	0	
T-20-XTEN-3	9.48	3.5	24.1	0	
T-20-XTEN-4	25.03	2.5	16.5	0	
XTEN-1A	18.46	2.0	0	0	
BSA (not heat treated)	2	2.6	0	0	
BSA (heat treated)	2	3.1	92.2	28	
Antiviral Activity of the
T-20-XTEN Conjugates
We used
an in vitro cell-based MAGI assay to characterize the antiviral activity
of the XTENylated peptides. Peptide-XTEN conjugates were incubated
with MAGI CCR5 cells prior to introduction of HIV-1Ba-L to the mixtures. While all of the compounds exhibited negligible
toxicities with TC50 values exceeding 10 000 nM,
all of the T-20-XTEN proteins were discovered to have dose-dependent
antiviral activity (Figure ). The T-20 peptide
alone had an IC50 of 0.38 nM, in agreement with published
values (Table ), while the negative control
(XTEN-1A) did not exhibit any discernible antiviral effects. In general,
the T-20-XTEN conjugates exhibited more than 30-fold reductions in
their antiviral activities compared with the native peptide. However,
trends in activity were observed among the individual T-20-XTEN conjugates.
T-20-XTEN-1, which contained a single copy of T-20, had an IC50 of 160.7 nM, whereas T-20-XTEN conjugates containing 3 copies
of T-20 (T-20-XTEN-2, 3, 4) exhibited substantially stronger antiviral
activities, indicating that multivalent display of the peptide did
improve the activity of the conjugates. Among the 3×T-20-XTEN
conjugates, the construct with the most closely spaced peptides, T-20-XTEN-4
(51 amino acids apart), exhibited the strongest antiviral activity
with an IC50 of 12.9 nM, followed by the less closely spaced
T-20-XTEN-3 (102 amino acids apart) with an IC50 of 20.7
nM, and finally, the least closely spaced T-20-XTEN-2 (204 amino acids
apart) with an IC50 of 30.7 nM. These results demonstrate
that T-20 retains its antiviral activity even following conjugation
to XTEN, and that the activity of the peptide-XTEN conjugates can
be tuned by varying the copy number as well as the positioning of
the peptides.

In vitro antiviral activity of XTENylated peptides. A
MAGI antiviral
assay was performed to assess the antiviral activity of the XTENylated
peptides. The β-galactosidase enzyme activities of the MAGI
cells were quantified as a measurement of virus amount and presented
as a percentage of the blank concentration, defined to be 100%.

Summary of the Antiviral
Activity
of the Compounds Tested by MAGI Assay
IC50 and TC50 value for the compounds
were calculated from the MAGI antiviral
assay and the MTS cytotoxicity assay, respectively.

Prolonged in Vivo Half-Life of the Conjugates
The pharmacokinetics
of the most active XTEN-conjugate, T-20-XTEN-4, was assayed in rats.
As shown in the time-course profile in Figure , the pharmacokinetic profile of T-20-XTEN-4 was characterized by
an absorption phase which led to a maximum plasma concentration Cmax of 11.1 mg/mL at 24 h, followed by a linear
elimination phase. The calculated elimination half-life of T-20-XTEN-4
was 55.7 ± 17.7 h, almost 20 times longer than the 2.8 h half-life
reported for T-20 dosed in rats.

Pharmacokinetics
of T-20-XTEN-4 in rats. The compound was administered
by subcutaneous injection to three rats at 1.8 mg/mL. Blood samples
were collected at different time points, processed to plasma, and
stored at −80 °C until analysis. Plasma samples were analyzed
using an anti-XTEN/anti-XTEN sandwich ELISA. The half-life was determined
to be 55.7 ± 17.7 h, and Cmax was
calculated to be 11 121 ± 1838 ng/mL.

Discussion
XTEN was originally designed as a recombinant
delivery system for
fused peptides or proteins to enhance their plasma half-lives and
solubility.,, As a chemically
defined, monodisperse protein polymer, XTEN avoids several key limitations
of PEG including product heterogeneity, nonbiodegradability, and potential
toxicity., In contrast to other recombinant half-life
extension technologies, e.g., Fc and albumin fusion, XTENylation allows
for fine-tuning the in vivo half-life of the therapeutic as the length
and composition of the XTEN protein is fully adjustable.

With
the expansion of the XTEN technology into chemical conjugation,
the versatility in XTEN’s applicability to drug classes has
been increased, enabling, for example, the covalent attachments of d-, non-natural, and modified amino acid-containing peptides
or proteins as well as organic molecules which were previously unattainable
with genetic fusion. In addition, chemical conjugation permits cross-linking
of multiple copies of monospecific molecules to XTEN polymers in any
chosen orientation, as well as of different drug classes to the same
XTEN polypeptide via orthogonal chemistries. These conjugates are
achievable with precise positioning of chemically reactive amino acids,
resulting in products of defined chemical structure and composition.

The goal of this study was to employ the versatile XTEN polymer
as a novel platform for multivalent drug display. We chose T-20 as
a model peptide for use in this study, with the goal to improve its
therapeutic properties through XTENylation. Although T-20 is a clinically
approved anti-HIV drug, it is notoriously difficult to work with due
to its extremely poor solubility and its short in vivo half-life.
Data from the literature indicated that incorporation of multiple
copies of T-20 or its derivatives had the potential to increase the
antiviral activity of its associated conjugates., With the XTEN platform, we were able to take advantage of increased
multivalency and avidity by introducing multiple copies of T-20 to
XTEN. This benefit was confirmed by the results of the MAGI antiviral
assay, with the T-20-XTEN conjugates containing three copies of T-20
exhibiting stronger activities than the conjugate containing only
a single copy of T-20 (overall a 5- to 12-fold increase in potency).
In addition to copy number, spacing of the T-20 peptides was also
essential in determining the antiviral activity of the conjugates.
Previously, Francis et al. tested peptide spacing in a series of branched
PIE12-trimers using PEG linkers of various lengths, and they found
that the PEG4 linker resulted in the most improved antiviral
potency in comparison with PEG2, PEG3, and PEG5 linkers. We also explored the
effect of T-20 spacing on antiviral activity, with the rationale that
proper spacing and positioning of the T-20 peptides could facilitate
bridging between neighboring hydrophobic pockets in the N-trimer coiled
coil region and improve the antiviral activity of the conjugates through
promoting avidity. However, if the T-20 peptides were too closely
spaced, steric hindrance could conceivably inhibit their activity
by preventing T-20 from binding to the deep hydrophobic pockets. Among
the three different spacings we tested, the most densely spaced 3×T-20-XTEN
conjugate, T-20-XTEN-4, displayed the strongest antiviral activity.
Using XTEN as a platform for chemical conjugation, it was possible
to produce and characterize a library of constructs in an efficient
manner to explore the optimal copy number and spacing for the T-20-XTEN
conjugates.

While we screened several conjugates to determine
the optimal configuration
for antiviral activity, the most promising conjugate still exhibited
a 30-fold decrease in activity in the MAGI assay in comparison with
the native T-20 peptide. Similar in vitro activity reductions have
been observed for XTENylated proteins produced recombinantly in previous
studies., For example, 12- and 50-fold in vitro potency
reductions were observed, respectively, for human growth hormone and
glucagon-like peptide 2 which had been fused with XTEN. This decrease
in in vitro activity is most likely caused by steric hindrance involving
XTEN, a phenomenon which is also observed with PEGylated ligands.
On the other hand, in the same studies involving XTENylated human
growth hormone and glucagon-like peptide 2, we have seen increased
in vivo efficacies for the XTENylated products despite observed reductions
in in vitro activity., Therefore, we suggest that in
many cases, the reduction in in vitro activities of the XTENylated
ligands may be more than compensated for by the longer efficacious
exposures due to the extensions in biological half-life, and we can
also predict an increase in in vivo potency for the T-20-XTEN conjugates
due to their prolonged exposure in the body. In addition, new constructs
can be designed to further improve the activity of the conjugates
in future studies. For instance, additional copies of T-20, more densely
spaced distributions of T-20, and different XTEN lengths can be easily
introduced and characterized using the XTEN platform. Recent developments
of peptides related to T-20 have resulted in new drugs with improved
potencies over T-20, and these can also be incorporated into XTEN.
For example, the d-peptides developed by Welch et al. were
reported to exhibit increased antiviral potencies of up to 3 orders
of magnitude, and they are compatible
for conjugation with XTEN.

The succinimide thioethers formed
by the maleimide–thiol
reaction used in this study are known to undergo exchange reactions
in the presence of other thiol-containing compounds, resulting in
the loss of the T-20 payload. To characterize the stability of the
succinimide thioethers, we previously evaluated the in vitro plasma
stability of the thioether bond in XTENylated proteins produced using
the same chemistry, and the half-life of the bond was determined to
be greater than 10 days.

Another
key objective of the study was to evaluate XTEN’s
utility for improving the half-life of the T-20 peptide. The most
densely spaced conjugate T-20-XTEN-4 not only exhibited the strongest
antiviral activity, it also possessed a prolonged in vivo half-life
of 55.7 ± 17.7 h in rats, with the potential to translate to
weekly or monthly dosing regimens in humans. The observed half-life
is 20-fold longer than the 2.8 h half-life of native T-20 peptide
in rats and is a substantial improvement over the 10.4 h half-life
displayed by its PEGylated analogue.

Finally, XTENylation drastically improved the solubility of the
T-20 conjugates, enabling T-20-XTEN to be formulated at high concentrations
without any indications of aggregation. During the synthesis of the
T-20 conjugates, the addition of MPA-T-20 (solubilized in DMF) to
the XTEN precursors in aqueous solvent immediately resulted in the
formation of a white precipitate, evidencing the peptide’s
insolubility. It was necessary to adjust the DMF concentration to
50% in order to completely solubilize the peptide and make it available
for reaction. However, after T-20 was chemically conjugated to XTEN,
the molecules exhibited significantly enhanced solubilities in aqueous
media, permitting their formulation in PBS buffer at high concentrations
(Table ). DLS experiments also confirmed that
minimal aggregation of products occurred under the chosen formulation
conditions. All these results point to the benefits of handling T-20-XTEN
conjugates over the free peptide.

Immunogenicity of XTEN has
previously been tested in animals, and
it was determined that XTEN did not elicit a substantial immune response. Both VRS-317 and
VRS-859 (unpublished data) have been evaluated in phase I clinical
studies and have been found to be safe and well tolerated in patients.
In this study, several new XTENs containing one or three cysteines
have been designed based on the compositions of previous XTENs. As
engineered protein scaffolds with high cysteine content (e.g., avimers)
were reported to be nonimmunogenic in animals, we believe the presence of multiple cysteine residues poses
a low immunogenicity risk. Further studies need to be performed to
confirm that there are no antibody-induced side effects associated
with these XTENs.

A major, ongoing challenge in HIV treatment
is drug resistance
arising from mutations generated by the error-prone HIV reverse transcriptase
in conjunction with the rapid replication of the virus. Current medications are focused on drug cocktails
as they offer the most effective treatment for HIV. T-20 easily induces
drug resistance, and new generations
of antifusion peptides including T-1249 and sifuvirtide have been
developed to reduce susceptibility to drug resistance. These new generations
of peptides also tend to avoid cross-resistance against other fusion-based
pharmaceuticals.− As a future direction for this research, it may be
fruitful to incorporate more than one peptide payload onto a single
XTEN protein, creating a multivalent “cocktail” therapeutic
to which an increased number and breadth of HIV strains is susceptible.

In summary, XTENylation by chemical conjugation delivers the advantages
of XTEN polymers to a broader range of molecules. By offering defined
chemical compositions, extended in vivo half-lives, and enhanced solubility
and enabling the multivalent display of drugs or combinations of drugs
with tunable spacings, the platform will have broad applications in
facilitating the development of next-generation biotherapeutics with
improved properties.

Materials and Methods
Preparation of MPA-T-20
Free Acid
3-Maleimidopropionamide-T-20
(MPA-T-20) free acid was manufactured using Fmoc solid phase peptide
synthesis. The peptide chain was assembled in a stepwise manner through
single amino acid additions using Fmoc-protected amino acid derivatives.
After coupling the maleimide group to the peptide chain, a final cleavage
and side chain deprotection reaction was carried out using TFA. The
reaction mixture was precipitated with MTBE followed by several washes
of MTBE and drying of the crude peptide under vacuum. The crude peptide
was purified by RP-HPLC and lyophilized to obtain the MPA-T-20 free
acid TFA salt at a purity of 95.2%.

XTEN Sequence Design
The following 432 amino acid XTEN
proteins were used in the study:

XTEN-1 (Cys-422)
SAGSPTPGTSESATPESGPGSEPATSGSETPGTSESATPESGPGSEPATSGSETPGTSESATPESGPGTSTEPSEGSAPGTSESATPESGPGSPAGSPTSTEEGSPAGSPTSTEEGSPAGSPTSTEEGTSESATPESGPGTSTEPSEGSAPGTSESATPESGPGSEPATSGSETPGTSESATPESGPGSEPATSGSETPGTSESATPESGPGTSTEPSEGSAPGSPAGSPTSTEEGTSESATPESGPGSEPATSGSETPGTSESATPESGPGSPAGSPTSTEEGSPAGSPTSTEEGTSTEPSEGSAPGTSESATPESGPGTSESATPESGPGTSESATPESGPGSEPATSGSETPGSEPATSGSETPGSPAGSPTSTEEGTSTEPSEGSAPGTSTEPSEGSAPGSEPATSGSETPTAEAAGCGTAEAASASR

XTEN-2 (Cys-12, Cys-217, Cys-422)
SAGSPTAEAAGCGTAEAAGTSESATPESGPGSEPATSGSETPGTSESATPESGPGTSTEPSEGSAPGTSESATPESGPGSPAGSPTSTEEGSPAGSPTSTEEGSPAGSPTSTEEGTSESATPESGPGTSTEPSEGSAPGTSESATPESGPGSEPATSGSETPGTSESATPESGPGSEPATSGSETPGTSESATPESGPGTSTEPSEGSAPTAEAAGCGTAEAAGSPAGSPTSTEEGTSESATPESGPGSEPATSGSETPGTSESATPESGPGSPAGSPTSTEEGSPAGSPTSTEEGTSTEPSEGSAPGTSESATPESGPGTSESATPESGPGTSESATPESGPGSEPATSGSETPGSEPATSGSETPGSPAGSPTSTEEGTSTEPSEGSAPGTSTEPSEGSAPGSEPATSGSETPTAEAAGCGTAEAASASR

XTEN-3 (Cys-217, Cys-319, Cys-422)
SAGSPTGSEPATSGSETPGTSESATPESGPGSEPATSGSETPGTSESATPESGPGTSTEPSEGSAPGTSESATPESGPGSPAGSPTSTEEGSPAGSPTSTEEGSPAGSPTSTEEGTSESATPESGPGTSTEPSEGSAPGTSESATPESGPGSEPATSGSETPGTSESATPESGPGSEPATSGSETPGTSESATPESGPGTSTEPSEGSAPTAEAAGCGTAEAAGSPAGSPTSTEEGTSESATPESGPGSEPATSGSETPGTSESATPESGPGSPAGSPTSTEEGSPAGSPTSTEEGTSTEPSEGSAPTSESTAEAAGCGTAEAATPESGPGTSESATPESGPGSEPATSGSETPGSEPATSGSETPGSPAGSPTSTEEGTSTEPSEGSAPGTSTEPSEGSAPGSEPATSGSETPTAEAAGCGTAEAASASR

XTEN-4 (Cys-319, Cys-370, Cys-422)
SAGSPTPGTSESATPESGPGSEPATSGSETPGTSESATPESGPGSEPATSGSETPGTSESATPESGPGTSTEPSEGSAPGTSESATPESGPGSPAGSPTSTEEGSPAGSPTSTEEGSPAGSPTSTEEGTSESATPESGPGTSTEPSEGSAPGTSESATPESGPGSEPATSGSETPGTSESATPESGPGSEPATSGSETPGTSESATPESGPGTSTEPSEGSAPGSPAGSPTSTEEGTSESATPESGPGSEPATSGSETPGTSESATPESGPGSPAGSPTTEEGSPAGSPTSTEEGTSTEPSEGSAPGTSESTAEAAGCGTAEAATPESGPGTSESATPESGPGSEPATSGSETPGSEPATSGTAEAAGCGTAEAATEEGTSTEPSEGSAPGTSTEPSEGSAPGSEPATSGSETPTAEAAGCGTAEAASASR

Expression Vectors for XTEN Precursors
The XTEN precursors
utilized the fusion format HD-XTEN-H8, in which HD is an
N-terminal helper domain with the amino acid sequence MKNPEQAEEQAEEQREET(RP)11, XTEN is XTEN-1, 2, 3, 4 flanked on both sides by the amino
acid sequence SASRSA for trypsin cleavage, and H8 is an
eight histidine purification tag at the C-terminus. The XTEN precursors
were cloned into a pET-30 based vector (Novagen) as described in a
previous paper.

XTEN Expression
All of the thiol-containing XTEN precursors
(XTEN-1, 2, 3, 4) were expressed in the BL21 E. coli strain (New England Biolabs, #C2530H) using 5 L B. Braun Biostat
B glass-jacketed fermentation vessels. 125 mL starter cultures were
used to inoculate 1.7 L batches of fermentation media containing 50
mM (NH4)2SO4, 20 mM K2HPO4, 15 mM KH2PO4, 4.5 mM C6H5Na3O7·2H2O, 11 mM NaH2PO4, 10 mM MgSO4, 30
g/L NZ BL4 soy peptone (Kerry Bioscience, #5X00043), 15 g/L yeast
extract (Teknova, #Y9020), 0.25 mL/L polypropylene glycol 2000, trace
elements, and 10 mg/mL tetracycline. Salt feeds containing 75 mM (NH4)2SO4, 150 mM K2HPO4, 110 mM KH2PO4, 7 mM C6H5Na3O7·2H2O, and 100 mM NaH2PO4 were started after 6 h at 25 g/h and continued
for 8 h. Cultures were grown at 37 °C for 17 h before shifting
the temperature to 26 °C and adding 27 mL of 1 M MgSO4. The carbon source consisted of a 70% glycerol feed, with roughly
2 L being fed over the course of the run. After 48 h, the cultures
were harvested by centrifugation, yielding cell pellets of approximately
1 kg by wet weight. The pellets were stored at −80 °C
until purification was commenced.

Purification of XTEN-1,
2, 3, 4
The cell pellet from
each of the thiol-containing XTEN precursors (XTEN-1, 2, 3, 4) was
resuspended in lysis buffer (20 mM Na-phosphate, pH 8.0, 5 mM imidazole,
500 mM NaCl) at a ratio of 3 mL buffer per gram of pellet and lysed
using a dynamic high pressure homogenizer. The resulting cell lysates
were heat-treated at 85 °C for 20 min, rapidly cooled to &lt;10
°C in an ice bath, then clarified by centrifugation in a Sorvall
RC-5B centrifuge at 10 000 rpm for 60 min. The supernatants
were passed through a 0.22 μm filter.

Capture immobilized
metal ion affinity chromatography (IMAC) was performed using Toyopearl
AF-Chelate-650 M (Tosoh Bioscience) flow-packed columns. For each
protein, columns were charged with NiSO4 and equilibrated
with 20 mM sodium phosphate, pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, and 5 mM imidazole
prior to loading the clarified lysate. The columns were then washed
with 20 mM sodium phosphate, pH 8.0, and 5 mM imidazole before being
eluted with 20 mM sodium phosphate, pH 8.0, and 100 mM imidazole.

Fractions were evaluated for eluted protein by SDS-PAGE analysis
and Coomassie staining, pooled, and digested overnight at 37 °C
using bovine trypsin (Sigma) for removal of the purification and expression
tags. The digests were verified using MALDI-TOF MS the next day before
the addition of 2 mM EDTA and 20 mM DTT and heating to 85 °C
to inactivate any residual trypsin and convert all cysteines to their
reduced form.

Next, a polishing anion exchange chromatography
(AEX) step was
performed using columns packed with MacroCap Q (GE Healthcare Life
Sciences) resin and equilibrated with 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.0. The trypsin
digests were filtered prior to loading onto the columns, which were
subsequently chased with equilibration buffer. Protein was eluted
over gradient from 0 to 250 mM NaCl, 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.0, and elution
fractions were pooled based on SDS–PAGE analysis and silver
staining.

As a final step, the pooled proteins were concentrated
and buffer
exchanged into the formulation buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.0, 50 mM NaCl)
using Biomax-5 Pellicon XL ultrafiltration cassettes (Millipore).
XTEN protein concentrations were determined by amino acid analysis
(AAA Service Laboratory, Damascus, OR, USA) and quality was assessed
by SDS-PAGE analysis with silver staining, analytical C4 reverse phase
chromatography (RPC), analytical size-exclusion chromatography (SEC),
and electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS).

Preparation
of T-20-XTEN Conjugates
Lyophilized MPA-T-20
free acid was freshly dissolved in anhydrous DMF to a final concentration
of 25 mM for the synthesis of the T-20-XTEN conjugates (T-20-XTEN-1,
2, 3, 4). Pilot-scale experiments were carried out first to optimize
the reaction conditions. MPA-T-20 was reacted with 1×Thiol-XTEN
(XTEN-1) at a molar ratio of 2:1 (MPA-T-20:XTEN) for 2 h at 25 °C,
with the reaction mixture analyzed by C4 RPC to determine the extent
of conversion. 3×Thiol-XTENs were diluted 2-fold into DMF to
facilitate the solubility of MPA-T-20 in the reaction mixtures, and
MPA-T-20 was added at molar ratios of 3:1, 6:1, and 12:1 (MPA-T-20:XTEN)
for 4 h at 25 °C, with the reaction mixtures monitored by C4
RPC at 1, 2, and 4 h to track the extent of conversion.

For
the large scale syntheses, 100 mg of 1×Thiol-XTEN (XTEN-1) was
diluted 2-fold into DMF to facilitate peptide solubility and reacted
with MPA-T-20 (MPA-T-20:XTEN = 2:1) for 2 h at 25 °C. The reaction
mixture was analyzed by C4 RPC to determine the extent of conversion
to the 1×T-20-XTEN conjugate (T-20-XTEN-1). Approximately 100
mg of 3×Thiol-XTENs (XTEN-2, 3, 4) were similarly diluted 2-fold
into DMF and reacted with MPA-T-20 (MPA-T-20:XTEN = 3:1) for 4 h at
25 °C. The reaction mixtures were analyzed by C4 RPC to determine
the extent of conversion to the 3×T-20-XTEN (T-20-XTEN-2, 3,
4) conjugates. The negative control (XTEN-1A) was prepared by reacting
1×Thiol XTEN (XTEN-1) with free 3-maleimidopropionic acid in
a 2:1 ratio (MPA:XTEN) for 2 h at 25 °C; the end products were
also confirmed and analyzed by C4 RPC.

Preparative C4 RPC of T-20-XTEN
Conjugates
The T-20-XTEN
conjugates (T-20-XTEN-1, 2, 3, 4) and the negative control (XTEN-1A)
were purified by preparative C4 RPC using a Vydac 214TP C4 10 μm
300 Å 22 × 250 mm column (Grace Davison Discovery Sciences).
Buffer A was 0.1% TFA in water, and buffer B was 0.1% TFA in 100%
acetonitrile. The system and column were equilibrated in a solution
of 5% buffer B and 95% buffer A at a flow rate of 10 mL/min at ambient
temperature. Separation was achieved with a gradient from 5% to 50%
buffer B over 70 min at a flow rate of 10 mL/min. Fractions containing
the fully modified T-20-XTEN conjugates were neutralized, concentrated
by vacuum centrifugal evaporation, and then buffer exchanged into
PBS buffer (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) using 5 kDa molecular
weight cutoff (MWCO) Vivaspin 15 mL centrifugal filters (Sartorius
Stedim Biotech) for storage at −80 °C. T-20-XTEN conjugate
concentrations were assayed by measuring their absorbances at 280
nm, and quality was assessed by analytical C4 RPC, analytical SEC,
ESI-MS, and dynamic light scattering (DLS).

SDS–PAGE Analysis
SDS–PAGE was performed
using NuPAGE Bis-Tris 4–12% gradient gels, NuPAGE MOPS SDS
running buffer, and Novex Sharp Standard (Life Technologies). The
thiol-containing XTEN precursors (XTEN-1, 2, 3, 4) were reduced with
10 mM DTT prior to analysis. The XTEN peptide conjugates were loaded
directly on the gels without reduction. Separation was performed for
40 min at 200 V, and the gels were stained using SimplyBlue SafeStain
(Life Technologies) or a Pierce Silver Stain Kit (Thermo Scientific).

Analytical Size-Exclusion Chromatography
Analytical
SEC was performed using a BioSep-SEC-s4000 7.8 × 600 mm HPLC
column (Phenomenex) connected to an LC2010 integrated HPLC system
(Shimadzu). The system and column were equilibrated using 50 mM sodium
phosphate, pH 6.5, and 300 mM NaCl at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min at
ambient temperature. For column calibration, a SEC column standard
(Phenomenex) was used. To analyze the samples, 20 μg of protein
was injected in a 3 to 5 μL volume and eluted from the column
at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min. The absorbance was monitored at 214
nm for 70 min to track the progress of the protein sample.

Analytical
C4 Reverse Phase Chromatography
Analytical
C4 RPC was performed using a Vydac 214TP C4 5 μm 300 Å
4.6 × 150 mm column (Grace Davison Discovery Sciences) connected
to an LC2010 integrated HPLC system (Shimadzu). Buffer A was 0.1%
trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in water and buffer B was 0.1% TFA in 100%
acetonitrile. The system and column were equilibrated in a solution
of 5% buffer B and 95% buffer A at a flow rate of 1 mL/min at ambient
temperature. For sample analysis, 20 μg of protein was injected
in a 20 μL volume. Separation was achieved using a linear gradient
from 5% to 50% B over 45 min at a flow rate of 1 mL/min, and the absorbance
was monitored at 214 nm to track the progress of the protein sample.

Electrospray Ionization Mass Spectrometry
100 μg
of purified protein was desalted by buffer exchange against 0.5% formic
acid in water using 5 kDa MWCO Vivaspin 500 μL centrifugal filters
(Sartorius Stedim Biotech). The retentate was recovered in a 100 μL
volume, mixed with an equal volume of acetonitrile, and infused at
a flow rate of 10 μL/min into a QSTAR XL mass spectrometer (AB
Sciex). Multicharge time-of-flight spectra were acquired in the 800
to 1600 amu range. Zero-charge spectra were obtained by Bayesian reconstruction
in the 10 to 100 kDa range.

Dynamic Light Scattering
The T-20-XTEN
conjugates (T-20-XTEN-1,
2, 3, 4), the negative control (XTEN-1A), and a positive control (BSA,
Fermentas) were centrifuged for 15 min at 18 000 g and transferred to clean, disposable cuvettes (Eppendorf) for analysis
in a DynaPro Titan dynamic light scattering instrument (Wyatt Technologies).
Readings were taken at 100% laser power until consistent intensity
readings were obtained, and 15 measurements were collected for each
sample to generate the particle size distribution using a regularization
fit. Both the effective radius and the aggregations by intensity and
mass were reported for each sample. The positive control was heat
treated at 80 °C for 10 min and cooled on ice for 5 min before
being analyzed a second time.

Antiviral MAGI Assay
A multinuclear activation of a
galactosidase indicator (MAGI) assay was performed at Southern Research
Institute (Frederick, MD) with MAGI CCR5 cells to test the activity
of the T-20-XTEN conjugates. MAGI CCR5 cells originate from a HeLa
cell line that constitutively expresses CXCR4 and is engineered to
express high levels of CD4 and CCR5, as well as contain one copy of
the HIV-1 LTR promoter driving the expression of the β-galactosidase
gene upon HIV-1 Tat transactivation. On
the day preceding the assay, 1 × 104 cells per well
were plated and allowed to adhere overnight at 37 °C. The media
used for plating the cells was aspirated and exchanged with a range
of concentrations (up to 10 nM) of the T-20-XTEN conjugates (T-20-XTEN-1,
2, 3, 4), followed by the introduction of the HIV-1Ba-L virus. The cultures were then incubated for 48 h, after which the
cells were lysed and β-galactosidase enzyme activity measured
upon the addition of Gal-screen reagent (Tropix, Bedford, MA). The
T-20 peptide without MPA (Southern Research Institute, Frederick,
MD) and XTEN-1A were respectively used as the positive and negative
controls, and all samples were tested in triplicate. As a measure
of compound toxicity, parallel cytotoxicity plates were set up for
which the virus was replaced with media and the cytotoxicity was monitored
by MTS staining (Promega, Madison, WI). The IC50 for inhibition
of virus replication and the TC50 for cytotoxicity of the
tested compounds were determined based on this analysis.

Rat Pharmacokinetics
T-20-XTEN-4, the compound with
the strongest antiviral activity, was administered by subcutaneous
injection at 1.92 mg/kg into three female Sprague–Dawley rats.
Blood samples were collected in prechilled heparinized tubes predose
as well as at 1, 3, 8, 12, 24, 48, 72, 96, and 120 h post-administration.
The samples were processed to heparin plasma and stored immediately
at −80 °C. Plasma samples were analyzed using a sandwich
anti-XTEN/anti-XTEN enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) in 3%
rat plasma, with purified T-20-XTEN-4 conjugate utilized as the calibration
standard. The ELISA utilized a proprietary anti-XTEN mouse monoclonal
antibody for capture, a biotinylated anti-XTEN antibody for detection,
and streptavidin–horseradish peroxidase (Pierce #21130) with
3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine peroxidase substrate
(Immunochemistry Technologies, SUBI) for development. Following absorbance readings at 450 nm, protein concentrations
were determined using a standard curve fitted using a 4 parameter
model and back-calculated to their values in 100% plasma. Pharmacokinetic
curves were averaged for the three assayed rats, with analyses performed
using PK Solutions 2.0 software (Summit Research Services, Montrose,
CO, USA).

Supporting Information Available
Supplementary figure describing
the RP-HPLC profiles of the XTEN precursors. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc500215m_si_001.pdf

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported
by the NIH Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) grant program (Grant Number: 1R43AI102765-01).

Abbreviations
AAAamino acid analysis

AEXanion exchange chromatography

DLSdynamic light scattering

IMACimmobilized metal
affinity chromatography

MAGImultinuclear activation of a galactosidase indicator

MPA3-maleimidopropionamide

PEGpoly(ethylene glycol)

RP-HPLCreverse-phase
high pressure liquid chromatography

RPCreverse phase chromatography

SDS-PAGEsodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis

SECsize-exclusion chromatography

