Introduction
Advances in unnatural
amino acid incorporation into proteins have
enabled the convenient functionalization of relevant proteins to a
broad array of chemical and biochemical motifs utilizing azide–alkyne
cycloaddition, or “click” chemistry.− This flexible strategy has been
used for the in vivo fluorescent labeling of target
proteins and to generate therapeutically
relevant agents such as bispecific antibodies. In addition, click chemistry approaches have been applied to fluorescently
label oligonucleotides, to image modified
cell-surface glycans, and to target nanoparticles
to cancer cells. Work by Agard et al. demonstrating that strain-promoted [3 + 2] azide–alkyne
cycloaddition (strain-promoted click chemistry) can be effectively
used to couple biological molecules, circumventing
possible copper toxicity associated with copper(I)-catalyzed [3 +
2] cycloaddition between azides and alkynes, has expanded this already
versatile click chemistry reaction. In order to improve cancer therapeutics
and enlarge the arsenal against human diseases, we utilized strain-promoted
click chemistry for protein–small molecule coupling. Our objective
was to develop a targeted therapeutic enzyme platform specific for
tumor cells (Figure ). To this end, we report
the site-specific incorporation of p-azidophenylalanine
(pAzF) to outfit the suicide enzyme yeast cytosine
deaminase (yCD) with a targeting molecule possessing selective and
high affinity for the prostate tumor biomarker prostate-specific membrane
antigen (PSMA).

Click chemistry strategy. (A) Strain promoted [3 + 2]
azide–alkyne
cycloaddition between a therapeutic enzyme, yCDtriple,
and a phosphoramidate inhibitor of PSMA, DBCO-PEG4-AH2-TG97 (), to generate a stable triazole (IDEPT agent). Please note that
both azide groups in yCDtriple are available for strain-promoted
click chemistry. (B) TG97 (PSMA targeting agent) structure. Images
were generated using the previously solved crystal structure of yCDtriple (Protein Data Bank accession code 1YSB).

The suicide enzyme yCD is responsible for the hydrolytic
deamination
of the nontoxic prodrug 5-fluorocytosine (5-FC) to the toxic chemotherapeutic
agent 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). Intracellularly,
5-FU is further converted into toxic antimetabolites that inhibit
DNA synthesis and RNA function, resulting in apoptosis. In targeted
therapeutic applications, cancer cells lacking the suicide enzyme
also undergo apoptosis due to the phenomenon known as the bystander
effect, whereby toxic antimetabolites produced by suicide enzyme containing
cells diffuse to surrounding tumor cells. Since 5-FU is capable of
nonfacilitated diffusion across cellular membranes, the CD/5-FC strategy
generates a potent bystander effect.− This is particularly
important for ablating tumors consisting of heterogeneous cancer cells
that differentially express surface biomarkers. The targeting of yCD
to cancer cells followed by prodrug administration thus results in
a potent, localized cancer cell killing effect with minimal systemic
toxicity. Yeast CD is a highly characterized enzyme that has been
utilized in cancer therapy as part of larger fusion proteins,, DNA vectors, and antibodies, and was selected for use in phase I clinical
trials for PCa. In addition, our lab
has generated a thermostable variant of yCD (yCDtriple)
that displays an improved half-life (t1/2 at 50 °C = 117 h) over the wild-type enzyme (t1/2 at 50 °C = 4 h)., In support
of using this enzyme for cancer therapeutics, a retroviral replicating
vector encoding yCDtriple, in combination with 5-FC administration,
is currently being utilized in a phase I/II clinical trial for the
treatment of recurrent malignant glioma (registration number: NCT01156584, www.clinicaltrials.gov). Since
yCDtriple displays an increased half-life that would allow
for enzymatic activity after circulation in the bloodstream, and is
relatively small (35 kDa homodimer,) and flexible,
it was selected as the therapeutic enzyme component of the PCa therapeutic.

The enzyme-biomarker prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA)
is an ideal PCa target. This type II membrane glycoprotein is upregulated
in PCa,, after androgen-deprivation therapy, and is expressed in the neovasculature of most
solid cancers., Furthermore, PSMA is an active
target for the delivery of PCa imaging and therapeutic agents.− Previously, we demonstrated that phosphoramidate-based inhibitors
of PSMA bind to PSMA in a pseudoirreversibe manner, and consequently
are potent inhibitors of PSMA enzymatic (carboxypeptidase) activity. In addition to their selective tumor uptake, these inhibitors have been demonstrated to deliver
large molecular and biomolecular payloads to PSMA expressing PCa cells, that are then internalized via a PSMA-dependent process. Therefore,
the utilization of click chemistry to couple yCDtriple to
a small molecule PSMA inhibitor is expected to generate therapeutic
agents capable of targeting prostate tumor cells and evoking cell
killing through prodrug activation. As the design of this platform
is composed of a suicide enzyme coupled to a potent biomarker inhibitor,
this therapy has been coined inhibitor-directed enzyme prodrug therapy,
or IDEPT.

Results and Discussion
To engineer yCDtriple for click chemistry, the codon
for amino acid position F54 was mutated to allow for pAzF incorporation into yCDtriple. Incorporation of pAzF was carried out using pEVOL technology, specifically
pEVOL-pAzF, developed by the Schultz laboratory., The pEVOL-pAzF vector encodes an orthogonal aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetase (aaRS) and its cognate tRNA (tRNACUA). The aaRS aminoacylates tRNACUA with pAzF, which is then incorporated into a growing peptide
at amber stop codons (UAG).pAzF has been successfully incorporated into other proteins using
this optimized pEVOL system and other unnatural amino acid incorporation
systems similar to pEVOL.,, Based on molecular modeling studies that identified surface aromatics
previously deemed nonessential for enzyme function, F54 of yCDtriple was selected for mutagenesis
to an amber nonsense codon for pAzF incorporation.
Since yCDtriple is a homodimer, two pAzF
molecules are predicted to be present within the final dimeric enzyme,
allowing for dual-valent targeting.

To determine if yCDtriple with pAzF
incorporated at position F54 (F54pAzF) retains enzymatic
activity, a genetic complementation assay was conducted utilizing Escherichia coli strain GIA39(DE3), a strain lacking codA (CD) activity. E. coli GIA39(DE3) containing a functional CD will grow on cytosine supplemented
minimal medium (cytosine as the only source of pyrimidines), since
CD deaminates cytosine to uracil. Cells lacking a functional CD will
only grow on nonselective minimal medium containing uracil.−E. coli GIA39(DE3) harboring the
positive control pET23d:yCDtriple grew on cytosine supplemented
minimal medium plates (CD selection), while the negative control, E. coli GIA39(DE3) containing both the pET23d and
pEVOL-pAzF plasmids, only grew on nonselective minimal
media (Figure ). E. coli GIA39(DE3) harboring the pET23d:yCDtriple-F54X plasmid
was viable on the nonselective minimal medium plates only, presumably
due to protein truncation at position F54 in the absence of the pEVOL-pAzF vector and pAzF. Importantly, E. coli GIA39(DE3) cells harboring both pEVOL-pAzF and pET23d:yCDtriple-F54X grew on CD selection
plates in the presence of pAzF, but were not viable
on CD selection plates when pAzF was omitted (lanes
2 and 3 in Figure ). These results suggest
that pAzF is incorporated via the pEVOL system, that pAzF must be present for functional yCDtriple to be produced from pET23d:yCDtriple-F54X, and that yCDtriple-F54pAzF retains CD activity due to
its ability to confer growth to E. coli GIA39(DE3) plated on CD selection medium.

Genetic complementation
of the CD deficient E. coli strain
GIA39(DE3) by yCDtriple and yCDtriple-F54pAzF. Representative images of the various agar
plates are shown. (A) Positive control, pET23d:yCDtriple (GIA39(DE3)). (B) Negative control, pET23d, pEVOL-pAzF (GIA39(DE3)). (C) pEVOL control, pET23d:yCDtriple-F54X
(GIA39(DE3)). (D) pET23d:yCDtriple-F54X, pEVOL-pAzF (GIA39(DE3)). Lane 1, nonselective medium containing
uracil. Lane 2, CD selection medium lacking uracil. Lane 3, CD selection
medium supplemented with pAzF (1 mM). F54X, location
of the TAG mutation. Cytosine (cyt), uracil (ura), p-azidophenylalanine (pAzF).

The relationship between yCDtriple-F54pAzF protein expression and pAzF concentration
in
the expression culture medium was also evaluated to determine if full-length
yCDtriple containing pAzF could be generated
and purified. Protein yields not only depend on the presence of pAzF in the culture media, but also increase as the concentration
of pAzF increases (Figure ). In further support of pAzF incorporation into
yCDtriple utilizing the pEVOL system, full-length yCDtriple could not be purified from expression cultures lacking pAzF, suggesting that His-tagged yCDtriple is
not synthesized without the incorporation of pAzF
(Figure ). Roughly 9 mg of yCDtriple-F54pAzF was obtained from a 500 mL culture using
optimized expression conditions.

Yeast CDtriple-F54pAzF protein yields
increase as pAzF concentration in the culture medium
increases. SDS-PAGE analysis of the three protein elutions (lanes
1–3) performed during purification via nickel affinity chromatography.
Predicted mass of yCDtriple-F54pAzF (monomer)
is 19.8 kDa. Molecular weight marker (M).

As discussed previously, click chemistry is a rapid, gentle
methodology
for coupling complementary molecules. In order to couple yCDtriple-F54pAzF to the PSMA targeting molecule, the PSMA
inhibitor TG97 (Figure B) was outfitted with
a strained alkyne capable of reacting specifically with azide containing
proteins. The resulting molecule, DBCO-PEG4-AH2-TG97 (Figure A and ), is capable of targeting PSMA through
the inhibitor core (TG97) and delivering biomolecular payloads coupled
to the molecule through click chemistry strategies. Furthermore, this
molecule meets the additional requirement of containing the equivalent
of a PEG8 spacer between the biomolecular payload and PSMA
binding motif (TG97). A spacer of this length ensures that the biomolecular
payload is sufficiently removed from the PSMA surface to allow the
PSMA entrance lid to close over the inhibitor core after binding,
while avoiding unproductive interactions between the payload and PSMA., This class of phosphoramidate-based PSMA inhibitors has also demonstrated
stability and specific tumor targeting in vivo, as
exhibited by low nonspecific binding and a high tumor-to-blood ratio.

An array of click chemistry conditions
were investigated to optimize
the coupling of the suicide enzyme and PSMA targeting agent. Yeast
CDtriple-F54pAzF and DBCO-PEG4-AH2-TG97 were mixed at various molar ratios (1:5, 1:10,
1:25, 1:50, 1:100, 1:200, 1:500 (protein:DBCO-PEG4-AH2-TG97)), tested at a range of biologically relevant temperatures
(rt, 37, 45, 50 °C), and analyzed at several reaction times (15,
30, 60, 90, 120 min) (Figure ). The click
chemistry reactions were analyzed via SDS-PAGE, since the clicked
protein could easily be identified by an observed shift in migration
rate (band identities were confirmed with mass spectrometry analysis,
Figure ). Click chemistry efficiency was maximal
at the 1:50 ratio, with a reaction time of 30–90 min. Elevated
temperatures did not significantly influence click chemistry at molar
ratios greater than 1:25. Densitometry analysis of the Coomassie Brilliant
Blue stained SDS-PAGE gel indicates that the integrated optical density
(IOD) value of yCDtriple-F54pAzF labeled
with DBCO-PEG4-AH2-TG97 using a 1:50 molar ratio
at rt for 90 min is 75% of the total IOD value for the lane, and this
condition was selected for all future analyses (Figure ). This is similar to the efficiency of click chemistry obtained
with other proteins engineered to contain unnatural amino acids., The control reaction, yCDtriple (no pAzF incorporated) reacted with DBCO-PEG4-AH2-TG97, did not demonstrate the shift in migration at the 1:50 ratio,
supporting the hypothesis that the introduced azide is the site of
modification (Figure ). Notably, no differences
in the click chemistry efficiencies using yCDtriple-F54pAzF purified from rich media containing 1, 2, or 3 mM pAzF were observed. This suggests that the concentration
of pAzF in the culture medium is the limiting factor
for yCDtriple-F54pAzF yields, but does
not influence the efficiency of click chemistry of the purified enzyme,
further supporting the high fidelity of the pEVOL system for pAzF incorporation. It should be noted that click chemistry
optimization may need to be performed for new combinations of azide-containing
proteins and DBCO-containing PSMA targeting agents, due to various
charge and structural interactions that may influence the click chemistry
reaction.

Click chemistry analysis. (A) Click chemistry optimization. Lanes
1 and 8, yCDtriple-F54pAzF (19.9 kDa);
lanes 2–7 and 9–14, clicked yCDtriple-F54pAzF (upper band). Lanes 1, 3, 5, 7, 8, 10, 12, and 14,
90 min reaction; lanes 2, 4, 6, 9, 11, and 13, 30 min reaction. Molar
ratios (1:5, 1:25, 1:50) and temperatures (rt, 37 °C) are indicated.
Samples were resolved using SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie Brilliant
Blue. Molecular weight marker (M). (B) Coupling yCDtriple-F54pAzF with DBCO-PEG4-AH2-TG97 via click chemistry. Yeast CDtriple (lanes 1 and
2) and yCDtriple-F54pAzF (lanes 3 and
4) were combined with DBCO-PEG4-AH2-TG97 (lanes
2 and 4) or PBS (control, lanes 1 and 3) using the 1:50 reaction discussed,
and analyzed by SDS-PAGE. Western blot analysis utilized polyclonal
antiserum to yCD. yCDtriple and yCDtriple-F54pAzF predicted monomer mass: 19.8 kDa. DBCO-PEG4-AH2-TG97 mass: 1276.32 Da. Noncoupled protein (b), DBCO-PEG4-AH2-TG97 coupled protein (a). Molecular weight
marker (M).

MALDI mass spectrometry
(MS) analysis was conducted to verify the
location of protein modification, with respect to both pAzF incorporation and click chemistry conjugation. As noted, yCDtriple was engineered for pAzF incorporation
at amino acid position F54. After tryptic digest, amino acid F54 is
part of the tryptic peptide FQK (residues 54–56). Therefore,
a tryptic digest of yCDtriple was analyzed to identify
the FQK tripeptide, and a tryptic digest of yCDtriple-F54pAzF was analyzed to identify peaks corresponding to the
FQK and F′QK (F′ = pAzF) tripeptides.
As predicted, the FQK tripeptide was seen at m/z 422.2294 (calculated mass: 422.22) for the tryptic digest
of yCDtriple, the control protein that does not contain pAzF, and confirmed via MS/MS analysis. The tryptic peptide
F′QK was not seen for yCDtriple-F54pAzF, and the absence of this peak may be due to the sensitivity of pAzF to the laser pulse (355 nm) used in the MALDI procedure.
Importantly, a peak corresponding to the wild-type FQK tripeptide
(calculated mass: 422.22) could not be found for the tryptic digest
of yCDtriple-F54pAzF. This suggests a
high fidelity of pAzF incorporation into yCDtriple when generating yCDtriple-F54pAzF, since the incorporation of phenylalanine at amino acid position
54 could not be identified with the mass spectrometry results.

To confirm that click chemistry occurred at position F54, yCDtriple-F54pAzF modified by DBCO-PEG4-AH2-TG97 was subjected to a tryptic digest followed by
mass spectrometry analysis. An ion corresponding to F′clickQK (F′click = pAzF
modified by DBCO-PEG4-AH2-TG97) was found at m/z 1738.9117 (calculated mass: 1738.795
Da) (Figure ). In further support of the click
chemistry reaction occurring at amino acid 54, a peak at m/z 1609.8473 was identified, corresponding to F′clickQK after hydrolysis of the terminal glutamate of TG97
(Figure ). TG97 glutamate hydrolysis was also
seen during whole protein click chemistry analysis (peak at m/z 20 999.42, Figure ).

Mass spectrometry analyses. (A) Analysis of the 1:50 click chemistry
reaction between yCDtriple-F54pAzF and
DBCO-PEG4-AH2-TG97. A peak corresponding to
yCDtriple-F54pAzF was seen at m/z 19 835.00 (expected average
mass: 19 848 Da), and the DBCO-PEG4-AH2-TG97 modified yCDtriple-F54pAzF peak
was seen at 21 127.82 (predicted mass: 21 124.32 Da),
noted in italics. (B) Analysis of a tryptic digest of the click chemistry
reaction between yCDtriple-F54pAzF and
DBCO-PEG4-AH2-TG97.

To assess the PSMA binding capabilities of this first generation
IDEPT agent (yCDtriple-F54pAzF modified
by DBCO-PEG4-AH2-TG97), an inhibition (IC50) study was performed with PSMA purified from LNCaP cells. The IC50 values indicate the concentration
of a molecule needed to inhibit PSMA enzymatic activity by 50%. The
IDEPT agent (IC50 = 41 nM) and parent compounds (DBCO-PEG4-AH2-TG97, IC50 = 2.83 nM and TG97,
IC50 = 27 nM) all exhibit low, nanomolar IC50 values indicative of PSMA inhibition. PSMA inhibition by noncoupled
yCDtriple-F54pAzF could not be detected
within 3 orders of magnitude of the IC50 of the IDEPT agent.
These data suggest that the IDEPT agent demonstrates a high affinity
for PSMA active site binding.

To demonstrate the functionality
and therapeutic relevance of the
IDEPT agent, in vitro cytotoxicity assays were performed.
Human PCa cell lines, LNCaP (PSMA-positive) and PC-3 (PSMA-negative),
were incubated with the IDEPT agent for 2.5 h, and then washed three
times to remove any unbound IDEPT agent. The nontoxic prodrug 5-FC
was added to the cells at 1 or 5 mM, and cell viability was assessed
using Alamar Blue after incubation for 7 days (Figure ). To avoid bone marrow depression and hepatotoxicity in patients
receiving 5-FC, the prodrug plasma level must not exceed 100 mg/L. To roughly correlate with this 5-FC plasma level,
we used 1 mM 5-FC in our studies. Since it is difficult to mimic the
variables associated with a tumor microenvironment in in vitro settings, such as changes in clearance, plasma levels, and tumor
concentrations, and since multiple doses of 5-FC are utilized in the
clinic,,, the 5 mM 5-FC
dose was selected to represent the accumulation of 5-FC in the tumor
microenvironment that may occur after multiple 5-FC doses.

In
the PSMA-positive LNCaP cells, an enhanced cell killing effect
was observed as the concentration of IDEPT agent and 5-FC increased.
In contrast, this correlation was not observed in PC-3 cells (note
the higher concentration of IDEPT agent used), suggesting that the
IDEPT agent was unable to target the PSMA-negative cell line. Furthermore,
the dose of TG97 used is nontoxic, and TG97 in combination with 5-FC
does not produce a cell killing effect (). Notably, 0.5 μM IDEPT agent combined
with 5 mM 5-FC resulted in 57% cell death. This cell killing mechanism
is predicted to result from surface targeted IDEPT agents producing
5-FU after 5-FC administration via yCDtriple catalysis.

As an initial benchmark, we sought to achieve a comparable level
of prodrug-mediated cell killing with a protein targeting strategy
(IDEPT), to that achieved with cells stably transfected with yCDtriple. Previous experiments from our lab that evaluated yCDtriple-5FC mediated cell killing in stably transfected rat
C6 glioma cells achieved 45% cell killing
in the presence of 5 mM 5-FC. Fifty-seven percent cell death was observed
when 0.5 μM IDEPT agent was administered to LNCaP cells followed
by a 5 mM 5-FC treatment. We believe that the IDEPT/5-FC treatment
outcome in these initial experiments is similar, if not slightly better,
than the 5-FC-mediated cell killing in stably transfected C6 glioma
cells, and thus serves as a comparison to other treatment modalities.
Further improvements to the therapeutic efficacy may involve multiple
IDEPT agent and 5-FC administrations, as well as utilizing the IDEPT
strategy to augment other PCa treatment strategies.

PCa survival after IDEPT.
LNCaP (A), PC-3 (B) cells. Each bar (mean
of experiments, n = 3, performed with 6 replicates)
is expressed as a percentage of the value of the untreated PCa cells,
which were defined as 100% viable. The percent SEM is indicated, and
statistical significance was determined using Student’s t-test with an α level of 0.05. (*), (†), and
(‡) denote statistical significance when compared to the corresponding
no drug control.

Conclusion
This
proof-of-concept study represents a novel contribution to
the development of targeted enzyme therapeutics for the treatment
of PCa. Our novel IDEPT agent displays cancer cell targeting capabilities
and enzymatic activity, suggesting that click chemistry reactions
can be employed not only to generate individualized, combinatorial,
curative treatment strategies for advanced PCa, but also for the development
of enhanced therapeutics that may improve the current standard of
care used to treat other cancers and diseases.

Experimental Procedures
General
Materials and Methods
Oligonucleotides used
for yCDtriple mutagenesis experiments were obtained from
Integrated DNA Technologies (Coralville, IA). Restriction endonucleases
were purchased from New England Biolabs (Ipswich, MA). The cytosine
deaminase (CD) and orotidine 5′-phosphate decarboxylase deficient Escherichia coli strain GIA39 (thr-1 leuB6(AM) fhuA21 codA1 lacY1 tsx-95 glnV44(AS) λ–dadX3 pyrF101 his-108 argG6 ilvA634 thiE1 deoC1 glt-15) was obtained from the E. coli Genetic Stock Center (CGSC #5594) and was lysogenized with λDE3
according to the manufacturer’s directions (Novagen (now EMD
Millipore) Billerica, MA). The derived strain, GIA39(DE3), was used
in genetic complementation studies and for protein purification. Photolysis of the aryl-azide of p-azido-l-phenylalanine (pAzF) was limited
by conducting relevant preparations and experiments under yellow light.
LNCaP and PC-3 human prostate cancer cell lines were obtained from
the American Type Culture Collection. All reagents were purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO) or JT Baker (Avantor Performance
Materials, Center Valley, PA) unless otherwise indicated.

Construction
of yCDtriple Vectors
The thermostable
yCD, “yCDtriple”, previously designed and
generated via computational design, was excised from pETHT:yCDtriple using NcoI and HinDIII restriction endonucleases, and subcloned into NcoI/HinDIII-digested pET23d vector DNA (Novagen (now
EMD Millipore) Billerica, MA))., Oligonucleotides MB713
(5′-GAAGATATTGGTGAGGTAGAGCACGCAGCAAGC-3′)
and MB714 (5′-GCTTGCTGCGTGCTCTACCTCACCAATATCTTC-3′)
were used to insert a single nucleotide within the stop codon of yCDtriple using QuikChange II Site-Directed Mutagenesis (Agilent
Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). The subsequent frame-shift mutation
at the yCDtriple stop codon allowed for fusion of the pET23d
encoded 6× His tag to the C-terminus of yCDtriple.
The resulting plasmid, pET23d:yCDtriple, was confirmed
by DNA sequencing.

To generate pET23d:yCDtriple-F54X,
QuikChange II Site-Directed Mutagenesis (using oligonucleotides MB717
5′-GGTCACAACATGAGATAGCAAAAGGGATCCGC-3′
and MB718 5′-GCGGATCCCTTTTGCTATCTCATGTTGTGACC-3′)
was used to mutate the phenylalanine 54 codon of yCDtriple (in pET23d:yCDtriple) to an amber stop codon, “F54X”.
The resulting plasmid was confirmed by DNA sequencing.

Genetic Complementation
in E. coli GIA39(DE3)
Genetic
complementation studies were performed
as previously described for the selection of functional CD mutants,
with the modifications outlined below., The pET23d,
pET23d:yCDtriple, pET23d:yCDtriple-F54X, and
pEVOL-pAzF vectors were used to transform E. coli GIA39(DE3). Isolated GIA39(DE3) transformants
were streaked from minimal medium containing uracil onto minimal medium
containing uracil or cytosine. Carbenicillin at 50 μg/mL (carb50, Research Products International Corp., Mt. Prospect, IL)
was included to select for transformants harboring pET23d plasmids.
Chloramphenicol at 100 μg/mL (cam100) was included
to select for transformants harboring the pEVOL-pAzF plasmid. Where indicated, 1 mM pAzF (final)
was added to cytosine containing minimal media.

Protein Expression
and Purification
Yeast CDtriple-F54pAzF expression in the presence of 0, 0.1, or
1 mM pAzF was performed as previously described with
the following minor modifications.E. coli GIA39(DE3) cells harboring the pET23d:yCDtriple-F54X and pEVOL-pAzF plasmids were grown
in 500 mL of 2 × YT carb50 cam100 medium
(2 × YT (1 L) contained 16 g tryptone, 10 g yeast extract, and
5 g NaCl) at 37 °C with constant shaking at 225 rpm until an
optical density at 600 nm (OD600) between 0.85 and 0.9
was reached. After reaching an OD600 within this range,
75 mL of the culture was added to 3 flasks. To each flask, 25 mL of pAzF (dissolved in 2 × YT carb50 cam100) or 2 × YT carb50 cam100 was
added, such that the final pAzF concentrations were
0, 0.1, or 1 mM. Protein expression was induced by adding isopropyl
β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) and l-arabinose
to final concentrations of 1 mM and 0.02%, respectively, for 14 h
at 30 °C with constant shaking at 225 rpm. The 100 mL expression
cultures were harvested by centrifugation at 4000 × g for 30 min and the cell pellets were frozen at −80 °C.
Protein purification was completed using the nickel-nitrilotriacetic
acid (Ni-NTA) Spin Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) with the following modifications:
Cells were resuspended in 2 mL of lysis buffer supplemented with lysozyme
(1 mg/mL) and Halt Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (1×, EDTA-free,
Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL), four washes (wash buffer contained
30 mM imidazole) were performed, and the protein was eluted five times
with 150 μL of elution buffer. Protein purification was analyzed
using 15% sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS-PAGE) gels under reducing conditions followed by Coomassie Brilliant
Blue staining. Yeast CDtriple-pAzF was
purified to near (&gt;95%) homogeneity.

Large scale purification
of yCDtriple-F54pAzF was performed as
described above, using 500 mL of 2 × YT carb50 cam100 medium containing 3 mM pAzF. Cell lysates
were prepared under native conditions as described in the QIAexpressionist handbook (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). Briefly,
cells were resuspended in lysis buffer (2 mL lysis buffer/g cell pellet)
supplemented with 1 mg/mL lysozyme and 1× Halt Protease Inhibitor
Cocktail. Following sonication, the lysate was centrifuged at 10 000
× g for 45 min at 4 °C. This centrifugation
step was repeated with the resulting cleared lysate. Yeast CDtriple-F54pAzF was purified using Ni-NTA metal-affinity
chromatography according to the manufacturer’s protocol for
batch purification under native conditions, with the exceptions that
four washes (wash buffer contained 40 mM imidazole) were performed
and the protein was eluted with five aliquots of elution buffer. Protein
purification was analyzed using a 15% SDS-PAGE gel as described above.
Yeast CDtriple-F54pAzF was purified to
near homogeneity (&gt;95%). Eluted fractions were pooled and dialyzed
against 50 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5 or phosphate buffered saline
(PBS, 10 g/L NaCl, 0.25 g/L KCl, 1.44 g/L Na2HPO4, 0.24 g/L KH2PO4) at 4 °C. Protein concentration
was determined by the Bio-Rad Protein Assay (Bradford method) (Bio-Rad,
Hercules, CA) using a bovine serum albumin standard.

For expression
and purification of yCDtriple, E. coli GIA39(DE3) cells expressing pET23d:yCDtriple were grown
in 2 × YT carb50 at 37 °C
at 225 rpm until an OD600 of 0.6 was reached. Protein expression
was induced for 4 h by addition of 1 mM IPTG (final). Cells were harvested
by centrifugation at 4000 × g for 30 min, and
the cell pellets were frozen at −80 °C. The generation
of cell lysates and protein purification were performed as described
for the preparative purification of yCDtriple-F54pAzF.

DBCO-PEG4-AH2-TG97
Synthesis
Detailed synthesis procedures of DBCO-PEG4-AH2-TG97 can be found in the experimental procedures
section of the .

Click Chemistry Reaction Conditions
Yeast CDtriple-F54pAzF was modified via strain-promoted [3 + 2]
azide–alkyne cycloaddition with DBCO-PEG4-AH2-TG97 using the following method. Reactions were performed
in PBS at the molar ratios, temperatures, and time periods described
in the text and resolved on a 15% SDS-PAGE gel as described above.
The yCDtriple monomer concentration was used for all click
chemistry calculations. Immunoblot analysis using rabbit polyclonal
yCD antiserum followed by goat anti-rabbit alkaline phosphatase-conjugated
secondary antibody was performed as previously described. Densitometry analysis was performed using NIH
ImageJ software (rsbweb.nih.gov/ij/). The integrated optical density
(IOD) of each band on the Coomassie Brilliant Blue stained gel was
determined, and compared to the corresponding sum of IOD values for
all bands in each lane.

IC50 Determination of the IDEPT
Agent for PSMA
PSMA inhibition studies were performed as
previously published,, with the following modifications.
Working solutions of PSMA inhibitors
and substrate (N-[4-(phenylazo)-benzoyl]-glutamyl-g-glutamic acid, PABGγG) were prepared in Tris-HCl
buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4). A working solution of purified PSMA
was prepared on ice using Tris-HCl buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4,
1% Triton X-100) such that a 15–20% conversion of substrate
to product was achieved in the absence of inhibitor. Each reaction
mixture was prepared by adding 25 μL of an inhibitor solution
(serially diluted concentrations providing 10–90% PSMA inhibition),
or Tris-HCl buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4) for controls, and 25 μL
of PABGγG (1 μM final) to 175 μL Tris-HCl buffer.
The PSMA enzymatic reaction was initiated by the addition of 25 μL
of the PSMA working solution. Samples were incubated in a 37 °C
water bath with constant shaking for 15 min, and the reaction was
terminated by the addition of 25 μL of 2.5% trifluoroacetic
acid in methanol (v/v) and vortexed. Each sample was allowed to quench
for 15 min on ice, and buffered by the addition of 25 μL K2HPO4 (0.1 M). Samples were then centrifuged for
10 min at 7000 × g. An 85 μL aliquot of
the supernatant was analyzed for product formation via RP-HPLC, and
the IC50 values were determined using KaleidaGraph 3.6
(Synergy Software).

Mass Spectrometry Characterization of IDEPT
Agents
MALDI mass spectrometry was performed with a Sciex
4800 MALDI TOF/TOF
Analyzer. Whole protein spectra were collected using Linear High Mass
mode with sinapic acid matrix. For whole protein MALDI, the samples
were desalted and concentrated using a C8 hydrophobic tip (NuTip C-08,
Glygen Corp., Columbia, MD), followed by a 2-fold dilution with matrix.
When applicable, excess DBCO-PEG4-AH2-TG97 compound
was removed using Performa DTR Gel Filtration Cartridges (EdgeBio,
Gaithersburg, MD) according to the manufacturer’s protocol
with the exception that an additional spin with 20 μL of ddH2O was used to elute the protein. Default calibration was used
unless otherwise stated, and internal calibration was performed using
myoglobin and the +2 charged bovine serum albumin peak.

Trypsin
digestion of yCDtriple and DBCO-PEG4-AH2-TG97 modified yCDtriple was performed in solution
by the addition of trypsin (1.5 μg/mL final, Promega, Madison,
WI) to the protein sample suspended in 100 mM bicarbonate buffer,
pH 7.5. Digested samples were then diluted with water to lower the
bicarbonate concentration, and mixed 1:1 with matrix. Mass spectrometry
of digested peptides was collected using positive reflector mode using
α-cyano-4-hydroxcinnamic acid as matrix. Internal calibration
was obtained by using peptide peaks from the yCDtriple enzyme
that were not expected to be modified by a click chemistry reaction.
This allowed accurate masses of peptides modified by the click chemistry
reaction to be obtained. MS/MS spectra were obtained in both positive
and negative mode using 1 kV MS/MS mode, and default calibrations
were used for the MS/MS spectra.

In Vitro Cytotoxicity Assays
For cell
culture experiments, the IDEPT agent was prepared as described in
the text and above, with additional purification steps. The 1:50 click
chemistry reaction of protein:DBCO-PEG4-AH2-TG97
was performed, and analyzed via denaturing SDS-PAGE and mass spectrometry.
The IDEPT agent was then purified to remove excess DBCO-PEG4-AH2-TG97 using Ni-NTA chromatography as described above.
After mass spectrometry analysis of the eluted fractions, IDEPT agent
containing fraction(s) were pooled. Buffer exchange (into 50 mM Tris-HCl,
50 mM NaCl, pH 7.5) was performed using a 7 kDa molecular weight cutoff
Zeba Spin Desalting Column (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. The recovered IDEPT agent
was subjected to an additional buffer exchange step using an additional
Zeba Spin Desalting Column. The recovered protein was then sterilized
using a 0.22 μm syringe filter, and protein concentration was
determined by the Bio-Rad Protein Assay (Bradford method) (Bio-Rad,
Hercules, CA) using a bovine serum albumin standard. IDEPT stock solutions
were prepared in phosphate- and l-glutamine-free RPMI 1640
medium, supplemented with 1× Penicillin–Streptomycin–Glutamine
(Gibco, Life Technologies Corp., Grand Island, NY).

Human prostate
cancer cells lines, LNCaP (PSMA-positive) and PC-3 (PSMA-negative)
cells, were routinely grown in a humidified incubator at 37 °C
containing 5% CO2. Unless otherwise indicated, complete
HyClone classical medium was used and cells were passaged using 0.25%
trypsin-0.53 mM EDTA. Complete HyClone classical medium consisted
of HyClone RPMI 1640 (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL) containing
2.05 mM l-glutamine and 25 mM Hepes, supplemented with 10%
fetal bovine serum (Atlanta Biologicals, Lawrenceville, GA), 1×
Penicillin–Streptomycin–Glutamine (Gibco, Life Technologies
Corp., Grand Island, NY, 1 U/mL penicillin, 1 μg/mL streptomycin,
292 μg/mL l-glutamine final), and 1× sodium pyruvate
(Gibco, Life Technologies Corp., Grand Island, NY, 1 mM final). For
cell survival assays, cells were plated in 96-well format on BD BioCoat
Poly-d-Lysine coated
plates (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) at a density of 9000 cells/well.
After adherence for 48 h (roughly 70% confluency), media was removed
(via inversion of plates), and cells were incubated with the IDEPT
agent (0, 0.1, or 0.5 μM for LNCaP cells; 0, 0.5, or 1 μM
for PC-3 cells) for 2.5 h, with mild agitation every 30 min. Following
this incubation, the IDEPT agent was removed by inversion of the 96-well
plate. Cells were washed three times by the addition of complete HyClone
classical medium to each well, followed by inversion of the 96-well
plate to remove the media. Following the final wash, HyClone classical
medium containing 0, 1, or 5 mM 5-FC was added. After 5-FC incubation
for 7 days, cell viability was analyzed via the redox-indicator dye
Alamar Blue (AbD Serotec, Oxford, UK) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions (530 nm excitation/590 nm emission). All experiments
were performed in triplicate. The data were plotted with a standard
error of the mean bar, and analyzed for statistical significance using
Student’s t-test with an α-level of
0.05.

Supporting Information Available
DBCO-PEG4-AH2-TG97 structure
and detailed synthesis methods. This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc500362n_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Desiree E. Mendes
for developing an assay to measure
the concentration of the PSMA inhibitors. This work was supported
in part by the National Institutes of Health (R01CA140617) including
support for S.E.M. by a National Institutes of Health Biotechnology
Training Grant (T32GM008336).

Abbreviations
5-FC5-fluorocytosine

5-FU5-fluorouracil

aaRSaminoacyl-tRNA synthetase

CDcytosine deaminase

IDEPTinhibitor-directed
enzyme prodrug therapy

pAzFp-azidophenylalanine

PCaprostate cancer

PSMAprostate-specific
membrane antigen

yCDyeast cytosine deaminase

