Surface enhanced
Raman scattering
(SERS) is a phenomenon with significant potential in analytical and
bioanalytical chemistry.− This potential stems from the
molecular information contained in Raman scattering spectra and the
great increases in Raman scattering intensity that result from localized
electric fields in certain nanostructures. However, these signal enhancements
and specificity have proven difficult to harness in a general way,
and the development of robust SERS-based analytical methods is very
much a work in progress.

One implementation of the SERS phenomenon
involves the fabrication
of nanoparticle-based SERS labels or tags for antibodies or other
targeting molecules.− SERS signals can be as bright as fluorescence with better photostability,
and the narrow spectral features have great potential for multiplexing.
In their most general form, SERS tags are composed of a plasmonic
nanoparticle that generates a strong electric field upon illumination
with an appropriate light source, a Raman-active compound that confers
a distinct spectral signature, and a stabilizing coating that also
provides a surface for functionalization with a molecular recognition
element such as an antibody. Silica-coated gold nanospheres can be
viewed as the prototypical SERS tag,, and these have
been characterized extensively in terms of fundamental properties− and practical applications.− The hot spots of high E-field
intensity that form at the interface of nanosphere dimers and trimers
have been exploited to make SERS tags with significantly increased
intensity. Gold nanorods have also been
extensively characterized as plasmonic nanoparticles− and can produce bright SERS tags, because of
the high electric fields that can occur at the ends of the rods. Mixed
metal core–shell structures composed of, for example, gold
and silver can also result in bright SERS tags.− For any SERS tag, the brightness
of individual tags is obviously a major determinant of the performance
of an assay that employs them, but there are few standard measures
of SERS tag brightness.

SERS tags have been used as labels in
applications ranging from
immunoassays to molecular analysis of cells and tissues;,− however, these demonstrations have not matured into widely used
or useful methods. At least one of the reasons for this is a lack
of standardized methods for characterization of the SERS tag reagents
that would allow, for example, the analysis of the dependence of an
assay’s analytical performance on the properties (intensity,
size) of the SERS tag. The enhancement factor is an often-cited property
of a SERS tag but, as a relative measure of the effect of the nanoparticle
on the scattering intensity of an adsorbed compound, this value is
of limited use in predicting assay performance. The intensity of a
bulk suspension of SERS tag can be a useful measure, but uncertainties
about SERS tag concentrations, size heterogeneity, and a lack of widely
accepted external intensity standards for calibrating intensity present
significant hurdles for this approach. Single particle analysis methods
that provide correlated size and intensity information on many individual
nanoparticles in a population would be ideal, but these approaches
can be slow, labor intensive, and involve complex and often custom
instrumentation that is not suitable for widespread use.

Our
lab is interested in using SERS tags as labels for antibodies
in single cell analysis. We know that the number of antigens per cell
might range from a few thousand to several hundred thousand and that
optimizing the discrimination of cells expressing low levels of antigen
from those expressing none is essential for many applications. It
is reasonable to expect that a more intense SERS tag will perform
better at this task, but we can also anticipate that larger sized
SERS tags might lead to undesired effects like less efficient binding
and steric hindrance on the surface of the cell, so it is important
to consider both of these features in optimizing SERS tags for this
purpose.

Microspheres have many uses in the calibration of analytical
measurements,
especially in flow cytometry where polymer beads play roles as intensity
calibration and reference standards,− particle counting standards, and in reagent characterization.,− We created calibrated capture beads bearing avidin and, using flow
cytometry, we are able to characterize the effective size-normalized
intensity, or emittance, of biotinylated SERS tags in a manner that
helps predict the performance of those tags in an assay. We applied
this approach it to four different SERS tag compositions and compare
these results with those obtained by TEM, SEM, and nanoparticle tracking
analysis (NTA). We then prepared antibody conjugates of similar tags
to stain cell surface receptors for flow cytometry and found that
tag performance in this application correlated with the emittance
estimated by our calibration approach. This approach is general and
can be applied to any SERS tag formulation, allowing objective comparison
of the emittance of different SERS tag compositions and facilitating
rational optimization of the performance of SERS tag-based assays.

Results
and Discussion
Our SERS calibration approach is based on
surfaces with a known
number of SERS tag binding sites. Here, these are polymer microspheres
functionalized with different amounts of neutravidin that can be quantified
using conventional fluorescence flow cytometry. To create microspheres
with defined numbers of binding sites and surface densities, we mixed
neutravidin with BSA in different ratios and coupled these to microspheres.
The microspheres were fluorescently encoded with different intensities
of a green fluorochrome and by different diameters so that they can
be identified in a mixture. Staining this multiplexed bead set allows
us to assess capture protein capacity and density simultaneously in
one tube. As presented in Figure A, 3.5-μm-diameter
beads bearing different amounts of capture protein could be identified
by their green fluorescence (gates B1–B5), while 5.5 μm
beads could be distinguished by their increased light scatter. Gating
individual populations in the side scatter vs green fluorescence histogram
allows us to measure the fluorescence or SERS from each bead. To determine
the bead binding capacity, we stained these beads with a fluorescent
ligand, biotinylated phycoerythrin (biotin-PE), and at saturation,
and measured them by flow cytometry. After appropriate calibration
of the fluorescence signals, we estimated the binding capacity of
each bead population (Figure B), which ranged
from 0 to ∼200,000 molecules of biotin-PE.

Fluorescence flow cytometry
of microspheres with defined binding
capacities. A. Bivariate histogram of FALS vs green fluorescence showing
populations of fluorescence-encoded 3.5 um beads (gates B1–B5)
and nonfluorescent 5.5 um beads. B. Yellow fluorescence intensity
histograms for the indicated populations of neutravidin-coated beads
stained with biotin-PE.

SERS tags based on gold nanorods are well-established as
having
a readily tunable plasmon resonance and producing strong SERS from
a variety of resonant and nonresonant compounds.−, Given that the use of a resonant compound produces
SERS signals that are significantly stronger compared to nonresonant
compounds,, we focused on MGITC, a Raman tag that binds
strongly to Au and Ag nanoparticles, absorbs near our excitation and
nanoparticle resonance wavelength, and produces strong SERS from a
variety of nanoparticle types. We stained the calibrated neutravidin
microspheres with red-excited Au nanorod SERS tags (Figure A) and measured the resulting SERS intensity on
a custom spectral flow cytometer using excitation at 488 to measure
the green fluorescence from the microsphere encoding dye and excitation
at 660 nm to measure the entire microsphere SERS spectra from ∼300
to 2000 cm–1 (Figure ).
Presented in Figure C are the integrated emission
intensity histograms for the different neutravidin density beads.
The intensity axis is scaled to photons detected using the detector
response calibration provided by the manufacturer. We also used a
commercial flow cytometer (FACSCalibur) to excite the SERS tag stained
beads at 635 nm and measure the emission between 653 and 669 nm, a
band corresponding to a Raman shift of roughly 450–900 cm–1 (Figure B), with very similar
results (). We calibrated the intensity of the low density bead (∼12K
binding sites) in units of molecules equivalent soluble fluorochrome
(MESF) of allophycocyanin (APC), a red-excited fluorophore, using
commercially available intensity standard beads and found that the
signal from 12,000 Au rod-based SERS tags was equivalent to ∼25,000
MESF of APC.

Characterization of the plasmonic particles used to prepare
SERS
tags in this study. A–C. TEM images of large Au nanorods (A,
scale bar: 50 nm), Ag@Au nanorods (B, scale bar: 20 nm), and Ag plates
(C, scale bar: 50 nm). D. UV/vis extinction spectra of monodisperse
(solid line) and aggregated Au rods (dashed line). E. UV/vis extinction
spectra of Au rods (solid line) and Ag@Au rods (dashed line). F. UV/vis
extinction spectra of Ag plates (solid line) and Ag plate-based SERS
tags (dashed line).

SERS flow cytometry of
microspheres stained with biotinylated SERS
tags. A. SERS spectra of individual SERS-tag stained beads measured
on a spectral flow cytometer. B. Average spectra of SERS tag-stained
beads. C. SERS intensity histograms of the neutravidin-density multiplex
bead set.

At low
binding capacities (0–70,000), the SERS intensity
on the 3.5 μm beads increases with increasing binding capacity,
and then plateaus at the highest capacity beads (Figure A, filled circles). We interpret this plateau to result from
steric hindrance and competition among SERS tags for access to binding
sites on the bead surface. We imaged these beads using SEM. Presented
in  are SEM images of high density
avidin beads, showing a high degree of SERS tag surface coverage,
low density avidin beads exhibiting subsaturating coverage, and BSA-coated
negative control beads, showing a very low amount of nonspecific binding
of the biotinylated SERS tags. Upon closer inspection of the SERS
tags bound to the neutravidin beads (Figure A), it can be seen that the majority of the SERS tags are single
rods and dimers (small arrows), with relatively few higher order aggregates.
Also consistent with the limiting effect of surface density on binding,
the larger 5.5 um beads with a higher capacity but comparable Neutravidin
density shows a higher intensity (Figure B), reflecting the reduced steric
hindrance on the bigger beads. Thus, at low binding site densities,
the brightness of a known number of SERS tags can be measured while
at higher surface densities the size of the SERS tags limits binding,
providing an indication of the effective “footprint”
of the SERS tag. For low binding densities (0–12,000 sites),
where intensity is expected to be proportional to binding capacity,
the slope of this curve reflects the radiant intensity per SERS tag
(Itag). At saturation, intensity (Isat) is limited by the physical size of the
SERS tag, and the number of SERS tags bound at saturation (Nsat) can be calculated as Isat/Itag. As the surface area
of the microsphere is known, the average cross-sectional footprint
of a SERS tag can be calculated, as can the radiant emittance, or
size-normalized intensity, of each SERS tag. The radiant emittance
is arguably the most important determinant of a SERS tag’s
assay performance, and thus is of prime interest in comparing different
SERS tags. We applied this approach to several different SERS tag
compositions based on different plasmonic nanoparticles, but with
the same Raman active compound, MGITC, and the same coating of biotin-functionalized
PEG.

Plots of median SERS intensity versus microsphere binding capacity
for 3.5 μm (A) and 5.5 μm (B) neutravidin beads stained
with biotinylated SERS tags prepared from four different plasmonic
nanoparticles: monodisperse Au rods (filled circles), aggregated Au
rods (open circles), Ag@Au rods (solid triangles), and Ag plates (open
triangles).

SEM of neutravidin microspheres
stained with biotinylated SERS
tags. A. Au rod-based SERS tags (small arrows: single nanorods). B.
Aggregated Au rod-based SERS tags (large arrows: nanorod aggregates).
C. Ag@Au rod-based SERS tags. D. Ag plate-based SERS tags. Magnification:
61,472×. Scale bar: 500 nm.

First, we evaluated SERS tags based on red-resonant Au nanorods
exhibiting different levels of aggregation. The aggregation of plasmonic
particles can induce a shift in the localized surface plasmon resonance
and generate “hotspots” of high local E field intensity,
making aggregation a popular way to increase SERS intensity. When
Au nanorod-based SERS tags are prepared as we have described previously, the degree of aggregation, as evidenced by a
red-shift in the extinction spectrum (Figure D), can be affected by the acid washing step used to remove CTAB
from the rod surface. Using a single stock of CTAB-stabilized red-resonant
Au nanorods (approximately 25 × 50 nm2), we prepared
two lots of MGITC biotinylated SERS tags exhibiting different degrees
of aggregation, as judged from the red-shifted shoulder in the UV/vis
extinction spectrum (Figure D). We used these
to stain the calibrated bead set described above and measured them
using spectral flow cytometry. Inspection of SEM images of these SERS
tags bound to neutravidin beads (Figure B)
reveals a heterogeneous population of large aggregates (large arrows),
with relatively fewer monomers and dimers seen with unaggregated tags.
This qualitative assessment is confirmed by NTA measurement, which
also indicates significantly larger SERS tags when compared to those
prepared from unaggregated rods (Table , ). Plots of intensity vs binding
capacity (Figure , open circles) show saturation
at lower binding densities compared to unaggregated rods. Analysis
of these data as above (Table ) shows that
the intensity of tags prepared with aggregated rods (Tags B.1 and
B.2) is approximately 2–4 times higher than tags prepared from
less aggregated rods (Tag A.1), while the binding footprint is approximately
1.5 times larger. When the size-normalized intensity is considered,
the aggregated Au rod-based tags have a lower radiant emittance than
SERS tags made from monodisperse Au rods.

Characterization
of the SERS Tags
Used in the Study
tag	base particle
description	size, TEM
(nm)	Itag (pe–)	# tags/3.5
um bead	footprint
(nm2)	emittance
(pe–/nm2 ×1000)	SERS tag
diameter, NTA (nm)	
A.1	Au rod	54 ×
23	2.91	65,548	587	4.95	49	
B.1	Au rod (aggregated)	50 × 21	8.48	14,583	2640	3.21	113	
B.2	Au rod (aggregated)	50 × 21	4.36	18,668	2062	2.11	103	
C.1	Ag@Au rod	27 × 13	10.21	47,714	807	12.66	62	
C.2	Ag@Au rod	27 × 13	7.05	74,694	515	13.68	73	
C.3	Ag@Au rod	nd	4.08	89,888	428	9.52	59	
C.4	Ag@Au rod	40 × 20	4.83	58,453	659	7.33	73	
D.1	Ag plate	nd	8.96	45,923	838	10.69	108	
D.2	Ag plate	nd	7.82	39,985	963	8.13	106	
D.3	Ag plate	nd	9.13	41,958	918	9.95	89	
nd, not determined.

Next,
we prepared MGITC SERS tags based on a Ag shell over a Au
rod (Ag@Au rod). We prepared red resonant Au nanorods (∼10
× 25 nm) and coated them with Ag. These Au rods were smaller
than those used above and, as prepared, produced fairly dim SERS signals
with MGITC (data not presented), but after Ag coating the resulting
plasmonic base particles produced significantly brighter SERS tags
that are comparable in size to the larger unaggregated Au rods described
above. We used these bimetallic core–shell-based SERS tags
to stain the calibrated bead set (Figure ,
filled triangles), and analyzed the results as above. We found that
the per tag intensity of these Ag@Au rod-based SERS tags was comparable
to that of SERS tags made from aggregated Au rods, but that the binding
footprint was more similar to SERS tags made from monodisperse Au
rods, resulting in tags that are ∼3–5 times brighter
on a size-normalized basis than either rod-based tag. Inspection of
these SERS tags bound to beads show primarily monodisperse particles
without much evidence of aggregation, consistent with NTA diameter
estimates (Tags C.1–4, Table ; Figure ; ).

Finally, we prepared MGITC SERS tags based on Ag plates. Red resonant
plates were incubated with an optimal amount of MGITC, followed by
sulfhydral PEG-biotin, and washed. We stained calibrated capture beads
with these SERS tags (Figure , open triangles)
and analyzed the results as above. The Ag plate-based SERS tags (Tags
D.1–3) had single tag intensities and radiant emittance comparable
to the Au rod/Ag shell-based tags (Table ).
Inspection of SEM images of capture beads with Ag plate-based SERS
tags (Figure D) reveals mostly monodisperse
particles (∼50 nm diameter), consistent with NTA diameter estimates
(Table ; ).

To evaluate how the bright tags performed in cell analysis
applications,
we conjugated antibodies to Au rod-, Ag@au rod-, and Ag plate-based
SERS tags (similar to those above, but bearing carboxy groups instead
of biotin) and used these to stain cells for analysis by spectral
flow cytometry. We cultured two breast cancer cell lines: BT474, which
expresses high levels of the cell surface receptor HER2, and MDA-MB-435,
which does not. These cells were fixed and stained with an anti-HER2
primary antibody, followed by an anti-mouse IgG conjugated SERS tag
secondary label. Presented in Figure  are
average single cell spectra from these cells, as well as spectra from
secondary-only and unstained cells. The Au rod-based SERS tags allowed
resolution of HER2 positive and negative cell lines, but with only
∼10-fold difference in the median intensities of the cell populations.
As expected from the calibration results summarized in Table , cells stained with SERS tags based on Ag@Au rod
cores and Ag plates showed brighter staining and better resolution
from unstained and secondary-only stained cells, with the Ag plate-based
tags producing a &gt;100-fold separation of the population mean intensities.
This performance advantage, combined with the relative ease of preparing
Ag plate-based SERS tags compared to rod-based SERS tags, makes these
tags attractive for cell analysis and other applications.

Performance
of SERS tags in spectral flow cytometry. Breast cancer
cell lines BT474 (HER2+) and MB435 (HER2-) were stained with anti-HER2
conjugated primary antibody followed by anti-mouse IgG SERS tags prepared
from (A) gold nanorods, (B) Ag@Au nanorods, and (C) Ag plates. Left
column: Average spectra from unstained cells (black), BT474 (blue),
and MB435 (red), with (solid line) or without (dotted line) primary
antibody. Right column: Intensity histograms from unstained cells
(black), BT474 (blue), and MB 435 (red), with (solid fill) or without
(no fill) primary antibody.

In summary, we present a general approach to characterize
the brightness
and staining performance of nanoparticle SERS tags in the context
of a surface binding assay. By measuring the binding of SERS tags
to microspheres with different densities of binding sites, we are
able to estimate the relative single tag brightness and binding footprint
of several different SERS tag compositions. We show that the SERS
radiant emittance is a good predictor of performance in flow cytometry
analysis of mammalian cells, and that this approach should be generalizable
to other applications and assay platforms as well. The analysis we
present can be performed using widely available reagents and commercial
flow cytometers and represents a straightforward approach to interlab
standardization of SERS tag intensity and assay performance.

Materials
and Methods
Reagents
Fluorescent and nonfluorescent carboxylated
microspheres were from Spherotech. 1-Ethyl-3-[3-(dimethylamino)propyl]carbodiimide
hydrochloride (EDC), N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS),
and Neutravidin were from Thermo. Malachite Green isothiocyanate (MGITC),
biotinylated phycoerythrin (b-PE), and Linear Flow Deep Red beads
were from Life Technologies. Quantum MESF APC beads were from Bangs
Laboratory. Mouse anti-human HER2 (clone 24D2) was from Biolegend
and goat anti-mouse IgG (H+L) antibody was from Protein Biosystems.
BSA and all other reagents were from Sigma-Aldrich unless otherwise
indicated.

Preparation and Characterization of Microspheres
with Defined
Binding Capacity
Carboxylated beads (5 × 107/mL) were incubated with a mixture of Neutravidin and BSA in varying
ratios (0:10, 1.5:8.5; 2.5:7.5, 4:6; 10:0; 10 μg total protein per 100 μL reaction) for 15 min, followed by
addition of EDC (5 mg/mL) and NHS (5 mg/mL) and incubation for 60
min with occasional mixing. Beads were then diluted in PBS/Tween 20
(0.05%) and washed twice by centrifugation and resuspension, and stored
in the same buffer. To measure binding capacity, beads were stained
with biotinylated PE at saturating concentration (50 nM) in PBST,
and their fluorescence measured by flow cytometry (FACSCalibur, BD
Biosciences). Forward angle and 90° light scatter (488 nm), green
(488 nm excitation, 530 ± 30 nm emission), and yellow fluorescence
(488 nm excitation, 585 ± 42 nm emission) of at least 1000 individual
beads were measured. The intensity of the yellow fluorescence was
calibrated in units of molecules of equivalent soluble fluorophores
(MESF) of PE by measuring calibrated standard beads (QuantiBrite PE,
BD Biosciences) at the same detector setting.

Plasmonic Nanoparticles
Au nanorods were prepared based
on modifications of published protocols, as described previously., Briefly, for large rods (20 ×
50 nm2; Figure A), gold seed was
prepared by adding 5 mL of a 0.0005 M HAuCl4 solution to
5 mL of an aqueous hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) solution
(0.2 M). To the vigorously stirred solution, 0.21 mL of 0.026 M ice
cold NaBH4 is added to produce a light-brown solution.
Stirring was continued for 2 more minutes, after which the seed solution
was kept in a water bath at 25 °C for up to 2 h. Then, 500 mL
of a 0.2 M aqueous CTAB solution was mixed with 0.1 mL AgNO3 at 0.004 M followed by addition of 500 mL of 0.001 M HAuCl4 to form the growth solution. After vigorous mixing, 7 mL of 0.0788
M l-ascorbic acid was added, and the solution incubated in
a 25 °C water bath. After 10 min, the solution was removed from
the water bath, 1.2 mL of the seed solution added, and the mixture
stirred for 2 min. The solution was then placed back in the 25 °C
water bath for 18 h. After fabrication, excess CTAB was removed by
incubating rods at 4 °C overnight and then removing supernatant
and discarding precipitated CTAB.

To produce Ag@Au rods (Figure B), smaller Au rods (10 × 25 nm2) were prepared as described. Briefly,
666 mL of a 0.2 M aqueous CTAB solution was gently swirled with 333
mL HAuCl4 and warmed to 27 °C. Then 5 mL of 0.004
M AgNO3 was added and the solution was gently swirled.
Then 1.27 mL of 5 M HCl was added without mixing, followed by addition
of 4.6 mL of 0.078 M ascorbic acid. Solution was gently swirled until
color changed from yellow to clear and then 1 mL of 0.01 M NaBH4 was added without mixing. The solution was then placed back
in the 25 °C water bath undisturbed for 18 h. After fabrication,
excess CTAB was removed by incubating rods at 4 °C overnight
and then removing supernatant and discarding precipitated CTAB. These
Au rods were then coated with a shell of Ag. First, nanorods were
washed by centrifugation into nanopure water. Then, with magnetic
stirring, 300 μL/mL of 0.1 M AgNO3 was added, followed
immediately by 300 μL/mL of 37% formaldehyde and 30 μL/mL
0.83 M NH4OH. Formation of the Ag shell resulted in a blue
shift of the extinction spectrum (Figure E).

Ag plates (Figure C) were prepared as described
by Zhang, 0.05 mL of 0.05 M AgNO3 was added to 24.75 mL of nanopure water with gentle stirring.
To this solution, 0.5 mL of 0.075 M trisodium citrate, 0.1 mL of 17.5
M glycerol, 0.06 mL of 30% H2O2, and 0.25 mL
of 0.1 M NaBH4 were added. Reaction was complete after
5 min when color changed from clear to dark blue. Ag plates were washed
by centrifugation to remove excess capping agent before use. The Ag
plates have a broad extinction spectra with a peak in the red (∼670
nm, Figure F).

SERS Tag Preparation
To prepare SERS tags, large nanorods
were incubated with 32 μM HCl at 60 °C for 45 min to remove
CTAB, and then washed twice. This step of the protocol results in
a degree of aggregation of the nanorods, as evidenced by a red shift
in the UV/vis extinction spectrum (Figure D), that can vary between preparations. Ag-coated Au nanorods and
Ag plates were used as prepared. Raman tag (MGITC) at an optimal concentration
(determined beforehand via titration and generally in the range of
0.1 to 1 μM) was incubated with the plasmonic base particle
for 15 min at ambient temperature. Functionalized sulfhydral PEG (0.5
μM, carboxylated or biotinylated, 3000 MW, Rapp Polymer) and
5 μM unfunctionalized sulfhydral PEG (CH3 2000 MW,
Nanocs) was then added and incubated with the tagged nanorods for
15 min at ambient temperature, and then overnight at 4 °C. The
SERS tags were then washed by three cycles of centrifugation and resuspension
and characterized by UV/vis and Raman spectroscopy. The extinction
spectra of the Au rods and Ag shell/Au rods did not change during
preparation of the SERS tags. However, the Ag plate-based SERS tag
exhibited a blue-shifted extinction spectrum (Figure F), suggesting a change in nanoparticle structure associated
with binding of the MGITC and sulfhydral PEG ligands. Goat anti-mouse
antibody was coupled to carboxylated SERS tags as described.

SERS Tag Binding and Measurement
SERS tags (0.5–2
nM particles) were incubated with 10 μL of beads or cells (5
× 107/mL) in 100 μL for 2 h at ambient temperature
in a microwell plate with shaking. The concentration of each SERS
tag needed to reach binding saturation was determined in preliminary
titrations. After incubation, samples were washed 3× with PBST
using a filter plate (1.2 μm pore size, Millipore) vacuum apparatus.
The SERS tag was measured using a commercial flow cytometer as described
above or with a custom spectral flow cytometer. For conventional flow
cytometry (BD Biosciences FACSCalibur), SERS was excited at 635 nm
and emission measured through a 661 ±16 nm bandpass filter. The
SERS intensity was calibrated in units of MESF of APC, a red-excited
fluorophore, using fluorescent hard-dyed beads (Linear Flow Deep Red)
that had been cross calibrated against APC standard beads (Quantum
MESF) on that instrument. SERS tag binding was also measured on a
custom spectral flow cytometer,, using spatially separated laser spots at 488 and 660 nm. Forward
angle light scatter, 90° light scatter, and green fluorescence
(525 ± 20 nm emission) excited by 488 nm were measured as for
conventional fluorescence flow cytometry. SERS was excited at 660
nm and collected light was dispersed by an imaging spectrograph (Kaiser,
Holospec) with a 660 nm edge filter (Razor Edge, Semrock) through
a volume phase holographic grating onto an EM-CCD (Newton 970U–BV,
Andor). Spectra from individual beads were collected and the integrated
intensity calculated for each.

Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis
(NTA) of SERS Tags
The
hydrodynamic radius of SERS tag was estimated using a nanoparticle
tracking analyzer (LM-20, Nanosight) equipped with a 532 nm laser
and high sensitivity CMOS camera. Samples were diluted in 0.1 μm
filtered H2O, loaded into the analysis chamber and three
videos of 30 s each were acquired for each sample. The Brownian diffusion
of &gt;200 individual particles was analyzed and the hydrodynamic
radius
for each estimated using the NanoSight software.

Electron Microscopy
Transmission electron microscopy
was performed on samples deposited onto carbon grids (EM Sciences)
and dried. Grids were imaged on a FEI Tecnai Sphera at the University
of California San Diego Cryo-EM facility or at the National Resource
for Automated Microscopy at the Scripps Research Institute. Particle
dimensions were estimated using a semiautomated ImageJ script. For
scanning EM, samples were deposited on nucleopore polycarbonate membrane
filters (Millipore, average pore diameter 200 nm), mounted on sample
stubs and coated under vacuum with a 5 nm layer of platinum. Samples
were imaged with a FEI Quanta 450 FEG Scanning Electron Microscope
at the San Diego State University Electron Microscopy facility.

Supporting Information Available
Conventional
flow cytometry
measurements, SEM images, and nanoparticle tracking data. This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc5000252_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
† John
P. Nolan: The Scintillon Institute, 6404
Nancy Ridge Drive, San Diego, California 92121.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Samuel Stoner (University of California
San Diego)
and Tilak Jain (The Scripps Research Institute) for producing the
TEM images, Steve Barlow (San Diego State University) for producing
the SEM images, and Er Liu (LJBI) for culture of the breast cancer
cell lines. Some of the work presented here was conducted at the National
Resource for Automated Molecular Microscopy which is supported by
a grant from the National Institute of General Medical Sciences (9
P41 GM103310) from the National Institutes of Health. Supported by
a Bioengineering Research Partnership grant (R01 EB003824) from the
National Institute of Bioimaging and Bioengineering of the National
Institutes of Health.

