Amphotericin B (AmB) is an important
antifungal agent that has been used to treat systemic fungal infections
for more than half a century.− Although considerable effort has been made to understand
its mechanism of action, the means by which this macrolide antibiotic
destroys fungal cells remain a matter of debate. In the most popular
model, several AmB molecules are thought to combine with ergosterol
to form water-filled pores (Figure ). Subsequent thinning of the plasma membrane in
the vicinity of this pore, or an alignment of two such pores across
the membrane, is then presumed to result in the release of vital ions
and ultimately cell death. Recently, evidence has been obtained indicating
that AmB may also act by simply forming a complex with ergosterol.

Despite its efficacy in killing fungal
cells, the use of AmB for
treating fungal infections in the central nervous system (CNS) has
proven challenging. In particular, the
ability of AmB to penetrate the blood–brain barrier is known
to be poor; i.e., concentrations of AmB in the CNS are barely measurable
at the ng/mL level.− To the best of our knowledge, no derivative of AmB
has yet been reported that has exceeded the ability of AmB itself
to cross the blood–brain-barrier; i.e., underivatized AmB remains
as the drug of choice for clinical use. In principle, any improvement
in transporting AmB across the blood–brain barrier could lead
to a significant advance in treating fungal infections in the CNS.
With this ultimate goal in mind, we sought to explore molecular umbrella–AmB
conjugates as potential therapeutic alternatives.

Barrel stavelike model in which AmB (gray oval) combines with ergosterol
(red rectangle) to form single (A) or two aligned (B) water-filled
pores or a simple complex (C).

The primary aim of the present investigation was to test
the hypothesis
that molecular umbrella–AmB conjugates would (i) exhibit relatively
high critical micelle concentrations, (ii) be nonhemolytic in their
monomeric form, (iii) cross lipid bilayers by passive transport, and
(iv) be capable of releasing a derivative of AmB having high antifungal
activity. In principle, the generation of a high concentration gradient
of such conjugates across the blood–brain barrier should facilitate
the delivery of this AmB derivative into the CNS by increasing the
driving force (i.e., chemical potential) for transport.

In brief,
molecular umbrellas are molecules that contain two or
more facial amphiphiles (i.e., “walls”) that are attached
to a central scaffold. When immersed
in a hydrophilic environment, these molecules have the potential for
creating a hydrophilic exterior. Conversely, when immersed in a lipophilic
environment, these same molecules have the potential for producing
a lipophilic exterior. Since AmB is also facially amphiphilic, it
too can act as wall. A stylized illustration of AmB that has been
incorporated into a molecular umbrella is shown in Figure . In this illustration, the thermodynamically favored
conformations that are expected in aqueous (I) and lipophilic (II)
environments are depicted.

Stylized illustration of a molecular umbrella–AmB
conjugate
favoring conformations in which the lipophilic faces of the umbrella
and AmB are shielded (I) in an aqueous environment and exposed (II)
in a lipophilic environment (II). The filled and open rectangles represent
lipophilic and hydrophilic faces of each umbrella wall, respectively.
The filled and open ovals represent the lipophilic and hydrophilic
face of AmB, respectively.

Previously, we and others have shown that the hemolytic action
of AmB requires that it attack red blood cells in an aggregated form., We have also shown that the attack of a
simple detergent (Triton X-100) on cholesterol-rich liposomal membranes
can lead to a “catastrophic rupture” of the bilayer
but only when the detergent is in an aggregated state. Since molecular umbrella–AmB conjugates
may shield their lipophilicity by adopting conformation I, their ability
to aggregate in water, and also their hemolytic activity, is expected
to be greatly reduced. In addition, their potential for undergoing
conformational transitions from I to II and then back to I offers
a plausible mechanism for diffusion from an aqueous environment across
a lipid bilayer into an adjoining aqueous compartment (Figure ). As discussed, elsewhere, this has been our working
hypothesis.

Two molecular umbrella–amphotericin
B conjugates that were
chosen as prototypes for the present investigation were the tetrawalled
conjugate 1 and an octawalled analogue 2 (Chart ). Tetrawalled and octawalled conjugates
were selected based on our past success in using them to transport
polar and nonpolar agents across lipid bilayers. A cleavable disulfide moiety was included in the molecular
design to facilitate their synthesis and to confer prodrug properties.
Thus, a thiol-bearing derivative of AmB, 3, was first
synthesized as outlined in Scheme . Activation
of previously reported Fmoc-protected AmB, 4, with N,N,N′,N′-tetramethyl-1,2-dihydrobenzo-1,2,3-triazineuronium
tetrafluoroborate (TDBTU) and condensation with 2-pyridyldithioethylamine
afforded 5. Subsequent deprotection
with piperidine and dithiothreitol (DTT) then afforded 3. As expected, 3 exhibited strong antifungal properties.
With 100% inhibition of growth as an end point, 3 showed
the following activities against four different fungi: Candida
albicans, 2 μg/mL; Candida glabrata, 2 μg/mL; Cryptococcus neoformans, 1 μg/mL; Cryptococcus gatti, 1 μg/mL. Under similar experimental
conditions, AmB showed 100% inhibition of growth values that were
0.5, 0.5, 0.25, and 0.25 μg/mL, respectively. Preliminary experiments
further indicate that 3, like AmB, is fungicidal.

By use of procedures similar to those previously described, a tetrawalled
and octawalled molecular umbrella precursor bearing a cleavable 2-thiopyridine
moiety (i.e., 6a and 7a, respectively) were
prepared (Chart )., Both molecular umbrellas were then persulfated by treatment with
sulfur trioxide pyridine complex to give 6b and 7b. Subsequent coupling of 3 via thiol–disulfide
interchange in methanol afforded 1 and 2. Both of these molecular umbrella–AmB conjugates showed excellent
solubility in water and a significant reduction in their tendency
to aggregate relative to AmB. Also, 1 and 2 fully released 3 when subjected to reducing conditions,
i.e., when subjected to excess dithiothreitol in methanol.

In its monomeric state, AmB exhibits a characteristic absorption
at 409 nm with an apparent molar absorptivity that decreases upon
aggregation. As discussed previously,
if one lets (i) T, m, and P represent the total, the monomeric, and the micellar concentrations
of this macrolide, respectively, (ii) ε represent the apparent
molar absorptivity, and (iii) εm and εp represent the molar absorptivity for the monomeric and micellar
components, respectively, then ε = εp + (εm – εp)m/T. At concentrations that are in excess
of its cmc, m is constant and ε is expected
to be inversely proportional to T. Thus, by measuring
the apparent molar absorptivity as a function of the reciprocal of
the macrolide concentration, one can estimate the cmc of the antibiotic
from the intercept of two straight lines. Such plots are shown for 1 and 2 in Figure . While
a cmc for 1 is evident at ∼100 μM, no aggregation
was found for 2 at concentrations as high as 330 μM.
To put these numbers into perspective, AmB exhibits a cmc of 1.1 μM
under similar conditions. A UV spectrum
that was recorded for 2 at 330 μM is shown in Figure .

As expected, 1 and 2 showed no hemolytic
activity at relatively high concentrations. Thus, whereas 4 μM
AmB was sufficient to produce 50% hemolysis of sheep red blood cells
(4 × 107 cells/mL), no evidence of hemolysis was apparent
for 1 and 2 at concentrations as high as
200 μM. In contrast to 3, which showed strong antifungal
activity, both molecular umbrella–AmB conjugates showed no
antifungal activity up to 100 μM against the same four fungi
tested. The fact that these conjugates exhibit no antifungal activity
can be accounted for by a shielding effect; i.e., the molecular umbrella
covers the AmB moiety, which prevents the formation of barrel stave
structures and ergosterol-based complexes (Figure ).

Plot of molar absorptivity (λmax = 409 nm) as
a function of the reciprocal concentration of 1 (■)
and 2 (△) in PBS at 37 °C.

To gain insight into the transport properties of 1 and 2, liposomes (200 nm, extrusion) were prepared
from a mixture of 1-palmitoyl-2-oleyol-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine
(POPC) and 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphatidylglycerol
(POPG) [i.e., POPC/POPG, 95/5, mol/mol] in PBS containing a given
concentration of 1 or 2. After an initial
dialysis at 23 °C for 48 h to remove the conjugate from the external
aqueous phase, the loss of the residual conjugate from the liposomes
was then monitored at 37 °C (Figure ).

UV absorption
spectrum of 2 (330 μM) in PBS
at 37 °C.

On the basis of an average
liposomal diameter of 200 nm (dynamic
light scattering) and the concentration of lipid used (20 mg/mL),
the theoretical percent capture of these molecular umbrella–AmB
conjugates is ∼17%. This assumes
that there is negligible absorption to the membrane. The percent capture
refers to the percentage of the aqueous phase that is used in preparing
the liposomes that becomes encapsulated within the aqueous interior
of the liposomes. As shown in Figure , the
apparent capture of 2 was slightly higher than this value,
while that of 1 was much higher, reflecting modest and
strong absorption to the liposomal membranes, respectively. Whereas
the release of entrapped 2 was essentially complete after
extended dialysis, the removal of entrapped and adsorbed 1 was close to negligible over the same time period. Examination of
both liposomal dispersions before and after dialysis showed no change
in their size or size distribution (dynamic light scattering). Incorporation
of AmB in similar liposomal dispersions showed negligible release
over the same time period of dialysis (not shown).

These results
are similar to the transport behavior that we have
reported previously for related tetrawalled and octawalled conjugates
bearing a fluorescent dye (Cascade Blue); i.e., the larger persulfated molecular umbrellas crossed lipid bilayers more readily
than smaller analogues. However, in sharp
contrast, where the larger octawalled umbrella–dye conjugate
showed higher membrane affinity and higher transport activity, the larger octawalled molecular umbrella–AmB conjugate (2) shows lower membrane affinity but higher transport
activity. This finding further highlights the fact that the
permeation across lipid bilayers is a multistep process consisting
of adsorption, dehydration, diffusion, rehydration, and desorption
and that depending on the nature of the molecule to be transported,
as reflected by the number, type, and distribution of polar groups,
its shape, and its hydrophilic/lipophilic balance, any one of these
steps can become rate-limiting. The exact reason for this difference
between these molecular umbrella-bound dye versus molecular umbrella-bound
AmB conjugates is not presently clear.

Plot of percent capture
of 1 (■) and 2 (△) remaining
with liposomes made from POPC/POPG
(95/5, mol/mol) as a function of dialysis time at 37 °C after
an initial dialysis period of 48 h at 23 °C.

The combination of high water solubility, a low tendency
to aggregate,
negligible hemolytic activity at 100 μM, an ability to cross
lipid bilayers by passive transport, and release a potent antifungal
agent (3) under reducing conditions provides considerable
incentive for exploring the in vivo properties of 2 and
related molecular umbrella–AmB conjugates in detail. Such studies
are currently under active investigation.

Supporting Information Available
Experimental procedures used
for chemical synthesis and physical measurements. This material is
available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc500277v_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the National Institutes of Health
(Grant PHS GM100962).

