Introduction
Long-term
and reversible silencing of selected central nervous
system (CNS) areas and neuronal subpopulations in freely moving organisms
would benefit both neuroscience and clinical medicine. One way to
meet these difficult requirements is to re-engineer and utilize clostridial
neurotoxins.− These toxins target neuronal synapses and neuromuscular
junctions, enter presynaptic terminals, and then proteolyze unique
SNARE proteins, thereby stopping neurotransmitter release.− Neuronal activity resumes when the proteolyzed proteins are replaced
by de novo synthesized SNARE molecules in the active
zones of presynaptic terminals.,

In nature, clostridial
neurotoxins—produced by anaerobic Clostridium bacteria—selectively target motor
functions to paralyze the intoxicated organism and gain a rich anaerobic
environment upon the victim’s death. Seven botulinum toxins
(designated A-G) from the genus Clostridium botulinum inactivate cholinergic motor neurons to cause flaccid paralysis. The blood-brain barrier is impenetrable to botulinum
neurotoxins and therefore all effects of botulinum poisoning are peripheral.
In contrast to botulinum neurotoxins, tetanus toxin—produced
by Clostridium tetani—traverses
motor neurons, via retrograde vesicular traffic, to inactivate inhibitory interneurons in the spinal cord,
causing rigid muscle paralysis. This
route to the spinal cord is utilized by C. tetani upon wound infection; but experimentally almost all central neurons
(glutamatergic, glycinergic, etc.) can be targeted by tetanus toxin,
leading to a blockade of neurotransmitter release.

The major stumbling block in utilizing clostridial
toxins for probing
CNS functions is their life-threatening paralytic activity. For example, when toxin is injected in a defined
CNS area, its entry into the bloodstream can still lead to widespread
paralysis. Clearly, non-motor-targeted versions of clostridial toxins
would exclude paralytic actions and thus allow safe interrogation
of CNS functions and new therapeutic applications. Our recent investigation
of the reassembled botulinum neurotoxin type A, which carries an extended
linker, demonstrated that it is as effective as native type A toxin
in inactivating central neurons but has a reduced potency at neuromuscular
junctions., This was a fortuitous discovery,
which could be accounted for by the reduced ability of the elongated
toxin to enter tight neuromuscular junctions covered by Schwann cells.
At high doses, the reassembled botulinum neurotoxin type A still causes
flaccid paralysis (see  section), and
therefore we attempted to produce a truly nonparalytic neuronal blocker
which combines the highly efficient botulinum protease and the CNS-targeting
tetanus domain. Here we describe creation and properties of this new
clostridial chimera which efficiently targets central neurons, blocks
central nervous functions, and yet does not cause any paralysis.

Experimental
Procedures
Plasmids and Sequences
mCherry fused to Tetanus toxin
Binding Domain (TBD) was made by introducing the mCherry sequence
from pmCherry-C1 vector (Clontech) into the EcoRI
restriction site of pGEX-KG, followed by the Clostridium
tetani TBD sequence (codon optimized for E. coli expression and synthesized by Eurogentec,
from amino acids 856–1315 of the NCBI reference sequence NP_783831.1)
into the SacI restriction site. The plasmid for the expression of
TBD fused to synaptobrevin was prepared by introducing the Rattus norvegicus synaptobrevin 2 sequence (codon
optimized for E. coli expression and
synthesized by Eurogentec, from amino acids 3–84 of the NCBI
reference sequence NP_036795.1) into the XhoI restriction site of
pGEX-KG in front of the TBD sequence in the above pGEX vector. Botulinum
neurotoxin A-derived LcTd-SNAP-25 has been described previously. The Rattus norvegicus syntaxin 1 stapling peptide (amino acids 201–245 of the NCBI
reference sequence NP_446240.2) is C-terminally amidated and linked
at the N-terminus to either fluorescein or TAMRA through an aminohexanoic
acid spacer (synthesized by Peptide Synthetic, UK).

Protein Preparation
and Assembly Reaction
mCherry TBD,
botulinum LcTd-SNAP25, and synaptobrevin TBD were expressed in the
BL21 strain of E. coli. Briefly, all
proteins were expressed as GST C-terminal fusions cleavable by thrombin.
Proteins fused to GST were purified on glutathione-Sepharose beads
(GE Healthcare) and eluted from the beads in 20 mM Hepes, pH 7.3,
100 mM NaCl (Buffer A), using thrombin. Further purification was achieved
by gel filtration using a Superdex 200 10/200 GL column (GE Healthcare).
Protein concentration was determined using the BCA protein assay kit
(Pierce). The clostridial chimera was assembled by mixing the two
clostridial fragments with the syntaxin peptide for 30 min at 20 °C,
with each component at a 5 μM concentration, in the presence
of 0.4% octyl glucoside. To visualize SNARE assemblies, SDS-PAGE was
performed at 4 °C, and the gels were stained with Coomassie blue.

Neuronal Cultures and Confocal Imaging
Hippocampal
neurons were cultured as previously described. Briefly, the hippocampi were dissected from E18 BL21 mice
and dissociated with 0.25% trypsin and trituration. The cells were
counted and plated on 18-mm glass coverslips treated with 1 mg/mL
poly lysine in borate buffer. The plating media was MEM (Gibco #11095)
containing 0.6% glucose and 10% horse serum. After 3–4 h the
coverslips were transferred to glia-conditioned media comprising Neurobasal
(Gibco #21103) supplemented with glutamax and B27 serum-free supplement.
The hippocampal neurons were used after 14 div and treated as previously
described. Neurons in Figure A were treated with fluorescein-linked chimera (10
nM) for 5 min in the presence of high K+, then fixed and
processed for immunocytochemistry using an anti-synaptobrevin antibody.
Coverslips were imaged using a Zeiss LSM 710 confocal microscope.
Dorsal root ganglia (DRGs) neurons were prepared from neonatal Sprague–Dawley
rats (2–8 days old) killed by cervical dislocation and then
decapitated. Approximately 40–45 DRGs were removed from the
vertebral column and transferred into Hank’s Balanced Salt
Solution (HBSS, Invitrogen). Nerve trunks and connective tissue were
dissected away and the DRGs were placed in NeurobasalTM medium (Gibco,
Life Technologies) containing 0.25% collagenase (type IV, Worthington)
for 60 min at 37 °C. After washing with fresh Neurobasal medium
(containing B27 supplement, Gibco, Life Technologies), ganglia were
dissociated by trituration using a fire-polished Pasteur pipet. Cells
were washed in fresh Neurobasal medium and triturated again using
a smaller bore fire-polished pipet to produce a suspension of single
cells. Cells were concentrated by centrifugation at 1000 r.p.m. (110 g) for 5 min and the resulting pellet was resuspended in
neuronal culture medium containing B27 supplement, 1% penicillin–streptomycin
solution, 1% l-glutamine, 100 ng/mL NGF (Alomone laboratories),
and 2% cytosine β-d-arabinofuranoside (AraC, Sigma).
The neuronal suspension was then slowly placed on poly(l-lysine)
and laminin precoated glass bottomed culture dishes (MatTek Corproration)
and incubated for 24 h at 37 °C in a humidified incubator gassed
with 5% CO2 in air. After 24–48 h of incubation,
10 nM TAMRA-linked chimera and 5 μg/mL Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated Griffonia simplicifolia IB4 (Invitrogen) were added
to a 35 mm glass bottomed culture dishes. After a 15 min exposure
in the dark, the culture was washed 3 times with clean Neurobasal
culture medium before live imaging commenced. All live-cell images
were taken with a confocal laser-scanning microscope (Zeiss LSM 710).

AFM Imaging
Purified clostridial chimera (500 nM) was
diluted 50-fold in 100 mM NaCl, 50 mM Hepes-Na, pH 7.5; and 50 μL
of the sample was allowed to adsorb to freshly cleaved mica disks
for 10 min. The sample was washed with high purity water (Sigma-Aldrich)
and dried under nitrogen. Imaging was performed with a Multimode atomic
force microscope controlled by a Nanoscope IIIa controller (Bruker,
Santa Barbara, CA, USA). Dry samples were imaged using the tapping
mode. The silicon probes used (OMCL-AC160TS, Olympus, Tokyo, Japan)
had a typical tip radius of 6.8 nm, a resonance frequency of ∼300
kHz, and a spring constant of 40 N/m. The applied imaging force was
kept as low as possible (between 85% and 90% of the free amplitude).

Immunoblotting
Hippocampal or DRG neurons were incubated
for 20 h with the indicated concentration of either chimera or the
control protein, lysed in 2% SDS, benzonase (250 U/mL, Novagen), 2
mM MgCl2, 60 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8. Botulinum-induced cleavage
of SNAP-25 was evaluated by immunoblotting using an anti-SNAP-25 antibody
(clone SMI 81, Covance) which recognizes both intact and cleaved SNAP-25.
The percentage of the cleaved SNAP-25 was estimated by densitometry
analysis using Quantity One software (Bio-Rad).

Circadian Rhythms
Organotypic slices of suprachiasmatic
nucleus were obtained from neonatal mice (10 days of age) carrying
a knock-in mutation of the Period2 circadian clock gene that encodes
Per2-luciferase fusion protein. Following
a 3-day initial period to confirm robust circadian oscillation, the
slices were bath treated with 5 nM of the clostridial chimera and
recording continued for further 9 days. Per2-driven bioluminescence
was recorded using photomultiplier tubes (Hamamatsu), as described
elsewhere.

Hemidiaphragm Assay
Left phrenic nerve-hemidiaphragm
preparations from male inbred mice (Balb/c) were incubated in a 37
°C bath containing the Krebs-gelatin buffer gassed with 95% O2/5% CO2. Muscle contractions triggered by stimulation
of the nerve with a supra-maximal voltage (∼3 V, 1 Hz, 0.2
ms) were measured using an isometric force transducer (FMI, Seeheim,
Germany) linked to a bridge amplifier ML110 and a Powerlab/4SP 4 channel
recorder (ADInstruments, Chalgrove, UK). The hemidiaphragm resting
tension was increased stepwise during the equilibration period until
a reproducible twitch was observed. Once the muscle twitch responses
to nerve stimulation had stabilized and were of constant size for
at least 30 min, the Krebs solution was replaced with one containing
native type A toxin or reassembled toxin and stimulation resumed.
The decrease in contraction was calculated in relation to the contractions
just before toxin addition. Native botulinum
neurotoxin (580 pM) used for reference (HPA, Potters Bar, UK) had
efficacy of 20 000 LD50/mL.

Biological Testing
Adult C57 BL6 mice (20–25
days of age; average weight 20 g) were injected intravenously or intramuscularly
with the clostridial chimera or reassembled botulinum neurotoxin (500
ng). The proteins were diluted in Hartmann’s Solution to achieve
a required dose for the injection volume of 50 μL. Animals were
replaced in their cages and monitored every 6 h for 4 days. The end
point of the experiment was the appearance of weakness of the musculature
of the limbs either ipsilateral to the injection point or bilaterally.
Surviving animals were sacrificed after 7 days.

Visual Cortex
Experiments
A portion of the skull overlying
the occipital cortex was drilled on one side of the skull. The injections
into the visual cortex were done using a glass micropipet, connected
to an injector, at the following coordinates (in mm with respect to
lambda): AP, 0; ML, 4.5; 1.2 below dura. Clostridial chimera (50 nM, 1 μL, equivalent to 7.5 ng) or
vehicle (rat serum albumin 2%, in PBS, 1 μL) was injected into
the visual cortex of P40 Long Evans rats. Electrophysiological, anatomical,
and biochemical analyses were performed 4–8 days after toxin
delivery. For electrophysiological recordings, rats were anesthetized
with Hypnorm/Hypnovel (3.75 mL/kg body weight) and placed in a stereotaxic
apparatus. Recordings were performed as described previously., Both eyes were fixed by means of adjustable metal rings surrounding
the external portion of the eye bulb, and optic disk locations were
projected onto a tangent screen to determine the vertical meridian.
Body temperature during the experiments was constantly monitored with
a rectal probe and maintained at 37 °C with a heating blanket.
The electrocardiogram was also continuously monitored. A portion of
the skull overlying the occipital cortex was drilled on one side of
the skull, and a tungsten electrode (FHC; 1 MΩ) was mounted
on a three-axis motorized micromanipulator and inserted into the portion
of the visual cortex previously injected with clostridial chimera
(4.5 mm lateral from midline and in correspondence with lambda). Visual
evoked potentials (VEPs) were recorded at depths of 100 and 400 μm
within the cortex. Steady-state VEPs were recorded in response to
reversal (4 Hz) of a horizontal sinusoidal grating (spatial frequency,
0.07 cycles/deg; contrast 10%, 20%, 30%, 90%), generated by computer
on a display (Sony; 40 × 30 cm; mean luminance 15 cd/m2) by a VSG card (Cambridge Research Systems). Signals were amplified
(1000-fold), band-pass filtered (0.5–100 Hz), and fed into
a computer for storage and analysis. At least 80 events were averaged
in synchrony with the stimulus contrast reversal. VEP amplitude was
quantified by measuring the amplitude of the second harmonic of the
Fourier transform computed from the recorded signal, as previously
described, using a custom-made application
based on the LabView software. The response to a blank stimulus (0%
contrast) was also frequently recorded to estimate noise. In each
animal, contrast threshold curves were measured close to (&lt;500
μm) or far from (&gt;500 μm) the injection site. In each
animal, at least six penetrations were performed (3 ‘close
to’ and 3 ‘far from’ the injection). Visual responsiveness
was determined as the signal-to-noise ratio, that is, the ratio between
VEP amplitude at a given contrast and blank amplitude. In each animal,
we compared visual responses close to and far from the injection by
plotting a contrast threshold curve, in which responsiveness at a
given contrast was normalized to the values measured at 90% contrast
in penetrations distant from the delivery site. Analysis of VEP responses
was performed blind to experimental treatment. For immunohistochemistry,
the animals were deeply anesthetized with chloral hydrate and perfused
through the heart with freshly prepared 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1
M phosphate buffer, pH 7.4. Tissues were dissected and postfixed for
2 h at 4 °C. Brain sections (40 μm thick) were cut with
a microtome. Sections were blocked with 10% normal horse serum in
PBS containing 0.25% Triton X-100 and then incubated overnight at
room temperature with a rabbit polyclonal antibody to cleaved SNAP-25
(1:200 dilution; kind gift of O. Rossetto, University of Padua, Italy).
On the following day, sections were incubated with Rhodamine Red X-conjugated
secondary antibody (1:500, Jackson ImmunoResearch) for 2 h at room
temperature. Sections were washed in PBS and incubated for 5 min with
YoYo-1 (1:500 in PBS; Invitrogen), then washed again in PBS and mounted
using an antifading agent (Vectashield; Vector Laboratories). Images
were acquired using a Leica confocal laser-scanning microscope and
a 10× objective. Immunoblotting was performed as described previously., Cortical parts were excised and lysed using a buffer containing
1% Triton X-100, 10% glycerol, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM Na3VO4, 1 μg/mL leupeptin, 1 μg/mL aprotinin,
1 mM PMSF, and 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5). Proteins (10 μg) were
separated by electrophoresis and transferred to blotting paper, which
was then incubated with primary antibody overnight at 4 °C (anticleaved
SNAP-25, 1:500 dilution; antitubulin antibody 1:15 000 dilution,
Sigma). Blots were then reacted with HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies
(Jackson ImmunoResearch) and developed using an enhanced chemiluminescence
kit (GE Healthcare).

Inflammatory Pain Experiments
Experiments
were carried
out on male Sprague–Dawley rats (∼200 g body weight
at the beginning of the experiment) from the colony at University
College London. Animals were housed in their home cage controlled
for temperature (21 °C) and humidity (55%) under a regular 12-h
day/night cycle (lights on at 8:00 a.m.; lights off at 8:00 p.m.).
Standard laboratory rodent chow and water were available ad
libitum. Animals were habituated to testing procedures for
at least 3–4 days before experiments. For intrathecal (i.th.)
injections, rats were anesthetized using 2% isoflurane with oxygen
as the carrier gas (1 L/min). Rats were placed in a stereotaxic frame
and a small incision was made in the atlanto-occipital membrane. A
cannula was inserted into the subarachnoid space, terminating in the
L4–L5 region. Animals received either 10 μL of clostridial
chimera (100 ng) or vehicle (saline). The cannula was then withdrawn
and the wound closed with suture clips. Local inflammation was induced
by intraplantar (i.pl.) injection of CFA (Sigma, Poole, UK; 50 μL)
into the left plantar surface of the hind paw, under isoflurane anesthesia
as above. During the injection the needle penetrated the skin just
distal to the targeted area and terminated at the center of the plantar
surface of the left hind paw. To assess mechanical sensitivity following
the development of inflammation, withdrawal responses were measured
with an automatic Von Frey apparatus (Ugo-Basile, Italy). Animals
were left to habituate to the experimental room in their home cage
for 20 min before the beginning of each testing session. Each animal
was tested 4 times with a resting time of 5–10 min between
each measurement. For the automatic Von Frey, the ramp was set to
reach the maximum stimulus of 50 g in 20 s. Mechanical threshold at
the central plantar surface of the hind paw was assessed before the
chimera and CFA injections (as a basal pain threshold). The chimera
was first injected intrathecally and the mechanical threshold was
assessed 3 days after the injection. Then, in the same group of rats
CFA was injected i.pl. and behavioral testing continued between 2
h and 11 days after CFA. During testing the observer was blinded to
the i.th. treatment. Data analysis and statistical comparisons were
performed using GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software, USA). Results are
presented in the graphs as % of control (basal pain threshold prior
the i.th. injection) ± SEM. Statistical analysis was performed
by two-way analyses of variance (ANOVA) with Bonferroni’s multiple
comparison posthoc tests, n = 6. A value of p &lt; 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.

Ethics Statement
Animal experiments were carried out
under license from the UK Home Office in accordance with the Animals
(Scientific Procedures) Act 1986 and in accordance with the European
Community Council Directive of November 24, 1986 (86/609/EEC).

Results
To assess the ability of our fully synthetic tetanus toxin binding
domain (TBD) to bind central neurons, we prepared mCherry-fused TBD
as a single recombinant protein and incubated it with cultured rat
embryonic hippocampal neurons for 30 min. Figure A shows that mCherry-TBD bound to hippocampal neurons in a
robust way.

Assembly of the tetanus-botulinum chimera from two components.
(A) mCherry-tagged tetanus binding domain (left) efficiently binds
mouse hippocampal neurons in culture within 20 min (right). (B) Botulinum
enzyme type A was stapled to the tetanus receptor binding domain using
a fluorescently labeled stapling peptide (top schematic). Coomassie-stained
SDS-PAGE gel (bottom) showing assembly of the clostridial chimera
in the presence of the stapling peptide in a 30-min reaction. The
stapled product is resistant to SDS indicating an irreversible assembly.

Next, we assembled the clostridial
chimera from two separately
prepared parts: (i) botulinum type A protease/translocation unit fused
to a linker polypeptide, and (ii) TBD fused to a complementary linker.
The two linkers utilize SNARE-derived peptides, which assemble spontaneously
within minutes in the presence of a stapling peptide., Figure B shows the typical assembly reaction
as visualized by SDS-PAGE. As expected from the uniquely irreversible
reaction, the chimera made of two independent clostridial parts exhibited
SDS-resistant properties.

Next we assessed the assembled clostridial
chimera using atomic
force microscopy (AFM), which demonstrated uniform dumbbell-shaped
particles (Figure A). The topographic image
of individual particles and the profile of the measured height along
their major axis presented two peaks, likely corresponding to the
two assembled clostridial chimera parts (Figure B). Single-molecule analysis of a large number of individual particles
resulted in an average peak-to-peak distance of 14.6 nm (Figure C). This value is consistent with the molecular
model depicted in Figure D. In this model
the length of 14.6 nm equals the distance between the approximate
geometrical centers of the botulinum protease/translocation unit and
the TBD, assuming they are kept apart and oriented by the assembled
SNARE complex. The molecular model, supported by the single-molecule
analysis, allowed us to estimate an apparent length of the clostridial
chimera of ∼23 nm.

AFM imaging of the clostridial chimera. (A)
AFM image showing a
field view of the stapled clostridial chimera (upper panel, scale
bar 100 nm). Four representative enlarged images of the clostridial
chimera demonstrating the dumbbell-like shape of the molecule (lower
panel, scale bar 20 nm). The color-coded bar (right) indicates the
height of the probed surface. (B) Single-molecule analysis of particles
from selected topography images (upper panel). The height profile
along the major axis (white line) was plotted and the peak-to-peak
distance measured. (C) The distribution of a large number of particles’
peak-to-peak distances (N = 108) has been plotted
and fitted to a Gaussian curve, which has a mean value of 14.6 nm.
(D) Molecular model of the clostridial chimera generated using the
following structures available in the Protein Data Bank archive (http://www.rcsb.org): 3BTA (BoNT/A), 1N7S (SNARE complex), 1FV2 (TBD). The protein sequences have been
truncated and/or joined according to the ‘Plasmids and sequences’
section in the  and
then oriented and assembled using PyMol. The average peak-to-peak
distance of 14.6 nm, obtained from the single-molecule analysis, is
visually compatible with the structure of the molecular model.

To test the ability of the chimera
to enter the nerve endings of
central neurons,, we added it to cultured hippocampal
neurons and activated the neurons using 50 mM potassium chloride for
10 min. The presynaptic uptake of the clostridial chimera was assessed
by colocalization with a synaptic vesicle marker, synaptobrevin. Confocal
microscopy of the neurons revealed robust internalization of the chimera
into the synaptic endings of neurons (Figure A). Clostridial neurotoxins
block synaptic transmission by cleaving SNARE proteins at defined
sites: the botulinum type A enzyme removes only 9 amino acids from
the C-terminus of the intraneuronal SNAP-25 protein, and yet this
is sufficient to block neurotransmitter release. The ability of the clostridial chimera to translocate its
botulinum enzyme and cleave SNAP-25 was evaluated by immunoblotting.
Figure B shows that neuronal SNAP-25 was efficiently
cleaved by the chimera at concentrations in the low nanomolar range,
confirming functionality of the assembled molecule.

The clostridial chimera
penetrates synaptic endings and cleaves
intraneuronal SNAP-25. (A) Confocal microscopy images (63× magnification)
showing colocalization of the fluorescein-labeled chimera (green)
with a synaptic vesicle marker, synaptobrevin (red), following KCl-induced
stimulation of cultured hippocampal neurons. Right panels show digitally
zoomed details from the confocal images on the left. (B) Immunoblot
showing cleavage of SNAP-25 by the botulinum enzyme in hippocampal
neurons following addition of the clostridial chimera at the indicated
concentrations (upper panel). Control reactions were carried out using
the botulinum enzyme without tetanus binding domain. The graph (lower
panel) shows quantification of the SNAP-25 cleavage measured by densitometry
of the above immunoblot and indicates the EC50 for the
chimera-induced proteolysis being 2 nM.

To evaluate the biological activity of the chimera, we applied
it to mouse suprachiasmatic nucleus organotypic brain slices, which
exhibit circuit-driven circadian rhythms visualized using a luciferase
activity. Figure A shows that application of the chimera at 5 nM led to a strong inhibition
of circadian rhythms, confirming its ability to affect native neuronal
circuits. We previously noted that structurally extended botulinum
toxin type A has a significantly reduced paralytic ability, most likely
because of its inability to reach/penetrate neuromuscular junctions. Indeed while the LD50 of the native
BoNT/A in mice is ∼5 pg, peritoneal injections of ∼5
ng had no lethal effect in mice. Further
experiments, however, revealed that when injected in mice in the range
of 100–500 ng, the stapled botulinum toxin leads to typical
signs of botulism and death (data not shown).

Functional testing of
the clostridial chimera in mouse tissues
ex vivo. (A) Circadian rhythms in ex vivo cultured
mouse suprachiasmatic nucleus, visualized using a luciferase activity,
are significantly damped following application of the clostridial
chimera (5 nM). (B) Comparison of the paralytic ability of the clostridial
chimera and native botulinum toxin type A (BoNT/A). Muscle twitch
responses to nerve stimulation were recorded for up to 4 h following
application of BoNT/A and the clostridial chimera at the indicated
concentrations.

We used isolated mouse
hemidiaphragm muscles to assess the paralysing
ability of the new clostridial chimera. Figure B shows that while picomolar amounts of native botulinum toxin readily
blocked muscle twitching, the clostridial chimera could only achieve
this effect at nanomolar concentrations. We estimated from the fitted
LD50 curve that the clostridial chimera is 11 000
times less effective than the native toxin in causing neuromuscular
paralysis. To confirm the nonparalytic nature of the chimera, we injected
it either in a mouse thigh or intravenously at 500 ng, that is, 100 000-fold
higher than the LD50 of native botulinum toxin. All mice
(n = 6) survived the injections and none exhibited
signs of paralysis.

Long-acting nonparalytic neuronal blocking
agents could be an excellent
tool for silencing selected brain areas or spinal regions both in
research and in medicine, for example, for treatment of drug-resistant
epilepsy or chronic pain. For this reason, we evaluated the ability
of the chimera to inhibit cortical activity in the rat visual cortex.
The chimera (1 μL containing 7.5 ng) was pressure-injected in
layer V of the visual cortex and clostridial activity was first assessed
by tissue immunoblotting and brain slice immunostaining, using an
antibody that recognizes only the cleaved SNAP-25 product. Figure A shows that
the cleaved SNAP-25 can only be detected in the injection site, being
restricted to a small area of the visual cortex extending from layer
V up to the pipet penetration point. Lateral spread of toxin (delineated
in yellow in Figure B) was consistently less
than 1 mm in coronal sections of the infused hemisphere. Next, visually
evoked potentials (VEPs) were recorded either around the toxin delivery
site or at a distance &gt;500 μm from the injection, 4–8
days after toxin delivery. We found that visual responsiveness (i.e.,
the VEP signal-to-noise ratio,) was substantially
dampened within the affected cortex as compared to distant regions
(Figure C, left). VEPs were significantly
reduced across a range of stimulus contrasts (two-way ANOVA, p = 0.006, followed by Holm Sidak test, p &lt; 0.05; Figure C, left). No alterations
in visual responsiveness in the treated area were found in animals
injected with vehicle solution (two-way ANOVA, p =
0.41; Figure C, right), confirming that the
new clostridial chimera can attenuate neuronal activity in a small,
selected area of the brain.

Clostridial chimera attenuates brain activity
following localized
injection into the rat visual cortex. (A) Schematic diagram showing
the injection site of the chimera (left). The brain areas tested were
subjected to immunoblot analysis revealing the cleaved SNAP-25 product
only in the chimera-injected, but not in vehicle-treated cortex (control).
Staining with the anti-α-tubulin antibody indicates equal loading
of brain-derived material. (B) Confocal microscopy images of immunostained
brain slices showing localized cleavage of SNAP-25 (in red) 4 days
following the injection. The yellow contour delineates an intense
immunofluorescence observed for the cleaved SNAP-25 product (left
panel). YoYo-1 nuclear staining (green) was used to highlight the
brain structure (middle panel); the yellow line in the right panel
indicates the pipet track. Scale bar = 120 μm. (C) The amplitude
of visual evoked potentials (VEPs) as a function of variable contrast
(K20–K90) is strongly reduced following the injection of the
chimera (left, n = 5) but not the vehicle (right, n = 4) in the visual cortex. The internal standard in each
experiment consisted of VEPs measured far (&gt;500 um) from the injection
site (blue). In vehicle-injected rats there is no difference between
contrast curves measured either close to (red) or far from (blue)
the injection site (two-way ANOVA, p = 0.41). On
the contrary, in the chimera-injected rats, the contrast curve recorded
at the injection site displays significantly lower VEP values (two-way
ANOVA, p = 0.006 followed by Holm-Sidak test, p &lt; 0.05). Data are expressed as mean ± SEM.

The most promising use of long-acting
nonparalytic neuronal blocking
agents would be in the treatment of prolonged pain. We evaluated the ability of the clostridial chimera to
reduce mechanical hypersensitivity triggered by injection of an inflammatory
substance into the hind paw of rats. The clostridial chimera (100
ng) was delivered at the L4-L5 level of the rat spinal cord intrathecally
in a volume of 10 μL. Following the injections, rats exhibited
neither spastic nor flaccid paralysis, indicating that tetanic muscle
spasms are a specific feature of the motor neuron route that tetanus
toxin normally exploits to reach the ventral horn of the spinal cord. Three days after the clostridial chimera injections,
basal mechanical sensitivity thresholds were evaluated using an automatic
von Frey apparatus. This revealed no change in acute mechanical nociception
(Figure A).

Intrathecally delivered clostridial chimera
reduces mechanical
hypersensitivity in a rat model of inflammatory pain. (A) Graph showing
relative rat paw mechanical sensitivity measured using an automatic
von Frey apparatus. The clostridial chimera (100 ng) was injected
intrathecally (i.th.) at the L4-L5 level of spinal cord (red diamonds, n = 6). Control rats (blue squares) received i.th. injection
of vehicle (saline). CFA was injected into left hind paw (intraplantar,
i.pl.) and mechanical hypersensitivity was assessed between 2 h and
11 days after CFA. BS1 – basal pain threshold prior to i.th.
injections; BS2 – basal pain threshold three days after i.th.
injections. Data are expressed as % of control (basal pain threshold
prior to the i.th. injection) ± SEM. (B) Immunoblot showing that
the clostridial chimera even at high concentrations cleaves only 50%
of neuronal SNAP-25, suggesting a degree of specificity in neuronal
targeting by the chimera. (C) Confocal microscopy images of cultured
dorsal root ganglion neurons, exposed to both the clostridial chimera
and IB4 lectin, demonstrate that the clostridial chimera targets an
IB4-lectin negative subpopulation of the sensory cells.

Next, these rats were injected with Complete Freund’s
Adjuvant
(CFA) into the hind paw and inflammation-induced mechanical hypersensitivity
was assessed for up to 11 days (Figure A).
Compared to the control group injected with saline, rats that had
received intrathecal injection of the chimera exhibited significant
reduction of mechanical hypersensitivity. This effect was observed
from 24 h after CFA injection and lasted for as long as 11 days after
CFA injection, which can be explained by the long-lasting botulinum
proteolytic effects., To determine the proportion of
sensory neurons affected, we exposed cultured rat dorsal root ganglion
neurons to the chimera and assessed cleavage of SNAP-25 using an antibody
against the intact N-terminus of SNAP-25. Figure B shows that even at high concentrations
approximately half of the SNAP-25 remained intact, suggesting that
a population of sensory neurons is resistant to the chimera. It has
been reported that mechanical sensitivity is transduced by the IB4-lectin-binding
neurons. We evaluated whether the IB4
lectin and the TBD bind the same population of dorsal root ganglion
neurons. Remarkably, the TBD and IB4 bound to two populations of sensory
neurons in a mutually exclusively manner (Figure C). This result indicates that pain-conducting mechanoreceptors
in the rat belong to tetanus- rather than IB4-binding neurons.

Discussion
Silencing selected neuronal populations in defined areas of the
CNS is important for both research and medicine. Clostridial molecules
which inactivate the synaptic release machinery offer an opportunity
to design long-acting neuronal blocking agents. The first step toward
utilization of clostridial molecules for selective neuronal blockade
is to remove their highly potent neuromuscular paralytic activity.
Here we present the first clostridial chimera which does not cause
muscle paralysis in mammals and yet efficiently blocks CNS functions.
The rational design of the chimera depended on three basic pieces
of knowledge. First, the botulinum enzyme together with its translocation
domain is highly effective in causing long-lasting blockade of neurotransmitter
release. Second, introduction of the linking
system within the redesigned botulinum molecule significantly diminishes
its paralytic activity. Third, the tetanus
binding domain targets central neurons without affecting the neurotransmitter
release machinery at neuromuscular junctions. Combination of these three properties allowed us to achieve a nonparalytic
neuronal blocking agent.

The potential uses of the new clostridial
chimera for neurobiology
and medicine are likely to be diverse: here we would like to highlight
several potential applications. First, native botulinum toxin type
A (e.g., BOTOX, Allergan) is now used for the treatment of chronic
migraine. Although BOTOX efficiently induces neuromuscular paralysis
in all patients injected, only half report adequate relief from migraine
symptoms., This result suggests that the medicinal
properties of botulinum molecules are not always based on their paralytic
action at neuromuscular junctions. Indeed, we and others have reported
that peripheral injections of clostridial molecules can affect a diverse
set of neurons, ranging from sensory primary afferents to central
neurons.,, Clearly, a
nonparalytic molecule which targets specific neurons will be invaluable
in delineating the neuronal circuits that are important in chronic
pain conditions. Further work on a wide variety of pain conditions
(neuropathic, inflammatory, postoperative symptoms, etc.) will be
necessary to provide new insights into the mechanisms of pain generation,
its longevity, and potential treatment. Second, a sizable proportion
of people with epilepsy suffer from drug-resistant focally generated
seizures, with surgical removal of the affected brain areas being
the only option to treat some of these patients., It can be envisioned that safe delivery of a nonparalytic clostridial
chimera into spatially defined regions measuring as little as one
cubic millimeter might be effective in blocking seizure-generating
areas for several months. Such a silencing effect could be a relatively
noninvasive means of predicting the likelihood that surgery would
be successful, and might even be sufficiently effective to rewire
and permanently disable seizure-generating circuits, thereby avoiding
the need for surgery.

Here, we have demonstrated for the first
time that the newly introduced
‘protein stapling’ technique allows creation of a safe
neuronal blocking agent. Development of new synthetic neuronal blocking
agents with enhanced functions which can be injected into desired
areas opens new avenues for probing nerve functions not only in rodents,
but also in higher organisms—a requirement in our quest to
understand the human brain.,

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This study was supported by the MRC grant U10578791 and Wellcome
Trust Grant No. 089125/Z/09/Z. We thank David Menon and Peter McNaughton
for helpful discussions. We thank Richard Berks, Claire Knox, and
Angela Middleton for their help with the biological tests.

Abbreviations
AFMAtomic Force Microscopy

ANOVAAnalysis of Variance

BoNT/ABotulinum Neurotoxin
type A

CFAComplete
Freund’s Adjuvant

CNSCentral Nervous System

DRGDorsal Root Ganglia

HBSSHanks’s Balanced Salt Solution

HRPHorseradish Peroxidase

MEMMinimum Essential
Medium

NGFNerve
growth factor

PBSPhosphate Buffered Saline

SDSSodium Dodecyl Sulfate

SDS-PAGESodium Dodecyl Sulfate

PAGEPolyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis

SEMStandard Error
of the Mean

SNAP-25Synaptosomal-associated protein of 25 kDa

SNARESNAP Soluble NSF Attachment Protein
Receptor

TAMRACarboxytetramethylrhodamine

TBDTetanus Binding
Domain

VEPVisual
Evoked Potential

