The ability to reliably and
reproducibly conjugate antibodies to nanoparticles is key to developing
platforms for next generation technologies from diagnostics to therapeutics. Applications include single molecule tracking,
cell sorting, bioseparations, quantitative assays for protein detection,
enzyme immobilization, protein purification, immunoasays, along with in vivo applications such as targeted contrast agents for
imaging and targeted drug/gene delivery.−

Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) are widely used for protein recognition
and targeting since they have two epitope binding sites, high selectivity,
and high binding affinity. Despite the
efforts devoted to the development of antibody-conjugated nanoparticles,
there remain many challenges and limitations. Conventional approaches generally involve modification of the nanoparticle
surface with reactive groups, such as carboxyl or amine groups, that
can be covalently coupled to a side group on a surface residue of
the antibody using standard bioconjugation methods (e.g., EDC/NHS
chemistry). These covalent coupling methods
have several drawbacks, including (1) aggregation and polymerization
due to cross-linking at multiple sites on the antibody, (2) additional
purification steps needed to remove cross-linking and catalytic reagents
that result in low yield and poor reproducibility, and (3) random
orientation of the antibody on the nanoparticle surface such that
the antigen binding sites may not be accessible. Several noncovalent
coupling methods have also been explored for antibody conjugation.
The most promising involve functionalization of the nanoparticle surface
with immunoglobulin binding proteins, such as protein A and protein
G,, or by coupling biotinylated antibodies to
an avidin modified particles.

Here
we use FcγRIs for antibody conjugation to a nanoparticle
surface (Figure A). This approach has several
advantages: (1) antibody conjugation is performed in physiological
solution with no additional coupling reagents, thereby avoiding the
necessity for additional purification steps and problems with antibody
stability and functionality; (2) coupling to the Fc region of the
antibody by the FcγRI avoids aggregation and polymerization
allowing high yield; (3) the antibody is oriented perpendicular to
the surface such that the binding sites are fully functional; and
(4) antibodies can be used interchangeably. The FcγRIs and antibodies
are conjugated to quantum dots (QDs) for optical detection. Fluorescence-based
methods are widely used for biomarker identification and determination
of relative expression levels; however, photobleaching of organic
fluorophores severely limits quantitative analysis. QDs exhibit stable
and tunable emission, enabling applications requiring single molecule
tracking, quantitative analysis, and multiplexing.,,,

The
Fc receptors (FcRs) are a class of cell-surface molecules that
bind to the Fc region of antibodies and facilitate efficient antibody–antigen
interactions. In humans, about 75% of antibodies in the circulation
are immunoglobulin-Gs (IgGs): antibodies with two identical heavy
chains and two identical light chains arranged in a characteristic
Y-shape. Receptors for the Fc region of IgGs are known as FcγRs
and are involved in immune responses such as cell activation and inhibition,
phagocytosis, antibody-dependent cell mediated toxicity (ADCC), cytokine
release, and B cell proliferation.−

The FcγRs are divided
into three classes: FcγRI (CD64),
FcγRII (CD32), and FcγRIII (CD16).− The FcγRI
(CD64) has an affinity of 10–7–10–9 M to monomeric IgG (10–7–10–8 M for mouse IgG), significantly higher than FcγRII and FcγRIII
which have binding affinities of 10–6–10–7 M. The high affinity
recognition of IgG by FcγRI permits the triggering of effector
responses at low IgG concentrations typical of early immune responses.
FcγRI is expressed constitutively on monocytes and macrophages
and can be induced on neutrophils and eosinophils., Structurally, the extracellular region of FcγRI has three
Ig-like domains, which allows high affinity binding to a single antibody.− Domains D1 and D2 are joined at an acute angle, which is maintained
by a network of hydrogen bonds, and the ligand-binding sites of are
located in domain 2 (Figure C). Therefore, we have selected the FcγRI
for universal conjugation since it has high affinity to the Fc region
of a single antibody, allowing a 1:1 ratio for FcγRI/antibody
binding. The FcγRI has several advantages over other binding
proteins for antibody conjugation. For example, protein A has five
binding sites for the Fc region of IgGs and protein G has two binding
sites.− In addition, although protein A and protein G have
strong binding affinity for human IgGs, protein G has moderate affinity
and protein A has weak affinity for mouse IgGs commonly used in research.−

Strategy
for universal antibody conjugation to nanoparticles using
Fcγ receptor I (FcγRI). (A) Schematic illustration of
antibody conjugation to lipid coated QDs using FcγRI. The binding
affinities (dissociation constants) are 10–11 M
(NTA - Ni(II)), 10–6 M (Ni(II) - histag), and 10–7–10–9 M (FcγRI - IgG).
(B) The main requirements for quantitative detection of biomarker
expression at the cell surface are one probe (QD-Ab conjugate) per
cell surface biomarker, minimal aggregation, negligible nonspecific
binding, and saturation of all cell surface biomarkers. (C) Structurally,
FcγRI receptors have three extracellular domains and an associated
immunoreceptor tyrosine activation motif (ITAM). The FcγRI binds
to the heavy chain region of IgG antibodies orienting the antigen
binding sites perpendicular to the surface. (D) QD functionalization
involves the formation of an outer lipid layer on the core/shell QD with native hydrophobic surfactants.
The lipids include a single acyl chain lipid, a double acyl chain
lipid with a PEG group, and a double acyl chain phospholipid with
a nitrolotriacetic acid (NTA) moiety attached to the headgroup. FcγRIs
with a histag are coupled to the Ni(II)/NTA groups and antibodies
are coupled to the FcγRIs. Antibodies conjugated to the FcγRIs
are oriented perpendicular to the surface to ensure that the antigen
binding sites are active.

To demonstrate universal antibody conjugation using FcγRIs,
we report on quantitative targeting of a panel of four membrane-bound
cancer biomarkers (claudin-4, mesothelin, mucin-4, and cadherin-11)
on four cell lines (Panc-1, MIA PaCa-2, Capan-1, and HPDE). The relative
expression levels for some of the biomarker/cell line combinations
are known (see ), allowing qualitative comparison to our method for universal antibody
conjugation. In addition, we report new results on the quantitative
expression levels of mucin-4 and cadherin-11 on the four cell lines.

Results
and Discussion
QD-FcR-Ab Characterization
To conjugate
the FcγRI
to the lipid-modified QDs, we use a Ni(II)-NTA complex/his-tag motif
(Figure A). The complexation of divalent transition
metals to a chelator such as nitrolotriacetic acid (NTA) is widely
used for protein purification. To incorporate
the NTA group into the lipid layer on the nanoparticle, we use a commercially
available double acyl chain phospholipid with a NTA group appended
to the headgroup (DOGS-NTA-Ni) (Figure A).
The FcγRI is coupled to the Ni(II)-NTA complex using a his-tag
with six histidine residues. An FcγRI with a 6xHis-tag coupled
to the C-terminus is commercially available. While FcγRIs could
be attached to a lipid coated nanoparticle by synthesizing a fusion
protein with a transmembrane domain that inserts into the lipid layer,
all lipids and reagents in our approach are commercially available
thereby avoiding the need for specialized synthesis methods.

The dissociation constant for the Ni(II)-NTA complex is 10–11 M, and for the Ni(II)–6xHis-tag
is 10–6 M (Figure A). As described previously, the dissociation constant
for FcγRI-IgG binding is 10–7–10–9 M for human FcγRI and 10–7–10–8 M for mouse FcγRI. In protein purification, the difference in Kd between the Ni(II)-NTA complex and the Ni(II)–6xHis-tag
interaction is exploited in stripping and regeneration. For example,
imidazole (Kd = 10–3 M for imidazole-Ni(II)) is used for protein elution whereas EDTA
(Kd = 10–19 M for EDTA-Ni(II))
is used for regeneration. The dissociation
constants for antibody–antigen binding varies over a wide range
from 10–6 to 10–9 M, but can be
as high as 10–12 M for high affinity antibodies.

The QDs are water solubilized by forming
a lipid layer on the surface
(Figure D).,− Lipid encapsulation is relatively straightforward, taking advantage
of the native hydrophobic surfactants on the QD surface after synthesis
to drive the formation of an outer layer of amphiphilic lipids, analogous
to the outer leaflet in a cell membrane. The combination of the outer
lipid layer and the inner layer of hydrophobic surfactants provides
stability and protects the QD core. Many lipids are commercially available,
including those with single and double acyl chains, head groups with
ligands that can be used for covalent conjugation, and pegylated lipids,
providing significant flexibility in designing lipid coatings with
multiple components for specific applications.

The lipid coated
QDs in water showed an average hydrodynamic diameter
of 15.7 ± 3 nm (Figure A). The average
diameter of the core/shell QDs is about 8 nm. Taking a thickness of 1 nm for the HDA/TOPO inner leaflet and a
thickness of 2 nm for the outer leaflet, we would expect a diameter
of about 14 nm for lipid coated QDs without additional functional
groups. The hydrodynamic size of PEG2k on the DSPE-PEG2k phospholipid
is 2 nm, and hence a lipid-coated nanoparticle
with a complete monolayer of PEG2k at the surface would be expected
to have a diameter of 18 nm. Here we use 10 mol % DSPE-PEG2k so that
the PEG2k groups, assuming a footprint of 4 nm2, correspond
to a coverage of about 55%. Therefore, the measured diameter of 16
nm is intermediate between 0% and 100% PEG2k (14–18 nm).

The addition of the three FcγRIs per QD resulted in an increase
of size from 15.7 to 18.2 nm (Figure A). Conjugation
with three antibodies resulted in an increase in hydrodynamic diameter
to 24.4 ± 1.7 nm. A typical antibody (150 kDa) is about 15 nm
long and about 5 nm in diameter at the base, and hence the FcγRI
receptor (35 kDa) is expected to be about 5 nm in length. Therefore,
the increase in hydrodynamic size is consistent with the addition
of a small number of FcR groups and antibodies.

The zeta potential
for the lipid-coated QDs with 80 mol % MHPC,
10 mol % DSPE-PEG2K, and 10 mol % DOGS-NTA-Ni was about −7.5
mV (Figure B). In previous work we reported
a similar zeta potential of about −9 mV for QDs functionalized
with an outer leaflet of MHPC and 10–50 mol % DSPE-PEG2k. The addition of the Fc-receptor resulted in
negligible change in zeta potential (Figure B). The final zeta potential, after conjugation with anti-CLDN4,
was −11.8 mV. Since the isoelectric point for IgG1 monoclonal
antibodies is 6.6–7.1, they are
expected to be negatively charged, and hence the zeta potential is
expected to show a small decrease.

Characterization of QD-FcR-Ab conjugates.
(A) Particle size distribution
for lipid conjugated QDs (QD-L), lipid-conjugated QDs after incorporation
of the his-tag FcR (QD-FcR), and after antibody coupling (QD-FcR-Ab).
(B) Zeta potential for QD conjugates.

For any conjugation scheme, the overall yield can be important
in cost and utilization of reagents. Figure  shows the fraction of QDs recovered (see ) after each step. After the initial lipid coating
and water solubilization step, the fraction of QDs in suspension was
83%, significantly higher than the yield for water-solubilization
with MHPC and DSPE-PEG2k, indicating
that the DOGS-NTA-Ni significantly improves the stability. After conjugating
with the Fc-receptor, the yield was 90%, and after antibody conjugation
the yield was 59%. Therefore, the overall yield in producing QD-FcR-Ab
conjugates starting with a batch of QDs in chloroform was 44%. The
overall yield is relatively high, especially given the stringent requirements
of antibody conjugation and monodispersity required for quantitative
targeting.

Yield during surface modification. (A) Absorbance spectra for QDs
in chloroform (QD) and QD conjugates during surface modification,
normalized to the initial concentration in chloroform. (B) Fraction
of QDs recovered after surface modification steps. Determined from
absorbance measurements (see  for details).

Quantitative Targeting
The three main requirements
for quantitative detection of biomarker expression at the cell surface
are (1) one probe per surface biomarker, (2) saturation of all cell
surface biomarkers, and (3) negligible nonspecific binding (Figure B). The requirement for a single probe (QD-Ab conjugate)
per target molecule implies a monodisperse suspension with minimal
aggregation, as shown in Figure A. To verify
that all biomarkers on the cell surface are saturated, QDs were conjugated
with anticlaudin-4 (aCLDN4) and the QD-FcR-aCLDN4 conjugates incubated
with Panc-1 cells at a concentration of 3 × 106 to
9 × 107 QDs per cell. All cells showed relatively
uniform fluorescence, with an intensity that was dependent on the
concentration of the QD-FcR-aCLDN4 conjugates (Figure A). The background fluorescence intensity away from the cells
showed no significant differences compared to experiments where cells
were not incubated with the QDs, which suggests minimum nonspecific
binding.

Quantitative cell targeting using QD-FcR-Ab conjugates. (A) phase
and fluorescence images of Panc-1 cells incubated with different concentrations
of QD-FcR-aCLDN4 conjugates. (B) The fluorescence of known concentrations
of QD suspensions is used for calibration (see  for details). (C) Calibration curve showing average
fluorescence intensity per unit area versus QD concentration per unit
area. The calibration curve is used to convert the fluorescence intensity
per unit area on the cell surface to an expression level per unit
area. (D) Average fluorescence intensity per unit area for CLDN4 expression
on Panc-1 cells versus QD concentration. Error bars represent standard
error. Each point represents the average intensity from at least 200
cells.

To convert the fluorescence intensity
on the cell surface to the
number of QDs per unit area, we performed calibrations for each batch
of QDs (see  for details)
(Figure B). The calibration curve (Figure C) is linear with a slope of one as expected for
a uniform distribution of monodispersed QDs, and the intercept is
dependent on the quantum yield and hence varies from batch to batch
of QDs. For the experiments reported here the quantum yield of the
QD-FcR-Ab conjugates varied from 30% to 44%, resulting in a maximum
difference in the intercept of the calibration curves of a factor
of 1.49. From the background intensity, the resolution corresponds
to an expression level of about 10 μm–2.

The fluorescence intensity obtained from images of cells incubated
with QD-FcR-aCLDN4 conjugates (Figure D) can
be converted to an absolute expression level of number per square
micron on the cell surface using the calibration curve (Figure C). For Panc-1 cells incubated with QD-FcR-aCLDN4
conjugates, the expression level initially increases linearly with
QD concentration and then saturates at an expression level of about
230 μm–2. The linear region with a slope of
one provides evidence that there is one QD per biomarker on the cell
surface. As we describe below in more detail, preblocking of the target
protein with free antibodies resulted in no detectable binding, indicating
negligible nonspecific binding. For the experimental conditions used
here, saturation occurred at a concentration of about 4 × 107 QDs per cell. For all subsequent experiments, we used a QD
concentration of 2 × 108 QDs per cell, allowing for
measurement of expression levels up to 1000–2000 μm–2, close to the upper limit defined by steric exclusion.
For a 25 nm QD-FcR-Ab conjugate, steric exclusion is expected to occur
at a concentration of about 1600 μm–2. The
lower limit is dependent on many factors, including the quantum yield
of the QDs, autofluorescence of the cell line, and the microscope
and imaging conditions. Using a conventional fluorescence microscope,
a resolution of about 10 μm–2 is typical.

The linkages in our QD-FcR-Ab conjugates have different binding
affinities. The Ni(II)-histag linkage is the weakest with a binding
constant of about 10–6 M. Our targeting experiments
show that this linkage is stable in the experimental conditions used
here for targeting in cell culture. Further evidence is provided by
the fact that we can elute the QDs from the fixed cells by incubation
in imidazole. Increases in the stability of this linkage could be
achieved by using multivalent NTA groups.,

Profiling of Pancreatic Cancer Biomarkers
Having verified
targeting using our QD-FcR-aCLDN4 conjugates, we determined the expression
levels for a panel of four membrane biomarkers (CLDN4, MSLN, MUC4,
and CDH11) on four cell lines (MIA PaCa-2, Panc-1, Capan-1, HPDE)
(Figure ). MIA PaCa-2 is an epithelial cell
line of pancreatic cancer,, the Panc-1 cell line
was established from a human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, and the Capan-1 cell line was established from
a liver metastasis of a grade II pancreatic adenocarcinoma. The immortalized pancreatic cell line HPDE (human
pancreatic duct epithelium) was used as a control. For some of the biomarker/cell combinations, the relative
expression level is known from Western blot or other measurements,
whereas in other cases the expression level is not known (see ).−

Quantitative
expression levels for CLDN4, MSLN, MUC4, and CDH11
on Panc-1, MIA PaCa-2, Capan-1, and HPDE cells. (A) phase and fluorescence
images of MiaPaCa-2, Panc-1, Capan-1, and HPDE cells incubated with
QD-FcR-Ab conjugates (Ab = aCLDN4, aMSLN, aMUC4, and aCDH11). Biomarker
expression levels on (B) MIA PaCa-2, (C) Panc-1, (D) Capan-1, and
(E) HPDE cells. Error bars represent standard error. Expression levels
for each biomarker on MIA PaCa-2, Panc-1, and HPDE are obtained from
measurements of between 565–997 individual cells (see  for details).
For Capan-1, expression levels are based on measurements of at least
180 clusters of cells. In total, measurements were made on more than
9600 individual cells and more than 780 cell clusters.

Claudin-4 (CLDN4)
Claudin-4 is one
of a large family
of tight junction membrane proteins that is overexpressed in ovarian,
breast, prostate, and pancreatic tumors.,− In pancreatic cancer, the onset of claudin-4 overexpression is observed
in PanIN-2 lesions. Claudin-4 is weakly
expressed or absent in all normal pancreas and chronic pancreatitis
tissues, but is strongly overexpressed in primary and metastatic pancreatic
cancer tissues., From analysis of protein expression
using Northern blot analysis, CLDN-4 was found to be expressed in
15 of 16 pancreatic cancer cell lines, with expression levels for
the cell lines studied here in the order Capan-1 &gt; Panc-1 &gt;
MIA PaCa-2.

Targeting experiments
with QD-FcR-Ab conjugates
revealed average claudin-4 expression levels of 70 μm–2 on HPDE cells, 130 μm–2 on MIA PaCa-2 cells,
256 μm–2 on Panc-1 cells, and 504 μm–2 on Capan-1 cells (Figure ). Expression levels for Panc-1, MIA PaCa-2, and HPDE cells were
obtained from isolated, individual cells. In contrast, individual
Capan-1 cells did not adhere to the surface of the dish but formed
clusters. The expression levels reported here (Figure ) are in agreement with the relative order of expression levels
reported in the literature, and with
previous measurement of claudin-4 expression on the four cell lines
using EDC-coupling to conjugate antibodies to QDs. The distribution of the average expression levels per cell
is relatively narrow (Figure C); for example,
the expression level of claudin-4 on Panc-1 cells is 256 ± 13.3
μm–2 (SE).

Mesothelin (MSLN)
Mesothelin is a cell surface glycoprotein
overexpressed in ovarian and pancreatic cancers, and in mesotheliomas.,, Immunostaining studies of tissue
sections have shown that mesothelin is overexpressed in pancreatic
adenocarcinomas, but is not detected in normal tissue. Western blot analysis has shown MSLN expression
in the order Capan-1 &gt; Panc-1, MIA PaCa-2 &gt; HPDE. Analysis of gene expression using RT-PCR has
shown strong
mesothelin mRNA expression in Capan-1 cells, weak expression in Panc-1
and HPDE cells, and no detectable expression in MIA PaCa-2 cells.

The expression level of mesothelin using
QD-FcR-Ab conjugates was found to be 363 μm–2 for Capan-1, 176 μm–2 for Panc-1, 111 μm–2 for MIA PaCa2, and 88.1 μm–2 for HPDE (Figure ). The strong expression
levels for Capan-1 are in agreement with both protein and gene analysis
reported in the literature,, and order of expression
levels is in agreement with Western blot analysis. The main difference between our results and gene expression
is for MIA PaCa-2 cells, where we find expression levels slightly
higher than HPDE cells.

Mucin-4 (MUC4)
The mucins are a
family of high molecular
weight glycoproteins that are widely overexpressed in epithelial cells.
Mucin-4 is overexpressed in pancreatic cancer,,,,, and previous studies have demonstrated differential
expression of MUC4 in invasive pancreatic adenocarcinoma and the absence
of MUC4 in normal pancreas by RT-PCR and immunohistochemical analysis. MUC4 mRNA was reported to be expressed in 75%
of pancreatic adenocarcinoma tissue samples and pancreatic adenocarcinoma
tumor cell lines, in 0% chronic pancreatitis and normal pancreas tissues. Analysis of gene expression using RT-PCR has
shown very strong expression levels in Capan-1, and undetectable levels
in Panc-1 and MIA PaCa-2 cells.,

The expression
levels of MUC4 were 542 μm–2 in Capan-1 cells,
196 μm–2 in Panc-1 cells, 154 μm–2 in MIA PaCa-2 cells, and 94 μm–2 in HPDE cells (Figure ). In contrast to
gene expression studies,, we observe moderate
protein expression in Panc-1 and MIA PaCa-2 cells.

Cadherin-11
(CDH11)
Cadherins constitute a family of
transmembrane glycoproteins involved in Ca2+-dependent
cell–cell interactions. Microarray
analysis, RT-PCR, and immunohistochemistry have shown high expression
levels of cadherin-11 in the stromal compartment of both pancreatic
adenocarcinoma and chronic pancreatitis., There are no qualitative or quantitative reports of cadherin-11
expression in pancreatic cancer cell lines studied here.

Our
targeting results (Figure ) also show higher
expression levels of CDH11 in the cancer cell lines compared to the
normal pancreatic cell line, HPDE. The expression levels of CDH11
were 339 μm–2 in Capan-1 cells, 155 μm–2 in Panc-1 cells, 194 μm–2 in MIA PaCa2 cells, and 106 μm–2 in HPDE
cells (Figure ).

Confocal Imaging
Panc-1, Capan-1, and MIA PaCa-2 cells
were labeled with selected antibodies for confocal imaging (Figure ). The confocal images of Panc-1 cells (Figure A,B) show a characteristic pancake-like morphology
with a central approximately hemispherical nucleus. Panc-1 cells are
typically 80–100 μm wide and 15–20 μm tall
above the nucleus. Epifluorescence images (Figure ) generally show uniform fluorescence over most of the cell
but lower fluorescence near the nucleus where the membrane is above
the focal plane. The confocal images reveal relatively uniform expression
over the cell surface. Pancreatic cancer cell lines exhibit heterogeneity
from cell line to cell line. Figure C shows
confocal images of Capan-1 cells that are labeled with QD-FcR-aCLDN4.
Capan-1 cells are known to form spheroids consisting of smaller cell
aggregates. After 3 days in culture,
each cluster of Capan-1 cells contained 50 to 200 cells. Figure D shows confocal images of MIA PaCa-2 cells that
are labeled with QD-FcR-aCLDN4. MIA PaCa-2 cells are known to be poorly
differentiated and exhibit poorly developed membrane structures.

Confocal z-stack images of Panc-1 cells
incubated
with (A) QD-FcR-aCLDN4 and (B) QD-FcR-aMUC4 conjugates. Confocal z-stack images of (C) Capan-1 and (D) MIA PaCa-2 cells incubated
with QD-FcR-aCLDN4 conjugates. (Top) top view, (middle) isometric
view, (bottom) cross-section.

Controls
To confirm our targeting results, we followed
standard antibody labeling protocols to stain Panc-1 cells with CLDN4,
MSLN, MUC4, and CDH11 antibodies. Immunofluorescence images () show uniform
expression over the cell surface for all four antibodies with relative
expression levels consistent with the quantitative results shown in
Figure . The stable fluorescence from the
QDs allows quantitative analysis, whereas photobleaching of the fluorophore
makes quantitative analysis extremely difficult.

To verify that
nonspecific binding of QDs was negligible, we performed blocking experiments
where Panc-1 cells were first incubated with free anti claudin-4 for
30 min prior to introducing QD-FcR-aCLDN4 conjugates (). The fluorescence
on cells incubated with QD-FcR-aCLDN4 conjugates after preincubation
with the free antibody was not detectable above the background intensity,
providing evidence that the QD-FcR-Ab conjugates are specifically
binding to the target protein and that nonspecific binding is negligible.
We also performed control experiments where Panc-1 cells were incubated
with QD-lipid and QD-FcR conjugates (no antibody) (). Images for cells incubated
with QD-lipid or QD-FcR conjugates revealed a small amount of punctate
nonspecific staining. While the controls with QD-lipid or QD-FcR conjugates
are not representative of the QD-FcR-Ab structure since the antibody
provides significant steric screening (), quantitative analysis of fluorescence
images showed very low levels of nonspecific binding ().

Reproducibility
The targeting results summarized in
Figure  were obtained from five independent
experiments (see ). These experiments used two different batches of QDs with
quantum yields of 49% and 54% for lipid coating and functionalization.
Here we compare the independent experiments for claudin-4 expression
on Panc-1 cells. The average expression level of claudin-4 on Panc-1
cells from all experiments was 256 ± 13.3 μm–2. Experiments #1 and #2 were performed with the same batch of core/shell-QDs
but the functionalization was performed independently. The expression
level for CLDN4 on Panc-1 cells was 235 μm–2 in Experiment #1 and 273 μm–2 in Experiment
#2, showing good reproducibility between independent surface functionalizations.
In Experiment #3, QDs were prepared from a different batch of QDs
resulting in an expression level of 263 μm–2, very close to the values obtained from Experiments #1 and #2. Experiments
#4 and #5 were performed using the same batch of QDs and from the
same surface functionalization. The CLDN4 expression levels were 218
μm–2 and 291 μm–2,
respectively. The difference in the average expression level between
the minimum and maximum values was 25.1%. In the targeting experiments
on Panc-1 cells, the passage numbers were between passage 3 and passage
10; however, there was no correlation between expression level and
passage number over the range studied here. These results demonstrate
good reproducibility between different batches of QDs and between
different functionalizations.

Conclusions
We
have demonstrated an efficient method for universal conjugation
of antibodies to lipid-coated nanoparticles using a radially oriented
Fcγ receptor I. This method has several advantages over conventional
covalent coupling methods, including: (1) antibody conjugation is
performed in physiological solution with no additional coupling reagents,
thereby avoiding the necessity for additional purification steps and
problems with antibody stability and functionality; (2) coupling to
the Fc region of the antibody avoids aggregation and polymerization
allowing high yield; (3) the antibody is oriented perpendicular to
the surface so that the binding sites are fully functional; (4) antibodies
can be used interchangeably; (5) the FcγRI has high affinity
to the Fc region of a single antibody, allowing a 1:1 ratio for FcγRI/antibody
binding, particularly important for quantitative recognition and targeting;
(6) all lipids and reagents are commercially available; and (7) the
yield for preparation of QD-FcR-Ab conjugates is high. Furthermore,
we have shown good reproducibility between different batches of quantum
dots and different surface functionalizations. This method is applicable
to a wide range of technologies, including solution based protein
detection assays and active targeting of cell surface membrane biomarkers.

Protein expression levels obtained using our QD-FcR-Ab conjugates
for claudin-4 and mesothelin expression on Capan-1, MIA PaCa-2, and
Panc-1 cells are in good agreement with the relative expression levels
reported in the literature. The expression levels for claudin-4, mesothelin,
mucin-4, and cadherin-11 on Capan-1 cells of 340–550 μm–2, significantly higher than the expression levels
of these proteins in the other cell lines studied. Expression levels
for the four proteins on Panc-1 and MIA PaCa-2 cells varied between
110 and 260 μm–2, while expression levels
on HPDE cells were between 70 and 110 μm–2. Here we have demonstrated quantitative profiling in cell culture
using QD-FcR-Ab conjugates. This method can be easily adapted for
multiplexed profiling using different color QDs.

Materials and Methods
QD Synthesis
and Lipid Functionalization
CdSe cores
were synthesized from CdO and Se in TOPO and HDA and passivated with
a (Cd,Zn)S shell, as described previously. The core/shell QDs have an average diameter of 8 nm and an emission
peak at about 605 nm., The details of lipid functionalization
are provided in the .

FcγRI and Antibody Conjugation
Antibodies were
conjugated to the lipid coated QDs using an FcγRI group attached
to a his-tag. Recombinant mouse FcγRI/CD64 (R&amp;D Systems,
cat# 2074-FC-050) with a C-terminal 6xHis-tag constituted at 500 μg
mL–1 in sterile PBS was added to NTA(Ni)-terminated
QDs for 30 min at RT. The concentration of the 6xHis-tag Fc-receptor
was calculated to give three Fc-receptors per QD. The resulting solution
was passed through a syringe filter with a 200 nm polytetrafluoroethylene
membrane to remove any aggregates.

Targeting experiments were
performed by conjugating antibodies of four pancreatic cancer biomarkers: Claudin-4 (anti-CLDN4, #329400, Invitrogen),
mesothelin (anti-MSLN, #354200, Invitrogen), mucin-4 (anti-MUC4, #354900,
Invitrogen), and cadherin-11 (anti-CDH11, ab151446, Abcam). Antibodies
as supplied (100 μg in 200 μL) were added to a suspension
of the QD-FcR complex to give three antibodies per QD and incubated
for 1 h at RT.

Characterization of QDs
Absorbance
spectra were obtained
using a Varian Cary 50 UV/vis spectrophotometer (Agilent Technologies,
Santa Clara, CA). For CdSe/(Cd,Zn)S QDs suspended in chloroform it
was necessary to dilute the starting solution. Typically, 2 μL
QD suspension was added to 700 μL chloroform in a quartz cuvette.
For water solubilized QDs, dilution was not necessary and the entire
sample was used for absorbance measurements.

The effectiveness
of water solubilization was quantitatively determined from the fraction
of QDs recovered after filtration through a 200 nm PTFE 13-mm-diameter
syringe filter prior to each measurement. The fraction recovered is
defined as the number moles of QDs recovered after water solubilization
and filtration normalized to the number of moles of QDs in chloroform
prior to water solubilization. Particle
size distributions and zeta potential were obtained using a Nano Zetasizer
(Malvern, Worcestershire, UK) (). Error bars represent standard error.

Cell Culture
Targeting
experiments were performed using
three pancreatic cancer cell lines: MIA PaCa-2, Panc-1, and Capan-1.
The human pancreatic duct epithelium cell line (HPDE) was used as
a control. Panc-1 and MIA PaCa-2 cells were cultured using DMEM supplemented
with 10% FBS and 1% Pen-strep. Capan-1 cells were cultured using IMDM
supplemented with 20% FBS and 1% Pen-strep. HPDE cells were cultured
with keratinocyte SFM media supplemented with 0.1 ng mL–1 of EGF and 30 μg mL–1 of bovine pituitary
extract. The passage number for the cells used was as follows: 3–25
(MIA PaCa-2), 3–18 (Panc-1), 3–12 (Capan-1), and 3–10
(HPDE).

Calibration of QD Emission
Stock solutions of QDs in
water were prepared with concentrations from 150 nM to 1 nM. 5 μL
of the QD suspension was dispensed onto a glass slide. A 22 mm ×
22 mm coverslip was placed on top of the drop, which was allowed to
spread out to completely contact the coverslip. Fluorescence images
were recorded at five random locations using identical conditions
as for cell imaging. After subtracting the background, the average
intensity was plotted versus the QD concentration per unit area. The
QD concentration per unit area was calculated from the volume of the
drop, the QD concentration, and area. The calibration curve was then
used to convert the fluorescence intensity per unit area on a cell
surface to the number of QDs per unit area.

Targeting and Imaging
Cells were grown for 6 to 12
days and were trypsinized at 80–90% confluency. 2 mL of 0.5%
trypsin-EDTA was used to lift off cells from the plates. After incubation,
2.5 mL of trypsin inhibitor was used for HPDE cell line. Next, 8 mL
of medium was added to the plate to neutralize the trypsin. The cells
were then transferred to a 15 mL tube and centrifuged at 1000 rpm
for 3 min, and resuspended in 5 mL of medium. The number of cells
was determined using a hemocytometer.

5 × 104 cells were seeded in each well (12-well plate) and cultured for
2 days. Cells is each well were washed with PBS once and fixed with
3.7% formaldehyde for 15 min, and then washed again three times with
PBS. Cells were blocked with 20% horse serum for 1–2 h and
washed three times with PBS. QDs were injected into each well with
500 μL of PBS and incubated for 20 min in room temperature.
In experiments to confirm target saturation, the amount of QDs varied
from 3 × 106 to 9 × 107 QDs per cell.
In all other experiments the QD concentration was 2 × 108 QDs per cell. The cells were then washed with PBS three times.
Finally, 1 mL of PBS was added to each well for imaging.

In
control experiments, conventional immunofluorescence experiments
were performed to image CLDN4, MSLN, MUC4, and CDH11 expression on
Panc-1 cells. Briefly, Panc-1 cells were fixed with 3.7% formaldehyde
(diluted in PBS buffer) for 15 min and washed 3 times with PBS. Cells
were then blocked using 20% horse serum for 1 h prior to incubation
with primary antibodies. Claudin-4 was labeled using mouse anti-CLDN4-Alexa
Fluor 594 Conjugate (329494, Invitrogen.). The other three proteins
were labeled using primary mouse antibodies (aMSLN, aMUC4, and aCDH11)
and a secondary goat anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 594 (A-11005, Invitrogen).

Phase and fluorescence images were obtained using a Nikon TE-2000
microscope and analyzed using NIS-elements software with a 20×
objective. Using a Nikon DS-Qi1Mc-U3 camera, the pixel size was 0.32
× 0.32 μm. Confocal images were obtained using a Nikon
TiE spinning disk microscope. Images were taken in 60–100 z-steps (0.2–0.3 μm per z-step)
with a resolution of 0.4 μm/pixel at an exposure time of 200
ms.

Fluorescence intensities of single cells were obtained from
NIS
element software. The background intensities were recorded from selected
regions without cells. After subtracting the background, the fluorescence
intensity per unit area on a cell surface was converted to expression
level per unit area by using the previously performed calibration
curve. Critical steps in the protocols are summarized in .

Supporting Information Available
Relative expression levels
(where known) for biomarker/cell combinations. Tabulated data for
all targeting experiments. Distributions of fluorescence intensity
per pixel for claudin-4 (CLDN4), mucin-4 (MUC4), mesothelin (MSLN),
and cadherin-11 (CDH11) for single Panc-1 cells. Immunofluorescence
control experiments: Panc1 cells incubated with a primary antibody
(aCLDN4, aMSLN, aMUC4, and aCDH11) and a fluorescently labeled secondary
antibody. QD control experiments: Panc-1 cells incubated with QD-lipid
conjugates, QD-NTA/Ni(II) conjugates and QD-FcR-aCLDN4 conjugates,
after preincubation with aCLDN4. Schematic illustration of lipid functionalization.
Quantitative analysis of negative controls. Critical steps in the
protocol. Lipid functionalization of QDs. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc5003778_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NIH (U54CA151838). K.H.L.
acknowledges
support from KIST (#2Z04150).

