Introduction
Nucleic
acid sequences can form noncanonical structures by folding
in the presence of small molecule ligands or following the binding
of a protein.− The realization that single-stranded DNA forms unique,
complex, nucleic acid structures in response to ligand binding has
led to the development of synthetic, single-stranded DNA sequences
tailored to fold in the presence of a specific target. These synthetic
sequences, termed aptamers, can be highly selective for a target ligand.− The rapid advancement of the field stems from the use of combinatorial
library screening to select aptamer sequences based on binding affinity
(Kd) response, resulting in new aptamers
appearing in the literature for a wide range of small molecules including
thrombin, ATP, cocaine, HIV-1 REV, Hg2+, and prostate-specific
membrane antigen (PSMA).− Since their discovery, the use of aptamers to sense the binding
of target molecules in solution or on cell surfaces has evolved rapidly
for bioanalytical applications. Recently, the incorporation of gold
nanoparticles (AuNPs) onto aptamers has further pushed aptamer technology
into applications such as fluorescence, electrochemical, and plasmonic
sensors to report binding.−

It is well-known that the fluorescent quenching of a dye by
a AuNP
is well described within the nanometal surface energy transfer (NSET)
model, and thus has attracted considerable attention as an optical
ruler in biophysics. NSET with longer R0 values (R0 &gt;100
Å) makes separation of the donor and acceptor more attainable
than FRET studies, which can be advantageous for molecular beacon
fluorescent sensors. In fact, earlier fluorescent biosensors utilizing
pyrene-appended aptamers have shown perturbation of target binding
due to interference of the binding site by dye-labeling in the binding
pocket. NSET allows the positioning of
the donor and acceptor labels away from the binding pocket.

While the AuNP based fluorescent assays are very sensitive, the
difficulty in tuning the binding affinity to match the experimental
conditions has limited their broader applicability. To increase the
long-term applicability of nanoparticle based aptamer sensors, the
sensor response has to be generalizable to the experimental conditions
in biophysics. The ability to systematically tune a previously identified
aptamer’s binding affinity to better match experimental conditions
(concentration range) without redesigning the aptamer or relying on
single point mutations is not well developed. When the aptamer is bound to a AuNP, the response of the aptamer
can be influenced by the aptamer structure and any interaction with
the AuNP surface, which can impact sensitivity as well as specificity
of future sensors. The interaction of the AuNP with the aptamer can
be minimized by surface passivation as previously demonstrated,, but the effect of aptamer design on response is far less understood.
It has been observed in molecular beacon stem-loop architectures that
the aptamer Kd values are affected by
stem-loop size, stem length, stem composition, and single point mutations
in and away from the target’s binding site.,, Several studies have also indicated that
the aptamer binding affinity in optical sensors, including nonhairpin
optical probes, is strongly impacted by the degree of duplex formation
over the aptamer sequence. The higher Kd values are attributed to the thermodynamics associated with overcoming
the duplexed regions or target accessibility to the binding sites
on the aptamer., Developing a deeper understanding
of the underlying consequences of positioning the single-stranded
aptamer sequence into a stem-loop molecular beacon framework could
allow more judicious design of AuNP aptasensors.

Scheme of the NSET stem-loop
beacons and their response to ATP.
The red bars in the stem-loop structures are indicative of the aptamer
sequence location in the stem-loop architectures. Sequences i–iv remain a single construct upon ATP binding whereas
sequence v contains enough aptamer sequence overlap
in the stem to induce displacement of the flare strand upon ATP binding.

In this manuscript, we systematically
study the influence of the
location of a 25-mer ATP single-stranded DNA aptamer on the binding
affinity for ATP when incorporated into the loop region of a 57-mer
stem-loop molecular beacon. The influence of target site exposure
in the loop is investigated by sliding the aptamer sequence along
the loop circumference, resulting in a variable degree of single-stranded
exposure for the ATP aptamer. The design allows the influence of ligand
accessibility and duplex formation to be investigated. The chosen
ATP aptamer is based upon the Huizenga and Szostak 25-mer ATP DNA
aptamer sequence whose structure and ATP binding properties were previously
analyzed by NMR., The aptamer binds two ATP molecules
per sequence and induces a folded structure. For the analysis of the
influence of aptamer position within the loop, the aptamer beacon
incorporates a 3 nm AuNP at the 3′ end as an energy acceptor
and a fluorescein dye at the 5′ end as an excited state donor.
The use of the AuNP-FAM energy transfer pair allows the binding affinity
to be measured and the change in distance following ATP binding to
be monitored using nanometal surface energy transfer techniques. The change in the photoluminescent (PL) intensity
data with increasing ATP concentration allows the change in Kd and the change in aptamer sequence location
in the loop to be correlated. The results clearly demonstrate that
the binding affinity of ATP to the aptamer is directly dependent on
degree of sequence exposure.

The highest binding affinities
are observed with full exposure
of the aptamer sequence in the loop, while duplex formation reduces
binding affinity most likely due to the thermodynamics of DNA base
pairing. Importantly, the positioning of the aptamer allows several
orders of magnitude variability in the Kd values, indicating that for a given aptamer, the Kd can be systematically tuned by placement in the stem-loop
architecture. No differences in binding affinity were observed for
partial blocking of the 5′ vs 3′ aptamer sequence ends
in this study. Hill plot analysis of the aptamer concentration dependence
on the PL intensity reveals negative cooperativity between sequential
ATP binding events. In addition, the specificity of the aptamer for
ATP over UTP and GTP is maintained, as well as similar responsiveness
to AMP vs ATP. Inspection of the thermodynamic stabilities of the
loop and stem region indicates that a nonlinear correlation exists
between the measured binding affinity and length of aptamer duplexed
region in the stem-loop architecture. The results of the study establish
a guideline for systematically manipulating Kd values in a stem-loop molecular beacon designed around the
thermodynamics of the aptamer construct.

NSET Stem-Loop
Beacon Sequences Used
in This Study
Red, italicized text is indicative
of the conserved 25-base-pair ATP aptamer sequence. A dotted underline
represents the loop portion in the stem-loop structure while a bold
underline represents the 6-base-pair stem. Amine-terminated 15-base-pair
linkers are listed below the sequence, aligned at the appropriate
complementary positions.

Results
and Discussion
The stem-loop construct contains a 25-mer
Huizenga-Szostak ATP
aptamer, wherein the aptamer sequence is moved along the stem-loop
region from the 5′ toward the 3′ end, resulting in partial
blocking of the ATP target site due to base pairing when the loop
is closed. The five individual 57-mer stem-loop constructs
utilized in the study are shown in Figure  and Table . In Table , the 25-mer Huizenga-Szostak aptamer sequence in each of the five constructs is red and italicized for clarity. To distinguish
between the loop and stem region, the loop is highlighted by a dashed
underline, while the stem is highlighted by a solid underline. As
a control, the stem-loop studies were compared to a single-stranded
sequence containing the aptamer (sequence vi) that
cannot form a stem-loop structure ().

The stem-loop construct is designed
(Figure ) to detect the conformational changes
in the ATP-induced aptamer
binding by monitoring the change in the fluorescent intensity of the
appended fluorescein when quenched in the vicinity of the AuNP. A
3 nm AuNP with low loading (1:1 AuNP:DNA) was chosen to promote high
efficiency of the aptamer binding to ATP, as observed in previous
studies where hybridization of DNA on AuNP surfaces was most efficient
at low primer loading levels and on surfaces of high curvature., The AuNP acts as a dark acceptor of the fluorescein excited state
via a long-range NSET mechanism. The NSET method is similar to FRET
techniques, wherein the separation distance between the fluorescein
and AuNP are reported by the change in emission intensity of the fluorescein.
The quenching can be described within an NSET model allowing the ensemble-averaged
distances to be calculated by comparison to theoretical values. Unique
to NSET, the R0 (critical distance for
50% energy transfer) is a longer value of 110.6 Å for a 3 ±
0.5 nm AuNP-FAM acceptor donor pair, allowing the fluorescein (FAM)
and AuNP to be bound distally from the aptamer site to minimize impact
on the observed aptamer folding behavior. The impact of small molecule dyes, quantum dots, and EPR tags on
the folding of biopolymers is an area of open discussion in the biophysics
community. Studies on AuNPs below 4 nm approach the size of the footprint
of DNA. Earlier studies have shown that no impact on folding is observed
for substrate induced folding of RNA or protein induced folding in
DNA when bound to a small AuNP surface, presumably due to the increased
distance of separation from the binding site allowable by NSET probes., It is also important to note that nonspecific DNA interactions with
the AuNP surface are not expected because previous groups report little
to no DNA adsorption onto nanoparticle surfaces with a ligand-passivated,
neutral surface., Typical DNA adsorption studies
that report high levels of single-stranded adsorption utilize citrate-capped
AuNPs where the citrate molecule is displaced to accommodate DNA laying
down on the surface. The AuNPs used in
this study are DHLA-capped, thus the surface is thiol-coated, and
it is assumed that the small particle size and the stable ligand coating
make these AuNPs resistant to nonspecific adsorption.

The PL
NSET efficiencies and calculated distances for the aptamer
sequences at I0 (no ATP) and Imax (high ATP concentration) are listed in  (SF Table 1.) In the absence
of ATP, the aptamer forms a closed stem-loop hairpin conformation
positioning the AuNP and the FAM in close proximity, resulting in
partial quenching of the FAM in the AuNP near field. The intensity
of the fluorescein emission in the absence of ATP for the closed stem-loop
yields a separation distance of AuNP to FAM of 77 Å (E = 19%) confirming loop formation in the absence of ATP.
Exposure of the aptamer to ATP induces opening of the loop and formation
of a folded DNA conformer that repositions the FAM and AuNP to cause
the change in fluorophore emission, tracking the binding of ATP. The
fluorescein intensity at high concentrations of ATP yields a separation
distance consistent with the NMR predicted folded structure, wherein
the AuNP to FAM separation distance is 96–109 Å (∼44%
E), confirming formation of the ATP induced folded aptamer in the
presence of ATP. A distal range is reported
here because TEM analysis indicates a ±0.5 nm Gaussian distribution
in AuNP sizes, which results in an NSET R0 that is better described as a weighted probability to account for
the nanoparticle size (). By incorporating the measured population distribution for particle
size coupled to the change in extinction coefficient which scales
as r3, the R0&lt;avg&gt; value for the prepared AuNPs in the study is 110.6 Å. Although
it should be noted that the correction to R0 for the distribution results in only a minimal perturbation to the R0&lt;calc,3 nm&gt; for the 3 nm average
size
(R0&lt;calc, 3 nm&gt; = 110.5
Å).
Moreover, while the ATP-bound NMR structure is available, its orientation
to the surface could vary. Photoluminescent saturation is therefore
used to establish the ATP saturation limit for ATP binding.

As a control and in an effort to ensure that free, unlabeled AuNPs
in solution do not impact the conformation of the folded aptamer,
analysis of the fluorescein intensity following the addition of free
AuNP (up to 2 nM excess AuNP) in solution is provided (). No change
in PL saturation was observed. Binding assays for UTP and GTP on selected
sequences are available in  (Figure SF7) and demonstrate that specificity for ATP over other
triphosphate nucleosides is not impacted by the binding of the AuNP
or the position of the aptamer in the loop. Control studies on AMP
binding relative to ATP are also shown in the , wherein similar binding affinities
are observed to be consistent with literature results.,,

The binding affinities
for the five stem-loop constructs were measured
by analyzing the ATP concentration-dependent change in fluorescein
photoluminescence (ΔPL) at 1 nM aptamer (Figure ). The data is plotted as a saturation curve and as a log
plot of ΔPL vs [ATP] in Figure , and
as the raw PL data in . Consistent with the proposed structural folding of the
aptamer following opening of the stem-loop upon ATP binding, the observed
PL intensity increases asymptotically with increasing ATP concentration.
The maximum intensity change (ΔPL) reflects the final conformation
of the aptamer after ATP-induced folding. In analogy to the NMR studies,
the binding affinity for the ATP is extracted by fitting the ΔPL
data to a two-step ATP binding modelwhere B(1)max represents the maximum ΔPL for the first binding
event, B(2)max represents the
maximum ΔPL for the second binding event, and Kd(1) and Kd(2) are the binding affinities for the individual events. The Kd values are listed in Table  and the fits are shown in Figure . The Kd values obtained from the two-state
binding model were statistically analyzed using an F-test and Akaike’s
test of the DOF/sum of squares. Plots of the two- vs one-state model
for each sequence are shown in the  (Figure SF4). For the stem-loop conformers, analyzing
the sum of the squares relative to the degrees of freedom yields F-test
values of &gt;1 with the Akaike’s test values &lt;0 (Table ). The F-test values of &gt;1 coupled to negative
AIC
values confirms the validity of the more complex two-state model for
the studied sequences. Details of the statistical equations and the
values for the single-stranded control are available in the  (SF Table ). The control sequence, which cannot form a stem-loop structure,
exhibits an F-test value of zero and a positive AIC value, and therefore
is fit to the single-binding model.

ATP saturation curves of the five NSET
stem-loop beacons fit to
eq . The left-hand column displays the relationship
between the ΔPL intensity and micromolar ATP concentration.
The right-hand column utilizes the same fit in eq  but graphs the ATP concentration as a log function to demonstrate
the detectable concentration range of each NSET stem-loop beacon.

Table of the Kd Values with the Reported 95% Confidence Limits
(2σ)
Extracted from eq , the Hill Coefficients (h) Extracted from eq , and the F-test
and Akaike’s Values Extracted from Statistical Analyses
Seq 	Kd1 (2σ)	Kd2 (2σ)	Hill (h)	F-test, AIC	
i	1.1 (1.2) μM	35.3 (30.2) μM	0.77	1.615, −0.307	
ii	1.3 (2.4) nM	102.3 (93.4) nM	0.55	8.754, −10.502	
iii	0.3 (0.6)  μM	6.9 (12.0)  μM	0.70	2.368, −1.818	
iv	33.6 (5.4)  μM	232.8 (333.4)  μM	0.49	1.498, −0.473	
v	203.0 (129.8)  μM	5486 (8248)  μM	0.73	7.940, −9.123	
Comparison of the Kd values
for the
sequences reveals that increasing single-stranded exposure in the
loop decreases the Kd value. A decreasing Kd value indicates stronger binding affinity.
No significant preference in Kd value
is observed if the 5′ or 3′ end of the aptamer is partially
blocked (sequence i vs sequence iii). The measured Kd value of the fully
exposed loop sequence (sequence ii) is consistent
with the measured value for the single-stranded molecular beacon analogue
in the . Likewise
the sequence incorporated into the stem-loop configuration with significant
duplex formation in the stem exhibits Kd values similar to previous reports in an analogous nanoflare design,
supporting the effect of aptamer location on the observed Kd values., The results of the
saturation curves imply that ATP accessibility to the single-stranded
region is critical to the experimentally measured binding affinity
with an observed tunability over 4 orders of magnitude.

Interestingly,
NSET observes two ATP binding events similar to
the reported NMR studies, but earlier FRET studies have been unable
to distinguish the separate events. Whether the FRET studies’
shortcomings are due to the close proximity of the dye molecule tagged
to the binding site, or due to cooperativity effects, is not well
understood. To analyze cooperativity in the binding of ATP to the
stem-loop constructs, concentration dependent data for ATP and the
stem-loop construct were analyzed by a Hill coefficient expressionwhere h is the Hill coefficient
representative of positively cooperative (h &gt;
1),
negatively cooperative (h &lt; 1), or noncooperative
behavior (h = 1) between ATP binding sites. The Hill
plots of the NSET stem-loop beacons are shown in the  (Figure SF5). Fitting the ΔPL
data to the Hill equation (eq ) yields values
for h between 0.4 and 0.8 for the stem-loop constructs.
A Hill value of &lt;1 indicates the presence of negatively cooperative
binding of the ATP molecules for the sequences in Figure . A negative cooperativity can be understood in
terms of the initial binding of one ATP obstructing the binding of
the second ATP in the aptamer. A Hill coefficient value of 2.04 is
measured for the control sequence, which is indicative of near-simultaneous
binding of the two ATP moieties. It is worth noting that a value of
∼2.0 in the control sequence would explain the inability to
observe two distinct binding events in support of the F-test and AIC
statistical analyses for the control.

It is believed that the
folded aptamer is energetically favorable
in the presence of the ATP, but the ATP binding is hindered by base
pairing in the duplex region. The observed differences between a fully
exposed single-stranded aptamer and an aptamer embedded in a stem-loop
conformation should reflect thermodynamic competition between a Watson–Crick
base-pairing configuration, and the induced denaturing of the duplex
by ATP binding and folding of the single-stranded aptamer. Inspection
of the thermodynamic values of the stem-loop conformers (Table ) and correlating the values with Kd is informative. The −ΔG value is calculated by assuming a fully complexed aptamer region
in the stem is formed with no nick in the 5′ stem of the molecular
beacon, as shown in Figure .

% Double-Stranded Portion of the Aptamer
Sequence, the Melting Temperature of the Hairpin, the Gibbs Free Energy
of the Hairpin, and the Gibbs Free Energy of the Duplexed Aptamer
Sequence in Each NSET Stem-Loop Beacon
 	% d.s.	Thairpin °C	ΔGhairpin kcal/mol	ΔGduplex kcal/mol	
Seq i	20%	47.1	–3.31	–9.69	
Seq ii	0%	36.5	–1.79	--------	
Seq iii	20%	40.5	–2.29	–8.19	
Seq iv	44%	50.2	–4.18	–24.25	
Seq v	68%	33.9	–1.34	–34.92	
Melting temperatures and ΔG values
were calculated with IDT’s oligo analyzer
software.

(A) Correlation between
the aptamer Gibbs free energy of a pseudoduplex
vs experimentally measured Kd1 (circles)
and Kd2 (triangles) values of the aptamer.
(B) The region of duplex sequence utilized for the −ΔGduplex calculation, depicting sequence iv as an example.

The ΔG for duplex formation indicates
that
with increasing ΔGduplex, the Kd value also increases, while ΔGhairpin does not appear to correlate. This implies
that competitive binding of the ATP for the duplex region is the likely
driving force for the observed increasing Kd values with increasing duplex content. To ensure that a change in
aptamer specificity does not also contribute to the scaling of Kd with duplex content, AMP concentration studies
were performed on sequences iii and iv. The NSET beacon binds AMP on sequences iii and iv nearly identically to ATP (). The results are consistent with experimental
results on the Huizenga-Szostak apatmer which is observed to bind
to ATP, AMP, and ADP with similar affinity., Coupled with the observation that 5′ and 3′ blockages
of the aptamer sequence exhibit similar changes in binding affinity,
this too supports the notion that only thermodynamic properties are
responsible for the observed modulations in aptamer binding affinity.

The values of −ΔG and Kd should be logarithmically related based on the thermodynamic
relationship between equilibrium constant and free energy change.
A plot of −ΔGduplex vs Kd1 and Kd2 on a
logarithmic scale is shown in Figure A. The
graph demonstrates that a logarithmic correlation is observed consistent
with thermodynamic expectations. Moreover, correlation to a logarithmic
fit across all ATP binding events and for the limited AMP measurements
implies that the kinetic expression of this system is not altered
by duplex formation over the aptamer sequence, but rather the ratio
of kon/koff changes from the thermodynamic hindrance of the duplex, shifting
the equilibrium and the dissociation constant. Similar phenomena were
observed previously in varying duplex lengths away from the aptamer
sequence. The results of the thermodynamic
plot supports the observation that the ATP aptamer site location in
the stem-loop architecture provides a strategy to systematically vary Kd by intentionally including duplexed regions
without affecting selectivity or cooperative binding behavior.

Conclusion
For the Huizenga-Szostak ATP aptamer in this study, the results
clearly indicate that increasing duplex formation by positioning the
sequence in the stem allows the binding affinities for ATP to be tuned
over four orders of magnitude with a seven order range of detection, as shown by the saturation curves. The
study shows a correlation between single-stranded exposure, lower Kd values, and a scaling with −ΔG values in a Huizenga-Szostak ATP aptamer. The advantage
of using the stem-loop architecture and tuning the Kd values by positioning the aptamer target region in the
loop is purely in the simplicity of the design parameters, not in
adjusting the aptamer sequence itself. Earlier studies by Plaxco et
al. show similar results for control of metal ion sensors using allosteric
inhibition, where distal DNA duplex sequences predictably tune the
binding affinities of Hg2+ ions two orders
of magnitude and across detection ranges of three orders. This confirms an advantage
in blocking portions of the aptamer sequence directly, as we see no
change in ATP cooperative binding behavior while pushing the Kd’s and detection range to longer magnitudes.
Another allosteric inhibition technique employed by Plaxco and colleagues
tuned a cocaine aptamer with distal-site modifications where the Kd’s span three orders
of magnitude and the detectable concentration range spans six. Changing the aptamer sequence
itself can be risky, as single-site modifications in nucleic acid
strands capable of forming secondary structures can unpredictably
impede secondary structure formation.,

The
observation of native biophysical constants for the NSET stem-loop
designs indicates no perturbation of the ATP aptamer folding in the
presence of the appended AuNP, which supports the utilization of NSET
to monitor other complex biological events without manipulating native
behavior. From a biophysical viewpoint the use of the NSET aptamer
beacon allows multidimensional analysis of ATP aptamer binding. While
previous optical studies have been unable to identify the cooperativity
or distinguish individual ATP binding events, the NSET probe method
clearly observed two distinct binding events with discrete structural
motions.

The selection of aptamers against a target ligand leads
to the
aptamers with the lowest Kd values and,
thus, aptamers are typically only useable in a narrow concentration
range. The results of the study suggest that judiciously tuning the Kd value to expand the applicability of the aptamer
can be achieved by site control of the aptamer in a stem-loop architecture
without relying on mutation approaches or multiprobe platforms., The ability to tune the Kd value by
changing the duplex content in a stem-loop architecture provides clear
design criteria that can be more widely implemented, the results of
which may have an advantage in sensor design, namely, the ability
to rationally extend the detectable concentration range for a ligand
in a previously isolated aptamer from library screening.

Materials
All reagents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received.
The aptamer and complementary DNA strands were purchased and purified
by Midland Certified Reagent Company. Spherical, 3 nm dihydrolipoic
acid (DHLA)-coated AuNPs were prepared by modification of literature
protocol as described in .

Aptamer Sequence
The 25-mer aptamer
strand is incorporated
into a 57-mer stem-loop construct with the aptamer sequence positioned
sequentially around the structure. The sequences are listed in Table . The 57-mer DNA sequences contain a fluoroscein
dye label coupled to a C6 phosphate spacer appended to
the 5′ terminus of the single-stranded, aptamer-encoded DNA.
The complementary 15-mer ssDNA sequence contains a 5′ C6-NH2 modification to allow coordination to the
DHLA-AuNP through an EDC condensation reaction.

Construction
of the NSET Aptamer Beacon
The aptamer
hairpin is annealed prior to appendage to the AuNP by heating to 95
°C for 4 min then snap cooling to 4 °C to ensure hairpin
formation. The annealing is carried out at pH 7.5 phosphate buffer
(20 mM phosphate, 50 mM NaCl). Coordination of the aptamer hairpin
to the AuNP is accomplished through condensation of the C6-NH2 to the free acid group on the DHLA-AuNP by reaction
of DHLA-AuNPs (1 nmol) with 10 μL of a stock EDC solution (10
mg/mL), and 100 μL of stock NHSS solution (1 mg/mL) in 0.5 mL
nanopure H2O at RT (3 h) to form the NHS intermediate.
The NHS intermediate is coupled by addition of the annealed aptamer
(3 nmol) and reacted for 3 h. Final concentrations obtained in the
reaction are 1.3 μM and 3.8 μM for the AuNPs and aptamer,
respectively. The AuNP–aptamer construct was purified via ethanol
precipitation and analyzed by gel electrophoresis, UV–vis,
and TEM (). The AuNP–aptamer construct is stored at 4 °C in the
dark until use. Gel electrophoresis (2% agarose) on the hairpin aptamer
appended to the AuNP exhibits a single band. TEM analysis shows a
spherical, 3 ± 0.5 nm AuNP core, and absorption features consistent
with the AuNP (520 nm) and duplex DNA (260 nm). The FAM feature is
obscured by the AuNP LSPR by comparison to the DNA aptamer absorption.
The UV–vis confirms a stochastic, ∼1:1 coupling ratio
for aptamer to AuNP. The aptamer loading is measured by UV–vis
absorption spectra by analyzing the ratio of the DNA absorption at
260 nm to the AuNP absorption at 520 nm using the Beer–Lambert
law ().

Photoluminescence
Energy Transfer Experiments
Photoluminescence
(PL) was measured in 0.3 cm quartz cuvettes on a Varian Eclipse fluorimeter
in a thermostated optical cell holder (20 °C) by exciting the
FAM at 494 nm and collecting the PL spectra from 505 to 650 nm. The
aptamer beacon and ATP dilutions were dissolved in TRIS buffer (20
nM TRIS, 300 mM NaCl, and 5 mM MgCl2). The AuNP–aptamer
concentration was ∼1 nM and ATP concentrations were varied
systematically from 5 nM to 97 mM. UTP, GTP, and AMP binding studies
were carried out for selected aptamers identically to the ATP studies
to analyze the impact on specificity and selectivity.

Supporting Information Available
Detailed synthesis
and analysis
of the AuNPs, theoretical NSET values for AuNP–fluorescein
conjugates; experimental data for the single-stranded control sequence;
UTP, GTP and AMP binding studies; raw PL data for the five stem-loop
constructs; AuNP controls; statistical analysis of the saturation
curves; and Hill plots. This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc500286r_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
The manuscript
was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have
given approval to the final version of the manuscript.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Support for this work was provided by the Florida State University
through an FSU-planning grant and the National Institute of Health
through NIH-R01-EB00832.

