Introduction
Peptide nucleic acids (PNA) are synthetic
nucleic acid analogues
wherein the negatively charged sugar-phosphate backbone is replaced
with charge-neutral amide linkages. Nucleobases
(A, C, T, and G) are spaced along the peptide backbone such that PNA
hybridization with DNA and RNA obeys the rules of Watson–Crick
base pairing., PNA offer several advantages over
DNA and RNA, including greater binding affinity for complementary
oligos, innate resistance to both nuclease
and protease degradation,, and the ability to form
hybrids with less sensitivity to changes in temperature, pH, and ionic
strength., These attributes make PNA oligomers ideal
candidates for application as antisense therapeutics that block expression
of complementary mRNA,, therapeutic inhibitors of post-transcriptional
gene regulatory micro-RNA (miRNA), and
biosensor probes for detection of target nucleic acid hybridization.−

A critical requirement for therapeutic or biosensing applications
of PNA is stable conjugation to either an intracellular therapeutic
delivery platform or a biosensing substrate. In the absence of a delivery
vector, PNA therapeutic efficacy is hindered by poor intracellular
bioavailability and lack of activity., It is therefore
necessary to chemically modify PNA by fusion with cell penetrating
peptides or formulation into delivery systems that can mediate cellular
internalization and cytoplasmic release.,,, Similarly, biosensing
applications require stable integration of PNA at high surface densities
onto analytical devices capable of reproducible and sensitive detection
of hybridization events.,

This communication
describes a versatile, automated method of synthesizing
PNA from a nanostructured material, porous silicon (PSi). The large
internal surface area (&gt;100m2/cm3), biocompatibility,
tunable pore geometry, and biodegradability of PSi have motivated
a large body of research into PSi technologies for drug delivery and
label-free biosensing.− However, the only reported method of PNA attachment to PSi thus
far has been nonspecific adsorption, and
there are no published studies for delivery of PNA-based therapeutics
using PSi delivery vehicles. Methods have been established for peptide
synthesis directly from PSi,− and our group has shown that
base-by-base synthesis of DNA directly within PSi films (referred
to as in situ synthesis) significantly increases DNA loading relative
to attachment of presynthesized oligos. Herein, the first use of PSi as a platform for the automated synthesis
and label-free characterization of PNA is reported. It is shown that
in situ PNA synthesis increases PNA loading relative to conjugation
of the presynthesized molecule. The advantage of this approach is
demonstrated for intracellular delivery of a well-characterized anti-miR-122
PNA, which targets a liver-specific miRNA
whose suppression has been linked to decreased hepatitis C viremia. Application of this conjugation strategy in
selective, label-free nucleic-acid biosensing is also successfully
accomplished using a model 16mer PNA probe.

Results and Discussion
In Situ
PNA Synthesis from PSi
PNA synthesized in situ
from PSi was compared to PNA loading into PSi using conventional physical
adsorption and direct nucleic acid conjugation strategies (detailed
methods available in ). PSi films were etched from p-type Si (0.01 Ω-cm) using 15%
hydrofluoric acid in ethanol to form 10-μm-thick single layers
(70% porosity, 30 nm average pore diameter) that were then thermally
oxidized at 800 °C for 30 min. Anti-miR122
PNA (NH2-ACA AAC ACC ATT GTC ACA CTC CA-COOH) was synthesized
from the PSi substrate following functionalization with 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane
(APTES). For postsynthesis conjugation and physical adsorption to
PSi, the same PNA was synthesized from Rink Amide LL resin (EMD Millipore).
For postsynthesis conjugation, cysteine was added to the C-terminus
(referred to as “cys-PNA”) to provide a reactive thiol
used for conjugating to APTES-functionalized PSi via an amine-to-sulfhydryl
heterobifunctional cross-linker, N-succinimidyl 3-(2-pyridyldithio)
propionate (SPDP). All PNA syntheses were performed using fluorenylmethyloxycarbonyl
chloride (Fmoc) solid phase chemistry within a PS3 automated peptide
synthesizer (Protein Technologies).

In situ PNA synthesis was characterized by reflectometry and matrix
assisted laser desorption-ionization mass spectrometry (MALDI-MS)
(Figure ; experimental methods available in ). Reflectometry was used
to monitor PNA synthesis from the PSi film by measuring PSi film optical
thickness (Figure a). Increases in optical
thickness are directly proportional to the amount of monomer coupled
to growing PNA oligos within the PSi film. Addition of the first 9 bases resulted in a stepwise increase in
optical thickness, while the change in optical thickness was increasingly
nonlinear for the addition of bases 10–23.

To verify
synthesis of the desired PNA sequence, in situ synthesized
PNA was analyzed by mass spectrometry at two critical points during
synthesis: after completion of the 9-mer miRNA seed-targeting sequence
and after the full 23-mer anti-miR (Figure b). The seed-targeting sequence of therapeutic PNA is the most important
miRNA-binding motif, whereas the full
23-mer sequence improves PNA target specificity and anti-miR activity. MALDI spectra of the 9-mer seed-targeting sequence
contained a single peak corresponding to the expected molecular weight
of the 3-APTES-conjugated PNA, 2485 Da, and two additional, closely
spaced peaks corresponding to Na+ and K+ adducts
were resolved at 2507 and 2523 Da, respectively. MALDI spectra of
the full 23-mer PNA revealed an intense peak at the expected m/z for the full PNA oligo, 6243 Da, as
well as a series of less intense peaks grouped at molecular weights
corresponding to PNA sequences that were truncated during synthesis.

It is postulated that steric crowding of the growing PNA oligos
within nanosized pores causes the partial truncation seen during in
situ synthesis. The molecular length
of 3-APTES is approximately 8 Å, and each PNA base extends a growing oligo by approximately 3.5 Å. Thus, the full, 23-mer PNA is estimated to be
8.9 nm in length. Electrochemical porosification of Si produces a
Gaussian-like distribution of pore sizes, so while the average pore
diameter of PSi films in this study is 30 nm, it is estimated that
approximately 40% of the pores are between 10 and 25 nm in diameter. To investigate whether the yield of longer oligos
can be improved by increasing the minimum pore size, anti-miR122 PNA
was synthesized from a PSi film that was first exposed to a pore-widening
solution of potassium hydroxide (KOH) in ethanol at room temperature
for 20 min (Figure S4a in the ). Pore widening increased the average pore diameter by 5 nm and
decreased the number of pores with diameter less than 25 nm by ∼20%,
resulting in increased shifts in optical thickness during in situ
synthesis (Figure S4b in the ). These data suggest that longer oligos can be more efficiently
synthesized within a porous silicon matrix by increasing the average
pore size, and although it was outside the scope of our testing, it
may also be beneficial to utilize a fabrication method that yields
more homogeneous pores. Since pore widening improved synthesis of
the 23-mer anti-miR122, it was implemented for in vitro functional
studies, i.e., cytotoxicity and bioactivity assays (all other studies
were done with non-pore-widened substrates). Overall, these results,
combined with subsequent experimental readouts, are a promising demonstration
of successful synthesis of functional 23-mer PNA from PSi, with highly
efficient growth of the vital anti-miR122 PNA seed sequence.

(a) Nondestructive
optical characterization of in situ synthesis
of 23-mer anti-miR122 PNA using reflectometry and Fourier transform
analysis to determine the optical thickness of the loaded PSi film.
(b) MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry of in situ synthesized 9-mer miRNA
seed targeting sequence (top) and the full 23-mer PNA (bottom). (c)
Comparison of the PNA loading capacity achieved using in situ synthesis,
physical adsorption, and direct conjugation of a 23-mer PNA to PSi.
Loading was calculated based on increase in optical thickness due
to the addition of PNA to the PSi surface (* P &lt;
0.0001).

Optical thickness measurements
were also used to determine the
amount of anti-miR122 PNA loaded within PSi through in situ synthesis
compared to standard methods of physical adsorption and conjugation
of presynthesized PNA (Figure e). Consistent
with our previous studies of DNA conjugation to PSi, PNA loading from in situ synthesis was 8-fold greater than
the amount of PNA loading achieved from conjugation to a PSi surface.
This corresponds to a yield of 8.6 × 10–4 mol
PNA/g PSi, or 5.3 g PNA/g PSi for anti-miR122 synthesized in situ
in non-pore-widened PSi, quantified by measuring the absorbance at
260 nm of PNA released after dissolution of the PSi matrix. It is
postulated that during PNA loading by direct conjugation, PNA preferentially
attaches nearer to the pore openings at the film surface, thereby
restricting access of PNA deeper into the pores. Interestingly, there
was no significant difference in the loading efficiency of in situ
synthesis and physical adsorption within the pores. It is hypothesized
that, in the case of nonspecific PNA loading by adsorption, lack of
PNA covalent binding allows PNA to freely diffuse further into the
pores and achieve a level of loading similar to in situ synthesis.
Although nonspecific adsorption yielded a similar level of loading,
we show in the following sections that the covalent attachment achieved
from in situ synthesis provides more sustained release in the context
of therapeutic PNA delivery and a more stable and reproducible substrate
for biosensing.

Intracellular Delivery of In Situ Synthesized
Therapeutic PNA
To evaluate the potential of therapeutic
delivery of in situ synthesized
PNA from PSi, the in vitro PNA temporal release profiles were compared
for physically adsorbed and in situ synthesized PNA from PSi films
(Figure a). Release of PNA synthesized in
situ was significantly (p &lt; 0.005) less than adsorbed
PNA at every time point within the first 24 h, and overall, the PNA
synthesized in situ showed reduced initial burst and more sustained
release profiles. Because in situ synthesized PNA are covalently attached
to pore walls, it is anticipated that hydrolytic degradation of the
PSi matrix is the primary mechanism of PNA release, providing a means
for more sustained PNA delivery when compared to physical adsorption., Mass spectra in Figure b provide support
for a surface-degradation PNA release mechanism, as the molecular
weight of the PNA released from in situ films corresponds to 3-APTES-conjugated
PNA. For eventual in vivo applications, it is anticipated that reducing
the burst release upon initial contact with physiological (aqueous)
environments will ultimately improve drug bioavailability at the site
of action, especially for intravenous delivery applications.

PNA anti-miR activity is dependent upon delivery into the cytoplasm
where active micro-RNA is located. To
demonstrate the application of in situ PNA synthesis for therapeutic
purposes, anti-miR122-loaded multilayer PSi films ( Figure S5) were ultrasonically fractured
to produce PNA-functionalized PSi nanoparticles (PSNPs). The resultant
PSNP mean size (236 nm) and size distribution were determined by Nanoparticle
Tracking Analysis (NTA) and confirmed
by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Figure b).

(a) Cumulative release of physically adsorbed PNA and in situ synthesized
PNA in PBS at 37 °C. Release of in situ synthesized PNA was significantly
lower (p &lt; 0.005) for time points within the boxed
region. (b) PNA–PSNP size distribution characterized by NTA.
Inset: Representative SEM image demonstrating PSNP size and morphology
(scale bar = 400 nm). (c–f) Confocal micrographs of Huh7 cells
incubated for either 1 or 24 h with (c and d) free PNA, or (e and
f) PNA–PSNPs at a 2 μM dose of anti-miR-122 PNA (3.7
μg/mL PSNPs for PNA–PSNP treatments). Labels: Hoechst
nuclear dye (blue), Alexa-488 labeled PNA (green). (g) PSNPs had no
significant effect on Huh7 cell viability relative to untreated negative
control samples, in contrast to a 2′OMe-modified AMO delivered
with Fugene 6 (p &lt; 0.05). (h) Anti-miR122 activity
indicated by luciferase activity in Huh7 psiCHECK-miR122 cells 44
h after treatment with free PNA, empty PSNPs, or PNA–PSNPs
(2 μM dose of anti-miR-122 PNA, 3.7 μg/mL PSNPs). Results
are normalized to cell number and expressed relative to luciferase
activity in Huh7 psiCHECK-miR122 control cells without treatment.
Dashed green line indicates anti-miR122 activity 44 h after treatment
with 2 μM of an optimized anti-miR-122 AMO delivered via the Fugene 6 commercial transfection reagent.

Huh 7 human hepatic carcinoma
cells were selected for evaluation
of PNA–PSNP cellular uptake, cytotoxicity, and anti-miR activities
because they express elevated levels of miR122 and thus provide a
good platform for testing anti-miR122 therapies (detailed cell culture
and biological assay methods can be accessed in the )., Intracellular
delivery of a 2 μM dose of fluorescently labeled free or in
situ synthesized PSNP anti-miR122 PNA was evaluated by confocal microscopy
(Figure c–f). At each treatment time,
cells treated with PNA–PSNPs showed greater intracellular delivery
of PNA relative to those treated with free PNA. Additionally, a lactate
dehydrogenase enzymatic assay was used to compare the cytotoxicity
of PNA–PNSPs to that of a 2′OMe-modified anti-miR oligonucleotide
(AMO) delivered by the commercial transfection reagent, Fugene 6 (Promega)
(Figure g). Consistent with previous studies
on the cytotoxicity of thermally oxidized PSi nanoparticles, no reduction in cell viability was observed
for the PSNP concentration investigated in this study (2 μM
PNA, 3.7 μg/mL), whereas the AMO treatment led to a 25% decrease
in cell viability at an equivalent AMO dose of 2 μM.

Finally,
Huh7 cells stably transfected with a psiCHECK-miR122 Renilla luciferase reporter for endogenous miR122 activity were used to determine the anti-miR activity
of PNA in situ synthesized on pore-widened PSi prior to ultrasonic
particle formation (Figure h). With this reporter,
luciferase is translated upon inhibition of miR122. PSNP delivery
of a 2 μM dose of in situ synthesized anti-miR122 PNA triggered
a significant, 44% increase in luciferase activity at 44 h after treatment,
while treatment with an equivalent dose of free PNA or empty PSNPs
had no significant effect relative to untreated controls. These results
provide evidence that PSNPs improve the intracellular delivery and
bioactivity of therapeutic PNA without the need for fusion with cell-penetrating
peptides, or use of cytotoxic transfection reagents, such as that
used to deliver the AMO control in this study.

DNA Biosensing using in
Situ Synthesized PNA Probes
To demonstrate the utility of
in situ PNA synthesis in biosensing,
a model 16-mer probe PNA was synthesized from a 10 μm thick
single-layer PSi film. For biosensing applications, PNA probes must
be stably bound to the PSi substrate to achieve accurate and reproducible
detection; hence, the PNA adsorption
approach is not an effective approach for fabricating PSi biosensors
(Figure S6 in the ). Biosensor selectivity was evaluated by incubating with 10 μM
solutions containing either a 100% complementary DNA target (NH2-A CGA GGA CCA TAG CTA-COOH) or a 100% mismatch DNA sequence
(NH2-G GTT TCT GAT GCT GAC-COOH). As shown in Figure , negligible change in optical thickness was observed
following incubation with either the mismatch DNA sequence or buffer
alone, suggesting that there are no significant nonspecific binding
events. In contrast, incubation with the complementary DNA target
significantly increased the film optical thickness, confirming that
DNA hybridized to the complementary PNA probe molecules. This is the
first demonstration of selective nucleic acid biosensing with a covalently
functionalized PNA–PSi biosensor. Further studies will be conducted
to investigate whether PSi nucleic acid biosensors based on in situ
synthesized PNA have superior selectivity and sensitivity relative
to traditional DNA probe molecules, as has been suggested for other
biosensing platforms.,

Optical thickness-based hybridization
assay using in situ synthesized
16-mer PNA on a single-layer PSi biosensor. Sequence-specific hybridization
(indicated by a positive shift in optical thickness) was detected
with a complementary target sequence but not with a mismatched control
sequence. (*p &lt; 0.0005).

Conclusions
A new method for automated PNA synthesis
from PSi has been developed
and applied for drug delivery and biosensing. The optical properties
of nanostructured PSi were exploited to nondestructively monitor synthesis
progression with single-base resolution. In situ synthesis addresses
the need for efficient, covalent conjugation of PNA to PSi, as demonstrated
by 8-fold greater PNA loading when compared to covalent attachment
of presynthesized PNA to the surface via a cross-linker. The versatility
of this in situ synthesized PNA platform was demonstrated by employing
it for proof-of-concept drug delivery and nucleic acid biosensing
applications. In situ synthesized anti-miR122-loaded PSi nanoparticles
were biocompatible and increased the intracellular delivery and bioactivity
of therapeutic PNA, while PNA probes synthesized from a PSi biosensor
exhibited selective hybridization to DNA target molecules. Taken together,
these studies demonstrate the utility of this conjugation strategy
for developing improved systems for controlled intracellular delivery
of PNA therapeutics, as well as more selective and sensitive nucleic
acid biosensors.

Supporting Information Available
Detailed experimental methods
and schematics for in situ synthesis, physical adsorption, and direct
conjugation of PNA. Detailed mass spectrometry experimental methods.
In situ PNA synthesis in pore-widened PSi. Experimental methods for
in vitro PNA release study. Experimental methods for generating porous
silicon nanoparticles, including characterization of multilayer PSi
film by scanning electron microscopy. Cell culture protocols and experimental
methods for biological assays. Adsorbed PNA surface stability study.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc5001092_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors
gratefully acknowledge Brian Evans for helpful
discussions and assistance with peptide synthesis and HPLC, and Dr.
Christopher Nelson for help with confocal microscopy and cell culture.
The authors would also like to thank Dr. Alexander Deiters’
group at North Carolina State University for kindly providing the
cell lines used in this study, Dr. Robert Coffey’s group at
Vanderbilt University for access and assistance to the Nanosight used
for NTA analysis, and Dr. John McLean’s group at Vanderbilt
University for providing access and technical expertise with MADLI-MS.
This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation
(DMR-120701 and ECCS-0746296), the Army Research Office (W911NF-09-1-0101),
and a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship to
KRB. Confocal Imaging was performed in part through the use of the
VUMC Cell Imaging Shared Resource, (supported by NIH grants CA68485,
DK20593, DK58404, HD15052, DK59637 and Ey008126).

Abbreviations
PNApeptide nucleic acid

PSiporous silicon

miRmicroRNA

