Introduction
DNA functionalized
gold nanoparticles (DNA-AuNPs) have shown great
potential and exciting opportunities for disease diagnostic and therapeutic
treatment.− DNA-AuNPs have been used for gene regulation,− drug delivery, cancer cell imaging,− and photothermal
therapies.− Stable conjugation between DNA oligonucleotides and gold nanoparticles
is critical to any of the practical applications because extended
incubation at elevated temperatures (e.g., 37 °C)− or photothermal treatments to release DNA from AuNPs are commonly
involved.− The covalent bond between gold and sulfur (Au–S, also known
as the thiolated-gold bond), usually mediated through the sulfhydryl
(SH) functional group, is the most widely used interaction to achieve
the stable conjugation between DNA oligonucleotides and AuNPs. However, such a Au–S bond is known to
be subject to cleavage that can be induced by other thiols or elevated
temperatures.−

Efforts have been made to improve the stability
of DNA-AuNPs formed
through the Au–S bond by using different organosulfur anchors
for conjugation. These anchors include alkanethiol, acyclic disulfide,
cyclic disulfide, and other types of multidentate thiolated anchor
groups.− However, most studies have been focused on the salt-dependent colloidal
stability of DNA-AuNPs as a function of the extent of the colloidal
aggregation rather than directly monitoring the cleavage of the Au–S
bond. Furthermore, most comparison studies were based merely on chemical
stabilities, where thiols, such as dithiothreitol (DTT) or mercaptohexanol
(MCH), were used to displace the thiolated DNA from AuNP surfaces.− Only limited few studies have explored the thermal stability of
DNA-AuNPs at room temperature or elevated temperatures without interference
from other thiols., For example, with the aim of
finding the most desired conditions for the storage of purified DNA-AuNPs,
Liu et al. studied the long-term DNA dissociation kinetics at 4 °C
and at room temperature as a function of ionic strength, pH, and organic
solvents. Taton et al. studied the short-term
dissociation kinetics of DNA-AuNPs at elevated temperatures (40 to
95 °C). Both studies focused only
on the Au–S bond formed with alkanethiol (RSH) as an anchor.
No systematic thermal stability study for DNA-AuNPs has been reported
regarding Au–S bonds formed with other types of organosulfur
anchor groups. To understand the influence of different anchor groups
on the thermal stability of DNA-AuNPs, we have designed DNA-AuNP probes
with 3 different anchor groups (Figure ).
We report here a systematic study of their thermal stability by monitoring
the kinetics of DNA release from DNA-AuNPs. We also report the effect
of packing densities on the thermal stability of DNA-AuNPs. DNA packing
densities on AuNPs can influence the stability of DNA-AuNPs, as a
result of the strong intermolecular repulsions among the largely negatively
charged phosphodiester backbones of DNA molecules.− Such a density
effect on the thermal stability of DNA-AuNPs has not been reported
previously.

DNA-AuNP probes constructed by conjugating oligonucleotides having
different organosulfur anchor groups to AuNPs. SP-1, SP-2, and SP-3
represent DNA-AuNP probes that involve conjugation through thiol,
acyclic disulfide, and cyclic disulfide (DTPA), respectively.

Experimental Section
Materials and Reagents
Gold nanoparticles with 20 nm
diameter were purchased from Ted Pella (Redding, CA). All DNA samples
were purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies (Coralville, IA) and
purified by HPLC. The DNA sequences and modifications are listed in
Table S1, . Phosphate
buffered saline (PBS) 10× solution and Tween20 were purchased
from Fisher Scientific. Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride
(TCEP), 6-mercapto-1-hexanol (MCH), dl-dithiothreitol (DTT),
and β-mercaptoethanol (ME) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
(Oakville, ON, Canada). NANOpure H2O (&gt;18.0 MÙ),
purified using an Ultrapure Milli-Q water system, was used for all
experiments.

Preparation of DNA-AuNPs
All organosulfur
modified
DNA oligonucleotides were received in disulfide or cyclic disulfide
forms. For preparing the DNA-conjugated AuNP probe (SP-1) with thiol as the anchor, the disulfide modified oligonucleotide
with a concentration of 50 μM was treated with 100 μM
TCEP for 1 h at room temperature to reduce the disulfide bond. This
solution was then added to 1 mL of 20 nm AuNP solution (concentration
1 nM), and the mixture was incubated at room temperature for 12 h.
To this mixture was slowly added 20 μL of 3 M NaCl, followed
by sonication for 10 s. This process was repeated 5 times at a 1 h
interval. The process was repeated to maximize the oligonucleotide
loading amounts. The final solution was
stored at room temperature for 24 h. The solution was centrifuged
at 13,500 rpm for 30 min to separate the AuNPs from the unreacted
reagents. The DNA-AuNPs were then washed 3 times with 1/2 × PBS
buffer (pH 7.4) containing 0.01% Tween20 and finally redispersed in
PBS buffer. For preparing DNA-conjugated AuNP probes with the disulfide
(SP-2) and DTPA (SP-3) as anchors, the same
experimental procedures as those for preparing SP-1 were
used, except that the initial TCEP reduction step was omitted.

Double-stranded DNA-AuNP probes (DP-1, DP-2, and DP-3) were prepared by hybridizing two complementary
organosulfur modified DNA strands followed by conjugating them to
AuNPs. Briefly, two complementary single-stranded DNA oligonucleotides
(50 μM, 20 μL each) were mixed together with 160 μL
of 1× PBS buffer. The solution was then heated up to 70 °C
for 5 min and left at room temperature for 1 h. The rest of the procedure
was the same as that described above for preparing SP-1.

Characterization of DNA-AuNPs
DNA-conjugated AuNPs
were characterized by using UV/vis absorption spectrometry. A Lambda
35 UV/vis absorption spectrophotometer (Perkin-Elmer) was used to
obtain the extinction spectra of DNA-AuNPs from 400 to 700 nm (Figure
S1, ). The average
number of oligonucleotides loaded on each particle was determined
by measuring the concentration of AuNPs and the concentration of fluorescent
DNA in each sample according to a previously reported method.

Monitor the Thermal Stability of DNA-AuNPs
A 200 μL
solution of DNA-AuNPs was centrifuged at 13,500 rpm for 30 min to
remove oligonucleotides possibly released during storage. The pellet
containing DNA-AuNPs was redispersed in 200 μL of 1/2×
PBS buffer and then incubated at specific temperatures. Fluorescence
was monitored with a multimode microplate reader (DTX880, Beckman
Coulter) at time points of 0, 1, 2, 4, 8, and 20 h. After 20 h of
incubation, a 5 μL solution of β-mercaptoethanol was added
to reach a final concentration of 50 mM. This solution was incubated
overnight, and its fluorescence was measured with a microplate reader.
The ratio of the fluorescence signal at each time point over the fluorescence
signal from the β-mercaptoethanol treated solution was expressed
as [released]/[total].

Monitor the Chemical-Induced Cleavage of
DNA-AuNPs
A 5 μL solution of 6-mercapto-1-hexanol (MCH)
was added to
a 95-μL solution of AuNPs (50 μM) conjugated with FAM-labeled
DNA. The mixture was then incubated at 25 °C, and its fluorescence
was monitored using the multimode microplate reader. Fluorescence
intensity was measured every 10 min for 400 min. Finally, a 5-μL
solution of β-mercaptoethanol was added to the sample so that
the concentration of β-mercaptoethanol was 50 mM. This solution
was incubated overnight, and its fluorescence was measured with a
microplate reader. The ratio of the fluorescence signal at each time
point over the fluorescence signal from the β-mercaptoethanol
treated solution was expressed as [released]/[total].

Results
and Discussions
Experimental Design
To systematically
study the thermal
stability of DNA-AuNPs, we designed a set of single-stranded DNA-AuNP
probes, as shown in Figure . SP-1, SP-2, and SP-3 represent single-stranded
DNA-AuNP probes modified with the three most widely used organosulfur
anchor groups, including thiol,− acyclic disulfide,− and DTPA (cyclic disulfide).,− We then studied the thermal stabilities of these
DNA-AuNP probes by monitoring the kinetics of release of DNA from
DNA-AuNP. We also prepared DNA-AuNPs with different packing densities
and compared their thermal stabilities.

We first designed a
simple but sensitive fluorescence turn-on assay (Figure A) that was modified from the literature. Briefly, single-stranded DNA molecules were labeled with
the fluorescent dye FAM, and these labeled DNA molecules were conjugated
to AuNPs. The fluorescence of FAM-labeled DNA was quenched as a result
of the close proximity between FAM and AuNPs. Once released from AuNPs,
FAM-labeled DNA restored its fluorescence as a result of the increased
distance between FAM and AuNPs.

Thermal-induced release of FAM-labeled
DNA from SP-1. (A) Schematic illustrating the fluorescence-based
measurement of
the released FAM-labeled DNA from DNA-AuNP. (B) Fraction of released
DNA from SP-1 over a period of 20 h at different temperatures
(25, 37, 60, and 85 °C). (C) Determination of the rate constants k based on the plots. (D) The logarithmic value of rate
constants as a function of reciprocal of temperatures, providing information
on the activation energy of the process. Error bars represent one
standard deviation from triplicate sample analyses.

In this study, we first established the fluorescence
turn-on assay
using SP-1. We monitored the released DNA from SP-1 at different temperatures over a period of 20 h (Figure B). We then evaluated the rates of this release
(Figure C) by determining the rate constant k from plots of the reaction rate equation: ln([bound]/[total])
= kt. Using these rate constants obtained at different
temperatures (Figure D) and by fitting these
data into the Arrhenius equation, we were able to determine the activation
energy.

Effect of Anchor Groups on the Thermal Stability of DNA-AuNPs
After establishing the fluorescence turn-on method with SP-1, we studied the effect of anchor groups on the thermal stability
of DNA-AuNPs by comparing the rates of releasing DNA from SP-1, SP-2, and SP-3 at different temperatures
(Figure ). After incubation at 37 °C
for 20 h, the fraction of FAM-labeled DNA molecules released from SP-1, SP-2, and SP-3 were 1.6%,
1.7%, and 3.6%, respectively (Table  and Figure A). The rate constants were the same for SP-1 and SP-2 (k = 1.3 × 10–5 min–1). However, the rate constant for SP-3 (k = 2.7 × 10–5 min–1) was twice as those for SP-1 and SP-2. This observed trend in thermal stability was reproducible
for at least three independently prepared DNA-AuNPs. To confirm this
thermal stability trend, we repeated the experiments at 85 °C.
Consistent with the results obtained at 37 °C (Figure A), experiments conducted at 85 °C (Figure B) also showed that the DNA probes in SP-1 and SP-2 were more stable than that from SP-3. Furthermore, we observed a strong colloidal aggregation for SP-3 after heating at 85 °C for 20 h (Figure B, inset), evidenced by changes in color of the
solution from red to blue to colorless. No solution color change was
observed for SP-1 or SP-2, i.e., both remained
red. These observations confirmed that SP-3 was less
thermally stable than SP-1 and SP-2 under
the same thermal treatment. The activation energies obtained from
the above kinetic data show that they were similar for SP-1 (85.3 kJ/mol) and SP-2 (82.4 kJ/mol). These were 7.6–10.5
kJ/mol higher than the activation energy for SP-3 (74.8
kJ/mol). These results were obtained under the same experimental conditions,
including DNA sequences, packing densities (Table ), buffer conditions, and incubation temperatures. Our observation
of the differences in activation energy is consistent with the understanding
of the Au–S bond cleavage. As has been demonstrated in previous
studies of alkanethiol monolayers on Au (111),− disulfide is the final product from thermal cleavage
of the Au–S bonds. Below a critical surface coverage (1.8 ×
1014 molecules/cm2), the Au–S bonds cleave
through a thiolate radical mechanism. This is probably the case for the SP-1 and SP-2 probes, whose surface density of thiolated molecules is much lower
(4.0 × 1012 molecules/cm2) than the critical
coverage. In the case of SP-3, cyclic disulfides could
be readily formed on AuNPs due to the intramolecular interactions,
resulting in lower activation energy and a faster dissociation rate.

Fraction
of FAM-labeled DNA released from the three DNA-AuNPs probes
(SP-1, SP-2, and SP-3) over
a period of 20 h at 37 °C (A) and at 85 °C (B). Error bars
represent one standard deviation from triplicate sample analyses.
Inset photographs in B were taken after 20 h of incubation at 85 °C,
showing colors of different sample solutions at this time point.

Summary of Three
DNA-AuNP Probes (SP-1, SP-2, and SP-3), Their Packing
Densities, the Rate Constant (k), and the Fraction
of DNA Released after Chemical or Thermal Treatment
 	 	DNA
dissociation induced by MCH	DNA
dissociation at 37 °C	
probe	packing density	ki (min–1)	fMCH	k (min–1)	f37	
SP-1	207 ± 1	1.1 × 10–2	53.8%	1.3 × 10–5	1.6%	
SP-2	210 ± 9	1.3 × 10–2	51.4%	1.3 × 10–5	1.7%	
SP-3	223 ± 3	4.0 × 10–3	39.6%	2.7 × 10–5	3.6%	
Packing density:
defined as the
number of DNA oligonucleotides per AuNP.

For DNA release induced by 50 μM
mercaptohexanol (MCH), the initial rate constant ki was determined from the following equation: ln(1 –
[released]/[total]) = kit, where t = 10–30 min.

Final released fraction f: fMCH = [released]/[total]
at 400 min; f37 = [released]/[total] at
1200 min.

Rate constant k was determined from the first order rate equation: ln(1
–
[released]/[total]) = kt, where t = 60–1200 min.

We also conducted a chemical stability study by treating DNA-AuNPs
with mercaptohexanol (MCH) and monitoring the released DNA using a
revised fluorescence turn-on method (Figure A). As shown in Figure B, upon the addition
of 50 μM MCH, fluorescence signals for SP-1 and SP-2 quickly plateaued within 30 min, and the signal for SP-3 increased more slowly and gradually plateaued over a
period of 400 min. The observed initial dissociation rates for SP-1 (ki = 1.1 × 10–2 min–1) and SP-2 (ki = 1.3 × 10–2 min–1) were two times faster than that for SP-3 (ki = 4.0 × 10–3 min–1) (Table ). These results
are consistent with previous observations that cyclic disulfide was
more stable under the treatments with competing thiols, e.g., MCH
or DTT. Thus, we conclude that the thermal
stability and chemical stability of the DNA-AuNPs with these three
different anchor groups follow an opposite trend.

Release of FAM-labeled
DNA from the DNA-AuNPs when the DNA-AuNPs
were treated with 50 μM mercaptohexanol (MCH) at 25 °C.
(A) Schematic illustrating the fluorescence-based measurement of the
chemical release of FAM-labeled DNA from the DNA-AuNPs. (B) Fraction
of FAM-labeled DNA released from DNA-AuNPs having three different
anchor groups (SP-1, thiol; SP-2, acyclic
disulfide; and SP-3, DTPA).

Effect of Packing Densities on the Thermal Stability of DNA-AuNPs
Packing density is another important factor that can influence
the stability of DNA-AuNPs at elevated temperatures. To study this
effect, we prepared a series of thiol modified DNA-AuNPs (SP-1) that have surface densities varying from 90 to 190 DNA molecules
per AuNP. This DNA density range was achieved by controlling the ratio
of DNA oligonucleotides to AuNPs in the conjugation reaction mixture
and by adjusting the NaCl concentration during the salt aging step.

We first examined the thermal stability of DNA-AuNPs as a function
of packing densities, using the established fluorescence turn-on assay
(Figure A). As shown in Figure A, DNA-AuNPs with lower packing densities released DNA more
slowly when incubated at 37 °C. The rate of DNA release from
DNA-AuNPs with a packing density of 90 DNA molecules per AuNP was
3.4-fold slower than that of 190 DNA molecules per AuNP (Table ). This kinetic difference is understandable because
with the higher packing densities, the repulsion among DNA oligonucleotides
on the surfaces of DNA-AuNPs increases. In addition, the increased local concentration of DNA molecules
on AuNPs and the consequently decreased interaction between the surface
of AuNPs and DNA molecules at a higher packing density could also
contribute to the observed effect., As temperature
increases, the process is dominated by the cleavage of the Au–S
bond. Thus, the effect of packing density is less pronounced at 85
°C, as shown in Figure B and Table .

Effect of packing density on the thermal stability of
DNA-AuNPs
at 37 °C (A) and at 85 °C (B). The average density ranged
from 90 oligonucleotide molecules per AuNP to 190 oligonucleotide
molecules per AuNP. Error bars represent one standard deviation from
triplicate sample analyses.

Effects of Packing Density on the
Thermal Dissociation Kinetics of DNA-AuNPs
 	DNA
dissociation at 37 °C	DNA
dissociation at 85 °C	
packing density	k37 (min–1)	f37	k85 (min–1)	f85	
190/AuNP	1.2 × 10–5	1.5%	4.5 × 10–4	40.4%	
175/AuNP	9.0 × 10–6	1.1%	5.0 × 10–4	43.6%	
150/AuNP	8.0 × 10–6	1.0%	5.3 × 10–4	45.3%	
123/AuNP	5.8 × 10–6	0.8%	5.7 × 10–4	47.2%	
90/AuNP	3.5 × 10–6	0.4%	5.6 × 10–4	46.7%	
Rate constant k was determined from the first order reaction rate equation:
ln(1
– [released]/[total]) = kt, where t = 60–1200 min.

Final released fraction f: f =
[released]/[total] at 1200 min.

Enhancing the Stability of DNA-AuNPs Using Double-Stranded DNA
and Multiple Thiol Anchors
It has been demonstrated that
DNA-AuNPs that were formed with double-stranded DNA improved the rate
of target hybridization and DNA-mediated AuNP assembly.,, Here, we explored the possibility
of using double-stranded DNA to enhance the stability of DNA-AuNPs.
As shown in Figure A, we designed three double-stranded
DNA to construct a set of double-stranded DNA-AuNP probes (DP-1, DP-2, and DP-3). These double-stranded
DNA were modified with different combinations of organosulfur anchor
groups. We reasoned that modifying both complementary strands with
anchor groups could allow each double-stranded DNA to carry multiple
thiol anchors and thus could potentially be used to enhance the stability
of DNA-AuNPs.

Design of double-stranded DNA-AuNP probes to enhance the
stability
of the short internal complementary DNA (sicDNA). (A) Schematic showing
the double-stranded DNA-AuNP probes constructed by conjugating both
of the complementary strands with different combinations of organosulfur
anchors. DP-1 represents DNA-AuNP constructed by conjugating
both DNA strands with thiol anchors; DP-2 represents
DNA-AuNP by conjugating one DNA strand with the thiol anchor and the
other strand with the DTPA anchor; DP-3 represents DNA-AuNP
by conjugating DNA strands with DTPA anchors. (B) Release of DNA from
DNA-AuNPs induced by 2 mM DTT at room temperature. (C) Release of
DNA from double-stranded DNA-AuNP probes at a temperature of 37 °C,
which is lower than the melting temperature (48.6 °C) of the
double-stranded DNA (dsDNA). (D) Comparison of the thermal stability
of DP-1 (two thiol anchors) with its control (a single
thiol anchor) at a temperature of 60 °C, which is higher than
the melting temperature (48.6 °C) of the dsDNA. Error bars represent
one standard deviation from triplicate sample analyses.

It is necessary to maintain a stable DNA duplex
during the conjugation
process. To achieve this, we designed double-stranded DNA probes to
have a melting temperature (Tm = 48.6
°C at [NaCl] = 50 mM) much higher than the temperature (T = 25 °C) used for the conjugation procedures. To
further examine the formation of double-stranded DNA-AuNP probes,
we studied their chemical stabilities by treating DNA-AuNPs with 2
mM DTT. As shown in Figure B, all three double-stranded
DNA-AuNPs have improved chemical stability as compared to the single-stranded
DNA-AuNP (SP-1). These results indicate that the generation
of multiple thiol anchors by using double-stranded DNA can enhance
the chemical stability of DNA-AuNPs. Additionally, the increasing
number of thiol anchors from 2 (DP-1) to 4 (DP-3) did not result in kinetic differences.

We then studied the
thermal stability of this set of DNA-AuNP probes
by incubating them at 37 °C for a period of 20 h. As shown in
Figure C, DP-1 has the best thermal
stability, which is consistent with our previous results (Figure ), confirming that the thiol anchor is more thermally
stable than the cyclic disulfide anchor on DNA-AuNPs. We further examined
the thermal stability of DP-1 at 60 °C, a temperature
higher than the melting temperature of the double-stranded DNA (Tm = 48.6 °C). As can be seen from Figure D, DP-1 remained stable at this elevated
temperature. Only a small fraction (less than 10%) of FAM-labeled
DNA was released from DP-1 after 20 h of incubation at
60 °C. In contrast, more than 40% of the DNA was released within
1 h from the DNA-AuNPs that was formed with double-stranded DNA having
a single thiol anchor at one strand. These results verify the conjugation
of both strands of double-stranded DNA to AuNPs in DP-1, DP-2, and DP-3. The conjugation of both
strands to AuNPs can substantially increase the local effective concentrations
of complementary strands, which favors the hybridization of these
complementary strands and increases the melting temperature of these
double-stranded DNA., This approach may be applied
to maintain DNA hybridization under thermally stressed conditions.

Conclusions
We have systematically studied the thermal stability
of DNA functionalized
gold nanoparticles (DNA-AuNPs) as a function of anchor types and packing
densities. By monitoring the kinetics of releasing DNA from DNA-AuNPs
that have different designs, we demonstrated that thermal stability
of DNA-AuNPs varied with both anchor types and packing densities.
Further analyses on the effects of anchor types revealed an opposite
trend between the thermal stability and the chemical stability among
the DNA-AuNPs that have different anchor types. These results can
potentially be used to guide the design of DNA-AuNPs for different
therapeutic applications. Finally, we designed a series of double-stranded
DNA-AuNP probes by conjugating both DNA strands with organosulfur
anchors and demonstrated their abilities to enhance both the chemical
stability and thermal stability of DNA-AuNPs.

Supporting Information Available
DNA sequences used for
constructing
different DNA-AuNPs; UV/vis extinction spectra of bare gold nanoparticles
(AuNPs) and DNA functionalized AuNPs (DNA-AuNPs); and evaluation of
the inner filter effect from DNA-AuNPs. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc300687z_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research,
the Canada Research Chairs Program, Alberta Health, and Alberta Innovates.

