Introduction
Methods for engineering
of composite multifunctional molecules
with preserved biological activity of individual functional parts
are highly sought after for preparation of bispecific antibodies,− antibody–drug conjugates,, and antibody-imaging
agent probes., Toward this end, many strategies
have been exploited, such as Dock-and-Lock,, chemical
cross-linking,, peptide nucleic acid conjugation
via unnatural amino acids, hybrid–hybridoma, assembly via short synthetic peptides, and genetic engineering., However, current methods suffer from high complexity and cost of
engineering of individual constructs, hampering high-throughput production
of bispecific molecules. Here we describe a versatile solid-phase
bioconjugation platform that enables straightforward synthesis of
a variety of homo- and heterobifunctional molecules. Further, we have
employed this platform for assembly of universal heterobifunctional
adaptors consisting of two strong binary affinity systems—Protein
A(G,L)/Antibody and biotin/streptavidin—which facilitate simple
preparation of antibody–antibody, antibody–drug, and
antibody–reporter pairs via self-assembly in a mix-and-use
manner (Figure a). Use of such universal molecular
adaptors should prove instrumental in a high-throughput screening
of bispecific constructs prior to costly and laborious synthesis of
lead candidates via recombinant engineering or chemical cross-linking.

Results
and Discussion
In general terms, the solid-phase bioconjugation
platform described
here involves monofunctionalization of molecule A with a surface-bound
cross-linker, release of an activated molecule A from the surface,
and binding to a molecule B on another solid support at 1:1 molar
ratio. Typically, due to availability of multiple potential conjugation
sites on a single biomolecule, conventional liquid-phase bioconjugation
procedures inevitably yield heterogeneous products with poorly controlled
stoichiometry and require time-consuming laborious purification. In
contrast, restricting chemical cross-linking to sparsely dispersed
active sites on a solid support ensures monovalent conjugation, while
aiding in quick and efficient purification., To demonstrate this concept, we assembled heterobifunctional Protein
A(G,L)-PEG-Streptavidin (PrA(G,L)-PEG-SA, 1:1:1 molar ratio) adaptors
using two commercially available solid supports, monomeric avidin
resin and human IgG agarose, and employing 10 kDa PEG as a flexible
spacer between PrA(G,L) and SA to prevent potential steric hindrance
and loss of functionality. Monomeric avidin resin presents an optimal
support for reversible immobilization of biotinylated molecules due
to its requirement for mild elution conditions and compatibility with
multiple regenerations (over 10 times). However, it is important to
block exposed primary amine groups, should amine-based cross-linking
chemistry be used. In this regard, we modified the resin with sulfo-NHS
acetate to irreversibly protect all exposed primary amines that might
interfere with further conjugation steps. Notably, protecting amine
groups did not affect biotin–avidin binding, which may be attributed
to a unique conformation of biotin binding site composed of a conserved
Trp120, a hydrophobic pocket, and eight hydrogen bonds, while lacking exposed amines. Human IgG agarose,
in turn, presents a suitable support for immobilization of all IgG-binding
adaptor proteins (such as PrA, PrG, PrL used here), featuring efficient
elution at low-pH conditions, which are sufficient for IgG/PrA(G,L)
dissociation, but not for breaking a stronger SA–biotin bond
or for irreversible protein denaturation.

Preparation of universal
molecular adaptors for bispecific ligand
self-assembly. (a) Schematic of a universal heterobifunctional adaptor
molecule consisting of Streptavidin and Protein A(G,L) connected via
PEG linker. Use of two versatile binary affinity systems—SA/biotin
and PrA(G,L)/Antibody—enables assembly of a wide variety of
ligands in a simple mix-and-use manner. Streptavidin and Protein A Z-domain structures adopted from NCBI MMDB. (b) Workflow
of solid-phase bioconjugation of heterobifunctional PrA(G,L)-PEG-SA
adaptors. Monomeric avidin column (with free amines blocked) is loaded
with biotin-PEG-NH2. Following avidin–biotin binding,
PrA(G,L) activated by EDC/NHS is added and allowed to conjugate to
primary amine groups on PEG. Physical separation of conjugation sites
(NH2 groups) ensures conjugation of PrA(G,L) to only one
PEG molecule, yielding 1:1 PrA(G,L):PEG–biotin conjugates.
Monofunctional PrA(G,L)-PEG-biotin is eluted with 2 mM d-biotin,
further immobilized onto IgG agarose column and incubated with excess
SA. Similarly, physical separation of biotin moieties on a solid surface
ensures SA binding to only one biotin, forming column-bound heterobifunctional
PrA(G,L)-PEG-SA adaptors. Finally, elution with 0.1 M pH 2.4 Glycine
releases fully functional product from the column.

The workflow for solid-phase adaptor bioconjugation
includes five
key steps (Figure b): (1) Monomeric avidin
resin (with primary amine groups protected) is loaded with biotin-PEG-NH2. Then, EDC/NHS-activated PrA(G,L) is added onto the column
and reacted with exposed primary amine groups on biotin-PEG, forming
monovalent PrA(G,L)-PEG-biotin conjugates. (2) PrA(G,L)-PEG-biotin
conjugates are eluted from the column using d-biotin and
(3) immobilized onto human IgG column via noncovalent PrA(G,L) binding
to IgG. (4) SA is then loaded onto the column and allowed to bind
to exposed biotins on immobilized PrA(G,L)-PEG-biotin conjugates.
(5) After washing, heterobifunctional PrA(G,L)-PEG-SA conjugates with
precisely defined stoichiometry of 1:1:1 are eluted with 0.1 M Glycine
(pH 2.4) buffer.

PEGylation of PrA on avidin resin produced
monofunctional PrA-PEG-biotin
conjugates at high purity of over 96%, whereas bioconjugation in solution
yielded a mixture of PrA with 1, 2, 3, and 4+ PEG molecules, containing
only 20–30% of mono-PEG conjugates (Figure a). Low-density distribution of biotin-PEG-NH2 on
the column surface ensured that at most 1 PEG could be conjugated
to an activated PrA molecule, whereas efficient column-based purification
aided in quick removal of unconjugated PrA. Similarly, solid-phase
PEGylation of PrG and PrL yielded monofunctional products at 94% and
97% purity, respectively, whereas liquid-phase reaction yielded 60%
and 25% purity, respectively (). Taken together, these results support versatility
and efficiency of monomeric avidin-based solid-phase bioconjugation
procedure for monofunctionalization of various proteins with PEG-biotin.

Characterization
of PrA-PEG-SA adaptor assembly on a solid support
and in solution. (a) Conjugation of PrA to biotin-PEG-NH2 was performed on a solid support (monomeric avidin resin) and in
solution. SDS-PAGE characterization of products reveals high purity
of mono-PEG-PrA conjugates produced via solid-phase bioconjugation,
in contrast to a heterogeneous mixture of PrA with 1, 2, 3, 4+ PEG
molecules produced by bioconjugation in solution. Molecular weight
reference is shown in kDa. (b) Conjugation of PrA-PEG-biotin to SA
on a solid support (IgG agarose) and in solution. Characterization
with hybrid gel demonstrates 1:1:1 PrA-PEG-SA stoichiometry achieved
with solid-phase procedure, whereas mixed SA conjugates with 0, 1,
2, 3+ PrA-PEG-biotin are produced via assembly in solution.

To attach the second functional
component, SA, to PrA(G,L)-PEG-biotin
conjugates in a 1:1 stoichiometry-controlled manner, PrA(G,L)-PEG-biotin
was first reversibly immobilized onto a human IgG agarose column via
noncovalent PrA(G,L)/IgG binding, and SA was then added and allowed
to bind to surface-immobilized biotins. Similarly to mono-PEGylation,
restricting SA-biotin binding to distant sites on agarose bead surface
prevents cross-linking of multiple PrA(G,L)-PEG-biotin molecules by
a single SA (which has 4 biotin-binding sites and can bind up to 4
biotinylated molecules in solution), while use of SA excess ensures
complete functionalization of all immobilized PrA(G,L)-PEG-biotin
conjugates. Elution with 0.1 M pH 2.4 Glycine buffer achieved efficient
release of fully functional PrA(G,L)-PEG-SA adaptors into solution
without disrupting the SA-biotin bond. The large product size and
potential PEG–SDS interaction interfered
with characterization by conventional SDS-PAGE, which failed to distinguish
SA containing multiple copies of PrA(G,L)-PEG-biotin (data not shown).
To overcome this issue, we employed a hybrid gel (0.5% agarose + 2.5%
polyacrylamide), which was previously used for separation of large
nanoparticle–protein conjugates., As shown in
Figure b, hybrid gel successfully fractionated
the conjugates produced by simple mixing of SA with PrA-PEG-biotin
in solution, yielding distinct bands corresponding to unreacted SA,
as well as SA with 1, 2, and 3+ copies of PrA-PEG-biotin. In contrast,
solid-phase assembly on IgG agarose column produced a single pure
product—1PrA-1PEG-1SA (Figure b, lane
2). Similar 1:1:1 stoichiometry was achieved with solid-phase assembly
of adaptors based on PrG () and PrL (). Therefore, the solid-phase platform presented
here has proven instrumental for preparation of composite heterobifunctional
molecules with defined 1:1 stoichiometry.

Preserved functionality
of adaptor components (PrA(G,L) and SA)
was confirmed by performing enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA,
Figure a). First, IgG molecules were immobilized
on a 96-well plate and incubated with PrA(G,L)-PEG-SA adaptors, resulting
in PrA(G,L)-PEG-SA binding to the surface via preserved PrA(G,L)/IgG
binding. Then, a solution of biotin-HRP (biotinylated horseradish
peroxidase) was added, depositing HRP to the surface via preserved
SA/biotin binding. As expected, fully functional PrA(G,L)-PEG-SA adaptors
successfully linked surface-bound IgG and biotin-HRP, yielding IgG
concentration-dependent positive signal, whereas only the background
signal was detected in a control experiment with a simple mixture
of PrA(G,L), biotin-PEG, and SA (Figure b, ). The results
further confirmed proper PrA(G,L)-PEG-SA adaptor structure and preserved
dual functionality.

Incorporation of two versatile adaptor components,
PrA(G,L) and
SA, within a single heterobifunctional structure should enable high-throughput
assembly of a variety of bispecific ligands and bifunctional probes
in a simple mix-and-use procedure. For example, we have employed PrA-PEG-SA
adaptors for preparation of reporter probes for one-step immunoassays.
By eliminating intermediate steps, direct target labeling with unique
reporters is advantageous for multiplexed detection and accurate quantitative
analysis of the target expression. However, modification of primary
antibodies with bulky reporters (such as nanoparticles and enzymes)
is often complex and cost-prohibitive. Self-assembly via heterobifunctional
adaptors presents an attractive alternative for small-scale on-demand
preparation of targeting probes, featuring all the benefits of one-step
immunoassays, while offering simplicity and flexibility of the mix-and-use
methodology. As shown in Figure , self-assembled
probes composed of biotinylated fluorescent nanoparticles (quantum
dots, QDs) and unmodified primary antibodies targeting androgen receptor
(AR) produced a characteristic nuclear staining in AR-positive formalin-fixed
permeabilized LNCap cells via a one-step immunofluorescence procedure
(Figure a,b), while anti-Her2 antibody-HRP
assembly specifically detected abundance of Her2 protein in a lysate
of Her2-positive SKBR3 cells via a one-step ELISA (Figure c,d).

Characterization of adaptor binding functionality
with ELISA. (a)
Test schematic. IgG-coated surface was incubated with PrA(G,L)-PEG-SA,
then labeled with biotinylated HRP via binding to available SA sites
on IgG-bound PrA(G,L)-PEG-SA adaptors. (b) IgG concentration-dependent
signal detected with PrA-PEG-SA adaptors confirms preserved functionality
of both PrA and SA blocks, whereas only background signal detected
in control (simple mixture of adaptor components) shows lack of nonspecific
binding.

Self-assembly of detection probes via PrA-PEG-SA
adaptors for direct
target labeling in bioassays. (a) Schematic of a one-step immunofluorescence
staining with self-assembled antibody-QD probes. (b) Androgen receptor
(AR) in formalin-fixed permeabilized LNCap prostate cancer cells was
labeled with red-emitting QDs preassembled with anti-AR primary antibodies
via a one-pot 2 h incubation. Clear characteristic nuclear AR staining
is observed with αAR/PrA-PEG-SA/QD605 probes, whereas only minimal
background fluorescence is detected in a control lacking anti-AR antibody
(i.e., PrA-PEG-SA/QD605), confirming specificity and sensitivity of
target labeling with self-assembled probes. Scale bar, 50 μm.
(c) Schematic of a one-step ELISA with self-assembled antibody-HRP
probes. (d) Abundance of Her2 antigen in a lysate of Her2-positive
SKBR3 breast cancer cells was measured using biotinylated HRP preassembled
with anti-Her2 primary antibodies via a one-pot 2 h incubation. The
expected dose-dependent response was achieved with fully functional
αHer2/PrA-PEG-SA/HRP probes, while a control composed of a simple
mixture of anti-Her2 antibodies and biotinylated HRP failed to produce
signal above background, supporting the utility of self-assembled
probes for ELISA applications.

One area of active research that might substantially benefit
from
such a methodology is cancer immunotherapy with bispecific antibodies
capable of simultaneously binding two different molecular targets
to direct effector cells (e.g., NK cell, T cells) against pathogenic
target cells.,, Since T cells cannot be directly recruited by monoclonal antibodies
due to the lack of Fcγ receptors, bispecific antibodies, such
as CD3xCD19 and CD3xEpCAM, have been employed to direct T cells against
cancer cells, showing potential to eradicate tumors. To overcome many limitations of chemical cross-linking
methodologies for preparation of bispecific antibodies, we have employed
heterobifunctional PrA-PEG-SA adaptors for straightforward assembly
of unmodified anti-Her2 and biotinylated anti-CD3 antibodies into
bispecific CD3xHer2 targeting ligands (Figure a). First, PrA-PEG-SA was incubated with unmodified anti-Her2 antibody
at 1:1 molar ratio and followed by blocking the excess binding sites
with human IgG, resulting in assembly of Her2-targeting IgG/PrA-PEG-SA
ligands. Then, biotinylated anti-CD3 antibody was added at 1:1 antibody-to-adaptor
molar ratio, producing CD3xHer2 bispecific ligands featuring an anti-Her2
antibody bound to the PrA end and anti-CD3 antibody bound to the SA
end of a heterobifunctional PrA-PEG-SA adaptor. In order to control
the orientation of a biotinylated antibody upon binding to SA and
prevent cross-linking of multiple adaptors, we performed site-specific
biotinylation to an IgG hinge region, which introduced a single accessible
SA binding site on an antibody, while preserving the accessibility
and functionality of antigen-binding sites. Targeting activity and specificity of resulting bispecific ligands
was tested on Her2-positive human breast cancer SKBR3 cells and CD3-positive
human Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells (PBMCs) with flow cytometry.
Cells were incubated with CD3xHer2 targeting ligands and then labeled
with FITC-conjugated anti-PrA antibodies for fluorescence detection.
Consistent with predicted targeting profile, bispecific ligands efficiently
labeled both SKBR3 cells and PBMCs, whereas ligands missing a single
targeting antibody failed to label respective cell populations, confirming
lack of nonspecific binding (Figure b).

Assembly of
bispecific CD3xHer2 antibodies via PrA-PEG-SA adaptors
for enhanced T cell-mediated lysis of cancer cells. (a) Schematic
of T cell-mediated lysis of cancer cells directed via cross-linking
with self-assembled bispecific antibodies. (b) Characterization of
target-binding functionality of CD3xHer2 bispecific antibodies with
flow cytometry. Both CD3-positive PBMCs and Her2-positive SKBR3 cells
were specifically labeled with bispecific antibodies, whereas ligands
missing a single targeting antibody failed to bind to respective cells.
(c) PBMCs (effector, E) were co-cultured with SKBR3 cells (target,
T) at different E:T ratios in the presence of 10 nM CD3xHer2 ligands
or equal amount of control (mixed anti-CD3 and anti-Her2 antibodies),
exhibiting enhanced cell lysis mediated by CD3xHer2 bispecific ligands.
(d) PBMCs were co-cultured with SKBR3 at a fixed E:T = 10 in the presence
of different concentrations of CD3xHer2, showing further enhancement
of cell lysis with increasing ligand concentration. (e) PrA-PEG-SA
molecular adaptor alone showed a lack of cytotoxicity in a concentration
range up to 90 nM.

Finally, we evaluated
the capability of CD3xHer2 bispecific ligands
to drive T cell-mediated lysis of Her2-positive breast cancer cells.
Unstimulated CD3-positive PBMCs were used as effector (E) cells, and
SKBR3 breast cancer cells served as Her2-positive targets (T). Binding
of CD3xHer2 bispecific ligand to both CD3 on PBMCs and Her2 on SKBR3
cells should bridge effector and target cells, stimulating cell lysis.
PBMCs and SKBR3 cells were co-cultured for 20 h at 37 °C at different
E:T ratios in 96-well plates in the presence of either 10 nM CD3xHer2
bispecific ligands or equal concentration of anti-CD3 and anti-Her2
antibodies without PrA-PEG-SA adaptors as a control. The efficacy
of cell lysis was evaluated by lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release
assay. In comparison to the control, CD3xHer2 bispecific ligands increased
T cell-mediated cytotoxicity by 15–20% throughout the range
of E:T ratios from 1:1 to 25:1 (Figure c).
To test the effect of CD3xHer2 ligand concentration on cell lysis
activity, we fixed E:T ratio at 10 and incubated cells with a range of CD3xHer2 concentrations.
As shown in Figure d, lysis of SKBR3 breast
cancer cells in the presence of PBMCs happened in a CD3xHer2 ligand
dose-dependent manner. Importantly, heterobifunctional PrA(G,L)-PEG-SA
adaptors alone did not exhibit any cytotoxicity over a concentration
range up to 90 nM (Figure e and ), further supporting
specificity of CD3xHer2 ligand-driven cancer cell lysis by effector
T cells. In an analogous manner, a number of bispecific antibodies
can be easily assembled for a variety of immunotherapy studies, highlighting
the versatility of PrA(G,L)-PEG-SA adaptors described here. It should
be noted, however, that multivalency of adaptor components (i.e.,
availability of up to 5 IgG-binding sites on PrA(G,L) and up to 3
biotin-binding sites on SA) allows for formation of highly multivalent
bispecific assemblies, featuring more than 1 antibody on each adaptor
terminal. A higher antibody load typically results in increased binding
avidity and prolonged circulation time in vivo, while it might also
lead to steric hindrance to target binding and reduced tissue penetration. Therefore, the antibody-to-adaptor stoichiometry
should be characterized and taken into account when assessing therapeutic
efficacy of self-assembled bispecific ligands.

In summary, we
have developed a versatile solid-phase bioconjugation
platform that can be readily adapted for preparation of a variety
of hetero- and homobifunctional molecules. We have further employed
this platform for synthesis of PrA(G,L)-PEG-SA adaptors with precisely
controlled stoichiometry of 1:1:1 and demonstrated the utility of
adaptors for assembly of detection probes for cell staining and ELISA,
as well as bispecific targeting ligands for ligand-driven cancer cell
lysis by effector T cells. In general, incorporation of two binary
affinity systems, Protein A(G, L)/Antibody and biotin/streptavidin,
within a single adaptor construct offers a straightforward route for
assembly of target-specific antibodies with other functional biotinylated
ligands, such as antibodies, reporter molecules, and therapeutic moieties,
without requiring extensive customization. This makes PrA(G,L)-PEG-SA
an instrumental preclinical tool for high-throughput screening of
bifunctional combinations before proceeding to synthesis of lead candidates
via recombinant engineering or chemical cross-linking.

Supporting Information Available
Experimental details
and supporting
figures. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc5002455_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
Hong
Yan Liu, Center for Biotechnology and Genomic Medicine, Medical College
of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia 30912, United
States

Author Contributions
H.Y.L, P.Z.,
and X.G. contributed to the experiment design and data analysis. H.Y.L.
performed the experiments. H.Y.L., P.Z., and X.G. wrote the paper.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work
was supported in part by NIH (R01CA140295). H.Y.L
thanks the NIH for an F32 fellowship (CA150301) and Georgia Regents
University for the new faculty start-up funding. P.Z. thanks the National
Cancer Institute for a T32 fellowship (T32CA138312).

Abbreviations
PrAprotein A

PrGprotein G

PrLprotein L

PEGpoly(ethylene glycol)

SAstreptavidin

IgGimmunoglobulin G

ELISAenzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay

HRPhorseradish
peroxidase

QDquantum
dot

PBMCsperipheral
blood mononuclear cells

FITCfluorescein isothiocyanate

LDHlactate dehydrogenase

