Introduction
The creation of protein conjugates as
tools for biological studies
and as effective therapeutics is currently an area of intense interest.− Targets include protein–protein conjugates,, protein–DNA conjugates,, and protein–small
molecule conjugates.− There are a number of different techniques already
available to create these types of protein conjugates including native
protein ligation, non-natural amino acid
expression, chemical synthesis, and enzymatic labeling. Most of these methods require the initial attachment of a small
molecule handle that can then undergo further reaction to create the
final desired conjugate.

Post-translational enzymatic labeling
offers several advantages
over other types of protein labeling techniques. Reaction conditions
are typically mild and help to preserve the biological functionality
of the protein target; it can occur rapidly
with high specificity;, and it generally gives a high
yield. Many investigators have used enzymatic
labeling to introduce non-natural functionalities onto proteins for
the purpose of creating protein conjugates. This strategy works via
the use of alternative substrates bearing bioorthogonal functional
groups that then become enzymatically incorporated onto the protein
of interest. Enzymes, which have been used for this type of protein
labeling, include biotin ligase, sortase, lipoic
acid ligase, and protein farnesyltransferase.

Protein farnesyltransferase (PFTase) is
an α/β heterodimer
enzyme which catalyzes the attachment of a farnesyl group, from farnesyl
diphosphate (FPP), through a thioether bond to a cysteine near the
C-terminus of a number of proteins (Figure ).

Scheme of protein prenylation. The terminal
four amino acid sequence
(CaaX) serves as the recognition site for the enzyme which then catalyzes
the attachment of the farnesyl moiety onto the cysteine residue.

This cysteine is located four
residues upstream from the C-terminus,
and the sequence of the next three amino acids determines whether
the protein becomes farnesylated or prenylated with a longer geranylgeranyl
isoprenoid by protein geranylgeranyltranserfase I (PGGTase I). This post-translation modification plays a role
in anchoring proteins to the cellular membrane and also modulates
protein–protein interactions. The process of protein prenylation
has attracted significant attention since many diseases including
cancer require prenylated proteins for their effects.,

Recently, PFTase has been used by a number of groups for selective
labeling of a variety of different proteins including several with
potential therapeutic applications., Interestingly,
PFTase is promiscuous with regard to its isoprenoid specificity and
can tolerate a variety of modifications, predominantly in the third
isoprenoid unit of the FPP.− A number of different groups have synthesized a wide variety of
probes for use in protein labeling. These
include FPP analogues that contain azides and alkynes,, for the click reaction; aldehydes and ketones for aminooxy conjugation;, NBD and anthranilate for fluorescent studies; and benzophenone, and diazotrifluoropropanoyl for photolabeling.
Highly unusual non-isoprenoidal analogues can also be accommodated
in some cases.

One of the limitations
to using non-natural FPP analogues with
bioorthogonal functionality is that they have low activity when compared
to natural FPP. This is especially true with the FPP analogues that
contain bulkier moieties. In order for these types of analogues to
be more readily used in protein labeling it would be helpful to have
PFTase variants that could catalyze the incorporation of different
FPP analogues into proteins more efficiently compared to the wild-type
enzyme. Additionally, having different PFTases that can catalyze the
reaction preferentially for different FPP analogues would be advantageous
for multiple substrate labeling experiments.

In order to allow
for bulkier isoprenoid analogues to be efficiently
processed by PFTase, the first step is to understand the binding of
FPP in the PFTase binding pocket, specifically looking at the interactions
between the third isoprenoid unit and PFTase. The PFTase binding pocket
consists mainly of large aromatic amino acids that act as the backstop
for FPP (Figure ). There are three specific
residues in the binding pocket that come into close contact with the
third isoprenoid unit of FPP. All those residues lie within the β
subunit of the enzyme and include a tryptophan at position 102, a
tyrosine at position 154, and a second tyrosine at position 205. The
other molecular structures that come in close contact with the third
isoprenoid unit are amino acids in the CaaX box substrate itself.

FPP binding
pocket of PFTase (1JCR). (Above) The FPP binding pocket
of PFTase. The isoprenoid and key residues are shown in stick representations
with the protein secondary structure given in a cartoon form. Color
scheme: the isoprenoid portion of FPP is shown in green. A peptide
inhibitor CVFM that is bound in the CaaX substrate binding pocket
is shown in purple. Key amino acid residues in the binding pocket
are shown in blue. (Below) Space filling representation of the PFTase
binding pocket. The color scheme is the same as that used in the top
panel.

Previously, mutants of the PFTase
binding pocket have primarily
been used to study how prenyltransferases distinguish between FPP
and GGPP, and how they alter CaaX-box peptide specificity. While generally similar, comparison of the structures
of PGGTase I and PFTase revealed that PFTase contains a tryptophan
residue at position 102 (W102β) whereas PGGTase I has a threonine
residue at the analogous location. Terry et al. have shown that by
mutating the tryptophan at 102β to a threonine and the tyrosine
at 361β to a phenylalanine, which was also observed from an
overlay of the binding pockets, that PFTase could employ GGPP as a
substrate. Additionally, it has been
shown that by mutating W102β, Y154β, and Y205β amino
acids all to threonine, there is greater incorporation of both biotin-
and nitrobenzofurazan-containing FPP analogues by the resulting mutant
PFTases, although the kinetic behavior of these mutants was not investigated
in detail. Overall, these studies suggest
that it is possible to engineer PFTase to accept FPP analogues.

In the present study, we extend this work to isoprenoid analogues
that contain bioorthogonal functionality that would be useful for
site-specific protein labeling applications. Hence, here we report
on the preparation of several mutant forms of PFTase including W102Aβ,
Y154Aβ, and Y205Aβ and their reactivity with aldehyde-,
cyclo-octene-, NBD- and coumarin-containing FPP analogues. Significant
increases in catalytic efficiency with the aldehyde- and coumarin-containing
substrates were obtained suggesting that protein engineering is a
fruitful approach for improving PFTase for biocatalysis.

Results and Discussion
Mutant
Creation
In order to explore the different binding
capabilities of PFTase, we designed and synthesized three different
mutants of rat PFTase to enlarge the isoprenoid binding pocket. Our
studies focused on three amino acids in the substrate binding pocket
including W102β, Y154β, and Y205β. As can be seen
in Figure , these three residues (shown in
blue) form the bottom of the binding pocket and limit the length of
the isoprenoid (shown in green) that can fit into the PFTase active
site along with the protein substrate (shown in pink). Since our group
has developed a number of different isoprenoid substrates that are
longer than FPP (Figure ), we hypothesized
that we could improve the activity of PFTase with these analogues
by creating mutants that contained smaller residues at these three
positions that would enlarge the active site. As shown in Table , the volume occupied by these different analogues
is 5–25% greater than the volume of FPP. By mutating the large
residues found in the PFTase binding pocket, we reasoned that it should
be possible to accommodate these larger analogues. Additionally, we
wanted to explore which of these mutations were the most important
for improving the catalytic properties of PFTase toward these analogues.
We reasoned that it might be possible to create “tunable”
PFTases where the different mutations would have different analogue
specificities.

Structures of farensyl diphosphate and analogues. (Left)
Lewis
structure representation. (Right) Extended conformation space fill
model. Structures include 1 (FPP); 2 (an
aryl aldehyde-containing analogue; 3 (a cyclooctene-containing
analogue); 4 (a coumarin-containing analogue); and 5 (an NBD-containing analogue). Carbon is shown in green,
oxygen in red, nitrogen in blue, phosphorus in orange, and fluorine
in light blue.

Molecular
Volume of FPP and Four Synthetic
Analogues
functionality	compound	molecular
volume (Å3)	
None (FPP)	1	306.0	
Benzaldehyde	2	333.0	
Cyclooctene	3	322.0	
Coumarin	4	382.0	
NBD	5	338.0	
Volumes were calculated using the
molecular modeling program Schrodinger and the values are given in
units of cubic angstroms (Å3).

Accordingly, three mutants W102Aβ,
Y154Aβ, and Y205Aβ
were created using site directed mutagenesis and expressed in E. coli as His-tagged polypeptides. The resulting
mutant proteins were purified via immobilized metal affinity chromatography
to yield the desired proteins in good yield (20 mg/L of culture broth).

Kinetic Analysis with FPP
The three mutant proteins
were initially assayed for enzymatic activity using a continuous fluorescence
assay using N-dansyl-GCVLS and FPP as substrates. This assay monitors
the increase in dansyl group fluorescence as the peptide substrate
becomes modified by the hydrophobic isoprenoid. These experiments
were performed at a constant concentration of peptide substrate while
the concentration of FPP was varied to obtain the kcat and KM parameters listed
in Table . Inspection of those values shows
a 2- to 3-fold reduction in both kcat and KM suggesting that mutation of those residues
has minimal effect on the catalytic efficiency of PFTase when FPP
is the substrate.

Kinetic Values for PFTase and Three
Mutants Using FPP as the Isoprenoid Substrate
protein	kcat (s–1)	KM (μM)	kcat/KM (μM s–1)	rel. kcat/KM	
WT	0.27 ± 0.02	0.5 ± 0.2	0.5 ± 0.2	1	
W102A	0.083 ± 0.005	0.26 ± 0.09	0.3 ± 0.1	0.59	
Y154A	0.11 ± 0.007	0.27 ± 0.09	0.4 ± 0.1	0.76	
Y205A	0.18 ± 0.01	0.5 ± 0.2	0.4 ± 0.1	0.67	
All values
are apparent kinetic
parameters since the peptide concentration was held constant at 2
μM. Values are reported here as the averages and standard deviations
from three separate experiments.

Kinetic Analysis with Benzaldehyde Analogue (2)
Next, the three mutants were assayed using an aryl aldehyde-containing
FPP analogue (2). In previous work, we have shown that 2 can be used to incorporate an aldehyde functional group
into a number of different proteins. In contrast to azide- and alkyne-containing
analogues that require Cu(I) or synthetically complex strained-ring
reagents for their subsequent derivatization, aldehydye-based compounds
can be easily functionalized with commercially available hydrazine-
or alkoxyamine-containing moieties. In addition, using recently developed
aryl amine catalysts, they react rapidly with half-lives of less than
2 min. Given their larger size relative
to FPP (see Figure ), we hypothesized that
they should fit better into the enlarged active sites generated by
mutagenesis described here.

The results of kinetic studies with
benzaldehyde 2 using the continuous fluorescence described
above are given in Table . As was previously
reported, wild-type PFTase catalyzes the transfer of the benzaldehyde-containing
isoprenoid 2 several hundred-fold (kcat/KM) less efficiently than
FPP. However, importantly, the W102Aβ mutant manifests a (43-fold)
increase in catalytic efficiency in processing 2 compared
with FPP. That increase is derived from a 4-fold increase in kcat and a 12-fold decrease in KM. In contrast, the Y154Aβ and Y205Aβ mutants
showed only small increases in catalytic efficiency. In those cases,
decreases in KM values were offset by
decreases in kcat. These observations
suggest that increasing the active site dimensions allows more favorable
interactions between the substrate and enzyme to occur resulting in
lower KM values. However, modulation of kcat is clearly dependent on other factors including
the precise conformation of the substrate which is harder to predict.
Nevertheless, these findings are quite exciting given the relatively
large increase in catalytic efficiency obtained with the W102Aβ
mutation.

Kinetic Values for PFTase and Three
Mutants Using the Benzaldehyde Containing Analogue (2) as the Substrate
protein	kcat (s–1)	KM (μM)	kcat/KM (μM s–1)	rel. kcat/KM	
WT	0.0021 ± 0.0002	2.4 ± 0.6	0.0008 ± 0.0002	1	
W102A	0.0076 ± 0.0005	0.2 ± 0.1	0.04 ± 0.02	43	
Y154A	0.0014 ± 0.0009	0.7 ± 0.2	0.002 ± 0.001	2.3	
Y205A	0.0012 ± 0.0006	0.5 ± 0.1	0.002 ± 0.001	2.7	
All values
are presented as apparent
kinetic parameters with the peptide concentration held constant at
2 μM. Values are reported here as the averages and standard
deviations from three separate experiments.

Kinetic Analysis with Cyclooctene Analogue (3)
Next, we choose to examine the ability of the mutants to process
an FPP analogue appended with a moiety different in shape from the
planar benzaldehyde group present in 2. Compound 3 incorporates a trans cyclo-octene group
for subsequent reaction via an inverse electron demand Diels–Alder
reaction. That type of conjugation reaction has the advantage of having
a rate of ligation of 2000 M–1 s–1, substantially faster than other traditionally
used ligation reactions including the “click” reaction.
However, compared with azides and alkynes, the cyclo-octene moiety
is larger and must be in the trans configuration.
Hence, we reasoned that it would be a good candidate to evaluate with
the mutant PFTases described here that have enlarged active sites.

Our initial screen of the mutant PFTases using the aforementioned
continuous fluorescence assay showed that, at high concentrations
of the cyclo-octene analogue, only the Y205Aβ mutant catalyzed
the incorporation of 3 at a faster rate compared to the
wild-type enzyme; the W102Aβ and Y154Aβ enzymes did catalyze
the transfer of 3 but at a slower rate (data not shown).
Hence a more detailed kinetic analysis was performed only with the
wild-type enzyme and the Y205Aβ mutant; kinetic constants from
those experiments are summarized in Table .

Kinetic Values for PFTase and the
Y205A Mutant Using the Cyclo-Octene Containing Analogue (3) as the Substrate
protein	kcat (s–1)	KM (μM)	kcat/KM (μM
s–1)	rel. kcat/KM	
WT	0.017 ± 0.002	0.2 ± 0.1	0.08 ± 0.04	1	
Y205A	0.082 ± 0.007	0.5 ± 0.2	0.16 ± 0.07	2	
All values
are presented as kinetic
parameters with the peptide concentration held constant at 2 μM.
Values are reported here as the averages and standard deviations from
three separate experiments.

Interestingly, for the wild-type enzyme, the KM value for 3 (0.2 μM) is 2.5-fold
less than that observed for FPP (0.5 μM, see Table ). For the Y205Aβ mutant, the trend is reversed
with the KM value for 3 being
higher than that for FPP. However, perhaps more importantly, the kcat value for 3 is almost 5-fold
higher for the Y205Aβ mutant compared with the wild-type enzyme.
Since the Y205Aβ mutant manifests a KM value that is submicromolar, it is relatively easy to saturate the
enzyme with 3 and hence fully capitalize on the ca. 5-fold
improvement in kcat for in vitro protein
labeling applications.

PFTase FRET Assay Using a Protein Substrate
and a Fluorescent
Isoprenoid
In addition to analogues 2 and 3 which contain bioorthogonal functionality, we also wanted
to evaluate some alternative substrates that contain intrinsically
fluorescent moieties. These latter compounds are particularly interesting
since their incorporation could, in principle, allow direct fluorescent
labeling of proteins without the need for a secondary modification
reaction to install the fluorophore. Several types of fluorescent
FPP analogues have been previously used to label proteins. However,
those molecules interfere with the continuous fluorescence assay used
for the experiments described above rendering kinetic analyses of
their activity difficult.

To solve this problem, we developed
a continuous fluorescence assay that can monitor the attachment of
a coumarin-containing FPP analogue (4) to a GFP variant
equipped with a C-terminal CVIA sequence that makes it a substrate
for PFTase. Because the emission spectrum of the coumarin fluorophore
overlaps with the excitation spectrum of GFP, PFTase mediated prenylation
with the coumarin analogue results in fluorescence resonance energy
transfer (FRET). Figure a shows that when
GFP-CVIA and the coumarin analogue are mixed together in the absence
of PFTase and the reaction is excited at 330 nm (a wavelength suitable
to excite the coumarin) emission occurs at 460 nm due to the coumarin
emission as well as a smaller amount at 510 nm due to GFP fluorescence;
this latter emission occurs because there is a low level of absorption
at 330 nm by GFP. However, upon addition of PFTase, a significant
increase in the 510 nm emission occurs along with a concomitant decrease
in 460 nm fluorescence signaling the covalent attachment of the coumarin
moiety to GFP. Figure b shows that the enzymatic
reaction can be monitored by exciting the coumarin fluorophore and
monitoring the increase in GFP fluorescence intensity using this FRET-based
process. This assay has the benefit of not only allowing continuous
monitoring of coumarin incorporation, but also does so using a whole
protein in lieu of a small peptide. The presence of the peptide sequence
at the C-terminus of a protein more accurately represents the true
context in which prenylation occurs compared with short peptide sequences
since upstream sequences are known to modulate substrate affinity
such as in the case of K-Ras.

In
order to confirm that the observed fluorescence increase was
due to covalent attachment of the coumarin moiety to the GFP, a variant
of GFP that contained a CVLL sequence instead of a CVIA tag was employed.
The CVLL CaaX-box is preferentially recognized by GGTase-I and is
not a good substrate for PFTase. If the observed increase in fluorescence
was due to association of GFP with either PFTase or the courmarin
analogue, then changing the CaaX-box should not affect the rate of
fluorescence increase. However, when the assay was performed using
GFP-CVLL (see ), a much slower
increase in fluorescence was observed compared with that seen with
GFP-CVIA. This is consistent with the fact that GFP-CVLL is a poor
substrate for PFTase. Finally, to definitively determine whether the
fluorescence increase was coming from the covalent modification of
the GFP, mass spectrometry was performed to confirm that GFP-CVIA
was being modified with the coumarin analogue. The ESI-MS results
(see ) showed that unmodified
GFP had a mass of 27 334 Da, whereas after reaction with the
coumarin analogue and PFTase, the GFP had been transformed to a species
with mass of 27 713 Da. That difference, 379 Da, is consistent
with covalent attachment of the courmain-isoprenoid to the GFP. Based
on these results it can be concluded that PFTase is catalyzing the
attachment of coumarin resulting in the FRET interaction between the
GFP-fluorophore and the coumarin moiety on the isoprenoid.

Development
of a continuous FRET assay for PFTase: (Above) Emission
spectra of a reaction mixture containing GFP-CVIA and coumarin FPP
analogue before and after the addition of PFTase showing overall decrease
in the fluorescence intensity of the coumarin at 460 nm with simultaneous
increase in the fluorescence intensity of GFP at 510 nm (λex = 330 nm). (Below) Continuous FRET assay based on labeling
of GFP with the coumarin analogue showing an increase in the fluorescence
intensity at 510 nm after the addition of PFTase (λex = 330 nm).

Kinetic Analysis with the
Coumarin Analogue
This FRET
assay described above was used to examine the rate of reaction for
all three mutant enzymes at high coumarin analogue (4) concentrations (data not shown). Similar to results obtained with
the cyclo-octene-containing compound (3), only the Y205Aβ
mutant showed an increased rate and was further investigated to determine
its kinetic parameters. As seen in Table ,
the Y205Aβ mutant enzyme manifests both a significant (ca. 25-fold)
increase in kcat and a decrease (10-fold)
in KM resulting in an overall impressive
300-fold increase in catalytic efficiency.

Kinetic
Values for PFTase and Three
Mutants Using Coumarin Containing Analogue (4) as the
Substrate
protein	kcat (min–1)	Km (μM)	kcat/KM (μM min–1)	rel. kcat/KM	
WT	0.08 ± 0.01	1.4 ± 0.3	0.06 ± 0.01	1	
Y205A	2.1 ± 0.3	0.12 ± 0.08	20 ± 10	300	
These values
were generated using
the PFTase FRET assay described herein. All values are reported as
apparent kinetic parameters with the GFP-CVIA concentration held constant
at 2.5 μM. Values are reported here as the averages and standard
deviations from three separate experiments.

CNTF NBD Labeling
Next, we examined the activity of
a different fluorescent FPP analogue that incorporates an NBD group
developed by Waldmann and co-workers. Unfortunately, that compound cannot be assayed in the continuous
fluorescence assay or the FRET assay described above due to incompatible
spectral properties. Hence, a discontinuous assay based on SDS-PAGE
and fluorescence scanning of the resulting gel was employed. Given
the effort involved in performing this protocol, we elected to use
a form of cilliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) tagged with a C-terminal
CVIA PFTase recognition sequence as a substrate. CNTF is a neurotrophic
factor that is currently being investigated for a number of therapeutic
applications,− and hence fluorescently labeled forms of CNTF would
be useful for a variety of studies.

CNTF was prenylated with
the NBD analogue (5) using both the wild-type enzyme
and the Y205Aβ mutant. The reaction was monitored as described
above using a gel-based assay coupled with fluorescence scanning to
detect the desired product. A plot illustrating the production of
NBD-labeled CNTF as a function of time for the two different enzymes
is shown in Figure . Inspection of that data
reveals that the Y205Aβ mutant enzyme catalyzes the reaction
approximately 1.5-fold faster than the wild-type. Since the reactions
were performed at high (10 μM) concentrations of 5, it is likely that this effect is due to an increase in kcat. While the effect of mutation is not as
substantial for this FPP analogue,
these results are still significant from a practical perspective since
use of the Y205Aβ mutant allows for a reduction in reaction
time. Such a decrease would be helpful in decreasing potential proteolytic
degradation that is sometimes observed in enzymatic labeling procedures.

Labeling
of CNTF with NBD analogue 5 by wild-type and Y205Aβ
mutant PFTase. Fluorescence intensity of the fluorescence scan shown
in the  was calculated using ImageJ software.
Conversion is based on the ratio of fluorescence at the given time
point to the fluorescence at its maximum. The lines on the graph indicate
the initial rate of enzyme-catalyzed NBD incorporation determined
in the first 15 min of reaction.

Computational Modeling of Analogue Binding
To better
understand the interactions between the different FPP analogues studied
here and their recognition by mutant PFTases, a series of computational
modeling studies were performed. Models for the different PFTase mutant
proteins were generated using the crystal structure of wild-type PFTase,
and then the various FPP analogues were modeled in the isoprenoid
binding site using a molecular docking program. Of the four FPP analogues
studied, aldehyde 2 and coumarin 4 manifested
decreased KM values for different mutant
enzymes relative to their activity with the wild type, suggesting
that mutation improves their binding affinity. Consequently, modeling
focused on those analogues.

When analogue 2 is
docked into the wild-type enzyme active site (Figure a, red), the benzaldehyde group becomes occluded by the indole
side chain of W102β amino acid which prevents the analogue from
adopting an extended conformation of the type observed for FPP (green).
Instead, the structure is “kinked” in the region of
the second isoprenoid unit relative to the normal FPP-bound structure.
It is quite likely that this perturbation is deleterious for binding
and for efficient catalysis. In contrast, when 2 is docked
into the W102β mutant structure (orange), sufficient space is
available for the benzaldehyde moiety to fit into the area previously
occupied by the indole, resulting in an overall conformation similar
to that for FPP with minimal changes in the isoprenoid structure in
the region where catalysis occurs.

Computational modeling structures of benzaldehyde
analogues in
PFTase. (Above) Overlays of benzaldehyde analogue docked in WT structure
(red), benzaldehyde analogue docked in W102A mutant (orange), and
FPP bound in the WT structure (green). The peptide substrate (purple)
and the three relevant amino acids (blue) are also displayed. Note
the benzaldehyde analogue docked into mutant structure comes into
contact with the tryptophan residue in the overlay. (Below) Benzaldehyde
analogue docked into W102Aβ mutant binding pocket. The structure
is shown as spheres to show the benzaldehyde moiety binding into the
place occupied by the tryptophan residue in the WT structure. Benzaldehyde
analogue showed in orange, peptides substrate shown in purple, residues
Y154β and Y205β shown in blue, and the mutated W102β
shown in yellow.

The docking results for
the coumarin analogue 4 show
a more drastic change in binding conformation (Figure ). When 4 is docked into the wild-type structure,
the highest scoring pose is one in which the coumarin ring is positioned
outside the active site (red). Interestingly, that putative binding
site partially overlaps with a second isoprenoid binding site present
on PFTase previously identified in X-ray crystallographic experiments;
in the PFTase catalytic cycle, it has been hypothesized that the isoprenoid
group from a nascent prenylated protein is translocated to this second
site prior to product release. Thus, it is reasonable that the coumarin
analogue could bind in this site although not in a catalytically productive
fashion. Lower scoring poses do show binding of 4 within
the active site, but in those cases, the structure of the isoprenoid
is distorted in a way that is likely to be less productive for enzymatic
reaction as was observed with 2, described above. A more
likely explanation for how 4 binds in the active site
is that side chain rearrangements occur that allow the analogue to
be better accommodated; this has been previously observed in the binding
of other probes to PFTase. In contrast,
when the coumarin analogue is docked into the Y205A mutant structure
(orange), the aromatic moiety fits neatly into the space previously
occupied by the tyrosyl phenolic side chain. This in turn allows for
the rest of the isoprenoid chain to adopt a conformation similar to
that manifested by FPP (green). Taken together, these computational
results provide a compelling rationale for understanding the behavior
of these mutant PFTase variants and suggest that docking experiments
should be useful in predicting the effects of mutations as this enzyme
is further engineered.

Computational modeling structures of coumarin analogues
in PFTase.
(Above) Overlays of coumarin analogue docked in WT structure (red),
courmarin analogue docked in Y205A mutant (orange), and FPP bound
in the WT structure (green). The peptide substrate (purple) and the
three relevant amino acids (blue) are also displayed with the surface
of the WT enzyme. (Below) Coumarin analogue docked into Y205A mutant
binding pocket. The structure is shown as spheres to show the coumarin
moiety binding into the place occupied by the tyrosine residue in
the WT structure. Coumarin analogue showed in orange, peptides substrate
shown in purple, residues W102β and Y154β shown in blue,
and the mutated Y205β shown in yellow.

Conclusion
In conclusion, site directed mutagenesis
has been used to enlarge
the isoprenoid binding site of PFTase. Those mutant enzymes are able
to process several FPP analogues that are significantly larger than
FPP more efficiently than the wild-type enzyme. In some cases the
catalytic efficiency has been increased ca. 300-fold. Much of this
improved catalytic activity has come from an improvement in kcat, which is important if PFTase is used for
a labeling reagent in vitro. For use in in vivo studies where the
substrate concentration of the FPP analogue is at lower concentrations,
decreases in KM will also be important
for improving the enzyme labeling. One of these mutants has been used
to prepare a fluorescently labeled form of CNTF, a therapeutically
important protein. Computational docking experiments have been used
to provide a rationale for understanding the interactions between
the larger FPP analogues and the mutant enzymes. As PFTase labeling
becomes more widely used and the number of FPP analogues grows, these
enzymes should contribute significantly to the development of more
advanced protein therapeutics.

Experimental Section
General Synthesis
FPP analogues were synthesized as
previously reported.,,, Reagents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
unless otherwise noted.

Mutant Creation
PFTase mutants were
created using the
Quikchange II Site Directed Mutagenesis Kit from Agilent (Catalogue
# 200523). The plasmid used as the template for mutants has been previously
described. In brief, primers were designed
containing an alanine mutation for each of the three amino acid positions
for W102β, Y154β, and Y205β (see ). The manufacturer’s protocol was followed for PCR
conditions, DpnI DNA digestion, and E. coli transformation. Plasmids were purified using Wizard Plus SV Minipreps DNA Purification System (Catalogue # A1460). Mutations
were confirmed via Sanger type DNA sequencing from the University
of Minnesota Genomics center. Plasmids containing the proper mutation
were transformed in electrocompetent JM109(DE3) cells and stored at
−80 °C for long-term storage.

Protein Purification
JM109(DE3) cells were plated on
LB-agar plates containing 50 μg/mL streptomycin and grown overnight
at 37 °C. Single colonies were used to inoculate 50 mL of LB
media containing 50 μg/mL streptomycin and grown overnight at
37 °C shaking at 250 rpm. 10 mL of that overnight culture was
added to 1 L LB media containing 50 μg/mL streptomycin and grown
to an OD600 of 0.8, by shaking at 250 rpm at 37 °C,
which took approximately 3 h. Cells were induced to express the PFTase
by addition of IPTG and ZnCl2 to final concentrations of
1 mM, and 500 μM, respectively. Cells were grown for 4 h at
37 °C, shaken at 250 rpm. Cells were harvested by centrifugation
at 5400g for 10 min. Pelleted cells were stored at
−80 °C prior to use.

The enzyme purification procedure
for the various PFTases was performed as previously described. Briefly, the cell pellet from 1 L of liquid
broth was suspended in 50 mL of lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris·HCl
(pH 7.0), 200 mM NaCl, 5 μM ZnCl2, 5 mM MgCl2, 20 mM imidazole, and 1 mM β-mercaptoethanol. To this,
1 mL of protease inhibitor cocktail was added (Sigma-Aldrich), and
the cells were sonicated at 50 W for 5 min (10 s on/10 s off). The
resulting solution was centrifuged at 13 000g for 30 min and the soluble fraction was then loaded onto a 30 mL
Ni-NTA column bed equilibrated with lysis buffer at a rate of approximately
2 mL/min. The column was washed with lysis buffer until the A280 reached a minimum level where no further
was observed (approximately 200 mL) and the PFTase enzyme was eluted
using the above lysis buffer supplemented with 250 mM imidazole. Fractions
containing PFTase were pooled together and concentrated using an Amicon
Ultra-15 centrifugal filter from Millipore, and concentrated to 4
mL. This was diluted 10-fold with buffer containing 50 mM Tris·HCl,
200 mM NaCl, 5 μM ZnCl2, 5 mM MgCl2, and
1 mM β-mercaptoethanol and concentrated again to a volume of
4 mL; this dilution/concentration process was repeated a total of
three times. The enzyme was stored in the latter buffer containing
50% glycerol at −80 °C. This purification typically yielded
approximately 20 mg/L of liquid culture of PFTase.

Continuous
fluorescence Assay for PFTase Activity Measurement
The assay
for PFTase activity employed here using FPP and analogues 2 and 3 as substrates is based on the previously
published assay by Pompliano et al. and
later refined by the Poulter group.N-Dansyl-GCVLS was preincubated with DTT for 30 min to ensure
that no disulfide was present. After incubation, the peptide/DTT solution
was used to make an assay solution that had a final concentration
of 2 μM dansyl-CVLS, 5 mM DTT, 50 mM Tris·HCl (pH 7.5),
10 mM MgCl2, 10 μM ZnCl2, 0.2% n-octyl-β-d-glucoside, and varying concentrations
of the FPP analogue being investigated, ranging from 0 to 25 μM.
The enzyme concentration varied between 5 nM to 50 nM depending on
the FPP analogue being studied.

The reactions were performed
using a DTX 880 Multimode Detector plate reader (Beckman Coulter)
in a black pinch bar 96-well plate (Nunc 237105) with a reaction volume
of 250 μL. The reactions were performed by addition of 100 μL
of a concentrated reaction solution (5 μM dansyl-GCVLS, 12.5
mM DTT, 125 mM Tris·HCl (pH 7.5), 25 mM MgCl2, 25
μM ZnCl2, 0.5% n-octyl-β-d-glucoside). The diphosphate analogue was added at varying
concentrations along with H2O to give a volume in the well
of 230 μL. An initial fluorescent measurement was taken using
the excitation filter A340/10 to excite at 340 nm and emission was
monitored at 505 nm using the F535/25 filter. Then, 20 μL of
PFTase in enzyme buffer (50 mM Tris·HCl (pH 7.5), 50 μM
ZnCl2, 5 mM MgCl2, 20 mM KCl, 1 mM DTT, 1 mg/mL
BSA) was used to initiate the enzymatic reaction. The fluorescence
was monitored until it reached a plateau signifying that the reaction
was complete.

The data was exported from the Multimode Analysis
Software, and
the initial rate values were calculated using Microsoft Excel. This
rate was calculated using the linear region of the progress curve.
This was usually in the first 20 min of the assay, but for assays
containing low substrate concentrations this time period was shorter.
The enzymatic rate of each reaction was determined by converting the
rate obtained in fluorescence intensity units (FIU/s) to μM/s
with the equation vi = RP/ΔF, where vi is the enzymatic
rate in μM/s, R is the measured rate in FIU/s,
and P is the amount of product formed in the assay.
ΔF is the change in fluorescence intensity
between the start of the assay and when the reaction is complete.
This rate data was exported to KaliedaGraph 3.6 and the kcat and Km were determined
using a nonlinear least-squares analysis. All kinetic values reported
here are apparent values because they were measured at single fixed
concentration of peptide substrate.

FRET Assay for PFTase Activity
Using Coumarin-Containing FPP
Analogue 4
PFTase activity with coumarin-containing
analogue 4 was detected using a FRET based assay. A 1
mL mixture containing 2.4 μM GFP-CVIA, 5 mM DTT, 10 mM MgCl2, 10 μM ZnCl2 and 50 mM Tris·HCl, pH
7.5, was transferred to a cuvette and the emission at 510 nm (λex = 330 nm) was monitored until a stable baseline was obtained.
The reaction was initiated with 50 nM PFTase of the wild-type enzyme
and 10 nM for the mutant enzyme and the increase in the fluorescence
was monitored until a plateau was reached. To determine the kinetic
parameters, the concentration of 4 was varied from 0.1
to 20 μM.

Gel-Based Assay for PFTase Activity Using
NBD-Containing FPP
Analogue 5
PFTase activity with the NBD-containing
analogue 5 was measured using a gel-based assay. A reaction
mixture containing 2 μM CNTF-CVIA, 50 mM Tris·HCl (pH 7.5),
10 mM MgCl2, 50 μM ZnCl2, 15 mM DTT, 20
mM KCl, 10 μM 5, and 5 nM PFTase was incubated
at 30 °C and 500 μL aliquots were removed at various times,
flash frozen, and lyophilized to dryness. The resulting residue was
resuspended in 20 μL SDS-PAGE loading buffer and fractionated
on a 12% SDS-PAGE gel. The labeled protein was visualized by scanning
the gel for fluorescence using a Storm 840 fluorescence scanner with
450 nm excitation wavelength and 520 nm long pass emission filter.
Quantitation of fluorescent images were performed using ImageJ software.

Computational Modeling
For modeling of FPP analogues
into the active site of PFTase (pdb file 1JCR), docking was performed using MacroModel
v 9.9 and its program Glide. The PFTase crystal structure was prepared
using the default settings in the protein preparation wizard as part
of the Maestro (Schrodinger, version 9.3) package. To generate models
of the mutant enzymes, the PFTase structure generated from the protein
wizard was used and only the mutant modification was made in Maestro.
Once that was accomplished, the mutant amino acid was subjected to
a local minimization search using the MacroModel feature to find the
most likely conformation of the amino acid within the binding pocket.
A receptor grid large enough to encompass the entire binding site
for the FPP analogues was generated from the prepared PFTase enzyme
or the prepared mutant enzymes. A standard precision docking parameter
was set and 10 000 ligand poses per docking were run per analogue
per enzyme model. The conformations with the overall highest binding
score were chosen for display here.

Molecular volumes calculations
of FPP and FPP analogues were performed using the volume calculation
script from Schrodinger, version 9.3.

Supporting Information Available
Description of primers for PFTase mutants, MS results for NBD labeled
CNTF, gel results for NBD labeling of CNTF, and stereoscopic images
for all structural figures. This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc500240p_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Dr. Mohammad Rashidian for the preparation
of compound 2 and Dr. Jake Vick for help in mutant construction.
This work was funded in part by the National Institutes of Health
(GM058442, GM084152, and T32 GM008700), an award from the Research
Corporation for Science Advancement (#20888) and support from the
Minnesota Supercomputer Institute.

