Introduction
Structurally defined
and homogeneous glycoforms are of benefit
for applications of glycoproteins as biotherapeutics and tools for
biological research.− Unfortunately, precise structural control of protein glycosylation
is difficult to achieve in conventional glycoprotein expression systems.
Thus, chemists have sought to contribute new technologies to conjugate
chemically defined glycans to either synthetic or recombinant proteins.
One approach is to replace natural protein–glycan linkages
with conservatively altered structures generated by chemoselective
ligation., In a typical workflow, the protein is first
engineered to display a uniquely reactive functional group that serves
as a point of attachment for glycans armed with complementary functionality.
Popular chemistries include disulfide conjugation,, elimination/addition
reactions,, azide/alkyne-based click chemistries,− and oxime formation.−

A central challenge of such efforts is to arm the protein
for chemical
glycosylation only at the desired sites. We recently achieved this
goal using the aldehyde tag method.− We installed a six amino-acid
sequence (LCTPSR) recognized by the formylglycine generating enzyme
(FGE) near the C-terminus of a recombinant protein; FGE converted
the Cys residue to the aldehyde-bearing residue formylglycine (fGly)
during coexpression in E. coli. Subsequently, the fGly aldehyde was chemically
conjugated to synthetic aminooxy glycans, affording homogeneous oxime-linked
glycoprotein products. Notably, the oxime-linked products bear resemblance
to native N-glycans (Figure A) and therefore are close structural mimics.

Oxime-linked glycoconjugates.
(A) Natural N-glycan
linkage is structurally similar to oxime-glycan linkage. (B) Schematic
representation of incorporation of the aldehyde tag at the glycosyation
site of Fc in order to make oxime-linked glycoconjugates.

In our previous work, high Cys-to-fGly conversion
efficiencies
were achieved by overexpressing recombinant FGE alongside the tagged
protein of interest.− An alternative to this in vivo enzymatic conversion
approach is to express proteins with unconverted Cys residues, and
then modify them with recombinant FGE ex vivo. X-ray
structures of FGE in complex with synthetic substrates show the bound
peptides in an extended conformation, consistent with the assumption
that FGE modifies the target Cys co-translationally, before folding
has occurred., Not surprisingly then, FGE readily
introduces fGly residues on short synthetic peptide substrates, and on recombinant proteins wherein the aldehyde tag sequence was
added at a C-terminal position.

Whether FGE can modify internal sequences located in relatively
structured parts of a folded protein remains an open question. For
applications in glycoengineering, this is a critical issue since most
protein glycosylation sites reside at internal positions rather than
near the termini. The crystallizable fragment (Fc) of IgG, for example,
is a homodimer that contains a highly conserved N-glycosylation site. The Fc domain typically exists as a mixture
of different glycoforms wherein each monomer might be differently
glycosylated.− These glycans modulate the binding of Fc to various
immune receptors, thereby altering antibody effector function.− Therefore, methods for preparing specific Fc domain glycoforms have
been the subject of considerable interest.,,−

Here, we demonstrate that the aldehyde tag can serve as a
site
for internal chemical glycosylation of the Fc domain. We expressed
in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells an Fc construct in which the N-glycosylation sequence was replaced with the FGE consensus
motif. The protein underwent minimal Cys-to-fGly conversion during
expression, but could be efficiently converted in vitro by reaction with recombinant FGE from Mycobacterium
tuberculosis (M. tb). We conjugated
aldehyde-tagged Fc to aminooxy N-acetylglucosamine
(AO-GlcNAc), the protein-proximal residue in native N-glycans. The oxime-linked GlcNAc residue was then elaborated by
enzymatic transfer of complex N-glycan moieties using
an engineered bacterial endo-β-N-acetylglucosaminidase
from Streptococcus pyogenes (EndoS-D233Q)
(Figure B). This
ability to install a reactive aldehyde at the Fc glycosylation site
offers a new route to make glycosylated antibodies and a platform
to study glycan-mediated functions.

Results and Discussion
Replacement
of the Fc Glycosylation Site with an Aldehyde Tag
The natural
Fc N-glycosylation site lies within
the C′E-loop; we sought a motif that introduced negligible
structural perturbations while also introducing the minimal recognition
elements for FGE conversion of Cys-to-fGly. Human FGE can convert
peptide substrates containing the minimal CxPxR motif; however, the
CTPSR motif is more efficiently converted in peptide and model protein
substrates., Extending the FGE recognition
motif to 13 residues (LCTPSRAALLTGR) can offer increased conversion
efficiency in model systems as well. Based
on this information, we constructed the three aldehyde tag Fc sequences
shown in Table : CxPxR (Fc1), CTPSR (Fc2),
and CTPSRxxxLTGR (Fc3), where x denotes the native amino acids in
the Fc sequence. In all cases, the Cys/fGly site replaced the Asn
residue that is normally glycosylated. Notably, each construct possessed
the same total number of residues as the wild type sequence. Amino
acid changes were made via point mutagenesis rather than, for example,
sequence additions or insertions.

Aldehyde Tag Sequences
Installed at
Fc Glycosylation Site
Fc construct	Sequence	Experimental Outcome	
Wild Type Fc	Y-N-S-T-Y-R-V-V-S-V-L-T-V	N/A	
Fc1 CxPxR	Y-C-S-P-Y-R-V-V-S-V-L-T-V	No fGly formation	
Fc2 CTPSR	Y-C-T-P-S-R-V-V-S-V-L-T-V	In vitro fGly formation	
Fc3 CTPSRxxxLTGR	Y-C-T-P-S-R-V-V-S-L-T-G-R	No expression	
N: Natural N-glycosylation site. N/A: Not Applicable.

Genes encoding the Fc1, 2,
and 3 constructs were introduced into
the commercial pFuse vector (InvivoGen). As controls, analogous Fc
constructs in which the Cys residue was mutated to an Ala residue
were also generated. Following expression in CHO cells, the Fc proteins
were purified using protein A/G agarose. The expression levels of
Fc1 and Fc2 were similar to that of wild type glycosylated Fc (∼1
mg/L). The Fc3 construct showed little to no expression, perhaps because
the longer aldehyde tag sequence disrupted its overall structure;
this construct was therefore no longer pursued.

Incorporation of aldehyde
tags at the glycosylation site of Fc.
(A) SDS-PAGE of fGly formation in Fc monomer. Purified Fc was treated
with (+) or without (-) M. tb FGE. Following FGE
incubation, tagged Fcs were reacted with AF488 hydroxylamine. AF488
fluorescence (Top); colloidal blue stain (Bottom). (B) SDS-PAGE of
fGly formation of aldehyde-tagged Fc dimer as a result of M. tb FGE activity. Fcs were incubated with either no (-),
active (+), or heat killed (HK) FGE follewed by reaction with AF488
hydroxylamine. AF488 fluorescence (Top); colloidal blue stain (Bottom).
(C) Deconvoluted mass spectra of Fc2 treated with 1 equiv M. tb FGE at pH 9 for 20 h at 42 °C followed by reaction
with O-benzylhydroxylamine at pH 4 for 20 h at 30
°C. (Top) untreated Fc2. (Middle) Fc2 treated with M.
tb FGE. (Bottom) Fc2 treated with M. tb FGE
and reacted with O-benzylhydroxylamine. Expected
masses (Da): Fc2, 25914; fGly-Fc2, 25896; fGly-Fc2(M-H2O), 25878; Oxime-benzyl Fc2, 26001.

To probe for the conversion of Cys-to-fGly, we incubated
Fc1 and
2 with AlexaFluor 488 (AF488) hydroxylamine (Invitrogen) in sodium
acetate buffer (pH 4) and analyzed the products by SDS-PAGE with fluorescence
scanning. Neither Fc1 nor Fc2 exhibited detectable fluorophore labeling,
indicating that the CHO cells’ endogenous FGE did not convert
Cys-to-fGly at a level detectable by in-gel fluorescence. These unconverted
proteins were thus ideal substrates to test M. tb FGE’s ability to convert an internal sequence in
vitro. The Fc constructs were incubated with M. tb FGE (0.1 equiv) in Tris buffer (pH 9) with 0.5 mM dithiothreitol
(DTT) at 30 °C. An appealing feature of this FGE ortholog is
its tolerance for a variety of CxPxR sequences. After in vitro treatment with FGE, the
Fc1 and 2 proteins were again reacted with AF488 hydroxylamine. Fc2
showed labeling by in-gel fluorescence analysis, indicating that fGly
conversion had occurred. The control Fc2 Cys-to-Ala mutant showed
no detectable fluorescence (Figure A), confirming
that fGly was present exclusively at the desired glycosylation site.
As further verification of enzymatic conversion, we treated Fc2 with
heat killed FGE and saw no reactivity with AF488 hydroxylamine (Figure B). In contrast to Fc2, Fc1 exhibited no detectable
labeling after incubation with active FGE. This observation suggests
that despite its promiscuity among CxPxR sequences in short peptides, M. tb FGE requires the more native CTPSR substrate sequence
in folded proteins.

We next sought to optimize the efficiency
of in vitro Cys-to-fGly conversion by M.
tb FGE. The reaction
was relatively insensitive to different buffer salts but showed a
strong preference for alkaline pH (optimum conversion was obtained
at pH 9) (). We observed a pronounced
effect of reaction temperature on conversion efficiency as assessed
qualitatively by in-gel fluorescence intensity. We performed identical
reactions (Fc2 with 0.4 equiv M. tb FGE in Tris buffer
(pH 9) with 0.5 mM DTT) at temperatures ranging from 25 to 45 °C.
fGly-Fc2 was then labeled with AF488 hydroxylamine and analyzed by
SDS-PAGE (Figure A). The intensity of Fc2’s
fluorescence increased with reaction temperature, indicating more
efficient fGly formation. This observation may reflect temperature-dependent
conformational fluctuations that give FGE better access to its internal
substrate sequence. Since maximum conversion occurred at 42 °C,
all subsequent FGE reactions were performed at this temperature.

Optimization
of the in vitro Cys-to-fGly conversion
efficiency by M. tb FGE. (A) Temperature optimization.
Fc2 was treated with 0.4 equiv M. tb FGE at 25–45
°C for 20 h before labeling with AF488 hydroxylamine. Reactions
were reduced and resolved by SDS-PAGE. fGly formation was assessed
by AF488 fluorescence (Top) and protein loading by colloidal blue
stain (Bottom). (B) FGE dosage. Fc2 was treated with 0.5–5
equiv M. tb FGE at 42 °C for 20 h before conjugation
to AF488 hydroxylamine. Reactions were resolved by SDS-PAGE. fGly
formation was assessed by AF488 fluorescence (Top) and protein loading
by colloidal blue stain (Bottom).

Next, we focused on optimizing the stoichiometry of FGE to
Fc2.
Reactions containing Fc were incubated with various amounts of FGE
ranging from 0.05 to 5 equiv. After the enzyme reaction, fGly-Fc2
constructs were probed with AF488 hydroxylamine and analyzed by SDS-PAGE
(Figure B). The in-gel fluorescence reached
a maximum at 1 equiv of FGE, suggesting that the enzyme is being consumed
in the reaction rather than functioning catalytically. In the proposed
mechanism of human FGE catalysis,, completion
of the catalytic cycle requires consumption of a reducing equivalent
from the medium. DTT was proposed to fulfill this function in the
context of in vitro reactions.M. tb FGE does not seem to follow this
paradigm; even in the presence of excess DTT, the enzyme appears to
function stoichiometrically. Further optimization with M.
tb FGE might focus on identifying a reducing agent that can
complete its catalytic cycle in vitro.

Having
optimized the in vitro FGE reaction by
qualitative assessments, we next sought to quantitate both the Cys-to-fGly
conversion process as well as the yield of oxime formation. We confirmed
fGly formation by liquid chromatography electrospray ionization mass
spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS) analysis of Fc monomers generated by DTT
reduction. Following FGE treatment, we observed ions corresponding
to aldehyde-tagged (fGly-Fc2) and unconverted (Cys-Fc2) Fc2 monomers
by MS (Figure C). Based on their relative
mass spectral abundances, we calculated the Cys-to-fGly conversion
to be 76% under optimized conditions. To assess the efficiency of
oxime formation, we incubated fGly-Fc2 with O-benzylhydroxylamine.
Ions corresponding to oxime-conjugated (oxime-benzyl Fc2) and unconverted
Cys-Fc2 were observed (Figure C). Unconjugated
fGly-Fc2 was below the limit of detection, indicating that quantitative
oxime conjugation had occurred. Control reactions using the Cys-to-Ala
Fc2 mutant, which does not contain fGly, showed no FGE conversion
or reaction with O-benzylhydroxylamine (). LC-ESI-MS analysis was also performed
on the Fc dimer to verify that both Fc subunits contained the aldehyde
modification ().

Chemoenzymatic
Glycosylation of fGly-Fc2
After the
successful introduction of a reactive aldehyde at the glycosylation
site of Fc, we sought to introduce defined glycans by oxime formation
and enzymatic elaboration. Aminooxy (AO) GlcNAc was synthesized as
previously described and conjugated to
fGly-Fc2 in sodium acetate buffer (pH 4) (Figure A). The formation of the corresponding glycoconjugate was
confirmed by lectin blot probing with wheat germ agglutinin conjugated
to AlexaFluor 647 (WGA-AF647). WGA binding was observed only for the
product of fGly-Fc2. Control reactions using either non-FGE treated
Fc2 or the Cys-to-Ala Fc2 mutant did not give products that bound
to WGA (Figure B). LC-ESI-MS analysis verified
oxime-GlcNAc formation on the Fc dimer (Figure C). To ensure that the Fc domain retained its overall structure after
FGE conversion and oxime formation, we confirmed that the glycosylated
Fc2 dimer could still bind to protein A/G resin ().

AO GlcNAc conjugation to aldehyde-tagged Fc2 dimer. Fc
constructs
were treated with M. tb FGE at pH 9 for 20 h at 42
°C followed by conjugation to AO GlcNAc at pH 4 for 20 h at 30
°C. (A) Schematic of AO GlcNAc conjugation to fGly-Fc2. (B) Lectin
blot of Fc construcs following conjugation to AO GlcNAc. Conjugation
of AO GlcNAc was assessed using WGA-AF647 (Top) and protein loading
by India ink (Bottom). (C) Deconvoluted mass spectrum of fGly-Fc2
(Top) and oxime-GlcNAc Fc2 (Bottom). Expected masses (Da): Cys-Fc2,
51824; fGly-Fc2 (M-2H2O), 51754; FGly-Fc2 + 1GlcNAc (M-H2O), 51990; fGly-Fc2 +2GlcNAc, 52226.

With oxime-GlcNAc Fc2 in hand, we next sought to elaborate
the
glycans analogously to native glycosylated Fc. Previous work has shown
that IgG glycans can be remodeled using endo-β-N-acetylglucosaminidases, which can be engineered to transfer oxazoline
glycans onto single core GlcNAc-Asn residues at natural glycosylation
sites.− Moreover, the endoglycosidase EndoA has promiscuous transglycosylation
activity on GlcNAc moieties attached to peptides or proteins via non-natural
linkages (i.e., triazole, thioether, and disulfide-linked GlcNAc)., However, this enzyme is limited with regard to the complexity of
its glycan substrates. A mutant form of EndoS (EndoS-D233Q), by contrast,
can transfer complex glycan oxazolines to GlcNAc-modified IgG and
Fc, recapitulating the native structures,, and is thus ideally suited for Fc glycoengineering. However, EndoS
is highly specific for IgG Fc N-linked GlcNAc residues
and will not elaborate Asn-GlcNAc sites on other proteins or on denatured
IgG,, suggesting sensitivity to the protein structure
surrounding the glycosylation site. Thus, the ability of EndoS to
elaborate oxime-GlcNAc within the aldehyde tag motif on the Fc was
an open question.

Chemoenzymatic glycan remodeling of oxime-GlcNAc Fc2.
(A) Representative
schematic of the transglycosylation reaction. LC-ESI-MS analysis of
(B) oxime-GlcNAc Fc2, (C) transglycosylation product from the EndoS-D233Q
catalyzed reaction between oxime-GlcNAc Fc2 and S2 oxazoline or (D)
G2 oxazoline. Expected masses (Da): fGly-Fc2 (with disulfides), 25897;
fGly-Fc2 (reduced disulfides), 25901; Oxime-GlcNAc Fc2 (with disulfides),
26115; Oxime-GlcNAc Fc2 (with reduced disulfides) 26119; S2-Fc2, 28117;
G2-Fc2, 27539. Lectin blot of Fc2 dimer constructs following glycosylation
remodeling. (E) Glycan elaboration to oxime-S2 was assessed using
SNA-FITC (Top) and protein loading by india ink (Bottom). Lanes: 1,
Fc2; 2, Oxime-GlcNAc Fc2; 3, S2-Fc. (F) Glycan elaboration to oxime-G2
was assessed using ECA-FITC (Top) and protein loading by India ink
(Bottom). Lanes: 1, Fc2; 2, Oxime-GlcNAc Fc2; 3, G2-Fc2.

We incubated oxime-GlcNAc Fc2 with EndoS-D233Q
and two oxazoline
glycans previously shown to exhibit good substrate activity: a sialylated
complex-type glycan (S2) and its unsialylated congener (G2) (Figure A). Reactions were performed in Tris buffer (pH
7.5) at 30 °C for 1.5 h. Product formation was monitored by LC-ESI-MS.
Ions corresponding to S2-glycosylated Fc2 (S2-Fc2), oxime-GlcNAc Fc2,
and fGly-Fc2 were observed, the latter presumably derived from hydrolysis
of either oxime conjugate. The relative abundances of oxime-GlcNAc
Fc2 and S2-Fc2 indicated a transfer yield of 51% (Figure C). The analogous reaction
with G2 oxazoline proceeded similarly, with a glycan transfer yield of 61% (Figure D). Further,
we analyzed the enzymatic reaction products by lectin blot probing
with the sialic acid-binding Sambucus nigra agglutinin conjugated to fluorescein isothiocyanate (SNA-FITC) (Figure E) or the terminal N-acetyllactosamine-binding Erythrina crista-galli agglutinin conjugated to FITC
(ECA-FITC) (Figure F). Significant lectin
binding was observed only for the transglycosylation products. These
results demonstrate that oxime-linked GlcNAc at the glycosylation
site of Fc2 is a suitable substrate for EndoS-D233Q. This is the first
report of transglycosylation activity with this non-natural GlcNAc
linkage, as well as the first to show transfer of complex-type glycans
onto a non-natural linkage on a fully folded protein.

Conclusions
In summary, an internal aldehyde tag sequence can replace native N-glycosylation sites in the IgG Fc domain without perturbing
protein structure. Despite their location within a folded protein,
these sites can be converted by FGE in vitro, generating
a reactive aldehyde for subsequent chemical glycosylation. EndoS,
previously thought to be highly specific for the Fc N-glycan sequon, can elaborate oxime-linked GlcNAc residues conjugated
to the aldehyde tagged Fc. We used these tools to generate specific
Fc glycoforms that emulate native structures. While this work focused
on Fc glycoengineering, it can serve as a model for tailored glycosylation
of other proteins by a combination of genetic, chemical, and enzymatic
methods.

Experimental Section
Expression and Purification of Aldehyde Tagged
Fc Constructs
The plasmids encoding Fc constructs were transiently
transfected
into CHO cells using TransIT-LT1 (MirusBio) following the manufacturer’s
protocol. CHO cells were cultured in F-12 media (HyClone) containing
5% ultralow IgG fetal bovine serum (Gibco) in a humidified atmosphere
of 5% CO2 at 37 °C. Two to four days after transfection,
the media was collected and centrifuged at 3700g for
15 min. The media was then concentrated using a 10-kDa spin concentrator
(Millipore). The concentrate was diluted (1:1) with phosphate buffered
saline (PBS) and purified using Protein A/G agarose (Pierce).

Expression
and Purification of M. tb FGE
Recombinant M. tb FGE was expressed
in E. coli as previously reported. Briefly, BL21 (DE3) E. coli harboring a pBAD plasmid containing a His6-tagged M. tb FGE were grown in LB media supplemented with 75 μg/mL
ampicillin at 37 °C. When OD600 reached 0.5, 100 mM
isopropyl-1-thio-β-d-galactopyranoside was added, and
the temperature was lowered to 18 °C. After 18 h, the cells were
harvested and lysed. The His6-tagged protein was purified
using Ni-NTA-agarose beads (Qiagen) following the manufacturer’s
protocol. FGE was eluted with 50 mM Tris, 500 mM NaCl, 250 mM imidazole,
10% glycerol, and 1 mM DTT, pH 7.5. The eluted protein was concentrated
to &lt;2 mL and further purified on a Superdex 75 column (GE Healthcare)
using elution buffer without imidazole. Purified FGE was concentrated
to 7 mg/mL and stored at −80 °C.

Expression and Purification
of EndoS-D233Q
The EndoS-D233Q
plasmid was previously constructed and
was transformed into BL21 (DE3) E. coli. The transformants were cultured in 2YT broth at 37 °C. When
OD600 reached 0.8, 1 mM isopropyl β-d-thiogalactoside
was added, and the temperature was lowered to 25 °C. After overnight
growth, cells were harvested and frozen at −80 °C prior
to protein purification. Bacterial pellets were resuspended and lysed
in B-Per Bacterial Protein Extraction Reagent (Pierce) supplemented
with 10 μg/mL of DNase I. Cell lysate was centrifuged at 26000g for 20 min at 4 °C, and the supernatant was applied
to Glutathione-Superflow resin (Clontech). Samples were incubated
at 4 °C for 60 min with gentle agitation. The resin was first
washed with PBS, then 125 mM Tris, 125 mM NaCl, pH 8.0 until no protein
was detected. EndoS-D233Q was eluted with 125 mM Tris, 125 mM NaCl,
pH 8 supplemented with 10 mM reduced glutathione. Eluted protein was
concentrated to 3 mg/mL and stored at −20 °C.

Verification
of fGly via Coupling AF488 Hydroxylamine to Aldehyde
Tagged Fc
To probe for the presence of aldehyde, Fc (5 μg)
protein was reacted with 100 μM AF488 hydroxylamine in labeling
buffer (100 mM sodium acetate, 150 mM NaCl, pH 4, 50 μL) at
30 °C overnight. Reaction mixtures were resolved by SDS-PAGE
and fluorescence was detected using a Typhoon 9410 fluorescence scanner
(GE Healthcare).

Initial In Vitro Formylglycine
Conversion Using M. tb FGE
Fc constructs
(5 μg) were incubated
in 75 mM Tris, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM DTT (pH 9, 95 μL) with 0.1
equiv of FGE for 18 h at 30 °C. Following FGE treatment, Fcs
were buffered exchanged into labeling buffer and were reacted with
AF488 hydroxylamine as stated above. Fc protein (2 μg) was separated
by SDS-PAGE, and fluorescence was detected using a fluorescence scanner.

Temperature Optimization for M. tb FGE In
Vitro Reaction
Fc2 (4 μg) was treated
with 0.4 equiv of FGE in 75 mM Tris, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM DTT (pH 9,
30 μL) for 18 h at 25, 30, 33, 36, 40, 42, or 45 °C. After
FGE treatment, Fc was reacted with AF488 hydroxylamine as stated above.
Fc2 (1 μg) from each reaction was separated by SDS-PAGE, and
fluorescence was detected using a fluorescence scanner. Relative fluorescence
was measured using Image J imaging software.

FGE Dosage Optimization
for M. tb FGE In Vitro Reaction
Fc2 (4 μg) was incubated
with 0.05, 0.15, 0.3, 0.5 1, 2, or 5 mol equiv of FGE in 75 mM Tris,
100 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM DTT (pH 9, 30 μL) overnight at 42 °C.
After the FGE reaction, Fc2 was reacted with AF488 hydroxylamine as
stated above. Fc2 (1 μg) from each reaction was separated by
SDS-PAGE, and fluorescence was detected using a fluorescence scanner.
Relative fluorescence was measured using Image J imaging software.

Optimized In Vitro Formylglycine Conversion
Using M. tb FGE
Purified Fc (5 μg)
was incubated in 75 mM Tris, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM DTT (pH 9, 95 μL)
with 1 mol equiv of M. tb FGE overnight at 42 °C.

Verification fGly Conversion Resulting from Active M.
tb FGE Treatment
Heat-killed FGE was boiled at 100
°C for 10 min in 8 M urea. Fc2 (4 μg) was incubated with
no FGE, FGE, or heat-killed FGE using the optimized protocol previously
described. Following FGE treatment, Fc was reacted with AF488 hydroxylamine
following the above protocol. Fc (1 μg) was separated by SDS-PAGE,
and fluorescence was detected using a fluorescence scanner.

Formylglycine
Conversion Determined Using Mass Spectrometry
Mass spectrometry
was used to confirm the presence of fGly after
treatment with exogenous FGE. After fGly conversion, Fc2 (30 μg)
was reacted with 13 mM O-benzylhydroxylamine hydrochloride
(Sigma-Aldrich) in labeling buffer before being reduced in 5 mM DTT
at 37 °C for 30 min. High-resolution LC-ESI-MS measurements were
obtained using an Agilent 1200 LC that was equipped with a C8 column
(100 mm × 1.0 mm, Restek) and connected in-line with an LTQ Orbitrap
XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The instrumentation
is located in the QB3/Chemistry Mass Spectrometry Facility at the
University of California, Berkeley. Raw mass spectra were viewed using
Xcalibur software (version 2.0.7 SP1, Thermo) and mass spectral deconvolution
was performed using ProMass software (version 2.5 SR-1, Novatia).
Percent conversion was determined by comparing mass spectral abundances
of non-FGE treated protein and FGE-treated protein assuming the two
components have the same ionization efficiencies.

Chemical Glycosylation
of fGly-Fc2 with Aminooxy N-Acetylglucosamine
AO GlcNAc was synthesized as described. Fc2 (5 μg) or the alanine mutant was treated
with FGE as stated above. Following fGly formation, Fc constructs
were reacted with 0.5 mM AO GlcNAc in labeling buffer at 30 °C
overnight. Reaction mixtures were resolved by SDS-PAGE and analyzed
by lectin blot with WGA-AF647. Oxime-GlcNAc Fc2 (30 μg) was
subjected to LC-ESI-MS analysis in the QB3/Chemistry Mass Spectrometry
Facility at the University of California, Berkeley.

Complex Type
and Sialylated Complex Type Oxazoline Synthesis
Semisynthesis
of the asialo complex type (G2) oxazoline and sialylated
complex type (S2) oxazoline was performed as reported., Briefly, S2 free glycan was obtained from wild-type EndoS cleaved
sialylglycopeptide from chicken egg yolk. S2 was further purified
with ion-exchange chromatography on a DEAE-sepharose column to give
pure S2. A portion of the S2 was treated with neuraminidase (New England
Biolabs) to give G2 glycan. Free S2 and G2 were converted to oxazolines
by adding 25 mol equiv of 2-chloro-1,3-dimethylimidazolinium chloride
and 45 mol equiv of triethylamine. The G2 and S2 oxaolines were then
purified using gel filtration and lyophilized to give G2 oxazoline
and S2 oxazoline.

Transglycosylation of Oxime-GlcNAc Fc2 with
Complex-Type Glycan
Oxazoline
Oxime-GlcNAc Fc2 (100 μg) and S2 or G2 glycan
oxazolines (300 μg) dissolved in Tris buffer (pH 7.4, 30 μL)
were incubated with EndoS-D233Q (6 μg) at 30 °C for 1.5
h. The reactions were monitored by LC-ESI-MS and lectin blot.

LC-ESI-MS
Analysis of EndoS-Mediated Transglycosylation
LC-ESI-MS was
performed on a LXQ system (Thermo Scientific) with
an Agilent Poroshell 300SB-C8 column (5 μm, 75 × 1 mm).
Fc samples were reduced in 40 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine at
37 °C for 20 min before LC-ESI-MS measurement. LC separation
of the resulting monomers was performed at 40 °C eluting with
a linear gradient of 20–40% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic
acid within 10 min at a flow rate of 0.25 mL/min. Percent glycan transfer
was determined by comparing mass spectral abundances of oxime-GlcNAc
Fc2 and oxime-(S2/G2) Fc2.

Supporting Information Available
Plasmid construction, SDS-PAGE
of differing pH and buffers for M. tb FGE reaction,
LC-ESI-MS of Fc2 (Ala) and Fc2 dimer, and lectin blot of oxime-GlcNAc
Fc2 binding to Protein A/G resin. This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc500061s_si_001.pdf

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Kimberly Beatty, Mason Appel, and Krishnan
Palaniappian
for valuable discussions. E.L.S. was supported by a Berkeley Fellowship
for Graduate Study and a Novartis Graduate Fellowship. This work was
supported by grants from the NIH to C.R.B. (GM059907) and L.X.W. (GM096973).

