Introduction
Quantitative understanding
of surface-chemistry effects on in vitro behaviors
of inorganic nanoparticles (NPs) is of
fundamental importance to their future success in preclinical research
and clinical practices.− Two surface chemistries, PEGylation and conjugation of active targeting
ligands such as cyclic Arg-Gly-Asp (c-RGD) peptides, have been widely
applied to enhance the delivery of NPs into tumor sites.,− With the assistance of PEG molecules, NPs can avoid
macrophage uptake and passively accumulate in tumors at high efficiency
through well-known enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect.− For instance, PEGylated gold NPs with a core size of ∼2.3
nm exhibited high tumor targeting efficiencies of 8.3 ± 0.9%ID/g
at 12 h post injection (p.i.). Gold nanocages
coated with PEG surface ligand also enabled high blood retention and
an efficient tumor uptake of 7.9 ± 1.1%ID/g at 24 h p.i. Alternatively, conjugation of active targeting
ligands that exhibit high affinities to cancer receptors is also a
widely used strategy to increase tumor-targeting efficiencies of the
NPs., For example, c-RGD coated iron oxide NPs
targeted integrin expressing tumor vasculature after injection, and
a significant decrease of tumor magnetic resonance (MR) signal intensity
(42 ± 5%) was observed. While both
surface strategies can enhance the tumor delivery of NPs at the in vivo level, how these two different surface chemistries
quantitatively influence their follow-up cellular uptake, intracellular
dynamics, and local chemical interactions inside endosomes still have
not been fully understood and demand substantial investigations. To
address these questions, NPs that not only exhibit robust single-particle
fluorescence but also can chemically report local interactions are
highly desired.

Luminescent plasmonic nanoparticles (LPNPs)
are a class of nanofluorophores
which can give bright and robust single-particle fluorescence while
exhibiting plasmon properties such as strong surface plasmon absorption
and large surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) enhancements.− The synergy of these properties in one NP allows strengths of different
optical microscopic imaging techniques to be integrated for better
understanding of nano-bio interactions at the in vitro level. One strategy for creating such LPNPs is to coat a fluorescent
quantum dot (QD) with an ultrathin gold nanoshell through precise
control of the distance between QD and the shell with elegant surface
chemistries. Alternatively, by tuning
grain size distributions of metal NPs, we were able to create 20 nm
highly polycrystalline silver or gold NPs with strong single-particle
fluorescence and giant Raman enhancements., While simple cellular imaging of cancer receptors labeled with LPNPs
has been demonstrated,, how to further apply them to
advance our fundamental understanding of nano-bio interactions has
not yet been demonstrated. In this communication, we applied luminescent
plasmonic silver NPs (LPAgNPs) as contrast agents to quantitatively
investigate the effects of two widely used surface chemistries in
cancer targeting, passive PEGylation, and active c-RGD conjugation,
on cellular uptake, intracellular dynamics, and local chemical interactions
of the NPs inside the endosomes. Our studies showed that the conjugation
of c-RGD peptides () to the NPs
resulted in 20 times more rapid cellular uptake and also enhanced
constrained motion of the NPs about 13% higher than that of PEGylation.
In addition, specific binding between c-RGD and αvβ3 integrin minimized interference of intracellular
biomolecules on Raman signals of LPAgNPs and allowed c-RGD vibrations
to be well dissolved inside endosomes in the live cells, offering
an exciting opportunity to investigate ligand–receptor interactions
in real time at the chemical level.

Results and Discussion
The LPAgNPs with a mean size of ∼20 nm were selected for
the follow-up bioconjugation and in vitro cellular
studies. To conjugate c-RGD peptides or PEG molecules onto the particle
surface, the LPAgNPs were incubated with mercaptobenzoic acid (MBA)
and c-RGD peptides or 1 kDa PEG molecules. MBA ligand was introduced
as the secondary ligand because its characteristic vibrations at 1071
cm–1 and 1575 cm–1 can serve as
an internal standard during SERS studies. After the bioconjugation,
the obtained NPs were further characterized with transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) and dynamic light scattering (DLS). DLS studies showed
that the hydrodynamic diameters (HDs) of the NPs coated with either
c-RGD peptides or PEG molecules were 28.1 ± 6.1 nm (Figure a) and 33.7 ± 6.9 nm (Figure b) in phosphate buffer saline (PBS), respectively, indicating
that NPs remained monodispersed in the physiological environment.
HD layer of PEG-LPAgNPs (∼7 nm) was slightly larger than that
of c-RGD conjugated ones (∼4 nm), indicating that PEG exhibited
an extended conformation once coated on the NP surface. In addition, zeta potential measurements on
these NPs showed that c-RGD-LPAgNPs and PEG-LPAgNPs were negatively
charged in PBS buffer with zeta potentials of −30 mV and −32
mV, respectively. The obtained AgNPs retained their strong surface
plasmons at 400 nm and exhibited identical absorption profiles, further
suggesting that conjugation of the different ligands on the NP surface
induced little change on their absorption (Figure c). Emission spectra of both PEG-LPAgNPs and c-RGD-LPAgNPs
were composed of broad fluorescence background superimposed with sharp
Raman emissions. Since PEG and c-RGD exhibit different Raman vibrational
spectra, the overall emission spectra of AgNPs conjugated with different
ligands exhibit different profiles (Figure d). The observation of Raman spectra from c-RGD-LPAgNPs and PEG-LPAgNPs
also indicated that surface ligands were successfully conjugated on
the NP surface. As shown in Figure e,f, Raman
spectra of c-RGD-LPAgNPs showed the characteristic Raman vibrations
of c-RGD ligands on the surface. For instance, the vibrations of amide
β-sheet (1631 cm–1), II (1518 cm–1), III (1265 cm–1), and phenyl ring (1179, 1212
cm–1), of c-RGD were readily observed, consistent
with the previous report. Characteristic
vibrations of PEG ligands on PEG-LPAgNPs such as the CH2 rocking vibration (936 cm–1), C–O–C
asymmetric stretching (1129 cm–1), the coupled vibration
of C–C and C–O stretching (1132 cm–1) and CH2–CH2 antisymmetric bending
mode (1462 cm–1) were also observed from PEG-LPAgNPs. In addition, Raman bands of MBA on the LPAgNPs
were observed at 1071, 1352, and 1575 cm–1, which
were exactly consistent with the previous report on C–C stretching
ring-breathing modes (1071 and 1575 cm–1) and COO
stretching (1352 cm–1), respectively.

Characterization of LPAgNPs. (a) c-RGD-LPAgNPs with a
core size
of 20.9 ± 4.6 nm, and a hydrodynamic diameter (HD) of 28.1 ±
6.1 nm. (b) PEG-LPAgNPs with a core size of 20.5 ± 4.2 nm, and
a HD of 33.7 ± 6.9 nm. The scale bar of the TEM images is 50
nm. (c) Absorption spectra of c-RGD-LPAgNPs and PEG-LPAgNPs. (d) Emission
spectra of c-RGD-LPAgNPs and PEG-LPAgNPs. (e) Raman spectra of c-RGD-LPAgNPs.
(f) Raman spectra of PEG-LPAgNPs.

(a, b) Bright field and fluorescence images of fixed U87MG cancer
cells incubated with 10 nM PEG-LPAgNPs. (c, d) Bright field and fluorescence
images of fixed U87MG cancer cells incubated with 10 nM c-RGD-LPAgNPs.
The scale bar of the images is 20 μm.

LPAgNPs with different surface ligands exhibited distinct
binding
affinities to glioblastoma U87MG cancer cells with high expression
level of αvβ3 integrin receptors
on the membrane. The fixed U87MG cancer cells were incubated with
c-RGD-LPAgNPs and PEG-LPAgNPs of the same concentration (10 nM) in
PBS respectively. After 45 min incubation, the excess amount of NPs
was washed away with PBS and the cells were imaged under a fluorescence
microscope with a 100× objective in total internal reflection
geometry. As shown in Figure a,b, only a very
small amount of PEG-LPAgNPs was found to nonspecifically bind to the
U87MG cells because of the antifouling nature of PEG molecules. On the other hand, a large amount of c-RGD-LPAgNPs
was labeled on the cell membrane (Figure c,d).
Because of a strong surface plasmon of c-RGD-LPAgNPs and their high-density
labeling of U87MG cancer cells, the cells became yellowish and could
even be readily observed with the naked eye (). To further confirm that the observed high labeling
efficiency of c-RGD-LPAgNPs was due to specific ligand–receptor
interactions, we also conducted blocking and c-RAD peptide control
studies. We first blocked the binding of the integrin receptors of
U87MG cells with 1 mM c-RGD peptide and then incubated U87MG cells
with c-RGD-LPAgNPs with the same procedures. No binding of the AgNPs
with U87MG cells was observed (Figure a,b).
In addition, we also incubated U87MG cells with LPAgNP conjugated
c-RAD, () a widely used negative control
peptide for c-RGD, and observed very little binding of the AgNPs to
the cells (Figure c,d). With all these control
studies, we could indeed attribute the high labeling efficiency of
c-RGD-LPAgNPs to the high binding affinity of c-RGD peptides to αvβ3 integrin receptors. These results also
indicated successful conjugation of c-RGD to LPAgNPs, and the conjugated
c-RGD peptides retained their high binding affinity and specificity
to cancer receptors on the membrane.

(a,b)
Bright field and fluorescence images of c-RGD blocked U87MG
cancer cells incubated with 10 nM c-RGD-LPAgNPs. (c,d) Bright field
and fluorescence images of fixed U87MG cancer cells incubated with
10 nM c-RAD-LPAgNPs. The scale bar of the images is 20 μm.

Once LPAgNPs (1 nM in MEM) were
incubated with live U87MG cancer
cells at 37 °C, the NPs were internalized by the cells, where
the NPs were encapsulated in endosomes regardless of which types of
ligands were on the surface. To gain a quantitative understanding
of the differences in endocytosis kinetics between two types of LPAgNPs
with different surface coatings, we used fluorescence microscopy to
quantify the average number of endosomes at different incubation time
points. The number of endosomes incubated with c-RGD-LPAgNPs reached
a platform with 49 ± 9 endosomes observed at the first 3 h (Figure a and ), while
only very few endosomes (2–3) containing PEG-LPAgNPs were found
inside cells during the same time period (Figure b and ), suggesting the
specific ligand–receptor interactions played a key role in
the internalization process of NPs. With
the increase of incubation time, the number of endosomes containing
with PEG-LPAgNPs continues increased and reached 24 ± 6 in 24
h (Figure b), which was still 2 times lower
than the number of endosomes induced by c-RGD ones (Figure a). The much faster endocytosis of c-RGD-LPAgNPs
than the cellular uptake of PEG-LPAgNPs might be attributed to the
decrease of localized Gibbs free energy induced by receptor–ligand
interactions, which caused the membrane around the NPs to quickly
wrap and form vesicle structures., After internalization,
the LPAgNPs with different surface ligands also exhibited distinct
intracellular dynamics. Depending on the time exponent value derived
from the correlation of log mean square displacement (MSD) versus
log time lag D = (1/4)(Γτα-1), where Γ is the transport coefficient, τ is the time
lag, and α is the time exponent, the motion of endosomes can
be divided into three categories according to the α value: directed
motion due to the active transport (α &gt; 1.1), Brownian diffusion
(0.9 ≤ α ≤ 1.1), and constrained diffusion (particles
are constrained in a limited area) (α &lt; 0.9). After 3 h incubation, we found that ∼54%
of endosomes encapsulated c-RGD-LPAgNPs showed directed motion while
∼10% and ∼36% of them showed Brownian diffusion and
constrained diffusion, respectively (Figure c). On the other hand, ∼67% of endosomes encapsulated PEG-LPAgNPs
exhibited directed motion, while ∼10% and ∼23% showed
Brownian diffusion and constrained diffusion, respectively (Figure d). Significant increase in constrained diffusion
observed from c-RGD-LPAgNPs indicated that the specific ligand–receptor
interactions enhanced constrained diffusion of the NPs after internalized
by the cells.

Cellular uptake kinetics of LPAgNPs. (a) Uptake kinetics
of c-RGD-LPAgNPs
in 3 h. (b) Uptake kinetics of PEG-LPAgNPs in 24 h. (c) Endosome cellular
dynamics of c-RGD-LPAgNPs in U87MG cells. (d) Endosome cellular dynamics
of PEG-LPAgNPs in U87MG cells.

Strong Raman enhancements of these LPAgNPs also offered a
unique
opportunity to investigate the local chemical environment around the
NPs before and after internalization. While characteristic Raman peaks
were clearly observed from c-RGD-LPAgNPs and PEG-LPAgNPs in PBS solution
(Figure e,f), these peaks were no longer distinguishable
with only the same two bundled peaks at 1340 cm–1 and 1515 cm–1 observed in the presence of MEM
cell culture media (Figure a,b) or PBS containing
10% FBS (v/v) (). However, once
the NPs were reseparated from those biomolecules through centrifugation
purification, characteristic Raman vibrations of PEG, c-RGD, and MBA
ligands on the particle surface were recovered (). Such broadening in Raman spectra can be due to
the significant interference from local amino acids and serum proteins
in the media (the neighboring bands derived from amino acid residues
and proteins are broad and appear in the same spectral region),− similar to the previous report by Tam et al. Interestingly, once c-RGD-LPAgNPs were internalized into endosomes
inside the cells, characteristic Raman vibrations at 1179, 1265, and
1518 cm–1 of c-RGD peptides were readily observed
in individual endosomes again (Figure c).
In contrast, the characteristic Raman vibrations of PEG-LPAgNPs and
c-RAD-LPAgNPs remained indistinguishable after internalization (Figure d and ). The
interesting recovery of Raman signals of c-RGD-LPAgNPs in endosomes
suggested that specific binding of c-RGD peptides to the αvβ3 integrin receptors potentially can minimize
interference from local intracellular biological molecules.

(a) Raman spectra
of c-RGD-LPAgNPs in MEM. (b) Raman spectra of
PEG-LPAgNPs in MEM. (c) Raman spectra of c-RGD-LPAgNPs in endosomes.
(d) Raman spectra of PEG-LPAgNPs in endosomes.

In summary, by taking advantage of the synergy of bright
and robust
single-particle emission and strong Raman enhancements of LPAgNPs,
we quantitatively investigated effects of two different well-known
surface chemistries on cellular uptake and intracellular dynamics.
Active targeting ligand, c-RGD, induced much more rapid cellular uptake
than PEG due to the specific ligand–receptor interactions.
Binding of c-RGD to αvβ3 integrin
receptors on the cancer cells also increased the constrained diffusion
of endosomes after internalization. More interestingly, specific ligand–receptor
interactions also minimized interference from biomolecules in the
local environment on Raman signals of c-RGD-LPAgNPs and resulted in
recovery of specific c-RGD Raman vibrations inside endosomes, which
potentially can be used to identify local specific ligand–receptor
interactions at the chemical level inside live cells.

Experimental
Procedures
Synthesis of Luminescent Plasmonic Silver Nanoparticles (LPAgNPs)
LPAgNPs were synthesized using the solid-state thermal reduction
method we reported before. 200 mg of
glycine and 15 mg of silver nitrate were codissolved in 1.5 mL DI
water. After the water evaporated, the mixture was then reduced at
453 K for 2 min in the solid state. When the color of the mixture
became blackish, the reaction was stopped and the product was dissolved
in 1 mL of DI water. The final solution was first centrifuged at 2000
and 4000 g for 2 min respectively to remove the large
aggregates. LPAgNPs of ∼20 nm were obtained by collecting the
pellets after centrifuging the supernatant at 7000 g for 3 min. The sample was further purified by centrifugation at
7000 g several times to remove the free ions and
excess glycine ligands. The pellets were collected and redissolved
in 10 mM sodium borate buffer for further study.

Bioconjugation
of LPAgNPs
Mercaptobenzoic acid (MBA),
as a ligand to serve as the internal standard of SERS studies, was
dissolved in methanol solution (10 mM) and diluted to 1 mM using 10
mM sodium borate buffer. The conjugation of c-RGD peptides, cyclo
(Arg-Ala-Asp-d-Phe-Cys) (c-RAD) peptides, or PEG molecules
to LPAgNPs was conducted by incubating the LPAgNPs with MBA and c-RGD
(c-RAD, PEG) at a molar ratio of 1:5 × 104:5 ×
104 in 10 mM sodium borate buffer for 2 h with gentle shaking.
The excess ligands and free ions were removed by passing the sample
through a Sephadex-20 column with PBS as elution phase. The sample
was then centrifuged at 7000 g for 3 min and the
pellets were redissolved in phosphate buffer saline (PBS) for further
study.

Fixed Cell Labeling and Imaging
For cell labeling,
U87MG cells were first fixed by 3.7% formaldehyde for 10 min. Then
the fixative was removed and the cells were blocked with 1 mL 2 weight
(wt) % BSA for 30 min. The fixed cells were incubated with 10 nM c-RGD-LPAgNPs,
c-RAD-LPAgNPs, or PEG-LPAgNPs in 500 μL PBS buffer solution
at room temperature for 45 min, respectively. The cells were then
washed thoroughly with PBS buffer to remove the excess amount of NPs
and used for imaging studies.

Blocking Study
U87MG cells were first fixed by 3.7%
formaldehyde for 10 min. Then the fixative was removed and the cells
were blocked with 1 mL 2 wt % BSA for 30 min. The fixed cells were
incubated with 1 mM c-RGD in 500 μL PBS buffer solution at room
temperature. After 45 min, the c-RGD was removed and the cells were
washed thoroughly with PBS buffer for 3 times. Then the cells were
incubated with 10 nM c-RGD-LPAgNPs for another 45 min before being
used for cell imaging studies.

Cellular Endocytosis Studies
The live cells were incubated
with 1 nM c-RGD-LPAgNPs in MEM for 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, and 3 h or
with 1 nM PEG-LPAgNPs in MEM for 3, 6, 12, and 24 h at 37 °C,
5% CO2. The cells at different time points were washed
thoroughly with PBS buffer and used for cell imaging studies. Before
the fluorescence cell images were taken, the cells were photobleached
for 15 s. For each time point, the bright endosomes in each cell were
localized and counted by Insight software developed by Dr. Bo Huang
(Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Department of Biochemistry
and Biophysics, University of California, San Francisco). The size
of the bright dots was chosen as larger than 50 pixels. Ten cells
were analyzed at each time point and presented as mean ± SD (n = 10).

Cellular Dynamic Studies
The live
cells incubated with
c-RGD-LPAgNPs for 3 h and the live cells incubated with PEG-LPAgNPs
for 24 h were used for the cellular dynamic studies, respectively.
After 15 s photobleaching, fluorescence cell images were taken every
500 ms for 50 s. The Insight software was used for the localization
and tracking of the bright dots (endosomes). The bright dot size was
chosen as larger than 50 pixels. For the tracking study, the minimum
trace length was 20 frames. The motions of the NPs were classified
into three different modes according to the α (slope) value
of the trajectories: constrained diffusion (α &lt; 0.9), Brownian
diffusion (0.9 ≤ α ≤ 1.1), and directed motion
(α &gt; 1.1).

Cellular SERS
Studies
U87MG cancer cells were incubated
with c-RGD-LPAgNPs or c-RAD-LPAgNPs for 3 h or with PEG-LPAgNPs for
24 h. The cells were washed thoroughly with PBS for 3 times after
incubation to remove the excess amount of LPAgNPs. The Raman spectra
were then collected with an Acton SP2300 (Princeton Instruments) under
532 nm excitation.

Supporting Information Available
Materials and equipment,
supplementary
figures showing cellular study and Raman spectra. This material is
available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc500008a_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work
was supported in part by the NIH (1R21EB011762)
and the start-up fund from The University of Texas at Dallas (J.Z.).

Abbreviations
PEGpolyethylene glycol

c-RGDcyclo (Arg-Gly-Asp-d-Phe-Lys)

SERSsurface-enhanced Raman scattering

LPAgNPsluminescent
plasmonic silver nanoparticles

QDquantum dot

c-RADcyclo (Arg-Ala-Asp-d-Phe-Cys)

MBAmercaptobenzoic acid

TEMtransmission electron
microscopy

DLSdynamic
light scattering

HDhydrodynamic diameter

PBSphosphate buffer saline

MEMminimum essential
media

FBSfetal
bovine serum

MSDmean square displacement

