Introduction
A biomaterial developed
as an artificial extracellular matrix (ECM)
mimic must recapitulate several features of the native ECM. The nanoscale
surface features and mechanical properties of the scaffold should be tuned for the targeted
tissue in order to achieve precise control of cellular behavior. The chemical structure of the biomaterial should
ideally contain chemical bonds that allow biodegradation in
vivo and thus eventually be replaced by native ECM. Finally, the method for incorporating biological
functionality into the material should be applicable to a broad array
of bioactive molecules, from small molecules to peptides to proteins.

Biomaterials based on peptide amphiphiles (PAs) meet many of these
criteria. PA molecules, composed of an oligopeptide conjugated to
a lipid tail, self-assemble into supramolecular nanostructures. The chemical structure of the PA molecule does
not contain any non-natural components or linkages, and PA nanostructures
are biodegradable and biocompatible in vivo.() Our group pioneered the use of peptide sequences
that lead to the self-assembly of high aspect ratio cylindrical nanofibers
and at the same time effectively display bioactive cues on their surfaces. This self-assembly process is mediated by hydrophobic
collapse of the lipid tails and β-sheet formation among oligopeptides. The highly entangled PA nanofiber gel mimics
the fibrillar nature of native ECM and
confers tunable mechanical rigidity and supramolecular cohesiveness. Biological activity is provided by inclusion
of bioactive peptide sequences that can bind soluble ligands or cell
surface receptors. The presentation of
multiple bioactive cues on a single PA nanofiber at high surface densities that maximize signaling capability can be achieved
through coassembly of different PA molecules. Through the inclusion of different bioactive cues, PA nanofibers
have demonstrated the capacity to signal for differentiation, proliferation, biological
adhesion, angiogenesis, and insulin secretion. Previous
strategies to incorporate bioactivity into PA nanostructures have
generally been limited to short peptide sequences that allow for the
solid-phase peptide synthesis of the entire PA molecule, including
the bioactive sequence. However, the presence of a bioactive cue can
potentially influence the self-assembly process of the PA molecules,
resulting in the formation of an altered nanostructure. Post-assembly functionalization of the PA nanostructures
with bioactive groups would allow independent control of self-assembly
and incorporation of bioactivity. Furthermore, in many cases the complexity
of ligand–receptor binding interactions cannot be fully recapitulated
with short peptides. The ability to attach larger peptides and proteins
to the self-assembled PA nanostructure would therefore expand the
scope of possible biological applications.

One approach for
conjugating larger peptides and proteins to the
self-assembled PA nanostructure is native chemical ligation (NCL).
Originally developed by Dawson et al. in 1994, NCL achieves the chemoselective
formation of a native peptide bond between peptides or protein fragments. This reaction occurs at neutral pH upon simple
mixing of two reactive precursors, one containing an N-terminal cysteine
residue and the other containing a C-terminal thioester moiety. In contrast with conjugation strategies such
as carbodiimide-mediated amide chemistry or Schiff base formation,
amine-containing lysine residues and carboxylic acid-containing glutamate
and aspartate residues do not interfere with the NCL reaction. Moreover,
the NCL reaction occurs under biocompatible conditions, unlike other
chemoselective conjugation strategies such as copper-catalyzed click
chemistry. In the context of peptide-based
self-assembled systems, the NCL reaction has been utilized to enhance
the mechanical strength of a hydrogel composed of fibrillar β-sheet
peptides via terminal cross-linking and
for surface PEGylation of self-assembled monolayers. The biocompatibility of the NCL reaction has been demonstrated
by its use in a FRET-based probe for in vivo cellular
imaging and by its use for cross-linking
soluble polymers into hydrogels for three-dimensional cell culture. In addition, the NCL reaction has been used
to conjugate relatively large bioactive moieties, including proteins
and other macromolecules.

In this
work, we investigate the use of post-assembly modification
of PA nanostructures using NCL as an approach to add bioactivity while
retaining the basic one-dimensional morphology. As a model, our objective
has been to carry out functionalization of fibers with the fibronectin
derived epitope RGDS as a bioactive cue.
We have also investigated the attachment of proteins to the fibers
using thioester-terminated fluorescent proteins.

Results and Discussion
NCL Conjugation
of RGDS Peptide to the Surface of PA Nanofibers
The NCL reaction
was used to conjugate peptides functionalized
with an N-acyl-benzimidazolinone leaving group at the carboxy terminus (peptide-Nbz, 2) to PA molecules
functionalized with a cysteine residue at the amino terminus (CysPA, 1). Both components were synthesized using standard Fmoc-protected
solid phase peptide synthesis with commercially available resins.
The NCL reaction was performed upon simple mixing of reactants in
the presence of a mild reducing agent (DTT) and thiol catalyst (4-MPAA)
in PBS at pH 7.4 (Figure ). This reaction
occurs via a three-step mechanism, with
initial substitution of the peptide-Nbz leaving group with the thiol
catalyst to form a thioester, followed by attack from the free thiol
group of the cysteine on the CysPA, and finally an irreversible intramolecular
rearrangement that generates the native peptide bond (). This mechanism was confirmed by
observing the presence of the thioester intermediate 4 in the mass spectrum of the NCL reaction at 3 h ().

NCL reaction scheme. The reaction mixture containing 1
mM CysPA
(1), 1 mM peptide-Nbz (2), 5 mM 4-MPAA,
and 5 mM DTT in PBS was reacted at pH 7.4 for 24 h at 37 °C to
generate peptide-functionalized PA (3). The peptides
used in the reaction are RGDS (2a,3a), biotin-RGDS
(2b,3b), and RGES (2c,3c).

The solution-phase NCL
reaction was analyzed by liquid chromatography
with electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (LC-MS). A 1:1 mixture
of the two reactants generated the desired product (RGDS-PA, 3a) that was separable from the CysPA (Figure a). Two major peaks identified in the mass spectra were the
CysPA 1 and the RGDS-PA product 3a (Figure b,c). Based on integration of the major peaks, the
NCL reaction proceeded to 46% conversion of the CysPA. Similar analyses
on NCL reactions with different reagent mixtures are shown in Figure d. Increasing the concentration of the RGDS-Nbz
to a 5-fold excess increased the conversion to 68%. We hypothesize
that the proximity of the reactive cysteine residues on the surface
of the CysPA nanofibers creates steric limitations preventing the
reaction from achieving quantitative conversion of all reactive sites.
However, complete conversion of reactive sites is not necessary to
achieve optimal bioactivity, as we demonstrate below.

Reaction yields and analysis.
(a) LCMS trace of NCL reaction between
RGDS peptide and CysPA. (b,c) The two major peaks correspond to the
RGDS-PA product 3a (b) and residual CysPA 1 (c). (d) The percent conversion of the CysPA was calculated based
on integration of the peaks for multiple NCL reactions.

The self-assembled nanostructures that the CysPA
formed were analyzed
before and after the NCL reaction using negatively stained transmission
electron microscopy (TEM). The CysPA self-assembled in aqueous solution
into high aspect ratio nanofibers of approximately 10 nm diameters
with a variable degree of bundling, and this morphology was conserved
following the NCL reaction (Figure a and b).
The secondary structure within the nanofibers was investigated using
CD spectroscopy (). The CD spectra
of the CysPA before and after the NCL reaction with RGDS-Nbz peptide
suggested a mixture of β-sheet and random coil secondary structure
(estimated by fitting to linear combinations of reference spectra)
with a minimal change caused by the conjugation of epitope. Interestingly,
the spectra from presynthesized RGDS-PA had a predominant α-helical
character. This result indicates that the presence of epitope on the
PA molecule could influence the self-assembly process and the resulting
secondary structure.

Surface accessibility of NCL-conjugated PA assemblies.
(a,b) TEM
micrograph of CysPA (a) and NCL RGDS-PA (b) negatively stained with
uranyl acetate. (c,d) TEM micrographs of NCL RGDS-PA (c) and NCL biotin-RGDS-PA
(d) following incubation with streptavidin-conjugated gold nanoparticles
(SA-gold).

To confirm that the ligated peptide
is present on the surface of
the PA nanofiber, we added a biotin group to the N-terminus of the
RGDS-Nbz peptide (biotin-RGDS-Nbz, 2b) and used NCL to
attach this peptide to the CysPA nanofiber. Labeling the reaction
product (biotin-RGDS-PA, 3b) with 10 nm streptavidin-conjugated
gold nanoparticles (SA-gold) confirmed the ligation and accessibility
of biotin-RGDS peptide on the nanofiber surface (Figure d). The SA-gold did not bind to CysPA nanofibers reacted with
nonbiotinylated RGDS peptide (Figure c). This
result also demonstrates another potential strategy for incorporation
of bioactivity, as the accessible biotin moiety can be utilized for
further functionalization of the PA surface with avidin-conjugated
bioactive molecules.

Cellular Response to RGDS-Ligated Nanofibers
The binding
of SA-gold to biotin-RGDS-conjugated nanofibers confirmed the accessibility
of the NCL-conjugated peptides on the nanofiber surface. We next investigated
whether such post-assembly peptide conjugation could be used to deliver
ECM signals to cells. Since fibroblasts are extensively studied in
the context of RGDS presenting scaffold materials,, we used these cells to test the bioactivity of NCL-modified PA nanofibers.
Cell response was measured to PAs coated on glass coverslips using
a method previously established in our group. Sterile coverslips were first coated with cationic poly(d-lysine) (PDL) and subsequently with a layer of anionic alginate,
and finally with the cationic PA nanofibers (). Not only does this method of sequential coating
help to achieve a uniform PA layer on the surface, but the intermediate
nonfouling alginate layer also prevents any confounding cell response
resulting from attachment to underlying glass or PDL. NIH/3T3 mouse
embryonic fibroblasts were seeded on these PA-coated surfaces and
maintained under serum-free conditions to minimize nonspecific adsorption
of proteins to the nanofibers.

Fibroblast morphology was evaluated after 5 h of culture, as such
short incubation was found to be suitable by our group and others
for comparison of their response to substrates.,, Fibroblasts were found to attach to CysPA
surfaces but displayed a rounded morphology indicating a lack of cell
spreading and adhesion (Figure a). This observation
can be explained by the ability of PA nanofibers to provide cell attachment;
however, an absence of an integrin-binding cue limits their spreading.
In contrast, on the CysPA surfaces functionalized with the RGDS peptide
using the NCL reaction (NCL RGDS-PA), cells appeared to be more spread
with the presence of prominent cytoplasmic processes giving the cells
a stellate morphology, similar to that found on presynthesized RGDS-PA
(Figure c,e). The observed change in cell
morphology was further quantified by measurement of circularity, calculated
as 4π × area/perimeter so that a perfectly round cell will
have a value of 1. The circularity of
fibroblasts on the NCL RGDS-PA surface was 0.38 ± 0.03, significantly
lower than the value of 0.65 ± 0.04 found on the CysPA surface
(Figure f). Cell viability was found to be
higher than 95% in each of these conditions (), indicating that a toxic response to the underlying
substrate is not attributable to the difference in the cell morphology.
To further evaluate whether the observed change in the cell morphology
was specific to the RGDS sequence, we conjugated a mutated non-bioactive
RGES peptide to CysPA nanofibers using the NCL reaction (NCL RGES-PA).
Fibroblasts on the NCL RGES-PA surface (Figure d) had a circularity of 0.56 ± 0.04, which was not significantly
different from the circularity on the CysPA surface, indicating that
the change in cell morphology is due to the specific bioactivity of
the RGDS peptide and not due to the conditions of the NCL reaction.
Furthermore, addition of soluble RGDS peptide into the culture medium
did not alter the morphology of cells on the CysPA surface (Figure b), confirming the need for tethering of the RGDS
peptide to nanofibers to provide for cell signaling.

Fibroblast morphology
on PA-coated coverslips. (a–e) Fluorescent
micrographs of NIH/3T3 fibroblasts cultured for 5 h and stained by
phalloidin for F-actin on coverslips coated with CysPA (a), CysPA
and soluble RGDS peptide (b), NCL RGDS-PA (c), NCL RGES-PA (d), and
presynthesized RGDS-PA not formed by NCL (e). (f) Comparison of cell
circularity (4π × area/perimeter2) on various
PA-coated surfaces (** p &lt; 0.01 vs CysPA, n = 100 cells).

Although NCL did not achieve full conjugation efficiency,
several
reports from our group and others have shown that the presence of
10% bioactive molecules in a peptide nanofiber system is sufficient
to demonstrate the maximal cell response., Consistent with those findings, we observed a comparable cell response
between the NCL RGDS-PA surfaces and the presynthesized RGDS-PA surfaces,
which have a cue present on every molecule. It has been suggested
that the critical RGD sequence density required for fibroblast spreading
is determined by the steric factor separating two integrin molecules. Even with a submaximal functionalization, following
NCL reaction, RGDS sequence availability on the nanofiber surface
would be sufficient for maximal integrin binding.

Apart from
the possibility of post-assembly functionalization of
PA nanofibers, the NCL conjugation strategy allows simultaneous covalent
functionalization of the PA nanofiber with multiple different bioactive
ligands. This approach could take advantage of potential synergies
among different classes of bioactive ligands without the need for
independent chemical conjugation schemes for each component. Furthermore,
the relative biocompatibility of the NCL reaction mixture creates
the opportunity for temporal control over ligand conjugation in live
cell culture, potentially allowing the sequentially timed presentation
of bioactive cues to influence cell behaviors such as differentiation.

Protein Ligation to PA Nanofibers in Solution and on Coated
Surfaces
Next, we sought to extend the scope of the NCL method
for biofunctionalization of PA nanofibers to larger molecules such
as proteins. To demonstrate that the NCL reaction can be used to ligate
proteins to the PA nanofiber, we utilized YFP that was expressed with
a self-cleavable intein domain and purified with 2-mercaptoethane
sulfonate sodium salt (MESNA) to yield a thioester at the C-terminus.
This YFP-MESNA was ligated to the CysPA via NCL with dilute reactant
concentrations (Figure a). The overall nanofiber
morphology of the CysPA was retained following conjugation with YFP,
although the nanofibers appear wider and less bundled (Figure b,c). These changes would be expected upon ligation
of large proteins onto the nanofiber surface.

Protein ligation to PA
nanostructures via NCL. (a) Schematic of
NCL conjugation of YFP to CysPA using YFP-MESNA. (b,c) TEM micrograph
of CysPA assemblies prior to (b) and following NCL with YFP (c). (d)
Emission spectra of YFP following NCL conjugation to CysPA coassembled
with different concentrations of TAMRA-labeled PA.

The CysPA-YFP NCL reaction mixture was analyzed
by SDS-PAGE to
identify the reaction product. Two distinct bands were detected on
silver staining, one corresponding to the YFP and a second for a product
that appears to have higher electrophoretic mobility than the YFP
(Figure a). Western blot analysis showed both
bands to be positively stained with anti-GFP antibody (Figure b). We attribute the band with higher electrophoretic
mobility to YFP conjugated with PA; although conventionally, the electrophoretic
mobility would be expected to decrease following conjugation due to
an increase in molecular mass, we believe the character of the PA
molecule to be responsible for the increased electrophoretic mobility.
The conjugation of the PA molecule adds a highly hydrophobic aliphatic
chain and three positively charged lysine residues to the YFP protein,
and due to this aliphatic chain and these positive charges, the PA
molecule can potentially bind a higher number of SDS molecules relative
to its molecular mass than the protein alone, resulting in an increase
in surface charge that is disproportionately higher than the increase
in mass. This “gel shifting” effect has been observed
for other proteins modified with hydrophobic groups, as well as other peptide amphiphile systems analyzed by electrophoresis with SDS. This effect
would increase the apparent electrophoretic mobility of the product
on SDS-PAGE, consistent with the new band observed in the reaction
mixture. The possibility of the second band being a YFP degradation
product can be excluded because the YFP control was treated under
exactly the same conditions as the NCL reaction except for the absence
of PA. Taken together, the new band observed in the reaction mixture
likely corresponds to the CysPA-YFP ligation product.

Characterization of PA–protein
conjugates formed by NCL.
(a,b) SDS-PAGE visualized by silver staining (a) and Western blot
against GFP (b) were used to analyze the NCL reaction between YFP
and PA (Lane 1: YFP only, Lane 2: YFP conjugated to CysPA, Lane 3:
CysPA only, Lanes L1, L2, L3: protein standards with indicated molecular
weights in kDa). (c) YFP fluorescence intensity after conjugation
to CysPA-coated surface (CysPA-YFP NCL). An identical PA lacking cysteine
(GlyPA-YFP Control) or CysPA treated with reaction buffer alone (CysPA
Control) was used as a control (** p &lt; 0.01 vs
CysPA-YFP NCL). (d) Confocal fluorescence microscopy of CysPA nanofiber-coated
alginate microparticles simultaneously reacted with YFP and CFP. (e)
Fluorescence anisotropy of YFP following NCL reaction with CysPA.
GlyPA was used as a control (* p &lt; 0.05 vs YFP; #p &lt; 0.05 vs GlyPA).

In order to confirm the YFP immobilization on the CysPA nanofibers,
we performed FRET experiments. The CysPA was coassembled with TAMRA-labeled
PA (), which has an excitation
spectrum that overlaps the YFP emission spectrum, forming a FRET pair.
The proximity of YFP to TAMRA fluorophores on the nanofiber surface
should therefore induce FRET and quench the YFP emission. For distances
in the range of the Förster radius, closer proximity of the
fluorophores will induce a greater degree of YFP emission quenching.
This effect was observed as shown in Figure d, where all spectra were normalized using the maximum intensity
observed in the absence of TAMRA (YFP emission maximum at 525 nm).
Increasing the molar concentration of the TAMRA-labeled PA increases
the surface density of acceptors. A higher density of TAMRA on the
nanofiber surface effectively reduces the average distance from YFP
attached via NCL, resulting in greater quenching. In fact, increasing
the proportion of TAMRA-labeled PA from 1 to 2 mol % generated an
increase in the quenching of YFP fluorescence from 20% to 80%. For
single donor–acceptor FRET pairs, the decrease in intensity
of the donor is accompanied by an increase in intensity of the acceptor.
However, at 2 mol % TAMRA fluorophore density on the nanofiber surface
was high enough to induce self-quenching due to homo-FRET phenomena.
Consequently, we did not observe an increased intensity of TAMRA signal
with increasing energy transfer between YFP and TAMRA-PA.

The
specificity of YFP immobilization on CysPA nanofibers via NCL
was further confirmed by fluorescence anisotropy (r) measurements. In the absence of depolarization phenomena, such
as homo-FRET, light scattering, or reabsorption, the anisotropy only
depends on the rotational diffusion of the fluorophore. If the rotational
diffusion rate of a fluorophore is of similar magnitude to the fluorescence
decay rate, the slower rotational diffusion rate expected upon binding
will be reflected as an increase in anisotropy. As shown in Figure e, at less than 10 nM, YFP anisotropy increased
after NCL with CysPA but remained essentially the same in the presence
of an identical PA lacking the N-terminal cysteine (GlyPA). Interestingly,
the anisotropy decreased steadily as the concentration increased above
a threshold of 10 nM YFP. At higher concentration of YFP, the likelihood
for the distance between two or more YFP molecules to be shorter than
the Förster radius for homo-FRET can no longer be neglected.
Therefore, the anisotropy decreases due to energy transfer between
fluorophores with different orientations. A similar behavior was observed
previously for YFP-labeled protein homodimers and used to detect protein
reorientation upon binding. These results
provide evidence not only that the YFP was immobilized on the CysPA
nanofibers by NCL, but also that the surface density of immobilized
YFP increased as the YFP to CysPA molar ratio increased in the reaction
mixture.

Finally, we sought to demonstrate that protein ligation
via NCL
can be achieved on PA nanofiber-coated surfaces. Higher fluorescence
intensity was observed following the NCL-mediated conjugation of YFP
to CysPA nanofibers coated on glass coverslips (Figure c). Conversely, adding the same YFP-containing reaction mixture
to an identical PA lacking the N-terminal cysteine (GlyPA) produced
significantly lower fluorescence intensity, indicating that the observed
fluorescence was due to retention of the YFP by a specific reaction
with CysPA and not a nonspecific adsorption to PA nanofibers. To demonstrate
a potential application of protein ligation to PA nanofiber-coated
surfaces via NCL, we utilized cell-size alginate microparticles electrostatically
conjugated with a coating of CysPA nanofibers by a process similar
to the formation of the CysPA-coated glass coverslips. We simultaneously
ligated YFP and cyan fluorescent protein (CFP) to the surfaces of
these CysPA-coated microparticles and visualized their surface fluorescence
by confocal microscopy. The surfaces of the microparticles showed
colocalized YFP and CFP fluorescence (Figure d), indicating that the two proteins were coligated to the PA-coated
microparticles. A full view of the field shows separate areas of high
intensity for each fluorophore, indicating that colocalization of
fluorescence was not due to spectral bleed-through ().

The approach of conjugating proteins
to PA nanofibers by NCL as
described here can be applied to any protein expressed with a C-terminal
intein domain and purified by thiol-mediated cleavage. The conjugated
protein can potentially fulfill multiple functions, including targeting,
adhesion, and cell signaling. These functions are especially useful
when combined with the advantages offered by PA nanofibers, including
the ability to encapsulate hydrophobic drugs, form a scaffold that
mimics ECM, and coat polymer surfaces. For example, PA nanofibers
encapsulating therapeutic agents or drug
loaded alginate particles coated with PA nanofibers could be targeted
to specific cells and tissues via proteins conjugated by NCL. The
conjugation of proteins to PA nanofibers via NCL would facilitate
these potential applications while maintaining the desirable properties
of biodegradability and biocompatibility inherent to the PA molecule.

Conclusions
We have demonstrated here the use of native
chemical ligation to
conjugate both bioactive peptides and fluorescent proteins to self-assembled
peptide amphiphile nanofibers. The ligated peptides and proteins were
displayed on the nanofiber surface without compromising the morphology
of the supramolecular nanostructures. Evidence for bioactivity was
established by the observation of fibroblast spreading following conjugation
of a biological signal to nanofibers using the ligation reaction.
Our results suggest that post-assembly chemical ligation could be
a useful tool to tailor the bioactivity of supramolecular nanostructures.

Experimental
Procedures
Peptide Synthesis and Purification
All PAs and peptides
were synthesized by fluorenylmethoxycarbonyl (Fmoc) protected solid-phase
peptide synthesis as previously reported by our group using materials purchased from EMD Chemicals Inc. (Merck
KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany) unless otherwise indicated. Briefly, the
PAs were synthesized at 0.25 mmol scale on Rink Amide MBHA resin,
and peptides functionalized at the carboxy-terminus with an N-acyl-benzimidazolinone
for native chemical ligation (peptide-Nbz) were synthesized at 0.25
mmol scale on 3-(Fmoc-amino)-4-aminobenzoyl AM resin. For each amino
acid addition, the resin was deprotected using 2% 1,8-diazabicycloundec-7-ene
(DBU) and 2% piperidine in N,N-dimethylformamide
(DMF), and the amino acid was coupled using 4 equiv of protected amino
acid functionalized with 4 equiv of 2-(1h-benzotriazole-1-yl)-1,1,3,3-
tetramethyluronium hexafluorophosphate (HBTU) and 6 equiv of N,N-diisopropylethylamine (DIPEA) in DMF. The dodecanoic
acid tail was similarly functionalized and coupled to a lysine side
chain following selective deprotection of the 4-methyltrityl (Mtt)
group using a 92:5:3 mixture of dichloromethane (DCM), triisopropylsilane
(TIPS), and trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). For synthesis of peptide-Nbz,
a Boc-protected amino acid was added at the N-terminus, and the resin
was treated with 5 equiv p-nitrophenylchloroformate
in DCM followed by 0.5 M DIPEA in DMF for activation. Resin cleavage
and amino acid deprotection was performed using a 95:2.5:2.5 mixture
of TFA, TIPS, and water for all PAs and peptides. Following removal
of solvent by rotary evaporation, the crude PAs/peptides were precipitated
by addition of cold diethyl ether. The precipitate was collected and
dried in vacuo to generate crude product with identity
confirmed by electrospray ionization (ESI) mass spectrometry. All
PAs and peptides were purified by reverse-phase high performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) as previously reported by our group. Briefly, the crude product was dissolved in
0.1% TFA in water, filtered, injected onto a Gemini-NX 5 μm
C18 column, and eluted using a water-acetonitrile solvent gradient
for separation. The purified product was lyophilized and stored at
−20 °C. To conjugate biotin, 10 mM RGDS-Nbz peptide in
PBS was mixed 1:1 with 20 mM sulfo-NHS-biotin (Thermo Scientific,
Rockford, IL) in PBS and reacted for 4 h at room temperature and overnight
at 4 °C. The biotinylated peptide was purified from the reaction
mixture by HPLC, lyophilized, and stored at −20 °C.

Protein Expression and Purification
The pTXB1-EYFP
and pTXB1-ECFP plasmids (see ) were transformed, according to the manufacturer’s protocol,
into E. coli BL21 (DE3) (Novagen) competent
cells by electroporation. The transformed
cells were plated on Lysogeny Broth (LB)-agar plates containing ampicillin
(Amp) and grown overnight at 37 °C. Single colonies were picked
and grown in 30 mL LB medium (10 g peptone, 5 g yeast extract, 10
g sodium chloride, 1 L water) containing Amp overnight at 37 °C
in shaker at 250 rpm. Cells were stored in 1 mL aliquots at −80
°C in the presence of 15% (w/v) glycerol. For overnight cultures,
10 mL of Amp-containing LB was inoculated with ∼1 μL
of the glycerol stock and grown overnight at 37 °C and 250 rpm.
For small-scale expression, volumes of 30 mL were used, while large-scale
expression was performed in 500 mL LB medium. Cell culturing was started
with 5 mL overnight culture and cells were grown at 37 °C, 250
rpm in the presence of Amp. When an optical density (OD600) of 0.6–0.8 was reached, protein expression was induced by
the addition of isopropyl-β-d-thiogalatopyranoside
(IPTG; Duchefa Biochemie). Large-scale expression was induced by 0.5
mM IPTG and grown overnight at 15 °C. Cell harvesting was performed
by centrifuging the cell culture for 5 min at 10,000 g at 4 °C. The supernatant was removed and the cell pellet was
resuspended in 5 mL Bugbuster (Novagen) and 5 μL benzonase (Novagen)
per gram of cell pellet. After incubation for 20 min at 21 °C,
the cell suspension was centrifuged at 16,000 g for
20 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was directly applied to 10 mL
chitin beads (New England Biolabs), equilibrated with 10 column volumes
of column buffer (20 mM sodium phosphate, 0.5 M sodium chloride, pH
6). The loaded column was washed with 10 volumes of column buffer
after which the column was quickly flushed with 2 column volumes of
cleavage buffer (20 mM sodium phosphate, 0.5 M sodium chloride, 100
mM 2-mercaptoethane sulfonic acid (MESNA), pH 6). Subsequently, the
flow was stopped and the column with the cleavage buffer was incubated
2 × 20 h at room temperature (using fresh cleavage buffer for
the second time). Elution fractions containing the cleaved proteins
with a C-terminal thioester were collected and pooled. The proteins
were buffer-exchanged (into 20 mM Tris, 150 mM sodium chloride, pH
7.8) using Amicon ultra centrifuge tubes (MWCO: 10 kDa), after which
the concentration was measured using UV–vis. Protein solutions
were stored at −80 °C.

Native Chemical Ligation
Reaction in Solution
The N-terminal
cysteine PA (CysPA) was mixed with 5 equiv of dithiothreitol (DTT)
and dissolved in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) at pH 7.4, and the
peptide-Nbz or YFP-MESNA was mixed with 5 equiv of 4-mercaptophenylacetic
acid (4-MPAA) and dissolved in PBS at pH 7.4. The two reagents were
mixed at the desired ratio, and the reaction was subsequently analyzed
by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry, gel electrophoresis, transmission
electron microscopy, circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy, Förster
resonance energy transfer (FRET), or fluorescence anisotropy as indicated.

Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectroscopy
Analytical
liquid chromatography mass spectroscopy (LC-MS) was performed using
an Agilent 1200 system with an Agilent 6250 quadrupole-time-of-flight
mass spectrometer using a Phenomenex Gemini C18 column (5 μm
particle size, 150 × 1.0 mm) eluting with a gradient of 5% ACN
to 95% ACN in water, with each solvent containing 0.1% TFA. UV absorbance
was monitored at 220 nm.

Transmission Electron Microscopy
The nanostructure
morphology of each PA was characterized using conventional transmission
electron microscopy (TEM). Each PA or NCL reaction mixture was diluted
in water to 0.1 mM PA, and 7.5 μL of this solution was deposited
on a copper grid with 300 mesh carbon support film for 5 min, washed
with water twice for 1 min each, negatively stained with 2% (w/v)
uranyl acetate twice for 30 s each, and dried at room temperature
overnight.

For labeling, streptavidin-conjugated 10 nm gold
nanoparticles in suspension (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) were mixed
at 1:1 volume ratio with 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in PBS and incubated
for 30 min to prevent nonspecific thiol binding to the gold. This
suspension was mixed at a 1:4 volume ratio with the PA or NCL reaction
mixture and incubated for 30 min to allow streptavidin binding to
biotin. This mixture was diluted to 0.1 mM PA and deposited onto the
copper grid as described above, except with four water washes to ensure
complete removal of unbound gold nanoparticles. All images were acquired
using an FEI Tecnai Spirit G2 microscope working at 120 kV.

Circular
Dichroism Spectroscopy
Circular dichroism
(CD) spectra of PA (1 mM) in PBS or NCL reaction mixture were acquired
on a JASCO J-715 CD spectrophotometer at room temperature using quartz
plates with a 0.05 mm path length. The CD spectra were fit to linear
combinations of reference spectra for known secondary structures using
the PEPFIT algorithm to estimate secondary
structure.

Gel Electrophoresis and Western Blotting
Polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis with sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS-PAGE) was performed
using 17.5% polyacrylamide gels. Samples were prepared in SDS sample
buffer with 4 M urea and heated for 5 min at 95 °C. The reaction
mixture and controls were diluted 15-fold resulting in consistent
protein loadings of approximately 5.6 μg per well for the YFP
and 0.5 μg per well for the CysPA across all samples. As reference,
Bio-Rad Precision Plus Unstained Protein Standard was used for both
silver stain and Western blot, while Bio-Rad Broad-Range 15% Protein
Standard was used specifically for the silver stain and Magic Mark
XP Western Protein Standard (Invitrogen) was used specifically for
the Western blot. Electrophoresis was performed at 65 V for 21 h in
Tris-Glycine running buffer using the Pharmacia EPS 600 power supply.
Gels were rinsed with water and developed by either silver nitrate
exposure or Western blot. For the Western blot, the protein was transferred
to an immobilin-P membrane using a Bio-Rad Trans-Blot cell with model
200/2.0 power supply at 35 V for 2 h in Tris-Glycine transfer buffer.
The membrane was blocked using 5% milk in PBS + 0.3% Tween for 1 h.
The membrane was then stained with anti-GFP rabbit polyclonal primary
antibody (ab290, Abcam) at 1:5000 dilution for 1 h, washed with PBS
+ 0.3% Tween, further stained with goat anti-rabbit polyclonal secondary
antibody conjugated to FITC (Jackson ImmunoResearch) at 1:5000 dilution
for 1 h, and washed again with PBS + 0.3% Tween. The membrane was
then read on a Fujifilm FLA-5100 imager.

Förster Resonance
Energy Transfer and Fluorescence Anisotropy
CysPA was mixed
in hexafluoroisopropanol (HFIP) with 5-carboxytetramethylrhodamine
(TAMRA) labeled PA at different ratios (0, 1, and 2 mol %) and lyophilized
to ensure homogeneous mixing of coassembled nanofibers. The lyophilized
powder was redissolved in 10 mM DTT aqueous solution, diluted in PBS
at pH 7.4, and subsequently mixed with YFP-MESNA solution (supplemented
with 5 equiv 4-MPAA), to yield final concentrations of YFP and PA
of 1 and 100 μM, respectively. This mixture was reacted for
around 24 h before measurements. TAMRA was used as a FRET acceptor
for YFP. The same procedure was used to prepare solutions of an identical
PA lacking the N-terminal cysteine (GlyPA). These solutions were used
as control to rule out the contribution to FRET signal of potential
nonspecific adsorption of YFP to PA nanofibers. Emission intensity
spectra were recorded on a Horiba Nanolog fluorimeter, using an excitation
wavelength of 485 nm (bandpass of 2 nm). Emission intensity was scanned
between 495 and 680 nm (increment of 1 nm), encompassing both YFP
and TAMRA emission ranges, using a bandpass of 2 nm, integration time
of 0.1 s, and PMT detector set at 950 kV. A similar procedure was
used to prepare solutions for fluorescence anisotropy (FA), but without
TAMRA labeled PA, and at variable YFP concentration (1–500
nM). FA was recorded at an emission wavelength of 535 nm (excitation
at 495 nm), 1 s integration time, and using variable monochromators’
bandpasses, which were set to guarantee signal intensities over 10
kCPS. Intensity was recorded at the four possible combinations for
the orientations of excitation and emission polarizers: both along
the vertical direction (IVV), both oriented
horizontally (IHH), the excitation polarizer
oriented vertically and the emission horizontally (IVH), or vice versa (IHV).
FA (r) was calculated according to the following
equation:

The correct alignment
of the polarizers
was verified using a diluted colloidal silica suspension (r ≥ 0.97).

Native Chemical Ligation Reaction on PA-Coated
Surfaces and
Microparticles
All PAs, peptides, and other materials were
UV-sterilized prior to use to maintain sterility. 12 mm glass coverslips
were coated with 0.01% poly(d-lysine) (PDL) overnight and
then washed with water and dried overnight. The PDL-coated coverslips
were then coated with 0.25% alginate dissolved in water for 1 h, after
which the alginate was cross-linked with 10 mM calcium chloride in
water. The alginate-coated coverslips were then coated with 0.5 mM
PA dissolved in water with 5 equiv DTT overnight. Alginate microparticles
were similarly coated with 0.5 mM PA dissolved in water with 5 equiv
DTT for 30 min. Following wash steps with water and PBS, the PA-coated
coverslips or microparticles were immersed in NCL solution, which
contained either 0.5 mM peptide-Nbz or 5 μM YFP-MESNA and 5
μM CFP-MESNA dissolved in PBS with 5 equiv of 4-MPAA and DTT.
Following a 24 h incubation at 37 °C, the coverslips or microparticles
were washed with PBS, and the coverslips were either used for cell
morphology and viability studies or assayed for YFP fluorescence on
a SpectraMax M5 microplate reader, while the microparticles were visualized
by confocal microscopy for both YFP and CFP fluorescence.

Cell Culture
NIH/3T3 mouse embryonic fibroblasts (American
Type Culture Collection, Manassas, VA) were maintained in monolayer
culture in T25 culture flasks. Growth medium consisted of Dulbecco’s
Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) with high glucose supplemented with 10%
fetal bovine serum, 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL streptomycin.
Assay medium consisted of growth medium without serum.

Cell Morphology
and Viability Assays
The PA-coated
coverslips functionalized using the NCL reaction were placed in 24-well
plates and seeded with 5,000 NIH/3T3 fibroblasts in 1 mL assay medium
per well. Following a 5 h incubation at 5% CO2 and 37 °C,
the coverslips were washed with PBS containing 1 mM CaCl2 and fixed for subsequent analysis. For quantification of cell spreading,
fibroblasts were stained with phalloidin and visualized by light microscopy.
Coverslips were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 30 min at
room temperature, then blocked with blocking buffer (10% normal goat
serum, 2% bovine serum albumin, and 0.4% Triton X100) for 30 min at
4 °C, then stained for F-actin with rhodamine-phalloidin (Invitrogen,
Grand Island, NY) at 1:500 dilution for 2 h at room temperature, and
finally dried and mounted on slides for light microscopy. Solutions
used in fixing, staining, and washing steps were supplemented with
1 mM CaCl2 to maintain alginate cross-linking. The cells
were imaged using a Nikon Eclipse TE2000-U inverted fluorescence microscope,
and images were analyzed using the Shape Descriptor 1u plugin on ImageJ
software (NIH) to determine the circularity of the cells (calculated
as 4π × area/perimeter2).

Cell viability
was assessed using commercially available LIVE/DEAD cell viability
assay kit (Life Technologies). Fibroblasts were cultured on PA coating
for 5 h and stained with 1 μg/mL calcein AM and 1 μg/mL
ethidium homodimer-1 following manufacturer’s protocol. Live
cell (calcein positive) and dead cell (ethidium homodimer positive)
populations were counted manually under an inverted fluorescence microscope
(Nikon Eclipse TE2000-U).

Statistics and Data Analysis
For
the determination
of form factor, five images from each of two replicates of each condition
were analyzed, and the mean and standard deviation of the form factor
of cells were calculated across all ten images. To establish statistical
significance, each condition was compared to CysPA alone using the
Student’s t test. For comparison of cell viability
approximately 100 cells were counted from at least two replicates
per condition. The cell viability index was defined as the ratio of
calcein positive cells to the total number of cells. Statistical significance
was measured against CysPA alone. For the determination of YFP fluorescence
on PA coatings, two independent measurements of the fluorescence emission
at 535 nm following excitation at 495 nm were taken from each of four
replicates of each condition, and the mean and standard error were
calculated based on these four replicates for each condition following
background subtraction of wells with alginate-coated coverslips without
PA nanofibers. To establish statistical significance, the CysPA-YFP
NCL condition was compared to each control using the Student’s t test. For the statistical comparison of fluorescence anisotropy,
three independent replicates were measured for each condition, and
the CysPA condition was compared to the GlyPA and YFP only conditions
using the Student’s t test.

Supporting Information Available
Description of the construction
of the expression plasmids for EYFP-MESNA and ECFP-MESNA is provided
in Methods. A detailed mechanism for the NCL reaction and confirmation
of this mechanism by mass spectroscopy is provided in Figure 1. CD
spectra of PAs with analysis of secondary structure analysis is provided
in Figure 2. A schematic of the protocol for coating surfaces with
PA nanofibers for assessment of cell adhesion and spreading is provided
in Figure 3. The cell viability on PA coatings is provided in Figure
4. The structure of the TAMRA-labeled PA, full pictures of the protein
gels, and a full field of the fluorescent protein-ligated PA-coated
microparticles are shown in Figure 5. This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc400507v_si_001.pdf

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by a grant from the National
Institutes
of Health–National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering
(2 R01 EB003806-06A2, NIH/NIBIB). S.K. acknowledges support from the
National Institutes of Health–National Institute on Drug Abuse
(5 T90 DA022881 NIH/NIDA). P.Y.W.D. acknowledges the Council for Chemical
Sciences of The Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (CW-NWO)
and J.B. acknowledges the NWO for a Rubicon grant. The authors would
like to acknowledge the following core facilities at Northwestern
University: Cell Imaging Facility, Electron Probe Instrumentation
Center and Institute for BioNanotechnology and Medicine. Finally,
the authors would like to thank Xuan Yue for performing the LC-MS
analysis, Liam Palmer for editing this manuscript, Marieke Rensen,
Maarten Merkx, and Joost van Dongen for their input with respect to
the fluorescent protein experiments and Mark Seniw for graphic designs
used in this contribution.

