Introduction
Conceptually, antibody–drug
conjugates (ADCs) represent
an elegant solution to the problems of systemic toxicity encountered
during treatment with conventional chemotherapeutics. By linking a cytotoxic payload to an antibody that specifically
recognizes antigens expressed on target cells, one could, in principle,
achieve potent efficacy without unwanted side effects. However, in
practice, translating this idea into clinical treatments has been
difficult, as exemplified by the fact that it has been more than 30
years since cytotoxins were first conjugated to antibodies, and yet
to date only three ADCs have successfully cleared the FDA approval
process. In spite of the selective targeting potential of the antibody,
systemic toxicity remains one of the key challenges encountered during
ADC development. Indeed, Mylotarg, the first ADC to win FDA approval,
was voluntarily pulled from the market after 11 years due to safety
concerns. Nonetheless, the field has made significant progress, garnering
two recent FDA approvals for Adcetris (brentuximab vedotin) in 2011
and Kadcyla (ado-trastuzumab emtansine) in 2013. Furthermore, the
ADC drug development pipeline has exploded, with more than 30 conjugates
currently in clinical trials.

The
first-generation ADCs, including Kadcyla and Adcetris, are
produced using nonselective conjugation chemistries that exploit the
reactivities of native lysines or cysteines, respectively. The ADCs made by these methods are characterized
by extreme heterogeneity at the molecular level. Multiple surface-accessible
reactive residues result in a spectrum of conjugation sites and ADCs
with drug-to-antibody ratios (DARs) ranging from 0 to 8. The products
are typically assessed in aggregate, with the measured efficacy, pharmacokinetic
(PK), and toxicity values describing the mean of the population. This
heterogeneity manifests across all stages of ADC development as complex
mixtures of ADC isoforms plague analytical characterization, individual
ADC batches can be difficult to reproduce, and, most importantly,
an ADC with heterogeneous DAR populations results in suboptimal pharmacological
profiles.

The importance of DAR in defining the properties of
an ADC has
been highlighted in experiments where conventional ADC mixtures were
separated into subpopulations of defined DARs and their biological
properties were analyzed. These experiments have shown that drug loading
plays a dominant role in PK, efficacy, and the therapeutic index. Specifically, ADCs with higher DARs (e.g., DAR
8) were cleared faster and demonstrated reduced efficacy, in spite
of higher drug loading, as compared to ADCs with lower DARs (e.g.,
DAR 2). As a result, the past few years
have seen the emergence of site-specific conjugation methods for making
ADCs that promise to produce homogeneous products with controlled
drug loading, simplified analytics, and, most importantly, an improved
therapeutic index. In principle, these methods rely on introducing
reactive amino acids at defined locations on the antibody backbone
and using chemical or enzymatic approaches to exploit the unique reactivity
of these amino acids to conjugate payloads.− We have pioneered a novel chemoenzymatic
approach to the site-selective modification of proteins that uses
the naturally occurring formylglycine-generating enzyme (FGE) to introduce
a formylglycine (fGly) residue into protein backbones. We have designed
modular linker systems that selectively react with the aldehyde side
chain of fGly to form a stable C–C bond with the protein. Here,
we demonstrate the application of this method to create site-specifically
conjugated ADCs with controlled stoichiometry and clean analytics
that permit structure–activity relationship (SAR) studies of
ADCs at the conjugate level that enable the design of ADCs with excellent
potency, minimal toxicity, and wide therapeutic windows.

Aldehyde tag
coupled with HIPS chemistry yields site-specifically
modified antibodies carrying a payload attached through a stable C–C
bond. (A) A formylglycine-generating enzyme (FGE) recognition sequence
is inserted at the desired location along the antibody backbone using
standard molecular biology techniques. Upon expression, FGE, which
is endogenous to eukaryotic cells, catalyzes the conversion of the
Cys within the consensus sequence to a formylglycine residue (fGly).
(B) Antibodies carrying aldehyde moieties (in red, 2 per antibody)
are reacted with a Hydrazino-iso-Pictet-Spengler
(HIPS) linker and payload to generate a site-specifically conjugated
ADC. (C) The HIPS chemistry proceeds through an intermediate hydrazonium
ion followed by intramolecular alkylation with a nucleophilic indole
to generate a stable C–C bond.

Our platform for site-specific ADC production is built upon
the
incorporation of formylglycine (fGly), a non-natural amino acid, into
the protein sequence. To install fGly (Figure ), a short consensus sequence, CXPXR—where X is usually serine,
threonine, alanine, or glycine—is inserted at the desired location
in the conserved regions of antibody heavy or light chains using standard
molecular biology cloning techniques. This
“tagged” construct is produced recombinantly in cells
that coexpress the formylglycine-generating enzyme (FGE), which cotranslationally
converts the cysteine within the tag into an fGly residue, generating
an antibody expressed with two aldehyde tags per molecule. The aldehyde functional group serves as a chemical
handle for bioorthogonal conjugation. We developed the Hydrazino-iso-Pictet-Spengler
(HIPS) ligation to connect the payload to fGly, resulting in the formation
of a stable, covalent C–C bond between the cytotoxin payload
and the antibody. This C–C bond
is expected to be stable to physiologically relevant challenges encountered
by the ADC during circulation and FcRn recycling, e.g., proteases,
low pH, and reducing reagents. Due to the modular nature of our platform,
we can produce antibodies bearing the aldehyde tag at a variety of
locations, enabling us to empirically discover ideal conjugation sites.
In this work, we tested the effects of inserting the aldehyde tag
at one site in the light chain and seven sites in the heavy chain.
We present in-depth biophysical and functional characterization of
three of the resulting ADCs made by conjugation to maytansine payloads
via a HIPS linker.,, We observed that HIPS conjugation produces physiologically stable
conjugates; however, modulating the conjugation site had a pronounced
effect on antibody efficacy and PK, and resulted in ADCs with an improved
safety profile as compared to a conventional lysine-conjugated ADC.

Results
and Discussion
Development and Initial Screening of an Antibody
Tag-Placement
Library
As a first step toward generating a library of antibodies
carrying the aldehyde tag at various locations, we surveyed the human
IgG1 crystal structure to identify exposed,
relatively unstructured areas within the heavy and light chain constant
regions. Our design principle was to install the tag at locations
that minimally perturbed the native IgG structure but remained accessible
for conjugation. We incorporated each tag once into either the heavy
or light chain, such that each antibody would bear two aldehyde groups.
Specifically, we chose one internal site in the light chain, one at
the C-terminus and seven internal sites (three in
the CH1, two in the CH2, one in the CH3 domains) of the heavy chain
(Figure , top). For the purpose of this discussion
we have represented these heavy chain sites in alphabetical order
according to their occurrence from N- to C-terminus (Tags A-G), while the light chain tag is designated
as “LC”. The selected tag sites were cloned into the
constant regions of a prototype human IgG1 heavy chain and kappa light
chain. Proteins were produced transiently in bulk pools of cells overexpressing
human FGE to ensure efficient conversion of Cys to fGly within the
consensus sequence and resulting tagged antibodies were purified using
Protein A affinity columns and stored in PBS.

Together, the aldehyde
tag and HIPS chemistry allow for stable
cytotoxic payload conjugation at precise locations across the antibody
surface. (Top) We inserted the aldehyde tag (red) at one location
in the light chain (LC) and seven locations (labeled A–G) in
the heavy chain. Antibodies bearing these tags were produced and analyzed
as the first step in making ADCs conjugated at different sites. (Bottom)
HIPS-Glu-PEG2-maytansine 20 served as the linker (in black) and the
cytotoxic payload (in blue) for ADCs used in these studies.

We tested the propensity for immunogenicity
of our aldehyde tagged
antibodies by in silico analysis in order to assess whether they could
be viable as ADCs. Specifically, we used both known MHC class II peptide
binding motifs (iTope) and previously identified immunogenic sequences
(TCED) to identify peptides that may bind promiscuously in a number
of MHC contexts with high and moderate affinity., Of the eight aldehyde tag placements that we screened, only one
(Tag B) was determined to generate peptides that were likely to be
immunogenic. Next, to address the effect of tag placement on antibody
stability, we looked at aggregation. By size-exclusion chromatography
(SEC) it was apparent that out of the eight tagged antibodies that
we screened, six exhibited no to very little aggregation (Table ). Two antibodies, containing Tags D and F, in the
CH2 and CH3 domains, respectively, demonstrated significant aggregation.

We decided to focus our attention on generating ADCs with a representative
panel of tag sites using a well-characterized ADC reference made using
conventional conjugation that could serve as a good comparator for
our studies. We decided to focus on Her2-targeting ADCs and generate
site-specific ADCs that were equivalent to T-DM1 (Kadcyla), in terms
of the underlying antibody (trastuzumab) and the cytotoxin payload
(maytansine). We chose this system because
T-DM1 is a clinically approved drug, with good preclinical models
and literature benchmarks., Thus, we expressed
trastuzumab, the antibody component of T-DM1, with aldehyde tags at
the LC, Tag C, or Tag G positions, which represent conjugation sites
distributed across antibody domains. These tag placements produced
antibodies with high titers, had low aggregation, and underwent facile
conjugation to produce well-behaved ADCs, as determined by chromatographic
analysis, as well as biophysical and functional tests. In addition,
we generated an ADC (α-HER2-DM1) made by conjugating trastuzumab
through conventional lysine chemistry to SMCC-DM1 that served as a
positive control in our experiments.

Aldehyde
Tag Is Well-Tolerated when
Inserted into a Variety of Locations along the Antibody Backbone
tag designation	tag domain	residues
bordering tag	% aggregation	
A	CH1	G118, V121	0	
B	CH1	P123, S128	0	
C	CH1	A165, G169	2.3	
D	CH2	D283, E285	31.5	
E	CH2	N344, A349	4.5	
F	CH3	G361, E366	76	
G	C-terminus	K478	7	
LC	LC	A153, Q155	0	
Kabat numbering.

Site-Specific Conjugation
of a Cytotoxic Payload to Three Different
Locations on Aldehyde-Tagged α-HER2 Antibodies Yields Stable
ADCs
Trastuzumab antibodies modified to contain the aldehyde
tag in either the light chain (LC), the CH1 domain (Tag C), or at
the heavy chain C-terminus (CT, Tag G) were produced
in bulk pools of cells overexpressing human FGE. In terms of Cys to
fGly conversion efficiency, we achieved 86%, 92%, and 98% conversion
at the LC, CH1, and CT aldehyde tag sites, respectively, as measured
by a mass spectrometric method. The conjugation
reaction was carried out by treating the fGly-tagged antibody with
8–10 equiv of HIPS-Glu-PEG2-maytansine in 50 mM sodium citrate,
50 mM NaCl pH 5.5 containing 0.85% DMA and 0.085% Triton X-100 at
37 °C, and the progress of the reaction was tracked by analytical
hydrophobic interaction chromatography (HIC). Upon completion, the
excess payload was removed by tangential flow filtration and the unconjugated
antibody was removed by preparative HIC. These reactions were high
yielding, with &gt;90% conjugation efficiency at the CH1 and CT tag
sites,
and 75% conjugation efficiency at the LC tag site. HIC analysis of
the final product highlights the facile analytics (Figure ), which are a major benefit of site-specific conjugation
approaches as compared to global conjugation strategies. SEC analysis
of the conjugates demonstrated minimal aggregation ().

Hydrophobic interaction chromatography analysis demonstrates
the
clean conversion of LC-, CH1-, and CT-tagged antibodies into homogeneous
ADCs. Unconjugated antibody (black) elutes as one peak. After conjugation
to HIPS-Glu-PEG2-maytansine, the ADC (green) elutes as a diconjugated
material (right). This clean separation of conjugated from unconjugated
material allows for conjugate enrichment and simple determination
of DAR. α-HER2-DM1 was included as a comparator.

In order to assess the impact of tag incorporation
on antibody
structure, the thermal stability of these antibodies was examined
by thermofluorescence. There were no detectable differences in Tm1
(the lowest observed thermal transition) among the α-HER2 antibodies
tested (range 67.6–68 °C), which included the untagged
sequence as well as antibodies tagged at the LC, CH1, or CT locations
(). Furthermore, conjugation
of the CT-tagged antibody with HIPS-Glu-PEG2-maytansine had only a
minor effect on Tm1, decreasing the melting temperature by only one
degree as compared to the untagged antibody. Next, we determined the
effect of tag placement and payload conjugation on FcRn binding as
determined by surface plasmon resonance analysis. Previous reports
have documented the significant role of this receptor in antibody
pharmacokinetics. Specifically, FcRn
is broadly expressed on vascular endothelium, where it is poised to
capture internalized IgG (by binding at acidic pH in endosomes) and
return it to the circulation (by releasing the antibody at neutral
pH). Interestingly, both association at pH 6.0 and dissociation at
pH 7.3 correlate with an antibody’s circulating half-life,
with the latter value having a greater influence than the former. We measured both parameters (Table ). Our controls included the untagged α-HER2
and α-HER2-DM1. We found no effect of aldehyde tag placement
or payload conjugation on the FcRn KD at
pH 6.0. By contrast, the dissociation at pH 7.3 did reveal differences
in the percent of antibody that remained bound after 5 s. Specifically,
trastuzumab had the smallest amount of retained antibody, and inclusion
of the aldehyde tag increased the retention slightly, but not significantly.
Conjugating the antibodies did somewhat affect dissociation at pH
7.3, although the aldehyde-tagged ADCs were less impacted as compared
to the α-HER2-DM1. Retention of the latter conjugate was significantly
different from all other measured analytes. These trends suggest that
insertion of the aldehyde tag into the antibody does not significantly
modulate FcRn binding, and that aldehyde-mediated site-specific conjugation
yields ADCs with FcRn dissociation characteristics that are more similar
to the wild-type antibody as compared to the nonspecifically conjugated
α-HER2-DM1.

Aldehyde Tag Insertion and Payload
Conjugation Minimally Affect Antibody FcRn Binding Characteristics,
and Show Improved Dissociation at pH 7.3 Relative to α-HER2-DM1
measured
value	α-HER2
untagged	α-HER2
CH1 tag	α-HER2
CT tag	α-HER2
LC tag	α-HER2
CH1 ADC	α-HER2
CT ADC	α-HER2
LC ADC	α-HER2-DM1
ADC	
KD (association [nM] at pH 6.0)	5.2 ± 1.3	5.2 ± 1.9	5.8 ± 0.7	4.7 ± 1.2	4.8 ± 1.0	4.4 ± 1.1	4.8 ± 1.0	5.0 ± 0.2	
% Bound after 5 s at pH
7.3	8.6 ± 0.8	9.9 ± 1.0	9.9 ± 1.7	11.0 ± 1.2	9.5 ± 0.9	12.0 ± 1.4	10.9 ± 0.6	14.9 ± 0.8	
Mean KD values are not statistically
significantly different as determined
by one way ANOVA.

Significantly
different from αHER2
untagged, p &lt; 0.03, Two-tailed t-test.

Significantly different
from all
of the other analytes, p &lt; 0.04, Two-tailed t-test.

The immunogenicity
profiles of the LC, CH1, and CT tags were explored
by conducting an ex vivo human T-cell assay (EpiScreen) in which both
the unconjugated and ADC versions of these constructs were incubated
with leukocytes from 50 healthy donors representing the world population
of HLA allotypes− and compared with unmodified trastuzumab. T-cell
responses were measured by assessing proliferation and IL-2 cytokine
secretion. By this functional measure, the unconjugated and ADC versions
of LC-, CH1-, and CT-tagged antibodies were found not to be immunogenic
(). Specifically, the analytes
induced T-cell proliferation in only 2–10% of donor leukocytes
for trastuzumab and all other tagged antibody samples, as compared
to proliferation in 22% of samples induced by a positive control—a
relatively immunogenic, monoclonal antibody for which clinical immunogenicity
data are available.−

In a parallel set of experiments using a different
antibody backbone
but the same three tag placements, we tested the stability of aldehyde-tagged
HIPS conjugates in plasma at 37 °C. We tested antibodies carrying
the HIPS-Glu-PEG2 linker attached to either a fluorophore (Alexa Fluor
488, AF488) or cytotoxin payload (maytansine). The purpose of testing
two payloads was to explore how differences in payload attachment
to the linker (e.g., ester vs aryl amide bond, see ) can affect stability. The results indicated
that the HIPS conjugation chemistry is highly stable; specifically,
for the AF488 conjugates, we saw no loss of payload signal over 12
d at 37 °C in rat plasma, regardless of tag placement (Figure A). However, this stability did not completely translate
to the maytansine conjugates, which did show some loss of payload
signal over time (Figure B). The amount of
payload loss differed according to tag placement, with the CT site
showing the greatest stability, followed by the CH1 and LC sites.
We hypothesize that the differences in stability between the AF488
and maytansine conjugates are related to the differences in the chemical
linkages connecting the payload to the PEG2 portion of the linker
(). While the AF488 is attached
to the PEG2 by a stable aryl amide bond, the ester bond that connects
the maytansine payload is a known chemical liability at high pH. Therefore,
the differences that we observed in the stability of the three maytansine
ADCs might reflect distinct microenvironments at the three attachment
sites that influence the differential hydrolysis of the ester bond.

Aldehyde-tagged
HIPS conjugates are stable in plasma at 37 °C,
but payload attachment plays a role. We tested the plasma stability
of LC-, CH1-, and CT-tagged antibodies conjugated using HIPS-Glu-PEG2
to either (A) Alexa Fluor 488 (AF488) or (B) maytansine. Conjugates
were incubated in rat plasma at 37 °C for up to 13 d. When analyzed
by ELISA for total payload and total antibody, we observed no loss
of total payload signal relative to total antibody signal for the
AF488 conjugates, regardless of tag placement. For the maytansine
conjugates, we observed evidence that some deconjugation occurred
over time at 37 °C. The stability differed according to tag placement,
with the CT-tag showing the highest conservation of payload-to-antibody
signal (84%), followed by CH1 (72%), and LC (65%).

LC-, CH1-, and CT-Tagged ADCs Demonstrate
Potent Activity against
Tumor Targets in Vitro and in Vivo
As a first measure of
efficacy, the LC, CH1, and CT tagged α-Her2 ADCs were tested
in vitro against the HER2-overexpressing cell line, NCI-N87. Free
maytansine and α-HER2-DM1 (DAR 3.4) were used as comparators.
All three of the α-HER2 HIPS-Glu-PEG2-maytansine ADC conjugates
showed excellent in vitro cytotoxicity that was on par with free maytansine
and α-HER2-DM1 (Figure ). By contrast,
the isotype control CT-tagged conjugate showed essentially no activity,
as expected.

Payload location does not influence in vitro potency of
aldehyde-tagged
α-HER2 ADCs against NCI-N87 target cells. NCI-N87 cells, which
overexpress HER2, were used as targets for in vitro cytotoxicity in
a 6 day assay. Free maytansine (gray line) was included as a positive
control, and an isotype control ADC (orange line) was used as a negative
control to indicate specificity. α-HER2 HIPS-Glu-PEG2-maytansine
ADCs bearing the aldehyde tag on the light chain (LC, green), or on
the CH1 (red) or C-terminal (CT, blue) regions of
the heavy chain showed comparable activity. α-HER2-DM1 was included
as a comparator. IC50 values (reflecting the antibody concentrations
except in the case of the free drug) were measured as follows: free
maytansine, 214 pM; isotype control ADC, could not be determined;
LC ADC 87 pM; CH1 ADC, 132 pM; CT ADC 114 pM, α-HER2-DM1, 54.7
pM.

The in vivo efficacy of LC-, CH1-,
and CT-tagged α-HER2 ADCs
was explored using a staged NCI-N87 xenograft model in SCID mice.
Trastuzumab alone and an isotype control CT-tagged HIPS-Glu-PEG2-maytansine
ADC were used as negative controls, and α-HER2-DM1 (DAR 3.4)
was included as a comparator. All compounds were administered as a
single 5 mg/kg dose at the onset of the study. While the tumors continued
to grow in mice treated with either trastuzumab or the isotype control
ADC, a single dose of α-HER2-targeted ADC was sufficient to
stop tumor growth for ∼30 days in treated animals (Figure A). When tumors did eventually begin to grow back,
it became clear that the tumor sizes were larger in animals treated
with the CH1-tagged ADC as compared to those treated with LC- or CT-tagged
ADCs (p &lt; 0.026 and 0.016, respectively, two-tailed t-test at day 67). In order to investigate this effect,
we looked at the log10 cell kill for tumors dosed with
the various treatments (Table ). Indeed, the
results suggested that treatment with the CH1-tagged ADC killed fewer
tumor cells as compared to treatment with the other ADCs. Furthermore,
the CT-tagged ADC appeared to be the most efficacious conjugate resulting
in the highest log10 cell kill. This increased potency
translated into a significant survival advantage for animals treated
with the CT-tagged ADC (Figure B).

Payload placement
modifies the in vivo efficacy of aldehyde-tagged
α-HER2 ADCs against NCI-N87 xenografts in mice. CB.17 SCID mice
(8/group) were implanted subcutaneously with NCI-N87 cells. When the
tumors reached ∼113 mm3, the animals were given
a single 5 mg/kg dose of trastuzumab alone, an isotype ADC, or an
α-HER2 HIPS-Glu-PEG2-maytansine ADC conjugated to either the
light chain (LC), or the CH1 or C-terminal (CT) regions
of the heavy chain. α-HER2-DM1 was included as a comparator.
(A) Tumor growth was monitored twice weekly. (B) The differences in
efficacy among the tag placements tested were reflected in survival
curves. Animals were euthanized when tumors reached 800 mm3.

In Vivo Log10 Cell Kill
of NCI-N87 Tumor Cells Achieved by a Single 5 mg/kg ADC Dose
treatment	log10 cell kill	
αHER2 CT ADC	1.24	
αHER2 CH1ADC	0.83	
αHER2 LC ADC	1.08	
αHER2-DM1 ADC	1.03	
ADCs Carrying the Payload at Different Locations on the Antibody
Demonstrate Distinct Pharmacokinetics
We wanted to determine
if the differential efficacy of our ADC panel was a function of distinct
pharmacokinetic profiles. Mice were dosed with 5 mg/kg of LC-, CH1-,
or CT-tagged ADC, or with trastuzumab or α-HER2-DM1 as comparators.
Plasma was collected from the mice and analyzed by ELISA to quantitate
the total ADC and total antibody concentrations. To measure total
ADC, analytes were captured with an anti-human Fab-specific antibody
and detected with an anti-maytansine antibody. To measure total antibody,
analytes were captured with an anti-human IgG-specific antibody and
detected with an anti-human Fc-specific antibody. The measured concentrations
over time were fit to a two-compartment model by nonlinear regression
to determine half-lives (Table ). The total
antibody half-life for each aldehyde-tagged ADC was the same as, or
longer than, trastuzumab, suggesting that aldehyde tag insertion and
HIPS conjugation did not change the basic PK properties of the antibody.
By contrast, the total antibody half-life of the α-HER2-DM1
conjugate was significantly shorter, suggesting that the nonspecific
conjugation chemistry (which leads to overconjugated species) had
a negative effect on PK. We also measured the conjugated antibody
(total ADC) half-lives, which showed that the CT-tagged ADC, which
conferred the biggest survival benefit to tumor-bearing mice, also
demonstrated longest total half-life. The conjugate half-lives of
the α-HER2-DM1, and the CH1- and LC-tagged ADCs, were shorter
than the CT-tagged conjugate. These numbers clearly indicate that
the conjugation site played a key role in governing ADC half-lives.
In all cases, the aldehyde-tagged conjugates were stable in the circulation,
with percent area under the curve ratios of total ADC to total antibody
concentrations comparable to or better than the α-HER2-DM1 conjugate
(Figure ).

Pharmakinetic Parameters
Are Influenced
by Tag Placement and Conjugation Chemistry
analyte	total ADC
half-life (days)	total antibody
half-life (days)	total ADC
AUC	total antibody
AUC	
α-HER2 CTADC	7.8 ± 0.5	16.6 ± 2	366 880	695 913	
α-HER2
LC ADC	5.2 ±
0.2	14.13 ±
1.5	289 607	678 971	
α-HER2 CH1 ADC	5.7± 0.3	15.0 ±1.9	275 677	617 428	
α-HER2-DM1 ADC	6 ± 0.3	10.7 ± 0.7	240 082	482 220	
Trastuzumab	n.a.	13.65 ± 1	n.a.	809 674	
Area under the
curve (day ×
ng/mL) for the beta phase, measured from 2 to 28 d.

Not applicable.

α-HER2 HIPS-Glu-PEG2-maytansine ADCs are highly stable in
vivo regardless of tag placement. BALB/c mice were dosed with 5 mg/kg
of aldehyde-tagged α-HER2 HIPS-Glu-PEG2-maytansine ADCs conjugated
to either the light chain (LC), or to the CH1 or C-terminal (CT) regions of the heavy chain. α-HER2-DM1 was included
as a comparator. Plasma was sampled at the time points indicated and
assayed by ELISA. Area under the curve (AUC) was determined using
GraphPad Prism and is reported in Table .

CT-Tagged ADC Exhibits
an Improved Nonclinical Safety Profile
as Compared to a Conventional Lysine-Conjugated ADC
Finally,
we wanted to get an initial assessment of the safety profile of our
site-specific conjugates. Accordingly, we conducted a single dose
exploratory toxicology study in Sprague–Dawley rats. Animals
(5/group) received a 6, 20, or 60 mg/kg dose of CT-tagged α-HER2
followed by a 12 day observation period. As a comparator, we used
the conventional α-HER2-DM1 at the same doses. Body weight and
food intake were assessed at days 0, 1, 4, 8, and 11. Blood was drawn
on days 5 and 12 for clinical chemistry, hematology, and toxicokinetic
(TK) analysis. Additional TK blood samples were drawn at 8 h and on
day 9. All of the animals in the α-HER2-DM1 60 mg/kg group died
on day 5 (Table ). This mortality was consistent
with the known preclinical safety profile of the analogue, T-DM1. By contrast, no mortality was observed in the
α-HER2 CT ADC groups, even at 60 mg/kg. With respect to body
weight (Figure A), treatment with 6 or 20
mg/kg of α-HER2 CT ADC had no effect, while treatment with 60
mg/kg of α-HER2 CT ADC reduced rat body weight to a similar
extent as treatment with 20 mg/kg of α-HER2-DM1. With respect
to clinical chemistry, levels of both alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) were essentially unchanged in
rats treated with 6 or 20 mg/kg of α-HER2 CT ADC, but were somewhat
elevated in rats treated with 20 mg/kg of α-HER2-DM1 (Figure B and C). Levels of both enzymes were elevated at
the 60 mg/kg dose for both compounds, although to a lesser extent
with the α-HER2 CT ADC. Increased ALT and AST levels are indicators
of liver toxicity, the former a much more specific marker than the
latter. Increases in these enzymes are consistent with known toxicity
profiles of maytansine and maytansine conjugates. With respect to
hematology, platelet counts were essentially unchanged in rats treated
with 6 or 20 mg/kg of α-HER2 CT ADC, but were decreased in rats
treated with 20 mg/kg of α-HER2-DM1 (Figure D). Platelet counts were decreased at the 60 mg/kg dose for
both compounds, although to a lesser extent with the α-HER2
CT ADC. Decreases in platelet counts at day 5 postdose are generally
indicative of localized tissue damage, rather than bone marrow toxicity,
which takes longer to manifest due to the long half-life of platelets.
For all surviving animals, the clinical chemistry and hematology indicators
of toxicity observed at day 5 were essentially resolved by day 12
(). In total, the data indicated
that the α-HER2 CT ADC was less toxic to rats than the α-HER2-DM1
at the same doses; however, as expected, the target organs were the
same. Furthermore, toxicokinetic analyses of the total ADC and total
antibody concentrations showed that the α-HER2 CT ADC was stable
in vivo, showing similar profiles in the rat as were observed in the
mouse. Notably, the α-HER2-DM1 total ADC was cleared faster
than the α-HER2 CT ADC total ADC (Figure ).

No Mortality Was Observed in α-HER2
CTADC Groups, even at 60 mg/kg, Which Was a Lethal Dose for α-HER2-DM1
group	test article	dose (mg/kg)	mortality	
1	Vehicle	0	0/5	
2	α-HER2-DM1	6	0/5	
3	α-HER2-DM1	20	1/5	
4	α-HER2-DM1	60	5/5	
5	α-HER2 CTADC	6	0/5	
6	α-HER2 CT ADC	20	0/5	
7	α-HER2 CT ADC	60	0/5	
Animal euthanized
for reasons not
related to treatment.

α-HER2
CT ADC is less toxic than the α-HER2-DM1 at
the same doses in Sprague–Dawley rats. Animals (5/group) received
a 6, 20, or 60 mg/kg dose of α-HER2 CT ADC (shown in blue) or
α-HER2-DM1 (shown in red), followed by a 12 day observation
period. Body weight (A) was monitored at the times indicated. Alanine
aminotransferase (B), aspartate aminotransferase (C), and platelet
counts (D) were assessed at day 5 postdose. Due to premature death
(for 2 animals in the α-HER2-DM1 60 mg/kg group) or sample collection
errors (platelet-specific, for animals in the vehicle control and
both 6 mg/kg groups), some groups comprise fewer than 5 data points.

Toxicokinetic analysis demonstrated that the
α-HER2 CT ADC
was more stable in rats than the α-HER2-DM1. The same animals
that were analyzed for indicators of toxicity (Figure ) were used to assess the toxicokinetic profiles of the α-HER2
CT ADC and α-HER2-DM1 analytes. Plasma was sampled at the time
points indicated and assayed by ELISA.

ADC Structure–Activity Relationship Mapping
In this
study, we demonstrated that the aldehyde tag coupled with
HIPS chemistry could be used to site-specifically conjugate cytotoxic
payloads to antibody heavy and light chains. Critically, this included
varying the conjugation placement at internal, as well as N- or C-terminal sites, allowing wide flexibility in terms of exploring the SAR
space and optimizing the ADC structure. Furthermore, we demonstrated
that our approach generated ADCs with improved PK, equivalent or better
efficacy, and improved safety profiles as compared to a conventional
conjugate. The aldehyde-tagged ADCs were also highly stable in vivo
as shown by the pharmacokinetic and toxicokinetic studies. This observed
stability is likely a combination of HIPS chemistry, which results
in a C–C bond between antibody and payload, and the ability
to conjugate at a site that minimizes the hydrolysis of the payload
from the linker.

Our data add to a growing body of evidence
supporting the functional advantages of site-specific ADCs.,, Beyond the overall influence
of stoichiometry, whereby ADCs with higher DARs are cleared faster
from the circulation, less is known about
how conjugation chemistries and locations affect ADC properties. The
conjugation site can be considered both from a macro viewpoint—the
targeted antibody domain—and a micro viewpoint—the local
chemical and structural environment, including contributions from
the antibody backbone and from the payload linker. To date, our data
presented here along with some recent examples suggest that the latter
perspective may be more instructive in influencing the design and
control over the biological disposition of the resulting ADCs.,,,

We tested three aldehyde-tagged ADCs with conjugation sites
in
distinct antibody domains and observed that the CT-tagged ADC had
superior PK and in vivo efficacy as compared to the CH1- and LC-tagged
ADCs. The serum stability studies with the AF88 amide conjugates showed
comparable stability at the three tag sites, whereas the maytansine
ester conjugates demonstrated greater stability with the CT conjugate.
These observations indicate that the HIPS conjugation to the antibody
is inherently stable with little difference across the three sites,
and that the difference in the stability of the maytansine conjugates
at the three sites is a manifestation of the differences in the protein
microenvironment of the three sites and its influence on the ester
bond hydrolysis. Although it will need
to be demonstrated empirically, we surmise that conjugation sites
that work well in the context of an IgG1 ADC (explored here) might
also work well in the context of other, related antibody fragments.
The likely drivers determining tag site efficacy are protein conformation
and the local chemical microenvironment. To the extent that these
remain the same or are similar across antibodies or related proteins,
our observations may hold true.

The HIPS chemistry is less subject
to environmental influences
at different conjugation sites, as it results in a chemically stable
C–C bond formation between the protein and the payload. However,
other portions of the linker may well influence stability and efficacy. The ability to vary linker composition in order
to test the affects of length, hydrophobicity, and conformation remains
an important aspect of optimizing in vivo properties of ADCs. The
flexibility and versatility of the aldehyde tag conjugation platform
has enabled us to undertake a systematic evaluation of the impact
of conjugation site and linker composition on ADC properties. Our
novel and practical chemoenzymatic bioconjugation platform enables
exploring bioconjugate SAR space in order to find optimal combinations
of conjugation site and linker chemistry to produce ADCs with enhanced
stability, safety, and efficacy.

Experimental Procedures
General
The murine anti-maytansine antibody was made
and validated in-house. The rabbit anti-AF488 antibody was purchased
from Life Technologies. The goat anti-human IgG-specific and goat
anti-human Fab-specific antibodies, and the donkey anti-rabbit, goat
anti-mouse IgG subclass I-specific, and goat anti-human Fc-specific
HRP-conjugates were from Jackson Immunoresearch.

Cloning, Expression,
and Purification of Tagged Antibodies
The aldehyde tag sequence
was inserted at various points in the
light and heavy chain consensus regions using standard molecular biology
techniques. For small-scale production, CHO-S cells were transfected
with human FGE expression constructs and pools of FGE-overexpressing
cells were used for the transient production of antibodies. For larger-scale
production, GPEx technology (Catalent Pharma Solutions, LLC) was used
to generate a pooled cell line overexpressing human FGE. Then, the FGE pool was used to generate bulk
stable pools of antibody-expressing cells. Antibodies were purified
from the conditioned medium using Protein A chromatography (MabSelect,
GE Healthcare Life Sciences). Purified antibodies were flash frozen
and stored at −80 °C until further use.

Bioconjugation,
Purification, and HPLC Analytics
Aldehyde-tagged
antibodies (15 mg/mL) were conjugated to HIPS-Glu-PEG2-maytansine
(8 mol equiv drug:antibody) for 72 h at 37 °C in 50 mM sodium
citrate, 50 mM NaCl pH 5.5 containing 0.85% DMA and 0.085% Triton
X-100. Free drug was removed using tangential flow filtration. Unconjugated
antibody was removed using preparative-scale hydrophobic interaction
chromatography (HIC; GE Healthcare 17–5195–01) with
mobile phase A: 1.0 M ammonium sulfate, 25 mM sodium phosphate pH
7.0, and mobile phase B: 25% isopropanol, 18.75 mM sodium phosphate
pH 7.0. An isocratic gradient of 33% B was used to elute unconjugated
material, followed by a linear gradient of 41–95% B to elute
mono- and diconjugated species. To determine the DAR of the final
product, ADCs were examined by analytical HIC (Tosoh #14947) with
mobile phase A: 1.5 M ammonium sulfate, 25 mM sodium phosphate pH
7.0, and mobile phase B: 25% isopropanol, 18.75 mM sodium phosphate
pH 7.0. To determine aggregation, samples were analyzed using analytical
size exclusion chromatography (SEC; Tosoh #08541) with a mobile phase
of 300 mM NaCl, 25 mM sodium phosphate pH 6.8.

In Vitro Stability
Antibody–fluorophore and
antibody–drug conjugates were spiked into rat plasma at ∼1
pmol (payload)/mL. The samples were aliquoted and stored at −80
°C until use. Aliquots were placed at 37 °C under 5% CO2 for the indicated times, and then were analyzed by ELISA
to assess the anti-maytansine and anti-Fab signals. As a first step
for the analysis, a dilution series of the analyte into 1% bovine
serum albumin was performed to ensure that the analyte concentration
was within the linear range of the assay (20–40 ng/mL). Once
the appropriate dilution was determined, samples were removed from
the incubator and tested. A freshly thawed aliquot was used as a reference
starting value for conjugation. All analytes were measured together
on one plate to enable comparisons across time points. Analytes were
captured on plates coated with an anti-human Fab-specific antibody.
Then, the payload was detected with either an anti-AF488 or an anti-maytansine
antibody followed by an HRP-conjugated secondary; the total antibody
was detected with a directly conjugated anti-human Fc-specific antibody.
Bound secondary antibody was visualized with TMB substrate. The colorimetric
reaction was stopped with H2SO4, and the absorbance
at 450 nm was determined using a Molecular Devices SpectraMax M5 plate
reader. Data analysis was performed in Excel. Each sample was analyzed
in quadruplicate, and the average values were used. The ratio of anti-maytansine
signal to anti-Fab signal was used as a measure of antibody conjugation.

In Vitro Cytotoxicity
The HER2-positive gastric carcinoma
cell line, NCI-N87, was obtained from ATCC and maintained in RPMI-1640
medium (Cellgro) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen)
and Glutamax (Invitrogen). Twenty-four hours prior to plating, cells
were passaged to ensure log-phase growth. On the day of plating, 5000
cells/well were seeded onto 96-well plates in 90 μL normal growth
medium supplemented with 10 IU penicillin and 10 μg/mL streptomycin
(Cellgro). Cells were treated at various concentrations with 10 μL
of diluted analytes, and the plates were incubated at 37 °C in
an atmosphere of 5% CO2. After 6 d, 100 μL/well of
Cell Titer-Glo reagent (Promega) was added, and luminescence was measured
using a Molecular Devices SpectraMax M5 plate reader. GraphPad Prism
software was used for data analysis, including IC50 calculations.

Xenograft Studies
Female C.B-17 SCID mice were inoculated
subcutaneously with 1 × 107 NCI-N87 tumor cells in
50% Matrigel. When the tumors reached an average of 113 mm3, the animals were given a
single 5 mg/kg dose of ADC, trastuzumab antibody (untagged), or vehicle
alone. The animals were monitored twice weekly for body weight and
tumor size. Tumor volume was calculated using the formulawhere w = tumor width and l = tumor length.

Tumor
doubling times were obtained
by averaging the tumor growth rate curves from four groups of mice.
Then, log10 cell kill was estimated using the formula

Pharmacokinetic Analysis
Male BALB/c mice were dosed
intravenously with a single 5 mg/kg bolus of antibody conjugate. Plasma
was collected at 1, 8, and 20 h, and 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 14, 21, and 28
days postdose, with three animals per time point. No single animal
was sampled more than twice per week. Plasma samples were stored at
−80 °C, and the concentrations of total antibody and total
ADC were quantified by ELISA. For the former, conjugates were captured
with an anti-human IgG-specific antibody and detected with an HRP-conjugated
anti-Fc-specific antibody. For the latter, conjugates were captured
with an anti-human Fab-specific antibody and detected with a mouse
anti-maytansine primary antibody, followed by an HRP-conjugated anti-mouse
IgG-subclass 1-specific secondary antibody. Bound secondary antibody
was detected using Ultra TMB One-Step ELISA substrate (Thermo Fisher).
After quenching the reaction with sulfuric acid, signals were read
by taking the absorbance at 450 nm on a Molecular Devices Spectra
Max M5 plate reader equipped with SoftMax Pro software. Data were
analyzed using GraphPad Prism software. The measured concentrations
over time were fit to a two-compartment model by nonlinear regression
of the mean of the Y values (weighted by 1/Y2) with the following equation

The resulting exponential decay constant
(τβ) was used to calculate t1/2.

Rat Toxicology Study and Toxicokinetic Analysis
Male Sprague–Dawley rats (8–9 wk old at study start)
were given a single intravenous dose of 6, 20, or 60 mg/kg of either
the α-HER2 CT ADC or α-HER2-DM1 (5 animals/group). Animals
were observed for 12 days postdose. Body weights were recorded on
days 0, 1, 4, 8, and 11. Blood was collected from all animals at 8
h and at 5, 9, and 12 d for toxicokinetic analyses (all time points)
and for clinical chemistry and hematology analyses (days 5 and 12).
Toxicokinetic analyses were performed by ELISA, using the same conditions
and reagents described for the pharmacokinetic analyses.

Supporting Information Available
Size-exclusion
chromatography
traces corresponding to the LC-, CH1-, and CT-α-HER2 HIPS-Glu-PEG2-maytansine
ADCs shown in Figure . Experimental methods
for thermofluorescence, FcRn-binding, and ex vivo immunogenicity experiments,
and tables (S1–S3) of the results. Synthetic route for and
analytical data describing the HIPS-Glu-PEG2-maytansine payload. This
material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc500189z_si_001.pdf

The authors declare the
following competing financial interest(s): All authors are employees
of Redwood Bioscience and hold financial interest in the company.

Acknowledgments
Both the in silico and ex vivo immunogenicity
assessments
were performed by Antitope Ltd. This work was funded in part by grants
to DR from the NIH (GM096494) and the NSF (1151234).

Abbreviations
HIPSHydrazino-Pictet-Spengler

HIChydrophobic interaction
chromatography

SECsize-exclusion chromatography

FGEformylglycine-generating enzyme

fGlyformylglycine

LClight chain

CTC-terminal

ANOVAanalysis of variance

AF488Alexa Fluor 488

