Introduction
Lung cancer kills more
people than any other form of cancer. Cancer
cell growth depends on high expression of cancer genes. As lung cancer progresses, more and more characteristic
cancer genes turn on in transformed lung cells, driving malignant
cancer cell growth, such as EGFR and KRAS2. Overexpression of epithelial growth
factor receptor (EGFR) stimulates lung cancer cell growth. However,
70% of lung cancer patients fail to respond to tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) directed against EGFR. Similarly,
76% of lung cancer patients fail to respond to anti-EGFR antibodies.KRAS2 mutation, particularly
in the 12th codon, makes cancer cell proliferation through the Ras-Raf-MEK
pathway independent of EGFR activity. As
a result, treating lung cancer with anti-EGFR antibodies or TKIs fails
when KRAS2 has been mutated. PCR of biopsy tissue is the current gold standard for determination
of KRAS2 mutation. A
noninvasive imaging method would reduce patient discomfort and stress,
as well as reduce healthcare costs.

Single base mutations in
DNA occur frequently in nature and variations
in the genome can affect the development and progression of certain
diseases. Mutations in specific genes can result in proteins with
altered function. An example of this phenomenon
is oncogene activation in cancers. Nucleic
acid probes that are designed to target oncogenes are usually only
capable of recognizing one distinct sequence. In the case where several
different single base substitutions occur in one location on a particular
gene, single mismatches can lead to severe reduction in oligonucleotide
targeting efficacy.

Noninvasive radioimaging of gene expression
by detection of specific
mutant or wild-type mRNAs in cells to diagnose cancer and other diseases
in living systems has been achieved with antisense oligonucleotides. Specific imaging of target gene mRNA requires
multiple steps: probe permeation into tissue, endocytosis into the
cells, probe hybridization with the target mRNA, probe:mRNA accumulation
in the specific cells, and effluxing of unbound probes. Nonhybridized
probes must efflux from cells with little or no expression of the
target mRNA in order to permit a specific image in the targeted cells.

Peptide nucleic acids (PNA) are a useful nuclease-resistant DNA
derivative for the purpose of mRNA imaging. PNA includes a N-(2-aminoethyl)glycine backbone with DNA bases attached
to the α-N. With such a structure,
the bases are spaced appropriately to hybridize with DNA/RNA via Watson–Crick
hydrogen bonding. PNA is electrically
neutral, resulting in rapid and stronger hybridization compared to
DNA:DNA or DNA:RNA duplexes. The stability of PNAs in biological fluids
and their low cytotoxicity make them attractive for use in human diagnostic
and therapeutic applications.

Previously,
we pioneered reporter-peptide nucleic acid (PNA)-spacer-insulin-like
growth factor 1 (IGF1) tetrapeptides to enable IGF1R-mediated cellular
uptake, followed by single-mismatch specific
PET imaging of CCND1 mRNA and HER2 mRNA in breast
cancer xenografts, and mutant KRAS2 mRNA in pancreatic
cancer xenografts and spontaneous transgenic
lung cancer. Mismatches lowered tumor
signals to background. Incubation with recombinant IGF1 also lowered
tumor signals to background. But a direct
test for PNA hybridization with RNA in the cytoplasm is desirable.

Seitz and co-workers utilize thiazole orange (TO) dye as a surrogate
base for detection of DNA/RNA hybridization in cells.− Free thiazole orange has a low fluorescence quantum yield, but intercalation
into DNA induces a high quantum yield. The single-stranded TO probe shows low fluorescence because the
lack of planarity around the central methine bridge minimizes delocalization
and directs the excited state to nonfluorescent decay modes. Upon
TO stacking with neighboring nucleobases in the formed probe-target
duplex, however, the TO rings adopt a planar conformation, favoring
delocalization and maximizing fluorescence quantum yield.

TO-PNA fluorescence enhancement occurs
when TO at one end of a
hybridization agent is stacked upon a matched base pair. This has
facilitated applications in real-time PCR genotyping and RNA detection. In live cells, TO-PNA probes have been used
to detect H1N1 mRNA, miRNA-122, and mutant KRAS2 mRNA.

To apply a rigorous RNA hybridization
test to our fluorophore-PNA-IGF1
tetrapeptide agents that enter cells by receptor-mediated endocytosis,, traffic to the cytoplasm via early endosomes, and accumulate in cells with single mismatch specificity, we designed, modeled, synthesized, and tested
a variety of KRAS2 TO-PNA-IGF1 tetrapeptide agents
with the TO embedded within the PNA sequence, adjacent to the site
of mutation (Figure ).

Schematic of KRAS2 PNA with internal TO hybridizing
with KRAS2 RNA, resulting in TO intercalation.

Results
Design of TO-PNA-Peptide
Hybridization Agents
We previously
found that 12 PNA residues provided sufficient hybridization strength
and specificity for KRAS2 mRNA PET imaging in tumors
in mice with single mismatch specificity. We hypothesized that PNA 12mers with an internal TO could distinguish
a single base mutation in RNA. Thus, we designed KRAS2 PNA-peptides with an internal TO adjacent to the middle base of
the 12th codon, a frequent site of cancer-initiating mutations, such
as G12D (Table ; Figure ). We further hypothesized that the introduction of a separate thiazole
orange PNA residue after the initial N-GCCA of the original 12mer
would provide greater stability than the 12mer with TO substituting
for A. Hence, 13mer PNA-IGF1 tetrapeptides were also designed (Table ).

Structure of TO1, KRAS2 PNA-IGF1 tetrapeptide
with internal TO specific for KRAS2 G12D mRNA.

One of the primary requirements
for an oligonucleotide analogue
to be successful as an antigene/antisense agent is for it to be taken
up by the cells in reasonable quantity so that it can reach its target
in sufficient concentration. Since PNAs suffer from poor cellular
uptake they have not been well developed as an antigene/antisense
therapeutic agents., To improve cellular uptake, PNAs
have been conjugated with cell-penetrating positively charged peptides
with homology to nuclear localization sequences such as transportan,
penetratin, and TAR-binding peptides, or the SV40 nuclear localization sequence itself.,

Cell penetration in these cases is not receptor-dependent
and thus
not cell-specific. To elevate cellular uptake of PNA by cancer cells
that overexpress insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF1R), we introduced
a disulfide-cyclized d-peptide IGF1 analogue, d-(CysSerLysCys), at the C-terminus. The introduction of disulfide
bridges into peptides allows the creation of conformational constraints
that can improve the recognition between a ligand and its receptor,
therefore improving biological activity. The flexible, hydrophilic aminoethoxyethoxyacetic acid (AEEA) spacer
was introduced between the IGF1 tetrapeptide ligand and the PNA to
reduce steric hindrance.

Molecular Dynamics
Predictions of PNA:RNA Duplex Stabilities
Prior to initiating
chemical synthesis, the energetic effects of
including a TO PNA residue in the PNA:RNA duplex were measured computationally
(Figure ). The MM-PBSA method was used to
calculate the free energy of the PNA:RNA duplexes from the molecular
dynamics simulations. We used normal mode approximations to calculate
the entropy change of each trajectory. Typically nonlinear solvation
methods can lead to overestimation of the free energy changes, complicating
the calculation of absolute free energy changes. However, this overestimation does not impede the determination
of relative free energies. MM-PBSA calculations
were done on all the duplexes using the last 8 ns of each simulation
( Table 2). Figure  illustrates the predicted destabilization induced
by a mismatch just adjacent to the TO residue in a PNA:RNA duplex.

MM-PBSA
calculated structure of TO1, KRAS2 G12D
TO-PNA hybridized to KRAS2 G12WT RNA in 0.1 M NaCl,
pH 7.0. The TO residue was predicted to flip out of the helix at the
site of PNA:RNA mismatch. 50 ns of simulated motion of KRAS2 G12D TO-PNA hybridized to KRAS2 G12WT RNA are shown
in an mpg file ().

The theoretical Tm’s were calculated
from the MM-PBSA results in order to compare them with the experimental Tm’s from CD temperature ramps (see below).
Previously we found that using aMD to increase sampling efficiency
was effective in improving the theoretical Tm’s. After 25 ns of cMD
were carried out, an additional 50 ns of aMD for each duplex was done.
Post-processing of the binding energies was done using MM-PBSA over
the entire aMD run.

Synthesis and cCharacterization of TO-PNA-Peptides
The syntheses of 12 mer/13mer TO-PNA-peptide chimeras (Table ) were carried out (Scheme ) by Fmoc solid phase peptide synthesis on TG Sieber resin on a Protein
Technologies PS3 synthesizer at the 10 μmol scale. Cys-Cys cyclization
was executed with 10 equiv of I2 in Me2NCHO
for 4 h at room temperature before final cleavage. The PNA-peptide chimeras after cleavage from the resin
were purified by preparative HPLC and characterized by MALDI-TOF (). The purity of TO-PNA-peptide
chimeras was &gt;95% ().

Thermodynamics of TO-PNA-Peptide:RNA Duplexes Measured by CD
Temperature Ramps
CD spectra were obtained for TO-PNA-peptide:RNA
duplexes in a JASCO J-810 spectropolarimeter with Peltier temperature
control., Spectra were recorded over 320–220
nm at 25 °C. The CD spectra were recorded by using fully complementary
RNA (Figure A) versus single base mismatch
RNA (Figure B). CD spectra revealed that all
TO-PNA-peptide:RNA duplex spectra showed a negative absorbance band
around 290 nm and a strong positive CD signal around 265 nm (Figure ) which is a distinct hallmark feature of A-like
helices.

CD spectra of TO-PNA-peptide:RNA duplexes.
320–220 nm scans
of annealed 1 μM TO-PNA-peptide:1 μM RNA duplexes in 100
mM Na2HPO4, 1.0 M NaCl, 5.0 mM EDTA, pH 7.2,
were measured at 25 °C. (A) TO-PNA-peptide with fully complementary
RNA. (B) TO-PNA-peptide with single mismatch RNA.

In the case of activated KRAS2 G12D mRNA
overexpressed
in multiple cancers, the Tm of the complementary KRAS2 G12D TO-PNA-peptide 12mer with a KRAS2 G12D RNA 20mer was 80 ± 2 °C, independent of the peptide
ligand sequence, following the typical
behavior of PNA:RNA duplexes. The CD
melting studies for TO-PNA-peptides were carried out with fully complementary
as well as single mismatch RNA (Figure  and
Table ).

CD thermal denaturation plots of normalized
ellipticity at 265
nm versus temperature at pH 7.2 for TO-PNA-peptide:RNA duplexes (fully
complementary versus single mismatch) (A, C, E). Sigmoid decreases
correlate with a duplex to single strand transition upon melting.
First derivative plots determined Tm,
the midpoint of the duplex to single strand transition (B, D, F).

Melting Temperatures
of TO-PNA-Peptide:RNA
Duplexes
complementary TO-PNA-peptide:RNA duplex	single mismatch TO-PNA-peptide:RNA duplex	
duplex	Tm (°C)	duplex	Tm (°C)	
TO1 (12mer): KRAS2 G12D	72.27 ± 0.25	TO1 (12mer): KRAS2 G12WT	64.30 ± 0.06	
TO2 (13mer): KRAS2 G12D	70.14 ± 0.12	TO2 (13mer): KRAS2 G12WT	63.4 ± 0.47	
TO3 (12mer): KRAS2 G12WT	73.23 ± 0.25	TO3 (12mer): KRAS2 G12D	60.10 ± 0.41	
TO4 (13mer): KRAS2 G12WT	72.33 ± 0.12	TO4 (13mer): KRAS2 G12D	63.12 ± 0.36	
TO5 (12mer): KRAS2 G12V	72.3 ± 0.25	TO5 (12mer): KRAS2 G12D	61.1 ± 0.56	
TO6 (13mer): KRAS2 G12V	71.7 ± 0.21	TO6 (13mer): KRAS2 G12D	62.2 ± 0.36	
CD thermal ramps
from 25 to 95 °C
were monitored at the peak wavelength, 265 nm. Tm of each duplex was determined from first derivative peaks
± standard deviation from n = 3 independent
measurements.

The Tm for TO1 (12mer) KRAS2 G12D
duplex was 72.27 ± 0.25 °C, 8 °C less than
the Tm of the TO-free duplex, 80 ±
2 °C. The Tm for TO2 (13mer) KRAS2 G12D duplex was 70.14
± 0.12 °C, which is 2 °C less than Tm for TO1 (12mer) KRAS2 G12D duplex.

Figure  shows the average CD Tm values for fully complementary versus single mismatch
TO-PNA-peptide:RNA duplexes. The observed average Tm for fully complementary TO-PNA-peptide:RNA duplexes
was 72.0 ± 1.0 °C, while for single mismatch TO-PNA-peptide:RNA
duplexes, Tm was 62.4 ± 1.6 °C.
A single mismatch, corresponding to the difference between the KRAS2 G12D sequence, vs KRAS2 G12WT or KRAS2 G12 V sequences, lowered the Tm by 9.6 ± 2.3 °C. These values revealed that introduction
of TO into the PNA backbone slightly destabilized TO-PNA-peptide:RNA
duplexes, with a significant difference between fully complementary
versus single mismatch sequences.

Average CD melting temperatures of TO-PNA-peptide:RNA
duplexes
from 25 to 95 °C were monitored at the peak wavelength 265 nm.
(Violet) 12mer TO-PNA-peptide with fully complementary RNA, (Red)
12mer TO-PNA-peptide with single mismatch RNA, (Blue) 13mer TO-PNA-peptide
with fully complementary RNA, (Magenta) 13mer TO-PNA-peptide with
single mismatch RNA.

To test the validity of molecular dynamics predictions of
TO-PNA-peptide:RNA
stability, we compared n = 6 calculated Tm values vs measured CD Tm values (Figure ). For the 12mer TO-PNA-peptides,
good agreement (r2 = 0.87) between the
measured CD Tm and the calculated Tm was obtained. For the 13mer TO-PNA-peptides,
the correlation between the experimental and calculated Tm was poor (r2 = 0.46). This
poor correlation could be derived from limitations in the MM-PBSA
approximations, further sampling inefficiencies, or the accuracy of
the force fields. Apparently, the strain created in the RNA backbone
to accommodate the intercalated TO was not reflected in the molecular
dynamics calculations.

Correlation between calculated and experimental Tm. Calculated Tm from MM-PBSA
for the 12mer TO-PNA-peptides (A) and 13mer TO-PNA-peptides (B) hybridized
with RNA 12mers were compared with experimental Tm from CD. N = 6 values were then correlated
for the 12mer (r2 = 0.87) and 13mer (r2 = 0.46).

Fluorescence Measurements of Hybridization of TO-PNA-Peptides
with Synthetic RNA
We tested the ability of 12mer and 13mer
TO-PNA-peptides with internal TO residues to hybridize in solution
and fluoresce in the presence of complementary KRAS2 G12D RNA versus single mismatch KRAS2 G12WT RNA
20mers (Table ). Synthetic RNAs were hybridized
with TO-PNA-peptides at 37 °C and the resulting fluorescence
intensity was compared between match and mismatch duplexes for 12mer
and 13mer TO-PNA-peptides (Figure ). TO-PNA-peptides
alone in buffer only showed background fluorescence intensity.

In the presence of fully complementary KRAS2 G12D
RNA, the G12D TO-PNA-peptide 12mer showed a significant 7-fold increase
in fluorescence intensity compared to the TO-PNA-peptide alone (Figure A). With the single mismatch KRAS2 G12WT RNA, the G12D TO-PNA-peptide 12mer showed only a 4-fold increase
in fluorescence intensity (Figure A). Similar
results were observed for G12WT TO-PNA-peptide 12mer. In the presence
of fully complementary KRAS2 G12WT RNA, the G12WT
TO-PNA-peptide 12mer showed a significant 5-fold increase in fluorescence
intensity compared to the TO-PNA-peptide alone (Figure B). With the single mismatch KRAS2 G12D RNA,
the G12WT TO-PNA-peptide 12mer showed only a 3-fold increase in fluorescence
intensity (Figure B).

In vitro hybridization
of 50 nM 12mer or 13mer TO-PNA-peptides
with 50 nM synthetic fully complementary RNA (blue) or single mismatch
RNA (red) or with no RNA (green) at 37 °C. (A) G12D TO-PNA-peptide.
(B) G12WT TO-PNA-peptide. Mean values are shown for n = 3 independent measurements ± SD. ** p &lt;
0.01, *** p &lt; 0.005.

However, G12D TO-PNA-peptide 13mers and G12WT TO-PNA-peptide
13mers
showed no significant discrimination when hybridized with match versus
single mismatch KRAS2 RNA (Figure ). The above results indicate that as candidates for fluorescence
hybridization probes, TO-PNA-peptide 12mers are more promising than
TO-PNA-peptide 13mers, since 12mers can detect RNAs with single mismatch
sensitivity while 13mers fail. Comparable results for 5′-terminal
TO-DNA/TO-PNA:DNA were reported earlier.

Confocal Fluorescence Microscopy of Hybridization of TO-PNA-Peptides
with KRAS2 mRNA in Human Lung Cancer Cells
200 nM G12D and WT TO-PNA-peptide 12mers were introduced into the
culture medium of SK-LU-1 KRAS2 G12D mutant lung
cancer cells and H460 KRAS G12 wild type lung cancer
cells. The cells were incubated 4 h at 37 °C. SK-LU-1 and H460 cells
both overexpress IGF1R. We previously observed that receptor-mediated
endocytosis under these conditions results in the internalization
of millions of PNA-peptides per cell, relative to the thousands of
copies of overexpressed oncogene mRNAs in cancer cells. Excess unbound PNA-peptides efflux from cells,
resulting in a dynamic equilibrium of hybridized PNA-peptides accumulated
in treated cells after suitable incubation time.

Confocal fluorescence imaging of fixed cells showed
that SK-LU-1 cells treated with G12D TO-PNA-peptide showed higher
cytoplasmic fluorescence intensity vs G12WT TO-PNA-peptide, while
in H460 cells, G12D TO-PNA-peptide showed negligible cytoplasmic fluorescence
signal compared to G12WT TO-PNA-peptide (Figure A). We have previously observed comparable cytoplasmic accumulation
in both fixed− and live cells, over
the concentration range 4 nM – 1 μM. Therefore, TO-PNA-peptide
12mers detected complementary RNA targets in cells with single mismatch
discrimination. Quantification of corrected total cell fluorescence
(CTCF) of n = 9 confocal cell images agreed with
the above observation that in two different cell lines, TO-PNA-peptides
with matched sequences displayed higher CTCF compared to TO-PNA-peptides
with one mismatched base (Figure B), in agreement
with the lower stability of mismatched duplexes (Figure ).

13mers, however, displayed no significant discrimination.
The indistinguishable
cytoplasmic signals agreed with the indistinguishable solution fluorescence
results.

Confocal fluorescent microscopy of KRAS2 G12D
SK-LU-1 and KRAS2 G12WT H460 human lung cancer cells
incubated with 200 nM TO-PNA-peptide 12mers after 4 h at 37 °C.
(A) Fluorescent images recorded after TO excitation at 488 nm. Emission
was observed at 535/40 nm. (B) Quantification of corrected total cell
fluorescence (CTCF) intensity in SK-LU-1 and H460 cells treated with
200 nM G12D TO-PNA-peptide or G12WT TO-PNA-peptide 12mers. N = 9 cells were selected, three from each of three separate
images. Fluorescence intensities were quantified using ImageJ. Fluorescence
values were expressed as integrated density after background subtraction
± SE. * p &lt; 0.05, *** p &lt;
0.00001 (Student’s t test).

Discussion
We designed and modeled
a variety of internally intercalating TO-PNA-IGF1
tetrapeptide agents that hybridized with KRAS2 RNA.
Molecular dynamics calculations predicted slightly reduced thermal
stability compared with normal base PNAs. In agreement with our molecular
dynamics calculations, large CD Tm differences
were observed between fully complementary TO-PNA:RNA duplexes versus
single mismatch duplexes. We observed that the single-stranded PNA-peptide
12mer agent with an internal TO residue in place of adenine 4 showed
low fluorescence, but when it hybridized with KRAS2 RNA, fluorescence escalated 5–6-fold at 37 °C. We ascribe
the reduced fluorescence in the presence of a mismatched KRAS2 RNA to partial dissociation of the mismatched duplex at 37 °C.

However, the PNA-peptide 13mers with TO inserted between adenine
4 and thymine 5 showed insufficient mutant discrimination upon RNA
binding. Perhaps intercalation of TO upon hybridization of the 13mer
to KRAS2 RNA created excess strain on the ribose-phosphodiester
backbone, limiting the achievable fluorescence quantum yield upon
hybridization to RNA. Apparently, less strain was experienced by the
RNA upon hybridizing with the 12mer, which required the displaced
uracil to flip out of the PNA:RNA helix.

Fluorescence measurements
of treated human lung cancer cells similarly
showed elevated cytoplasmic accumulation of fully complementary vs
single base mismatch 12mer agents. We ascribe the reduced cytoplasmic
fluorescence in the presence of a mismatched KRAS2 TO-PNA-peptide to partial dissociation of the mismatched duplex
at 37 °C. Sequence-specific elevation of TO fluorescence is consistent
with the model of cytoplasmic TO-PNA-peptide:RNA hybridization. These
studies gave direct evidence that PNA conjugated with an IGF1 receptor
peptide trafficks to the cytoplasm and hybridizes specifically with
a target mRNA.

For reliable clinical application of PNA-peptide
agents with internal
TO residues, more study is needed on the mechanism of endosome trafficking,
release of agents in the cytoplasm, and efflux of unbound agent from
cells. Brighter TO derivatives are desirable, ideally a near-infrared
analogue, with an even greater reduction in quantum yield adjacent
to a mismatch in the RNA.

Conclusion
We observed that single-stranded
PNA-IGF1 tetrapeptide 12mers with
an internal TO showed low fluorescence, but fluorescence escalated
5–6-fold upon hybridization with KRAS2 RNA.
Circular dichroism melting curves showed ∼10 °C higher Tm for fully complementary vs single base mismatch
TO-PNA agent duplexes with KRAS2 RNA. Fluorescence
measurements of treated human lung cancer cells similarly showed elevated
cytoplasmic fluorescence intensity with fully complementary vs single
base mismatch 12mer TO-PNA agents, in agreement with the lower Tm of a mismatched duplex. Sequence-specific
elevation of internal TO fluorescence is consistent with our hypothesis
of detecting cytoplasmic PNA:RNA hybridization if a mutant agent encounters
the corresponding mutant mRNA.

Methods
Molecular Dynamics Simulations
System equilibration
and production MD simulations were performed using the Amber 12 suite
of programs. The LeaP module of Amber
12 was used to create parameter and topology files for the MD simulations
using the ff99SB force field., PNA force fields were
created in our earlier study of hypoxanthine-containing wobble base
PNAs. RNA molecules were set to predicted
protonation states at pH 7.0. Na+ and Cl– counterions were added to each system to achieve neutrality and
a salt concentration of 0.1 M. TIP3P water molecules were added with
a minimum spacing of 30 Å (3.0 nm) from the box edges to the
PNA:RNA molecules. Energy minimization on each system was performed
in a two-step process. First the solute atoms were restrained while
the water and ion molecules were allowed to relax over 1000 steps.
The entire system was then subjected to energy minimization using
the steepest descent method for the first 1000 steps, followed by
the full conjugate gradient method for an additional 24 000
steps. Each molecular system was then heated to 300 K for 100 ps followed
by a 50 ps constant pressure simulation to adjust the density to 1
g/mL. An additional 500 ps simulation was run prior to production
simulations to allow for further temperature and pressure equilibration.

Production runs were performed using a canonical ensemble (NVT)
scheme. Langevin dynamics with a collision frequency of 2.0 were used
for temperature regulation, (ii) the SHAKE algorithm was used for
all hydrogen atoms, and (iii) the particle mesh Ewald method was employed
to treat long-range electrostatics and van der Waals forces (cutoff
of 8 Å) with an integration step of 2.0 fs. All Amber 12 equilibration
and production runs were performed using double precision. All production simulations were repeated in
triplicate with random seeding for initial velocities and extended
to 25 ns. Structural features were determined using the Curves+ software
package, while visualization of trajectories
was performed in VMD.

Accelerated
Molecular Dynamics Simulations
Accelerated
MD (aMD) is one method to increase the sampling of a molecular system
to overcome the computational cost of long time scales. aMD modifies
the system’s original potential energy surface (V(r)) by adding a boost potential (ΔV(r)) when V(r) falls below a certain threshold energy (E). The boost potential is defined aswhere α modulates the depth and roughness
of the energy basins on the modified potential. In order to enhance
sampling of internal and diffusive degrees of freedom, a dual boosting
potential was applied to the backbone torsion angles and the overall
boost potential aswhere Vt(r) is the total potential of the torsional
terms, Vt(r) and ΔVT(r) are the boost potentials
applied to the
torsional terms, and the total potential energy, respectively. The
parameters were set as follows: Et = 1.2{⟨ΔVt(r)⟩}, αt = 0.20 kcal/mol, ET = 0.2 kcal/mol·number
atoms, plus the ensemble averaged potential energy from the conventional
MD simulations, and αT = 0.2 kcal/mol·number
atoms., aMD runs simulated 50 ns.

MM-PBSA Calculations
The binding energies for each
RNA:PNA duplex were calculated using the molecular mechanics-Poisson–Boltzmann
surface area (MM-PBSA) method in Amber 12., The MM-PBSA method calculates the binding free energy by the free
energies of solvation for the complex (ΔGduplex), PNA (ΔGPNA), and
RNA (ΔGRNA).

Each term is calculated by determining
the enthalpic energy of the solute using molecular mechanics (EMM),
the polar solvation free energy (ΔGSOLV), the nonpolar solvation free energy (ΔGnp), and the entropic contribution (ΔS):

The enthalpic
term is taken as the average over the molecular mechanics
force field terms for the solute. The solute vibrational entropy is
estimated using either normal-mode analysis or quasi-harmonic approximation.
ΔGsolv is calculated using the Poisson–Boltzmann
(PB) equation. The nonpolar term (ΔGnp) is estimated from the solvent accessible surface area (SASA).where γ is the surface tension, set
to 0.0072 kcal/Å2. β is an offset value used
to correct for the nonpolar contribution to the solvation free energy
term. Free energy values were converted
to theoretical melting temperatures using the following equation:where ΔH is calculated
from the sum of the enthalpic terms in the MM-PBSA calculation, ΔS is the entropy value from normal-mode analysis, R is the gas constant in kcal/mol·K, and ct is the concentration (M) of each individual RNA/PNA
strand in the CD experiments.

For each RNA:PNA system, MM-PBSA
calculations were performed using
the last 8.0 ns of the simulation with 100 ps intervals. The entropy
was determined using normal-mode analysis using 50 frames over the
8.0 ns. All energy values represent 3 independent MD simulation runs
for each RNA:PNA duplex. aMD MM-PBSA calculations were performed over
the entire 50 ns simulation with 50 ps intervals. aMD entropy values
were determined using the same method as for conventional MD (cMD)
simulations. All calculations were performed with the MMPBSA.py.MPI
module in Amber 11 with an ionic strength equal to 1.0 M. For MM-PBSA
calculations the PB equation was solved numerically by the PBSA program
included with in the AmberTools 12 module. The hydrophobic contribution
was approximated by the LCPO method implemented within the Sander
module.

Synthesis of TO-PNA Monomer
The synthesis of TO-Aeg-PNA
monomer (8) was achieved in seven steps (Scheme ) by using an adaptation of previously developed
methods.−

The synthesis began with commercially available
2-(methylthio)benzothiazole
(1) which was treated with iodomethane to yield the N-alkyl compound 3. The quinoline derivative 4 was obtained by reaction of 4-methylquinoline (2) with bromoacetic acid. The condensation of N-alkyl
compound 3 and the quinoline derivative 4 in the presence of Et3N yielded TO carboxylic acid 5. The TO carboxylic acid 5 was coupled with
commercially available Fmoc-Aeg-OtBu (6) in the presence of PyBOP and HOBt
gave tBu ester compound 7 with moderate
yield. When compound 7 was treated with 20% CF3CO2H in CH2Cl2 to deprotect the tBu-ester group, a complex reaction mixture was observed
that was difficult to purify. Hence, a new synthetic route (Scheme ) was adopted.

The tBu group
of compound 6 was deprotected
by CF3CO2H followed by treatment with allyl
alcohol in the presence of thionyl chloride to yield the allyl ester 9. This was coupled with TO carboxylic acid 5 in the presence of PyBOP and HOBt to give the TO allyl ester 10. Finally, the allyl protecting group in compound 10 was removed by Pd0-catalyzed allyl transfer
to N-methyl aniline to
yield TO-Aeg-PNA monomer 8 which was used in solid phase
peptide synthesis.

Circular Dichroism (CD) Spectra and Thermal
Melting of PNA:RNA
Duplexes
CD spectra were obtained for TO-PNA-peptide:RNA
duplexes using a JASCO J-810 spectropolarimeter with Peltier temperature
control., Spectra were recorded over 320–220
nm at 25 °C. Gel-purified RNA icosamers were purchased from Thermo
Scientific (Dharmacon). Prior to measurement, samples were heated
to 95 °C for 10 min and then cooled for 10 min. All spectra were
subjected to baseline correction. Final spectra were calculated as
the average of 3 independent measurements. Stock RNA samples were
suspended in H2O and TO-PNA-peptide molecules in 20 mM
sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.2), TO-PNA-peptide:RNA solutions were
diluted in 20 mM Na2HPO4, 1.0 M NaCl, 5 mM EDTA,
pH 7.2, to reach a final concentration of 1 μM:1 μM. Thermal
denaturation experiments were carried out by increasing the temperature
from 25 to 95 °C at a rate of 0.5 °C/min while monitoring
the CD signal at 265 nm. Tm values were
determined based on the assumption of a two-state model. Melting curves
were normalized by subtracting baseline slopes. The first derivative of the melting curves was computed
with respect to the temperature (dθ/dT), and
the maximum was used to determine the Tm. We have previously reported no perturbation of Tm due to peptide moieties on the PNAs.

Fluorescence Intensity Measurements of TO-PNA-Peptide:RNA
Duplexes
Hybridization was carried out of TO-PNA-peptides
with synthetic
RNAs. 50 nM G12D TO-PNA-peptide and G12WT TO-PNA-peptide were incubated
with 50 nM RNAs (Thermo Scientific Dharmacon) in 3 mM Na2HPO4 buffer (Molecular Research Center) for 1 h at 37
°C. Single stranded TO-PNA-peptides were incubated with buffer
only. At the end of 1 h incubation, fluorescent intensities were measured
with a plate reader (infiniteM200PRO, TECAN). Background intensity
values consisting of only buffer were subtracted from every fluorescence
measurement. Each well was excited at 495 nm and the fluorescence
intensities were collected at 531 nm.

Confocal Fluorescence Microscopy
of TO-PNA-Peptide:RNA Duplexes
in Cells
Fluorescent imaging was carried out of TO-PNA-peptides
in KRAS wild type and mutant cells. SK-LU-1 cells
(ATCC) were cultured in EMEM medium with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS).
H460 cells (ATCC) were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium with 10% FBS.
20 000 cells were seeded in an 8-chamber well slide (Millipore)
in 10% growth medium and incubated overnight. 200 nM TO-PNA-peptides
were added to each well in serum-free medium and were incubated for
4 h at 37 °C to allow equilibration of bound TO-PNA-peptide.
At the end of incubation, cells were washed 3× with PBS containing
Ca2+ and Mg2+ (Fisher) followed by fixation
with 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS. Cells were then washed one more time
with PBS containing Ca2+ and Mg2+. Chambers
were removed and the slides were mounted with Prolong Gold Antifade
reagent with DAPI (Life Technologies). All images were taken on a
Nikon C1 Plus two point-scanning laser confocal microscope using 40×
oil objective. Excitation was at 488 nm, and emission was observed
at 535/40 nm.

Quantification of Confocal Images Using ImageJ
Nine
cells were selected individually using drawing tools in ImageJ, followed
by measurement of the area and the integrated density of each cell.
Three different background areas were selected for each image and
were measured for mean pixel values. The corrected total cell fluorescence
for each cell = integrated density of the cell – area of the
cell × mean pixel values of three background areas. Standard
errors were calculated, and significance was assessed by Student’s t test.

Supporting Information Available
Methods and analytical data
for synthesis of thiazole orange-PNA monomer and solid phase assembly
of PNA-AEEA-IGF1 tetrapeptide sequences containing thiazole orange
are shown. 50 ns of simulated motion of KRAS2 G12D
TO-PNA hybridized to KRAS2 G12WT RNA are shown in
an mpg file, which illustrates the TO residue flipping out of the
helix at the site of PNA:RNA mismatch. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc500304m_si_001.pdf

bc500304m_si_002.mpg

Author Present Address
Mahesh
V. Sonar, Department of Chemistry, State University of New York, Binghamton
NY 13902

Author Present Address
Matthew E. Wampole, Discovery Science,
Thomson-Reuters, Boston MA 02210

The authors declare
the
following competing financial interest(s): We wish to inform the Editor
of potential conflicts of interest. Prof. Eric Wickstrom and Prof.
Mathew L. Thakur hold shares in GeneSeen LLC, which might ultimately
benefit from the results of this investigation, but did not support
the work.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr.
Yolanda Covarrubias for assistance with confocal
microscopy in the Kimmel Cancer Center Molecular Imaging Facility,
supported in part by NCI P30 CA56036. This work was supported by NIH
1 R01 CA148565 to E.W. IP owned by EW/MLT, licensed to MTTI.

