Introduction
Various polyanionic
macromolecules such as heparin, heparan sulfate
(HS) proteoglycans (HSPGs), DNA, RNA, or proteins featuring aspartic
or glutamic-rich stretches are produced by living organisms. Some
of these polyanions such as DNA and RNA participate in various highly
specific interactions to mediate essential biological processes. However,
an increasing body of evidence shows that these macromolecular polyanions
participate also in a vast array of strong but nonspecific electrostatic
interactions, which play a critical role
in almost all cellular and extracellular phenomena (for recent reviews
see refs (,)). This dual mode of
binding is not exclusive in that both types of interactions, specific
and nonspecific, often contribute to trigger important biological
events.

A good example of a class of proteins utilizing nonspecific
electrostatic
interactions with polyanions is the HS-binding growth factor family.
For example, the binding of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
to its receptors (VEGFRs) involves the presence of HSPGs as co-receptors.− Another example of proteins using HS as co-receptor and directly
related to this study are the hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)− and its MET tyrosine kinase receptor. HGF/MET signaling controls cell growth, invasion, and survival.
Its deregulation is associated with the acquisition of tumorigenic
properties but also invasive phenotype. The involvement of MET in
numerous human tumors is now established, and interfering with its
activation is therefore a potential strategy for developing therapeutics
against tumorigenesis or metastatic processes., Both HGF and MET proteins bind heparin. The HGF binding site for
heparin has been well characterized and is located within the N domain.− In contrast, the MET binding site for heparin has not been identified
yet.

The capacity of some proteins
to interact strongly with polyanions
has been exploited for modulating or blocking their biological action.
The HGF/MET signaling is potentiated by heparin or small sulfated oligosaccharides., Large polyanions such as carboxymethylated and/or sulfated dextran
polymers were studied for their ability to mimic heparin and to inhibit− or potentiate the biological activity of HS-binding growth factors. However,
the polydispersity of these macromolecular polyanions as well as their
poor specificity is a severe limitation to their use as drugs. An
emerging trend in the field is toward the synthesis of homogeneous
and well-defined polyanion–peptide conjugates., The basic idea is to increase the selectivity and the affinity of
the polyanion by its covalent association with a peptide that is specific
for the target protein. These molecules can be regarded as heterobivalent
ligands, the peptide part bringing the specificity of the scaffold,
whose interaction with the target protein is stabilized by the ionic
interaction of the polyanion with a proximal surface-exposed cationic
patch (Figure A). Heteromultivalency, which
is defined as an interaction in which two or more different types
of molecular recognition events take place simultaneously between
the two interacting partners, is in fact a generalization of multivalency
which involves multiple molecular recognition events of the same type
between two entities.(A) Polyanion–peptide conjugates act as bivalent
ligands.
(B) Polyanions used in this study are sulfonated dendrimers synthesized
starting from taurine 1 or gem-disulfonate 2. (C) Polyanion and peptide modules are assembled site-specifically
using thiocarbamate ligation.

 Heteromultivalency is frequently encountered in biological
interactions. The affinities and specificities of biological heteromultivalent
interactions are greater than the monovalent interactions they are
made of. The concept of heteromultivalency
is also increasingly used in the design of high affinity ligands toward
proteins which do not have two similar binding sites. For example, recent studies showed the potential of heteromultivalency
for designing potent allosteric modulators of factor XIa or thrombin.−

The aim of this proof-of-concept study was to design and select
polyanion–peptide conjugates able to bind the extracellular
domain of MET receptor. Instead of using polyanions related to heparin
or sulfated oligosaccharides, whose synthesis may be challenging,
we decided to design novel sulfonated dendrimers derived from 2-aminoethanesulfonate 1 (also known as taurine) or
2-aminoethane-1,1-disulfonate 2() as potential HS mimetics (Figure B). Examination
of the literature revealed that the synthesis of high molecular weight
polysulfonated–peptide conjugates such as those reported here
has not been addressed previously. Several reports highlight the challenge
of incorporating taurine or other highly hydrophilic aminosulfonic
acid derivatives into peptides., We therefore designed
a simple, convergent, and efficient access to these amphiphilic scaffolds
relying on the chemoselective and site-specific formation of a thiocarbamate
linkage between phenylthiocarbonyl functionalized HS mimetics and
MET peptide binders featuring a thiol group (Figure C). Importantly, this convergent
approach enabled easily the variation of number and the density of
the sulfonate groups within the polyanion by varying the valency of
the dendrimer core or the nature of the sulfonate end-group. Moreover,
this strategy also enabled variation of the position of the polyanionic
moiety relative to the peptide and thus to search for a cationic patch
on the protein near the peptide binding site. This possibility was
of prime importance for this work because the MET binding sites for
heparin and for the selected peptide binders are not known, thus precluding
any rational basis for the design of the polyanion–peptide
conjugates. Finally, the polyanion–peptide conjugates were
screened for their capacity to bind selectively a recombinant MET-Fc
chimera using a peptide microarray format.

Results and Discussion
The principle of the thiocarbamate ligation, is presented in Figure C. The process is
based on the reaction of a thiol such as a peptide featuring a cysteine
residue with a phenylthiocarbamate (PTC) component. It is formely
a thiol–thioester exchange which proceeds efficiently in water
at neutral pH. In this work, the PTC group was introduced on the polyanion
scaffold to be ligated with the cysteinyl peptides of interest. Thus,
the importance of the polyanionic moiety position relative to peptide
ligand could be easily examined by just varying the position of the
cysteine residue, i.e., N- or C-terminally, within the peptide ligand.

Design
and Synthesis of the Sulfonated Dendrimers
Figure  shows the structure of the divalent or tetravalent
dendrimers which were synthesized in this study. The structure of
the sulfonated dendrimers shows 2-aminoethanesulfonate or 2-aminoethane-1,1-disulfonate
residues, which are linked to peripheral α- and ε-amino
groups of divalent or tetravalent lysinyl trees through an urea bond.
The PTC group was introduced on the opposite side on the ε-amino
group of a C-terminal lysine residue.

Structure of the sulfonated dendrimers
derived from taurine 1 or gem-disulfonate 2.

Note that a glycine-tyrosine dipeptidyl
unit was inserted in the
structure of dendrimers between the lysinyl core and the PTC group.
This modification was suggested by the fact that tyrosine, together
with small and highly flexible amino acids such as glycine in polyanion 4, is particularly powerful in establishing favorable contacts
within protein–protein binding interfaces., Obviously, nature is exploiting this property because tyrosine is
substantially more frequent within the protein binding sites compared
to the frequency of tyrosine generally observed in proteins.

The sulfonated dendrimers 6, 7, and 9 lacking the PTC group or the PTC dendrimer 3 in which the sulfonate residues were substituted by acetyl groups
were used as controls in the binding studies with MET extracellular
domain. Likewise, dendrimer 5 with an alanine residue
in place of the tyrosine was used to evaluate the contribution of
tyrosine to the binding strength.

We started with the synthesis
of divalent dendrimers 3–6, which
were assembled using 9-fluorenylmethyloxycarbonyl
(Fmoc)-solid-phase peptide synthesis (SPPS) protocols on a Rink PEG
PS resin as shown in Scheme . The N-terminal
lysine residue was incorporated as Fmoc-l-Lys(Fmoc)-OH derivative,
whereas the C-terminal lysine residue was incorporated as Fmoc-l-Lys(Mtt)-OH (Mtt: 4-methyltrityl) or Fmoc-l-Lys(Boc)-OH
(Boc: tert-butyloxycarbonyl) derivative depending
on the structure of the target compound.

Synthesis of Dendrimers 3–6
The synthesis of dendrimer 5 was carried out as described
for dendrimer 4 starting from peptidyl resin LysGlyAlaLys(Mtt)-Rink
PEG PS 14 (39%, omitted for clarity).

Acetylated dendrimer 3 was synthesized using peptidyl
resin 12 in which the last lysine residue was protected
by an Mtt group (PG = Mtt). For this, the amino groups
were acetylated with a mixture of acetic anhydride and N,N-diisopropylethylamine (DIEA). Then the Mtt group
was removed selectively using 1% TFA in CH2Cl2. The PTC group was incorporated by
treating the peptidyl resin with phenylthiochloroformate in the presence
of triethylamine (TEA) as described elsewhere. Finally, cleavage and deprotection of the peptidyl resin
in trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) furnished PTC dendrimer 3, which was isolated with a yield of 53% after RP-HPLC purification.

A similar strategy was used for the synthesis of sulfonated PTC
dendrimer 4 and 5. The incorporation of
the taurine residues was carried out using derivatives 13a or 13b (Scheme ). First, taurine 1 was converted into the corresponding tetra(n-butyl)ammonium salts to allow its subsequent solubilization in organic
solvents. Imidazolylcarbonyl derivative 13a was obtained
by reacting the tetra(n-butyl)ammonium salt of taurine 1 with N,N′-carbonyldiimidazole
(CDI) in DMF. This solution was used immediately for the coupling
step. p-Nitrophenylcarbonyl derivative 13b was also prepared by reacting the tetra(n-butyl)ammonium
salt of taurine with bis(p-nitrophenyl)carbonate.
To the contrary of imidazolylcarbonyl derivative 13a, p-nitrophenylcarbonyl derivative 13b could
be isolated (60%) and stored prior to use. A single carbamoylation
step using either of these reagents enabled the successful incorporation
of taurine residues onto peptidyl resins 11 or 12. The presence of sulfonate groups did not perturb the subsequent
removal of Mtt group or the incorporation of the PTC group to a significant
extent. Finally, the cleavage and deprotection step in TFA furnished
dendrimers 4 and 5, which were purified
by RP-HPLC. Taurine derivatives 13a and 13b gave similar yields for dendrimer 4 (25 and 36% respectively).
Dendrimer 5 was produced using derivative 13b only (39%).

Synthesis of Taurine Derivatives 13a,b
Dendrimer 6 was synthesized with a tert-butyloxycarbonyl (Boc)
protecting group (PG) for the C-terminal
lysine residue (PG = Boc). In this case, the grafting of taurine residues
was carried out using imidazolylcarbonyl derivative 13a. Finally, the cleavage and deprotection step in TFA furnished dendrimer 6 with a 69% isolated yield.

We next examined the synthesis
of tetrasulfonated dendrimers 7 and 8 using
a similar solid-phase strategy
(Scheme ). Although the coupling of imidazolylcarbonyl
derivative 13a to divalent peptidyl resin 12 (Scheme ) was straightforward, the derivatization
of the tetravalent peptidyl resins 15 and 16 with the same reagent and experimental conditions proved to be problematic.
Up to five coupling steps were necessary with 13a to
derivatize all the primary amino groups within the supported tetravalent
lysine dendrimer. Conversely, p-nitrophenylcarbonyl
derivative 13b required two coupling steps. In any case,
the derivatization of tetravalent peptidyl resins 15 and 16 proved to be more difficult than for divalent peptidyl
resins 11 and 12. The difficulty of obtaining
sulfonated peptidyl resins 17 and 18 might
be due to a significant increase of sulfonate anion concentration
within the beads during the coupling step. Indeed, the initial loading
of the Rink PEG PS resin is 0.25 mmol/g, meaning that the final loading
in sulfonate anion for peptidyl resins 17 or 18 is expected to be as high as 1 mmol/g. Such a high concentration
might disfavor the diffusion of reagents 13a or 13b within the beads due to electrostatic repulsion by the
immobilized sulfonate anions.

Synthesis of Sulfonated Dendrimers 7 and 8
Deprotection and cleavage of Boc-protected sulfonated
peptidyl
resin 17 furnished dendrimer 7 (11% overall).
On the other hand, peptidyl resin 18 was treated with
diluted TFA to remove the Mtt group and acylated with phenylthiochloroformate
in the presence of TEA as usual. A final cleavage and deprotection
step in concentrated TFA furnished successfully the target PTC sulfonated
dendrimer 8 (16% overall).

We next examined the
synthesis of gem-disulfonated
dendrimers 9 and 10 starting from peptidyl
resin 12 (PG = Mtt, Scheme ). Because p-nitrophenylcarbonyl
derivative 13b proved to be a good acylating reagent
during the synthesis of dendrimers 7 and 8, we prepared the p-nitrophenoxycarbonyl derivative 19 by reacting the tetra(n-butyl)ammonium
salt of amine 2 with p-nitrophenyl carbonate
(isolated yield 49%, Scheme ). p-Nitrophenoxycarbonyl derivative 19 was coupled successfully
to peptidyl resin 12 in the presence of DIEA. However,
treatment of peptidyl resin 21 with 1% TFA in CH2Cl2 failed to remove the Mtt group as expected.
This problem was not anticipated considering the successful synthesis
of dendrimer 6 using a similar approach. As raising the
TFA concentration for removing the Mtt group would potentially lead
to a loss of orthogonality, we devised
instead a two-step procedure for accessing to dendrimer 10. For this, Mtt group was substituted by a Boc group to give peptidyl
resin 20, which yielded dendrimer 9 after
deprotection and cleavage in concentrated TFA, albeit with a modest
yield (overall yield 10%). Compound 9 was subsequently
reacted in solution with phenylthiocarbonyl chloride and TEA in DMF
to give successfully the target dendrimer 10 (43% yield).

Synthesis of PTC Dendrimer 10 by a Mixed Solid–Liquid
Phase Approach
Synthesis of 2-Sulfonated
Taurine Derivatives 19
Optimization of the Thiocarbamate Ligation Procedure
The successful synthesis of dendrimers 3–10 set the stage for the preparation of the peptide–polyanion
conjugates. We used in this study three MET binding peptides selected
by Zhao and co-workers from a phage display library. The peptides were synthesized with a GlyGlyCys extension
at the C-terminus or a CysGlyGly extension at the N-terminus to vary
the position of sulfonated dendrimer relative to the MET binding peptide.

The procedure initially described for thiocarbamate ligation used
thiophenol as an additive to minimize the oxidation of cysteine residues., However, thiophenol is toxic and malodorous and requires an extraction
procedure prior to the RP-HPLC purification step. Thus, we examined
the possibility of performing the ligation in the absence of thiophenol
to facilitate the preparation of the conjugates. Interestingly, the
thiocarbamate ligation reaction proceeded highly efficiently at room
temperature in the absence of thiophenol when the reaction was performed
under argon atmosphere at 10 mM concentration for each ligation partner.
A typical example is shown in Figure , which
corresponds to the RP-HPLC trace of the crude ligation mixture for
the reaction between peptide 23 and sulfonated dendrimer 4. The reaction yielded exclusively conjugate 31 after 24 h at room temperature, which was isolated with a 76% yield
after RP-HPLC purification (entry 2 of Table ). The efficiency of the ligation reaction combined with the use
of the reactants in stoichiometric amounts yielded crude polyanion–peptide
conjugates in excellent purity. All the synthesized conjugates were
purified by RP-HPLC with satisfactory yields (Table ). Conjugates 30–35 were
prepared by reacting MET binding peptides 22–27 with dendrimer 4 (entries 1–6 of Table ). The other entries were synthesized for further
structure–function relationships and will be discussed later.

RP-HPLC
analysis (C18 column, UV detection at 215 nm)
of the thiocarbamate ligation reaction between sulfonated dendrimer 4 and peptide 23 to produce conjugate 31. (A) A few seconds after mixing, linear water–acetonitrile
gradient 0–80% in 30 min (0.05% TFA). (B) Crude reaction mixture
after 24 h, linear water–acetonitrile gradient 0–80%
in 60 min (0.05% TFA). (C) MALDI-TOF analysis of the conjugate 31 after RP-HPLC purification (negative ion mode).

Synthesis of the Polyanion–Peptide
Conjugates
entry	R1-SH	PhS-CO-NH-R2	R1-S-CO-NH-R2	yield (%)	
1	Ac-QHKTSITGHHLEPGGC-NH2 22	4	30	61	
2	Ac-CGGQHKTSITGHHLEP-NH2 23	4	31	76	
3	Ac-YLFSVHWPPLKAGGC-NH224	4	32	44	
4	Ac-CGGYLFSVHWPPLKA-NH225	4	33	47	
5	Ac-TLPSPLALLTVHGGC-NH226	4	34	59	
6	Ac-CGGTLPSPLALLTVH-NH227	4	35	44	
7	Ac-QHKMRMVLGVIVPGGC-NH228	4	36	40	
8	Ac-QHKMRMVLGVIVPGRGC-NH2 29	4	37	25	
9	Ac-QHKTSITGHHLEPGGC-NH222	3	38	25	
10	Ac-QHKTSITGHHLEPGGC-NH222	5	39	60	
11	Ac-QHKTSITGHHLEPGGC-NH222	8	40	56	
12	Ac-QHKTSITGHHLEPGGC-NH222	10	41	64	
Isolated
yields after RP-HPLC purification.

Microarray Screening of the Polyanion–Peptide Conjugate
Chemical Library
The successful synthesis of conjugates 30–35 enabled setting up of the first
binding experiments with recombinant MET extracellular domain. For
this, sulfonate dendrimer 6, MET binding peptides 22–27 and conjugates 30–35 were microarrayed on microscope glass slides (0.1 mM, n = 3). This screening method enabled to assay all the compounds
in a single experiment while minimizing the consumption of the different
peptide probes. Because the oriented covalent immobilization of the
polyanion–peptide conjugates on the glass slides would require
installing an additional functional group on the synthesized compounds
and to set up an orthogonal ligation scheme, we chose instead to immobilize
the capture probes by physisorption. For this, we took advantage of
our previous studies on sulfated polysaccharide microarrays for performing
binding experiments with HS-binding growth factors, which showed the interest of semicarbazide coated glass
slides− for immobilizing anionic probes by physisorption. Indeed, semicarbazide
groups are neutral at pH 7 and unable to mask the anionic groups by
electrostatic interactions. Moreover, we have verified that the modification
of the peptides by the sulfonated dendrimers had no significant effect
on their physisorption properties by using a series of small biotinylated
peptides and conjugates derived from peptide 22 and sulfonated
dendrimers 4 and 9 (see ). The peptide microarrays
were incubated with recombinant MET-human Fc chimera (MET, 0.3–10
μg/mL, n = 3) or with recombinant HER1 human
epidermal growth factor receptor-human Fc chimera used as control
(HER1, 1–5 μg/mL) and then with goat antihuman IgG antibodies
labeled with tetramethylrhodamine (Figure A). The fluorescence intensity for each peptide spot was quantified
at 532 nm using a 16 bits confocal microarray scanner. The data are
presented in Figure B,C (data for peptide 26 and its conjugate 34 are missing due to solubility
problems).

(A) Principle of the
microarray binding experiment. (B) Fluorescence
data for binding experiments with MET (rMET-hFc) or HER1-hFc chimeras,
16 bits intensities in arbitrary units after background subtraction, n = 3, median and interquartile range).

Figure B shows that the signal displayed
by the polyanion–peptide conjugates was significantly greater
than the signal displayed by their individual constituents (i.e, the
MET binding peptides 22–25, 27, or the sulfonate dendrimer 6). The highest
signals were produced by polyanion–peptide conjugates 30 and 31 which present the same MET binding
sequence QHKTSITGHHLEP. In comparison, the intensities obtained after
incubating the microarrays with HER1 corresponded to the background
and suggested a selective interaction between the conjugates and MET
extracellular domain.

Next, several modifications were performed
starting from the peptide
conjugate 30, which was among the best MET binders, to
further assess the specificity of the interaction and identify the
structural features that are important for binding to MET receptor.

We first examined the sequence of the MET binding peptide 22. Intriguingly, the MET binding sequence with the GGC extension
at the C-terminus showed 40% of identity with HGF 681–698,
i.e. QHKMRMVLGVIVPGRGC, which contain several residues implicated in the
HGFβ chain–MET SEMA domain binding interface (underlined). Besides V692, G694, G696, and C697, the other
residues are located in the interior of the HGFβ domain. The
fact that most of the residues contained within HGF 681–698
are buried in the interior of HGFβ chain and lack the main binding
determinants such as Y673 makes the binding of this peptide to MET
extracellular domain unlikely to occur. Nevertheless, peptides 28 and 29 corresponding to HGF 681–693
with an extra GGC sequence and HGF 681–698 respectively were
synthesized and conjugated to dendrimer 4 to produce
conjugates 36 and 37 (entries 7–8,
Table ).

Second, taurine residues of
the polyanion tail 4 were
substituted by acetyl groups (4 → 3, Figure ). Ligation of acetylated dendrimer 3 with peptide 22 yielded conjugate 38 (entry 9, Table ), which enabled evaluating
the importance of the sulfonate groups in the binding properties of
conjugate 30. Third, substitution of tyrosine residue
within the polyanion by alanine (4 → 5, Figure ) enabled the synthesis of conjugate 39 (entry 10, Table ). Finally, the
importance of the number and density of the sulfonate groups was examined
by using phenylthiocarbonyl polyanions 8 and 10 (Figure ), which yielded successfully conjugates 40 and 41, respectively, upon reaction with peptide 22 (entries 11 and 12, Table ).

These novel compounds enabled to perform additional microarray
preparations and binding experiments (Figures  and ). As expected, the modification of
the peptide sequence (conjugate 30 → conjugates 36 and 37, Figure ) resulted
in a dramatic decrease of the signal intensity upon binding with MET
extracellular domain. Moreover, the replacement of sulfonate groups
by acetyl groups (conjugate 30 → conjugate 38) or changing tyrosine residue within the polyanion by alanine
(conjugate 30 → conjugate 39) resulted
in a significant decrease of the signal intensity upon incubation
with rMET-Fc protein (Figure ). The contribution
of tyrosine to the binding strength is noteworthy and suggests as
discussed before that electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions,
and perhaps hydrogen bonds with the phenol group, synergize in the
interaction with MET extracellular domain.

Role of the peptide sequence,
of the sulfonate groups, and of the
tyrosine residue within the polyanion for the binding of the conjugates
to MET extracellular domain (rMET-hFc). Fluorescence data at 532 nm,
16 bits intensities in arbitrary units after background subtraction, n = 3, median and interquartile range).

Role of the number and density of sulfonate groups for the binding
of the conjugates to MET extracellular domain (rMET-hFc). (A) Typical
microarray image (MET-Fc 5 μg/mL, fluorescence image at 532
nm, 16 bits, false color scale). (B) Incubations with MET-Fc, HER-Fc,
or KDR-Fc proteins, intensities in arbitrary units after background
subtraction, 3 slides, 3 spots per slide, median and interquartile
range).

Figure  details the data obtained by varying
the number or the density of the sulfonate groups within the polyanion
(conjugate 30 → conjugates 40 and 41). For this last experiment, the microarrays were incubated
with MET and HER1 proteins but also with the KDR recombinant VEGFR-hFc
chimera. EGF-induced receptor activation is independent of heparin. In contrast, HS molecules are important cofactors
for the activation of KDR by VEGF 165 isoform. Moreover, an heparin-binding
site has been identified on the KDR molecule, which is essential for
receptor activation.

Conjugate 40 presenting four 2-aminoethanesulfonate
groups on a tetravalent lysinyl core displayed lower signal intensities
compared to conjugate 30. The result obtained with tetrasulfonated
conjugate 40 might be due to the bulkiness of the dendrimeric
part of the molecule, which might impair the access to the MET peptide
and/or to the Gly-Tyr dipeptide unit. In contrast, gem-disulfonate conjugate 41, which is very similar in
structure to conjugate 30, gave strong signal intensities
upon binding with MET extracellular domain. As in the previous experiments
(Figure ), incubation with HER1 extracellular
domain resulted in poor signal intensities even for gem-disulfonate conjugate 41. Conjugates 30, 40, and 41 bound to KDR molecule too,
albeit with a signal strength about 3-fold less than for MET extracellular
domain.

Finally, the capacity of conjugate 30 to
inhibit the
binding of HGF to the extracellular domain of MET receptor was assayed
using the Alphascreen technology, which relies on a bead-based homogeneous
approach (Figure ). In this assay, light-sensitive (donor) beads coated with streptavidin
and light-emitting (acceptor) beads coated with protein A are brought
in close proximity due several specific biomolecular interactions:
the biotin–streptavidin interaction, the capture of HGF by
a biotinylated antibody raised against HGF, the interaction of HGF
with the MET extracellular domain, and finally the interaction of
protein A with the human Fc domain of MET-Fc recombinant chimera (Figure A). Irradiation of the light-sensitive beads generates
singlet oxygen close to the light-emitting beads only when the series
of interactions take place. In this case, the short distance between
the beads enables singlet oxygen to diffuse and react with the light-emitting
beads despite its short half-life. The separation of the beads due
to the inhibition of the HGF/MET interaction makes unlikely the emission
of light due to the decomposition of singlet oxygen before it can
react with the light-emitting beads. The data presented in Figure B show that unlike sulfonated dendrimer 6 and peptide 22, conjugate 30 was able
to inhibit the interaction of HGF with its receptor, thereby validating
previous microarray experiments and the potential of the approach
for improving the binding capacity of small peptides for their target
proteins. The inhibitory activity of conjugate 30 on
HGF/MET binding was moderate (IC50 ∼ 15 μM)
but not unexpected given the complexity of the HGF/MET interaction
and the involvement of an extensive binding interface. Indeed, HGF is a 90 kDa disulfide-linked α/β
heterodimer. The 60 kDa α chain is composed of a 10 kDa N-terminal
domain (N domain) followed by four kringle domains (K1 to K4). The
N domain contains the binding site for heparin or HS. Contiguous N
and K1 domains constitute the high affinity HGF binding site for MET.
The 30 kDa β chain consists of an enzymatically inactive serine
protease homology domain (SPH) which corresponds to the secondary
HGF binding site for MET. Therefore, the inhibition of HGF/MET binding
with small molecules or peptides is highly challenging. Small heparin
mimics were shown to inhibit the HGF-induced MET activation in in
vitro cellular assays, but no direct binding of the compounds to HGF
or MET has been demonstrated.

Inhibition
of HGF/MET interaction was probed using Alphascreen
HGF/MET binding assay.

Conclusion
This proof-of-concept study shows that short
peptides can be modified
chemoselectively by synthetic HS mimetics for improving their ability
to interact with HS-binding proteins. In this work, MET binding peptides
were site-specifically modified with lysine-based dendrimers decorated
with sulfonate groups using chemoselective thiocarbamate ligation.
The ligation reaction proved highly efficient and enabled the rapid
synthesis of a small conjugate library aimed at studying the importance
of several parameters such as the dendrimer structure or the number
and density of the negatively charged sulfonate groups on the binding
strength. The interaction experiments of the conjugates with recombinant
MET, HER1 EGFR, or KDR VEGFR extracellular domains showed an interesting
selectivity for MET protein. One of the most promising sulfonated–peptide
conjugate inhibited the interaction of HGF with the extracellular
MET receptor domain in an Alphascreen assay. Further work for improving
the binding selectivity for MET and characterize the biochemical properties
of the conjugates is in progress.

Supporting Information Available
Procedures and characterization
for all new compounds, procedure for microarray and Alphascreen assays.
Materials and methods section including synthesis and characterizations
of peptides and related conjugates. This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc500137j_si_002.pdf

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Dr. Oleg Melnyk and
Pr. Patricia Melnyk thank the Lille 2
University, CNRS, the Pasteur Institute of Lille, and Région
Nord Pas de Calais for financial support. Prof. Anthony Romieu thanks
the Institut Universitaire de France (IUF) for financial support.
We thank Gauthier Goormachtigh for useful discussions.

