Introduction
Optical imaging is one
of the most facile and straightforward ways
to investigate biomedical specimens. To
improve imaging signal contrast and spatial resolution, various optical
probes have been developed in the past decades, which can pinpoint the position of prescribed biomolecule
targets. Especially, the classic category of fluorescent probes, such
as fluorescent dyes, fluorescent proteins, and quantum dots (QDs), have drawn a great deal of attention from both chemistry and biology
scientists. Thanks to these fluorescent probes, some secrets of life
from downward at the single molecular scope to upward at the in vivo
tissue level are able to be visualized. However, these well-established fluorescent probes are experiencing
certain incompetence when tackling the puzzles with ever-elevating
difficulties and complexities in life science. For instance, a single molecular study is severely limited by the
problems of insufficient intensity and fast photobleaching of fluorescent
probes, while in vivo fluorescent optical
imaging suffers from a strong background of autofluorescence and light
scattering as well as a limited imaging depth. The demands for new fluorescent probes with higher brightness, photostability,
and spectral distinguishability for bioimaging never end.

Lanthanide-doped upconverting nanoparticles
(UCNPs) are emerging
as a new class of optical probes, which hold great promise to overcome
the inborn shortcomings associated with dyes, fluorescent proteins,
and QDs. The emission phenomenon from
UCNPs is, by appearance, a little similar to multiphoton-excited fluorescence
from conventional biolabels (such as dyes and QDs), since both of
them are produced by converting long-wavelength excitation photons
into shorter-wavelength emission photons. It is noted that simultaneous multiphoton excitation has been widely
applied in fluorescent optical microscopy to show increased resolution,
decreased specimen autofluorescence, as well as increased imaging
depth. However, the low NIR absorption
cross section of multiphoton labels requires this technique to subject
to the use of high-peak-power ultrashort-pulsed laser. Moreover, the
photobleaching and/or photoblinking problem persists for dyes or QDs
in multiphoton microscopy, and the high peak power of the femto or
pico pulsed laser used can produce possible photodamage in biological
specimens. Principally distinct from
simultaneous multiphoton process in dyes and QDs, which involves the
use of a virtual energy level, photon upconversion in UCNPs relies
on the sequential absorption of low energy photons through the use
of ladder-like energy levels of lanthanide doping ions. This quantum mechanical difference makes UCNPs
orders of magnitude more efficient than multiphoton process, thus
allowing excitation with a low-cost continuous-wave laser diode at
low-energy irradiance; typically as low as ∼10–1 W.cm–2. UCNPs also
have other superior advantages for probe uses in imaging, as shown
in Table . First, the intra f–f electronic
transitions of Ln dopants produce a set of atomic-like line emission
peaks from UCNPs. These sharp emissions are able to reduce the possibilities
of spectra overlapping, and facilitate the retrieval of signal during
signal screening process. Second, the parity-forbidden nature of intra
f–f transitions produces a long UC luminescence decay (up to
10 ms), providing opportunities for time-resolved imaging, biosensing,
and multiplexing. Third, the intra f–f electron transitions
are well-shielded by the outer complete 5s and 5p electron shells,
thus resisting oxidation-induced photobleaching that is often seen
for electronic transitions of organic dyes. Fourth, due to a collective
emission of abundant dopants within a single UCNP, luminescence from
a single UCNP does not show the blinking behavior, which is important
for single molecule imaging experiments involving a long-time observation. These unique and fascinating properties of UCNPs
will offer realistic resolutions to address the challenges met in
single molecule level, as well as in deep tissue optical imaging level.
It also inspires manipulation of various photochemical reactions in
vivo using biocompatible and captivating NIR light in conjunction
with the frequency converting ability of UCNPs.

Photochemical and Photophysical Parameters
Showing the Advantages of UCNPs in Imaging Compared to Dyes and QDs
parameter	days	QDs	UCNPs	
emission fwhm	50 nm	20–50 nm	&lt;20 nm	
decay magnitude	1 ns	10 ns	100 μs	
photobleaching	fast	slow	none	
photoblinking	yes	yes	no	
multiphoton excitation power (W/cm2)	106–109	104–106	1–103	
In this Review, as illustrated in Scheme , we will cover four aspects of UCNPs from their
recent advances:
(i) a brief introduction to UCNPs; (ii) single nanoparticle imaging;
(iii) ensemble optical imaging, encompassing in vitro cell culture
imaging, deep tissue optical imaging, as well as multimodal animal
bioimaging; (iv) NIR light mediated photochemistry and phototherapy.
We will also present our own views in regard to the future directions
for UCNPs in the  section.

Overview
of the Present Tutorial Review
Introduction of UCNPs
UC Phenomenon
Photon upconversion
is characterized by the conversion of long-wavelength radiation, for
instance, infrared or near-infrared (NIR) radiation, to short-wavelength
emissions. The upconversion could take place by several different
mechanisms, which have been summarized and discussed in detail in
several review articles. Typically, realization
of the UC phenomenon requires a proper host lattice selected lanthanide
dopants of sensitizer and activator, and an excitation source of appropriate
wavelength (Figure ). The host lattice determines
the spatial distribution, coordination number, as well as the type
of surrounding anions of the dopants. An ideal host material should
have low lattice phonon cutoff energies to minimize nonradiative energy
losses in the intermediate states, thus maximizing the output of radiative
emission. To date, NaYF4, NaYbF4, NaGdF4, NaLaF4, NaLuF4, LiYF4,
LiLuF4, LaF3, YF3, GdF3, GdOF, La2O3, Lu2O3,
Y2O3, Y2O2S, and others
have been identified as competent UC host materials. The Ln3+ with ladder-like arrangement energy levels, such as Er3+, Tm3+, and Ho3+, are typically used as activator
dopants, while the Yb3+ is often codoped as the sensitizer
to enhance the resulting UC efficiency. The Yb3+ sensitizer
has only two distinct energy levels, permitting an exclusive strong
absorption at ∼980 nm that coincides with the output of NIR
laser diodes.

Schematic representation of the excitation/emission and
interatomic
energy transfer profiles of UCNPs.

Synthesis and Functionalization of UCNPs
Much earlier than the arise of UCNPs, UC phenomena have been established
in bulk materials with numerous combinations of host and Ln3+ dopants, yet only a few combinations are able to reproduce UC phenomena
in the form of colloidal nanocrystals (i.e., UCNPs) mainly due to
the synthetic problems, as well as nanosize-induced low emission efficiency.
Typically, fluoride-based lattices, such as NaYF4, have
been extensively used as an UCNP host material because of their relatively
low phonon energy (i.e., 350 cm–1), high optical
transparence, and good crystallinity under mild synthesis temperature.
A range of synthetic approaches such as thermal decomposition, hydro-(solvo)thermal
synthesis, sol–gel processing, coprecipitation method, as well
as ionic liquid-based synthesis have been investigated to synthesize
high-quality lanthanide-doped NaYF4 UCNPs with controlled
stoichiometric composition, crystalline phase, and morphology. In
particular, thermolysis and solvothermal
method are the two most widely used methods,
as they can produce precise control over the phase, shape, size, and
stoichiometric composition of the core only and/or the core/shell
UCNPs.

To produce high crystallinity and uniform morphology
of UCNPs, the aforementioned synthesis strategies are usually carried
out in high-boiling-point (nonaqueous) solvents in association with
one or two appropriate long-chain ligands. As a result, the synthesized
UCNPs are generally capped by hydrophobic ligands (such as oleic acid).
Thus, water solubilization and/or bioactive/inert functionalization
are two further critical steps to empower UCNP to serve as a reliable
nanoplatform in biological applications. General strategies include
ligand removal, ligand exchange, ligand oxidiation, polymer coating, silica coating, and layer-by-layer deposition. Details of these pertinent procedures can be found in the
recent review.

Single
Molecule Level Imaging
Single UCNP Imaging
The development
of optical probes
for single molecule imaging has boosted the subcellular study of single
molecule events in cells. An ideal single-molecule probe should exhibit
good brightness, uninterrupted emission, resistance to photobleaching,
and minimal spectral overlap with cellular autofluorescence. Despite
significant improvements in software and methodology for microscopic
imaging in the past decade, the currently available single molecule
probes (such as dye and protein) are problematic with respect to the
following characteristics: lack of superior brightness, uninterrupted
emission (no blinking), resistance to photobleaching, and minimal
spectral overlap with cellular autofluorescence (consult Table ).

One key requirement when using nanoparticles
to image a single molecule behavior is that they must be size-compatible
with the biomolecules so as not to produce interference on bioactivity
of the labeled biomolecule. To this end, several kinds of nanoparticles
in the size range of ∼4–10 nm have been developed and
used for such a purpose, such as gold nanoparticles, semiconductor
QDs, and nanodiamonds. In particular, QDs have been frequently used
for molecular imaging due to their superior brightness. Yet, single/near
single QDs have a time-dependent emission that goes on and off, in
other words, a “blinking” problem. The blinking dynamics
of a QD is essentially random and cannot be predicted. Thus, although
the pros and cons for blinking are not absolute, a QD trajectory cannot
last indefinitely and an off-state of blinking can kill the trajectory
instantly.

Single UCNP imaging was first proposed and demonstrated
by Han
et al. UCNPs are ideal for single-molecule
imaging due to five unique features: (1) Unlike Stokes-shifted luminescence
from organic- and protein-based fluorophores or semiconductor QDs,
anti-Stokes luminescence of UCNP circumvents autofluorescence imaging
background. (2) They are completely nonblinking and exceptionally
photostable, allowing for long-term tracking of biomolecules. Moreover,
they are orders of magnitude more efficient than conventional two-photon
processes. (3) The utilization of noninvasive NIR excitation can minimize
cell damage as well as the scattering imaging background. (4) All
the individual UCNPs are bright; no dark nanoparticles exist. (5)
Strong upconverting signals can be detected against a virtually zero
background in the context of cells (Figure ). In 2011, Suh et al. reported the first real-time tracking study
with UCNPs at the single vesicle level in a living cell; intracellular
movements of UCNPs were able to be visualized for as long as 6 h without
interruption.

(a) Confocal upconverted
luminescent image of individual UCNPs.
(b) Live-cell imaging of UCNPs in NIH 3T3 murine fibroblasts, showing
virtually zero autofluorescence background. (c,d) Zoom-in time trace
and histogram of emission intensity, showing no on/off behavior-nonblinking.
(Reprinted with permission from ref (). Copyright 2009 Highwire press PNAS.)

Single UCNP imaging has become
increasingly available in biology;
however, the involved UCNPs often have a size of ∼20–30
nm that is larger than most big biomolecules, such as proteins. Preparation
of smaller-sized UCNPs but retaining the exceptional optical properties
had met with limited success. In this regard, Cohen et al. systematically
adjusted several factors that influence the size of UCNPs using a
nanocrystal-making robot.

These factors include the crystalline
phase of the host matrix,
reaction time, and temperature as well as the compositions and ratios
of reaction precursors. They identified reactions that permit the
synthesis of Ln-doped hexagonal phased NaYF4 nanocrystals
with controlled diameters ranging from 4.5 to 15 nm. These ultrasmall nanocrystals (&lt;1/4 the diameter of
previously characterized UCNPs) retain their continuous emission and
photobleaching resistance (Figure ), so those
single particles of sub 10 nm diameter were able to be successfully
imaged when excited using a ∼980 nm continuous-wave laser irradiance.

(left)
TEM microgragh of 4.5 nm ultrasmall UCNP; (right) time trace
showing no blinking. (Reprinted with permission from ref (). Copyright 2012 American
Chemical Society.)

Although the sub 10 nm
size is compatible with many imaging applications,
the reduction in size significantly diminishes the brightness, because
surface energy losses are increased due to the amplified surface to
volume ratio, and the number of sensitizer and emitter ions per particle
are also reduced. Recently, Cohen et al. developed upconverting nanoparticles
with sub 10 nm diameter, yet are over an order of magnitude brighter
than existing compositions under single-particle imaging conditions.
Single UCNP as small (d = 4.8 nm) as fluorescent
proteins was still able to be visualized.

They showed that, for single-molecule studies, emitter concentrations
should be as high as possible without compromising the structure of
the nanocrystal, while the sensitizer content becomes less significant
under high laser irradiance (∼106 W/cm2) and can potentially be eliminated for single-molecule imaging applications.
To validate this assumption, they synthesized a series of 8 and 5
nm UCNP with either higher emitter or lower activator content, and
compared the brightness employing laser irradiance in a single-particle
experiment. They observed that the conventional Yb3+/Er3+-codoped UCNPs indeed are brighter than single high-Er3+ doped UCNPs at lower powers. As excitation powers are raised,
the conventional UCNPs saturate in brightness while the high-Er3+ doped UCNPs continue to increase in brightness, finally
surpassing the conventional UCNPs. The excitation intensity at which
NaYF4:20% Er3+ UCNPs become brighter than conventional
NaYF4:20% Yb3+, 2% Er3+ counterparts
are ∼3 × 105 W.cm–2. This
concludes that even smaller UCNPs may be viable as single-molecule
probes. They further prepared 5.5-nm-diameter β-NaYF4 UCNPs doped with 20% Er3+ and no Yb3+ sensitizer,
as well as 4.8 nm UCNPs doped with 20% of Er3+ and 20%
Yb3+. They found that both UCNPs are significantly brighter
than the canonical β-NaYF4:20% Yb3+, 2%
Er3+ nanocrystals of a similar size.

Similarly, Jin
et al. demonstrated a novel approach to significantly
enhance the upconverting luminescence of nanocrystals, by increasing
the activator concentration from 0.5 mol % to 8 mol % Tm3+ in NaYF4 in combination with an elevated irradiance excitation
(∼1 × 106 W/cm2). The microstructure photonic fiber dip sensor used can easily
achieve such high excitation intensities. They showed that even a
single nanoparticle can be detected when entering the phototonic fiber
from the other end, providing new possibilities to implement high-sensitivity
remote biosensing. Highly Ln3+-doped nanoparticles in conjuction
with sufficient irradiance excitation have strong potential for use
as photostable, background-free, and extremely bright probes for single
molecule imaging.

Ensemble Optical Imaging
In Vitro Imaging
Multicolor Emission for
Bioassays
Fabricating multicolor assays based on UCNPs is
of particular importance
for bioimaging and real-time tracking of multiple targets, such as
the systems of proteins and genes. A number of strategies have been
used to fulfill the multicolor output of UCNPs, such as (1) modulating
component species and ratio; (2) adjusting appropriate energy transfer
pathways; (3) adapting energy transfer to organic dyes or quantum
dots. Among others, Chen and Han fabricated a series of ultrasmall (3.7 nm)
YF3 nanocrystals doped with Yb3+/Er3+, Yb3+/Tm3+, and Yb3+/Er3+/Tm3+. By changing the Yb3+ doping concentrations
in order, the interaction between sensitizer and the activator was
tailored, and as a result the output colors were harnessed (Figure ).

Compiled luminescent
spectrum and photos showing corresponding
colloidal solution of series of Ln3+-doped nanoparticles.
(Reprinted with permission from refs () and (). Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society and 2012 Royal
Society of Chemistry Publishing.)

Yb3+/Er3+ codoped NaYF4 UCNPs
have an intense green emission around 550 nm and a weak dark red emission
around 660 nm. While the dark red emission falls on the edge of “optical
transparency window of tissue” and thus is preferred for in
vivo imaging studies,
the weak intensity impedes such applications. To enhance the red emission
output while suppressing the generation of green emission, Gu and
Zhao prepared NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ UCNPs
tridoped with Mn2+ ions. The coexistence of Mn2+ disturbs the pathway of generating green emission and facilitates
the possibilities of red emission, and thus, the obtained 30% Mn2+ doping resulted in a bright pure red emission.

Cellular Imaging
High contrast
cellular imaging has been widely reported in recent years using developed
multicolored UCNPs. It has been shown that surface modification using
targeting molecules such as folic acid (FA), biotin, antibodies, and
peptides can lead to improved cellular uptake and enhanced intracellular
imaging due to receptor-mediated endocytosis. The ability of UCNPs
to target cancerous cells produces opportunities to diagnose the tumors
inside the bodies.

One of the first demonstrations of UCNPs
for cellular imaging was reported in 2008 by Zhang et al., who demonstrated
that polyethylenimine (PEI)-coated NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ UCNPs conjugated with folic acid were able to target
human HT29 adenocarcinoma cells and human OVCAR3 ovarian carcinoma
cells that overexpressed folate receptors on the cell surface. Similarly, Wang and co-workers demonstrated
that amino-modified NaYF4:Yb,Er UCNPs were linked to the
rabbit anti-CEA8 antibody to form the antibody–UCNP conjugates
by a simple route, and the antibody–UCNP conjugates were used
as fluorescent biolabels for the effective and time-efficient immunolabeling
and imaging of HeLa cells. Strong fluorescence signal from the UCNPs
was observed over the cell membrane, but no autofluorescence from
the cell was found under 980 nm NIR light excitation.

Deep Tissue Imaging
Compared to
visible UC emission, the NIR UC emission are more interesting in deep
tissue imaging, as both excitation and emission wavelengths fall within
the biological NIR optical transmission window (700–1000 nm).
High-contrast deep tissue optical imaging is allowed using NIRin-NIRout UCNPs, as biological tissue will show
much lower NIR light attenuation and scattering effects, and auto
fluorescence is absent when collecting the NIR UC emission. Prasad
and co-workers first reported high-contrast in vitro and in vivo bioimaging
using NIRin-NIRout NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+ UCNPs. In order to
improve the UCNPs’ efficiency, the same group by Prasad and
co-workers established a novel strategy that not only results in an
8-fold enhancement of the quantum yield, but also increases the extinction
coefficient of every nanoparticle 5 times by elevating the concentration
of the sensitizer Yb3+. In
2013, Yan et al. reported on the use of biocompatible material of
CaF2 to encapsulate UCNPs cores, displaying emissions 4–5
times stronger than the one coated with a traditional NaYF4 inert shell. Using the same strategy, Han et al. developed NaYbF4:Tm3+/CaF2 UCNPs and used for whole-body
mice imaging. An imaging depth as high as ∼3.2 cm was demonstrated
using biological tissue (pork tissue) as a model. Moreover, high-contrast
UC imaging of deep tissues was demonstrated by using a nanoparticle-loaded
synthetic fibrous mesh wrapped around rat femoral bone; 7 days after
the UCNP-loaded mesh was implanted, the operated hind leg was imaged
(Figure ).

(top) left:
the tissue depth of NIR and visible light. right: (a)
UCPL bright-field image of a cuvette filled with a suspension of the
core/shell nanoparticles, (b) bright-field image of a cuvette covered
with pork tissue with a quarter coin stood aside showing its thickness,
(c) merged UCPL/bright-field image of the cuvette covered with pork
tissue, and (d) bright-field image of the pork tissue (side view).
The inset in (c) shows the spectra obtained from the circled areas.
(bottom) Polyethylenimine-coated NIRin-NIRout R-(NaYbF4:0.5%Tm3t)/CaF2 core/shell nanoparticles
for imaging a synthetic periosteal mesh implanted around a rat femur.
(a) UCNPs were loaded on a 7-mm-wide sulfated polymer mesh and wrapped
around the mid shaft of a rat femur. Scale bar: 500 μm. (b)
Bright-field image of the rat hind leg after closing muscle/skin by
suture (left) and PL image (right) of the deeply embedded UCNP-stained
synthetic mesh wrapped around the rat femur. Scale bar: 2 cm. (Reprinted
with permission from ref (). Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.)

Multimodal Small Animal
Imaging
Small
animal imaging, especially in vivo imaging, is able to provide important
information on the pathogenesis, progression, and treatment of many
human diseases, which is of vital significance in the study of biology
and medicine. Various imaging technologies, such as single-photon
emission computed tomography (SPECT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),
and fluorescence imaging, have been developed to obtain the structural
and functional information on biological systems. Among these imaging
techniques, luminescence imaging offers a simple but powerful and
versatile tool for the visualization of both structural and functional
information ranging from living cell to animal level. Recently, upconversion
luminescence imaging of small animals has received increasing attention
due to its ability to obtain anatomical and physiological details
of living systems. Owing to their unique NIR excited anti-Stokes luminescence
properties, unified UCNPs have found diverse applications in tumor
imaging, vasculature imaging, brain imaging, and multimodal imaging.

Detection of life-threating tumors is
considered to be one of the most important applications of optical
nanoprobes. In spite of the fast development toward this regard, imaging
of small tumors, especially tiny tumors (1–4 mm), still remains
a challenge. Typically, small tumors have a geometric resistance which
is lower than the large tumors against a blood flow. As a result,
it is more difficult for nanoparticles to absorb in small tumors than
in big tumors due to the higher blood flow rate. This probably constitutes
the reason that most nanoprobe-based tumor imaging results achieved
so far have been on tumors with a size ranging from 5 to 15 mm. Liu
and co-workers reported imaging results of tiny tumor with a diameter
smaller than 2 mm utilizing an antibody (monoclonal anti-EGFR antibody)
modified PEGylated NaGdF4:Yb3+/Er3+ UCNPs. Specifically, combined MRI and
UC luminescence imaging was performed to image intraperitoneal tumors
and subcutaneous tumors in vivo. A subcutaneous tumor ∼1.7
mm × 1.9 mm was clearly visualized through the green upconversion
luminescence. Pharmacokinetic studies revealed a size-dependent elimination
pathway. A biliary elimination pathway was taken by larger UCNPs ∼18.5
nm excreting more than 87% of the particles after 30 days postadministration,
while both renal and biliary clearance pathways were adopted by smaller
UCNPs ∼5.1 nm resulting in a greatly shortened biological half-time.

Up to now, various imaging modalities have been developed for diverse
applications. However, no single imaging modality can meet all the
requirements either for scientific research or practical application,
since each imaging modality has its own advantages and disadvantages.
For example, SPECT is highly sensitive and quantitative, but limited
by the resolution (micrometer level) and the inability to provide
anatomical information. MRI and CT are suitable for anatomical reconstruction
but lack the ability to provide molecular information. Fluorescence
optical imaging is suitable for multiscale imaging from the cellular
level to the whole-body animal but is hindered by the limited imaging
depth of less than several centimeters according to up-to-date reports.
Bioimaging using multimodalities in a single nanoplatform is able
to overcome the limitations of single imaging modality, and then provide
more abundant and complementary information to improve the accuracy
of diagnostics. Thus, the fabrication of multimodal imaging nanoprobes
with upconversion properties has become one of the most important
developing directions of UCNPs. In this regard, Li’s group
has made lots of constructive contributions such as dual-modal, trimodal
imaging, by carefully integrating diverse properties of various elements
into single particle. Recently, Li’s group reported on NaLuF4:Yb,Tm@NaGdF4 (153Sm) core@shell nanocomposites
which allowed achievement of CT, MRI, SPECT, and upconversion luminescence
four-modal imaging in a mouse model (Figure ). The use of multimodal nanoprobes
entails collection of abundant information at the same time including
the biodistribution in different tissues and organs, the dynamic long-term
quantification data, as well as the 3D information on a body.

Four-model
imaging of the focused tumor from the tumor-bearing
nude mouse 1 h after intravenous injection of NaLuF4:Yb,Tm@NaGdF4(153Sm): (a) In vivo UCL-image, (b) X-ray CT image,
(c) SPECT image, (d) MR image of tumor. (e) UCL confocal image of
the paraffin section of tumor tissue. (f) Schematic illustration of
tumor angiogenesis imaging using aLuF4:Yb,Tm@NaGdF4(153Sm) as the probe. (Reprinted with permission
from ref (). Copyright
2013 American Chemical Society.)

Angiogenesis, the formation of new blood vessels from the
preexisting
vasculature, is essential for tumor growth and progression. Esipova
and co-workers reported cortical vasculature imaging in mouse brain
by using UCNPs with surface modification by polyanionic dendrimer. These polyglutamic dendritic UCNPs dissolved
in the blood allowed mapping of the brain cortical vasculature down
to 400 μm under the tissue surface. Owing to the high efficiency
of UCNPs, laser photon flux almost 106 times lower than
that typically used in two-photon imaging was involved to perform
the excitation to reach high-resolution depth-resolved imaging of
brain tissue.

Ex vivo fluorescent images of glioblastoma-bearing brain
in 1 h
after the intravenous injection with ANG/PEG-UCNPs, PEG-UCNPs (excitation,
980 nm; emission, 800 nm), and 5-ALA (excitation, 470 nm; emission,
650 nm). All imaging experiments were performed under the same condition.
H&amp;E-staining of the tumor tissues from glioblastoma-bearing mice
brain was used to demonstrate the existence of glionblastoma. Scale
bar: 100 μm. (Reprinted with permission from ref (). Copyright 2014 American
Chemical Society.)

Glioblastoma are typical
malignant tumors on the supportive tissue
of the brain; the cancerous cells reproduce quickly and its growth
is supported by a large network of blood vessels. Surgical resection
bears the potential risk of incomplete excision due to the inherent
infiltrative character of the glioblastoma. Present contrast agents
suffer from poor blood-brain barrier permeability and non-targeting-specificity,
resulting in the risk of inefficient diagnosis and resection of glioblastoma.
Ni and co-workers developed a dual-targeting NaYF4:Yb/Tm/Gd@NaGdF4 nanoprobe to cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB). Angiopep-2
was covalently bound to PEGylated UCNPs, which allowed a receptor-mediated
transcytosis (to cross BBB) and subsequently targeted the glioblastoma.
Moreover, the Angiopep-2/PEG-UCNPs bimodal nanoprobes showed a great
potential in preoperative diagnosis and intraoperative positioning
of the brain tumors by MR and NIR-to-NIR upconversion imaging, outperforming
the clinically used MRI contrast Gd-DTPA and fluorescent dye 5-aminolevulinic
acid (Figure ).

New Excitation Wavelengths for Ensemble Imaging
Even though deep tissue penetration and high contrast imaging have
been achieved by using conventional UCNPs, they are typically excited
at ∼980 nm which coincides with the extinction of water. Thus,
high laser irradiance or long time irradiation at ∼980 nm could
lead to a temperature rise and consequently induce tissue damage.
Shifting of the excitation to other NIR wavelengths to preclude possible
heating effect would be appealing for bio applications. Excitations
at 900–1000 nm for Yb3+ and 1522 nm for Er3+ have been reported. Moreover, Han et al. designed UCNPs tridoped
with the absorber Nd3+, the sensitizer Yb3+,
and the activator Er3+ (or Tm3+) which were
able to be excited at ∼800 nm. Minimized absorption of water
as well as other biological constituents lies around this wavelength,
producing a sweet exciting wavelength pot. In this nanosystem, Nd3+ acts as absorber to harvest 800 nm laser photons, while
the Yb3+ ions play as bridging ions to accept the transferred
energy from Nd3+ ions, and then sensitize the lanthanide
activator (Er3+ or Tm3+) to produce upconversion.
They demonstrated that doping of a small proportion of Nd3+ concentration (e.g., 1%) was able to enhance upconversion more than
20 times when compared with conventional Yb3+/Er3+ (or Tm3+) codoped UCNPs under excitation at ∼800
nm (Figure a,b). Based on a similar mechanism, a core/shell structure was employed
by Yan and co-workers to spatially isolate lanthanide ions to eliminate
deleterious cross relaxations. Yb3+ and activators were
codoped in the core, while the shell contains Nd3+ and
Yb3+. This design produces a similar UC efficiency when
excited at ∼808 nm excitation to the one when excited at ∼980
nm. In vivo application of these UCNPs with minimized water heating
phenomena were verified by them (Figure c). Along this line, Liu and co-workers fabricated
efficient core/shell UCNPs excitable at 795 nm by confining Nd3+ ions in both core and shell. Viability study of HeLa cells
under 800 and 980 nm irradiation showed that almost all cells were
killed when irradiated with 980 nm laser (5 min, 6 W/cm2), while cells remained intact under identical conditions of 800
nm.

(a) Upconversion process of Nd3+ → Yb3+ → Er3+(Tm3+) tridopants system with
800 nm excitation. (b) Spectra profiles of tissue optical window.
The extinction coefficient of water at 800 nm is about 20 timers lower
than that at 980 nm (Hb: hemoglobin; HbO2: oxyhemoglobin).
(c) In vivo heating effect induced by laser irradiation with 808 and
980 nm. (Reprinted with permission from refs () and (). Copyright 2013 John Wiley
and Sons and 2013 American Chemical Society.)

UCNP-Mediated Photochemistry and Phototherapy
UCNPs for Photoreaction
Light can
act as a highly orthogonal external stimulus to manipulate photochemical
reactions in a spatiotemporal manner. Photolysis of photoactivatable
or “caged” molecules has been well proven to be one
effective strategy for noninvasive regulation of biological activities
and processes in living systems. This strategy involved the use of
a light-sensitive linkage to introduce a caging moiety onto therapeutic
or imaging agents, thus darkening their bioactivities. When delivered
to an intended area, the use of light stimuli is able to photocleave
the linkage, detach the caging moiety, and then recover the bioactive
effects of the agents. As such, minimized bioactive side effects are
achieved during the delivery process of agents.

In this regard,
versatile photosensitive molecules have been developed. However, most
photosensitive molecules are in need of ultraviolet (UV) light to
produce photochemical reactions. An excessive exposure of living systems
to such short-wavelength light can produce a phototoxic effect. Moreover,
UV light can penetrate tissue only to a limited extent (&lt;3 mm),
limiting its use in vivo. Meanwhile, although multiphoton caging compounds
have been developed under NIR light excitation, their low multiphoton
absorption cross sections as well as the required use of an expensive
ultrashort pulsed laser limit their use. Hence, an in situ generation
of UV light utilizing nanoparticles with a biocompatible low-energy
NIR excitation is fascinating, since it can spatiotemporally restrict
photochemical reactions in the nanometer regime with minimal photodamage,
and can produce significantly enhanced light penetration in tissue.
Therefore, NIR-to-UV UCNPs can be selected as promising functional
materials toward photoactivatable imaging.

One of the first
demonstrations on UCNP induced photochemical reaction
was reported in 2010 by Yan et al., who presented a prototype of rewritable
2D optical storage medium with a potential high-density recording
capacity. The writing and erasing processes are provided by the regulation
of switched optical properties of photochomic diarylethene with UC
luminescence from ordered UCNP nanopatterns. Then, Neil R. Branda et al. demonstrated photolysis of caged compounds
from the generalized 3′,5′-dialkoxybenzoin by using
NIR-to-UV UCNPs to yield a 2-phenylbenzo[b]furan
and a carboxylic acid.

In 2012,
Xing et al. reported controlled photo-uncaging of d-luciferin
from d-luciferin-conjugated NIR-to-UV UCNPs.
The released d-luciferin can produce enhanced bioluminescence
signals in deep tissue of a live mouse; low cellular damage is created
due to the use of deeply penetrating biocompatible NIR light. Similarly, they also presented a novel strategy
for remote activation of platinum prodrug and for real-time imaging
of apoptosis by encapsulating the photoactivatable PtIV prodrug and
the caspase imaging peptide into silica-coated UCNPs. Upon NIR light
irradiation, the converted UV UC emission from UCNPs@SiO2 can activate the PtIV prodrug to produce potent antitumor cytotoxic
effect in human ovarian carcinoma A2780 cells and in cisplatin-resistant
variant A2780cis cells. Moreover, the caspase enzymes produced in
apoptosis can effectively cleave the caged peptide to recover the
luminescence of Cy5, thereby allowing the direct imaging of apoptosis
in living cells.

Moreover, our
group reported on a new family of UCNPs with tunably
enhanced NIR-to-UV upconversion. We observed that the upconverted
UV emission can be monotonically increased with an increase of Yb3+ concentration while the enhancement of blue and NIR emissions
was rather limited. The optimal α-NaYbF4:Tm@CaF2 core/shell UCNPs produce even stronger UV emissions than
the well-established β-NaYF4:30%Yb, 0.5%Tm@β-NaYF4 core@shell nanoparticles. In addition, the CaF2 shell is found to be more effective than typically used β
-NaYF4 shell in resisting quenching in aqueous medium to
preserve the upconverted UV emissions. Furthermore, we demonstrated
that the UV-emitting UCNPs can produce rapid in situ photoactivation
in live cells under irradiation with a low-power NIR (975 nm) CW laser
(Figure ). These UV enhanced UCNPs offer an
opportunity to serve as UV nanoilluminators for various biomedical
applications, such as tracing cell lineages and probing protein dynamics.
Moreover, this research improved our understanding of upconverting
luminescence and accelerated the development of more efficient UV
emitting UCNPs for a broad spectrum of biophotonic applications.

(top) NIR photoactivation process of caged fluorescein
on UCNPs.
(bottom) Photoactivation of cF-UCNPs in live HeLa cells by 975 nm
laser confocal microscope scanning. (Reprinted with permission from
ref (). Copyright
2013 John Wiley and Sons.)

Photodynamic Therapy
Photodynamic
therapy (PDT) is a clinical tumor treatment that uses light-generated
cytotoxic singlet-state reactive oxygen species to kill tumors. This
treatment is recognized as having minimal invasiveness and toxicity.
Typical PDT treatments involve three components: the photosensitizer,
the light source, and the oxygen within the tissue at the disease
site. Conventional PDT is limited by the penetration depth of visible
light needed for its activation. The involvement of UCNPs in PDT is
of clinical significance, as it provides a new technique to treat
tumors located in deep tissue. It relies on the fact that UCNPs can
efficiently convert deeply penetrating NIR light to visible wavelengths
that can excite photosensitizer to produce cytotoxic 1O2.

A large amount of UCNP-photosensitizer systems have
been developed by energy transfer from (blue, green, and red) UCNPs
to photosensitizers with appropriate absorption. For example, NaYF4:Yb,Tm nanoparticles were coated by a tris(bipyridine)ruthenium(II)
(Ru(bpy)32+), which has a maximum absorbance
at 450 nm matching the blue emission of Tm3+. Under 980
nm excitation, singlet oxygen (1O2 generation)
was chemically demonstrated. In addition,
a new and efficient NIR photosensitizing nanoplatform for UC-PDT has
been developed, based on red-emitting UCNPs. Three commonly used photosensitizers,
including chlorine e6 (Ce6), zinc phthalocyanine (ZnPc), and methylene
blue (MB), are simultaneously loaded onto the α-cyclodextrin-modified
UCNPs to form Ps@UCNPs complexes. Efficient cytotoxic effects in cancer
cells have been demonstrated under 980 nm NIR excitation. More importantly, the first in vivo UCNP-based
PDT was demonstrated by Liu et al. Therein, a FDA approved PDT drug
[i.e., photosensitizing porphyrin derivative chlorine 6 (Ce6)] was
noncovalently incorporated into PEGylated amphiphilic polymer-coated
NaYF4:Yb,Er nanoparticles. Excellent tumor regression was
observed upon intra tumor injection with UCNP-Ce6 and laser irradiance
with 980 nm cw laser. Moreover, as opposed
to previous use of single photosensitizer, Zhang et al. exploited
the use of multicolor emission bands of the UCNPs for simultaneous
activation of two photosensitizers to produce an enhanced PDT. Indeed,
the combined use of two photosensitizers leads to a more efficient
utilization of upconverted energy from UCNPs, thus collectively producing
a greater PDT efficacy. In vivo studies showed effective tumor growth
inhibition in PDT-treated mice either by direct injection of UCNPs
into melanoma tumors or by intravenous injection of UCNPs conjugated
with a tumor-targeting agent into tumor-bearing mice (Figure ).

(a) Representative gross
photos of a mouse showing tumors (highlighted
by dashed white circles) at 14 d after treatment with the conditions
described for groups 1–4. Scale bars, 10 mm. (b) Tumor volumes
in the four treatment groups at 6, 8, 10, 12, and 14 d after treatment
to determine the effectiveness of the treatment in terms of tumor
cell growth inhibition. (c) TUNEL staining of tissue sections from
the treatment groups at 24 h after treatment to determine the effectiveness
of the treatment in terms of tumor cell death by apoptosis. DAPI counterstaining
indicates the nuclear region, and upconversion fluorescence imaging
indicates the position of the injected UCNP-labeled cell (400×
magnification). Scale bar, 20 μm. (d) The apoptotic index charted
as the percentage of TUNEL-positive apoptotic nuclei divided by the
total number of nuclei visualized by counterstaining with DAPI obtained
from counts of randomly chosen microscopic fields. (Reprinted with
permission from ref (). Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group.)

Conclusion and Perspectives
In the
past decade, many conceptual UCNP applications have been
successfully presented to visualize both structural and functional
information ranging from a single living cell level to a whole body
of animal level. In addition, toxicity of these nanoparticles has
been recently comprehensively reviewed, generally describing their
cellular uptake, cytotoxicity, biodistribution, and in vivo excretion.
Although further systematic examinations are required, the current
results are quite encouraging and these UCNPs shows much less toxicity
in vitro and in animal models (e.g., zebra fish) than QDs., However, most of commercialized imaging equipment applicable for
dyes and QDs is inappropriate for direct application to UCNPs due
to their unique optical properties. Many research groups have to construct
homemade instruments by their own endeavor, such as a 980 nm CW laser
equipped confocal microscope and in vivo imaging box. Somehow the
instrument problem has limited the popularity of UCNP-based bioprobes
for biologists and clinicians, and slowed the process of commercialization.
Fortunately, some instrument manufacturers have recently begun to
accept customized orders for UCNP imaging, which is good news to the
community of UCNPs.

On the other hand, despite their superior
advantages when compared
with conventional imaging probes of dyes or QDs, there still exist
some important challenges for the community of UCNPs, mainly arising
from the problems of UCNPs themselves. We have listed here some of
these important challenges:How to increase the upconversion efficiency
of ultrasmall UCNPs. Besides traditional epitaxial core/shell strategy,
is it possible to further improve the crystallinity and decrease the
lattice defect by postsynthesis aging or calcination?

Despite much progress in material development,
no single molecule imaging using UCNP in the context of cellular systems
has been demonstrated. Is it possible to develop monofunctional UCNPs
for protein conjugation? Since these UCNPs are not blinking, how can
we confirm that what we observed are single identities?

Lanthanide doped UCNPs are hampered
by the low absorption cross section and narrow excitation band. Zou
et al. reported on an innovative strategy of employing organic dyes
as light harvesting antennas to entail broadband excitation along
with much more efficient light harvesting. In their studies, NIR-absorbing cyanine dyes were linked to the
nanoparticle surface via a carboxylic acid functional group. Dye antenna
effects are capable of producing as high as ∼3300-fold intensity
UC enhancement when dispersing UCNPs in organic solvents. How can
we incorporate this development in bioimaging?

Despite much progress in making sub
10 nm small lanthanide doped UCNPs, the impact of nanoparticle size
on pharmacokinetics is largely unknown. Ultrasmall (∼2 nm)
NaGdF4 nanodots have been developed by Bu and Shi et al.
These nanoparticles were found to be removable from the animal through
the urine. Since UCNPs share a similar
matrix, is it possible to make UCNPs possessing satisfactory renal
clearance?

Development
and application of 800
nm excited Nd-Yb-Er/Tm tridopant UCNPs in biomedical photoreactions
is encouraging to overcome the potential water heating effects in
980 nm. Can we further improve the spatioresolution of the whole animal
imaging? Can we eventually beat the photoacoustic or micro-CT, MRI
in the clinical uses regarding the resolution?



The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors
thank the financial support from the start-up
fund of the University of Massachusetts Medical School, a Worcester
Foundation Mel Cutler Award, Human Frontier program, National Institutes
of Health R01MH103133, and a UMass CVIP award and the China Scholarship
Council (CSC).

