Introduction
Combining proteins with different functions
into a single entity
can offer new opportunities to the field of protein engineering. Protein
chimeras, made from protein building blocks that nature already optimized
for a specific function by natural selection, could be especially
attractive for multienzyme mediated catalysis, nanobiotechnology, and improved medicinal
proteins., Proteins carrying artificially combined
domains are already widely used both in research and in medicine:
recombinant proteins are often fused to affinity tags to facilitate
their purification, fluorescent fusion proteins are used to track
their localization in cells and throughout the body, biotin–protein
conjugates are used for immobilization purposes, antibody conjugates
are widely used for detection of antigens or for therapeutic use,
and medicinal toxins can be targeted to new localities using various
targeting domains.,

Despite the ever-growing
interest in novel multimodular proteins,
there are factors that limit development and production of such chimeras.
A general versatile platform to develop multimodular functional proteins
is still missing and successful production of protein chimeras still
relies on an empirical approach. Recombinant DNA technology allows
fusion of two or more modules in a single polypeptide chain; however,
this strategy may not be convenient: for example, when production
of the engineered chimera (i) leads to low expression levels or yields
insoluble protein, (ii) results in orientation of fused parts not
optimal for biological function, (iii) raises safety issues like in
the case of modified botulinum neurotoxin, or (iv) results in cytotoxicity. Chemical
cross-linking, on the other hand, utilizes physically separate proteins
and relies on the reactivity of either natural (cysteine or lysine)
or non-natural amino acids. Site-specific
chemical conjugation is, in practice, possible only in a limited number
of cases, and chemical-cross-linking often leads to partially inactive
chimeras or aggregated conjugates. Recently, several techniques utilized
self-assembling linkers which can be fused to proteins prior to their
assembly. ‘Protein trans-splicing’ technique utilized
a split intein—mixing of two tagged proteins allowed binding,
incision, and trans-thioesterification resulting in a covalent bondage
of the two proteins. In contrast, the
‘expressed protein ligation’ method exploited the self-splicing capability of an intein, recombinantly
fused to the C-terminal of a precursor protein, to trigger formation
of α-thioester followed by trans-thioesterification to another
protein carrying N-terminal cysteine. Both intein-based approaches
require a number of critical steps and conditions to successfully
orient and bind two precursor proteins and the conditions often cannot
be practically fulfilled. Heterodimeric leucine zippers fused to proteins
were proposed for protein linkage, but the affinity
of natural leucine zippers is not strong enough to compete with recombinant
fusion or chemical cross-linking. Another recently introduced platform,
so-called dock-and-lock platform, relies on association of a sequence
from Protein Kinase A (PKA) with A-Kinase Anchoring Protein (AKAP). Recombinant fusion of two separate proteins
of interest to the PKA and AKAP-derived peptides allows site-oriented
protein assembly. However, the flexibility of this system is limited
due to the obligatory dimerizing nature of the PKA sequence and the
necessity of introducing cysteines to stabilize the final assembled
product.

We recently described
a new approach to assemble proteins in solution
using a 52 aa synthetic peptide. This
approach relies on two polypeptide linkers which can be fused to proteins
of interest and then ‘stapled’ together (Figure ) resulting in an oriented, noncovalent, and yet
irreversible complex. The linkers and the staple are derived from
the uniquely stable SNARE coiled-coil complex. Since each module can be developed and processed separately,
we performed an optimization of this new, promising technique. Here
we report that the staple can be shortened to 24 aa still allowing
firm linking of proteins. In addition, we extend the technique to
proteins which cannot be routinely obtained by bacterial expression.

Schematic
of protein stapling and design of staples. (A) Two protein
modules are fused to separate linkers (yellow). In the presence of
a peptide staple (blue), they assemble into an irreversible complex.
(B) Tested staples range from 15 to 45 aa, encompassing 5 to 13 layers,
characteristic of the coiled-coil SNARE complex structure. Both the hydrophobic layers (boxed in gray)
and so-called ‘ionic’ layer (glutamine in red) take
part in the SNARE assembly.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Linkers/Staple Design and Synthesis
All recombinant
proteins were expressed in BL21 strain of E. coli as glutathione-S-transferase (GST) C-terminal fusions cleavable
by thrombin. The plasmid for expression was the pGEX-KG vector and
the design, expression, and purification of all of them, except for
the linker A-mCherry construct (see below), has been already reported., Briefly, the linker A corresponds to the rat SNAP25 full-length
sequence (GenBank: AAH87699.1), with all four cysteine residues mutated
to alanine; the linker B corresponds to the rat synaptobrevin2 (NCBI
Reference Sequence: NP_036795.1), amino acids 25 to 84. GST fusion
constructs were purified by glutathione affinity chromatography and
either cleaved using thrombin or eluted with excess of glutathione.
The linker A-mCherry plasmid has been made by introducing the mCherry
sequence from pmCherry-C1 vector (Clontech) into the EcoRI restriction site of pGEX-KG, following SNAP25 sequence (22–206
aa; four cysteines mutated to alanines). The botulinum neurotoxin
serotype A (BoNT/A) light chain-translocation domain (LcTd) fusion
to linker A and the linker B fusion to BoNT/A receptor binding domain
(Rbd) have been previously described in detail. The horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-linker B construct was
made by cross-linking maleimide activated HRP (ThermoScientific) to
a modified linker B peptide. The N-terminal acetylated and C-terminal
amidated modified linker B peptide, with the sequence CGSGS RLQQT
QAQVD EVVDI MRVNV DKVLE RDQKL SELDD RADAL QAGAS, was synthesized by
Peptide Synthetics, UK, and stored in DMSO. See  for the list of all the recombinant
proteins and the cross-linked conjugate used in this study.

Stapling peptides are based on rat syntaxin 1 (GenBank: EDM13396.1)
and were synthesized by Peptide Synthetics, UK, and stored in DMSO.
The native lysine was substituted with arginine to remove primary
amines; individual sequences are shown in Figure B. All peptides have been modified with an acetyl group and
FITC at the N-terminus and two additional lysine residues at the C-terminus
were separated from the syntaxin motif by a flexible aminohexanoic
acid linker. This design allows site-oriented attachment of the staples
to bromo-cyanide (BrCN)-activated Sepharose 4B resin (Amersham Biosciences)
via reactive lysines. Both linkers and
staples migrate as single bands on SDS-PAGE gels (NuPAGE 10% Bis-Tris
Gel, Invitrogen) (). Among linkers A and B, only the linker A migrates sharply
on native gels (12% Tris-HCL, Bio-Rad) ().

Proteins Stapling and Pull-Down Assays
The stapling
reactions (Figures C, , and A) were performed
in 20 mM Hepes, 100 mM NaCl, 0.8% n-octylglucoside
(OG), pH 7.4 (buffer A). Linkers and protein modules fused to the
linkers, were at 5 μM, and were incubated 1 h at 24 °C
with a 1.5-fold excess of relevant staple. Electrophoresis in both
the native gel in Figure C and the SDS-PAGE
gel in Figure A was performed at 4 °C
to avoid overheating of the protein assembly during the gel run. 300
μL samples of the 5 μM stapled proteins used in Figure  have been analyzed by size-exclusion chromatography
to attest purity and integrity of the complexes using an AKTA purifier
10 system (GE Healthcare). The readouts at 280 and 490 nm have been
acquired and 0.5 mL fractions have been collected and analyzed by
Coomassie stained SDS-PAGE gels ().

24 aa and 45 aa staples exhibit the best linker binding
properties.
(A) Coomassie-stained SDS-PAGE gel showing the amounts of linkers
A and B bound to staples immobilized on beads. The length of peptide
staples is indicated above the gel. (B) Bar chart showing integrated
density (id) values of Coomassie-stained protein bands in the SDS-PAGE
gel from panel A. Note that the higher values for linker A compared
to linker B are because larger proteins bind more Coomassie stain.
(C) Coomassie-stained native gel showing a shift of linker A migration
after 30 min incubation in the presence of linker B and indicated
staples. (D) Biacore traces showing the stapling reaction on the chip
surface carrying immobilized linker A. The traces were obtained following
the injection of the linker B mixed at equimolar ratios with different
staples. Values are in resonance units (ru) after subtraction of signals
due to the loading buffer.

Peptide-dependent stapling of the mCherry fluorescent
protein or
horseradish peroxidase (HRP) to glutathione-S-transferase (GST). (A)
Schematic showing GST-linker (gray) immobilized on glutathione beads
which were used to pull-down mCherry (red). (B) Histogram showing
relative fluorescence units (rfu) bound to GST-linker beads in presence
of different staples. Error bars represent standard deviation (n = 3). (C) Schematic showing GST-linker (gray) immobilized
on glutathione beads which were used to pull-down HRP. (D) X-ray film
showing relative amount of HRP bound to beads in a 96-well plate in
the presence of the different staples, revealed using a luminol reaction.
(E) Histogram showing relative amount of HRP bound to GST-linker beads
in the presence of the indicated staples as revealed by a TMB-based
colorimetric reaction. (F) Plot showing grand average of hydropathicity
(GRAVY) index of the stapling peptides as a function of their sequence
and length.

24 aa peptide is sufficient for stapling functional parts
of botulinum
neurotoxin. (A) Schematic showing design of the botulinum construct:
the Rbd part (light blue) is stapled to the enzymatic part (yellow),
that consists of the light chain (Lc) and translocation domain (Td).
LcTd-linker A is produced as a single protein. (B) Confocal fluorescence
images showing the uptake by hippocampal neurons of the reassembled
toxins stapled with the indicated length peptides labeled with FITC
(green). Blue represents the DAPI-stained nucleus. (C) Western immunoblot
showing the intact (upper bands) and cleaved (lower bands) endogenous
SNAP25 upon incubation of hippocampal neurons with reassembled botulinum
toxin stapled with the indicated length peptides.

Resistance of stapled molecules to SDS. (A) A Coomassie
stained
SDS-PAGE gel showing the migration of BoNT/A LcTd-Rbd complexes stapled
with the indicated length peptide. The individual components migrate
as a 120 kDa (LcTd-linker A), a 55 kDa (linker B- Rbd) and less than
10 kDa bands (staples). Only when the staple is 45 aa long the assembly
of the two modules is clearly visible in the gel as an increase in
the molecular weight. (B) Stability of stapling by the indicated peptides
under denaturing conditions. Bars indicate the amount in resonance
units (ru) of linker B remaining on linker A-functionalized Biacore
chip after incubation with 1% SDS. Error bars represent standard deviation
(n = 4).

Pull-downs have been performed using BrCN-activated
Sepharose beads
after cross-linking of the staples as previously reported (Figure A) or glutathione
Sepharose beads after 1 h preincubation with 5 μM GST-linker
fusion proteins (Figure ). Incubations were
performed in buffer A for 1 h at 24 °C with shaking, followed
by extensive washes in buffer A to remove the unbound reagents. Fluorescence
and absorbance readings in Figure  were performed
using Saphire 2 plate reader (Tecan, Switzerland). Densitometry analysis
of the Coomassie stained gels (Figure B) has
been done using the software Quantity One v 4.5.1
(Bio-Rad). Stapled conjugates used in this work are listed in .

Biacore Assay
Analysis of binding and stapling was
conducted using a Biacore 2000 system (Figures D, B, and ). CM5 chip (Biacore) was used to covalently immobilize GST-linker
A. For each staple, binding of linker B combined in equimolar ratio
to the staple was recorded. All proteins/peptides were at 5 μM
in buffer A and were applied to the chip at a rate of 5 μL/min
for 20 min. For stability measurements (Figure B), the assembled complex was exposed to 1% SDS for 1 min.

Hippocampal Neurons Culture and Western Immunoblotting
Primary cultures of hippocampal neurons were prepared as previously
described and used after 7–10 days
in culture. For imaging of the uptake of the reassembled toxins (Figure B), neurons were exposed to 10 nM of the indicated
compound for 2 h, DAPI-stained, fixed with 4% PFA and the fluorescence
was observed on a Radiance Confocal system (Zeiss/Bio-Rad) linked
to a Nikon Eclipse fluorescence microscope equipped with an oil immersion
objective (100×, 1.4 N.A.). The fluorescent staples alone have
been used as a negative control (). For the functionality assay (Figure C),
neurons were incubated for 20 h with 10 nM of the indicated compound,
lysed in 60 mM Tris (pH 6.8), 2 mM MgCl2, 2% SDS, and benzonase
(250 U/mL, Novagen). SNAP25 cleavage was then analyzed by immunobloting
using an anti-SNAP25 antibody (clone SMI81, Covance) which recognizes
both the cleaved and uncleaved proteins.

Results
Optimization of the Staple
Syntaxin-derived SNARE motif
used previously for stapling is 52 aa
in length, presenting a challenge for routine, mass-scale linking
of proteins in solution or to surfaces. To determine the minimal length
of staple (Figure B), we investigated the
ability of chemically synthesized peptides, covalently attached to
Sepharose beads, to pull-down linkers A and B (Figure A). The staples were immobilized on BrCN Sepharose beads via
two lysines and then incubated with an excess of both linkers. As
expected, binding of both linkers to the immobilized staples occurred
in parallel and in equimolar ratio (Figure A). The Coomassie-stained SDS-PAGE gel and its densitometry quantitation
(Figure B) show that efficient binding of
linkers occurs only when the length of staples exceeds 20 aa with
the 24 aa staple already reaching maximum. Interestingly, extending
the staple to 27 aa compromises binding of the two linkers before
the interaction recovers at the 45 aa length. Next, we exploited the
ability of linker A and stapled assemblies to migrate in native gel
electrophoresis as separate distinct bands (Figure C). We incubated the staples in the presence of the two linkers
in solution for 60 min and then analyzed protein migration by Coomassie-staining
of the nondenaturing gel. Figure C shows that
staples as short as 20 aa can be effective in triggering linkers association.
Indeed, linker A shifts into a faster migrating entity, most likely
due to the addition of negative charges from linker B and the staples,
and/or the tight structure of the resulting SNARE bundle.

To further test the efficiency of the
stapling reaction we employed the surface plasmon resonance (SPR)
approach. Linker A was immobilized on the surface of the Biacore chip
and an equimolar mixture of linker B and staple was injected into
the microfluidic chamber. Figure D shows the
traces acquired for each staple during the 20 min incubation. The
end-point values show that larger staples yielded faster assembly;
however, the 24 aa peptide clearly showed an increased binding compared
to its neighbors. This confirms that the 24 aa peptide is uniquely
effective in stapling reaction. Since dissociation of the linker A/linker
B/staple complex was not observed with any of the staples used (see ), a dissociation constant KD cannot be calculated. How different staples
yield different resonance units in irreversible binding reactions
after 20 min is currently unclear.

Stapling of Functional Proteins
Next we investigated
the efficiency of stapling proteins with diverse functions. We fused
one of the linkers to GST, functionality of which can be tested by
binding to glutathione–Sepharose beads, whereas the other linker
was fused to mCherry fluorescent protein. mCherry provides easy readout
in pull-down experiments. Figure B shows that
the amount of stapled mCherry has a similar trend to that in Figure , confirming that the 24 and 45 aa staples exhibit
the strongest binding.

It was also important to assess the suitability
of our stapling system to protein which cannot be routinely expressed,
e.g., HRP. We designed a modified version of linker B specifically
for the chemical cross-linking by adding a cysteine residue which
can be reacted via maleimide reaction with proteins of interest. The
modified linker B was conjugated to maleimide-activated HRP enzyme
which can be easily detected via luminescent or colorimetric reactions.
We then tested the ability of staples to attach the HRP enzyme to
GST-linker A-containing beads in a 96-well plate. Following extensive
washing of individual wells, the amount of HRP bound to Sepharose
beads was estimated by the luminol reaction which emits light. Exposure
of an X-ray film to the 96-well plate revealed that the HRP can be
efficiently stapled to the GST-linker A beads and that the minimal
staple must be at least 24 aa long (Figure D). A quantitative measurement of the bound HRP was obtained by the
HRP-catalyzed colorimetric reaction in presence of the 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine
(TMB), confirming the optimal length for the staple being 24 aa (Figure E).

To better understand the reason for the
unique efficiency of the
24 aa staple, we analyzed the hydropathicity as a function of peptide
length (analysis performed using ProtParam tool available at http://expasy.org/tools/protparam.html). The plot in Figure F revealed that the 24 aa staple is the most hydrophobic
of all the stapling peptides, which may explain its enhanced ability
to drive SNARE assembly which depends on N-to-C zippering of hydrophobic
layers. Extending the syntaxin peptides
beyond 24 aa incorporates the ionic layer (see Figure B), bringing to the consequent drop in hydropathicity, likely
explaining why 27 aa and 34 aa have a reduced ability to staple proteins.
The hydropathicity increases again at 45 aa, with the incorporation
of more hydrophobic layers, and the stapling efficacy increases accordingly.

Functional Testing of the 24 aa Staple
Next we tested
whether the shortened peptides can allow a stable assembly as judged
by a biologically relevant assay. We chose to staple two functional
parts of botulinum neurotoxin type A (BoNT/A), widely known as BOTOX,, which needs to penetrate neuronal interior to proteolyze its molecular
target, the SNAP25 protein. The two BoNT/A modules used in this work
(see the  section and ) are the linker
B - Rbd, which accomplish the function of binding to the specific
neuronal receptors, and LcTd - linker A, whose functions are (i) translocation
of the bound and endocytosed neurotoxin from the endocytic vesicles
to the cytoplasm (Td part) and (ii) proteolysis of the target (Lc
part) that eventually impairs the fusion of the synaptic vesicles
and therefore the neurotransmitter release. Binding to neurons, entry
into the cytosol, and cleavage of the molecular target occur only
when the two modules are physically connected, and thus the BoNT/A
offers a useful paradigm to study the functionality of the stapling
method. We stapled the two neurotoxin parts using 24 aa and 45 aa
peptides, both tagged with FITC, and applied the stapled fluorescent
products to cultured mouse hippocampal neurons. Functionality of the
stapled toxins was assessed by penetration of the fluorescently labeled
toxin into neurons and proteolytic cleavage of intraneuronal SNAP25.
Figure B shows that both stapled
botulinum products efficiently entered the neuronal interior combining
binding and translocation functions of the neurotoxin. Both the 24
and 45 aa stapled products triggered extensive cleavage of intraneuronal
SNAP25 at 10 nM concentration, with no proteolytic cleavage detected
in the absence of staples (Figure C). Clearly,
the translocation module, LcTd, must be stapled to the binding part,
Rbd, to be taken up by the endocytotic machinery. This proves that
a staple as short as 24 aa is able to efficiently link the functional
modules together allowing the neurotoxin to accomplish its sophisticated
functions: binding to neuronal membranes, entry of the botulinum enzyme
into cytosol, and a highly specific proteolysis of its intraneuronal
target.

One feature of the stapling assembly is its resistance
to SDS which could be useful in verifying the success of the stapling
reaction simply by SDS-PAGE. We analyzed whether the two stapled botulinum
products, which migrate identically in a size-exclusion chromatography
(), exhibit such SDS resistance.
Figure A shows that, only in the presence
of the 45 aa staple, the botulinum product becomes SDS-resistant,
whereas SDS breaks the 24 aa stapled product into its constituent
parts. To better understand the boundary where SDS resistance is acquired,
we analyzed the resistance of linker/staple associations to 1% SDS
solution using the surface plasmon resonance method. Figure B shows that only 45 aa staple was able to confer
the SDS resistance to the stapling system, confirming possible utility
of the longer linker in aiding visualization of stapled products in
SDS-PAGE gels (Figure A).

Discussion
Here we described optimization of the new
protein stapling technique
which allows linking of two modules using a synthetic peptide. We
demonstrated that the staple as short as 24 amino acids in length
can efficiently link proteins either in solution or to a surface.
The shortening of the staple allows an easy and straightforward synthesis
and also opens room for incorporation of other functionalities (for
example, imaging reagents). We also demonstrated that the linkers
can be chemically cross-linked to protein building blocks. The possibility
to use the linking system for nonrecombinant proteins opens many possibilities
for conjugation of widely used proteins such as naturally derived
enzymes, lectins, growth factors, and so forth. When recombinantly
fused, the linkers caused neither a reduction in the expression levels
of proteins tested nor solubility issues. Conceivably, the unstructured
nature of the SNARE-based linkers—prior to their assembly—makes them easy to express with no deleterious
effects on the function of the building blocks. In all cases, the
obtained conjugates retained functions of individual modules.

Similarly to the intein-based protein trans-splicing technique
and the dock-and-lock platform, protein stapling requires the expression
of N-terminal and C-terminal linkers to bring together the two parts.
However, there are important differences that can affect the choice
of the ideal system for a specific use: SNARE-based protein stapling
is robust in a very wide range of conditions while the intein mediated
trans-esterification is highly affected by the chemical contest of
the reaction or requires additional disulfide bridging in the case
of the dock-and-lock platform. A sortase-driven protein conjugation,
on the other hand, requires millimolar calcium and elevated pH and
temperatures, limiting its utility. SNARE-based
protein stapling does not result in the formation of the peptide bond
between the two parts, but allows parallel incorporation of chemical
agents, e.g., fluorophores or other labeling compounds. Finally, while
intein-based trans-splicing may allow reconstitution of a desired
split-protein with fully preserved structure, the protein stapling
evidently permits combinations of structurally unrelated proteins
and thus could be suitable for production of multienzyme complexes,
antibody–enzyme conjugates, heterofunctional targeting agents
for binding two receptors, and so forth. The stapling mechanism between
the two stapled domains can potentially give new beneficial features
to the assembled product as was previously demonstrated for the stapled
BoNT/A (preserved silencing of central neurons without muscle paralytic
activity).

In summary, we optimized
the protein stapling method making it
more attractive for protein engineering: (i) a functional peptide
staple that is half the length of the previously reported, (ii) the
possibility to cross-link a synthetic SNARE linker to a protein obtained
by sources other than recombinant (e.g., HRP), and (iii) the possibility
to immobilize a SNARE linker fusion protein to a surface through a
staple (e.g., on a Biacore chip). Finally, we highlighted the possibility
to follow supramolecular assembly by SDS-PAGE when using a 45 amino
acid staple.

It is likely that future design and synthesis of
supramolecular
complexes and molecular machines made from heterologous protein domains,,, will be based on a modular approach. Clearly, production of individual
building blocks carrying SNARE linkers still relies on the recombinant
fusion or on chemical cross-linking. However, once the expression
of a SNARE linker-fusion protein is established, it will be straightforward
to staple it to many protein or synthetic entities, fulfilling the
step-by-step nature of the modular approach. On the contrary, the
recombinant fusion of many different chimeras could be problematic
in terms of time, different levels of expression, or even impossibility
to synthesize the protein. Another specific advantage of the stapling
method is the possibility to easily create protein–synthetic
molecule conjugates. Pertinently, the fast SNARE-based assembly happens
when the linkers and staple are at equimolar concentrations, while
chemical cross-linking often requires a large excess of one of the
reagents, leading to losses of valuable material and potential denaturation
or aggregation. Moreover, the quick and robust self-assembling and
the potential to visualize the assembled products in less than one
hour together present a uniquely versatile platform for combinatorial
assembly of multifunctional proteins.

Supporting Information Available
Table listing proteins and
stapled assemblies used in this work; Coomassie stained SDS-PAGE and
native gels showing purified linker A, linker B and staple; size-exclusion
chromatography of the stapled BoNT/A LcTd-Rbd complexes used for the
functional testing; confocal fluorescence images showing lack of uptake
by hippocampal neurons of FITC-labeled staples in the absence of botulinum
parts; Biacore traces showing the association of linker B on the chip
surface carrying immobilized linker A in presence of different staples
and indicating no complex dissociation for all individual staples.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc2005208_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
BoNT/Abotulinum
neurotoxin serotype
A

DAPI4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole

FITCfluorescein isothiocyanate

GSTglutathione S-transferase

HRPhorseradish peroxidase

OGn-octyl-β-d-glucoside

SDSsodium dodecyl sulfate

SNAP25synaptosomal-associated protein
25

SNAREsoluble
N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor

TMB3,3′,5,5′
tetramethylbenzidine

