Introduction
The design of novel chemoselective and
site-specific ligation methods
provides new tools for obtaining complex scaffolds, peptidomimetics,
and peptide conjugates. The entry of the N-phenylthiocarbonyl
group (Figure ) into the peptide field began
in the late 1940s, but its potential as a thioester surrogate for
the design of chemoselective ligation methods has been realized only
recently. The aim of this short review is to highlight the main features
of phenylthiocarbonyl peptide 1 chemistry and its potential
for obtaining novel peptide scaffolds and peptide conjugates.

Structure of N-phenylthiocarbamate peptide 1, phenylthiochloroformate 2, and S-phenyl phenylcarbamothioate 3.

Apart from the introduction,
the review is composed of six main
sections. The first section gives a historical overview of the field
and presents some important chemical properties of the N-phenylthiocarbonyl group. The second section describes the synthesis
of phenylthiocarbonyl peptides 1 using Fmoc solid-phase
peptide synthesis (SPPS) and commercially available phenylthiochloroformate 2. The third section presents the interest of the N-phenylthiocarbonyl group for the preparation of peptide
polymers. The fourth section is focused on thiocarbamate chemoselective
ligation, whereas the fifth section describes the potential of azaGly
ligation for accessing azaGly peptides or conjugates. Lastly, the
final section is devoted to the synthesis of cyclic peptide scaffolds.

History
and Chemical Properties of Phenylthiocarbamates
Phenylthiochloroformate 2 was first described by Rivier
in 1907. Rivier also reported the reaction
of phenylthiochloroformate 2 with aniline, which led
to the isolation of S-phenyl phenylcarbamothioate
product 3a. In the same paper, the author noticed that S-phenyl phenylcarbamothioate 3a decomposed
into phenylisocyanate and thiophenol upon heating or at room temperature
in aqueous alkali. In contrast, compound 3b proved to
be stable in aqueous alkali. Note that the hydrolysis of S-phenyl dialkylcarbamothioates has been used to obtain thiophenols.

The entry of the phenylthiocarbonyl group
into the peptide field
began with the report of Ehrensvärd in 1947, who suggested
that the phenylthiocarbonyl group might overcome some limitations
of the benzyloxycarbonyl (Cbz) group when used as an amine protecting
group during peptide synthesis. In particular,
the work of Rivier suggested that phenylthiocarbonyl derivatives of
α-amino acids or peptides might be selectively deprotected in
aqueous alkalis, whereas hydrogenolysis of the Cbz group was complicated
by the simultaneous hydrogenation of some peptide functional groups.

The phenylthiocarbonyl group could be introduced on the α-amino
group of glycine ethyl ester 4 to produce derivative 5 (Scheme ). The acid-catalyzed hydrolysis
of the ester functionality successfully yielded N-phenylthiocarbonyl glycine 6. Activation of the carboxylic
acid function with phosphorus pentachloride yielded acid chloride 7, which was reacted with glycine ethyl ester 4 to produce N-phenylthiocarbonyl diglycine ethyl
ester 8., Ehrensvärd claimed that
the deprotection of N-phenylthiocarbonyl amino acids
or dipeptides could be performed by heating the compounds in 70% ethanol
in the presence of lead diacetate. However, 5 years later, Lindenmann
and co-workers established that treatment of N-phenylthiocarbonyl
diglycine ethyl ester 8 with lead diacetate in 70% ethanol
at 80–85 °C yielded essentially ethyl hydantoin-3-acetate 9 instead of expected dipeptide 10. Hydantoin formation was confirmed with other
dipeptides. The authors concluded that the phenylthiocarbonyl protecting
group had “little practical significance as a tool in peptide
chemistry”.

Deprotection of N-Phenylthiocarbonyl
Dipeptides
in the Presence of Lead Diacetate Leads Mainly to Hydantoin Formation
Following the work of Lindenmann and co-workers, Kollonitsch and co-workers showed that the phenylthiocarbonyl
group can be split off from various N-phenylthiocarbonyl
dipeptides using perbenzoic acid at −5 °C (Scheme ). The reaction presumably
proceeds through the formation of a thiocarbamate sulfoxide intermediate 12,, which is further oxidized by the peracid
into thiocarbamate sulfone 13. The latter decomposes
spontaneously in the presence of water, with production of carbon
dioxide and benzenesulfonic acid 14. This deprotection
procedure has not been used very much, probably because of the poor
compatibility of perbenzoic acid with many functional groups present
in peptides. In support of the mechanism proposed in Scheme , the S oxidation of S-alkylthiocarbamates
by peracids is known to yield thiocarbamate sulfone products similar
to 13.− This point will be discussed later in the section
devoted to thiocarbamate ligation.

Removal of N-Phenylthiocarbonyl
Group by Treatment
with Perbenzoic Acid
The work of Lindenmann and co-workers shows
that the removal of
the N-phenylthiocarbonyl group is problematic when
the intermediate isocyanate can react intramolecularly with a nucleophile
in a 1,5 relationship relative to the carbonyl. This is typically
the case in Scheme , where the activated carbonyl
reacts with an amide nitrogen through a five-membered ring intermediate
to yield a hydantoin product. The same
authors showed that treatment of N-phenylthiocarbonylglycine
carbobenzyloxyhydrazide PhSCO-Gly-NHNHCOOBn with lead acetate yielded
a 2-carbobenzyloxy-3,6-dioxohexahydro-1,2,4-triazine product, which
was formed in this case through a six-membered ring intermediate.

Similarly, Degani and co-workers showed that S-phenylthiocarbonyl
derivatives of cysteinyl peptides undergo a cyclization
reaction by nucleophilic attack of the cysteine amide nitrogen on
the S-phenylthiocarbonyl group (Scheme ). The resulting 2-keto-3-acylthiazolidine
intermediate 17 is then cleaved by hydroxide ion to yield
peptide acid 18 and 2-ketothiazolidine product 19. Interestingly, the authors screened a series of carbonic
acid derivatives as S-acylating agents, among which, phenylthiochloroformate 2 proved to be the most efficient for peptide cleavage. In
essence, this cyclization reaction is homologous to the cleavage of
cystine peptides by cyanide, a process
that involves the intermediary of an S-cyanocysteinyl
residue, which yields a 2-imino-3-acylthiazolidine after cyclization.

Specific Cleavage of Peptides at Cysteinyl Residues
The phenylthiocarbonyl
group can be used advantageously as an amine
protecting group when such an intramolecular cyclization process cannot
occur. In this case, treatment of the N-phenylthiocarbonyl
derivative with base yields the intermediate isocyanate, which can
be trapped by an external nucleophile. For example, treatment of N-phenylthiocarbonyl-protected nucleosides with sodium benzyl
alkoxide yielded the corresponding N-Cbz-protected
nucleosides., In another application, exposure
of N-phenylthiocarbonyl derivatives of gem-diaminoalkanes with aqueous base yielded the amine products in good
yield (Scheme ). This deprotection procedure was exploited by Gazerro and co-workers
for the synthesis of peptidomimetics starting from N-[2-methyl-2-(2′-nitrophenoxy)propionyl] α-amino acid
azides such as 20.,

Synthesis of the gem-Diaminoalkane 23 Derived from O-tert-Butyl Threonine
and Protected by a 2-Methyl-2-(2′-nitrophenoxy)propionyl Group
(MNP),
To summarize, the instability of the N-phenylthiocarbonyl
group in the presence of aqueous alkali, various primary or secondary
amines such as piperidine,− or very popular alkylating reagents such as diazomethane, as well as the paucity of methods for removing it, have
discouraged the routine use of this protecting group for the stepwise
or block synthesis of native peptides in solution. Apart from the
synthesis of peptide polymers, which is presented later, the main
applications of the N-phenylthiocarbonyl group in
peptide chemistry exploit its thioester surrogate properties for setting
up chemoselective ligations, as will be discussed in the last sections
of this review.

Fmoc Solid-Phase Synthesis of Phenylthiocarbonyl
Peptides
In early studies discussed in the preceding section,
the phenylthiocarbonyl
group was introduced onto α-amino acids,,, or peptides using phenylthiochloroformate 2 and solution chemistry. Therefore, the functionality of the studied
peptides was limited because of the need to work with protected peptides.
Recent studies have shown that the phenylthiocarbonyl group can be
easily introduced into peptides using phenylthiochloroformate 2 and Fmoc-SPPS, provided that
it is installed in the last stage of synthesis to avoid exposure of
the phenylthiocarbamate group to the piperidine used for removing
the Fmoc group., The introduction of a phenylthiocarbonyl
group on the N-terminus of peptides is described in Scheme . Triethylamine can be used as base when hydantoin
formation is not favored. This is typically the case when the second
amino acid residue, isoleucine in peptide 25, is bulky.
When hydantoin formation can be a potential issue, as in the case
of lysine dendrimers 27 and 28, triethylamine
must be replaced by a weaker base such as N-methylmorpholine
and the reaction time must be kept as short as possible.

Synthesis of Phenylthiocarbonyl Peptides
Using Fmoc-SPPS
The phenylthiocarbonyl group can also be introduced exclusively
on the side chain of a lysine residue, as shown in Scheme . For this, the side-chain amino group of the lysine
residue must be orthogonally protected to enable the selective unmasking
of the ε-amino group on the solid phase after the peptide elongation
step. The example provided in Scheme  makes
use of methyltrityl protection, which
can be selectively removed by washing with 1% TFA in dichloromethane. Contrary to what has been observed during the
synthesis of N-terminal phenylthiocarbonyl peptides, hydantoin formation
cannot occur during the reaction of phenylthiochloroformate 2 with internal lysine residues, so isolation of peptides
such as 30 shows no particular difficulties. The thiol
group of the N-terminal cysteine residue is protected with a tert-butylsulfenyl group to avoid any intramolecular or
intermolecular thiol–thiol ester exchange during workup, purification,
or storage.

Synthesis of Peptides Featuring the Phenylthiocarbonyl
Group on a
Lysine Side Chain
Synthesis of Polymers
The synthesis
of polymers made of amino acids has various potential
applications such as the preparation of biomimetic biomaterials derived
from natural proteins. One well-known
method for producing peptide polymers is the polymerization of N-carboxy α-amino acid anhydrides, which was introduced
by Leuchs at the beginning of the 20th century. The tendency of N-carboxy α-amino
acid anhydrides to oligomerize was noticed by Leuchs himself, but the potential of N-carboxy
α-amino acid anhydrides for giving access to large peptide polymers
was established in 1947 with the work of Woodward and Schramm. The field has been reviewed.

Soon after the work of Woodward and Schramm, Noguchi
introduced
a novel method for producing peptide polymers based on the chemistry
of the N-phenylthiocarbonyl group (Schemes  and ). The polymerization of N-carboxythiophenyl-derivatized
amino acids or peptides occurs by melting (Scheme , method 1) or by heating in an organic solvent in the presence
of pyridine (Scheme , method 2).

Synthesis
of Polymers Using N-Carbothiophenyl Derivatives
of Amino Acids or Peptides, Method 1 (&gt;130 °C)
Synthesis of Polymers Using N-Carbothiophenyl
Derivatives
of Amino Acids or Peptides, Method 2 (80 °C),
In the absence of solvent, N-carbothiophenyl amino
acids start to decompose at 120–130 °C. Decomposition
is a fast process at 150 °C. Under these conditions, the N-phenylthiocarbamate group yields isocyanate derivatives
such as 33, which react with the C-terminal carboxylic
acid group of another peptide molecule to produce mixed anhydride
intermediate 34 (Scheme , method
1)., The latter was believed to yield amide product 35 after elimination of carbon dioxide. This is indeed a mode
of decomposition of mixed anhydrides of type 34. However,
it has been known since the work of Naegli and co-workers, that another mode of decomposition can occur, leading to the formation
of symmetrical anhydride 36 and urea 37,
which, on heating to high temperatures (&gt;135 °C), can react
with
each other, again yielding amide 35 with the loss of
carbon dioxide.

Noguchi noticed that polymerization of N-carbothiophenyl
α-amino acids at high temperatures (&gt;130 °C) yielded
polypeptides
with a low degree of polymerization because of the occurrence of side
reactions. For example, polymerization of N-carbothiophenyl-l-nitroarginine in dimethyl sulfoxide at 120 °C for 14
h resulted in a degree of polymerization of only 5–10. Thus, an alternative procedure for inducing
the polymerization of N-carbothiophenyl α-amino
acids was developed (Scheme , method 2)., In method 2, the N-phenylthiocarbamate group of 32 reacts directly with the carboxylate function of 31 to again produce mixed anhydride intermediate 34. The transient formation of an isocyanate intermediate of type 33 (Scheme ) could be ruled out in
this case because, in a control experiment, N-carbothiophenyl-d,l-alanine ethylester was found to be stable in ethanol
at reflux.,, Interestingly, method 2 enabled the synthesis of polypeptides with
a high degree of polymerization by minimizing the occurrence of side
reactions (135.000 g/mol for polyglycine and 22.400 g/mol for poly-d,l-alanine). The use of a mixture of N-carbothiophenyl α-amino acids yielded copolymers such as copoly-(glycine, d,l-alanine) with a degree of polymerization of 89
(11.500 g/mol).,

Interestingly, this method
also enabled the polymerization of N-carbothiophenyl
dipeptides (dioxane or benzene, pyridine,
80 °C), thereby giving better control of the copolymer structure
and periodicity.,,, In particular, polymerization of N-carbothiophenyl-ε-aminocaproyl-d,l-alanine yielded poly-ε-aminocaproyl-d,l-alanine
endowed with reversible heat coagulation properties. The fate of the N-terminal phenylthiocarbonyl group was
not discussed by Noguchi and co-workers. It presumably evolves into
a hydantoin product when the kinetics
of the amide bond forming reaction are slowed because of the decrease
of the reactant concentration and because of the decrease of the diffusion
rate as a result of the viscosity of the polymer mixture.

Synthesis of
Bioconjugates Using Thiocarbamate Chemoselective
Ligation
Chemoselective ligation methods are important tools
for obtaining
various peptide conjugates or scaffolds. In particular, thiol-based
ligation methods that enable the formation
of a thioether,− disulfide,, or thiazolidine− bond between unprotected peptides or biomolecules are very popular
because of their efficiency, the ease of introducing a thiol group
in peptides using cysteine residue, and, lastly, the possibility of
combining some of these techniques with other chemoselective ligation
methods.− Thiocarbamate ligation belongs to the
family of thiol-based chemoselective ligation methods and is the subject
of this section. Interestingly, the thiocarbamate bond is considered
to be a peptide bond bioisostere., This, combined
with the specific features of the S-CO-NH group chemistry or biochemistry,
makes thiocarbamate ligation of potential interest for building molecules
and modulating their physicochemical or biological properties.

The development of thiocarbamate ligation was stimulated by pioneering
studies on thioester ligation by Kent and co-workers (Scheme )., Thioester ligation is based on
the reaction of peptide thiocarboxylate 38 with bromoacetyl
peptide 39 to yield a thioester-linked peptide, 40.

Thioester Ligation,
One significant limitation
of the method is the sensitivity of
the thioester bond toward hydrolysis at neutral pH or in the presence
of nucleophiles. For example, Kent and co-workers noticed that a thioester
bond of the type -NHCH2COSCH2CO- displayed a
half-life of 2 h at pH 7.5. However,
the thioester analogue of HIV-1 protease reported in their seminal
paper was stable in the pH range 4 to 6. Similar results were reported
by Tam and co-workers using model thioester peptide Gly-SCH2-CO-Ala-Lys-Ala. Thus, thioester ligation
is best carried out at mildly acidic pH (pH ∼ 4.3) to avoid
the hydrolysis of the target product during the ligation reaction.
At this pH, the thioacid is mainly in the thiocarboxylate form because
of the low pKa of thioacids and is a better
nucleophile than the thiol group of cysteine so that the thiocarboxylate
group can be selectively alkylated at pH 4 in the presence of cysteine
residues. In contrast, an alkylthiocarbamate
bond is stable in a wide pH range (2–7.5). The ligation can
be performed in pH 7.4 phosphate buffer or in an organic solvent such
as N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) in
the presence of triethylamine, whereas HPLC monitoring and purification
can be done as usual using acidic water–acetonitrile gradients.

Another significant limitation of thioester ligation is the limited
access to the thioacid component because of the sensitivity of the
thioacid functionality to various nucleophiles, oxidants, and electrophilic
reagents. In particular, the Fmoc-SPPS of peptide thioacids is highly
challenging, although significant advances have been realized during
the past few years., In contrast, N-phenylthiocarbonyl peptides are easily prepared using Fmoc-SPPS
as discussed before.

The principle of the thiocarbamate ligation
is presented in Scheme . The process is based
on the reaction of a thiol
such as a peptide featuring a cysteine residue with a phenylthiocarbamate
component. Basically, it is a thiol–thioester exchange that
proceeds efficiently in water at neutral pH. The reaction has been
performed in the presence of an excess of thiophenol to minimize the
oxidation of the cysteine residue by molecular oxygen. However, recent
studies have shown that this is not mandatory because of the high
kinetic rates for the ligation in most cases.

Thiocarbamate Ligation
N,N-Dialkyl-S-thiocarbamate compounds have been intensively developed
as pesticides.
Consequently, examination of this literature gives a lot of information
on the stability of this bond toward various chemicals, in the environment,
and in living organisms. S-Phenylthiocarbamates of
type 42 are highly reactive toward alkylthiols. In contrast, S-ethyl dipropylcarbamothioate (nPr)2NCOSEt is resistant to hydrolysis and does not participate
significantly in transthiocarbamoylation in the presence of thiophenol or glutathione.N,N-Diethyl-S-p-chlorobenzylthiocarbamate, also called thiobencarb
(p-ClPhCH2SCONEt2), is oxidized
by aqueous chlorine into thiobencarb sulfoxide, p-ClPhCH2S(O)CONEt2. Moreover, various N,N-dialkyl-S-thiocarbamates
are oxidized by peracids into sulfoxide or sulfone thiocarbamate derivatives,
as discussed earlier (Scheme ). These derivatives
are also the main metabolites formed in living organisms.−,− Unlike the starting N,N-dialkyl-S-thiocarbamates, the
sulfoxide or sulfone derivatives formed by chemical or metabolic S-oxidation
are potent carbamoylation agents that react efficiently with cysteine
or glutathione. Thus, the formation of thiocarbamate-linked conjugates
might find use in the design of prodrug systems.

The efficiency
of thiocarbamate ligation is illustrated in Scheme  with the synthesis of model multiple antigenic
peptides (MAPs,,) built on a divalent or tetravalent lysine dendrimer core, the preparation
of which was presented in the section devoted to the synthesis of N-phenylthiocarbonyl peptides using SPPS. Divalent dendrimer 45 was assembled in phosphate
buffer at neutral pH, whereas the synthesis of tetravalent dendrimer 46 required the use of DMF to solubilize the starting phenylthiocarbonyl
lysinyl core 28. Note that the thiocarbamate ligation
product does not rearrange by S,N-acyl shift, as is observed for thioesters during the native chemical
ligation (NCL) reaction,− even under forcing conditions.
Thus, peptide dendrimer 46 features four amino groups
in addition to those displayed by the peptide chains. This certainly
improves the solubility of the ligation product in aqueous buffer.

Application of the Thiocarbamate Ligation to the Synthesis of Peptide
Dendrimers
Given the ease of introducing the N-phenylthiocarbonyl
functionality on peptides and the thiol group on various biomolecules
or modifiers, thiocarbamate ligation constitutes an interesting chemoselective
reaction for obtaining well-defined conjugates.

AzaGly Ligation: Synthesis
of azaGly Peptides and azaGly-Linked Lipopeptides
In an aza-amino acid, the α-carbon is replaced by a nitrogen
atom., Azapeptides are peptide analogues in which
at least one α-amino acid residue is substituted by an aza-amino
acid residue. Azapeptides exhibit propensity to adopt a β-turn
geometry.− Aza-amino acid scan has been used to study the relationship between
β-turn secondary structure and biological activity., Moreover, azapeptides were shown to be more stable in biological
medium compared to native peptides, and for this reason, they have
been used to improve the stability and bioavailability of peptide
drugs.

Glycine is a frequent amino
acid in peptides and proteins (7.4%
in vertebrates) and is the most flexible among the coded amino acids.
The replacement of Gly by azaGly (Agly) induces significant conformational
constraints in the peptide chain, a property that has been used for
improving the stability and/or potency of bioactive peptides. Thus, methods enabling the synthesis of Agly
peptides are of great interest because bioactive peptides very often
feature one or several glycine residues. Moreover, the bioactivity
and properties of bioconjugates are often dependent on the flexibility
and/or stability of the linker regions. Here again, incorporation of an Agly residue can be used to achieve
the desired properties.

Agly can be incorporated into peptides
using well-developed SPPS
methods.,,− Alternatively, the preparation of large Agly peptides or conjugates
is best carried out in solution using chemoselective ligation methods.
Agly ligation between a hydrazide 47 and an N-terminal
phenylthiocarbonyl peptide 48 in the presence of silver
ions offers a potential solution to this problem (Scheme ).

Agly Ligation
AzaGly ligation is reminiscent of the so-called thioester
method
developed by Aimoto and co-workers for protein total synthesis., This method relies on the activation of peptide thioesters by silver
ions for the coupling of fully or minimally protected peptide segments.
Besides silver ions, other metal ions such as Hg2+ or Tl3+ were shown to promote the activation and hydrolysis of phenylthiocarbamates
in dilute aqueous acid solution.

Two critical parameters for Agly chemoselective ligation are the
use of a high proportion of tert-butanol as cosolvent
(80%) and the control of the apparent pH, which must be around 4.
The role of the cosolvent is to minimize hydrolysis of the N-phenylthiocarbonyl group by lowering the concentration
of water in the reaction mixture. Another advantage of using a tert-butanol/water mixture for the reaction is the possibility
to solubilize hydrophobic compounds such as lipids. The apparent pH
must be kept around 4 to ensure a good in situ protection
of ε-amino groups by protonation, which is essential for the
chemoselectivity,, whereas the hydrazide component
remains nucleophilic because of its low pKa (3.24 for acetylhydrazine). The different examples presented in
Scheme  illustrate the potential of the method
for the synthesis of azaGly peptides or lipopeptides with an azaGly
linker between the lipid moiety and the peptide. The mildness of the
experimental conditions enabled the incorporation of unsaturated lipidic
or cholesterol moieties.

Synthesis of azaGly Peptides or azaGly-Linked
Conjugates
Synthesis of Cyclic Peptide Scaffolds
The importance
of peptide cyclization for studying peptide conformation,
for creating new structures, or for developing peptide therapeutics
is well-established. Cyclization enables one to rigidify the structure
and to improve the interaction with the molecular target, the biological
activity, or the stability., The synthesis of cyclic peptides can be challenging, and various
methods have been designed to affect peptide macrocyclization. For a given peptide sequence, it is also of
interest to vary the bond formed in the cyclization reaction because
its chemical and conformational properties are expected to affect
the properties of the target cyclic scaffold. One important method
for producing cyclic peptides is the NCL reaction,, between a β-amino thiol
group such as a cysteinyl residue and a thioester group or thioester
surrogate.,

The N-phenylthiocarbonyl group chemistry has been
used for the synthesis of tail-to-side chain cyclic peptides using
thiocarbamate ligation, as shown in Scheme . For this, an internal lysine residue
was modified by an N-phenylthiocarbonyl group while
a cysteine residue was placed N-terminally. The tert-butylsulfenyl group protecting the N-terminal cysteine residue of
peptide 30 was removed in situ during
the cyclization process because of the mild reducing properties of
thiophenol present in the reaction mixture. Corresponding cyclic scaffold 53 was isolated successfully after HPLC purification. As mentioned
earlier, the thiocarbamate ligation product does not rearrange by S,N-acyl shift as observed for thioesters
during the NCL reaction, even under forcing conditions. Consequently,
this method easily enables one to vary the size of the cyclic part
of the molecule and its position within the peptide by modifying the
position of the lysine residue bearing the N-phenylthiocarbonyl
group and of the cysteine residue. In contrast, cyclization using
NCL has so far been restricted to the preparation of tail-to-head
or side chain-to-head cyclized peptides by varying the position of
the cysteine residue (N-terminal cysteine, cysteine on a lysine side chain),
whereas the thioester functionality was on the C-terminus.

Synthesis
of a Cyclic Peptide Using Thiocarbamate Ligation
The N-phenylthiocarbonyl group also enabled the
synthesis of tail-to-head cyclic peptides such as peptide 55 using a carbamate bond forming process catalyzed by a nonribosomal
peptide cyclase (Scheme ). Cyclase-catalyzed hydrolysis of the N-phenylthiocarbonyl
group of peptide 54 was mentioned as a significant side
reaction (cyclization/hydrolysis ratio of 0.78), which could be minimized
by using o-methyl (cyclization/hydrolysis ratio of
0.73) or, even better, p-methoxyphenylthiocarbonyl
derivatives (cyclization/hydrolysis ratio of 0.64). In the control
experiment in the absence of cyclase, peptide 54 evolved
into a different cyclic peptide by reaction of the N-phenylthiocarbonyl group with diaminopropionic acid residue at position
three to give a urea bond. In this case, hydrolysis of the N-phenylthiocarbonyl group was not significant. This spontaneous
intramolecular urea bond forming reaction has not been studied so
far and might represent an interesting entry to novel cyclic peptide
scaffolds.

Nonribosomal Peptide Cyclase Catalyzed the Formation
of a Cyclic
Peptide with Formation of a Carbamate Bond
Conclusions
The
phenylthiocarbonyl group can be easily incorporated into peptides
on α- or ε-amino groups using commercially available phenylthiochloroformate
and standard Fmoc-SPPS protocols. N-Phenylthiocarbonyl
peptides can be purified using standard HPLC procedures and are stable
upon storage. Nevertheless, the N-phenylthiocarbonyl
group is an active thiol ester that can participate in a variety of
useful chemical transformations, enabling the synthesis of dendrimers,
cyclic peptides, or peptide conjugates. Recent synthetic applications
have exploited its thioester surrogate properties. In particular,
the N-phenylthiocarbonyl group participates efficiently
in a thiol–thioester exchange reaction with alkylthiols to
yield S-alkylthiocarbamate-linked scaffolds. Alternately,
it can react chemoselectively with hydrazide nucleophiles upon activation
with silver ions to form an azaGly bond. Another interesting application
examined the activation of the N-phenylthiocarbonyl
group by nonribosomal peptide cyclases to produce peptides cyclized
through the formation of a carbamate bond. We believe that the ease
of synthesis of N-phenylthiocarbonyl peptides will
certainly stimulate novel synthetic developments and biological applications.

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.

