Introduction
We previously reported
the development of N-ethoxybenzyl-imidazole (NEBIs)
as pH-sensitive linkers for potential use in drug delivery applications. Since a common mechanism for internalization
of drugs into cells involves subcellular localization to acidic endosomes
(pH 5.5–6.0) and lysosomes (pH 4.5–5.0),, we designed these NEBI linkers to undergo accelerated hydrolysis
in mild aqueous acidic solutions (e.g., pH 5.5) compared to in solutions
at neutral pH (e.g., pH 7.4). We hypothesized that covalent attachment
of drugs to drug carriers via NEBI linkers would lead to accelerated
release of active drug upon uptake of the drug delivery system (DDS)
in cells. We previously demonstrated that an analogue of doxorubicin
(i.e., a model drug) conjugated to a model protein-based drug carrier,
human serum albumin (HSA), via a NEBI linker showed improved uptake
and cytotoxic activity to cancer cells compared to the unconjugated
drug alone. While these initial proof-of-concept
studies are encouraging, doxorubicin (an FDA-approved amine-containing
chemotherapeutic drug) was not released in free form. Additionally,
HSA does not specifically target cancer cells and has been reported
to internalize in cells through a nonreceptor, mediated pathway.

Here, we report the first example of a
cell-receptor targeted drug
delivery system that comprises a NEBI linker. To achieve this goal,
we also developed a novel imidazole-containing indenoisoquinoline
to expand the scope of drug candidates that could be targeted for
delivery using NEBI groups. The indenoisoquinolines are a class of
non-camptothecin topoisomerase 1 (TOP1) inhibitors that have shown
promising antitumor activity in animal models for cancer. Indenoisoquinolines have several potential advantages
over camptothecin for providing prolonged drug action in that they
(1) are chemically more stable, (2) can form TOP1 cleavage complexes
at different genomic locations, and (3) can form more stable TOP1
complexes. To date, over 400 indenoisoquinolines
have been reported, two of which are currently in clinical trials
(indotecan and indimitecan, Figure )., To our knowledge, however, attempts to enhance the targeting of
indenoisoquinolines to cell receptors that are naturally overexpressed
in cancer cells has not been reported.

Representative examples
of indenoisoquinoline TOP1 inhibitors.

We chose to incorporate a folate targeting moiety into a DDS because
of its
capability to specifically interact with cells expressing folate receptors
(FRs).− FRs are cell surface glycoproteins that bind folate
with high affinity and mediate the cellular uptake of both folate
and folate conjugates. Once bound to
the FR, folate conjugates are transported into the cell via receptor-mediated
endocytosis. FRs are attractive targets
for anticancer therapy because they are expressed in high levels in
many types of cancers. Folate conjugation
shows great promise for selective delivery of nonspecific drugs into
cancer cells while reducing toxic effects to healthy tissue. For
instance, EC145 (vintafolide), a folate-conjugated vinca alkaloid
desacetylvinblastine hydrazide (DAVLBH), is currently undergoing phase
II clinical studies in patients with advanced epithelial ovarian cancer
and non-small cell lung cancer.

In this work, we designed and synthesized a novel indenoisoquinoline
that is covalently attached to a folate group via a NEBI linker. We
examined the hydrolysis of the NEBI linker in mild acidic solutions
compared to at neutral pH. We evaluated the uptake of this folate-targeted
indenoisoquinoline in FR-overexpressing cells. Finally, we evaluated
the cytotoxic activity of this DDS in FR-overexpressing and FR-knockdown
cells.

Results and Discussion
Cushman and co-workers previously
reported potent and broad anticancer
activity of an indenoisoquinoline compound containing an N-linked imidazole group (compound 3, Figure ). In order to design
an indenoisoquinoline that could be reversibly conjugated to a DDS
via a NEBI linker, we hypothesized that a derivative of indenoisoquinoline
(3) containing an imidazole linked at C-4/5 to the indenoisoquinoline
group would retain anticancer activity while providing a chemical
handle for ready incorporation into a NEBI group. To test this hypothesis,
we synthesized molecule 6 using the procedure outlined
in Figure . In the first step, the condensation
of phthalide with phthaldehydic acid (2-carboxybenzaldehyde) afforded
the intermediate 4, which was converted to indenopyran 5 upon acidification. We then
formed indenoisoquinoline 6 via a condensation reaction
between the indenopyran and histamine. This simple procedure made it possible to synthesize &gt;10 g of 6 with 71% overall isolated yield from inexpensive and readily
available starting materials.

Scheme for the synthesis of indenoisoquinoline
compound 6.

Indenoisoquinoline 6 was incorporated into a
NEBI
group and attached to a folate-containing conjugate to produce DDS 9 (Figure A). We designed the DDS
with the consideration that the NEBI group should be hydrolyzed within
the duration of FR recycling, estimated to be 12–24 h. Previous work demonstrated that the hydrolysis
rates of the NEBI can be easily tuned by the incorporation of electron
donating or electron withdrawing groups on the phenyl ring of the
NEBI. We, therefore, designed DDS 9 to contain an ortho-methoxy group on the phenyl ring of
the NEBI because preliminary studies revealed that the presence of
this electron-donating group accelerates the hydrolysis rate by more
than 2-fold. Additionally, earlier unpublished
work suggested that the solubility of the DDS has a direct negative
effect on the hydrolysis rate of the NEBI group.
Due to the poor water solubility of both the indenoisoquinoline (6) and folate by themselves, we designed 9 to
contain a 5-unit ethylene glycol (EG5) spacer in order
to improve the overall solubility of the DDS and to maintain desired
rates of hydrolysis. This EG5 spacer was attached via the
γ-carboxylate of the folate moiety, since previous reports demonstrate
that binding of folate to the FR receptor is not affected upon derivatization
of folate at the gamma position. As a
control, we synthesized folate-indenoisoquinoline conjugate 10 (Figure B), which does not contain
an acid-labile linker, in order to evaluate the role of the acid-sensitive
NEBI group on the activity of DDS 9.

Folate-conjugated pH-sensitive
bifunctional cross-linkers. (A)
Synthetic scheme of the folate-conjugated NEBI drug delivery system
(9) incorporating the indenoisoquinoline 6. (B) Structure of a control molecule (10) comprising
folate directly attached to the indenoisoquinoline 6 via
an acid-stable amide bond.

We performed hydrolysis studies to determine the rate of
cleavage
of the NEBI group in DDS 9 under mild acidic conditions
compared to at physiological pH. The hydrolysis half-life of DDS 9 at 37 °C was determined to be 32 min at pH 5.5 and
17 h at pH 7.4 (Figure ). This result suggests
that if DDS 9 can be internalized in cells and localized
to the acidic endosomes or lysosomes through a FR-mediated
endocytotic mechanism, indenoisoquinoline 6 should be
released in free, active form within the expected FR recycling time
of the cell (12–24 h). Additionally,
previous studies have shown that 4-substituted benzaldehydes (i.e., the product after hydrolytic release of 6 from the NEBI) and poly(ethylene glycol) conjugates of folate are not toxic to cells. We, therefore, expect
that any toxicity observed by DDS 9 would arise only
from the indenoisoquinoline 6 that is released after
uptake in cells.

Kinetic studies showing the acid-catalyzed hydrolysis
of folate-conjugated
NEBI DDS 9 under mildly acidic conditions (MES buffer,
pH 5.5, t1/2 = 32 min) and physiological
pH (HEPES buffer, pH 7.4, t1/2 = 17 h).
The pH-dependent rate of hydrolysis of the DDS was determined by RP-HPLC.
See  for details.

To determine whether the folate-conjugated
DDS 9 targets
cells via a FR-mediated pathway, we next evaluated its cytotoxic activity
and uptake in KB cells (a subline of HeLa cells), which naturally
overexpress FR. As a control, we created a FR-knockdown KB cell line
by transfecting KB cells with FOLR1 siRNA (see  for more details). A modified pulse–chase
sulforhodamine B (SRB) assay was used
to evaluate the cytotoxicity of 9 versus control compounds.
In this assay, cells were incubated with the compounds for 5 h (pulse),
washed to remove unbound compound, and then incubated for an additional
67 h (chase) in fresh media. The pulse–chase
assay is considered to be more appropriate for the evaluation of folate-targeted
compounds than a long exposure (e.g., 72 h) assay, since folate conjugates
are commonly cleared from both the vasculature and the interstitial
spaces within a short amount of time. This assay also provides additional
insight into the basis for cellular uptake of the DDS.

When
exposed to increasing concentrations of DDS 9 in folate-deficient
media, an 11-fold enhancement of cell toxicity
was observed in KB cells (IC50 = 60 μM, Figure A) compared to in FR-knockdown KB cells (extrapolated
IC50 = 655 μM, Figure B).
We attribute this selective toxic activity to increased cellular uptake
of the folate-conjugated DDS 9 within the KB cells compared
to the FR-knockdown KB cells during the 5 h pulse period, presumably
due to FR-mediated endocytosis.

In vitro cytotoxicity
studies of the DDS 9 and indenoisoquinoline–folate
conjugate (control) 10 in folate-deficient media (A) KB (FR+) cells and (B)
FR– knockdown KB cells
(i.e., treated with FOLR1 siRNA). (C) Cell viability in the presence
of compound 7 on FR+ and FR– cells. In all experiments,
a pulse–chase SRB assay was performed in which the compounds
were dosed for 5 h (pulse), washed with media, and allowed to incubate
for an additional 67 h (chase) with fresh media.

As a control, the indenoisoquinoline–folate conjugate 10 (without a pH-sensitive NEBI group) showed much lower or
no cytotoxic activity in KB cells (IC50 = 250 μM,
Figure A) or in FR-knockdown KB cells (no
significant toxicity observed up to 250 μM, Figure B). This result demonstrates that the NEBI
linker plays an essential role in the cytotoxic activity of DDS 9. As a second control, the cytotoxic activity of
the indenoisoquinoline–NEBI conjugate 7 (without
a folate group) to KB and FR-knockdown KB cells was indistinguishable
(IC50 ≈ 200 μM in both cell types, Figure C). This result further
supports that the selectivity of DDS 9 for cytotoxic
activity in KB cells is due, at least to a large extent, to FR-mediated
endocytosis.

Since folate is a natural vitamin that is found
throughout the
body, we further examined the toxicity of DDS 9 in FR-positive
KB cells in the presence of externally added folate. Although the
concentration of folate in blood plasma has been reported to be 2–20
ng·mL–1 (4.5–45 nM), we evaluated the efficacy of DDS 9 in folate-rich
media that contained ∼1 μg·mL–1 folate (corresponding to ∼2.2 μM) in order to demonstrate
that DDS 9 could perform effectively in the presence
of folate at a concentration that was 50–500 times greater
than the concentration of folate present in vivo.
We found that the toxicity of DDS 9 was similar in folate-rich
and folate-deficient media (see Figure S1A in the ). Additionally, we performed a competition
assay for the toxicity of 80 μM DDS 9 in KB cells
in the presence of increasing concentrations (2.2–1000 μM)
of folate. As expected, we observed that the toxicity of DDS 9 in KB cells decreased as a function of increasing concentrations
of folate (), with complete loss
of activity of DDS 9 at folate concentrations &gt;100
μM.
This observed reduction in toxicity in folate-rich solutions further
supports the hypothesis that the cytotoxic activity of 9 depends on the binding of the DDS to folate receptors present on
the cell surface.

Finally, we also examined the cellular uptake
of DDS 9 in KB cells using fluorescence deconvolution
microscopy (Figure ). Incubation of the KB
cells with DDS 9 for 2 h resulted in significant cellular
uptake. Co-localization
analysis with Lysotracker blue showed
that DDS 9 was able to internalize and localize substantially
in the acidic lysosomal compartments (Pearson coefficient of correlation, = 0.606). Incubation of DDS 9 in FR-knockdown KB cells
showed a significantly reduced (&gt;3-fold) cellular uptake compared
to exposure of DDS 9 to folate-overexpressing KB cells
under exactly the same conditions (Figure ). Taken together, these results again support a folate receptor-mediated
mechanism of uptake of DDS 9 in cells.

Brightfield and fluorescence micrographs showing the internalization and localization of DDS 9 in KB cells. (A) Differential interference contrast image of KB cells treated with DDS 9. (B) Fluorescence micrograph of a z-slice through the cells showing the location of DDS 9 (red) inside the cells. (C) Fluorescence micrograph of the same z-slice through the KB cells shown in (B), except showing the location of the lysosomes (blue) stained with Lysotracker blue. (D) A merged fluorescence image of (B) and (C) indicating the areas of co-localization (green) of DDS 9 and Lysotracker blue.

Analysis of the cellular uptake of DDS 9 by (A) KB
cells and (B) FR-knockdown KB cells. The intrinsic fluorescence of
indenoisoquinoline 6 is shown in red. (C) Quantification
of the average total fluorescence per cell, determined from analysis
of 10 cells in each sample image.

We, thus, demonstrate the design, synthesis, and in vitro evaluation of a novel imidazole-containing indenoisoquinoline
conjugated
to a folate via a pH-sensitive NEBI linker. The folate-NEBI-indenoisoquinoline
DDS 9 exhibited higher levels of cellular uptake and
toxicity in FR-overexpressing KB cells compared to in FR-knockdown
KB cells, supporting the important role of the folate group in the
cell specific activity of DDS 9. A folate–indenoisoquinoline
conjugate 10, which lacked an acid-sensitive hydrolytic
group, did not exhibit significant cytotoxic effects on KB cells or
FR-knockdown KB cells, highlighting the importance of the pH-sensitive
NEBI linker in DDS 9.

This work represents the
first example for the incorporation of
NEBI linkers in a receptor-targeted DDS. Some potential advantages
of these NEBI linkers for drug delivery applications are (1) they are
easy to synthesize, (2) they have tunable rates of hydrolysis, and
(3) they are amenable to attaching drugs containing a variety of functionalities
(e.g., amines, alcohols, or imidazoles) to drug carriers. Here, we
also demonstrate the first example of a receptor-targeted indenoisoquinoline,
which may further enable the use of these novel TOP1 inhibitors for
the treatment of cancer. Since several imidazole-containing drugs− have already been developed for the treatment of a number of diseases
including cancer (e.g., dacarbazine), this work represents a promising step toward improving their efficacy
through incorporation into targeted DDSs.

Supporting Information Available
Additional experimental details and
characterization of molecules. This material is available free of
charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc500146p_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the NSF (CHE-0847530) and the American
Cancer Society (RSG-07-024-01-CDD). We also thank the NIH for financial
support of the Mass Spectrometry facilities at UCSD (1S10RR25636-1A1).
The authors thank Dr. Alice Luong for helpful conversations and advice.
We would also like to acknowledge Dr. Yongxuan Su from the UCSD small
molecule mass spectrometry facility for help with characterization
of the compounds. We also thank Dr. Kersi Pestonjamasp from the UCSD
Moores Cancer Center light microscopy facility for help with fluorescence
imaging experiments.

