Introduction
Graphene, an emerging
nanomaterial with single-layered carbon atoms
in two dimensions, has attracted tremendous interest since 2004, due
to its unique electronic, optical, mechanical, and chemical properties.− Among different subtypes of graphene-based nanomaterials, graphene
oxide (GO) and reduced graphene oxide (RGO) have been widely studied
in the realm of nanomedicine. Owing to
their extremely high specific surface area, GO and RGO have been reported
to be able to interact with various molecules, such as doxorubicin
(DOX) and polyethylenimine (PEI), and have been accepted as excellent
platforms for drug delivery and gene transfection.−

Surface engineering of graphene-based nanomaterials has played
a vital role in their biomedical applications.,, For example, suitable PEGylation could not
only improve the solubility and biocompatibility of GO, but also reduce
its potential toxicity in vitro as well as in vivo.− After integration
with other functional nanoparticles, such as magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles
(IONPs),− gold nanoparticles,− and quantum dots (QDs),− functionalized
GO and RGO have also shown great potential for simultaneous cancer
imaging and therapy in small animals.− With the conjugation of well-selected targeting ligands,
tumor targeted GO (or RGO) has already shown significantly enhanced
tumor accumulation in different cancer models in vivo.− Scheme  summarizes representative processes
of surface functionalization of GO and RGO. In this chapter, we will
focus on surface engineering of GO and RGO for biomedical applications.

Schematic Illustration of Functionalization of Graphene-Based Nanomaterials
Reproduced with permission
from ref ().

Synthesis of Graphene-Based Nanomaterials
Generally,
two methods have been developed for the synthesis of
graphene. The first method is a top-down approach, which could cleave
multilayer graphite into single layers via mechanical, physical, or
chemical exfoliation.− The second method is a bottom-up approach, wherein
graphene could be obtained by chemical vapor deposition of one-layer
carbon onto well-selected substrates.−

So far, oxidative
exfoliation via the Hummers method (developed
by Hummers and Offeman in 1950s) is the most popular method for the
generation of graphene derivatives, such as GO, with great output. This technique involves the oxidative exfoliation
of graphite using a mixture of potassium permanganate (KMnO4) and concentrated sulfuric acid (H2SO4). As-produced
GO is highly oxidized with a large number of residual epoxides, hydroxides
and carboxylic acid groups on its surface. To restore the structure
and properties of graphene, GO could be further reduced to obtain
RGO by reacting with well-selected reducing agents (e.g., N2H4). In comparison with GO,
RGO is known to have increased conductive and optical absorbance,
making it a more attractive agent for future cancer photothermal therapy. For more detailed information about the synthesis
of graphene-based nanomaterials, readers are referred to these excellent
review papers.,

Surface Engineering of
Graphene-Based Nanomaterials
To Improve Biocompatibility
As we
have mentioned, GO
has abundant epoxides, hydroxides, and carboxylic acid groups on its
surface, which makes it possible for covalent surface functionalization
based on these reactive groups. Polyethylene glycol (PEG) is among
the most widely used for improving the solubility and biocompatibility
of graphene derivatives.,, By using amine-terminated branched PEG, successful PEGylation of
GO has been reported (Figure A). Intensive sonication was first introduced to
break larger GO (size range: 50–500 nm) down to nanographene
oxide (nGO) with a significantly reduced size range (i.e., 5–50
nm) (Figure B). Six-armed branched PEG was
then covalently linked to the carboxylic acid groups on nGO using
well-established EDC (1-ethyl-3-(3-(dimethylamino)propyl)carbodiimide)/NHS
(N-hydroxysuccinimide) chemistry. The resulting PEGylated
nGO (nGO-PEG) exhibited superior stability in biological solutions
(Figure C). The same PEGylation strategy has
been widely used for surface modification of other GO-based nanoparticles,
and has shown reduced toxicity in vitro.,− Besides enhanced biocompatibility and reduced toxicity, GO coated
with amine-terminated PEG could also provide abundant amino groups
for the further bioconjugations.

Covalent functionalization of GO by six-armed
branched PEG. (A)
Schematic illustration of PEGylated GO. (B) Atomic force microscope
(AFM) image of GO (top) and nGO-PEG (bottom). (C) Photos of GO (top)
and nGO-PEG (bottom) in different solutions recorded after centrifugation
at 10000g for 5 min. GO crashed out slightly in PBS
and completely in cell medium and serum while nGO-PEG was stable in
all solutions. Reproduced with permission from ref ( and ).

Many other hydrophilic polymers, including poly(l-lysine)
(PLL), poly(acrylic acid) (PAA), dextran,, and chitosan,− have also been studied for surface functionalization of GO. In one
study, GO was functionalized with PLL by stirring GO solution with
PLL in the presence of potassium hydroxide (KOH), and subsequently
treated with sodium borohydride (NaBH4). As-synthesized PLL functionalized GO showed high solubility
and biocompatibility, and contained plentiful amino groups. In another
work, PAA-coated GO was synthesized via intensive sonication and microwave
irradiation. Functionalization of PAA
could not only improve the biocompatibility of GO but also work as
a bridge for linking the fluorescein o-methacrylate
(FMA), resulting in fluorescent GO for optical imaging.

Besides
covalent surface modification, noncovalent coating via
hydrophobic interactions, π–π stacking, and electrostatic
interactions are other effective approaches to enabling improved solubility
and biocompatibility of graphene derivatives. The attachment of PEGylated phospholipids on RGO was completed in
one of the first studies of this kind. In a follow-up study, PEG-grafted poly(maleic anhydride-alt-1-octadecene) (i.e., C18PMH–PEG) was
used for nano RGO (nRGO) surface modification via strong hydrophobic
interactions between the hydrophobic graphene surface and long hydrocarbon
chains in the C18PMH–PEG polymer (Figure A and B). The solubility
of RGO and nRGO in physiological solutions was found to be dramatically
enhanced after coating (Figure C). In addition,
C18PMH–PEG coating was also found helpful for prolonging
the blood circulation half-life of functionalized nRGO., Other agents, including bovine serum albumin (BSA), polyoxyethylene sorbitan laurate (Tween), Pluronic F127 (PF127),, polyethylenimine
(PEI), and cholesteryl hyaluronic acid
(CHA), have also been used for noncovalent
surface functionalization of graphene derivatives.

Noncovalent surface functionalization
of RGO with C18PMH-PEG. (A) Schematic illustration of PEGylated
RGO and nRGO. (B)
AFM images of RGO-PEG (top) and nRGO-PEG (bottom). (C) Photos of RGO,
RGO-PEG, nRGO, and nRGO-PEG in water (top), saline (middle), and fetal
bovine serum (bottom). RGO and nRGO aggregated slightly in water and
completely in saline and serum, whereas RGO-PEG and nRGO-PEG are stable
in all solutions. Reproduced with permission from ref ().

Cancer Imaging with Graphene-Based Nanomaterials
Molecular
imaging holds great potential in drug development, disease diagnosis,
therapeutic responses monitoring, and the understanding of complex
interactions between nanomedicine and living biological systems.− In the past several years, enormous efforts have been devoted to
surface engineering of different graphene derivatives for studying
their in vivo biodistribution patterns and tumor targeting efficacy
using imaging modalities such as optical imaging,,,,− positron emission tomography (PET),−,, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),−,,− and others.

Optical Imaging
Optical imaging
is an inexpensive,
widely available, and highly sensitive imaging technique.− By using the intrinsic photoluminescence of nGO in the near-infrared
(NIR) range, nGO was functionalized with PEG and Rituxan anti-CD20
(a B-cell specific antibody) to form nGO-PEG-Rituxan and examined
in the range of 1100–2200 nm (Figure A). Optical imaging demonstrated the
specific uptake of nGO-PEG-Rituxan in Raji B-cell surfaces (CD20 positive),
but not in CEM T-cells (CD20 negative) (Figure B). Due to the relatively low autofluorescence, excellent image contrast
could be obtained.

Functionalization of graphene for cancer imaging. (A)
Schematic
drawing illustrating nGO-PEG conjugated with anti-CD20 antibody Rituxan.
(B) NIR fluorescence image of nGO-PEG-Rituxan conjugate in CD20 positive
cells (left) and negative cells (right). (C) Schematic illustration
of shielding effect of RGO for the two sizes, absorbing more incoming
irradiation and stimulating less QD fluorescence by the larger RGO.
(D) Optical imaging exhibiting locations of the QD-US-RGO within the
cells (left) and mouse (right). (E) Schematic illustration of synthesis
of RGO-IONP. (F) T2-weigted MR imaging of noninjected mouse
(left) and injected mouse (right) with RGO-IONP-PEG. Reproduced with
permission from refs (, , , and ).

Besides intrinsic photoluminescence,
various fluorescent labels
such as organic dyes, and QDs− have been functionalized
on graphene for optical imaging. For example, a commonly used NIR
fluorescent dye (i.e., Cy7) was conjugated to nGO-PEG for in vivo
optical imaging in mice bearing different kinds of tumors (i.e., 4T1
murine breast cancer tumors, KB human epidermoid carcinoma tumors,
and U87MG human glioblastoma tumors).

Conjugating QDs (or other optical imaging nanoparticles) onto RGO could also result in fluorescent RGO
provided that optical quenching is efficiently suppressed.− For example, tri-n-octylphosphine oxide (TOPO)
protected QDs were attached onto RGO-PLL, resulting in RGO-PLL-QD
with effectively reduced fluorescence quenching. Interestingly, QD-loaded ultrasmall RGO sheets (i.e., QD-US-RGO)
demonstrated a decreased fluorescence quenching when compared with
QD-loaded larger RGO sheets (QD-S-RGO) (Figure C). The imaging property was tested in cells and mice (Figure D), demonstrating that both size and surface modification
play important roles in the optical imaging of QD integrated graphene.

PET Imaging
PET is a highly sensitive and quantitative
imaging modality and could become a useful imaging tool for studying
the in vivo fate of graphene-based nanomaterial after radiolabeling.,, So far, radioisotopes such as
copper-64 (64Cu, t1/2 = 12.7
h) have been labeled to GO (or RGO) for in vivo biodistribution and
targeting studies.,,, In one study, GO was modified with 2-(1-hexyloxyethyl)-2-devinyl
pyropheophorbide-α (HPPH), which could bind to 64Cu for PET imaging via passive targeting. Higher tumor uptake was achieved with HPPH modified GO in comparison
with HPPH alone, indicating the successful in vivo passive targeting.
In another study, we reported the synthesis of 64Cu-labeled
GO and RGO by using NOTA (i.e., 1,4,7-triazacyclononane-1,4,7-triacetic
acid) as the chelator., For example, rapid and persistent
tumor uptake was achieved with 64Cu-labeled GO and peaked
at 3 h post injection (&gt;5%ID/g) with excellent image contrast,
suggesting
the potential of graphene-based nanomaterials for PET imaging in preclinical
studies and future applications. Since
in vivo active targeting has been successfully achieved, this study
will be discussed in detail in a later section.

Magnetic
Resonance Imaging
Iron oxide nanoparticles
(IONPs) are well-studied T2 contrast agents, and have been
decorated to GO or RGO using different strategies.,, In one study, IONPs were decorated onto
GO via chemical deposition using soluble GO as carriers, where Fe3+/Fe2+ ions with a proper ratio were captured by
carboxylate anions on the graphene sheet by coordination, forming
IONPs on GO after treatment with NaOH solution at 65 °C. In follow-up study, a simple in situ method
for decorating RGO with monodisperse IONPs was reported by reacting
iron(III) acetylacetonate (Fe(acac)3) in liquid polyol
triethylene glycol (TREG) at high temperature. The distribution of IONPs on the RGO sheet was found to
be uniform with no obvious magnetic particle aggregation. Furthermore,
in another interesting study, GO-IONP-PEG was synthesized by the reduction
reaction between FeCl3 and diethylene glycol (DEG) in the
presence of NaOH at high temperature and MRI with enhanced T2-weighted MR images was then achieved in mice, suggesting that integrated
graphene could be an excellent platform for in vivo MRI (Figure E and F)., Besides IONPs, gadolinium
(Gd)-based complexes have also been conjugated to GO for enhanced
T1-weighted MR imaging.

Other Imaging Modalities
Functionalized GO has attracted
extensive interest in photoacoustic (PA) imaging for noninvasive imaging
of tissue structures and functions, due to its strong NIR light absorbance. It was proven that the PA signal (under a laser
pulse of 808 nm) remained strong at a depth of 11 mm and gradually
weakened as the detection depth increased in ex vivo studies. In vivo PA imaging has also been accomplished
in mice model., Raman imaging is another application
of graphene-based nanomaterials, due to the inherent Raman signals. It was discovered that the inherent Raman signals
were significantly enhanced after integration of metal nanoparticles
with graphene-based nanomaterials., The integrated
nanoparticles (e.g., GO-Au or GO-Ag NPs) have been tested in living
cells as sensitive optical probes.− Besides, single-photon
emission computed tomography (SPECT) has also been applied for tumor
imaging with graphene-based nanomaterials. However, considering the higher sensitivity of PET over SPECT, most of current radiolabeled studies have been
focused on PET imaging.

Photothermal Therapy and
Photodynamic Therapy
PEGylated
GO (i.e., GO-PEG) is one of the first reported graphene derivatives
designed for in vivo photothermal therapy (PTT), and showed highly
efficient tumor ablation under NIR light irradiation (808 nm, 2 W/cm2). No obvious side effects of
GO-PEG were noticed during the treatment. To further improve the PTT
efficiency, in a follow-up study, RGO with a more restored graphene
structure was utilized by the same group. PEGylated ultrasmall nRGO (i.e., nRGO-PEG) with an average size
of 27 nm was prepared. Systematic in vivo PTT study demonstrated highly
efficient tumor ablation under significantly reduced NIR laser power
density (0.15 W/cm2) and improved survival (Figure A,B,C), indicating RGO could be one of the best
candidates for PTT with a low-power laser irradiation. Besides pure
GO, nanoparticle-decorated GO has also been reported for synergistic
enhanced PTT. For example, gold nanoparticles (or nanorods) were attached
onto GO resulting in enhanced PTT effects., Other nanoparticles such as silver (Ag), copper(I) oxide (Cu2O), and copper monosulfide (CuS) have
also been integrated with GO for similarly enhanced PTT.

Photothermal
therapy and photodynamic therapy with functionalized
graphene. (A) Tumor growth curves of different groups of mice after
treatment. The tumor volumes were normalized to their initial sizes.
(B) Survival curves of mice bearing 4T1 tumors after various treatments
indicated. nRGO-PEG injected mice after PTT treatment survived over
100 days without a single death. (C) Representative photos of tumor-bearing
mice after various treatments indicated. The laser irradiated tumors
on the nRGO-PEG injected mice were completely destructed. Laser wavelength
= 808 nm. Power density = 0.15 W/cm2. Irradiation time
= 5 min. (D) Schematic illustration showing Ce6 loading on GO-PEG.
Red: Ce6; black: GO; blue: six-arm PEG. (E) Schemes of the experimental
design in photothermally enhanced photodynamic therapy. Free Ce6 (top)
and GO-PEG-Ce6 (middle) for 20 min in the dark and then irradiated
by the 660 nm laser (50 mW/cm2, 5 min, 15 J/cm2) for PDT in control experiments; GO-PEG-Ce6 incubated cells were
exposed to the 808 nm laser (0.3 W/cm2, 20 min, 360 J/cm2) first (bottom) to induce PTT before PDT treatment. Reproduced
with permission from refs ( and ).

Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is
another recognized alternative for
the treatment of various cancers by triggering the generation of reactive
oxygen species (ROS) through the interaction of light with selected
photosensitizers (PSs). PSs such as
zinc phthalocyanine (ZnPc), Chlorin e6 (Ce6), and others have been
loaded on the surface of GO-PEG for PDT studies in vitro and in vivo., For example, research showed that Chlorin e6 (Ce6) could be attached
to the surface of GO via hydrophobic interactions and π–π
stacking. As-synthesized GO-Ce6 nanosheets
showed increased accumulation of Ce6 in tumor cells and could lead
to a remarkable photodynamic efficacy upon light irradiation (633
nm). A PTT/PDT combined therapy could also be achieved by using GO-PEG-Ce6
(Figure D). Significantly
enhanced therapeutic outcome was observed when compared with either
PDT or PTT alone (Figure E), highlighting
the attractive potential of combined phototherapy using graphene-based
nanomaterials.

Drug and Gene Delivery
Graphene-based
nanomaterials
can also be used for drug and gene delivery., The strong π–π interaction allows for the loading
of various aromatic drug molecules such as doxorubicin (DOX),,, and camptothecin (CPT),,, while hydrophobic interaction provides a chance to bind to numerous
poorly water-soluble drugs, such as paclitaxel, without compromising
their potency or efficiency. By appropriate
surface coating with PEI or chitosan, as functionalized graphene could
also be used for effective gene delivery.,,

DOX was loaded on to nGO-PEG by simply
mixing the two together at pH 8 environment via π–π
stacking to form nGO-PEG-DOX. A similar
loading mechanism was used for the synthesis of nGO-PEG-SN38 (SN38
is an analogue of CPT). The resulting
nGO-PEG-SN38 complex exhibited excellent water solubility while maintaining
a high chemotherapeutic potency similar to that of the free SN38 molecules.
In addition to single drug loading, nGO can be used for loading multiple
drugs for chemotherapy. For example, both DOX and CPT were loaded
on functionalized nGO and showed higher cytotoxicity to cancer cells
compared to nGO loaded with DOX or CPT alone. More sophisticated surface engineering techniques have also been
reported for achieving on-demand drug release functionality. For example,
disulfide linkages were introduced to PEGylated GO to form nGO-SS-mPEG
(mPEG = methoxy polyethylene glycol) (Figure A). PEG was able to selectively detach
from nGO upon intracellular glutathione (GSH) stimulation and effectively
accelerate the drug release at lower pH (Figure B). In a recent study, GO was modified with 2,3-dimethylmaleic anhydride
(DA), which is negatively charged under physiological pH at 7.4 and
could be rapidly converted into positively charged moiety in a slightly
acidic environment (pH 6.8). Significantly
enhanced pH-responsive drug release and improved therapeutic efficacy
were achieved in cells. Overall, these studies demonstrated the potential
of using graphene-based nanomaterials for loading and delivery of
aromatic and/or hydrophobic drugs.

Functionalization of GO for drug and gene
delivery. (A) Schematic
diagram showing antitumor activity of redox-sensitive Doxorubicin
(DXR)-loaded nGO-SS-mPEG. (B) GSH-mediated drug release from DXR-loaded
nGO-SS-mPEG at pH 7.4 and 5.5. Higher release rate was achieved in
the presence of GSH at pH 5.5. (C) Schematic illustration showing
the synthesis of GO-PEI conjugate and the preparation of GO-PEI-pDNA
complex. (D) Confocal images of PEI and GO-PEI transfected HeLa cells
with two different molecular weights of PEI (N/P ratio = 80). Reproduced
with permission from refs ( and ).

The development of nanoparticle-based
gene delivery is still limited
by the immunogenicity and potential cytotoxicity of gene carriers., Successful loading and intracellular transfection of plasmid DNA
(pDNA) in HeLa cells has been reported recently by using PEI functionalized
GO (Figure C). Results showed that the chain length of PEI could have a significant
influence on the transfection rate and cellular toxicity. GO-PEI-1.2k
exhibited higher transfection efficiency than PEI-1.2k, while GO-PEI-10k
exhibited lower cellular toxicity than PEI-10k (Figure D). This work demonstrated that GO could potentially become
an effective platform for further applications in nonviral gene therapy.
In addition, under irradiation with NIR light beam, enhanced cellular
uptake was achieved due to mild photothermal heating, which increased
the cell membrane permeability. Besides
pDNA, small interfering RNA (siRNA) was also delivered with nGO-PEG-PEI.,

In Vivo Tumor Targeting with Graphene-Based Nanomaterials
Although graphene-based nanomaterials have shown attractive potential
for future cancer imaging and therapy, it is still a major challenge
to improve their in vivo tumor targeting efficiency.− In comparison with passive and tumor cell-based targeting strategies,
tumor angiogenesis targeting (or vasculature targeting) has recently
been accepted as a generally applicable in vivo targeting strategy
for most nanoparticles regardless of tumor types.

CD105, also known as endoglin, is an ideal marker
for tumor angiogenesis since it is almost exclusively expressed on
proliferating endothelial cells. Recently,
by using TRC105 (a human/murine chimeric IgG1 monoclonal antibody
that binds to both human and murine CD105),, we reported the first example of in vivo active targeted PET imaging
of well-designed GO and RGO nanoconjugates (Figure A).− Significantly higher uptake in 4T1 murine breast
tumors (which express high level of CD105 on the tumor vasculature)
was observed for TRC105-conjugated GO, which was about 2-fold that
for the nontargeted GO (Figure B). Enhanced
tumor uptake with high specificity and little extravasation was achieved
in this study, encouraging future investigation of these GO conjugates
for cancer-targeted drug delivery and/or PTT to enhance therapeutic
efficacy.

Conjugation of targeting ligands for tumor active targeting. (A)
Schematic representation of the nanographene conjugates with NOTA
as the chelator for in vivo imaging and TRC105 as the targeting ligand.
(B) Coronal PET images of 4T1 tumor-bearing mice at 3 h postinjection
of 64Cu-NOTA-GO-TRC105 (targeted), 64Cu-NOTA-GO
(nontargeted), or 64Cu-NOTA-GO-TRC105 after a preinjected
blocking dose of TRC105 (blocking). Enhanced tumor uptake was achieved
with 64Cu-NOTA-GO-TRC105 compared with nontargeting and
blocking groups. Reproduced with permission from ref ().

Conclusion and Future Perspectives
Over the past decade,
great efforts have been made to employ functionalized
graphene-based nanomaterials in biomedical applications. Optical imaging
has been widely studied via either intrinsic fluorescence of graphene
or integrating fluorescent dyes and nanoparticles. Although optical
imaging is limited by limited tissue penetration and quenching from
graphene, the undesired quenching could possibly be utilized for engineering
of activatable fluorescent probes for on-demand imaging with enhanced
contrast. Compared with optical imaging, PET and MRI could become
better candidates for future in vivo imaging due to their excellent
tissue penetration property. For therapy, PTT, PDT, and drug (or gene)
delivery have proven to be efficient and effective methods with reduced
side effects to normal tissues, where the surface engineering plays
an important role in the therapeutic efficacy. With sophisticated
surface engineering, graphene-based nanomaterials could be designed
as multifunctional probes for multimodality image-guided therapy,
which would be one of the most promising research directions in the
next 5 years.

Despite recent progress in surface engineering
of graphene-based
nanomaterials for biomedical applications, challenges still exist.
Among them, potential long-term toxicity and unsatisfactory tumor
targeting efficacy are two of the major concerns. As discussed, surface
functionalization plays a critical role in improving the solubility
and biocompatibility of graphene-based nanomaterials. By modification
with various biocompatible molecules, significantly improved stability
and reduced toxicity have been achieved. Although PEGylation has been
accepted as the best surface modification method, due to the relatively
large size and nonbiodegradable property of graphene-based nanomaterials,
the high liver uptake and potential long-term toxicity are still major
concerns for future clinical translation. Second, although enhanced
GO (or RGO) accumulation has been demonstrated with the assistance
of well-selected antibodies, so far the tumor targeting efficacy is
still relatively low (5–8%ID/g). The development of new tumor
targeting strategies, better tumor targeting ligands and bioconjugation
techniques will be highly useful for the engineering of the next generation
of graphene-based nanomaterials.

In conclusion, we summarized
the functionalization of graphene-based
nanomaterials for various biomedical applications. With appropriate
surface engineering techniques, graphene and its derivatives could
be used for cancer multimodality imaging, photothermal therapy, photodynamic
therapy, drug and gene delivery, cancer active targeting, and other
applications.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work
is supported, in part, by the University of Wisconsin
- Madison, the National Institutes of Health (NIBIB/NCI 1R01CA169365),
the Department of Defense (W81XWH-11-1-0644), and the American Cancer
Society (125246-RSG-13-099-01-CCE).

