Introduction
Hyaluronic acid (HA)
is a high molecular weight linear polysaccharide,
composed of a repeating disaccharide unit of d-glucuronic acid and N-acetyl-d-glucosamine
linked through an α-1,3 glycosidic bond (Figure ). The disaccharides are in turn linked to each other through
an α-1,4 glycosidic bond. HA is found in the extracellular matrix
and is the main ligand for CD44, a type 1 transmembrane glycoprotein
that is overexpressed in many cancers.

Disaccharide
repeat unit of HA.

HA has been extensively
used as a drug carrier and a ligand on
liposomes/nanoparticles− to target anticancer drugs to CD44 overexpressing cells. Luo et
al. found that HA-drug conjugates are internalized via CD44 receptors and the drug is released primarily by intracellular
enzymatic hydrolysis., Drugs, prodrugs, proteins, or
lipids can be potentially attached to HA via the
carboxylate group on the glucuronic acid residue, the primary hydroxyl
on the N-acetylglucosamine moiety, or via reductive
amination chemistry through the reducing end of HA. Liposomes, bearing
HA conjugated to a phosphatidylethanolamine lipid, have been used
for targeting CD44 receptors.− In an earlier report to prepare bioadhesive liposomes,
high molecular weight HA was coupled to phosphatidylethanolamine via the glucuronic carboxylate group in preformed liposomes. This approach resulted in multipoint attachment
of HA to liposomes, but the size distribution of the HA oligosaccharides
was uncharacterized. In an alternate conjugation method, the phosphatidylethanolamine
was attached to the oligosaccharide HA via reductive
amination to the reducing end of HA, but the precise composition of
the oligosaccharide mixture coupled to the lipid was not specified.

The molecular weight of the HA oligomers
used for conjugation is
critical for the resulting interaction of HA with CD44. Journo-Gershfeld
et al. have evaluated the correlation
between the lengths of HA oligomers and their binding affinity to
CD44 receptor. They demonstrated that polymer conjugates, bearing
HA oligomers containing 10 monosaccharides or more, bound strongly
to CD44-overexpressing ovarian cancer cells, and internalized to a
greater extent relative to HA-polymer conjugates of 8 oligomers or
less. Moreover, the conjugate synthesized with HA34 was
50 times more cytotoxic to cells relative to the control. HA oligomers
(containing 12–28 monosaccharides) also inhibit melanoma cell
proliferation in vitro as well as formation of tumors
from subcutaneously injected cells in vivo.

Our ongoing work to target CD44 overexpressing
cells requires an efficient route to synthesize well-defined HA-lipid
conjugates for their incorporation into liposomes. The current approach
involves the digestion of high molecular weight (HMW) HA with hyaluronidase,
followed by separation of well-defined populations of oligomers by
running a size exclusion column. These oligomers are subsequently
coupled to lipids, and the HA-lipid conjugates are then purified.
This conventional approach is low yielding, both in the production
of the appropriate length HA oligomers and in the coupling of the
lipid to the reducing end of the HA oligomers, and hence is inefficient.
To improve upon the yields, we designed an alternate chemoenzymatic
synthesis of HA-lipids.

To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first report on such
an approach to synthesize phospholipo-oligosaccharides. This strategy
is initiated by a carbodiimide-mediated coupling of diphytanoyl glycerophosphatidylethanolamine
(DiPhPE) to commercially available HMW HA, followed by digestion of
the mixture with hyaluronidase and then a final purification of the
HAn-DiPhPE from both the free HA oligomers generated (during
digestion) and the unreacted lipid. This strategy is efficient and
high yielding, since we bypass the size exclusion column step, shorten
the overall synthetic route, and obtain a narrow oligosaccharide distribution
(HA monosaccharides ranging from 10 to 20) for binding to the CD44
receptor, on the resulting lipo-oligosaccharide.

A 10–20
oligomer HA length is long enough to bind to the
CD44 receptor but shorter than the HA length required to tightly bind
to the HARE receptor, found in liver endothelial cells. Binding constants
of HA oligomers to liver endothelial cells or the HARE receptor are in the low
micromolar range for HA oligomers composed of 10–20 monosaccharides,
but binding constants rapidly increase to subnanomolar levels as the
HA length grows longer., The consequence of
having a facile chemoenzymatic route to HA conjugates in the size
range reported herein is that it enables the synthesis of targeting
ligands that will preferentially bind to CD44 but not to HARE; longer
HA length ligands are rapidly eliminated by HA receptors found in
the liver. This rapid removal of high molecular weight HA-drug conjugates
has previously been reported, and this
is a limitation for their application to target drugs to CD44 expressing
cells.

Results and Discussion
Conventionally, HA conjugates
of defined range of sizes are prepared
by first enzymatically digesting commercially available HMW HA, followed
by separation of the oligomers using either size exclusion or anion
exchange chromatography. These oligomers are then conjugated to lipids,
proteins, or drugs. This multistep approach is cumbersome, low yielding,, and difficult to scale up. To circumvent these issues, we designed
a chemoenzymatic synthetic route to prepare HA conjugates. In this
approach we first conjugated the high molecular weight HA with a lipid,
with the hope that the presence of a lipid moiety in a semi-random
fashion might restrict the digestion of the conjugate by the enzyme
so that a mixture of HA-lipid conjugates encompassing a narrow range
of moderately sized HA oligomers (containing monosaccharides in the
range of 10–20) would be formed.

To test our hypothesis,
we coupled DiPhPE to commercially available
HMW HA. Also, to overcome the challenge of reacting two molecules
of very different solubilities: high molecular weight HA and lipid,
we converted the HA to its tetrabutylammonium (TBA) salt which had
enhanced solubility in solvents like (CH3)2SO,
and switched to phospholipid with branched fatty acyl chains, DiPhPE.
DiPhPE has a much lower transition temperature than other commonly
used phosphoethanolamines such as DPPE and DSPE with linear acyl chains.
The diphytanyl phospholipids are also less susceptible to oxidation
than the low transition temperature unsaturated PE’s. We calculated
the molecular weight of the starting HA based on the molecular weight
of a decasaccharide, and then added the same equivalents of DiPhPE
so that, on an average, every 10 sugar residues contained one DiPhPE
molecule. To some extent the coupling is random and uncontrollable.
The coupled product was then subjected to hyaluronidase digestion
for different time intervals (5 h, 12 h, 18 h, 24 h, and 48 h). The
above samples were individually dialyzed (to remove unmodified HA)
and lyophilized. The products were then analyzed by MALDI-TOF () and no significant difference was
observed in the mass profiles of the four samples, indicating that
the presence of the lipid tail on HA had indeed restricted the enzyme
digestion, and longer digestion times did not further reduce the extent
of digestion of the HAn-DiPhPE conjugates. After passing
the above material through a C18 Sep Pak cartridge (to separate pure
conjugate from the unreacted DiPhPE) the overall yields were in the
range of ∼60–65%.

In order to analyze the mass
of these relatively large lipo-oligosaccharides,
the laser power used in the MALDI-TOF had to be increased, which possibly
led to fragmentation of the lipid. This fragmentation, coupled with
the various different adducts formed, made it difficult to conclusively
determine the size distribution of HA oligomers that were conjugated
to DiPhPE. Some HA molecules may have more than one lipid molecule
attached to them, further complicating the analysis.

Therefore,
to obtain an estimate of the DiPhPE/HAn ratio
we digested a small aliquot of HAn-DiPhPE with phospholipase
D (Figure ) and analyzed the aqueous layer
obtained after extraction. The mass results () confirmed that the MW of the HA oligomers ranged from 10
monosaccharides to 18 monosaccharides, with principally the monosubstituted
DiPhPE and a very small fraction of disubstituted DiPhPE lipid residues.

Digestion
of HAn-DiPhPE with Phospholipase D.

The lipid to carbohydrate ratio determined from the phosphate
analysis
(1 phospholipid per 9.8 monosaccharides) confirmed the MALDI analysis
on the digested lipo-oligosaccharide, if we assume that the sample
by mass was a mixture of X HA disaccharide units (379.13 g/M) Figure  and the lipid DiPhPE (804 g/M).

Purified
HAn-DiPhPE (obtained after elution from Sep
Pak cartridge) was characterized by 1H NMR (Figure ). The NMR showed characteristic peaks for both
the sugar and lipid: δ 4.00–3.03 (sugar protons), δ
1.87 (sugar N-acetate protons), δ 1.40–1.03 (methylene
protons of DiPhPE), and δ 0.93–0.77 (methyl protons of
DiPhPE). Comparing the ratio of the methyl protons of DiPhPE to the
N-acetyl protons of HA gave us a value of 1.76. This would correspond
to 13 monosaccharides per lipid molecule. The spectra were slightly
broadened, so precise integration was not possible; the value obtained
is consistent with both the oligosaccharide size distribution and
the phosphate/carbohydrate ratio.

1H NMR of Han-DiPhPE
recorded in DMSO.

The HA-lipid conjugates
were evaluated for their ability to bind
to either COS7 cultured cells or CD44 expressing COS7 cells using
both a FACS assay to quantify the level of binding of liposomes to
the cells and a fluorescent confocal imaging assay. The imaging analysis
was used to determine if both CD44 and liposomes were present on the
target cells but absent on the control cells. In the binding assay,
liposomes that incorporated the HA-DiPhPE conjugates on their surface
were preferentially bound to cells that expressed CD44 receptors,
compared to the control liposomes. Binding and uptake of liposomes
was quantified by FACS as shown in Figure .

Uptake of liposomes as determined by FACS in (A) COS 7 cells overexpressing
CD44 receptors and (B) COS 7 cells. DMPG control (red), 0.3 mol %
undigested conjugate HA-DiPhPE 2 (blue), 0.3 mol % digested
conjugate HAn-DiPhPE 3 (green), and 0.03 mol
% digested conjugate HAn-DiPhPE 3 (orange).

In the fluorescent confocal imaging
analysis, HA-liposomes were
internalized into CD44 expressing cells and colocalized with intracellular
compartments that stained positive for the CD44 receptor (Figure ), as we had previously reported for liposomes modified
with a HA-conjugate prepared by reductive amination of the reducing
end of HA oligomers. Control liposomes
did not appreciably bind to the cultured cells nor were they internalized.

Internalization
of liposomes as visualized by imaging experiments
in COS 7 cells overexpressing CD44 receptors (left two columns) and
COS 7 cells lacking CD44 (right two columns). The first row consists
of images of liposomes containing DiO tracker dye (green fluorescence).
In the second row, CD44 receptors are detected with an anti-CD44 antibody
(red fluorescence). The third row is a merged image of rows 1 and
2, respectively, illustrating the co-localization of HA-liposomes
with compartments that stained positive for CD44 receptors. Under
these incubation conditions there is little binding of control liposomes
to either CD44 expressing or cells that did not express CD44.

In summary, we have designed a
facile chemoenzymatic synthetic
route to prepare HA-lipid conjugates that encompass a population of
moderately sized HA oligomers, that may be useful for targeting liposomes,
solid lipid particles, micelles, emulsions, or other nanoparticles
to CD44 receptors. This approach can be extended to the conjugation
of other drug molecules, imaging agents, and proteins to generate
HA-conjugates containing moderately sized oligomers that may be useful
for CD44 targeted imaging or drug delivery.

Experimental Procedures
Synthesis
of the Lipooligosaccharide 2 (Scheme )
HMW sodium hyaluronate, molecular weight
1.5 MDa (Lifecore Biomedical, Chaska, MN), was converted to its tetrabutylammonium
(TBA) salt using Dowex 50WX8–400 cation exchange resin as described
previously. All solvents were anhydrous
and the HA-TBA salt was co-dried with toluene prior to use. HA-TBA
was dissolved in a (CH3)2SO:CH3OH
solvent mixture (3:2) ratio v/v at a 6 mg/mL concentration to prepare
an opalescent mixture. To this solution was added 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide
(EDC) and N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS), and the mixture was allowed
to stir at 60 °C for 2 h, followed by addition of required equivalents
of DiPhPE (Avanti Polar Lipids, Alabaster, AL) prepared in a 1:1 v/v
solution of toluene and CH3OH. Another batch of EDC and
NHS was added after 24 h, and the reaction was allowed to stir at
60 °C for 48 h to yield the corresponding HA-DiPhPE conjugate,
with DiPhPE attached to every tenth monosaccharide via the carboxylate group on an average.

A typical preparation
started with 300 mg of HA-TBA in 50 mL of (CH3)2SO:CH3OH (3:2 v/v) mixture. To this was added a solution
of EDC (90 mgs) and NHS (90 mgs) in 3 mL of CH3OH. The
mixture was stirred for 1.5 h at 60 °C, followed by the addition
of a solution of DiPhPE (300 mg) prepared in 6 mL of 1:1 v/v toluene:CH3OH mixture. After 24 h, another batch of EDC and NHS (same
amount as described above) was added and stirring was continued for
an additional 24 h. The final reaction mixture was poured into acetone
and centrifuged at 3800 rpm for 20 min. Acetone was decanted off and
the precipitate was collected.

Chemoenzymatic Synthesis of HAn-DiPhPE Conjugates
Enzymatic Digestion of HA-DiPhPE (2)
The
above precipitate was suspended in digestion buffer (0.1 M sodium
acetate, adjusted to pH 5.4) at a concentration of ∼100 mg/20
mL. To this was added 4000 U of bovine testicular hyaluronidase (Sigma-Aldrich
Co., St. Louis, MO) and the solution was allowed to incubate at 37
°C for various times up to 48 h. The enzyme was then deactivated
by immersing the test tube in boiling water for 10 min, and the contents
were lyophilized.

Purification of HAn-DiPhPE Digest
(3)
The lyophilized powder was dissolved in
H2O
and placed in a 25K cutoff dialysis membrane and dialyzed against
100 volumes of 1 M NaCl solution overnight, followed by H2O changed two times over a 2 day period. The dialyzed material was
then lyophilized. The resulting white powder was dissolved in a 4:1
CH3OH:H2O solvent mixture and loaded onto a
reverse phase C18 Sep Pak cartridge (Fisher Scientific, #11–131–8).
HAn-DiPhPE was eluted out with 4:1 CH3OH and
H2O, followed by elution of the unreacted DiPhPE using
CH3OH and 3:2 CH3OH:CHCl3 successively.
These solute mixtures contained 0.1% acetic acid to enable a cleaner
separation. Each fraction was analyzed by MALDI-TOF (Microflex LT,
Bruker Daltonics) using 2,4,6-trihydroxyacetone with sodium citrate
as the matrix. The fractions were also spot tested with molybdenum
stain for phosphate and ninhydrin reagent for amino functionality,
respectively. NMR of the conjugate was recorded in (CD3)2SO on a 300 MHz Bruker instrument.

Phospholipase
D Digestion of Purified HAn-DiPhPE
A minimum amount
of purified HAn-DiPhPE was suspended
in 0.1 M sodium acetate buffer pH 5.4, containing 20 mM CaCl2 to create an opalescent dispersion. To this was added 50 U of Phospholipase
D (from white cabbage, Sigma-Aldrich Co., St. Louis, MO), and the
mixture was allowed to incubate at 30 °C for 4 h. To this solution
was added 1.1 volume CH3OH followed by 1.1 volume CHCl3 (to aqueous solution) and then transferred to a separating
funnel. The contents were shaken well and allowed to form layers.
The aqueous layer was collected and lyophilized, and analyzed by MALDI-TOF
to determine the range of distribution of the HA oligosaccharides
conjugated to the lipid. The control tube had everything except the
enzyme and was processed in exactly the same manner as the experimental
tube.

Analysis of Phosphate/Carbohydrate Ratio in the Conjugate
In order to experimentally determine an average ratio of the number
of DiPhPE molecule conjugated to HA sugar units in the HAn-DiPhPE conjugate, we carried out a traditional phosphate colorimetric
assay. We carefully weighed out a known
amount of the conjugate and dissolved it in a known volume of water.
The micromoles of phosphate present in the sample were determined
from a phosphate standard curve. This value was converted to the micromoles
of DiPhPE present in the sample. The ratio of lipid phosphate to HA
carbohydrate was computed based upon the dried weight of the conjugate.

Liposome Preparation
Lipid films were prepared by drying
10 μmol of total lipid, including the HAn-DiPhPE
conjugate on a rotary evaporator under vacuum. The lipid film was
left to dry overnight under high vacuum. Liposomes (composed of POPC:Cholesterol:HAn-DiPhPE 50:40:0.03–0.3 mol %) containing 0.3 mol %
of the fluorescent lipid tracer DiO (3,3′-dioctadecyloxacarbocyanine
perchlorate) were prepared by rehydrating the above lipid film with
1 mL of 10 mM HEPES containing 10% sucrose (pH 7.4), followed by agitating
the preparation using a vortex mixer for 1 min, and sonication at
40 °C for 20 min under argon. The liposomes were then extruded
through a 0.08 μm polycarbonate membrane to produce liposomes
of approximately 100 nm in size. Liposomes were stored at 4 °C
under argon. Control liposomes were prepared at the same lipid concentration,
but they contained dimyristoylphosphatidylglycerol (DMPG) at a mole
ratio of 0.3 mol % in place of the HA lipid to provide a similar zeta
potential to the control liposomes as used in the HA-containing liposomes.

Cell Culture Growth and of Liposome Binding Assay
All
cells were maintained in DMEM media supplemented with 10% fetal calf
serum, 20 mM Hepes (pH 7.5), and 2 mM glutamine. For binding assays,
cells were seeded 24 h prior to incubation with liposomes, in a 96
well plate at a density of 25,000 cells per well. Just before liposome
addition the cells were washed twice with DMEM media without serum.
Cells were then incubated at 37 °C for 3 h with liposomes at
indicated concentrations in serum free DMEM supplemented with 20 mM
Hepes, 2 mM glutamine, and 3% BSA. After the 3 h incubation, cells
were washed twice with serum free media and twice with PBS. Cells
were trypsinized to remove them from the culture plate, diluted 4-fold
with PBS, and immediately analyzed by FACS (BD Biosciences, San Jose,
CA).

Cell Imaging Experiments
COS 7 cells were grown on
glass coverslips 24 h prior to incubation with liposomes in DMEM +
10% FCS. Liposomes (100 nmol of lipid) were incubated with cells at
37 °C for 3 h in serum free DMEM supplemented with 20 mM Hepes,
pH = 7.5, containing 3% BSA and 2 mM glutamine. Cells were washed
after liposome incubation with serum free media (2 times) and then
with PBS (2 times). Cells were fixed with 4% formaldehyde in PBS at
4 °C for 15 min. Fixed cells were then washed and blocked with
1% normal goat serum, 1% BSA in PBS for 1 h at room temperature. Blocked
cells were incubated overnight at 4 °C with anti-CD44 (clone
IM7). On the following day, cells were washed 5 times with PBS followed
by an 1 h room temperature incubation with Alexafluor 568 conjugated
goat anti-rat secondary antibody and 5 PBS washes. Cells were mounted
in DAPI containing Prolong Gold mounting media and visualized by a
Nikon Ti-E epifluorescent imaging system. The cells were imaged using
an air Plan Apo 40x objective with NA 0.95. The filter set is DAPI/FITC/TRITC/Cy5/Cy7-optimized
Sedat type penta-band filter set from Semrock on the 6D epifluorescence
microscope at the UCSF Nikon center.

Supporting Information Available
MALDI-TOF results of HA-DiPhPE
digested at different time intervals; MALDI-TOF results of the PLD
digested HAn-DiPhPE. This material is available free of
charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc4005975_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare the following competing financial interest(s): F.C.S. discloses
a conflict of interest. F.C.S. has a financial interest in a liposome
drug delivery company and also has liposome related patents that are
owned by the University of California.

Acknowledgments
We gratefully
acknowledge the financial support from the National
Institutes of Health (GM 061851). We would like to thank Dr. David
Tran for his assistance in running the phosphate assay.

