Introduction
First described by
Sharpless in 1999, the term “click chemistry”
defines chemical reactions that are selective, rapid, and highly efficient., Early focus of click chemistry centered on the Cu(I)-catalyzed azide–alkyne
cycloaddition (CuAAC) reaction., The CuAAC reaction is
highly bioorthogonal due to the biologically inert nature of the azide
and alkyne functional groups. Applications of this reaction in chemical
biology include activity-based protein profiling and selective biomolecule
labeling.− One potential pitfall of using CuAAC in living systems is the cytotoxic
effects of Cu(I) catalysts, which can be avoided using the copper-free
azide-cyclooctyne cycloaddition reaction., Due to ring strain, the cyclooctyne triple bond has an elevated
energy state and therefore reacts spontaneously with an organic azide
under mild aqueous conditions, bypassing the use of Cu(I) catalysts.
Although originally described as a relative slow reaction, cyclooctyne
derivatives that show fast reaction kinetics with organic azides have
been developed.− The pursuit of other fast catalyst-free click reactions that can
be applied in living systems for the labeling of biomolecules under
biologically relevant conditions has recently revitalized two other
reactions, namely, the inverse electron-demand Diels–Alder
cycloaddition (IEDDAC) and the nitrilimine-alkene/alkyne 1,3-dipolar
cycloaddition (NADC) (Scheme ).− Both reactions display rapid kinetics when a strained alkene/alkyne
is involved. Applications of these two reactions include labeling
biomolecules in cells and cancer diagnostics.− Here, we report
kinetic investigations of IEDDAC and NADC reactions that involve strained
alkene/alkyne functionalities including norbornene, trans-cyclooctene, and cyclooctyne, and their applications in labeling
proteins that are genetically modified with these functional groups.

(A) Tetrazine-Alkene/Alkyne IEDDAC and (B) NADC Reactions
Results and Discussion
Kinetic
Characterization of IEDDAC Reactions of Norbornene, trans-Cyclooctene, And Cyclooctyne
Kinetic investigations
of reactions between strained alkene/alkyne dienophiles and tetrazines
have been reported.,, However, solvent systems, tetrazines, dienophiles, and methods of
kinetic determination varied in previous reports, making it challenging
to compare relative reactivities of dienophiles with tetrazines of
interest. We chose to characterize and compare IEDDAC reactions of
strained alkene/alkyne dienophiles in PBS buffer at pH 7.4 to mimic
physiological conditions. For our kinetic studies, we selected three
strained alkenes, 5-norbornen-2-ol and two diastereomers of (E)-2-(cyclooct-4-en-1-yloxyl)ethanol, and cyclooct-2-ynol
(NOR, DS1, DS2, and COY in Scheme ) and a
fluorescein tetrazine (FITC-TZ in Scheme ).
DS1 and DS2 are two diasteromeric products (ratio close to 1:2) of
the UV-induced isomerization of (Z)-2-(cyclooct-4-en-1-yloxyl)ethanol.
As minor products, DS1-like molecules were mostly dismissed in previous
reports. Since structural differences
between DS1 and DS2 may lead to different reactivities toward tetrazines,
both were included in our studies. COY is a racemic mixture. Its two
stereoisomers are enantiomers that are expected to display the same
reactivities toward FITC-TZ. Therefore, the two stereoisomers were
not separated for undertaking kinetic analysis. FITC-TZ has a tetrazine
entity that efficiently quenches the fluorescence emission of fluorescein
until reaction with a dienophile, enabling easy tracking of the reaction
progress. The reactions of all four dienophiles with FITC-TZ were
carried out in pseudo-first-order conditions, in which the dienophile
was present in a 20-fold excess compared to FITC-TZ (Figure ). For NOR and COY, FITC-TZ was used at a 1 μM
concentration for an optimal dynamic range of the signal, while for
DS1 and DS2, the reactions with FITC-TZ are so fast that the concentration
of FITC-TZ had to be significantly reduced to 250 pM in order to detect
the reaction progress. Data collected at all conditions was fit to
a single exponential increase equation F = F1 – F2 ×
e(−k′×t), where F is the detected fluorescent signal at
a given time t, F1 is
the final fluorescence, F1 – F2 is the background fluorescent signal, and k′ is the apparent pseudo-first-order rate constant.
The determined values for k′ were plotted
against dienophile concentrations and fitted to the equation k′ = k × [dienophile] + C, where k is the second-order rate constant
of a dienophile reaction with FITC-TZ. The calculated second-order
rate constants for all four dienophiles are shown in Table .

Structures of Four Strained Alkene/Alkyne Molecules
and a Fluorescein
Tetrazine Dye
Second-Order
Rate Constants of FITC-TZ
Reactions with Strained Alkene/Alkyne Dienophiles
Dienophile	NOR	DS1	DS2	COY	
k/M–1 s–1	5.7 ± 0.2	292 000 ± 6000	64 000 ± 4000	17 ± 1	
Characterization
of FITC-TZ reactions with (A) NOR, (B) DS1, (C)
DS2, and (D) COY. All reactions were carried out in PBS buffer at
pH 7.4. The fluorescence emission was detected at 515 nm with excitation
at 493 nm. For A–D, each presents the fluorescence change as
a function of time at a given concentration shown in the top left
corner. The insets show the linear dependence of the pseudo-first-order
rate constants of a reaction on dienophile concentrations.

Among all four dienophiles, NOR reacts most slowly
with FITC-TZ.
The determined rate constant is similar to what has been reported
for reactions between norbornenes and tetrazines.− The determined
rate constant for COY is 20-fold lower than what was reported previously, which may be attributed to structural differences
in the tetrazine dyes used in the two analyses. Both DS1 and DS2 react
exceedingly fast with FITC-TZ, several orders of magnitude faster
than the reactions of the NOR and COY dienophiles. For DS2, its reaction
with FITC-TZ has a rate constant in the same range as of those of
reported rapid trans-cyclooctene reactions with tetrazines.,,, Interestingly, the reaction of DS1 with FITC-TZ is almost 5-fold
higher than that of DS2 demonstrating that small stereochemical differences
can have significant effects on IEDDAC reactions. With this fast rate
constant, a reaction with both reactants at 1 μM reaches 97%
conversion in just 100 s. Thus, DS1 is a better choice than DS2 for
applications that require labeling molecules at very dilute concentrations
such as in living systems.

To further analyze this reactivity
difference between DS1 and DS2,
we carried out a detailed computational study at the CPCM-M06-2X/6-311+G(d,p)
level of theory− (see  for details). This level of ab inito calculations provides accurate
reaction barriers for Diels–Alder cycloaddition reactions and
has been employed in similar studies of strain-promoted click reactions. We predict free energy barriers of 14.0 and
15.5 kcal/mol for the IEDDAC reaction of slightly simplified models
of DS1 and DS2 with 3-phenyl-1,2,4,5-tetrazine, respectively. This
corresponds to a predicted rate for DS1 that is 12-times that of DS2,
in agreement with the experimentally observed 5-fold difference. The
1.5 kcal/mol difference in free energy barrier can be explained in
part by distortion-interaction analyses, in which the energy barrier
for a bimolecular reaction is deconstructed into the energy required
to distort the reactants into the transition state geometry (Edist) and the stabilization provided by the
interaction of these two distorted reactants (Eint). In particular, we find that both the interaction energy
and the distortion energy slightly favor DS1 over DS2. This net 0.8
kcal/mol difference, combined with a 0.9 kcal/mol contribution from
vibrational and entropy effects, leads to the final free energy difference
of 1.5 kcal/mol.

Kinetic Analysis of NADC Reactions of Norbornene, trans-Cyclooctene, and Cyclooctyne
Previously,
it was shown that
olefins, serving as dipolarophiles, react with diaryl nitrilimines
to form fluorescent pyrazoline products with appreciable reaction
rates under physiological conditions. Due to the labile nature of nitrilimines, currently two methods
are used to generate them transiently in aqueous conditions. One is
the photolysis of tetrazoles, while the other is the dissociation
of hydrazonyl chlorides in water., The first
method has been significantly expanded by Lin and co-workers for photoclick
labeling of biomolecules.− The second method has been recently applied to label
biomolecules that contain norbornene and acrylamide functionalities
and used to understand the NADC reaction mechanism in water.−

Recently, we reported that NOR reacts readily with a hydrazonyl
chloride (HZCL in Scheme ) with a rate constant
of 0.75 M–1 s–1. Similar kinetic characterizations were also carried out
for DS1, DS2, and COY. Like NOR, both DS1 and DS2 also reacted readily
with HZCL, as detected by following the fluorescence emission of the
cycloaddition products (Figure ). To determine
second-order rate constants of the reactions of DS1 and DS2 with HZCL,
reactions were set up under pseudo-first-order conditions in PBS/acetonitrile
(1:1) at pH 7.4. Acetonitrile was provided to increase the solubility
of all tested reactants and corresponding fluorescent products. At
a 1:1 ratio, PBS and acetonitrile forms a homogeneous solvent system
at pH 7.4 that can still be considered mimic to physiological conditions.
The determined k′ values were plotted against
dipolarophile concentrations and fitted to the equation k′ = k1 × [dipolarophile]
+ k2, where k1 is the second-order rate constant of a dipolarophile reaction with
HZCL and k2 is the rate constant of HZCL
hydrolysis. The determined rate constants for DS1 and DS2 are shown
in Table . Unlike NOR, DS1, and DS2, COY does
not yield a fluorescent product when it reacts with HZCL. In order
to kinetically characterize the reaction of COY with HZCL using fluorescence
spectroscopy, acrylamide, which competes against COY to react with
HZCL to form a fluorescent product, was provided at 50 μM. Reactions
at all conditions showed single exponential fluorescent increase over
time. The determined pseudo-first-order rate constants were plotted
against COY concentrations and fitted to the equation k′ = k1 × [COY] + k2′, where k1 is the second-order rate constant of the COY reaction with HZCL
and k2′ is the sum of the rate
constant of HZCL hydrolysis and the pseudo-first-order rate constant
of the HZCL reaction with 50 μM acrylamide. The determined rate
constant for COY is also presented in Table .

Structure of a Hydrozonoyl Chloride, HZCL
Second-Order Rate Constants of HZCL
Reactions with Strained Alkene/Alkyne Dipolarophiles
Dipolarophile	NOR	DS1	DS2	COY	
k/M–1 s–1	0.75 ± 0.03	17.2 ± 0.4	19.0 ± 0.3	0.77 ± 0.07	
This rate constant
was determined
in ref ().

Characterization of HZCL reactions with (A)
DS1, (B) DS2, and (C)
COY. All reactions were carried out in PBS/acetonitrile (1:1) at pH
7.4. HZCL was provided at 1 μM. The fluorescence emission was
detected at 480 nm with excitation at 318 nm. The detected fluorescence
data for 37.5 μM DS1 and 25 μM DS2 are presented in A
and B. C shows data at two conditions, one with only acrylamide and
the other with both acrylamide and COY. The insets show the linear
dependence of the pseudo-first-order rate constants on the dipolarophile
concentrations.

As shown in Table , COY and NOR have similar
reactivity toward HZCL. Both DS1 and DS2 react rapidly with HZCL with
rate constants more than 20-fold higher than those for NOR and COY.
Although elevated energy states of DS1 and DS2 lead to higher reactivities
toward HZCL than NOR and COY, the rate enhancement is not as significant
as observed in the IEDDAC reactions. In addition, DS1 and DS2 have
similar reactivities toward HZCL, agreeing well with small stereochemistry
differences between DS1 and DS2.

Genetic Incorporation of
Tyrosine Derivatives Bearing Strained
Alkene/Alkyne Functionalities into Proteins in E. coli
Lysine derivatives that contain strained alkene/alkyne
functionalities were previously incorporated into proteins in live
cells using engineered pyrrolysyl-tRNA synthetase (PylRS)-tRNACUAPyl pairs.,,,, Here, we took
a different route to install strained alkene/alkyne functionalities
into proteins. Previously we engineered a N346A/C348A mutant of PylRS
(PylRS(N346A/C348A)) and demonstrated that this mutant enzyme in conjunction
with tRNACUAPyl was able to incorporate a wide range of tyrosine
and phenylalanine derivatives into proteins in response to the amber
codon in E. coli.− Since one of the successfully tested tyrosine derivatives, O-benzyl-tyrosine, is bulky and hydrophopic, we hypothesized
that PylRS(N346A/C348A) might be applicable for the genetic incorporation
of noncanonical amino acids (NCAAs) bearing functionalities with similar
bulky and hydrophobic characteristics such as norbornene, trans-cyclooctene, and cyclooctyne. Seven O-alkylated tyrosine derivatives with strained alkene/alkyne functionalities
were synthesized (structures 1–7 in
Scheme ). Their genetic incorporation into
protein was tested in an E. coli BL21
system that contained two plasmids, pEVOL-pylT-N346A/C348A and pET-pylT-sfGFP2TAG,
with genes coding PylRS(N346A/C348A), tRNACUAPyl, and
superfolder green fluorescent protein (sfGFP) with an amber mutation
at its 2 position. However, this E. coli system was not able to express sfGFP in GMML (a minimal medium supplemented
with 1% glycerol and 0.3 mM leucine) in the absence or presence of 1–7 (2 mM). Apparently, the active site
pocket of PylRS(N346A/C348A) could not accommodate the large side
chains of 1–7. To expand the active
site pocket, we introduced two more mutations, Y306A and Y384F, to
PylRS(N346A/C348A), generating PylRS(Y306A/N346A/C348A/Y384F). The
Y384F mutation has been shown to improve the genetic incorporation
of several NCAAs and the Y306A mutation has been introduced to the
wild type enzyme to accommodate lysine derivatives with bulky side
chains.,,,− The crystal structure of PylRS(Y306A/Y384F)
complexed with a furan-containing NCAA was recently published and
indicated a very deep and large hydrophobic pocket for favorable interactions
with bulky and hydrophobic chemical moieties.,E. coli BL21 cells transformed with
pEVOL-pylT-Y306A/N346A/C348A/Y384F and pET-pylT-sfGFP2TAG were not
able to express sfGFP in LB medium in the absence of 1–7. The Y306A mutation apparently decreased the
activity of the original mutant enzyme PylRS(N346A/C348A) and reduced
the mis-incorporation of phenylalanine in a rich medium. However, supplementing LB with 1 mM of one of
five NCAAs (1, 2, 4, 5, or 6) induced sfGFP expression (Figure ). The addition of 3 or 7, even at 2 mM, led to no sfGFP expression. All five purified sfGFP
variants were confirmed by ESI-MS (Table ).

Structures of O-Alkylated Tyrosine Derivatives That
Contain Strained Alkene/Alkyne Functionalities
Detected and Theoretical Molecular
Weights (MWs) of sfGFPs with Different NCAAs Incorporated at the Second
Position
Protein	Observed
MW	Theoretical
MW	
sfGFP-1	27 879	27 880	
sfGFP-2	27 837	27 836	
sfGFP-4	27 895	27 896	
sfGFP-5	27 894	27 894	
sfGFP-6	27 894	27 894	
With an error of ±1 Da.

sfGFP with 1, 2, 4, 5, or 6 incorporated
at the S2 position.

Site-specific
incorporation of NCAAs 1, 2, and 4–6 into sfGFP at its 2 position.
Proteins were expressed in E. coli BL21
cells transformed with pEVOL-pylT-Y306A/N346A/C348A/Y384F and pET-pylT-sfGFP2TAG.
Cells were grown in LB medium supplemented with 1 mM of a NCAA for
8 h. Supplementing LB with 2 mM of 3 or 7 did not yield sfGFP expression.

Protein Labeling with Genetically Encoded Strained Alkene/Alkyne
Functionalities Using IEDDAC and NADC Reactions
After purifying
sfGFPs that contained site-specifically incorporated NCAAs with strained
alkene/alkyne side chains, we next proceeded to test their bioconjugation
reactions with FITC-TZ and HZCL. To label sfGFP with FITC-TZ, reactions
were set up in PBS buffer at pH 7.4 in the presence of 100 μM
of FITC-TZ for 1 h. As expected, sfGFP containing 1, 2, 4, 5, or 6 was efficiently
labeled with FITC-TZ and showed intense fluorescence in a denaturing
SDS-PAGE gel under UV irradiation (Figure A). As a control, sfGFP with Nε-Boc-lysine incorporated at the second position
(sfGFP-BocK) could not be labeled with FITC-TZ under the same conditions.
All protein samples were treated with SDS and heated at 100 °C
for 20 min to quench the intrinsic GFP fluorescence before they were
analyzed by SDS-PAGE. The same treatment was also performed with proteins
labeled with HZCL. For labeling with HZCL, each protein was incubated
with 0.5 mM HZCL in PBS buffer at pH 7.4 for 1 h before analysis via
denaturing SDS-PAGE gel and imaging under UV irradiation. SfGFP bearing 1, 2, 4, or 6 was fluorescently
labeled after their reactions with HZCL. As expected, the labeling
product of sfGFP-5 could not be fluorescently visualized due to the nonfluorescent
reaction product of a cyclooctyne with HZCL. As a control, wild-type
sfGFP did not undergo any labeling reaction with HZCL under the same
conditions.

Selective labeling of sfGFPs that contained site-specifically incorporated
NCAAs with strained alkene/alkyne functionalities with (A) FITC-TZ
and (B) HZCL. In A and B, the top panels show denaturing SDS-PAGE
analysis of proteins stained with Coomassie blue and the bottom panels
are from fluorescent imaging of the same gels before Coomassie blue
staining. In A, the fluorescent image was captured by a digital camera
and displayed was real color of the emitting light. In B, the fluorescent
image was captured by a Bio-Rad ChemiDoc XRS system.

Additionally, we tested the IEDDAC and NADC reactions
in labeling
proteins that bear site-specifically incorporated NCAAs with strained
alkene/alkyne functionalities in living cells. pEVOL-pylT-Y306A/N346A/C348A/Y384F
and a previously constructed plasmid pETDuet-OmpXTAG that contained
an E. coli outer membrane protein OmpX
gene with an AAAAXAA (A denotes alanine and X denotes the NCAA) insertion
between two extracellular residues, 53 and 54, were used to transform E. coli BL21 cells. The transformed cells were grown
in LB supplemented with 2 mM of 4, 5, or 6 to produce OmpX with these NCAAs site-specifically incorporated.
The subsequent reactions with FITC-TZ fluorescently labeled the expressed
proteins at the bacterial cell surface. Similar reactions with HZCL
also fluorescently labeled the expressed proteins except for OmpX
incorporated with 5, whose labeling with HZCL led to
a nonfluorescent product (Figure ). Collectively,
our assembled in vitro and cell labeling data demonstrate the high
efficiency and selectivity of IEDDAC and NADC reactions in the labeling
of newly developed and genetically encoded strained alkene/alkyne
NCAAs.

Selective labeling of sfGFPs that contained site-specifically incorporated
NCAAs with strained alkene/alkyne functionalities with (A) FITC-TZ
and (B) HZCL in E. coli cells. Cells
were labeled with FITC-TZ and HZCL for 3 h and then washed with PBS
buffer 3 times before undertaking epifluorescent and differential
interface contrast (DIC) imaging.

Conclusions
In summary, we have kinetically characterized
IEDDAC and NADC reactions
that involve strained alkene/alkyne functionalities including norbornene, trans-cyclooctene, and cyclooctyne, and applied the two
reactions to selectively label proteins bearing these functionalities.
Being a rapid catalyst-free click reaction with a high bio-orthogonality,
IEDDAC has received substantial attention recently.,,, Our study
showed that all three strained alkene/alkyne functionalities undergo
rapid IEDDAC reactions with tetrazines and rate constants close to
300 000 M–1 s–1 could be
reached. Our study also revealed that all three functionalities undergo
fast reactions with diaryl nitrilimines at rate constants close to
20 M–1 s–1. To the best of our
knowledge, the current study is the first report of fast reaction
kinetics between trans-cylooctenes and diaryl nitrilimines.
To synthesize proteins with site-specifically encoded strained alkene/alkyne
functionalities, a mutant PylRS-tRNACUAPyl pair was developed, which has been
successfully applied to incorporate five tyrosine derivatives containing
norbornene, trans-cyclooctene, and cyclooctyne functionalities
into proteins at amber mutation sites in E. coli. Proteins bearing these tyrosine derivatives were fluorescently
labeled using IEDDAC and NADC reactions both in vitro and in living
cells. Our current study has significantly expanded the tool kits
for protein labeling. Potential applications of the developed methods
include studies such as protein folding/dynamics, protein trafficking,
and protein–protein/DNA interactions.

Experimental Procedures
Synthesis
Synthesis of strained alkenes/alkynes, noncanonical
amino acids (NCAAs), and a fluorescein tetrazine (FITC-TZ) is provided
as  due to substantial
procedure descriptions and spectroscopic data.

Kinetic Characterizations
All kinetic measurements
were carried out using a PTI QMA40 fluorescent spectrophotometer.
For IEDDAC reactions between strained alkenes/alkynes and FITC-TZ,
fluorescent emission was monitored at 515 nm with an excitation light
at 493 nm. For NADC reactions between strained alkenes/alkynes with
a hydrazonyl chloride (HZCL) that served as a nitrilimine precursor,
fluorescent emission was monitored at 480 nm with an excitation light
at 318 nm. Data were collected during a reaction period of 1 h.

Plasmid Construction
Plasmid pEVOL-pylT-Y306A/N346A/C348A/Y384F
was derived from pEVOL-pylT-N346A/C348A that contains genes coding tRNACUAPyl and pyrrolysyl-tRNA synthetase (PylRS) with
mutations N346A/C348A. Two primers PylRS-Y384F-Fwd: 5′-tggggatacccttgatgtaatgcacg-3′
and PylRS-Y384F-Rev: 5′-aagaccatgcaggaatcgcctacgat-3′
were used to run site-directed mutagenesis to introduce the Y384F
mutation. Another two primers PylRS-Y306A-Fwd: 5′-aactacctgcgcaagcttgacagggc-3′
and PylRS-Y384F-Rev: 5′-cgcaaggtttggagcaagcatgggt-3′
were subsequently used to run site-directed mutagenesis to introduce
the Y306A mutation.

Protein Expression
Plasmid pET-sfGFPS2TAG, which contains genes coding tRNACUAPyl and superfolder
green fluorescent protein (sfGFP) with an amber mutation at S2, was
cotransformed with plasmid pEVOL-pylT-N346A/C348A/Y384F/Y306A into E. coli BL21 (DE3) cells. From a single colony, a
5 mL overnight culture was prepared and inoculated into 300 mL Lysogenic
Broth (LB) medium. Cells were grown to OD600 as 0.6 and
then induced to express sfGFP site-specifically incorporated with
a NCAA with the addition of 1 mM isopropyl-β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside
(IPTG), 0.2% arabinose, and 1 mM of the designated NCAA. After overnight
expression, cells were harvested and suspended in lysis buffer (50
mM NaH2PO4, 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM imidazole, pH
8.0), and sonicated in an ice water bath. The cell lysate was clarified
by centrifugation (11 000g at 4 °C for
60 min). The crude supernatant was decanted and allowed to bind to
5 mL of Ni-NTA superflow resin at 4 °C for 1 h. The mixture was
loaded into an empty cartridge and washed with wash buffer (50 mM
NaH2PO4, 300 mM NaCl, 20 mM imidazole, pH 8.0).
The expressed sfGFP was eluted with elution buffer (50 mM NaH2PO4, 300 mM NaCl, 250 mM imidazole, pH 8.0). Eluted
fractions were concentrated in a Pierce 10 KD MWCO filter unit and
dialyzed against 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The finally purified
protein was analyzed by 12% SDS-PAGE and characterized using electrospray
ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS).

In Vitro Protein Labeling
with FITC-TZ
0.1 mM FITC-TZ
was added to a solution of a NCAA-containing sfGFP in PBS (pH 7.4)
buffer. The reaction was carried out at room temperature for 1 h.
The protein was purified using Ni-NTA resin and analyzed by 12% SDS-PAGE.
The fluorescence was detected using a regular UV transilluminator.

In Vitro Protein Labeling with HZCL
0.5 mM HZCL was
added to a solution of a NCAA-containing sfGFP in PBS (pH 7.4) buffer.
The reaction was carried out at room temperature for 1 h and then
directly applied to undergo analysis with 12% SDS-PAGE. The fluorescence
was detected in a Bio-Rad ChemiDoc XRS+ system under UV irradiation.

Live Cell Labeling and Imaging
BL21(DE3) cells were
transformed to carry plasmids pEVOL-PylT-Y306A/N346A/C348A/Y384F and
pETDuet-OmpXTAG that contained a gene
coding E. coli membrane protein OmpX
with an amber mutation. The transformed cells were grown to OD600 as 1 and then induced to express OmpX site-specifically
incorporated with a NCAA with the addition of 0.5 mM IPTG, 0.2% arabinose,
and 1 mM of the designated NCAA. Cells were let grown overnight, pelleted,
and washed with isotonic saline three times before they were incubated
with 0.1 mM FITC-TZ or 0.5 mM HZCL at room temperature. The incubation
time for cell labeling was typically 3 h. After reactions, cells were
pelleted, washed with PBS buffer four times, and then subjected to
fluorescent imaging. Cells grown in LB without a NCAA but subjected
to same labeling procedures were set up as control. Fluorescent imaging
of cells was performed using an Olympus IX-81 inverted microscope.

Computational Methods
All computations were run at
the M06-2X/6-311+G(d,p) level of theory, using Gaussian09.

Supporting Information Available
Kinetic
characterizations of
strain-promoted click reactions; NCAA synthesis; plasmid construction;
protein expression; protein/cell labeling; supplementary figures; 1H and 13C NMR spectra of NCAAs. This material is
available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc500361d_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
Yadagiri
Kurra and Keturah A. Odoi contributed equally.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work
was supported in part by the National Institute
of Health (grant 1R01CA161158 to W.R.L), the National Science Foundation
(grants CHE-1148684 to W.R.L. , CHE-0848398 to A.D., and CHE-1266022
to S.E.W.), and the Welch Foundation (grants A-1715 to W.R.L. and
A-1775 to S.E.W.). J.T.K. was supported by the National Science Foundation
Graduate Research Fellowship (grant NSF-0750733). We thank Prof. Joseph
Fox and Samantha Brannick at University of Delaware for providing
help in the synthesis of transcyclooctenes. We also thank Dr. Yohannes
H. Rezenom from the Laboratory for Biological Mass Spectrometry at
Texas A&amp;M University for characterizing proteins with electrospray
ionization mass spectrometry, and the Texas A&amp;M Supercomputing
Facility for providing computational resources.

