Introduction
Early detection is
one of the critical
challenges for contemporary
clinical cancer care. Detection of small premalignant lesions and
early
stage primary tumors is crucial for effective cancer therapy. For
this
reason, interest in highly sensitive imaging techniques for clinical
oncology has increased tremendously in recent decades. Many groups
have studied the in vivo detection of tumors using contrast agents
appropriate for various imaging modalities.− Methods have
been developed for specific targeting in order to maximize
the localization of ligands in the tumor and to minimize the uptake
in the surrounding normal tissues to achieve high signal-to-noise
ratios.− These approaches include targeted imaging of tumors
using monoclonal
antibodies that specifically bind to receptors on the tumor cells,, protease-activated near-infrared fluorescent probes for detection
of tumors, folate receptor-targeted in
vivo imaging of tumors using
a near-infrared (NIR) dye-folate conjugate, and integrin-targeted imaging of lung and liver metastases
using a 64Cu-1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane-1,4,7,10-tetraacetic
acid (DOTA) dimeric arginylglycylaspartic acid peptide radiotracer.

Cyclooxygenase (COX) isozymes catalyze
the biotransformation of
arachidonic acid into a wide variety of prostaglandins that are important
biological mediators of inflammatory diseases. COX-1 is constitutively expressed in most normal tissues,
where it modulates housekeeping functions, such as hemostasis, vascular
tone, and cytoprotection of the gastric mucosa. COX-2 is absent or expressed at very low levels in most
epithelial cells but is found at high levels in inflammatory lesions
and many premalignant and malignant tumors. COX-2 mRNA is detected
in the early stages of tumorigenesis, such as adenomatous polyps in
the colon or Barrett’s esophagus.− COX-2 expression promotes tumor
growth, angiogenesis, and metastasis
of cancer cells., Recent work has shown that selective
COX-2 inhibitors are useful
in the prophylaxis of various human cancers.,

The high level of COX-2 in premalignant and malignant tumors
compared
to surrounding normal tissue suggests that it is an ideal target for
molecular imaging by radiolabeled or fluorescent COX-2 inhibitors.
To test this hypothesis, we and other laboratories have studied imaging
of COX-2 expression in inflammation and cancer using 123I- or 18F-labeled COX-2 selective inhibitors.− In addition, we recently described a conjugate-based conversion
of
the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), indomethacin, into
fluorescent carboxy-X-rhodamine
(ROX) conjugates that are capable of inhibiting COX-2 selectively
and potently in both purified protein and intact cells. These conjugates,
which do not significantly inhibit COX-1, enabled the optical imaging
of COX-2 in inflammatory lesions and COX-2-expressing tumors in vivo. The present paper describes the details of the
structure–activity
relationship (SAR) studies performed for optimization of these lead
compounds from a wide range of fluorescent conjugates of NSAIDs or
COX-2-selective inhibitors (COXIBs). The conjugates were evaluated
as COX-2-targeted imaging agents, and active molecules were validated
in vitro and in vivo as COX-2-targeted agents in cells and tumors.
The results provide critical background and further support for our
previous report, which reveals the first
fluorescently labeled optical
imaging agent validated for COX-2-targeted in vivo imaging of inflammation
and cancer.

Experimental Procedures
Chemistry
Standard methods were
utilized for the synthesis
of fluorescent derivatives of NSAIDs and COXIBs. A wide variety of
carboxylic acid-containing core compounds (e.g., indomethacin, an
iodoindomethacin, an indolyl carboxamide analog of indomethacin (reverse
indomethacin), flurbiprofen, ketoprofen, or a carboxylic acid derivative
of celecoxib) were tethered through a series of alkyl, aryl piperazinyl,
or polyethylene glycol linkers to a diverse range of bulky organic
fluorophore moieties. The fluorophores included dansyl, dabsyl, coumarin,
fluorescein, rhodamine, alexa-fluor, nile blue, cy5, cy7, near IR,
and IR dyes, as well as some lanthanide chelators (Figure ). Synthetic procedures, in addition to analytical
and spectroscopic characterization of all compounds, are described
in .

Fluorescent COX-2 probes.
Carboxylic acid containing core NSAIDs,
COXIBs, or their derivatives were used as building blocks for conjugate
chemistry. These compounds were tethered through a series of alkyl,
piperazine, and other linkers to a diverse range of fluorophore moieties
to synthesize fluorescent conjugates as COX-2-selective fluorescent
imaging agents.

Fluorometry
Steady
state fluorescence excitation and
emission spectra were determined for each compound with a Spex 1681
Fluorolog spectrofluorometer, equipped with a 450 W xenon arc lamp.
The excitation and emission monochromator slit widths were 1–2
mm. The solvent used was pH 7 buffer.

Inhibition Assay Using
Purified COX-1 and COX-2
Inhibition
of purified ovine COX-1 or mouse COX-2 by test compounds was assayed
by a previously described method, which
quantifies the conversion of [1-14C]arachidonic
acid to [1-14C]prostaglandin products. Reaction mixtures
of 200 μL consisted of hematin-reconstituted protein in 100
mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 500 μM phenol, and [1-14C]arachidonic
acid (50 μM, ∼55–57 mCi/mmol, Perkin-Elmer). For
the time-dependent inhibition assay, hematin-reconstituted COX-1
(44 nM) or COX-2 (66 nM) was preincubated at 25 °C for
17 min and 37 °C for 3 min with varying inhibitor concentrations
in dimethylsulfoxide followed by the addition of [1-14C]arachidonic
acid (50 μM) for 30 s at 37 °C. Reactions were
terminated by solvent extraction in diethyl ether/methanol/1 M citrate
buffer, pH 4.0 (30:4:1). The phases were separated by centrifugation
at 2000g for 2 min,
and the organic phase was spotted on a thin-layer chromatography plate
(EMD Kieselgel 60, VWR). The plate was developed in ethyl acetate/methylene
chloride/glacial AcOH (75:25:1) at 4 °C. Radiolabeled
products were quantified with a radioactivity scanner (Bioscan, Inc.,
Washington, DC. The percentage of total products observed at different
inhibitor
concentrations was divided by the percentage of products observed
for protein samples preincubated for the same time with dimethyl sulfoxide.

Cell Culture and In Vitro Intact Cell Metabolism Assay
Inhibition
of COX-2 in intact cells by test compounds was assayed
by a previously described method. Briefly,
RAW264.7,
ATCC TIB-71 murine macrophage-like cells (passage number
8–15, mycoplasma negative by a polymerase chain reaction detection
method) were grown in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM)
+ 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum to 40% confluence (6-well
plates, Sarstedt). The cells were activated for 7 h in 2 mL serum-free
DMEM with 200 ng/mL bacterial lipopolysaccharide (Calbiochem) and
10 U/mL interferon
gamma (Calbiochem) to induce COX-2 expression. Human 1483 head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cells (passage 8–18, mycoplasma
negative by a polymerase chain reaction detection method)
were cultured in DMEM/F12 + 10% fetal bovine serum + antibiotic/antimycotic
in 6-well plates to 60% confluence. Serum-free medium (2 mL) was added,
and the cells were treated with inhibitor dissolved in
DMSO (0–5 μM, final concentration) for 30 min at 37 °C
followed by the addition of [1-14C]-arachidonic acid
[10 μM, ∼55 mCi/mmol] for 20 min at 37 °C. Reactions
were terminated and analyzed by thin layer chromatography
as described above.

Fluorescence Microscopy of 1483 HNSCC Cells
Fluorescence
imaging of human 1483 HNSCC cells by compound 58 was
performed by a previously described method. Briefly, human 1483 HNSCC cells were grown to 60% confluence.
The cells were incubated in 2.0 mL Hank’s balanced salt solution
(HBSS)/Tyrode’s with
200 nM compound 58 for 30 min at 37 °C. The cells
were then washed briefly three times and incubated in
HBSS/Tyrode’s for 30 min at 37 °C. Following the required
washout period, the cells were imaged in
2.0 mL fresh HBSS/Tyrode’s on a Zeiss Axiovert 25 Microscope
with
the propidium iodide filter (0.5–1.0
s exposure, gain of 2). All treatments were performed
in duplicate dishes in at least three separate experiments. To block
the COX-2 active site, the cells were preincubated with 5 or 10 μM
indomethacin for 20 min prior to the addition of the test compound.

Establishment of Xenograft Tumors in Nude Mice
Human
1483 HNSCC cells and HCT116 colorectal carcinoma cells were used to
grow tumor xenografts in nude mice using a previously described method. Female nude mice, NU-Fox1nu, were purchased
at 6–7
weeks of age from Charles River Laboratories. Human 1483 HNSCC cells
and HCT116 colorectal carcinoma cells were
trypsinized and resuspended in cold PBS containing 30% Matrigel such
that 1 × 106 cells in 100 μL were injected subcutaneously
on the left flank. The HCT116 and 1483
xenografts required only 2–3 weeks of growth.

In Vivo Imaging
of Nude Mice with Xenografts
Fluorescence
imaging of tumors by test compounds was performed by a previously
described method. Female nude mice bearing
medium-sized 1483 or HCT116
xenograft tumors on the left flank were dosed by intraperitoneal injection
with 2 mg/kg compound 58. The animals were lightly anesthetized
with 2% isoflurane for fluorescence imaging in the Xenogen IVIS 200
with the DSRed filter at 1.5 cm depth and 1 s exposure (f2).

Results
Synthesis
of Fluorescent COX-2 Inhibitors
The synthesis
of NSAID- or COXIB-diamide imaging agents targeted to COX-2 first
required the conjugation of the carboxylate functional group of the
NSAID or COXIB nucleus to a diamine linker. Diamide linkages were
chosen rather than mixed amide-ester linkages to minimize the potential
for hydrolysis in intact cells or in vivo. Selective amidation of
only one of the two available amino groups present in the diamine
tether necessitated protection of one of the groups. This was accomplished
by the use of the mono tert-butoxycarbonyl (BOC)-protected
alkyldiamine. Reaction of indomethacin with a series of mono BOC-alkyldiamines
in the presence of ethyl-1-[3-(dimethylamino)propyl]-3-ethylcarbodiamide
followed by treatment with HCl (gas) gave the corresponding indomethacin-alkylamine
hydrochloride salts in high yield. Similarly, indomethacin-piperazine
hydrochloride and indomethacin-phenylenediamine hydrochloride were
synthesized by substituting mono BOC-alkyldiamine with mono BOC-piperazine
or mono BOC-phenylenediamine, respectively. For synthesizing indomethacin-polyethylene
glycolyl (PEG) carboxylic acid, t-butyl-PEG4-amine
was used in place of mono BOC-alkyldiamine, followed by deprotection
with trifluoroacetic acid at room temperature. As described above,
other NSAIDs, COXIBs, or appropriate analogs were linked to a chosen
tether (alkyldiamine, PEG, piperazine, or phenylene diamine) to form
the corresponding conjugates having a terminal primary or secondary
amine or a carboxylic acid group. The isothiocyanate, sulfonylchloride,
or succinimidyl ester of the desired fluorophore was conjugated with
the amino group of the tether-linked-NSAID or -COXIB using triethylamine
as a base. Alternatively, formation of a carboxylamide
from the reaction of a carboxylic acid with an amino-group required
either ethyl-1-[3-(dimethylamino)propyl]-3-ethylcarbodiamide or N,N,N,N-tetramethyl-O-(N-succinimidyl)uronium
tetrafluoroborate coupling reactions. Using this general strategy,
5-ROX-acid was activated using N,N,N,N-tetramethyl-O-(N-succinimidyl)uronium tetrafluoroborate in the
presence of triethylamine at room temperature and coupled with the
free amino group of the tether-linked-NSAIDs or COXIBs to afford the
target fluorescent conjugates. All other fluorescent dyes were conjugated
with the respective NSAID or COXIB scaffolds using a similar coupling
strategy in good yields (60–70%). The structure of all compounds
was established by NMR and mass spectrometry. HPLC analyses in two
different solvent systems of all representative fluorescent compounds
indicated a minimum purity of 96.0%. Most of the compounds were in
excess of 98.5% purity. The synthetic procedure and compound characterization
are described in detail in .

Evaluation of Fluorescent COX-2 Inhibitors Using Purified Enzymes
The inhibitory activity of test compounds against ovine COX-1 or
mouse COX-2 was evaluated by a thin layer chromatography assay, as briefly described in .

Indomethacin Conjugates of Blue and Green
Fluorophores
IC50 values for the inhibition of
purified COX enzymes
by test compounds are listed in Table . Compound 1, a conjugate of indomethacin and coumarin tethered through
an ethylenediamide linker, displayed selective COX-2 inhibition (Table ). Chain length extension of the linker group of 1 to higher alkyl homologues or replacement of coumarin with
7-diethylaminocoumarin revealed significant increases in potency and
selectivity against COX-2 (4–5).
For example, the n-butydiamide-conjugate 5 was more potent and selective as a COX-2 inhibitor than 1. Conjugation of organic functionalities (i.e., N,N-dimethylamino cinnamic acid, sulfathiazole, sulfadimethoxine, mycophenolic
acid, or biotin) afforded a series of compounds (6–12), of which the trans-cinnamyl (6) or sulfathiazolyl (7) conjugates displayed potent
and selective COX-2 inhibition. Compared to compounds 6 or 7, the dansyl (13–15) or dabsyl (16–17) derivatives
were more potent and selective for COX-2 inhibition (13, λex = 355 nm, λem = 493 nm).
The n-butydiamide-tethered
nitrobenzoxadiazole (NBD)-conjugate (18) also displayed
selective COX-2 inhibition. However, shortening of the alkyl chain
or incorporation of perphenazine with compounds 19 and 20 showed complete loss of COX inhibitory activity (20, λex = 492 nm, λem =
505 nm). Although a similar loss of COX
activity was observed with fluorescein-conjugates (e.g., 21, 22, 24–26, 29–31), compounds 23, 27, and 28 displayed COX-2 inhibitory activity
to some extent. These results suggested that transformation of indomethacin
into fluorescent conjugates can lead to selective COX-2 inhibition;
however, the length and nature of the tether and the structure of
the fluorophore have a significant impact on the COX inhibitory potential
of the conjugates.

In Vitro Purified COX-1 and COX-2
Enzyme Inhibition Assay Data of Compounds 1—31
IC50 values were determined
as described in . Assays
were run in duplicate.

Indomethacin
Conjugates of Red Fluorophores
The fluorescent
derivatives of indomethacin with alexa fluor, tetramethylrhodamine,
or bis-iodobenzylcarboxyrhodamine (compounds 32–35) showed no COX inhibitory activity,
even at the higher concentrations (Table ).
However, COX-2 inhibitory activity was achieved with the PEG-containing
tetraethyl 5- or 6-sulforhodamine conjugates 36 and 37. Poor COX inhibition was observed with 38 having
an n-pentylsulfonamido n-butyldiamide
linker (36, λex = 571 nm, λem = 593 nm). Selective COX-2 inhibition by
the 5- or 6-ROX derivatives was extremely sensitive to the length
and electronic properties of the linker moieties. For instance, the
5-ROX conjugate 39, containing an ethylenediamide linker,
was a weak inhibitor of COX-2. As the alkyl chain length increased,
COX-2 inhibitory potency and selectivity increased substantially,
with the n-butyldiamide derivative 41 (Fluorocoxib A, λex = 580 nm, λem = 605 nm) exhibiting the best combination
of COX-2 inhibitory potency and selectivity and identified as one
of the most potent derivatives in the series. A further increase in alkyl chain length resulted in
a dramatic reduction in COX-2 inhibitory potency (e.g., 42 and 43). Interestingly, the phenylene derivatives 44 and 45 showed similar potencies to 41. Replacement of the n-butyldiamide linker of compound 41 with a piperazine linker yielded a very weak inhibitor
(46) of COX-2. Likewise, indomethacin-6-ROX conjugates
(47–56), linked through alkyl, piperazine,
or phenylene tethers, showed similar potencies to those of the corresponding
5-ROX conjugates. Notably, the regioisomer 49 (Fluorocoxib
B, λex = 581 nm, λem = 603 nm) exhibited
selective COX-2 inhibition.27 However, fluorescent conjugates 57–64, containing bulkier rhodamine dyes,
showed significantly
lower potency or complete loss of COX-2 inhibitory activity with the
exception of compound 58 (λex = 572
nm, λem = 595 nm), which displayed activity comparable
to the 5- and 6-ROX conjugates. In summary, a four-carbon n-alkyl linker with 5- or 6-ROX provided the best balance
for COX-2 inhibitory activity and selectivity of the fluorescent indomethacin
conjugates.

In Vitro Purified COX-1 and COX-2
Enzyme Inhibition Assay Data of Compounds 32–64
IC50 values were determined
as described in . Assays
were run in duplicate.

Indomethacin
Conjugates of NIR Fluorophores
Conjugation
of a nile blue dye with the carboxylic acid moiety of indomethacin
tethered through a PEG4 linker afforded compound 65 (λex = 618 nm, λem = 670 nm), a perchlorate
salt, which was
identified as a poor COX-2 inhibitor (Table ). A complete loss of COX inhibitory activity was observed with the
Cy5 conjugate 66. Interestingly, the Cy7 conjugate 67 inhibited COX-2 with poor potency, while inhibitory activity
but lack of selectivity was observed with the NIR641 conjugate (68), a chloride salt. No significant COX-2 inhibition was
discernible with the ethyl- or propyldiamide-linked indomethacin conjugates
of NIR664, such as compounds 69 and 70,
respectively. Nonselective COX inhibition was observed with the piperazine-linked
conjugate 71, an inner salt (zwitterion). However, a
complete loss of
COX activity was documented with the higher alkyl homologues (72, 73). A similar loss was observed
with the NIR667 conjugates 74–78 (chloride
salts). Conjugation of indomethacin with NIR700, an inner salt, afforded
the selective COX-2 inhibitor 79 (λex = 710 nm, λem = 731 nm), which contained an n-butyldiamide linker. When the length of the linker was
increased,
conjugates 80–81 showed a dramatic
loss of COX-2 inhibitory activity. Interestingly, a poor potency was
achieved when the n-butyl linker was replaced by
a phenylene-alkyl hybrid linker in compound 82, and no
COX-2 inhibition was observed with the NIR782 or IRDye800 derivatives,
compounds 83 and 84, respectively. A similar
lack of activity was observed with DOTA-, Eu-Quinoline(F)-DOTA-, Eu-Quinoline(CH3)-DOTA-, or Gd-DOTA-derivatives (compounds 85–106), even at very high concentrations (Table ). Thus, conjugation of indomethacin with a zwitterionic
fluorophore tethered through an n-butyldiamide linker
is most suitable to achieve COX-2 inhibitory activity. Highly polar
organic functional groups, such as DOTA, or its analogous lanthanide
chelators, are not suitable for COX-2 inhibitory activity of the conjugates.

In Vitro Purified COX-1 and COX-2
Enzyme Inhibition Assay Data of Compounds 65–84
IC50 values were determined
as described in . Assays
were run in duplicate.

In Vitro Purified COX-1 and COX-2
Enzyme Inhibition Assay Data of Compounds 85–106
IC50 values were determined
as described in . Assays
were run in duplicate.

Fluorescent
Conjugates of Miscellaneous NSAIDs and COXIBs
Lack of isoform
selectivity or complete loss of COX-2 inhibitory
activity was often observed with fluorescent conjugates of NSAIDs
and COXIBs other than indomethacin (Table ). For instance, the iodoindomethacin-5-ROX conjugates 107 and 109 showed no COX-2 selectivity. A complete loss
of COX inhibitory activity was observed with the 5-ROX or NIR664 conjugates 108, 110, and 111. We synthesized O-des-methyl- or 2-des-methyl-indomethacin-5-ROX conjugates 112 and 113, which were selective COX-2 inhibitors. However,
the 2-des-methyl-, N-des-4-chlorobenzoyl-, or N-4-chlorobenzyl-indomethacin and 5- or 6-ROX conjugates 114–117, containing an n-butyldiamide linker, showed no COX-2 inhibition. A loss of COX-2
inhibitory activity was also observed with fluorescent derivatives
of reverse-indomethacin, 118–122. An exception was identified with the reverse-indomethacin-NIR700 conjugate (123), which exhibited
selective COX-2 inhibition with a moderate potency. A complete loss
of COX-2 inhibitory activity was observed with the majority of fluorescent
derivatives of celecoxib, flurbiprofen, or ketoprofen (compounds 124–139). However, conjugation of the
celecoxib analog with nile blue or sulforhodamine (e.g., 124 and 125) resulted in selective COX-2 inhibition with
moderate to poor potencies. The COX-2 inhibitory activity of indomethacin-
or celecoxib-like building blocks (140–152) is delineated in Table . Although the derivatives
of indomethacin and celecoxib, such as iodoindomethacin and carboxypropionyl
celecoxib, retain the COX-2 inhibitory activity of the parent compound,
their fluorescent derivatives were not always COX-2 inhibitors. So,
unlike the parent indomethacin, conversion of indomethacin- or celecoxib-like
molecules into fluorescent amide derivatives does not readily generate
a family of highly selective COX-2 inhibitors.

In Vitro Purified COX-1 and COX-2
Enzyme Inhibition Assay Data of Compounds 107–123
IC50 values were determined
as described in . Assays
were run in duplicate.

In Vitro Purified COX-1 and COX-2
Enzyme Inhibition Assay Data of Compounds 124–152
IC50 values were determined
as described in . Assays
were run in duplicate.

Evaluation of Fluorescent COX-2 Inhibitors in Cell Culture
The ability of fluorescent derivatives to inhibit COX-2 in intact
cells was assayed in activated RAW264.7 macrophages or 1483 HNSCC
cells using previously reported methods, as briefly described in . In this assay, many of the structurally diverse
fluorescent compounds inhibited COX-2 in LPS-activated RAW264.7 cells
with IC50 values in the nanomolar range (Table ). For instance, the IC50 values for
inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis by 41 and 58, were 0.31 and 0.34, μM, respectively. In 1483 HNSCC
cells, which constitutively express COX-2, compounds 41 and 58 retained their COX-2 inhibitory activity with
IC50 values of 0.09 and 0.38 μM, respectively. Thus,
conjugation of an NSAID, indomethacin, with zwitterionic fluorophores,
tethered through an n-butydiamide linker afforded
fluorescent conjugates that were capable of passing through the cell
membrane to inhibit COX-2 effectively.

In Vitro
Cell Line Assay Data of Promising
Compounds
IC50 values were determined
as described in  for
RAW264.7 macrophage-like cells.

IC50 values were determined
as described in  for
human head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), 1483 cells. The
NT designation indicates that cell line assay results were not tested.

In Vitro Optical Imaging
of Cells
The human head and
neck cancer cell line, 1483, which expresses high levels of COX-2, was treated with compound 58. After
washout,
the cells were imaged by fluorescence microscopy and exhibited strong
red fluorescence due to the accumulation of the rhodamine derivative
(Figure A). Preincubation of the cells with
the COX inhibitor indomethacin blocked uptake and labeling of 1483
cells by compound 58 (Figure B). These results are consistent with those reported previously for
compound 41.

Labeling of COX-2-expressing
cells by compound 58.
The experimental protocols are described in . (A) 1483 HNSCC cells treated with 200 nM compound 58 for 30 min. (B) 1483 HNSCC cells pretreated with 5 μM
indomethacin for 20 min prior to compound 58 treatment.

In Vivo Optical Imaging
of Tumor Xenografts
We evaluated
the ability of compound 58 to target COX-2 in human tumor
xenografts. Nude mice bearing 1483 or HCT116 xenograft tumors on the
left flank were dosed by intraperitoneal injection with compound 58 (2 mg/kg). At 60 min postinjection, no fluorescence was
observed in the tumor. Signal was detected in
the COX-2 expressing 1483 tumors starting at 3 h (Figure A). In contrast to the selective uptake of 58 into 1483 xenografts, minimal uptake was observed at 3
h in HCT116 xenografts, a human colon tumor that does not express
COX-2. An ex vivo imaging was performed
to confirm
the in vivo
imaging results and to verify the 1483 tumor signal was due to the
tumor uptake of 58, and not from the nearby normal tissues
or skin. A bright fluorescence signal was detected in the ex vivo
1483 tumor as compared with the HCT116 tumor (Figure C,D). The signal enrichment of 58 in the 1483
tumors compared to HCT116 or contralateral leg muscle was established
to be &gt;10:1 (Figure E). Further, we performed
a COX-2
blocking experiment using indomethacin, in which nude mice with 1483
xenografts were pretreated with either DMSO or indomethacin in DMSO
(2 mg/kg, intraperitoneal) prior to compound 58 dosing
(2 mg/kg, intraperitoneal). At 3 h postinjection, the DMSO-pretreated
mice showed strong
fluorescence in their tumors, as compared to weak signals in the tumors
of the indomethacin-pretreated mice (). So, COX-2 expression in the 1483 tumor seems to be required
for this selective uptake, although other factors besides the level
of COX-2 protein may contribute to the relative enrichment over the
control tissues. This result supports the hypothesis that the difference
in labeling of 1483 and HCT116 xenografts is due to their differential
in COX-2 expression, and confirms those reported previously for compound 41.

In vivo labeling of COX-2-expressing
xenografts by compound 58. (A) Nude mice with 1483 xenograft
(COX-2 positive) or
HCT116 xenograft (B, COX-2 negative) on the left flank were dosed
intraperitoneally with compound 58 (2 mg/kg) and imaged
at 3 h postinjection. (C) Ex vivo fluorescence image of 1483 xenograft
tumor at 4.5 h postinjection of 58. (D) Ex vivo fluorescence
image of HCT116 xenograft tumor at 4.5 h postinjection of 58, showing a significant tumor uptake difference between COX-2 positive
versus COX-2 negative tumor models. (E) Software measurement of light
emission from the 1483 versus HCT116 xenograft tumor at 4.5 h postinjection
of 58, as compared with leg muscle (n = 4). RFU, relative fluorescence units.

Discussion
The present report describes our SAR studies
of fluorescent derivatives
of NSAIDs or COXIBs as COX-2-selective inhibitors. The compounds were
prepared using a conjugate-based strategy. Some, but not all, fluorescent derivatives of NSAIDs
or COXIBs, such as indomethacin or celecoxib, exhibit the ability
to inhibit COX-2 selectively. This is consistent with our observation
that nonselective carboxylic acid-containing NSAIDs can be transformed
into COXIBs
by converting them into amide or ester derivatives. Relatively large fluorophore moieties containing an
alkyl, aryl, aralkyl, polyethylene glycolyl, or heterocyclic esters
or amides of indomethacin or celecoxib exhibit COX-2 inhibitory activity.
It is noteworthy that, among the fluorescent conjugates of NSAIDs
or COXIBs that were evaluated in this study, only indomethacin derivatives
bind tightly to COX-2 without binding to COX-1. Therefore, tethering
fluorescent tags at the carboxylic acid site of indomethacin generates
optical probes that are potent and selective COX-2 inhibitors.

The COX active site is located at the top of a deep channel that
runs from the membrane-binding domain into the catalytic domain. The initial portion of the channel has a large
volume,
termed the lobby, which narrows at the top into a constriction comprising
residues Arg-120, Tyr-355, and Glu-524. These residues must open and close in order for substrates
and inhibitors to pass into or out of the COX active site, which is
located above it. The use of the long alkyl, aryl, phenylene, polyethylene
glycol, or heterocyclic chain allows the indomethacin functionality
to fully insert into the binding pocket of COX-2, while the bulky
fluorescent secondary amide functional group projects through the
constriction at the base of the active site and into the wide lobby
in the membrane-binding domain. This model, which is consistent with
the crystal structure of a complex of COX-2 with a carboxyl chain-extended
analogue of zomepirac, helps to explain
how such large moieties as 5- and 6-ROX
can be conjugated to indomethacin with retention of inhibitory activity.

The systematic evaluation of a large number of conjugates generated
from a wide variety of carboxylic acid-containing core molecules,
tethers, and fluorophores provides some key insights into the structural
requirements for COX-2-selective inhibition. For example, the results
showed that as the number of methylene groups in the alkyl linker
increased from 2 to 4, the inhibitory activity of conjugates was increased
in an ordered fashion. A further increase (n = 5
to n = 14) in methylene groups or incorporation of
additional amide groups in the tether reversed the trend of inhibitory
activity, suggesting that an n-butyl linker was optimal
for selective COX-2 inhibition by these conjugates. In addition, the
activity varied depending on the number of amide-linkages in the chain.
However, hybrid linkers (i.e., alkyl and PEG or alkyl and piperazine)
were tolerated to some extent. The activity of conjugates also depended
on the size and electronic properties of the fluorophores. Fluorophores
having molecular weight of &lt;650 without a charged atom afforded
effective COX-2 inhibitory potencies.
For example, coumarin or dansyl fluorophores are uncharged and have
a molecular weight of &lt;650. Indomethacin-coumarinylamide (5) was a highly potent
and selective COX-2 inhibitor, and as the coumarin fluorophore was
replaced by an uncharged dansyl fluorophore, the extent of COX-2 selectivity
and potency of the conjugate (15) remained unchanged.
In contrast, fluorophores with a favorable molecular weight but containing
a charged atom that ion-pairs with an external oppositely charged
ion afforded indomethacin conjugates (e.g., 74–78) that did not inhibit COX isozymes. Furthermore, conjugating
the polar IRDye800 trisodium salt or polycarboxylic lanthanide chelators
with indomethacin yielded inactive compounds (85–106). Interestingly, zwitterionic fluorophores, such as 5-
or 6-ROX, conjugated with indomethacin through an n-butyl linker afforded selective and potent COX-2 inhibitors (e.g., 41 and 49). ROX fluorophores proved to be the
optimal functional groups for effective COX-2 binding of their conjugates.
Although indomethacin conjugates of dansyl, dabsyl, coumarin, or related
fluorophores exhibited promising COX-2 inhibition in purified protein
and in intact cells, they did not possess fluorescence properties
suitable for in vivo imaging.

Among the compounds that emerged
from our development pathway,
only the 5-ROX- and 6-ROX-based conjugates (linker = n-Butyl) exhibited the necessary combination of adequate photophysical
properties and effective COX-2 inhibitory potencies. As we previously
reported, the 5-ROX and 6-ROX conjugates
(compounds 41 and 49) show great promise
as in vivo imaging agents for inflammation and cancer. Here, we have
expanded those findings, through the demonstration that compound 58 also displays a very high degree of selectivity of uptake
by intact cells in tissue culture and tumors in live animals. The
selective delivery of compound 58 requires the expression
of COX-2 at the target site and is not seen when COX-2 is not expressed.
Thus, these fluorocoxibs are capable of targeting COX-2 in intact
cells and tumors that express COX-2 in both in vitro and in vivo settings.
Thus, conversion of NSAIDs or COXIBs into their fluorescent derivatives
provides a facile strategy for generating effective imaging agents
for detection of COX-2 in premalignant and malignant tumors. Also,
this facile strategy provides proof-of-principle for the development
of COX-2-specific NSAID or COXIB–toxin conjugates (Chemocoxibs)
enabling selective delivery of cytotoxic
agents into neoplastic cells for the treatment of premalignant and
malignant tumors.

Conclusions
We describe the SAR
of a series of optical imaging agents comprising
bulky fluorescent functional groups tethered onto NSAIDs or COXIBs
to create dual function fluorescent COX-2 inhibitors. A wide variety
of fluorescent conjugates were synthesized and evaluated as COX-2-selective
inhibitors against both purified protein and COX-2-expressing human
cancer cells. The SAR study revealed that indomethacin conjugates
afford the best COX-2 inhibitors compared to conjugates of other carboxylic
acid-containing NSAIDs or COXIBs. A four-carbon n-alkyl linker is optimal for conjugating bulky zwitterionic fluorescent
functionalities, such as ROX, to provide the best balance between
selectivity and potency of COX-2 binding. Fluorophores that are metal
or halide salts, such as IRDye800 or NIR667, or organic polycarboxylic
acid-containing functional groups that are highly polar, such as lanthanide
chelators, are not suitable for developing COX-2-targeted imaging
agents.

Supporting Information Available
Full synthetic procedures
and analytical and spectral characterization data of synthesized compounds.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc300693w_si_001.pdf

The authors declare
the following
competing financial interest(s): Drs. Uddin, Crews, and Marnett are
inventors on a patent that describes the synthesis of COX-2-targeted
imaging agents. The patent has been licensed and compounds are being
marketed for use in preclinical experiments.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported
by research grants from the National
Institutes of Health (CA136465, CA128323, CA89450). We are grateful
to H. Charles Manning for assistance with lanthanide chelator synthesis
and Carol Rouzer for critical reading and editing of this manuscript.

Abbreviations
COXcyclooxygenase

SARstructure–activity relationship

NSAIDnonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory
drug

COXIBCOX-2-selective
inhibitor

DMEMDulbecco’s
Modified Eagle Medium

HNSCChead and neck squamous cell carcinoma

BOCtert-butoxycarbonyl

PEGpolyethylene glycol

NIRnear-infrared

DOTA1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane-1,4,7,10-tetraacetic
acid

ROXcarboxy-X-rhodamine

