Introduction
Protein–polymer
conjugates are of great interest due to
their applications in drug delivery, biomaterials, and nanotechnology.− The role of the attached polymer is to enhance existing functions
or introduce new properties to the unmodified protein. For example,
the covalent attachment of poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG), also known
as PEGylation, is commonly used to improve the pharmacological properties
of therapeutic proteins. Site-specific
conjugation is important for retaining bioactivity of the protein,
and therefore development of new conjugation approaches are of high
interest in the field of bioconjugation. Typically site-specific conjugation is achieved by targeting rare
natural amino acids, genetic modifications, or chemically installed
functionalities.−

Other methods have also been used for protein–polymer
conjugation,
such as noncovalent interactions including ligand protein affinity.
Using ligand–protein binding affinity, ligand-modified polymers
can specifically bind to the corresponding protein. This type of conjugation
method has been most commonly used with the biotin–streptavidin
systems.− Another example is cofactor reconstitution, which has been employed
to couple polystyrene to heme-dependent proteins, such as horseradish
peroxidase (HRP) and myoglobin, to form bioactive giant amphiphiles., Recently, our group and others have also utilized the interaction
between glutathione (GSH) and gluthathione S-transeferase
(GST) to form protein–polymer conjugates., However, the major drawback of noncovalent interactions is that
the conjugates are prone to dissociate under charge disruption, heat,
or other denaturing conditions.

GSTs (EC 2.5.1.18) are a family
of enzymes that catalyze the nucleophilic
addition of the thiol of GSH to electrophilic centers in organic compounds
for means of cellular detoxification., There are
several classes of GSTs, but all exhibit similar monomer sizes (23–28
kDa), amino acid sequences, and substrate specificity. They function
as homodimeric or heterodimeric species, with heterodimers only forming
between different subunits belonging to the same class. GSTs have
two active sites per dimer, with each active site separated into two
distinct functional regions: a hydrophilic “G-site”
for recognition of GSH, and an adjacent “H-site” for
binding hydrophobic electrophiles. Due to its specificity to GSH (with
a dissociation constant of kd ∼
10–4 M–1), GST has been commonly integrated into recombinant proteins
to allow for affinity chromatography purification with immobilized
GSH., Herein, we describe an approach to prepare
site selective PEG-GST proteins by light activation of photoreactive
GSH-PEG (Figure ).

Photoaffinity labeling
has been widely used in mapping the active
sites of enzymes and studying protein interactions., A photoaffinity probe contains at least two parts: an affinity unit
and a photoreactive unit. Benzophenone, diazirine, and azide are widely
used photoreactive groups that can generate highly reactive species,
namely, triplet state carbonyls, carbenes, and nitrenes, respectively.
Benzophenone (BP) was selected for study because it has an advantage
in that it is chemically more stable than the other groups or species,
can be manipulated in ambient light, and inserts into unreactive C–H
bonds even in the presence of nucleophilic solvents such as water
and alcohols. Recently, affinity association
followed by photoexcitation of benzophenone has been utilized by Aida
and co-workers to develop “photoclickable molecular glue”
that labels proteins with a fluorescent dendron. Yet there have been no examples of using benzophenone to
form protein–polymer conjugates. We also prepared a GSH analogue
containing a diazirine (DA) moiety. Upon irradiation, diazirine generates
a highly active carbene intermediate that can insert into C–H
bonds within close proximity., In one earlier report,
PEG has been functionalized with diazopyruvate and nitroaryl azide
for protein conjugation, which after photolysis generated carbene
and nitrene, respectively. The reactive species then underwent rearrangements
followed by amine insertion of protein lysine residues or N-terminal
to give PEGylated proteins. However,
the PEGs did not contain a specific affinity tag and highly reactive
carbene and nitrene could also insert into C–H and N–H
bonds, especially without close proximity of the reactive groups.
Described herein is the first example, to our knowledge, of PEGylation
through photoaffinity conjugation.

Schematic overview of the photoaffinity
PEGylation using GSH-BP.

Results and Discussion
Synthesis of GSH-BP
To form an irreversibly
bound,
covalent protein–polymer conjugate, a GSH analogue containing
a photoreactive probe was designed to act as the cross-linking moiety
between GST and the polymer. We hypothesized that the modified polymer
end-group could be directed into the GSH binding pocket of GST through
ligand affinity, and then activated by UV irradiation to form a stable
and irreversible covalent bond. The overall approach was to prepare
a BP labeled GSH and react vinyl sulfone PEG (2K mPEG, 5K mPEG, and
20K mPEG) with the GSH via thiol–ene chemistry. The modified
polymers could then conjugate to GST and a GST fusion protein through
photoactivation (Figure ).

It has been
reported that the γ-glutamyl residue of the GSH tripeptide is
crucial for binding to GST, whereas the C-terminal glycyl carboxylate
is nonessential. Therefore, the design
of our GSH analogue (GSH-BP) replaces the glycine with amino-benzophenone.
The free thiol of cysteine was used as a handle for PEG modification,
and the glutamyl group remained free for GST binding. The GSH-BP was
synthesized by solution phase peptide synthesis. To incorporate the
benzophenone moiety, 4-aminobenzophenone was coupled to Fmoc-Cys(Trt)-OH.
Following Fmoc deprotection and subsequently coupling Boc-Glu-OtBu,
fully protected GSH-BP was obtained. Global deprotection yielded GSH-BP
in 28% overall yield. UV–vis showed λmax =
295 nm; ESI-MS gave the mass +H+ 430.1450 (calculated 430.1392).
(The synthetic scheme and NMR spectrum of each step are provided in  Scheme S1 and Figure S1
through Figure S6.)

Conjugation of GSH-BP to GST
To
confirm GSH-BP attachment
to GST after irradiation, 200 mM GSH-BP was added to 4 mM GST, incubated
on ice for 2 h to allow association, and subsequently irradiated for
30 min with a mercury arc lamp. At the same time, two control samples
were prepared: one without the addition of GSH-BP substrate but with
30 min of UV irradiation, to confirm the integrity of GST after the
irradiation condition. The other was with GSH-BP, but without UV irradiation,
to confirm that irradiation is necessary for GSH-BP binding. The GST
samples were analyzed by MALDI-TOF (Figure ). The peak corresponding to GST without GSH-BP or UV irradiation
showed up as the GST monomer subunit with m/z around 23 300. An increase of mass was observed
only when both GSH-BP and UV irradiation were present. The difference
in mass between the new peak and unmodified GST was 426.74, which
closely corresponded to the mass of GSH-BP (429.14). This confirmed
the covalent attachment of a single GSH-BP to GST after irradiation.

(a) Photoconjugation
of GSH-BP to GST and (b) MALDI-TOF MS results
with or without the presence of GSH-BP or UV irradiation. Only in
the case of addition of GSH-BP and application of UV irradiation was
an increase in mass observed.

The peak intensities of the unmodified GST and modified GST
were
very similar, which could be explained if only one subunit of the
GST dimer was modified. Wang et al. have synthesized a photoaffinity
probe consisting of glutathione and benzophenone, in which benzophenone
acts as the photoreactive group as well as the xenobiotic substrate. They demonstrated that the probe binds to both
the glutathione binding site (G-site) and hydrophobic substrate binding
site (H-site), and reacts specifically with Met-112 of the μ
class GST, isoenzyme 4–4. From experimental and docking results,
they concluded that modification of one subunit prevents the modification
of the other dimer subunit. This would explain the results observed
in the MALDI spectrum, namely, that the GSH-BP covalently binds to
one of the two GSTs in the dimer and subsequently the dimer dissociates
during the mass spectrometry experiment.

Synthesis of GSH-DA
We also synthesized a GSH analogue
containing a diazirine group to compare its photoconjugation efficiency
to GSH-BP. Diazirine was incorporated into the peptide sequence as
an amino acid side chain using commercially available l-photo-leucine
(see  Figure S7 and
S8 for NMR spectra of Fmoc-photo-Leucine). The peptide (GSH-DA) was
synthesized by solid phase synthesis and verified by ESI-MS (see  for Scheme S2). GSH-DA
has a smaller photoreactive group than GSH-BP, and conserves the carboxylic
acid on the original glycine position.

PEG Functionalization with
GSH-BP, GSH-DA, and Controls
Vinyl sulfone-PEG (VS-PEG) was
prepared from three sizes of mPEG,
modifying reported procedures (see  for Scheme S3). Michael
addition of the PEG hydroxyl group to divinyl sulfone yielded monofunctionalized
VS-PEGs (see  Figures
S9–S11 for 1H NMR spectra of 2K, 5K, and 20K VS-PEG).
By comparing the integration of the vinyl peaks to that of the ethylene
glycol peak in 1H NMR, the vinyl sulfone conversion of
2K, 5K, and 20K VS-PEG, was calculated to be 89%, 85%, and 90%, respectively.
GSH-BP was then added to each size of VS-PEG to form the corresponding
size of GSBP-PEG (see  for Scheme S4). GSH-BP is insoluble in water, so it was dissolved
in methanol before addition to a phosphate buffer solution of VS-PEG.
The pH of the reaction mixture was kept at pH 8.0 to avoid side reactions
of vinyl sulfone with the free amine of GSH-BP. The disappearance of vinyl protons was confirmed by 1H NMR after 48 h. GSBP-PEGs were purified by HPLC with gradient
elution of MeOH/H2O or dialysis against water followed
by filtration to remove excess GSH-BP (see  Figures S12–S14 for 1H NMR spectra
of 2K, 5K, and 20K GSBP-PEG). By comparing the integration of the
aromatic protons of benzophenone to the ethylene glycol protons in 1H NMR, the modification ratio of 2K, 5K, and 20K GSBP-PEG,
was calculated to be 94%, 100%, and 95%, respectively. 5K GSDA-PEG
was synthesized in a similar fashion (see  Scheme S5), and the conversion was calculated as
75% (see  Figure
S15 for 1H NMR spectrum).

To confirm the selectivity
and ability of GSBP-PEG to covalently attach to GST, we prepared PEG
with different end-groups, including GSH and BP, as controls (Figure ). 5K GS-PEG, with the affinity probe (GSH), but
not the photoreactive component (BP), was synthesized by conjugating
GSH to VS-PEG through the free thiol of the cysteine moiety, and the
conversion was 86%. 5K BP-PEG, with the photoreactive probe (BP) but
no affinity moiety (GSH), was synthesized via 1-ethyl-3-(3-(dimethylamino)propyl)carbodiimide
(EDC) coupling of mPEG and 4-benzoylbenzoic acid. The end-group conversion
was calculated to be 100% (see  Schemes S6 and S7 for 5K GS-PEG and 5K BP-PEG synthesis, and  for their 1H NMR
spectra).

Chemical structures of GSBP-PEG, GSDA-PEG, GS-PEG, and BP-PEG.

Conjugation of GSBP-PEG
to GST
To investigate the photoinduced
reactivity of GSBP-PEG to GST, a mixture of GSBP-PEG (20 mM) and GST
(0.4 mM) in pH 7.4 D-PBS was irradiated in an ice bath over a period
of 15 min. All subsequent conjugation experiments used the same protocol.
SDS-PAGE analysis demonstrated that the synthesized GSBP-PEGs could
be covalently conjugated to GST, appearing as an additional band with
higher molecular weight above the unconjugated GST band (Figure a). Importantly, no conjugates were observed in
samples that were not exposed to UV irradiation. The conjugation yields
of 2K, 5K, and 20K GSBP-PEG were estimated by quantification of the
band intensities taking into account the dimeric form of GST, and
were calculated to be 52%, 56%, and 76%, respectively (Table ). Various concentrations of protein and polymer
equivalents were then investigated for 5K GSBP-PEG (Table ) and it was found that by increasing the polymer
concentration to 50 equiv and the irradiation time to 30 min keeping
the polymer concentration the same, the yield was increased from 56%
to 74%. Photoaffinity labeling approaches are often limited from their
low efficiencies. Photolysis of benzophenone in protein–protein
cross-linking events or the labeling of peptide binding sites generally
resulted in efficiencies lower than 40%., Recent reports that have utilized benzophenone to covalently conjugate
immunoglobin-binding domains to antibodies showed conjugation yields
of 70% at maximum., Thus, the conjugation yields
of GSBP-PEGs to GST ranging from 52% to 76% are fairly high.

SDS-PAGE of
(a) GSBP-PEG conjugation to GST; (b) comparison between
GS-PEG, 5K GSBP-PEG, and GSDA-PEG; (c) comparison between BP-PEG and
5K GSBP-PEG.

Conjugation
Yields for the Different
PEGs to GST
size	2K	5K	20K	5K	5K	5K	
polymer	GSBP-PEG	GSBP-PEG	GSBP-PEG	GS-PEG	BP-PEG	GSDA-PEG	
conjugation yield	52%	56%	76%	0%	14%	18%	
GST is a protein dimer, and showed
on SDS-PAGE gels as broken subunits. The yield was obtained by dividing
the conjugate percentage on gel by the theoretical maximum yield because
of the dimer (50%).

The
conjugation yield is presented
as an average from three separate SDS-PAGE gels.

Conjugation Yields
for 5K GSBP-PEG
to GST, BSA, Lyz, Ubq, and GST-Ubq at Various Conditions
protein	GST	Ubq	GST-Ubq	
protein conc. (mM)	0.4	0.4	0.4	0.1	0.05	0.05	0.05	0.4	0.4	
polymer (eq)	50	10	5	1	1	5	10	10	10	
UV time (min)	30	30	30	15	15	15	15	15	15	
conj. yield (%)	74	62	54	26	20	54	52	9	36	
protein	BSA	Lyz	
protein
conc. (mM)	0.4	0.4	0.1	0.05	0.05	0.05	0.4	0.4	0.1	0.05	0.05	0.05	
polymer (eq)	10	5	1	1	5	10	10	5	1	1	5	10	
UV
time (min)	30	30	15	15	15	15	30	30	15	15	15	15	
conj.
yield (%)	37	38	16	13	28	24	24	12	4	0	8	12	
The conjugation efficiency is presented
as an average from two separate SDS-PAGE gels.

While the naturally existing GST
dimer is denatured and unfolded
during SDS-PAGE analysis releasing free GST, the band we observe is
based on the molecular weight of one monomer subunit. Therefore, we
also analyzed unmodified GST and its conjugates by native PAGE, because
native gels are run under nondenaturing conditions, and the mobility
of the proteins is based on its charge and hydrodynamic size. However,
the conjugates and protein itself appear as a smear, which makes the
results unsuitable for determination of the conjugation yield (see  Figure S18a for native
PAGE results).

To compare the conjugation efficiency of GS-PEG
and GSDA-PEG to
GSBP-PEG, a mixture of each polymer (20 mM) and GST (0.4 mM) was irradiated
following the previously mentioned protocol. SDS-PAGE analysis demonstrated
that, as expected, GS-PEG does not form any covalent conjugates with
GST after UV irradiation due to the lack of photoreactive group (Figure b). This is exactly what we would expect, since
SDS would disrupt any noncovalent interactions. Surprisingly, GSDA-PEG
only showed a small conjugation yield of 18%, compared to the 56%
conjugation yield of 5K GSBP-PEG (Table ).
Native PAGE analysis was also conducted, and no obvious difference
in the bands was observed in either GS-PEG or GSDA-PEG conjugate after
irradiation (see  Figure S18b for native PAGE). However, the conjugation of GSBP-PEG
was observed as an intense high molecular weight smear. We originally
anticipated that the GSH with the smaller DA group would bind better
than the larger BP group. However, given the results, we propose that
the larger, hydrophobic benzophenone may play an important role in
binding the hydrophobic “H-site” of the binding pocket,
which further increases the binding affinity of GSH-BP to GST.

To confirm that covalent conjugation was not exclusively due to
hydrophobic binding of benzophenone, the photoinduced conjugation
of GSBP-PEG and BP-PEG to GST were compared under the same conditions.
From SDS-PAGE analysis, the conjugation yield of BP-PEG to GST was
calculated as 14%, which is much lower than the 56% yield of GSBP-PEG
(Figure c and Table ). This demonstrates that the GSH binding component is crucial to
the design of the GSH-BP probe. The conjugation results were also
analyzed by native PAGE, and the higher molecular weight smear of
GSBP-PEG conjugate was observed to be significantly more intense than
BP-PEG, which further demonstrates the higher conjugation efficiency
of GSBP-PEG (see  Figure S18c for native PAGE). The conjugation efficiencies of different
sizes of GSBP-PEG, as well as different end-functionalized 5K PEGs,
are summarized in Table .

GSBP-PEG Conjugation
to Other Proteins—BSA, Lyz, Ubq,
and GST-Ubq
In order to investigate the further applicability
of this conjugation method, several proteins including GST were tested
under various conjugation conditions (including protein concentration,
polymer ratio, and irradiation time). First, bovine serum albumin
(BSA, 66.5 kDa) was chosen as a model protein. A mixture of GSBP-PEG
(2K or 5K, 20 mM) and BSA (or GST as a control, 0.4 mM) was irradiated
on ice over a period of 30 min and analyzed by SDS-PAGE. Similar conjugation
efficiency of GSBP-PEG to BSA as to GST was observed, which can be
explained by the known binding effect of benzophenone to the subdomain
IIA hydrophobic cavities of BSA (Figure a). This further strengthens our hypothesis that
GSH-BP is interacting with the hydrophobic binding site (H-site) in
GST. To eliminate this factor, lysozyme (Lyz, 14.4 kDa) was also tested
as a general nonbinding protein (Figure b).
Under conditions of 0.4 mM protein concentration and 30 min of irradiation,
12% and 24% of nonspecific conjugation to Lyz were observed after
adding 5 equiv and 10 equiv of 5K GSBP-PEG, respectively. When protein
concentration, irradiation time, and the polymer ratio were decreased,
the nonspecific conjugation was significantly reduced compared to
GST and BSA under the same conditions down to 0% (Table  and  Figure
S19). These results convey that after photoexcitation, benzophenone
nonspecifically attaches to nonbinding proteins (Lyz) at high protein
concentrations and large excess of GSBP-PEG. Decreasing concentration,
stoichiometry, and irradiation time can reduce the nonspecificity.
The results indicate that polymer concentrations and polymer equivalents
may be identified for each fusion protein to yield conjugation to
the GST tag component only. For example, at 0.05 mM GST and 5 equiv
of polymer the conjugation yield to GST was 54%, while to Lys it was
8%, and 1 equiv of polymer resulted in yields of 20% and 0%, respectively.

SDS-PAGE
of the conjugation of (a) 2K and 5K GSBP-PEG to GST and
BSA, (b) 5K GSBP-PEG to Lyz with different polymer to protein ratios,
and (c) 5K GSBP-PEG to Ubq and GST-Ubq.

To further study the applicability of the approach, the conjugations
of GSBP-PEG to Ubiquitin (Ubq, 8.5 kDa) and GST-tagged Ubq (GST-Ubq,
38.5 kDa) were compared side-by-side, with higher conjugation efficiency
of the fusion protein expected. The important role of the GST tag
in the conjugation of GSBP-PEG to Ubq was demonstrated by SDS-PAGE
analysis (Figure c). The conjugation efficiencies
calculated by the band intensities were 9% for Ubq and 36% for GST-Ubq
(Table ).

From the investigation of
various end-functionalized PEGs to GST,
we have determined that GSH (affinity) and BP (labeling) were both
crucial to the irreversible conjugation of GSH-BP to GST. By the tuning
the concentration, stoichiometry, and irradiation time, the conjugation
yields of 5K GSBP-PEG to GST ranged from 20% to 74%. However, at higher
concentrations, larger excess of polymer, and longer irradiation time,
nonspecific proton abstraction and radical recombination would be
more prone to occur. Investigations of the interactions between GSH-BP
and several other proteins, including BSA, Lyz, Ubq, and GST-Ubq,
were also conducted. Under each condition, the conjugation yields
of GST were clearly higher than that of Ubq and Lyz. As a result,
the described conjugation method should be generally applicable to
other GST-fusion proteins for applications such as therapeutic protein
delivery or construction of macromolecule architectures, provided
the protein does not bind to BP (as demonstrated for BSA). PEGylation
should exclusively occur at the binding site of GST, leaving the major
protein unaffected when the photoconjugation condition is optimized.
Other polymers, macromolecules, or small molecule probes that allow
GSH-BP functionalization are also applicable for site-selective protein
modifications. This would be convenient since many GST-tagged proteins
are produced for purification purposes and then the GST group is removed
post expression and purification prior to PEG conjugation. The approach
reported herein would allow for the GST tag to remain and serve as
the site for polymer conjugation, reducing steps, and cost in the
construction of the protein–polymer conjugates.

Conclusions
Herein, we reported the synthesis of a new GSH analogue containing
a photoreactive benzophenone and analyzed its use for photoinduced
GST fusion protein–PEG conjugation. To test our hypothesis,
different end-functionalized PEGs were synthesized as controls, including
GS-PEG and BP-PEG. Without the addition of both GSH and benzophenone
moieties, conjugation efficiency was significantly reduced. The conjugation
yields of different proteins, including BSA, Lyz, Ubq, and GST-Ubq,
were analyzed. GSBP-PEG nonspecifically conjugates to BSA through
the hydrophobic binding effect with benzophenone, but has less than
10% conjugation efficiency to Lyz and Ubq under controlled conditions.
In other cases, the GST moiety is crucial for the conjugation effect
to occur. The conjugation efficiency of 5K GSBP-PEG ranges from 20%
to 74% for GST. As a result, this system is a light-responsive and
site-selective protein–polymer conjugation that occurs only
after photoexcitation. It is a versatile method, for the GSH analogue
could be attached to any thiol-reactive polymers or substrates, and
other GST-fusion proteins could serve as conjugation targets.

Experimental
Section
Materials
All the reagents and solvents were purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich and Fisher Scientific and used without purification
unless noted otherwise. 4-Aminobenzophenone was recrystallized from
DCM/MeOH = 1/5. GST from equine liver was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
as a lyophilized powder containing salts, and the protein concentration
was determined by its extinction coefficient (ε280 = 47 000 M–1 cm–1) at
280 nm. Polyacrylamide gels for electrophoresis were purchased from
Invitrogen and Bio-Rad. l-Photoleucine was purchased from
Thermo Scientific. Ubiquitin (human, recombinant) GST-tag was purchased
from Enzo Life Sciences.

Instrumentation
NMR spectra were
obtained on Bruker
AV 500 and DRX 500 MHz spectrometers. 1H NMR spectra were
acquired with a relaxation delay of 2 s for small molecules and 30
s for polymers. UV–vis spectroscopy was performed using a Biomate
5 Thermo Spectronic spectrometer or Thermo Scientific NanoDrop 2000
(for small quantities). ESI-MS data were gathered on a Waters LCT
premier with ACQUITY LC. Infrared absorption spectra were recorded
using a PerkinElmer FT-IR equipped with an ATR accessory. Photoreactions
were carried out in a photochemical safety cabinet equipped with a
broadband, medium pressure Ace-Hanocia 7825–34 quartz mercury
arc lamp and ACE Glass Inc. power supply. Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization
time-of-flight mass (MALDI-TOF MS) spectrometry data was gathered
using sinapic acid (SA) as a matrix on an Applied Biosystems Voyager-DE-STR
spectrometer.

Methods
Reaction of GSH-BP with
GST
GST (0.94 μL, 100
mg/mL in Milli-Q H2O) and GSH-BP (1 μL, 86 mg/mL
in MeOH) were added to Milli-Q H2O (8.06 μL) to prepare
a mixture with final concentration of 0.4 mM GST and 20 mM GSH-BP,
containing 10% MeOH for GSH-BP solubility. Upon addition of the GSH-BP
solution to water, a precipitate was observed. The sample was kept
in the dark and incubated on ice for 2 h and then irradiated in an
ice bath for 30 min in the photochemical safety cabinet with a mercury
arc lamp. The crude mixture was purified by centrifugal filtration
(0.5 mL, MWCO 3000) and three washes of H2O. The solution
was then collected and analyzed by MALDI-TOF MS using sinapic acid
as the matrix. Controls were prepared following the same procedure,
but without adding GSH-BP, or without UV irradiation.

General Procedure
of Irradiation Experiments of PEG
With GSBP-PEG as an example,
GST (10 μL, 0.8 mM, 18.64 mg/mL
in pH 7.4 D-PBS) and GSBP-PEG (10 μL, 8 mM, 40 mg/mL in Milli-Q
H2O) were combined to prepare a 20 μL mixture with
final concentration of 0.4 mM GST and 4 mM GSBP-PEG. The concentration
of GST was ascertained by UV–vis measurement of A280 using
ε = 47 000 M–1 cm–1. The mixture was kept in the dark and incubated on ice for 2 h to
allow polymer association. An aliquot (10 μL) was transferred
into a disposable UV cuvette and irradiated on ice bath for 15 min
in the photochemical safety cabinet, while the other 10 μL was
kept in the dark on ice as a control without UV irradiation. The samples
were then directly analyzed by SDS-PAGE (200 V, 35 min) and/or native
PAGE (100 V, 3.5 h) with Bio-Rad Any kD precast polyacrylamide gels
(or Invitrogen 4–12% precast polyacrylamide gels). Coomassie
was used to stain the protein, and iodine was used to stain PEG. All control experiments with other proteins
(BSA and Lyz) and different PEGs (GS-PEG, GSDA-PEG, and BP-PEG) were
conducted following the same procedure.

Analysis of Conjugation
Yield
The SDS-PAGE gels were
scanned with an Epson Perfection 2480 scanner as tiff images, and
analyzed with the ImageJ software. Each lane was selected by the rectangular
selection tool, and plotted with the gel analysis function. The percentage
peak area of the conjugate divided by the sum of the conjugate and
unmodified protein is the conjugation efficiency (conjugation yield).
In the cases of GST and GST-Ubq, the conjugate percentage was divided
by the theoretical maximum yield (50%) considering the dissociation
of the protein dimer.

Supporting Information Available
Synthesis and characterization
of the photoreactive probes (GSH-BP and GSH-DA) and all modified polymers,
and results of additional photoconjugation experiments. This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc500380r_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the National Science Foundation (CHE-1112550).
E.-W. L. thanks the 2014 Cram Fellowship for funding. N.B. thanks
the NIH Biotechnology Training Fellowship (5T32 GM06755509) for funding.
AV 500 NMR was supported by National Science Foundation under equipment
grant number CHE-1049904.

Abbreviations
BPbenzophenone

BSAbovine serum albumin

Cyscysteine

DAdiazirine

DCMdichloromethane

D-PBSDulbecco’s phosphate
buffer saline

EDC1-ethyl-3-(3-(dimethylamino)propyl)carbodiimide

ESI-MSelectrospray ionization mass
spectrometry

Gluglutamic acid

GSHglutathione

GSTglutathione S-transferase

HPLChigh performance liquid chromatography

HRPhorseradish peroxidase

Lyzlysozyme

MALDI-TOFmatrix-assisted
laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight

MeOHmethanol

NMRnuclear magnetic resonance

PAGEpolyacrylamide gel electrophoresis

PEGpoly(ethylene glycol)

SDSsodium dodecyl
sulfate

SAsinapic
acid

Ubqubiquitin

VSvinyl sulfone

