Introduction
The glycome, the complete
set of glycans produced by a cell, is
a dynamic indicator of the cell’s physiology. Changes in the
glycome reflect the changes in the cell’s developmental stages
and transformation state of the cell. It
has been heavily documented that aberrant glycosylation patterns,
including both the under- and overexpression of naturally occurring
glycans, as well as neoexpression of glycans normally restricted to
embryonic tissues, are a hallmark of the tumor phenotype., The ability to visualize and monitor these changes in cells and
in tissue samples would advance our understanding of the detailed
roles of glycans in these diseases and provide new diagnostic tools
for their treatment.

Monitoring the kinetics of glycan biosynthesis
and recycling has
been an attractive topic for glycobiologists over many years.− Previous studies on this subject relied heavily on metabolic labeling
with radiolabeled monosaccharides to follow the turnover of cell-surface
glycoconjugates. This method is cumbersome and requires lengthy detection
periods (1–2 days). To accurately
monitor dynamic synthesis of glycoconjugates, more sensitive and efficient
methods are required.

The nonradioactive detection of glycans
has recently been enabled
using a bioorthogonal chemical reporter strategy. Using this methodology, cells or organisms are first treated
with a monosaccharide building block bearing a chemically reactive
tag. The modified monosaccharide, when taken up by cells and metabolized,
is incorporated into cell-surface glycoconjugates. The bioorthogonal
chemical tag then allows covalent conjugation with fluorescent probes
for visualization and analysis. The two most popular bioorthogonal
reactions to date are the Cu(I)-catalyzed azide–alkyne cycloaddition
(CuAAC), and strain-promoted copper-free click chemistry,, the former being 10–100 times faster than the latter in aqueous
solutions., CuAAC is a ligand accelerated
process—ligands that stabilize the Cu(I) oxidation state in
aqueous solutions can dramatically speed up this reaction.− As discovered by Fokin and co-workers, the Cu(I)-catalyzed cycloaddition
is initiated by the formation of a Cu(I) acetylide intermediate, which
is then followed by the approach of a second Cu(I) to generate a dinuclear
copper intermediate a (Scheme A). Based on this mechanistic rationale,
organic azides bearing a Cu(I)-chelating motif could facilitate the
coordination of the second Cu(I) species and further accelerate the
CuAAC reaction. Indeed, pioneering work done by the Zhu− and the Ting laboratories have showed
that 2-(azidomethyl)pyridine derivatives could accelerate the CuAAC
reaction 4–6-fold in the presence of a tris(triazolylmethyl)amine-based
ligand compared to reactions using nonchelating azides in in vitro
model systems. Ting et al. further showed that one of such 2-(azidomethyl)pyridine
derivatives can be processed by an engineered Escherichia
coli lipoic acid ligase for site-specific labeling
of membrane proteins via CuAAC; they also showed that the same azide
can be conjugated to Alexa Fluor 647 to label RNA molecules in fixed
cells. To our knowledge, however, this
chelating azide-assisted CuAAC has never been utilized to study other
biological processes such as post-translational modification; the
detection of post-translationally modified proteins in cellular systems
represents one of the most exciting and powerful applications of bioorthogonal
chemistry.

Organic Azides with a Cu(I)-Chelating Motif Can Further
Accelerate
the Ligand-Assisted CuAAC
(A) Mechanistic
rationale
of CuAAC. (B) Fluorogenic assay for the qualitative measurement of
the kinetics of CuAAC. Reaction conditions: potassium phosphate buffer
(100 mM, pH 7.0), 2-ethynylbenzo[d]thiazole (50 μM),
azide (25 μM), Cu-BTTPS (25 μM: 50 μM), sodium ascorbate
(2.5 mM). (C) Triazole conversion at various time points.

In the work presented here, we examined a small library
of azide
probes bearing an internal chelating motif to identify the probe with
the best kinetic behavior. By combining this new probe with the Cu(I)-stabilizing
ligand 3-[4-({bis[(1-tert-butyl-1H-1,2,3-triazol-4-yl)methyl]amino}methyl)-1H-1,2,3-triazol-1-yl]propyl
hydrogen sulfate (BTTPS), and 3-(4-((bis((1-tert-butyl)-1H-1,2,3-triazol-4-yl)methyl)amino)methyl)-1H-1,2,3-triazol-1-yl)-propan-1-ol
(BTTP), the unsulfated version of BTTPS, we developed the fastest protocol of CuAAC to date. Using this protocol,
we evaluated the detection limit of CuAAC semiquantitatively for labeling
a single-alkyne containing protein in crude cell lysates and for labeling
glycans on the cell surface for the first time. We discovered that
this new protocol is at least 5-fold more sensitive than the one using
a nonchelating azide in a Western blot-based detection; as low as
30 ng of protein could be detected in the new reaction system. Furthermore,
a combination of the chelating azide and BTTPS afforded 20–38-fold
enhancements in fluorescent labeling of alkyne-tagged glycans on the
cell surface compared to that provided by using BTTPS alone. The new
probe enabled us to monitor the dynamic glycan biosynthesis in mammalian
cells and in zebrafish early embryogenesis. Our results revealed that
cellular uptake and conversion of a monosaccharide building block
into cell-surface glycoconjugates takes place within minutes.

Results
and Discussion
Evaluating Rate Acceleration of the Chelating
Azide-Assisted
CuAAC Using a Fluorogenic Assay
Studies by the Zhu and the
Ting laboratories showed that an azide with an internal chelating
motif, e.g., picolyl azide 3, can accelerate CuAAC substantially.
Inspired by these precedents, we synthesized five picolyl azide analogues
and evaluated how electron-donating groups introduced to the pyridine
ring impact the rate acceleration of the cycloaddition reaction. We
monitored the progress of CuAAC using a fluorogenic alkyne—2-ethynylbenzo[d]thiazole, whose fluorescence is activated upon the cycloaddition
reaction (Scheme B). The cycloaddition reaction was performed in aqueous solution in
the presence of BTTPS. Our previous work
showed that when coordinating with the in situ generated Cu(I), BTTPS
and its analogue 2-[4-({bis[(1-tert-butyl-1H-1,2,3-triazol-4-yl)methyl]amino}methyl)-1H-1,2,3-triazol-1-yl]acetic acid (BTTAA) provided the fastest and most biocompatible catalytic systems for
CuAAC-mediated bioconjugation in live cells and living organisms.
Under the reaction conditions specified in Scheme B, picolyl azide 4 exhibited the fastest kinetics
and generated the desired triazole product with a 4-fold and nearly
3-fold higher yield during a 5- and 60-min reaction course, respectively,
as compared to that of the azide 3 reported by Ting and
co-workers (Scheme C). Interestingly, no rate acceleration was observed when azide 5 was used as the cycloaddition partner, presumably due to
protonation of the tertiary amine under neutral pH conditions, converting
it from an electron-donating group into an electron-withdrawing motif
(Figure S2, ).

Evaluating the Sensitivity of Chelating Azide-Assisted CuAAC
in the Detection of a Single Alkyne-Tagged Protein in Cell Lysates
With the best performing azide identified, we first evaluated its
activity toward the detection of a single alkyne-tagged protein in
a complex protein mixture. We constructed an alkyne-tagged bovine
serum albumin (BSA-alkyne), in which a single terminal alkyne group
was introduced into cysteine34. The BSA-alkyne
was mixed with the lysates of Jurkat cells, a human T lymphocyte cell
line, in various weight ratios. The protein mixtures were then reacted
with the conventional biotin azide probe 6 (Click Chemistry
Tools, Cat. No. AZ104-25), or the new biotin azide probe 7, derivatized from the picolyl azide 4, in the presence
of BTTP, and in situ generated Cu(I) ([BTTP]:[Cu] = 2:1), the catalytic
system designed for the CuAAC-mediated bioconjugation in crude cell
lysates for proteomics analysis. After
a 1 h reaction, the protein mixtures were resolved by SDS polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and probed with an anti-biotin horseradish
peroxidase (HRP). As quantified by ImageJ, biotin azide 7 afforded 2-fold stronger signal than biotin azide 6, when 200 ng BSA-alkyne was presented in the cell lysates (Lane
3 vs Lane 2; Figure B). It was also capable
of detecting low levels of dimeric BSA present in the protein mixtures,
which was beyond the detection limit of the conventional biotin probe 6 (BSA dimerization is irreversible between pH 4.2 and 7.0
even after treatment with DTT). When
only 50 ng of BSA-alkyne was included in the protein mixture, biotin
azide probe 6 was not capable of detecting its presence,
whereas biotin azide 7 still provided a robust signal
(Lane 5 vs Lane 6; Figure B). As shown in
Figure C, we discovered that biotin azide 7 was capable of detecting BSA-alkyne as low as 30 ng, whereas
the detection limit of biotin azide probe 6 is approximately
150 ng (Figure S3, ). To our knowledge, this study represents the first rigorous characterization
of the detection limit of CuAAC in a complex protein mixture, paving
the way for using this powerful chemistry to quantitatively analyze
the dynamics of glycan biosynthesis.

Comparison of the efficiency of biotin
azide probes functionalized
with and without a Cu(I)-chelating motif for labeling a BSA-alkyne
in a mixture of cell lysates. (A) Chemical structures of biotin azide 6 and 7. (B) Comparison of the efficiency labeling
the BSA-alkyne in cell lysates using biotin azide 6 and 7. (C) Evaluation of the detection limit of biotin azide 7 for labeling the BSA-alkyne in cell lysates.

Monitoring the Dynamic Glycan Synthesis in
Live Cells
After the sensitivity of the new biotin probe
was verified, we decided
to explore its application toward monitoring dynamic glycan biosynthesis
in cultured mammalian cells. The first question we chose to address
was: how long does it take for a monosaccharide to be imported and
incorporated into cell-surface glycoconjugates?

Toward this
goal, we cultured Jurkat cells in media supplemented with peracetylated N-(4-pentynoyl) mannosamine (Ac4ManNAl), an alkyne-tagged
metabolic precursor of sialic acid (Figure A).− Peracetylation enhances the cellular uptake of the
unnatural sugar., Once entering the cytoplasm,
the ester groups in Ac4ManNAl are hydrolyzed by nonspecific
esterases to release the free sugar that enters the sialic acid biosynthetic
pathway, which allows for the metabolic incorporation of the alkyne
tag into membrane sialylated glycoconjugates for their detection via
CuAAC. A recent study from Lavis’s group showed that cytosolic
esterases have high activity toward straight-chain esters and the
hydrolyzed products of those esters can be detected within 30 min
in different cell lines tested. However,
it remained to be discovered how fast the unprotected unnatural precursor
could be converted into the corresponding sialic acid analogue and
integrated into cell-surface glycans. To answer this question, we
first determined the sensitivity of the new biotin azide probe 7 in the detection of cell-surface alkyne-tagged sialic acids
(SiaNAl) introduced by metabolic labeling (Figures S4–5, ). We cultured Jurkat cells
in media with various doses of Ac4ManNAl for 21 h before
reacting with biotin-azide 7 in the presence of the BTTPS-Cu(I)
catalyst ([BTTPS]:[Cu] = 5:1), the catalytic system designed for live
cell bioconjugation. The treated cells were then probed with an Alexa
Fluor 488-conjugated streptavidin (streptavidin-488) and analyzed
by flow cytometry. As shown in Figure A, as
low as 1 nM Ac4ManNAl could yield a detectable signal after
a 21 h incubation, even at 25 μM Cu(I) concentration. In addition,
similar experiments were performed to compare the efficiency of biotin-azide 7 with that of biotin-azide 6. In these experiments,
cells were incubated with Ac4ManNAl (50 μM) for 72
h before reacting with 6 and 7 for 30 s
to 5 min in the presence of the BTTPS-Cu(I) catalyst. We observed
20–38-fold enhancements in cell-associated fluorescent signal
when biotin-azide 7 was used vs biotin-azide 6 (Figure B). Thus, the new biotin 7 is a significantly superior probe for the detection of alkyne-tagged
glycans in live cells.

Monitoring the kinetics of sialic acid biosynthesis in
mammalian
cell lines. (A) Sialic acid biosynthetic pathway. Metabolic conversion
of Ac4ManNAl into a cell surface sialoside proceeds by
the sequential action of nonspecific esterases (a), ManNAc 6-kinase
(b), sialic acid 9-phosphate synthase (c), sialic acid 9-phosphatase
(d), CMP-sialic acid synthetase (e), CMP-sialic acid Golgi transporter
(f), and sialyltransferases (g). Monitoring the kinetics of sialic
acid biosynthesis in Jurkat cells using (B) Ac4ManNAl (50
μM) and (C) SiaNAl (1.5 mM) as the metabolic precursor. (D)
Monitoring the kinetics of sialic acid biosynthesis in CHO cells using
SiaNAl (2 mM) as the metabolic precursor. Data shown in (D) were obtained
using biotin azide 7.

Sensitivity of biotin azide 7 for labeling alkyne-tagged
glycans on the cell-surface of live cells. (A) Evaluation of the detection
limit of biotin azide 7 for labeling the metabolically
incorporated SiaNAl on the cell-surface of live Jurkat cells. Jurkat
cells were incubated in RPMI medium containing 50 μM Ac4ManNAl for 21 h. The treated cells were reacted with biotin
azide 7, probed by streptavidin-488, and the cell-associated
MFI was quantified by flow cytometry. The two asterisks indicate a
statistically significant difference from control group (p-value &lt;0.01). (B) Comparison of the reactivity of biotin azides 6 and 7 in the labeling of metabolically incorporated
SiaNAl on the cell-surface of live Jurkat cells. Jurkat cells were
incubated in RPMI medium containing 50 μM Ac4ManNAl
for 72 h. The treated cells were reacted with biotin azides 6 or 7 for 30 s to 5 min, probed by streptavidin-488,
and the cell-associated MFI was quantified by flow cytometry.

To monitor the conversion of Ac4ManNAl into the corresponding
sialic acid analogue and its integration into cell-surface glycans,
we incubated Jurkat cells with 50 μM Ac4ManNAl. At
various time intervals, we washed the cells, and reacted them with
biotin azide probes 6 and 7 in the presence
of the BTTPS-Cu(I) catalyst. After a 5-min reaction, we quenched the
reaction with bathocuproine disulfonate (BCS), incubated the cells
with streptavidin-488, and then quantified the mean fluorescence intensity
(MFI) of the treated cells using flow cytometry analysis. Strikingly,
with biotin azide 7 we were able to detect an increase
in cell-associated fluorescence as early as 75 min after the cells
were treated with Ac4ManNAl. By contrast, no increase in
fluorescence could be detected until 45 min later when biotin azide 6 was used (Figure B). Because 30
min is estimated for a peracylated molecule to diffuse across the
plasma membrane and its ester protecting groups to be hydrolyzed by
nonspecific esterases, our results showed that it takes approximately
another 45 min to convert the liberated ManNAl into the alkyne-bearing
sialic acid and to incorporate it into cell surface glycans.

To confirm this result, we treated Jurkat cells with N-pentynoyl-neuraminic acid (SiaNAl) directly as the metabolic precursor
to determine if similar or less time was required for the cells to
generate an alkyne-dependent fluorescent signal. Previous studies
showed that when sialic acid or its analogues were used directly as
metabolic precursor, millimolar concentrations were required to achieve
robust incorporation and metabolic remodeling of cell-surface sialylated
glycoconjugates. Accordingly, we incubated
Jurkat cells with 1.5 mM of SiaNAl. At various time intervals, we
repeated the click labeling protocol and analyzed the MFI of the treated
cells using flow cytometry. As shown in Figure C, the alkyne-dependent fluorescent signal could be detected at as
early as 30 min after the cells were treated with the unnatural sugar,
and the fluorescence intensity increased gradually over the time increments.

To validate that the observed increase in cell-associated fluorescence
was indeed generated by the metabolically incorporated alkyne sugar,
we repeated the same experiments using the Lec2 Chinese hamster ovary
(CHO) cell mutant. The Lec2 mutant has a defect in its CMP-sialic
acid Golgi transporter; thus, it does not produce any sialylated species
on its cell surface. In control experiments,
wild-type CHO cells with the normal sialic acid biosynthetic machinery
were used. Analysis of the treated cells by flow cytometry revealed
an increase in MFI for the wild-type CHO cells at 30 min after the
cells were subjected to SiaNAl. By contrast, Lec2 mutants only showed
background fluorescence even after a 2 h incubation (Figure D). Taken together, these results confirmed that
the cell-associated fluorescence was produced by the metabolically
incorporated alkyne-bearing SiaNAl.

To determine the minimum
amount of time required for cells to be
subjected to a metabolic precursor to produce modified cell-surface
glycans that could be detected by click chemistry, we performed a
pulse-chase experiment, in which Jurkat cells were treated with Ac4ManNAl (50 μM) for 1, 5, or 10 min before cells were
washed and transferred to the culture medium without the unnatural
sugar. At 21 h post treatment with Ac4ManNAl, we performed
the CuAAC-mediated biotin labeling and analyzed the MFI of the treated
cells using flow cytometry. A significant increase in cell-associated
fluorescence could be detected even for cells that were only subjected
to Ac4ManNAl for 1 min (Figure A). Through analysis of this experimental group at various time intervals,
we discovered that the alkyne-dependent fluorescent signal could be
detected as early as 3 h and the fluorescent intensity reached the
maximum the latest at 24 h post treatment (Figure B, red line). Next, we performed a pulse-chase experiment,
in which Jurkat cells were pulse labeled with Ac4ManNAl
for 1 min, then chased with the azide-containing ManNAc analogue,
peraceylated N-azidoacetyl mannosamine (Ac4ManNAz) (50 μM). As shown in the blue line of Figure B, no significant increase in alkyne-dependent florescence
could be detected as assayed by flow cytometry at various time points
post the Ac4ManNAz treatment. Nevertheless, an azide-dependent
fluorescence was observed as early as 90 min after the cells were
switched to the Ac4ManNAz-supplemented media (Figure C). These findings suggest that the concentration
of the endogenous sialic acid precursor is so low that it can be readily
perturbed using exogenously supplemented analogs—even a 1 min
treatment can produce a dramatic effect to remodel the cell-surface
sialylated glycans.

Monitoring the cellular uptake and metabolism of peracetylated
ManNAc derivatives in Jurkat cells. (A) Monitoring the cellular uptake
and metabolism of Ac4ManNAl in Jurkat cells by treating
cells with 50 μM Ac4ManNAl for 1, 5, or 10 min, followed
by growing the cells in Ac4ManNAl-free medium for 5 or
21 h. (B) Monitoring the cellular uptake and metabolism of peracetylated
ManNAc derivatives in Jurkat cells by a pulse-chase labeling. Pulse,
Ac4ManNAl (50 μM, 1 min); Chase, Ac4ManNAl-free
medium with or without the addition of Ac4ManNAz. The red
curve represents the alkyne-dependent MFI at various time intervals
when chasing with an unnatural sugar-free medium. The blue curve represents
the alkyne-dependent MFI at various time intervals when chasing with
50 μM Ac4ManNAz. (C) Monitoring the cellular uptake
and metabolism of Ac4ManNAz in Jurkat cells that are treated
with Ac4ManNAl (50 μM, 1 min) followed by Ac4ManNAz (50 μM) treatment. The curve shows azide-dependent
fluorescence at various time intervals. Data shown in (A) and (B)
were obtained using biotin azide 7.

Imaging Fucosylated Glycans in Zebrafish Early Embryogenesis
Finally, we monitored the kinetics of glycan biosynthesis in living
organisms by using the zebrafish embryo as a model system, taking
advantage of its transparency and external development. Previously,
we demonstrated that microinjection of an alkyne-tagged GDP-fucose
analogue, GDP-L-6-ethynylfucose (GDP-FucAl), into the yolk of zebrafish embryos at the one-cell stage allowed
the nucleotide sugar to disperse into daughter cells and to be incorporated
into cell-surface fucosylated glycoconjugates. Using the biocompatible
CuAAC, the alkyne-tagged glycans could be detected as early as the
blastula period (2.5 h post fertilization (hpf)). With the new, rate-accelerating azide in hand, we hypothesized
that the newly synthesized glycans could be detected at earlier developmental
stages.

Toward this end, we microinjected zebrafish embryos
with GDP-FucAl at the one-cell stage. Following the synchronous cell
divisions at the 2-, 4-, and 8-cell stages, which take place every
15–20 min and during which new membranes are delivered preferentially
to the cleavage furrows, we fixed the embryos with paraformaldehyde—the
fragile nature of early stage embryos prevented their direct treatment
with the copper catalyst and extensive washing. We then reacted the
treated embryos with azide 4 conjugated Alexa Fluor 488
(8) in the presence of the BTTPS-Cu(I) catalyst, which
allowed us to visualize the newly synthesized glycans via fluorescence
microscopy. Fluorescently labeled fucosides could be detected as early
as the 2-cell stage with the most intense staining pattern observed
at the newly formed membrane junctions (Figure A). When the embryos underwent further division to enter the 4-cell
stage, the newly formed membrane junctions marked by the labeled fucosides
emerged perpendicularly to the membrane formed at the 2-cell stage
(Figure B). This distribution reflects the
sites where new cell surface is secreted to promote cell cohesion
during early embryogenesis. In a control
experiment, we incubated embryos in medium supplemented with the AurB
inhibitor ZM2 immediately after microinjection with GDP-FucAl. Consistent
with a previous report, ZM2 caused a delay or a complete failure in
furrow formation (Figure D). Upon labeling, no 488 fluorescence was observed on the
cell-surface at 2 hpf; detectable fluorescence only accumulated in
the cytoplasm as revealed by confocal microscopy analysis. To our
knowledge, this was the first time that the newly synthesized glycans
were detected at the cleavage period (0.75–2 hpf) using bioorthogonal
chemistry. Our observation suggests that glycan addition likely contributes
to the mechanisms allowing these otherwise nonadhesive cells to cohere
following cell division.

Monitoring the kinetics of fucoside biosynthesis
in zebrafish embryos.
Zebrafish embryos were microinjected with GDP-FucAl at the one-cell
stage. At (A) 2-, (B) 4-, (C) 8-cell stages, and (D) 2 hpf of ZM2
treated embryos, embryos were fixed and reacted with Alexa Fluor 488
azide 8, and imaged using confocal microscopy. First
row, side views of live embryos at time points equivalent to 2-, 4-,
and 8-cell stages and 2 hpf of ZM2 treated embryos. Rows 2–4:
animal pole views of fixed embryos labeled with 488. Nuclei were stained
with Hoechst 33342.

Conclusion
In
summary, by examining a small library of azides bearing an internal
Cu(I)-chelating motif, we have identified a picolyl azide derivative
that, when combined with the BTTPS-Cu(I) or BTTP-Cu(I) catalyst, provides
the fastest reaction kinetics for a CuAAC to date. We discovered that
this new protocol is at least 5-fold more sensitive than the one using
the conventional, nonchelating azide and BTTP-Cu(I) in detecting a
single-alkyne containing
protein in crude cell lysates by Western blot. Therefore, the accelerating
azide probe, as well as the new CuAAC protocol, represents an important
contribution to the chemical biologist’s toolbox, which will
permit enrichment of proteins with nanogram abundance for the analysis
of their expression changes in a dynamic process or their ligand binding.

With this supersensitive reaction, we were able to follow the kinetics
of sialic acid biosynthesis in cultured cells using as low as 1 nM
metabolic precursor. We discovered that it takes approximately 30
and 45 min, respectively, for the alkyne-bearing SiaNAl and ManNAl
to be converted into cell-surface sialylated glycoconjugates. Using
zebrafish embryos as a vertebrate model, we discovered that the labeled
fucosides could be observed as early as the 2-cell stage, and the
newly synthesized glycans accumulate in the cell membrane junctions
where new membranes are secreted. Currently, we are exploring if the
optimized CuAAC protocol could be extended to track the early stages
of glycan biosynthesis in the Golgi apparatus and to label glycoproteins
in mice models.

Experimental Section
Chemical Synthesis
Detailed methods and characterization
can be found in the .

Comparison of the Efficiency of Biotin Azide 7 and
Biotin Azide 6 for Labeling BSA-Alkyne in a Mixture of
Cell Lysates (Figure )
BSA-alkyne
was synthesized by reacting BSA (100 μM) with acetylene-PEG4-maleimide
(Click Chemistry Tools, Cat. No. TA104–25) (2 mM) in PBS overnight
at 4 °C. Excess acetylene-PEG4-maleimide was removed by dialysis
against PBS using a 10 kD molecular weight cutoff cellulose membrane.

Jurkat cell lysates were prepared by lysing 10 million cells in
200 μL lysis buffer containing 1% NP-40, 100 mM sodium phosphate
(pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, and Roche protease inhibitor cocktail (EDTA
free). Cell lysates were fast-frozen and thawed five times, and centrifuged
at 15 000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. Supernatants
were transferred to a new tube.

BSA-alkyne (200 ng, 50 ng, 40
ng, or 30 ng) was mixed with Jurkat
cell lysate (20 μg). To the protein mixtures were added biotin
azide 7 or biotin azide 6 (100 μM),
a mixture of the BTTP-CuSO4 catalyst ([BTTP]:[CuSO4] = 2:1, [CuSO4] = 250 μM) and sodium ascorbate
(2.5 mM) in a total volume of 20 μL. After incubating at 25
°C for 1 h, the reaction mixtures were resolved by SDS-PAGE.
The samples were transferred to nitrocellulose, and incubated for
1 h at room temperature in blocking buffer (5% nonfat milk in TBST
(Tris buffered saline with 0.1% Tween-20, pH 7.5)). The blocked membrane
was incubated for 1 h at room temperature with an HRP–anti-biotin
antibody (1:100 000 dilution) in blocking buffer, washed with
1× TBST (3×, 15 min/wash) and developed using SuperSignal
West Pico Chemiluminescent Substrate (Pierce). X-OMAT LS film (Kodak)
was used to detect the chemiluminescence.

Detection of Cell Surface
Glycans by Metabolic Labeling and
Flow Cytometry Analysis (Figures , , and )
For the
experiments of monitoring the sialic acid biosynthesis in live cells
(Figure ), Jurkat cells were seeded at 0.5
million/mL in untreated RPMI or RPMI medium containing 50 μM
Ac4ManNAl or 1.5 mM SiaNAl for different time periods.
CHO cells (wild-type and Lec2, seeded at 0.5 million/mL) were cultured
in suspension in untreated α-Minimum Essential medium or medium
containing 2 mM SiaNAl for different time periods. For the experiments
monitoring the sensitivity of biotin azide 7 for labeling
alkyne-tagged glycans in live cells (Figure A), Jurkat cells (seeded at 0.5 million/mL) were incubated in untreated
RPMI or RPMI medium containing various concentrations of Ac4ManNAl for 21 h. For the CuAAC labeling efficiency evaluation experiment
(Figure B), Jurkat cells were seeded at 0.15
million/mL and incubated for 3 days in untreated RPMI or RPMI medium
containing 50 μM Ac4ManNAl. For the pulse-chase experiments
of tracking alkyne-modified or azide-modified sialic acid expression
on the surface of live cells (Figure ), Jurkat
cells (seeded at 0.5 million/mL) were incubated in 1 mL RPMI medium
containing 50 μM Ac4ManNAl for various times. Then
the cells were pelleted, washed 2× with RPMI medium, and resuspended
in 2 mL untreated RPMI medium or RPMI medium containing 50 μM
Ac4ManNAz, and allowed to grow for various times.

The metabolically labeled cells were harvested and washed 2×
with labeling buffer (PBS, pH 7.4, 1% FBS), and were transferred into
a 96-well round-bottom tissue culture plate (0.4 million cells in
90 μL/well) (Corning Inc.). To each well were added the following
reagents in order: 50 μM biotin azide 7 or biotin
azide 6 or biotin-PEG4-alkyne (Click Chemistry Tools,
Cat. No. TA105–25), the BTTPS-CuSO4 complex ([BTTPS]:[CuSO4] = 5:1, [CuSO4] = 50 μM), and 2.5 mM sodium
ascorbate. After reaction for 5 min (Figures , A, and ) at room
temperature, the reactions were quenched with 1 mM BCS. The cells
were pelleted, washed 3× with 200 μL labeling buffer, and
resuspended in the same buffer containing 1 μg/mL streptavidin-488
(Invitrogen). The plate was covered with aluminum foil and incubated
at 4 °C for 30 min. The cells were then washed 3× with 200
μL labeling buffer and resuspended in 250 μL cold FACS
buffer (Hank’s Balanced Salt Solution, pH 7.4, 1% FBS, 2 μg/mL
7-AAD, 0.2% NaN3) for flow cytometry analysis using an
Eclipse iCyt flow cytometer. Similar results were obtained by using
the BTTAA-Cu(I) catalyst (data not shown).

Metabolic Labeling of Fucosylated
Glycans in Zebrafish Embryos
by Microinjection with GDP-FucAl and Visualization via Confocal Microscopy
(Figure )
Zebrafish embryos at the
one-cell stage were collected, followed by microinjection of 1 nL
of a 40 mM solution of GDP-FucAl and rhodamine-dextran (5% w/v) as
a tracer in 0.2 M KCl. The embryos without microinjection were kept
as a negative control group. The embryos were then cultured in E3
embryo medium at 28 °C. When embryos reached 2-cell, 4-cell,
and 8-cell stages, they were transferred to a microcentrifuge tube
containing 0.5 mL E3 embryo medium using a fire-polished glass Pasteur
pipet. 0.5 mL of 8% paraformaldehyde (PFA) was then added to the tube
immediately to fix the embryos overnight at 4 °C. In the ZM2
treated group, embryos were collected and treated with ZM2 solution
as previously described.

Before
the CuAAC reactions, the fixed embryos were transferred to PBST and
dechorionated by hand with forceps, followed by washing 4× with
PBST. 92 μL PBST was added to each well of a 1% agarose-coated
96-well plate, followed by addition of Alexa Fluor 488 azide 8 (50 μM), BTTPS-CuSO4 complex ([BTTPS]:[CuSO4] = 2:1, [CuSO4] = 150 μM). Embryos were
then transferred into these wells with less than five embryos per
well. The solutions were gently shaken, and freshly prepared sodium
ascorbate (5 mM) was added to initiate the CuAAC. After 15 min, the
reaction was quenched with 1 mM BCS and diluted immediately with 100
μL PBST. The treated embryos were washed 4× with PBST,
incubated in Hoechst 33342 solution for 10 min, followed by mounting
on 35 mm glass bottom dishes (MatTek) in 3% methyl cellulose. All
embryo images were acquired by Leica confocal microscopy SP5, and
composite figures were prepared using ImageJ.

Supporting Information Available
Synthesis details, experimental
details, and supporting figures and illustrations. This material is
available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc400502d_si_001.pdf

Acknowledgments
This work was supported partially by a DuPont Young
Professor
Award and the National Institutes of Health to P.W. (R01GM093282)
and F.L.M. (R01GM089979).

