Introduction
Glycosylation of cell
surface proteins is involved in cell differentiation,
communication, and migration and is frequently altered in disease,
particularly in cancer. Several epithelial
tumors overexpress mucin glycoproteins, which can function as scaffolds
for various cancer-associated glycan epitopes and are important biomarkers of tumor development, progression and
metastasis.

The relative abundance
and accessibility of cell surface glycans
and their changes in disease have made them attractive targets for
noninvasive imaging. Antibodies, peptides, boronic acid-based probes, and lectins have been used
for imaging glycosylation in vivo. However, these imaging agents provide
only a snapshot view of tissue glycosylation, whereas metabolic labeling
with azido-sugars can, in principle, report on the dynamics of glycan
turnover. Metabolic labeling with azido-sugars, in conjunction with
click chemistry, has been used previously for imaging glycans in mouse
tissues, although the click reaction or subsequent imaging was performed
ex vivo., We reported recently the first demonstration
of noninvasive imaging of tumor sialylation in live mice based on labeling of tumor glycans with an azido-sugar,
followed by Staudinger ligation with a biotinylated click reagent
and subsequent imaging with a fluorescent or radionuclide-labeled
avidin probe. Such a pretargeting approach has been widely used previously
in radionuclide imaging., However, the large
size of the avidin, which limited vessel permeability, precluded glycan
imaging in normal tissues. The aim of this study was to develop small
molecule click reagents that could be used to image azido-sugar labeled
glycans in any tissue in the living mouse.

Initially, we produced
small molecule click probes, either by direct
conjugation of a Staudinger phosphine to a gadolinium chelate, to
generate an MRI contrast agent, or by conjugation of a fluorophore
to tetramethoxydibenzocyclooctyne (TMDIBO647), to generate a fluorescent agent. However, the relatively
slow reaction rate of azido-labeled sugars with phosphines or cycloctynes
meant that these reagents had to be used at relatively high concentrations,
which generated high background signals and failed to give significant
contrast in vivo (see Figures S2 and S3 in ). Therefore, we developed a two-step labeling strategy
(“double-click”) in which the first click reagent is
a bifunctional reagent, in which a phosphine or cyclooctyne is conjugated
to a trans-cyclooctene. The imaging probe is then
introduced in a second click reaction between the trans-cyclooctene moiety and a tetrazine conjugated to the imaging probe
(Figure ). Since this second click reaction
is 104–105 times faster than the first
click reaction, between the azido-labeled sugar and the phosphine
or cyclooctyne, the imaging agent can be used at much lower concentrations.
This will lower background and improve image contrast if the nonspecifically
bound bifunctional agent is washed out by the time the tetrazine imaging
agent is administered or if the trans-cyclooctene
moiety is inaccessible in the nonspecifically bound form. This strategy
has the added advantage that the imaging probe can be used at much
lower concentrations, which has a significant cost advantage in the
case of the fluorophore-labeled tetrazine and would minimize radiation
dose if a radiolabeled agent were used. Similar tetrazine ligations,
based on the inverse-electron-demand Diels–Alder reaction,
have been used recently for bioconjugation, for modifying live cell surfaces in combination with cyclooctynes,, although not in vivo, and as single probe in vivo imaging agents.

Imaging cell surface glycosylation in vivo. Mice were
injected
i.p. daily for 3 days with peracetylated azido-labeled N-acetylgalactosamine (Ac4GalNAz; 1), which
is incorporated metabolically into N-azidoacetylgalactosamine
units of cell surface glycans. The azido group in the glycan was reacted
in vivo with either TMDIBO-TCO (2) or PHOS-TCO (3), which were then reacted with Tz-DyLight (4) in vivo for subsequent fluorescence imaging.

Experimental Procedures
Cell Culture
Lewis lung carcinoma
cells (LL2, from
ATCC, Teddington, UK) were grown in complete DMEM medium (Dulbecco’s
Modified Eagle medium) (Invitrogen, Paisley, UK), supplemented with
10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (PAA Laboratories, Yeovil, UK) and maintained
in 5% CO2, at 37 °C.

Probe Binding to Serum
Albumin
BSA (Sigma-Aldrich,
Gillingham, UK) was incubated with either PHOS-TCO (3) or TMDIBO-TCO (2) (see Figure ) for 1 h at 37 °C in HBS buffer (20 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl,
pH 7.40). Tz-DyLight (4; Figure ) was added subsequently and reacted for a further 20 min. The directly
conjugated probes, PHOS647, TMDIBO647, and DIFO647 were incubated with BSA for 1 h at 37 °C. The mixtures
were resolved by native gel electrophoresis (Figure ; 10% acrylamide, 0.8 M tricine, 1.2 M Tris, pH 8.3 (Expedeon,
Harston, UK)). Tz-DyLight fluorescence (excitation, λ: 630 nm;
emission, λ: 680 nm) was detected following illumination with
633 nm light using a Typhoon Trio scanner (GE Healthcare, Hatfield,
UK). Protein was detected after Coomassie Blue staining (Instant Blue
gel stain, Expedeon) using an Image Scanner III scanner (GE Healthcare).
Gel densitometry was used to quantitate fluorescence intensity using
ImageJ software (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA).

Probe
binding to serum albumin (a, b) and flow cytometric analysis
of cell labeling (c–f). BSA was incubated with either PHOS-TCO
(lane 4, a, b) or TMDIBO-TCO (lane 5, a, b) and the TCO moieties were
then reacted with Tz-DyLight. BSA was also incubated with the directly
conjugated probes, in which a Staudinger phosphine (PHOS647, lane 6), tetramethoxydibenzocyclooctyne (TMDIBO647, lane 7) or difluorocyclooctyne (DIFO647, lane 8) were directly conjugated to a DyLight647
fluorophore. The BSA in the resulting reaction mixtures was resolved
on a native gel and stained with Coomassie Blue. The fluorescence
from Tz-DyLight (a) and Coomassie Blue staining (b) were imaged. The
BSA monomer is indicated by the black arrow in (a). BSA oligomers
frequently form under these conditions. Concentrations (a, b) are
expressed in μM. Lanes 2, 3, 9, 10, and 12 were not loaded.
Lane 11 contained BSA (15 μM). Lewis lung carcinoma (LL2) cells
were cultured in the presence or absence of Ac4GalNAz for
24 h, washed and then incubated with either PHOS-TCO or TMDIBO-TCO
and Tz-DyLight. Fluorescence histograms of cells labeled with PHOS-TCO
(c) or TMDIBO-TCO (d). Control groups (cells incubated in the absence
of Ac4GalNAz): green (cells); orange (cells + Tz-DyLight);
blue (cells + PHOS-TCO or TMDIBO-TCO + Tz-DyLight); Test group (cells
incubated with Ac4GalNAz): shaded red (cells + Ac4GalNAz + PHOS-TCO or TMDIBO-TCO + Tz-DyLight). Data in (e) are the
mean ± SD (n = 3 replicate experiments/group,
*p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.005). Time
course (f) of reaction of TMDIBO-TCO with Ac4GalNAz labeled
LL2 cells.

Cell Surface Azido-Glycan
Labeling and Flow Cytometry
LL2 cells were incubated for
24 h in complete DMEM medium containing
50 μM of Ac4GalNAz (1; Figure ) or solvent vehicle (10% DMSO in HBS buffer). The
medium was then removed, and the cells were washed with warm PBS and
trypsinized (0.25% trypsin, 1 mM EDTA) (Invitrogen) at 37 °C
for 5 min. Warm complete DMEM was added to inactivate the trypsin.
Cell suspensions were resuspended in cold FACS buffer (1% FBS in HBS
buffer) and reacted with TMDIBO-TCO or PHOS-TCO (30 μM in FACS
buffer containing 50 nM SYTOX Green (Invitrogen)) for 30 min at 37
°C. Tz-DyLight (20 μM) was then added, and the cells were
incubated for a further 20 min. They were then washed three times
with cold FACS buffer, filtered through a 50-μm pore-size membrane,
and analyzed using a LSRII (BD Biosciences, Oxford, UK) flow cytometer,
using 20 000 events. Data analysis was performed using FlowJo
software (Tree Star, Ashland, OR, USA). The population of interest
(viable cells) was gated based on high levels of NADH autofluorescence
and low levels of SYTOX Green staining. The far-red median fluorescence
intensity (MFI) of the viable cell population was then determined.
Data points were collected in triplicate.

Tumor Model and Metabolic
Labeling in Vivo
BALB/c female
nude mice (aged 6–9 weeks) were purchased from Charles River
Laboratory (Kent, UK). LL2 cells (5 × 106) were resuspended
in ice-cold PBS and implanted (100 μL s.c.) in the lower flank.
After 7 days, mice were injected daily i.p. for 3 days with a solution
of Ac4GalNAz (300 mg/kg) in DMSO:PBS (10:90%) or with the
solvent vehicle alone. On day 11, TMDIBO-TCO or PHOS-TCO or solvent
vehicle (DMSO:PBS, 6.7:93.3% or 0.3:99.7%, respectively) were administered
i.p. (67 or 3.3 μmol/kg, respectively). At 3 or 24 h after TMDIBO-TCO
administration or 3h after PHOS-TCO administration, Tz-DyLight (0.02
μmol/kg) was administered i.v.

Imaging
Fluorescence
imaging was performed using an
IVIS-200 camera (Perkin-Elmer, Waltham, MA, USA). Mouse imaging in
vivo was performed before and at 6 h, and 24 h after intravenous administration
of Tz-DyLight (Figure ). Image acquisition
parameters: emission bandpass filter Cy5.5, excitation filter Cy5.5,
epi-illumination, small binning, aperture range F1–F2, exposure
1–2 s; the field of view varied between 19.4 cm (in vivo) and
13.0 cm (ex vivo). All images were normalized by dividing the fluorescence
image by a reference illumination image; this resulted in a unit-less
fluorescence efficiency scale, which represents the fractional ratio
of emitted photons per incident excitation photon, and which was multiplied
by a factor of 105 for ease of presentation. The excitation
and emission band-pass ranges were 615–665 and 695–770
nm, respectively. A far-red background band-pass correction filter
(580–610 nm) was also used to subtract autofluorescence.

Probe biodistribution
Tissues were collected at 6 or
24 h after the administration of Tz-DyLight. Tumor, hind limb muscle,
skin, kidney, spleen, small intestine, liver, heart, lung and brain
were harvested from animals that had been injected with Ac4GalNAz (or solvent vehicle), TMDIBO-TCO and Tz-DyLight. The tissues
were kept briefly at 4 °C, weighed, imaged in the IVIS camera
(Figure  and ) and then fixed in neutral buffered formalin (NBF: 4% formaldehyde
in PBS) for 24 h, prior to histological analysis. Tissue fluorescence
was reported as the ratio of the total fluorescence emission divided
by the wet weight of the tissue collected on necropsy, multiplied
by a factor of 105 for ease of presentation, and reported
in arbitrary units (Figures  and ).

Planar fluorescence images of live mice bearing
subcutaneous lung
(LL2) tumors, injected i.p. with solvent vehicle (a, f) or Ac4GalNAz (1) (b, g) daily for 3 days and then with
TMDIBO-TCO (2) (a, b) or PHOS-TCO (3) (f,
g). The fluorescent imaging agent, Tz-DyLight (4), was
injected i.v. 3 h (a–j) or 24 h (k-m) after injection of either
TMDIBO-TCO or PHOS-TCO. Fluorescence images (λ, excitation:
647 nm; λ, emission: 680 nm) were acquired at 6 and 24 h after
the injection of Tz-DyLight. Black and white arrows in (a, b, f–g,
k–m) indicate tumors and kidneys, respectively. Data in (c–e,
h–j) are mean ± S.E.M., N = 5/group;
box plots represent median and 95% confidence intervals. Data shown
in (e) and (j) are the ratio of tumor mean fluorescence intensity
(MFI) to the adjacent control (flank) tissue MFI at 24 h postinjection
of Tz-DyLight. Data in (n–o), in which Tz-DyLight was injected
24 h after injection of TMDIBO-TCO and images were acquired 6 h after
injection of Tz-DyLight, are the mean ± S.E.M., N = 3–4/group. Differences were considered significant when p &lt; 0.05 (*) or p &lt; 0.005 (**).

Fluorescence microscopy of metabolically labeled
glycans in mouse
tissues. Tissues were collected post mortem, fixed for 24 h with 10%
formalin and embedded in paraffin. Histological sections were cut,
dewaxed, and mounted, and cell nuclei were stained with DAPI. Fluorescence
images (columns 1 and 3, from left, in a) were collected at 25-μm
resolution and compared with the corresponding H&amp;E-stained sections
(columns 2 and 4, from left, in a). The weight-corrected mean whole-organ
fluorescence intensities (b, c), calculated from macroscopic images
collected using an IVIS 200 camera, are also shown for two panels
of mouse tissues (b, c). The times allowed for TMDIBO-TCO and Tz-DyLight
clearance from the body, prior to ex vivo imaging, were 3 and 24 h
respectively in (b) and 24 and 6 h respectively in (c). Data in (b,
c) are mean ± SEM. Differences between groups (b, c) were considered
significant when *P &lt; 0.05 (N = 4–7/group). Error bars in (b, c) lie within the chart bars
when not visible. Scale bars (a): 50 μm.

Histology and Fluorescence Microscopy
Immediately after
collection and fluorescence imaging, tissues were fixed using NBF
for 24 h at room temperature and transferred into 70% ethanol before
paraffin embedding. Histological sections (8-μm) were dewaxed
and stained with either hematoxylin and eosin (H&amp;E) or mounted
using aqueous medium (Prolong Gold with DAPI; Invitrogen) for 16 h
at room temperature. Slides were then scanned in fluorescence mode
(excitation, λ: 633 nm; emission, λ: 680 nm) using a Typhoon
Trio scanner (GE Healthcare) at 25-μm resolution.

Results
Cell Labeling
and Probe Synthesis
Cell surface glycans
were metabolically labeled using 1 (see Figure ), a peracetylated azido-labeled N-acetylgalactosamine (Ac4GalNaz) that is incorporated
into the core-0 of mucin-type O-linked glycoproteins and also into glycosphingolipids, which are
the predominant glycans in lung tumors and in the murine small cell
lung cancer cells (LL2) used in this study. The azido-labeled glycans were then reacted, in the first click
reaction with 2, a bifunctional tetramethoxydibenzocyclooctyne
conjugated to a trans-cyclooctene (TMDIBO-TCO), in
a Huisgen [3 + 2] cycloaddition of the azido group with the cyclooctyne,
or with 3, a bifunctional trans-cyclooctene-phosphine
(PHOS-TCO), via Staudinger ligation of the azido group with the Staudinger
phosphine. The trans-cyclooctene groups were then
reacted, in a very fast second-click
reaction involving a [4 + 2] inverse electron demand Diels–Alder
reaction, with 4, a fluorescently labeled tetrazine (labeled
with DyLight650; excitation λ: 652 nm; emission λ: 672
nm), whose fluorescence is detectable in surface tissues in vivo.
Both TMDIBO-TCO and PHOS-TCO had a negatively charged lysine core
to improve aqueous solubility.

Comparison of Probe Binding
to Serum Albumin
Molecules,
such as TMDIBO-TCO and PHOS-TCO, can bind to serum albumins, removing
them from the circulation and conferring
upon them the pharmacokinetic behavior of macromolecular agents and
thus restricting their tissue access., The albumin-binding
properties of TMDIBO-TCO and PHOS-TCO were assessed by incubating
them with bovine serum albumin (BSA), and subsequently with Tz-DyLight,
and then separating the mixture on a native protein gel. BSA was visualized
by Coomassie blue staining (Figure b) and
Tz-DyLight by fluorescence imaging (Figure a). BSA shows a characteristic ladder of oligomers on these gels. The BSA-binding profiles were compared with
those of TMDIBO (TMDIBO647), a Staudinger phosphine (PHOS647), and
a difluorocyclooctyne (DIFO647), in which
the fluorophore was conjugated directly to these click reagents. TMDIBO-TCO
bound to BSA more strongly than PHOS-TCO (2.6 ± 0.3-fold) (Figure ) in agreement with previous studies. However, both TMDIBO-TCO and PHOS-TCO showed
less BSA-binding (5.0 ± 0.6- and 3.8 ± 0.6-fold less, respectively)
than their directly fluorophore-conjugated counterparts (TMDIBO647
and PHOS647) and much less binding than DIFO647. The higher binding of TMDIBO647 and PHOS647 cannot be attributed
to the presence of the fluorophore since the same fluorophore was
present in Tz-DyLight, which showed no detectable binding to BSA (Figure ).

Evaluation of Cell Labeling in Vitro
Next, we assessed
the reactivity of TMDIBO-TCO and PHOS-TCO for azido-glycan detection
in LL2 cells. Cells were cultured in the presence or absence of Ac4GalNaz for 24 h, washed, and then incubated with either TMDIBO-TCO
or PHOS-TCO for 20 min followed by incubation with Tz-DyLight for
20 min. The signal-to-background ratio (SBR) was considerably higher
for cells labeled with TMDIBO-TCO than with PHOS-TCO; 40 ± 1
and 1.7 ± 0.4 respectively (Figure c–e).
These are comparable to SBRs of 23.9 ± 0.8 and 3.3 ± 0.1,
obtained when the corresponding probes, in which the fluorophore was
attached directly to the phosphine (PHOS647) or cyclooctyne (TMDIBO647), were used, indicating comparable reactivity
of the mono- and bifunctional reagents. The time course of the reaction
of TMDIBO-TCO with Ac4GalNAz-labeled cells is shown in
Figure f. Ac4GalNAz-labeled cells
or controls were collected at different times following the addition
of TMDIBO-TCO, incubated with Tz-DyLight for 20 min, washed and then
analyzed by flow cytometry. Cell viability was comparable and &gt;90%
in both groups. Reaction of TMDIBO-TCO with the azido-sugar labeled
cells increased linearly relative to controls for up to 6 h following
addition of TMDIBO-TCO and then plateaued thereafter. The decrease
in cell labeling between 6 and 24 h can be explained by cell growth
during this period, when the cell number increased by ca. 70%.

Imaging
Labeled Glycans in the Living Mouse
Mice bearing
subcutaneous LL2 tumors were injected i.p. daily, for three days,
with Ac4GalNaz or with solvent vehicle, and then injected
i.p., on day 4, with TMDIBO-TCO or PHOS-TCO and 3 or 24 h later injected
i.v. with Tz-DyLight. Fluorescence images were acquired at 6 and 24
h postinjection of Tz-DyLight. There was more fluorescence from the
tumors and kidneys of animals injected with Ac4GalNaz (Figure b,g), when compared to controls injected with solvent
vehicle (Figure a,f), demonstrating glycan-dependent
tissue labeling. There was also considerably more fluorescence from
these tissues in animals injected with TMDIBO-TCO (&gt;2-fold) when
compared
to those injected with PHOS-TCO (Figure b,g;
c,h; d,i). These results were confirmed by ex vivo measurements (Figure  and ). These
data are qualitatively in agreement with the differences in LL2 cell
labeling observed in vitro (Figure c–e).
Better labeling with TMDIBO-TCO as compared to PHOS-TCO was confirmed
by measurements of the tumor-to-flank fluorescence ratios (Figure e,j). These ratios for control animals (injected
with solvent vehicle instead of Ac4GalNaz) are a measure
of nonspecific probe accumulation in the tumor interstitial space.
This tumor-to-flank ratio in vivo, 24 h post injection of the probe
was 1.5 ± 0.2 in the animals used here as compared to a much
higher value of 2.3 ± 0.4 observed previously with NeutrAvidin
as the imaging probe. The lower ratio
reflects presumably the much smaller size of the probes compared to
NeutrAvidin, which will facilitate their washout, and their lower
protein binding when compared to TMDIBO647 (Figure ). The higher glycan labeling with TMDIBO-TCO as compared
to PHOS-TCO (Figure ) is most likely due to
its greater aqueous solubility, which meant that it could be administered
at higher concentrations (67 μmol/kg for TMDIBO-TCO versus 3.3
μmol/kg for PHOS-TCO), and also its greater reactivity toward
azido-labeled glycans (23.2 ± 1.0-fold; Figure e). The fluorescently labeled imaging probe Tz-DyLight was
used at 0.02 μmol/kg. Extending the clearance time for TMDIBO-TCO
from 3 to 24 h decreased the background fluorescence by ∼50%
and thus increased the change in the signal-to-background ratio (Figure k–o), from +95% (Figure c, 6 h) to +130% (Figure n) for tumors
and from +120% (Figure d, 6 h) to +145% (Figure o) for kidneys. In control animals injected with
TMDIBO-TCO and Tz-DyLight, in which the TMDIBO-TCO was allowed to
clear for only 3 h before injecting the Tz-DyLight, the background
was ∼2 au (−/+/+, Figure c,d,
6 h), whereas with a clearance time of 24 h the background was ∼1.0
au for both control groups (−/+/+ and −/–/+,
Figure n,o).

Imaging Tissue Glycans
ex Vivo
The limited depth penetration
of the fluorescence emission meant that we were only able to image
superficial glycan-labeled tissues in vivo (tumor and kidney), however
this could easily be extended to deeper tissues by using an imaging
modality with greater tissue penetration, such as radionuclide imaging. In order to determine the range of tissues that
were labeled we imaged excised tissues at high-resolution (Figure a). There was significant labeling of tumor, kidney,
small intestine, spleen and liver (Figure b,c). Within the tumors, areas rich in tumor cells showed 3.1 ±
0.2-fold greater fluorescent labeling (Figure a-TC), whereas areas of dense neutrophil infiltration, which have
been reported previously in LL2 tumors and in human non small cell
lung carcinoma,, showed only low levels of fluorescence.
Spleen (Figure a-SC) showed very intense labeling
of the red pulp (12.7 ± 0.7-fold more than control, Figure a-SA), which was likely associated with high levels
of terminal N-acetyl-d-galactosamine residues
present in reticulocytes and low labeling
of the white pulp, which may reflect the fact that nude mice lack
both mature B and T lymphocytes. Small intestine (Figure a-IC) showed intense fluorescence located predominantly
on the luminal aspect, possibly associated with goblet cells, which
are rich in terminal N-acetyl-d-galactosamine
in cell surface mucins., Kidney (Figure a-KC) showed an intense renal cortical signal (8.6
± 0.6-fold more than control, Figure b-KA), which may be associated with S3 proximal tubules or collecting
ducts, which have high levels of N-acetyl-d-galactosamine. Liver (Figure a-LC), which is an important site for N-acetyl-d-galactosamine protein O-glycosylation, showed intense fluorescence (1.6 ± 0.2-fold
more than control, Figure a-LA) within portal
tracts, central vein and in the main hepatic tissue. Brain and heart
tissue were unlabeled. Brain glycans have been shown previously not
to label with azido-sugars and observation
of heart tissue labeling with a different azido-sugar to that used
here suggests the failure to detect labeling
may be due to limited incorporation of Ac4GalNaz into heart
tissue glycans. A longer TMDIBO-TCO clearance time of 24 h vs 3 h
substantially reduced background labeling and thus generated considerably
more contrast (10-, 6-, 2.3-, and 1.6-fold more contrast for tumor,
spleen, small intestine and liver respectively; see Figure b vs c). Further work is
required to determine the extent to which probe pharmacokinetics and
vessel permeability affect the extent of tissue labeling.

Discussion
Click chemistry has been used previously for labeling and imaging
cell surface glycans in developing zebrafish and Caenorhabditis elegans.() In the mouse, tissues including splenocytes, intestine,
kidney, heart, and liver have been glycan-labeled. Initially, the
click reaction was performed ex vivo, on isolated splenocytes or on
protein extracts of the various tissues, and the labeled click reagent was then detected by flow cytometry
or Western blotting. Subsequently, the click reactions have been performed
in vivo, although detection of azido-labeled glycan that had reacted
with the click reagent was again performed ex vivo. Biocompatible, small molecule, and fast-reacting click
reagents that can be used to image glycan labeling in vivo in the
mouse have yet to be described. We showed previously that we could
detect and image azido-sugar labeling of tumor glycans in vivo using
a phosphine-biotin probe, in which the biotin was detected, following
Staudinger ligation between the azido-sugar and the phosphine, using
a NeutrAvidin imaging probe that had been tagged with either fluorescent
or radionuclide labels. However, the
large size of the NeutrAvidin meant that it could not access normal
tissues, and imaging was restricted largely to tumor glycans. The
large size of the probe also resulted in relatively high levels of
nonspecific tumor retention via the enhanced permeability and retention
(EPR) effect. We have since attempted
direct conjugation of a Staudinger phosphine to a gadolinium chelate,
as a contrast agent for MRI; however, this probe generated a high
background signal on MR images acquired in vivo and failed to give
significant contrast (). A fluorophore-labeled
tetramethoxydibenzocyclooctyne (TMDIBO), which has ca. 40-fold faster reactivity with azido-sugar labeled
cells in vitro than the Staudinger phosphine, showed ca. 3-fold higher non-azido-sugar dependent retention of
the probe in tumors, in comparison with surrounding tissue, at 24
h post injection. This nonspecific tumor retention, which is much
higher than that observed with the probes used here (ca. 1.0–1.5-fold;
Figure ), can be explained by its higher protein
binding (Figure ), which again impaired the
development of significant contrast in vivo ().

We have described here a double click labeling approach
for imaging
cell surface glycans in mouse tissues in vivo, which employs small
molecule reagents that can access normal tissues and which show good
clearance properties. In the first bio-orthogonal click reaction,
TMDIBO or PHOS groups react with an azido-labeled sugar that has been
incorporated into cell surface glycans, and then, in a second click
reaction, the TCO group reacts with a fluorescently labeled tetrazine
(Tz-DyLight). We have shown that these reagents will fluorescently
label tumor, spleen, kidney, liver, and small intestine in vivo, although
only tumor and kidney tissue could be imaged in vivo due to the limited
tissue penetration of light in the far-red range. In tumors and kidney,
we showed that TMDIBO-TCO was much better at labeling glycans than
PHOS-TCO (Figure ). This is most likely due
to its greater aqueous solubility, which means that it can be administered
in vivo at higher concentrations, and also its greater reactivity
toward azido-labeled glycans (∼20-fold; Figure ). The fluorescently labeled imaging probe, Tz-DyLight, could
be used at much lower concentrations since the [4 + 2] Diels–Alder
reaction between TCO and tetrazine is very fast (k2 = 13090 M–1 s–1 measured
in PBS buffer at 37 °C) when compared
to the [2 + 3] cycloaddition between the azido-sugar and the TMDIBO
(9.4 × 10–2 M–1 s–1 in MeOH). Moreover, reaction of the
tetrazine in Tz-Dylight with a TCO group increases the far-red fluorescence
of DyLight647, which in the case of TMDIBO-TCO increased by 60% (see ). All three reagents
showed relatively low protein binding (Figure ), which facilitated their clearance from the body and thus produced
relatively rapid tissue contrast. In this study, TMDIBO-TCO or PHOS-TCO
were administered 3 or 24 h before the Tz-DyLight and the animals
were then imaged at 6 and 24 h after Tz-DyLight administration. Increasing
the clearance time for the “double click” probe TMDIBO-TCO
from 3 to 24 h substantially reduced the background and thus generated
considerably more glycan-dependent contrast, both in vivo (Figure ) and ex vivo (Figures  and ), particularly in tumor tissue, where the
contrast was increased by ∼40% in vivo and ∼10×
ex vivo. Image contrast in tumor and kidney, however, was not improved
on increasing the clearance time for Tz-DyLight from 6 to 24 h; in
fact, there was a slight decrease in image contrast by 24 h (Figure ).

Conclusions
In summary, the bifunctional
probes described here provide a set
of chemical tools with which to image tissue glycosylation in vivo.
These probes represent a significant advance over those described
previously in that they show much lower levels of nonspecific albumin
binding than the corresponding monofunctional probes and also better
tissue penetration and lower levels of nonspecific retention in vivo
than a macromolecular imaging probe used previously. These characteristics led to glycan-dependent labeling
of normal tissues in vivo as well as better image contrast in tumors.

Supporting Information Available
Details of
synthesis, spectral
data, and data collected with single-click agents in vitro and in
vivo. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org/

Supplementary Material
bc300621n_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
§ (A.A.N.
and H.S.) Equal contributions.

The authors
declare no competing financial interests.

Acknowledgments
We thank Jane Gray, Scott Lyons, and Mikko
Kettunen for technical
assistance. H.S., J.K., and Y.A.W. were in receipt of Cancer Research
UK Ph.D. studentships. S.F. was the recipient of a Ph.D. studentship
from the Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre of the National Institute
of Health Research with financial support from GlaxoSmithKline UK.
This work was supported by a Cancer Research UK programme grant to
K.M.B.

