Introduction
Antibody
conjugates, which
include antibody–drug, −enzyme, −hapten, and
so forth, have been used for a wide variety of applications in the
biomedical sciences, from detecting antigens in immunoassays to acting
as vehicles for targeted drug delivery. Antibodies remain the targeting
agent of choice for these diverse biological studies due to their
wide availability, broad range of validated targets, and proven clinical
efficacy.− Traditionally, antibody conjugates have been prepared using inefficient
conjugation methods, such as those based on carbodiimide (e.g., EDC)
and/or N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) chemistries. While these methodologies have proven sufficient
in a variety of settings, e.g., the preparation of the antibody–drug
conjugate herceptin-emtansine, they nonetheless suffer from various
shortcomings such as heterogeneities with respect to the number and
location of antibody modifications.− This lack of control limits the efficacy
of the resulting antibody conjugates and can hamper their wider adoption.
What’s more, many novel applications of antibodies, such as
fluorescent resonance energy transfer (FRET) probes or some antibody–drug
conjugates (ADC), necessitate, not merely benefit from, precise control
over antibody labeling. For example,
it is increasingly apparent that substantial subpopulations of randomly
conjugated ADCs show little, if any, therapeutic activity, yet account
for most of the toxicity.− As such, obtaining the next generation
of ADCs with maximal therapeutic index, not to mention new immunoassays
with higher sensitivity, hinges on developing more precise conjugation
chemistries that enable site-specific attachment onto antibodies.−

While numerous site-specific conjugation methods have been
developed,
most are technically complex, requiring genetic engineering of the
parental antibody and subsequent hybridoma preparation., Genetic engineering approaches have included the incorporation of
unnatural amino acids, peptidyl substrates for modifying enzymes,
and cysteine handles to direct downstream site-specific modifications.− Similarly, antibody fragments such as scFV and antibody alternatives
such as affibodies have also been cloned and expressed in part to
simplify site-specific attachment., However, these
agents often suffer from decreased stability, short serum half-life,
and weak antigen binding. Alternative conjugation strategies for full-length
antibodies, such as those that attach conjugates onto glycosylated
residues, avoid the need for cloning, and can accelerate the time
needed to produce a functional conjugate. However, consecutive chemical
or enzymatic reactions are still required, which can take days., To ensure speedy production and wider adoption, it would be ideal
to develop site-specific conjugation methods that can be used with
native, full-length IgGs. Given the wide availability of IgGs against
a variety of targets, such a method would lower the technical and
economical barriers to conjugation and potentially allow the identification
and development of novel antibody conjugates to be “crowd-sourced”
to the research community at large.

One versatile and promising
approach for conjugating native antibodies
that has emerged involves utilizing a small engineered antibody-binding
protein, Protein Z, containing both a UV-active benzophenone cross-linker
within the Fc-binding domain and one or more functional moieties such
as a biotin, fluorophore, or azide at its C-terminus.− Derived from the IgG-binding B domain of Protein A, Protein Z exhibits
nanomolar affinity for a binding site in the CH2-CH3 region of most
IgG isotypes. Upon binding to IgG and exposure to long wavelength
UV (365 nm), the engineered Protein Z constructs can be site-specifically
and covalently conjugated to the Fc region of the IgGs. In addition
to being compatible with native IgGs, this approach is also attractive
because of the fast kinetics of conjugation, since photo-cross-linking
only takes hours, and the employment of long wavelength UV light,
which does not damage IgG.

Despite the advantages described
above, broader adoption of this
approach can be hampered by the difficulty of producing Protein Z
with multiple modifications. Neither peptide synthesis nor post-translational
modification of recombinant proteins, both of which have been used
before, can efficiently produce photoactive Protein Z with high yields. Adding to the woes, even after these Protein
Z constructs have been produced, they may exhibit low cross-linking
efficiencies. The location of the photo-cross-linker greatly influences
both the cross-linking extent and the isotypes that can be cross-linked,
in often unpredictable ways (Table ).− Previous studies have found that only those variants with benzophenone
at the F5 (Phe5), F13 (Phe13), and Q32 (Gln32) positions can appreciably
cross-link to human IgG1, IgG2 (Q32), mouse IgG1 (Q32), IgG2a (F5,
F13), and rabbit polyclonal IgG (F5), all with only around 40–60%
of all heavy chains cross-linked after 2 h of UV exposure. As such, it is important to further characterize
additional Protein Z constructs with the photo-cross-linker at different
locations, so we can both better understand the mechanism of cross-linking
and engineer improved Protein Z variants that can more efficiently
cross-link a greater range of antibodies.

Variants
of Protein Z-Based IgG Conjugation
Reagents
sites/mutations	cross-linker	reference	
D2	Maleimide-BP	Yu	
N3	Maleimide-BP	Yu	
K4	Maleimide-BP	Yu	
F5	BPA/BBA	Konrad, Perol, Hui	
Q9	Maleimide-BP	Yu	
N11	Maleimide-BP	Yu	
F13	BPA	Hui	
E15	Maleimide-BP	Yu	
L17	BPA	 	
H18	BPA	Konrad	
N23	BPA	 	
E24,	Maleimide-BP/BPA	Yu	
E25,	BPA	 	
N28,	BPA	 	
A29	BPA	 	
I31	BPA	 	
Q32	Maleimide-BP/BPA	Yu, Perol	
Q32 F5I	BPA	Yu, Perol	
K35	BPA	 	
K35 F5I	BPA	 	
D36	BPA	 	
L17 Q32	Two
BPAs	 	
L17 K35	Two BPAs	 	
Cross-linker abbreviations: BP,
Benzophenone; Maleimide-BP, Maleimide-benzophone; BBA, benzoylbenzoic
acid; BPA, benzoylphenyalanine.

Mutations explored in this work.

Little to no expression—excluded
from study.

Recently, we
developed an efficient bacterial expression system
that allows for the recombinant production of photoactive Protein
Z with a diverse range of C-terminal modifications (e.g., azides,
haptens, fluorophores, etc.). This system
combined a well-validated unnatural amino acid incorporation technique
using an engineered Amber codon suppressor pair with intein mediated
expressed protein ligation (EPL), which allows functional moieties
to be added to the C-terminus of Protein Z., To further improve the efficiency of EPL, we have now replaced intein-mediated
EPL with sortase-tag expressed protein ligation (STEPL) (Figure ). Using this robust
and high-yield expression system, we incorporated the unnatural amino
acid benzoylphenylalanine (BPA) into various sites in Protein Z and
screened for optimal cross-linking to a range of IgG isotypes. We
were able to identify three Protein Z variants that, taken together,
can effectively, or in some cases completely, cross-link to almost
all commonly used IgG isotypes with less than 1 h of UV exposure,
thereby representing a vastly faster and more effective labeling method.

Schematics
of Protein Z production and IgG cross-linking. (A) The
Protein Z sequence is engineered to contain an Amber codon that encodes
BPA and is cloned into the STEPL vector pSrtA. Protein Z is expressed
as a fusion protein containing a self-cleaving sortase domain and
polyhistidine tag, to be subsequently purified using metal affinity
column. Simultaneous sortase cleavage and ligation are triggered by
the addition of calcium and triglycine (GGG) or any peptide with a
triglycine at the N-terminus (GGG-X, where X represents peptides carrying
functional moieties). Only ligated Protein Z is released from the
column. (B) After Protein Z is mixed with IgG, it first binds to the
Fc region noncovalently. Upon irradiation with long wavelength UV
(365 nm), BPA is activated and a covalent bond is formed between the
BPA on the Protein Z and the IgG.

Results
Selecting Sites of Cross-Linker Placement
Previous
works have studied Protein Z variants with benzophenone-based cross-linkers
placed at several different locations (Table ).− In addition it has been reported that a F5I (Phe5Ile) background
mutation could confer increased binding and cross-linking between
the Q32 Protein Z variant and human and mouse IgG1 subtypes. Based on these studies and the crystallographic
model of Protein A binding to human IgG, we tested the three previously
reported sites that demonstrated the best cross-linking (F5, F13,
Q32) and nine additional sites in Protein Z for BPA incorporation
(Figure , Table ).
These sites cover all remaining Fc-facing residues on helix 1 and
2 of Protein Z that have yet to be explored in previous studies. Additionally,
residues in the loop connecting the first two helices (E24, E25 in
PBD model 1FC2) were also investigated. The Q32BPA and K35BPA variants
were also combined with the background F5I mutation to investigate
whether this substitution consistently provides improved cross-linking
performance. Additionally, based on the results of the three best
performing single-BPA-containing Protein Z variants, constructs with
two BPA moieties were also investigated for potentially synergistic
effects in cross-linking.

Model of Protein Z showing sites of BPA cross-linker
placement.
Twelve residues within Protein Z were selected for BPA incorporation.
These sites include nearly all Fc facing residues that were not previously
investigated in previous works. Helix one (right) and two (left) of
the Protein Z are shown along with the modeled side chains of the
original residues. Helix three is not shown for clarity. All mutations
were successfully expressed except for E24BPA, E25BPA, and N28BPA
variants. Models used include: 1Q2N (shown), 1FC2 (not shown).

Construction of Mutant
The investigation of a broad
array of mutations is made tractable due to the facile recombinant
protein production technique used here (Figure ), which does not require any post-translational modifications. As
was done previously, selected codons in the Protein Z sequence were
mutated to Amber codons (TAG) for BPA incorporation during expression. The resulting fusion proteins, which contain
a histidine tag, can be efficiently purified using metal affinity
columns. To elute the bound protein from the column, calcium along
with either triglycine or any synthetic peptides with N-terminal triglycine
are added into the column. This triggers sortase catalyzed fusion
protein self-cleavage and the simultaneous ligation of either triglycine
or a triglycine-containing peptide to the C-terminus of the Protein
Z (Figure A). By combining the ligation and
purification steps, the STEPL system can efficiently generate native
Protein Z, as was done in this work, or Protein Z-conjugates with
synthetic peptides containing functional moieties such as FITC or
azide ligated to the C-terminus.,, Unlike intein based EPL systems, STEPL does not release
unligated Protein Z from the column. Hence there is no need for an
additional purification step between Protein Z elution from the column
and its use in antibody labeling. Instead, after UV cross-linking
of IgG, labeled antibodies can be separated from both un-cross-linked
Protein Z and the excess peptides used during the ligation step. For
characterization, however, pure Protein Z can be obtained by high
performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC), as was done here.

Cross-linking
of human IgGs with photoactive Protein Z variants.
Human IgG isotypes (hIgG1, hIgG2, hIgG3, hIgG4) were each cross-linked
using 11 Protein Z variants, each containing BPA in different locations
as indicated. Five molar excess of Protein Z was mixed with IgG and
exposed to 365 nm UV light for 1 h. The product was analyzed on a
reducing SDS-PAGE gel.

All variants, except E24BPA, E25BPA, and N28BPA, were successfully
expressed and purified. Very low protein expression level was seen
for N28BPA and no expression was seen for E24BPA and E25BPA. These
variants were therefore excluded from further analysis.

Cross-Linking
of Human IgGs
The panel of Protein Z
variants was screened for the ability to cross-link all four subtypes
of human IgG (hIgG). Five molar excess of Protein Z variant was mixed
with human IgG samples and exposed to long wavelength UV on ice for
1 h. The reaction products were then analyzed on a reducing SDS-PAGE
gel (Figure ).

Most mutations, including
the previously reported F5BPA and F13BPA variants, demonstrated poor
cross-linking with 1 h of UV exposure. The Q32BPA variant, however,
was able to significantly cross-link human IgG1 at a level (37% of
heavy chains cross-linked) consistent with the previously reported
estimate of near 40%. The best cross-linking
performance for hIgG1, however, was demonstrated by the K35BPA variant
(47%). The presence of the F5I mutation in the background did not
significantly improve cross-linking for either the Q32BPA or K35BPA
variants.

Cross-linking of mouse IgGs with photoactive Protein Z variants.
Mouse IgG isotypes (mIgG1, mIgG2a, mIgG2b, mIgG3) were each cross-linked
using 11 Protein Z variants with BPA placed in different locations.
Five molar excess of Protein Z was mixed with IgG and exposed to 365
nm UV light for 1 h. The product was analyzed on a reducing SDS-PAGE
gel.

Similarly for hIgG2, the Q32BPA
and K35BPA variants were found
to exhibit the greatest extent of cross-linking, albeit with a much
lower efficiency, at 12% for Q32BPA and 17% for K35BPA. No cross-linking
of hIgG3 was seen with any Protein Z, likely because Protein A, the
parental molecule of Protein Z, is known to have little to no affinity
for hIgG3. Finally, hIgG4 was cross-linked
by several variants including F5BPA, as reported by Perol et al.,
as well as F13BPA, Q32BPA, and K35BPA. As was the case for hIgG1, K35BPA was found to perform best, cross-linking
approximately 50% of the heavy chains. The F5I mutation in the background
did not significantly improve cross-linking for either of the variants
tested.

In all, three out of four human IgG isotypes can be
cross-linked.
The K35BPA variant displayed the best performance, with nearly 50%
of all hIgG1 and hIgG4 heavy chains cross-linked, exceeding that of
the previously reported Q32BPA variants.

Notably, different antibodies of the same isotype were cross-linked
with similar efficiencies (), supporting the idea that the difference among isotypes,
rather than individual antibody variations, accounts for the observed
differences in cross-linking efficiency. This is consistent with previous
reports.−

Cross-Linking of Mouse IgGs
The
cross-linking of various
isotypes of mouse IgGs (mIgG) was also screened using the 11 Protein
Z variants. As with human IgGs, mIgG samples were mixed with a five
times molar excess of Protein Z and exposed to long wavelength UV
for 1 h. Reducing SDS-PAGE gel of the cross-linking reactions showed
dramatically different cross-linking profiles between mIgG1, mIgG2a,
mIgG2b, and mIgG3 (Figure ).

Consistent
with previous reports, the Q32BPA variant gave the maximum cross-linking
of mIgG1, with 50% of heavy chains cross-linked in 1 h., However, mIgG2a, mIgG2b, or mIgG3 isotypes were not appreciably
cross-linked by Q32BPA. Instead they were all extensively cross-linked
by L17BPA, with efficiencies of 60% (mIgG2a), 71% (mIgG2b), and 80%
(mIgG3). The F5BPA, F13BPA, and K35BPA variants were able to modestly
cross-link mIgG2a, mIgG2b (F5BPA and F13BPA only), and mIgG3 isotypes,
but to a lesser extent than L17BPA.

Encouragingly, all mouse
IgG isotypes were able to be significantly
cross-linked with Protein Z. With 80% of mIgG3 heavy chains labeled
after only 1 h of UV exposure, the L17BPA variant displayed the best
cross-linking performance ever reported of any Protein Z or Protein
G based conjugation technique.,

Cross-Linking of Rat IgGs
and Other IgGs
Protein Z
variants were also screened for their ability to cross-link rat IgGs.
As with human and mouse IgGs, representative isotypes were cross-linked
with five molar excess Protein Z and exposed to UV light for 1 h.
The results were analyzed by reducing SDS-PAGE gel (Figure ). While it is generally recognized that most rat
IgGs do not bind Protein A or Protein Z, all but rat 2a isotype were
able to be cross-linked, albeit with lower efficiencies than seen
with human and mouse IgG. The Q32BPA variant cross-linked the rat
IgG1 subtype with 10% efficiency, while the rat 2b subtype was cross-linked
by the L17BPA variant with a slightly higher 20% efficiency. In contrast
to other rat isotypes, the rat 2c isotype was substantially cross-linked
by the L17BPA variant, with an efficiency of ∼60%. This enhanced
cross-linking can perhaps be attributed to Protein A and Protein Z’s
natural affinity toward the rat IgG 2c isotype.

Cross-linking of rat IgGs with photoactive Protein Z variants.
Rat IgG isotypes (rIgG1, rIgG2a, rIgG2b, rIgG2c) were each cross-linked
using 11 Protein Z variants with BPA placed in different locations.
Five molar excess of Protein Z was mixed with IgG and exposed to 365
nm UV light for 1 h. The product was analyzed on a reducing SDS-PAGE
gel.

While the association constants
between Protein Z and rat IgG1,
2a and 2b, are low, the formation of a covalent bond by BPA shifts
the equilibrium such that even the low level of binding can result
in detectable cross-linking., The specificity of
cross-linking is still maintained in this case, as demonstrated by
cross-linking that is specific to the heavy chain. While in this work
only 1 h of UV exposure and five times molar excess of Protein Z were
used, both of these parameters can be increased to achieve a higher
cross-linking extent if so desired. This will be especially important
when conjugating precious antibody samples.

In addition to the
above-mentioned IgG isotypes, Protein Z variants
were also used to cross-link hamster and rabbit IgGs (Figure ). Cross-linking was seen with both hamster IgG1
and rabbit polyclonal antibody. Hamster IgG1 displayed a similar cross-linking
pattern to those of human IgG1 and IgG2, where only Q32BPA and K35BPA
showed appreciable cross-linking, with K35BPA (30%) outperforming
Q32BPA (20%). Interestingly, the additional background mutation of
F5I significantly improved the cross-linking of hamster IgG (37% vs
30%). Rabbit IgG, on the other hand, was equally well cross-linked
by both the L17BPA (30%) and K35BPA (34%) variants, with little difference
seen upon the addition of the F5I mutation.

Cross-linking of hamster
and rabbit IgGs with photoactive Protein
Z variants. Hamster IgG1 and Rabbit polyclonal IgG were cross-linked
using 11 Protein Z variants with BPA placed in different locations.
Five molar excess of Protein Z was mixed with IgG and exposed to 365
nm UV light for 1 h. The product was analyzed on a reducing SDS-PAGE
gel.

Reducing and nonreducing gel showing cross-linking
kinetics between
mIgG3 and photoactive Protein Z. To examine the kinetics of cross-linking,
L17BPA Protein Z and mIgG3 were subjected to UV exposure for 15 min
to 2 h. The results were analyzed using (A) reducing (showing percent
of heavy chain cross-linked) and (B) nonreducing (showing percent
of intact IgG cross-linked) SDS-PAGE gels stained with Coomassie blue.
The gel images were analyzed using ImageJ software.

Kinetics of Cross-Linking
To assess
the kinetics of
the cross-linking reaction, three pairs of Protein Z-IgG that showed
the best cross-link formation: L17BPA with mIgG3, Q32BPA with mIgG1,
and K35BPA with hIgG1 were mixed at a 5:1 Protein Z to IgG molar ratio
and UV exposed for various durations of time from 15 min to 2 h.

As shown in Figure A, the cross-linking between
L17BPA and mIgG3 demonstrated the fastest kinetics with more than
70% of all heavy chains already covalently cross-linked within 15
min of UV exposure. After 2 h, 90% of all mIgG3 heavy chains were
cross-linked. To assess whether IgG needs to be incubated with Protein
Z prior to UV exposure to achieve optimal cross-linking, each Protein
Z and IgG pair was also preincubated for 1 h at 37 °C followed
by UV exposure for 2 h (Figure A, Incub.).
No increased cross-linking was observed, demonstrating that preincubation
is not necessary to achieve sufficient Protein Z binding to IgG during
the subsequent UV exposure.

To analyze the cross-linking extent
of intact IgG, rather than
reduced heavy chains, the samples were analyzed using nonreducing
conditions (Figure B). Protein Z was able
to cross-link onto one or both of the heavy chains in an intact mIgG3.
Within 15 min, the gel revealed that 90% of mIgG3 had at least one
Protein Z covalently attached, while more than 95% and 96% of IgG
were cross-linked to Protein Z at 1 and 2 h, respectively.

The
cross-linking of both Q32BPA and K35BPA with their respective
IgG also displayed fast reaction kinetics, albeit slower than that
demonstrated by L17BPA (). In both cases, approximately 50% of heavy chains
were cross-linked within 1 h of UV exposure and more than 55% were
cross-linked by 2 h. When assessed on nonreducing gel, it was found
that at 1 h approximately 60% of intact IgG were cross-linked by at
least one Q32BPA (mIgG1) or K35BPA (hIgG1), while the percentages
reach more than 70% by 2 h.

The fast cross-linking kinetics
of the examined Protein Z variants
make them ideal tools for convenient and efficient antibody labeling.
The ability to bypass the preincubation step also speaks to the fast
binding kinetics between Protein Z and IgG, such that binding equilibrium
can occur either near-instantaneously or over the duration of UV cross-linking.
For the majority of the isotypes tested (mIgG2a, mIgG2b, mIgG3, rat
2c), more than 70% of intact IgGs are conjugated in 15 min and nearly
all are conjugated by 1 h. For human IgG1 and mouse IgG1 isotypes,
more than 60% conjugation is obtained in 1 h while a higher level
can be achieved with longer exposure. This makes the Protein Z based
approach not only much faster than existing site-specific conjugation
methods that may take 1–2 days, but comparable to many general
conjugation techniques such as those using EDC/NHS, which often take
30 min or more.,,

Effects of Protein Z to IgG Ratio on Cross-Linking
To better
optimize the parameters of conjugation, the effect of altering
the ratio of Protein Z to IgG on cross-linking was also examined.
The L17BPA, Q32BPA, and K35BPA variants of Protein Z were each cross-linked
for 1 h with their compatible isotypes at Protein Z to IgG molar ratios
of 0.5×, 1×, 5×, 10×, and 20× (Figure ). It was found that the cross-linking extent improved
with increasing Protein Z amount when less than 5 molar excess was
used. Exceeding this ratio provided little, as was the case of Q32BPA
variant, to no improvement in cross-linking.

Influence of Protein
Z to IgG ratio on cross-linking kinetics.
Three photoactive Protein Z and IgG pairs (L17BPA + mIgG3, Q32BPA
+ mIgG1, K35BPA + hIgG1) were cross-linked at varying ratios of Protein
Z to IgG (0.5, 1, 5, 10, and 20 times). (A) The products were analyzed
using Coomassie stained reducing SDS-PAGE gel. (B) The gel images
were analyzed using ImageJ software.

The inability to further improve cross-linking when more
than five
molar excess of Protein Z was used suggested that conjugation in this
case is limited by the formation of the covalent bond rather than
Protein Z binding onto IgG. In practice, these findings suggest that
only five molar excess of these Protein Z variants, as compared to
10–20× reported for other Protein Z based reagents, is
sufficient to saturate the IgG and achieve maximum cross-linking.− This reduced reagent requirement, when combined with the short UV
duration and the ease of recombinant production, makes site-conjugation
of IgG using Protein Z more accessible for researchers at large.

Construction of Additional Protein Z Format
To further
enhance cross-linking, additional Protein Z variants containing two
BPAs, L17BPA-Q32BPA and L17BPA-K35BPA, were constructed. The recombinant
nature of production allowed double mutants to be easily produced
using two site-directed mutatgenesis reactions followed by the normal
expression protocol. All mutants were successfully expressed and purified
without any noticeable decrease in yields. However, no improvement
in cross-linking efficiency was seen with any of the double mutants
(). In
fact, in most cases there was a loss in cross-linking efficiency and
some Protein Z variants lost the ability to cross-link IgG altogether.
It is hypothesized that the addition of a second BPA at these locations
may significantly interfere with Protein Z binding to IgGs, thereby
resulting in poor cross-linking efficiency.

While no promising
double mutation variants were identified in our preliminary screen,
further work is needed to better identify optimal placements of BPAs
in multimutation variants. The recombinant approach as used here nonetheless
demonstrated the ease of constructing and producing such species.

Discussion
While the utility of photoactive Protein Z has
been previously
demonstrated, it is very challenging to produce such a recombinant
protein with multiple modifications. For example, Protein Z has previously
been produced by peptide synthesis, but standard synthetic approaches
give less than 35% theoretical yield for peptides longer than 50 amino
acid (Protein Z has 56 amino acids), and much worse actual yield after
purification. Alternatively, photoactive
protein Z constructs have been made by post-translationally modifying
a recombinant protein, but the need for additional reaction and purification
steps complicates production and limits the final yield. Moreover, it is very challenging to introduce
multiple post-translational modifications onto a single recombinant
protein. We previously utilized an intein-based EPL technique to make
BPA-containing Protein Z that is site-specifically modified at the
C-terminus with functional moieties (e.g.., fluorescent dyes, click
chemistry compounds, etc.). While this
approach was promising, it had a number of downsides, including the
requirement for an additional purification step to get rid of those
Protein Z that are not ligated with moieties of interest. In contrast,
by incorporating the recently developed sortase-tag expressed protein
ligation (STEPL) into our system, this
additional purification step is avoided in the method described in
this current work. Further, STEPL also has the advantage of been able
to utilize nearly all of the peptides carrying the functional moieties
during ligation. This is economically advantageous since these synthetic
peptides can be cost-limiting for Protein Z production. Notably, in
this study unlabeled peptides (i.e., triglycine) were used since the
objective was to optimize the placement of BPA.

Using this facile
production approach, we were able to quickly
construct a panel of Protein Z with BPA placed into different locations
throughout the first and second IgG binding helices. By screening
for the ability of these variants to cross-link a range of IgG isotypes,
several variants were discovered which taken together can cross-link
nearly all isotypes to a significant extent. This greatly expands
the repertoire of native antibodies that can be conjugated. What’s
more, Protein Z, in particular, the L17BPA variant, displays extremely
fast cross-linking kinetics that enables conjugation to be completed
in less than 1 h (&lt;15 min in the case of L17BPA). This is significantly
faster and easier than alternative site-specific conjugation methods
such as those requiring hybridoma construction or those using engineered
β-galactisidases to modify glycosylated residues.,,, The Protein Z based method is also more advantageous than another
recently developed site-specific conjugation approach where a UV-active
nucleotide analogue was used to covalently cross-link a conserved
nucleotide binding site (NBS) within the Fab region. The proximity
of the NBS to the Fab region poses the risk of sterically hindering
antigen binding. Additionally, the NBS
method requires cross-linking with short wavelength UV light (250
nm), which has the potential to damage proteins. Taken together, the
recombinant nature of Protein Z production combined with the ease
of cross-linking will greatly expand the accessibility and utility
of this conjugation method.

Conceptually, the cross-linking
reaction can be viewed as a two-step
reaction composed first of Protein Z binding noncovalently to IgG
followed by the UV-activated covalent bond formation between the BPA
and IgG. Definitively understanding the contribution of these two
steps toward cross-linking will require additional experiments such
as using surface plasmon resonance (SPR) to measure binding affinity,
which is the subject of ongoing work. Nonetheless, the different isotype
cross-linking profiles and kinetics seen with different Protein Z
variants can give mechanistic insights into the cross-linking reaction.
For example, the inability to further improve cross-linking when more
than five molar excess of Protein Z was used suggests that the rate
limiting step in these cases is the formation of a covalent bond between
the Protein Z and IgG, rather than slow or poor binding between the
two. The observed plateauing of cross-linking extent, despite prolonged
UV exposure, at around 55% for the Q32BPA and K35BPA variants also
supports this conclusion. These two findings raise the possibility
of competing reactions that prevent some proportion of the IgG-bound
Protein Z from forming the proper covalent link with IgG. Preliminary
results in our lab suggest against intramolecular cross-linking within
Protein Z, since pre-UV exposure does not reduce the efficiency of
antibody cross-linking and non-cross-linked Protein Z from one experiment
can still cross-link fresh batches of antibody (data not shown). The
L17BPA variant’s ability to cross-link a variety of antibodies
in a shorter time frame than other variants suggests that any competing
reactions that do exist are sensitive to the local environment and
can be avoided if more ideal BPA location can be chosen. It is well-known
that benzophenones preferentially cross-link some amino acids, particularly
methionine., While this effect may explain
the outstanding performance of the L17BPA variant toward mIgG2, mIgG3,
and rat IgG2c, since these isotypes all share a Met252 that lies closely
to L17BPA, it cannot account for all of the observed variations in
cross-linking extent. Further, this theory does not explain the plateauing
of cross-linking extent for Q32BPA and K35BPA variants, since inefficient
cross-linking should be able to be overcome by prolonged UV exposure.

While adequate cross-linking extent can already be obtained for
most of the istoypes using the above-reported Protein Z variants,
better insight into the cross-linking mechanism will be important
for understanding the properties of the resulting conjugates and for
further improving Protein Z variants. Recent work by Perol et al.
showed that the linkage length of the benzophenone group greatly influences
cross-linking when placed in some, but not other, sites in Protein
Z. It would be valuable to investigate
whether this is also true for the K35 and L17 sites discovered in
this work. Additionally, in this work it was found that while the
background F5I mutation did not significantly improve cross-linking
for most mutations and isotypes, it did increase K35BPA cross-linking
to hamster IgG1. This opens up the possibility that other background
mutations can interact with BPA placement to improve cross-linking.
What’s more, while those variants containing two BPAs tested
in this work did not outperform single BPA variants, the possibility
that the right combinations of BPA placements can improve cross-linking
cannot be ruled out, as previously suggested.

An ideal site-specific conjugation method should demonstrate
several
properties. First, the antigen-binding domain should be unaltered,
thereby maximizing the antibody function. Second, the conjugation
method should be sufficiently versatile to allow a variety of moieties
to be conjugated to a broad range of antibodies. Lastly, the method
should be broadly accessible to a large number of researchers. We
approached our work with these goals in mind and created a versatile
Protein Z based method that can be used to efficiently and effectively
conjugate a range of native IgGs site-specifically.

Materials and
Methods
Materials
Clinical grade anti-CD20 antibody, rituximab,
was kindly provided by Dr. Eline Luning Prak at the University of
Pennsylvania. Clinical grade anti-EGFR antibody, cetuximab, was kindly
provided by Dr. Daqing Li at the University of Pennsylvania. Human
IgG2 isotype control antibody (HCA108A), human IgG3 isotype control
antibody (HCA178), and human IgG4 isotype control antibody (HCA050A)
were all purchased from AbD Serotec (Kidlington, UK). Mouse IgG1 anti-Dextran
(10730) antibody was purchased from StemCell Technologies (Vancouver,
Canada). Mouse IgG1 anti-Rat CD68 antibody (MCA341R) was purchased
from AbD Serotec Inc. (Kidlington, UK). Mouse IgG1 anti-Fas (DX2)
antibody was purchased from R&amp;D Systems (Minneapolis, MN). Mouse
IgG2a anti-PECAM (AB62) antibody was kindly provided by Dr. Vladmir
Muzykantov at the University of Pennsylvania. Mouse IgG2a anti-CD3
antibody (OKT3) was purchased from Bio-X-Cell (West Lebanon, NH).
Mouse IgG2b isotype control antibody (14–4732) was purchased
from eBioscience (San Diego, CA). Mouse IgG3 antiprostate lipid antibody
(F77) was kindly provided by Dr. Mark Greene at the University of
Pennsylvania. Mouse IgG3 isotype control antibody (14–4742)
was purchased from eBioscience (San Diego, CA). Rat IgG1 isotype control
antibody (14–4301) was purchased from eBioscience (San Diego,
CA). Rat IgG2a isotype control antibody (14–4321) was purchased
from eBioscience (San Diego, CA). Rat IgG2b anti-ICAM1 antibody (YN-1)
was kindly provided by Dr. Ann-Marie Chako at the University of Pennsylvania.
Rat IgG2c isotype control antibody (400701) was purchased from Biolegend
(San Diego, CA). Hamster IgG1 anti-CD3E antibody (145–2C11)
was purchased from Thermo-Fisher (Waltham, MA). Polyclonal Rabbit
anti-tetramethylrhodamine (A-6397) antibody was purchased from Invitrogen
(Carlsbad, CA). Triglycine was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. (St.
Louis, MO) All other reagents were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific
(Waltham, MA) unless otherwise noted.

Cloning of Protein Z Fusion
Protein into pSrtA Vector
Two complementary oligonucleotides
encoding the Protein Z amino acid
sequence and flanked at both ends by 15 base sequences homologous
to the desired NdeI and AgeI restriction sites of the destination
vector pSrtA were ordered from Integrated DNA Technologies (Coralville,
IA). The full amino acid sequence for the Protein Z can be found in
the . Oligonucleotides were incubated together at
a final concentration of 5 μM and hybridized at room temperature
for 30 min. The resulting Protein Z sequence was then digested with
NdeI and AgeI restriction enzymes (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA)
and gel purified. The corresponding sortase pSrtA vector was also
double digested with NdeI and AgeI and gel-purified. The pSrtA vector
was previously described. Ligation was
done overnight using T4 ligase (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA)
at 16 °C. Insertion of the Protein Z sequence was verified by
Sanger DNA sequencing using the T7 promoter as the sequencing primer.
Site-directed mutagenesis of selected codons into an amber codon (TAG)
was done using Quikchange Mutagenesis Kit (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA).
For double mutations, two consecutive Quikchange mutageneses were
performed.

Expression and Purification of Protein Z
Fusion Protein
The pSrtA plasmid containing the cloned Protein
Z sequence and the
pEVOL-pBpF plasmid (Addgene.org) were cotransformed into the T7 Expression
Crystal Competent Cells (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA). Bacterial
cell cultures were initially grown overnight in an air shaker (225
rpm) at 37 °C in 3 mL of lysogeny broth (LB) media. Cultures
were scaled up to 50 mL of LB media and grown overnight under the
same conditions, and then inoculated into 1 L LB media containing
50 mg/L of ampicillin and 25 mg/L of chloramphenicol.

For BPA
incorporation, l-benzoylphenylalanine (Bachem, King of Prussia,
PA) was added into the culture for a final concentration of 300 μM
and the culture was left to grow for 30 min. Next, at optical density
(OD) 600 nm = 0.6, isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside
(IPTG) was added to a final concentration of 0.5 mM and arabinose
to a final concentration of 0.1% to begin the inductions of the pSrtA
and pEVOL plasmids, respectively.

Cultures were allowed to express
for 2 h at 37 °C. Bacterial
cultures were centrifugally pelleted at 10 000 g for 5 min, resuspended in 10 mL of B-PER lysis buffer (Pierce, Rockford,
IL) containing 0.75 g/L lysozyme, 1 μg/mL DNase, and 50 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl
fluoride. Cells were lysed by incubation for 1 h in room temperature
and then pulse sonicated on ice. Cell lysates were centrifuged at
15 000 g for 30 min at 4 °C. Supernatant
was collected and stored at −20 °C. For the following
purification steps, all procedures were run at 25 °C. The supernatant
(9 mL) was incubated for 1 h in a 10 mL Poly-Prep chromatography column
(Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) packed with 1 mL of Talon metal affinity resin
(Clontech, Mountain View, CA). Supernatant was then allowed to pass
through the column and resin beads were washed with 50 mL of column
buffer (0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) at a flow rate of approximately 2
mL/min and then drained. The stopper was placed back onto the column.

Expressed Protein Ligation
Triglycine (30 uL of 150
mM solution in column buffer) and calcium chloride (2.4 uL of 50 mM
solution in column buffer) was added into 1 mL of column buffer and
then applied to the column. The resin was vortexed to ensure uniform
distribution of the triglycine solution and then incubated at 37 °C
for 4 h. Afterward, the column was eluted using 2 mL column buffer.

Purification and concentration of the final product can be performed
using a 3 kDa molecular weight cutoff (MWCO) filter (Amicon Ultra,
Milipore, Temecula, CA) or size-exclusion chromatography (Zeba 7kD
columns, Pierce, Rockford, IL).

Alternatively, Protein Z can
also be purified with RP-HPLC (Varian
Prostar) as was done here. A C8 300 Å 5 μm column (Agilent)
was used. Protein Z was eluted at 1 mL/min using a mixture of water
and acetonitrile, both containing 0.1% TFA. The solvent gradient used
was: 95–75% water over the first 10 min, then 75–69%
over the next 60 min. Absorbance was monitored at 215 nm. The collected
fractions were then dried using vacuum centrifuge concentrator (Labconco,
Kansas City, MO) and reconstituted in column buffer. Protein concentration
was determined using BCA assay (Pierce, Rockford, IL).

Cross-Linking
Unless otherwise stated, Protein Z were
cross-linked with IgGs by first mixing the IgG (final concentration
0.4 μM) and Protein Z (final concentration 2 μM) in 0.1
M Tris-HCl buffer at molar ratio of 1 to 5 in a clear 1.5 mL centrifuge
tube. Next, the mixture was immediately placed on an ice bath and
irradiated for 1 h with 365 nm UV light using a UVP CL-1000L UV cross-linker
(Upland, CA). Samples were then analyzed using SDS-PAGE gel as described
below.

To assess the effect of irradiation length on cross-linking,
the samples were prepared as above, but irradiated for 15 min, 30
min, 1 h, and 2 h. To test whether preincubation of IgG with Protein
Z was necessary, samples were first incubated in 37 °C for 1
h after mixing and then UV irradiated for 2 h.

To assess the
effect of IgG to Protein Z ratio on cross-linking,
the IgG (final concentration 0.4 μM) were mixed with Protein
Z at final concentrations of 0.2 μM (0.5×), 0.4 μM
(1×), 2 μM (5×), and 4 μM (10×) and 8 μM
(20×) and UV irradiated for 1 h as above.

Analysis of Cross-Linking
Cross-linked products were
analyzed directly using SDS-PAGE electrophoresis. For reducing SDS-PAGE,
cross-linked samples were boiled for 3 min with equal volume of SDS-PAGE
loading buffer (Biorad, Hercules, CA) containing 1:20 dilution of
β-mercaptoethanol (Biorad). The samples were then loaded onto
AnyKd gradient PAGE gels (Biorad) and ran for 21 min at constant 250
V. For nonreducing gel, the samples were boiled as above, but using
SDS-PAGE loading buffer without any β-mercaptoethanol, and then
also loaded onto a AnyKD gradient gel and ran for 1.5 h at 250 V.
The gels were stained for protein using SimplyBlue Coomassie stain
(Invitrogen).

Images of the gel were taken using a Kodak Gel
Logic 100 system (Rochester, NY) with background illumination correction.
The images were then analyzed using ImageJ software (http://imagej.nih.gov). Specifically, images were background corrected using the background
subtraction function with a rolling ball radius of 50 pixels. Next,
the lanes were selected using the rectangle tool and band intensity
profiles plotted using the gel analysis functions. For reducing gels,
the intensity of the cross-linked heavy chain as a percentage of total
heavy chain was taken to reflect cross-linking extent. For nonreducing
gels, the percentages of double cross-linked IgG, single cross-linked
IgG, and non-cross-linked IgG were all calculated as percentages of
total IgG.

Supporting Information Available
Protein Z sequence,
Cross-linking of additional IgG isotypes by
Protein Z, Additional cross-linking kinetics. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bc500305v_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
The
manuscript
was written through contributions of all authors.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NIH/NIBIB (R01EB012065 and U01EB016027)
and NIH/NCI (R01CA157766 and R21CA187657).

