Laboratory medicine in sports

Faculty of Pharmacy and Biochemistry

Lecture Hall,

Ante Kovačića 1, Zagreb

May 11th, 2013

Organizers

Clinical Department of Laboratory Diagnostics, Dubrava University Hospital, Zagreb

Croatian Society of Medical Biochemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Zagreb

Faculty of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, Zagreb

Organizing Committee

Željko Romić, president

Sanda Berženji

Marina Čeprnja

Nataša Hodak-Samovojska

Tamara Knežević

Tihana Serdar

Scientific Committee

Rajko Kušec, president

Jasna Juriček

Jasna Lovreček

Željko Romić

Branka Vitunjski-Englert

Marcela Živković

Sports injuries are injuries that occur in athletic activities and can be broadly classified as either traumatic or overuse injuries. Traumatic injuries because of the dynamic and high collision are nature of some sports. Overuse injuries cause wear and tear on the body, particularly on joints subjected to repeated activity.

At every age, competitive and recreational athletes sustain a wide variety of soft tissue, bone, ligament, tendon and nerve injuries, caused by direct trauma or repetitive stress. Different sports are associated with different patterns and types of injuries, whereas age, gender and type of activity influence the prevalence of injuries. Sports trauma commonly affects joints of the extremities or the spine.

The hip, knee and ankle are at risk of developing osteoarthritis (OA) after injury or in the presence of malalignment, especially in association with high impact sport. Spine pathologies are associated more commonly with certain sports. Upper extremity syndromes caused by a single stress or by repetitive micro-trauma occur in a variety of sports.

Random control trials expose some subjects, but not others, to an intervention. This is more clinical in nature and not typically appropriate for the study of injury patterns. Cohort studies monitor both injured and non-injured athletes, thereby providing results on the effects of participation. Case-control studies monitor only those athletes who suffered an injury. The Ideal study would be Cohort design conducted over several teams, with longitudinal prospective data collection and one recorder where possible, as well as uniformity of injury definition across sports so comparisons between studies can be made accurately.

Physical injury is an inherent risk in sports participation and, to a certain extent, must be considered an inevitable cost of athletic training and competition. Injury may lead to incomplete recovery and residual symptoms, drop out from sports, and can cause joint degeneration in the long term.

Advances in arthroscopic techniques allow operative management of most intraarticular post-traumatic pathologies in the lower and upper limb joints, but long-term outcomes are not available yet. It is important to balance the negative effects of sports injuries with the many benefits that a serious commitment to sport brings.

