Introduction
Over the last decade, scientific publishing has sky-rocketed to almost two million
articles a year (). This
overwhelming growth is accompanied by a strong shift toward open access (OA)
publishing that has forced for-profit publishers to gradually replace the
subscription model with the author-pay model in which article-processing charges
(APC) are covered by authors or affiliated institutions. This, in turn, boosted the
emergence of many new journals that promise quick peer-review and high manuscript
acceptance for an average fee of USD 1,418 for online journals and USD 2,727 for
hybrids, which publish both online and in print (). At the same time, researchers are pressured to
“publish or perish” (), as their academic recognition, career advancement,
and research funding depend on how much they publish and get cited. In the
environment of hypertrophied scholarly publishing, it is not easy to identify
low-quality or even false research. Some claim that the responsibility for
maintaining public trust in research integrity lies as much with editors and journal
policies as with researchers. Marušić et al. believe
that the “greatest power of journal editors is their responsibility
and privilege to formulate and implement editorial policies to ensure the
validity, objectivity, fairness and transparency of the publishing process in
science” (). While this may be true for well-established
journals supported by big publishers, does this apply to editors of small journals,
who usually work pro bono, alongside their research and teaching
careers, and in small scientific communities that may not be so keen on pursuing
research integrity and other ethical standards? The answer is, it does, but the
question is how? With insufficient institutional support staff, and budget, it looks
as though small journals cannot afford to deal with ethical issues the way top
journals do. They more often receive manuscripts which are plagiarised or hide some
other type of misconduct, because their authors are reluctant to take their chances
with more prominent journals.

Publication ethics is indispensable for all scientific disciplines, but the majority
of articles on this topic have been published in biomedical journals (–). Medical information is sensitive and
sloppy research and publication, as well as research fraud, may lead to loss of
human life. Because “biomedical journals […] are supposed to
be more than purely scientific publications: they are also medical journals and
as such their articles potentially influence medical practice and are likely to
contribute to the improvement of public health“ (), the most ethical
guidelines are designed for the field of biomedicine. In its nearly 30-year history
International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) issued different versions
of its guidelines for the submission of manuscripts, establishing ground for journal
editors and their associations, publishers, and other major players in the scholarly
publishing world to create numerous standards, guidelines and recommendations on
different aspects of scholarly communication. Adopting the best practices, policies,
recommendations, codes, and guidelines which share the responsibility for research
integrity between authors, editors, and publishers, journals can respond to
potentially low-quality submissions.

Guidelines on publication ethics or, more often, instructions to authors have an
important role in “setting the rules”. Instructions to authors should
mirror editorial policies, including the ones on publication ethics. Furthermore,
journals and editors should be educating their communities about ethical issues in
publishing. Several studies have assessed instructions to authors of mostly
biomedical journals in terms of reporting ethical issues (–, –). As far as we know, editorial policies of
Croatian biomedical or other journals have not been analysed in terms of publication
ethics. An exception is the recent study by Broga et al. which
compared the publication ethics policies of biomedical journals published in Central
and Eastern Europe, which did include a few Croatian biomedical journals ().

The aim of our study was to investigate Croatian Open Access (OA) journals from all
disciplines in terms of instructions given to authors that address ethical issues.
We also wanted to see how biomedical journals differ from the journals from other
disciplines in that respect. Our hypothesis was that biomedical journals maintain
much higher publication ethics standards.

Common ethical issues addressed by guidelines and recommendations
Scholarly publishing is rather complex process and authors, reviewers, editors and
publishers have different roles and responsibilities at different stages. According
position statements developed at 2nd World Conference on Research
Integrity discussed by Wager and Kleinert (), authors should adhere to publication
requirements that submitted work is original and has not been published elsewhere in
any language. Copyright laws and conventions should be observed; previous work and
publications should be properly acknowledged and referenced; data, text, figures or
ideas originated by other researchers should be properly acknowledged; and authors
should respond to reviewers’ comments in a professional and timely manner. To
carry out responsibility to their readers, editors are responsible for ensuring the
accuracy of the material they publish (). Reviewer role is crucial and reviewer is
expected to be prompt and systematic in review, protect confidentiality of
information and ideas obtained from the manuscript, ensure objective and unbiased
assessment, and disclose possible conflict of interest. Publisher must be committed
to ensuring that commercial income has no influence on editorial decisions.

Conflicts of interest (CoI) can inappropriately influence design, conduct, or
reporting of research and are usually connected with funding. According to
Pitak-Arnnop et al., financial ties or personal interests can
threaten scientific integrity through biased study design and
conclusions/interpretations that favour certain industry or ignore unfavourable
findings. Ultimately, this can undermine patient safety and public trust in a
biomedical journal (). To
avoid this, CoI statement is intended to provide readers with the necessary
information to make their own judgment on potential bias.

Redundant publications are those that add little new information to the work of the
same author already published (). Duplicate publication is a subset of redundant
publication involving the reproduction of data with nothing new contributed to the
literature and is often regarded as self-plagiarism or recycling. During indexing
process for example, National Library of Medicine (NLM) identifies articles with one
or more authors in common that substantially duplicates other articles without
acknowledgement. Submitting the same manuscript to several journals is also regarded
as redundancy or dual, concurrent, simultaneous or multiple submissions.

During the last 30 years the number of retracted articles rose from 1 or 2
retractions per year to around 500 per year (), and instructions to
authors should address the issue of possible retraction. Authors must know why and
how their work might be corrected, withdrawn, or retracted. Committee on Publication
Ethics (COPE) has defined a retraction as “a mechanism for correcting
the literature and alerting readers to publications that contain such seriously
flawed or erroneous data that their findings and conclusions cannot be relied
upon”. Retractions are also used to alert readers to cases of
redundant publication, plagiarism, and failure to disclose a major competing
interest likely to influence interpretations or recommendations (). It is generally believed
that retractions serve to maintain the integrity of scholarly publications, and,
when properly enforced, to avert scientists from bending the rules of scientific
conduct and publication ().

One of the most important journal selection criteria for the author is the likelihood
of timely publication. Despite technological advancements, journals still have a
problem defining the period between submission and publication. There are two main
periods to be defined: time from initial submission to final acceptance, and time
from final acceptance to actual publication, and it is very important to share this
kind of information with potential authors.

Many international journals have addressed the attribution of authorship by
requesting authors to describe individual contributions to the manuscript. According
to ICMJE, authorship credit should be based on four criteria (), and authors should meet all four
conditions. Determining the authorship can be difficult, but listed
individuals’ contributions tells the reader who takes the credit and blame
for the work (). It can also
prevent authorship abuse, like the appearance of guest, gift and ghost authors
().

Raw data publishing has become increasingly important and has already been
incorporated in the policies of the world’s leading research funding
frameworks and organisations. Access to raw data is also welcome to improve efficacy
and transparency of the peer review process, which is at the present time-consuming,
biased, inconsistent, conservative, and open to abuse (). Access to the raw data allows peer
reviewers to validate the findings, discussions, and conclusions.

Materials and methods
Study design
To investigate Croatian OA journals in terms of ethical issues we identified 228
journals on the Croatian repository of Open Access journals HRČAK
(http://hrcak.srce.hr) which had an English version of the
Instructions to authors. Thirty-one were excluded because
the files were not machine readable (PDF stored as image or odd encodings),
empty, or contained only a link to the journal web page. Among final 197
instructions, we also identified 38 Croatian biomedical journals according to
the discipline coverage declared by their editorials. The list of all 197
journals is available as supplementary material (Supplement 1) in electronic
publication.

Next, we analysed the content of each .pdf or .doc document that contained
instructions to authors using the QDA Miner and WordStat software licensed by
author (by Provalis Research) for text analysis. The pilot stage lasted from May
to June 2014, and the final sample was collected between 15 and 17 September
2014. A non-validated categorisation scheme was developed to code text from the
instructions by grouping words, phrases, and rules describing different
categories of publication ethics. These categories were defined according to the
published literature, the results of the preliminary testing, and content
analysis of the most influential publication ethics guidelines. The text was
coded automatically according to categories and subcategories, and assigned
words, phrases, and rules stored in the categorisation dictionary. The
dictionary consisted of 10 categories, 23 subcategories, and 146 words, phrases,
and rules used for coding. Provided syntax was used to register all possible
appearances of words and phrases. 
shows the simplified version of the terms used for coding, and .XML and .txt
versions of the whole categorisation dictionary are provided as supplementary
material (Supplement 2) in electronic publication.

Ethical issues used for the content analysis organized in
categories.
Category	Subcategory	Terms used for coding	
0.
General	
	Publication ethics	ethics	
	Research integrity	integrity	
	Responsibilities of editor,
reviewer, publisher, author	responsibility/duty of publisher,
responsibility/duty of editor, responsibility/duty of
author	
	Accuracy	accuracy	
	Confidentiality	confidentiality, privacy	
	Originality of submitted work	original, unpublished, not previously published	
1.
Guidelines, codes, recommendations	
	General	best practice, code of, ethical
guideline, policy, principle, protocol, recommendation,
regulation	
	Editorial guidelines	Committee on Publication Ethics
(COPE), Declaration of Helsinki (DoH), European Association of
Science Editors (EASE), International Committee of biomedical
journal Editors (ICMJE), etc.*	
	Reporting guidelines	Animal Research: Reporting of In Vivo Experiments (ARRIVE),
Consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative research
(COREQ), etc.**	
2. Research
approval and registration	
	Research approval	approval, assent, committee	
	Registration of clinical
trials	trial registration	
	Patient	patient, human	
	Informed consent	informed consent	
	Patient confidentiality	confidentiality (patient,
human)	
	Use of experimental animals	animal	
3. Funding
and conflict of interest	
	Research funding	funding, financing	
	Project/Grant	grant	
	Sponsorship	sponsorship	
	Conflict of Interest	conflict of interest, COI	
4. Peer
Review	
	/	assessment, blinded, evaluation, external expert, final
decision, non-blinded, peer review, reviewer, referee	
5. Redundant
publications, misconduct, retraction	
	Redundant publications	compilation, concurrent, duplicate,
multiple, recycled, redundant, simultaneous submission	
	Misconduct	allegation, fabrication,
falsification, fundamental error, fraud, malpractice,
manipulation, misconduct, plagiarism	
	Retraction	erratum, expression of concern, retraction, suspicion,
withdraw	
6.
Copyright	
	/	copyright, Creative Commons, exclusive licence, intellectual
property, infringement, rights transfer	
7.
Timeliness	
	/	publishing within period of time (e.g. number of months,
weeks), reasonable speed, timelines	
Category	Subcategory	Terms used for coding	
8.
Authorship	
	/	authorship, contributorship, criteria (author, contributor),
honorary authorship, ghost author, gift author	
9. Data
accessibility	
	/	data accessibility, data management, dataset, experimental
data, raw data, research data, underlying data	
* Editorial guidelines included in the
categorisation dictionary: Committee for the Purpose of Control
And Supervision of Experiments On Animals (CPCSEA), Committee on
Publication Ethics (COPE), Council Directive, Council of Science
Editors (CSE), Declaration of Helsinki (DOH), European
Association of Science Editors (EASE), Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), Guide for the Care And Use of Laboratory
Animals, Guidelines for the Use of Animals In Research (IASP),
International Committee of biomedical journal Editors (ICMJE),
„Uniform Requirements“ (ICMJE), Meta-analysis Of
Observational Studies in Epidemiology (MOOSE), Office of
Research Integrity (ORI), Reporting guidElines For randomized
controLled trials for livEstoCk and food safeTy (REFLECT
Statement), U.S. Federal Policy for the Protection of Human
Subjects (HHS), World Association of Medical Editors
(WAME).
** Reporting guidelines included in the
categorisation dictionary: Animal Research: Reporting of In Vivo
Experiments (ARRIVE), Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials
(CONSORT), Consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative
research (COREQ), Enhancing the QUAlity and Transparency Of
health Research (EQUATOR), Minimum Information About a
Microarray Experiment (MIAME), Preferred Reporting Items for
Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA), Standards for
Quality Improvement Reporting Excellence (SQUIRE), STAndards for
the Reporting of Diagnostic accuracy studies (STARD),
STrengthening the Reporting of OBservational studies in
Epidemiology (STROBE).	
Statistical analysis
Results were expressed as frequencies and percentages for categorical variables
or mean ± standard deviation for continuous variables. Associations
between discipline and categorical parameters were tested using
χ2-test. Fisher’s test was used for frequencies
&lt; 20. Level of significance was set at 0.05. Statistical analysis was done
using statistical software WordStat (Provalis Research, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada).

Results
The groups of biomedical and non-biomedical journals were similar in terms of
originality (χ2 = 2.183, P = 0.140), peer review process
(χ2 = 0.296, P = 0.586), project/grant statement
(χ2 = 2.184, P = 0.141, F-test), timeliness of publication
(χ2 = 0.369, P = 0.544, F-test), and misconduct
(χ2 = 4.057, P = 0.045, F-test) (). As expected, we identified significant differences
among categories including ethical issues typical for the field of biomedicine, like
patients (χ2 = 47.111, P &lt; 0.001, F-test), and use of
experimental animals (χ2 = 42.543, P &lt; 0.001, F-test).
International editorial guidelines formulated by relevant professional organizations
are represented in biomedical journals in significantly greater extent
(χ2 = 42.666, P &lt; 0.001, F-test), although these guidelines
can be easily applied also to other disciplines. Some categories relevant to all
disciplines are significantly more represented by biomedical journals, like
publication ethics (χ2 = 21.311, P &lt; 0.001), accuracy
(χ2 = 13.828, P &lt; 0.001), research funding
(χ2 = 14.492, P &lt; 0.001, F-test), copyright
(χ2 = 11.383, P = 0.001), and CoI (χ2 =
33.065, P &lt; 0.001, F-test).

Rate of reference to ethical issues by category in instructions to
authors of Croatian OA journals.
Category	Subcategory	All journals	Biomedical
journals	Non-biomedical
journals	Chi square value	P (Chi square
test)	
		N = 197	%	N = 38	N = 159			
0.
General	176	89%	37	139	3.186	0.074	
	Originality of submitted work	166	84%	35	131	2.183	0.140	
	Responsibilities of editor, reviewer,
publisher, author	75	38%	23	52	10.069	0.002	
	Accuracy	40	20%	16	24	13.828	&lt; 0.001	
	Publication ethics	40	20%	18	22	21.311	&lt; 0.001	
	Reporting	19	10%	11	8	22.194	&lt; 0.001*	
	Confidentiality	12	6%	6	6	7.976	0.005*	
	Research integrity	7	4%	4	3	6.844	0.010*	
1. Guidelines,
Codes, Recommendations	82	42%	26	56	13.913	&lt; 0.001	
	General	76	39%	23	53	9.571	0.002	
	Editorial guidelines	37	19%	20	17	42.666	&lt; 0.001*	
	Reporting guidelines	4	2%	3	1	8.404	0.004*	
2. Research
approval and registration	42	21%	21	21	32.338	&lt; 0.001	
	Patients	27	14%	17	10	47.111	&lt; 0.001*	
	Use of experimental animals	23	12%	15	8	42.543	&lt; 0.001*	
	Research Approval	16	8%	8	8	11.033	0.001*	
	Informed consent	9	5%	8	1	34.130	&lt; 0.001*	
	Registration of clinical trials	3	2%	3	0	13.490	&lt; 0.001*	
	Patient confidentiality	3	2%	2	1	4.447	0.036*	
3. Funding and
Conflict of Interest	42	21%	14	28	6.932	0.009*	
	Research funding	33	17%	14	19	14.492	&lt; 0.001*	
	Conflict of Interest	18	9%	12	6	33.065	&lt; 0.001*	
	Project/Grant	11	6%	4	7	2.184	0.141*	
	Sponsorship	11	6%	6	5	9.664	0.002*	
4. Peer Review	138	70%	28	110	0.296	0.586	
5. Redundant
publications, Misconduct, Retraction	35	18%	11	24	4.071	0.045*	
	Misconduct	23	12%	8	15	4.057	0.045*	
	Retraction	20	10%	8	12	6.266	0.013*	
	Redundant publications	11	6%	5	6	5.207	0.024*	
6. Copyright	68	35%	22	46	11.383	0.001	
7. Timeliness	30	15%	7	23	0.369	0.544*	
8. Authorship	28	14%	11	17	8.667	0.004*	
9. Data accessibility	18	9%	9	9	11.143	0.001*	
*Fisher exact test.	
Among 197 Croatian OA journals the most frequent issues addressed publication ethics
were the originality of the submitted work and peer review process. The term
“original” and related variations were mentioned 874 times by 166
instructions to authors, describing mostly submitted work and including phrases such
as “original scientific paper”, “original article”,
“original contribution”, “original research paper”. In
some documents the term original is related to images (“original
graphics”) or research process (“results of original research”,
“original laboratory techniques”).

From all generic terms related to guidelines and recommendations the most frequent
were recommendation (31/197 journals), policy (28/197 journals), regulation (27/197
journals), principle (22/197 journals), and standard (19/197 journals). The most
addressed publication ethics recommendations were those by COPE, referred to by
14/197 journals. ICMJE was mentioned by 10/197 journals, and its old version of the
Uniform Requirements for Manuscripts Submitted to Biomedical Journals by 12/197
journals. Only one journal referred to the ICMJE’s most recent version,
Recommendations for the Conduct, Reporting, Editing and Publication of Scholarly
Work (). The Declaration
of Helsinki () was
referred to by 13/197 journals. One veterinary journal referred to the outdated
version of European Community Council Directive on the approximation of laws,
regulations and administrative provisions of Member States regarding the protection
of animals used for experimental and other scientific purposes, even an updated
version is available ().

Misconduct issues, including fabrication, falsification, and manipulation of data as
well as plagiarism, were addressed by 23/197 journals, of which 8 were biomedical,
and “plagiarism” was the most common term used by 18/197 journals.
Retraction policy was addressed by 20/197 journals, and manuscript withdrawal by
11/197 journals, while article retraction was referred to by 9/197 journals.

The likelihood of timely publication was addressed by 31/197 journals, 23 of which
spoke in terms of months and 6 in terms of weeks.

If we look at the total set of 197 instructions to authors, the average number of
ethical issues addressed per journal was 7.6 ± 8.5, showing great dispersion
of values (0 to 55). The median of registered ethical issues was 5. Ranked by the
number of addressed ethical issues in parenthesis, the first ten journals are
Medicina Fluminensis (55), Croatian Medical
Journal (46), Transactions of Maritime Sciences (45),
Geoadria (43), JAHR - European Journal of
Bioethics (41), Biochemia Medica (37), Acta
Pharmaceutica (), Nursing Journal (), Medicinski
vjesnik (),
and Croatica Chemica Acta (). From ten “top ranked” journals,
eight are from the field of biomedicine, according the discipline assigned by
journal editors.

Discussion
This study shows that Croatian OA journal editors are committed to receive original
articles. To obtain originality, editors are relying strongly on peer review which
is addressed by 70% of all journals, which makes our findings comparable with
eastern EU journals (75% reference rate) (). At the same time research data accessibility,
which can help reviewers in assessment of authors’ analyses, findings, and
interpretation, is addressed only by few journals. From nine journals referring to
the research data one of them is explicit in this respect: “Authors should
retain raw data related to their submitted paper, and must provide it for editorial
review, upon request of the editor”. Also the most editors do not specify how
they intend to prevent, detect and process misconduct or redundant publications. We
expected the key ethical issues from the group Redundant publications,
Misconduct, Retraction to be addressed to a much greater extent,
especially by biomedical journals (). Among all the terms and phrases related to
redundant publications, misconduct, and retraction, “plagiarism” was
most frequently addressed.

Authors’ responsibilities are often described (72/197), and they are fully
responsible for the entire content of the manuscript, the accuracy of references,
proof corrections, permissions to reproduce illustrations and tables from other
sources, and the quality of language. The role and responsibilities of the editors
(17/197), and publishers (3/197) are much less discussed. The Council of Science
Editors stated that “editors of scientific journals have responsibilities
toward the authors who provide the content of the journals, the peer reviewers who
comment on the suitability of manuscripts for publication, the journal’s
readers and the scientific community, the owners/publishers of the journals, and the
public as a whole” (). Some Croatian OA journals assume the
responsibility toward authors to keep disclosed conflicts of interest confidential
but rare are those that profess to keep manuscript information confidential until it
is published.

Ethical issues grouped in the category Research approval and
registration were mostly related to the field of biomedicine. Knowing
that all clinical research or animal studies must be approved by an ethics
committee, we expected that Croatian biomedical journals would much more often use
terms research approval, clinical trial registration or patient confidentiality,
compared with journals from other disciplines. Instead, only a small number does
address these issues, and some issues from this category remain completely ignored.
For comparison, reference to clinical trial registration by Croatian OA journals
(3/38 biomedical journals) is lower than that reported for European surgical
journals (7/38) ().

In terms of CoI disclosure, Croatian biomedical journals fared worse (32%) than
biomedical journals from other studies (89% of biomedical journals, 73-100% of
surgical journals, 78% of paediatric journals) (, , ). Since CoI is an emerging ethical issue related
to all disciplines, we expected this percentage to be significantly higher. It is
possible, however, that some Croatian OA journals require that CoI is disclosed at
an early stage of manuscript processing by different submission forms.

Authorship was addressed by 15% of Croatian OA journals, which is similar with the
study of 20 SciELO journals (). Defining authorship is a relatively new ethical
standard still not adopted by a large number of journals from countries belonging to
the so called “scientific periphery” ().

Our study has several limitations related to the text analysis method we used and
automatic coding approach. Although the categorization dictionary used for coding
was comprehensive, it was not validated and some terms and phrases could be omitted.
On the other hand, automatic coding is limited to the analysis of computer readable
tokens, and could failed to exclude small percentage of the irrelevant content and
it became part of the statistical data. Further, some of the hindrances were
characters used in the documents that could not be recognised by the software.

The results of this study of the ethical issues included in the instruction to
authors suggest that Croatian OA journals’ editors have yet not sufficiently
responded to the global concerns about research integrity and misconduct, and
emerging ethical issues are not well addressed by instructions to authors. As we
expected, biomedical journals have performed significantly better in almost all
elements of this study, and most of them are aware of the well known international
guidelines. Guidelines and recommendations can help to improve publication practice,
but they give editors also much of the responsibility for monitoring all possible
threats to research integrity. Other reason why editors are restrained to change
existing publishing models is related to the limited subsidizes which are
distributed across journals according partially outdated criteria. Limited
submission, mostly traditional researchers as potential authors, and rapid pace of
changes in the scholarly communication area, could be additional reasons for the
reluctance in the adoption of new trends related to publication ethics.

Our results show that current international recommendations aiming to improve
publication practice have not yet been implemented widely in Croatian OA journals,
even among the subset of biomedical journals. Adherence to the editorial and
reporting guidelines has a potential to improve the quality of biomedical journals,
and many elements could be applied also to other disciplines. Adoption of ethical
issues like confidentiality, research integrity, misconduct, authorship, data
accessibility, and CoI represent solutions for publication bias. Open access to the
majority of Croatian scholarly journals is a great advantage and can enhance
transparency of the whole research and publishing process and to promote science in
Croatia globally.

For future research, a broad study should include also instructions to authors in
Croatian language. To take the most advantage of the content analysis method,
additional coding in Croatian language will enable much larger set of documents to
be analysed, and give us more accurate insight about journals’ awareness of
ethical issues. We also plan an expanded study that will include journal documents
other than instructions to authors, which are provided at journals’ web
site.

None declared.

