Background
The production of transgenic plants with novel traits has relied
largely on the use of effective selectable marker genes and
selection agents. These are generally used in the initial stages of
transformation for an early selection of transgenic cells from the
majority of untransformed cells []. The frequently used plant
selectable marker genes include the nptII gene conferring
resistance to antibiotics like kanamycin, neomycin and G-418 
[–], 
the hph gene conferring antibiotic hygromycin resistance [],
and the bar gene conferring resistance to the herbicides
containing phosphinothricin as an active compound such as
Basta or Bialaphos [].

Due to the public concern on the possible risks posed to human,
animal health and the environment by the presence of antibiotic
resistance genes in genetically modified plants or their
products, alternative selection systems have been proposed
including the use of positive selectable marker genes and
selection agents. Among the well studied positive selection
marker genes reported are xylose isomerase (xylA; 
[]) which
utilizes xylose, 2-deoxyglucose-6-phosphate (DOGR1; 
[]) which
confer resistance to 2-Deoxyglucose and phosphomannose
isomerase (pmi; []) which could utilizes mannose as a carbon
source. Expression of pmi gene isolated from E. coli enables
transgenic pmi-expressing plant cells to convert unmetabolized
mannose-6-phosphate into an easily metabolizable fructose-6-
phosphate, which serves as a carbon source that improves the
energy status and positively influences the growth of
transformed cells []. The non-transformed plant cells growing
on medium containing only mannose or minimal sucrose will
eventually starve and result in cease growth.

PMI enzyme is common in nature. it is found in bacteria
(Escherichia coli), yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) and mammals
(Amophophallus konjac), as well as humans (Homo sapiens) 
[, 
–]. 
Therefore, the PMI-based selection system employing the E.
coli manA gene [] will be highly versatile in plants. More
importantly, the selection gene product is harmless. The safety
assessment for PMI has revealed that purified PMI protein has
no unfavourable effects in a mouse toxicity test and does not
change glycoprotein profiles in PMI transformed plants 
[–].

The mannose-based selection system with phosphomannose
isomerase (pmi) gene as a selectable marker was first reported
by Joersbo et al. (1998) for the generation of transgenic sugar
beet. PMI has since been shown to be a useful marker in a
variety of crops. It enables selection by providing the transgenic
cells a metabolic advantage over non-transgenic cells 
[]. Many
more important crops were later transformed using this
selection system such as cassava [], maize 
[], wheat 
[],
rice [], pearl millet 
[], papaya 
[], sugarcane 
[], tomato,
potato [] and sorghum 
[]. Following the successful
utilization of mannose as a suitable selection system for other
ultimate crops, this research was embarked with the aim to
produce transgenic oil palm (Elaeis guineensis Jacq) using
mannose as the selection agent. However the transformation
vectors carrying the pmi gene need to be constructed before the
system could be used in oil palm. In this paper, we report the
construction of four (4) transformation vectors carrying either
pmi gene alone or in combination with gusA gene driven by
either maize ubiquitin or CaMV35S promoter. Two of the
constructs were tested transiently on tobacco leaves and one
was used to stably transform tobacco leave using biolistics
approach to evaluate the effectiveness of the construct and
gene. These constructs will eventually be used to transform oil
palm.

Methodology
Bacterial strains:
E.coli strain DH5α was used in all routine cloning experiments.
The preparation of E. coli competent cells was performed
according to method of Hanahan, 1982 [].

Enzymes and other biochemical reagents:
Methods for isolation and manipulation of DNA were as
described by Sambrook and Russel, 2001 []. Restriction
endonucleases were purchased from Research Biolabs and
digestions were performed as recommended by the
manufacturer. A QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit (QIAGEN) was
used to isolate specific restriction and PCR fragments from
agarose gels. DNA ligations and subsequent transformations
into competent Escherichia coli cells were carried out according
to standard protocols [].

Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification:
PCR amplification was performed using MJ Research
Programmable Thermal Controller (PTC-100™). Amplifications
were carried out in 25 µl final reaction volume. Ten (10) ng of
plasmid DNA were used as template, depending on
experiments. Each PCR reaction contains 2.5 µl 10X PCR buffer
(Promega), 3.0 µl 25 mM MgCl2 (Promega), 0.5 µl 10 mM dNTP
(Promega), 1.0 µl 10 µM PMI-F (5'-GCG CTA GCC ATG GAA
AAA CTC ATT AAC TCA G-3') and NOS-R (5'-GGA CTA GTG
CTA GCG ATC TAG TAA CAT AGA TGA-3') primers, 0.2 µl 5
U µl-1
Taq polymerase (Promega) and appropriate amount of
template DNA. Total volume was made up with sterile distilled
water. The following PCR conditions were used: 95°C for 5 min
to denature the DNA template and followed by 30 cycles of 1
min denaturation at 95°C, 1 min annealing at 60°C, and 3 min
elongation at 72°C. The reaction was completed with a final 5
min elongation at 72°C. The PCR products were
electrophoresed in a 1.2 % agarose gel at 110V for 80 min. The
gels were stained with ethidium bromide and visualized under
UV light. The PCR products were excised from the agarose gel
and purified by using QIAquick PCR Purification Kit
(QIAGEN) for cloning.

Vector construction:
The pMB3 and pMB11 vectors [] carrying CaMV35S and
ubiquitin promoters linked to NOS terminator, respectively,
were used as backbone vectors for inserting pmi gene. The pmi
gene of Escherichia coli strains XL-1 Blue was cloned into
PCR2.1TOPO vector by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using
the specific primers (F: 5'-GCG CTA GCC ATG GAA AAA CTC
ATT AAC TCA G-3'; R: 5'-GCG CTA GCT TAC AGC TTG TTG
TAA ACA CG-3'). The resulted construct was verified by DNA
sequencing and designated as PCRIIM2-68. The PCRIIM2-68
plasmid DNA was digested with NheI to yield the 1.1 kb
fragment. The fragment was gel purified and ligated to the
AvrII site of pMB3 and pMB11. The ligation mixtures were
transformed into DH5α competent cells and plated onto LB
agar containing 50 µg ml-1 ampicillin, followed by overnight
incubation at 37°C. Positive clones were selected by BamHI
digestion. The sense orientation of pmi gene was confirmed by
PCR amplification using primers PMI-F and NOS-R. The two
transformation vectors designated as pMI3 and pMI11 were
further confirmed by digestion with BglII, EcoR1 and HindIII for
the presence of DNA fragments with expected size. The
plasmid pMI3 contains the PMI gene under the control of
constitutive promoter, CaMV35S (). Plasmid pMI11
carries PMI gene driven by the ubiquitin promoter ().
The two vectors, pMI3 and pMI11, were further modified by the
introduction of gusA gene driven by the CaMV35S ()
and ubiquitin promoter (), respectively. The DNA
fragment of CaMV35S-gusA-Nos was excised from pBI221 by
digestion with HindIII and EcoR1, gel purified and ligated into
HindIII/ EcoR1 digested pMI3 to create pMI3G. The ligation
mixture was transformed into DH5α competent cells and plated
on LB agar containing 50 µg ml-1 ampicilin followed by
overnight incubation at 37°C. Positive clones were selected by
HindIII and EcoR1 digestion. On the other hand, the Ubi1-gusANos
fragment was excised from pAHC27 [] by HindIII
digestion, gel purified and ligated into HindIII site of pMI11 to
create pMI11G. The ligation mixture was transformed into
DH5α competent cells and plated on LB agar containing 50 µg
ml-1 ampicilin followed by overnight incubation at 37°C.
Positive clones were selected by HindIII digestion.

Plant material:
In this work, tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum L.) plant was used as a
model system. Leaf discs for transformation work were
obtained from four weeks old tobacco plantlets grown in vitro.
Sterile tobacco leaves were cut into small pieces (2–4 mm) using
razor blade and five leaf discs were cultured for each plate. The
explants were placed on modified MS medium []
supplemented with 30 g l-1 sucrose and 1.0 mg ml-1 BAP and
cultured in the dark at 25°C. Medium was solidified with 0.8%
agar (Sigma, St. Louis, Mo.), and the pH was adjusted to 5.8
before autoclaving (121°C, 20 min). After 30 days, the callus
obtained were incubated under 16/8h light/dark conditions
and maintained with monthly subculturing for regeneration.

Particle bombardment and selection of transformants:
The plasmid DNA was coated onto 1.0 µm gold particles and
delivered into leaf discs using parameters previously optimized
for Biolistic PDS-1000 Helium device (BioRad) []. Each target
plate containing 5 leaf discs was shot twice. After gene delivery,
explants were incubated in the dark at 25°C for a month to
initiate callus. After one month, the bombarded tissues were
transferred onto medium containing 30 g l-1 mannose as the
selection agent. Sucrose was not added to the above medium,
and mannose was used to serve as the only carbohydrate source
in the cultures. The explants were grown under 16/8h
light/dark conditions at 25°C and subcultured every four
weeks onto fresh selection medium containing 30 g l-1 mannose
until plantlets were obtained.

Screening transformants
Transient GUS histochemical assay:
Expression of the gusA gene was examined using a modified
protocol of []. 
Two pmi gene transformation vectors, pMI3G
and pMI11G, carrying the gusA gene were bombarded into
tobacco leaf discs. The experiment was carried out in 5
replicates. The bombarded explants were incubated in the dark
at 25°C for 48 h. The explants were later stained overnight (20 h)
at 37°C in GUS buffer (0.2M sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.0),
0.5 mM K4 [Fe (CN) 6]; 0.5 mM K3Fe (CN) 6), X-GlucA (5-
bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-β-D-glucuronic acid; 0.5 mg ml-1)
dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). Blue spots were
scored optically using a Nikon UFX-DX system.

Polymerase chain reaction (PCR):
For the detection of the pmi gene in the regenerated plants, total
genomic DNA was isolated from control and transgenic tobacco
leaves using the modified method []. PCR amplification was
performed using 600 ng of DNA in 25 µl reaction mixtures
containing 2.5 µl 10X PCR buffer (Promega), 3.0 µl 25 mM
MgCl2 (Promega), 0.5 µl 10 mM dNTP (Promega), 1.0 µl 10 µM
appropriate primers; forward and reverse PMI primers (F: 5'-
GCG CTA GCC ATG GAA AAA CTC ATT AAC TCA G-3'; R:
5'-GCG CTA GCT TAC AGC TTG TTG TAA ACA CG-3') and
0.2 µl 5U µl-1 Taq polymerase (Promega). PCR was carried out
using the PTC-100TM Programmable Thermal Controller (MJ
Research, Inc.). A 1.1 kb fragment was expected to be amplified
using these PMI primers. The samples were denatured initially
at 94°C for 5 min, followed by 34 cycles of 1 min of denaturation
at 94°C, 1 min of primer annealing at 50°C, and 1 min 5 sec of
synthesis at 72°C, with a final extension step of 72°C for 5 min.
The PCR products were electrophoresed on a 1.2 % agarose gel
at 110V for 80 min. The gels were stained with ethidium
bromide and visualized under UV light.

Discussion
Construction of PMI transformation vectors:
Four vectors carrying the pmi gene were engineered to facilitate
transformation of oil palm using positive selection via biolistic
method. The four vectors constructed for expressing pmi gene
were designated as pMI3, pMI3G, pMI11 and pMI11G (
). In this study, two constitutive promoters have been chosen
to drive the pmi gene; CaMV35S promoter in plasmid pMI3 and
pMI3G and ubiquitin promoter in pMI11 and pMI11G. The
most widely employed promoter to drive selectable marker
gene is the CaMV35S promoter which is strongly expressed in a
variety of plant species and tissues []. CaMV35S promoter has
also been used to drive pmi gene in a number of different plant
species. The promoter has been shown to be constitutive and
highly active especially in dicot plants, such as sugar beet []
and cucumber []. In contrast, ubiquitin promoter has been
shown as a suitable promoter for monocot plants [,
–].
Similar results were obtained for oil palm transformation
studies which indicated that ubiquitin promoter is an efficient
and stable promoter in oil palm transformed tissues 
[–].
Previously, ubiquitin promoter has also been shown to drive
high levels of pmi gene expression in other monocots such as
rice [,
], sugarcane [,
], maize 
[], wheat 
[] and
sorghum []. In all cases, significantly higher transformation
frequencies were observed and very few escapes were found. It
is believed that the arrest in cell growth of untransformed cells
by starvation rather than the necrosis induced by toxic selective
agents may contribute to the survival and growth of the
transformed cells and high transformation frequencies.

In addition, pMI3G and pMI11G vectors also contained gusA
gene which is the most widely used reporter gene in plant
transformation work. The enzyme utilizes the external
substrates 4-methyl umbelliferyl glucuronide (MUG) for
measurements of specific activity and 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-
indolyl glucuronide (X-gluc) for histological localization []. It
is therefore a conditional non-selectable marker gene. GUS
expression was used as a reporter to monitor the transformation
efficiency. gusA gene has been co-transformed with pmi
selectable marker gene in rice [,
], rapeseed 
[–] and
chinese cabbage [] to facilitate the selection of transformed
tissues.

Initially, for the construction of pMI3 and pMI11 vectors, as
shown in  and 
, the pmi gene was isolated
from Escherichia coli strains XL-1 Blue by polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) to generate a 1.1 kb fragment. The fragment was
cloned into PCR2.1TOPO (3.9 kb) to generate PCRIIM2-68 (5.1
kb). PCRIIM2-68 was sequenced for verification. Plasmid was
confirmed by digestion using NheI to yield the 1.1 kb fragment
(). The 1.1 kb fragment of pmi gene was later inserted
into the AvrII site of pMB3 (4.0 kb) and pMB11 (5.2 kb),
respectively. Expected clones were screened by BamHI
digestion to cleave the 2.3 kb of CaMV35S-pmi-Nos and 3.4 kb of
Ubi1-pmi-Nos fragment as shown in  and 
,
respectively. The inserted gene was confirmed to be in sense
orientation to the CaMV35S and Ubi1 promoter by PCR analysis
using forward (PMI-F) and reverse (NOS-R) primers. A PCR
product of approximately 1.4 kb for pmi-Nos was amplified as
shown in  and . All plasmids generated
(pMI3 and pMI11) were also confirmed by digestion with
BamHI, BglII, EcoR1 and HindIII to yield fragments with
expected size (1.1 kb, 3.3 kb, 4.0 kb, 4.0 kb and 4.0 kb for pMI3;
3.4 kb, 3.0 kb, 6.4 kb, 5.0 kb, 1.4 kb and 6.4 kb for pMI11) as
shown in  and .

The pMI3G vector as shown in  has been constructed
by introducing the CaMV35S-gusA-Nos fragment from pBI221
() into the 
HindIII and EcoR1 site of pMI3 
().
The reporter gene could be used to monitor transgenic events
and visually separate transgenic material from non-transformed
material. Selected clones were screened by HindIII and EcoR1
digestion to cleave the 3.0 kb of CaMV35S-pmi-Nos fragment as
shown in . Similar approach was used to generate
pMI11G (10.5 kb) vector shown in . Ubi1-gusA-Nos
fragment from pAHC27 () was introduced into the
HindIII site in pMI11 (). The size of the insert was
confirmed by digestion with HindIII as shown in . All
vectors were sequenced to confirm the identity of insert.

Transient GUS Histochemical Assay:
For transient expression assays, two vectors namely, pMI3G
and pMI11G carrying the pmi and gusA reporter genes, were
bombarded into tobacco leaf discs using biolistic PDS/He 1000
device. The pmi gene in the 2 vectors was driven by different
promoters, namely CaMV35S and Ubiquitin, in pMI3G and
pMI11G, respectively. Explants were also bombarded with gold
particles without DNA as control. Bombarded explants were
histochemically assayed for gusA expression by staining with X
Gluc. This was carried out to ensure that the construct carries
an effective and functional gusA gene.  showed that
blue spots were detected as a result of gusA activity. No gusA
activity was observed in control tissues. The result clearly
suggested that the blue spots observed were due to introduced
gene which confirmed the transgene activity. This indicated
that the promoters used were able to drive the gusA expression
in all tissues. However, the level of gusA expression could be
further verified by quantification of β-glucuronidase activity.

Selection and regeneration of putative transgenic plants:
In this study, callus was induced from leaf discs explants to
regenerate plantlets. After bombardment, explants were
cultured on selection medium supplemented with 30 g l-1
mannose as the carbon source. The calli appeared at the cut
ends of expanded tobacco leaf discs after a month of
bombardment. Then, primary shoots appeared within a month
and subsequently developed into rooted plantlets within 2 to 3
months. Subculture was performed every 3 to 4 weeks on the
selection medium. After 3 months, surviving and elongated
shoots were developed into rooted plantlets. At 30 g l-1
concentration of mannose, shoot and root formation was
completely inhibited in untransformed tobacco explants,
whereas transgenic tobacco developed normal growth. Cells
transformed with the pmi gene were able to utilize mannose as a
carbon source and grew well.  shows the regeneration
of transgenic tobacco tissues from callus formation until
regeneration of plantlets complete. The transgenic tobacco
plantlets were maintained and regenerated on 30 g l-1 mannose
prior to confirmation of transgene integration in the genome.

PCR Analysis:
The integration of pmi gene in the regenerated plants was
screened using polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The
amplification of 1.1 kb fragment will demonstrate the insertion
of the pmi gene in the genomic DNA. In the PCR analysis of the
plantlets transformed with the pmi gene, nine out of twelve
plantlets amplified the expected 1.1 kb pmi gene product
(). 
The result showed that approximately 75% of
tobacco plantlets screened were positive for pmi gene. PCR
product was also observed for the positive controls (DNA of
transformation vector, Lane P), while no signal was detected for
the untransformed plantlet (Lane U).

Conclusion
Four transformation vectors were successfully constructed
carrying either pmi gene alone or in combination with gusA
gene driven by either ubiquitin or CaMV35S promoters. The
effectiveness of the constructs was evaluated by transient gusA
gene expression and production of transgenic tobacco plantlets
after the use of mannose as a carbon source. The pmi gene
driven by ubiquitin promoter is being evaluated in oil palm;
however, due to the long regeneration of oil palm, the results
could not be presented here.

The authors would like to thank the Director-General of MPOB
for permission to publish this paper. We thank Dr. Omar Rasid
of MPOB for critically reviewing the manuscript. We also
would like to acknowledge Ms Haiza Hazrina and all members
of the Genetic Transformation Laboratory of MPOB for their
assistance.

Citation:Bahariah et al, Bioinformation 8(3): 151-157 (2012)

Construction of pMI3 and pMI3G. The PMI fragment
was excised from PCRIIM2-68 by NheI digestion, gel purified
and ligated to the AvrII site of pMB3 to create pMI3. The DNA
fragment of CaMV35S-gusA-Nos was excised from pBI221 by
digestion with HindIII and EcoR1, gel purified and ligated into
HindIII/ EcoR1 site of pMI3 to create pMI3G.

Construction of pMI11 and pMI11G. The PMI
fragment was excised from PCRIIM2-68 by NheI digestion, gel
purified and ligated to the AvrII site of pMB11 to create pMI11.
The DNA fragment of Ubi1-gusA-Nos was excised from
pAHC27 by HindIII digestion, gel purified and ligated into
HindIII site of pMI11 to create pMI11G.

Schematic diagram of single transformation vectors,
(A) pMI3; (B) pMI11; (C) pMI3G and (D) pMI11G. The
restriction sites and the numbers indicate the approximate
position in the vectors.

Restriction enzymes and PCR analyses for the
construction of pMI3 and pMI11. (A) Positive clones for
PCRIIM2-68; (B) Positive clones for pMI3 vector (lane 5); (C)
Positive clones for pMI11 vector (lanes 1 and 3); (D) Sense
orientation of pmi gene in pMI3 (lanes 4 and 5); (E) Sense
orientation of pmi gene in pMI11 (lanes 3 and 5); (F) Restriction
endonuclease analysis of pMB3 (lanes 1, 2, 5, 6, 9, 10, 13 and 14)
and pMI3 (lanes 3, 4, 7, 8, 11, 12, 15 and 16) with different
restriction endonucleases (lane 1-4: BamHI; lane 5-8: BglII; lane
9-12: EcoRI; lane 13-16: Hind III); (G) Restriction endonuclease
analysis of pMI11 with different restriction endonucleases (lane
1-2: BamHI; lane 3-4: BglII; lane 5-6: EcoRI; lane 7-8: HindIII).
The size of the fragments in each gel was as predicted. Lane M:
1 kb plus DNA ladder

Restriction enzyme analyses for the construction of
pMI3G and pMI11G. (A) Purification of DNA fragment
(CaMV35S-gusA-Nos) from plasmid pBI221; (B) Digestion of
pMI3 with HindIII and EcoR1 (lanes 1 and 2) and pMI11 with
HindIII (lanes 3 and 4) as cloning vectors; (C) Restriction
enzyme analysis of pMI3G with HindIII and EcoRI digestion;
(D) Selection of DNA fragment (Ubi1-gusA-Nos) from plasmid
pAHC27 with HindIII digestion; (E) Restriction enzyme analysis
of pMI11G (lane 2) with HindIII digestion. The size of the
fragments in each gel was as predicted. Lane M: 1 kb plus DNA
ladder.

Comparison of transient histochemical gusA gene
expression in tobacco leaf: (A) pMI11G (B) pMI3G and (C)
without DNA.

Regeneration of transgenic tobacco plants. (A)
Tobacco callus and shoot appeared at early stage of selection on
media containing mannose and (B) shoot development from
mannose surviving callus.

PCR analysis of tobacco plantlets using PMIF-PMIR
primers to amplify the pmi gene. The expected size (1.1 kb) is
indicated by an arrow. Lane M = 1kb plus DNA ladder marker;
P= pMI3 (positive control); U = Untransformed (negative
control); 1-3 = TB1; 4-6 = TB2; 7-9 = TB3; 10-12 = TB4.

