Background
Saccharomyces are the safest and most effective microorganisms
for fermenting sugars to ethanol and traditionally have been
used in industry to ferment glucose based agricultural products
to ethanol []. Yeast is ubiquitous in the environment, but is
most frequently isolated from sugar rich samples. Some good
examples include fruits berries and exudates from plants. Some
yeast strains are found in association with soil and insects. In
assessing a yeast strain for industrial use, specific physiological
properties are required []. Ethanol tolerance, sugar tolerance
and invertase activities are some of the important properties for
use in industrial ethanol production (Jimenez and Benetez,
1986). Yeast has also been isolated from many fermenting
sources including fermenting cassava tubers []. Many research
workers found yeast in large numbers in a wide variety of
natural habitats as different as leaves, flowers, sweet fruits, tree
exudates, grains, roots fleshy fungi, insects, dung, soil 
[].

Recently they have been used in the production of bio fuels, a
potentially important alternative energy source. Renewable
energy is one of the most efficient ways to achieve sustainable
development. Increasing its share in the world matrix will help
prolong the existence of fossil fuel reserves, address the threats
posed by climate change, and enable better security of the
energy supply on a global scale []. Successful fermentations to
produce ethanol using yeast require tolerance to high
concentrations of both glucose and ethanol. These cellular
characteristics are important because of high gravity (VHG)
fermentations, which are common in the ethanol industry, give
rise to high sugar concentrations, at the beginning of the
process, and high ethanol concentration at the end of the
fermentation Saccharomyces cerevisiae is an important micro
organism in bio- industry and its tolerance to ethanol is one of
main characteristics to decide whether it can be used as biofermentation
resources. Molecular Genetic techniques can be
used to discriminate between yeast strains that have similar
physiological characteristics. RAPD analysis is faster,
technically less demanding and more economical than the other
genomic typing methods like RFLP, AFLP. Unlike conventional
PCR data on DNA sequences of the organisms are not a prerequisite
for RAPD analysis. Further, this technique elucidates
the biodiversity in a group of isolates []. The present study is
an attempt for isolation and identification of yeast strains from
natural habitats, Screening of those yeast strains for ethanol
tolerance and Molecular characterization of yeast strains using
RAPD marker.

Methodology
Isolation of yeast strains from different sources:
Yeast strains are commonly associated with sugar rich
environments. Various fruit samples were selected as sources
for isolating yeast cells. Fruits such as grapes, molasses,
mosambi, cashew apple, sugarcane, sorghum, and distillery
effluents were used for isolation of yeast and named as Yeast
Grape strain (YGP),Yeast Molasses strain (YMO), Yeast
Mosambi strain (YMI),Yeast Cashew apple strain (YCA), Yeast
Sorghum strain (YSM) and Yeast Distillery effluent strain
(YDE). The collected fruits were washed and rinsed in distilled
water. They were then cut, squeezed and the juice was extracted
in separate sterile flasks and allowed for seven days of
fermentation. After fermentation they were diluted serially and
0.1 ml of the diluted samples (10-4) was plated on Yeast Extract
Peptone Dextrose Agar (YEPDA) medium and incubated at
300C for 24 to 48 h.

Identification and Screening of the isolated yeast strains for ethanol tolerance:
Simple staining was performed for of 24 h cultures obtained
from different fruit sources plated on Yeast Extract Peptone
Dextrose Agar (YEPDA) and observed under microscope for
morphological characters such as shape, size and budding. The
obtained isolates were given with specific names for further
experimentation and easy recognition. Ethanol tolerance of each
strain was studied by allowing the yeast to grow in liquid
YEPD having different concentrations of ethanol such as 6%,
7%, 8%, 9%, 10%, 11%, 12%, 12.5% 13%, 13.5%, 14% and 14.5%
[].

Molecular Characterization of Yeast strains using RAPD marker:
DNA was isolated from all the strains by following the method
as developed by []. Isolated DNA samples from all the strains
were subjected to RAPD analysis with 4 random primers 
(). 
Agarose gel electrophoresis was performed to resolve the
amplified products. The bands were manually scored ‘1’ for the
presence and ‘0’ for the absence and the binary data were used
for statistical analysis. The scored band data (Presence or
absence) was subjected to cluster analysis-using STATISTICA.
The dendrogram was constructed by Ward's method of
clustering using minimum variance algorithm. The dissimilarity
matrix was developed using Squared Euclidean Distance (SED),
which estimated all the pair wise differences in the
amplification product. Only clear and unambiguous bands
were taken into account and the bands were not scored if they
were faint or diffused, as such fragments posses poor
reproducibility. The band sizes were determined by comparing
with the 100 bp DNA ladder, which was run along with the
amplified products. The Genetic distance was computed as:

 Σ n =1 dj2 where dj = ( Xik – Xjk )

Where Xik refers to binary code of ith tree for allele “k” and Xjk
refers to the binary code of the jth tree for allele “k”.
Dendrogram was computed based on Ward's method of
clustering, using minimum variance algorithm.

Results
Colony characters were used for preliminary identification.
Yeast strains produced different types of colonies on YEPDA
medium such as raised, creamy white color colonies.
Microphotographs of different colonies from different samples
have shown in (). Strains were observed for
Saccharomyces characteristic oval cell shape and budding
characters. Out of fifteen isolates, seven isolates showed oval
cell shape with budding character and classified as Yeast Grape
strain (YGP),Yeast Molasses strain (YMO), Yeast Mosambi
strain (YMI),Yeast Cashew apple strain (YCA), Yeast Sorghum
strain (YSM) and Yeast Distillery effluent strain (YDE). From
the ethanol tolerance study the tolerance levels of all the strains
were found to be in the range of 7% to 12%. Even though some
strains had tolerance at 13%, growth was less. YDE has highest
tolerance when compared to other strains up to 12% (Table 2 &amp;
, , 
). A total of 22 RAPD bands produced from the
selected 4 primers were used for fingerprinting and for
estimation of genetic diversity among seven isolates of
Saccharomyces species. For the purpose of illustration, the RAPD
fingerprints or electrophoretogram generated for seven
Saccharomyces isolates using 10-mer random primers are
presented in ( &amp; ).

The number of bands scored for each primer varied from 1 to 8
with an average of 9.3 bands per primer. Out of 22 different
sizes of amplification bands, 2 bands (9.0%) were
monomorphic, 4 bands (11.11%) were unique and 18 bands
(81.81%) were shared polymorphic, which were informative in
revealing the relationship among the genotypes. The Cluster
analysis based on 22 RAPD bands revealed that the seven yeast
isolates examined. The dendrogram has clearly depicted that all
the 7 yeast isolates formed two major clusters. Among the two
major groups, there were five sub clusters (). Isolates
YCA, YDE, formed the first group, the isolates YSM, YMI,
YMO, YSC and YGP formed the second group. Linkage
distance was almost equal between two clusters. In first group
there were no sub clusters and second group two sub clusters
with linkage distance from 1.8 to 2.4.

Discussion
The budding yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisae, has enjoyed a long
and distinguished history in the fermentation industry. Owing
to its efficiency in producing alcohol, Saccharomyces cerevisae is
the most important commercial microorganisms with GRAS
(Generally Regarded as Safe) status. Mankind's oldest
domesticated organism made possible the world's first
biotechnological process with the emergence of modern
molecular genetics. S. cerevisiae has again been harvested to shift
the frontiers of mankind rawest revolution genetic engineering.
This yeast represents the prototype for fermentative yeast,
responsible for fermentation in foods, such as wine, beer, bread.
In the present study, Yeast strains were isolated from different
sugar rich samples such as fruits, distillery effluent on YEPDA
medium. Totally 7 isolates were obtained from different
samples. Previous studies have shown that the yeast are
commonly associated with sugar rich samples such as leaves,
flowers, sweet fruits, tree exudates, grain, roots, insects, dung,
soil []. 
Yeast isolates were identified up to genus level through
colony characters and cell morphological studies. Out off 15
isolates only seven were identified as Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Identification was based on simple microscopic observation.
Ethanol tolerance has yet to be clearly define, although it has
been reported to reproducible under defined conditions, and
appears to be under complex genetic control. Ethanol has three
major effects on yeast, it decreases the rates of growth and of
fermentation and it cell viability. The range of ethanol tolerance
obtained in the present study was 7-12% which correlates with
the previous reports by []. Even though the highest tolerance
level was observed in YDE up to 12% but tolerance rate was
found to be very low from 12.5% onwards when compared to
the other strains. Same type of results was also observed in case
of YSC strain. But based on the above results YCA has optimum
tolerance in a wide range up to 14%. RAPD analysis showed the
different monomorphic and polymeric bands among these
strains and from the dendrogram analysis the 7 strains were
divided in to two groups and further in to sub clusters. These
studies prove that the substrates have a major impact on the S.
cerevisae and can induce some change in the genotype which
tends to develop in to different strains. The polymorphism
found in these strains may be the reason for this type of results
which was yet to be confirmed by further studies.

Conclusion
The data collected from the study concludes that even though
YDE and YSA had highest tolerance up to 12%, YCA showed
optimum tolerance throughout the range of ethanol percentage
up to 14%. It was also shown that substrate have major impact
on the genotype of S. cerevisae using RAPD and dendrogram
analysis.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Tikka et al, Bioinformation 9(8): 421-425 (2013)

Growth of yeast colonies on various sources on
YEPDA medium

Ethanol tolerance graph of YGP, YMO &amp; YMI

Ethanol tolerance graph of YCA &amp; YDE

Ethanol tolerance graph of YSM &amp; YSC

RAPD Gel profile of seven isolates of Saccharomyces
sp. generated using 10-mer random 2 primers. No.1 primer:
Lane1:YGP,2: YMO, 3: YMI,4:YCA,5:YDE,6:YSM,7: YSC. No.2
Primer: Lane 8: YGP, 9: YMO, 10: YMI, 11: YCA, 12: YDE, 13:
YSM, 14: YSC.

RAPD Gel profile of yeast isolates generated using 10-
mer random primer no.3 &amp; no.4; Lane1: YGP, 2: YMS, 3: YMI, 4:
YCA, 5: YDE, 6: YSM, 7: YSC. No.4. Primer-8: YGP,9:
YMS,10:YMI,11: YCA,12: YDE,13: YSM,14: YSC

Dendrogram based on RAPD profile of 7
Saccharomyces strains obtained from different samples

