Background
Deciphering the structure and dynamics of complex network
of protein-protein interactions is among the essential objectives
of systems biology for understanding many aspects of living
systems in depth []. The construction of protein interactome
was supported by ongoing experimental and computational
techniques. The number of experimentally supported PPIs for
model organisms has been increasing in recent years as evident
from the large protein-protein interaction (PPI) databases. The
experimentally identified PPIs are mined and stored in open
source databases. Currently, the experimental techniques for
the massive characterization of PPI networks still have several
drawbacks []. First, there is surprisingly low convergence rate
between the results of similar kind of experiments. Second,
experimental techniques like yeast two hybrid often produce a
large number of false positives with an estimated percentage of
10% in some cases. Third, experimental approaches are still
unable to reach a high-throughput state since the inherent
drawbacks of the methodologies are only allowing them to test
a fraction of all possible pairs of proteins. Finally, these
limitations of experimental techniques arise from their
experimental nature itself. However, appropriate care has been
taken in the construction phase as we considered only the
experimentally reviewed ones.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is an irreversible, progressive brain
disorder that slowly destroys memory and thinking skills and
the ability to carry out the simplest tasks []. Alzheimer's
disease is the most common cause of dementia among the
older people. Dementia is the loss of cognitive functioning like
thinking, remembering, reasoning etc to an extent that it
interferes with a person's daily activities. Plaques and tangles
in the brain are the major causes for Alzheimer's disease and
the third being the loss of connections between nerve cells
(neurons) in the brain []. Molecular Changes in the
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) of Alzheimer's Patient's Brain
gives the initial information about the severity of the disease.
The reasons for choosing AD for this study are two-fold []:
first, the lack of food and drug administration (FDA) approved
drugs to treat AD today, in spite of decades of research on the
disease's molecular mechanisms; second, the wealth of
biomedical research articles published for AD studies can
make validations of our approach less challenging. Biological
networks capture a variety of molecular interactions and in
particular, protein–protein interaction networks facilitate the
understanding of pathogenic mechanisms that trigger the
onset and progression of diseases []. Protein interaction
networks present gene products that physically interact with
each other to accomplish particular cellular functions, such as
metabolism, cell cycle control, and signal transduction [].
Advanced network based approaches are becoming
particularly important to identify pathways or functional
modules that may indicate potential therapeutic target(s) [].
Recently, network theory is making an important contribution
in topological study of biological networks, such as proteinprotein
interaction (PPI) networks []. A PPI network can be
described as a complex network of proteins joined by
interactions. Proteins are represented as nodes in such a graph;
two proteins that interact physically are represented as
adjacent nodes connected by an edge. In general, an average of
five interaction partners per protein has been calculated by
Piehler. J [].

Most biological processes can hardly be understood without a
comprehensive analysis of a large number of molecular
components and interactions []. From the simple system to
complex ones, the interactions between different molecules
usually determine the resulting phenotype. This is the case
with cellular proteins, which rarely work in isolation but are
frequently involved in pathways and interaction networks.
The eventual perturbation of these networks can lead to
disease or even death []. So, the knowledge of protein-protein
interactions can greatly contribute to the understanding of
living systems in general and pathology in particular. In recent
years, identifying candidate genes of complex diseases was
mainly based on biochemical networks such as metabolic
networks [], transcriptional regulatory networks 
[], and
protein-protein interaction networks (PPINs) []. An
understanding of the basic biochemistry of the key interactions
in AD may provide a framework needed to develop drugs for
curing AD. Moreover, interacting proteins have been shown to
have a tendency of sharing similar functions and causing the
same disorder [–
]. The objective of the present study is to
construct the current experimentally supported network of
direct human protein interactions, explore it for potential
target proteins. At one end, the UniProt Knowledge base
(UniProtKB) [] was taken as the reference set of nodes that
the network can have. Then we performed text mining on the
PPI databases, i.e Human protein reference database (HPRD)
[], InAact molecular interaction database (IntAct) 
[], The
molecular interaction database (MINT) [], Database of
interacting proteins (DIP) [], Systems biology of the innate
immune response (INNATEDB) [], bio-molecular interaction
network database (BIND) [] and biological general
repository for interaction datasets (BioGRID) [], for direct
interactions between the reference proteins. We analyzed the
network for the prioritized proteins among the reference
protein set.

Methodology
We used experimentally validated PPI information to obtain
the neighbors for each seed group. Our analysis includes only
direct interactions identified either by biochemical experiments
or by two-hybrid studies. In this method, integrated
interlogous dataset (formerly OHPID []) was taken as the
basis for interaction data. The dataset includes the interactions
taken from different databases that includes IntAct [], HPRD
[], BioGrid [], 
MINT [], 
DIP[], 
INNATEDB [] and
BIND []. The dataset has a massive set of 8,46,116
interactions, of which 4,90,600(58%) were source interactions
and 3,70,002(42%) were the predicted ones. In these
interactions, 1,73,338(20%) interactions were related to Human.
Out of 1,73,338 interactions,1,20,030(69%) were from source
and 59,741(31%) were predicted interactions and all the
interactions were considered in the construction of network.

Second, 136 Reviewed disease proteins (seed) were taken as
input after performing text mining on Uniprot etc and the
proteins can be accessed from supplement file1. For these
proteins, an IIM (In-Direct Interaction Matrix) was calculated
using the IIM algorithm which takes the input proteins and
produces the interactions upto the required cycle length. The
workflow for the foresaid method was given in the ().
After taking all the 1412 interactions into consideration, the
interactions were then converted into SIF (Simple Interaction
Format), which specifies the nodes and interactions. Then the
SIF file was loaded into the Cytoscape [], a tool used to
visualize molecular interaction networks. In (), the
nodes are shown in green color and edges are shown in black
color. Whenever the resultant dataset contains a proteinprotein
interaction between the protein A and protein B, the
generated network depicts an edge between two nodes A and
B. The network thus constructed can be seen in ().

Results &amp; Discussion
The novelty of our approach was instead of merging PPI
information for any protein identifier stored in source
databases; we have mined PPIs exclusively between reference
proteins. The interactions which were detected by the algorithm
were given in the supplement file2. The PPI network has 73
proteins with at least one characterized partner. The network
was further investigated for individual protein-protein
interactions of corresponding proteins for further research. The
cycle level was fixed at three as there will not be any
interactions beyond this level as seen from the resultant dataset.
The confidence score for each protein was also calculated using
the equation (Please see  for equation
and explanation).

The top five high scored ranked proteins are identified as APPP05067,
SP1-P08047, GSK3B-P49841, PSEN1-P49768 and UBBP0CG47
respectively. These proteins with highest number of
interactions are involved in essential biological processes. These
results will be helpful in drug target identification. The network
analysis was further performed using the Cytoscape tool for
important network properties. The network properties were
recorded (Please see  for network
properties)

We resolve the issue of PPI redundancy which originates from
combination of records of multiple databases at different levels.
We comment on the proteins represented with high degree in
interactome network; We resolve the orphan proteins inclusion
(no direct PPIs with reference proteins) as a result of their
interaction at different cycle level; Dataset preparation has
augmented additional interactions with the application of IIM
algorithm.

The prediction performance of this method depends heavily on
the topology of the network and the quality of protein-protein
interactions with respect to size and reliability []. The network
structure follows a scale-free property with few hubs and the
majority of proteins involving in small number of interactions
and some interactions needed further verification. The
homology of top high ranked proteins was persisted with
mouse (MUS MUSCULUS). The protein APP (UniProt
identifier: P05067) was the protein identified with the largest
number of interactions in the constructed network as conformed
by Jiao Li et al []. 
To assess the reliability of this network, the
interactions of P05067 (Amyloid beta A4 protein) were
compared with the results of STRING [] database. The results
show that IIM algorithm successfully detected 80% of
interactions when compared with STRING. However, out of
80% of the interactions detected successfully, 20% interactions
need further experimentation for validation purpose. The
results were recorded in the  (see supplementary
material).

Conclusion
We have provided a novel method, which will extract the direct
protein-protein interactions from integrated databases referring
to manually reviewed UniProtKB proteins. We suggest that this
PPI network has to expand to its maximum potential with
support of more reviewed proteins and their potential
interactions. Now, this set of protein interactions may trigger
text mining efforts for identification of any novel disease
proteins and their interactions. The method already provides a
new technique for investigation of important biological
processes and molecular functions in the context of drug
research. This method can be improvised for other diseases in
future.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Rao et al, Bioinformation 9(19): 968-972 (2013)

Workflow of the proposed method

Protein-protein interaction network for Alzheimer's disease

