Background
It is a verity now universally acknowledged that population-level
vaccination is the most effective preventative measure discovered
thus far for the control of infectious disease and for subsequently
mitigating the effects of re-infection. A vaccine is a molecular or
supramolecular agent able to engender specific protective immunity,
an enhanced adaptive immune response to re-infection by
pathogens. Immunity is characteristic of proper immune system
functioning and manifests itself in the ability of the host to tolerate
endogenous, somatic substances and to eliminate exogenous,
foreign material. This discrimination defends us against diverse
infectious diseases, since microbial products are readily seen by the
immune system as alien products. Protection results in the
potentiation of host survival and the destruction of pathogens [].

Vaccines themselves come in various guises. Some may be living
but weakened - or attenuated - strains of micro-organisms that have
been cultured under conditions which reduce their capacity to cause
disease and thus give rise only to mild or undetectable infections;
and include those acting against measles, rubella, yellow fever,
mumps, and tuberculosis. Such vaccines reduce the intrinsic
virulence exhibited by a virulent microorganism, typically by
altering their growth conditions, yet leave their immunogenic
properties largely unaffected. Vaccines may also be killed or
inactivated organisms treated with heat or chemicals; examples
include vaccines active against Influenza, cholera, bubonic plague,
polio, hepatitis A, and Rabies. So-called subunit vaccines are a third
form of vaccine. They comprise individual pathogenic proteins, and
examples include vaccines against HBV, Human Papillomavirus,
and Haemophilus influenzae B. Subunit vaccines, consisting of
highly immunogenic carbohydrate, such as cell wall components;
protein; or glyco-protein conjugates, stimulate measurable yet often
quite weak immune responses, necessitating the use of adjuvants to
raise initial levels of immunogenicity and also complex vaccination
regimes to sustain enduring protection. Yet despite such drawbacks,
subunit vaccines remain a popular objective and are thus a current
focus for vaccine discovery.

In the era of reverse vaccinology, we may pose ourselves the
question: given the genome of a pathogen, how do we choose
appropriate antigens as efficacious candidate subunit vaccines? The
immunogenicity of an antigen arises no doubt from a complex
interplay of factors. Traditionally, people have seen sub-cellular
location as a prime determinant: immunogenic proteins need to be
accessible to surveillance by the immune system; and as such they
likely to be secreted or located on the cell surface. Others have
sought to use sequence similarity to identify antigens [] or
developed non-parametric methods to predict antigen status [&gt;,].
Yet another alternative postulates that the immunogenicity of a
protein is determined by its overall lack of similarity to the host
proteome []. This idea is, in its simplicity and directness, quite
compelling. Based upon this assumption, and through the use of the
sequence similarity search tool BLAST, we attempt here to leverage
sequence similarity to discriminate effectively antigen from nonantigen
and establish a threshold that ostensibly separates the two
classes. If successful, such an undertaking would constitute a
significant advance in rational vaccine design. More specifically, we
sought to analyse the degree of similarity between known bacterial
antigens and the Human Genome and Mouse Genome, compared
with a control group of non-antigens, and thus establish a systematic
benchmark for such a strategy.

Methodology
Sequence similarity analysis of antigen datasets, non-antigen
datasets and various pathogenic genome sequences to the Human
and Mouse Genome were performed using a local, standalone
version of BLAST [], which allowed full control of E-value cut-off
and of the substitution matrix used. E-value thresholds were raised
from 10 to 6000 to identify best matches even when these lacked
statistical significance. Seven substitution matrices were examined:
BLOSUM45, BLSOUM62, BLOSUM80, BLOSUM90, PAM30,
PAM70 and PAM250. Datasets of 100 known antigens obtained
from the literature and 100 non-antigens from bacteria were
analysed []. Non-antigens were selected from SWISSPROT so that
they mirrored the antigen sets, being selected stochastically from the
same set of species [,]. Bacterial antigens used are listed in
. Additionally, genomes corresponding to Human, Mouse, 
and Bacteria were downloaded from FTP sites at National Center
for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)
[http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/], European Bioinformatics Institute
(EBI) [http://www.ebi.ac.uk/], and Ensembl
[http://www.ensembl.org/]. Looking at log10E-value+1 values from
BLAST, the Mann-Whitney ‐ or two-sample rank - test was used to
compare the bacterial antigen and non-antigen sets, as random
samples of two larger, independent populations, using the statistical
package Minitab, Release 14.1.

Discussion
A dataset comprising 100 known bacterial literature protein
antigens, as well as a control set of 100 bacterial protein nonantigens
[, ], were compared against the Human and Mouse
Genomes, resulting in lists of the highest scoring similarities. For
completeness, a similar analysis for five whole bacterial genomes
(Escherichia coli, Chlamydophila pneumoniae, Haemophilus
influeanzae, Salmonella typhi and Mycobacterium tuberculosis) was
also undertaken. All sets analysed were similarly distant to both
mouse and human genomes. Scores for antigen, non-antigen, and E.
Coli proteome versus the human proteome are plotted in .
It is clear that the three overall distributions strongly overlap, and
that no cut-off point is apparent.

We also analysed the effect of modifying BLAST parameters (data
not shown), primarily by varying the substitution matrix. Such
matrices purportedly measure the probability of evolutionary
divergence of the protein to develop an evolutionary protein model.
Technical practicalities limited us to 7 matrices: 4 BLOSUM series
and 3 PAM series. To a first approximation, the use of different
matrices makes no operationally significant difference: although
individual values varied, the shape and structure of the plotted score
distributions remained ostensibly unaltered. Moreover, the ability to
discriminate antigens from non-antigens was essentially unaffected.

We also assessed the statistical significance of differences between
distributions of scores using the Mann-Whitney test, a nonparametric
statistical method, which tests the differences in medians
rather than means, since the population being analysed was skewed
and un-normalised. We used two different confidence intervals:
90% and 95%; p-valued were the same for each. Although p-values
for several of the PAM and BLOSUM matrices were marginally
significant, overall ‐ and in accordance with our visual
interpretations ‐ the test established the acceptance of the statistical
null hypothesis that the apparent differences resulted solely from
chance. The most promising results came with the use of the
PAM30 matrix, but even here the result was again marginal and
poorly predictive.

Overall, and given our original objectives, these results can be seen
as disappointing, yet they leave no doubt that there is no obvious
and significant difference between bacterial antigens and bacterial
proteins or proteomes deemed to be non-antigens, and there is
certainly no clear and unequivocal means to differentiate the two
sets simply on the basis of scores. The non-antigen set seems to
contain marginally more proteins that are more similar to the
eukaryotic host proteomes than the antigen set, though this may be a
statistical quirk due to the limited data set we use. It may thus be
that when dissimilarity screening versus the human proteome is
used in concert with other properties characteristic of antigens, such
a technique predicated on dissimilarity will in part prove useful, at
least in terms of rejecting a portion of the bacterial genome as lowlikelihood
candidates. However, as a tool for vaccine discovery,
dissimilarity is in itself of limited utility, at least for Bacteria and as
the sole arbiter of immunogenicity.

Thus a key feature of future work would be to integrate this
approach with our nascent techniques for antigen identification.
Other work might include making use of more sophisticated
approaches available for sequence similarity analysis, such as
PatternHunter []. Rather than use pairwise alignment, use could be
made of multiple sequence alignment to derive distances, as
implemented in say T-coffee []. Likewise, the more sophisticate
scoring available in phylogenetic software, such as PHYLIP or
PALM [], could prove useful. In terms of analysing data, some
virtue may be gained by using Operating Characteristic (ROC) plots
and the 2 sample Kolmogorov Smirnov test to compare
distributions.

Conclusion
The hypothesis of Kundac et al. [] is undeniably compelling.
However, our examination provides evidence that contradicts their
hypothesis, at least as we restate it: that non-redundancy is key to
predicting candidate vaccine antigens. To abbreviate our story: we
were unable to determine a suitable threshold able to differentiate
antigens from non-antigens on the basis of similarity to the host’s
proteome. Both antigens and non-antigens were, to a first
approximation, essentially equally dissimilar to host proteomes, and
about as dissimilar as the background distribution provided by
whole bacterial genomes. We conclude that straightforward
dissimilarity searching is not a suitable approach for selecting
candidate vaccine antigens from bacteria. We are currently pursuing
more sophisticated and successful approaches, so far without
success.

Protein immunogenicity arises from many factors. These include
host-side properties ‐ possession of B or T cell epitopes for example
- and pathogen-side properties ‐ protein expression levels and subcellular
location - as well as its aggregation state and the possession
of post-translational danger signals. A candidate vaccine should be
highly expressed, available for immune surveillance, and possess
epitopes that the host recognises. Predicting such diverse properties
remains challenging, though several contributing factors can be
reliably predicted. What we need is an integrative, systems biology
approach to the problem. Our search for such an approach
continues.

Citation:Ramakrishnan &amp; Flower , Bioinformation 4(10): 445-447 (2010)

Protein sequences compiled and annotated in-house as Bacterial antigens.

A sequence similarity comparison with the E-value as 6000 and BLOSUM 62 matrix, between the Antigen, Non-antigen and Ecoli
genome sequences. Two separate scales were used as the number of matches to the Human Genome varied from the antigen and nonantigen
datasets to the genome. The blue line with the star marker symbolizes the genome is plotted on the scale to the right hand axis (Y
axis).

