miRNAs are a well-established RNA phenomenon derived
from the non-coding major portion of the human genome.
miRNAs cannot be ignored because they are so heavily
involved in the control of gene expression []. The study of
neurological and neuropsychiatric disease also has miRNA
components that are commencing to be mapped and
characterized. Due to their high stability, for example miRNA
can be found in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) as well as within cells.
In a recent publication, comparisons of miRNAs were made
among individuals that were HIV positive, without and with
HIV encephalitis (HIVE), in individuals with HIV-Associated
Neurological Disorders (HAND), and HIV negative controls.
CSF and frontal cortex were studied. Comparing HIV positives
with HIV negatives, a total of 66 miRNAs were found
differentially upregulated for HIV positive individuals. The
HIV negative cases were a type of disease control in that they
had non-viral acute encephalomyelitis. Of the 66 upregulated
miRNAs, statistical analyses demonstrated that 11 miRNAs
were upregulated significantly [].

HIV-1 Tat is an important virus coded regulator protein
produced during HIV-1 infection []. HIV-1 Tat disrupts
neuronal function via miRNAs. Specifically, miRNA expression
becomes altered in neuron cultures exposed to HIV-1 tat. Tat is
a high inducer of miR-34a as well as other miRNAs. However,
tat also decreased levels of target genes including CREB
involving miR-34a [].

Earlier studies on the effects of Tat specifically and HIV-1 in
general need to be reinterpreted in terms of the involvement of
miRNAs. For example, PC12 (neuronal) cell cultures
demonstrate a rapid (ca. 5 minutes) increase in cAMP and CREB
transcription factor levels upon exposure to HIV-1 Tat. The
serine-133 (Ser-133) amino acid is phosphorylated on CREB.
However, when this experiment is done at later times of
addition of Tat (ca. 1-2 hours), there is a continued decline of
cAMP and reduction of phosphorylated CREB. The
dephosphorylation was shown to be due to activation of a
phosphatidyl-inositol-3-kinase, AKT, and cyclic nucleoside
phosphodiesterase pathway. In addition, there was increased
apoptosis of the treated cells. These findings may be relevant
for the mechanisms of pathogenesis for HIV-1-associated
dementia (HAD) [] as well as HAND.

In related studies, HIV-1 Tat protein was shown to affect
histone deacetylases (HDACs) (that are central in
transcriptional epigenetics and remodeling of chromatin). Tat
protein upregulates HDAC2 in neuronal cells. This may result
in inhibition of transcription in neurons and down regulation
for Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) as
well as CREB gene expression. These genes are involved in
neuronal function and synaptic plasticity. Moreover, as
indicated by findings described above, miRNAs may be
involved. These pathways may be components of dysfunction
that lead to HAD and HAND. Consequently, specific HDAC2
inhibitors may be of use in NeuroAIDS [].The manipulation of
miRNA expression may become an important component of the
attack on disease. The figure illustrates various gene
interactions. It is left as a puzzle for the interested reader to
identify the various genes and their functions in the ()
[,
].

There are no financial conflicts.

Citation:Shapshak, Bioinformation 8(23): 1123-1124 (2012)

CREB HDAC2 CaMKII Network. The graph shows
interactions among proteins CREB, HDAC2, and CaMKII. As
mentioned in the text, the expression of these proteins may be
modulated by miRNAs that are consequent to HIV-1 infection.
In this figure, line-colors and various interactions with other
genes are red Down-regulation, green Up-regulation, beige
Regulation, purple Co-expression, brown Physical Interaction,
turquoise dotted Predicted Protein Interaction, and mauve
dotted Predicted TFactor Regulation (GenePro SA Biosciences,
http://www.sabiosciences.com/).

