Background
A large number of photosensitizers have been used for
Photodynamic therapy (PDT). They consist of Porphyrins,
Chlorophylls and Dyes [,
]. Other examples include Amino
levulinic acid (ALA), Silicon Phthalocyanine, m-Tetra hydroxy
phenylchlorin and mono-L-Aspartylchlorin. An important
requirement for a photosensitizer is that it should have the
ability to produce Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS). The
predominantly formed ROS is Singlet Oxygen. In order to
produce singlet oxygen, the energy of the triplet state of the
photosensitizer must be higher than the energy needed to excite
oxygen from its ground triplet state to the first singlet state (0.98
eV21). ROS induce controlled cell death via apoptosis or
sudden cell death via necrosis [,
].

Small ligand docking is useful for the computational analysis of
binding interactions between proteins and ligands [,
].
Binding interactions are reported as Scoring Functions. Scoring
Functions can describe the strength of intermolecular van der
Waals and electrostatic interactions between all atoms of
ligands such as Porphyrin derivatives in the complex with a
receptor such as CaCa2+ ATPase. Calcium ATPase transports CaCa2+
ions across the cell membrane against a concentration gradient.
The crystal structure of the CaCa2+ ATPase of rabbit sarcoplasmic
reticulum (SERCA1a) is known at 2.6 Å resolutions ()
[,
]. It is a 994 amino acid protein which contains a large
cytoplasmic headpiece consisting of the A (actuator), N
(nucleotide binding) and P (phosphorylation) domains. There
are also ten transmembrane α-helices (M1–M10) and small
luminal loops. The lengths of helices and the angle which they
make with the membrane, is variable. Some of the helices (M2
and M5) are very long (60 Å), some are unwound (M4 and M6)
and some have a kink in the middle (M10). In this study,
molecular docking was employed to study the interactions with
CaCa2+ ATPase of Tetraphenyl porphine sulfonate (TPPS),
5,10,15,20-Tetrakis(4-sulfonatophenyl) porphyrinato Iron(III)
Chloride (FeTPPS) and 5,10,15,20-Tetrakis(4-sulfonatophenyl)
porphyrinato Iron(III) nitrosyl Chloride (FeNOTPPS) 
().

Methodology
Energy Minimization:
All the three molecules, Tetraphenylporphinesulfonate (TPPS),
5,10,15,20-Tetrakis (4-sulfonatophenyl) porphyrinato Iron(III)
Chloride (FeTPPS) and 5,10,15,20-Tetrakis (4-sulfonatophenyl)
porphyrinato Iron(III)nitrosyl Chloride (FeNOTPPS), were
constructed on a Silicon Graphics Octane2 workstation with
IRIX 6.5 operating system. The energies of all the molecules
were minimized using a MM3PRO force field [] and Gasteiger-
Hückel charges [] with a convergence gradient of 0.05
kcal/mol/Å. For FeTPPS, the coordinate bonds of Fe+2 with
pyrrole nitrogen were defined first before energy minimization.
For FeNOTPPS, the coordinate bonds of Fe+2 with pyrrole
nitrogen were defined first and then with nitric oxide. The total
energies of TPPS, FeTPPS and FeNOTPPS after minimization
were 67.9, 90.9 and 125.8kcal/mol respectively. The breakup of
energies is shown in  (see supplementary material).

Molecular Docking:
CAChe program was used for docking TPPS, FeTPPS and
FeNOTPPS in the crystal structure of CaCa2+ ATPase (PDB code:
1SU4). These complexes were then subject to molecular
dynamics simulation for duration of 10,000 fs then submitted
for energy minimization using a MM3PRO force field [] and
Gasteiger-Hückel charges [] with convergence gradient of
0.05 kcal/mol/Å for TPPS, FeTPPS and FeNOTPPS bound to
CaCa2+ ATPase. Individual docking studies of TPPS, FeTPPS and
FeNOTPPS were then conducted using a trifurcated CaCa2+
ATPase molecule divided into domain 1 (amino acid 1-150),
domain 2 (amino acid 151-591) and domain 3 (amino acid 635-
994) respectively ().

Results &amp; Discussion
Photodynamic therapy is a medical treatment which uses the
combination of light and a photosensitizer to kill cancer cells.
When a Porphyrin derivative (photosensitizer) is introduced in
the body, it reaches the interior of the cells where it is most
likely present in a bound state. When these compounds reach a
certain critical level in the diseased tissue, light is shone on the
tissue to activate the Porphyrin-derivativesto produce the ROS
(mostly singlet Oxygen) [].

Singlet Oxygen can be produced by a chemical reaction 
[], a
gas phase discharge [] or a photosensitization reaction 
[]. In
PDT, the damage caused to cells by TPPS, FeTPPS and
FeNOTPPS is due to singlet Oxygen production which results
in cell death []. Singlet Oxygen can be produced either in the
ER membrane from which it diffuses to the protein, or the
photosensitizer itself can be bound to the CaCa2+ ATPase. Single
Oxygen has a short lifetime and a small radius of action. The
binding site of Porphyrin-derivatives is likely within the CaCa2+
ATPase. Initial diffusion of these compounds into the ER
membrane followed by diffusion to binding sites within the
transmembrane region of the CaCa2+ ATPase is a possible
mechanism.

In this study, molecular docking has been used to predict the
binding orientation of Porphyrin-derivatives: TPPS, FeTPPS
and FeNOTPPS, with respect to CaCa2+ ATPase. The protocol used
for docking comprised two parts: (i) initial introduction of a
ligand in an active site; and (ii) assessment of the strength of
binding by a Scoring Function. CaCa2+ ATPase was not considered
to undergo any significant conformational changes upon
binding of the ligands []. The strength of binding was
determined by use of Scoring Functions that approximate the
free energy of binding of a ligand to a receptor. Scoring
Functions are expressed as a sum of separate terms that
describe the various contributions to binding [,
]. Generally,
Scoring Functions are used to assess protein−ligand binding
affinity in structure-based drug discovery. Empirical Scoring
Functions (such as the one used by MM3PRO force field in
CAChe) estimate the binding affinity by taking into account the
various terms that can contribute to the binding free energy.
These terms may include, for example, van der Waals
interactions, hydrogen bonding, de-solvation effects,
metal−ligand bonding, etc [–]. A high value of the Scoring
Function represents “tight” binding between the protein and
the ligand and vice versa.

Table 1 gives the Scoring Functions [,
] obtained by
Molecular Docking of TPPS, FeTPPS and FeNOTPPS with the
three domains of CaCa2+ ATPase. The values of Scoring Functions
show that FeNOTPPS is energetically stable in domain 2 (amino
acid 151-591) of CaCa2+ ATPase (). According to the crystal
structure of CaCa2+ ATPase () [,
], domain 2 contains 17
α-helices and 19 β-strands. Two of these α-helices are
membrane spanning (M3 and M4). Domain 2 is also where the
two Calcium-binding and a Nucleotide-binding (N) domains
are located. Nucleotide-binding domain (N) is the largest of the
three cytoplasmic domains. This domain stretches from Gln
360-Arg 604 and comprises a seven stranded antiparallel β-
sheet with two helix bundles sandwiching it. Phe 487, which
has been identified as an important residue for Nucleotidebinding,
is present in this domain. Other residues such as Lys
515 and Lys 492 which are also important for Nucleotidebinding
are located nearby. Given the comparable molecular
sizes of ATP and Porphyrin derivatives, it is possible that
FeNOTPPS is energetically stable in the Nucleotide-binding (N)
domain [].

Summation of Scoring Functions of TPPS/FeTPPS/FeNOTPPS
in the various CaCa2+ ATPase domains and division by three for
the mean yielded Delta-values as shown in . The Deltavalue
for domain 2 is the highest which also proves that the
molecules preferentially tend to dock into domain 2 (amino acid
151-591) of CaCa2+ ATPase.

Conclusion
Most of the photosensitizers currently being used in human
clinical trials are porphyrin-based, so investigation of binding
properties of TPPS, FeTPPS and FeNOTPPS and their potential
application in photodynamic therapy, is important. A possible
intracellular target for these molecules, after they have reached
the interior of a cell, is CaCa2+ ATPase of sarcoplasmic reticulum.
Molecular docking revealed that interactions of FeNOTPPS
with CaCa2+ ATPase are relatively energetically favorable. It is
possible that binding of FeNOTPPS to domain 2 (amino acid
151-591) stabilizes the CaCa2+ ATPase in a confirmation that
inhibits any further changes in conformation.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Hai et al, Bioinformation 9(8): 409-413 (2013)

(a) Ribbon diagram based on the crystal structure of CaCa2+ ATPase of sarcoplasmic reticulum (PDB Code: 1SU4) 
[]. α-
Helices are represented by cylinders and β-strands by arrows. Colors change gradually from the N-terminus (blue) to the Cterminus
(red). The nucleotide-binding domain is labeled ‘N’, the activator domain is labeled ‘A’ and the phosphorylation domain
is labeled ‘P’; (b) Chemical structures of Tetraphenylporphinesulfonate (TPPS), 5,10,15,20-Tetrakis(4-sulfonatophenyl)
porphyrinato Iron(III) Chloride (FeTPPS) and 5,10,15,20-Tetrakis(4 sulfonatophenyl)porphyrinato Iron(III)nitrosyl Chloride
(FeNOTPPS)(counter clockwise from top).

(a) Clockwise from the top, docking of TPPS with domain 1 (amino acid 1-150), domain 2 (amino acid 151-591) and
domain 3 (amino acid 635-994) of CaCa2+ ATPase of rabbit sarcoplasmic reticulum; (b) Clockwise from the top,docking of FeTPPS
with domain 1 (amino acid 1-150), domain 2 (amino acid 151-591) and domain 3 (amino acid 635-994) of CaCa2+ ATPase of rabbit
sarcoplasmic reticulum; (c) Clockwise from top, docking of FeNOTPPS with domain 1 (amino acid 1-150), domain 2 (amino acid
151-591) and domain 3 (amino acid 635-994) of CaCa2+ ATPase of rabbit sarcoplasmic reticulum.

