Background
Gene networks can be described in a rather abstract way: They
consist of genes (nodes) connected to other genes by edges. The
edges represent a relationship between the two genes they
connect in a network of genes. This abstract nature of networks
means that they have found a wide variety of applications in
(systems) biology [–]. The construction of a network begins by
defining the nodes to be part of the network and then
establishing edges, which may be weighted, between relevant
nodes. Edges are established by using some sort of
measurement (e.g. a correlation metric) taken between two
nodes.

A network exhibiting scale-free topology has most nodes
connected to a small number of other nodes (i.e. less
connectivity), but has a small number of nodes which are
connected to many nodes (i.e. high connectivity). These highly
connected nodes are often referred to as hubs. One property of
such networks is their robustness to random perturbation or
deletion of nodes, since most are only connected to a few other
nodes []. 
On the flip-side, the hubs are essential to maintain
the structure/topology of the network and targeted deletion of
these nodes has major impacts on the network. If a hub gene
becomes dysfunctional, then the network will be severely
perturbed and may result in a disease state [,
]. While the
hubs in a network are essential to biological function, there are
other important structures existing in a network. For example,
sets of nodes that are highly interconnected with each other but
poorly connected to the rest of the network. We call these
modules, but they are also known in the literature as dense
subgraphs or communities, and are important for helping us to
better understand the structure and function of the network 
[,
].

Gene co-expression networks (GCN) are a way to model data
from gene expression microarray or RNAseq experiments.
Nodes are the transcripts, edge weights are a measure of how
strongly the expression levels of the two transcripts/nodes are
co-expressed across a series of treatments and are typically the
absolute Pearson correlation coefficients. A co-expression
measure is biologically interesting to study since two genes
whose transcript levels rise and fall together across a series of
samples might be under a common control mechanism such as
a transcription factor or other regulatory machinery. The GCN
are increasingly becoming important in integrative genetics and
systems biology approaches that aim to detect causal genes and
their networks [, 
–].

The main objective of this study was to compare two common
categories of GCN construction methods, with respect to
detecting and keeping highly interconnected hub genes in the
GCN, using connectivity as a criterion. One method is called,
Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analysis (WGCNA)
and is thoroughly discussed in the original paper of Zhang and
Horvath [], an R package is also available for performing these
analyses []. Since its first publication by Zhang and Horvath
[], the WGCNA method has been refined, standardized and
now widely used in the construction of gene co-expression
networks in many different species [,
]. The other method is
called, Partial correlation and an information theory (PCIT) and
full details of the PCIT algorithm are provided in Reverter and
Chan [] and an R package implementing the algorithm is also
available in Watson-Haigh et al. []. PCIT is a method used to
identify spurious edges for removal and is a data driven
approach. We have provided some details of WGCNA and
PCIT methods in .

For comparison of methods, we use real microarray datasets
from our fetal sheep skin transcriptomics experiment. The
rationale for this experiment was that the density of Merino
wool follicles is established early in fetal development and this
commercially important trait dictates wool fibre diameter,
which is the key driver of the price paid for wool. It has been
shown that Merino lambs exposed to metyrapone, an inhibitor
of cortisol synthesis, in utero show a lifetime alteration in wool
growth parameters. McDowall et al. [conference
presentation/paper] performed a microarray gene expression
experiment in an attempt to elucidate the genes responsible for
initiating primary wool follicles (between days 55-65 of
gestation). We use the microarray gene expression data from
this experiment to compare the two GCN methods.

Methodology
Microarray data quality control and analyses:
The microarray experimental design and generation of
transcriptomics data across 4 different experimental conditions
are given in the (see supplementary material). All
microarray data analyses were performed in the R statistical
programming environment, using BioConductor programs.
Several quality control (QC) steps were used to ensure that
there were no gross anomalies with the technical aspects of
hybridization []. The identification of differentially expressed
(DE) genes was achieved using the limma package while
GOEAST package was used to identify gene ontology (GO)
terms enriched in a list of DE genes. See  for
additional results from microarray data quality control and
exploratory analyses.

Building gene co-expression networks:
Ten gene co-expression networks (GCN) were created, a
WGCNA and PCIT derived network for each of the following:
D60 (day 60 samples); D67 (day 67 samples); Treated
(Metyrapone samples); Control (control samples) and ALL (all
samples). For each network, Pearson correlations were
calculated for all pairs of transcripts and used as the basis for
building the networks. Of the 24,072 probe sets on the array,
10,561 were excluded due to low mean expression (≤ 2.5 on the
log2 scale) or low variance (≤ 0.001) across all 16 arrays, leaving
13,511 genes from which to calculate Pearson correlations.

In the WGCNA approach, a power adjacency function was
applied to the absolute Pearson correlation matrices. The value
of the power adjacency function's exponent (β) was chosen
using the scale-free topology criterion. We chose β in the
interval (1, 11) which maximized the scale-free topology fit (R2
≥0.85) while maintaining a high mean connectivity. In the PCIT
approach, we applied the PCIT algorithm to the Pearson
correlation matrices using the PCIT R package [] to identify
and delete edges found to be insignificant by the algorithm [].
We define the adjacency matrix by using the absolute value of
the remaining edge weights (Pearson correlations).

The WGCNA approach created a Topological Overlap Measure
(TOM) using gene expression data. The TOM is a generalized
measure of the common edges for those two nodes in a network
share []. It has been shown to be useful in biological networks
[] and takes values in the interval (0,1). A TOM based
dissimilarity measure (1-TOM) can be used as input to average
linkage hierarchical clustering. Modules can be defined as
discrete branches in the clustering tree and can be formally
defined by applying a tree cutting algorithm to it []. We do
not formally define modules by using tree cutting, instead we
use TOM plots to visualize the interconnectedness of nodes in
the network.

We defined highly differentially ranked (HDR) nodes based on
first computing the connectivity (k) of the ith gene (ki). Then
ranks of the node connectivities (coded in ascending order as
1,2,3,…) are computed for each method. Then we compared the
ranks to identify those which are highly differentially ranked
(HDR) between WGCNA and PCIT derived networks. See
 
for calculations of ki and HDR.

Results and Discussion
Constructed gene networks:
Of the 24,072 genes present on the array, 13,511 were identified
for network construction by applying the mean and variance
filters, described above, across all 16 microarray samples. With
WGCNA that uses the scale-free topology criterion, we found
coefficients of β for the power adjacency function to be 3, 7, 11,
8 and 6 for the ALL, Control, Treatment, D60 and D67 networks
respectively. Mean connectivity for these networks were 518,
319, 153, 185 and 561 respectively. TOM plots showed clear
modular structures present in all networks ().
In one of the D67 network we have identified a module of 267
genes, some of which is known to be involved in wool follicle
development  (see supplementary material). In
particular BMP4 is expressed around the time of secondaryderived
follicles which give Merinos their distinctive fleece.

With PCIT, many edges were identified as insignificant and
deleted by PCIT () leaving a much sparser
network with 2.76%, 3.07%, 3.14%, 3.11% and 2.77% edges with
absolute weights of ≥0.49, 0.66, 0.66, 0.63 and 0.69 for the ALL,
Control, Treatment, D60 and D67 networks respectively.

Highly differentially ranked (HDR) nodes:
For the ALL network, the Spearmans rank correlation
coefficient for connectivity is high (0.94) indicating a broad level
of agreement between the connectivity ranks of nodes in the
WCNA and PCIT derived networks. There is some
disagreement among middle ranking nodes as seen by the
departure from the line of equality (y=x), but highly and lowly
connected nodes are similarly ranked in the WGCNA and PCIT
derived networks (). Therefore, one may
conclude that both approaches rank nodes, by connectivity,
approximately equally. This is especially true when looking at
the most highly connected nodes (hubs) which are always
ranked highly. However, the connectivity ranks for the Control,
Treatment, D60 and D67 networks show a different story
(). They show reasonable agreement in
rank for most nodes with Spearman rank correlation
coefficients of 0.79, 0.66, 0.81 and 0.78 for the Control,
Treatment, D60 and D67 networks respectively. However, a
small number of nodes (n=357 for the Control network; n=370
for the Treatment network; n=251 for the D60 network and
n=477 for the D67 network) showed highly different
connectivity ranks in the PCIT network compared to the
WGCNA network. We call these highly differentially ranked
(HDR) nodes and are identified as dense clusters of data points
in the off-diagonal regions of the plots (red data points in
). Of the 13,511 genes in the networks, we
found a total of 1,017 were HDR in at least 1 of the networks
and 29 were HDR in all but the ALL network (see
supplementary material).

These HDR nodes are highlighted in the TOM plots of the
WGCNA derived networks (). We found that
all HDR nodes are among the most highly interconnected, as
determined by TOM, and were present in every module of their
respective networks.  (see supplementary material)
gene enrichment analyses of a list of HDR nodes from one of
the WGCNA modules. From this type of analyses, we could
make an informed conclusion regarding relevance from a
biological perspective and the impact of WGCNA vs. PCIT in
retaining or deleting hub genes.

We found that PCIT is removing edges from nodes that are
among the most highly interconnected genes, not only in a
network but also within modules, like those mentioned in
 (see supplementary material). I.e. it's removing all the
strong connections that exist between tightly co-regulated
genes. While some of these edges may not be seen to be
independent of the edges to a third node, they are likely to be
key members of modules. The highly interconnected nature of
the HDR nodes means that these are good candidate hubs. The
removal of hubs from networks has a serious effect on the
topology of that network and of the modules from which it is
comprised. We believe that the PCIT approach to edge deletion
is also deleting edges for hub nodes due to the fact that they are
all highly interconnected for biological reasons rather than the
formation of spurious edges forming due to non-independence
of the correlations. The removal of edges by PCIT from HDR
nodes is likely to have the effect of knocking out the hub nodes
of the network and is likely to severely disrupt its topology.

Conclusion
We have generated ovine microarray gene expression data and
applied various quality control methods available in
Bioconductor R programs before comparing two commonly
used co-expression network construction methods. We
illustrated similarity and differences in these approaches using
this real biological data set (a drug challenge transcriptomics
experiment in sheep) rather than an artificial simulated data set
or a large data set often only seen in human or mouse studies.
Thereby, our findings are more applicable to the typical rather
than atypical studies where experiments tend to be smaller in
size. However, these investigations and results apply to any
microarray gene expression data regardless of species. We have
restricted our comparison to just WGCNA and PCIT softwares
because they represent two broad categories. The results of this
study can, somewhat, be extrapolated to those softwares that
fall under the two broad categories. We can conclude that
WGCNA method is favorable over PCIT method as the former
retains biologically relevant hub genes and their connections
within sub-networks intact. This is proven by gene enrichment
analyses of all genes within each sub-networks and modules
across different treatment conditions in both methods and its
relevance to phenotypes in question (here wool or hair growth).
While we can recommend testing more GCN algorithms, there
are several new approaches and softwares constantly emerging
(e.g. FunNET []) and it is impossible to compare all. Lastly,
one could also test these methods on other transcriptomics data
sets but this would not change the conclusion.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors thank M.L. McDowall, N.M. Edwards, G.S. Natrass,
H.A. McGrice and P.I. Hynd for their contribution to sheep
experiment and providing data from this experiment to authors
for comparison of network methods.

Citation:Kadarmideen &amp; Watson-haigh, Bioinformation 8(18): 855-861 (2012)

Plots relevant to the All, Control, Treatment, D60 and D67 networks (columns). Top row: TOM plots for the WGCNA
networks. Heat maps shows the level of topological overlap as measured by TOM, where dark red/orange represents a higher
level of overlap between pairs of nodes in the network. Modules can be defined using the dark red/orange squares along the
diagonal. Red bars above and to the left of each heat map indicate the location of the highly differentially ranked (HDR) nodes. All
HDR nodes identified from all the networks are show in the ALL network TOM plot. Middle row: Frequency distributions of all
Pearson correlations (grey) used to generate the networks and those edges remaining following PCIT (red). Bottom row: Plots of
ranked connectivity's calculated from the PCIT and WGCNA derived networks. Data points are semi-transparent, thus dense
regions of points appear as dark areas. Green dashed line is the line of equality. HDR nodes are shown in red, with all 1,017
indicated in the connectivity rank plot for the ALL network.

