Background
One class of platyhelminth, Monogenea is found parasitic
mostly on external surfaces and gills of freshwater and marine
fishes. In this class, 53 families were recognized in the most
recent phylogenetic analysis which is based on morphological
characters, but omitted at least ten other ‘families’ because of
uncertainties about origins and/or validity []. For many years,
despite different aspects of study, the validation and
phylogenetic position of the species of this class and their
relationship between the sister groups is unresolved. Generally,
monogenean identification is based on morphological criteria
and morphometric analysis which allows a qualitative and
quantitative approach in the analysis of several body parts of
monogeneans []. The status of many Indian species of
monogeneans is considered as species inquirendae []. Thus, there
is need to evaluate the status of many of the Indian species on
the basis of morphological as well as molecular features. During
the course of this study, we selected large subunit rRNA as
taxonomic tool because it is highly conserved across all
domains of life [,
] and the expansion segments can vary
greatly, even across recently diverged lineages [,
]. The 28S
rDNA is useful for evaluating different levels of taxonomic
divergence as they are ideal phylogenetic markers. Moreover, in
the case of platyhelminth systematics, rDNA have been
successfully used by workers in general and 28S rDNA in
particular in estimation of the relationships among the
Platyhelminthes []. Besides this, it has been known for at least
two decade that reference to secondary structure can improve
the assignment of positional homology in length heterogeneous
data sets [,
] and structure-based alignments have also been
shown to increase phylogenetic accuracy over automated
approaches [,
]. As a supplement to the phylogenetic
analyses, RNA secondary structure prediction and sequence
motifs are as important as the sequence for the function as well
as in the functional RNA. Interactions in the base pairing in an
RNA molecule are more important to the overall structure in
RNA than any other interaction. Secondary structure study
finds out the highly conserved elements in the structure of
monogeneans that is found to be common in all species along
with consensus structure prediction. The 28S rDNA segments
consist of one or a series of putative helical and nonpairing
regions that are useful for assessing different levels of
taxonomic divergence as they are ideal phylogenetic markers
[]. Apart from this, a predictive approach for the identification
of motifs that are conserved between different species was
undertaken. The 28S region offers short sequence motifs that
are also useful for monogenean species identification. These
short DNA sequences are taken from a standardized region of
the genome of all studied monogenean species and used as a
diagnostic marker for species identification. Thus, with the goal
to study the phylogenetic status of different species of
monogeneans, the present investigation was made. During
study, focus of our investigation was on monogenean species of
families Dactylogyridae [] which is the most diverse family
and Gyrodactylidae that is known to be affected by abiotic
factors in the macroenvironment []. The purpose of this study
is to examine the taxonomic status, phylogenetic relationships
and secondary structure prediction of 28 rDNA sequences from
nine different species of monogeneans that represents nine
genera and two families.

Methodology
Sample Collection:
Monogeneans were collected from infected freshwater piscine
hosts from Hastinapur Meerut, U.P., India (29°01+N and
77°45+E). Parasites were isolated from the gill filaments and skin
of the host as per method suggested by Malmberg [].
Monogeneans were examined under a dissecting stereoscopic
microscope. Morphological study of the monogeneans was
made as suggested by Malmberg []. Collected monogeneans
were cleaned with water, transferred to microcentrifuge tubes
in 95% ethanol for DNA analysis and stored at -20°C until
further use. List of the monogenean species used in this study,
with their host species, site, voucher details and GenBank
accession numbers are given in the  (see supplementary
material). Mounted voucher specimens of each sequenced
monogenean species were deposited in the Museum of
Department of Zoology, Ch. C.S. University, Meerut (U.P.),
India.

DNA and phylogenetic analysis:
DNA was extracted from individual parasites by using a
Qiagen DNeasy Tissue Kit (Qiagen, Germany) as per the
manufacturer+s instructions. 28S rDNA was amplified by PCR
using forward (5+-ACCCGCTGAATTTAAGCAT-3+) and
reverse primers (5+-CTCTTCAGAGTACTTTTCAAC-3+) 
[].
PCR amplification was performed using the following protocol
in a final volume of 25 μl PCR reaction. Each amplification
reaction contained 10X PCR buffer, 0.4 mM dNTP, 1 U Taq
polymerase (Biotools, Spain) and 10 pM of each primer. PCR
was carried out with the following steps: an initial denaturation
at 94°C for 3 min, 35 cycles of 94°C for 30 s, 56°C for 45 s, and
72°C for 1 min, and a final extension at 72°C for 10 min. PCR
products were separated by electrophoresis through 1.5%
agarose gels in TBE (Tris–borate–EDTA) buffer, stained with
ethidium bromide, transilluminated under ultraviolet light.

PCR products were purified using Chromous PCR clean up Kit
(#PCR 10, Chromous Biotech) and sequenced in both directions
using PCR primers on an automated sequencer using a Big Dye
Terminator vr.3.1 cycle sequencing kit in an ABI 3130 Genetic
Analyzer (Applied Biosystems). In addition to the sequences
generated from this study, all nucleotide sequences were
initially aligned by ClustalW and then manually adjusted.
Phylogenetic analyses based on the maximum parsimony (MP),
neighbour- joining (NJ) and maximum-likelihood (ML)
algorithms. The phylogenetic analysis was performed using a
distance method with the MEGA 5 []. The distance matrix
and the NJ tree were based on the Kimura+s 2-Parameter (K2P)
model and gaps were treated as missing data. Subsequently, the
most-parsimonious tree was obtained using the Close-
Neighbor-Interchange algorithm and branch robustness was
estimated through bootstrap (BP) analyses of 1000.

Predicted 28S RNA secondary structures and analyses:
Secondary structures of 28S sequences of monogenean species
were predicted by the online MFold package []. MFold is the
most widely used algorithm for RNA secondary structure
prediction that is based on a search for the minimal free energy
state. Since, GC content is known to influence structural energy
GC percentage was determined using a GC calculator
(http://www.genomicsplace.com/gc_calc.html). Prediction of
28S consensus secondary for nine different monogeneans was
made by using the MARNA web server [] based on both the
primary and secondary structures. Default settings were used
including base deletion, was scored 2.0, base mismatch 1.0, arc
removing 1.5, arc breaking 1.75, and mismatch 2 with ensemble
of shaped structures.

Motif identification, testing and validation:
28S sequence motifs were identified from the aligned sequences
by using PRATT software (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pratt/). The
C% parameter was adjusted to report pattern matching at 100%
of the sequences input. The motifs were expressed by using the
DNA alphabet (A, T, C, G) in PROSITE language [].
Validation of the motifs was performed for each monogenean
species using a “PATTERN MATCHING” web application
(http://genoweb.univrennes1.fr/Serveur-GPO/outils_acces.php3?id_syndic=175). In order to test for
additional reliability of monogenean species identification, the
motifs were evaluated using the Basic Local Alignment Search
Tool (BLAST) against the GenBank database of the National
Centre for Biotechnology Information. BLAST outputs were
then analysed to find only exact or perfect matches showing
significantly high score and low E-values for species. The
BLAST analysis investigated motifs that exhibited conserved
sites obtained from the species. A motif was considered highly
specific to a monogenean species if it matched most or all the
28S sequences available for that species.

Results
Construction of phylogenetic trees:
Phylogenetic trees were made by comparing the 28S sequence
of monogenean species from India with other species of
different geographical isolates. Estimates of evolutionary
divergence between sequences were conducted using the K-2-
parameter model. Bootstrap results from NJ and ML analyses
() indicate the phylogenetic position of these
monogeneans. The MP tree () reveals a similar topology
as observed in NJ and ML, but with bootstrap values lower than
the NJ and ML trees. Among the monogeneans, phylogenetic
relationships indicate that T. parvulus constitutes a clade with
Pseudancylodiscoides, Cornudiscoides, Bifurcohaptor and
Quadriacanthus. The species T. parvulus, C. proximus and B.
indicus were found in a close molecular biological relationship.
The species T. parvulus, C. proximus and B. indicus are both
molecularly and morphologically closely related. M. bihamuli
showed its validity as it is a monotypic genus and formed a
separate clade with a Neocalceostoma species. Phylogenetic
relationship of another group Trianchoratus and especially T.
agrawalae is also molecularly supplemented that constitute a
clade with Heteronchocleidus and Mastacembelocleidus indicus
together with other species of genus Trianchoratus. The genera
Mastacembelocleidus is found to be closely related to the genus
Trianchoratus and established its validity by forming a different
clade. Dactylogyroides i.e., D. longicirrus also confirmed its
position by forming a clade with its sister genus, Dactylogyrus
from which it was originally differentiated. Another species of
genus Sundanonchus, S. behuri validated itself by placing with its
sister species S. micropeltis having high bootstrap values in NJ,
ML and MP analysis along with genus Bothitrema. Recently, the
generic placement of the species S. behuri was changed from
genus Urocleidus to Sundanonchus on the basis of morphology
[]. Finally, within monogenea, another very species rich
group Gyrodactylus includes G. colisai with a well-supported
bootstrap value and supports its status by placing it with other
species of this genus. The MP tree was obtained using the
Close-Neighbor-Interchange algorithm [] in which the initial
trees were obtained with the random addition of sequences (10
replicates). Besides this, a separate phylogenetic analysis for
nine different species from the Indian region were also obtained
() based on MP method.

Secondary structure analysis:
Predicted 28S rDNA secondary structural features from the
different isolates were reconstructed () with the
highest negative free energy which provides the basic
information for phylogenetic analysis. The free energy value of
all these parasites and the characteristics of sequences for the
28S rDNA region shown in  (see supplementary
material). Length of 28S sequences of nine selected
monogeneans ranged from 298 to 362 bp. G+C content for all
isolates ranged from 45% to 53%.

The RNA secondary structures of the 28S gene regions were
analyzed on the basis of conserved stems and loops. The
observed structural similarities in the predicted secondary
structure are further reflected at the energy level. Highest
negative structural energy was observed in the Gyrodactylus
colisai (-117.80 Kcal) followed by Thaparocleidus parvulus (-116.60
Kcal) while Malayanodiscoides bihamuli (-98.30 Kcal) had lowest
negative free energy. Structural energy was found to be nearly
similar in Cornudiscoides proximus and Trianchoratus agrawalae
viz., (-114.90 Kcal) and (-114.70 Kcal) respectively. Major
common features found to be conserved in all nine species
() are (1) AUGU; (2) CCUGG; (3) AAGUCC; (4)
GGGUG; (5) GAGUCGGAUU. The secondary structure
analysis reveals presence of external loop, multi loop, bulge
loop, hairpin loop and interior loop. In order of preference for
the conservation, it is found to be in the case of external loop
and multi loop followed by bulge loop and hairpin loop with
considerable variations was found in the interior loop 
(.
External loop remained constant in all nine species. In the
present work, we applied a more objective approach for the
reconstruction of best alignment using secondary structure
(). The figure shows alignment of nine monogenean
species which evaluates both the sequence and structural
similarity. The alignment optionally satisfies given constraints
and allows unaligned fragments at the end of both sequences
without penalty. The alignment is shown together as the
predicted structure (). The consensus structure is
printed as a string of dots and brackets on top of the alignment.
The string is well bracketed, such that each base pair in the
structure is shown by corresponding opening and closing
brackets. Furthermore, compatible base pairs are dark grey,
where the hue shows the number of different types C–G, G–C,
A–U, U–A, G–U or U–G of compatible base pairs in the
corresponding columns. In this way the hue shows sequence
conservation of the base pair. The saturation decreases with the
number of incompatible base pairs; thus, it shows the structural
conservation of the base pair. Prediction of the consensus
structure is much higher in accuracy than the secondary
structure prediction from single sequences.

In-silico identification of monogenean species based on 28S motifs:
During the study, we identified sequences of motifs from 28S
rDNA region of the nine monogenean species. These motifs
were screened, validated and as a final choice, six
representative short sequence motifs of sizes inferior to 35
nucleotides  (see supplementary material) were
selected. Total motifs of 28S sequences were tested by BLAST
analysis against the generalized GenBank database. All the
motifs showed exact or perfect BLAST matches with the
monogenean sequences (best hits, 100; 100% of identity; E
values, 3e-08 to 1e-07). All motifs did not match any distantly
related non-monogenean species available in the GenBank
database. This proves that this tool can also be successfully used
for phylogenetic analysis.

Discussion
The taxonomy of monogeneans is based mainly on
morphological data but DNA based methods work as
supplementary tools for more authentic and accurate
identification. In the case of monogeneans, sequences of 28S
rDNA have been successfully used to study phylogenetic
relationships at higher levels i.e., family and subfamily 
[,
]
and generic levels [–]. These studies of 28S sequences from
monogenean species indicate that there exists a high specific
homogeneity. During this study, T. parvulus was found to be
closely related to Pseudancylodiscoides and Cornudiscoides species
because these genera also exhibit morphological similarities [].
Cornudiscoides was similar to Thaparocleidus but differs in having
a ventral bar that is divided into two parts and a long pair of
modified marginal hooks which are usually situated close to the
ventral anchors []. Besides this, in Thaparocleidus species they
have complete ventral bar and lacks the long pair of marginal
hooks found in Cornudiscoides species []. However,
Thaparocleidus and Pseudancylodiscoides exhibit close
morphological resemblance but can be differentiated on the
basis of having a divided ventral bar, the parts of which are
well separated, and presence of larval type of marginal hooks
[]. Although, Pseudancylodiscoides has been considered a
synonym of Thaparocleidus [] but now this genus is considered
valid []. Validity of Bifurcohaptor species is also erroneous in
India because many species are probably synonymous and are
in the category of species inquirendae. About 14 species of
Bifurcohaptor reported by different workers from India were
found to be synonym of B. indicus []. On the evidence of
molecular phylogenetic analysis in this study by different
methods, B. indicus is valid and closely related to C. proximus in
having a divided ventral bar and ventral anchors disposed on
separate lobes of the haptor. Another monogenean of
Dactylogyridae studied M. bihamuli which was considered as a
monotypic genus and therefore no other species can provide for
comparative morphological or molecular information. Methods
of phylogenetic reconstruction unequivocally place T. agrawalae
with its sister species from different geographical regions
amongst a clade with members of Heteronchocleidus with high
bootstrap values. Trianchoratus and Heteronchocleidus showed
close morphological and molecular similarity [, 
,
] so
both genera have been assigned to the subfamily
Heteronchocleidinae [] (Ancyrocephalidae Bychowsky 1937).

A new genus Mastacembelocleidus within Monogenea under the
family Dactylogyridae was proposed to include all freshwater
monogeneans on Mastacembelid fish []. In this analysis,
different tree methods exhibited that M. indicus forms a
separate clade which shows their closeness to members of
another clade including Trianchoratus and Heteronchocleidus.
This study also shows the validation of D. longicirrus, an
indigenous monogenean shows close similarity with the genus
Dactylogyrus from which it was originally differentiated. Genus
Dactylogyroides [] was proposed for the worms previously
described under the genus Dactylogyrus. The tree topologies
derived from the phylogenetic analysis inferred from 28S rDNA
data depicted that Dactylogyroides and Dactylogyrus as
genetically closely related sister taxa. Therefore, based on our
molecular results we propose that the species D. longicirrus is
correctly accommodated in the genus Dactylogyroides. In the
Indian monogeneans, the taxonomic position of Sundanonchus
[] within the class Monogenea has been unstable since the
genus was proposed. In India, the species S. behuri was
originally described as Urocleidus behuri [] but this generic
placement was not suitable because Urocleidus [] is typically a
freshwater North American genus. On the basis of the presence
of a single intestinal tract, 16 hooks and a coiled copulatory
tube, characteristics of Sundanonchus [] placed U. behuri in this
genus but retained the species valid. Though difficult, the
accurate identification and validation of monogeneans species
is very crucial for further study of this diverse, economically
and ecologically important group. Kritsky et al. 
[] considered
Indian species of the genus Urocleidus [] as incertae sedis.
Therefore, Tripathi et al. [] redescribed Urocleidus behuri 
[]
from Nandus nandus in India and transferred it to the genus
Sundanonchus on the basis of morphological features only. But,
the morphological characters among genera and species groups
are affected by investigator+s personal subjective view. Through
this study an attempt has also been made to confirm the
validation of this species from India by the use of molecular
characters and secondary structure prediction in taxonomic and
phylogenetic studies. The results show that on the basis of
molecular similarity with S. micropeltis, the S. behuri shows its
validation and correct generic placement with high bootstrap
values. Genus Gyrodactylus within monogenea is very species
rich, for which the morphological and morphometric diagnosis
is evidently difficult []. The best evidence of this difficulty is
the ratio of described and named species to the estimated global
number of species and predicted that the real number of species
might be more than 20 000, yet only 470 names are considered
valid and available []. It is difficult to manage 20 000 species
in a morphological archive based on subtle differences in the
opisthaptoral hard parts. Thus, additional and more
informative characters are needed to understand the evolution
and even taxonomy of parasites in this genus. Our analysis
show that, beside the morphological features, molecular data
further supports that G. colisai fits in the G. neonephrotus
anguillae sp. group [] with high bootstrap values.

RNA structure and prediction analyses plays an important role
in evaluating the evolutionary relations that link all organisms
with each other which led Woese to propose the Archaea as a
distinct major branch on the “Tree of Life” []. RNA structure
proves commonly used markers for phylogenetic reconstruction
and knowledge of RNA secondary structure can improve
alignment quality []. Elements of RNA secondary structure
themselves can be treated as evolving characters and
phylogenetic connections may be traced by changes in
structural character states []. Predicted rRNA structures of
monogeneans reported from India shows similarities in their
thermodynamic energy and structural parameters like in
different types of loops. Since rRNA forms evolutionarily well
conserved secondary structures and these structures are related
to the functions of molecules. Thus, computing the consensus
structure that is common to several related RNA sequences can
drastically improve the prediction []. It can be used as an
additional source of data incorporating structural parameters of
molecules for the study of monogenean phylogeny. Prediction
of consensus have been made for nine species of monogeneans
using individual sequences which were then combined in a
form of sequence alignment for the finding of conserved
structure motifs that is needed for the accuracy. This study also
investigated the development of short 28S sequence motifs, as
DNA oligonucleotide barcodes for unambiguous, correct and
easy identification of monogenean species. A critical point in
monogenean taxonomy is the identification of these small
parasites and this difficulty can be overcome by motifs
sequences. The present in-silico identification of nine
monogenean species with 28S motifs is consistent with
investigations made using traditional approaches like by
morphology as well as through molecular phylogenetics and
secondary structure predictions. This approach provides a new
tool for an accurate identification of monogenean species and
DNA barcoding which also offers new ways of understanding
their life cycles more clearly. In conclusion, this study reveals
that the 28S rDNA gene may prove useful for studies of
systematics of parasitic Platyhelminthes. Molecular study of
this group along with secondary structure analysis could be a
valuable tool to distinguish new species and too strong
monogenean systematic because on the basis of morphological
studies identification and validation of these parasites is very
difficult.

Conclusion
This study also reveals that 28S sequences are reliable for
sequence analysis and secondary structure prediction to resolve
the phylogeny. 28S sequence motifs allowed an accurate insilico
distinction of the monogeneans and indicate that motifs
(≤50 bp in size) can be considered a promising tool for
monogenean species identification. Further studies are required
for more adequate elucidation of the phylogeny of monogenean
parasites using other genome sequences.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Special thanks to the Department of Zoology, Ch. C. S.
University, for resources. Funding for this study was partially
supported by grants from the UGC (University Grants
Commission), India, under the Post Doctoral Fellowship to AC
and by the Uttar Pradesh Government, Centre of Excellence,
India, to HSS, wide project number (No.1486/70-4-2011-
46(43)/2010).

Citation:Chaudhary &amp; Singh, Bioinformation 8(18): 862-869 (2012)

Neighbor joining (NJ) tree of monogenean species
from different geographical regions. The tree was identical to
that obtained using maximum likelihood (ML) and the numbers
along branches represent bootstrap values given as NJ/ML. The
asterisk indicates the species sequenced from India.

Maximum parsimony (MP) tree of monogenean
species from different geographical regions. The asterisk
indicates the species sequenced from India.

Topology obtained from maximum parsimony (MP)
analysis for nine species of monogeneans reported from Indian
region.

Predicted 28S rDNA secondary structures for nine
species of Monogenea from the Indian region. (A) Bifurcohaptor
indicus (B) Cornudiscoides proximus (C) Dactylogyroides longicirrus
(D) Gyrodactylus colisai (E) Malayanodiscoides bihamuli (F)
Mastacembelocleidus indicus (G) Sundanonchus behuri (H)
Thaparocleidus parvulus (I) Trianchoratus agrawalae

Distribution of various types of loops in 28S region in
monogenean parasites of nine species from Indian region.

Nine monogenean species sequence alignment shows
a consensus secondary structure. The structure is shown in the
dot bracket format above the alignment and each corresponding
bracket represents consensus base pairs of the alignment
columns beneath. A sequence conservation profile is also
shown in light grey bars below the alignment.

Consensus putative secondary structure of the 28S
region of nine species of Monogenea from the Indian region.
The consensus predicted secondary structure from Figure 6,
light and dark grey according to the different types of base
pairs in the corresponding alignment columns.

