Background
The melting temperature is an important characteristic feature
of a sequence in the prediction of thermal stability of proteins.
Increasing the fraction of hydrophobic contacts in a protein
tends to raise melting temperature; increasing the fraction of
repulsive charge contacts decrease the melting temperature and
consistent with a destabilizing effect. It has been revealed that
thermophilic and mesophilic proteins have both similar polar
and non-polar contribution to the surface area and
compactness. Salt bridges and main chain hydrogen bonds
show an increase in the majority of thermophilic proteins than
their mesophilic homologues. In thermophilic proteins,
hydrophobic residues are significantly more frequent and polar
residues are less frequent []. It has been described that
thermophiles prefer to have contacts between residues with
hydrogen-bond-forming capability. The contact density is not
significantly correlated with protein melting temperature. More
contacts are observed between polar and non-polar residues in
thermophiles than mesophiles. Tyr has good contacts with
several other residues, and Cys has considerably higher longrange
contacts in thermophiles compared with mesophiles 
[].
It has been reported that both thermophilic and mesophilic
proteins have similar hydrophobicities, compactness,
oligomeric states, polar non-polar contribution to surface areas,
main-chain and side-chain hydrogen bonds. Salt bridges and
side-chain hydrogen bonds increase in the majority of the
thermophilic proteins. Arg and Tyr are more frequent, Cys, Ser
are less frequent in thermophilic proteins. Thermophiles have a
larger fraction of their residues in the α-helices and avoid Pro in
its α-helices to a greater extent than the mesophiles. It may be
the cause to withstand high temperature [].

The stabilizing group consists of polar-charged residues and
non-polar residues that possess high surrounding
hydrophobicity. It has been described as the polar uncharged
residues destabilize the molecule against temperature and Ser
being the most destabilizing residue. A very high co-operativity
exists among the stabilizing non-polar residues. In small
globular proteins, the melting temperature remains mainly a
function of amino acid composition and in complex molecules it
depends on other factors also []. The maximum melting points
of proteins with respect to pH are reported that the correlation
coefficient of hydrophobic index versus melting point was
0.622; average residue volumes versus melting points was 0.960;
the average residue volume versus hydrophobic index was
0.697 []. In proteins, the strongest contributors to thermostability
are increased in ion pairs on the surface and the very
strong hydrophobic interior []. Identifying the protein regions
that are most likely to be involved in function is useful to gain
information about its potential role. The combination of
experimental and in-silico approaches will help us to interpret
the genetic information in functional terms and be the final goal
of the so-called post-genomic era []. It has been analyzed that
multiple peptide motifs are capable of different temperature
dependent transitions []. In the present work, we have studied
the distribution of amino acids in both thermophilic proteins
and in its functional sites. In this amino acids distribution
studies, the classification of amino acids as hydrophobic,
charged and polar residues is followed. Then, the distribution
of such classified amino acids and the melting temperature
transition among proteins is analyzed.

Methodology
Datasets:
The database ProTherm [] available at:

http://gibk26.bio.kyutech.ac.jp/jouhou/Protherm/protherm.html 
is used for our study. The melting temperature of wild
proteins measured by different techniques such as DSC, CD,
Adsorption, Fluorescence, and NMR, for both single chain and
multi-chains proteins is mainly focused in this study. Certain
conditions such as measurement, state, chain type, pH etc. is set
to derive a proper dataset for the analysis. To avoid bias in
prediction of result, the size of the derived dataset was reduced
by redundancy check.

Amino acid composition (%):
The percentage of amino acids present in the protein sequences
were collected using Protparam tool [] available at
http://web.expasy.org/protparam/. The percentages of
collected amino acids were classified as hydrophobic, Hp (A, I,
L, M, F, P, V), charged (R, D, E, K) and polar (N, C, Q, G, H, S,
T, W, Y) residues.

Non-polar residues (hydrophobic):
Hydrophobic amino acids are found at the core of many
proteins and they mainly composed of non-polar residues. A
significant amount of non-polar residues are also found on the
surface of proteins. These are not favorably interact with water
but stabilized by numerous van der Waals interactions.

Charged residues:
Charged amino acids are found on the surface of the protein as
well as seldom buried in the interior of a folded protein. They
can interact with water and other important biological
molecules. The positively and negatively charged amino acids
form salt bridges.

Polar residues (hydrophilic):
Polar amino acids are found both at buried position as well as
on the surface of proteins and posses hydrophilic groups which
either form hydrogen bonds with other polar residues in the
protein or with water. Polar amino acid side chains may form
side chain-side chain or side chains-main chain hydrogen
bonds. These interactions are often crucial for the stabilization
of protein tertiary structure and are normally conserved.

Functional/ Active sites:
The CASTp server [,
] available at 
http://stsfw.bioengr.uic.edu/castp/ is used. Using this server, the amino
acids present in the active sites of single chains proteins were
identified. The POOL program (Partial Order Optimal
Likelihood) available at: http://www.pool.neu.edu:8080/wPOOL/,
which is a machine learning method that identifies the
functionally important residues in a given protein structure 
[]
is also used in this research.

Multiple sequence alignment:
Analysis of multiple alignments was performed using the
software MAFFT. It is a multiple alignment program for amino
acid or nucleotide sequences [,
] available at
http://mafft.cbrc.jp/alignment/software/. This program is
used to understand the phylogenetic relationships among wild
proteins particularly with single chain and Tm &gt; 80°C at pH7.
Jalview version-2 was used for editing and for obtaining
phylogenetic tree [].

Discussion
As per previous report, in complex molecules the melting
temperature depends on other factors also []. So, the dataset
with defined conditions such as pH, state, number of chains etc
is generated. Due to these limitations, the study is carried out
with limited data. The overview of available Tm measured by
different techniques at different pH is given in 
(). 
These scatter plots depicting the size of Tm dataset
measured by DSC and CD measurements is larger than the
datasets derived through adsorption, florescence, NMR
measurements. Since the reliability of result prediction attained
by large dataset, the research is focused on Tm obtained
through DSC. The distribution of single chain and multi-chains
proteins with Tm &gt; 80°C at different pH are shown in 
(). The study is to find out the type of amino acids
significant for maintaining the temperature in thermophilic
proteins. While considering the whole protein with Tm &gt; 100°C
at pH 7, hydrophobic residues are more frequent followed by
polar residues in single chain proteins (4 data) and
hydrophobic/ charged residues are more frequent and polar
residues are very less frequent in multi-chains proteins (4 data)
which illustrated in (). As per the previous
report the hydrophobic residues are significantly more frequent
and polar residues which are less frequent in thermophilic
proteins []. 
The dataset of 16 proteins with many single chains
as well as few multi-chains having Tm &gt; 40°C at pH 7 make it
clear that almost 50% are shared by polar residues and the
remaining 50% are shared by mostly hydrophobic residues
which followed by charged residues (). This dataset is
taken just for the comparison of different melting temperature
transition.

While considering the whole protein with Tm &gt; 80°C at pH 7,
not much variations is observed in polar residue distribution
for both single chain and multi-chain proteins. In single chain
proteins (11 data), hydrophobic residues are more frequent and
in multi-chains proteins (7 data), charged residues are more
frequent (
) illustrates the top
ten residues

Which constitute the functional site of proteins having Tm &gt;
80°C at pH 7. While considering the functional sites of these
proteins, not much variation is observed in polar residue
distribution for both single chain and multi-chain proteins. It
seems polar residues remain same in protein as well as in
functional sites for both single chain proteins. In single chain
proteins (10 data), hydrophobic and charged residues are
equally frequent and in multi-chains proteins (7 data), charged
residues are high frequent (). As reported
earlier more contacts have been observed between polar and
non-polar (Hp) residues in thermophiles than in mesophiles 
[].
The individual amino acid distribution of single and multichain
proteins having Tm&gt;100°C at different pH is shown in
(). In which, the composition of Hp (A, I, L) and
charged (E, K) are high; charged (R, D), polar (G) and Hp (V)
are of medium composition; polar (N, Q, H, P, S, T, W, Y) and
Hp (M, F) are less in composition. Previous studies
demonstrated that Arg and Tyr are more frequent and Cys, Ser
are less frequent in thermophilic proteins [].

Identifying the protein regions that are most likely to be
involved in function may give the direction to melting
temperature transition. So, the study is focused on the amino
acid distribution in its functional sites. As reported by Pool
server, either because of atoms with undefined parameters or
because of high-potential regions in the protein, the functional
site residues for our entire dataset could not be collected. And
also, it is given as the top 8-10% of the residues in the rank
order gives the best performance in this server. Hence, the top
10 residues were considered for work (see
supplementary material). The Accession number and PDB ID
of proteins used in the multiple sequence alignment for the
dataset generated using the conditions such as: single chain,
two state, pH7, Tm&gt;80°C  (see supplementary
material). The phylogenetic tree shown in () depicted
that 1BSQ, 1QG5 are similar proteins; 1ONC and 1J2V/1NZA
might have another internal ancestor. In this, 1J2V and 1NZA
belong to same family. 1NZA, 1ONC and 1J2V are of almost
same length and the percentage of top 10 functional site
residues are also same for single chain proteins with Tm&gt;80°C
at pH7.

Conclusion
Previous report described whether it is a single chain or multichain
protein, the polar amino acids composition is often crucial
for the thermal stabilization of proteins. The present study
concludes that while considering the entire protein,
hydrophobic residues are more frequent in single chain proteins
and charged residues are more frequent in multi-chains
proteins. While considering the functional sites of these
proteins, hydrophobic and charged residues are equally
frequent in single chain proteins and charged residues are very
high in multi-chains proteins. But, the polar residue distribution
remains same for both single chain and multi-chain proteins
and its functional sites. From the phylogenetic tree of single
chain, two state proteins having Tm&gt;80°C at pH7, it is clear that
the thermophilic proteins having similar amino acid length
might have same internal ancestor. This may lead to the
conservation of functional site residues and its chemical nature
is same which may also responsible for high melting
temperature. Instead of considering the entire protein, the
functional site analysis leads to better understanding of how
these distributions of amino acids may affect the melting
temperature of proteins.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank Bharathidasan University and Anna University – BIT
campus, Tiruchirappalli for providing the facility to carry out
our research work. We also thank Ms. A. Sheeba Princess,
Assistant Professor, Department of English, Bishop Heber
College, Tiruchirappalli for helping the language corrections.
This work was partially supported by grants from University
Grants commission and UGC – SAP, Government of India.

Citation:Maheshwari &amp; Archunan, Bioinformation 8(23): 1176-1181 (2012)

1.a: The plot depicts the melting temperature of various proteins obtained by DSC technique at different pH; 1.b): The plot
depicts the melting temperature of various proteins obtained by CD technique at different pH; 1.c); The plot depicts melting
temperature of various proteins obtained by Absorption technique at different pH; 1.d): The plot depicts melting temperature of
various proteins obtained by Fluorescence technique at different pH; 1.e): The plot depicts melting temperature of various proteins
obtained by NMR technique at different pH.

2.a: The plot depicts the single chain proteins having melting temperature above 80°C at different pH 
[]. 2. b) The plot
depicts the multi-chains proteins having melting temperature above 80°C at different pH 
[].

3.1a: Illustration of amini acids distribution among single-chains proteins having Tm&gt; 100°c at different pH; 3.1b)
Illustration of amini acids distribution among multi-chains proteins having Tm&gt; 100°C at different pH; 3.2) Illustration of
Proteins with many single chains as well as few multi-chains having Tm&gt; 40°C at pH7; 3.3) Illustration of single chain two state
proteins having Tm&gt; 80°C at pH 7; 3.4) Illustration of multi-chain two state proteins having Tm&gt; 80°C at pH 7; 3.5a) Illustration of
functional site residues of single chain proteins having Tm&gt; 80°C at pH 7; 3.5b) Illustration of functional site residues of multichains
proteins having Tm&gt; 80°C at pH 7

plot depicting the amino acid distribution (%) of single and multi-chain proteins having Tm&gt;100°C and at different pH
[]. (Note: Different proteins used for our study are highlighted in VIBGYOR coloring scheme by its PDB ID)

5.a: Pictorial representation of the output of MAFFT program which depicts the multiple sequence alignment of usersubmitted
sequences (note:cinsensus positions of amino acids are highlighted in VIBGYOR coloring scheme); 5.b): Snapshot for the
phylogentic tree of user-submitted multiple sequence alignment for wild proteins particularly with single chain having Tm &gt;
80°was performed using the software MAFFT [].

