Background
Transcription factors interact with cis-acting elements present
in the promoter region of various stress-responsive genes and
thus, activate cascades or a whole network of genes to enhance
tolerance towards multiple stresses at a time []. The AP2/ERF
family contains unique plant transcription factor subfamilies
with a principle role in biotic and abiotic stress responses.
Dehydration responsive element binding factors, also known as
DREB transcription factors, are members of the AP2/ERF
family which consist of many important regulatory and stress
responding genes []. DREBs, which are identified in different
plant species, induce the expression of functional target genes
involved in abiotic stresses. The Arabidopsis genome contains
different DREB genes. Until 2002, it was thought that
Arabidopsis had 14 DREB genes categorized in two different
DREB1 and DREB2 subclasses 
[]. Since then, other
Arabidopsis DREB genes such as DREB3, DREB4 and DREB5
were isolated and studied. In general, it is known that DREB1
related genes are responsible for cold stress responses, while
DREB2s regulate genes in drought and salinity signaling
pathways []. In fact, regulatory network studies show that
many of these signal pathways are overlapped [,
]. A large
regulatory portion of plant genes is located primarily in the
1000 bp upstream the transcriptional start site generally
referred to as the gene promoter region 
[]. This region consists
of specific cis-acting regulatory elements recognized by other
transcription factors to regulate gene expression. Cis-acting
regulatory elements are specific short DNA sequence motifs of
approximately 5-25 bp []. Therefore, understanding the cisacting
regulatory region bound by TFs can offer essential
information regarding transcriptional regulatory systems 
[].
Moreover, studying DREB transcription factor promoters can
reveal useful information about genes and signaling networks
involved in abiotic stress responses. Web-based databases such
as PlantCARE, PLACE, PlantPAN, Softberry and Genomatix
Matinspector facilitate the search for promoter motifs and their
identification. These databases consist of plant cis-acting
regulatory elements and provide access tools for in silico
analyses of regulatory sequences. Abiotic stresses regulatory
networks consist of different regulatory and functional genes
that cooperate to induce stress tolerance. DREBs have been
acknowledged as key regulators in these networks and
stimulate other inducible genes. One of the promising ways to
identify and functionally analyze genes that cooperate with
DREBs is to study gene regulatory networks. Recently, many
studies for elucidation and annotation of gene functions have
been carried out by use of in silico methods. Fortunately, the
past decade has seen a revolution in omics technologies
that have generated abundant amounts of useful data for in
silico function predictions []. Among the limited plant gene
network databases, Genemania is of the most reliable network
analyzers. GeneMANIA, is a flexible, user-friendly web
interface used for generating hypotheses about gene functions,
analyzing gene lists and prioritizing genes for functional assays
[]. 
Networks are produced from co-expression data from
Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), physical and genetic
interactions from BioGRID, and pathways data. This research
has focused on in silico analyses of Arabidopsis DREBs
promoters in order to determine chief cis-acting regulatory
elements relative to abiotic stress responses. In addition,
regulatory network analysis of At-DREB genes was carried out
to identify DREB participant genes in abiotic stresses tolerance.

Methodology
Data collection:
All complete mRNA coding sequences of Arabidopsis thaliana
DREB genes were collected from the RefSeq database of NCBI
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). In order to recognize the
upstream promoter region, nucleotide sequences of 1.5 Kbp
extending 5׳ from the genes׳ translation start site were
identified (http://www.phytozome.net).

Tools used for promoter analysis and regulatory network study:
1.5 Kbp of the 5׳ upstream promoter region of each gene was
scanned for the presence of cis-acting regulatory elements
involved in abiotic stress signaling pathways based on the Plant
CARE program (www. Plant CARE. Com/encyclopedia). A
number of DREB genes were nominated for the network study
based on containing the most varied motifs involved in abiotic
stress tolerance. In order to depict DREB regulatory networks
and analyze co-expressed genes, the GeneMANIA
(http://www.genemania.org) web tool was used. Based on this
database, an analysis of genes interacting with DREB genes and
gene function predictions was carried out.

Results &amp; Discussion
Accession numbers and definitions of all 20 Arabidopsis thaliana
DREB genes stored in RefSeq database are listed in  (see
supplementary material). According to their definition, all
DREBs were categorized as DREB1, DREB2, DREB3, DREB4
and DREB5 groups for succeeding studies. Promoter analysis
was carried out to identify chief cis-acting elements involved in
abiotis stress responses. Different functional cis-acting
regulatory elements associated with abiotic stress responses
were identified in DREBs upstream region. These functional
motifs are presented in  (see supplementary material).
Nine types of significant motif related to abiotic stress were
found in. These cis-acting elements included ABRE, (CGTCA)
MeJA response, MBS, HSE, TC rich, (TGACG) MeJA response,
TCA, LTR and ERE motifs. The promoter region of DREB genes
showed variety in motif types. All studied genes contained the
ABRE motif in their promoters. ABREs (ABA response
elements) showed perception of ABA-mediated osmotic stress
signals. The ABA-responsive element (ABRE; PyACGTG/TC)
is a well-studied cis-element involved in ABA-induced gene
expressions [,
]. ABRE-binding Protein/factors
(AREB/ABF) have positive effects on the osmotic stress
tolerance of plants [–
]. Although DREB genes are assumed
to work in ABA-independent signal transduction pathways,
presence of ABREs in the promoters of DREB genes indicated a
role for ABA-signaling in the regulation of DREB gene
expressions.

Another important stress-signaling observed motif is methyl
jasmonate (MeJA), which activates plant defense mechanisms
in response to environmental stresses such as drought, low
temperature, and salinity []. This motif was distributed in the
regulatory region of all DREB gene promoters except for
DREB2E and DREB2F. DREB2G and DREB2D possess ERE
motif. Having an important role in stress conditions, ERE, or
ethylene responsive element, is a conserved motif bind to
ethylene-responsive factor (ERF) []. In fact, it seems that an
integration of abscisic acid, ethylene and methyl jasmonate
signaling is crucial for regulating expressions of drought and
cold responses through DREB transcription factors.

Two temperature associated motifs, HSE and LTR, were
distributed in different DREBs. HSE motifs that bind to heat
shock factors (HSFs) are responsible for heat stress tolerance.
HSEs have been found to be consistently conserved in the
regulatory regions of many heat induced genes 
[]. The low
temperature responsive element (LTR) is important for the
induction of cold regulated genes [,
]. Our results indicate
that DREB2 group members possess LTR cis-acting elements in
their promoter regions. Thus, from the theoretical point of
view, DREB2 genes can be expressed in cold temperatures. This
result is, however, in contrast with previous studies 
[] which
demonstrated that DREB2s had a role in drought and salinity
signaling pathways but not cold stress. Nevertheless, to
support this finding, more empirical evidence is required. Some
DREB1 and DREB2 members were found to have an HSE
functional motif. Therefore, it can be concluded that both
groups can participate in heat stress tolerance. Moreover, the
results showed that MBS motifs are located in the promoters.
MBS cis-elements have been previously reported to be required
for the binding of MYB transcriptional factors required for
drought inducible gene expressions []. TCA is another motif
found in DREBs involved in salicylic acid responsiveness.
Evidence suggests that salicylic acid plays a significant role in
responses to abiotic stress effects such as low and high
temperatures. The TC rich motif, present in the studied genes,
is a cis-acting, stress responsive element involved in defense.
Due to the diversity of cis-acting elements involved in abiotic
stress tolerance, five DREB genes included DREB1A, DREB1C,
DREB2C, DREB2G and DREB3 were selected as candidate
genes containing the most diverse motif types related to abiotic
stresses. They all have seven different types of Cis element. It
can be suggested that these five genes are the most involved
transcription factors in abiotic stresses which can be expressed
in almost all different signaling pathways related to stresses.
Gene network depicting and analyses were hence carried out
on these genes. Since the type of cis-acting elements in DREB1A
and DREB1C, DREB2C and DREB2G were identical, only one
was selected. DREB1C, DREB2C and DREB3 were selected for
gene network studies using GeneMANIA. Network prediction
results using GeneMANIA for DREB1C, DREB2C and DEAR3
are shown in (). The results of co-expressed genes with
each of the candidate DREBs are presented in 
 (see
supplementary material). According to physical interaction
predictions, only DREB1C had physical interactions with
ATRCD1, SRO1 genes (). These two genes are important
regulators in stress, hormonal and developmental responses in
Arabidopsis thaliana []. From all input parameters such as
shared protein domains, co-expression and physical
interactions, 13 distinct functional groups were predicted. All
genes in the network were classified according to their function
in different groups. The results show that 7 groups including
ethylene-activated signaling pathway, response to water, cold
acclimation, heat acclimation, response to water deprivation,
response to cold and response to heat were involved in abiotic
stress responses. Each gene belongs to one or more group(s)
 (see supplementary material). The network contained
23 nodes, involving 8 known DREB genes. All functional
groups of the genes are shown in (). The network
analysis showed that other Arabidopsis DREB genes had
interactions with the selected DREB genes. DREB1A, CBF4,
DREB2H, DEAR2 and DREB2A were found to be types of other
dehydration responsive element transcription factors that either
had similar domains or co-expressed with DREB1C, DREB2C
and DEAR3 genes. Therefore, It can be suggested that different
DREB genes cooperate in abiotic stress responses. The results
demonstrate the utility of web based tools for discovering
potential cross-talk and interaction between DREB genes in
abiotic tolerance pathways.

Conclusion
This study focused on AtDREB genes and their non-coding
regulatory regions by computational analysis. Comparisons
among regulatory regions of different AtDREBs accomplished
and a number of putative motifs at the 5׳ regulatory regions
were identified. The diversity found among Cis-acting elements
in genes implied their different roles in signaling pathways.
Most of these transcription factors (ATDREBs) show
remarkable activity overlapping that confirmed with regulatory
network analysis in this study. Both promoter analysis and
genes network study of AtDREBs provide comprehensive
information about many other genes which induce the
expression of AtDREB genes or have functional collaborations
with AtDREBs. In fact, the knowledge of cis-acting regulatory
elements make a better understanding of abiotic stresses
signaling pathways, in which AtDREB transcription factors are
involved. However, since the predicted cis-acting regulatory
elements may not precisely correlate with experimental
expression data, experimental studies are crucial in order to
confirm computational analysis results.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Sazegari et al Bioinformation 11(2): 101-106 (2015)

Gene networks predicted by GeneMANIA web tool for DREB1C (A), DREB2D (B), and DEAR3 (C). Black nodes show
DREB1C, DREB2D and DEAR3. The gray nodes show differenet Genes, co-expressed, physical interacted and shared protein
domains with DREB1C, DREB2C and DEAR3 respectively.

