Background
The gene indices use available expressed sequence tag (EST), tentative consensus (TC), expressed transcript (ET) and gene sequences along with a reference genome. 
The EST data in the public databases provide an important resource for comparative and functional genomics studies []. Gene index is constructed for species organisms 
by first clustering, then assembling EST and annotated gene sequences. The TGI gene indices provide such an analysis for humans, animal, fungi, plant and use the available 
EST/gene identifier along with the 34 species genomes [,]. The importance of EST assembly and clustering has been well established as evidenced by databases such as 
XGI [] and TGI database []. The mining of these datasets is an important component of gene discovery and expression profiling []. The Gene Ontology (GO) is 
one of the most important and well-used ontology within the bioinformatics community and is dynamically controlled to describe molecular function, process/location for a protein [].

The Chinese cabbage (Brassica rapa) and rice (Oryza sativa) are most important vegetables in Korea and in northeast Asia. The National Institute of Agricultural Biotechnology 
(NIAB) was established in 1997 to complete rice genome using the cultivar japonica with the participation of the International Rice Genome Sequencing Project (IRGSP) consortium []. 
We obtained over 120,000 ESTs of Chinese cabbage (B. rapa ssp. pekinensis) derived from 26 different cDNA libraries described elsewhere []. We used similar base data for different 
agricultural species genomes to construct PlantGI at NIAB. Here, we describe the construction and utility of PlantGI.

Methodology
Dataset
The EST data was collected for Chinese cabbage and rice genome project at NIAB (127,144 EST). We then used the EST dataset at NCBI [] for species specific Gene Index development.

Development
Using the collected EST sequence, we constructed a database for EST CONTIGS and an EST assemble map viewer for CONTIG viewing. The EST CONTIG was assembled to EST sequences using 
the Fragment Assembly program []. The developed used is MYSQL in JAVA application with Oracle RDBMS. Thus, the database is developed using MYSQL [], JAVA [] and Oracle relational 
database management system (RDBMS).

Database content
PlantGI database provides 34,000 EST CONTIGS information for 10 species namely, rice (8488 records), wheat (8560 records), maize (4570 records), soybean (3726 records), barley (3417 records), 
Chinese cabbage (3602 records), tomato (1236 records), hot pepper (998 records), mushroom (130 records) and Arabidopsis (8 records).

Database design
The PlantGI is designed to provide information on gene indices in agricultural plants. The databases consist of ten species-specific menus that include Rice (Oryza sativa), Chinese cabbage 
(Brassica rapa), Wheat (Triticum aestivum), Maize (Zea mays), Soybean (Glycine max), Barley (Hordeum vulgare), Mushroom (Pleurotus ostreatus), Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), Hot Pepper 
(Capsicum annuum) and Tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum). It is a web application for interactive mining of EST contig and assembled individual EST data. It is possible to view individual EST 
sequence data and GenBank records as well as expandable nodes that correspond to EST members for CONTIGS.  shows four major menus, namely (i) a web blast search, (ii) identifier searching, 
(iii) keyword searching and, (iv) gene ontology analysis. Search result shows assembled EST map of CONTIG, individual EST sequences and an expression summary of ESTs within each species.

Database usage
The user can access PlantGI through the web browser using internet. The database is visualized using a web-based graphical view and anonymous users can query and browse the data using the 
search function. We propose to update data from various public resources on a quarterly basis and hence develop a useful tool for gene index analysis for agricultural plants.

PlantGI database was supported by NIAB research project (No: 2007139062200001602, the construction of agricultural biotechnology information management system).

A web snapshot for PlantGI database is shown. The view page shows individual windows; blast search, searching by identifier, EST contig number and GO. 

