Background
Combinatorial libraries have been extensively used in the
pharmaceutical industry to discover novel drug compounds. In
essence a combinatorial library: a library of related chemical
compounds is synthesized by chemical methods. The
combinatorial library can then be screened for identification of
compounds binding to a target protein. A variation on the
combinatorial library has been introduced by Ramstrom and
Lehn [] which has been termed as dynamic combinatorial
library. This chemistry employs continuous interconversion
between the library constituents to generate libraries. Novel
structures are continuously generated by reversible chemical
reactions which are used for spontaneous assembly and
interconversion of building modules. The dynamic
combinatorial library is thus able to form all variations of
building blocks which however are limited by the time and
chemical resources. We propose that the DNA within the
chromatin behaves as a dynamic combinatorial library capable
of forming novel structures by reversible processes. We also
propose that states within the library are linked via quantum
tunneling. These states are scanned by RNA polymerase and
the system decoheres to the “appropriate” state.

Discussion
Quantum tunneling is a term widely used in chemistry and is
also termed as chemical tautomerization. Several compounds
such as nucleotide bases exist as mixtures of related chemical
structures known as tautomers. In context of nucleic acids
tautomeric structures differ with respect to the position of
protons with in nucleotides thus resulting in keto and enol
forms. The alternative positions of keto and enol forms are
linked by proton tunneling [] and each preparation of
nucleotides contains a mixture of tautomers. Each molecule of a
DNA base exists as superposition of enol or keto form 
() linked by proton tunneling, the composition of the mixture
being governed by relative stability of each tautomer. It is
noteworthy that there are several molecules in the DNA that
exist in such superposition. We propose that the DNA molecule
exists in a superposition of all the possible tautomeric states, the
search of the DNA space results in selection of most appropriate
configuration of DNA for the given environmental
condition/developmental stage. It is however critical that the
quantum superposition of all possible states in the
combinatorial library can be built up and scanned before the
onset of decoherence. This is also the principle that forms the
basis of a quantum computer. That is why quantum
computation is so fast.

Time scales involved:
A two potential model has been proposed by Khalili and
MacFadden to give a rough estimate of time scales involved.
The authors have proposed a 1-dimensional quantum
mechanical model of a double potential well containing a single
particle that must exist in a superposition of being in both sides
of the well until a measurement is made (See 
 for the following equations).

Usually a=1Å, m=10-27 kg (proton mass) and ω = 1012 Hz
(terahertz vibration frequency). Thus the value of ts comes to
about 1012 seconds. Horsewill et al. [] have experimentally
calculated coherent proton tunneling in a hydrogen bonded
network as ts = 10-7 seconds. The scanning of DNA molecule to
explore all possibilities the quantum mechanical evolution of its
wave function will involve a large number of such tunneling
processes. These will involve similar timescale ts as a quantum
system isolated from its environment.

Thus decoherence time tD is very important and is defined as
the time that the full quantum superposition of all possible
states in the combinatorial library can be scanned by RNA
polymerase before the interaction with the environment
decoheres it. After collapse the quantum state is reset and the
wave function starts to evolve again. If decoherence is rapid,
i.e., tD&lt; ts, then the DNA molecule will never get a chance to
scan other configurations before collapsing back to original
state. However if tD&gt;ts, then there is a chance that it will find
itself in the “appropriate configuration“. This scanning is
extremely rapid and much faster than that achieved through
chemical reactions and random thermal collisions.

A question has been raised (although in a different context) by
Khallili and MacFadden that what would happen if the
“appropriate configuration” of the DNA molecule is achieved
after decoherence has taken place. Would this mean that the
“appropriate configuration” would be lost as the wave function
evolves again? The authors posit that this won't be the case.
Once the appropriate configuration is selected, the DNA
molecule is transcribed. This leads to significant change in the
dynamics of the system. In these conditions, the thermal
fluctuations are not the only source of decoherence. Here the
system is coupled more strongly to environment as more
nucleotides enter the transcription complex. Thus once
transcription begins, then it will be permanently coupled to its
environment and the transcription becomes an irreversible act
(a classical measurement). In this case the DNA molecule is
irreversibly dragged into the macroscopic world represented by
the appropriate state. Thus in essence if the time needed for
scanning of all possible structures within the quantum
combinatorial library is shorter than decoherence time,
quantum mechanics can speed up the process considerably.
This is because the scanning time is much shorter than the time
required scanning all the structures classically.

Avoiding decoherence:
It is important to avoid decoherence in order to obtain the
quantum mechanical advantage. Avoiding decoherence in the
‘warm and wet’ conditions of the cell is not trivial and our
knowledge of understanding of decoherence in complex
systems is far from complete. Margadonna and Prassides 
[]
have demonstrated superconductivity in doped fullerene
molecules. This indicates that certain organic structures may
support quantum superpositions. The use of quantum
tunneling to transport charges along DNA double helix by
whole transfer has been demonstrated by Giese et al., 
[] as also
the coherent proton tunneling in hydrogen bonded network by
Horsewill et al. []. Intramolecular quantum tunneling has been
demonstrated to be responsible for room temperature chemical
properties of organic chemicals such as benzene. The three π
electrons have been shown to tunnel across all bonds in the
benzene ring. As mentioned above the tautomeric forms also
display quantum tunneling. A number of enzyme reactions 
[,
&amp;
]
have been shown to involve quantum tunneling of
electrons and protons. Proton tunneling has also been
demonstrated to be dominant reaction mechanism responsible
for the rate acceleration performed by aromatic amine
dehydrogenase []. It is essential for our hypothesis that there
exist some ways of sustaining quantum coherence at relevant
time scales. In this context two ways have been hypothesized.
The first way is screening: in this method the quantum system
can be kept isolated from its decohering environment.

For instance, an active site is partially screened from van der
Waals-mediated thermal interactions from the rest of the cell. In
DNA the histone wrapped double helix might shield coding
protons in DNA from decoherence. The second way is the
existence of decoherence free subspaces. In building a quantum
computer attempts have been made to identify degrees of
freedom (subspaces of Hilbert space) that are not affected by
coupling of the system to its environment. It is notable that
when a system couples very strongly to its environment
through certain degrees of freedom, it may effectively “freeze”
other degrees of freedom by quantum Zeno effect, allowing
entanglements and coherent superpositions to persist. Davies
provides an example of a double-well one-dimensional
potential (similar to the one described above). A particle which
is placed in the lowest energy state of one well will shuttle back
and forth through the barrier, and will oscillate with a
particular frequency. However, if the particle is placed in an
excited state of the well this shuttling frequency will be
different. Consequently an initial state consisting of
superposition of lowest energy and excited states soon evolves
into a complex pattern. If the particle is now allowed to interact
with external environment, the environment has the effect of
forcing the complicated pattern of oscillations into synchrony,
thus maintaining a limited form of quantum coherence because
of environmental interactions [], present an example
demonstrating the above point in the context of neutrino
oscillations in a medium. This model can possibly be extended
to DNA.

The discovery of high temperature superconductivity has
established the existence of large-scale quantum coherence at
temperatures close to biological temperatures. DNA molecules
act as ohmic conductors and can also superconduct 
[].

Conclusion
We have proposed in this paper that the DNA within the
chromatin behaves as a dynamic combinatorial library capable
of forming novel structures by reversible processes and that
states within the library are linked via quantum tunneling.
RNA polymerase scans these states and the system decoheres to
the “appropriate” state. Two ways of sustaining quantum
coherence at relevant time scales could be possible. In the first
way, that is screening, the quantum system can be kept isolated
from its decohering environment. The second way is the
existence of decoherence free subspaces. The role of
superconductivity in context of avoiding decoherence has been
discussed in context of our hypothesis.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Grover et al, Bioinformation 9(3): 141-144 (2013)

Keto and Enol forms of nucleotides

