Background
The availability of large amount of genomic data generated by
the microbial genomes and the human genome project has
revolutionized the field of drug-discovery against threatening human
pathogens []. These large sets of genomic data are useful in
identification and characterization of the novel therapeutic targets and
virulent factors prevalent in the pathogens. Subtractive genomic
strategy is developed by assuming that the novel targets identified in
the pathogen should be essential for the pathogen that is it should
be involved in the replication, survival and a important component
of various metabolic pathways and mechanisms occurring in the
pathogen while at the same time should be absent on the host that is
human and should have no homolog in human, so that when a drug or
a lead compound is designed considering the potential target it should
only be against the mechanism and functionality of the pathogen not
the host. Subtractive genomics has been successfully used by authors
to locate novel drug targets in Pseudomonas aeruginosa []. The work
has been effectively complemented with the compilation of the
Database of Essential Genes (DEG) for a number of pathogenic
microorganisms []. The current studies make use of the subtractive
genomics approach and DEG to analyze the complete genome of
Salmonella typhi to search for potential vaccine candidates which
would possibly lie on the surface membrane of the pathogen and drug
targets.

Salmonella enterica serovar typhi is a human-specific gram-negative
pathogen causing enteric typhoid fever, a severe infection of the
reticuloendothelial system [–]. It has two strains CT18
(multiple drug resistant) [] and Ty with a complete proteome of 4718
proteins. Worldwide, typhoid fever affects roughly millions of people
annually, causing deaths. Infection of S. typhi leads to the development
of typhoid, or enteric fever. This disease is characterized by the
sudden onset of a sustained and systemic fever, severe headache,
nausea, and loss of appetite. Other symptoms include constipation or
diarrhea, enlargement of the spleen, possible development of
meningitis, and/or general depression. Untreated typhoid fever cases
result in mortality rates ranging from 12-30% while treated cases
allow for 99% survival. The early administration of antibiotic
treatment has proven to be highly effective in eliminating infections,
but indiscriminate use of antibiotics has led to the emergence of
multidrug-resistant strains of S. enterica serovar Typhi [].
Chloramphenicol was the drug for the treatment of this infection till
plasmid mediated chloramphenicol resistance was encountered [].
Following this ciprofloxacin became the mainstay of treatment being a
safer and more effective drug than Chloramphenicol but after clinical
resistance to treatment with ciprofloxacin in the patients suffering
from enteric fever, the choice left now is an expensive drug like
ceftriaxone or cefexime.[]. Resistance against ceftriaxone have been
reported to CDC (Centre for Drug Control) [] mild to moderate side
effects have been shown for ceftriaxone. The novel targets identified
by us using subtractive genomics will help enable understanding the
biology of the pathogen to provide a more cost effective medication.

Methodology
The systematic identification and characterization of potential targets
in salmonella typhi is illustrated in .

Retrieval of proteomes of host and pathogen
The complete proteome of Salmonella typhi were retrieved from
SwissProt [] and protein sequences of Homo sapiens were
downloaded from NCBI []. The Database of Essential genes was
accessed from its location http://tubic.tju.edu.cn/deg/.

Identification of essential proteins in S. typhi
The S. typhi proteins were purged at 60% using CD-HIT [] to
identify the paralogs or duplicates proteins within the proteome of
S.typhi. The paralogs are excluded and the remaining sets of protein
were subjected to BlastP against Homo sapiens protein sequences with
the expectation value (E-value) cutoff of 10-4. The resultant dataset
obtained were with no homologs in Homo sapiens. BLASTP analysis
was performed for the non homologous protein sequences of S. typhi against DEG with E-value cutoff score of 10-100. A minimum bitscore
cut-off of 100 was used to screen out genes that appeared to
represent essential genes. The protein sequences obtained are non
homologous essential proteins of S.typhi.

Metabolic pathway analysis
Metabolic pathway analysis of the essential proteins of S. typhi was
done by KAAS server at KEGG for the identification of potential
targets. KAAS (KEGG Automatic Annotation Server) provides
functional annotation of genes by BLAST comparisons against the
manually curated KEGG GENES database. The result contains KO
(KEGG Orthology) assignments and automatically generated KEGG
pathways. []

Sub-cellular Localization prediction
Protein sub cellular localization prediction involves the computational
prediction of where a protein resides in a cell. Prediction of protein sub
cellular localization is an important component as it predicts the
protein function and genome annotation, and it can aid the
identification of targets. Sub-cellular localization analysis of the
essential protein sequences has been done by Proteome Analyst
Specialized Subcellular Localization Server v2.5 (PA-SUB) [] to
identify the surface membrane proteins which could be probable
vaccine candidates.

Discussion
The results obtained through computational analysis reveals that out of
4718 proteins in salmonella typhi 159 were identified as duplicates
through CD-HIT with 60% similarity. The remaining 4559 paralogs
were subjected to subtractive genomics which leads to 3570 proteins.
These 3570 proteins when subjected to blastp against DEG database
showed 300 proteins, which were essential for the pathogen. The
results for subtractive proteome approach, metabolic pathway analysis
and sub cellular localization are listed in Table No. 1(). The purpose of the present studies was to locate those
essential proteins of S. typhi that play vital roles in the normal
functioning of the bacterium within the host and to pick out them in
the view of targeting. Detection of non-human homologs in the
essential proteins of S. typhi with subsequent screening of the
proteome to find the resultant protein product are likely to lead to
development of drugs that exclusively interact with the pathogen.
The non-human homologs of the surface proteins would represent
potential vaccine candidates. 300 of the essential proteins were
without human homologs. Metabolic pathway analyses of these 300
essential proteins by KAAS server at KEGG revealed that out of 300,
149 proteins might be concluded to be unique and are invariably
linked with essential metabolic and signal transduction pathways.
Presumably, screening against such novel targets for functional
inhibitors will result in discovery of novel therapeutic compounds
active against bacteria, including the increased number of antibiotic
resistant clinical strains [].

Metabolic pathway analyses of the 149 essential proteins revealed
that 15 proteins are involved in Carbohydrate Metabolism, 10 in
Energy Metabolism, 5 in Lipid Metabolism, 4 in Nucleotide
Metabolism, 30 in Amino Acid Metabolism, 20 in Glycan
Biosynthesis and Metabolism, 16 in Metabolism of Co-factors and
Vitamins, 20 in genetic information processing, 26 in environmental
information processing and 2 in human disease. The results are
summarized in Table 2 (). Comparative
analysis of the metabolic pathways of the host (Homo sapiens) and the
pathogen (S.typhi) by using Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and
Genomes (KEGG) reveals 8 pathways which are unique to S.typhi.
Thereafter, each selected pathway was screened for the unique
enzymes and proteins involved. The peptidoglycan layer of the
bacterial cell wall is the major structural element which plays an
important role in pathogenesis as it provides resistance to osmotic
lysis. D-alanine is the central molecule in the peptidoglycan assembly
and cross-linking. D-alanine-D-alanine ligase (ddlA) is an important
target as it is involved in D-alanine metabolism. Lipopolysaccharides
(LPS) are also one of the main constituents of the outer cell wall of
gram negative bacteria and play an important role for the survival of
the pathogen. Out of the 14 enzymes involved in LPS biosyntheseis
pathway, 13 enzymes are found to be essential for the variability of the
bacteria and could be probable drug targets and it did not show
homology with any human protein.

Two-component systems of bacteria represent the primary signal
transduction paradigm in prokaryotic organisms. 8 essential enzymes
were found to be potential targets in this pathway. Tryptophan
synthase beta chain (trpB) is an important enzyme as it is involved in
tyrosine and tryptophan biosynthesis pathway. Chemotaxis protein
(MotA) and chemotaxis protein methyltransferase (CheR) is essential
enzyme due to its involvement in multiple metabolic pathways like
cell Motility, bacterial chemotaxis and flagellar assembly.
Phosphoenolpyruvate (ppc) has been identified as a possible target due
to its involvement in carbon fixation in photosynthetic organism,
pyruvate metabolism and reductive carboxylase cycle. The focus of
the present studies was to hunt for potential targets in S. typhi by
computational approach. The sub-cellular localization prediction done
by PA-SUB identify 11 proteins lying on the surface of the pathogen
which could represent promising candidates for further
characterization and analysis with a support to vaccine design. The
results are summarized in Table No. 3 ()

Conclusion
The availability of full genomic and proteomic sequences generated
from the sequencing projects along with the computer-aided softwares
to identify and characterize probable drug targets is a new emerging
trend in pharmacogenomics . The application of the Database of
essential genes helps to identify the potential drug targets in
pathogens. The current study helps in the characterization of the
potential proteins that could be targets for efficient drug design against
Salmonella typhi. As subtractive genomic approach is applied for the
identification of drug targets, so the drug would be specific for the
pathogen and not lethal to the host. Molecular modeling of the targets
will decipher the best possible active sites that can be targeted by
simulations for drug design. Virtual screening against these potential
targets might be useful in the discovery of potential therapeutic
compounds against Salmonella typhi.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Sharma et al, Bioinformation 4(4): 143-150 (2009)

Flow chart for systematic identification and characterization of potential targets in salmonella typhi.

