Background
Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) causes “non-A non-B hepatitis” in
humans. It is estimated that 170 million people has been
infected worldwide by HCV []. The virus is transmitted
through contaminated blood, organ transplants and all other
means of exposures that ranges from needle prick among drug
abusers to unprotected sex []. The acute infection will become
chronic, leading to liver cirrhosis, hepatocelluar carcinoma and
liver failure. There is no effective vaccine available to prevent
the disease or a proper treatment regime to cure the infection 
[,
]. Hence a large amount of resources are being utilized to
discover a drug molecule which can clear the virus and cure the
infection with minimum side effect and maximum efficacy. At
present pegylated interferon, which generally targets the
immune system and the purine analogue ribavarin are used
against HCV. The combination of ribavarin and pegylated
interferon is not specific to HCV infection and also associated
with significant side effect []. The HCV NS5B protein is a 65
kDa protein formed of the C-terminal 591 amino acids of the
polyprotein. An RNA dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp)
activity was predicted for the NS5B gene product due to the
presence of the Gly-Asp-Asp motif (GDD) that is common to
the reverse transcriptase and other viral polymerases 
[]. This
was later confirmed in vitro by experiments using recombinant
expressed NS5B protein []. The active RdRp enzyme requires
divalent metal ions and uses the RNA template strand to direct
the synthesis of a complementary strand. Divalent manganese
ions (Mn2+) are preferred over magnesium ions (Mg2+) for
optimal enzyme activity, whereas zinc ions (Zn2+) inhibit the
RdRp activity [].

HCV RdRp consists of 21 α-helices and 18 β-strands. The
catalytic domain consists of 531 residues folded into
characteristic fingers, palm and thumb subdomains. The NS5B
adopts a unique globular shape due to extensive interactions
between the fingers and thumb sub-domains that serve to
encircle the active site of the enzyme 
[].

HCV NS5B is an important target for therapeutic intervention
aimed at inhibiting HCV replication. The rational approaches of
drug designing which target NS5B have identified several
classes of inhibitor molecules. But, a nucleoside analogue
NM283 is the only inhibitor that has demonstratable levels of
antiviral activity in human subjects []. Chemically, NM283 is a
2'-C-methyl cytidine resistance to NM283 has been reported in
sub-genomic replicons. Substitution of the amino acid serine at
position 282 with threonine was seen to confer resistance to 2'-
C-methyl ribonucleosides by efficient discrimination between
the analogues and the natural substrates []. Two nonnucleoside
inhibitors of HCV NS5B, JTK 109 and JTK-003 are
also under clinical trials. These are benzimidazole compounds
and act as allosteric inhibitors of NS5B. Replacement of proline
495 with alanine or leucine is found to confer resistance against
these compounds in sub genomic replicons []. Several other
compounds of the benzothiadiazine class are also being
investigated. However, a cause for concern is the observation
that the subgenomic mutants develop resistance against
benzothiadiazines []. The allosteric binding sites may be far
away from the usual binding site of the protein, but binding of
small molecules to these sites may alter the function of the
protein []. 
Crystallographic study by Di Macro et al. 2005 
[]
revealed that an allosteric non-nucleoside inhibitor (NNI)
binding site can be targeted for small molecule search. This
allosteric binding site can lead a new path in discovering
effective inhibitors against the polymerase enzyme. Here we
describe the identification of 10 small molecules through
molecular docking and ADME analysis. These show more
binding properties than the existing inhibitor bound to the
protein.

Methodology
The 3D structure of HCV NS5B bounded with an allosteric
inhibitor were retrieved from Protein databank (PDB), accession
code 2BRK was found to bound to an allosteric inhibitor named
compound 1. The ligand bounded with the protein was redocked
inorder to obtain binding affinity information. The
active residues were identified as the neighbouring amino acids
with in 10 Å distance from the bounded ligand.

Virtual screening using Zinc database:
The ZINC database is a curate collection of commercially
available chemical compounds prepared especially for virtual
screening []. ZINC is used by investigators (generally people
with training as biologists or chemists) in pharmaceutical
companies, biotech companies, and research universities. There
are many subsets available in the Zinc database. We had
selected leads subset containing 1,283,469 molecules which is
ready to perform virtual screening.

Molecular Docking:
Molecular docking was carried out using GOLD 4.1(Genetic
Optimization of Ligand Docking) []. The parameters used for
genetic algorithm were population size - 100, selection pressure
- 1.1, number of operations - 100,000, number of islands - 5,
niche size - 2, migrate - 10, mutate - 95 and cross-over - 95. The
default speed selection was used to avoid a potential reduction
in docking accuracy. Fifty genetic algorithm runs with default
parameter settings, were performed without early termination
for both Gold score and Chem score. The whole protein
complexes were used for Molecular Docking, run in order to
obtain maximum accurate binding possibility. The best binding
pose were determined after careful visualisation and scoring
function.

ADME Prediction (Absobtion, Distribution, Metabolism, Excretion):
Predicting physiochemical properties of a chemical compound
will always cut short the expensive experimental testing and
hard labour. Molecular Docking studies revealed that 10
compounds from the Zinc small molecule databank have
potential binding affinity towards HCV NS5B RdRp. Hence, the
ADME predictions of these compounds were carried out using
freely and commercially available web based ADME Boxes
developed by Pharmaco Algorithms
(http://pharmaalgorithms.com/webboxes/). It is a software
module that calculates physiochemical properties, oral
availability (human), human intestinal absorption, plasma
bound distribution based on the chemical structure.

Discussion
The HCV NS5B is the RNA dependent RNA polymerase
responsible for replication of the viral genome and is a key
target for the therapeutic intervention against HCV. The
ADME/T characteristics of the compound reveal that it has
high mutagenic potential which increases its toxicity. The LD50
studies also showed that it had to be administered at high
dosages which would again increase its toxicity. It has low
solubility characteristics in various pH and it is highly insoluble
in water. Upon docking, Compound 1 showed a GOLD score
and Chem score of 46.50 and 13.56. These drawbacks indicate
the need for an effective drug that can replace this molecule. All
the lead candidates that were shortlisted from small molecule
databases had better docking scores than the known ligand
 (see supplementary material).

Lipoxin A4, Fluprostenol displayed excellent oral
bioavailability and distribution characteristics. They had weak
acidic character and obeyed Lipinski's Rule. They showed
moderate to low solubility in various pH and water and do not
act as P-gp substrates. They exhibited low probability of
mutagenic potential and the LD50 studies suggested
intravenous route of administration for mice and
intraperitoneal route of administration for rats at low dosage
forms.

Leukotriene E4 showed limited ability to cross the intestinal
barrier by passive diffusion, hence affecting its oral
bioavailability. It had good distribution characteristics and
behaved as a weak base. It obeyed Lipinski's rule, had
moderate to low solubilities in various buffers and water and
does not act as a P-gp substrate. It showed moderate probability
of acting as a mutagen thereby increasing its toxicity.

Lactacystin, Diethylnorspermine showed limited ability to
cross the intestinal barrier by passive diffusion, hence affecting
their oral bioavailability. They had low protein binding
efficiency thereby affecting its distribution. They showed low
probability of acting as P-gp substrates. They showed basic
character, obeyed Lipinski's rule and had good solubilities in
various buffers and water. They also displayed low probability
of acting as a mutagen and were required to be delivered in low
dosage inspite of the route of administration. The lead
candidates Thromboxane B2, Leukotriene B3, 17-phenyltrinor-
pge2 and Misoprostol free acid displayed good oral
bioavailability and distribution characteristics. They had strong
acidic character and obeyed Lipinski's Rule. They showed
moderate solubility in various pH while it was insoluble in
water. They showed low probability of acting as a P-gp
substrate. They exhibited low probability of mutagenic
potential and the LD50 studies suggested intraperitoneal route
of administration for mice and rats at low dosage forms for
Thromboxane B2 and intravenous route for mice in the case of
Leukotriene B3, 17-phenyl-trinor-pge2.

Lavendustin A shows high probability of undergoing first pass
metabolism thereby affecting its oral bioavailability. It
displayed good distribution characteristics and did not act as a
P-gp substrate. It had both acidic and basic groups with a
majority of the former. It obeyed Lipinski's rule and had low
solubility in various buffers and water. It had low mutagenic
potential and the LD50 studies showed that the preferred route
of administration was intravenous in mice and intra-peritoneal
in rats. It should be noted that these compounds are designed in
silico and should be further tested in vitro and in vivo for toxicity
and activity.

Competing interests
The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Amjesh et al, Bioinformation 8(15): 716-719 (2012)

