Background
Research biobanks are among the most indispensable tools in
the era of personalized medicine. A decade ago, biobanks were
just simply repositories of biospecimens. Clinical data of limited
quantity and quality had to be retrieved from hospital
information systems retrospectively.

This trend has significantly changed recently. The number of
patients involved in projects increased, sample and data
collection has also become multicentred. Molecular biological
experiments based on high-throughput technologies (e.g.
microarray, Next Generation Sequencing) serve as primary
sources of the increasing amount of data. Consequently,
biobanks store huge amounts of data of different origin that
need to be managed and analyzed by combining them with
each other while supporting scientific needs. Besides data
protection and security, the legal and ethical regulation of
patients' rights also receives more pronounced attention. All
this amounts to a strong need for a biobank software system
supporting data collection, management and analysis.

The fact that most research biobanks are disease and projectspecific
makes it unfeasible to develop standard software
systems solutions. Biobank projects differ in study design,
applied methods of data collection and analysis in terms of
collected biospecimens, personal and health information (e.g.
health records, family history, lifestyle and genetic
information). These differences are demonstrated by comparing
the clinical data content of three biobanks developed by the
research team. () illustrates the results, showing that
there is little overlap between the clinical data features stored in
them. According to this comparison, as many as 500 features
are stored in the three biobanks but the center overlap between
them is just 5%, which means approximately 25 features 
[–];
the majority of the matching data originate from blood samples.
The significant diversity of the 95% of features can be explained
by the project-specific nature of diagnostics and therapeutics
research required for specified questionnaires. In spite of the
variety of biobanks mentioned above, there are standards and
regulations that should be taken into consideration during the
development of a biobank software system, like data protection
and security. Other aspects should also be considered during
the development process.

Methodology
The objective of the work was to prepare a comprehensive
guideline, Model Requirements for the Management of Biological
Repositories (BioReq) covering ethical, technical, management,
and ICT requirements applicable to the development of biobank
software systems. The guideline also references the best-known
international standards and recommendations, such as Best
Practices for Repositories I: Collection, Storage, and Retrieval of
Human Biological Materials for Research or OECD Best Practice
Guidelines for Biological Resource Centers [,
]. Its novelty is
the well-structured and precise collection of ICT requirements,
which can be a practical help for research groups with little
experience in the field of biobank software system
development.

The first version of BioReq was finished in 2011. In the same
year, using this guideline, our research group developed a new
biobank software system. The project proved the feasibility of
the guideline, and its success served as a further motivation for
developing and releasing version 2.0.

The guideline consists of four chapters: (1) Ethical
Requirements; (2) Technical Requirements; (3) Management
Requirements; and (4) Biobank Software System Requirements.
Each chapter is divided into sections containing the
requirements presented in a table format. In this way, the
guideline is a collection of carefully organized, easy-to-check
requirements as opposed to other standards, where the
recommendations are provided in the form of unstructured
narrative paragraphs. During the guideline preparation,
internationally-accepted recommendations and standards have
been considered that were judged as applicable to researchpurpose
biorepositories. Since the various standards show a
significant overlap in scope, repetitions have been removed,
and conflicting requirements have been resolved. While
preparing BioReq, we have adapted the requirements of
MoReq2 [] 
(a joint European specification of electronic records
management) to serve the needs of biobanks.

The content of the first three chapters have been analyzed and
translated into software system requirements so that the
Biobank Software System (BSS) Requirements part (chapter 4)
can be used on its own for design purposes.

BSS Requirements
The BSS Requirements (last chapter of the guideline) chapter
first covers metadata requirements [] and the outline of entity
types managed by a BSS [,
], then discusses general samplerelated
processes requirements [].The flow chart displayed on
() presents the biological sample lifecycle processes
from sample acquisition through sample and data management
to sample destruction and distribution. Depending on the size
and needs of the operating organization, the BSS may be
required to track laboratory processes.

BBS contains purely technical requirements not strictly related
to biobank-specific processes (e.g. user management, search,
logging), and supports biobank audits with features to monitor
the system and provide a number of standard reports capable of
being configured by authorized users. Non-functional
requirements contributing to security, usability, performance,
and scalability are also important attributes of a successful BSS
implementation. External interface requirements specify the
characteristics of the system's interaction with the hardware
platform and with other software components outside the
boundary of the BSS and they provide guidance on user
interface design consideration as well.

Conclusion
In this paper we have given an overview of the Model
Requirements for the Management of Biological Repositories
guideline. We have shown that the guideline successfully
incorporates the best practices of international standards on
biobanks, giving users a single and consistent document to
review. The novelty of the guideline lies (1) in its
comprehensive coverage of topics from legal regulations to ICT
considerations, and (2) in the strict format used in describing
the requirements, which can guide implementation and can
serve as a feature checklist. Note however that for any specific
biobank software system care must be taken to adhere to all
national regulations; this lies outside the scope of BioReq. Based
on the presented content, the Model Requirements for the
Management of Biological Repositories guideline provides a
comprehensive aid in operating biobanks and conducting
research involving biospecimens.

The authors sincerely thank KOVEX-Computer Ltd. for their
help in adapting the specification of electronic records
management of MoReq2 for the needs of biobanks. The authors
are also grateful to the SCHIZOBANK Consortium and EU
Pharma Ltd. for the possibility of participating in their biobank
projects and to gain experience in biobank software system
development.

Citation:Tukacs et al, Bioinformation 8(6): 290-292 (2012)

A Venn diagram showing the intersection of features
represented in SCHIZO (schizophrenia patients), HPV (HPVinfected
human tissue), and Trisomy (numerical chromosomal
aberrations) Biobanks (numbers refer to clinical data per
patient)

Biological sample life cycle processes

