Background
Follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) found in humans and other
animals as crucial molecule in regularion of reproductive
organs and physical characteristics of the gender 
[]. It is
synthesized and secreted by gonadotrops of the anterior
pituitary gland which regulates the growth and reproductive
process of the body. Structurally, it is a glycoprotein with two
polypeptides such as alpha and beta subunits having 92 and 111
amino acids respectively, which contributes to the biological
function and is reliable for interaction with FSH receptor 
[]. In
females, FSH helps to control the menstrual cycle and the
production of eggs by the ovaries. The amount of FSH varies
throughout a women's menstrual cycle and is highest just
before she releases an egg []. In men, FSH helps to control the
production of sperm and its level is normally remains constant.
The ability of fertilization leading to conception of a woman can
be determined by measuring levels of sex hormones in both
couple along with FSH []. Several attempts are made to build
models by evaluating the binding ability of different FSH
related proteins with their inhibitors. Moreover, these types of
encouraging studies disclose the molecular mechnism behind
the male or female infertility and stratagies would come into
view for design of authentic medicine to regulate the process. In
this paper, we report virtual screening studies to screen
inhibitors for the selected protein to investigate the influence of
molecular structure and biological activity with its receptor.
Several investigations are reported on drug-receptor
interactions, which states that their compatibility is always
depends on robustness and domain applicability of the
screened compounds (drug/ligand). However, Molecular
docking approaches are commonly used in modern drug design
process to understand the drug–receptor interactions. The three
dimensional structure of the protein-ligand composite could be
served as a considerable source of understanding the way of
protein interact with one another and perform biological
functions []. Therefore, it is worthwhile to know the
comprehensive structure of protein-ligand and its complexes at
atomic level and is one of the significant subjects in biological
sciences. Infact, it is observed that the conformational changes
occur in proteins up on binding of ligand during the docking
studies using data bank proteins (PDB). Moreover, the binding
sites for regulatory ligands in the counter part protien are often
located at the boundary between individual polypeptide chains.
This arrangement may occupy small side chain rotations to
enhance interaction between ligand and receptor. Prediction,
Molecular Docking and Virtual Screening based studies at
molecular level have become an integral part of many modern
structure-based drug discovery efforts. Therefore, our
molecular docking studies on the protein–ligand interactions
with the specific drugs may provide a significant insight into
the binding interactions and relativeness of the drugs.

Methodology
Protein-ligand docking:
It is a process for promising and consistent scoring scheme to
evaluate the protein-ligand complex in order to select the best
binding conformations in which two molecules fit together in
3D space and it is a key tool in structural biology as well as in
computer-aided drug design [,
]. The goal of ligand and
protein docking is mainly to predict the major binding mode(s)
of a ligand with a protein of known three-dimensional structure
[]. 
Schrodinger 9.3 is used for molecular docking analysis and
QikProp tool is for screening of pharmacological and
pharmacokinetic parameters. Receptor docking is done by
Glide [Grid-Based Ligand Docking with Energetics] in
Schrodinger suite []. Glide is an integrated platform and a
systematic approach for searching conformations, orientations
and positions of ligand in the receptor site using a series of
hierarchical filters which improves the binding affinities by
lowering the penalties

Virtual screening:
It is an in-silico tool for drug designing and widely used for lead
identification in drug discovery programs []. Experimental
efforts to carry out the biological screening of many compounds
are still considerably high and therefore, computer-aided drug
design approaches have become attractive alternatives.
Structure hits of FSH are found from PDB [], out of which
1XWD having resolution 2.92 Å with respective ligands is
retrieved for docking studies and for searching. Filtering of
chemical structures screening is done with database namely
ZINC []. Protein preparation of 1XWD is done by using
protein preparation wizard in maestro 9.3. Desolvation is done
by removing crystallized free water molecules beyond 5Å
which hinders the mobility of ligand and results in entropy gain
by applying OPLS-2001 Force Field. Finally, optimization and
free energy minimization is done after adding bond orders to
Hydrogens.

ADMET prediction analysis:
QikProp module of the Schrödinger 9.3 software is used to
predict pharmacokinetic properties. This is standard as being
dissimilar to other 95% of the known drugs. Predicted
significant ADMET properties in accordance with Lipinski's
rule of five, QikProp is used to evaluate the bioavailability of
the lead molecules by assessing their physicochemical
properties to observe the range of the Lipinski rule for induced
molecules []. These compounds are also evaluated for their
chemical behavior through analysis of pharmacokinetic
parameters required for absorption, distribution, metabolism,
excretion and toxicity (ADMET). Compounds obtained after
ADMET analyses are to be prepared for docking using glide xp
mode. LigPrep tool is used for preparing Ligands by optimizing
geometries through OPLS-2001 Force Field. Prepared Ligands
are rigidly docked to receptors of 1XWD using Glide extra
precision function. Initially, a set of ligand poses which are
generated by torsional minima are clustered and docked as a
single object. Ligands with more than 300 atoms or 50 rotatable
groups are not docked. Further post dock minimization is done
for the molecules having 5-10 Glide score lowest energy poses
and threshold for rejecting is 0.5 Kcal/mol. Finally minimized
poses are rescored by Glide scoring function and visualized and
data recorded through XP-Visualizer.

Results &amp; Discussion
Virtual screening has become a vital part of contemporary drug
research. Flexible ligand based high-throughput virtual
screening (HTVS) mode of Glide is carried out and identified
inhibitors against the pdb. Then, all these ligands are docked
with the original protein 1XWD. The process of docking using
the Receptor Grid Generation protocol with centroid at the
active site of the enzyme generated grid file represented the
shape and properties of receptor on a grid for more accurate
scoring of ligand pose. Docked ligands with the (HTVS) mode
and obtained molecules which are subjected to the Glide extra
precision (XP) mode of docking performed extensive sampling
and provides reasonable binding poses those interacted with
the residues that bind substrate analogs in the active site.
Docked poses with original three ligands resulted with the
hydrogen bond and ligand interactions with amino acid
residues such as serine, aspartic acid, glutamine, histidine,
tyrosine respectively. Where as in zinc compounds (ZINC
database of 2.7 million compounds), screened against original
protein resulted that the interactions of H-Bonds formed by the
Ligand with the active residues of 1XWD i.e. serine, aspartic
acid, glutamine, histidine, and tyrosine with modest
discrepancy with its amino acid positions (). These
amino acid positions play a vital role to determine the activity
of the screened ligands when compared with the original
ligand. Binding affinity glide scores [G-scores] are better than
the reference i.e. standard score as in 
 (see
supplementary).

Properties based on ADMET analysis assessed for their
chemical properties of these ligands with their molecular
weights are &lt; 500 Daltons with &lt; 5 hydrogen bond donors, &lt; 10
hydrogen bond acceptors and QPlogPo/w &lt; 5; these properties
are well within the acceptable range of the Lipinski rule for
drug-like molecules. Bioavailability of these compounds
resulted in the partition coefficient (QPlogPo/w) ranges from -
2.0 to 6.5 and water solubility (QPlogS), critical for estimation of
absorption and distribution of drugs within the body, ranged
between -6.5 and 0.5, cell permeability (QPPCaco), a key factor
governing drug metabolism and its access to biological
membranes ranged from &lt; 25 poor to &gt;500 great. Overall, the
percentage human oral absorption for the compounds tested
ranged from 82% to 89%. All these pharmacokinetic parameters
are within the acceptable range  (see supplementary
material).

Conclusion
There is an increasing interest to inhibit FSH in the context of
infertility. Hence, the structure of FSH (PDB ID: 1XWD) is
screened using molecular docking techniques against the ZINC
database in reference to known compounds given in ().
Data depicted in  with corresponding ADMET data in
() shows compounds with better binding and ADMET
properties compared to known standard compounds. These
observations find application for the consideration of such
compounds for further validation towards inhibiting FSH.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Bhogireddy et al, Bioinformation 9(15): 788-791 (2013)

Images showing the interactions of ligands (standard and zinc database compounds) with amino acid residues.

