Background
Several mathematical models have been widely used to predict
thermal stability of oligonucleotide duplexes. Whereas
empirical methods based on nucleotide composition alone can
be used to calculate the thermal stability with reasonable
precision, nearest-neighbor (NN) models are better considered
for describing thermal stability of oligonucleotide duplexes
because this is strongly correlated with sequence variations 
[,
]. Complete sets of NN parameters for energy contributions
due to perfect base-pairings, single mismatches, and dangling
ends have been published recently [–]. These thermodynamic
parameters provide a basis for predicting the stability of both
perfectly paired and mismatch-containing duplex structures.
Several computer tools have been developed that predict
thermal stability of probes in order to select the most
appropriate probes for microarray design [,
], but there are
comparatively few of them that incorporate such analysis, using
the most recent thermodynamic parameters, for probe design,
and even fewer of them incorporate analytic tools for both
designing and interpreting microarray experiments.
Furthermore, none of them analyze the probe set for the
existence of stable mismatched-duplexes with the target. This
server allows web access to the tool called Virtual
Hybridization (VH) [], which is a simulation of the
hybridization reaction between the probes and DNA targets
(including complete genomes), considering thermodynamic
data for predicting the stability of the double chain and finding
probable sites for hybridization as would happen in real
conditions. This simulation takes into account not only the
stability of perfect matched-duplexes, but also the stability of
mismatched target-probe duplexes.

Web server design
All algorithms for DNA stability prediction have been
implemented in the VH, which was written using the
programming software Borland Delphi 7.0 (Borland Software
Corporation). Linux versions of the VH software have been
developed using Borland Kylix Desktop 1.0 (Borland
International), and they have been successfully tested in Linux
Red Hat 7.3, Fedora Core 16 and Mandrake 10. User interface of
the web server has been created with PHP 5.2 and the system
has been currently tested in an Apache 2.2 server running on
Linux Fedora Core 16.

Software input
The registration is free for both academic and non-commercial
applications. Registered users can upload target and custom
probe sets to perform the virtual hybridization. Alternatively
users can select previously designed universal probe sets. Next,
define the hybridization parameters:
Cut-off free energy for stable hybridization,

Allowed number of mismatches and

Select target strand (direct, complementary or both).


Finally, select the format mode of results according to their needs for
the detailed information about hybridization of each probe and
summary (global) table of results, ().

Software output
Once the virtual hybridization process is done, the software
generates three output files (Figure 1b). A log file which
resumes all parameters selected target and probes sequences
tested and summary of the results. The vh file shows the details
of the results of the hybridization reporting total number of
targets and probes, name of probe sets, description of target
files and for each hybridized probe: total number of sites,
number and sequence of the probe, target hybridization
positions, recognized target sequence and free energy value.
The global file shows one of the three alternative options: the
overall results of the probes hybridized with each genome in
binary code, absence (0) and presence (1), the total number of
probe hits/target or, the total number of paired bases per probe.
Global file data can be used for comparing virtual hybridization
patterns which in turn can be analyzed for building
phylogenetic trees using third-party software packages such as
Phylip or MEGA.

Future Development
Current aim of this server is the prediction of hybridization
probes against known target sequences. Hybridization patterns
can be used for comparing sequences which can be used for
both phylogenetic and phylogenomic studies. Future
development will include specialized analytical tools for such
applications.

The web server design was supported by a grant from the
National Council for Science and Technology (CONACyT
project #105833).

Citation:Casique-Almazán et al, Bioinformation 8(12): 586-588 (2012)

Universal Fingerprinting Chip web server. a) Main parameters to perform virtual hybridization between a probe set of
definite length and a set of user-defined sequences. b) Display of VH results file.

