Background
Flaviviruses are a group of more than 70 enveloped RNA viruses that cause
serious diseases in humans and animals. Most of them are arthropod-borne
viruses (arboviruses) and are transmitted to vertebrate hosts by either
mosquitoes or ticks []. 
Flaviviruses cause a variety of diseases, including
fevers, encephalitis, and hemorrhagic fevers 
[]. It is believed that JE is
responsible for more than 50,000 cases of encephalitis annually, with at least
10,000 deaths. Some 2.5 billion people – two fifths of the world's population –
are now at risk for dengue, and despite 50 years of efforts, there is no dengue
vaccine available on the market. WHO currently estimates that there may be 50
million dengue infections worldwide every year. In 2007 alone, there were
more than 890,000 reported cases of dengue in the Americans, of which 26,000
cases were diagnosed as Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever (DHF). There are almost
100 asymptomatic infections for every reported flavivirus case, and the case
fatality rates vary from 1 to 30% depending on the infecting flavivirus [WHO].
The family Flaviviridae consists of approximately 70 viruses, nearly 40 of
which cause human disease []. 
Dengue virus (DENV), Japanese encephalitis
virus (JEV), Murray Valley encephalitis virus (MVEV), Usutu virus (USUV),
and West Nile virus (WNV) are a member of the genus Flavivirus and family
Flaviviridae [,
].

Flaviviruses have a positive-sense single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) genome
(approximately 11 kb) that encodes one large open reading frame containing a
5' type 1 cap and conserved RNA structures at both the 5' and 3' untranslated
regions that are important for viral genome translation and replication. The
genomic RNA is translated into a single polyprotein precursor consisting of
three structural (C [capsid], prM [membrane], and E [envelope]) and seven
nonstructural (NS1, NS2a, NS2b, NS3, NS4a, NS4b, and NS5) proteins
arranged in the order C-prM-E-NS1-NS2a-NS2b-NS3-NS4a-NS4b-NS5 
[].
Only the structural proteins become part of the mature, infectious virion,
whereas the nonstructural proteins are involved in polyprotein processing, viral
RNA synthesis, and virus morphogenesis 
[]. NS3 is a multifunctional protein
with an N-terminal protease domain (NS3pro) that is responsible for proteolytic
processing of the viral polyprotein, and a C-terminal region that contains an
RNA triphosphatase, RNA helicase and RNA-stimulated NTPase domain that
are essential for RNA replication. The serine protease domain of NS3 plays a
central role in the replicative cycle of Flaviviruses 
[] and is therefore a
possible target for anti-flaviviral compounds 
[].

In this in-silico study, we designed an inhibitor which showed inhibitory
activity towards flavivirus (DENV, JEV, MVEV, USUV, and WNV) NS3
protein. The binding interactions between this inhibitor and NS3 protein were
studied by docking methods using AutoDock vina software. The aim of this
study was to get a better ligand that could inhibit polyprotein processing of
Flavivirus (DENV, JEV, MVEV, USUV, and WNV), and to better understand
the interactions between the inhibitor and the enzyme's binding sites via
computational docking methods. We hope, this Drug will get success to clear
out all the phases of clinical trial and it will be effective drug in the cure of
encephalitis and hemorrhagic fevers.

Methodology
Sequence alignment
The protein sequences of NS3 were obtained from GenBank
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/) 
database (MVEV (NP_722535.1),JEV (NP_775670.1), USUV (YP_164814.1) and WNV (NP_776018.1)) and
Swiss Prot (DENV (P27909)). Using the BLAST P
(http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) through NCBI, the homologous
structure of MVEV NS3 was identified, which was used as template for the
homology modeling. The sequence alignment was done using the online
version of ClustalW (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalw2/) 
().

Homology modeling
BLASTP was used to identify the most suitable template for homology
modeling of NS3 protein. The available structure of NS3 protein from MVEV
in the Protein Database (PDB entry 2WV9) was used as a template for DENV,
JEV, USUV and WNV. The homology modeling was carried out using the
Modeller (http://www.salilab.org/modeller/) 9v7 program. The target and the
template sequences were aligned using Modeller 9v7, a comparative protein
modeling program, was used for homology modeling to generate the 3-D
structures of NS3 protein for MVEV, DENV, JEV, USUV and WNV. The
energy computations were done with the GROMOS 96 by implementation of
Swiss-PdbViewer (http://www.expasy.org/spdbv). 
 shows the
superimposed NS3 3D models of JEV, MVV, WNV, USUV and DENV in
cartoons view with Pymol software.

Validation of the generated models
Different structure verification programs such as PROCHECK, VERIFY3D
and ProSA (http://nihserver.mbi.ucla.edu/SAVES/) were used to evaluate the
3D-model of NS3 protein. The above mentioned validation programs validate
the predicted structure by checking various parameters. While PROCHECK, a
structure verification program relies on Ramachandran plot 
[], determines
the quality of the predicted structure by assessing various parameters such as
lengths, angles and planarity of the peptide bonds, geometry of the hydrogen
bonds, and side chain conformations of protein structures as a function of
atomic resolution. The Verify3D determines the compatibility of an atomic
model (3D) with its own amino acid sequence (1D) by assigning a structural
class based on its location and environment (alpha, beta, loop, polar, nonpolar
etc.) and comparing the results to valid structures 
[].

Inhibition site identification
The active sites were revealed on the basis of previous studies. The aminoterminal
domain contains the serine protease catalytic triad consisting of amino
acid residues H51, D75, and S135 and the substrate-binding pocket is
contained within NS3 protein [,
,
].

Generating novel ligands
The structure of the fragment, i.e. the “seed molecule” was revealed on the
basis of previous studies of available inhibitors for NS3 protein 
[]. The
fragment “1 H-1, 2, 4-triazole” was identified on the basis of “Lipinski's Rule
of Five” and may therefore represent suitable starting point for evolution of
good quality lead compounds. The docking analysis of “1 H-1, 2, 4-triazole”
compound with MVEV NS3 protein was carried out by HEX
(http://hex.loria.fr/) 
docking software with default parameters. The
conformation of the pre-placed “seed” ensuring the binding affinity decides the
manner that ligands would be grown with Ligbuilder software. Novel ligands
had been developed with Ligbuilder
(
http://mdl.ipc.pku.edu.cn/drug_design/work/ligbuilder.html) v1.2 software.
We developed 100 novel ligands for the inhibitory site in NS3 protein.

Virtual screening
Out of 100 novel ligands generated, 10 ligands were selected on the basis of
maximum binding affinity measured in kcal/mol. The selected 10 ligands were
then analyzed for drug- relevant properties based on “Lipinski's rule of five“
and other drug like properties of valid structures using OSIRIS Property
Explorer (http://www.organic-chemistry.org/prog/peo/), Molsoft: Drug-
Likeness and molecular property explorer (http://www.molsoft.com/mprop/),
and Molinspiration property explorer 
(http://www.molinspiration.com/cgibin/properties). 
On the basis of binding affinity and drug like properties, one
ligand () was finally screened.

Lead optimization
The goal of lead optimization is to improve the effectiveness of initial ‘hits’
from primary screening. There are many approaches to lead optimization, all of
which have the same theme: reduce off-target effects, create an improved
ADME/T profile and improve a compound's efficacy. The lead optimization
was performed using Toxtree (http://toxtree.sourceforge.net/) v1.60 software.

Protein-ligand docking
The docking of ligands to the catalytic triad of NS3 protein for MVEV, DENV,
JEV, USUV and WNV was performed using AutoDock Vina software.
Docking was performed to obtain a population of possible conformations and
orientations for the ligand at the binding site. Using the software, polar
hydrogen atoms were added to the NS3 protein and its nonpolar hydrogen
atoms were merged. All bonds of ligands were set to be rotatable. All
calculations for protein-fixed ligand-flexible docking were done using the
Lamarckian Genetic Algorithm (LGA) method. The grid box with a dimension
of 20 × 20 × 20 points was used around the catalytic triad to cover the entire
enzyme binding site and accommodate ligands to move freely. The best
conformation was chosen with the lowest docked energy, after the docking
search was completed. The interactions of complex NS3 protein-ligand
conformations, including hydrogen bonds and the bond lengths were analyzed
using Swiss-PdbViewer v4.0 and Pymol software.

Discussion
Sequence alignment of NS3 protein for MVEV, DENV, JEV, USUV and WNV
from same family revealed MVEV to be the best template for homology
modeling as the MVEV shared 61% identity with DENV, 86% identity with
JEV, 88% identity with USUV and 81% identity with WNV. The crystal
structure of the NS3 protease-helicase from Murray Valley Encephalitis Virus
(PDB entry 2WV9) was used as a template to predict the structure of NS3
protein and the predicted 3D structure of NS3 protein was generated by
Modeller and the structure with the lowest DOPE scores were selected. The
qualities of the 3D models were evaluated using the PROCHECK program and
assessed using the Ramachandran plot. It is evident from the Ramachandran
plot that the predicted models have most favorable regions, the allowed
regions, the generic regions and the disallowed regions. Such a percentage
distribution of the protein residues determined by Ramachandran plot shows
that the predicted models are of good quality. The models show all the main
chain and side chain parameters to be in the ‘better’ region. The quality of the
generated models of NS3 protein as evaluated by ProSA web server
(https://prosa.services.came.sbg.ac.at/prosa.php) provided a z-score of -11.03
(MVEV), -11.09 (JEV), -11.63 (USUV),-11.18 (WNV) and -7.06 (DENV)
which falls within the range of values observed for the experimentally
determined structures of similar lengths. The validity of the predicted model of
NS3 protein was also verified by employing the structure verification server
Verify-3D. The DOPE scores of NS3 protein were 63437.13672, 52417.43359,
62345.25391, 63189.61719 and 62632.42969 for MVEV, DENV, JEV, USUV
and WNV respectively.

The Protein-ligand interaction plays a significant role in structure based drug
designing. Overall, the best confirmation shows that the free energy of binding
(ΔGbind kcal/mol) for the designed ligand were -5.9 kcal/mol, -6.0 kcal/mol, -
6.7 kcal/mol, -6.6 kcal/mol and -6.6 kcal/mol for MVEV, JEV, USUV, WNV
and DENV respectively (). The negative and low value of ΔGbind
indicates strong favorable bonds between NS3 protein and the novel ligand
indicating that the ligand was in its most favourable conformations. The
information about the number of hydrogen bonds formed and catalytic site
residues involved in protein-ligand complex are shown in Table 1 (see
).

Conclusion
In this study, we designed a novel ligand against NS3 protein of MVEV,
DENV, JEV, USUV and WNV. The molecular docking was applied to explore
the binding mechanism and studies on the novel ligand against the NS3 protein
showed that the free binding energy for the inhibitor was small, indicating that
the ligand binds favorably to the binding site. The ligand was observed as the
best inhibitor candidate, which may be considered as a potential ligand for
treatment of diseases caused by flavivirus. The ligand thus developed is likely
to inhibit viral infections, which share high sequence similarity with the five
NS3 proteins of MVEV, DENV, JEV, USUV and WNV from same family. We
plan to calculate ADME/T (Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism, Excretion /
Toxicity) properties of the designed ligand using the available commercial
ADME/T tools in future.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Jitendra &amp; Vinay, Bioinformation 6(2): 57-60 (2011)

The sequence alignment between the five NS3 proteins of MVEV, DENV, JEV, USUV and WNV. All three major amino acids forming the Catalytic
Triad (H51, D75, and S135) have been highlighted.

Structural model Superposition of NS3 proteins for JEV (Green),
MVV (Red), WNV (Blue), USUV (Yellow) and DENV (Cyan).

The solvent-accessible surface of the protein is shown in color-coded
atoms (white, carbon; red, oxygen; blue, nitrogen). Molecular docking of novel
ligand onto NS3 protein of MVEV (A), JEV (B), USUV (C), WNV (D) and
DENV (E). Figure 3(F) represents the structure of novel ligand.

