Background
NGS technology can generate nearly complete information of
genetic mutations in the human genome. However, the
enormous amount of information also represents a great
challenge for a researcher in comprehending the significance of
all these mutations. For example, the estimated number of nonsynonymous
single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) in each human
is 24,000- 40,000 [], which is almost impossible for a regular
laboratory to sort through using experimental approaches.

A useful approach for solving the problem of too many SNVs
for interpretation is to utilize computational methods and
predict in silico the consequences of these point mutations.
Many bioinformatic tools have been developed in the past few
years for this purpose [–]. However, different algorithms
could generate different predictions regarding the consequence
of the mutation on a given protein. We believe that a better
strategy is to gather information from as many different
computational tools as possible. We developed MICO web
interface that contains six leading prediction tools: Condel,
MutationAssesor, Mutation Taster, PolyPhen2, SIFT, and
CADD see .

Condel uses a weighted average of the normalized scores
(WAS) for integration of five prediction tools -Logre, MAPP,
MutationAssessor, Polyphen2, and SIFT- into a unified
classification []. MutationAssesor calculates the change of
entropy of a refined class of evolutionarily conserved residues
with functional specificity to predict the mutation impact [].
MutationTaster implements a naïve Bayes classifier for
evaluation of the mutation potential using the information
obtained from multiple biomedical databases and prediction
methods such as NNSplice, polyadq, Grantham Matrix, phastCons
and phyloP []. PolyPhen2 determines if a given mutation is
damaging by a naïve Bayes posterior probability based on the
results of eight sequence-based and three structure-based
predictive features []. SIFT utilizes a sequence homologybased
algorithm (“sorting tolerant from intolerant”) to evaluate
amino acid substitutions within protein families []. CADD
reports each variant's deleteriousness based on allelic diversity,
functionality, pathogenicity, disease severity, regulatory effects,
and complex trait associations [].

Implementation
MICO submits queries to the bioinformatic tool servers by
sending out HTTP requests via the Internet. The status and
results of the queries are recognized by parsing the returned
HTML documents. MICO consists of a user interface layer, a
front-end server layer, a back-end server layer, and a relational
database. The front-end server layer includes Web Server/Web
Application Server (Apache Tomcat), a Database Management
System (MySQL), and MICO Web Application. The Web
application is implemented as Java servlets for Web user
interface, and a Java library that communicates with back-end
servers. The back-end servers are independent bioinformatic
tool Web servers for mutation queries. MICO utilizes AJAX
(Asynchronous JavaScript And XML) for automatic refresh of
query results. The database is used to find matching proteins,
transcripts, and chromosomes to supplement query parameters.

Software input
To minimize the error during data entering process, the query
page of MICO first matches the input format with the colorcoded
bioinformatic tools for their input requirement. After
selecting bioinformatic tools, input fields will be automatically
enabled. Users can select from predefined values in some fields
such as chromosome number, reference, and mutation. MICO
automatically checks if the input values are consistent with the
required format of the specific web sites.

Software output
The predicted results from multiple bioinformatic websites are
returned and organized as an easy-to-read summary table -
“MICO Query Results” (). The response time from
different websites can vary significantly, ranging from a few
seconds to several minutes. MICO will update the report every
10 seconds as results become available. If it takes longer than 10
minutes, it wills time out.

The user can now quickly obtain a consensus whether a given
mutation may have a deleterious result. The user can also
inspect detailed reports originated from the original
bioinformatic tools by clicking the underlined “Report” link.
The entire search results of MICO can be downloaded as a
comma-separated values (csv) file by clicking the “Download
Report” button from the result page.

Caveat and future development
In the near future, we will expand the functionality of MICO to
include a total of 37 leading bioinformatic tools. Among these
tools, 31 bioinformatic tools will be directly accessed via the
Internet as back-end servers, while 6 tools will be implemented
locally on our MICO server. Currently, MICO can only accept
one mutation per query. We plan to expand the capacity of
MICO to accept multiple mutations in batch mode.

Conclusion
MICO presents the researcher with an unbiased view of all
possible predictions on the effects of a given mutation. MICO
thus could speed up the understanding of the genetic basis of
human diseases. Further, MICO may enhance research in
computational biology and bioinformatics. The summary table
of MICO would be an easy follow-up for constructing a
computational model or algorithm, such as by assigning
different weights to each prediction result.

Citation:Lee &amp; Chen, Bioinformation 10(7): 469-471 (2014)

A screenshot of the MICO tool (at http: //mico.ggc.org /MICO). The left panel of MICO lists the software to be used;
right panel is for entering the mutation information.

An example screenshot of a MICO report. Detailed reports from the original bioinformatic tools are available through the
Report links in the last column.

