Background
Allergy has been one of the most common chronic health 
problems in the world, and other hypersensitivity reactions 
have become major causes of chronic suffering in human. With 
advances in genomic technologies, there is a rapid increase in 
allergy-related information and multiple tools have been 
developed for performing allergenicity prediction []. Allergen 
nomenclature website [] is the official site for the systematic 
allergen nomenclature that is approved by the World Health 
Organization and International Union of Immunological 
Societies (WHO/IUIS) Allergen Nomenclature Sub-committee. 
Food Allergy Research and Resource Program [] provide the 
food industry with credible information, expert opinions, tools, 
and services relating to allergenic foods. In order to assessment 
of potential allergenicity and patterns of cross-reactivity, 
AllerTool [] provide a web server with essential tools for the 
assessment of predicted as well as published cross-reactivity 
patterns of allergens. AllergenOnline database [] provides an 
allergen sequence entries and sequence searchable database 
intended for the identification of proteins that may present a 
potential risk of allergenic cross-reactivity.

Methodology
Data collection and development:
The allergen sequence, motif-allergen and epitopes data were 
collected from the IUIS allergen database, UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot 
and NCBI PubMed database. The allergen information were collected 
the 2,434 allergen sequence data without duplication, and were 
categorized the animals (i.e., worms, rodents, mammals, insects, 
mites, foods, others), microbes (i.e., bacteria, fungi), and 
plants (i.e., pollen, latex, foods, others) sections. The platform 
was developed using MYSQL and Oracle relational database management 
system. Using the collected allergen information, we have developed 
an allergen database with three main functions: (i) allergen list 
with structure and epitopes; (ii) searching of allergen by keyword and sequence
information; and (iii) three computing methods for allergenicity 
prediction. In 2014, we have released a major update for 
allergenicity prediction to compare the three different methods 
such as the FAO/WHO, motif-based and epitope-based 
methods.

Implementation and features:
We have developed an integrated web database system which is 
comprised of allergenic proteins for food safety and homology 
search tools. The integrated allergen database has developed a 
web-based system that will provide information about allergen 
in microorganisms, foods, animals and plants. The database has 
three major parts and functions: an allergen list, allergen search 
and allergenicity prediction. The allergen list provides the 
information which selected allergen sequence data without 
duplication. The related information for allergen structure and 
epitopes were connected with UniProtKB/TrEMBL database, 
and users can search for specific-protein name by keywords, 
protein sequence and specific categories ().

In addition, we developed an allergenicity prediction tools to 
identify potential cross-reactivity with well-known allergens, 
and users can run tools for allergenicity prediction using three 
different methods such as the FAO/WHO, motif-based and 
epitope-based methods (). The Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) propose the method 
to analysis of sequence homology when the expressed protein is 
derived from a source with known allergenicity. According to 
the FAO/WHO method 7, AllergenPro provide the function to 
find the query protein for an 80 amino acids sliding window by 
a FASTA alignment program. Motif-based prediction method 
[] 
provides the function to compare the two sequences with the 
specific profiles between the conserved motifs and the unique 
sequences. If specific protein is predicted to be allergenic, query 
result will be displayed to compare against a set of well-known 
allergenic motifs. Using the AllergenPro database, a user easily 
can predict the allergenic structure of query protein by 
changing related parameters and e-value. In browsing the result 
table, a user can access the individual characterization
information tables by clicking a linked their respective 
hypertext.

Utility, caveats and future developments
The AllergenPro database provides allergen related information 
(motif structure and epitope of allergens) in microorganisms, 
foods, animals and plants. The database has three major utility 
features (dataset list, allergen search, and allergenicity 
prediction). The database provides options for (1) multiple 
allergen categories, (2) search of specific allergen, and (3) tools 
for allergenicity prediction using three different methods. The 
integrated allergen database provides a platform for allergen 
sequence search through a user-friendly web-interface. NABIC 
plans to provide this service to allergen research institutes and 
societies in the near future. We also plan to develop an 
integrated allergen database with web tools combining specific 
allergen datasets and tools for allergenicity prediction using 
various methods.

This study was conducted with support from the Research 
Program for Agricultural Science &amp; Technology Development 
(Project No. PJ010112) of the National Academy of Agricultural 
Science, Rural Development Administration, Republic of Korea. 


Citation:Kim et al, Bioinformation 10(6): 378-380 (2014)

A snap shot of the database. This view table shows samples of search results such as the allergen information table by clicking a specific category.

A snap shot shows individual searching table such as the FAO/WHO, motif-based and epitope-based methods.

