Background
Yellow fever is endemic in South America and in Sub-Saharan Africa. It was
reported that 40,000 deaths occur in the endemic regions annually [,
]. The
Yellow Fever Virus (YFV), causative agent of the Yellow fever disease is
transmitted to vertebrates by mosquitoes during feeding. The RNA genome of
YFV contains 10,862 nucleotides and encodes a large polyprotein precursor of
3411 amino acid residues which consist of three structural proteins (C, prM and
E) and seven non-structural proteins (NS1, NS2A, NS2B, NS3, NS4A, NS4B,
NS5) []. 
Optimal activity of the NS3 serine protease is required for the
maturation of the virus and the presence of the NS2B co-factor is a prerequisite
for the optimal catalytic activity of NS3 []. Studies revealed that
NS3, contains a serine proteinase catalytic triad within amino terminal regions
of 181 amino acid residues and also it requires the 40 amino acid residues of
NS2B for protease activity []. 
We focus on insilico modeling and mutation of
YFV NS2B/NS3 serine protease complex. Three-dimensional models of the
NS2B-NS3 complex would be extremely useful in design of pharmaceutical
compounds.

Methodology
Homology model building
The Modeller software package (mod9v7) was used to build the NS2B/NS3
complex model []. 
The homology modelling of NS2B/NS3 complex of YFV
was performed with WNV NS2B/NS3 in complex with Bz-nKRR-H (PDB ID:
2FP7) as a template []. 
The model generated was then submitted to the
SAVES server for evaluation of its quality using PROCHECK 
[].

Mutation and interaction studies
In NS2B-NS3 complex, residues His 94, Asp 118 and Ser 176 were mutated
using Bioedit [] 
and again modeled. To know the stability of complex,
hydrogen bonds formed between the NS2B/NS3 complex was studied using
CCP4 packages [].

Docking studies
The docking of three competitive bioactive molecules, 4-hydroxypanduratin A,
panduratin A and ester, onto the catalytic triad of the serine protease were
performed using Autodock 4.0.1 (http://autodock.scripps.edu/). Polar hydrogen
atoms were added to the model of YFV NS2B/NS3 complex and its non-polar
hydrogen atoms were merged. Kollman charges were added to this molecule.
For the ligands, non-polar hydrogen atoms were merged with Gasteiger charges
assigned. All rotatable bonds of ligands were set to be rotatable. Docking was
performed using genetic algorithm and lamarckian genetic algorithm methods.
A population size of 150 and 10 millions energy evaluations were used for 50
times searches, with a 60 × 60 × 60 dimension of grid box size and 0.375 Ǻ
grid spacing around the catalytic triad. Clustering histogram analyses were
performed after the docking searches.

Results and Discussion
In this study, the crystal structure of WNV NS2B/NS3 in complex with BznKRR-
H was chosen as template to generate the YFV NS2B/NS3 model. After
modeling, mutations were done at the catalytic triad to study the stability of the
modeled complex protein before and after mutation. Binding studies between
inhibitors and YFV serine protease complex were studied by performing
protein-ligand docking using Autodock 4.0.1. This program utilizes lamarckian
genetic algorithm for configuration search and evaluates the energy using gridbased
molecular affinity potential.

Homology model of NS2B/NS3complex
The overall sequence identity between YFV NS2B/NS3 complex and WNV
NS2B/NS3 was 69%, and was successfully modeled (). Validation
through PROCHECK shows that model after minimization contains 80.4% of
the amino acid residues in the most favoured region, 14.1% in allowed regions,
3.8Å in generously regions and 1.6% in disallowed region in Ramachandran
plot. The RMSD value of the modeled NS2B-NS3 complex was found to be
4.702 Å . The modeled structure was well within the described Ramachandran
limits, and thus was considered to be the putative structure for NS2B-NS3
complex for further studies.

Mutation at the catalytic triad
NS2B-NS3 complex has a catalytic triad comprising of His94, Asp118 and
Ser176 which has the proteolytic activity [], important for viral replication.
Thus abolishing or dramatically reducing protease activity has the ability to
control the viral replication and thus stop spreading yellow fever 
[,
,
]. 
Taking this factor into account, an insilico mutation study was done and
comparison was drawn between the wild and the mutant models. The sequence
retrieved from swiss-prot was mutated at 3 residues (His94, Asp118 and Ser
176) with 4 different combinations by using BioEdit software as tabularized
below in Table 1(see ). After mutation the sequence was modeled and validated.

Based on the three-dimensional structure of NS2B-NS3 complex, the hydrogen
bonds in the active centre of NS2B-NS3 complex are discussed. As shown in
(see Table 2), there are five hydrogen bonds in the
NS2B-NS3 complex. These hydrogen bonds are important because they are
formed between the catalytic triad and also catalytic triad residues with other
residues in the complex. Studies by Lau et al. (1999) 
[], suggests that the
breaking of Asp118-His94 hydrogen bond of the catalytic triad has drastic
effect on the structure and dynamics of the protein. The instability induced in
the structure may also be reasoned to substantiate the reduced catalytic activity
of the protein. Hence H-bonds formed between the residues were taken as
deciding factor for judging the level of activity of the catalytic triad in various
mutated models.

The effect of mutation was studied by considering the H-bonds formed within
the catalytic triad. After mutation all bonds are formed, except one functionally
important bond between His94 and Asp118 (See Table 3a in ). 
Asp118-His94 bond was prominent in the wild model but this bond
was non-existent in all of the mutant models. The RMSD values of the mutated
models are given in Table 3b (See Table 3b in ). From the values
it is evident that the mutation of any of these residues disrupts the structure.
Thus applying this study at molecular level may prove an important strategy for
controlling the replication of Yellow Fever Virus.

Docking
The discovery of potential ligands as drug candidates was an important aspect
for controlling diseases like dengue, swine flu based on homology models 
[].
Inhibitors namely 4-hydroxypanduratin A, Panduratin A and Ester were used as
ligands for binding interaction studies with the active site of the DEN2 serine
protease []. 
Since the active residues of catalytic triad are found to be same
in serine proteases of all flavi virus, the same three inhibitors 4-
hydroxypanduratin A, Panduratin A and Ester are used in our docking studies.
Docking analysis of the ligands 4-hydroxypanduratin A, Panduratin A and
Ester with the NS2B-NS3 complex showed interesting pattern of interactions
and binding mode to the active site. To have a better understanding of the
interaction of ligands with the complex, binding energies as well as the
hydrogen bond interactions, are tabulated in (see Table 4 in
). 
Among the three ligands screened, 4-hydroxypanduratin A was
found to have best docking in terms of interaction and forming hydrogen bond
with active site residue, Asp118 (). The minimum binding energy
indicated the strong affinity of 4-hydroxypanduratin A with the NS2B-NS3
complex which had been stabilized by strong hydrogen bond interactions in the
binding pocket.

Conclusion
Working at the catalytic triad of YFV is one important way of studying viral
replication and can provide an insight into the way to prevent its replication.
Current work can be considered as a preliminary approach in determining the
3D structure of NS2B-NS3 complex. Docking studies of the 4-
hydroxypanduratin A compound also yielded satisfactory result and thus can be
used as potential lead compounds for drug trials against YFV. Thus structure
validation, mutation and docking are approaches used to control YFV that
needs to be potentially harnessed in lab and if successful, will prove a break in
medical genetics. The SNP modification if carried out at molecular level will
decrease viral activity and thus control viral replication leading to vaccine
development. The X-ray crystallographic studies on our theoretically modeled
NS2B-NS3 complex structure will lead to determination of 3D structure that
may further help in the study of its mechanism. Mutation studies will help us
determine the structure modification undergone due to instability of the
structure.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Kannappan &amp; Narayanan, Bioinformation 6(8): 303-306 (2011)

Three dimensional structure of YFV NS2B-NS3 complex modeled
using Modeller9v7. The 2FP7 from WNV was used as template. NS2B is
shown in red color and NS3 is shown in green color.

NS2B-NS3 complex docked with 4-hydroxypanduratin forming
hydrogen bonds with Asp118 and Gly 195.

