Background
Diabetes mellitus, a disease characterized by persistent
hyperglycemia is a global epidemic and it is conclusively
known to be associated with active tuberculosis [,
]. Latent
tuberculosis, the dormant form of the disease, is known to be
activated if associated with Diabetes mellitus []. However,
diabetes mellitus is not yet established as a predisposition
factor for latent tuberculosis. Currently latent tuberculosis is
not recommended to be routinely screened for in diabetic
individuals. In fact, a substantial controversy exist at the
present moment regarding latent tuberculosis is predisposed by
diabetes mellitus or not [,
]. Since both diabetes and
tuberculosis are common diseases a solution of this dilemma is
warranted. A recent work has shown that Mycobacterium
tuberculosis can stay in dormant stage inside CD271+/CD45-
mescenchymal stem cells. There is enough possibility that such
stem cells are niche for the tuberculosis bacterium in cases of
latent tuberculosis []. If diabetes mellitus is the predisposing
factor for latent tuberculosis then CD271+/CD45- MSCs have to
be more long-lived compared to non diabetic state. We have
explored the above possibility in this work using tools of in silico
biology.

Methodology
In this study we have considered CD73 (P21589), CD90
(P04216), CD105 (P17813), CD106 (P19320), CD166 (Q13740),
CD146 (P43121) and CD271 (P08138) mesenchymal stem cell
surface receptor markers []. The sequences of the
mesenchymal stem cell surface receptor proteins are taken from
swissprot database and in the parenthesis the corresponding
accession code of swissprot database are mentioned 
[]. It is
reported that bone marrow derived CD271+/CD45-
mesenchymal stem cell are a good shelter for Mycobacterium
tuberculosis and perhaps such habitat is the niche for latent
tuberculosis []. Although mesenchymal stem cell does not
express CD45 surface receptor, for the understanding of
association of diabetes mellitus and latent tuberculosis, we have
considered CD45 (P08575) marker protein in this study. The
functional activity and active site residues (if present) are taken
from PROSITE and other databases linked with swissprot
accession code. NetGlycate server is used to predict glycation
sites of the proteins [].

Results &amp; discussion
In long standing diabetes mellitus non enzymatic glycosylation
of proteins (glycation) happen and this phenomenon is
expected to alter biological process including inflammatory
response of tuberculosis [–]. It is expected that glycation
pattern of CD271 will modulate latent tuberculosis since
CD271/CD45- mescenchymal stem cells are proved to be the
niche of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in latent tuberculosis. It is
in this context we have studied the glycation of mesenchymal
stem cell related proteins using in-silico tools to explore the
relation of latent tuberculosis and diabetes mellitus. The
function of the studied surface marker proteins of
mesenchymal stem cell (as mentioned in the Methods) along
with predicted to be glycated lysine residues and active site if
present are given in  (see supplementary material).
Several lysine molecules of the studied proteins are observed to
be glycated. However, it is observed that only in case of CD105
and CD271 the predicted to be glycated lysine residues resides
within five residues range of the functionally important
domain. It is obvious that if residues are sequentially nearer,
they should also be located nearer in the three dimensional
structure. In CD105, Lys402 is located nearby residues 399-401,
a region whose function is predicted to be cell attachment by
similarity search using in-silico tools []. CD271 belongs to
tumor necrosis factor superfamily. Residues ranging 344-421
constitute the death domain known by experimental studies
[]. The residues ranging 326-341 requires for interaction with
KIDINS220 as known by in-silico similarity search []. Here
we have observed that two predicted lysine residues, Lys330
and Lys343 are positioned just before the death domain and
middle of the region which is required for interaction with
KIDINS220. KIDINS220 interacts with RanBP9, a molecule
critical for functioning of death domain []. RanBP9 is proved
to be a pro-apoptotic protein in other cells as well [].

If the above observations are a reality and proved by
experimental studies as well there can be glycation induced
signal modification in the death receptor (CD271) in diabetes
mellitus. This phenomenon has the potential to impair the
death /apoptosis promoting signal transduction through the
CD271 molecule of mescenchymal stem cell converting such
cell comparatively long lived than non diabetic state. In that
case the tuberculosis bacterium can have a longer lived stay
inside the protective cover of CD271+/ CD45 – mescenchymal
stem cell causing latent tuberculosis. In case such glycation
causes accentuation of signal transduction process through
CD271 molecule then it will make the life span of
mescenchymal stem cells shorter, a phenomenon which goes
against suitability of latent tuberculosis. Therefore to
understand whether diabetes mellitus predisposes to latent
tuberculosis or not experimental studies of glycation of CD271
death domain and its effect on the signal transduction process
for apoptosis are required to be done. We recommend
performing experimental study guided by these observations to
solve the present dilemma.

Conclusion
Results of this study highlights a probability of glycation of
functional domain of CD271 which can occur in long standing
uncontrolled diabetes mellitus. This phenomenon has the
potential to modulate the life span of CD271+ mescenchymal
stem cells. Since CD271+/CD45- mescenchymal stem cells are
proved to be niche of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in latent
tuberculosis such phenomenon has the potential to modulate
the occurrence of latent tuberculosis as well. Therefore we feel
that experimental verification of such result is warranted.

Author contribution
DB and RB have developed the basic concepts. RB supervised
the in-silico works. MS &amp; SN performed the in-silico works. DB
has written the paper and all the authors analyzed the data and
gone through the final version of the manuscript. DB
acknowledges DBT, Govt. of India for financial grant.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Bhattacharyya et al, Bioinformation 9(16): 829-831 (2013)

