Background
Peripheral CB1 receptors are located in the gastrointestinal (GI)
tract, liver and in adipose tissue. CB1 receptor is a 7-
transmembrane G-protein coupled receptor associated with the
endocannabinoid signalling system. It inhibits adenyl cyclase
and activates mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase. In
addition, CB1 receptors inhibit presynaptic N- and P/Q-type
calcium channels and activate inwardly rectifying potassium
channels []. As seen earlier many potent drugs have been
utilized in blocking the CB1 receptor but still pose a lot of
neuropsychiatric effects which emphasizes the need of a novel
drug which targets the peripheral CB1 receptor []. The drug
Rimonabant which is a highly selective and potent inverse
agonist for the hypothalamic CB1 receptor has been banned due
to neuropsychiatric effects []. Recently, LH-21 a peripherally
acting cannabinoid receptor neutral antagonist and possessing
lower brain penetration profile was used for the treatment of
obesity. It showed potentially reduced side effects indicating
that peripheral blockage provides a safer means to alleviate
obesity []. It has been reported that flavonoids have various
biological activities such as antioxidant, antibacterial and
anticancer effect and play roles in prevention of obesity 
[].
Hence, flavonoids may act as novel drug candidates. For the
present study, Quercetin a flavonol from Mimosa pudica leaves
was employed. Quercetin is an extensively used flavonoid in
research, which possesses good pharmacophore and
bioavailability properties [–]. Secondly, it is an herbal
adaptogen having drug like properties and obesity related
studies have been carried out. Blocking of adipose tissue CB1
receptor with Quercetin is a novel approach since it is much
more specific and potent approach in reducing the visceral fat.
The major key role in obesity is the excess endocannabinoid
production by adipocytes driving CB1 in a feed-forward
dysfunction. Several health consequences attributable to obesity
include coronary heart disease, diabetes, sleep apnea, digestive
disorders and cancer []. Endocannabinoids (eicosanoids) act
at the CB1 receptors to increase hunger and promote feeding
and it is speculated that they decrease intestinal peristalsis and
gastric emptying. Thus, antagonism at these receptors can
inverse these effects []. CB1 antagonists produce inverse
cannabimimetic effects that are opposite in direction from those
produced by agonists for these receptors []. Antagonism of
CB1 receptors increases insulin sensitivity in peripheral tissues
and oxidation of fatty acids in muscles and the liver 
[].
Structure prediction enables to explain the mechanisms of
interaction between G-protein coupled receptors and variety of
ligands, enzymes, ion channels and current drugs which
underlies the basic concept of drug designing []. The major
focus of the study is prediction of putative adipose tissue CB1
receptor – Quercetin binding conformations. Based on extensive
literature studies we propose antagonism by computational
docking thereby discovering novel herbal adaptogen for
controlling obesity.

Methodology
Selection of ligand:
Endocannibinoids stimulate appetite and also regulate fat
metabolism. This is evident from the fact that CB1 -/- mice are
resistant to diet induced obesity even though their calorie
intake is similar to that of wild type []. Thus, CB1 antagonists
showing promise in treatment of obesity. It is possible to find
out the druggish properties of herbal compounds by computer
aided screening and the data will be useful to screen best lead
molecules. The 3D structure of plant based ligand Quercetin is
available in drug data base and the structure was retrieved
from PubChem []. The required file format corresponding to
the analysis such as modelling, docking, validation and ADME
studies was generated by Open Babel [].

ADMET studies:
The absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion and toxicity
(ADMET) are the most important part of pharmacological
studies of the concerned molecule required for drug based
discovery. Pre-ADMET is the tool that provides drug-likeliness,
ADME profile and toxicity analysis for the ligand. Quercetin
identified from the selected plant Mimosa pudica was tested by
Pre-ADMET to study the pharmacological properties. It uses
Caco2-cell (heterogeneous human epithelial colorectal
adenocarcinoma cell lines) and MDCK (Madin-Darby Canine
Kidney) cell models for oral drug absorption prediction and
skin permeability, and human intestinal absorption model for
oral and trans-dermal drug absorption prediction. Distribution
is predicted using BBB (blood brain barrier) penetration and
plasma protein binding. Pre-ADMET predicts toxicity based on
the mutagenicity of Ames test and rodent carcinogenicity assays
[–].

Receptor characterization:
The amino acid sequence of human CB1 [Accession:
NP_001153731] was retrieved from GenBank [] and the
FASTA sequence is used for our studies. The secondary
structure conformation of CB1 protein sequence was predicted
by GORIV []. The domains and motifs, and transmembrane
regions were predicted by TMHMM []. Information related to
the CB1 signaling was given by KEGG [] and concise genomic
related information on human CB1 gene was retrieved from
Gene Cards []. The availability of good template dictates
quality of the model, so it is important to identify the best
template structure. The template was selected based on
percentage of identity, similarity, expectation value and
alignment scores using BLASTP [] algorithm across Protein
Data Bank (PDB).

Homology modelling:
Previous studies have reported that blocking CB1 receptor
circumvents obesity condition [,
]. Computer aided drug
design provides the platform to understand the receptor and
ligand interactions. A three dimensional structure of the protein
from its amino acid sequence was generated by Modeller. Easy
Modeller, based on programming language PerlTk uses a very
simple and easy interface to implement the features of Modeller
v9.7 []. The crystal structure of CB1 was modelled using Easy
Modeller v2.0 and Swiss PDB Viewer [] with 3V2W, chain A
used as the template from Protein Data Bank [].

Model validation:
The X-ray diffraction structure of template (PDB ID: 3V2W,
Chain A) was identified as the best template. The initial model
building and structural alignment was performed and the
modelled protein was visualized using PyMol []. Parameters
like covalent bond distances and angles, stereochemical
validation and atom nomenclature were validated using
PROCHECK []. The overall quality factor of non-bonded
interactions between different atoms types were calculated by
ERRAT program []. DaliLite 
[] is used to calculate root
mean square deviation (RMSD) between the set of targets and
template protein to check deviation of modelled protein from
the template protein structure.

Docking studies:
The selected herbal ligand, Quercetin was used to dock the
target protein using AutoDock 4.2 [] by Lamarckian genetic
algorithm. The program uses a Monte Carlo simulated
annealing for configurational exploration using grid based
molecular affinity potentials and provides bioactive
conformation by energy minimization. The catalytic and
binding site of the target has been identified by Auto Grid. The
grid box was set in such a way that includes only the selected
active site residues. The rigidity parameters were set for the
receptor, keeping the ligand flexible. The structure and
chemical properties of the active site allow the recognition and
binding of the ligand. The best conformations were screened in
terms of lowest binding energy among several bioactive
conformations generated by various iterations 
[].

Discussion
The three dimensional coordinates of Quercetin was retrieved
from PubChem. The molecular properties were deduced from
Molinspiration [] which is tabulated 
 (see
supplementary material). The PreADMET tool provided
information about the absorption, distribution and toxicity
details about the herbal ligand and was found to be in
acceptable limits,  (see supplementary material). The
seconadary structure of CB1 receptor was predicted and which
contains 100 alpha helices, 135 extended strands and 237
random coils. It was found that coils were predominant in the
modelled protein and helices were present in small proportion.
CB1 receptor has 7 transmembrane helices in which residues
118-140, 153-175, 190-212, 233-255, 275-297, 345-367 and 377-399
span the membrane. CB1 receptor [Gene name: CNR1] is a
GPCR and mediates through MAP kinase pathway.

Homology searches in PDB were performed using the program
BLASTP, by comparing and aligning the target sequence with
each sequence in PDB. The sequence identity between the
template (PDB ID: 3V2W chain A; crystal structure of a lipid G
Protein-coupled receptor) and cannabinoid receptor 1 isoform a
(Homo sapiens) is 40%. Further, structure-based sequence
alignment of CB1 of Homo sapiens against the selected template
was performed. The 3D homology model of CB1 receptor in
Homo sapiens (Accession NP_001153731) was predicted using
Easy Modeller v2.0, which used Modeller automodel to build
homology models. High quality models demands an accurate
sequence alignment between the model and the template
protein. The annotated model structure of the receptor was
predicted, which was “CB1 receptor. B99990001”. It was further
mutated with same residues and torsion angles were adjusted
by SPDBV to generate the best model “CB1 receptor.pdb” for
further docking studies (). The energy value of the
model was calculated before and after the minimization. It has
noted that after minimization the energy of the model reaches
its energy minima which showed more stable structure.
Structural evaluations and validation of protein model were
performed by the programs called ProCheck and Verify 3D. The
evaluation of CB1 receptor model revealed that stereochemical
and geometrical parameter implemented in ProCheck was
satisfied in this model. The path with the best RMSD is subject
to dynamic programming to achieve an optimal alignment. The
z-score can be used to filter less significant results or
alternatively look for weak similarities. In spite of that, the
relationship between backbone RMSD in Å and structure
quality for X-ray structure ensemble for protein structure
comparison showed that they were barely acceptable and have
a very closely related to each other [,
]. Therefore, the
model predicted was acceptable. The RMSD value of modelled
protein was found to be 1.0 Å and z-score of 40.7.
Stereochemical validation shows out of 377 residues, 85.1%
residues are in allowed region, 11.9% in additional allowed
regions, 1.5% in generously allowed regions and 1.5% in
disallowed regions of Ramachandran plot (). Further,
validation was done by various empirical force fields. Overall
quality factor of the model identified to be 81.30 and error
values of individual residues are negligible. The docking was
performed effectively with the selected ligand. Active site was
deduced from Q-site finder [], a ligand binding site prediction
tool. It works by binding hydrophobic (CH3) probes to the
protein, and finding clusters of probes with the most favourable
binding energy. These clusters are placed in rank order of the
likelihood of being a binding site according to the sum total
binding energies for each cluster. The residues selected for the
grid were Met 103, Asp 104, Glu 106, Cys 107, Val 110, Leu 111,
Asn 112, Pro 113, Ser 114, Gln 115, Gln 116, Leu 117, Asp 176,
Phe 177, His 178, Val 179, His 181, Arg 182, Phe 189, Lys 192,
Leu 193, Asp 266, Ile 267, Phe 268 and Pro 269. The main
interacting residues of protein with Quercetin are Ser 114, His
181, Asp 266, His 178, Ile 267, Asn 112, Asp 104 and Lys 192. A
total of 10 conformations were generated. Information about the
number of hydrogen bonds and binding energy is provided
 
(see supplementary material). The best docked
conformation was the 4th one with -6.56 kcal/mol binding
energy and 4 hydrogen bonds ().

Though the use of drugs has been utilized to curb obesity, it still
shows prominent side effects making it not viable for long term
use. Herbal compounds are better therapeutic substances with
fewer side effects. Based on the above studies we have
identified the phytoligand Quercetin as a novel inhibitor
against the receptor. Previous studies have revealed that
blockage of CB1 receptor is mainly mediated through
transmembrane helix (TMH) 3−4−5−6 region which includes an
aromatic microdomain comprised of residues F3.25, F3.36,
W4.64, Y5.39, W5.43 and W6.48. Earlier reports devised that
aromaticity at position 5.39 in CB1 is crucial for proper function
of CB1. Modelling studies reported that in the inactive state of
CB1, the binding site of the CB1 inverse agonist/antagonist
SR141716A (rimonabant) is within the TMH 3−4−5−6 aromatic
microdomain and involves direct aromatic stacking interactions
with F3.36, Y5.39 and W5.43, as well as hydrogen bonding with
K3.28 [–]. 
CB1 receptor displays a high level of constitutive
activity and displays two state-model of receptor activation in
which receptors are in equilibrium between two states, active
and inactive. An agonist will stabilize the active state leading to
activation, a neutral antagonist binds equally to active and
inactive states, whereas an inverse agonist will preferentially
stabilize the inactive state. Rimonabant has been reported in
many cases to behave as an inverse agonist rather than as a
neutral antagonist and it is likely that it binds preferentially to
the inactive state of the CB1, thereby decreasing the activation
of the signalling pathway. The key binding interaction is a
hydrogen bond formed between the carbonyl group of
Rimonabant and the Lys192 residue of the CB1 receptor. From
our study, it has been deduced that Quercetin not only shows
binding efficiency to the Lys192 
() 
&amp;()
indicating it will be suitable to block the receptor but also has
efficient binding capacity due to its 4 hydrogen bonding with
Ser114, His 181 and Asp 266. Thus, a potential inhibitor against
obesity by blocking CB1 receptor has been proposed.

Conclusion
Computer aided drug discovery is an imminent and effective
platform for identification of novel therapeutic substances.
Naturally available herbal compound and its antagonistic
effectiveness against the CB1 receptor are tested by molecular
docking. Quercetin was identified to be an effective
phytoligand for CB1 receptor with better binding and inhibitory
properties. Hence, it is a novel approach against obesity with
better efficacy in comparison to known drug Rimonabant.
Present study will boost the use of herbal adaptogens as a
remedy with potentially less side effects for treating obesity and
its related disorders. Henceforth, drugs will be designed and
derived from plant origin and discovery and development of
flavonoids as ideal drug candidates through computer aided
screening will be a major contribution to pharmaceutical
sectors.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors thankfully acknowledge the R &amp; D Centre of Life
Sciences and Engg, Dayananda Sagar Institutions for providing
the necessary facilities and also grateful to Dr. P.S Rao, Vice
President, R &amp; D in Life Sciences for his constant support and
encouragement throughout the study.

Citation:Shrinivasan et al, Bioinformation 8(11): 523-528 (2012)

(A) The generated 3D model of protein (CB1 receptor)
consists of stable secondary structure (helices and coils) which
gives the catalytic sites for drug interaction is visualized; (B)
Ramachandran plot of the model depict that 85.1% residues are
in allowed region, 11.9% in additional allowed regions, 1.5% in
generously allowed regions and 1.5% in disallowed regions.

Docked structures of Quercetin with modelled CB1
receptor (A&amp; B) by AutoDock. (A) The ligand – receptor
interaction in the 4th conformation was stabilized by four H
bonds (represented as green colored stick). The bond length
was 1.03 Ao with His178, 2.11 Å with His181, 2.09 Å with
Ser114 and 2.12 Å with Asp266 respectively, indicating a
stronger and stable interaction The binding energy of docked
complex was found to be -6.56 kcal/mol implies more stable
docking. (B) Since, inverse agonism on CB1 receptor is based on
binding to Lys192, Quercetin was docked to observe for the
same. The interaction was stabilized by two hydrogen bonds
and bond length was 1.9 Å with His178 and 2.22 Å with Lys192
respectively. This interaction indicated that Quercetin can be
implicitly used to block the receptor with better binding
affinities as compared to known drug Rimonabant.

