Background
The stability of a protein results from a delicate balance
between opposing forces. Salt-bridges are bonds between
oppositely charged side chain atoms of acidic (acceptor atoms)
and basic (donor atoms) residues that are within 4Å distance
[]. 
Under cellular pH conditions, these side chains in proteins
remain ionized and thus form salt-bridges. It can forms in 1:1,
1:2, 1:3 etc ratios. The first type is known as monomeric 
() 
and others are network type salt-bridges ().

Salt-bridge forming residues can either be in secondary (sheet
and helix) or in coil structures of which more in the former
indicates that they are evolutionarily conserved. Both in
experimental and theoretical scenario, it has been entertained
that salt bridges are mostly stabilizing and specific in nature 
[,
,
]. Salt-bridges play crucial role in protein-protein
interactions (), molecular recognition, allosteric
regulation, domain motions. Extremophilic proteins make
special use of these interactions for maintenance of stability in
their robust environments [,
].

At this point it is worth raising the question as to how many of
the database-protein-structures are computationally approach
for the above purpose. The question is relevant as currently
there are about sixty thousand (till 4th Feb, 2014) high
resolution (&lt;2.5Å) crystal structures in the protein database to
extract massive information on salt-bridges and to find their
involvement in relation to the above issues. Such computation
would also be useful for determining “structural classification
of protein” (SCOP) based pattern of salt-bridges and to develop
pattern specific scoring functions. The paucity of such results
might have stemmed from the fact of lack of efficient software
that could analyze a large number of structures in a single run
for output with all relevant details. Mention may be made of
the fact that while interface [], plug-in 
[] and web based 
[]
computation of salt-bridges are possible; some produce
erroneous results [] or lack of complete details 
[,
] and others
are limited by the speed of internet []. Moreover, none of this
program provides information on network salt-bridge,
secondary structure and residue specific analysis. In this end
our development i.e. SBION potentially overcome most of the
above limitations. Not only salt-bridge but also ion-pair of any
distance can be computed for any number of protein with any
number of chain. Taken together it could be said that our
SBION is unique and first of its kind.

Methodology
SBION works in C-Shell UNIX environment and is interpreted
by GAWK programming language. A detailed flow-chart of its
functioning is shown below (). First it makes a list of all
crystal structure files that are present in the working directory
and process one at a time in stage wise manner (four stages e.g.
S1, S2, S3 and S4). The program extracts itemized results for
preparing compact, named output per input file. Upon
completion, it loops back to next PDB for named output as
above and so on.

Program input
Users need to place all protein structures (X-ray/NMR:
PDB/ENT files) in a directory and run SBION from UNIX
prompt providing salt-bridge distance (). The
program uses crystal structure files as input by screening out
NMR files (), if they are exist in the working directory.

Program output
All named outputs () will be in the same working
directory. SBION writes one output per PDB/ENT file in
itemized manner (). In first section of output
file it gives missing atoms information, if any are there in the
structure files (III: A). Then it describes details on secondary
structure and residue composition (III: B). In next section, it
provides intra molecular (monovalent) and inter-molecular salt
bridges (III: C). Finally details on residue specific and net
worked salt-bridges are presented (III: D &amp; E).

Caveats and future development
Program is written in GAWK (interactive) language which can
preferably run in any C shell UNIX prompt including CYGWIN
and also be made work in B shell LINUX and WINDOWS
environment. We are developing web interface to integrate
SBION and other tools such as PHYSICO [] developed in our
lab, within a unique web service.

We thankfully acknowledge the computational facility
Laboratory of the Department of Biotechnology, The University
of Burdwan.

Citation:Gupta et al, Bioinformation 10(3): 164-166 (2014)

Details of SBION extracted salt-bridge analysis (panel-I: A, B &amp; C), response during run (panel-II) and output in
subsections (panel-III).

Flowchart for topology scanning procedure by SBION

