Background
In recent years there has been an exponential growth in the
number of full genome sequencing projects. This has generated
huge genome sequence and related data. Organization of data
related to genome, proteome, metabolome etc., in databases and
analysis of the data in these databases have given insights in
organization of biological systems. At each level of organization
new properties and rules emerge that could not be predicted by
studying lower levels [,
]. For example, studying genes and
proteins in isolation does not provide information on network
of genes and proteins. The unique property that emerges by
studying interacting network of genes and proteins is the
dynamic interactions among chemical compounds −
metabolites, substrates etc. Metabolism is an emergent property
of this dynamic interaction. Various approaches have been used
to simplify and understand complex network of metabolic
pathways. This has lead to classification of metabolome by
implementing different set of rules.

Jeong et al., [] have shown that the metabolic pathways are
scale free and highly interconnected. Ma et al., 
[] have used
KEGG LIGAND [] database to classify the metabolome in a
fully connected sub-network using substrate and product
properties. The primary aim of their work was to study
network properties such as strong component of a network and
closeness centrality. Another study on metabolic classification
reported that metabolic networks are organized into highly
connected topological modules. These modules then combine in
a hierarchical manner into larger less cohesive units and
demonstrated that their degree of clustering follows a power
law []. 
Further these authors have classified the modules
depending on the biochemical property such as carbohydrate
metabolism, nucleotide and nucleic acid metabolism, protein,
peptide and amino acid metabolism, lipid metabolism etc 
[].
Ihmels et al., [] 
analysed the co-expression pattern of genes and
revealed strong coordinated regulation of genes involved in
individual metabolic pathways. Their analysis demonstrated
that a clear hierarchical structure exists in metabolic network
that converges with one of the three modules associated with
amino acid biosynthesis, protein synthesis and stress. From
these studies it is difficult to infer global relation between
metabolic pathways in the organisms. Also none of the above
studies have used specific metabolic pathway ontology, thus
making it difficult to unveil unique features of a metabolome.
Further, non-usage of specific ontology makes it difficult to
compare the results from different studies.

Handorf et al., [] introduced the concept of biosynthetic
potential of a compound and expansion of metabolic network
depending on the scope of randomly selected seed compounds.
More recently Azuma et al., [] reported minimal pathway
maps by analyzing KEGG pathway maps of 30 representative
genomes. These studies have identified energy conversion,
amino acid biosynthesis and nucleotide biosynthesis as
essential or part of the minimal set of metabolic pathways.
Therefore it is argued that simpler/conserved metabolic
pathways were present in the primordial cell. However these
studies do not comment on direct or indirect dependence of rest
of the pathways on the minimal/conserved pathways.
Understanding the evolution of present complex metabolic
network from the primordial set of pathways is difficult and
thus above studies fail to pinpoint the causality behind
pathways interactions. None of the above studies fully utilizes
the potential of enormous metabolic data in large number of
bacteria available in the post-genomic era. There is a need to
develop a method that extract knowledge from this large data
and helps in understanding the organization as well as
functioning of the organism at higher resolution. This
knowledge will help in engineering organism to attain specific
function, through suitable modification of pathways. A simple
method is developed with this aim and the results obtained are
discussed in succeeding sections.

Methodology
Data collection:
Reliable and highly curated data from Pune University
Metabolic Pathway Engineering (PuMPE) resource 
[] is used
in this study. Pathways data for ninety-four bacteria (50 aerobic,
38 facultative and 6 anaerobic bacteria) having 250 or more
metabolic pathways was extracted from PuMPE database.
Further analysis was carried out using this data for each of the
ninety-four bacteria. Data from archaea are not included in the
present analysis.

Identification of core pathways (Stage I):
U1 U2 ……U94 are sets of metabolic pathways in each bacterium
B1, B2 …B94 respectively. Core pathways C called Stage I
pathways are U1∩ U2∩U3∩…..∩U94 = C

To find out therefore C pathways following approach was used:
Each pathway has a ‘Unique id’ in PuMPE database. In order to
identify common identical pathways in ninety-four bacteria
‘Unique id’ in each bacterium was compared iteratively. The
presence of pathways with same ‘Unique id’ in each of ninetyfour
bacteria represents identical pathways. 42 such identical
pathways were found to be present in each of these ninety-four
bacteria. These identical metabolic pathways that are present in
all bacteria are termed as Core pathways C or Stage I pathways.

Categorization of metabolome according to metabolic pathways interactions:
The metabolome is categorized depending upon direct or
indirect interaction of Core pathways (Stage I) with rest of the
pathways. To categorize metabolome and assign a stage to the
pathway in each bacterium following approach is used. Any
pathway is said to be interacting with other pathway if at least
one of the compounds − start, intermediate or end product is
common in two pathways under consideration.

Following algorithm was used to categorize the metabolome
using above definition of interacting pathways: 1) A set of all
start, intermediate and end compounds {Cm}i from set of
pathways {P}i belonging to Stage i was prepared; 2) A set of
pathways categorized as ‘other’ pathways {O}i at Stage i was
prepared after each stage of categorization of pathways; 3)
Compounds (start, intermediate or end) in a particular pathway
from the set of other pathways {O}i were compared with {Cm}i
and if even a single compound was found to be identical then
that pathway was categorized to Stage (i+1); 4) This process
was continued for each pathway in the set {O}i to identify a set
of interacting pathways {P}i+1 belonging to Stage (i+1); 5) Noninteracting
pathways form the set {O}i+1 pathways of category
are termed as ‘other’; 6) This process was continued till
pathways in {O}n do not interact; 7) The initial set or Stage I
pathways for each bacterium is always a set of core pathways C
and the starting point of subsequent categorization.

Result &amp; Discussion
From 422 bacteria in PuMPE database, ninety-four bacteria have
≥250 annotated pathways. Among these pathways 42 pathways
are identical in all bacteria, called Stage I or Core pathways. The
list of Core pathways (Stage I) is given in 
(see
supplementary material).

As can be seen from , core pathways include important
pathways such as amino acid, carbohydrate, lipid and
nucleotide metabolism. Presence of these pathways as core
pathways supports the hypothesis that these are primary
pathways, as suggested by Woese [], could be the most
ancient pathways. Thus these 42 pathways are suggested as
being part of the universal ancestor metabolome. The
methodology explained in the methods section was applied to
categorize the pathways in each of the ninety-four bacteria.
Results of a case study of categorization of metabolome of E.coil
O157 are discussed below.

Metabolic categorization: a case study of Escherichia coli O157:
Escherichia coli O157 is one of the best-annotated metabolome. In
this strain of E.coil 433 pathways are annotated. Therefore,
categorization of these 433 pathways is discussed. Start,
intermediate and end compounds in each of the 433 pathways
were extracted from PuMPE database. These were then
organized in two sets: I - Compounds from 42 Core/Stage I
pathways and II - Compounds from remaining or other 391
pathways

If common compounds are present between Stage I and one or
more remaining pathways, then those pathways were
considered to have interaction with Stage I pathways. Such
interacting pathways are called Stage II pathways. In Escherichia
coli O157, 289 pathways from set of 391 pathways were found to
interact with 41 core pathways. Thioredoxin pathway in the set
of core pathway did not interact with any of the 391 pathways
as there is no compound from this pathway that is common to
any of the compounds from remaining 391 pathways.
Thioredoxin pathway is termed as non-interacting.

In next step a set of start, intermediate and end compounds of
the 289 Stage II pathways was prepared. These compounds
were then compared with start, intermediate and end
compounds of each of the remaining 102 pathways of the set
‘other’ pathways. This comparison gave 75 interacting
pathways with Stage II. These 75 pathways are categorized as
Stage III pathways and remaining 27 pathways as other
pathways. The interaction between 75 pathways of Stage III and
remaining 27 pathways gave rise to 13 Stage IV pathways.
Finally Stage IV pathways interact with only one of the
remaining 14 pathways giving one Stage V pathway namely -
“Lipid A-core biosynthesis”.

 
(see supplementary material) also points out that at
every stage there are pathways that do not interact with any of
the remaining pathways. These are called ‘next stage noninteracting
pathways’. In other words, in the hierarchical
network of pathways model, these non-interacting pathways
interact with previous stage pathways but do not interact with
next stage pathways. For example, Thioredoxin pathway, the
non-interacting pathway at Stage I do not have any direct or
indirect impact on any of the ‘other’ metabolic pathways in
Escherichia coli O157. On the other hand 200 non-interacting
pathways of Stage II will interact with one or more 41 pathways
of Stage I and will have no interaction with remaining 102
pathways belonging to Stage III (75), IV (13), V (1) or noninteracting
(13) pathways. Similar is the case with other noninteracting
pathways that, they will not affect higher stage
pathways.

Previously, a set of randomly selected seed compounds from
KEGG database was used to demonstrate expansion of
metabolic network []. The method described here selects seed
compounds by following a rational approach and is biologically
more meaningful. This simple approach of categorization
allows identification of pathways that will not get impacted
even if certain pathways are modified or engineered.

The fourteen non-interacting pathways are listed in 
 (see
supplementary material). None of these pathways have a
single common compound with remaining pathways in the
metabolome of E.coil O157. In other words substrate and
catalysing enzymes are unique in these fourteen pathways.
Identification of such pathways is not easy, though important,
and may be very good target to engineer specific property of
the organism. The analysis of these non-interacting pathways
thus becomes essential. A careful reading of names of pathways
in Table 3 gives some idea as to why these pathways are present
but do not interact with each other or any other pathway in
E.coil O157.

The first three pathways in  (see supplementary
material) are responsible for degradation of aldoximes,
acrylonitrile and catechol respectively, which can enter bacterial
cell through free diffusion, use of a permease or other transport
system []. Aldoxime, acrylonitrile and catechol are toxic and
are often discharged into environment by various chemical
industries. If these compounds are not degraded then they will
harm environment and can have severe impact on aquatic
ecology. The capability of degradation of aldoximes and
acrylonitrile by Escherichia coli O157 is of interest as it may help
in treatment of nitrile pollution. Similarly, catachols are also
great environmental concern as they are known to be
carcinogenic to human beings []. Therefore, the three
degradation pathways 1 to 3 in  (see supplementary
material) in Escherichia coli O157 can help in bioremediation of
contaminated sites. Hence the non-interaction of these
pathways can be understood, as they seem to have evolved in
response to the change in environment.

In a similar manner Cis-vaccenate biosynthesis, sulphate
activation for sulfonation and Cyclopropane fatty acid
biosynthesis pathways (4 to 6 in ) help the organism to
survive under stress by producing /utilizing unusual
compounds. For example Cis-vaccenate is the only unsaturated
fatty acids found in Escherichia coli O157. It helps in adjusting
growth and differentiation to differing temperatures. Sulfate
activation for sulfonation pathway improves the defence
mechanism of E.coli, where as the cyclopropane fatty acid
synthesised in the cyclopropane fatty acid biosynthesis
pathway protects from acid shock [].

Pathways 7-11 Table 3 can be categorized as co-factor
biosynthesis pathways and are known to be essential for
viability of an organism [–] On the other hand pathways 12
&amp; 13  are electron donor and acceptor pathways where
as pathways 14  is transporter of inorganic nutrient
namely ammonium. In fact, pathways 7-10 in  are
identified as drug target in various bacteria [–] and can be
used as target pathways for designing drug against the diseases
such as haemorrhagic colitis or haemolytic uremic caused by
E.coli O157 [].

From above analysis it is clear that set of non-interacting
pathways are essential and play very important role in the
survival, growth and differentiation of an organism. Evolution
of these pathways is in response to stress, environmental
condition or to improve its defence mechanism and have
therefore carefully chosen enzymes and substrates that have
unique properties and are not part of other complex networks
of pathways so that any change in these complex network will
not have adverse impact on survival or defence mechanism.
These non-interacting pathways exist in every organism. Since
no simple tool to identify them was available till this study,
their importance and roles are not studied in depth or are not
utilised in engineering organism or pathways. Identification of
a set of non interacting pathways along with set of identical or
Stage I pathways is the most important contribution of this
simple metabolic pathways categorization study described here.

This metabolome categorization approach also allows studying
in detail complex metabolic networks in the organism. It is clear
from  that only one network has highest complexity up
to Stage V whiles thirteen metabolic networks have four stages.
To understand the complexity of network a case study of
pathways belonging to carbohydrate metabolism at Stage I are
discussed. It can be seen from  that only four pathways
namely, gluconeogenesis I, glycolysis I, pentose phosphate
pathways (non-oxidative) and TCA cycle, can be grouped as
carbohydrate metabolism.

These four pathways interact with 178 pathways, which are
termed as Stage II pathways. Out of these 178 pathways only 53
pathways interact to give 50 Stage III pathways. From these 50
Stage III pathways, 8 pathways interact to give 9 Stage IV
pathways, which do not interact further. The same is depicted
in (). 
It is clear that there is one to many mapping for
Stage I to Stage II pathways (4→178) but for at least few
pathways of Stage II there is many to one mapping to Stage III
pathways (53→50) as well as for Stage III to Stage IV pathways
(8―9). However, the analysis also points out one to one as well
as many to many mappings of pathways in the complex
metabolic networks. To understand this complexity, networks
of two pathways glycolysis I and gluconeogenesis I, belonging
to the Stage I / Core pathways in the group of carbohydrate
metabolism, was studied.

It can be seen from (), that both these pathways interact
through compounds Pyruvate and Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate with Stage II pathways glycine betaine degradation
and CDP – diacylglycerol biosynthesis I &amp; II. These Stage II
pathways interact through 1, 2 diacylglycerol -3- phosphate and
Glycine betaine with Stage III pathways phospholipid
degradation, choline degradation and glycine betaine
biosysnthesis I. These three pathways through choline and
phosphadylcholine interactions give rise to phosphadylcholine
biosynthesis I pathways - a single pathway (). It can
also be seen that the compound Glycine betaine is common for
two pathways choline degradation I and glycine betaine
biosynthesis I. The network and its complexity can be worked
out to high precision using above-mentioned approach for
every pathway. Therefore the effect of pathway perturbation on
the substructure as well as whole metabolome can be
understood. Modifications of precise nature or engineering of
metabolome is possible because of the understanding of precise
connection among pathways and chemical / biochemical
reactions. It must be kept in mind that these networks are
results of the assumption that pathways given in 
 (see
suplementry material) are at the lowest level.

The occurrences of various types of complex networks not only
of different hierarchy but also different mappings indicate that
interacting compounds are used with varied frequency. To
understand the correlation between number of times the same
compound is used to connect different pathways and its
chemical properties an in-depth analysis is necessary. The
simple analysis of complex network of pathways discussed
above suggested that few compounds are used more frequently
in connecting pathways from lower stage to higher stage.
() shows top 10 compounds from Stage I pathways that
interact with remaining pathways to form Stage II. Pyruvate
from four Stage I pathways interact with more than 50 Stage II
pathways, clearly demonstrating the many to many
relationship. Similarly acetyl-CoA from three Stage I pathways
interacts with more than 40 Stage II pathways. As can be seen
from (), there is a sharp drop in the number of Stage II
pathways that interact with compounds from Stage I. This point
out that pyruvate and acetyl-CoA play a major role in
connecting pathways from Stage I to Stage II. It is clear that
removal or reduction in supply of metabolite like pyruvate or
acetyl-CoA will have immense impact on the metabolome of the
E.coli 0157. Many pathways will get affected at Stage II and thus
those that are connected to them at higher stages will also be
affected. List of such pathways can be easily determined
because of the approach used here. In short, the approach of
metabolic categorization discussed here pinpoints the role of
compounds in connecting metabolic pathways and expansion
of network. Also one can study the impact of removal of a
metabolite on metabolic organization by using metabolic
categorization.

A similar analysis for compounds from Stage II interacting to
form Stage III pathways revealed no over representation of a
particular compound. Among the top 10 interacting
compounds, three compounds viz., dimethylbenzimidazole,
UDP-D-glucose and menaquinol, which belong to one Stage II
pathway, interact with five Stage III pathways. In this case one
to many relationship is evident. The situation did not differ
when we studied compounds from Stage III interacting to form
Stage IV. However the compound viz., KDO2-lipid IVA from
Stage IV interact to form Stage V Lipid–A core pathway, an
example of one to one relationship as it belongs to one Stage IV
pathway and interacts with one Stage V pathway. This shows
that as the level of categorization increases the metabolites
become more pathway specific.

It is clear from above analysis that compounds that connects
lower level to higher level of pathways becomes specific as the
level of pathways connectivity increase. For example, pyruvate
interacts with fifty-one Stage II pathways through Stage I
pathways. On the other hand highest connectivity for Stage II to
Stage III is five and Stage III to Stage IV is four. However, one
Stage IV pathway interacts with only one Stage V pathway.
Morowitz [] 
has identified compounds such as pyruvate,
acetyl – CoA, L-glutamate, succinate and oxaloacetate as a part
of core metabolome and they are reported to have high
biosynthetic potential []. 
It can be seen from () that
these entire compounds are interacting with Stage I and Stage II
pathways large number of times, indicating the validation of
the approach used in this study. In fact as mentioned earlier the
granularity being very high, this type of analysis allows
studying specific role of various metabolite in categorization of
metabolome.

Conclusion
A very simple approach of categorization of metabolome has
helped to identify most of the primordial pathways. The
categorization approach provides a framework to understand
global pattern of metabolic organization. Analysis of metabolic
categories revealed compounds with high connectivity that
plays an important role in maintaining the complex network of
metabolome. For the first time the categorization has helped to
identify precise sub group of pathways that may be affected
due to perturbations in a particular pathway. The
categorization of pathways is useful in identifying choke point
enzymes by analyzing the non-interacting pathways at each
stage. These choke point enzymes can further be used to
identify probable drug targets. The process of categorization
being simple and objective has been used to categorize
metabolome of ninety-four well-annotated bacteria and is
available at http://115.111.37.202/mpe/

Supplementary material
Data 1
One of the authors, Shweta Kolhi would like to acknowledge
Department of Biotechnology, Government of India for
Financial Assistance under Centre of Excellence Scheme.

Citation:Kolhi &amp; Kolaskar, Bioinformation 8(7): 309-315 (2012)

Extension of metabolic categories from four
Core/Stage I pathways belonging to carbohydrate metabolism.
Nodes in red colour denote non-interacting pathways while
green coloured nodes denote interacting pathways at each
stage.

Detailed sub-network of Figure 1 shows the interacting pathways and compounds from Stage I to Stage IV of two core
pathways - Glycolysis I and Gluconeogenesis I. Interacting compounds are shown in boxes while pathway names are along the
lines.

Top 10 interacting compounds form Stage II
pathways. Here x-axis represents the common compounds
between Stages I and II. While y-axis represents the number of
Stage II pathways with which the compound interacts.

