Background
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are important components of the regulatory networks
in plant and animals. Plant miRNAs have been well characterized in several
model systems for plant genomics such as Arabidopsis, Brachypodium, Oryza
and Populus [–]. 
They are single-stranded 20–22 nt small RNAs that are
endogenously produced from their own genes []. MiRNA genes in plants are
systematically grouped into families that yield almost identical miRNAs.
Currently, 2952 miRNA genes across 43 plant species were identified and
annotated in miRBase v16 []. Here, we present the computational approach
miRTour for homology-based discovery of plant miRNA and their targets from
sequencing datasets (EST, GSS, SRA, etc.). The program automates all the
steps of miRNA similarity search, miRNA precursor selection, target
prediction and annotation, each of them performed with the same set of input
sequences. The miRTour software has a user friendly web-interface which
provides a comprehensive pipeline for identification of plant miRNA
homologs.

Implementation
We developed a web-based application for identification of new homologs of
plant miRNAs in EST/GSS/SRA or assembled contig dataset. The program
uses a local database that consists of all plant mature miRNA sequences from
miRBase v16 (http://www.mirbase.org). The first step in our algorithm is
mapping the plant mature miRNA sequences onto the ESTs/GSS dataset
provided by the user. For the short sequence mapping, we employ the Gassst
(Global Alignment Short Sequence Search Tool) v1.27, with no more than 4
mismatches. []. 
In the next step, the miRTour filters out the protein-coding
ESTs/GSSs with miRNA hits applying BLASTX with E value 10-6 with
Arabidopsis and Orysa protein sequences (A local copy of the BLAST tool was
obtained from the NCBI FTP server, ftp://ftp.ncbi. nih.gov/blast). Next,
putative miRNA foldback precursors are extracted from the non-coding
ESTs/GSSs that contain matched known miRNAs. For selection of new premiRNA
and miRNA candidates, the following criteria are taken into
consideration: (1) MFEI (minimum free energy index) for the predicted premiRNA
secondary structure to be greater than 0.7; (2) the number of the
mismatches in miRNA/miRNA* must be less than 5; (3) the number of
consecutive mismatches in miR/miR* must be less than 4. The secondary
structure of the putative precursor sequence is predicted and visualized with the
RNAfold algorithm from Vienna RNA package, on which bases the described
criteria are evaluated []. Using ClustalW, the miRTour creates a colour
alignment of the predicted precursor sequence with sequences of known plant
mature miRNAs. To find the protein-coding targets of newly identified
miRNAs in the same initial EST/GSS dataset, we have wrapped the software
for target searching TargetFinder v1.6 in our script 
[]. The annotation of the
protein-coding target sequences is performed against all known Arabidopsis
and Orysa protein sequences by BLASTX.

Software Input
The miRTour is freely available at 
http://bio2server.bioinfo.uniplovdiv.bg/miRTour/. 
It has a simple and intuitive web-based user interface
(). 
In order to run a job on the miRTour, the following data are
required as an input: Step 1: First, the user has to upload a file with
EST/GSS/contig sequences (up to 50MB) in multi FASTA format. Step 2: The
user has to input an e-mail address. This step is obligatory since the batch
process of a large dataset requires more server-side time. The user can turn
on/off both, the BLASTX filter and the target search module, if needed. Other
options that the user should specify are the minimum number of plant
homologs that the miRTour must align and the maximum number of unpaired
bases in miR/miR* (the default parameter is 5).

Software Output
The output results are sent automatically by e-mail in HTML and PDF formats.
The result data will be kept on the server for 5 days from the moment of
submission. For each query dataset submitted to the miRTour, the output
consists of sections with putative pre-miRNA and mature miRNA sequences;
homology alignment of the newly-identified miRNA precursors to known plant
miRNAs; details for secondary structure of the precursor - MFEI, CG% and
number of mismatches in miR/miR*; predicted target sequences for the new
mature miRNAs.

Conclusion
High-throughput parallel sequencing technologies have made possible the
production and accumulation of large genome and transcriptome datasets
(EST/GSS contigs). Homology-based discovery of miRNAs in plant species,
along with target prediction step, were a comprehensive assignment, which
have been done so far manually. The developed miRTour automates those tasks
and provides a pipeline for identification of new miRNAs and prediction of
their targets from a single dataset of sequences.

Caveat and future development
Due to server limitation, large datasets (more than 50MB) cannot be submitted
for analysis by the miRTour. As the future development of our tool, we plan to
extend our server capacity in a way that will allow larger file uploading.
Another stage of development is to upgrade the miRTour to work with animal
miRNAs, but it will take a longer time since the prediction of animal miRNA
targets is more complex task compared to plant miRNA target prediction.

Citation:Milev et al, Bioinformation 6(6): 248-249 (2011)

The miRTour software web-interface.

