Background
Shewanella oneidensis MR-1 can use a diverse set of terminal electron
acceptors including iron, manganese, nitrate, nitrite, fumarate,
uranium, sulfur, trimethylamine-N-oxide, dimethyl sulfoxide [] and
thrive in the environments contaminated with heavy metals and
radionuclides []. For efficient adaptation to such environments the
organism has evolved a robust regulatory system []. A sophisticated
and complex regulatory network exists to modulate the expression of
genes that enable MR-1 to utilize different carbon and energy sources
[]. This regulatory information is available from both computational
predictions [–] and experimental studies 
[,] , but its usefulness is limited because it is not available in a centralized, web accessible
regulatory database.

Understanding regulation is key to gaining a systems level
understanding of any living organism. Regulatory databases exist for
many model organisms, including gram-positive bacterium, Bacillus 
subtilis, [] and gram-negative bacterium, Escherichia coli. The
regulatory information for E. coli is available in two main databases,
RegulonDB [] and EcoCyc []. Most of the information in these
databases is manually curated. A number of eukaryotic databases [–] employ GBrowser from the Generic Model Organism Database
Toolkit [] to visualize the regulatory information. As a rule the type
of regulators in the databases is limited, or the regulatory information
is not integrated with experimentally collected data on the organism.
The main objectives of the study was to develop a regulatory database
for S. oneidensis MR-1 and a GBrowser based visualization
environment that allows integration of the regulatory information in
the analysis of diverse experimental data (experimental results from
studies employing microarrays, proteomics, and/or gene mutagenesis)
collected in the Shewanella knowledgebase(http://shewanellaknowledgebase.org:8080/Shewanella/).

Methodology
The information collected in the Regulatory database, which is further
referred as ShewRegDB, is based on computational prediction of
different regulatory elements in S. oneidensis MR-1 and published
experimental data. Different Internet resources including TractorDB,
RegTransBase, Rfam, RibEx, TransTermHP, PromScan, ShewCyc,
ODB, MicrobesOnline, and others were used for computational
predictions of the regulatory elements. Table1 (see ) summarizes number of elements located by these sources in
Shewanella oneidensis MR-1. A diverse set of methods were
employed by these resources/databases to find the location of the
regulatory protein binding sites, operon or RNA regulators including
the use of weight matrices [], phylogenetic footprinting 
[,]
building profiles or models [,]
, motif clustering [], clustering coexpressed
genes in order to find conserved patterns in their upstream regions, comparative genomics [], gene/domain architecture 
[], decision rule based algorithm [], combination of above approaches
[,,,] or 
literature search by using a controlled vocabulary [].
In addition to computational predications from the Internet resources,
we also collected regulatory information based on experimental data
available in literature.

The collected information was analyzed to identify basic regulatory
elements (entities), their characteristics (attributes) and main types of
the regulatory elements (database objects or classes) that are essential
to characterize regulation in S. oneidensis. The identified database
objects include DNA regulator binding sites, RNA regulators, operons
and genes. At present the class of RNA regulators includes noncoding
and small RNAs, different types of terminators and
riboswitches. The class of DNA regulator binding sites includes
binding sites of transcription and sigma factors. An entity relationship
model of the database was developed according to the identified entity
classes and their characteristics, then implemented as a relational
database in MySQL, and populated with the collected information.

Description of the web-server
A web interface was designed to allow users to search and to
download collected regulatory information. The search engine queries
three main data objects of the database: DNA regulator binding sites,
RNA regulators and operons. Users can search for a specific DNA
regulator binding site from 4 different resources. RNA regulator
search extracts information on seven types of RNA regulators of a
specific gene queried by its name or locus tag. Operon search
retrieves information on operon predictions from 6 different sources.

Search results for each query are displayed in the tabular format and
can be downloaded as an EXCEL spreadsheet. Entries of the table
have links to GBrowser and to the Shewanella knowledgebase by
location of each regulatory element and by the gene locus tag.
Clicking on the links provide further options on visualization of the
regulatory information by GBrowser and on association of the
information with the experimental data in the knowledgebase.

A visualization environment based on GBrowser [] was developed
for accessing the collected information and for its overlaying with
experimental data and other genome annotations. The browser was
configured for the S. oneidensis MR-1 genome and adjusted to the
specificity of collected information. The data collected in the
regulatory database on each database object were converted into
standard gff-files for visualization of the regulatory elements on
GBrowser tracks. The following visualization options are currently
available:
an overview of all regulatory elements in the genome
with scrolling to any selected region,

 presentation of each type of
element on different tracks,

different types of zooming and

displaying detailed information on each regulatory element including
decorated (colored conserved regions) FASTA sequences

. The browser has four main sections: 
Search, navigation, download section,

Overview,

Tracks, and

Track Selection

. Tracks in
the Genome browser are organized according to main data objects in
ShewRegDB and include genes, DNA regulator binding sites, sigma
factor binding sites, RNA regulators, and operons (). Two
additional tracks “Experimental Data Selection” and “ShewCyc
pathways” are included to provide overlay of the regulatory
information with the experimental data collected in the knowledgebase
and with the S. oneidensis metabolic pathway annotation from
ShewCyc [].

Utility to the biological community
ShewRegDB is unique in providing regulatory data in the framework
of omics data including transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics
datasets. This will facilitate studying the exceptional metabolic and
respiratory versatility of Shewanella oneidensis MR-1, an important
model organism for environmental research.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors would like to thank Michael Galloway for system support and
Loren Hauser for providing valuable comments and suggestions for
this article. This research is sponsored by the U.S. Department of
Energy, Office of Biological &amp; Environmental Research. Oak Ridge
National Laboratory is managed by the University of Tennessee-
Battelle, LLC, for the U.S. Department of Energy under contract DEAC05-
00OR22725. The Pacific Northwest National Laboratory is
operated by Battelle Memorial Institute for the U. S. Department of
Energy under contract DE-AC05-76RL01830.

Citation:Syed et al, Bioinformation 4(4): 169-172 (2009)

Visualization of the regulatory data from ShewRegDB in GBrowser

