Background
Mycorrhizal symbiosis is likely to influence plant nutrition,
competition and soil nutrient cycling []. The importance of the
mycorrhizal colonization for life survival has been widely
acknowledged, as 90% of plant species have an association with
mycorrhizal fungi []. The role of mycorrhizal fungi in nutrient
uptake by host plant may vary from one group of fungi to
another, and with changing environmental conditions.
However, it remains the least known component from the
standpoint of species diversity. They are majorly classified into
various categories like endo, ecto, ectoendomychorrhiza etc.
Ectomycorrhizal (ECM) fungi accounts for 25% or more of the
root mass of forest plants such as pine (Pinus), spruce (Picea),
fir (Abies), poplar (Populus), willow (Salix), beech (Fagus),
birch (Betula), dipterocarp, eucalyptus, oak (Quarcus) and rose
families [,
]. So, it is representing a major underneath
structural component of the forest ecosystem. The Central
Himalaya (Kumaun region) shows rich diversity in Oak and
Pine trees, accounting ECM association more than 50% [].The
importance of ECM fungi in determining plant diversity
relative to other mechanisms such as species competition and
species coexistence has been studied extensively []. Since ECM
is considered to be a multipurpose net having about 500
documented uses [,
], its importance has been increased
many folds in the last few decades. There are distinct
assemblages of some new unknown ECM species associated
with Gymnosperms/ Angiosperms first time in Central
Himalaya in comparison with other species, making the
formation of common mycorrhizal networks (CMNs) between
them unlikely [,
]. This academic database is first of its kind
available in a public domain worldwide. Considering the
ecological and economical significance of ECM in Kumaun
region, authors are making first effort to explore this region
with the consultation of a taxonomist. The primary goal of this
database is to extensively address the published literature on
ECM taxonomy, edible properties, morphological features etc.
ECMdb is an attempt to give compiled information on various
species of mychorrhizae encountered in the same.

Methodology
DATABASE:
A relationally organized database was designed to serve as a
repository of species with Ectomycorrhizal identity. The
database was implemented using MySQL
(http://www.mysql.com), a free-to-use RDBMS while the
scripts were written in HTML. Linux web server was used to
deliver the interface.

Database construction:
The methodology followed in constructing ECMdb is as per
Middha et al., 2009 [].

Data collection:
Initially an extensive fieldwork was done to collect ECM fungi
associated with oak and pine trees. After getting the samples
from the field, identifications were made by examining various
macroscopic, microscopic, and chemical characteristic as per
our previous studies [4]. A search with MeSh terms
“Ectomycorrhiza” and “Central Himalaya” or “Kumaun
Region” was carried out on all literature databases available
such as PubMed [], ScienceDirect 
[], Mary Ann Liebert 
[],
BlackWell Synergy [], Scirus 
[], Bentham Publishers 
[],
BioMedAsia [], Indian Journals 
[] and others. This resulted
in an initial list of 102. In order to remove cross-database (Xref)
redundancy, searches were repeated with the same keyword
through the internet, local agencies, researchers, local people
through a questionnaires and results downloaded onto local
machines. Unless otherwise explicitly stated, all further
processing was carried out locally using default parameters.

The final lists of 79 species obtained at this stage were manually
scrutinized and scientifically proved 51 species were retained in
the database, based on their primary annotations. For every
entry, vital information pertaining to the species name,
morphological characterization, and their real time pictures,
structure, source, were included.

Curation of data:
All ECM species identifications, abstracts, titles, and articles
were reviewed by two experts, and all divergences were
resolved by consensus. We have tabulated all the mycorrhizal
genera and species found in the Central Himalaya, particularly
Kumaun region, with their specific host species by conducting
an extensive search of contents of the published papers related
to macro fungi of the area. ECM pictures exhibited in this
database had been clicked by one of the authors and are real
time. The major genera in terms of species were Amanita (7
sp.), Russula (4 sp.), Boletus (6 sp.), Lactarius (5 sp.),
Hygrophorus (1 sp.) and Cortinarius (2 sp.).

Results
The ECMDdb, thus created using the above mentioned
methodology, contains a total number of 51 Ectomycorrhizal
species of Kumaun region. The outlook of ECMdb is as
illustrated in ().

Discussion
ECMdb provides an easy-to-use web interface with flexibility to
select for an entry or a collective set of entries matching users
criteria such as name of the species, morphological features.
Empirical evidence of efficacy of this database for mychorriza
would be helpful to identify areas for potential research in
future to provide a rapid review on numerous mychorrhizal
species for the benefit of the scientific community.

Future development
ECM db is the first approach as a free accessible academic real
time database for ECM species found in Kumaun region. We
are going to incorporate more scientific information regarding
mychorrhizal species of this region as well as worldwide.
Periodically continuous updates shall be unconfined to
embrace other mychorrhizal species. We plan to incorporate a
provision to avail the required information using keywords.

This research has been carried out in Kumaun University, DBTBIF
facility under BTIS (Biotechnology information system),
DBT (Department of biotechnology), Ministry of Science and
Technology, Government of India, India. The authors are also
grateful to whole scientific community for their contribution
towards science.

Citation:Pande et al, Bioinformation 8(2): 104-106 (2012)

a snap shot of ectomycchorizal database

