Description
One of the most significant challenges is to assign reliable function association to genes and gene products. Many proteins (and domains) in eukaryotic genomes are part of multi-member 
families; they participate in many cellular processes and are located in different parts of cells. In recognition to this, the Gene Ontology (GO) consortium annotates information about 
molecular function, biological process and cellular component to describe function of a protein. [] In the post-genomic era, there have been attempts at function annotation that procure 
data from varied sources. Biological data from a single type of data source, though useful, is often limited in the extent to which it may help uncover functional associations; either because 
of a systematic bias towards specific genes, gene families and pathways and/or incorporation of false positives during data acquisition. With focus shifting from genes and proteins to biological 
systems, integrating information from multiple data types is seen as a more robust and accurate means of unraveling functional associations. []

Several attempts have been undertaken to obtain biological data from multiple data types and implement statistical frameworks for their integration. These studies employ data sources such as 
global gene expression patterns [], yeast two-hybrid data [], genomic characteristics 
[], genome-wide RNAi screens [], literature information etc. Approaches that combine information from 
multiple data types with information from peer-reviewed scientific literature are particularly successful in providing functional associations for genes and gene products. [] Most of these 
frameworks output profiles or clusters of genes based on their similarities within a particular data source and their interpretation is largely dependent on expert knowledge. For instance, 
microarray technology allows simultaneous study of expression patterns of thousands of genes under specific conditions. Expression data is analysed (using approaches such as clustering) to 
identify sets of genes with similar expression patterns that are assumed to function in similar physiological processes. Clustering aims to partition genes such that genes with similar expression 
patterns fall into the same groups called clusters. Since gene clusters are often inclined to be enriched in specific functional categories, identification of such clusters may be used to assign 
putative functional associations to uncharacterised genes within those clusters. Approaches such as hierarchical clustering, k-means, self organizing map (SOM), principal component analysis (PCA) 
have been employed to identify sets of co-expressed genes and tools are available for visualisation of these clusters. Different datasets may often provide overlapping or complementary information 
due to hierarchy in the definition of function of a gene []; integrating knowledge from various data types thus, provides a uniform view of functional associations and is most useful when coupled 
with expert knowledge. Few such attempts have proved to be highly successful in annotating prokaryotic genomes [] and there have been few attempts in eukaryotic genomes as well. []

In a recent study, knowledge from structure-function analysis of 3-D structures and sequences, gene expression profiling, text mining, protein-protein interactions and knowledge-based computational 
tools () have been extensively employed to manually assign either of the three GO [] categories to the putative members of trypsin-like serine proteases (SPs) family encoded in the genome of 
Drosophila melanogaster. [] Through this approach, functional information was obtained for 190 gene products containing serine protease like domains. This approach provides significant functional 
information for 30 of 190 gene products and to assign a putative function to these with high confidence. Of these ten are supported by literature curation and four are supported by Flybase annotations, 
while annotations for 16 gene products are entirely derived from analysis of large-scale datasets employed in the study (http://caps.ncbs.res.in/download/Bioinformation/
). A large scale involvement of many Drosophila SPs and SPHs 
(that are likely to be proteolytically inactive due to mutations in the residues of the serine protease catalytic triad) was observed in development and immune response, which would explain the diversity 
observed for this gene family in Drosophila. The approach also helps uncover putative functional associations between genes involved in different metabolic pathways. For example, Drosophila SP CG3066 is a 
monophenol monooxygenase activator involved in activation of melanization chiefly in response to fungal infection and believed to be involved in a possible cross-talk between melanization and Toll pathway. 
Time-series expression data suggests that expression of CG3066 is correlated with Easter and Snake, members of Toll signaling pathway in Drosophila. Also, studies suggest high similarity in the putative active 
sites of CG3066 and Easter. Thus, a probable role for CG3066 in association with the components of the Toll pathway may be associated in early embryogenesis. 

Thus, integration of biological data from diverse sources provides an effective means for large-scale function annotations of genes, multi-member gene families and networks. The evolution of such tools is 
likely to gain further momentum as enormous amounts of high-throughput experimental data from diverse sources are likely to become available in the near future.

L. T. is a Senior Research Fellow of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), India. The author would also like to thank Prof. R. Sowdhamini for critical reading and inputs 
for the manuscript.

A schematic representation of biological data sources and evidence types employed for the enhanced function annotation of Drosophila SPs

