Background
Leptospirosis is a zoonotic disease caused by infection with pathogenic Leptospira species. It 
			is currently identified as a worldwide emerging infectious disease, especially in developing countries. Leptospirosis 
			caused by Leptospira interrogans serovar lai strain 56601 is commonly prevalent in India, China, Japan, 
			Malaysia and Singapore. These spirochaetes are transmitted to man usually either by direct or indirect contact with the 
			urine of the infected animal. The clinical presentation of the disease is biphasic, with the acute or septicemic phase 
			lasting about a week, followed by immune phase, characterized by antibody production and excretion of leptospires in urine. 
			[] Infection may be sub clinical, mild or severe, affecting various 
			internal organs. Febrile illness of sudden onset, chills, myalgia and abdominal pain are the common symptoms in sub clinical 
			or mild infections. Jaundice and acute renal failure are also seen in severe cases. [] Specific antibiotic treatment using doxycycline or penicillin antibiotics has shown mixed results for mild 
			or sub clinical infections. Treatment of severe leptospirosis (organism localized in tissues) is still unclear. [] Availability of complete genome sequence of Leptospira interrogans serovar lai 
			strain 56601 [] has opened great opportunities for identifying potential 
			drug targets by computational analysis. This can in turn improve leptospiral treatments. 

Vitamin B1, in its active form thiamin pyrophosphate, is an essential cofactor for several important enzymes in carbohydrate metabolism. 
		Many microorganisms, as well as plants and fungi, synthesize thiamin, but vertebrates do not produce it. In bacteria, it is synthesized by 
		coupling of pyrimidine (hydroxymethyl pyrimidine; HMP) and thiazole (hydroxyethyl thiazole) moieties. Of the many enzymes involved in bacterial 
		cell's thiamin biosynthetic pathway, phosphomethyl pyrimidine kinase plays a key role. Hence, it is a promising chemotherapeutic target. This 
		is also known as HMP phosphokinase and it catalyses the conversion of 4-amino 2-methyl 5-phosphomethyl pyrimidine to 4-amino 2-methyl 5-hydroxymethyl 
		pyrimidine diphosphate, an intermediary step in the conversion of purine into thiamine. [] This 
		enzyme is coded by thiD gene (822 bp in length) located on chromosome 1 of Leptospira interrogans serovar lai strain 56601. 
		[–] Here, we predict 3 Dimensional structure of 
		Leptospira interrogans serovar lai strain 56601 phosphomethyl pyrimidine kinase employing homology modeling. The predicted 3D structure 
		was further subjected to structural feauture analysis, aiming towards developing potent inhibitors.

Methodology
The protein sequence (273 residues long) was obtained from the SWISS PROT database (Q8F9R1).The protein databank (PDB) contains two
phosphomethyl pyrimidine kinase structures from 2 species (Salmonella tyhpimurium (PDB ID: 1JXH), Thermus thermophilus HB8 (PDB ID: 1UB0)). 
[] However, structure for phosphomethyl pyrimidine kinase from Leptospira interrogans serovar lai 
strain 56601 was not available. Sequence analysis using BLASTP [] against PDB sequences showed
phosphomethyl pyrimidine kinase from Leptospira interrogans serovar lai strain 56601 having 38% sequence identity (highest homology compared to
other known structures) with Thermus thermophilus HB8. Therefore we used the structure of Thermus thermophilus HB8 phosphomethyl 
pyrimidine kinase (PDB: 1UB0) as template for building homology model for Leptospira interrogans serovar lai strain 56601 phosphomethyl pyrimidine kinase using
MODELLER [] by satisfaction of spatial restraints. MALIGN script of MODELLER was implemented to
build global alignment in this modeling process. The obtained alignment is shown in .

The backbone of the obtained model overlapped well with the template structure and the most reliable structure was chosen based on least objective function
value and stereo chemical quality of the models using the PROCHECK analysis. [] In addition, the superimposition 
was also performed using the SUPERPOSE command in MODELLER and the RMSD (root mean square deviation) between predicted model and template was 0.4 angstrom. The predicted 
model quality assessment was checked using Ramachandran plot analysis for phi and psi torsion angles. The analysis shows that 90.4% of residues are found to be in the 
allowed region of the plot, which is more than the average cut-off of 90% in most reliable models. [] The final model 
has been deposited in PDB and is now publicly accessible [PDB ID: 2G53]. The protein structure predicted is displayed in .

Results and Discussion
 An active phosphomethyl pyrimidine kinase is a 273 residue long monomer with a molecular mass of 29 kDa. A similar result has been documented earlier in E.coli
ThiD protein. [] The protein molecule is an alpha beta structure identified to contain a single large domain (17-
270 residues). Totally 8 helices and 10 sheets are present in it. All helices and sheets are right hand twisted. All sheets are arranged parallel to each other
except for β4 and β9 sheets, which are anti parallel.

In E.coli, although the phosphorylation reaction of HMP appears to occur by two steps, only one ATP binding
motif was found in its ThiD. It is a two step mechanism for phosphorylation is still unclear. [] In the current
work, only a single large domain has been identified. Possibly the phosphorylation process in Leptospira species also follows the not so well understood two step
mechanism. Walker et al (1984) suggested that many ATP- and GTP-binding proteins contain a consensus sequence motif [AG]X%GK[ST]. A sequence similar to
this motif, GGGAGIQADLKT, is found in the ThiD sequence starting at position 19 from the N terminus. Previously a similar sequence motif was also reported in
E.coli. [] This indicates the domain identified in phosphomethyl pyrimidine kinase could be an ATP
binding motif. 

Conclusion
Doxycycline or penicillin drugs are commonly used for treatment of mild or subclinical leptospiral infections. Treatment for severe leptospiral disease is still unclear.
Therefore, it is important to design effective antileptospiral drugs. A molecular model of the phosphomethyl pyrimidine kinase from Leptospira
interrogans serovar lai strain 56601 is documented in this study. The predicted model is believed to provide valuable insights towards the inhibitor design of
Phosphomethyl pyrimidine kinase pertaining to leptospirosis treatment.

Figures and Tables
Output of MALIGN script showing the alignment and ATP/GTP binding site (in yellow color)

Displaying the ATP/GTP binding site (yellow color) in phosphomethyl pyrimidine kinase enzyme from Leptospira interrogans 
      serovar lai strain 56601


      Citation:Umashankar       
      et al., Bioinformation 1(5): 158-160 (2006) 

