Background
Insects are the most abundant life forms on earth comprising
about 1 million species (&gt; 50% of life forms present on earth).
Statistical data from the world conservation union for the Year
2010 [], showed that there are 62,305 million vertebrates
species, 1,305,250 million species of invertebrates, 321,212
million species of plants and others are of 51,563 million
species. Among the invertebrates, insects represent around 1
million species. India, occupying about 2% of global space, is
among the top ten mega diversity nations of the world in terms
of insect diversity, with about 7.10% of the world insect fauna.
Ghorpade (2010) [] provided an estimate of 54346 described
species of insects belonging to 27 orders from India, with
nearly as many species yet to be discovered. Species
identification of insects is an important and difficult task as
they are more diversified. DNA barcode refers to the
identification of a species, by use of short conserved DNA
sequences from the specific mitochondrial gene CO1
(Cytochrome Oxidase 1) []. Hebert et al. (2003a) 
[] focused
this discussion by proposing that DNA barcoding system for
animal life could be based upon sequence diversity
cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1 (CO1) gene. They established
that diversity in the amino acid sequences coded by the 5׳ end
of this mitochondrial gene was sufficient to reliably place
species into higher taxonomic categories (from phyla to
orders). As such, insects provide a challenging test for the
ability of CO1 diversity to resolve species boundaries 
[]. The
cytochrome c oxidase I, 16S, 18S, and elongation factor-1α
genes have been widely used and are informative across a
broad range of divergences in insects []. The internal
transcribed spacer 2 (ITS2) is another phylogenetic marker
useful for higher level systematic analyses []. A 658-bp region
(the Folmer region) of the mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase
subunit I (COI) gene was proposed as a potential ‘barcode’ 
[]
as these sequences are highly conserved across species. Thus
DNA Barcode forms an additional master key to classify the
insect fauna of earth. Compilation of DNA barcode of
agriculturally important insects in the form of database is will
be useful for entomologists across the world. Keeping this in
view, an insect barcode database named “Insect Barcode
Informática (IBIn)” was developed under the project National
Agricultural Bioinformatics Grid (Insect Domain) by the
National Bureau of Agriculturally Important Insects,
Bangalore, India. The database access path is:
http://www.nabg-nbaii.res.in/barcode/. 
 is the flow
diagram of the database architecture and () is the web
page of IBIn database.

Methodology
Network and Programming Architecture:
IBIn was developed based on two tier client–server
architecture, where many clients can access data
simultaneously. The volume of insect barcode data is
enormous and needs a dedicated data server. The server is
located at NBAII, Bangalore with high performance computing
facility. IBIn database has been developed in MySQL and
Apache 2 web server as an interface between the user and the
server. PHP has been used for developing programs for login
facility, viewing of barcode information related with
agriculturally important insects, submission of barcode,
generation of barcode image, reviewing process of new
barcode entries by experts and etc.

National accession number and creation of barcode image:
A national accession number will be assigned after the
successful submission of each barcode entry and a unique
barcode image will be created as per the standardization of
BOLD (Barcode of Life Database) [] and the record will be
stored in IBIn. The color code used in barcodes are as follows:
A in Green (0,255,0), G in Black (0,0,0), T in Red (255,0,0) and
C in Blue (0,0,255).

Submission of a barcode data in IBIn:
Researchers can log onto the web site, 
http://www.nabgnbaii.res.in/barcode/ 
and can submit a barcode record by
clicking the Register Barcode button. A national accession
number (Indian accession number) will be assigned
automatically after the successful submission of each barcode
record. The required information for submission of the barcode
records are: Order, Family and Species of the insect for which
the barcoding has been done; Place, State and Country from
where the insect was collected; Longitude and Latitude of the
location; Barcode Marker (name of the gene), Source
(reference), Author name and Institute address, Nucleotide
sequence and the image of the insect. Once the submission of
barcode record is done, a unique barcode image will be
automatically created. Immediately after the submission of the
barcode record, E-mail alerts will be sent automatically to the
experts through database administrative members for
reviewing and approving of the new barcode entries. After
approval of the new barcode records, the record will be
updated on IBIn database.

Statistics
At present IBIn database has 171 barcode records. A
comparative statistical information of the insect Barcodes done
in India as well as in the world will be dynamically generated
in the form of pie charts in IBIn database.

Conclusion
Insect Barcode Informática (IBIn) can be one of the best
database and ideal platform for the entomologists working on
the barcoding of insects in India and other countries.
Researchers can view and submit their nucleotide sequences
by logging onto this web site 
http://www.nabgnbaii.res.in/barcode and barcode will be generated
automatically and the record will be stored into the database.

We express sincere thanks to the Director, NBAII for providing
the facilities and the National Agricultural Bioinformatics Grid
(NABG), under National Agricultural Innovation Project
(NAIP), ICAR, New Delhi for providing financial support to
carry out this work.

Citation:Pratheepa et al, Bioinformation 10(2): 098-100 (2014)

Flow diagram of IBIn database

Web page of IBIn

