Background
The enzyme diacylglycerol acyltransferase (DGAT) [EC
2.3.1.20] catalyses the chain terminating step in
triacylglycerol (TG) biosynthesis. This utilizes diacylglycerol
(DG) as a substrate in competition with phospholipids
biosynthesis through the Kennedy pathway. TG and
phospholipids thus synthesized have distinct physicochemical
characteristics that could have an impact on
intracellular membrane biogenesis. The fatty acid profile of
these lipids is well maintained due to the substrate
specificities of DGAT and DG­utilizing enzymes through
deacylation-reacylation of these lipids. TG is potentially
synthesized and sequestered in spatial cells such as
hepatocytes, adipocytes, plant seeds and oleaginous fungi [–]. DGAT is assumed to be involved in the specific
augmentation of TG accumulation in these types of cells.
Manipulation of DGAT could regulate the quality and
quantity of TG. However, the molecular role of DGAT is still
unclear despite its important role in TG associated disorder of
mammalian cells. A very few reports describe its purification
[–], and the purified fraction contained several peptides,
among which the catalytic subunit remains to be identified.
Mortierella ramanniana var. angulispora is known to
accumulate lipids (especially TG). TG contains relatively
large amount of γ­linolenic acid. The fungus is known as a
potent producer of γ­linolenic acid and essential fatty acids
by fermentation [–]. Such oleaginous fungi are expected
to exhibit amplified expression of specific mechanisms for
TG biosynthesis and TG sequestration in lipid bodies taking
advantage of oleaginicity. DGAT has been characterized in
this fungus to explain the mechanism of TG biosynthesis and
sequestration [,]. DGAT activity was higher in the lipid
body fraction as compared to that in membrane fraction. It
has also been found that DGAT is activated by specific
anionic phospholipids [] providing insights to the
regulation. We reported the purification of DGAT from the
lipid body fraction of the fungus []. This allowed for
further studies on TG biosynthesis. Here, we describe the
binding of the inhibitors with the protein model of DGAT
type 2B.

Methodology
DGAT sequence
The sequence of the diacylglycerol acyltransferse (DGAT)
type 2B from Mortierella ramanniana var. angulispora
(Protein_ID = AAK84180.1) comprising of 355 residues was
retrieved from GenBank.

Template structure selection
A suitable template (PDB-ID: 1K30) was selected using PSIBLAST
[] search with PDB. The selected template is
DGAT from Cucurbita moschata with more than 70%
sequence similarity.

Modeling of DGAT type 2B
The template (1K30) and target (DGAT Type 2B) sequences
were aligned using mGenThreader Server. [] After
careful examination for the potential alignment errors, the
automated comparative protein modeling program
MODELLER 9v2 [] was employed to build the model.

Structure submission to Protein Model Database
The molecular configuration of DGAT is investigated using
data described elsewhere []. The authors thus submitted the
two protein models for DGAT as follows: (a) DGAT 2B
model submitted to Protein Model Database in France during
August 2007 (Protein ID: PM 0074978) and (B) DGAT 2A
model submitted to Protein Model Database in France during
August’ 2007 (Protein ID: PM 0074981).

Discussion
Five theoretical models of DGAT Type 2A and Type 2B
were generated by MODELLER. The generated models of
DGAT Type 2A and Type 2B are represented in , respectively. Among the five DGAT Type 2B
models, the lowest energy structure was DGAT2A 1 and
DGAT2B as shown in , respectively. In
order to select the best model, we checked the structural
validity of DGAT Type 2B by PROCHECK. The torsion
angles φ and ψ of 88.9% of the residues had values within
the most favored regions and only 0.3% of the residues had
values within disallowed regions. The overall G­factor is a
measure of the overall normality of the structure and low G­factors
indicate that residues have unlikely conformations.
The overall value is obtained from an average of G­factors
for all residues in structure. X­ray structure of DGAT Type
2A with resolution of 2.0 Å and a G­factor of 0.26 Å. The
stereo­chemical quality of a protein model can be judged by
the use of φ and ψ scatter plots. The incorrect structures
generally have a larger fraction of residues in the disallowed
regions []. The model of DGAT Type 2B has only 0.3% of
its residues in the disallowed regions. Thus, the model
satisfies criteria of a reasonably acceptable model.

The catalytic mechanisms of DGAT in various fungi are
similar. However, they show significantly different substrate
specificities in various species. The active site of DGAT
Type 2B was hypothecated into two regions: (a) catalytic site
and (b) primer binding site. The mechanism of action of
DGAT involves a catalytic triad composed of an asparagine,
a histidine, and the catalytic cysteine residues in the catalytic
site. The catalytic triad of DGAT comprises of Cys112,
His238, and Asn268. These residues are conserved in DGAT
Type 2B (Cys113, His246, and Asn276). The enzyme DGAT
Type 2B catalyzes carbon­carbon bond formation by
condensing an acyl primer with an elongating carbon source
often attached to a holo­ACP []. Hence, the primer binding
site of DGAT is important to defining of substrate
specificities. The isoformic structure was described
elsewhere using the purification data reported by Kamisaka
et al. []. It should be noted that the function of Type 2A is
still unclear and inter conversion of inactive to active form of
DGAT probably requires certain hormonal and/or
biochemical and/or molecular modulator. We docked
Sphingosine, Trifluoroperazine, PhosphatidicAcid,
Lysophospatidylserine, KCl and 1, 2­diolein to DGAT type
2B. These are lavonoids (a group of polyphenolic
compounds) are widely distributed through out the plant
kingdom with antibacterial activity. The interactions of these
compounds with DGAT type 2B are described.

Ligand docking was carried out for DGAT Type 2B with
these inhibitors (). Lowest models of DGAT
Type 2B in complex with inhibitors are shown in . As shown in , the side chains of Cys113,
Phe308, Ser153 and Asn249 play important roles on
hydrogen bonds with 7­, 4­ and 4­hydroxyl groups of
naringenin, respectively. However, in the case of
phosphatidic acid, only the side chain of Ser153 forms
hydrogen bond with 7­hydroxyl group of apigenin. The
double bond of C2­C3 position of C ring in phosphatidic acid
provides a structural rigidity compared with
lysophospatidylserine. This rigidity interrupted an H­bond
between DGAT Type 2B and Lysophospatidylserine. The
results described here is in close resemblance to the data
described elsewhere []. It is speculated that the outer
membrane of fungus acts as a barrier against
lysophospatidylserine. However, it has already been reported
that the purified DGAT utilizes a broad range of molecular
species of diacyl glycerol and acyl­CoA as substrates [].
The highest activity of the purified enzyme was observed
with sn­1, 2­diolein and lauroyl­CoA. Data show that anionic
phospholipids such as phosphatidic acid (PA) activated the
purified enzyme. Reports also show that sphingosine dose
dependently inhibited DGAT activity activated by PA and
basal activity without PA. These results explain for the
molecular function of DGAT and the mechanism of triacylglycerol
biosynthesis.

Conclusion
The three­dimensional structure model of DGAT Type 2B
was created and described. Ligand docking shows that
lysophospatidylserine provides the proper binding model in
active site of DGAT Type 2 B with intensive hydrogen
bonding network. Nevertheless, the comprehensive studies
pertaining to elucidation of structural and functional models
of Type 2A of DGAT as well as other TG biosynthesis enzymes may provide new insights into the molecular
mechanism of these key players in fungal biotechnology.

Supplementary material
Data 1
An institutional research promotion grant to the Department
of Biotechnology, College of Engineering and Technology,
Moradabad, U.P., India is acknowledged. The authors are
grateful to Prof. R. M. Dubey (Managing Director, CET,
IFTM, Moradabad, U.P, India) for providing the necessary
facilities and encouragement. The authors are also thankful to
Prof. B.N. Basu (Director, Academics) and Prof. B.N. Kaul
(Director, Administration), College of Engineering and
Technology, Moradabad, U.P., India, for their generous help
and suggestions during the course of experimental work and
manuscript preparation. The sincere moral support by Prof. A
Srivastav (Head, Department of Mechanical Engineering),
Caledonian College of Engineering, Muscat, Sultanate of
Oman is duly acknowledged by the authors.

Citation:Mishra et al, Bioinformation 3(9): 394-398 (2009)

Model of Maretierella ramanniana DGAT (a) type 2A and (b) type 2B developed using MODELLER.

Docking models of several inhibitors with DGAT2B (a) Sphingosine; (b) Trifluoroperazine; (c) Phosphatidic acid; (d)Lyso phospatidylserine; (e) KCl and (f) 1, 2­diolein.

