Background
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of endogenous, small 
regulatory RNA averaging 22 nucleotides in length that 
mediate the post-transcriptional regulation of messenger RNAs. 
They bind to target messages in a sequence-specific manner, 
and induce translational repression or endonucleolytic 
cleavage. Recently, a novel class of chemically engineered 
oligonucleotides, termed antagomirs, is efficient and specific 
silencers of miRNAs. Moreover, the recent employment of 
synthetic analogues of these small RNA molecules termed 
‘antagomirs’ has shown that microRNAs of interest can be 
specifically targeted  [,
]. Functions have only been 
experimentally assigned to a small fraction of the 
experimentally designed antagomirs. These putative 
antagomirs are 20 nucleotides in length and complementary to 
the mature target human-miRNA. They specifically silenced 
miRNA expression (miR-122) up-regulating expression of 
hundreds of genes predicted to be repressed by miR  
[]. 
Paradoxically, antagomir treatment also revealed a significant 
number of down-regulated genes that may be activated as 
opposed to repressed by miR  [,
,
]. Computational 
approaches are thus likely to remain an important means of 
studying antagomir targets for the foreseeable future, not least 
as a means of directing wet-lab experiments. Several algorithms 
have been used to predict antagomir targets in animal species; 
these are listed in  Table 1 (see ). We 
built an experimental antagomir in a way that it could adhere to 
several humiR, respectively. Interactions are viewed in a global 
context by predicting folds for the entire miRNA, rather than 
just its 3'- UTR or seed match. The stem-loop sequences of 
humiR have been used in our experiment.

The probability profile displays predicted accessible sites on the 
target RNA. Because an accessible site can be targeted by a 
number of antisense oligos, selection of the “optimal” one can be 
based on binding energy, together with other empirical rules 
such as GC content, avoidance of GGGG (or more stringent 
GGG) motifs, etc. Stronger binding is indicated by smaller 
binding energy (stacking energies are  negatively valued). For 
example, an antisense oligo with a binding energy of ­10 
kcal/mol is more effective than an oligo with a binding energy 
of ­5 kcal/mol. The antisense oligo binding energy is a 
weighted sum of the antagomir/miRNA stacking energies for
the hybrid formed by the antagomir and the targeted sequence. 
For a base-pair stack, the weight for the sum is calculated by the 
probability of the unpaired dinucleotide in the target sequence 
that is involved in the stack. This weighting scheme accounts 
for the structural variation at the target site among the 
structures in the sample (). 

Implementation
Database
The antagomir database is based on the following assumptions.  
(1) Based on the humiR sequence the following details about 
the putative antagomirs are obtained with the help of Sfold. 
Column 1: target position (starting - ending) 
Column 2: target sequence (5'→3') 
Column 3: antisense oligo (5'→3') 
Column 4: GC content 
Column 5: oligo binding energy (kcal/mol) 
(2) The database also includes the secondary structure of 
antagomirs along with the other details mentioned above. The 
secondary structures have been designed with the help of 
mfold.

Tool
A tool has been integrated in this database. The tool accepts a 
sequence of 20-25 nuleotides and if it finds a match with the 
existing putative antagomirs in the database then it returns the 
respective target i.e. humiR ID along with the secondary 
structure of antagomirs. 

Statistical analysis of predicted targets
Negative normalized free energy
The occurrence of favourable hybridizations of short 
antagomirs with long miRNAs can frequently be attributed to 
chance: the longer the miRNA, the more likely the incidence. In 
order to eliminate the effect of sequence length on our measure 
of free energy  [,
], we define the negative normalized free 
energy where m is the length of the target sequence searched, 
and n is the length of the antagomir as shown in equation 1:   
gn  = ­ (g/log(mn)). 

Extreme value statistics
Extreme value distributions (EVDs) are limiting distributions 
that describe the minimum or maximum of independent 
random variables  []. If we consider the antagomir-miRNA 
duplex energy estimation to be essentially an optimization 
procedure that produces a minimum, the negative normalized 
free energy described above is a corresponding maximum, and 
can be described by an EVD having a distribution function of 
the form; P[G≤t]=D(t)
=exp(­exp(a­t/b)) (equation 2). A 
transformation then converts this distribution function into a 
straight line: Log(­log(D))=(a­t)
/b=(­1/b)t + a/b (equation 3). 
By scanning for targets of random antagomir sequences in the 
miRNA sequences in the dataset, we obtain a set of negative 
normalized free energies, which we expect will follow an EVD. 
We then transform the distribution function of the empirical 
EVD into a straight line, as in Equation 3, and estimate the 
parameters of the EVD by a linear least squares fit to the line y = 
mx  +  c, obtaining b=
­1/m (equation 4) and a=cb (equation 5). 
We can now compute, for each predicted antagomir-miRNA 
duplex, a  p-value, the probability that the same or a more 
favorable free energy is observed due to chance: 
P[Z≥  gn]=1­
exp(­exp((a­ gn)/b)) 
(equation 6), where  a  and  b  are estimated 
EVD parameters, and gn is the negative normalized free energy 
from equation 1 [].

Results
Antagomir database is the central online repository for 
antagomirs sequence data, annotation and target prediction. The 
current release (ver.1) contains 22 humiRNA from Homo sapiens, 
expressing 53 distinct putative antagomir sequences  (Table 2, 
see ). The humiRID and the secondary 
structure of antagomir are included in the database. The best 
four matches of the secondary structure with respect to free 
energy are given in .

Conclusion
The prediction of antagomir targets is an open and difficult 
problem in spite of a few years of the existing research. 
Antagomir Database designed based on human miR targets, is 
shown to provide predictions characterized by favorable 
sensitivity, which comes at a price of an increased number of 
predictions. Our future work will concentrate in the inclusion of 
more miRNAs from different species as targets of antagomirs.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Ganguli et al,  Bioinformation 7(1): 41-43 (2011) 

Screenshot of the database main page  

Screenshot of the database showing the UID (User 
Interface Design

