Background
Proteins that are not fold itself in a specified form for normal functioning are
defined as disorder proteins. There are many databases available for disordered
proteins (e.g. DISPROT). It provides sequence and structural information about
disordered proteins. What makes a protein to be disordered? Sethi et al.,
predicted disordered protein based on dipeptide composition and comparison of
features of secondary structure []. Based on SVM (support vector machine)
method they were able to predict a protein is disordered or not. Kumar et al.,
reported that the intrinsically disordered proteins form a structured
conformation at high temperature due to changes in hydrophobicity 
[]. Even
different solvent environments can alter the hydrophobicity followed by
structured conformation. It is reported that proteins prefers to have 31.45%
carbon for its stability []. 
This fraction of carbon content can be used as a
standard of carbon measurement and comparison. Here we report that the
carbon distribution along the sequence is responsible for protein disorder. The
order or disorders in proteins can be predicted based on carbon distribution.
Carbon is a very special element because it plays an important role in
hydrophobic interaction. The carbon content and distribution in disordered
proteins is expectedly different from normal one because the organization of
amino acids in these proteins is different.

Materials and Methodology
Dataset
The protein sequences of disordered proteins are collected from Disprot, a
curated database (www.disprot.org) 
of disordered proteins. It provides
information about proteins that lack fixed 3D structure in their native form. In
this study only one known disordered protein that is Methyl-CpG-binding
protein (Uniprot ID: DP00539, Uniprot ID: P51608) of human is taken. It has
486 amino acids with 91% disorder.

Method
The carbon distribution along the sequence is obtained using CARBANA
program available online []. The detailed methodology on how the carbon
content is calculated is given in reference []. A window size of 500 atoms is
chosen in all calculations. The output of the CARBANA program is plotted for
better visualization of results as shown in figures.

Results and discussion
Though several disordered proteins are analysed and tested for carbon
distribution, only one protein (Methyl-CpG-binding protein) is reported here.
This protein is important because of its characterization in 3D-structure,
alternative splicing, chromosomal rearrangement, disease mutation, DNAbinding
activity, mental retardation, polymorphism and transcription
regulation. It contains 486 amino acids and 91% of them are disordered. The
carbon distribution of this protein is given in . It is a plot of mean
distribution of carbon content along the protein chain. If the protein is stable
and ordered, it is expected to maintain a carbon content of 31.45% of carbon all
along the sequence. Normally globular proteins maintain it. This order and
disorder is a coded property of mRNA/DNA. It is discussed earlier that higher
or lower carbon content along the protein sequence might not fold properly due
to compression or expansion by water. Most of the time these disorder proteins
maintain higher carbon content. Any region with higher carbon content is likely
to misfold and makes the protein disordered []. Lower level of carbon content
over long stretches is also considered as to cause of disorder in protein. These
low carbon content regions interact with water and unfold from regular
structure that makes the protein disorder. In Methyl-CpG-binding protein, a
lower carbon content at 155-366 amino acids is maintained (circled region in
). 
This is a clear indication of protein disorder. This is predicted by
several other methods and reported in disordered protein databases. DISPROT
for example predicts this protein sequence as a disordered one. So the point is
carbon distribution pattern can predict if a protein is in order or not.
Importantly, it can locate the portion of sequence that is responsible for
disorder. One can also go for an alternative sequence that will have proper
carbon distribution for highly functional proteins. It must be noted that even a
disordered protein has link to other interactomes []. The first 108 and last 80
amino acids of this methyl-CpG-binding protein show up again with less
amount of carbon content. Overall the hydrophobicity of this protein is less. It
is likely to have more water molecules inside. The disordered proteins
sometimes match with viral proteins []. One can develop a dedicated tool for
prediction of disordered proteins based on carbon content. The development of
database of disordered proteins will be useful in developing a disease free
living system tomorrow as most of the animal proteins are already in disorder.
Particularly in humans, several proteins are in disorder due to evolutionary
cause. This is mainly due to reduction of thymine in coding frames of nucleic
acids during evolution [,
].

Conclusion
Prediction of disordered portion based on carbon allotment along the protein
sequence is reported here. The misfold due to carbon rich regions and unfold
due to carbon less regions are responsible for disorders in proteins. This new
method is cable of predicting the protein's disordered regions. This can aid in
development of ordered proteins for better function.

Citation:Rajasekaran et al, Bioinformation 6(8): 291-292 (2011)

Carbon distribution in Methyl-CpG-binding protein. The region
within the circle is disordered.

