Background
CD36 is a transmembrane glycoprotein which consists of a
single peptide chain of 472 amino acids and has a molecular
weight of 88 kDa. CD36 belongs to the class B scavenger
receptor family, which includes the receptor for selective
cholesteryl ester uptake, scavenger receptor class B type I (SRBI),
and lysosomal integral membrane protein 2 (LIMP-2). The
CD36 receptor has a significant role in different cardiovascular
diseases []. This implication is due to its power on lipids
fixation. Fatty acid transport regulated by CD36 scavenger
receptor occurs in variety of cell types, including
monocytes/macrophages [,
], microvascular endothelial cells
[], cardiomyocytes 
[,
], adipocytes and skeletal muscle cells
[,
].

The role of CD36 protein is described in the binding and
uptake of long chain fatty acids, and thereby in the control of
fatty acid metabolism [,
,
]. However, CD36 binding site
for long chain fatty acids is poorly mapped to the 127-279
region of the extracellular loop []. The CD36 also binds to
oxidized lipoproteins, especially oxLDL and promote their
internalization via the endocytosis pathway. The residues from
155 to 183 are the important functional domain of the CD36
involved in the fixing of the oxLDL, and Lys-164/166 is
involved in this interaction. A study showed that PLox bind to
CD36 in domain between amino acids 120-155. While, other
data reveals that the binding site of PLox on the CD36 is
located in the sequence at amino acids 157-171, and the two
Lys 164/166 are indispensable for this interaction 
[–]. The
elucidation of the three-dimensional (3D) structure of the CD36
receptor is indispensable to understand the mode of its
interaction with lipids and the mechanism by which this
receptor is involved in lipid transport. 3D structure of CD36
has not been experimentally solved via nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) and/or X-ray crystallography due to the
high size of this protein and their transmembrane position.
Hence, the structure-function relationship of this receptor is
unclear.

The purpose of our study is to know and understand the fixing
mechanism and absorption of lipids by the CD36 receptor
scavenger. Thus we were predicted for the first time the CD36
extracellular domain 3D structure by homology modeling
method using the lysosomal membrane protein integral 2
(LIMP-2) as a template. Thereafter, we studied the interaction
between this protein and some long-chain fatty acids (LCFAs)
using rigid and flexible docking approaches.

Methodology
Homology modeling of CD36 receptor:
In this study, we have used the crystallized structure of LIMP-
2 extacellular domain [] (PDB code: 4F7B) as a template to
predict the 3D structure of the CD36 extracellular domain
(CD36-ED) using the homology modeling method. We used
the Blastp algorithm (protein-protein BLAST) [] to establish
the sequence alignment between the extracellular domains of
CD36 [29-440 aa] and LIMP-2 [34-429 aa]. The algorithm
parameters exploited are those existing by default and this step
was performed to extract the locations where the residues are
identical or very similar. The MODELLER (version 9v11)
program based on homology modeling method was used for
generate the 3D structure of CD36-ED []. To evaluate and
validate the CD36-ED structure, three programs were selected,
Verify3D [], Procheck 
[] and Errat [].

LCFAs-CD36 interactions studies:
The LCFAs used were palmitic acid saturated with 16 C, oleic
acid monounsaturated with 18 C and arachidonic acid
polyunsaturated with 20 C. The PDB files of ligands were
downloaded from the database PubChem structure Search
[]. Discovery Studio program chemical modification 
[] and
Chimira [] were used, to examine the role of charged Lys-164
residue on the surface cover of CD36-ED and selective
mutagenesis. We have obtained three essential structures of
CD36-ED. The CD36-I with a Lys-166 neutralized by
acetylating and the CD36-II contains Lys-164 and Lys-166
acetylated. The third one was the CD36-III in which one
mutation was generated by changing the Lys-164 positively
charged by a negatively charged residue Asp, Lys-164/Asp-
164 the Lys-166 is still acetylated. Two types of Docking, rigid
and flexible using Autodock Vina were used []. For the Rigid
docking between LCFAs and CD36-ED, a docking box which
surrounds the entire of the protein was used. Equally, we have
performed a second rigid docking with a small box which
occupies just the cover loop of CD36-ED. The flexible docking
was used to confirm the role of Lys-164 in LCFAs binding by
putting its side chain in flexible mode. Side chains of all the
residues of the CD36 receptor portal were made Flexible to
check the mechanism by which CD36 receptor cover proceeds
during the interaction with LCFAs.

Results
Homology modeling of CD36 receptor:
The CD36 superfamily of scavenger receptor proteins consists
of SR-BI, LIMP-2 and CD36 and known for its specificity for
the lipids binding and uptake []. It was established that the
extracellular domain of LIMP-2 is identical (36%) to that of
CD36 [].

 elucidates the result of sequences alignment of CD36
and LIMP-2 which have nearly the same lengths with a query
cover of 96%. According to BLAST results, the extracellular 
domain of CD36 [29-440 aa] is identical by 36% with 2-LIMP
[34-429 aa].

 shows the Pymol visualization of the predicted CD36-
ED structure which revealed the presence of 16 α-helix and 16
antiparallel β-strands fragments. The predicted structure can
be divided into three regions: The superior region constituted
by five α-helices including the two longest helices (α5 and α6)
separated by a turn. The helix-turn-helix forming a loop was
named the cover; The tunnel comprises the majority of β-
strands in the CD36-ED and occupied a large volume; The
inferior region which is the domain of the CD36-ED adjacent to
the cytoplasmic membrane is composed of three α-helices (α1,
α2 and α16) representing the N- and C-terminal of the CD36-
ED.

Verify3D analysis showed that 82.81% of CD36-ED residues
have an average score of 3D-1D&gt; 0.2 confirming the
compatibility of the 3D structure and the primary sequence of
CD36-ED.  of the Ramachandran plot graph shows 
that 97.5% of CD36-ED residues were distributed in the most
favored regions and additional allowed regions and only two
residues were on the disallowed regions. Eventhough the
overall quality factor obtained by the program Errat of the
CD36-ED 3D structure is good by 62.531. To determine the
mechanism of CD36 receptor interaction with LCFAs, this
validated structure was used to realize molecular docking

The Binding Mechanism between CD36 and LCFAs studies by rigid docking:
Two molecular docking studies done to elucidate the
interaction between CD36-ED and LCFAs. The rigid docking
based on the concept that the ligand is flexible but the receptor
remains rigid allowed visualization of different interactions
between LCFAs and CD36-ED. Results showed that CD36-I (K-
166 neutralized by acetylating) and CD36-II (contains Lys-164
and Lys-166 acetylated) have successively a total charge of -
0.0336 and -1.0336.  shows that for the LCFAs
interactions with CD36-I and CD36-II using the box which
surrounds the entire receptor, the ligands are localized in the
inner space of the tunnel or they bind to the receptor cavity
entry. The LCFAs remain on the outer surface of CD36-III
(contains Asp-164 and the Lys-166 is still acetylated) receptor
which has a total charge of -2.0335 ().

 show the results obtained after visualization of
different interactions between LCFAs and the three types of
CD36-ED using a small docking box which just surrounds the
cover and demonstrating the LCFAs affinity to the outer
surface of the cover helices. The flexible docking by influencing
the Lys-164 and using a docking box that occupies the cover
has shown that the LCFAs are positioned near to the helices α6
and α8 rich in hydrophobic residues (). Hence, the
hydrophobic interaction between the CD36 and LCFAs
appears to be based on the hydrophobicity of fatty acid
carboxylic chain and the hydrophobic residues of the cover. It
is worth mentioning that in all the shown docking tests, the
energy of affinity between LCFAs and CD36 remain very low
and not exceeding -5.7 kcal / mol.

The Binding Mechanism between CD36 and LCFAs studies by flexible docking:
Results of flexible docking shown in  allowed us to
propose the mechanism of the LCFAs binding and uptake by
the scavenger receptor CD36. Indeed, setting the side chains of
all cover residues in flexible mode showed that the ligand
penetrates inside the inner space of the CD36 tunnel during the
docking between the receptor and LCFAs. It is worth noting
that the energy of affinity in this case of flexible docking is
slightly increasing to reach -6.8 Kcal / mol.

Discussion
In this paper, we exploited the availability of the crystal
structure of LIMP-2 extracellular domain recently determined
to predict 3D structure of CD36 extracellular domain. We were
able to show that the generated model of CD36 receptor has a
tunnel formed by interconnected cavities. We also
demonstrated that the large part of the sequence from 127 to
279 suggested as the binding site of lipids (LCFAs and
modified LDL) [] was included in the constitution of the
tunnel and the cover helices. The last Tyr and Arg in the
sequence of 127- 279 suggested as a key residues of the LCFAs
binding are oriented to the outside surface []. The cavity
opening of CD36-ED has an abundance of hydrophobic amino
acids, Leu-200, Phe-201, Pro-203, and a residue positively
charged Arg-337. We propose that the aliphatic chain of
LCFAs interacts with the receptor by a hydrophobic
interaction and its carboxyl group (COOH) interacts with Arg-
337 by electrostatic interaction.

Molecular docking studies of the CD36-ED and LCFAs
interaction gave important information about the mechanism
of CD36 in response to lipids. Indeed, the position of ligands
on the external surface of the receptor can be explained by the
hydrophobicity and the electropositivity of the residues on the
binding site such as the Lys-223 and Lys-316 of the region
interacting with LCFAs. The determined cover characterized
by seven hydrophobic residues (Phe-153, Val-154, Met-156, Ile-
157, Leu-158, Leu-161, Ile-162) was oriented towards the
external surface. Since, we determined near the cover, a
sequence rich in hydrophobic residues (Pro-185, Phe-186, Leu-
187, Leu-189, Val-190, Pro-191 and Pro-193), we propose that
LCFAs binds between the sequence mentioned above and the
helix α5 of the cover confirming that carboxylic part of LCFAs
regulate the recognition step with the CD36 receptor. Given
that the results of rigid docking were insufficient to explain
accurately the mechanism of interaction between the lipids and
the CD36 receptor, we realized the flexible docking by acting
in a first step on the Lys−164 and then on the sequence of the
CD36 cover. The LCFAs binds to the cover by the
hydrophobicity of the majority of these residues and the
electropositivity of Lys-164 with which LCFAs interact
reversibly. The flexible docking between CD36 and LCFAs in
which we put the side chains of the cover residues in a flexible
mode allowed a ligand penetration within the receptor tunnel

When we have used the Lys-164 in a flexible mode during
docking between CD36 and LCFAs we have got a position of
LCFAs just near the helix (α5) rich in hydrophobic residues.
Then, we deduce that the interaction between CD36 and
LCFAs is mainly hydrophobic. This state depends certainly to
the hydrophobicity of the carboxylic chain of fatty acids and
the residues of the cover. The pocket of CD36-ED plays a
crucial role in the absorption as a tunnel terminated by the two
helices of the N-terminus and C-terminus. Hence, the LCFAs
will pass through the tunnel and get in the plasma membrane
in order to penetrate into the cytoplasm.

The general mechanism by which the CD36 receptor fixes and
directs LCFAs into the cytoplasm of cells could be as follow.
The first interaction between ligand and the receptor cover
cause a movement of this cover and subsequently the opening
of the CD36 receptor which facilitates the ligand entry into the
hydrophobic pocket. The α5 and α6 helices are the CD36
receptor portal and their conformational change plays a crucial
role in the LCFAs fixation. Targeting CD36 receptor scavenger
especially its portal which preventing the conformational
change of the receptor and the uptake of LCFAs. Eventually,
the Sulfo-N-succinimidyl oleate (SSO) molecule may act as an
antagonist of CD36 making it as a promising avenue for the 
treatment of same disorders. The SSO molecule has an affinity
to the Lys-164 and an inhibitory effect on CD36.But it is unable
to enter into the cavity of the CD36 receptor in order to reach
cytoplasmic membrane, it satisfies by the recognition step with
CD36 in which the sulfonate group of SSO bound irreversibly
with the primary amine group of Lys-164. This interaction
prevents the binding of LCFAs and oxLDL with CD36. The
chemical interpretation of the reaction between SSO and Lys-
164 was already mentioned []. A covalent bond created
between the amine group of Lys-164 that is positively charged
and sulfonate group which is negatively charged. The N-amide
oleayl protein is the result of this reaction. The covalent bond
may be described by quantum mechanics and molecular
mechanics. However, no reliable program is available for
predict the covalent interaction between SSO and Lys-164.

Conclusion
Several studies made CD36 receptor as a therapeutic target for
pathologies such us athero-inflammatory disorders. Hence, the
importance to generate a three-dimensional structure of this
transmembrane receptor and study the simulations of its
interaction with its ligands.

In this study, we generated and validated CD36 extracellular
domain followed by the structure analysis. The CD36
molecular docking allows us to propose a mechanism for the
binding of LCFAs of the scavenger receptor CD36 and the
lipids orientation towards the cytoplasmic membrane. The
elucidation of the mechanism by which CD36 interacts with
LCFAs will lead to propose an antagonist molecule for
therapeutic purposes

Competing interests
I׳m Zineb TARHDA, corresponding author of the manuscript,
I׳m enclosing herewith a manuscript entitled “Insight into the
mechanism of lipids binding and uptake by CD36 receptor”
for publication in ‘Bioinformation Journal’. With the
submission of this manuscript I would like to undertake that:
1) All authors of this research paper have directly participated
in the planning, execution, and analysis of this study; 2) All
authors of this paper have read and approved the final version
submitted; 3) The contents of this manuscript have not been
copyrighted or published previously; 4) The contents of this
manuscript are not now under consideration for publication
elsewhere; 5) The contents of this manuscript will not be
copyrighted, submitted, or published elsewhere, while
acceptance by the journal is under consideration; 6) There are
no directly related manuscripts or abstracts, published or
unpublished by any authors of this paper; 7) My Institute׳s,
Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, University Mohammed V,
Morocco, representative is fully aware of this submission.

Financial competing interests: Any organization financing this
manuscript (including the article-processing charge) in the five
past years. − Any stocks or shares in an organization that may
in any way gain or lose financially from the publication of this
manuscript, either now or in the future. − We haven׳t received
reimbursements, fees, funding, or salary from an organization
that holds or has applied for patents relating to the content of
the manuscript. − We haven׳t any other financial competing
interests. Non-financial competing interests: we haven׳t any
non-financial competing interests (political, personal, religious,
ideological, academic, intellectual, commercial or any other) to
declare in relation to this manuscript.

Authors׳ contribution
ZT carried out the homology modeling and molecular docking
studies and drafted the manuscript. AI corrected the
manuscript and has given final approval of the version to be
published.

This work was carried out under intramural funding from the
University of Mohammed the Vth . We acknowledge support
from the NIH for H3Africa BioNet.

Citation:Tarhda &amp; Ibrahimi, Bioinformation 11(6): 302-306 (2015)

Sequence alignment between CD36 and LIMP-2
extracellular domain

 Predicted 3D structure of CD36 extracellular domain

Ramachandran plot graph of CD36 extracellular
domain

Interactions between CD36 and LCFAs: a) Location of the LCFAs in the cavity opening of CD36-I; b) Affinity of LCFAs to
the cavity opening and the cover of the CD36-II; c) Interaction between LCFAs and CD36-III on their outer surface.

Binding affinity between the cover of CD36 and
LCFAs using rigid and flexible docking. (a) Location of LCFAs
on CD36 using a small box. (b) Hydrophobic affinity of LCFAs
to the CD36 cover. (c) Simulation of CD36-LCFAs interactions
by acting on the side chain of K-164.

The CD36-LCFAs interaction results of flexible docking by acting on the side chains residues of the CD36 receptor portal.
(a) LCFAs position in the first contact with CD36; (b) Penetration of LCFAs into the CD36 tunnel; (c) Localization of LCFAs in the
CD36 inferior region adjacent to the cytoplasmic membrane.

