Background
The family 33 chitin binding proteins (CBM33) are believed to 
interact with chitin in crystalline form, making it accessible 
for degradation by chitinases [], where some of them can 
specifically bind to α-chitin [] while others prefer β-chitin. 
The ChbB from B. amyloliquefaciens [] and CBP21 from S. 
marcescens [] preferably bind β-chitin. On the other hand, 
some chitin binding proteins have shown synergistic action 
with chitinases either specifically or non-specifically 
[]. They 
are believed to have important roles such as antifungal 
activity, oviparous and cuticular layer development, 
biosynthesis of fungal cell walls and anti-inflammatory 
actions [,
]. Moreover, they have 
been found involved in adhesion strategy of some pathogenic bacteria 
[]. So, it seems that chitin 
binding proteins are not only important for biomass turnover, but they 
have crucial roles in different metabolic pathways. The computational 
packages are frequently being used these days for the sequence 
analyses and characterization of proteins. Despite of the fact that 
they are not as much reliable as experimental ones, still they can 
provide us nearly exact deep understanding of structure-function 
relationship and substrate-protein interactions of
proteins at almost no cost [,
]. We are using B. thuringiensis 
as a model organism to elucidate the substrate utilization 
pathways in prokaryotes. In this context, we have 
characterized two chitinases (Chi74, Chi39) and a chitin 
binding protein (CBP24) from B. thuringiensis 
[–]. In 
present study, the chitin binding protein CBP50 from the 
strain S4 was characterized using an in-silico approach. The 
CBP50 is a unique chitin binding protein and this is the very 
first study of its kind. This study will lead us towards better 
understanding of the substrate-protein interaction principles 
and mechanism.

Methodology
Template-based methods were used to predict the structure 
of the CBP50. Amino acid sequence of the target protein was 
obtained from Uniprot [] Accession number: C7DQN9. It 
was ascertained that three dimensional (3D) structure of 
target protein was not available in PDB so homology 
modeling approach was adopted to predict 3D structure of 
the CBP50. The SignalP 4.0 server [] was used to identify 
the extra cellular transport signal peptide. Primary sequence 
analyses of the query protein were performed using structure 
analysis tools available at Expasy []. The physico-chemical 
parameters of the protein sequence that includes amino acid 
and atomic compositions, isoelectric point, extinction 
coefficient were predicted by Protparam. Secondary structure 
analyses of the query protein were performed using Expasy 
tools and PSIPRED Server []. The domains of the CBP50 
were predicted by InterPro protein sequence analysis, 
classification Database Pfam, and by Conserved Domains 
Database [] at NCBI. The presence of particular motifs that 
reflects the specific functions of the proteins was searched by 
Motif Search Library. Because of large protein size and 
alignment length constraints, domain-wise modeling strategy 
was adopted. Domain wise multiple sequence alignment of 
the CBP50 was performed by ClustalW [] to see the 
conserved residues in each domain using multiple templates 
that were selected from different life forms. Multiple 
sequence alignment was used to analyze the conserved
residues in each domain. A fully automated modeling based 
on online servers (PHYRE, PS2, and SWISS Model) and 
manual homology modeling were adopted to generate the 
modeling dataset. Among all the generated models by both 
strategies the best one were selected for docking analysis. 
Homology models of proteins are of great interest for 
planning and analyzing biological experiments when no 
experimental three dimensional structures are available 
[]. 
MODELLER 9.9 was used to generate homology models 
based on comparative modeling using 3D atomic coordinates 
of a template structure [].

The first step in homology modeling was the selection of 
templates of known structure for the query protein. For this 
purpose library of experimentally determined protein 
structures was searched to identify suitable templates for 
query protein. The 3D structure of proteins is better 
conserved than their sequences, it is often possible to identify 
a homologous protein with a known structure (template) for a 
given protein sequence. The sequence identity between query 
protein and template were obtained by running BLAST 
against PDB []. The resulting candidates were short listed 
on four criteria by eliminating hits with E-values greater than 
0.01, alignment length shorter than 85% of target sequence or lower 
functional similarity and origin of protein. After the selection of 
template, the alignment between template and target sequence was 
generated by ALIGN 2D function of Modeller9.9 []. Once a target-template 
alignment was constructed, MODELLER calculated 3D models of the target 
using its auto model class. Models of the whole CBP50 and the models of 
its domains were also built separately. Overall, 50 Models of native CBP50 
and 10 models of each domain were built. The Lowest Objective Function is 
used to select the best model by the smallest value of normalized Discrete 
Optimized Molecule Energy (DOPE) score []. In the next 
step Loop optimization function of MODELLER9.9 was used for the loop modeling 
of the CBP50. The MODELLER includes a facility explicitly designed for 
loop modeling by a satisfaction of spatial restraints method. Side chain 
modeling of the CBP50 was done by adopting knowledge based approach. 
Rotamers libraries extracted from high-resolution X-ray structures were used. 
The various rotamers were tried successively and scored with a variety of 
energy functions. The CHIMERA [], containing libraries of high-resolution 
X-ray rotamers, was used for side chain modeling of the CBP50 models.

Different tools were used for evaluation of model. Structures 
were assessed by means of MolProbity [] and NIH server. 
Through Molprobity server Ramachandarn outliers, rotamers, 
Cβ deviation, bad angels and bond lengths of all the models 
were assessed. NIH server gives assess to various evaluating 
tools like PROCHECK, WHAT_CHECK, ERRAT, VERIFY 3D 
and PROVE. Structural alignment of proteins was performed 
using FATCAT server []. The outputs of a structural 
alignment are a superposition of the atomic coordinate sets 
and a minimal root mean square deviation (RMSD) between 
the structures []. After generating and evaluating models 
by the tools and servers, finally the models that show the best 
values of all the parameters were selected. Homology 
modeling may contain errors. The number of errors (for any 
given method) mainly depends on two values: percentage 
sequence identity between template and target and the 
number of errors in the template. After evaluating all models 
the selected model was validated. 


For the verification of the best selected model of query protein, 
the model and the template were superimposed. Superimposition was done 
by CHIMERA's structure comparison command; the RMSD value validates the 
model. The RMSD of superimposed structures indicates their divergence from 
one another. To study the protein-substrate interaction molecular docking 
of the CBP50 domains with the chitin substrate was performed. For this 
purpose Autodock Vina [] was used on windows 7. 
AutoDock vina is the newer version which inherits some of the ideas and 
approaches of AutoDock 4, such as treating docking as a stochastic global 
optimization of the scoring function, pre-calculating grid maps 
(Vina does that internally), and some other implementation tricks, 
such as pre-calculating the interaction between every atom type pair at 
every distance. The docking procedure includes four step; coordinate file 
preparation, defining grid maps, docking calculations and analysis of results. 
All four steps were used iteratively for each domain separately.

Results &amp; Discussion
The N-terminal signal peptide meant for the extra-cellular 
secretion of the protein was shown maximum cleavage site 
probability (C-score 0.752) between Ala-40 and His-41. So, the 
signal peptide of the CBP50 contained 40 residues and thus 
removed. According to ProtParam primary sequences 
analysis the target protein had overall 48 negatively charged 
residues and 44 positively charged residues moreover the 
instability index (II) was computed to be 29.86 which 
classifies the protein as negatively charged and stable. 
Secondary structure analyses of the query protein have 
shown that major portion of the target protein consist of loops 
that was nearly 63.1%, whereas approximately 7.5% were α-
helices and 29.5% β-strands. Domain analyses by different 
tools predicted the presence of four domains in CBP50 
presenting a modular structure, containing an N-terminal 
CBM33 domain (CBD-N, His-41 through Leu- 209), two Fn-III 
type fibronectin binding domains (Pro-220 through Thr-304 
and Pro-314 through Gly-389) and a C-terminal CBM5 
domain (Glu-391 through Val-455) as described previously 
[]. 
Only one Motif was found in CBP50 by PROSITE Profile 
search i.e. FN3 a Fibronectin type-III domain profile, two 
motifs (PD022912 and PD864246) were found by ProDom. 


Where, PD022912 is a chitin-binding protein fusolin and 
PD864246 is another chitin-binding motif. Whereas, seven 
motifs were found in the query sequence by PRINTS that 
were GPCRRHODOPSN4-Rhodopsin-like GPCR superfamily 
signature, FNTYPEIII3- Fibronectin type III repeat signature, 
FUMRATELYASE3-Fumarate lyase superfamily signature, 
GPCRRHODOPSN1-Rhodopsin-like GPCR superfamily 
signature, CADHERIN2-Cadherin signature, FADPNR5-
FAD-dependent pyridine nucleotide reductase signal and 
JDOMAIN4- DnaJ domain signature. Presence of such 
different motifs in the CBP50 protein reflects its possible 
involvement in biological functions other than chitin 
degradation pathway. By this, CBP50 is a unique protein 
because none of the chitin binding proteins have ever shown 
such modular structure. It reflects that either B. thuringiensis 
has been in close connection with several other species during 
its evolutionary past or the chitin degradation system has 
been evolved in a relatively complex environment. Moreover, 
Fn-III like domain is a human originated domain, its presence 
in the CBP50 structure shows that B. thuringiensis has been in 
close connection with humans as well.

Homology modeling:
To predict 3D structure of the CBP50, the protein sequence was submitted to 
online servers such as SwissModel-Automated Mode 
[], 
PS2: Protein Structure Prediction Server and Phyre 
[]. 
But online servers could model few residues of respective domains only. So, manual 
homology modeling had to be performed using Modeller9.9 and models of CBP50 domains 
were generated. Advance search feature of the PDB was used; PSI-BLAST was done for 
template selection for each of the four domains. For N-terminal domain only two hits and 
for C-Terminal six hits were found. Whereas, several hits were found for Fn-III domains 
but those having identity greater than 30% were considered. For N-terminal chitin binding 
domain 2BEM was selected as template because 2BEM is the crystal structure of chitin 
binding protein (CBP21) from Serratia marcescens 
[]. 
The CBP21 had three chitin binding domains belonging to CBM-33 and N-terminal of 
target protein (CBP50) also belongs to CBM-33. For Fn-III like domains 1K85-Chain A, 
solution structure of the fibronectin type III domain from Bacillus circulans WL-12 
chitinase A1 [] was selected as a template. 
For C-terminal, 1ED7 which is a solution structure of the chitin-binding domain of 
B. circulans WL-12 chitinase A1 [], 
was selected as template because 1ED7 is representative structure of CBM5, and the C-terminal 
of target protein also belongs to CBM5. Other hits found by various tools were not
representative of CBM5, that's why despite of low E-value 
1ED7 was selected as template. This short domain is found in 
many different glycosyl hydrolase enzymes and is presumed 
to have a carbohydrate binding function. The domain has six 
aromatic groups that may be important for binding []. In 
the next step each domain was aligned with its respective 
template sequence and two files in PIR and PAP format were 
generated for each domain by ALIGN 2D command of 
Modeller9.9. On the basis of aligned files models were 
generated by “get-model” command of Modeller9.9 for each 
domain. Twenty models were generated for each domain and 
the models with lowest objective function were selected 
(). MODELLER includes a facility explicitly designed 
for loop modeling by a satisfaction of spatial restraints 
method. Thus loop optimization of the models was done by 
using loop refinement script of Modeller9.9. With the loop 
refinement, the ERRAT quality factor [] for each model was 
observed to be increased  ( See supplementary 
material). Molprobity Server [] was used to identify poor 
rotamers of each model. The side-chain conformations 
(rotamers) of the residues were corrected by CHIMERA that 
has libraries of rotamers extracted from high-resolution X-ray 
structures. After evaluating all models by various tools and 
servers the selected model was validated  (See 
supplementary material).

For the verification of the best selected model of each domain 
and of whole CBP50, the model and the template were 
superimposed on the selected templates (). 
Superimposition was done by CHIMERA's structure 
comparison command; the RMSD value validates the model 
for each domain. The RMSD between 165 atom pairs of 
superposed N-Terminal domain was 0.274 Å. While the 
structure alignment had 167 equivalent positions with an 
RMSD of 0.32, without twist according to FATCAT server. 
Both the Fn-III domains were superimposed with their 
template 1K85. For this superimposition, RMSD was 0.257 Å 
between 85 atom pairs, whereas according to FATCAT the 
structure alignment had 85 equivalent positions with an 
RMSD of 0.26, without twists. For second Fn-III like domain, 
the RMSD was 0.441 Å between 62 atom pairs and FATCAT 
server shown structure alignment of 72 equivalent positions 
with an RMSD of 0.58, without twists. The C-Terminal 
domain was superimposed with its template 1ED7 and 
showed RMSD 0.705 Å between 33 atom pairs whereas the 
structure alignment had 43 equivalent positions with an 
RMSD of 1.08, without twists shown ().

Molecular docking analyses:
Usually chitin binding proteins are placed in families 14, 18, 
and 33 of carbohydrate-binding modules []. Studies on 
various chitin binding proteins of family 33 have revealed 
that they interact with insoluble crystalline chitin, making it 
more accessible for degradation by chitinases []. To 
understand the mode of chitin binding, the docking analysis 
of the CBP50 was carried out. Each domain of CBP50 was separately 
docked with the chitin oligomer and best docked complex were analyzed. 
All three domains were separately docked using Autodock Vina, and the 
output files were analyzed by Pymol []. 
Because of the dimensional limitations of grid, docking was performed by 
defining grid on particular portion of our models. The best conformation 
given by Autodock Vina was selected on the basis of RMSD cluster ranking 
and with lowest free energy of the protein-ligand complex. For studying 
molecular interaction of N-Terminal domain a grid box having coordinates 
center- x=10.724, center_y=27.8, center_z=11.359, size_x=102 size_y=76 , 
size_z=100 was set and let this portion to interact with chitin substrate. 
The 2nd conformation with lowest energy (-10.5 kcal mol-1) and distance 
from best model to be computed 20.471 RMSD l.b and 24.613 RMSD u.b was selected. 
The structural analyses of both chitin binding domains and chitinases have shown 
that such proteins, except CBP21, contain surface exposed aromatic residues, 
lined in a cleft, groove or in a tunnel that are necessary for substrate binding 
[–], whereas CBP21 showed neither a groove 
nor surface exposed aromatic residues []. 
The analysis of N terminal domain and high amino acid sequence identity suggests an 
evolutionary relationship of CBP50 with CBP21 []. The 
CBD-N has shown four amino acid residues Glu-71, Ser-74, Glu-76 and 
Gln-90 interacting with the substrate through strong H-bondings (). 
The amino acids serine and glutamic acid were also found to be involved in 
substrate binding in the previous reported work on same domain found in CBP24 
which is also a component of B. thuringiensis chitinolytic system 
[]. 


Similarly, Fn-III domain was docked by setting coordinates at 
center_x=3.889, center_y=0.43, center_z=-1.773, size_x=98, 
size_y=60 , size_z=76 positions. The very first conformation 
with the lowest energy (-10.0 kcal mol-1) was analyzed and 
four residues, Trp-20, Asn-21, Ser-23 and Val-30 were shown 
to be involved in substrate interaction. The CBP50 protein is 
the only chitin binding protein containing an Fn-III like 
domain []. For the docking analysis of the C-Terminal 
domain, a grid box was set at points center_x=-4.43, 
center_y=3.57, center_z=-4.436, size_x=76 ,size_y=60 and 
size_z=62. Out of nine conformations the one with lowest 
energy was selected for further analysis. Previously the Fn-III 
domains have shown cellulose binding activity but this is the 
first report presenting the interaction of this domain with 
chitin. To find the mechanism of the C-terminal domain with 
subtratrate interaction, this domain was also docked with 
chitin hexamer. It was shown that the amino acid residues 
Glu-15, Ala-17, Ser-18 and Leu-35 showed bonding with the 
chitin substrate (). Previous studies have shown that 
C-terminal domain of the CBP50 is essential for the efficient 
chitin binding because the CBP50 lacking C-terminal domain 
with showed poor interaction with chitin [] which is in 
accordance with our results. Being unique in its structure, 
CBP50 has shown interesting structural and substrate 
interaction insights. Site-directed mutagenesis studies will 
further elucidate the mechanism of substrate interaction of 
this protein in specific and will lead us to develop more 
understanding about the biodegradation of recalcitrant 
substrates by prokaryotes.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Sehar et al, Bioinformation 9(18): 901-907(2013)

Templates and Generated Model: A: a) Template (2BEM) downloaded from PDB b) N-Terminal domain of the CBP50 
generated by MODELLER; B): a) Template (1K85) downloaded from PDB b)1st Fn-III domain of the CBP50 generated by 
MODELLER. c) 2nd Fn-III domain model of the CBP50 generated by MODELLER; C): a) Template model (1ED7) downloaded 
from PDB b) C-Terminal domain model of the CBP50 generated by MODELLER. All images in Figure 1 were created using 
UCSF-CHIMERA 1.5.3 

Superimposition of the models with templates: a): Template (2BEM) and N-Terminal domain superimposition; b &amp; c): 
Template (1K85) and Fn-III Domain superimposition; d) Template (1ED7) and C-Terminal domain Superposition. Our target 
model is represented by green and template is shown in magenta.

: Domain wise docking analyses of the CBP50: The CBP50 domains are represented in green color while substrate is 
represented in sticks model. On the basis of lowest RMSD and minimum energy, the best docking was selected for each 
domain: A) N-terminal domain-substrate interaction, four amino acid residues of N-terminal domain, Glu-71, Ser-74, Glu-76 
and Gln-90 have shown interaction with the substrate; B) The amino acid residues Trp-20, Asn-21, Ser-23 and Val-30 from the 
Fn-III like domain have shown interaction with chitin hexamer; C) The residues Glu-15, Ala-17, Ser-18 and Leu-35 have shown 
H-bonding with the substrate.

