Background
Cancer is a disease caused by normal cells changing so that 
they grow in an uncontrolled way. The uncontrolled growth 
causes a lump called a tumour to form. If not treated, the tumor 
can cause problems in one or more of the following ways: 
Spreading into normal tissues nearby, causing pressure on 
other body structures, spreading to other parts of the body 
through the lymphatic system or bloodstream. Cancer is one of 
the most dreadful diseases in the modern era, which is taking 
millions of life every year worldwide []. Day by day it 
becomes more dangerous as it can affect any age group and any 
ethnicity. Cancer is not one disease but a conglomeration of 
more than 100 diseases, with lots of heterogeneity even within a 
single tumor type []. Nowadays various types of cancers are 
reported every month that spread with various mechanisms. 
There are over 200 different types of cancers for the reason that 
there are over 200 different types of body cells. The most 
frequently diagnosed cancers are bone, brain, breast, colon and 
skin cancers. There are many known causes of cancers like 
exposure to chemicals, drinking excess alcohol, excessive 
exposure to sunlight, and genetic differences, to name a few 
[].

Bone cancer can be either primary or secondary. Primary bone 
cancer starts in the bone which is uncommon, while the cancer
that spreads to the bone from the other parts of the body is 
secondary. With the spread of the disease, various proteins like 
TGF beta-I, VEGFR, MMP2, MMP9, collagen-X, bone 
sialoprotein(BSP), decorin, osteocalcin(OC), osteonectin(ON), 
osteopontin(OPN), and versican gets expressed. Alkaline 
phosphatase [] (AP), tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase 
(TRAP) is a known biomarker for bone cancer. A tumor 
biomarker is a measurable substance in cancer patients, which 
reflects the presence of a tumor [,
].

Solid tumors in brain are the leading cause of death in children. 
Overexpressed telomerase, MMP-2, MMP-9, aberrant mRNA 
transcripts of EGFR, cytokerin 14 and 15, TGFα, TGF-β1, STAT-
1, HLA-C, GST-2, and nuclear factor- kappa beta(NF-kB) are 
some of the most important biomarkers along with VEGFR-2 
for prognostic or predictive valve in brain tumors 
[]. The 
Combination of MMP-2 and VEGFR provides superior 
accuracy compared to any other combination or individual 
biomarker for the presence of disease, decrease with treatment, 
and can be tracked from source tissue to urine 
[].

Ductal carcinoma is the most common type of breast cancer 
other than lobular carcinoma. ER positive, HER2 positive, and 
Triple negative/triple positive are the three main types of 
breast cancers. About 75% of all breast cancers are ER positive, 
they grow in response to estrogen hormone, about 65% of these 
are also PR positive, and they grow in response to another 
hormone, progesterone. In about 20-25% of breast cancers, the 
cancer cells make high quantity of HER2 (human epidermal 
growth factor receptor 2). It is one of the most aggressive and 
fast growing cancer. Triple negative breast cancers lack the 
estrogen and progesterone receptors and do not overexpress 
the HER2 proteins. Majority of the breast cancers caused by 
BRCA1 gene are triple negative.

The American society of clinical oncology(ASCO) has 
recommended eight different protein related tumor markers for 
breast cancers: CA 15–13, CA 27–29, carcinoembryonic antigen, 
estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor, human 
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), urokinase 
plasminogen activator (uPA), and plasminogen activator 
inhibitor (PAI)-1. Starting 3 are biomarkers for monitoring, next 
3 markers are for treatment planning and last 2 are biomarkers 
for recurrence risk prediction respectively. Other potential 
markers include p53, TGF beta-1, cathepsin D, kallikrein 14, 
cyclin B1, D1 and E1 [].

Colon cancer and rectal cancer, collectively called as colorectal 
cancer, have many similar characteristics, is the third most 
common cancer in both men and women. About 95% of 
colorectal cancers develop in the glandular cells of the lining. 
Some of the genes that are important for the development of 
colon cancer are: APC gene (adenomatous polyposis coli), TP53 
gene, k-Ras gene, MSH2 and MLH1 genes. TGF beta-1, COX-2, 
B-raf, TRAP and EGFR are the potential biomarker in colon 
cancer [].

Skin cancer is by far the most common type of cancer. It can be 
divided into nonmelanoma and melanoma. Basal cell and 
squamous cell carcinoma are non-melanomus and treatment is 
very effective. Melanoma is a cancerous growth of melanocytes, 
develops in skin and usually brown or black, but can appear
pink, tan, or even white. Melanoma may also develop in other 
parts of the body that contains melanocytes including the 
meninges, the digestive tract, the eyes and lymph nodes. 
MC1R, CDKN2A, RAS, RAF and BCL2 are some of the 
causative genes for melanoma skin cancer. Mutations in BRAF 
genes were observed in 66% of melanoma cell lines examined 
[,
]. 
B-raf is the best biomarkers for skin cancers.

Darunavir (brand name Prezista) is an antiretroviral drug, 
used for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. Darunavir 
is always used in combination with the ritonavir and other 
anti-HIV medicines. It functions as protease inhibitor (PIs) 
which slows down the progress of HIV infection by reducing the amount 
of virus in the body. Many anti-HIV drugs have been reported as 
anti-cancer drugs and lots of new research works are still going 
on. Earlier, Darunavir (DRV), Lopinavir (LPV) and Ritonavir (RTV) 
were examined in vitro and in vivo for its anticancer activity on 
Primary effusion lymphoma (PEL) cell lines by Kariya et al 
[]. 
PEL is a non-Hodgkin lymphoma which occurs mainly in patients with advanced AIDS.

In our study we have designed the analogues of the Darunavir 
drug, its ADMET prediction and testing its anticancer activity 
against the biomarkers of the five main types of cancers i.e. 
bone, brain, breast, colon and skin cancers. Therefore, the most 
important aim of the work is to find out the anti-proliferative 
activity of Darunavir analogues by docking studies. 

Methodology
Ligand preparation:
We have taken the stereoselective and chemically active group 
for the designing of Darunavir analogues. The chemical 
structures of 9 analogues were drawn using ChemBioOffice 
2010 and saved in mol file format shown in (). LigPrep 
2.5 is used from Schrödinger software to take 2D structures and
produce the corresponding low-energy 3D structures with 
correct chiralities []. Minimization is performed using 
OPLS_2005 force field and Epik ionizer at the standard pH of 5 
to 9 and with maximum number of conformers per structure as 
1000 with RMSD 1.0 Å.

ADMET Studies:
QikProp 3.4 is performed on minimized structures to calculate 
the ADME properties for assessing the disposition and 
potential toxicity of ligand with in an organism and the overall 
pharmacological properties of these molecules 
 
(see supplementary material) justify that the molecules are 
biologically active without any toxic functional groups. 
QikProp predicts physically significant descriptors and 
pharmaceutically relevant properties like absorption, 
distribution, metabolism, excretion and toxicity (ADMET) 
[].

Protein preparation:
We have selected specific cancer protein biomarkers, which are 
expressible in maximum number of patients, for each type of 
cancer to perform the interaction studies with designed 
anticancer compounds. Human is the source organism of all the 
selected Protein biomarkers, their PDB IDs and active sites 
information are given in  (see supplementary material). 
Prior to docking, it is important to identify the binding site in 
the target protein. Protein preparation wizard from 
Schrödinger is used to locate and fix structural defects in raw 
state, (missing hydrogen atoms) then deleting unwanted 
chains, waters and het groups and finally we have performed 
optimization of the fixed structure. As active site is in the chain 
A of all the proteins, so we have deleted all chains except chain 
A. Energy minimization of all proteins was performed using 
OPLS_2005 force field and active site amino acid in all proteins 
are specified for the receptor grid generation. 

Grid generation:
Receptor grid generation was performed on all the minimized 
proteins using OPLS_2005 force field to define the active site, in 
the range of &lt; 20Å radius by specifying amino acids name 
given in ().

Glide:
Glide (Grid-based Ligand Docking with Energetics) uses a 
hierarchical series of filters to search for possible locations of 
the ligand in the active-site region of the receptor. On a grid, 
the shape and properties of the receptor are characterized by 
different sets of fields that provide gradually more accurate 
scoring of the ligand poses. Glide is used here to find the 
favourable interactions between ligand molecule and receptor 
molecule. We have used the XP (extra-precision) mode of Glide 
because it uses only good ligand poses to perform docking and 
it gives better result than the SP (standard-precision) mode 
[]. 
Finally, we got the result in GScore (GlideScore) scoring 
function given in  (see supplementary material)., which 
uses the various components (vdW-Van der Waals energy, 
Coul- Coulomb energy, Lipo -Lipophilic term, HBond- 
Hydrogen-bonding term, Metal -Metal-binding term, BuryP -
Penalty for buried polar group, RotB-Penalty for freezing 
rotatable bonds, Site -Polar interactions in the active site.) and 
the formula is given below: 
GScore = 0.065*vdW + 0.130*Coul + Lipo + Hbond + Metal + 
BuryP + RotB + Site

By this docking study we came to know that most of our 
designed ligands are interacting to various Oncoproteins with 
sufficient selectively and specificity. The docking analysis is 
done and the results are presented in the form of image given 
in (), and hydrogen bond interactions between receptor 
and ligands, given in the  (see supplementary 
material).

Results &amp; Discussion
Since a long time anti-HIV drugs are being used in cancer 
treatments. After development of HIV protease in 1990, their 
potential anti-tumor properties have been under investigation 
because of their success in treating HIV-related Kaposi's 
sarcoma []. Recent studies have shown that protease 
inhibitors might be used to treat cancer patients, who are not 
infected with HIV as they have direct anti-angiogenic and 
antitumor effects that are unrelated to their antiviral activity 
[].

We have selected the ligand conformations with least potential 
energy for each of nine individual analogues after geometry 
optimization. Results of the QikProp shows that all the ligands 
lied in the specified range of all the pharmacokinetic properties 
described by Professor William L. Jorgensen to become the
successful drug. The most important pharmaceutical descriptor 
in QikProp is stars, which are the combination of all properties, 
a few numbers of stars reflects more drug likeliness in the range 
of 0 to 5, and we have the valve of 0 &amp; 1 for four and five 
designed analogues respectively. Range of some of the other 
important parameters are, predicted range of central nervous 
system activity (CNS) is -2 (inactive) to +2 (active), molecular 
weight of the analogues must be within 130.0 – 725.0, total 
solvent accessible surface area (SASA) range is 300.0 – 1000.0, 
estimated number of hydrogen bonds donated (DonorHB) by 
the solute to water molecules in an aqueous solutions is 0.0 – 
6.0, estimated number of hydrogen bonds accepted (acceptHB) 
by the solute to water molecules in an aqueous solutions is 2.0 – 
20.0, predicted octanol/gas partition coefficient (QPlogPoct) is 
8.0 – 35.0, predicted water/gas partition coefficient (QPlogPw) 
is 4.0 – 45.0, predicted octanol/water partition coefficient 
(QPlogPo/w) is -2.0 – 6.5.0, predicted aqueous solubility, log S 
(QPlogS) is -6.5 – 0.5, predicted brain/blood partition 
coefficient (QPlogBB) is -3.0 – 1.2, Van der Walls surface area of 
polar nitrogen and oxygen atoms (PSA) is 7.0 – 200.0, and 
number of violations of Jorgensen's rule of three is maximum 3 
[].

Out of many protein biomarkers available for the each 
respective type of cancer, we have selected the one which has 
maximum sensitivity towards the detection of the disease and 
treatment response to anticancer drugs. Active sites of each 
receptor were taken from the crystallographic structure 
obtained from the PDB database. Docking studies revealed that 
all the analogues had good inhibitory activity and binding 
affinity towards the Oncoproteins. Analogues with the highest 
binding energy for the alkaline phosphatase, estrogen receptor, 
epidermal growth factor receptor and B-Raf Oncoproteins are 7, 
2C, 2E and 2G respectively. Ligands 2G &amp; 5 both has the 
highest and same Glide score for the brain cancer biomarker 
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 and most 
importantly they have formed the hydrogen bonds to the same 
active site amino acid (ASP 1046) determined by X-ray 
crystallography. All other ligands have also interacted to the 
Oncoproteins with good number of hydrogen bonds. 
Darunavir has best activity (G score = -7.0 Kcal/mol) against 
skin cancer and has the same activity (G score = -5.0 Kcal/mol) 
compared to analogue 7 against bone cancer.

Conclusion
All the nine designed analogues have good pharmacokinetic 
properties to become successful drugs and they have interacted
to all the five biomarkers with sufficient selectivity, specificity 
and reflected the optimum binding energy to form the stable 
docked complex. Most of the analogues have better binding 
energy to oncoproteins with compared to Darunavir. All the 
analogues have good ADMET properties to become successful 
drugs. Based on these good results with oncoproteins, we are 
proposing the synthesis of these ligand molecules and testing 
on the specific cancer cell lines.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank Raghu Rangaswamy, Senior Director and Vinod 
Devaraji IT consultant from Schrödinger for providing 
academic evaluations software and continuous support to 
undertake this work.

Citation:Mahto et al, Bioinformation 10(4): 221-226 (2014)

Structures of all the Darunavir analogues

Docking of each protein with best ligands

