Background
In Drosophila, chromation factors such as Polycomb group (PcG)
and trithroax group (trxG) proteins play a crucial role in the
development of gene regulation. One of the trxG group gene is
Trithorax like (Trl), also known as GAGA factor (GAF). It is
identified as a sequence specific DNA binding protein, which
could stimulate transcriptional activity 
[]. GAGA promotes
transcription by blocking repressive effects of histones. GAGA
is required for proper expression of variety of development loci
that contain GAGA binding sites in their upstream regulatory
regions. Trl-GAF binds to GAGA sites through its C2H2 zinc
finger domain and has an N-terminal BTB/PZ (broad complex
tramtrack bric a brac/poxvirus zinc finger) protein-protein
interaction domain. At N terminus of GAGA there is BTB/PZ
domain required for oligomerization which is highly conserved
and involves in protein-protein interaction. The C-terminal
glutamine-rich region is required for transcriptional activation.
Members of GAGA factor family bind to a 5'-GAGAG-3' DNA
consensus binding site, and contain a Cys2-His2 zinc finger core
as well as an N-terminal extension containing two highly basic
regions. The zinc finger core binds in the DNA major groove
and recognizes the first three GAG bases of the consensus in a
manner similar to that seen in other classical zinc finger-DNA
complexes []. It has been shown that GAGA factor has
multiple roles in regulating genes during Drosophila
development. A convenient way to study the function, structure
and mechanism of a gene is to identify homologues
(evolutionary relationships) in model organisms. It is
interesting to identify homologues of GAGA factor in mouse.
Dynamic programming based alignment tools such as BLAST
and FASTA have been widely used to provide evidence for
homology by matching a new sequence against a database of
previously annotated sequences. However, these approaches
can only detect homologous proteins that exhibit significant
sequence similarity. But if sequence identity is below 30% it
may be very difficult to detect homologue and they are called as
remote homologue which share the same evolutionary ancestry.
Accurate detection of homologue at low levels of sequence
identity still remains a challenging problem. Recently, the
vertebrate homologue of Drosophila GAGA factor was identified
in mouse as c-Krox/Th-POK gene encoded by zbtb7b 
[]. In this
present study through insilico analysis another probable
homologue of Drosophila GAGA factor in mouse is reported as
Zbtb3 (Zinc finger and BTB domain-containing protein 3).

Materials and Methodology
Sequence retrieval
The sequence of Drosophila GAGA factor was retrieved from the
UniprotKB (Q08605) and the domain boundaries were taken
from Uniprot annotations. Drosophila GAGA factor contains
BTB domain at N-terminus and zinc finger domain at Cterminus.

Remote Homology Detection Methodology
Similarity search
The retrieved sequence of GAGA factor (GAF) was searched
against mouse genome database through Protein-Protein Blast
(BlastP) of NCBI with default parameters.

PSI-Blast search
PSI-Blast makes use of iterated BLAST searches in order to
extend the number of evolutionary relationships detected.
Related proteins were searched using PSI-BLAST 
[] with five
iterations using the top twenty maximum hits.

Hidden Markow model and protein family search
The Drosophila GAGA factor sequence was used for searching
databases of protein sequence using profile Hidden Markow
Models (HMMs) for detection of remote homologs using the
server HHpred []. Through this search about eight probable
homologue clusters were obtained. The entire eight probable
clusters were crosschecked with pfam database of protein
families [
http://pfam.sanger.ac.uk/].

Multiple sequence alignment and phylogenetic analysis
From the eight probable homologue clusters, protein sequences
were obtained and multiple alignment was constructed using
ClustalW []. The phylogenetic tree was constructed with
distance matrix method.

Homology modeling
The sequence of mouse zbtb3 was obtained from the Uniprot
database (Q91X45) and the sequence was queried against the
Protein DataBank (PDB) using PSI-BLAST. Through the PSIBLAST
results, template, which has high sequence identity and
fewer gaps were selected. Comparative modeling of both BTB
domain and Zinc finger domain of Zbtb3 was performed by
using Modeller software version 9v5 []. The resulting model
was evaluated using Verify3D [] and Procheck. The quality of
models was assessed by Ramachandran plot analysis []. The
structures were visualized using pymol.

Docking of Zbtb3 and GAGA-DNA complex
The homology modeled zinc finger domain of Zbtb3 was
further studied to know how they interact with GAGA-DNA
complex through docking approach. NMR structure of GAGA
factor/DNA complex (PDB: 1YUI), which binds to the single
zinc finger, was used. Zinc finger was removed and only
GAGA factor/DNA complex was used for docking with
homology modeled zinc finger of Zbtb3. The modeled zinc
finger domain was docked with GAGA-DNA complex (1YUI)
using Hex software [].

Results and Discussion
Sequence analysis
Through BlastP search it was found that Drosophila GAGA
factor had very less identity (below 20%) with mouse. Since
sequence identity of the Drosophila GAGA factor with mouse
was below the twilight zone, various rigorous methodologies
were followed for the detection of remote homologues. PSIBlast
search method groups the closely related protein
sequences and reflects the information from a protein family
better than pair wise sequence comparison method like Blast.
PSI-Blast based search was carried out with default parameters
against mouse genome with five iterations. Careful selection of
the proteins containing both BTB and Zinc finger domain and
removal of redundant proteins resulted in about twenty
probable proteins. Profile Hidden Markov Model (HMMs) is
one of the most powerful approaches for remote homolog
identification. The mouse protein database was searched by
profile Hidden Markow Models (HMMs) with HHPred and
eight probable remote homologues were selected (Table 1, see
). Crosschecking the entire eight
clusters with pfam database of protein families 
[] confirmed
that they belong to the family of BTB and Zf-C2H2. Through
pair wise sequence alignment, comparison of GAGA factor with
the eight probable remote homologue clusters was carried out
by EMBOSS using the Needleman-Wunsch alignment
algorithm to find out the optimum alignment of two sequences
along their entire length []. Zbtb3 was found to have
maximum sequence identity in both domain wise and in whole
sequence alignment (Table 1, see ).
Phylogenetic analysis with distance analysis suggests that zbtb3
was close to GAGA factor. Recently, it is reported that large
number of transcription factors are mostly intrinsically
disordered []. From the Disprot database 
[], it is inferred
that disordered residues were between regions 137-519 for
Drosophila GAGA. The Zbtb3 predicted with consensus disorder
prediction method [] resulted in the disordered residues
placed between regions 134-498 which agreed well with
Drosophila GAGA factor. Intrinsic plasticity enables a disorder
region to recognize and bind many biological targets with high
specificity.

Structural analysis
Comparative modeling of Zbtb3 for both BTB domain and Zinc
finger domain was carried out using Modeller program. For
modeling of BTB domain, template of crystal structure of the
Btb domain of human myoneurin from the PDB ID 2VPK was
used. For modeling of Zinc finger domain, template of crystal
structure of a designed zinc finger protein from the PDB ID
1Mey was used. The sequence alignment of target and template
for both BTB domain and Zinc finger domain was about 40­
42%. Individual alignments were given as input to Modeller to
build 3D structures, and the resulting models were evaluated
using Verify 3D and Procheck. This analysis has led to the
conclusion that the models were more reliable. Homology
model of zbtb3 zinc finger consists of three finger coordinate
zinc ions with a combination of cysteine and histidine residues
(). 
As Drosophila GAGA factor binds well with DNA, it
is important to analyze and characterize the predicted
homologue for affinity to DNA-binding sites. The Zbtb3 was
predicted with DBS-PRED [] and found that their binding
affinity was about 34.7%. Solution and solid-state structural
studies have revealed that alpha helix of Zinc finger makes
contact with the major groove of DNA 
[]. The homology
modeled zinc finger domain of Zbtb3 was docked to GAGADNA,
keeping DNA as a fixed molecule, using Hex. Hex
employs spherical polar Fourier correlation and considers both
shapes complementarily and with electrostatic effects. The
binding energy score obtained was ­3.14 kcal/mol and RMS
value was about 1.00. From the docked model, it is inferred that
it contains favorable binding sites like AGC sequence at N
terminus, the presence of highly conserved glycine residues
within alpha helix and TGEKP residues at the linker region
necessary for promoting zinc finger to fit into the DNA major
groove and also to strengthen the DNA binding 
().
This result agrees with the previous findings 
[]. Zbtb3 was
also found to be the homolog of lolla gene in Drosophila. Lolla
gene functions with Trl for maintaining the repressed state of
target genes and also binds to a DNA polycomb response
element (PRE) at the bithroax complex 
[]. As it is known that
Trl binds with GAGA factor in Drosophila, it supports the
hypothesis that Zbtb3 might play a similar function like Trl,
binding with GAGA factor.

Conclusion
Drosophila GAGA factor plays a major role in developmental
gene regulation. In this study, through computational analysis
it is shown that mouse Zbtb3 is a remote homolog of Drosophila
GAGA factor. The reported homolog exhibits strong similarity
of highly conserved BTB domain as well as the zinc finger
domain to the corresponding regions of Drosophila GAGA
factor. The homology modeling and molecular docking was
applied in this study to explore the binding mechanism of
GAGA factor and Zbtb3. Through molecular modeling studies,
it contains favorable DNA binding sites, which are conserved.
These predictions confirm that Zbtb3 can bind to GAGA
repeats.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Kumar, Bioinformation 7(1): 29-32 (2011)

(a) Homology Model of zinc finger domain of Zbtb3
consisting of N and C terminus in the presence of zinc ions
shown as spheres in cyan and (b) Docked zinc finger with DNA
showing conserved TGEKP residues at linker region in green,
glycine residue in red and AGC sequence is shown in yellow.

