Background:
Transmembrane proteins belong to the largest protein family 
and are highly important for various biological functions. 
Membrane proteins are implicated in various diseases and are 
related to more than 30 different human diseases such as 
cancer, diabetes, hyperthyroidism, ovarian hyper stimulation 
syndrome, and congenital stationary night blindness and in 
causing obesity []. Few contiguous residues, namely sequence 
motifs, seem to be implicated in structural integrity and few 
other motifs are of relevance to diseases. LWYIK motif in HIV 
Type 1 Transmembrane gp41 protein for viral infection, 
permeabilizing motifs related to host membrane destabilization 
in alpha viruses, immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitor 
motif (ITIM) in cell proliferations, motifs in protein-protein 
interfaces, various classical motifs in GPCRs and ORs are few 
examples to emphasize the importance of locating motifs in
transmembrane proteins to connect functional relevance from 
sequence studies. Employing the fine grained analytical 
approach on membrane proteins would be helpful in 
identifying receptor-specific motifs and to distinguish receptor 
subtypes of GPCR families and functional diversity among 
them. Several computational tools and databases have been 
developed in recent years to focus on issues to identify 
conserved residues in membrane proteins with varying 
principles [,
]. Aside from the convenience of automation due 
to large number of sequences, previous methods do not 
consider mapping the identified motifs on TM- helices. The 
main objective of TM-MOTIF is to map the identified motifs on 
the predicted membrane topology that will provide a platform 
for comparison of sequences  across genomes (comparative 
genomics). The idea behind the current study is to employ 
computational tools effectively to identify sequence 
conservation in membrane proteins to connect it with 
functional, structural and evolutionary relationships. 

Here, we implement the logic of mapping the detected 
conserved motifs on predicted membrane topology  [] by the 
proposed VIBGYOR colouring scheme which clearly 
distinguishes the seven helices in varying colours on MSA and 
helps to visualize predicted topology and conserved motifs
simultaneously in the alignment window.  As discussed in our 
recent publication  [], the package is very handy to document 
not only the conserved motifs, but also permitted amino acid 
exchanges within GPCR families at varying level of 
conservation at cross- genome level.

Methodology:
A flowchart () explains the pictorial representation of 
the Methodology and the step-wise procedure is described in 
detail below: 

Inbuilt cross-genome GPCR and OR Cluster dataset:
Cross-genome GPCR (Previous lab publication)  []  and OR 
clusters (data unpublished) were considered for the current 
study and are treated as in-built cluster dataset (please refer 
label 1 in ). 

Human -Drosophila GPCR clusters
From our previous lab publication  [],  
phylogenetically established 32 human -
Drosophila GPCR clusters of eight major receptor types such as 
peptide receptors (PR), chemokine receptors (CMK), nucleotide 
and lipid receptors (N&amp;L), biogenic amine receptors (BGAR), 
secretin receptors (SEC), cell adhesion receptors (CAR), 
glutamate receptors (GLU) and  frizzled /smoothened (FRZ) 
receptors were incorporated as an inbuilt GPCR cluster dataset 
in the package.

Human- C. elegans GPCR clusters:
The selected human GPCR 
cluster association from previous lab publication  []  was 
retained where Drosophila GPCRs were replaced by introducing 
C. elegans GPCRs. Cluster association of C. elegans GPCRs was 
decided by RPS-BLAST technique, with varying E-value 
thresholds, and the resultant 32 human-  C. elegans GPCR 
clusters were also considered and incorporated into the inbuilt 
GPCR cluster dataset (data unpublished).

Human-mouse OR clusters:
Olfactory receptors (ORs) belong to  Class-A  type  of  GPCRs.  10  human-mouse  OR  clusters  (data
unpublished) were established through neighbour–joining 
method and are added as “OR-sub clusters” in the package.

Alignment procedures for cross-genome GPCR/OR clusters:
Appropriate alignment tool is important in generating highquality 
alignments. In our current study, the effective alignment 
procedures, like Clustal W [], 
PRALINE ™ [] 
and MAFFT [], 
were used to align sequences of  human -Drosophila  GPCR 
clusters,  human-  C.  elegans  GPCR  clusters  and human-mouse OR 
clusters, respectively. Different alignment methods were used 
since each cluster varies in parameters such as number of 
sequences, sequence length and percentage identity. But usersubmitted 
queries are aligned by standalone Clustal W [] 
incorporated in the package.

Prediction of membrane topology for TM helices and loops:
Each candidate receptor (GPCR or OR) from the cluster dataset 
was predicted for the membrane topology by using the 
standalone version of HMMTOP [] added in the package. Care 
was taken to retain sequences having only 7(±2) TM helices for 
inbuilt GPCR/OR cluster dataset. Sequences which are 
predicted to have five to nine TM helices were alone considered 
for the current analysis. User-submitted query is also 
considered for the same cut-off and prediction procedure [].

Detection of motifs and amino acid substitution (AAS) in the cross-genome GPCR/OR cluster alignment:
Cross-genome GPCR/OR cluster alignments were taken as an 
input (test set) to our in-house MOTIFS program [] to identify 
residue conservation and substitutions in each position of the 
alignment. Here, conservation simply refers to an average of all 
possible pairwise sequences and the score is consulted from a 
normalized AA exchange matrix. A motif is defined by at least 
three consecutive conserved AAs with amino acid conservation 
(more than 60% conservation score). The conservation of each 
residue in the set of aligned sequences was noted as ‘consensus’ 
and documented if the percentage conservation at an alignment 
position is from 60 to 100%. Once conserved amino acid 
patterns were recorded, the substituting AA residues were also 
identified and the properties for the AAS (like hydrophobic (@), 
aromatic (*), polar positive (+), polar negative (­) and polar 
uncharged ($)) were denoted by symbolic representation. The 
significant observation on preserved motifs and AAS in the 
helices and loop regions of the cross-genome GPCR cluster 
dataset was published recently  []  and the same principle was 
implemented in the package.

Mapping of identified motifs on TM-helices and Loops in MSA:
The motifs discovered by the in-house program  [],  was 
mapped on predicted membrane topology (refer Step2 in 
Methodology) of multiple sequence alignment (MSA) both for 
the in-built cluster alignment and user-submitted query. The 
predicted seven TM helices are  displayed  in seven varying 
colors such as Violet (V), Indigo (I), Blue (B), Green (G), yellow 
(Y), Orange (O) and Red (R) colors namely “VIBGYOR coloring 
scheme” along with the identified motifs, in self highlighting 
darker shades of VIBGYOR coloring scheme. Sequences with 
over predicted and under predicted TM-helices are denoted in 
‘pale cream color’ on the MSA as we are unaware of positions 
for “over” and “under” predicted helices (refer option “Run TMMotif”).

Identification of homologous  sequences by performing BLAST searches:
User-submitted query is aligned with the nearest homologous 
sequence along with its pre-aligned set of sequences in the 
cluster by performing BLAST search (using the profile 
alignment option of ClustalW []) and the results are displayed 
in a new window according to the user specifications in setting 
parameters (refer parameters in TM-MOTIF  package for more 
detail). The default threshold is set for the %identity is 60% to 
recognize hits. BLAST version 2.1.18 was incorporated to the 
package (refer option “Run -BLAST”).

Pairwise alignment with reference Sequences:
User  also  has  an  option  to  select  any  one  of  the  listed  reference 
sequences, whose structure has been solved experimentally and 
to align their sequence of interest to obtain a pairwise alignment
in the proposed VIBGYOR coloring scheme and aligned by 
CLUSTALW [] 
(refer option “select reference sequence”).

Requirements for TM-MOTIF package execution:
This tool has been coded in Perl language (using Tk module for 
GUIs). The package can be executed in LINUX OS and requires 
the following backhand programs to be installed prior to use: 
PerlTk, BioPerl, FORTRAN compiler and standalone versions of 
ClustalW and BLAST2. TM-MOTIF package shall be made 
available to users for academic purposes upon request to 
mini@ncbs.res.in 
with immediate help for installation and use.

Software input and output options:
The main menu of the front window of the TM-MOTIF package 
describes available input and output options (also referred to as 
display options), parameter setting and choice of available 
organisms (refer to Label 1- 7 in  and 
).

Input Options (refer Label 4 in )
The user can submit sequence in FASTA format or MSA by 
using the available text box given as ‘Submit your Fasta 
sequence(s),’ ‘Submit your Input MSA’. There are also choices 
given to select model organism, GPCR or OR cluster dataset. 
The cluster number, receptor type and organisms are 
mentioned in the main menu of the package (please refer to 
Labels 1 and 2 in ).

Output Options (refer Label 7 in )
Display of predicted 7 TM- helices in VIBGYOR coloring 
scheme:(by using “Run TM” option)
The predicted TM helices 1-7 are highlighted in seven different 
colors (VIBGYOR coloring scheme) (). This facilitates 
the user to view the transmembrane proteins in long sequence 
alignments and to keep track of membrane topology along with 
consensus of residue conservation patterns at each alignment 
position

Display of motifs and AAS in MSA:  (by using “Run Motif” 
option):
If the user is interested to record only the identified motifs in 
the selected cluster or user-provided MSA, it is possible to 
display only the identified motifs and AAS in the MSA (using 
“Run motif” option). Here, observed motifs are highlighted in 
“grey color” on MSA (). The conserved amino acid 
residues are displayed below the alignment as “text” and 
referred as “consensus”. Besides, mouse-over option is  also 
provided on each residue in MSA to guide the user to 
document the observations like  alignment position, percentage 
residue conservation, amino acid substitution (AAS), and 
property of amino acid substitutions in MSA ().

Display of motifs on TM-helices: (by using “Run TM-Motif” option):
It is also possible to display identified motifs and predicted 
membrane topology simultaneously on user-selected cluster or 
user-submitted MSA. This is probably the most crucial output 
delivered by the package since such an annotated alignment is 
biologically meaningful. As discussed by using “Run TM” 
option, the predicted membrane topology are displayed in 
VIBGYOR coloring scheme, and  the embedded motifs in the 
alignment are denoted with the self-highlighting colors within 
the VIBGYOR coloring scheme (). Display of 
“consensus” and navigating mouse–over option at each
position of the alignment are also available to facilitate the 
observation on motif properties with corresponding output files 
for documentation are also generated at each level (please refer 
to output files for more details).

Display of motifs on intra- and extracellular loops:
Predicted intra- and extracellular loop regions [] are displayed 
in plain background between the VIBGYOR colored TM helices 
and the detected motifs in the loops are highlighted in “grey 
color” (refer to  ). 
Details about “consensus” are also 
given. This may facilitate understanding of sequence properties 
at the predicted loop regions for comparative sequence analysis 
and to generate loop libraries.

Alignment with reference sequence: (by using “compare with 
reference sequence” option):
User-submitted sequence can be aligned with any one of the 
selected reference sequences by using the option “Select 
reference sequence” (please refer to Label 6 in ). There 
are about seven reference sequences (such as bovine rhodopsin, 
Japanese flying squid rhodopsin, common turkey  β-1 AR, 
human  β-2 Adrenergic receptor, human adenosine receptor 
A2A, human dopamine D3  receptor and human CXCR4 
chemokine receptor) whose crystal structures were solved 
experimentally    and    are  available  for    the  user  to  select    as 
relevant reference sequence or as template. This particular 
option helps the user to prepare a pairwise alignment with their 
sequence of interest, which in future can guide to generate a 
reliable 3D-model by homology modeling (  for the 
output of TM-MOTIF package). 

Identifying closest homologues of user-submitted sequence in 
selected organisms: (by using “Run blast: Align with closest 
cluster” option) 
When the user is interested to search the homologous sequence 
for their sequence of interest from the available GPCR and OR 
cluster dataset, “Run–blast” option is highly useful. The cluster 
from which maximum number of hits was obtained by BLAST 
search for the given query against the in-built GPCR and OR 
clusters is chosen for the resultant alignment and for
deciphering receptor type and functional relevance (please refer 
Label 5 in ).

Default settings of parameters:
The default cut-off for recognizing hits is 60% percentage 
identity in BLAST (please refer to Methodology) and the user 
has an opportunity to alter these values. The default threshold 
is fixed as 60% for recognizing conserved residues in 
“consensus” (please refer to Label 3 in  ). By using 
“Select Organism Combination”, user can select any two 
organisms from the available dataset which includes H. sapiens, 
M. Musculus, D. Melanogaster  and C. elegans to display cluster−
specific or cross-genome cluster alignments. Options like 
“Select GPCR Cluster” and “OR-subclusters” (also refer Step 1− 
1.3 in Methodology) are helpful for the user to select their 
interested cluster type for intra- and inter-genomic cluster 
alignments. Clusters are noted with respective cluster number 
and receptor types in the main menu of the front window 
(). User can select any one of the reference sequence in 
the given option “Select reference Sequence” or use “Run−
blast” (also refer 5, 6 in Methodology) to recognize closest 
cluster for pairwise alignment or for building MSA.

Output files:
Along with the previously discussed display options, three 
important output files are also generated. A detailed report on 
all the observed consensus residues with amino acid position 
for observed threshold values, including the percentage of 
conservation and percentage of substitutions with respective 
residue type is generated in output file called Zconsensus.txt. A 
list of all the conserved amino acid residues and substitutions 
observed at the motif sites of the alignment are given in 
Zpattern.txt. The consolidated result file, namely Zmotif.txt, 
provides the list of motifs with substitutions identified along 
with their start and end positions of the alignment. The 
alignment of sequences submitted by the user can be obtained 
in ClustalW and PIR format from the files Zuser.aln and 
Zuser.pir respectively. For the option “Run BLAST”, the 
number of hits observed from in-built cluster can be obtained 
from the file called Zblast_sorted.txt (also refer Read Me file of 
the package).

Utility:
The result files, particularly Zmotif.txt file, helps the user to 
document the cluster-specific or receptor-specific motifs and 
hence to discover novel motifs at inter- and intra-genomic level. 
The generated   Zpattern.txt file is most helpful in preparing the 
pattern, and with minimal editing, can be used to define 
sequence pattern for interested receptor types and to supply 
these pattern files to perform PHI-blast. Resultant 
Zblast_sorted.txt is effective to identify nearest homologues for 
the query of interest to the user from the available in-built 
cluster dataset. In the interest of observing the influence of 
critical parameters such as average sequence length, percentage 
identity and conservation in the clusters, a pilot study on 
Human-only GPCR clusters, Human-Drosophila and Human-C. 
elegans GPCR cluster dataset was done 
( in 
supplementary material) and infer the dependency of 
conservation by the other mentioned factors crucially.

Conclusion:
TM-MOTIF, a software package and an alignment viewer, helps 
to map discovered motifs on predicted TM- helices and loop 
regions in MSA and providing effective understanding on 
residue conservation in the long sequence window with least 
computational time and strain. The applied VIBGYOR coloring 
scheme for TM-helices not only helps the user to keep track of 
the current location of membrane topology and relative 
positions of observed motifs in the large sequence alignment, 
but also to identify the influence of predicted secondary 
structures (helix or loop) or topology on conservation. By 
running a Blast search against the given GPCR and OR cluster 
dataset, the user can collect  the nearest sequence homologue 
from the cluster dataset which further helps to correlate with 
functional similarities across genome. The pairwise alignment 
in VIBGYOR coloring scheme with selected reference sequence 
(structure known) could be a very useful starting step for the 
3D modeling. By using the option “organisms combination”, 
opportunity is provided to the user to understand the sequence 
properties at cross-genome level and the package is highly 
suited to perform comparative genomics studies and to identify 
receptor-specific motifs. Also, the given  navigating mouse-over 
option assists the user to obtain knowledge on position, amino 
acid conservation (motifs), amino acid substitutions (AAS) in 
each position of the alignment for better understanding of the
sequence properties to connect with evolutionary trends passed 
within  and across genomes in the particular interest of 
transmembrane proteins.

Caveat &amp; Future Development:
TM-MOTIF package could be extended to other genomes and 
membrane-bound helical proteins like ion channels and 
transporters  in  future.  TM-MOTIF  could  evolve  into  a 
specialized alignment viewer for transmembrane helix-rich 
proteins with added features such a graphical display to 
provide a 2D cartoon representation of the helix topology 
embedded with identified motifs

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work is supported by Department of Biotechnology, India. 
We thank S. Kalaimathy and R. Archana for involvement 
during the clustering of GPCRs and the initial sequence 
analysis, respectively. We thank Harini and Aniket Sengupta 
for critical feedback about the package. We also thank NCBS 
(TIFR) for infrastructural facilities.

Citation:Nagarathnam et al, Bioinformation 7(5): 214-221 (2011)

Flow-chart depicting the steps involved in 
methodology

Snapshot for the available main menu of the front 
window of TM-MOTIF with user-interactive features. Note : 
Label  1  refers  to  cluster  number,  receptor  type  of  the  in-built 
dataset, Label 2 directs for select organism combinations, Label 
3 denotes parameter settings  to set threshold for consensus and 
%id in Blast, , Label 4 provides input window to submit FASTA 
sequence or MSA, Label 5 provides option “Run Blast”, Label 6 
refers option “compare with reference sequence” . Label 7 refers 
to the display options like “Run TM”, “Run Motif”, and “Run 
TM-Motif”.

Snapshot for the pairwise alignment of user-submitted 
sequence with selected reference sequence (note: predicted 
topology is highlighted in VIBGYOR coloring scheme with 
highlighted motifs as consensus and navigating mouse –over 
options to display position ,conservation and AAS of  the 
alignment).

Pictorial representation for the tool guide of 
TMMOTIF which depicts the available options: User can start with 
selecting the in-built cluster dataset, organisms (pipelines 
referred in Left side), and viewing the MSA for the available 
display options of the TM-MOTIF (refer a, b, c of ) i.e., 
“Run TM”, “Run Motif”, “Run TM-Motif” options. The User 
can also start by submitting their sequence of interest or 
alignment (pipelines referred in Right side), and can perform 
“Run-blast” (refer section 6 in Methodology), to search for 
homologues against in-built cluster dataset. By selecting 
“Alignment with reference sequence” (refer section 6 in 
Methodology) user get benefit  by obtaining any one of the 
Display options -“Run TM”, “Run Motif”, “Run TM-Motif” 
(refer   also). The four important output files are 
generated as given in the readme file of the package (also refer 
Output files section).

Snapshot of results after running TM-MOTIF package. Snapshot 
5a depicts the display of predicted seven TM-helices in 
VIBGYOR coloring scheme. (Sample output for the option “RUN –TM”, given 
in two snapshots where first window for the display 
of  alignment  till  TM  IV  (green  color),  next  window  with  the  rest  of  
the  three  helices  i.e.,  till  TM  VII  (in  red  color)).  Snapshot 5b 
depicts the display of identified motifs in MSA along with the mouse-over options 
(Sample out-put for the option “RUN – Motif”). 
Snapshot 5c depicts the display of identified motifs on predicted seven TM helices 
(Sample output for the option “RUN –TMmotif”, where alignment window is given till TM IV (green color)). 

