Background
Citrus a delicious tropical fruit crop widely grows in the state of
Manipur of North-East (NE) Region of India. The aromatic,
nutritive and medicinal value of Citrus is integrally
associated with day to day lifestyle of peoples of Manipur
through ages. Citrus thrives in Manipur as cultivated, semiwild
and wild forms, with maximum diversity being maintained
in home gardens. The commonly available Citrus fruits in the
state are sweet oranges, pumelos, rough lemon, mandarins,
wild orange, citron and other Citrus species. Various Citrus
forms having acid taste is also widely available with ambiguities
in their names. Frequently, people use to call the acid ones as
champra or solom, if it is larger one. The rich germplasm of acidic
Citrus group is under threat of loss as it is frequently removed
from farmer's field or home gardens in exchange for crops of
higher economic value. Citrus is valued for the fruit, which is
either eaten alone as fresh fruit, processed into juice, pickles or
added to dishes and beverages. The rich polyphenolic
compounds of Citrus such as flavanoids can act as “functional
ingredients” in promotion of health and prevention of
degenerative diseases [–]. Citrus is also potential source for
compounds having high value in perfumery, cosmetic and
chemotherapeutic purpose of controlling phytopathogens []. The
NE Region of India of which Manipur is a part is considered as
“natural home for Citrus” []. Out of the 27 species reported in
India, 23 are confined to North-East Region of India []. Easy
hybridization amongst different Citrus species and genera and
unique favourable agro-climatic and soil-physiographic setup of
the region paves the way for origin of numerous forms growing
in wild and semi-wild forms []. Citrus plants in the NE region are
still growing in deep forests undisturbed by biotic factors
[,
]. An important crop, Citrus macroptera or wild orange due to
its habitat preference for wet and shady areas is growing
inside deep forest of Chandel District of Manipur. Despite rich
diversity in this biodiversity hotspot of the world, erosion of
genetic resources of Citrus in the natural habitat is taking
place due to various biotic and abiotic factors has resulted in
loss of gene pool from nature and as well as from different centre
of collections []. Even though there is availability of large Citrus
germplasm and suitable conditions that favours the growth,
Citrus industry of the state is in poor shape as its productivity is
extremely low. Region specific topographical problem,
traditional way of cultivation, lack of scientific way of nutrients,
diseases and insect-pest management and unavailability of
quality planting material contributes to low productivity of Citrus
in the state [].

Database to retrieve the comprehensive information on Citrus will
be extremely useful to modern research, and could enable new
insights and discoveries concerning evolutionary relationship
of gene and gene products anticipated in ethno-pharmacology.
Some attempt has been made by Hazarika [] for systematic
documentation of the Citrus found in North-East India, but
online interface will be certainly useful for the users to interpret
more effectively and retrieve the desired information. Thus we
have designed a sophisticated web based database to provide
comprehensive information on Citrus found in Manipur.

CIBMAN is first resource that provides comprehensive retrieval of
information related to Citrus bioresources found in Manipur
and is a unique publically available web-interface that
elaborates Citrus Biodiversity of MANipur
(http://ibsd.gov.in/cibman) which provides access to the
taxonomy, morphology (leaves, fruit and seed), geographical
distribution, economic status, uses, references and links.
CIBMANs' sophisticated web based graphical user interface
allows efficient retrieval of data. The reliable data content and
links add an advantage in exploring data and that will make
CIBMAN a comprehensive and sophisticated tool.

Methodology
Surveys for availability of Citrus in nine districts of Manipur
were conducted during 2008 to 2012. Data were obtained by
performing personal visit to the market place, homeyards and
forest. During the course of study, Citrus species were also
collected from different habitats and preserved following the
standard methods and identified up to genus level by following
the standard taxonomic keys. The genetic resources were
maintained at IBSD. The identification and authentication of the
Citrus species were done at Botanical Survey of India (Shillong,
Meghalaya); National Research Centre for Citrus (Nagpur,
Maharashtra) and National Bureau of Plant Genetic Resources
(Barapani, Meghalaya). Citrus crops are associated with sociocultural
activities of people of Manipur. Important Citrus species
present in Manipur are Citrus grandis, Citrus jambhiri, Citrus
medica, Citrus macroptera, Citrus pseudolimon, Citrus reticulata,
Citrus sinensis and other Citrus species which are not properly
known [,
]. 
There is high possibility of finding diverse form
of Citrus since Manipur is located bordering to Myanmar, a
region having high Citrus diversity. Proper exploitation of
pumelos and acid group of Citrus for economic returns is
required since farmers might opt for other crops thereby
reducing the Citrus diversity. Kachai lemon a high yielding
land race, cultivated in all the household of Kachai village of
Ukhrul District, Manipur as community garden is a unique
way for conserving the crop []. Conservation by community
gardening should be extended to Citrus species of lesser
economic value and rarely available or endangered ones [].

In this study, the morphological characters like shape, size can
give information about the diverse gene pool of Citrus available
in the state (. The information provided also
helps in differentiation between various Citrus accessions based
on the phenotypes which are highly heritable and equally
expressed in all environments. So far, there is limited
information available on diverse germplasm of Citrus reported
from the state.

Database Content:
CIBMAN database contains an extensive compilation on Citrus
biodiversity, which can be visualized and analyzed by
graphical web-interface. The database comprises of 33 Citrus
accessions of which most of them are used for edible and
medicinal purposes. Extensive study on evolutionary
relationship is under progress to understand the taxonomic
conundrum retain since long. Further, biochemical and
molecular data on gene and gene products will be updated after
experimental validation of the data.

Design and Implementation
The CIBMAN database was developed by extracting seamlessly
integrating data from extensive questionnaire compiled in MS
Excel. This data compiled in MySQL 5.1.41 (www.mysql.com)
relational database along with cross references to taxonomy,
morphology, gallery, references and links.  elaborates
the architecture and outline of CIBMAN database. The MySQL
database was normalized and indexed to ensure efficient and
accurate data retrieval through the query option available in
CIBMAN web interface. At present search by common name,
scientific name and advance options are available to the users.
The regular updates to the CIBMAN database to ensure that its'
contents are up to date with periodic update in experimental and
biochemical study.

The CIBMAN web interface developed in Apache 2.0 Handler
CGI 1.1 (www.apache.org) runs on the Windows 2003 web
server and utilizes the MySQL (XAMPP-win32-1.7.7) module
to query and retrieve data from back end MySQL database
(www.mysql.com). The graphical display of snaps was
implemented with JAVA Script 1.6 programming
(http://www.javascriptsource.com). The Google map API
developer implemented for graphical representation of the
distribution with respect to the GPS coordinates highlighting the
specific site of sample collection.

Future Development
The gene pool of Citrus requires systematic approach for its
collection, conservation and characterization and its availability
in the future. Large gene pool of wild relatives of cultivated
Citrus crops is also potential source of important traits to face the
unforeseen changes in climate and any further soil degradation,
the sudden appearance of insect and virulent forms of
pathogens. There is necessity of screening for any Citrus species
having tolerance to pathogens, higher content of economically
useful compounds and valuable horticultural traits. By
incorporating such cultivars having valuable traits in somatic
hybridization programs, crop genetic improvement of existing
Citrus rootstocks and cultivars of higher bioactive compound
with desired quality could be achieved []. The rich Citrus
germplasm can also be exploited for finding new antibiotic
compounds that might be useful as drug for treatment of
multi drug resistant pathogens that become resistant to
existing antibiotic compounds. Diverse forms of Citrus
available but most of them underutilized can give us some
insight on potential Citrus based industry in the state of
Manipur. It is the high time to establish field gene bank at
different sites as revival policy and thereafter proper care
needs to be taken for maintenance and better conservation of
the Citrus diversity. To reduce the risk of germplasm loss, in
addition to field gene banks, in vitro gene banks and
cryopreservation techniques have to be developed [,
].

Authors are thankful to Department of Biotechnology (DBT),
Govt. of India, New Delhi for providing financial support and
working facilities in the Medicinal Plants and Horticultural
Resources Division and Bioresources Database and
Bioinformatics Division, Institute of Bioresources and
Sustainable Development, Imphal.

Citation:Sanabam et al, Bioinformation 8(17): 838-840 (2012)

(A) Fruit weight variation among Citrus accessions;
(B) Segment variability among Citrus accessions; (C) Variation
in leaf lamina length.

Architecture and outline of CIBMAN database

