Background
Curcuma longa L. (turmeric) of the family Zingiberaceae is one of
the most important crop with great medicinal and economic
significance []. India is the world's largest producer, and
exporter of turmeric followed by China, Indonesia, Bangladesh
and Thailand []. The International Trade Centre, Geneva, has
estimated an annual growth rate of 10% in the world demand
for turmeric. However, turmeric yield is not up to the demand
because continuous domestication of the preferred genotypes
coupled with their exclusive vegetative nature seems to have
eroded the genetic base of this crop and as a result all of its
cultivars available today are equally suceptible to major fungal
and bacterial diseases. Crop losses to the tune of 60% has been
realized in the recent times mainly due to the infection by a
necrotrophic oomycetic fungus Pythium aphanidermatum causing
the rhizome rot disease in turmeric []. Due to several
constraint associated with the utilization of chemical pesticides
and host resistance breeding, a genetic transformation approach
using alien genes could be the most likely solution towards
development of rhizome rot resistance. Our lab has recently
identified and characterized a coiled-coil-nucleotide-bindingsite-
leucine-rich repeat (CC-NBS-LRR) R-gene, CzR1 from wild
turmeric genotype Curcuma zedoaria that exhibit constitutive
upregulated expressions in response to different strains of P.
aphanidermatum []. The conceptual protein has 906 amino acids,
a predicted molecular weight of 102473.57 Da and a calculated
isoelectric point (pI) of 8.55.

Before utilization in long term turmeric improvement
programmes, it is essential to determine the three dimensional
(3D) model of CzR1 to assess its structural integrity and
biological relevance. A homology modeling based protein
structure perdiction of CzR1 could be an efficient strategy
taking into account the time consuming and cumbersome
nature of X-ray diffraction or nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy (NMR) []. Further, several evidences suggest that
various R-genes and pathogenesis related proteins play major
role in neutralizing the oomycetic cell wall to kill the pathogen
in line of defense signaling []. Beta-1,3-glucan, the major cellwall
constituents of necrotrophic oomycetes often acts as
elicitors of defence reactions and serve as pathogen associated
molecular patterns (PAMPs) []. Thus, the recognition of these
PAMPs by R-genes are crucial to activate defense reactions in
plants. However, there is no report on the interaction between
R-gene and β-1,3-glucan to study the presence of a possible
glucanase activity in R-gene dependent pathogen defense. Thus
the present study was designed to predict the 3D structure of
CzR1 based on homology modeling and molecular docking of
the R-protein with β-1, 3(D)-glucan.

Methodology
A BLASTX search of the Protein Data Bank (PDB) using CzR1
predcited protein as query showed high sequence identity
(61%) with human APAF-1 protein (PDB ID: 1Z6T) and
significant homology with coiled coil domain of MLA10 gene of
Hordeum vulgare (PDB ID: 3QFL) and leucine rich repeat domain
from Xanthomonas oryzae (PDB ID: 4FCG). Models of CzR1
protein were constructed based on the crystal structure
coordinates of 1Z6T along with other two sequences at a
resolution of 2.21 Å. The pair wise alignment of CzR1 was done
with 1Z6T as reference using the homology module of Prime
through the Maestro interface (Schrodinger, LLC, and New
York, USA). The pair wise alignment was improved manually
by minor editing based on the secondary structure predictions
as well as the pair wise superposition of the NB-ARC domain to
develop the three dimensional structure of CzR1. The model
was screened for unfavorable steric contacts and remodeled
using a rotamer library database of Prime. Explicit hydrogen
was added to the protein and the model was subjected to
energy minimization using the force-field OPLS-2005 using 300
iterations in a simple minimization method. The steepest
descent energy minimization was performed until the energy
showed stability in the sequential repetition. CzR1 model
structure was evaluated for its backbone conformation by
inspecting the Psi/Phi angles in a Ramachandran plot
generated using the software PROCHECK version 3.5 
[]. Z
score of CzR1 and the template (1Z6T) was estimated using the
software Prosa2003 []. Nevertheless, PROCHECK assured the
reliability of the structure and the protein was subjected to
VERIFY3D [] available from NIH MBI Laboratory Servers. The
root mean square deviation (RMSD) was calculated by
superposing the predicted Cα traces and backbone atoms of
Cz1R structure onto the template (1Z6T) in order to assess the
the deviation of the modeled structure from the template. The
protein structure image of the model was illustrated using the
software PyMOL.

Molecular docking was performed in order to determine the
binding affinity of polymer of β-(1,3)-D-Glucan onto Cz1R
protein. The chemical structure β-(1,3)-D-Glucan was extracted
from Chemical Book (http://www.chemicalbook.com) and its
three dimensional structure was developed using the molecular
builder tool of Maestro (Schrodinger package, ver 8.5). Initially
different binding sites were predicted on CzR1 protein using
SiteMap (Schrodinger, ver 2.4), out of which only the binding
site from the NB-ARC domain was considered for docking
study. The receptor-grid file was generated at the centre of the
predicted binding site using Glide (Schrodinger, ver 2.5). A
bounding box of size 14Å x 14Å x 14Å was defined and
centered on the mass center of each binding site in order to
confine the mass center of the docked ligand. β-(1,3)-D-Glucan
was then docked into each predicted binding site using Glide
XP (extra precision) docking [–]. Out of the 5,000 poses that
were sampled initially through exhaustive search of the
torsional minima 800 poses per ligand were selected for energy
minimization (conjugate gradients 1,000 steps). The 10 lowestenergy
poses obtained were subjected to post docking
minimization (Monte Carlo sampling based on torsional
minima and refining the orientation of side groups of ligand). A
single best conformation of the ligand was considered for
further analysis and the binding affinity between the protein
and ligand was estimated using the GlideScore function 
[].
The mode of protein-ligand interaction was plotted using the
program LIGPLOT [].

Results &amp; Discussion
The CzR1 protein from C. zedoaria with 906 amino acids contains
NB-ARC domain (168 to 465) and LRR-1 domain (630 to 651)
predicted from Pfam database []. Although Mla1 protein from
Hordeum vulgare shared 62% similarity with CzR1, it could not
be used as a template due to non-availability of its structure
information in the PDB database. Hence, the crystal structures
of MLA10 coiled coil domain (3QFL), human APAF-1 protein
(1Z6T) and Xanthomonas oryzae leucine rich repeat domain
(4FCG) were combinedly used as templates for developing a
homology based model of CzR1 (). The overall stereo
chemical quality of the model was assessed by PROCHECK.
The Ramachandran plot showed 96.6% amino acid residues
from the main chain conformation of CzR1 within the favored
or allowed regions suggesting that majority of the amino acids
are in a phi-psi distribution that is consistent with a righthanded
α-helix. The G-factors, indicating the quality of the
covalent bond length and overall bond angles, were −0.10° for
dihedrals, 0.42° for covalent bonds, and −0.11° as overall value.
Although, a calculated RMSD value of 0.448 Å () was
obtained by super positioning of the Cα atoms of the CzR1 and
the template protein (1Z6T), the RMSD between the NB-ARC
domain structures between both the proteins was only 0.284 Å.
Prosa2003 analysis yielded a Z score of −4.32 for CzR1 and −4.63
for the central template (1Z6T). The final model, which we took
for further analysis, consisted of 631 amino acid residues. The
overall main-chain and side-chain parameters, as evaluated by
PROCHECK, are all very favorable. The assessment with
VERIFY3D, which derives a “3D-1D” profile based on the local
environment of each residue, described by the statistical
preferences for: the area of the residue that is buried, the
fraction of side-chain area that is covered by polar atoms
(oxygen and nitrogen) and the local secondary structure, also
substantiated the reliability of the three dimensional structure.

To examine the glucanase prospective of CzR1, we subjected it
to molecular docking with the polymeric carbohydrate β-(1,3)-
D-Glucan which is a major constituent of cell wall in most of
the necrotrophic oomycetes []. Five different binding sites
with different site scores were predicted with different
physiochemical properties in  (see supplementary
material). However, the binding site (site 4) that includes amino
acids from the NB-ARC domain with good site score, volume,
enclosure, hydrophilicity and donor/acceptor ratio was
considered for molecular docking of β-(1,3)-D-Glucan. The
docking show better docking score (-10.59 kcal/mol) and
Emodel energy (-48.44 kcal/mol) of β-(1, 3)-D-Glucan with the
binding site 4 located at the NB-ARC domain of CzR1 
(Table S2). β-(1,3)-D-Glucan shares higher values of electrostatic
interaction (Ecoul, -15.42 kcal/mol), hydrogen bonding energy
(Hbond, -2.092 kcal/mol) and Van der Waals interaction (Evdw, -
33.03 kcal/mol) energies  (see supplementary material)
predicted by Glide-XP because of the polar and non polar
interactions with the binding site amino acids. The model
produced by GlideXP predicts that six amino acid residues,
Ser186, Glu187, Ser263, Asp264, Asp355 and Tyr425 are
involved in hydrogen bonding with docked polymer β-(1,3)-DGlucan
(). The calculated distance between the
carboxylic oxygen atoms of the Glu187–Asp355 pair is 4.38Å,
which is well within the distance of 5Å required between the
two catalytic residues for glucanase activity []. Furthermore,
polymer of β-(1,3)-D-Glucan showed desirable hydrophobic
interactions with the hydrophobic residues within the binding
cavity (). The favourable H-bonding, columbic, and
hydrophobic interaction energies make polymer of β-(1,3)-DGlucan
highly active and selective for CzR1. Previous to our
studies, there is no data on the possible glucanase or hydrolytic
activity of the R-genes. However, many PR-proteins with antifungal
activity exhibits such interdomain surface cleft for
glycoside hydrolase enzymes and binding by (1,3)-b-D-glucan
[–]. 
Further research on binding interactions between
variable NBS-LRR class R-genes and different pathogen
/microbe associated molecular patterns (PAMPs/MAMPs) is
needed to get a decisive conclusion on the global functioning
and regulation of such R-genes.

Conclusion
In conclusions, molecular modeling procedures revealed the
presence of a narrow cleft near the ATP-GTP binding site of the
highly charged NBS domain of CzR1, a CC-NBS-LRR class Rgene
from C. zedoaria. Molecular docking predicted high affinity
between CzR1 and (1, 3)-β-D-glucan, a major component of the
oomycete cell wall with favorable pairing of two negatively
charged amino acid residues Glu187-Asp (355) within the
docked complex. This suggest that CzR1 could be possibly
having a β-1, 3-glucanase activity in vivo besides the regular
ATP-GTP binding function in initiating pathogen defense.
Revelation of these molecular characteristic of CzR1 controlling
the resistance of C. zedoaria against P.aphanidermatum together
with studies on the significance of hydrolytic activity of CzR1
will be highly informative towards the development of a broad
spectrum rhizome rot resistance in the cultivated turmeric.

Supplementary material
Data 1
SN gratefully acknowledges the financial assistance in the form
of Institutional research fellowship from Siksha O Anusandhan
University. ER acknowledges financial support in the form of
junior research fellowship from Department of Science and
Technology, Govt. of India. BK is thankful to Council of
Scientific and Industrial research (CSIR), Govt. of India for
providing senior research fellowship. The authors are grateful
to Dr. Manoj Ranjan Nayak, President,Siksha O Anusandhan
University for his encouragement and support.

Citation:Joshi et al, Bioinformation 9(11): 560-564 (2013)

Homology model structure of CzR1. A) The NB-ARC
domain of CzR1 is represented in red colour and the LRRs were
represented in green colour; B) Super positioning of CzR1 and
the template 1Z6T (yellow colour). The RMSD between both the
structures was 0.448 Å. The RMSD between the NB-ARC
domains between both the proteins was 0.284 Å.

A) Molecular docking snapshot of β-(1,3)-D-Glucan
bound to site 4 of NB_ARC domain in CzR1; B) Enlarge view of
bound β-(1,3)-D-Glucan along with the interacting amino acids.
β-(1, 3)-D-Glucan is represented in yellow carbon colour while
the binding site amino acids were represented in green colour

Ligand plot demonstrating the interacting amino acids
of CzR1 (site 4) with β-(1,3)-D-Glucan. The hydrogen bonds
were represented with dotted green line along with the bond
length in Å.

