Background
The proper conformation of proteins and hence cellular survival
is challenged by stress conditions like extreme heat which
results in a massive aggregation of proteins inside both
eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells. This response called the ‘heat
shock response’ leads to the induction of almost all the
universally conserved ‘heat shock genes’ which encode
chaperones, proteases and other stress related proteins. In E.
coli, this regulation is mediated by rpoH gene product, the
alternative sigma factor σ32. Its intracellular level is low and
increases transiently after temperature up-shift []. The cellular
concentration of σ32 is tightly controlled at four different levels:
transcription and translation of the rpoH and activity and
stability of σ32 protein. Heat induction of σ32 mainly occurs at
the post transcriptional level. An extended secondary structure
in the rpoH transcript blocks translation at low temperatures 
[,
]. 
Thermal melting of that structure permits ribosome entry
followed by translation initiation. Once produced the fate of σ32
is determined by its interaction with a number of other proteins
including chaperones as DnaK, DnaJ, GrpE and GroEL/ES and
proteases as ClpP family, HslUV, Lon and FtsH [,
].

Under non-stress conditions, σ32 is neutralized by an interaction
with DnaK and DnaJ proteins. This interaction serves two
regulatory functions. It inactivates σ32 by preventing it from
interaction with the RNA polymerase core enzyme and renders
it susceptible to FtsH-mediated degradation [,
] (half-life of
σ32 is &lt; 1min) as over expression of σ32 is toxic 
[]. Accumulation
of unfolded proteins upon heat stress conditions titrates away
the DnaK system, leaving behind free σ32, which associates with
RNA polymerase and in turn initiates transcription of heat
shock genes. Accumulation of σ32 only occurs in the initial
phase (induction phase) of the heat shock response where the
levels and half-life of σ32 increase transiently [,
]. Elevated
temperatures introduce a conformational change in σ32 which
specifically abolishes interaction with DnaK 
[]. It is assumed
that the amino acid residues 190-205 in σ32 are responsible for
σ32- specific function and become disordered at higher
temperatures []. The structurally altered sigma factor is rapidly
turned over by cellular proteases. As a consequence, the cellular
level of σ32 decreases and the heat shock response is shut off.
Several experiments for studying the dynamical properties as
fluorescence resonance energy transfer, fluorescence anisotropy
measurements and hydrogen / deuterium exchange have
suggested significant structural flexibility in the core of σ32 
[].
This property is probably the main hindrance for the formation
of good crystals and hence high resolution crystallographic 3D
structure of the protein is still unavailable. As a result many
structural and functional properties of σ32, its interactions with
the chaperones as well as with the proteases are still obscure. In
the present scenario an attempt has been made to analyze the
structural biochemistry of σ32 protein along with its interactions
with DnaK. We report a three dimensional model of σ32 built by
homology modeling. We have docked the 3D structure of DnaK
with the homology model of σ32. This docked model has been
used to illuminate structural insight of the mechanism by which
DnaK interacts with σ32 and regulate its activity and stability.

Methodology
The amino acid sequence of σ32 protein from E. coli K-12 was
collected from Uniprot (accession numbers P0AGB3). The
amino acid sequence of the σ32 was used to search Brookhaven
Protein Data Bank (PDB) [] for suitable template(s) to build
homology model using the BLAST software tool []. The
BLAST search picked up the crystal structure of T. thermophilus
RNA polymerase holoenzyme (PDB Code: 2A6H F chain) as the
template with 40% sequence identity with σ32 from E. coli K-12.
Modeler program in the Discovery Studio 2.5 Platform of the
Accelrys was used to model the three dimensional structure of
the σ32 using the above template. The model of σ32 protein was
then subjected to energy minimization using CHARMM force
fields [] using steepest descent (SD) algorithm. The stereochemical
qualities of the three dimensional models were then
checked using PROCHECK [], and ERRAT 
[] which
predicts it as a model of good quality and no residues were
found to be present in the disallowed regions of the
Ramachandran Plot []. In order to build σ32 –DnaK complex,
the modeled structure of σ32 was docked with the crystal
structure of DnaK protein (PDB Code: 1DKX) using the
program GRAMM []. GRAMM produced seven different
models of the σ32 –DnaK protein complex. Among them the best
structure of the complex was chosen on the basis of the
biological relevance as present in literature []. The model of
σ32 –DnaK protein complex was then protonated at pH 7.5 using
Accelrys Discovery Studio 2.5 and then subjected to 2000 cycles
of energy minimization using CHARMM force fields with
steepest descent (SD) algorithm until the structure of the σ32 –
DnaK protein complex reached the final energy derivative of
0.001 kcal / mole. The stereo-chemical qualities of the docked
protein complex were again checked using PROCHECK and
ERRAT and results were same as before. The system was
solvated with water molecules. Then molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations were performed on the docked structure to predict
the favorable binding interactions between σ32 and DnaK.
Initially the dynamics run was kept constant at 303K (30°C). The
σ32 –DnaK complex was then heated until it reached the
temperature 316K (43°C). The same process has been followed
for the modeled σ32 protein (i.e., before docking to DnaK
protein) at 303K and 316K temperatures. The final structures of
σ32 proteins as well as those of σ32 –DnaK complex at 303K and
after heating at 316K were then analyzed to find out the
possible modes of binding. The two structures were
superimposed using ‘align and superimpose’ module of
Discovery Studio 2.5 platform to find out the structural changes
of σ32 due to temperature up shift.

Discussion
Structure of sigma32:
The σ32 protein from E.coli is an all alpha protein with 284
amino acid residues. The protein has a total of thirteen helices
(). Structurally the protein can be considered to have
four domains. All the domains are made up of helices
connected together by loop regions. Overall the protein has
similar structural arrangements of its secondary structural
elements as in the protein RNA polymerase holoenzyme from
T. thermophilus (PDB ID: 2A6H_F chain).

Structural changes of sigma32 with temperature:
It has been a well established fact that in E. coli upon
temperature increase from normal to heat shock temperature,
cellular level of σ32 protein increases []. Till date no detailed
analysis of the conformational changes of σ32 at elevated
temperature has been elucidated. In order to account for the
loss of σ32 specific function from a structural perspective, the
model of the σ32 protein was stepwise heated from 32°C to
beyond 32°C. Initially no structural changes were observed but
at around 43°C the spatial arrangement of the protein were
found to be significantly altered as measured by the r.m.s.d
values (10.696 Å) of the backbone atoms of the proteins at these
two different temperatures. This clearly indicates a huge change
in the conformation of the σ32 protein at elevated temperature.

Interactions between sigma32 and DnaK:
The three dimensional coordinates of the σ32 -DnaK protein
complex have been generated using molecular docking
technique with the help of the software tool GRAMM. When σ32
interacts with DnaK no significant changes occur in the σ32
structure (r.m.s.d. between σ32 in σ32 -DnaK complex and σ32
alone 0.2Å). Analysis of σ32 - DnaK protein complex shows that
the interactions between the proteins have been stabilized
mainly by H-bonds involving the side chain atoms of the
proteins. The residues involved in interactions are shown in
 (see supplementary material) &amp; ().
Interestingly, it has been observed that all the amino acid
residues from σ32, involved in binding DnaK fall in the region2
and region3 of σ32. Though the aforementioned regions have
previously been predicted to be involved in binding with DnaK
and responsible for σ32 specific functions [,
], the molecular
details of the binding have not yet been established. This report
elucidates the structural details of σ32 as well as the interactions
between σ32 and DnaK. Heating σ32 -DnaK protein complex
beyond 42°C, destroys all six H-bond and results in total loss of
interaction between σ32 and DnaK. This is because of the loss of
structural arrangements in the binding interface of the σ32
protein. This is exemplified by r.m.s.d value (8.276Å) of the
backbone atoms of σ32 protein above 43°C (). This
might play a major role in decreasing the degradation rate of
σ32. Major structural change has been identified to occur in the
binding interface of σ32 -DnaK protein complex. This result is
consistent to earlier studies by Chattopadhyay et al. 2002, which
reports that this abolition of σ32-DnaK interaction is mainly due
to the structural changes of σ32 at heat shock temperature.

Conclusion
In this paper an attempt has been made to analyze the probable
molecular details of the interactions of σ32 with DnaK. The three
dimensional structure of σ32 has been predicted using the
homology modeling technique. The functions of σ32 are
dependent on temperature. Therefore, the modeled structure of
σ32 has been heated from 32°C to 43°C. It revealed a huge
structural change beyond 42°C. The σ32 is known to bind DnaK.
In order to elucidate the mode of binding of σ32 with DnaK, the
three dimensional coordinates of the σ32 and DnaK have been
used to dock the two proteins together by molecular docking.
The interaction scheme revealed that the role of amino acid
residues from the region 2 and region 3 of σ32. This report deals
with the detailed molecular biochemistry of temperature
dependence of σ32 structure and σ32 –DnaK interactions.
Therefore our study will be useful for future genetic studies to
elucidate the roles of the amino acid residues in the proteinprotein
interactions for the heat shock response.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors are thankful to anonymous reviewer for his/her
comments for the betterment of the manuscript. We are
thankful to the UGC, Govt. of India, for RFSMS fellowship to
SSR and Department of Science and Technology (DST), Govt. of
India for the financial support (Project No. SR/SO/BB-
71/2007). The authors also acknowledge Dr. Alpana Seal,
Coordinator, BIF for providing the DBT-Bioinformatics
Infrastructure Facility of University of Kalyani, Mr. Suman
Kumar Nandy, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics and
Mr. Rajabrata Bhuyan, BIF, University of Kalyani for their
immense help and Prof. Tarakdas Basu, Department of
Biochemistry &amp; Biochemistry, University of Kalyani for his
scientific advices.

Citation:Roy et al, Bioinformation 8(21): 1026-1029 (2012)

(A) Three dimensional ribbon representation of
prokaryotic transcription regulatory protein σ32. Helices are
presented in red. The remaining are loops; (B) Hydrogen
bonding interactions between DnaK and σ32. DnaK is colored
in cyan and σ32 in red; (C) Superimposition of the backbone
atoms of the binding interface of DnaK docked σ32 at 32°C (red)
and 43°C (cyan).

