Background
Human Immunodeficiency Virus type 1 (HIV), the virus which
leads to the development of Acquired Immunodeficiency
Syndrome (AIDS), currently infects 33 million individuals and
is responsible for over 25 million deaths, leading to a global
pandemic []. Human Leukocyte Antigen A*02 (HLA A*02), a
class-I allele, has been extensively studied as it is the most
diverse serotype and the most common allele of the human
Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC), particularly within
North America and Asia []. The expression of HLA A*02 has
been linked to strong immune response to HIV infection as well
as effects on viral load [,
]. This may result from the specificity
of conserved epitopes to the alleles associated with the
presentation of such amino acid configurations to cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (CTL). This is the case with the HLA-A2 restricted,
immunodominant SL9 epitope of Gag. Research has shown that
mutation in sequences adjacent to the conserved epitope rarely
lead to viral escape, which could be possible through
interference with recognition of the antigen []. Generally,
escape occurs via mutation of the presented configuration such
that recognition by CTL is reduced or altogether halted. The
HLA B*27 has also been studied for its link to long-term nonprogression
(LTNP) in HIV-positive individuals [] as well as to
a group of auto-immune diseases collectively known as
seronegative spondarthritis []. The efficacy of HLA B*27 in
responding to the HIV infection is associated with the
specificity of the allele for a conserved epitope of the virus' Gag
protein. However, mutation in that conserved epitope is linked
to viral escape and the onset of AIDS in B*27+ individuals [,
].

The envelope (ENV) protein, glycoprotein-160 (gp160), is the
precursor to both gp120 and gp41. The two components are
separated by the activity of the furin protein of the host cell 
[].
The function of gp120, which is secreted on the surface of the
envelope, is to bind to CD4 receptors before entry into the host
cells, allowing the membranes of the two to fuse 
[].
Glycoprotein-120 is of interest in HIV vaccine research because
its exposure upon the surface of the envelope means that it is
likely to be identified by CTL. An understanding of the
evolutionary origins of HIV and how the virus has evolved over
the past decades is important in efforts to develop techniques to
counter it in the future []. 
Studying the in vivo evolution of the
virus also contributes to such efforts. This is supported by a
number of studies which have taken the approach of mapping
sites of positive selection within the HIV genome in order to
identify restricted epitopes under pressure exerted by CTL and
anti-viral drugs [,
,
]. The purpose of this study is to
examine, using in silico tools, the kinds of changes which have
occurred in several ubiquitous immunogenic epitopes of gp120,
and how these changes have affected the immunogenicity of the
resulting HLA T-cell specific 9-mers.

Methodology
Full-length sequences of the ENV protein of the HIV subtypes
A, B, C and D were obtained through the NCBI Protein
database. These sequences were then queried into NCBI BLAST
in order to obtain genetic diversity in the samples to be studied.
A total of 25 variants for each of the four subtypes were chosen
for the study. These 100 sequences were then aligned using
ClustalW on default parameters. ClustalW is a multiplesequence
alignment algorithm provided by the European
Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) []. In addition to performing
alignments, the program also generates cladograms and
identifies conserved regions in both nucleotide and amino acid
sequences. RANKPEP is an immunoinformatics program which
performs several functions. Because of the importance of
generating a response from both CD8 and CD4 T-cells,
RANKPEP uses position specific scoring matrices (PSSMs) to
predict peptide binding capability to both sets of T-cells. The
algorithm determines a consensus peptide against which the
existing sequences are scored. Additionally, the program can
determine whether or not the C-terminus of the predicted
MHC-I molecule has resulted from proteasomal cleavage 
[].
Sequences for gp120 were excised from the aligned gp160
sequences and evaluated by RANKPEP on default parameters
to rank epitopes (9-mers) by their binding capability toward
HLA A*0201 and HLA B*27 MHC class I alleles. For each of the
selected HLAs, one peptide was chosen for its ubiquity among
the highest-ranked epitopes. Variants of this ‘archetype’ were
identified in all other strains and also scored by RANKPEP. The
chosen peptide archetype for the HLA A*02 binding list was
SLAEKNITI, and for HLA B*27 it was IRIGPGQAF.

Geneious is an integrated software suite for bioinformatics. It
allows convenient access to BLAST and the NCBI database
directly through the program and provides ways to easily
organize this information. The software also features alignment
and tree-building capabilities []. In this study, Geneious was
used to catalogue the collected gp160 sequences and to
construct a phylogeny based upon them. The phylogenetic tree
was constructed using the neighbor-joining method, with the
Jukes-Cantor genetic distance model and no out-group. The
sequences of the variants of each peptide archetype from
RANKPEP were placed on the tree with their calculated
optimal score (%OPT), alongside their respective accession
numbers (). This directly relates epitope sequence and
immunogenicity to the evolutionary history and relationships
of the peptide variants. Mesquite [] was employed for
ancestral state reconstruction (ASR) to infer the order of amino
acid substitutions in the epitopes examined. Mesquite serves as
a platform for many different modules, which can be loaded
and used independently of one another, offering great
flexibility in evolutionary analysis.

Discussion
The phylogenetic tree used in this paper was resampled using
the bootstrap method with 100 iterations (results not shown).
The placement of the subtypes received strong (100) support,
with subtype C as the progenitor of A, B and D. Some
relationships among finer branches received significantly
weaker support. However, discrepancy in these ambiguous
relationships would not have compromised any of the
conclusions of the present research. ASR performed on
Mesquite found SLAEEEIII as the most parsimonious ancestral
sequence of all sampled strains of HIV for the peptide
archetype analyzed for HLA A*02. IRIGPGQAF and
IHIGPGQAF were found to be equally parsimonious ancestral
states of the archetype tested for binding to HLA B*27.
However, it seems unreasonable to suppose that the ancestral
state of the pandemic HIV envelope protein should be a
recognized potential escape mutant [,
]. In addition, histidine
at the 2nd position is just one of many different potential escape
mutants shown in the data. Thus, it may be concluded that the
IRIGPGQAF sequence used as the archetype is most likely the
ancestral sequence of this epitope in HIV ().

Nearly all of the variants of the SLAEKNITI peptide archetype
examined for HLA A*02 have a high %OPT score, typically
ranging from approximately 64 – 77 percent. The most
immunogenic variant is SLAETKVKI; with a %OPT of 77.34
percent. This variant is present in two strains, accessioned as
ABA61523 and ABA61524. These are sisters to the two leastimmunogenic
variants. One of these variants, SLAEKVKIR,
differs from SLAETKVKI by the deletion of the threonine at the
5th position. This deletion alone brings the peptide's %OPT
score down from 77.34 percent to 39.06 percent, suggesting that
the deletion may have been of adaptive significance to the
particular strain of HIV. The other variant with a low binding
score is SLEKEVKIR, which incurred an independent deletion
of alanine at the 3rd position. This variant is scored at 28.12
percent. Both of these deletions have the effect of shifting
arginine into the binding frame at the 9th position (). It
is noteworthy that these two closely related strains are the only
ones which display deletion mutations within the targeted
epitope. Single residues were systematically changed, and the
resulting 9-mers were tested for predicted immunogenicity
again using the RANKPEP algorithm. This analysis revealed
that while the specific deletions of the alanine and threonine
residues themselves had negative effects on the peptides'
immunogenicity, the brunt of the reduction in binding score
was due to the resulting replacement of isoleucine with arginine
as the residue in the 9th position. This data may identify such a
change as a candidate escape mutation in strains of HIV
responding to pressure exerted by CTL expressing HLA A*02
(). The phylogenetic proximity of the two rare
mutations suggests that they may represent such a case, as both
sequences were submitted to Genbank as part of the same study
[].

The question arises, however, of why, in both of these cases, a
deletion occurred to move arginine into the 9th position rather
than a simple substitution of isoleucine for arginine. One
possible explanation would be that isoleucine or an amino acid
with similar chemical properties is important in some other
aspect of protein structure, and so its deletion or replacement
would be deleterious. An alternative hypothesis is that, as two
non-synonymous nucleotide substitutions are required to reach
most codons associated with arginine from a codon associated
with isoleucine, the intermediate residue could be deleterious.
RANKPEP analysis shows this to be the case if leucine is the
transitional residue between isoleucine and arginine. Leucine at
the 9th position yields approximately the same predicted
immunogenicity as isoleucine. However, serine can also be used
as a ‘bridge’ to arginine, and it yields nearly as low a binding
score as arginine (data unpublished). It is possible that serine
might disrupt the structure of the envelope protein in the same
way as the loss of isoleucine might, but it is unclear whether
that is the case. Further research into the physical and chemical
importance of those residues might be fruitful. It was found
that 9-mers of gp120 are significantly less immunogenic overall
toward HLA B*27 than they are toward HLA A*02. Many of the
IRIGPGQAF archetype variants examined with respect to HLA
B*27 were placed among the most immunogenic epitopes by
RANKPEP, but none of these were assigned a %OPT score
above approximately 45 percent. There appears to be a great
diversity of B*27 binding scores present among the variants of
this peptide archetype, which range from -19.77% to 44.60%.
However, all of these variants fall into two discrete classes with
respect to immunogenicity. These classes are differentiated
solely on the basis of the presence or absence of arginine at the
2nd position. It is known from the study of escape mutations in
HLA B*27-restricted epitopes in the gag protein that arginine at
this position is critical for efficacious binding, and is thus a
common escape mutant from HLA B*27 [,
].

Based upon that knowledge, this common substitution could be
supposed from the data to be adaptive. However, this is
probably not the case for two reasons: First, it is unlikely that
any variant of this peptide archetype, or for that matter, any
epitope on gp120 will be immunodominant toward HLA B*27
given the comparatively low binding score given by the
RANKPEP algorithm. Thus, it will probably face relatively little
selective pressure from CTL in the case of an immune response.
The second reason why the substitution is not necessarily
adaptive is that all of the sampled amino acid variants (e.g.
tryptonphan and histidine) at that position can be reached by a
single nucleotide substitution from one of the codons associated
with arginine. This means that the replacement of arginine in
this context may simply be an evolutionary accident.

Application
Amino acid replacements that can occur with HIV expressed
proteins could lead to the identification of conserved regions
that are vaccine targets. There have been several attempts to
develop a prophylaxis vaccine for HIV infection over the past
few decades. However, the hurdles for developing any type of
vaccine for this pathology have been daunting 
[,
,
]. This is
also true for peptide derived vaccines. Peptide vaccines may
never become the basis of a universal prophylaxis regiment for
HIV. There are several reasons for this. The lack of success for
peptide vaccine development may include the dependence on
uninterrupted vaccine candidate epitopes, the over confidence
in antibodies specificity, the monoclonal antibodies that are
used to characterize the epitopes are created with operational
bias, and then there is the challenge of associated with the
underestimation of what construes the differences between
antigenicity and immunogenicity. Van Regenmortel et al. 
[]
noted that these misconceptions need to be overcome if there is
ever to be a peptide vaccine for HIV. Therefore, this in silico
study which looked at the evolution of HIV in vivo could be
extrapolated to propose a novel methodology that could
revolutionize how peptide vaccines are designed for viral
infections. Using the concepts purported by this study in silico
tools may be utilized for the development of therapeutics
vaccines that could lead for a cure from HIV infection within a
single individual. The process of creating an individual
treatment paradigm could include the use of dendritic cells in
conjunction to algorithmic derived HLA specific T-cell based
peptide vaccine design.

Ultra-deep pyrosequencing is one technique in which HIV
nucleotides could be translated into sequences of amino acids
utilizing a correction algorithm. Rozera et al. 
[] showed that
cell membranes that are virally associated and are acquired by
HIV can provide information dealing with the circulating
virions cellular sources. In this case, the monocytic and
lymphocytic markers CD26 were targeted for identification
from HIV patients which had their HAART therapy
interrupted. The study created phylogenetic trees representing
the third variable region (V3) associated with HIV gp120
envelope (env) glycoprotein sequences from individual patients
() 
[]. HIV-1 gp120 env glycoprotein V3 region
possesses features necessary for coreceptor binding and is
immunodominant []. HIV V3 protein sequences have been
considered a prime vaccine target []. HIV quasispecies
analysis that leads to the identification of targeted proviral
sequences that has been archived or is in the actual stage of
viron replication does have therapeutic relevance as being
proposed as an application of this study []. Quasispecies
identification gives an evolutionary snapshot of HIV viron
proteins in vivo and therefore can lend itself to the next stage of
analysis in order to identify peptide vaccine candidates.

Many studies have shown that predictive algorithms are useful
in predicting virally important immunogenic epitopes.
Algorithms have been developed to predict immunogenic
peptides restricted to both MHC Class I and II. MHC Class I
and II in silico tools include ProPred, MHC2PRED, RANKPEP,
SVMHC, MHCPred, and MHC-BPS, SYFPEITHI, BIMAS,
IEDB_ANN, EpiJen, Rankpep, HLApred, NetCTL and
Multipred, among others. These algorithms have been shown to
be useful in identifying both MHC Class I and/or MHC Class II
restricted epitopes [,
,
,
]. Online in silico tools, though
advantageous, may be overwhelmed by the amount of data
which has to be entered manually by the data generated from
quasispecies techniques. EpiMatrix is a tool kit of algorithms
that has been designed to identify potential immunogenic MHC
Class I and II peptides. It has been successfully applied to the
identification of potential HIV T-cell restricted epitopes 
[,
].
These in vivo evolutionary selected and conserved peptides can
be pulsed to dendritic cells. Dendritic cells have been used in
therapy that is truly personalized. Tumor derived medicine
have been found to be a possibility in treating cancer. These
cells can be primed with tumor specific T-lymphocytic
immunogens and early studies have been shown to be
promising. This type of approach has been combined with
chemotherapy []. Dendritic cells have also been utilized in the
possible development of a HIV vaccine. Data showed that there
was an increase immune response to dendritic cells pulsed with
HIV Gag and p24 proteins in nonhuman primates []. Using a
personalized medicine approach in the treatment of individuals
with HIV infection could lead to individualize cures ().
However, though this proposed methodology could be
successful in AIDS patients undergoing the HAART regiment,
for example, the cost per treatment would probably be
tremendous. Thus, ethical questions would need to be
evaluated on how the treatment would be rendered.

Conclusion
The present paper combines the use of several in silico tools to
represent evolutionary changes in HIV together with their
precise immunological significance. From this study, it may be
concluded that vaccines based upon the envelope glycoprotein
of HIV are unlikely to be effective in eliciting an immune
response in vivo in HLA B*27+ individuals. A gp120-based
vaccine may, however, be effective in individuals expressing
HLA A*02. This work identifies potential target peptides for
such vaccines, and important antigenic residues within them. In
particular, isoleucine at the 9th position of an antigen is
important for its recognition by HLA A*02+ T-cells, and thus its
replacement at that site by certain other amino acids could lead
to immune escape. Further, the data confirms previous findings
on the importance for efficacious binding, of an arginine
residue at the 2nd position of the gag SL9 epitope, and extends
this principle to other epitopes which interact with HLA B*27. 
Such information may be useful in developing
individual treatments for rapidly evolving viral infections.
Though much more work is necessary in validating the
proposed methodology of treating HIV infected patients, the
hypothesis lends itself to tremendous possibilities of treating
many infectious viral diseases that currently does not have a
vaccine, such as, Dengue Fever, Epstien Barr Virus, Hepatitic C
Virus, among others. It is certain that the understanding the
evolution of HIV in vivo and applying massively parallel
pyrosequencing that highlights HIV env quasispecies protein
variants and in silico peptide design could lead to a
personalized medical approached given therapeutic relief for
HIV infected individuals.

Competing Interests
The authors declared that no competing interests relating to the
publication exists.

Authors would like to thank Dr. Yonnette Semple-Dormer of
Semple Professional Enterprises for their editing services. In
addition, authors desire to thank Dormer-Owusu BioInstitute,
Inc. for their support of the research conducted for this
publication.

Citation:Hecht &amp; Dormer, Bioinformation 9(6): 315-320 (2013)

Geneious was used to catalogue the collected gp160 sequences from HIV clade A, B, C, and D in order to construct a
phylogenic tree. RANKPEP results consisted of key immunogenic peptides predicted to stimulate to T-cell HLA-A*2 and B*27
clone is presented along with their binding percentages.

Based on the alignment and ancestral sequence
reconstruction, (ASR), there appear to have been two
independent deletions.

Rozera et al. developed individual phylogentic trees
of the V3 protein sequences from patients analyzed after longterm
suppression of viremia. The CD26-provirus is indicated in
red and represents monocytes that harbor proviral quasispecies.
The green circles represent the CD26-provirus proviral
quasispecies harbored in T-lymphocytes. The nucleotide
sequences obtained for this patient was translated in amino acid
sequences and then filtered.

The development of a HIV vaccine has been elusive.
Using a personalized approach may be helpful in a treatment
that is designed to the individual patient. The possible protocol
could include: Massively parallel pyrosequencing; Use of in
silico tools predictive programs (MHC Class I and/or Class II);
Dendritic cell pulse with selected in vivo evolutionary
conserved peptide; Personalized HIV vaccine; Weaning of the
patient from conventional HIV drug therapy.

