Background
The Comparative Toxicogenomics Database (CTD) is a public
resource that promotes understanding about the effects of
environmental chemicals on human health []. CTD biocurators
manually curate interactions from the scientific literature in a
structured format using controlled vocabularies and ontologies for
chemicals, genes, diseases, molecular interactions, and organisms [,]
. These datasets can be used to explore relationships and also to
generate novel, testable hypotheses about chemical-gene-disease
pathways. Finding chemicals and genes with similar interaction
profiles could promote alternative methods for classifying chemicals
and help identify additional members of interaction networks. There
are many ways to discover and organize related genes and proteins:
sequence similarity, co-expression analysis, shared protein-protein
interactions, and common biomarkers for a disease. In addition, the
Gene Ontology (an annotation vocabulary used to define gene
products by molecular function, biological process, and cellular
localization) can be data-mined to produce lists of comparable genes
[]. In contrast, criterion for finding similar chemicals has been
largely restricted to the physical properties (e.g., molecular weight,
atomic elements, boiling point, molar volume, etc.) or atomic structure
of compounds []. A relatively new approach, however, is to classify
chemicals based upon their effect on mRNA expression detected by
microarrays [,]. While this method and the development ofextensive chemical vocabularies 
[] and new ontologies [] may
further help organize compounds, comparative analysis among
chemicals with similar gene interaction profiles (beyond mRNA
expression) is still lacking.

At CTD we developed a simple approach to discover analogous genes
and chemicals based upon shared chemical-gene interaction profiles,
which we call GeneComps and ChemComps for comparable genes and
comparable chemicals, respectively. CTD biocurators manually curate
the literature and annotate over 50 different types of chemical-gene
molecular interactions, including, among others, effects on mRNA
expression, protein expression, phosphorylation, activity, localization,
degradation, metabolic processing, transport, and promoter
methylation. Every gene in CTD has a profile of chemicals with which
it interacts, and likewise every chemical has a profile of genes with
which it interacts. These extended, detailed, and more complete
interaction profiles essentially define a “footprint” for a gene or
chemical that can be leveraged to discover and cluster genes and
chemicals.

Methodology
We used the data available in CTD in September 2009, which included
184,646 chemical-gene interactions for 5,124 chemicals and 16,308
genes. Similarity indices were computed for chemicals (ChemComps)
and genes (GeneComps). The degree of similarity was estimated
using a modification of the Jaccard index, whose value ranges between
0 and 1 []. The index is the ratio of the number of elements in the
intersection of two sets (number of shared interactions between two
chemicals or genes) divided by the number of elements in the union of
two sets (number of combined interactions between two chemicals or
genes).

Utility
CTD computes statistics that reflect the degree of similarity between
the gene interaction profiles of each curated chemical and generates a
list of ChemComps (). Likewise, chemical interaction
profiles are compared between each curated gene to produce
GeneComps. ChemComps and GeneComps provide a simple
approach to view chemicals and genes that share interaction profiles.
ChemComps especially provide a novel way to classify and organize
chemicals based upon biological effects, which can be considered a
molecular signature or footprint. Every curated chemical in CTD now
includes a ChemComps data tab that lists the top 20 comparable
chemicals based upon their ranked similarity index derived from their
interaction profile. For example, the chemical bisphenol A (a plastic
additive) has curated interactions to 473 genes in CTD. ChemComps
lists comparable chemicals that share the most number of interactions
with those 473 genes to produce a ranked list that includes
polychlorinated biphenyls, genistein, and estradiol (),
suggesting that bisphenol A shares many of the networks common to
these three chemicals. Similarly, GeneComps are displayed on curated
gene pages and lists the genes that share a chemical profile.

ChemComps and GeneComps are datasets that allow researchers to
view and cluster chemicals and genes with similar biological activities.
This new metric at CTD provides researchers with additional
predictive information that will help construct novel, testable
hypotheses about chemical-gene-disease pathways.

Future development
Currently, the similarity indices used to generate GeneComps and
ChemComps are derived exclusively by looking for either a “yes” or
“no” binary interaction relationship between a gene and chemical
(). However, CTD biocurators capture many details about
the interactions between these two types of molecules, such as
“chemical Y decreases the phosphorylation of protein B” or “protein C
results in chemical resistance to chemical Z”, etc. [,]. These
specific details might be leveraged to derive more qualitative
similarity indices, such as finding comparable chemicals that increase
vs. decrease the phosphorylation of a protein, or increase vs. decrease
the methylation of a gene's promoter.

This work was supported by the National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences [R01ES015065 to APD, CGM, CAS, MCR, TCW and
CJM; and P42ES007373 to THH] and the Idea Network of Biomedical
Research Excellence program of the National Center for Research
Resources [RR-016463 to CJM] of the National Institutes of Health.

Citation:Davis et al, Bioinformation 4(4): 173-174 (2009)

A contingency table of chemical-gene interactions computes the similarity indices (a) to rank comparable chemicals for a user's
molecule of interest, such as bisphenol A, which are listed under the ChemComps data tab in CTD (b).

