Background
Endophytic fungi represents a group of diverse fungal lineages
that live invisibly and symptomless within their host for at least
part of their life time []. They have been isolated from almost
all major groups of plant kingdom from varied ecosystems.
They exhibit symbiogenic and mutualistic interactions 
[] with
the host thereby conferring ecological advantages and
protection against pathogens and herbivores [,
]. Their
potential to produce novel metabolites invites for rationale
screening [,
,
] of this group although their apparent
diversity remains relatively less explored. Developing rapid
methods of identification and classification is vital to tap this
overwhelmingly diverse group []. Inadequacies in
conventional morphotyping based fungal systematics owing to
the intricate life styles and multiple origins of the discerning
morphological characters had been resolved with the molecular
identification and availability of easy to use phylogeny
computational suites. Such a molecular phylogenetics based
approach had strengthened our understanding of fungal
evolution and systematics []; spurred up proposal for a single
identity to an organism with anamorphic and telomorphic
stages; uprooted and regrouped many synthetic taxa to erect
evolutionarily supported taxon.

Internal transcribed region (ITS) rDNA has been the widely
accepted standard molecular marker [,
] for fungal
barcoding and features in many scientific literatures of the last
two decades than the multilocus approach involving multiple
markers such as Cytochrome oxidase c (cox), Tublin (tub),
Translation elongation factor 1 subunit alpha (EF1a=tef1) and
rpb2 [,
]. The internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region
conventionally includes the entire ITS1, 5.8S gene and ITS2
portion of the nuclear rDNA cistron (). ITS based
phylogenetic reconstructions provide more clarification at both
genus and species level than other gene markers, also it
corroborates with the relationship of organism as obtained from
mating studies []. 
ITS2 a fast evolving sub-region (&lt;200bp) of
internal transcribed spacer; touted as the double edged tool 
[]
in phylogenetic analysis, has garnered much more attraction
[]. 
Incorporation of secondary structure data of this region
significantly enhances the reliability of sequence alignments,
stability of phylogenetic trees and provides finer resolution at
both lower and higher taxa levels [,
,
]. Phylogenetically
useful information obtained from ITS2 secondary structure
appears highly conserved in pan-eukaryotes []. Distinct
hallmarks of ITS2 core secondary structure comprises: (1) four
helices with (2) helix III as the longest and (3) containing an
UGGU motif 5׳ to the apex (deviations like UGGGU, UGG, or
GGU have been described) as well as (4) a U-U mismatch in the
second helix. Compensatory base changes (CBCs) were
mutations observed at both the nucleotides of a paired site in
the helical segments while the pairing itself is maintained. CBCs
in the internal transcribed spacer 2 region (ITS2) of the nuclear
rRNA cistron have been suggested as a possible marker for
distinguishing species. They can be a sufficient but not a
necessary criterion to differentiate between distinct species and
the result of a CBC analysis may be used to estimate the
minimal number of different species present in a multiple
alignment [].

In the present study, endophytes from 3 medicinal plants - Aegle
marmelos, Coccinia indica and Moringa oleifera were studied.
These three medicinal plants are commonly found in south
India. In addition to the well documented knowledge about
their utility in traditional medicine and culinary uses, recently
novel metabolites of higher therapeutic [,
] and
nutraceutical values were being reported [,
,
]. This study
reports the diversity and phylogenetic relationship of
endophytes from three medicinal plants.

Methodology
Collection of Samples:
Plant samples of A. marmelos, C. indica and M. oleifera were
collected from Chennai, Madurai and Courtallam (Kutralam) of
Tamil Nadu, India (). Samples were sealed and
transported immediately to laboratory; asymptomatic leaves
were separately processed within 24 hrs of collection for
endophytic fungi isolation [,
].

Isolation and identification of endophytic fungi from three different medicinal plants:
Phylloplane fungal propagules adhering to the surface of the
leaves were removed by surface sterilization using the modified
method reported []: the leaves were washed with running tap
water, sterilized with Ethanol (75% V/V) for 1 min and Sodium
Hypochlorite (2.5% V/V) for 5 min, then rinsed in sterile water
for three times and cut into 1 cm long segments. Plant segments
were then transferred to Potato Dextrose Agar (PDA) plates
supplemented with Ampicillin (200µg / ml) and Streptomycin
(200µg /ml) emerging isolates were sub-cultured on PDA
containing plates and incubated at 25°C for further studies 
[].

DNA extraction, amplification of ITS region and sequencing:
Genomic DNA was extracted from the endophytic fungus using
a modified CTAB method [].The partial nucleotide internal
transcribed spacer (ITS) region was amplified from the genomic
DNA using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) by using the
ITS1 forward primer (5׳ TCC-GTA-GGT-GAA-CCT-GCG-G 3׳)
and ITS4 reverse primers (5׳TCC-TCC-GCT-TAT-TGA-TAT-GC
3׳). The PCR amplification was performed in an L196GGD
Model Peltier Thermal Cycler Version-2.0 with a total 25 µl
reaction that comprised of 20 ng of genomic DNA template, 10X
buffer with 25mM MgCl2, 10mM DNTP׳s, 2U of Taq DNA
polymerase and 10 pmol of each primer (All molecular
chemicals were purchased from Sigma Aldrich). The following
reaction conditions were used: 4 min at 94°C for denaturation,
30 cycles each of 30 seconds at 94°C for denaturation, 1 min at
58.2°C for annealing, 2 min at 72°C for extension followed by
the final extension at 72°C for 7min []. The amplified DNA
fragments were analyzed by 1% agarose gel electrophoresis
with a 100bp ladder purchased from New England Biolabs
(Catalogue No. 3231S) and the amplicons were visualized using
a gel documentation system (Uvitech). A non-template control
was included in each run. PCR products were purified using
mini columns (PCR Preps DNA purification System, Sigma)
according to the manufacturer׳s protocol. Further, the amplified
products were sequenced by Eurofins Private Limited,
Bangalore, India.

ITS2 secondary structure prediction, alignment, phylogenetic analysis:
The ITS2 regions were extracted using fungal ITS extractor
program. In this study, secondary structures of ITS2 were
predicted for 48 query and 28 known isolates (downloaded
from genbank NCBI) using Mfold programme
(http://mfold.rna.albany.edu/?q=mfold/RNA-Folding-Form)
with default conditions (linear RNA sequence, folding
temperature: 37°C, 1M NaCl (no divalent ions) ionic conditions,
5% sub-optimality, upper bound number of the folding: 50,
maximum interior/bulge loop size: 30, maximum asymmetry of
an interior/bulge loop: 30, maximum distance between paired
bases: no limit). The selected secondary structures were
downloaded in Vienna format from Mfold server [,
]. The
consensus structure of each genus was generated using 4SALE
[].

Phylogenetic analysis:
ITS sequences of our isolates and control sequences were used
for phylogenetic analysis (Neighbor-joining method with 1000
bootstrap replication) using MEGA 5.1. ITS2 sequences and
secondary structures were synchronously aligned using 4SALE
V 1.7 and resultant alignment was exported to ProfDistS 
[] for
tree construction.

Results
Isolation of endophytes:
A total of 166 isolates were obtained from the above three
medicinal plants, among them 48 isolates were characterized
based on molecular identification and their ITS sequences were
submitted in Genbank (Genbank ID details were listed in 
 
(see supplementary material)). Phylogenetic tree was
constructed for our isolates and control isolates using MEGA 5.1
software (). Identified isolates belongs to 5 orders
(Glomerales, Pleosporales, Diaporthales, Capnodiales and
Eurotiales) and 6 genera (Colletotrichum/Glomerella,
Diaporthae/Phomopsis, Cochilobolus, Alternaria, Cladosporium,
Emericella) of Ascomycota. Colletotrichum/Glomerella genera
showed maximum diversity (52%), while Emericella, Cochliobolus
and Cladosporium showed minimum diversity (2.0%). Other
genera such as Alternaria showed 19% and Diaporthe/Phomopsis
had 23% diversity respectively (). C. gloeosporioides and
G. cingulata, a telomorph of the former were commonly found in
the leaves of all three medicinal plants. C. kusanoi and E.
nidulans were present only in C. indica while C. oxysporum was
found only from the leaves of M. oleifera. Distribution of other
isolates was represented in  (see supplementary
material).

ITS2 secondary structure:
The results of the ITS2 extraction for 76 sequences had been
summarised in  &amp; 
 (see supplementary material). ITS2
sequences varied from 157 to 167 base pairs and GC content
48.73 – 68.86%. Further they were used to model a consensus
structure for each of the respective genera (). In
Colletotrichum/Glomerella genus, secondary structures had been
modelled for 44 sequences whose minimum free energy (MFE)
was -69.51±3.84 (mean ± standard deviation (SD). Similarly,
secondary structure predicted for 17 sequences of
Diaporthae/Phomopsis had -79.85±3.35 MFE, 13 sequences of
Alternaria had -65.3±0.0 MFE and 2 sequences each of
Cladosporium, Cochilobolus, Emericella possessed -70.58±1.0, -
66.46±0.0 and -105.38±0.0 MFE respectively.

The putative secondary structures of all isolates from the 6
genera and 4 orders could be characterized into 2 patterns:
pattern I, the benchmark 4-domain model; pattern II, a 3-
domain model. The 20 bp of the 5.8S and 28S rDNA that was
present flanking to the 5׳-end and 3׳-end of the ITS2 apparently
forms canonical bonds with each other. Consensus structure of
genus Colletotrichum/Glomerella and Emericella were of 4 helices
while three helixes were observed in genus Diaporthe/Phomopsis,
Alternaria, Cladosporium and Cochilobolus. Third helix being the
longest-extremely conserved region in all genuses studied
where as helix I show variation among different taxa; helix IV is
not always occurs. Colletotrichum/glomerella and
Diaporthe/Phomopsis isolates had CBCs whereas in Alternaria
none could be detected. Hemi - CBCs. were observed in loop I,
II, III of all genera studied. Loop I and II has single hemi-CBCs
(G-U) in all observed genera except in GRMP-13 and 48 of
Diaporthe genus; While in loop III, in addition to G-U hemi-CBC
(2-5) other hemi-CBCs (A-C and C-A) were observed Table 4
(Available with authors). To the overall structure we observed a
conserved motif like an UGGC sequence preceding the apex of
the third helix in all class involved in this study. Further the
UGGUUU motif was observed in the loop III of order
Capnodiales, Glomerales and Pleosporales, whereas AGGA and
CGGA motif was only observed in Diaporthales and
Glomerales. Likewise CGGC motif was present in Capnodiales,
Eurotiales and Pleosporales.

Phylogenetic reconstruction:
Phylogenetic tree was constructed based on ITS2 sequencestructure
using our isolates and control sequences ()
have yielded well resolved clades with higher bootstrap
support. Monophyletic clades formed were supported with a
bootstrap value &gt;50% were represented at their respective
nodes ().

Discussion
A surge in the molecular phylogeny supported research has
greatly illuminated the fungal systematics the fungal systematic,
ecological and diversity studies as robust computational
algorithms with high statistical support and advancements in
sequencing technology continue to evolve. ITS2 had been
suggested as a standard marker for fungi and integrating ITS2
based phylogenetic analysis with the morphological features of
their primary sequences has been the recent trend, which has
significantly enhanced the resolution and stability of the clades
[,
,
,
]. ITS2 secondary structure of the sequences
analysed in our study were modelled with optimum and sub optimal
free energy in RNAfold program from MFOLD server
at default folding conditions []. We have employed this
approach due to its wide spread use especially in modelling
ITS2 secondary structure.

Structures sharing similarities (3-4 helixes) to pan-eukaryotic
ITS2 model were chosen from the predicted set of suboptimal
structures. On further evaluation of the chosen structures,
several conserved motifs were observed. Similar versions of a
conserved UGGU motif, preceding the apex of the III helix were
observed in our ITS2 structures. A UGGC motif in the 5׳ side to
the apex of the III helix was highly conserved across the
investigated genera barring Cochilobolus and Emericella.
Variations in this conserved motif were common among fungi
[,
,
,
] while their occurrence at similar position has
been maintained. Another conserved UGGUUU motif was
observed in III helix of all genera except in Diaporthe genus.
Conserved pyrimidine – pyrimidine bulge in the second helix
had been reported to occur in most fungi [] while NS1, an
environmental sequence of fungal origin had been reported to
lack this motif [].

In our study, Alternaria and Colletotrichum genera possessed
Pyr-Pyr motif while the others lacked. Also the single stranded
region connecting the II and III helices appeared to be
conserved among each genus [,
,
,
]. Sequence –
structure alignment in 4SALE program [,
] that allows
synchronous editing and visualization was further analysed for
the presence of CBCs. Diaporthe and Colletotrichum isolates
possessed CBCs in the basal regions of II helix. Occurrence of
even one CBC in ITS2 region has been regarded as a significant
evolutionary diversification event that distinguishes two closely
related organisms. He vividly demonstrated CBC as a classifier
with 93.11% reliability score in distinguishing species albeit the
fact a lack of CBCs is not an indicator of two organisms
belonging to the same species [].

A profile neighbour joining tree construct based on our
sequence-structure alignment resulted in well separated clades.
All the investigated isolates belonged to 5 orders and 6 genera
of Ascomycota. Distinct clades in Diaporthe and Colletotrichum
genera were formed based on the presence of CBCs. Several
sub-clades with less bootstrap value were also formed within
Diaporthe and Colletotrichum genera that were not supported by
CBCs. At species level, several incongruences were observed
mainly due to the conventional practices of naming nucleotide
sequences. Similar anomalies had been reported earlier 
[,
,
] 
and this mandates revisiting the erroneous Genbank entries
and naming after the maximum identical Genbank entries with
minimum E-value. Overall resolution of our phylotree at genera
level had a bootstrap support &gt;50%. The consensus tree
depicted Diaporthales closest to the root and all other genera
examined in this studied have to be derived. Glomerales, the
other Sorodoriomycetes order studied and Eurotiales of
Eurotiomycetes formed sister clades with Dothidiomycetes
clade that hosted 2 pleosporales genus (Alternaria and
Cochilobolus) and Cladosporium of Capnodiales in subclades, but
contradicted with the multigene based phylotree of Ascomycota
[]. 
The foremost reason for this variation may be due to the
random mutation (insertion and deletion) which happens
rapidly during the evolution and it depends upon mistakes
associated in DNA replication.

Conclusion
The present result provides novel support from immense
analysis of ITS2 sequences and CBC estimation for different
endophyte complex. CBC can be used as primary molecular
indicator to confirm no genetic exchange between two
populations is happened which widens the identification and
classification of endophytic species further. The proposed ITS2
based phylogenetics with the fungal isolates from our own
study (GRMP) with the reference sequences (ex-types) has
clearly distinguish the isolates with greater precision than any
other existing methods. This is the first report from India on
ITS2 sequence-structure analysis of endophytic fungi from the
medicinal plants of A. marmelos, C. indica and M. oleifera.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors (Dr. M. Pandi and K. Gokul Raj) thank University
Grants Commission (UGC) F.No.39-207/2010 (SR), Delhi for
financial support and Madurai Kamaraj University Madurai,
Tamil Nadu, India for providing the laboratory facilities.

Citation:GokulRaj et al, Bioinformation 10(6): 320-328 (2014)

ITS regions, flanked and interspersed by ribosomal
unit coding sequence. Approximate ITS2 region has shown as
line (340-500bp).

Plant photo of A) A. marmelos; B) C. indica; C) M. oleifera; D) Sample collection sites of three different medicinal plants
with their corresponding latitude and longitudes.

Phylogenetic tree inferred using Neighbor-Joining
method for query (organism name with GRMPs) and control
ITS sequence (organism written in bold and indicated by dark
lines).

Diversity percentage of different genus of endophytes
isolated in this study.

Consensus ITS2 secondary structure of endophytes
genera observed in this study. Colletotrichum/Glomerella and
Emericella shared the four helix loop regions, as helices II and III
are recognizable. Alternaria, Cladosporium, Diaporthe/ Phomopsis
and Cochilobolus possessed three helixes and third helix is the
longest in all genuses.

Molecular phylogenetic analysis of query (organism
name with GRMPs) and control ITS2 sequence (organism
writeen in bold and indicated by dark lines) by neighbour
joining method.

