Background
microRNAs (miRNAs) are short protein non-coding RNAs 
[].
They participate in translation repression []. Previously,
miRNA binding sites were predicted only at the 3'UTR [], but
recently it is known that these sites are also located at the 5׳-
untranslated regions (5׳UTRs) [] and coding sequences (CDSs)
of mRNAs []. Therefore, it is of interest to identify miRNA
encoded oligo-peptides that are conserved across evolutionary
distance. This was manually studied in previous report and
was time consuming []. Hence, it is of interest to develop
automated computer scripts for easy and robust analysis of
such data. Thus, we describe TmiRUSite and TmiROSite
scripts for the robust and fast extraction of nucleotide
sequences for miRNA binding sites with their encoded amino
acid residue sequences.

Methodology
Software development:
Scripts described in this article are programmed using Python
and starts up through terminal. TmiRUSite and TmiROSite
scripts allow to search for binding sites in “scheme.mres” file
of the miRTarget program. There are eight stages ()
that describe whole procedure of work with the scripts. mRNA
sequence with binding site and its encoded for oligopeptide in
open reading frame (ORF) can be defined by TmiROSite. The
script treat the binding sites located in CDS and TmiRUSite
script work with sites of untranslated regions. The
oligopeptides contain five amino acids before binding site that
is equivalent to 15 nucleotide (sixth stage of ) and
some amino acids after them. It translate 42 nucleotides after
start position of binding site. The quantity of additional
nucleotides can be increased if necessary.

Input:
The complete nucleotide sequences of precursor mRNAs (premRNAs)
of human genes were downloaded from GenBank at
NCBI [] and the human mature miRNAs were extracted from
the miRBase database []. The precursor were mRNAs
shortened into the mature mRNA sequences by
Lextractor_002_0020E3 script []. This script creates a file with
the mRNA sequence and indicates the boundaries between the
5'UTR, CDS, and 3'UTR according to the information available
in GenBank. This file on the mRNA sequence was used
together with a file of the miRNA sequences to identify
miRNA binding sites using the miRTarget program []. These
data are shown at first stage of ().

Output features:
The TmiROSite script (Translation of miRNA sites located in
ORF) extracts oligopeptides encoded by nucleotide sequences
of miRNA binding sites disposed in the CDS of mRNAs. It
should be noted that three possible oligo-peptides are encoded
by the same binding site in three reading frames.

Data Processing:
This script processes two types of files: sequences of mRNAs in
the file with the gene extension and schemes of binding sites
received using the miRTarget program in files with the mres
extension which contain the following data: the interaction
schemes between miRNAs and mRNAs; the mRNA part where
the site is located; beginning of a binding site; the ratio ΔG;
relation ΔG/ΔGm.

Results
The parameters used and the nucleotide sequence of binding
sites are added to the result.txt file. The TmiRUSite script
(Translation of miRNA sites located in untranslated regions)
allows to find the oligonucleotide sequences containing
binding sites with miRNA and above-mentioned
characteristics of miRNA binding sites in table format 
().

Caveat &amp; future development
It should be noted that additional nucleotide related
information is required for the analysis of binding site
conservation among evolutionary distance at yet another
relatively nearby sites. It is also possible to study variability of
sites for the same miRNA located in different parts of mRNAs.
It is further possible to analyse conservation of amino acid
residue sequence at the binding site localized in proteins. This
process was traditionally done manually consuming huge
processing time. The TmiROSite and TmiRUSite scripts
described here are fast, simple and robust for such analysis.
The accuracy of scripts is planned for improvement in future
with the possible addition of binding site specific novel
features.

Citation:Berillo et al, Bioinformation 10(7): 472-473 (2014)

The scheme of TmiROSite and TmiRUSite scripts.
Note: NCBI and miRBase are databases; Lextractor and
miRTarget are programs; “pre-mRNA.gbk”, “miRNA.mir”,
“Gene.gene”, “Scheme.mres” and “result.txt” are created files.
1 − preparation of necessary files; 2 − choice of TmiRUSite or
TmiROSite; 3 − selection of schemes with CDS for TmiROSite,
but schemes with 5'UTR and 3'UTR for TmiRUSite; 4 − analysis
the text after “CDS” for TmiROSite and “UTR” for TmiRUSite;
5 − definition of ORF (check of multiplicity to three); 6 − NNN
is start nucleotide position of fragment with binding site; 7 −
FFF is end nucleotide position of fragment; 4, 5 and 8 are
specific stages for TmiROSite.

