Background
Azo dyes which represent about one-half of all dyes in common
use are widely used by the textile, leather, cosmetics, food
coloring and paper production industries. They are considered
recalcitrant xenobiotic compounds due to the presence of a
nitrogen double bond (­N=N­) bond and other groups (i.e.
sulfonic group) that are not easily biodegraded. The annual
world production of azodyes is estimated to be around one
million tons [] .During the dyeing process, approximately 10-
15% of the used dye is released into wastewater Treatment of
dye-contaminated wastewater discharged from the textile and
other dye-stuff industries is necessary to prevent contamination
of soil and surface and ground water. Biological methods are
generally considered eco friendly as they can lead to
mineralization of organic pollutants effectively at very low cost
[]. Azodyes are recalcitrant to biodegradation due to their
complex structures and xenobiotic nature, and typically require
an anaerobic–aerobic process to achieve complete degradation.
Bioremediation of azo dyes in textile waste effluents by bacteria
or fungi is a very promising area of study because of the
relatively low expense involved.Bioremediation includes
biodegradation and biotransformation, with a goal to
mineralize hazardous contaminants in the environment. This is
fulfilled by the azodye degrading enzymes like
laccases,azoreductases ,lignin peroxidases and some more
which are vastly available in the variety of micro organisms
like fungi, algae, bacteria. Bioaugmentation of the wastewater
with highly effective strains provides a much more reliable
process in which the process manager can use bacterial strains
that target particular dye chemicals and metabolites to achieve
complete mineralization. The most effective inoculants are able
to degrade dyes over a broad concentration range,tolerate a
range of environmental conditions of temperature, pH, and
salinity. Laccases are usually known as benzenediol: oxygen
oxidoreductase. They belong to the class of blue oxidases.Their
molecular mass ranges from 60 to 85 kDa [].Laccases are
involved in the biodegradation of lignins, which constitute the
main noncarbohydrate component in wood and are among the
most abundant groups of biopolymers in the biosphere. A great
number of white-rot fungi have been reported to produce the
lignin-degrading enzymes laccase, lignin peroxidases, and
manganese peroxidases, or at least one of these enzymes [].
Azoreductase catalyzes the reductive cleavage of azo linkages
in benzidine based dyes and other compounds containing an
azo bond to produce aromatic amines.many bacterial strains
possess many unspecific cytoplasmic enzymes which act as
azoreductases. Azo reductases have been detected in liver cells
and several anaerobic bacteria. It is studied that when azodye is
incubated in oxygen free buffer with NADH as a source of
reduction equivalents,a slow decolorization is noted Lignin
peroxidase is a classical hemeprotein peroxidase containing
heme in the active site with molecular weight between 38 and
47 KDa []. Due to its high redox potential, LiP is able to
directly oxidize non-phenolic lignin units. A characteristic of
LiP, which is also shared by non-ligninolytic peroxidases, is its
relative unspecificity for substrates such as phenolic
compounds and dyes.

Methodology
Data collection &amp; curation
A literature search was done using PubMed and the journals
like ScienceDirect [], Springerlink 
[]. From that all the
available information is retrieved till date. Search terms
included azo dye degrading enzymes Laccase, Lignin
peroxidase and Azoreductase. The data has also been collected
form the database Brenda (an enzyme database). Nucleotide
sequences are collected from NCBI [] database and PDB ids are
retrived from the Protein Data Bank []. All the information has
been curated manually.

Database structure
The entries of our ‘BiodEnz’ database are generated from a text
mining of hundreds of published articles. Our current database
contains 234 entries of the micro organisms like bacteria, fungi
and algae and their strains containing the azo dye degrading
enzymes laccases, lignin peroxidases and azoreductases. The
data base has separate sections for each enzyme. The
information included the organism or strain in which the
particular enzyme is available, concentration of dye the enzyme
decolorizes, name of azodyes that are degraded or decolorized,
percentage of decolorization ,time taken by the organism to
decolorize, molecular weight of the particular enzyme,
optimum temperature and pH for that enzyme , enzyme
specificity, electron donors, inhibitors, substrates, sequences ,
accession number of the organism is given from NCBI, and
PDB ID from PDB.

Development &amp; website structure
The ‘BiodEnz’ database is developed using MySQL 
[] a
relational database management system that serves as the
backend for storing data. APACHE 2.2 (Apache HTTP Server) is
used as the web server and PHP5 (Hypertext preprocessor) 
[]
a widely used scripting language driven by Zend engine is used
as the web interface. For the process of database creation in the
PHP admin, the MySQL client version: 5.0.24a is used. The
localhost of Server version: 5.0.24a, Protocol version: 10, Server:
localhost via TCP/IP is used for the database creation. The
local host for the process is php Myadmin of 2.9.0 as shown in
the ().

Utility
BiodEnz database contains the detailed information about all
the micro organisms ( &amp; their strains) such as bacteria, fungi
and algae that contain the azo dye degrading enzymes ,and also
the properties of the lacasses, azoreductases, and lignin
peroxidases in those organisms like specificity of the enzymes,
molecular weight, percentage of decolorization, enzyme
activity, the optimum temperature and pH required for the
enzyme to degrade the dyes. Our current database includes 89
entries of micro organisms for laccases, 88 entries of micro
organisms for azoreductases and 57 entries of micro organisms
for lignin peroxidases from various literatures and journals
from1990 to 2010. An activated sludge with culture of selected
microbial strains is effective to degrade textile dyes in water. So
our database provides a valuable information to perform
bioaugmentation which is a biological cost effective method to
convert the highly toxic and colourful dyes to
colourless,nontoxic substances, so that eco reserves are
preserved. The sequences of the enzymes, Accession numbers,
pdb ids are also included for further research about azodyes.

Further development
The current database contains all the data about the three
enzymes azoreductases, lignin peroxidase and laccases. In
future we plan to add data about other azodye degrading
enzymes and to update and improve the information from time
to time from the sources.

Citation:Sugumar &amp; Thangam, Bioinformation 8(1):040- 042 (2012)

steps followed for creating database

