Background
Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia (CML) develops when a
single, hematopoietic stem cell acquires a Philadelphia (Ph)
chromosome carrying the BCR-ABL fusion oncogene which
gives its progeny an advantage for proliferation over normal
RBCs and allows the Ph-positive clone gradually to displace
normal RBCs during hematopoiesis [,
,
,
]. The abnormal
Ph chromosome is produced by the translocation between
chromosome 9 and 22 ().The major consequence of
Philadelphia translocation is the fusion of the ABL gene on
chromosome 9 with the BCR gene on chromosome 22 []. The
BCR-ABL fusion oncogene encodes new fusion proteins of 190,
210 and 230 kDa molecular weight [,
]. The p210BCR-ABL
isoforms have an increased level of tyrosine kinase activity,
which is important for the development of the disease []. The
production of fusion proteins increases the diversity of proteinprotein
binding domains associated with tyrosine kinase
activity.

The normal product of the BCR gene is a 160 kDa (p160BCR)
cytosolic phosphoprotein whose physiologic role is not clearly
defined. It has been shown to form cytoplasmic complexes with
p210BCR-ABL in Ph-positive CML cells, as well as with a 53 kDa
protein of unknown function in both Ph-positive and Phnegative
cell lines [,
]. The sequences encoded by the first
exon of BCR gene are responsible for the p160BCR
serine/threonine kinase activity []. The N-terminus of
p160BCR comprises a coiled–coil domain that allows dimer
formation in vivo. At the center, are DBL-like 
[] and
Pleckstrin-homology [] domains that stimulate the exchange
of guanidine triphosphate (GTP) for guanidine diphosphate
(GDP) and activate transcription factors such as NF-kB. The Cterminus
of p160BCR contains GTPase activity for Rac. In
addition, p160BCR can be phosphorylated at several tyrosine
residues, such as Tyrosine 177, which binds Grb-2, an adapter
protein involved in the activation of the Ras pathway.

The normal product of the ABL gene is a 145-kDa protein
(p145ABL) []. It is a protein tyrosine kinase that is involved in
cell differentiation, cell division, cell adhesion, and stress
response. The activity of p145ABL is regulated by its SH3
domain, and deletion of the SH3 domain turns it into an
oncoprotein. The Philadelphia translocation results in the headto-
tail fusion of p145ABL to p160BCR [].

The two p210 BCR-ABL onco-protein isoforms, b2a2 and b3a2
(), formed by the head-to-tail fusion of p160BCR and
p145ABL proteins, differ by a 25 amino acid insertion coded by
the b3 exon and a Glu903Asp substitution between b2a2 and
b3a2. Several studies have examined whether the type of fusion
transcript has any influence on the clinical outcome [,
,
,
,
,
]. However, the data remains controversial. In fact,
several groups did not succeed in demonstrating any such
correlation [,
,
]. A study has shown a correlation between
the b3a2 transcript and a higher platelet count at diagnosis in a
group of CML patients [].

Recently, the crystal structure of the oligomerization domain at
the N-terminus of both b2a2 and b3a2 (residues 1–72) has been
published. The investigators have reported a novel mode of
oligomer formation which involves dimerization of two
monomers by swapping of N-terminus helices and by
formation of an antiparallel coiled coil between C-terminus
helices. The two dimers then stack onto each other to form a
tetramer []. In the present study, we performed a comparison
of the structural elements of p210BCR-ABL protein isoforms, b2a2
and b3a2. For this purpose, Psipred and ExPASy servers were
employed [,
].

Methodology
The amino acid sequences of the p210BCR-ABL protein isoforms,
b2a2 and b3a2, were subjected to computer predictive analysis
in order to reveal possible differences in terms of secondary
structure and tertiary structure, Different tools and database
were used for molecular modeling of these proteins such as
GenBank-NCBI, Protein Data Bank, Psipred [] and ExPASy
servers []. The sequence of the proteins was retrieved in
FASTA format from NCBI database for homology modeling.
The procedure of homology modeling procedure comprised
three sequential steps: (i) template selection, (ii) target template
alignment, and (iii) model building. The secondary structures
of both b2a2 and b3a2 were predicted using Psipred server. The
tertiary structures were predicted using the ExPASy server.

Results
The use of Psipred server [] provided the secondary structure
elements of both b2a2 and b3a2 isoforms. The amino acid
sequence of b2a2 has 2006 residues and b3a2 has 2031 residues.
They differ by 26 amino acids. There is an amino acid
substitution (Glu903Asp) and a 25 amino acid insertion just
before Ala 904 in the sequence of b3a2. The secondary structure
of b2a2 comprises 48 α-helices (α1 to α48) and 37 β-strands (β1
to β37). The b3a2 isoform also contains similar secondary
structure elements along with an additional α-helix (α') and
two β-strands (β' and β"). A short β-strand, β33 is also missing
in b3a2 (, supplementary material). In total, there
are differences in five α-helices and nine β-strands of the two
proteins which relates to differences in the SH3, SH2, SH1 and
DNA-binding domains  (see supplementary material).
The tertiary structures of the two proteins were obtained via
the ExPASy server []. The tertiary structures show that both
the proteins possess a-helical and β-sheet domains (). 
The tertiary structure of b3a2 protein reveals that it has
greater amount of α-helical content.

Discussion
The oncogenic potential of p210BCR-ABL protein isoforms is due
to the fact that the normally regulated tyrosine kinase activity
of the ABL protein (p145ABL) becomes unregulated in both b2a2
and b3a2 isoforms. ABL proteins are non-receptor tyrosine
kinases that have important roles in signal transduction and the
regulation of cell growth []. At the N-terminus, there are
three SRC homology domains (SH3, SH2 and SH1). SH2 and SH3
domains regulate the tyrosine kinase function of ABL protein
and SH1 domain contains the tyrosine kinase activity of ABL
protein. SH3 has a negative regulatory effect on the tyrosine
kinase function. Deletion of SH3 or mutation in SH3 facilitates
tyrosine kinase activity of ABL protein [,
,
]. Mutations in
SH2 decrease phospho-tyrosine binding activity and reduce
transforming capacities of ABL protein []. The C-terminus of
ABL protein contains a DNA-binding domain, nuclear
localization signals, and a binding site for actin [] 
().

The structure of the oligomerization domain present at the Nterminus
of both the p210BCR-ABL protein isoforms (b2a2 and
b3a2) has been reported earlier []. It consists of a short Nterminal
helix (α1), a flexible loop and a long C-terminal helix
(α2). The two a-helices, together form an N-shaped structure,
with the loop allowing the two helices to assume a parallel
orientation. The monomeric domains associate into a dimer
through the formation of an antiparallel coiled coil between the
α2 helices and domain swapping of two α1 helices, where one α1
helix swings back and packs against the α2 helix from the
second monomer. The two dimers then associate into a
tetramer []. The oligomerization domain promotes clustering
of a C-terminal actin-binding domain that cross-links actin
filaments [,
]. The two p210BCR-ABL protein isoforms can
induce a redistribution of F-actin from the cortical cytoskeleton
into aggregates []. Oligomerization also plays a role in the
activation of the p210BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase activity []. A
comparison of the secondary structure elements of both b2a2
and b3a2 with the structural elements determined by X-ray
crystallography revealed that both similarities and differences.
The length of α1 and α2 are longer in the crystal structure. Also,
the position of a2 is shifted in the crystal structure. An
additional β-strand (β1) is present in the secondary structural
elements obtained via Psipred.

The experimental data shows that p210BCR-ABL protein isoforms,
b2a2 and b3a2, exhibit differences in their secondary structure
elements  (see supplementary material). A twenty five
amino acid insertion just before Ala 904 in the sequence of b3a2
shifts some of the secondary structure elements and also
produces some additional ones  (see
supplementary material). Both p210BCR-ABL proteins can cause
pleiotropic effects on many signal transduction pathways that
can affect cell survival, disease progression, and genomic
stability. The signals controlled by p210BCR-ABL proteins are
important for normal hematopoiesis. An earlier paper using the
GOR, NnPredict and PHD methods to predict the structural
elements of b2a2 and b3a2 did not find any difference between
the two full-length protein types. However, a discrepancy was
observed for the 25 amino acids coded by the b3 exon. In one
case, it was seen as completely solvent accessible loop region
(PHD method) whilst in the other cases (GOR and NnPredict
methods) it comprised a short β-strand and a short a-helix 
[].

Conclusion
The p210BCR-ABL protein isoforms, b2a2 and b3a2 show
differences in their secondary structure elements mainly due to
the insertion of a 25 amino acid segment coded by the b3 exon
in b3a2. In total, structural differences are found between the
two proteins in five α-helices (α25, α', α26, α27 and α29) and nine
β-strands (β12, β13, β15, β', β17, β30, β", β34 and β35). These
differing structural elements are present in the SH3, SH2, SH1
and DNA-binding domains which can result in different roles
played by the two isoforms in mediating signal transduction
during the course of Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Hai et al, Bioinformation 10(3): 108-114 (2014)

a) Shown is the Philadelphia chromosome (also called
derivative 22) produced by reciprocal translocation []; b)
Schematic showing the different lengths of the two p210 BCRABL
protein isoforms (b2a2 and b3a2) expressed by the
Philadelphia chromosome.

(a, b) Tertiary structures of b2a2 and b3a2 proteins
obtained via the ExPASy server. The structures show that both
the proteins possess α-helical and β-sheet domains. The b3a2
protein shows a greater amount of α-helical structure.

The domain organization of p210BCR-ABL proteins. The
part that is derived from BCR gene is shown in green and the
other half that is derived from ABL gene is shown in purple. The
structural differences found in the SH3, SH2, SH1 and DNAbinding
domains of p210BCR-ABL are indicated by arrows. Also
shown in the figure are oligomerization domain (D/D), actinbinding
domain and the positions of Tyr 177 and Tyr 412 [].

