Background
The three-dimensional structure of a protein molecule is
determined by its amino acid sequence, which is known to
display many distinctive patterns often repeating itself. In
protein sequences, these repeats can be catalogued based on
their orientation, such as – Direct and inverted repeats []; that
are known to play important roles in protein structure and
function [,
,
]. Palindromic sequence (a special type of
inverted repeats with no spacer sequence) is a symmetric set of
characters that looks the same when read from two directions
(forward and backward). Palindromes in DNA and RNA are
mostly linked with restriction enzyme recognition sites [],
termination of RNA polymerase III [] and in the formation of
hairpin loops. While palindromes in proteins are observed in
different classes of proteins like histones, prion proteins [,
,
], 
DNA binding proteins [,
,
], Rhodopsin family [],
metal binding proteins [], sugar metabolizing proteins 
[]
and receptors [] carrying out complex functions. However,
the precise function of these palindromic sequences has not yet
been fully understood. Palindromic sequences in proteins were
identified two decades ago and since then, it has been shown
that they are mainly seen in low complexity regions and
display a high tendency to form helices []. Apart from this,
not much information is available on these palindromes.
Secondly, SAARs (Single Amino Acid Repeats) also known as
“Homopeptides” (a special type of direct repeats with no
spacer sequence) are repeats that are formed by a single amino
acid being repeated in tandem and are believed to arise due to
the sequential expansion of short codons in the genome. These
repeats have also often associated with regulatory network of
epigenesis, replication, transcription and evolution [,
]. In
addition, they are linked to the development and activity of a
peripheral nervous system [] and with diseases like
Huntington disease and other nervous system related diseases.
In view of the above, a computing engine, PPS (Palindromes in
Protein Sequences) has been developed to identify palindrome
and SAARs in the protein sequences available in various
databases. To the best knowledge of the authors, there exists no
efficient and robust web engine. Thus, the development of a
computing engine for the identification of these sequences will
enable biologists and bioinformaticians better to understand
palindromes and SAARs present in various protein sequences.

Methodology
Our algorithm [] employs a strategic two step procedure to
extract the palindromes. Firstly, it finds all possible palindrome
(including odd and even length palindromes) and next
efficiently discards all unnecessary sub-palindromes, to avoid
redundancy. PPS is an efficient computing engine that makes
use of the above cited algorithm to identify palindromic
peptide sequences and SAARs. The user can use the computing
engine to identify palindromes in any of the three following
ways: (a) The amino acid sequence of a known protein
sequence can be entered in the text box provided (or); (b) The
FASTA sequence file can be directly uploaded (or); (c) To
analyze all the palindrome and SAAR sequences, an option has
been provided for the users to choose a particular database
from the available sequence databases such as SWISSPROT
[], GDB (In-house Genome database), PIR 
[] and structure
databases like PDB [], 25% and 90% non-redundant databases
[].

It is to be noted that the user can simultaneously perform all the
above three calculations and view the results dynamically. In
addition, the users need to enter a value corresponding to the
“number of residues in the sequences” option and choose either
palindromic sequence or SAARs in the “Show only” option.
Based on the above, the resulting window displays either the
palindromic sequence or the SAARs details and provides
additional options for the users to explore the occurrences of a
palindrome or SAAR in other sequence (PIR, SWISS-PROT and
GDB) and structural databases (Protein Data Bank [PDB]). As
an enhanced feature, the users can also view the threedimensional
structure (in case it is available in the threedimensional
crystal structures deposited in the Protein Data
Bank) of the identified palindrome or SAAR using an
interactive graphics JAVA plug-in Jmol, interfaced to the
proposed computing engine.

Implementation
The proposed computing engine, PPS, has been developed and
optimized using Solaris and is driven by a 2.66 GHz Xeon (R)
processor equipped with 4 GB of Random Access Memory
(RAM). This operating system was chosen for its reliability and
security. The computing engine has been tested vigorously
using all platforms (Windows, Linux, Mac and SGI). In general,
the computations are very fast and the results are displayed in
a rapid time. However, it may vary depending upon the speed
and traffic of the network. The computing engine was coded
using PERL, JavaScript and HTML in order to develop, validate
and design the web pages, respectively. The computing code
used for the identification of the palindromes and SAARs have
been written using C++. The proposed engine is freely available
for all academic users and non-commercial organizations over
the World Wide Web at: http://pranag.physics.iisc.ernet.in/pps/.

Case study
Palindromes in Tumor Suppressor Proteins:
Palindromes are mostly abundant in DNA binding proteins [].
p53 is a DNA-binding, tumor suppressor protein that adopts an
intricate mode of action in the reparation through various
regulatory mechanisms. Mutations in p53 are associated with
human cancers. It also prompts apoptosis when the DNA is
irreparable. PPS is used to investigate the p53 protein (GenBank
accession No. NP_000537; length: 393 amino acids; Organism:
Homo sapiens) for palindromes of length greater than 5. PPS
identifies six palindromes  (see supplementary
material) in 0.13 seconds, one of which (LTIITL) is known to
characterize the DNA binding domain of the protein []. The
spatial conformation of “LTIITL” in the crystal structure of a
p53 tumor suppressor-DNA complex (PDB-id: 1TSR) is
displayed in (). Upon further analysis (results not
shown), it is observed that the palindrome “LTIITL” is a key
part of the p53 DNA-binding domain. PPS can process multiple
sequences, which is a noteworthy and a useful feature for
researchers to study large databases of proteins.

Further Case Studies
Four SAARs (of lengths 6, 12, 6 and 7) are identified (results not
shown), when the amino acid sequence of formin-like protein
(Uniprot accession No. Q9XIE0; length: 929 amino acids;
Organism: Arabidopsis thaliana) is uploaded as the input
sequence. The number of residues is set to be greater than five
residues.  shows the three-dimensional structure
(highlighted) of one of the SAAR's sequences “GGGGGG“
observed in the crystal structure (PDB-id: 2X4M) of the
plasminogen activator PLA from Yersinia pestis.

The amino acid sequence of imidazole nepropionase (Uniprot
accession No. Q8U8Z6; length: 419 amino acids; Organism:
Agrobacterium tumefaciens (strain C58 / ATCC 33970)) is given
as the input sequence and here again the “Number of amino
acid residues in a palindromic sequence” is set to be greater
than five residues. The computing engine identified three
palindromic sequences GTATG, MEFEM and TGAKALAKAGT
of lengths 5, 5 and 11, respectively (results not shown). The
three-dimensional structure (highlighted) of the longest
observed palindrome “TGAKALAKAGT” in the crystal
structure of the imidazolonepropionase from Agrobacterium
tumefaciens (PDB-id: 2GOK) is shown in ().
Interestingly, upon further analysis, it is seen that this fragment
is a part of the amidohydro_3 domain, which is responsible for
the hydrolysis of amide or amine bonds.

Conclusion
Palindromes and SAARs are of momentous importance to
better understand the structure, function and evolution of
proteins. Thus, identifying them will aid biologists and
bioinformaticians to understand their significance. Thus, an
avant-garde internet computing engine, PPS, has been made
available over the World Wide Web to identify palindromes
and SAARs. General comments and suggestions for
improvements are welcome and should be addressed to
Professor K. Sekar at sekar@physics.iisc.ernet.in or
sekar@serc.iisc.ernet.in.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors gratefully acknowledge the facilities offered by the
Supercomputer Education and Research Centre (SERC) and the
Interactive graphics facility. One of the authors (KS) thanks the
Department of Information Technology (DIT) for financial
support in the form of a research grant.

Citation:Ahmed et al, Bioinformation 10(1): 048-051 (2014)

(A) The spatial conformation of “LTIITL” in the crystal structure of a p53 tumor suppressor-DNA complex; (B) The inset
depicts the three-dimensional structure of the one of the SAARs sequences “GGGGGG” (PDB-id: 2X4M); (C) The inset shows the
three-dimensional structure of the longest palindromic sequence “TGAKALAKAGT” (PDB-id: 2GOK).

