Background
The Protein Data Bank [] started to function as the depository
of the crystallographic data, complementing journal publications:
researchers solved the structure of a protein, wrote a
paper on the result, and deposited the data of the solution in
the publicly available PDB. The irregularities of the structure
deposited (such as lacking atomic coordinates, broken chains,
unidentified substructures) are mostly remarked in the cited
publications and also in the remark-fields of the PDB file. The
textual annotations in the scientific publication elsewhere or
in the remark-fields in the very same PDB-file, however,
make the automatic processing of the protein-structures very
difficult. This statement may be a little bit confusing, since
atoms, carrying the HET label are not supposed to be in the
peptide-chain, so those structures that contains HET atoms
other than the oxygen of the water would qualify for being a
complex. Unfortunately, this is not the case. Metal ions, modified
residues (in a surprisingly large number), and small
molecules added in the crystallization all contain heteroatoms,
and they are frequently not considered to be ligands.
With our decomp_pdb program [] protein-ligand complexes
are identified reliably, and the ligands are deposited in separate
files. Missing residues and atoms in chains are handled
properly, that is, even if several atoms are missing from a
chain our algorithm will still not recognize the parts as distinct
chains. Placeholders are inserted into chains for missing
residues/atoms (an example is given in ), denoting
that the objects were not measured crystallographically, but -
according to the more reliable sequence information - they
should be there. This way our algorithm "repairs'' faulty
PDB's, or recognizes that flexible chain sequences are present.
We should remark, that missing atoms are usually a sign of
mobile loop or string in the protein-crystal, since flexible
atoms will not give usable electron density maps. Consequently,
mapping missing atoms this way may help to automatically
identify flexible protein parts. Ligands are identified
without using the HET-atom labels, properly handling modified
residues and small artifacts, due to crystallization protocols.
CONECT records of the ligand-atoms are computed
automatically (these records for the ligands generally are not
present in the PDB file).

Methodology
Our program selects atoms from the PDB entry that are part of
a protein or DNA chain. We do not use the chain-identifier for
this purpose. However, we use SEQRES data and refined
graph-theoretical algorithms described elsewhere []. It selects
the water molecules, and removes them from the set of
possible ligand atoms. Then metal and other small ions are
selected, that will not be considered as ligands. A complete
list of residue names that were considered as ions (so not as
ligands) is given in the file ion_list.txt. All the remaining
atoms will form the set of ligand atoms. Within this set, we
use a graph-theory component detecting algorithm, so a ligand
is defined as a connected component of the graph formed by
the ligand atoms as vertices and the covalent bonds between
the ligand atoms as the edges.

Functionality
The DECOMP tool correctly identifies ligand molecules, even
if they are composed of more than one monomers. For example,
when decomposing PDB entry 10GS with options “Export
ligands”, the file 10gs.pdb.out.lig.3 contains the 3-
monomer GLU-BCS-PG9 molecule correctly ().

Utility
Provide a list of PDB codes in the appropriate box at the web
server and check the desired options. The PDB codes should
be separated either by “spaces” or “new line” characters.
Press the “schedule job” button and the request will be inserted
into a queue. Progress is monitored in the “Log window”.
The result will be a link in the “Log window” to a
tar.gz file. The result file contains one directory for each of
the pdb’s listed. Each of these directories contains an error log
with “.pdb.error” extension, the decomposed pdb file with
“.pdb” extension, and if “Export ligands” or “Export ions”
option was specified, than a separate file is present for each of
the ligands or ions. An error file is presented if there was a
fatal error while processing the PDB file. The result files are
usually viewed by popular PDB viewer tools. A preprocessed,
constantly updated compressed file can be
downloaded with the results when the entire PDB file has be
decomposed. The result files are stored for 3 days, and log
files are stored for 30 days in the server.

The authors acknowledge the partial funding of the following
agencies: NKTH: OMFB-01295/2006 and OM-00219/2007
through Uratim Ltd. and OTKA NK-67867 through Eotvos
University.

Citation:Ordog et al, Bioinformation 3(10): 413-414 (2009)

The DECOMP_PDB output-ligand 10gs.pdb.out.lig.3 contains the 3-monomer GLU-BCS-PG9 molecule correctly, in
one single file, even if it contains three monomer ID’s.

Atoms or residues are frequently missing at the beginning or at the end of polypeptide chains. In this example a missing
residue and six missing atoms are identified at the beginning of chain B of pdb entry 10gs.

