Background
The present day sustainable vector control activities are
primarily dependent on use of chemical insecticides. Because of
this reason, almost all of the mosquito-vectors around the globe
have successfully learned to defend themselves from the
existing insecticides that are being recommended by WHO. A
decade ago, due to lack of genome sequence information from
the disease transmitting mosquito species, it was challenging to
understand the molecular aspects behind the evolution of
insecticide resistance. The genome sequence of Anopheles
gambiae (African malaria mosquito) was first published in 2002
[], 
followed by Aedes aegypti in 2007 [] and very recently Culex
quinquefasciatus [] genome in 2010, has opened-up new
possibilities to look into the insecticide resistance at a molecular
level. Many conclusive reports on the candidate genes behind
the molecular mechanisms of insecticide resistance from
African malaria vector, An. gambiae have been published 
[–];
however, translating these studies for practical application is
still a due. The present Cx. quinquefasciatus genome sequence
further enhanced the capability to understand the molecular
science of insecticide resistance through the comparative
genomic studies. Culex species have acted as a model organism
to study the population genetics and evolution of the insecticide
resistance both in field and laboratory conditions [–]. Many of
the long-term studies on monitoring the role of different
processes that are important for insecticide resistance have been
conducted on Culex species []. Some of important aspects of
Culex species research are; origin of new adaptive mutations
against the insecticide used in the vector control program, and
their interaction with the existing insecticide resistance
mutations, interaction with the environment, cost of a mutation
in the presence and absence of an insecticide, establishment and
migration of the mutations to a wide geographical areas,
pleiotropic effect of a gene mutation on the fitness
characteristics of the mosquito, etc []. The Culex species being
as an urban vector, many of its control efforts are focused on the
usage of organophosphorous group based larvicides. Because of
this the Culex species has been extensively investigated for the
mechanisms behind the OP resistance. The established
insecticide resistance mechanisms for OP compounds includes
both target site mutations in acetylcholinesterase (ace) gene and
over production of the detoxification enzymes, majorly
esterases through gene amplification. The resistance
mechanisms against insecticides in Culex species are similar to
that of other disease causing mosquito-vectors (An. gambiae and
Ae. Aegypti) and are grouped into two major groups; target site
insensitivity and up-regulation of the detoxification enzymes.
The detoxification enzymes consists of hundreds of genes from
three supergene families, namely cytochrome P450s (P450s) or
monoxygenases, glutathione-S-transferases (GSTs), and
carboxyl/cholinesterases (CCEs). A plethora of information is
available on the insecticide resistance in public domains that
confirms the important role of detoxification enzymes (P450,
GST, and CCE) in the evolution of insecticide resistance. These
enzymatic groups possess a capability to virtually detoxify
myriad classes of xenobiotics that are found in nature. In
contrary, the target site mutations contribute resistance against
a particular selected insecticide. Due to continuous vector
control efforts using various strategies by placing the chemical
insecticides at a center stage has created multiple insecticide
selection pressure on the mosquito vectors. This particular
situation has resulted in the appearance of mosquito isolates
that are resistant to more than one insecticide. One such
mosquito species with multiple insecticide resistance
mechanisms is Culex. Nonetheless, this species has shown
multiple resistances to all of the four major classes of
insecticides, namely organochlorines, organophosphates,
carbamates, and pyrethroids, especially in field situations [].
These aspects coupled with the availability of a past history of
chemical control activities and multiple-insecticide resistance
information makes this species special to investigate the
molecular insecticide resistance aspects in-depth. Giving a due
importance to dissect the molecular basis of insecticide
resistance through analysis of the detoxification supergene
families, here, we utilized Cx. quinquefasciatus genome sequence
to in silico fish-out the detoxification enzymes that belong to
three major groups; P450s, GSTs, and CCEs. The aim of the
present study was to investigate the detoxification enzymes
from the Culex whole genome sequence and to classify them
into respective gene families such that the information could be
easily retrieved for further studies on delineation of the
insecticide resistance processes. In addition, the comparative
genomic analysis of Culex detoxification genes with Drosophila,
Aedes and Anopheles was performed. Apart from common
disease vectors (Aedes and Anopheles-model organisms for hostparasite
interaction), the Drosophila was selected for
comparative genomics due to its importance as a model
organism.

Methodology
Utilizing the published sequences of P450s, GSTs, and CCEs
from An. gambiae and D. melanogaster, the whole genome
sequence of Cx. quinquefasciatus (Cx. quinquefasciatus JHB
CpipJ1.2, June 2008 data base) was scanned using the tBLASTn
with default parameters (E-value-10, word size-3, similarity
matrix-Blosum62, Gap penalties-opening: 11 and extension: 1)
as a first step to find out the putatively active detoxification
enzymes. Following which, the special characteristics of each of
the enzyme group, namely cysteine heme-iron ligand signature
i.e. conserved FXXGXXXCXG motif and ~ 500 amino acids (a.
a.) protein length for P450s; SNAIL/TRAIL motif and ~ 200 a. a.
protein length for GSTs; and catalytic triad sequence (Ser-His-
Glu) and ~ 500 a. a. protein sequence length for CCEs, were
applied to preliminarily confirm the status to their candidature.
Following this, each of the putatively identified sequence was
evaluated for having complete protein domains' structure and
absence of multiple domains that are characteristics of a
functional protein. Final list of detoxification enzymes were
tabulated by removing the proteins with incomplete domain
structure (possible pseudogene), and/or with multiple
domains. For this, Conserved Domain (CD) search was
performed against Conserved Domain Database using the
protein sequence as a query. CD-search uses the RPS-BLAST to
scan the pre-calculated PSSM. The result of CD search are
graphical that identify and enlist the domain architecture
present in the given protein sequence (the CD-search can be
performed through NCBI and can be accessed at
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Structure/cdd/cdd.shtml). Any
partial domains in a given protein can be identified through this
procedure.

Further to this, the confirmed enzymes were classified into
various gene families based on their phylogenetic relationship
with the classified gene family members' from An. gambiae
and/or Ae. aegypti. The phylogenetic analysis of Cx.
quinquefasciatus detoxification enzymes was performed by
downloading the An. gambiae P450s and GSTs from VectorBase
database AgamP3 build available at
http://www.vectorbase.org/Anopheles_gambiae/Info/Index
and the D. melanogaster esterase sequences from FB2012_02
available at http://www.flybase.org. The P450 sequences of the
Culex and Anopheles; GST sequences of Culex and Anopheles; and
CCE sequences of Culex and Drosophila were analyzed for
drawing the evolutionary relationships among the genes. For all
the phylogenetic analysis MEGA4.0 software was employed as
described in Raghavendra et al. []. To construct phylogeny,
the final protein multiple sequence alignment was used as an
input with Jones-Taylor-Thornton (JTT) evolutionary model to
assess the genetic distance between various taxa. Finally, the
obtained phylogenies were statistically evaluated using the
bootstrap test with 500 replicates.

Discussion
The recent genomic sequences from Anopheles and Aedes species
have enabled us to utilize the genomic sequence to develop and
standardize the procedure to fish-out the detoxification
enzymes. In the year 2010, Arensburger et al. have published
the genome sequence of Cx. quinquefasciatus 
[], and to date, to
the best of our knowledge the Culex detoxification enzymes'
related information is yet to be made available. Although the
post-genomic era has brought simplifications in the way to
analyze the genomic data, the manual screening and annotation
is necessary in order to obtain specific function related
information from the genomes []. Ever since the first disease
causing mosquito genome has completed, the two mosquito
biology research areas, namely insecticide resistance and
understanding of the processes or basic genomic elements that
are responsible for blockage of the pathogen growth inside the
mosquito have flourished in comparison to the other scientific
areas. The genomic and bioinformatic analysis of Cx.
quinquefasciatus genome revealed 166 P450s, 40 GSTs, and 62
CCEs  (see supplementary material) &amp; (). The
total numbers of each of the supergene family are significantly
expanded in Culex genome as compared to other sequenced
dipteran mosquito species  (see supplementary
material). The differential expansion of the detoxification
enzymes in Culex species is due to the expansion of the
insecticide resistance causing gene families  (see
supplementary material).

Today it is known that CYP3 and CYP4 clan members from
P450s, Delta-Epsilon gene family members from GSTs, and
alpha-beta esterases from general esterases are primarily
responsible for the insecticide resistance 
[]. The substantial
expansion of detoxification enzymes in Culex might have
occurred due to the species breeding preference to highly
polluted water. Due to this, Culex mosquitoes might get
exposed (some chemicals might have similar chemical
structures as that of the insecticides that are being used in the
vector control programs) to numerous kind of chemical
molecules during the early stages of their development (aquatic
phase of life cycle). David et al. 
[] showed that larval breeding
site has a significant influence over detoxification responses of
the mosquitoes to various pesticides. According to Liska 
[]
the detoxification processes can be classified into two steps: (1)
functionalization- where the foreign compound(s) get oxidized
to create a reactive site (electrophilic site) by the phase I
detoxification enzymes (P450s and esterases), (2) conjugation –
utilizing the reactive site facilitated by the phase I system a
water soluble compound will be added to the reactive site by
the GSTs. This particular action results in the biotransformation
of lipophilic xenobiotic compounds into a more
water soluble byproducts and thus facilitates in easy excretion
[,
].

The phase I detoxification enzymes (P450s) are categorized into
four clans, viz. CYP2, CYP3, CYP4, and mitochondrial P450s
[]. Of these, mitochondrial and CYP2 clans are important for
performing the developmental regulations by facilitating in the
production of juvenile hormone, while CYP3 and CYP4 clan
members are important for detoxification of the xenobiotics.
Furthermore, each of these four clans are divided into
individual gene families based on the protein sequence identity
(&gt;55% and &gt;40-55% protein identity is used to define a
subfamily and a gene family, respectively). Of 16 P450 gene
families identified in An. gambiae, the CYP4, CYP6, CYP9, and
CYP325 gene families are important for insecticide resistance in
insects [–]. Due to the involvement of CYP2 and
mitochondrial P450s in developmentally important functions,
these gene families are least prone to gene duplications 
(); in contrary CYP3 and CYP4 clan gene families' that are
implicated in metabolizing and detoxification of foreign
compounds are expanded grossly in the mosquito genomes
(). Of a total 166 Culex P450s, 77 and 66 genes belong to
CYP3 and CYP4 clans, respectively that accounts for 86% of
total P450s  (see supplementary material) &amp; 
(). The comparative genomic analysis of P450s from the
dipteran species revealed that CYP3 and CYP4 clans are alone
contribute to 64-86% of the P450s  (see supplementary
material). The gene families (CYP2 and mitochondrial) that are
responsible for developmental regulation are not expanded
 (see supplementary material). Furthermore, they have
shown 1:1 secure orthologs in dipteran species (data not
shown). The comparative genomic analysis shows that
Drosophila has got least numbers of CYP3 and CYP4 clan
members as compared with the other disease causing dipteran
species. This may be due to restricted exposure of Drosophila to
pesticides. In contrast, the rest of the three disease vectors are
primary targets of human interventions to control the disease/s
that are basically centered in using the insecticides to kill the
vectors.

The GST supergene family of insects is divided into eight (that
include one unclassified GST class) classes, namely Delta,
Epsilon, Theta, Sigma, Omega, Iota, Unclassified, and
microsomal GSTs. Of these, Delta-and Epsilon-classes are
important for the detoxification of xenobiotics [,
]. The GST
supergene family forms the phase II detoxification system
where the conjugation reactions occur to render the xenobiotics
more soluble or to make them sequestered so that xenobiotics or
insecticides will become inactive in the cell. In Culex 57%
(23/40) of total GSTs belong to the Delta-Epsilon class 
(see supplementary material) &amp; (). The comparative
GST supergene family analysis suggests that 55 to 66% of total
GSTs belong to the Delta-Epsilon class. Delta-Epsilon classes are
primarily responsible for detoxification process while the
function of other GST classes is yet to be elucidated []. The
comparative genomic analysis show that classes Iota,
Unclassified, and Microsomal GSTs are absent from the
Drosophila, while class Zeta is absent from the Culex. The
maximum number of variations in the gene copy numbers is
observed in Delta- and Epsilon-classes  (see
supplementary material).

Esterases are classified into two major groups based on their
cellular functions; (a) metabolic enzymes (dietary detoxification,
hormone and pheromone processing esterases) (b)
neuro/developmental functions [,
]. These two groups are
further classified into gene families, namely alpha, beta,
acetylcholinesterases, neurotactin, neuroligin, gliotactin,
glutactin, juvenile, and unknown (still to classify) gene families
[,
]. Of which alpha esterases (phase I detoxification
enzymes) are majorly involved in xenobiotic-detoxification
processes. Of a total 62 CCEs identified in Culex genome 50%
(28 genes) of which are belonging to the alpha-esterases 
(see supplementary material) &amp; (). The comparative
analysis of dipteran CCEs revealed that 30 to 50% of total CCEs
are alpha-esterases. The rest of the gene families identified in
the Culex genome and their respective copy numbers are given
in  (see supplementary material). As described in the
methods section, the classification of the Culex esterases were
preformed based on the phylogenetic relationship with the
reference Drosophila esterases (). Similar to the case
with P450s and GSTs, the gene families that are responsible for
the detoxification of the xenobiotics are expanded in esterases,
i.e., alpha esterases. The highest number of alpha esterases is
reported from Culex (28 genes). The comparative genomic
analysis show that except Drosophila (3 genes) rest of the
dipteran mosquitoes have lost the integument esterases during
the evolution. Furthermore, there is considerable expansion of
the juvenile hormone gene copies observed in the mosquitoes
(10-13) while only three were reported from Drosophila.
Interestingly, in all the analyzed species, a single ortholog gene
copy that is classified under uncharacterized esterases is
reported  (see supplementary material). Finally, the
Cx. quinquefasciatus detoxification enzyme's data further
corroborate the popular understanding that detoxification
enzymes undergo adaptive evolution to satisfy the need of an
organism for its broad environmental adaptability [].
Furthermore, it is evident from the analysis that the strong
Darwinian selection will favor the organism to evolve new
functions through the extensive duplication of genes. Such a
mechanism is evident from the significant expansion (locally
and globally in the genome) of CYP4, CYP6, CYP9, and CYP325
cytochrome P450 gene families, Delta and Epsilon GSTs, and
alpha esterases  (see supplementary material) that are
implicated in causing insecticide resistance in the class Insecta.

In conclusion, the present study identified 268 detoxification
genes that belong to P450, GST, and CCE supergene families.
This is the first report on the full information about these genes
in Cx. quinquefasciatus. These data may act as a raw material for
further studies on insecticide resistance. Molecular
characterization of the detoxification enzymes involves
retrieval, identification, confirmation, and transcriptional
profiling of the genes. This needs an expert curated
detoxification gene's data set, and the process involved herein is
not straightforward [,
,
,
]. The comprehensive listing of
the detoxification enzymes along with their groupings may
helps in easy in silico retrieval of the enzyme related
information for molecular characterization of insecticide
resistance. The present information may also help in
understanding evolution of the detoxification supergene
families that are directly and/or indirectly responsible for
insecticide resistance in insects. However, as the generated
information on Culex detoxification genes is based on in silico
analyses and thus further studies are needed to confirm the
exact number of active genes and their functional roles in
various biological processes in Culex mosquitoes.

Supplementary material
Data 1
BPNR was supported by Council of Scientific and Industrial
Research (CSIR)-SRF fellowship. BPR was supported by Indian
Council of Medical Research (ICMR-SRF) fellowship. We are
highly grateful to the continuous support provided by the
Director, National Institute of Malaria Research, New Delhi.

Citation:Reddy et al, Bioinformation 8(9): 430-436 (2012)

Figure 1a: The NJ based phylogenetic analysis of 166 CuP450s and 105 AgP450s; Figure 1b: The NJ based phylogenetic analysis of
glutathione-S-transferases from An. gambiae (31 genes) and Cx. quinquefasciatus (40); Figure 1c: The NJ based carboxylesterase Ae.
aegypti (49 genes) and Cx. quinquefasciatus (62).

