Background
Omega-3 functions in preventing coronary heart disease,
diabetes, cancer, and also plays an important role in the
nervous system, brain and eyes [–]. The main and the best
source of omega-3 food is marine fish [], i.e. Sardinella lemuru
that is abundant in Indonesia. Lombok Strait has a variety of
Sardinella lemuru rich in omega-3 fatty acid. It is indicated that
Lombok Strait is very fertile and is appropriate for S. lemuru to
live and breed. However, the genetic kinship of S. lemuru with
other marine fish rich in omega-3 has not been widely studied
yet. Therefore, we analyzed the genetic relationship of Sardinella
lemuru from the srait with the economically valuable fish using
12S rRNA gene. The research provided basic information on
genetic proximity of S. lemuru with other marine fish, and the
information is considered very important for future
conservation of main sources of omega-3 in Lombok Strait.

Production levels of omega-3 in various marine fish species are
different. Some research reports explained that omega-3 content
on fish was affected by the food consumed by the fish 
[,
], the
genetic factors, and the environmental characteristics 
[]. The
other studies reported that the concentration of omega-3 in fish
is determined by the activity of groups of desaturase and
elongase enzymes [–]. A desaturase is a group of enzyme
which removes two hydrogen atoms from an organic
compound, creating carbon double bonds []. The desaturase
enzyme is known to be involved in synthesizing of omega-3
[], the Δ5 and Δ6-desaturases (D5D and D6D) are encoded by
fatty acid desaturase 1 (FADS1) and 2 (FADS2) genes,
respectively; and they are key enzymes in the metabolism of
omega-3 fatty acids.

The Δ6-desaturase (D6D) has an important role in the synthesis
of poly unsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), including omega-3, in
microorganisms and also in higher animals []. A previous
study reported that a factor which determines the activity of
enzyme to synthesize omega-3 is in the active site 
[]. The
active site usually lies within a domain that shows a high
degree of similarity among protein families or groups 
[].
Hence, conserve domain containing active site of Δ6-desaturase
might have an important role in biosynthesis of omega-3.
Furthermore, we examine the correlation between either genetic
proximity or Δ6-desaturase conserved domain with omega-3
productions on economically valuable fish.

Methodology
Sardinella lemuru was collected from Lombok Strait. DNA
isolation and other analyses were conducted at Molecular
Biology, and Bioinformatics Laboratories, Faculty of Sciences,
Brawijaya University, from January to September 2012.

DNA Isolation and Sequencing:
DNA was isolated using DNeasy Blood &amp; Tissue Kit (Qiagene).
The DNA was used as a template to amplify 12S rRNA gene by
using a pair of primers, the 5´GCTTGGTCCTGACTTTAGTA as
a forward primer and 5´CTTACCATGTTACGACTTGC as a
reverse primer. PCR composition consisted of sterile water 2µl,
5µl PCR mix, 1µl forward primer, 1µl reverse primer, and 1µl
DNA samples. The PCR condition was denaturation at 94° C for
1 minute, then 35 cycles of denaturation at 94° C for 1 minute,
annealing at 54° C for 30 seconds, and extension at 72° C for 1
minute. The last extension was performed at 72° C for 10
minutes, and followed by sequencing (First Base, Singapore).

Phylogenetics Construction:
The phylogenetic trees were constructed based on 12S rDNA
and sequences of Δ6-desaturase. The nucleutide sequence of
12S rRNA of S. lemuru was obtained by sequencing and other
sequences were obtained from GeneBank
(www.ncbi.nm.nih.gov). The whole amino acid sequences of
Δ6-desaturase were retrieved from GeneBank
(www.ncbi.nm.nih.gov). The alignments were done separately
for 12S rRNA gene and sequences of Δ6-desaturase. The
alignment processes were performed through Clustal-W using
MEGA5.05 software, and then followed by construction of
phylogenetic trees through a neighbor-joining method.

Conserved Domain Analysis:
The conserved domains of Δ6-desaturase from 11 kinds of fish
were identified by using Conserved Domain Databases (CDD)
search. CDD is a software to annotate Conserved Domains
within a protein sequence based on a sequence homology with
conserved domain database in GeneBank 
(www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Structure/cdd/wrpsb.cgi) 
[].

Construction of 3D Model of Δ6-desaturase:
The tertiary structure of Δ6-desaturase protein from the 11 fish
were not available yet in the protein databases, then the 3D
structures were predicted by threading modeling provided by ITASSER
[]. 
The 3D models were aligned to determine
structure differences among the proteins. The 3D aligment were
done by a super impose method using PyMol software.

Results
We have utilized 12S rDNA sequences to analyze the
phylogenetic relationships among the marine fish that were
considered economically important or contained high amount
of omega-3. The phylogenetic tree showed that Sardinella lemuru
is similar to Sardinella aurita and has a close similarity with
Sardinella maderensis. The Sardinella is more closely related to
Salmon and Oncorhypchus than to other species (). The
data indicated that S. lemuru shares genetic similarities with S.
aurita, and the two probably belong to the same species.
Moreover, all of the species were clustered into three groups
that did not correspond to omega-3 content. Thunnus has an
ability to produce high amount of omega-3 and so does
Sardinella. However, Thunnus were clustered with Siganus,
which has low content of omega-3. The productions level of
omega-3 among the 12 economically important marine fish
were different, ranged from 1.9% to 32.9%. The difference in
omega-3 contents are caused by multifactor i.e. food, species,
genetic, climate, enzyme activity, geography and environmental
characteristics [,
,
]. Because the concentration of omega-3 is
determined by different kind of factors, we just took the
minimum levels of omega-3 for each species to eliminate bias
from those factors in order to analyze the relationship between
genetic kinship with omega-3 concentration levels 
().
The minimum level of omega-3 production for Tunnus and
Sardinella were over than 20% of their tissue. The data
indicated that among the species, Tunnus and Sardinella
contained the higest amount of omega-3 that warrant them as a
main source of omega-3 from marine environment.

Discussion
The similarity in 12S rRNA gene between S. lemuru with S.
aurita indicated that the two kinds of fish might still belong to
the same species; since the polymorphism only occurs in 3 bases
along 575 of the gene (). Both of the fish share similar
genetic factors, characteristics, behaviors and suceptibility to
some certain environment factors. The genetic similarity of the
two kinds of fish would allow for cross-breeding, that will
improve the genetic diversity of Sardinella. This information is
very beneficial in order to rectify the genetic quality of
Sardinella and especially to promote a strategy to conserve S.
lemuru in Lombok Strait. Even though the morphology varity of
S. lemuru in Bali Strait is diverse, it does not reflect such a high
genetic variation. Furthermore, the data on genetic diversity of
S. lemuru in Lombok Strait is needed to be elucidated to portrait
its genetic variation.

The relationship based on 12S rRNA gene among the fish did
not correspond with omega-3 productions. Therefore, we
analyzed the relationship between omega-3 production with the
conserved domain of Δ6-desaturase among the fish. The results
showed that the similarities in the coserved domains were
clustered into 6 groups associated with omega-3 content 
(). According to the phylogenetic tree of Δ6-desaturase,
Thunnus thynnus and Salmo salar has a closed similarity, which
corresponded to their omega-3 production level. Hence, the
genetic distance between Thunnus thynnus and Salmo salar was
far, based on 12S rRNA gene (species relationship). Based on
the results, we suggest that the production of omega-3 is not
specified based on the proximity of the species, but is associated
with conserved domain of Δ6-desaturase. The phenomenon
indicated that activity of Δ6-desaturase is very influential on
fish ability to produce omega-3.

Generally, the ability of marine fish to synthesize long-chain
HUFA, including omega-3 from C18 precursors, is very low. It
is caused by the occurrence of various splicing variants of Δ6-
desaturase mRNA []. The variants caused different activity of
Δ6-desaturase to bind with the substrate. The aligment of the
conserved domain of Δ6-desaturase from 11 kinds of marine
fish species has revealed three conserved sites located at
position 180-185; 217-221 and 362-367—these results are similar
with the results from the previous report []. We also have
analyzed the 3D structure of Δ6-desaturase, residues 40-450,
which showed that the active site (red color) is located in
residues 362-367, that is same in all of the species, although they
have different amino acids composition (). The 3D
model demonstrated that all fish have similar backbones in
terms of the enzyme structure, but they are different in their
surface. These data suggested that the residues formed
conserved structure to maintain their ability to bind with
substrates. It corresponds with the previous study showing that
binding sites of protein are conserved to maintain competence
for binding with ligands/substrates [].

Therefore, we have classified the fish into 6 groups according to
3D model and motif of active site of Δ6-desaturase, namely:
group 1 consists of O. masou, O. mykiss and S. salar (active site,
HERHQ); group 2 consists of G. morhua (HEKQQ); group 3
consists of T. thynnus and T. maccoyii (HEKHQ); group 4
consists S. canalicuatus (YENHN); group 5 consists of
Rachycentron canadum (HEKHR) and S. maximus(HEKHK); and
group 6 consists of D. labrax and S. aurata (HEKHH). Groups 1,
2 and 3 contain higher amount of omega-3 (over than 10%)
compared to the other three groups. The variation of the active
site and protein surface might be involved in determining the
ability of the enzyme to bind and catalyze a substrate. The
active site motif indicated to have a relationship with the
production of omega-3. The last amino acid of the active site
motif might be a crucial factor to support catalytic activity of
the enzyme. Sifting from Q to other amino acids might decrease
the activity of the enzyme as indicated by the decreasing
omega-3 production levels. However, detailed mechanisms are
still needed to be elucidated.

Conclusion
Sardinella lemuru from Lombok Strait possesses some
similarities with S. aurita. The relationship based on 12S rRNA
gene among the fish did not correspond to the omega-3
productions. The similarity found in the coserved domains
indicated a relationship with omega-3 content. However,
further study is needed to elucidate the mechanism of Δ6-
desaturase activity and other parameters that correlated with
omega-3 production of marine fish.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors would like to thank the Directorate General of
Higher Education, Ministry of Education and Culture of
Indonesia for providing the funding to carry out this study.
Thanks to Brian Rahardi as the Head of Bioinformatics
Laboratory, Biology Department, Brawijaya University, for
providing the facilities to conduct this study.

Citation:Mahrus et al, Bioinformation 8(25): 1271-1276 (2012)

Phylogenetic tree of marine fish by using 12S rRNA gene. The S. lemuru from Lombok Strait has some similarities with S.
aurita and is closely related to S. maderensis.

Homology 12S rRNA gene between S. aurita and S. lemuru. The polymorphism accours only in 3 bases along 575 bases of
the gene. Squence numbering accordings to S. aurita 12S rRNA gene (DQ912032.1)

Phylogenetic tree of marine fish by using Δ6-desaturase protein. The fish were clustered into 6 groups associated with
omega-3 content. Groups 1-3 contain higher amount of omega-3 (over than 10%) compared to the other three groups. Active sites
were indicated by red color.

