Background
Protein-protein interactions (PPI) in living cells mediate numerous if
not most biological processes. Structural data, when available for such
protein complexes, could enable us to model the underlying molecular
mechanism of such interactions. Such models could be potentially
helpful for predicting protein function by identifying the complex
type. Two different types of protein complexes can be distinguished on
the basis of protomer affinity. In an obligate interaction, the protomers
are not found as stable structures on their own in vivo. Such
complexes are generally also functionally obligate. Most homodimers
and some heterodimers belong to this category. Non-obligate
interactions are those whose protomers exist independently. The
components of such proteinprotein complexes are often initially not
co-localized and thus need to be independently stable. Protein
complexes are also categorized as permanent and transient according
to their lifetime in vivo. Structurally and functionally obligate
interactions are also mostly permanent and non-obligatory interactions
can be transient or weaker (compared to obligatory interactions)
.Transient interactions are more stable compared to the weaker ones
and requires a molecular trigger for association or dissociation in vivo.

Previous workers like Ofran and Rost [] analyzed six types of protein
complexes, including homo-obligomers and hetero-obligomers.
Nooren and Thornton [] studied homo and heterodimeric transient
protein complexes. This study revealed that transient complex
interfaces have lesser area, are more planar and polar compared to
those homodimers which show permanent and stable interactions.
Block et. al identified several physiochemical interface descriptors []
and used machine learning techniques to classify permanent and
transient complexes. The first breakthrough in classifying permanent
and transient complexes was achieved by Mintseris and Weng using
atomic contact vectors [] as a structural descriptor. Dey et. al []
compiled a nonredundant set of 82 obligatory and 30 non-obligatory
complexes to compare their structural properties. Among the various
differences in interface properties, obligates showed somewhat better
shape complementarity at the interfaces compared to non-obligates
using Colman's method. The differences in interface area as well as
residue propensities were only marginally different for the two types
of complexes. Zhu et.al [] used a non redundant training set and six
interface properties to train a Support vector machine to classify
obligate, non-obligate and crystal packing interactions. Zhu's
NOXclass classifier achieved a remarkable accuracy of 91.8% in
classifying obligates from non-obligates. Of the various interface properties Gap volume and gap volume index were studied as a
measure of shape complementarity. In accordance with previous
studies obligate complexes show better geometric complementarity
over non-obligate ones.

Protein surface roughness is a structural property, which was shown to
be associated with binding surfaces. Surface roughness can be
quantified by the Fractal dimension (D), which denotes the rate of
change in the proteins surface area with respect to the yardstick or
probe size used to measure it. It is defined in equation 1 (see
) as described elsewhere [,
] . From a study of
surface roughness study Lewis &amp; Rees [] and Aqvist &amp; Tapia []
postulated that oligomeric protein-protein interfaces were rough
compared to the other regions of the protein chain. In a similar study
Pettit &amp; Bowie [] used a smoothened atomic fractal dimension
(SAFD) to measure protein surface roughness. As the measurement of
individual surface area of atoms is prone to statistical error, The SAFD
calculates the roughness around each atom by smoothing over its
neighborhood. The SAFD (fi) is defined in equation 2 (see ).

Analyzing the active site SAFD of a small data set (26 complexes),
they came to an almost opposite conclusion that oligomeric interfaces
are not much rougher than non interfacial regions of the complexes,
particularly when the interface area is 600Å2 or more. On the other
hand small molecule binding pockets showed significantly higher
surface roughness values. In a later work Pettit et. al used SAFD in a
neural network based protein functional site prediction software,
HOTPATCH []. Toufic et. al [] used fractal dimension as one of
the structural descriptors for the characterization and prediction of
different protein-RNA binding sites. Protein-RNA interface residues
were found to be rougher compared to the non-interfacial ones. In
another study the SAFD and Fractal Dimension were used to evaluate
the accuracy of protein homology models []

From the previous studies it became apparent that surface roughness
has an important role in molecular recognition. However, earlier
studies were performed on limited number of complexes and no
discrimination was made between obligates and non-obligates. This
motivated us to probe the role of surface roughness, in obligate and
non- obligate interactions. We specifically studied if SAFD is a
discriminating feature for these two types of complexes and if so,
whether it could possibly provide a plausible mechanism for complex formation. We hypothesized that similar interface roughness pairing
would provide more interdigitation leading to better geometric fit in
obligates and vice versa in non-obligates. We tested our hypothesis
against well characterized high quality benchmarked datasets of
obligates and non-obligates. The correlations (or lack of it) between
the roughness values of interacting chains in two types of complexes
substantiated our hypothesis.

Methodology
Generation of obligate and non-obligate dataset
Most homodimeric proteins fall into the obligate category. Obligate
homodimers are also in most cases symmetric in a way, that the
interface contains equivalent atoms belonging to the same surfaces of
the protomers. Such symmetric homomeric obligates were excluded
from our study. Because, in such complexes, the difference in interface
SAFD would be essentially zero, making it unsuitable for this analysis.
Therefore our dataset comprised of heteromeric subunits only. For
obligates, a subset of heteromeric complexes from the dataset of
Mintseris &amp; Weng [] were considered. This dataset of permanent
complexes was an extension of [] and was generated by automated
means. From this set we chose binary complexes having no more than
30% sequence identity between protomers. We rejected complexes
having ligands in the interfaces, as described in []. To select obligates
we subjected the rest of the complexes to the NOXclass multistage
classifier [] which has high prediction accuracy. The NOXclass
features used for classification include interface area, interface area
ratio, area-based amino acid composition, correlation between
interface and protein surface and gap volume index. Complexes that
were predicted to be obligate with greater than 55 % certainty were
accepted. Finally a total of 52 obligate complexes were considered
(Table 1a: ). For the non-obligate protein
complexes, the entire NOXclass [] non-obligate data set was taken,
comprising of 62 hetero complexes (Table 1b: ).
All the PDB files corresponding to the data sets were downloaded and
’ATOM‘ records of complexes and individual chains were written into
separate files.

Calculation of SAFD values
We used “Ezprot 2.2”, a free suite of programs, developed by Frank
Pettit [] to calculate SAFD, and interface residues.

Finding interface residues
To identify the amino acids at the interface of each chain, the
’listoligface‘ program which comes along the Ezprot suite was used.
’listoligface‘ reads one or more protein complex , and for each
chain, identifies any oligomeric interfaces; the output is a list of
which residues on each chain contact which neighboring chains.
Here, a ’neighboring chain‘ is defined as any chain within a
fixed distance to any heavy atom on a different chain. We used the
default fixed distance of 4.2 Angstroms. This method is akin to one of
the methods described in [] for defining interface residues using a
lenient accessible surface area change criterion.

Calculation of Fractal dimension
To calculate the fractal dimension of each atom, and to remove the
statistical error, the program ’rufness‘ calculates the SAFD for each
atom of the protein according to . In the default option the
probe radius is 1.4 Å and the small change in probe radius to be
used for calculating areas and fractal dimension is 0.1 Å. We used
these default values in all our calculations. The ’rufness‘ program can
optionally calculate the SAFD for solvent exposed atoms only. We used this feature to calculate the atomic SAFD averaged over all
neighboring atoms that were solvent exposed and not buried. The
SAFDi values for each exposed atom of all the amino acid residues
present at the interface, of each chain were calculated, and averaged to
get the average SAFD (ISAFD) of the chain interface atoms. Gap
volume Index (GVI) is a measure of interface geometric
complementarity, was calculated using the NOXclass server []. A
lesser value of GVI indicated better shape or geometric
complementarity at the interface.

Statistical analysis
Graphical and statistical analysis of SAFDs, viz. Box plots, correlation
coefficient and t-test calculations were done using the ’R‘ software
suite. Correlation plots were made using Microsoft Excel.

Discussion
Interacting protein chains in different complexes
In this study a total of 52 obligate and 62 non-obligate heteromeric
complexes of high resolution were used from curated benchmark data
sets. [,]

Interface SAFD values of obligates and non-obligates
The interface averages SAFD (ISAFD) of the two protomers in the
two types of complexes were studied using boxplots and unpaired ttest
(). For the obligate complexes, the ISAFD ranged from
2.94 to 3.45, the median value being 3.18. For the non-obligates the
ISAFD ranged from 2.84 to 3.77, the median value being 3.15.
However the spread of ISAFD values is a little more in non-obligates.
The two tailed unpaired t-test gave P value of 0.4689, considered
insignificant. The boxplots and statistics show that the median ISAFD
values of protomers didn't differ in two types of complexes and the
distributions of roughness values are quite close. The median interface
roughness values comes close to the average value of 3.12 reported by
Pettit [] for large functional sites (interface area &gt;600 Å2)

ISAFD differences between chains in obligates and non-obligates
For the two types of complexes, the absolute differences of ISAFD (d-
ISAFD) between the protomers were calculated, and analyzed by
boxplots and unpaired t-test (). The median d-ISAFD values
for obligate and non-obligates are 0.109 and 0.179 respectively. Thus
there was a noticeable, more than 1.6 fold increase in the median value
of ISAFD between protomers for non-obligates over obligates. The
two tailed unpaired t-test gave P value ≪ 0.0001, considered highly
significant. This indicates that in obligates the interface roughness
difference is much less than that of non-obligates. As a result a tight
distribution of d-ISAFD values in obligates was seen in the plot. In
non-obligates, d-ISAFD values were much scattered, indicating the
two chains of the complex had a wide range of interface roughness.

Correlation of protomer ISAFD in obligates and non-obligates
Correlations between the ISAFD of protomers in both types of
complexes were quantified by Pearson correlation coefficient. A high
positive correlation coefficient of 0.621 (P value ≪ 0.0001, considered
highly significant) was observed between the interface SAFD values
of the two chains involved in obligatory interactions. The
correlation coefficient for non-obligates was 0.027(P value 0.84,
considered not significant), which was negligible when compared with
obligates. This showed that there was practically no correlation of
roughness between the non-obligatory chains. A visual inspection of
the scatter plots (, ) also revealed that the chains in obligates
have more correlated surface roughness with respect to non-obligates.

Our study showed the predominant preference of protomers of similar
roughness to form obligate interactions. From correlation studies, it is
apparent that in obligates, the increase or decrease in roughness in one
of the protomers is also reflected in its binding partner by a
proportional increase or decrease of roughness. The underlying
mechanism can be described by . The surfaces of protomers
of similar roughness can interdigitate well to form better geometric fit
(: I, II). Given that the roughness values are similar, rougher
protomers can geometrically fit well, leaving lesser gap at the
interface, just as well the two protomers with comparatively smooth
interfaces can fit together. This type of protomer pairings are observed
in our obligate data set. On the other hand, protomer surfaces with
marked difference in interface roughness can't interdigitate well,
resulting in poor geometric fit with more gaps in the interface. The
later explains the case of non-obligates (: III, IV). This
structural model is in accordance with the better shape
complementarity observed in obligates over non-obligates [,,
].The
average GVI for our obligate data set was 2.15 as compared to 5.3 for
the non-obligate set [] indicating better geometric fit in obligate
complexes. This further corroborates our proposed mechanism. In
obligates the correlation allows the chains to preserve structural
complementarity as the roughness of one protomer is changed, unlike
the non-obligates. The proposed model also explains the more number
of contacts observed at obligate interfaces over non-obligates [].
Evidently, chances of having more contacts are more for rough/rough
or smooth/smooth association, compared to a rough/smooth
association.

Shape complementarity, in form of GVI, was successfully used as one
of the six descriptors in NOXCLASS [] to characterize complex
types by a Support vector machine, achieving 91.8% accuracy. In our
study too we have obtained high discriminatory values of correlation
coefficients (0.621, 0.027) and median d-IASFD values (0.0109 and
0.179) for obligate and non-obligates respectively. We propose that the
difference in interface SAFD (d-ISAFD) can be used as a
discriminatory feature for classification of complexes along with other
descriptors.

Conclusion
We studied interface roughness properties of a high quality, nonredundant
obligate and non-obligate heteromeric protein complex
dataset. We found that subunits with similar roughness values at the
interfaces tend to form obligate complexes, and those with different
values tend to form non-obligate complexes. One of the essential
features of obligate complexes is the better geometric fit between the
protomers. Our structural model provides an explanation of such
complementarity from observed similar and correlated roughness
pairing of subunits with better interdigitation at the interface. The
model also explains the observed higher interface contacts in obligates
compared to non-obligates. There are a few practical implications of
our findings. Firstly, along with various other surface based
descriptors interface roughness property can be used to discriminate
among heteromeric obligate and non-obligate complexes and thus can
further improve the performance of existing classifiers. This could be
an important tool for protein function prediction in a structural
genomics framework. Secondly, preferential roughness pairing can be
used to filter out wrong candidates in computational protein-protein
docking when the type of protein complex is known beforehand, viz.
from biological data. Thirdly, protein design experiments can also
benefit from these findings for designing appropriate binding
interfaces.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors thank the authorities of Birla Institute of Technology
(Mesra, Ranchi), Calcutta Center, for kindly providing the
infrastructure to carry out part of this research. IB did a part of this work for her Masters thesis at BIT, Calcutta under the guidance of SR
(ex-lecturer, BIT).

Citation:Bera &amp; Ray, Bioinformation 4(5): 210-215 (2009)

The interface average SAFD (ISAFD) values observed in obligates and non-obligates

The difference in ISAFD (d-ISAFD) between protomers in obligates and non obligates

Correlation plot of ISAFD values between protomers in obligate complexes

Correlation plot of ISAFD values between protomers in non-obligate complexes

Preferential pairing of rough(R) and smooth(S) interfaces in obligates (I, II) and non-obligates (III, IV). R-R and S-S pairings are
favored in obligates, whereas non-obligates prefer R-S type association.

