Background
In pathogenic microorganisms, single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) are used to define strains and are analyzed for possible 
correlations with geographic origin and differences in pathogenesis [,
]. After DNA sequencing of gene fragments from different 
individuals of the same species, SNPs are identified by multiple alignment of DNA sequences. One of the most popular softwares used for 
this purpose is Clustal, which employs a fast pairwise alignment algorithm [], 
helping the user identify identical and non-identical nucleotides along sequences. The most popular way of presenting SNPs based on 
these results is to manually build a table which shows the nucleotide changes between a selected reference sequence and the other 
aligned sequences. SNUFER was developed to automatize this task by integrating the steps of multiple sequence alignment, SNP 
identification and data presentation in a publication format.

Software description
After sequences are uploaded in SNUFER as a fasta file, the program provides the option to select all or a group of the sequences for 
SNP analysis. Using ClustalW [], SNUFER performs a multiple sequence alignment 
and the result is shown in a table. The user then has three options. The first option is to run an SNP detection and to display a table 
of results which can be exported to Microsoft Word, Microsoft Excel or as a single text file (). 
Any of the sequences can be selected as a reference for scoring nucleotide change and position. The exported table can be built with all 
SNPs found or with only those selected by the user. In the first two top rows of the table, the nucleotides (represented by A, T, C, G) 
and their position in the reference sequence is shown for each SNP detected. The underlying rows will display, for each SNP position, 
the nucleotide change in each sequence, represented by A, T, C or G. Identical nucleotides between the sequence analyzed and the 
reference sequences will be indicated by an asterisk (*). The first column of the table will display sequence information such as the 
accession number and the second column will display the percentage of similarity between the reference sequence and each of the 
sequences analyzed. The second user option is to build a Microsoft Word or Excel table to show the similarity between two selected 
sequences or between all sequences. Finally, the third option is to display a consensus strand based on the Clustal alignment. SNUFER 
output files can also be exported as a text-only file which can later be imported into other applications.

Concluding remarks
SNUFER was written using Delphi 7 for programming and FireBird 2.0 for sequence database management. It is freely available for 
noncommercial use and can be downloaded from 
http://www.heranza.com.br/bioinformatica2.htm. As a portable program ran under Windows, Linux or Mac, SNUFER is a useful 
tool for the localization and presentation of SNPs detected, for example, in genes used for 
phylogenetic studies [,].

This study was supported by funds from Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo (grants 04/14196-5, 06/068904). We 
thank Dr S.C. França and the staff of the Biotechnology Unit-UNAERP for general support, and K. Markendorf for revision of the English 
text.

Representative screen of an SNP table built from a multiple sequence alignment performed by ClustalW. The table can be 
exported to Word, Excel or as a text file

