Background
It is well documented that transcriptionally coexpressed genes
tend to be functionally related and may interact with each other
at physiological or molecular level. Recently, number of
comprehensive method have been developed and applied to
construct networks from diverse high-throughput data sources
such as microarray, next generation sequencing (NGS),
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and protein-protein
interaction assays []. These high-throughput techniques have
made it possible to analyze thousands of genes in one shot.
Availability of these datasets in public domain is useful
resource to accelerate incremental hypothesis generation via
reanalyzing the data by addressing new questions.

Gene networks are the basis of biological complexity and have
become the core area of research in systems biology. These
networks are modeled as graph where, node represents the
functional unit such as gene, protein, metabolite, etc., and edges
are dependencies or interaction between the nodes. In case of
the expression data of transcripts, the interaction may be the
expression co-relation between the paired genes that is
generally measured in terms of Pearson co-relation coefficient
(PCC). It has been shown that PCC value with large magnitude
are highly coexpressed often a result from direct coregulation
[]. 
Several user-friendly tools have been developed to build
coexpression network based on PCC values. The WGCNA
(Weighted gene co-expression network analysis) is one of the
tools for coexpression network that supports the assembly of
both signed and unsigned network.

In signed network positively and negatively correlated nodes
are clustered in separate modules, where as unsigned network
finds correlation by their absolute value. Biological networks
exhibit scale free topology, where connectivities between one
node with other nodes are of major concern []. Nodes with
high degree of connectivity are called hub nodes, and the edge
deletion of a hub gene will have consequences on architecture
and biological interpretations of the network 
[]. Hence,
prioritization of genes by selecting highly connected node as
hub node is a facile approach for better understanding and
interpretation of the network and overall biological complexity.

The system biology approach has accelerated unraveling the
knowledge in the area of plants stress biology []. The response
of plants to abiotic stresses is a very complex process []. Hence,
biological data on abiotic stress related genes and QTLs
available in public databases of great importance to understand
abiotic stresses [–]. Plant response to abiotic stresses depends
upon the developmental stage at which the plant experiences
the stress, the rate of stress development and duration of stress.
Some pathways of stress tolerance are conserved across tissues,
while others may be tissue specific [].

In the present study, we systematically reanalyzed the drought
stress responsive transcriptome data available for three main
tissues including leaf, root, and young panicle in rice 
[]. Wang
et al. (2011) imposed drought stress by withholding water at
three different stages: 4-tiller (tillering) stage, panicle elongation
stage, and booting stage. Leaf, root and young panicle (only at
booting stage) were sampled at leaf relative water content of
about 65-75%, and used for transcriptome analysis. We used the
transcriptome data of Wang et al. 2011 for computational and
coexpression analysis to: (i) identify differentially expressed
genes in coordinated manner across all the tissues, (ii) define
module of genes sharing similar expression pattern, eventually
defining global biological pathways and (iii) hub gene
identification. Our study provides novel insight in to gene
coordination under drought stress that was not revealed in
previous studies with conventional differential gene expression
analysis.

Methodology
Microarray data analysis:
Microarray data for temporal and spatial expression patterns of
drought stress response of a drought tolerant indica rice line
DK151 (GSE26280) was downloaded from NCBI GEO database
(www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/). This dataset consists of
transcriptome data for three tissues at three different
developmental stages of rice viz. root at tillering stage, leaf at
tillering stage, root at panicle elongation stage, leaf at panicle
elongation, young panicle at booting stage, and leaf at booting
stages with three biological replicate (total 36 samples). All CEL
files were analyzed by R (version 2.6.1) statistical programming
environment, using affy package of BioConductor
(http://www.bioconductor.org/) 
[]. Normalization was
performed by the robust multichip analysis algorithm (RMA), ttest
used to calculate the p-value of the expression change of
each probe and differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were
identified using the limma package []. We selected DEGs
with p-values &lt;0.05, and fold-change values &gt;2 for up and &lt; 2
for down regulated genes. Probe sets were mapped to the MSU
Rice Genome Annotation Project gene set (release 6.1).
Hierarchical clustering of significantly coordinated
differentially expressed genes was carried out by average
linkage and euclidean distance as a measurement of similarity
using EPICLUST; a module of Expression Profiler
(http://www.bioinf.ebc.ee/EP/EP/EPCLUST/).

Gene Ontology enrichment analysis:
Significantly enriched GO categories for all set of differentially
expressed genes was carried out by GOEAST, Gene Ontology
enrichment analysis tool
(http://omicslab.genetics.ac.cn/GOEAST) by selecting
Hypergeometric statistical test and threshold for False
Discovery Rate (FDR) adjusted p-value ≤ 0.05 
[].

Gene coexpression network:
Correlation network approach is being increasingly used in
bioinformatics applications and successfully applied in various
biological contexts []. WGCNA is a system biology method to
build robust network and module identification of highly
correlated genes with module membership measures using the
topological overlap measure (TOM) []. We used signed
version of the scale free topology fitting index and only
considered those parameter values that lead to a network
satisfying scale-free topology (signed R2&gt;0.8, β = 22) 
[].
Expression matrix was created on the basis of correlated
expression pattern between the genes, calculated by PCC value.
Further, the coexpression network of highly coordinated genes
among most of the tissue was visualized and analyzed by
Cytoscape (version 2.8.3) []. Cytoscape is an open source
bioinformatics platform for visualizing molecular interaction
networks and biological pathways 
(http://www.cytoscape.org/).

MCODE clustering:
Clusters of well interconnected genes were identified by
Molecular Complex Detection (MCODE) algorithm []. The
algorithm identified modules with network scoring parameter
and the degree cutoff was set to 2. Another important
parameter, K-Core value set as default and the depth from the
seed was set to 100 that calculate the distance between the seed
node and other cluster members.

Identification of over-represented motifs:
Over represented cis-motif in 2 kb upstream sequence from
translational initiation codon of coordinated genes that are
expressed across tissues was performed using the Osiris
programme (http://www.bioinformatics2.wsu.edu/cgibin/Osiris/cgi/home.pl) 
[].

Results &amp; Discussion
Signed WGCNA modules in temporal-spatial data set:
Differential expression analysis identified 8244 DEGs (2 fold up
or down) in at least one of the tissues under drought condition.
Further analysis revealed that 2199 DEGs showing coexpression
in ≥ 3 tissue samples under drought stress. We then generated
signed coexpression network of these 2199 DEGs ().
Though the sample size was small, the network created in this
study satisfied the scale free topology []. Eleven modules
were clustered from the whole network using topological
overlap measure (TOM) (). These analyses led to the
identification of blue (0.76) and turquoise (0.75) colored
modules, with highest significance value. The WGCNA
approach was used to create a TOM plot by using gene
expression data of the blue and turquoise module ().

Identification of coordinately regulated DEGs across tissues and developmental stages:
Out of 2199 coexpressed DEGs in ≥ 3 samples, 113 probes were
identified to have common expression kinetics (highly
coordinated) among all tissues across developmental stages
under drought stress. Of these 113 probes, two probes did not
map on any annotated genes on the rice genome. Rest of the 109
probes mapped to 95 different annotated genes. Interestingly,
among these 95 genes, 88 were upregulated (cluster I), and only
three genes were repressed under drought stress in all samples
(cluster III) (); 
 (see supplementary material).

Cluster I grouped genes for several dehydrins, late
embryogenesis abundant proteins (LEAs), protein phosphatase
2Cs and expressed proteins. Cluster III grouped one gene each
encoding invertase/pectin methyl esterase inhibitor protein,
MYB transcription factor and receptor protein kinase that were
significantly repressed in all the tissues under drought stress.
Clusters II grouped two genes with tissue specific opposite
regulation; LOC_Os03g20680 (LEA) was repressed in leaf at
tillering stage, while LOC_Os01g39020 (HSF protein) was
repressed in roots at both tillering and panicle elongation stage,
where as these genes were induced in other stages. These
results suggest that drought stress mediated upregulated gene
expression is coordinated through a common signaling
pathway across tissues, at least for the subset of genes identified
in this study, while downregulation in general appears to be
tissue specific in rice. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis of
highly coordinated DEGs showed that predominant DEGs were
enriched with response to stress (p-value: 0.00535), response to
stimulus (p-value: 0.0791), response to water stimulus (p-value:
1.41E-07), and response to abiotic stimulus (p-value: 0.000632)
with high significance (); 
 (see supplementary
material).

Coexpression network of coordinately upregulated DEGs:
The 107 probes (88 genes and 2 unannotated genes) shown in
hierarchical cluster I with coordinated upregulation in all
tissues were further subjected for coexpression network
construction to identify hub gene (master gene) using
Cytoscape (2.8.3). We selected 0.8 as PCC cutoff with which
almost all genes were integrated in to the network ().
Based on topological parameters like degree of the node,
neighborhood connectivity and cluster coefficient value, 18 hub
genes were identified (). Genes with high value of
degree (&gt;25), and neighborhood connectivity (&gt;23) are
LOC_Os09g39910 (ABC transporter ATP-binding protein),
LOC_Os11g26760 (dehydrin), LOC_Os05g47730 (LTPL153 -
Protease inhibitor/seed storage/LTP family protein precursor),
LOC_Os05g39250 (phosphatidylethanolamine-binding protein),
LOC_Os03g07170 (lactose permease), (LOC_Os01g54030)
NADP-dependent malic enzyme, Os.55227.1.S1_at (AK107694,
unknown protein), etc. were observed as hub genes in network
().

MCODE clustering identified four modules which integrated in
single turquoise module of WGCNA with high modular
membership value, showing the robustness of the network with
high significance (). For each of the module one seed
gene with high cluster coefficient value showed how well that
node was connected with others. Genes lies in largest module
with high cluster coefficient values were LOC_Os11g26750
(dehydrin; 0.9), LOC_Os07g42910 (cytochrome C oxidase
subunit; 0.7), LOC_Os09g39910 (ABC transporter; 0.65) and
LOC_Os01g19770 (mitochondrial import inner membrane
translocase subunit Tim17; 0.68) clustered in largest module.
Interestingly, gene ontology analysis also showed relatedness of
dehydrin gene to the “response to stress” GO term with high
significance.

Enrichment of conserved cis-regulatory elements within 2kb
upstream sequences from translational start site (ATG) of
coordinated genes was investigated. Distribution of TF binding
sites on the promoters showed that most predicted TF binding
sites on the promoter were between -480 to -1 base from ATG
(). Over-represented motifs analysis
revealed that the promoter of more than 55 genes has ABA
Responsive (ABRE) cis-elements  (see supplementary
material). Among the five PP2Cs identified in this study, four
PP2Cs belongs to ABA responsive Clade A group. These results
suggest that ABA dependent pathway may regulate the
coordinated upregulation of the genes across tissues and
developmental stages under drought in rice.

Conclusion
Correlation analysis facilitates network based gene screening
method for identification of candidate genes or targets under
drought stress []. We analyzed temporal-spatial gene
coexpression network of drought stress response in rice and
identified 88 coordinated genes. The commonly upregulated
genes consisted of several dehydrins, LEA proteins and heat
shock proteins, suggesting that protection of cellular machinery
is a common theme across tissues and development under
drought stress. The network was constructed by using WGCNA
tool and further analyzed by Cytoscape. The signed WGCNA
network appears to be robust as they retain biologically
relevant hub genes and their connections. We showed that
genes with high module membership value and neighborhood
connectivity (high degree) were valuable for candidate gene
identification related to drought response in rice. Hierarchical
cluster analysis of differentially expressed genes clearly showed
the coordinated expression of genes under drought stress in
each tissue and developmental stage. We incorporated gene
ontology information and highlighted several stress regulated
genes and their neighborhood as candidate drought responsive
genes for further biological study that would not have been
identified using a standard differential expression analysis.
Predominance of ABRE cis-elements in the promoters of
coordinately expressed genes suggested that ABA dependent
pathway may regulate these genes in response to drought stress
across tissues and developmental stages.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) for
supporting this work through the National Initiative on Climate
Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) project.

Citation:Smita et al, Bioinformation 9(2): 072-078 (2013)

Identification of coexpression network modules using spatial-temporal dataset of rice under drought stress. (a)
Hierarchical clustering of the Topological Overlap Measure (TOM) matrix for the expression data. Branches of the hierarchical
cluster tree define 11 modules with assigned color. (b) Bar plots showing modules significance. Note that the blue and turquoise
color modules are with highest significance value. Grey was reserved to color genes that are not part of any module. (c) Signed
TOM plot (top) and the MDS plot (bottom) of blue module with significant correlation value (r = 0.76). (d) Signed TOM plot (top)
and the MDS plot (bottom) of turquoise module with significant correlation value (r = 0.75).

Hierarchical clustering on expression ratios of the
differentially expressed genes obtained in three tissues at three
different stages used to identify common expression kinetics
among differentially expressed genes. Cluster I and III showed
constant expression pattern of genes i.e., induced and
repressed, respectively. Clusters II grouped two genes with
tissue specific opposite regulation.

Gene Ontology enrichment analysis of highly coordinated genes in all tissues at each developmental stages showed
enrichment of “response to water stimulus” with high significance.

Coexpression network of coordinately upregulated genes across tissues at three developmental stages created by
Cytoscape. (a) Seed nodes identified by MCODE in triangle shape, clustered nodes in oval and unclustered nodes are represented
in vee shape. Red-yellow-green gradient color represents nodes with high to less neighborhood connectivity. (b) Network
representing nodes in yellow color with high degree (&gt;30) as hub genes and their first neighbors highlighted with red colored
bordered and edges. (c) Four modules identified by MCODE showed each module with a triangled node (seed node).

