Background
Search for new and stable drug target is an essential
requirement of the day for treating Mycobacterium tuberculosis
(TB) infection as the multidrug-resistant (MDR) TB strain is
appearing at an alarming rate []. According to Times of India
(13 Oct.2011) report, 3.3% of all new tuberculosis cases had
multidrug resistance (MDR-TB) in 2009 and each year, about
0.44 million MDR-TB cases are estimated to emerge and 0.1
million people with MDR-TB, die. There are reports of more
than 2.8 million cases of MDR pathotype worldwide and
average death from TB reached to 9 million per annum []. The
worldwide prevalence of monodrug-, multidrug- and
extensively drug-resistant strains clearly indicates that the old
targets in Mtb. are no longer effective. Well-validated targets
with extensive biological characterization have proved to be
more valuable for the development of new anti-tubercular
drugs.

Methionine aminopeptidase (MetAP) is a pervasive enzyme
occurring both in prokaryotic and eukaryotic systems and
carried out a significant co-translational modification of newly
synthesized proteins. It is suggested that MetAP can be
established as a prominent target for developing novel inhibitor
of MDR-TB pathotype []. MetAP removes terminal N-terminal
methionine from nascent proteins and is required for post
translational processing and targeting of the virulent protein to
the host body. MetAP2 is found in all organisms and is
especially important because of its crucial role in tissue repair
and protein degradation []. Furthermore, MetAP2 is of
particular interest because the enzyme plays a key role in
angiogenesis, the growth of new blood vessels, which is
necessary for the progression of diseases including solid
tumour cancers and rheumatoid arthritis [].

Mycobacterium tuberculosis possesses two types of MetAP i.e
MetAP1b and MetAP 1c of which the later was found to be less
virulent []. Interestingly none of the present tuberculosis
therapy is targeting this enzyme as such MetAP 1b may be
considered for designing new drug for MDR-TB. This enzyme
belongs to the family dinuclearmetallo-hydrolases 
[–] and
various cofactors like Ni (II) were found to empower the
protein to act.

Although modification of target by the pathogen itself during
infection process remains a question, in the present work we
wanted to find out a suitable inhibitor of MetAP1b enzyme
selecting few phenolic and ketonic compounds as ligands.
Though there are a number of MetAP inhibitors known and
available in NCBI PubChem compound database, no antitubercular
drug from those known inhibitors could appear in
the market till date. Therefore, our objective was to search out
more suitable molecule(s) targeting MetAP1b with respect to
higher binding potential, lower IC50 value etc than that of the
known ones.

Methodology
Data Collection:
Drug target i.e. Methionine aminopeptidase (MetAP) of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (PDB ID -3PKA) was downloaded
from Protein Data Bank (PDB) and saved in pdb format. The
ligands were chosen with ketone and phenolic groups. Ligand1
had been generated using L-histidine based combinatorial
library and saved in sdf format. Rest two ligands were retrieved
from pubChem compound database in sdf format  (see
supplementary material).

Ten proven inhibitors of mtMetAP1b were taken from literature
with their respective IC50 value and were drawn using
freeware ChemSketch and saved in mol format. Descriptors i.e.,
Molar Volume (MV), Index of Refraction (IR), Surface Tension
(ST), Density (Den), Polarizability (Pol) and LogP were
calculated for all the ligands using ChemSketch. IUPAC names
of ligands and known inhibitors with their references are shown
in  (see supplementary material).

ADMETox screening:
ADMETox screening was performed for the selected ligands
using mobile@rpbs online portal and the results were recorded
 (see supplementary material). The other drug
likeliness properties were screened with Actelion property
explorer and given in ().

Molecular docking:
Molecular docking was performed using FlexX with the three
ligands in sdf format and Autodock 4.2 with the three ligands in
mol2 format separately against target in pdb format. Results of
Docking were recorded with binding energy, bonded residue,
bond length and bond energy for FlexX in  (see
supplementary material) and for Autodock 4.2 in  (see
supplementary material).

QSAR and activity prediction:
The QSAR study is normally performed to compare the efficacy
of the compounds in question []. This was performed using ten
known inhibitors of MetAP1b. IC50 values of those inhibitors
were taken from literature and the correlation and regression
were generated using freeware EasyQSAR. The regression
equation was used to predict the activity of selected ligands and
the F statistics was checked for the significance of the
correlation and the equation. Multiple regression plot generated
for QSAR model is shown in ().

Results and Discussion
PDB file showed that MetAP1b has 285 amino acid residues
with 5 L helices and 23 M strands. The active site residues and
their interactions with ligands were given in (). The
three ligands in the present work proved their non-toxicity by
passing ADME=Tox filter  and Actelion property
explorer and the drug score was found to be 0.64 ().
Molecular docking with the target showed that Ligand1 has
higher affinity (score-37.5096) and lowest IC50 i.e 4.46 EM
Table 3.

QSAR model prepared showed R2 (square of correlation coefficient)
is 99.50%. The F statistics value was found to be 99.62
which were much higher than F critical value 3.37 showing the
significance of the regression equation. The equation generated
was - LogInvIC50= 61.36 - 0.093*MV- 42.16*IR - 0.014*ST +
4.70*DEN + 0.67*POL + 0.00052*LogP.

During experimental process flexible docking of all three
ligands was carried out in the active site of MetAP1b enzyme of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis using FlexX tool. Fifty top ranking
poses for each ligand were returned in the simulation; out of
which one best pose for each ligand was selected on the basis of
their re-rank score . 
For QSAR model Potencies i.e., IC50
values against target for I-1 to I-10 were taken from literature
[]. 
Activities i.e., logarithm of inverse IC50s were correlated
with six descriptors viz., molar volume, index of refraction,
surface tension, density, polarizability and logP. These
descriptors showed significant correlation with the activities.

Analysis of result  showed that of all three ligands,
ligand L1 is the best option for MetAP1b inhibition as it has
better docking scores -37.5096, with least IC50 value of 4.46µM.
While choosing best ligands, the least score in docking was
preferred as it indicates more stability in binding []. Docking
pattern of ligand L1 with the receptor is presented in ().
Potency of compounds in question has been calculated as
inverse logarithm of IC50 for QSAR model.

In order to have more convincing result, all three ligands were
again docked in the same active site of the same target using
Autodock 4.2 [] and again found that ligand1 is the best
options out of the three, though docking scores in two different
software varies  &amp; 
 (see supplementary
material) the results showed consistency in the hypothesis of
ligand1 as the best option. Pharmacophores corresponding to
each of the ligands were prepared using Ligandscout 3.2
software evaluation package () indicated that Ligand1
has more suitable bonding pattern with target in comparison to
other ligands used. After choosing ligand1 as the best option on
the basis of its docking score, IC50 value and bonding pattern,
target fishing for Ligand1 was carried out using Pharmmapper
tool. Very interestingly it is recorded that ligand1 has MetAP of
human (1KQ0) as target at 205th rank with score 2.726 and fit
0.5453 (Link http://59.78.96.61/pharmmapper/result.php?job_id=12031307 1321).

Though cross validation of Flex X result with Autodock 4.2
confirms suitability of ligand1 for mtMetAP1b, result of target
fishing opened up other possibilities for the ligand and as such
Ligand1 was again docked with MetAP of human and E.coli.
Results obtained from this docking  (see supplementary
material) showed possibility of a wide range of spectrum of the
Ligand1 as drug. As human MetAP is a target for colon cancer
[] 
and collagen-induced arthritis [], Ligand1 may be of use
for those diseases and also for treatment of urinary tract
infection with E. coli over and above its application as antitubercular
drug. It is important to note that in drug
development process compounds having a wide range of
spectrum are always preferred and many such drugs with a
diverse range of application are already in market. Example
may be cited from Hydroxychloroquine which though known
better for its anti-malarial efficacy is also used in the treatment
of arthritis []. To have further convincing support, specific in
silico test for mutagenecity and tumergenicity of Ligand1 was
performed by using Actelion property explorer and found that
Ligand1 is neither mutagenic nor tumergenic ().

Very interestingly it is observed that none of the known
inhibitors of mtMetAP1b has comparable docking score and
IC50 as that of ligand1 (). In order to compare the
bonding pattern of Ligand1 with that of known inhibitors,
pharmacophore for each ligand was developed using
ligandscout 3.0 and compared to that of ligand1. More over a
massive pharmacophore combining all pharmacophores of
known inhibitors was also developed and pharmacophore of
Ligand1 is superimposed on it to see if Ligand1 has the same
amino acid residue bonding with that of known inhibitors. It is
observed that there are some common residues which are hit by
both ligand1 and the known inhibitors (I-1to I-10). Ligand1 also
had hit some amino acid residues that were not hit by the
known inhibitors but these are the active site residues of the
target as per record of Q-site portal. This also shows that
ligand1 may have comparable efficacy to that of the aggregate
efficacy of the ten inhibitors.

Analysis of pharmacophore thus indicates that having better
docking score and better bonding pattern over all ligands and
also over all known inhibitors of MetAP1b of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, Ligand1 may be the suitable option for developing
anti-tubercular drug targeting this particular enzyme. As
function of MetAP is to remove N terminal mathionine from
nascent proteins which is required for post translational
processing and targeting host body by the virulent protein 
[],
inhibition of MetAP enzyme may make the pathogen non
virulent.

Conclusion
We therefore, propose that -3-ammonio-3-(4-oxido-1Himidazol-
1-ium-5-yl) propane-1,1-bis(olate) as a potent MetAP
inhibitor and may be used in designing new anti-tubercular
therapy particularly in the context of Multi Drug Resistant
strains. However in vivo experimentation with both target and
ligand is essential. Especially study on stability of MetAP1b as
target is required as bacteria seldom have the ability to modify
the target in acquiring drug resistance.

In the light of global struggle against emergence of MDR-TB
and extensively drug resistant tuberculosis (XRD-TB), this novel
compound may not only help to control the situation but also
its wide spectrum of activity against other bacteria specially on
E coli may develop potential second line drug to treat
nosocomial infections.

This compound may also be considered for designing
anticancer and anti-rheumatoid arthritis drug targeting MetAP
enzyme of human.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors acknowledge the help of DBT Govt. of India for
establishing the Bioinformatics Centre in Assam University,
Silchar where the work has been carried out. Authors also
extend their thanks to Inte:ligand for providing the evaluation
license of Ligandscout 3.0, which was used as a supporting tool.

Citation:Chowdhury et al, Bioinformation 8(18): 875-880 (2012)

Actelion property Explorer view for drug likeliness of
ligand1.

Multiple regression plot (Linear) of ten phenol
compounds against MetAP of M. tuberculosis

Residues of target docked by ligands (L-1 to L-3) and
inhibitors (I-1 to I-10)

Docking poses of Ligand L1 against MetAp in FlexX and Autodock 4.2.

Ligandscout binding pattern of ligand1 with MetAp

