Background
GPCRs are the large protein families that are found only in
eukaryotes. They are the membrane spanning proteins that
traverse the membrane several times 
[]. There are a variety of
ligands that can activate these receptors like hormones,
pheromones, neurotransmitters and many others. GPCRs are
now a day's used as potent targets in the process of many
modern drug developments. GPCRs play important role in
causing many diseases like neuronal dysfunction including
seizures, Parkinson's disease, night blindness and epilepsy 
[].
Antagonists of mGluRs may exert anticonvulsant effect in
contrast to soman-induced seizures in rats challenged with
soman []. 
Glutamate plays a very crucial role of excitatory
neurotransmitter in brain. mGluRs are a member of GPCR
super family. Metabotropic receptors are a type of GPCRs as
their activity involves in a series of intracellular events which
involves the activation of G-protein and often signal
transduction pathway. Glutamate which is an amino acid acts
as a neurotransmitter []. 
Swanson C. J. et al indicated that
mGluR are interesting new targets to treat human's anxiety and
stress disorders []. 
Among known eight classes of mGluRs the
most extensively studied receptor is the metabotropic glutamate
receptor mGluR1 because of their pharmacological,
physiological, and anatomical as well as biochemical
characteristics []. 
There are two states of GPCR proteins i.e.
active state and inactive states, and these states maintains
equilibrium with each other and can switch over to each other
on sensitization of any ligand or external signals
[]. Active
structure of mGluR1 was modeled by using human B2–
adrenergic G protein-coupled receptor as template 
[].

Materials and Methods
Obtaining template sequence from PDB:
mGluR proteins previously used the structure of Rhodopsin
protein as a template to model the structure of other GPCRs as
stated by Melherbe et al []. In this work human B2-adrenergic
G protein-coupled receptor protein was selected as template
strand because it has similar active sites and activation
mechanism of mGluR protein []. The structure of human B2-
adrenergic G protein-coupled receptor was taken from PDB
database having the PDB ID 2RH1 in the activated state and the
structure was generated for mGlur1 its sequence was obtained
from NCBI,GenBank [,
].

Modelling and Evaluation:
Homology model of mGlur1 protein was generated by using
Modeller 9v7 version and finally structures were evaluated by
using Procheck program [,
].

Similarity searching on ZINC database:
ZINC database was used to obtain similar molecules on the
basis of the structures of previously known ligands, similar
molecules screened based on drug likeliness parameters and
also based on Lipinski's rule of 5 
[].

Pharmacophore generation:
The pharmacophore structure was generated by extracting the
information about the common interacting atoms among 15
already known ligand molecules with the help of Pharmagist
online server [,
].

Docking and interaction study:
The Molegro docking program was used for analyzing the
binding between receptor and ligand molecules to study the
existing interaction between the receptor and the ligand
molecule Ligplot was used [,
].

Designing Novel drug like molecules:
The de novo method of ligand designing process was done
using the Ligbuilder software () in which Pocket, Grow
and Process modules have been used to develop novel drug
candidates [,
].

Results
The Ramachandran plot in case of active mGluR1 protein was
showing that 90.5% residues were falling in the core region,
8.8% of the total residues in the allowed region and 0.7% in the
generously allowed region. By analyzing Naveena et al., 2008
work allosteric modulators were used and developed
pharmacophore (), based on this pharmacophore Zinc
database has been screened () and finally 200 molecules
obtained [].

On the basis of docking energies 12 molecules were selected. In
the other method de novo ligand designing done and results
into 200 novel molecules, from this finally 16 potent molecules
were screened based on binding energies and other parameters
 (see supplementary material). After docking the
molecules obtained by de novo and similarity search method
both are showing better results than the previously known drug
molecules  &amp; 
 (see supplementary material).Total
energy of 10 best ligands obtained by both de novo method and
similarity search method were compared (), it shows
ligands generated by de novo designing method have greater
energy values and they may be a good potential drug
candidates.

The total energy value of the pivot molecule was found to be -
132.576; it has been compared by the ligands generated by the
de novo method. The graph shows that () the energy
comparison of the drug like molecules generated by LigBuilder
and the energy of pivot molecule () i.e. -132.576, it is
observed the de novo method based developed ligands are
better than the pivot molecule. The residues involved in the
close interaction (Glycine 120, Alanine 117, Methionine 207 and
Methionine 86 while the residues that are distantly interacted
with the ligands are Asp 83, Lys 296, Ala 83, Thr 118 and Ala
169) were obtained by Ligplot analysis and a pivot molecule
(ZINC ID: [00] ZINC24890) was selected based on
pharmacophoric characters. A graph has been generated by
comparing the energy values of 10 best previously known
ligands and the ligands generated by de novo method.

Discussion
Our goal was to generate suitable drug candidate which can be
used for the treatment of neural dysfunction diseases. We got
insight from previous work of Melherbe et al 
[] who used
structure of Rhodopsin protein as a template to model the
structure of other GPCRs. Human B2-adrenergic GPCR
template because it has similar active sites and activation
mechanism of mGluR protein []. Human B2-adrenergic G
protein-coupled receptor structure was taken from PDB in the
activated state and the structure was generated for mGlur1 
[,
]. 
Homology model of mGlur1 protein was generated and
finally structures were evaluated [,
]. ZINC database was
used to obtain similar molecules on the basis of the structures of
previously known ligands, similar molecules screened based on
drug likeliness parameters and also based on Lipinski's rule of 5
[]. 
Pharmacophore structure was generated by extracting the
information about the common interacting atoms among 15
already known ligand molecules [,
]. Analyzed the binding
between receptor and ligand molecule [].The de novo method
of ligand designing process was also performed to develop
novel drug candidates []. It was found de novo based drugs
showed better binding than pivot molecule.

Conclusion
However the ligands generated through our method are
showing better binding to mGluR glutamate receptor protein as
compared to previous work. Hence they may be better
modulators for the activity of mGluR1 protein. They may help
to treat various neural dysfunctions like Epilepsy and
Parkinson's disease, but these results may be proved by
experimental evaluation.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are thankful to Dr. M. D. Tiwari, Director, IIIT, and
Allahabad for providing a supportive environment for research
and infrastructural support.

Citation:Omer &amp; Prasad, Bioinformation 8(4): 170-174 (2012)

Showing the docked position of ligand (IDZINC24890)
in the cavity in two different forms.

Showing the basis of preparing the seed

Pharmacophore molecule generated

Comparison of the energy values between ligands
generated by de novo method and ligands obtained by
similarity search method by pharmacophore based on ZINC
database.

Comparison of the energy values between ligands
generated by de novo method and the pivot molecule (ZINC
ID: [00] ZINC24890).

Comparison of the energy values between ligands
generated by de novo method and the pivot molecule. Series
one indicates energy of molecule generated by de novo and
series two indicates energy of molecule generated by pivote
molecule. The blue color represents the de novo ligands while
red one indicates already known ligands.

