Background
Clostridium perfringens is a gram-positive, anaerobic, spore forming and
pathogenic bacterium. The bacterium belongs to major intestinal flora of
human and animal. The pathogenesis of the organism includes gas gangrene,
necrotizing fasciitis, diarrhea brain abscess in pigs, calves, chickens, and other
animals. The rapid generation time and heat resistance ability makes the
organism a major food-borne pathogen []. The outbreak of Clostridium
perfringens is regarded as the second most bacterial food poisoning in USA
and UK, where cases occurring annually are 250,000 and 85,000 respectively
[]. 
Economic losses due to medical care and productivity loss from single
food poisoning amount to several hundred million dollars per year 
[]. The
major virulent factors involved in gastroenteritis and other infections are
extracellular toxins produced by the bacteria. C. perfringens is classified into
five serotypes (A, B, C, D and E) based on the type of enterotoxins. Type A
and C strains are the most dangerous pathogens as it is implicated in human
diseases. Type A strains cause the most destructive disease called gas gangrene
which is characterized by rapid destruction of tissue with the production of gas.
Type B, C, D and E are mainly responsible for veterinary infections 
[].
Deltatoxin is one of the five hemolysins released by most of the Clostridium
perfringens which plays most important role in the gasgangrene and
gastroenteritis. The organism is developing resistance to most conventional
classes of known antibiotics and has emerged as “superbugs”. So there is an
emergency to address the problem by finding better therapeutic substances
which could replace the antibiotics. The active substances present in many
medicinal plants could be used as therapeutic alternatives against Clostridial
infections []. 
The native structure of the deltatoxin was not reported in the
structural databases. Homology modeling is a computer aided approach to
generate all possible folds and conserved motifs responsible for the actual
function of proteins. It has proven to be the method of choice to generate a
reliable 3D model of a protein from its amino acid sequence (target) by
identifying a homologous protein with a known structure (template). The
comparative modeling of hypothetical protein consists of target selection,
template identification, fold assignment, structural alignment, model building
and model evaluation []. 
Prediction of receptor-ligand interaction is the
fundamental concept of drug designing. Structure prediction enables to explain
the mechanisms of interaction between G-protein coupled receptors and variety
of ligands, enzymes, ion channels and current drugs. 3D model prediction and
target identification have profound scope in the field of new generation drug
development process []. 
The prediction of putative protein– ligand binding
conformations by computational docking has pronounced impact for
discovering new generation lead molecules.

Methodology
Microbial characterization and study of multidrug resistance
Clostridium perfringens is a hyperthermophilic bacteria and it survives in any
kind of food items cooked improperly. A total of 32 fried samples of meat (10
samples), chicken and poultry (12 samples each) were collected from different
regions of Coimbatore, India. The presumptive detection of Closrtidium
perfringens was carried out by pour plate method on selective Tryptose
Sulphate Cycloserine (TSC) agar. The confirmed and completed tests were
performed by standard microbiological and biochemical tests. There are reports
that many bacteria developed multiple drug resistance towards conventionally
used antibiotics and emerged as “superbugs”. The antibiotics sensitivity testing
with the isolated organisms is a critical step to understand the drug resistance
and new drug discovery mechanisms. Hence, the isolated organism is tested
for antibiotic sensitivity patterns by Kirby- Bauer disc diffusion method.

Computer aided drug discovery
Since the isolated organism showed resistance to many antibiotics, the drug of
choice against the infection became limited. Thus, a novel approach has to be
developed to design new therapeutic substances; one such method is called
computer aided screening. Deltatoxin is the major virulent factor and probable
drug target. So the structural studies and fold recognition of deltatoxin is
critical step to develop new lead molecules. But the crystal structure of
deltatoxin is not present in its native form. The 3D structure of toxin could be
modeled by comparative modeling using its amino acid sequence.

Sequence retrieval and template selection
The amino acid sequence of deltatoxin was retrieved from GenBank (GI:
194719328) []. 
Since the quality of the model depends on the availability of
good template, it is important to identify the best template structure. The best
homologous protein was selected by PSI- BLAST [] based on the percentage
of identity and similarity. A multiple sequence analysis has been performed by
T-COFFEE [] to analyze the evolutionary conservation among the
sequences. The phylogenetic characterization was carried out using NJ PLOT
[]. 
All these steps are essential factors for the selection of best template.

Model building and validation
The crystal structure of drug target (Deltatoxin) is not available in its native
form. Thus, the protein was modeled using MODELLER 9v9. It is based on
satisfaction of spatial restraints derived from the alignment and Probability
Density Functions (PDFs) []. The X-ray crystal structure of α- hemolysin 
[]
of Staphylococcus aureus (PDB ID: 3M4D, Chain A) was identified as the best
template. The initial model building and structural alignment was performed
and the modeled protein was visualized using UCSF CHIMERA 
[]. Energy
minimization of the generated model was done through CHARMM 
[],
Quasi-Newton Mechanics [] 
and GBSA Surface Potential []. Parameters
like covalent bond distances and angles; stereo-chemical validation and atom
nomenclature were validated using PROCHECK [] and overall quality factor
of non-bonded interactions between different atoms types were calculated by
ERRAT program []. 
DaliLite [] is used to calculate Root Mean Square
Deviation (RMSD) between the set of targets and template protein to see how
much modeled protein deviates from the template protein structure. The
hypothetical model was then deposited to Protein Model Data Base.

Selection of ligands and docking studies
Since the organism has developed resistance towards many conventionally
used antibiotics, it is essential to screen for better therapeutic substances. It has
been known that many herbal based compounds have high druggish activity
and binding affinity towards deltatoxin. Selection and screening of molecules
with good pharmacophoric and druggish activity is the critical step in computer
aided drug screening. Based on extensive literature studies, 70 plant extracts
and 5 antibiotics were identified. The drug likenesses and pharmacophoric
features of ligands were studied by Lipinski’s rule of 5. Protein ligand docking
was performed using AUTODOCK 4.2 [] by Lamarckian genetic algorithm.
The catalytic and binding site of the target has been identified by auto grid. The
structure and chemical properties of the active site allow the recognition and
binding of the ligand. Around 2,500,000 bioactive conformations were
generated by 10 iterations and the best conformations were screened in terms of
lowest binding energy generated in the clustering histogram.

Discussion
The improper cooking of food items, especially meat and meat products, results
in the survival of hyperthermophilic Clostridia which may cause gastroenteritis
and other health hazards. We have isolated and characterized Clostridium
perfringens from fried samples of meat products (Table 1 See 
). We have noticed that the food samples were consumed by lots of
people without any hygienic practices that may result in sudden outbreak of
food poisoning. The isolated organism from the collected samples is illustrated
in ; the organism produces black colored colonies on the selective
TSC medium. The virulent factors of the organism are enterotoxins, mainly
delta, which is characterized by lecithinase activity, a zone of inhibition around
the colonies due to toxin production, is illustrated in , The major
problem pointed in this study is the necessity to develop other therapeutic
substances, because the isolated organism is resistant to many antibiotics and
treatment with conventional drug becomes challenging in future. We have
tested the antibiotic sensitivity patterns of isolated bacteria, illustrated in
. The antibiogram clearly showed that the organism is resistant to
Streptomycin, Polymyxin-B and Amphotericin-B and moderately sensitive to
Bacitracin, Erythromycin and Vancomycin which are all currently used drugs
against the infection.

Computer aided screening is an ideal platform to develop novel compounds
against many diseases. As mentioned deltatoxin is the major virulent factor for
the infections caused by Clostridium perfringens. The 3D structure of
deltatoxin is not available but it is very essential for rational drug discovery.
We have identified all the possible folds and generated a 3D model of
deltatoxin from its protein sequence (GenBank, GI: 194719328) by
comparative modeling. The protein has 318 amino acids and encodes
transposase genes (957 bps) which act as major functional element of the toxin.

The best template for homology modeling, selected based on the similarity
search and phylogenetic characterization is shown in  &amp; 
. Out of
six homologous sequences, the crystal structure of M113N mutant of α-
hemolysin of Staphylococcus aureus (PDBID: 3M4D, chain A) was identified
as best template with 33% identity and 53% similarity. The resolution of
template structure was 1.9 Ao and R value was 0.24. The molecular weight is
35,520 kDa and it consists of 293 amino acids. The secondary structure
prediction revealed that 56.29% of random coil, 31.13% of extended strands,
7.86% of alpha helices and 4.72% of beta turns. The toxin consists of a
hydrophobic transmembrane helix between the amino acids 40 and 57. The
generated 3D model is illustrated in . The model has same structural
conformation as the template which is very essential for receptor – ligand
interaction. The 3D model is refined using energy minimization by molecular
dynamic methods such as CHARMM, Quasi-Newton Mechanics and GBSA
surface potential, given the stable conformation of the model. The
Ramachandran plot (generated by PROCHECK) validated the quality of
homology model, 87.9% residues are in most favored region implies the quality
of the model is good. The overall quality factor of non-bonded interactions
between different atoms identified by ERRAT was 58.3%. The backbone
RMSD estimated from superimposition of the template and target was found to
be 1.2 Å also reveals the quality of the model is good. The model was
deposited to Protein Model Database, a repository of storing manually built 3D
models of proteins, and it can be downloaded by PM0076541.

Docking simulations are the best method to study receptor – ligand interactions
in drug designing. The docking was performed to compare the binding
efficiency of antibiotics and herbal compounds towards deltatoxin. There are
reports on the antimicrobial potentials of many plant compounds against
Clostridial infection. In this perspective, 70 herbal extracts were identified and
screened by Lipinski Rule of 5, implies that molecules should contain less than
10 Hbond acceptors and 5 Hbond donors. The calculated logP value should be
less than 5 and the molecular weight should be less than 500 g/mol. All
compounds satisfied the rule and the molecules were subjected to docking
studies (Table 2 See ). Out of 70 molecules tested,
Curcumin, Eugenol, Palmatine, Eucalyptol and Chrysin showed best
interactions with deltatoxin whose binding energies are -8.60 kcal/mol, -6.18
kcal/mol, -5.72 kcal/mol, -5.69 kcal/mol and 5.42 kcal/mol respectively.
Curcumin, a curcuminoid, isolated from Indian spice turmeric (Curcuma
longa) was the best inhibitor than the antibiotic Linezoid. The docked complex
is stabilized by two hydrogen bonds and the interacting amino acids are
LYS140, THR142, THR148, ASN186, THR 187, LEU246 and SER252 which
are illustrated in . The interactions were strong because of more
number of interacting residues, number of hydrogen bonds and shorter bond
length. The antibiotics Linezoid, Clindamycin, Penicillin, Chloramphenicol and
Metronidazole were docked with deltatoxin. Linezoid and Clindamycin showed
best interactions to the target protein with binding energies of -6.08 kcal/mol
and -5.69 kcal/ mol respectively. The interacting residues between Linezolid
and deltatoxin were ASP184, THR185, THR187, THR201, SER 244, SER 245,
LEU246 and it is stabilized by one hydrogen bond illustrated in 
. The
interactions with the antibiotics were not stable enough to produce good
docked conformations compared to plant derived molecules. The docking
studies clearly explains Curcumin is interacting more efficiently with
deltatoxin than antibiotic Linezolid and it could be a new lead molecule against
the deltatoxin mediated clostridial infection. Similarly the other plant
molecules tested in the study can also be used as therapeutic alternatives
because it is more effectively interacting with deltatoxin than antibiotics.

Conclusion
The study concluded that computer aided drug discovery is an emerging and
effective alternative for identification of novel therapeutic substances. Several
naturally available herbal compounds are identified and their effectiveness
against Clostridial infection is tested by molecular docking. Curcumin, Eugenol
and similar kinds of herbal based compounds were identified to be effective
inhibitors against deltatoxin. The binding energies of herbal based compounds
are less than that of antibiotics hence; herbal medicines could solve all
problems of multiple drug resistance by many bacteria. The study also helpful
for pharmaceutical sectors as computer aided screening would reduce the
complexities involved in the discovery and development of new lead
molecules.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors thankfully acknowledge the R &amp; D Centre of Life Sciences and
Engg, Dayananda Sagar Institutions for providing the necessary facilities and
also grateful to Dr. P.S Rao, Director Life Sciences and Engg. for his constant
support and encouragement throughout the study.

Citation:Skariyachan et al, Bioinformation 6(10): 375-379 (2011)

Clostridium perfringens, a notorious pathogenic bacterium, isolated
from improperly cooked food samples. (A) The growth is indicated by the
formation of black colored colonies on selective medium. (B) The enterotoxin
production of the organism characterized by lecithinase activity, an opaqueness
and halo around the colonies in the egg-yolk milk agar. (C) Multidrug
resistance patterns of the isolated organism towards Amphotericin B (20
mcg/disc), Polymyxin B (50 mcg/disc) and Streptomycin (25 mcg/disc). The
organism is moderately sensitive to Vancomycin (15mcg/disc), Erythromycin
(30 mcg/disc) and Bacitracin (10mcg/disc) indicating that antibiotics are not
suitable drug of choice against Clostridial infection.

Generation of hypothetical model of deltatoxin and selection of best
template for modeling (A and C). The phylogram and alignments are indicating
that the sequences of deltatoxin shared evolutionary relatedness to α-hemolysin
(A chain) of Staphylococcus areus (marked in red box). (B) The generated 3D
model of protein consists of stable secondary structure (helices and sheets)
which gives the catalytic sites for drug interaction.

Docked structures of Curcumin (A) and Linezoid (B) with
deltatoxin. Turmeric compound Curcumin showed better binding affinity to
deltatoxin than Linezoid explains the therapeuctic value of plant compounds
over antibiotics. The ligand – receptor interaction in the case of Curcumin is
stabilized by two H bonds (represented as green colored stick, length-1.815 AÅ
and 2.245 AÅ) and the amino acid residues interacting are LYS140, THR142,
THR148, ASN186, THR 187, LEU246 and SER252 making the interaction
more stronger and stable (A). The binding energy of docked complex was
found to be -8.6 kcal/mol implies more stable docking. The interaction of
Linezoid and deltatoxin is stabilized by only one H bond (green colored stick
of 2.0 AÅ lengths) and the interacting residues are ASP184, THR185, THR187,
THR201, SER 244, SER 245 and LEU246 indicating that the interaction less
stronger than that of Curcumin. The binding energy of the docked complex was
found to be -6.08 kcal/mol, which indicates that the docked complex is less
stable compared to curcumin.

