Background
Tuberculosis (TB) persists as a major global health issue. An
estimated 8.6 million people developed TB and 1.3 million
deaths were observed in 2012 which included 320,000 deaths
among HIV positive people. About 25 percent of TB cases and
deaths occur among men but TB is one among the top three
killer of women worldwide. Majority of cases were observed in
South-East Asia 29%, African and Western Pacific 27% and 19%
regions respectively. India alone accounted for 26 % of the total
cases and 12% of the cases were observed in China 
[].

Tuberculosis is primarily an airborne disease. Infection of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis is established as this bacterium
overcomes challenges brought forward by host immune
system. Mycobacteria invade and persist silently within host
macrophages for many years establishing a chronic infection
upon failure of host defense mechanisms.

The duration and administration of the drug regimen for
tuberculosis is long and complicated requiring directly
observed therapy (DOT) through a health professional. The
recent appearance of drug resistant strains threatens to make
the present treatment obsolete. Despite the occurrence of drug
resistance and the inadequacy of present drug regimen, no new
drug has been developed in the past 50 years. Infection with
resistant strains of M.tb decreases the probability of cure along
with increase in the cost of treatment [].

Novel drug targets of MTB should be explored to kill drug
sensitive as well as drug resistant bacteria. A good drug target
is a protein unique to the pathogen, and critical for its survival
within the host. One such pathway containing multiple
enzymes as potential targets is peptidoglycan biosynthesis,
widely conserved in bacteria and involves two stages 
[,
,
].
The formation of UDP-N-acetylmuramoyl pentapeptide, the
monomeric building block is the first stage which occurs in
cytoplasm and is catalyzed by the Mur enzymes. Transfer of an
enolpyruvate residue from phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) to UDP
N-acetylglucosamine is catalysed by MurA and is followed by
reduction of enolpyruvate to D -lactate by catalysis through
MurB enzyme yielding UDP N-acetylmuramate and is the first
committed step of this pathway. Formation of UDP Nacetylmuramyl
pentapeptide is a result of stepwise addition of
the pentapeptide side-chain on the newly reduced D -lactyl
group by ATP-dependent amino acid ligases (MurC, MurD,
MurE and MurF). Mur C adds L-Alanine to the UDP-Mur-NAc
followed by addition of D-Glutamine by Mur D enzyme. LLysine
is added to this precursor UDP-Mur-NAc-L-Ala-D-Glu
by the action of Mur E enzyme. The product of this reaction is
UDP-Mur-NAc-Tripeptide which later is used by Mur F
enzyme of ligase family that adds D-Ala-D-Ala which
completes the synthesis of UDP-Mur-NAc-Pentapeptide. These
ligase reactions are essentially ATP dependent. Of these
protein, only the crystal structures of the M.tb Mur E are
available, making it an appropriate target for prediction of
potential inhibitors.

Structure based virtual screening is typically employed to dock
a large library of small molecules against a known protein
target to score their potential as orthosteric or allosteric
inhibitors. Pitfalls in its implementation arise from unreal
assumptions and expectations - where scoring is typically, and
wrongly, assumed to be highly correlated with potency; data
design and content - where the lack of knowledge of positive
and negative controls, and improper filters in the library
creation can lead to erroneous interpretations; and errors that
arise from conformational sampling and the software used 
[].
In addition, the typical use case requires commercial
proprietary software and high-performance computing as the
large size of libraries makes the problem computationally
intractable.

We revise the aim of virtual screening to provide as many
diverse starting points for the hit-to-lead, and lead optimization
phases of drug discovery, and not as the endpoint of the
selection of highly potent molecules. The protocol is designed
to minimize the pitfalls normally associated with virtual
screening, and use commonly and freely available docking and
diversity libraries which can be performed on normal
computational equipment.

The Mur E protein is monomeric in its stoichiometry and is
present as a unit of four monomer in biological form with four
chains A, B, C, D. All of the chains being identical monomeric
units. Each chain/monomeric unit has a natural ligand
(Uridine-5'-Diphosphate-N-Acetylmuramoyl-L-Alanine-DGlutamate)
bound to the protein along with an ADP molecule
and two magnesium ions present as cofactor with presence of a
single water molecule. The structure of Mur E PDB ID 2XJA 
[]
is used in present docking study. The Chain A of protein was
selected for docking. The bound ligand was removed from
active site of the receptor retaining ADP and the two
magnesium ions. Critical amino acids with which the natural
substrate is interacting are identified using residue information
from PDBsum [] 
and this site is selected for virtual screening.

Methodology
Identification of Positive Control:
Positive control dataset consist of molecules identified for their
inhibitory effect against Mur E enzyme from a survey of the
literature. Phosphinate inhibitor of the meso-diaminopimelic
acid-adding enzyme [], compound SID 103691194 
[],
compound 6a [], 3-methoxynordomesticine 
[] and five Nmethyl-
2-alkenyl-4-quinolones [] are present in positive
control library. Structure of these compounds were sketched
using Avogadro Software [] before being converted to 3D
SDF format using Open Babel [].

Generation of Decoys:
DUD Gen Program of DUD-E [] was used for generation of
decoys. This program generates 50 decoys for every active
provided, with input and output being in SMILES format. The
decoys generated were converted into sdf format using Open
Babel [].

Standard Diversity Set:
For the benefit of the general research community with the goal
of identifying novel chemical leads and biological mechanisms
a compound screening program is operated by the
Developmental Therapeutics Program (DTP) (
http://dtp.nci.nih.gov/docs/misc/common_files/submit_compounds.html). 
NCI diversity set IV [] is a dataset containing 1596
molecule which are derived from almost 140,000 compounds
available for distribution from the DTP repository and was
used as a library for docking against the protein 2XJA.

Molecule Pre-Processing:
Preprocessing of ligand molecules involved conversion of
dimension from 2D to 3D and conversion of file format to .pdb
using Open Babel software []. To bring the receptor and the
ligands in the same coordinate space an in-house written
python and perl script for receptor and ligand, respectively was
used for transformation. The center of active site is used for
transformation of the coordinate of the receptor. The docking
site was centered at the following residues of the protein
(Ser222, Asp247, His248, Thr195, Thr196, Arg230, Glu198,
Leu67, Ser84, Ala69,Gln70, Thr86, Thr85). The geometric center
of the ligand is used to transform the molecule to the same
coordinate space.

Molecular Docking:
Docking study was performed using AutoDock Vina 
[]
Preparation of required input files for AutoDock Vina are
prepared using AutoDock program. Preparation of files
through AutoDock involved addition of polar hydrogen atoms
and gasteiger charges. The size of grid box in AutoDock Vina
was kept as 25,25,25 for X,Y,Z. The energy range was kept as 4
which is default setting. Vina is implemented through shell
script provided by AutoDock Vina developers. The binding
affinity of ligand is observed in as a negative score with
Kcal/mol as unit. AutoDock Vina script generates nine poses of
ligand with distinguished binding energy for each ligand input.
The pose of ligand with best binding affinity is extracted from
the docked complex using in-house perl script. Docking
through Vina [] is done in similar fashion for the three ligand
dataset i.e., active, inactives and NCI diversity set IV 
[].

Results &amp; Discussion
Identification of residues involved in substrate specificity and binding:
Amino acids which are involved in interaction with the natural
substrate were identified using residue information from
PDBsum and this site is selected for virtual screening. X,Y,Z
coordinates are derived by averaging the coordinates of the
residues derived from PDBsum [].

The active site of MurE is a large cavity, and from a structural
point of view can be divided into three sections. Two sections
impart specificity to the natural ligand, which maybe divided
into the UDP moiety - consisting of the uracil and
pyrophosphate rings, and the linear di-peptide L-Ala-D-Glu.
The interactions between the uracil ring of UDP moiety of UAG
is through residues in the loop connecting β2 and β3 while the
pyrophosphate moiety makes hydrogen bonds with the main
chain of the loop connecting β3 and α3, all three secondary
structures being part of the same domain. The O6׳ of Nacetylmuramic
acid ring forms a hydrogen bond with
carboxylate of Glu198 a conserved residue in the MurE family,
present in a second domain. For the linear di-peptide, O19 of
the carbonyl group of the peptide bond of UAG interacts with
NH1 and NH2 of Arg 230 that is again highly conserved. The α-
carboxylate of d-Glu forms a hydrogen bond with main chain
nitrogen of Thr195 and the side chain of Ser222. The other
carboxylate is coordinated with a Magnesium ion, involved
with the catalytic site with the binding of ATP. The third
section of the active site contains other conserved residues from
the MurE family associated with ATP binding - which is a
generic function present in a number of catalytic reactions.
Potential inhibitors of this section of the cavity would have a
problem of cross-reactivity with ATP binding, and have a high
chance of being toxic. In order to exclude this section of the
active-site cavity from the screen, the active site is prepared
with the ADP and Mg2+ ligands retrieved from the crystal
structure. The residues responsible for substrate specificity
identified from the active site are Ser222, Asp247, His248,
Thr195, Thr196, Arg 230, Glu198, Leu67, Ser84, Ala69, Gln70,
Thr8 and Thr85 ().

Virtual screening with Mur E does not have high specificity:
The enzyme MurE does have a range of known inhibitors,
though not all have been tested against M.tb. Enrichment
curves from virtual screening of inhibitors and their decoys can
evaluate the discriminating ability of the docking program as
they rank the known positives relative to decoys. The
enrichment curve of the known inhibitors against MurE show
that docking with AutoDock Vina cannot separate six of the
seven known ligands from their respective decoys ().

However, the large inhibitors Phosphoinate, SID 103691194 and
the natural ligand could be separated from the other decoys.
There is a known correlation between large molecular size and
its corresponding high binding energy []. This is found to be
the case with MurE: only the large molecular inhibitors rank
well against the set of decoys. Virtual screening would not be
able to select for smaller inhibitors like the quininoles, given the
large size of the active site. However, the actual mechanism of
quininoles in MurE inhibition is thought to be through the
interference of ATP, a site which has been modified in our
screening process, as we wish to select only for molecules
specific to Section I and II of the active site defined in the earlier
section of this manuscript. Given the range of inhibitors and
low enrichment, virtual screening for the MurE protein system
would be expected to result in a low sensitivity.

Prediction of potential fragments from a diversity library:
However, as three out of the known inhibitors still score well
with docking, virtual screening can still be successfully used to
select similar molecules, and maintain a high specificity if
appropriate thresholds and filters were used to select potential
inhibitors from the library. We have chosen to use a cutoff of 1
% of the highest scoring library compounds for further analysis
(). The top 16 ligands obtained after virtual screening
through AutoDdock Vina were further studied for their
potential as inhibitor against Mur E enzyme of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis. Docked complexes were analyzed using LIGPLOT
[], 
to identify interactions with residues critical for binding to
the natural substrate, shown in (,
). Interestingly,
seven of the sixteen molecules dock preferentially to section I
() of the active site, while three dock only with section
II, allowing for the potential pairing of the two sets of
molecules to create a more active inhibitor. A visual
examination of decoys with high energies, shows that this
selective docking is not present - residue interactions being
present across both sections of the active site.

Conclusion
Virtual screening of small molecule libraries, which is a
common strategy to shortlist potential inhibitors for screening,
does not have high accuracy. Algorithms for exploring
conformational space in the ligand are well-developed, but the
lack of accurate scoring functions, and other pitfalls including
improper protocols contribute to their inherently low
sensitivity.

We propose the use of virtual screening from a diversity set of
small molecules to be used as fragments to build larger, and
more specific inhibitors. Compounds that had higher or equal
scores than the natural ligand and SID 103691194,
corresponding to 1% (16 in no.) of the library, were selected as
potential building blocks. These were further evaluated by
visual inspection of their docked poses. Interestingly, the two
sections of the active site defined in this manuscript, serve as
separate sites for the eventual docking of the drug-like
molecules, allowing for the identification of two sets of
molecules, which can be combined to create more specific leads.
This property in high-scoring drug-like molecules is not found
in a sampling of high-scoring decoys, and maybe used as a
filter to further improve the sensitivity of docking.

Shilpi Singh acknowledges the award of a Tata-CSIR-OSDD
Scholarship (TCOS).

Citation:Singh et al, Bioinformation 10(11): 697-702 (2014)

A) The M. tb Mur E enzyme (2xja) with the active site grid used for docking visible as a mesh. Critical residues of
importance for natural ligand are shown as spheres. The associated ADP and magnesium in orange and green color respectively;
B) Critical residues responsible for binding can be defined from the X-RAY and docked ligand: Ser222, Asp247, His248, Thr195,
Thr196, Arg 230, Glu198, Leu67, Ser84, Ala69,Gln70, Thr8 and Thr85 residues interact with the natural substrate Uridine-5'-
Diphosphate-N-Acetylmuramoyl-L-Alanine-D-Glutamate. LIGPLOT superimposition shows overlap at eighteen places which
supports the docking algorithm being followed. The post docking ligand showed proximity with 10 out of the 13 earlier identified
specificity determining residues that interact with the natural substrate. The superimposed pre and post docked conformations of
the of natural substrate shows that the linear tail corresponding to the di-peptide (C21 to C28) is correctly docked in the groove of
the active site (average RMSD of C21-C28 = 0.9671), while the UDP moiety has a higher RMSD of 3.753. The orange and green
labels correspond to section I &amp; II, respectively.

A) Rank plot of known positives after docking. SID 103691194 is separated adequately from the decoys; B) Prediction of
potential inhibitors from libraries: A histogram plot of the docking energies of the NCI diversity set. The energies of known
positives are shown as bars on the X-axis.

Comparison of positive controls and predicted inhibitors: interacting residues after docking

Ligplot results for post-docking poses of selected ligands A) Uridine-5'-Diphosphate-N-Acetylmuramoyl-L-Alanine-DGlutamate-
(Natural Ligand.); B) SID 103691194 (Known inhibitor for E.Coli); C) SID 26732564 and; D) SID 26664473.

