Background
Aptamers are well-known nucleic acid molecules that tightly
bind to their targets by recognizing their three-dimensional
structures. Aptamers are usually obtained by the SELEX
(Systematic Evolution of Ligands by EXponential enrichment)
process [,
]. 
The aptamer sequence data show the following
four unique characteristics compared to the usual genomic,
RNA or other natural sequences analysis. The first is that the
length of each aptamer is usually shorter than 150 bases. The
second is that the sequence data sets from one selection process
usually consist of multiple sequence groups. The third unique
characteristic was that at least two structurally different forms
are predicted depending on the existence of their targets which
is well-known in riboswitch studies. Riboswitches are one of
the natural aptamers found in micro-organisms and plants 
[].
The fourth is that multiple aptamer sequences usually contain
some redundant motifs. Experimental truncation approaches of
aptamers retaining the redundant sequence part could
sometimes successfully minimize an aptamer length without
significant loss of its binding activity 
[]. It is worthwhile in
considering the third and the forth characteristics of aptamers
to verify the strategy of a secondary structure prediction
algorithm. The widely-used secondary structure prediction
software for RNA are well established for the universal
prediction of RNA molecules, but they have no capability to
predict the structural changes between the free-form and the
target molecule-bound form, which, we think, are important
aspects when the aptamer secondary structure is predicted.

Methodology
The ValFold program is developed using Java (JDK 1.6.0). The
mainstream of ValFold is a secondary structure prediction
algorithm to minimize the free energy. We expand this
algorithm to predict the G-quartet structure, which is generally
known as the unique structure of the telomere part of all
chromosomes [], and also reported in many aptamers binding
to target molecules []. ValFold algorithm is based on the
optimization concept for all of the stem candidate
combinations. It also predicts the G-quartet structure because
the G-quartet structure candidate list is combined with the stem
candidate list at the same time. Each G-quartet structure
candidate has a report with Gibbs free energy parameter 
[].
The ValFold algorithm process uses this energy parameter as an
indicator to find out the G-quartet structure candidates or the
usual stem candidates. The “CastOff” function is a characteristic
feature of ValFold. Aptamers are generally known to bind to
target molecules on single stranded regions known as “bulge”
or “loop” []. 
CastOff uses this hypothetical feature in aptamers
to predict the aptamer binding motif from single sets of SELEX
sequences.

The practical process of ValFold algorithm is as follows 
()
: First, the suboptimal secondary structures among all of the
sequence sets of SELEX process are predicted by main function
of ValFold (Step 1). A flowchart of this process is represented in
. All of 
the single stranded regions such as “bulge” or
“loop” candidates are extracted from the suboptimal secondary
structures, except for the primer compliment sequences (Step 2).
The maximum length of the motif candidates and the number
of allowed mismatches in the motif candidates are input for the
calculation process (Step 3). Then CastOff algorithm finds the
conserved scores for each of the motif candidates according to
the number of the motif conserved sequences. If one of the
single stranded region candidates possesses a motif candidate,
CastOff determines that the sequence is a conserved motif
candidate (Step 4). A flowchart of these steps 2 to 4 is
represented in .

CastOff determines the highest scoring motif as the most
possible motif. The filtering of secondary structure candidates
with CastOff generates results including cases where the motif
candidates are found only in a bulge and loop structures.
Therefore, it is possible to select the aptamer secondary
structures that can bind with the target molecules as a binding
conformation. If the candidate motif is found on “bulge” or
“loop” structure on the binding conformation, it is worthwhile
to attempt to retain those regions in a truncate aptamer
candidates and subject for further binding assays by
researchers. The example is shown in .

Software Input and output
ValFold supports FASTA format as an input. Users can add the
primer region information for each aptamer sequence to use the
CastOff function. Calculation results of ValFold are displayed
with GUI (). 
 shows the result of a RNA
aptamer bound to sphingosylphosphorylcholine (SPC) shown
as an examples []. 
“UUA” was predicted as target binding
motif in the loop region in this example. The result was
subsequently validated as the truncated aptamer, m12, is shown
to bind SPC with good affinity ().

Caveat and future development
We have developed the aptamer truncation program by using a
binding conformation prediction. The truncation strategy
worked very well in some cases such as SPC 
[] and rabbit
immunoglobulin G [] aptamers which are based on 96 well
based sequencers. At this moment, ValFold does not support
large data sets from next-generation sequencing equipments
because the current version is computationally slow. So, we
need to develop the next version of ValFold to adapt the large
sequence data sets which will enable us to find better aptamers.

The authors thank Drs. Penmetcha K. R. Kumar, Hiroshi
Mizuno, Fumiko Nishikawa and Satoshi Nishikawa for
scientific discussions. The development of ValFold was partially
supported by the Bio-oriented Technology Research
Advancement Institution (BRAIN).

Citation:Akitomi et al, Bioinformation 7(1): 38-40 (2011)

Truncation procedure of ValFold. Secondary
structures were drawn by using PseudoViewer 
[], Turner
model [] and SantaLucia model 
[] are used for the
calculation of free energies of RNA and DNA aptamers.

Flowchart of ValFold 1 (Figure 1A Step 1).

Flowchart of ValFold 2 (Figure 1A Step 2, 3, 4).

