Background
Helicobacter pylori is a gram negative microaerophilic bacterium causing 
chronic gastritis, peptic ulcer and gastric carcinoma  [,
]. The bacterium 
is able to survive in the hostile environment of the human stomach through 
the activity of urease. This enzyme catalyses the hydrolysis of urea to 
ultimately yield ammonium and bicarbonate ions, thus causing an increase 
of the local acidic pH of the mucosa for compatible survival of the 
pathogen  []. 
In particular, urease is assembled invivo as an inactive 
apoenzyme and undergoes a maturation process that involves Ni2+
incorporation and lysine carbamylation to produce a fully active holoenzyme. 
This assembly requires the significant involvement of urease 
accessory proteins and thus affirmative from the invivo studies using yeast 
two hybrid analysis  [,
], coimmunoprecipation assays  
[] which reveals 
a direct interaction between ureG and ureE. Hence by utilizing the 
available evidence, the urease accessory proteins and their interacting 
partners present in STRING database [] are taken for the present study. In 
this paper, interacting proteins namely, ureH, ureI, nikR, groL and flgS 
from Helicobacter pylori J99 which are devoid of a complete structure are 
chosen for modeling and insilico analysis. Plant defensins are small, basic 
peptides that  have a characteristic three-dimensional folding pattern that is 
stabilized by eight disulfide-linked cysteines. They are termed plant
defensins because they are structurally related to defensins found in other 
types of organism, including humans []. Plant defensins till date act on a 
wide range of fungi exhibiting antifungal activity which includes plant 
pathogens. Some plant defensins, however, do not inhibit fungal growth 
but rather inhibit a-amylase activity  and protein synthesis  [,
,
,]. 
Alpha-amylase is an insect gut enzyme and  it is proposed that inhibition of 
a-amylase activity results in indigestibility of plant material and thus in 
defense against feeding insects  []. Astonishingly, plant defensins that 
inhibit a-amylase activity however do not exhibit antifungal activity and 
vice versa  []. Hence in this study an attempt is also made to dock the 
VrD1 and VrD2 (Vigna radiata) defensin proteins and urease interaction 
proteins of Helicobacter pylori J99. Apart from antibacterial colonization 
activity, the work would sound novel as it also has anticancer activity.

Methodology
Sequence retrieval
Confidence interval map of urease accessory proteins were analyzed from 
STRING database and availability for authentic structures in Protein data 
bank was checked comparatively in NCBI Entrez, PDB and SWISSPROT 
databases. The protein sequences for ureH, ureI, nikR, groL and flgS were 
retrieved from the STRING database.

Template generation
Suitable templates for the above mentioned proteins (1VH4, 2NR1, 
2WVF, 1KP8_A and 3D36A) were selected using the homology detection 
and structure prediction by HMM-HMM comparison in 
http://toolkit.tuebingen.mpg.de/hhpred/. 
The templates chosen had an evalue &lt;1.0 and similarity &gt;90%.

Physicochemical characterization
Theoretical Isoelectric point (pI), Molecular weight, Number of positive 
and negatively charged residues, Extinction coefficient, Instability Index, 
Aliphatic Index and Grand average  hydropathicity (GRAVY) were 
computed using the Expasy's protparam server 
(http://us.expasy.org/tools/protparam.html).

Secondary structure prediction and functional analysis
Secondary structure prediction and functional analysis:
The SOSUI Server  [] was used to characterize whether the protein is 
soluble or transmembrane in nature. Disulphide linkages were found by 
DISULFIND Server  []. 
Secondary structure was predicted using PSIPRED Server 
[].

Model building and evaluation
The modeling of the three dimensional structure of the protein was 
performed by MODELLER9V8 []. The constructed models were energy 
minimized by CHIMERA  []. The overall stereochemical properties of 
the proteins were analyzed in the RAMPAGE Server  []. The three 
dimensional structures were further verified by VERIFY3D  
[]. RMS-Z 
score for bond angles of modeled protein () structure was estimated by 
QMEAN Server []. The models are viewed in RASMOL.

Analysis of Ligand binding sites and pockets
Ligand binding site and pockets were predicted by CASTp server 
[] and 
QSITE FINDER [].

Analysis of protein interaction
Protein ­ protein interaction residues were predicted by PPI-PRED 
[].

Docking studies
Protein structures of VrD1 and VrD2 plant defensins of Vigna radiata was 
retrieved from Protein Data Bank with Accession numbers 1T15 and 
2GL1. Docking between urease interaction proteins () and VrD1 and VrD2 
proteins was performed by patchdock server  []. Energy minimization
was performed before and after docking using GROMOS96 version of 
SWISS-PDB Viewer [].

Discussion
The sequences retrieved from STRING database are tabulated in  Table 
1(see ) and physicochemical parameters, 
SOSUI server results, Disulphide bond patterns and RMS-Z score values 
are computed and compiled in  Table 2, 3,4 and 5(see  
) 
respectively. The urease accessory interaction proteins are 
inactive in its apo form  [,
] and upon conformational change in to holo 
enzyme, they require an interaction among nine proteins ranging from 
ureA to flgS. Among which, four proteins have definitive structure. Hence 
this paper attempts to model the remaining five structures through 
homology modeling ().  Out of the five modeled structures, groL protein was 
found to be instable.  Moreover, the ratio of positively and negatively 
charged residues was found to be high.  It has high molecular weight and 
functions as heat shock protein homolog.  It prevents misfolding and 
promotes the refolding and proper assembly of unfolded polypeptides 
generated under stress.  Hence, it is affirmative that its structure might be 
unstable due to the above said function.  Instability of groL might also be 
attributed to the fact that it doesn't contain any tryptophan residues.  From 
, transmembrane region characteristics are indicative and except for 
UreI, Rest four proteins modeled are soluble in nature.  Disulphide bond 
patterns are absent in groL and flgS which is indicative that without 
disulphide bridges also a protein can exist.  flgS structure represent the 
above said phenomenon.  No valid RMS-Z score was detected for groL.  
This also affirms that no valid structure could be generated for the 
particular protein.  Further work is under progress in finding suitable 
candidates for competitively interacting with urease accessory interaction 
proteins and thereby inhibiting invivo survival of  Helicobacter pylori. 
Ligand binding sites are indicated in   and it depicts the 
interaction by PPI-PRED in . Aminoacids in red color represent 
the interaction sites for protein-protein docking. Docked results affirm the 
effective interaction between VrD1 and 2 with urease interaction proteins. 
The docking results show that the  Vigna radiata proteins when purified 
could act as a treatment modality. To be precise, it would efficiently curb 
the colonization and hinder the colonization efficacy of Helicobacter pylori 
J99. VrD1 was shown to possess insecticidal activity against bruchids 
[]
and VrD2 has alpha amylase inhibitory activity  
[], however, this report 
is first of its kind to indicate antibacterial activity together with anticancer 
possibilities.

Conclusion
The three dimensional structure models for ureH, ureI, nikR, groL and flgS 
were generated as described in the methodology.  Physicochemical 
characterization, functional analysis and stereo chemical properties reveal 
that groL is unstable. The four proteins modeled are efficiently docked to 
the VrD1 and VrD2 plant defensins of Vigna radiata This study is purely a 
bioinformatics work and pharmacological studies will further pave way for 
development of specific competitive inhibitors thus hindering colonization 
and survival of H.pylori in gastric mucosa.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Paramasivan et al,Bioinformation 5(10): 410-415 (2011)

Confidence interval map of urease interaction proteins.

Homology modeled structures.

Ramachandran plot analysis of modeled proteins.

(a),(b)Structure of docked proteins. 

Ligand binding sites and potential interactive aminoacid residues.

