Background
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have lately gained much interest, as recent 
genome-wide studies have shown that they are widespread in a variety of 
organisms and are conserved in evolution. Hundreds of miRNAs have been 
identified  by direct cloning and computational approaches in several 
species. However, there  are  still  many  miRNAs  that remain to be  
identified because  of  their small size and sequence specificity make the 
detection of completely  new  miRNAs  a challenging  task. This cannot be 
based on sequence information alone, but requires structure information 
about the miRNA precursor []. Bioinformatics approaches have proved to 
be very useful toward this goal by guiding the experimental investigations 
[]. Nearly 97% of the human genome is composed of noncoding DNA. 
Numerous genes in these non-protein-coding regions encode microRNAs, 
which are responsible for RNA-mediated gene silencing through RNA 
interference (RNAi)-like pathways. The  miRNAs  are  initially expressed 
as  part  of  an imperfect  RNA hairpin of  ˜70  nucleotides  in length that  
in turn forms  part  of  a  longer  initial  transcript termed a  primary  
miRNA  (pri-miRNA) [].The  majority  of  long  primary  transcripts  of 
the  miRNA  genes  are  transcribed by  RNA polymerase  II [,
]. The 7-
methylguanosine capped and poly  (A)  tailed transcripts  are cleaved by  
the  nuclear  RNase  III  Drosha  to release  the  precursors  of  miRNA  
(pre-miRNA)  in the  nucleus []. The precursors of miRNA that possess a 
thermodynamic stabile hairpin structure are exported into the cytoplasm by 
Exportin-5 or HASTY  [],  
(). Once there,  the  pre-miRNA  is 
processed by  a  second  RNAse  III  family member  called ‘Dicer’  to give  
the  mature ˜22 nucleotides  miRNA  [,
,]. 
Mature miRNAs  are  generated by  the  RNase  III-type  enzyme  60 Dicer,  producing  a  small 
double-stranded  RNA  from  which one strand (called miRNA)  is  quickly  
degraded, releasing  the  small  single-stranded miRNA [], 
().  

The  miRNA  is  then incorporated into the RNA-induced silencing 
complex  (RISC) [,
,].
and guided to target  sequences located at the  
3'-terminal untranslated regions  (3'-UTRs)  of  mRNAs  by  base pairing, 
resulting  in the  cleavage  of  target mRNAs  or  repression of  their  
productive translation  [] as in 
: The  current  release, version 
11.0, contains over 6396 miRNAs from various organisms including  678 
human  and 472 mouse miRNAs. However, the function of each miRNA  
is  mostly  unknown except  a  few. All  available  miRNAs  tools  were  
web based;  therefore  aim  of project  was  to provide  the  desktop  access  
to scientist  so that they can easily make alignment of their sequences with 
already  discovered miRNAs without  using  internet. The desktop facility 
provides access to scientist to perform better task in less time. User can 
easily retrieve, update and insert new record about miRNA in database. 
The aim and objectives in developing Mi-Discoverer were: To discover 
microRNAs from the human genome; To provide desktop software tool 
facility to young scientist; To reduce cost to maintain the software; 
Software in which there is facility of finding out new miRNAs and saving, 
editing and searching the record of discovered miRNA. The new software 
should have user friendly environment that is every task should be perform 
on single click environment. 

Materials and Methods
Tools that are used for software development include MS-Access Version 
2002(www.microsoft.com), 
(http://java.sun.com), JDK1.6.0 BioJava 1.0 
(http://biojava.org) and NetBeans IDE 6.0 
(http:// www.netbeans.org/ kb/60/java/gui-db.html). 
The software developed for the detection of miRNA in humans was based on the similarity searches of user sequence 
with already discovered miRNAs. The development of software involved 
following steps:. 

Data Mining
Data about miRNA was collected from following mentioned online 
databases. miRNA data includes names of miRNA in human genome, their 
accession numbers, precursor sequences, precursor length, maturesequences, 
mature length and different functions perform by different 
miRNAs. The following bioinformatics tools and databases were used to 
search the data related to miRNA human genome: miRanda, miRDB, 
MiRNAMap, MicroInspector, MiRGen, MicroRNAdb, Argonaute 2, 
MiRNAminer, PicTar, miRBase and Reference set (The miRNAs and their 
precursor sequences were downloaded from the MicroRNA Registry. This 
set contains 678 miRNAs and their precursors from Homo sapiens).  

Use case
A use case diagram is a type of behavioural diagram defined by the Unified 
Modeling Language (UML) and created from a Use-case analysis. Use 
case diagram is used here to show what system functions are performed for 
a user. Roles of the user in the system can be depicted. Here use case 
diagram of Mi-Discoverer is presented in .  

Database Design
Mi-Discoverer database has a centralize data dictionary for the storage of 
information pertaining to data and its manipulation. The data of 678 human  
mature as well as precursor miRNAs (collected from Reference set) with  
information about their unique accession ID, chromosomal location, 
mature sequence, precursor  sequence  and function was added. The 
database represents complex relationship among MiRNA data. Our 
database keeps a tight control of data redundancy as primary key is defined 
in all the tables so there is no chance of data redundancy. The database is 
designed in Microsoft Access Version 2002. 

ER Model
An entity-relationship model (ERM) is an abstract conceptual 
representation of structured data. Entity-relationship modelling is a 
relational schema database modelling method, used in software 
engineering to produce a type of conceptual data model. ER model for 
MiDiscoverer is represented in .  

Interface Design
Mi-Discoverer has a cool interface design. It is also very important for an 
application as interface is used for the user interaction with the application. 
Interface is concerned with the layout of the screen which has to be 
presented to the user for various data entries and view purpose. The 
interface was designed in NetBeans IDE 6.0. The interface has the 
following features.  Same layout was used for the entire screen and was designed to avoid 
mistakes.  The screen suited the purpose for which it is design. 
Buttons having meaningful labels was used so that an operator can easily 
realize what he is going to do. Once the error has been detected then the user interface has to display the 
message for ease of user. These messages explain what is wrong and what 
the software is expecting.  Different forms are used to input data. There is a separate form for each 
table to insert, delete and update the record.  

Sequence Diagram
A sequence diagram is a kind of interaction diagram in UML, which shows 
how processes operate with one another and in what order. It is a construct 
of Message Sequence Chart. Sequence Diagram of Mi-Discoverer is shown 
in .

Testing the Software
Testing was performed for Mi-Discoverer software. Basic objective of 
testing was to execute a program with intend to finding error. Sample data 
was entered to check whether system works properly or not. To test the 
performance of the software, Mi-Discoverer was used to predict premiRNAs 
from human genome using multiple sequence alignments. Among 
other things, Mi-Discoverer proposes a new criterion to select miRNAs 
from already entered miRNAs in the database that is based on the number 
of matching around their genome location. The program was tested on a 
PC with an Intel Pentium IV processor 2.8 GHz and 512MB RAM 
memory. The operation system was Windows XP 2003.The versions used 
were 1.6 JDK and 1.0 BioJAVA. The results and all additional information 
are saved in MS-Access database for each session. There are various 
techniques to test the software, here only two black box and unit testing is 
used. 

Black Box Testing
In this testing user interface is exercised over a full range of inputs and 
corresponding outputs observed for correctness. To perform the Black Box 
Test, open the mainframe form. Then open form to Search miRNA. Input 
the sequence and see output. Examine the output sequence in another form 
to view information about resulting miRNA. Save the results in save forms. 
MI-Discoverer qualified the Black Box Testing.  

Unit Testing
In this testing different modules of developed system are tested so that 
each module functions properly. The unit test of each individual unit was 
done. For Example, open data entry form and run it. Input the required data 
and save it. Its task to assure that a user can enter data and when user 
presses save button record must be save in database. Mi-Discoverer 
qualified the Unit Testing.

Results
In the present study, Mi-Discoverer, a bioinformatics strategy was 
developed that relies on a multiple sequence alignment to predict human 
miRNAs and successfully applied the program to identify miRNAs. Java 
language was used to write the program. This program aligned an input 
human gene sequence to a large collection of publicly available human 
MiRNAs. Database Mi-Discoverer was created that comprised on almost 
all miRNAs sequences which have been discovered yet from human 
genome. It contains 678 miRNA for humans.

When a human RNA sequence was submitted to find the miRNA the 
CLUSTLW program gives the output in two files, one is .aln and other is 
 dnd file. The .aln file is the alignment and the .dnd file is a guide tree. A.
pairwise score was calculated for every pair of sequences that are to be 
aligned. These scores are presented in a table in the results. Pairwise scores 
were calculated as the number of identities in the best alignment divided by  
the number of residues compared (gap positions are excluded). Both of 
these scores were initially calculated as percent identity scores and are 
converted to distances by dividing by 100 and subtracting from 1.0 to give 
number of differences per site. A guide tree was calculated based on the 
distance matrix that is generated from the pair wise scores  
(). It 
was found that the query sequence was best aligned with subject1 sequence 
as its guide tree score is lowest. Now we can find out the details of this 
sequence by the mature sequence table. The mature sequence table that 
gives the resulting sequence information is presented here ().  

Discussion
Experimental cloning  efforts have successfully identified highly expressed 
miRNAs from various tissues. However, cloning methods are highly 
biased towards miRNAs that are abundantly and/or ubiquitously expressed. 
On the other hand, computational prediction of miRNAs could become a 
robust approach for tissue-specific or lowly expressed miRNAs. Several 
computational methods have been developed to find close homologs 
among related miRNAs  [,
]. Both their small size and sequence 
specificity make the detection of completely new miRNAs a challenging 
task. This cannot be based on sequence information alone, but requires 
structure information about the miRNA precursor  []. Mi-Discoverer was 
accurately detecting miRNAs in human genome as it could be a better 
alternative of other miRNAs discovery softwares and its main features 
were:  It  is  universally  useful  software for  prediction of  new  pre-miRNAs  in 
unique  specie  that  is human genome.  
It automatically process large amounts of genomic sequences.  
It finds as many as possible miRNA from pre miRNA candidates   
It can easily used by people who have little knowledge about the 
computational theory and processes used behind the scenes.

Two programs have already been reported in literature for miRNA 
detection. The MiRscan program successfully predicted close homologs of 
Caenorhabditis briggsae with statistically conserved patterns of 
Caenorhabditis elegans miRNAs (Lim et al., 2003) while the program 
mirAlign was based on animal data from 12 species,  C. elegans, 
Caenorhabditis briggsae,  Drosophila melanogaster,  Drosophila 
pseudoobscura, Danio rerio, Gallus gallus, Homosapiens, Mus  musculus, 
Rattus norvegicus,  Epstein Barr virus,  Arabidopsis thaliana and  Oryza 
sativa []. 
But Mi-Discoverer is based on data from human genome only. 
Both of the software miRAlign and miRscan are online while Mi-Discoverer 
is a desktop application that facilitates the user to make 
identification of miRNA from human genome even without using internet. 
It allows sequence based search that used to find potential miRNAs in the 
query sequence based on established CLUSTALW alignment algorithms. 
The accurate prediction of a comprehensive set of messenger RNAs 
(targets) regulated by animal microRNAs (miRNAs) remains an open 
problem. In particular, the prediction of targets that did not possess 
evolutionarily conserved complementarity to their miRNA regulators were 
not adequately addressed by available tools.  

We developed a new computational approach, called Mi-Discoverer that 
can accurately detect miRNAs in human genome. Compared to similar 
methods, our method had been a better performance as its main advantage 
is that our application is purely desktop. Mi-Discoverer does not relay on 
different genomes and is able to address the unique human genome. A 
down side  might  be  that  the  species  specific  i.e. Homo sapiens could 
be predicted since these miRNAs  would be  left  out  in the  sequence 
alignment step before starting the prediction. The test results showed that 
this program met the goals relatively well.  
Mi-Discoverer has also a comprehensive database for human genome 
miRNAs, including all available latest information about pre-miRNA 
sequence and length of the stem loop region and function. The major 
diagnostic features of present software include, that the software is so easy  
and convenient to user and it has easy graphical user interface. This 
software is so fast that it works in no time. All Modules of Mi-Discoverer 
works properly and gives effective output. It is so easy that anybody can 
operate it. It also checks input and avoids duplication of data and gives 
steady information to user. Overall the software is error free. In short, Mi-Discoverer 
achieves better sensitivity than previously reported softwares.  

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Afzalet al, Bioinformation 5(6): 271-276 (2010)

MicroRNA processing (www.genscript.com/images/sirna/miRNA.jpg).

 Use Case Diagram.

ER Diagram explaining the MI-Discoverer Database.

Sequence Diagram.

Result of output for the sequence based on the distance matrix.

Result of sequence information.

