Background
Mycobacterium tuberculosis is an intracellular pathogen. After 
entering into the body it goes inside the macrophages by the 
process of phagocytosis. Unlike many pathogens it does not 
allow a very successful fusion of the phagosome with lysosome 
of the macrophage and stays inside the stable phagosome. It 
also inhibits the respiratory burst activity of the phagosome to a 
large extent reducing generation of reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) inside the phagosome. All these facts have made it a very 
competent pathogen infecting almost one third of the world 
population [].

Analogous to ROS, nitric oxide synthase (NOS) derived reactive 
nitrogen species (RNS) plays important role in killing of 
intracellular bacteria. Mycobacterium tuberculosis is also not an 
exception in this regard. NOS has three isoforms namely 
inducible NOS, endothelial NOS and neuronal NOS popularly 
known as iNOS, eNOS and nNOS, respectively []. Of these 
particularly iNOS is expressed in macrophages and plays 
important role for killing of intracellular pathogens including 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis [].

Diabetes mellitus is an epidemic of the modern world. It is 
characterized by persistent hyperglycemia due to relative or 
absolute deficiency of insulin. Long standing diabetes with 
uncontrolled hyperglycemia is known to cause increased nonenzymatic glycation of proteins. It is also known to be 
associated with increased occurrence of tuberculosis. There is 
evidence to believe that increased association of tuberculosis in 
chronic uncontrolled diabetes is directly correlated with the 
extent of protein glycation. In this context the consequence of
glycation on NADPH oxidase activity is investigated earlier 
using tools of computational biology and it is observed that 
there is possibility of glycation induced inhibition of the 
enzyme activity. This in silico observation, if proved to be a fact 
experimentally, can serve as an explanation for increased 
association of tuberculosis in diabetic state [].

In similar ways there may be glycation induced inhibition of 
NOS. In this work we have developed this hypothesis using 
tools of computational biology. Glycation induced inhibition of 
NOS may reduce generation of RNS and thus rendering a 
diabetic host more susceptible to tuberculosis.

Methodology:
Three isoforms of NOS proteins in human – iNOS, nNOS and 
eNOS are taken into consideration. The sequences are taken 
from UniProtKB database []. The accession numbers for the 
proteins are as follows – iNOS: P35228; nNOS: P29475; eNOS: 
P29474. Sequence and domain annotations of all the isoforms 
are noted from corresponding uniprot id database 
[–]. The 
complex structures of calmodulin and calmodulin binding 
region of NOS proteins are taken from Protein Data Bank (PDB) 
[] having PDB code - iNOS: 3HR4 
[], nNOS: 2O60 
[] and 
eNOS: 1NIW [], respectively. The glycation of the ε amino 
group of lysine (Lys) residues are predicted using NetGlycate 
1.0 server []. Molecular diagrams are drawn using pymol 
[].

Results and Discussion:
Domain classification of all the three isoforms of NOS proteins 
are given in (, see supplementary material). It is 
observed that the total number of residues is varied but the 
domain architectures are similar in all the three isoforms. The 
lysine residues of each domain which are predicted to be 
glycated are also mentioned in  (see supplementary 
material) NO production is regulated by interdomain 
interaction between NOS and calmodulin []. So we have 
analyzed all the complex structures of calmodulin and NOS 
proteins obtained from PDB. Calmodulin binding region of 
NOS proteins have lysine residue which is predicted to be 
glycated in all the three isoforms (, see supplementary 
material). Upon manual visualization of the complex structures, 
it is found that the predicted glycated lysine residue K531 is 
making salt bridge with acidic residue E54 (distance 2.89 Å) in 
iNOS-calmodulin complex (). Further, E54 is 
important residue for making the EF-hand loop that coordinates 
Ca2+ ions. So, if K531 becomes glycated, the + amino group is 
not expected to form salt bridge with partner residue of 
calmodulin. In such a situation the coordination to Ca2+ ion will 
be blocked due to improper conformation of the EF-hand loop. 
Furthermore, if EF-hand loop is not properly formed, it will also 
weaken the interaction between iNOS and calmodulim. In case 
of nNOS-calmodulin complex the predicted glycated lysine 
residue K737 is interacting with polar group (peptide oxygen 
atom) of M145 and A147 (). However, the distances 
are higher (3.49 Å and 4.45 Å, respectively) than the distance in 
iNOS-calmodulin complex (2.89 Å). Further, neither of these 
two residues is coordinating to Ca2+ ion. In case of 
eNOScalmodulin complex the predicted glycated lysine residue K497 
is interacting with acidic residue E7 with two carboxylate 
oxygen atoms at distances 3.31 Å and 4.35 Å, respectively
(). Here also, 
this E7 is not coordinating to Ca2+ ion. So 
if the lysine residues (K737 and K497) of nNOS and eNOS 
become glycated, the interaction between calmodulin and NOS 
may not be affected when compared to iNOS. In these cases the 
coordination to the Ca2+ ions is not expected be affected

Calmodulin binding to NOS is universally required for its 
functional activity and in case of iNOS the Calmodulin binding 
may be an effective stimulator of the enzyme irrespective of the 
availability of the calcium ion [,
]. It is in this context our insilico 
observation is important. We have found that glycation of 
Lys531 in the Calmodulin binding domain of iNOS is causing a 
structural change in the molecular microenvironment that is not 
suitable for Ca2+ and Calmodulin binding. Although Lys737 
and Lys497 are glycated in the other two isoforms of NOS, the 
possibility of glycation induced inhibition of Calmodulin (or 
Ca2+) binding is less apparent in the other two isoforms. 
Therefore possibility of Lys737 and Lys497 glycation induced 
inhibition of Calmodulin binding is comparitively less in nNOS 
and eNOS, respectively when compared to iNOS. Glycation is 
practically more possible in macrophages compared to other 
cells or its precursors since glucose transporters are expressed 
more on the mature macrophage membrane that is expected to 
transport more glucose inside the macrophage from extracellular 
environment particularly at hyperglycemic state 
[].
At the present moment there are experimental evidences to 
support this idea []. Therefore in persistent hyperglycemia 
proteins like iNOS that reside inside the macrophage are 
expected to be glycated more which has the potential to inhibit
Calmodulin-iNOS interaction. A vast literature is in the favor of 
absolute requirement of Calmodulin binding for functioning of 
iNOS [].

Therefore, if such in silico observation proves to be 
experimentally true there is enough chance of glycation 
induced inhibition of iNOS activity. It is needless to explain that 
glycation induced inhibition of iNOS will make the chronic 
diabetic host more susceptible to tuberculosis. It is also known 
that reactive nitrogen species (RNS) play an essential role in 
host defense against Mycobacterium tuberculosis in the mouse 
model of tuberculosis as evidenced by the increased 
susceptibility of mice deficient in the inducible isoform of nitric 
oxide synthase (iNOS) []. This fact makes it almost evident 
that if inhibition of iNOS happens due to any reason, it will 
make the host more susceptible to tuberculosis. Since glycation 
is the hallmark of chronic uncontrolled diabetes, glycation 
induced inhibition of iNOS can be considered as a cause of 
increased association of tuberculosis in diabetic state. In this 
connection it is worth mentioning that in diabetic state 
endogenous inhibitors of NOS is described in the literature 
[]
and that is also thought as a link between increased incidences 
of tuberculosis in diabetic state [].

Conclusion:
We show structural models to support that there is a high 
possibility of glycation induced inhibition of iNOS which may 
serve as a causative factor for more tuberculosis infection in 
diabetic state. It should be noted that this hypothesis should be 
validated using experimental inference.

Supplementary material
Data 1
RB has done the computational analysis and DB developed the 
basic hypothesis. RB and DB acknowledge DST, New Delhi for 
financial assistance.

Citation:Bhattacharyya &amp; Banerjee, Bioinformation 7(7): 324-327 (2011)

Interaction between calmodulin and calmodulin 
binding peptide region of NOS proteins (in 1a-iNOS, 1b-nNOS 
and 1c-eNOS, respectively) through predicted glycated lysine 
residue of calmodulin binding region of NOS proteins are 
depicted. Both calmodulin and calmodulin binding region of 
NOS proteins are shown in ribbon diagram with calmodulin in 
green and NOS proteins in blue colour. The Ca2+ ions are 
represented as green spheres. The lysine residues of calmodulin 
and interacting partner residues of NOS proteins are shown in 
stick mode with carbon, nitrogen and oxygen atoms in green, 
blue and red colour, respectively. The interaction between the 
atoms is shown by yellow dashed lines with distance in Å. All 
residues are labeled by one letter amino acid code with residue 
number obtained from corresponding PDB file.

