Background
Pathogenesis of S. Typhi is not completely understood. The
treatment of typhoid fever is complicated by the emergence of
drug resistance. Effectiveness of currently available vaccines is
also limited. The major shortcomings of the live vaccine are the
cost and requirement of multiple doses which do not enhance
protection. Further, memory cells are not generated which also
fails to induce intestinal secretory IgA response.
Approximately 21 million cases are estimated, resulting in
216,519 deaths in the year 2000. More than half of all
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi genes still remain
unannotated. Enolase is a ubiquitous enzyme that catalyzes the
reversible conversion of 2-phosphoglycerate (2-PGE) to
phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP). In addition to its metabolic role,
[] 
enolase has been implicated for its contribution to several
biological and pathophysiological processes by acting as a heat
shock protein and in modulating gene transcription, as well as
for its involvement in microbial diseases and autoimmunity
gene. This implies that enolase is not a housekeeping gene
since; its expression varies according to the
pathophysciologically metabolic or development condition of
cell [–
]. The presence of α-enolase on the surface of bacteria
adds a new insight in the generation of antibodies against
enolase, post infection. Numerous pathogenic bacterial species
intervene with the plasminogen system and a hypothesis has
emerged that bacteria use this system for migration across
tissue barriers or for nutritional demands during infection.
Cell-surface protein-mediated interactions are known to play a
major role in disease-progression. In various pathogenic
systems, including bacteria, fungi and protozoa, the invasive
phenotype has been correlated with the ability of the organism
to bind to laminin, an abundant extracellular matrix
glycoprotein. For an in-silico validation of this hypothesis, a 3-
D model of salmonella enolase has been constructed,
considering enolase-palsminogen interaction between
salmonella and human plasminogen. Structure based
comparative analyses of Salmonella enolase and Human alpha
enolase was performed in which different active residues and
different active pockets in both structures were found. Both
molecules were docked with enolase inhibitors, TSP (Dtartronate
semialdehyde phosphate) and AEP (3-
aminoenolpyruvate phosphate) [] in order to inhibit
salmonella's survival mechanism inside the host. This work
will prove to be strategic for development of new inhibitors for
Salmonella Tphi Ty2.

Invasive bacteria have evolved virulence strategies to interact
with host hemostatic factors such as plasminogen and
fibrinogen for infection. Different bacterial species gain access
to the human body through different sites, such as the skin,
nasopharynx, lungs, gastrointestinal, or urogenital tract.
Bacterial invasion is generally mediated by bacterial surface
and secreted products that can negate host innate and acquired
defense systems.[] 
Several gram-positive and gram-negative
invasive bacterial pathogens have been found to express a
plasminogen receptor (PlgR) function. These bacteria
immobilize plasminogen on their cell surfaces and enhance the
tPA catalyzed plasminogen activation. The bacterial
plasminogen receptor functions to generate proteolytic activity
on the bacterial surface by utilizing a host-derived proteolytic
system. [] 
Salmonella enterica have been identified as PlgRs
Bacterial enzymes acting directly on mammalian extra cellular
matrix (ECM) or activating on latent procollagenases. It is an
established fact that plasmin degrades noncollagenous
proteins of ECM, such as laminin, and activates latent
procollagenases. It has also been proposed that one function of
bacterial PlgRs is to potentiate bacterial damage to and
bacterial spread through tissue barriers, such as basement
membranes. [,
] 
In vitro tissue culture studies have
identified some of the host cell responses that lead to
Salmonella entry including actin rearrangement and
polymerization at host cell membrane and accumulation of
cytoskeleton protein at the site of bacterial entry 
[]. Most
Salmonella serotypes produce glycogen playing a
comparatively minor role in virulence and colonization, but
having a more significant role in survival. Enzymes present in
glycolytic pathway of bacteria helps in survival by activating
other factors which leads deeper into tissues away from
immune response.

Methodology
Protein Modeling &amp; Structure analysis:
Protein Sequence of Salmonella enolase was obtained from
NCBI GeneBank (Accession number GI2938841). Molecular
structures of Salmonella enolase were modeled by using
restraint-based modeling implemented in the program
Modeller9v8 []. 
Further, the structure was refined and
energy minimized with the insertion of Mg++ at the active site
of our modeled structure. Energy minimization and structure
refinement was done by Grommacs and Chimera program
respectively. The modeled structure and Human alpha enolase
structure (3B97), a homodimer structure were analysed for
differences in their binding sites, active residues and active
pockets by Castp and Pocket finder server respectively.

Protein-Protein Docking:
To study, enolase-plasminogen interaction the crystal
structures of plasminogen 1B2I and 1DDJ were studied.
Protein-protein docking was conducted on Grommacs server
and VEGAZZ Program. For better results both docked
structures were analyzed for conformational changes.

Protein Ligand Docking:
Both Salmonella and Human enolase were docked with
enolase inhibitors CID: 151938 “TSP”, CID: 3037152 “AEP” by
proved enolase inhibitors using Molegro Virtual Docker.

Discussions
The overall quality of our structure on the basis of the
Ramachandran plot showed that 94.7%#x00025; of residues were found
in favored region (407 out of 432), 4% of residues in allowed
regions (17 out of 432), while only 1.4% (6 out of 432) appeared
in outlier regions. Human alpha enolase and salmonella
enolase RSMD was found to be 2.36 by Superpose server.
Enolase binds with 2-phosphoglycerate, where Gln167 and
Lys396 are active residues, and are essential to hold and bind
the divalent magnesium cation. This facilitates the rotation and
neutralization of carboxyl group of PGA. Enolase catalyzes 11
different chemical reactions commonly as initial metal assisted
abstraction of carboxylate group. A different active-site pocket
catalyzes variety of chemical reactions including racemization,
cycloisomerization and elimination of either water or
ammonia. For a detailed study of interaction of the modeled
structure with human plasminogen, Mg++ ion was inserted
under the energy constraint of amber 
[] force field
implemented in the program Chimera.

Interaction of Salmonella enolase and Human Plasminogen:
Human plasminogen is about 810 amino acid residues long
containing different conserved domains such as ligand binding
sites, putative domain-interaction sites, active sites and
cleavage sites. We selected plasminogen structures which have
a maximum coverage of ligand binding sites. 1B2I (residue
position 183-263) and 1DDJ (residue position 564-810) were
considered for the plasminogen activation studies. Based on
rigid-body docking using Grommacs server and VEGAZZ,
conformational changes were analyzed in both proteins to
study the activation of plasminogen to plasmin 
().

1B2I (Kringle 2 Domain of Human Plasminogen) 83aa:
Tissue-type plasminogen activator kringle-2 domain has two
ligand binding sites one at C-terminal (lysyl residue), Tyr-Leu-
Leu-Lys (YLLK) and one at N-terminal, Ala-Phe-Gln-Tyr-His-
Ser-Lys (AFQYHSK). The sequence AFQYHSK is found within
the plasminogen activation peptide whereas tetrapeptide
YLLK corresponds to fibrinogen-B beta chain. Ligand-free and
ligand-bound kringle 2 samples leads to the conclusion that all
the small ligands as well as the C-terminal interact with a
common binding site in kringle-2. Aromatic rigs of Tyr36,
Trp62, His64, Trp72, Tyr74 and aliphatic side chains of Val35
and Asp55 participate in the common ligand binding sites of
kringle-2 domain. Interaction between refined 1B2I Structure
of Human Plasminogen with the modeled structure on
common ligand binding sites shows conformational change in
reported binding sites and different representation showing
interaction of Plasminogen binding sites with Modeled
Structure with conformational changes ()
[,
,
].

1DDJ (crystal structure of human plasminogen catalytic
domain) 247aa:
In this Structure N domain, consist of an activation loop (550-
570aa), Ca binding loop (620-630aa), autolysis loop (670-690aa),
methonine loop(710-729aa), oxyanion stabilizing loop(730-
760aa), with two, six and seven-stranded beta-barrel. Each
Beta-barrel forms the core of another separate subdomain. The
N domain and C domain are connected by three transsegments
as well as the A-chain peptide (residues 542-557).
The molecular surface of mPLG (micro plasminogen) consists
of various loops and two Alpha-helices. Functionally active
loop (558-566) is involved in plasminogen activation by tissue
type plasminogen activator (tPA) and urokinase 
[].

Interaction between four chains of 1DDJ with Modeled
Structure and interaction with different representations of the
activation loop in chain `B` confirms the direct interaction of
modeled enolase in Plasminogen activation. Plasmin
production and Proteolysis in order to penetrate the host extracellular matrix
by Salmonella enolase involves plasminogen activation which
can be observed by conformational changes in the activation
loop site. The proteolytic target bonds of Plasminogen (Arg
561-Val 562) are completely accessible to the solvent. Upon
activation the proteolysis- released alpha- amide group of
Val562 moves in order to enter the activation pocket 
().

Molecular Docking:
Enolase inhibitors were downloaded from PubChem as TSP
(D-tartronate semialdehyde phosphate) and AEP (3-
aminoenolpyruvate phosphate). These were docked with
human enolase and salmonella enolase on the basis of best
binding score and ligand stable conformation. We hypothesize
that both structures have a different expression scenario with
different electrostatic potential on structure surface 
().

Conclusion
In the present study, it has been concluded that α-enolase
could mediate the binding of S. Typhi to laminin, a major
component of the basal membrane of the vasculature. It can
therefore be postulated that the plasminogen–enolase
association may play a critical role in the virulence of S. Typhi
by causing direct damage to the host cell extracellular matrix,
possibly by enzymic degradation of extracellular matrix
proteins or other protein constituents. This might function as a
guidance mechanism, first allowing S. Typhi adherence to the
extracellular matrix, initiating tissue colonization, followed by
plasminogen activation and laminin degradation in restricted
areas. Hence, expression of α-enolase at the cell surface seems
to be a common mechanism by which S. Typhi could induce
destruction of the extracellular matrix, hence favoring their
invasion and dissemination. Attempts to block this interaction
could be of clinical relevance. Structural differences between
enolase salmonella and human can provide a better
understanding of bacterial survival inside host. Specifically,
the bacterial metabolic enzyme could prove to be a potential
drug target or could increase the efficiency of exiting drugs.
Autoimmune responses need to be further answered with in
vitro or in vivo validations.

Authors acknowledge the computational facility provided by
Bioinformatics Sub-DIC (funded by DBT, India), School of
Biotechnology, DAVV, Indore, India.

Citation:Chauhan et al, Bioinformation 8(4): 185-188 (2012)

Salmonell and human enolase overlapping complex
(A), docked regions being highlighted in circles in Human (B)
and Salmonella (C) enolase respectively

Plasminogen-enolase interaction with 1B2I (A) and 1DDJ (B) domains respectively

