Background
It is a known fact that water occupies at least three-quarters (3/4ths) of the earth's surface. Of this, more than 70¢ is the
marine water. Hence, marine waters form the reservoirs for a large variety of number of organisms. Different species of
organisms produce various metabolites. Several thousands of these compounds have been claimed to possess medicinal
properties. Metabolites used to treat cancer or other dreadful diseases are of considerable interest for the scientific
communities. The active metabolites are isolated from different marine organisms and can be used directly as drugs
or as pharmaceutical agents. Several of these metabolites might offer a natural key to unlock the complications of
several diseases. Because of the immense biological diversity in the sea, it has been recognized that a variety of natural
products and novel chemical entities exist in oceans and that they possess biological activities with greater efficacy and
specificity against human diseases [].

Diseases like cancer, malaria, tuberculosis and several other disorders are affecting large number of people world wide.
Many of the marine organism derived compounds are known to exhibit therapeutic potential and are more potent against
various disorders. For example, it has been reported that cone snail venoms are highly potent and act as selective peptide
antagonists or agonists of ligand or voltage-gated ion channels and G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) 
[]. Similarly, α- and αA-conotoxins, are known to competitively
inhibit nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChR) whereas ψ-conotoxins show noncompetitive inhibition of this family of
receptors. Several such studies have been reported in literature [,
]. Information on marine compounds is of prime interest to researchers involved in drug 
discovery, natural products isolation, purification and characterization, or marine biology research. Hence, initially, we created a
database of 182 natural products and chemical entities from marine habitat that contains information related to the
organism, derived compound, the disease against which the compound is active and the status of clinical trials, if any.

Methodology
Construction of Marine Compound Database
The database hereafter referred as MCDB (Marine Compound Database), is constructed using html and can be accessed at 
 http://www.progenebio.in/mcdb/index.htm. 
Data has been collected from various literature sources like NCBI (National Centre for Biotechnology Information) 
[], Google Scholar [], 
ScienceDirect [] etc.

Features of Marine Compound Database
MCDB contains about 182 compounds known to exhibit biological activity against human diseases are kept conveniently under 12 
different categories (Table 1 in ) with number of entries under each
category, given in parentheses. The additional advantage of MCDB is that the compounds from MCDB can be utilized for various scientific 
purposes and that these compounds, reported at a single place, could be useful in testing other diseases apart from the mentioned 
disease in the database, thus indicating the importance of medicinal values of the compounds. A screen-shot of the database is given in 
. The database architecture contains source of the compound, trade name, 2-dimensional 
structure, respective biological activity, clinical trial information and literature references, respectively.

Utility
The database finds utility in the scientific community for a quick review of the marine organisms and their compounds
for drug discovery and treatment. MCDB also contains information on clinical trials; therefore, the user shall have a
quick look on the compounds that entered in any phase of clinical trials. References are provided for each compound so
as to track the published data.

Conclusion
The main objective of MCDB is to provide an easy access of marine compounds to researchers working in marine
laboratories for novel drug discovery and to other users of scientific discipline. Database categorization reveals a clear
mechanism of data access, and is more user-friendly. The database shall be updated periodically and released with the
continuous updates of new compounds

Supplementary material
Data 1
Screenshot image of ’Marine Compounds from Tunicates‘ page of MCDB


