Background
Drug discovery and design is a time consuming process, which
often requires a lengthy period. A drug prescribed for a specific
disease can be also effective for another disease if the two
diseases share a common pathophysiologic mechanism. To
identify a new use of existing drugs is called drug
repositioning, and this approach is gathering momentum
because it can markedly shorten the time to obtain drug
approval []. Recent advancements of biomedical informatics
enable systematic search for candidates for drug repositioning.

There exist many works on systematic drug repositioning 
[–].
Methods for systematic drug repositioning can be divided into
groups based on the way they find repositioning candidates.
One approach seeks candidates based on the similarity of
diseases. Chiang and Butte devised a systematic method, in
which if two diseases share some similar therapies, then other
drugs used for only one of the two are deemed to also be
therapeutic for the other []. Another approach is based on the
drug similarity. Yang and Agarwal proposed a repositioning
method based on clinical side effects []. In their method, if the
side effects associated with a drug are also induced by many of
drugs for another disease, then the drug is deemed a candidate
for the disease []. Supervised inference methods such as
network based inference, which constructs a drug-target
bipartite network, were applied to predict drug-target
interactions and infer repositioning candidates []. However, a
combination of both approaches is rarely examined.

In this context, we proposed a two-step method which
combines the above approaches. First, the method evaluated a
similarity between two diseases by seeking the genes shared by
them. A protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was
generated based on the shared genes. Then drugs prescribed for
the diseases were obtained from a drug database. At the first
step, if the target gene(s) of each of the obtained drugs was
involved in the PPI network, the drug was deemed a candidate
for repositioning. However, because targets of many drugs
were still unknown, the second step inferred repositioning
candidates based on the similarities between the prescribed
drugs.

Methodology
In the proposed two-step method, first, lists of disease related
genes were obtained from a meta-database called Genotator 
[].
As a first attempt, we obtained the lists of disease related genes
for four different types of diseases: hypertension (a disease of
the circulatory system), diabetes mellitus (an endocrine,
nutritional and metabolic disease), autism (mental and
behavioral disorder) and Crohn disease (non-infective enteritis
and colitis). Genotator calculates a likelihood score for each
disease related gene []. For the sake of simplicity, we used only
the top 100 related genes for each disease. Then we sought the
genes shared by a pair of diseases for all possible combinations
of the four. Associations between the shared genes for each pair
were analyzed using STRING []. The resulting PPI networks
were used to investigate whether they included target proteins
of the drugs for the diseases obtained from DrugBank 
[]. If the
PPI network of the shared genes from a pair included the target
protein of a specific drug for one disease in the pair, the drug
could interact with other proteins in the network and thus, was
deemed a repositioning candidate for the other disease of the
pair. This was the first step of the proposed method.

At the second step, repositioning candidates were inferred
based on the similarities among the drugs prescribed for one of
the diseases in the pair because targets of many drugs were still
unknown. From DrugBank, we extracted information on drug
targets, drug interactions, substructures and side effects. Then a
drug-similarity network was generated using the extracted
information for the drugs prescribed for a disease. A node in
the drug-similarity network represented the drug itself, a target,
another drug interacted with the drug, a substructure, or a side
effect. Targets, drug interactions, substructures and side effects
were included in the network only when two or more drugs
shared the features. The resulting network was visualized with
Cytoscape []. If multiple nodes connected to a specific drug
were included in the drug-similarity network of the other
disease in the pair, the drug is deemed a repositioning
candidate. It should be noted that even though nodes
representing substructures were included in the drug-similarity
network, the drug was not deemed a candidate unless a node
representing another type of evidence was also included. This
was because the variety of substructures was limited and
accordingly, many drugs shared the same substructures.

All information from Genotator, STRING and DrugBank was
obtained between late December 2012 and early January 2013.

Results &amp; Discussion
The number of the shared genes between autism and Crohn
disease was two, and no drugs prescribed for them had any of
the genes as target. Similarly, the number of the shared genes
between autism and diabetes mellitus was four, and none of
them were the targets of the drugs for the two diseases. Thus,
for these two combinations, no candidate was found at the first
step. In contrast, 7, 22, 11 and 43 out of the 100 genes were
shared between autism and hypertension, Crohn disease and
diabetes mellitus, Crohn disease and hypertension, and
diabetes mellitus and hypertension, respectively. 

illustrates the PPI networks for a) autism–hypertension, b)
Crohn disease–diabetes mellitus, c) Crohn disease–
hypertension, and d) diabetes mellitus–hypertension.
Interestingly, almost all shared genes were included in the PPI
networks, suggesting that the shared genes form closely
interacting networks and each pair of diseases share common
molecular mechanism(s).

At DrugBank, we found three drugs used for both hypertension
and diabetes mellitus, which shared the 43 genes. These three
had the same drug target, ACE, which was included in the PPI
network of the shared genes (). The drug-similarity
network of the three is depicted in . The drugs were
also connected to many common nodes representing other
types of evidence. In this way, the three drugs shared many
common features. These results suggested that the first and
second steps could find repositioning candidates.

Drugs extracted from DrugBank for diabetes mellitus included
Voglibose, Pioglitazone, Gliquidone, Troglitazone,
Tolbutamide, Glimepiride, Miglitol, Acarbose, Sitagliptin,
Vildagliptin, and Rosiglitazone. Of these, Pioglitazone,
Troglitazone, and Rosiglitazone had at least one drug target in
the PPI network of the 43 shared genes. For example, one of the
targets of Pioglitazone is peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma (PPARG), which is involved in .
Accordingly, this drug could be effective for hypertension. The
drugs for hypertension included Bosentan, Treprostinil,
Iloprost, Moexipril, Nilvadipine, Trimethaphan, Bevantolol,
Benzthiazide, and Quinethazone. Of these, Moexipril and
Bevantolol had at least one drug target in the network. In total,
five drugs for diabetes mellitus had targets in the network
while another five for hypertension had other targets in the
network. These drugs were candidates for repositioning. Three,
six, and one candidates were found for the combinations of
autism–hypertension, Crohn disease–diabetes mellitus, and
Crohn disease–hypertension, respectively at the first step.

 depicts the drug-similarity network for hypertension.
Drugs prescribed for autism, Crohn disease, and diabetes
mellitus were examined whether they had multiple common
features in the network as described above. At the second step,
three, two, and nine candidates were found for the
combinations of autism–hypertension, Crohn disease–
hypertension, and diabetes mellitus–hypertension, respectively.
None was found for the combination of Crohn disease and
diabetes mellitus at the second step. 
 (see
supplementary material) summarizes the repositioning
candidates found at the first and second steps. If more
stringent/weaker criteria were used to select candidates, the
number of repositioning candidates would decrease/increase.

As shown in , the genes shared by diabetes mellitus
and hypertension form a large, closely related network. This
implied that drugs for one of them could be effective for the
other. In fact, the number of the candidates found was the
largest for this combination. Information on the functions of the
shared genes could be useful to further narrow down the
candidates. We used DAVID bioinformatics tools 
[] to
investigate the functions of the shared genes. The investigation
revealed that the significantly enriched categories were:
chemical homeostasis (GO BP term), positive regulation of lipid
metabolic process (GO BP term), extracellular space (GO CC
term), glycoprotein (UniProt keyword), regulation of foam cell
differentiation (GO BP term), negative regulation of
inflammatory response (GO BP term), positive regulation of
catalytic activity (GO BP term), protein-lipid complex
remodeling (GO BP term), regulation of steroid metabolic
process (GO BP term), regulation of cholesterol transport (GO
BP term), positive regulation of MAPKKK cascade (GO BP
term), positive regulation of oxidoreductase activity (GO BP
term), response to nutrient levels (GO BP term), regulation of
cellular ketone metabolic process (GO BP term), and regulation
of systemic arterial blood pressure mediated by a chemical
signal (GO BP term). Drugs which interact these functions
should be thoroughly investigated in the next step. However, it
is beyond the scope of this study. Hypertension is occasionally
found in patients with diabetes mellitus. Non-insulin
dependent type diabetes mellitus is characterized by insulin
resistance while hypertension is associated with abnormal
glucose tolerance and an impairment of insulin action 
[]. The
enriched categories were related to lipid metabolism and
glycoprotein, and these could be shared pathophysiological
mechanisms. These facts also implied that drugs for one of
them might be effective for the other.

Conclusion
In this study, we proposed a two-step method for drug
repositioning based on the PPI network of genes shared by two
diseases and the similarity of drugs prescribed for one of the
two. At the first step, drugs having their targets in the PPI
network of the shared genes were deemed repositioning
candidates. Because targets of many drugs were still unknown,
the similarities between the prescribed drugs for a specific
disease were used to infer repositioning candidates at the
second step.

As a first attempt, we applied the proposed two-step method to
four different types of diseases: hypertension, diabetes mellitus,
Crohn disease, and autism. Some repositioning candidates were
found both at the first and second steps. Needless to say,
further experimental investigations are required to verify
whether the candidates can actually be repositioned. Because
most of the systematic repositioning procedures were
performed semi-automatically, we were able to investigate only
four diseases. Also, the number of genes and drugs were
limited because of the time consuming procedures. However,
we believe that the basic idea of the proposed method was
demonstrated through the investigation on the four diseases.
We are planning to fully automatize the repositioning
processes.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Fukuoka et al, Bioinformation 9(2): 089-093 (2013)

Protein-protein interaction networks of the disease related genes shared by pairs of diseases. a) autism-hypertension, b)
Crohn disease-diabetes mellitus, c) Crohn diseaase-hypertension, and d) diabetes mellitus-hypertension

Drug-similarity networks. An octagon represents a drug prescribed for a specific disease. A circle, hexagon, diamond,
and rectangle denote a drug target, a drug which interact the drug of interest, substructure, and side effect, respectively. a) Three
drugs for both hypertension and diabetes mellitus, and b) drugs for hypertension.

