Background
Staphylococcus aureus is a gram-positive pathogen that is a major
cause of multiple types of infections both in and outside of the
hospital setting. These infections range from superficial skin
infections to deeper infections of hair follicles, abscesses, and
deep tissue infections, and even to systemic infections including
those of the heart, lungs, bones, and blood []. Although the
organism is part of the normal human flora, it can cause
infection when there is a break in the skin or mucous membrane
that grants it access to the surrounding tissues 
[–]. In the preantibiotic
era, these infections were often life threatening, and
even today they may give rise to death despite treatment with
antibiotics. S. aureus strains can produce a number of different
components that may contribute to virulence, including surfaceassociated
adhesins, capsular polysaccharides, exoenzymes,
and exotoxins. Staphylococcus aureus carries a large repertoire of
virulence factors, including over 40 secreted proteins and
enzymes that it uses to establish and maintain infections 
[,
].
Some of these virulence factors are known to cause or be
associated with specific diseases, for example, endocarditis and
osteomyelitis, septic arthritis, and septicemia, toxic shock
syndrome toxin (TSST) and toxic shock syndrome; Panton-
Valentine leukocidin (PVL) and necrotizing pneumonia and
skin diseases [,
]; the exfoliative toxins A and B (ETA and
ETB) and scalded skin syndrome, impetigo, skin infections, and
atopic dermatitis [,
]; and the family of staphylococcal
enterotoxins A and B(SEA and SEB) and food poisoning 
[].

There is a growing need for the automatic annotation of
proteins of unknown functional, termed “hypothetical
proteins” [], the structures of which are known 
[].
Structural genomics initiatives provide ample structures of
hypothetical proteins at an ever increasing rate. However
without function annotation, this structural goldmine is of little
use to biologists who are interested in particular molecular
systems. The structures of many hypothetical proteins are
solved in pipelines at structural- genomics centers, which
usually lack the resources to engage in thorough functional
characterization of each of the solved structures. Moreover,
some of the proteins, which are considered to be well
annotated, may have additional functions beyond their listed
records. About half the proteins in most genomes are
candidates for HPs []. This group is of utmost importance to
complete genomic and proteomic information. Detection of new
HPs not only offers presentation of new structures but also new
functions. There will be new structures with so far unknown
conformations and new domains and motifs will be arising. A
series of additional protein pathways and cascades will be
revealed, completing our fragmentary knowledge on the mosaic
of proteins per se. The network of protein–protein interactions
will be increasing logarithmically. New HPs may be serving as
markers and pharmacological targets.

Last not least, detection of HP would be of benefit to genomics
enabling the discovery of so far unknown or even predicted
genes []. Hypothetical protein is a protein that is predicted to
be expressed from an open reading frame, but for which there is
no experimental evidence of translation. Hypothetical proteins
constitute a substantial fraction of proteomes of human as well
as of other eukaryotes. With the general belief that the majority
of hypothetical proteins are the product of pseudogenes, it is
essential to have a tool with the ability of pinpointing the
minority of hypothetical proteins with a high probability of
being expressed []. There is so far no classification of
hypothetical proteins (HPs) and working terms are replacing
definitions of hypothetical proteins. In the strict sense, HPs are
predicted proteins, proteins predicted from nucleic acid
sequences and that have not been shown to exist by
experimental protein chemical evidence. Moreover, these
proteins are characterized by low identity to known, annotated
proteins. Conserved hypothetical proteins are defined as a large
fraction of genes in sequenced genomes encoding those that are
found in organisms from several phylogenetic lineages but have
not been functionally characterized and described at the protein
chemical level [,
]. These structures may represent up to
half of the potential protein coding regions of a genome.

Methodology
Sequence retrieval:
Randomly retrieved 10 hypothetical protein sequences of
Staphylococcus aureus from NCBI 
[] and were used in this
study. The sequence IDs of those 10 hypothetical proteins were
gi|166409299, gi|166409303, gi|166409302, gi|166409301,
gi|166409300, gi|390516769, gi|166409293, gi|390516759,
gi|390516760 and gi|166409294. To analyze the hypothetical
proteins and assign their physicochemical and structural and
functional properties, various bioinformatics tools and
databases were used.

Physicochemical and functional characterization:
For physicochemical characterization, theoretical Isoelectric
point (pI), molecular weight, total number of positive and
negative residues, extinction coefficient [], instability index
[], aliphatic index 
[] and grand average hydropathy
(GRAVY) [] were computed using the Expasy's Protparam
server [].

PFAM:
Pfam [,
] is a collection of multiple protein-sequence
alignments and HMMs, and provides a good repository of
models for identifying protein families, domains and repeats.
There are two parts to the pfam database: Pfam A, a set of
manually curated and annotated models; PfamB, which has
higher coverage but is fully automated (with no manual
curation). Pfam B HMMs are created from alignments
generated by ProDom in the automatic clustering of the protein
sequences in SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL.

CDD-BLAST:
CD-Search [] is NCBI's interface to searching the Conserved
Domain Database with protein query sequences. It uses RPSBLAST,
a variant of PSI-BLAST, to quickly scan a set of precalculated
position-specific scoring matrices (PSSMs) with a
protein query [].

Protein-Protein interactions prediction:
STRING (Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting
Genes/Proteins,) [] is a database of known and predicted
protein interactions. The interactions include direct (physical)
and indirect (functional) associations; they are derived from
four sources: Genomic Context, High-throughput Experiments,
(Conserved) Co-expression and Previous Knowledge. STRING
quantitatively integrates interaction data from these sources for
a large number of organisms, and transfers information
between these organisms where applicable. The database
currently covers 5,214,234 proteins from 1133 organisms 
[].

Prediction of transmembrane proteins:
SOSUI server is used to characterize whether the protein is
soluble or transmembrane in nature [].

Stability of proteins:
DISULFIND [,
] is a server for predicting the disulfide
bonding state of cysteines and their disulfide connectivity
starting from sequence alone. Disulfide bridges play a major
role in the stabilization of the folding process for several
proteins. Prediction of disulfide bridges from sequence alone is
therefore useful for the study of structural and functional
properties of specific proteins. In addition, knowledge about the
disulfide bonding state of cysteines may help the experimental
structure determination process and may be useful in other
genomic annotation tasks.

Protein structure prediction:
Online server PS2 (PS Square) Protein Structure Prediction
Server [] was used 
[–] which accepts the protein query
sequences in FASTA format and uses the strategies of Pair-wise
and multiple alignment by combining powers of the programs
PSI-BLAST, IMPALA and T-COFFEE in both target – template
selection and target–template alignment and finally it
constructs the protein 3D structures using integrated modeling
package of PS2 using best scored orthologous template.

Q-Site Finder:
Q-Site Finder [] is a new method of ligand binding site
prediction. It works by binding hydrophobic (CH3) probes to
the protein, and finding clusters of probes with the most
favorable binding energy. These clusters are placed in rank
order of the likelihood of being a binding site according to the
sum total binding energies for each cluster. Q-Site Finder was
shown to identify sites with high precision. The advantage of
this is that putative binding sites are identified as closely as
possible to the actual binding site. It uses the interaction energy
between the protein and a simple Vander Waal's probe to locate
energetically favorable binding sites. Energetically favorable
probe sites are clustered according to their spatial proximity
and clusters are then ranked according to the sum of interaction
energies for sites within each cluster [].

Discussion
The physicochemical properties of hypothetical proteins were
tabulated in  (see supplementary material). The
calculated isoelectric point (pI) will be useful because at pI,
solubility is least and mobility in an electro focusing system is
zero. Isoelectric point (pI) is the pH at which the surface of
protein is covered with charge but net charge of protein is zero.
At pI, proteins are stable and compact. The computed isoelectric
point (pI) will be useful for developing buffer system for
purification by isoelectric focusing method. Although Expasy's
Protparam computes the extinction coefficient for 276, 278, 279,
280 and 282 nm wavelengths, 280 nm is favored because
proteins absorb light strongly there while other substances
commonly in protein solutions do not. Extinction coefficient of
hypothetical proteins homologue at 280 nm is ranging from
1490 to 77825 M cm with respect to the concentration of Cys,
Trp and Tyr. The high extinction coefficient of hypothetical
proteins indicates presence of high concentration of Cys, Trp
and Tyr. The computed extinction coefficients help in the
quantitative study of protein–protein and protein–ligand
interactions in solution. The instability index provides an
estimate of the stability of protein in a test tube. There are
certain dipeptides, the occurrence of which is significantly
different in the unstable proteins compared with those in the
stable ones. This method assigns a weight value of instability.
Using these weight values it is possible to compute an
instability index (II). A protein whose instability index is
smaller than 40 is predicted as stable, a value above 40 predicts
that the protein may be unstable []. The instability index
value for the hypothetical proteins was found to be ranging
from 7.98 to 64.89. The stable proteins were gi|166409302,
gi|166409301, gi|166409300, gi|390516769, gi|166409293,
gi|390516759 and gi|166409294 and the other proteins were
unstable. The aliphatic index (AI) which is defined as the
relative volume of a protein occupied by aliphatic side chains
(A, V, I and L) is regarded as a positive factor for the increase of
thermal stability of globular proteins. Aliphatic index for the
hypothetical proteins sequences ranged from 65.36 to 138.39.
The very high aliphatic index of the protein sequences indicates
that these proteins may be stable for a wide temperature range.
The lower thermal stability of proteins was indicative of a more
flexible structure when compared to other protein. The Grand
Average hydropathy (GRAVY) value for a peptide or protein is
calculated as the sum of hydropathy values of all the amino
acids, divided by the number of residues in the sequence.
GRAVY indices of hypothetical proteins are ranging from -
0.172. This low range of value indicates the possibility of better
interaction with water.

Functional analysis of these proteins includes protein domains
and family prediction and prediction of trans-membrane
regions, disulfide bond and identification of sub-cellular
localization sites. Domains can be thought of as distinct
functional and/or structural units of a protein. These two
classifications coincide rather often, as a matter of fact, and
what is found as an independently folding unit of a polypeptide
chain also carries specific function. Domains are often identified
as recurring (sequence or structure) units, which may exist in
various contexts. In molecular evolution such domains may
have been utilized as building blocks, and may have been
recombined in different arrangements to modulate protein
function []. The proteins were classified into particular family
based on the presence of specific domain in the sequence. Out
of 10 hypothetical proteins, 7 proteins possessed specific
domains in them which were lactococcin_972, Mob_Pre,
L_ocin_972_ABC, DUF 1093 &amp; 1430, COG4652,
ABC_MJ0796_Lo1CDE_FtsE, HTH, HTH_MARR, oxido_YhdH
and MDR_yhdh_yhfp domains and they were classified as
super-families accordingly. Most of these possessed
functionally important domains in them except the sequences
with id gi|166409301 and gi|166409300 which had domains of
unknown function. There were no domains in the other 3
proteins. The presence of these domains in the hypothetical
proteins reveals that the proteins might be involved in
performing the same function. The domains of the hypothetical
proteins and their super-family descriptions were given in
 &amp; 
 (see supplementary material).

The study of subcellular localization is important for
elucidating protein functions involved in various cellular
processes. Knowledge of the subcellular localization of a
protein can significantly improve target identification during
the drug discovery process. The localization site of the
hypothetical proteins selected in this study was predicted by
PSORTB and they were tabulated in  (see
supplementary material). Cytoplasmic membranes were found
to be preferred site for performing functions in these proteins as
they were seen in most of the proteins involved in this study.
Multiple localization sites were found in sequences with id
gi|166409303, gi|166409301 and gi|390516759 in which the
targeting sites might be of anyone of Cytoplasmic, Cytoplasmic
membrane, extracellular and cell wall.

Pfam database search made to identify domains and families
present in hypothetical proteins  &amp; 
 (see
supplementary material). They were Zinc-binding
dehydrogenase family, MAR family, TMEM9 and ABCtransporters.
SOSUI distinguishes between membrane and
soluble proteins from amino acid sequences, and predicts the
transmembrane helices for the former. The server SOSUI
classified 3 hypothetical proteins as transmembrane proteins
having transmembrane helices atleast one in each and
maximally six transmembrane regions were found in the
protein, gi|166409300. The transmembrane regions type and
their length were tabulated in  (see supplementary
material). All the seven other proteins were soluble ones. The
transmembrane regions are rich in hydrophobic amino acids.
Thus there was higher number of hydrophobic amino acid
residues in the transmembrane proteins. When those
hypothetical proteins were analyzed for disulphide bridges by
DISULPHIND server to predict the thermo stability of the
proteins, it revealed no disulphide bonds in any of those
proteins which revealed that they were thermally unstable.

Protein-protein interactions (PPI) are essential for almost all
cellular functions. Proteins often interact with one another in a
mutually dependent way to perform a common function. As an
example, the transcription factors interact among themselves to
bring about transcription. It is therefore possible to infer the
functions of proteins based on their interaction partners.
Proteins seldom carry out their function in isolation; rather,
they operate through a number of interactions with other
biomolecules. Experimental elucidation and computational
analysis of the complex networks formed by individual proteinprotein
interactions (PPIs) are one of the major challenges in the
post-genomic era. Protein-protein interaction databases have
become a major resource for investigating biological networks
and pathways in cells []. The protein with ID gi|166409301
was found to have interaction with ABC transporter ATP
binding protein. Gi|166409299 had interaction with arsenate
reductase protein which reduces arsenate [As (V)] to arsenite
[As (III)] and dephosphorylates tyrosine and thus the protein
might involve in the enzymatic function of the protein.
Gi|166409302 showed interactions with three proteins which
were A) Elongation factor G which promotes the GTPdependent
translocation of the nascent protein chain from the
A-site to the P-site of the ribosome and also has Vitronectinbinding
activity; B) 30S ribosomal protein S5 which plays an
important role in translational accuracy with S4 and S12; C) 30S
ribosomal protein S7; being one of the primary rRNA binding
proteins, it binds directly to 16S rRNA where it nucleates
assembly of the head domain of the 30S subunit; it is located at
the subunit interface close to the decoding center, probably
blocks exit of the E-site tRNA. Gi|166409300 was found to
interact with cysteine protease precursor; Cysteine protease is
able to degrade elastin, fibrogen, fibronectin and kininogen. It
exhibits a strong preference for substrates where arginine is
preceded by a hydrophobic amino acid and also promotes
detatchment of primary human keratinocytes. Along with other
extracellular proteases the protein is involved in the
colonization and infection of human tissues.

Gi|166409293 had interaction with carboxy-terminal processing
proteinase CtpA. Gi|166409294 showed interaction with
quinone oxidoreductase putative YhdH/YhfP. The other
interacting proteins were hypothetical proteins. The proteinprotein
interacting networks of the hypothetical proteins were
given in () &amp; 
 (see supplementary material).
Thus those hypothetical proteins could have the functions of
their interacting proteins. The three dimensional structures of
the hypothetical proteins were modeled by PS Square server
(). Of the eleven hypothetical proteins, PS Square server
could model only four proteins. Since there was low sequence
identity, the remaining six proteins could not be modeled. The
templates used by the server to model those proteins were
tabulated in  (see supplementary material). Identifying
the location of ligand binding sites on a protein is of
fundamental importance for a range of applications including
molecular docking, de novo drug design and structural
identification and comparison of functional sites. Active site
residues of the hypothetical proteins were given in 

(see supplementary material). The active binding site residues
would be helpful for docking with specific ligand to study the
binding interactions between them.

Conclusion
There is a need to annotate and find the structural and
functional properties of hypothetical proteins in the pathogenic
bacteria Staphylococcus aureus which produce many virulence
factors and cause serious infections and disease. We retrieved
10 hypothetical proteins from NCBI database and characterized
its physicochemical properties and identified domains and
families using various bioinformatics tools and databases. The
structures were modeled and their ligand binding sites were
identified. The analysis revealed functionally important
domains and families which were involved in inducing protein
synthesis and multiple antibiotic resistances in the bacteria and
also perform enzymatic functions. This also would provide
useful solution for drug discovery for those proteins which
were involved in multiple antibiotic resistance and disease
mechanisms.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Mohan &amp; Venugopal, Bioinformation 8(15): 722-728 (2012)

Protein-protein interactions of hypothetical proteins predicted by STRING tool

Structures of S. aureus hypothetical proteins modeled
by PS SQUARE server

