Background
Influenza A virus subtype H5N1, which is also known as HPAI A
(H5N1) for “highly pathogenic avian influenza virus of type A of
subtype H5N1” that is highly contagious among birds, causing high
mortality among domestic poultry. H5N1 epizootic in Asia, Europe,
the Near East, and Africa is not expected to diminish significantly in
the short term. So far, the spread of H5N1 virus from person-to-person
has been very rare and unsustained. However, this epizootic continues
to pose an important public health threat. They are classified into
subtypes based on antigenic differences in the two surface
glycoproteins, the hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA).
Genetic variation of the HA and/or NA genes resulting in the
emergence of new influenza virus strains has frequently been
recognized. The mechanism of variation can be either ‘genetic drift’,
which occurs as a result of point mutations, or ‘genetic shift’, which
occurs as a result of genetic reassortment between two strains of
influenza A virus. Influenza A virus contains eight segments of a
single stranded RNA genome with negative polarity. The segmentation
of the genome thus makes genomic reassortment possible when two
strains co-infect a permissive cell [,]. Direct transmission of avian
influenza virus from domestic poultry to humans was demonstrated for
the first time by the outbreak of the highly pathogenic avian H5N1
virus in Hong Kong in 1997 [,] and subsequently confirmed by
human infection caused by avian H9N2 influenza viruses in Hong
Kong in 1999 [], by avian H7N7 viruses in UK in 1996 [] and in
Netherlands in 2003 [], and again by avian H5N1 viruses in Hong
Kong in February 2003 [].

The reemergence of H5N1 influenza A viruses affected a large area of
East and Southeast Asia for the first time from late 2003 to May 2004
and eight countries viz. South Korea, Vietnam, Japan, Thailand,
Cambodia, China, Laos and Indonesia [] were involved. However,
only Vietnam and Thailand reported the disease in humans [,].
The viral genome of H5N1 is contained on eight single (non-paired)
RNA strands or segments that code for eleven proteins. RNA
molecules fulfill a diverse set of biological functions within cells, from
the transfer of genetic information from DNA to protein, to enzymatic
catalysis. Just as proteins form distinct structural motifs such as zinc
fingers and beta barrels, certain structures are also commonly adopted
by RNA molecules. Among the most prevalent RNA structures is a
motif known as the pseudoknot, which are tertiary RNA structures that
are formed by Watson-Crick base pairing between a secondary loop 
structure and compliment bases outside the loop. Pseudoknots are of 3
main types: I-type (interior loop), B-type (bulge loop) and H-type
(hairpin loop) pseudoknot [–].

First recognized in the turnip yellow mosaic virus [], a pseudoknot
is an RNA structure that is minimally composed of two helical
segments connected by single-stranded regions or loops. Although
several distinct folding topologies of pseudoknot exist, the best
characterized is the H type. In the H-type fold, the bases in the loop of
a hairpin form intramolecular pairs with bases outside of the stem.
This causes the formation of a second stem and loop, resulting in a
pseudoknot with two stems and two loops. The two stems are able to
stack on top of each other to form a quasi-continuous helix with one
continuous and one discontinuous strand. The single stranded loop
regions often interact with the adjacent stems (loop 1‐stem 2 or loop
2‐stem 1) to form hydrogen bonds and to participate in the overall
structure of the molecule. Hence, this relatively simple fold can yield
very complex and stable RNA structures. It is fitting that they play a
variety of diverse roles like forming the catalytic core of various
ribozymes [,], self-splicing introns 
[], and telomerase [].
Additionally, pseudoknots play critical roles in altering gene
expression by inducing ribosomal frameshifting in many viruses [–]. The pseudoknot, therefore, represents an important piece of RNA
architecture, as it provides a means for a single RNA strand to fold
upon itself to produce a globular structure capable of performing
important biological functions. Therefore, the pseudoknot structures
involved in frameshifting are attractive targets for the development of
antiviral drugs. Due to this significance of pseudoknots in viral
perpetuation, it becomes necessary to take a look into the viral genome
of H5N1 in order to locate presence of pseudoknots within it. Presence
of pseudoknot within the genes might hold a great implication for 
future research into prevention of the deadly pandemic. In this analysis
we have found the pseudoknot motifs in the hemagglutinin gene of
HPAI A (H5N1) Asian strains and specific aptamers were designed
against these pseudoknots.

Methodology
Dataset
The work was performed absolutely in-silico. The materials
are existing database sequences available at the GenBank of NCBI.
Nucleotide sequences of hemagglutinin are obtained from the NCBIGenBank
[] and the summary of sequence data given in Table 1 (in ).

Conversion of nucleotide sequences
The nucleotide sequences were
converted to the complementary mRNA by the Complementary
Sequence Conversion Tool [].

Identification of pseudoknot motifs
The mRNA sequences were
analyzed for the identification of possible pseudoknot motifs. The
online pseudoknot detection tool from the Bielefeld University
Bioinformatics Server [] was used to identify pseudoknots in the
mRNAs.

Designing of aptamers
The sequences that are involved in the
pseudoknots were selected. Their complementary RNA sequences
were used to design the aptamers against these pseudoknots using the
Vienna RNA suite [].

Discussion
Pseudoknots induce ribosomes to slip into alternative reading frames,
otherwise known as frameshifting. Ribosomes typically translate
mRNA without shifting the translational reading frame []. However,
a number of organisms have evolved mechanisms to cause sitespecific
or programmed frameshifting of the ribosome in either the +1
or −1 direction []. Programmed −1 ribosomal frameshifting is
typically found in viruses and is required for the replication and
proliferation of all retroviruses. Therefore, the pseudoknot structures
involved in frameshifting are attractive targets for the development of
antiviral drugs. The frameshifting event is induced by two RNA
elements within the mRNA: 
a heptanucleotide slippery sequence X XXY YYZ (spaced triplets represent preframeshift codons) and

a downstream RNA structure, typically a pseudoknot [].


The mechanism behind how these elements promote −1 frameshifting is
not fully understood. The current model posits that the ribosome
encounters the downstream pseudoknot while the slippery sequence is
being decoded by the ribosome. The pseudoknot structure likely
causes the ribosome to pause, which is necessary but not sufficient for
frameshifting to occur []. While paused on the slippery sequence,
the ribosome slips back one nucleotide and subsequently continues
translation in the −1 reading frame. The analysis has revealed that
there are several pseudoknots present in the hemagglutinin mRNA
[]. The pseudoknot motif that is predominant among
the sequences is the H-type pseudoknot. After the identification of
these pseudoknot motifs we have designed the aptamers which can be
targeted to those pseudoknots []. By this approach the
pseudoknot motifs can be blocked and their ability to facilitate the
ribosomal frameshifting can be hindered. This may ultimately lead to
reduce the coding efficiency of the HA that encodes hemagglutinin.

Conclusion
The pseudoknot represents an important piece of RNA architecture, as
it provides a means for a single RNA strand to fold upon itself to
produce a globular structure capable of performing significant
biological functions. The pseudoknot structures involved in
frameshifting are the targets for the development of antiviral drugs. 
The present study focused on the identification of pseudoknots within
the viral genome of H5N1. Presence of pseudoknot within the genes
might hold a great implication for future research into prevention of
the virulent disease. We have found the pseudoknot motifs in the
hemagglutinin gene of HPAI A (H5N1) Asian strains and specific
aptamers were designed against these pseudoknots which will play
great role in development of drugs for this deadly epidemic.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Dhar et al., Bioinformation 4(5): 193-196 (2009)

(a - l) Pseudoknots in the Asian strain of Influenza A virus hemagglutinin (HA) mRNA secondary structure. (m - x) Designed aptamers
against the pseudoknots of HA mRNA

