Abbreviations
 HDAC - histone deacetylase, HDACi - histone deacetylase inhibitor , TPSA - total polar surface area , 
SCR - structurally conserved region.

Background
Cancer is a generic term for a group of over 100 chronic diseases, which can affect any part of the body. A defining feature of 
cancer is the rapid creation of abnormal cells, which grow beyond their usual boundary and can invade adjoining parts of the body. The 
cells may also spread to other organs, a process referred to as metastasis. It is expected that the Cancer incidence would have a steady 
increase to 15 million new cases in the year 2020 []. Thus, the challenge of 
developing a novel method to face the impending problem is becoming more significant.

HDAC, Histone Deacetylase, is especially known to play an important role in carcinogenesis. The enzyme has been considered a target 
molecule for cancer therapy []. The members of the classical HDAC family fall 
into two different phylogenetic classes, namely class I and class II [,
]. Deacetylation is a process that removes acetyl group from the histone tails, causing 
the histones to wrap more tightly around the DNA and interfering with the transcription of genes by blocking access by transcription 
factors. The overall result of deacetylation is a global (non‐specific) reduction in the gene expression. Therefore, the inhibition of 
HDAC activity by a specific inhibitor induces growth arrest, differentiation, and apoptosis of transformed or several cancer cells. 
It is this versatility that makes the discovery and development of specific HDAC inhibitors such a tempting prospect in cancer 
research.

The aim of this work is to compare the HDAC‐I enzyme inhibitors that are already in the Phase I/II trials based on their 
pharmacological and ADME (Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism and Excretion) and rank them accordingly to identify the inhibitor(s) 
group specific for the different enzymes of HDAC‐I with better binding affinity and better pharmacological properties. Since, no 
theoretical works have been carried out in identifying the properties and specificity we intend to identify the group that could act as 
potential binding inhibitors.

Methodology
Molecular modeling
Homology modeling of the three dimensional structure of class I Histone Deacetylase (HDAC 1,2,3&amp;8) was carried out using the 
Modeller9v2 []. The template used for the comparative modeling was PDB 
ID‐’1T64‘ (Crystal Structure of human HDAC8 complexed with Trichostatin A).The class I HDAC shows close similarity in 
their sequence and hence the structure of HDAC8 was used as template for the modeling of the class I Histone deacetylase. The SCRs 
(Structurally Conserved Regions), structurally variable regions, N‐terminal and C‐termini of reference structure was assigned to the 
target sequence based on the satisfactory spatial restraints. Thus, the initial models of the Class I HDAC enzymes were generated. The 
energy minimization was carried out using the SPDBV [] and the refined structure 
for all four HDAC‐I enzymes were obtained.

The Histone Deacetylase Inhibitor (HDACi) structures were drawn using the ACD Chemsketch11.0 
[] which offers functionalities like structure cleaning, optimization etc.,. About 
12 known HDACi () from different groups such as hydroxamic acid derivatives, benzamide 
derivatives, cyclic tetrapeptides and short chain fatty acids [,
,] were taken into account for the 
study.

Active site prediction
The active sites of the four class I HDAC were identified using the Q‐SiteFinder []. 
The Q‐SiteFinder works by binding hydrophobic (CH3) probes to the protein, and finding clusters of probes with the most 
favorable binding energy. These clusters are placed in rank order of the likelihood of being a binding site according to the sum total 
binding energies for each cluster. The higher cavity cluster considered and the residues around the cluster were identified as the 
binding residues using the SwissPDBViewer.

Docking
Molecular docking and virtual screening based on molecular docking have become an integral part of many modern structure‐based drug 
discovery efforts and the results are biologically significant. The constructed HDACi's were docked with all the four class I Histone 
deacetylase viz., HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3 &amp; HDAC8 using the Arguslab 4.0.1 [] which 
uses a shape‐based search algorithm . The Docking calculations attempt to place Ligands into binding sites.

Molecular descriptors calculation
Quantitative structure‐activity relationships (QSARs) correlate the response with molecular properties of compounds under interest. 
Any compound to be considered as a lead must possess acceptable scores for all of the descriptors. Molinspiration 
[] and Osiris Property explorer 
[] were used to calculate twelve descriptors‐logP, solubility, drug 
likeliness, polar surface area, molecular weight, number of atoms, number of rotatable bonds, volume, drug score and number of 
violations to Lipinski's rule [] for all the inhibitors taken for the 
analysis (Table in ).

Toxicity prediction
Toxicity is defined as a dose‐linked unsafe effect of a chemical compound on a target life form. Safety issues and ADME (Absorption, 
Distribution, Metabolism and Excretion) are major factors in drug failure and they are crucial to identify early in the discovery 
process to reduce late‐stage attrition. ADME‐Tox Box of PharmaAlgorithms [] was 
used to predict the various toxicity effects such as rat LD50, mouse LD50, oral bioavailability, Ames test, pKa and ion fraction values.

Discussion
The qualities of the homology modeled proteins were evaluated using the procheck tool []. 
It estimates the stereo‐chemical quality of the modeled structures. On analysis of the Ramachandran plot, it was observed that in the 
HDAC 1, 2, 3 and 8 around 96.7% of the residues were present in the favored regions. The Q‐SiteFinder analysis produced the ten 
top most ranked binding sites. The higher cavity site was taken as the most favorable site to dock the ligands. Each ligand showed 
different affinities with the Class I HDAC family for example SFHA compound showed the best affinity with the HDAC 8 (–10.16 kcal/mol). 
Whereas the same compound was found to be rank 2 with HDAC1 and HDAC3 (viz. -8.08 kcal/mol and -9.70 kcal/mol) and rank 3 
(-9.87 kcal/mol) with HDAC2. Hence, all the ligand compounds were ranked individually based on their binding energies with the four 
HDAC‐I enzymes in order to identify the more suitable and better binding inhibitor group of the HDAC‐I. The first five ranking 
inhibitors in each HDAC‐I enzyme were considered for the analysis and eliminating the common ones from the four groups about nine 
different inhibitors were identified from the first five ranks for each HDAC‐I enzyme. Based on their binding energy ranking TSA and 
SFHA were found to possess better binding affinity to the four HDAC‐I enzymes because they rank below five in each HDAC‐I enzyme.

The further descriptor analysis and the toxicity prediction helped in the identification of the more suitable inhibitor. From Table 1 
(), each inhibitor were lacking (red color) in at least 
one or more properties. TSA was the only compound that had the acceptable range (green color) for drug likeness 
[] and also found to possess better binding affinity score (Table 1 in 
). Drug Score and the Drug‐Likeness are the two 
properties that are important for considering a compound to become a successful drug. Though valproic acid had a drug score of 0.61 and 
drug likeness property score of 0.36 it was not appropriate as the molecular weight of valproic acid was 116.16 g/mol, a value lower 
than the preferable range of molecular weight for drug likeness property (160‐480 g/mol) []. 
These values were also taken into account to decide the best inhibitor (Table 1 in ).

The ADME‐TOX box results showed that the TSA has an oral bioavailability of more than 70% i.e., good solubility and 
stability. It acts as a non‐substrate and non‐inhibitor of P‐gp. TSA does not undergo significant first‐pass metabolism 
[]. The predicted LD50 values of TSA in mouse and rat was found to be 
1700mg/kg and 1800mg/kg respectively when administered orally. TSA acts as a non‐substrate when checked for the P‐glycoprotein substrate 
specificity.

Conclusion
The few compounds predicted to inhibit the HDAC family are not effective to all forms of HDAC. This analysis involves a comparative 
investigation by the ranking the inhibitors based on diverse strategies. It is clear that only TSA (a natural compound that can be 
isolated from the metabolites of strains of Streptomyces hygroscopicus) satisfied almost all the properties i.e., binding affinity 
scores of TSA in the four HDAC‐I enzymes was -8.99 kcal/mol, -8.58 kcal/mol, -8.90 kcal/mol &amp; -9.34 kcal/mol respectively, the 
Drug Likeness value (1.24) and drug score (0.37) with 70% oral bioavailability and the hydroxyl group of these compounds fits 
well into the active site of the target where the zinc is present [] 
(). Hence, better hydroxamate derivatives with more potency could be developed as potential 
inhibitors of class‐I HDAC and valuable anti‐cancer‐agents.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors thank Mr. G. Aravindhan, JRF, AU‐KBC Research Centre for assisting in preparing the documentation.

2D structure of different class of compounds with HDACi activity that is currently in Phase I/II clinical trials.
1a‐1g. Hydroxamic acid derivatives; 1h. Benzamide; 1i. Cyclic Peptide; 1j‐1l. Short chain fatty acid derivatives.

Structure showing a bound Hydroxamic acid derivative, TSA with HDAC 8.

