Background
Kandelia rhedii, alternatively known as K. candel, is a mangrove
plant found abundant in Indian subcontinent- especially in
Bengal deltaic region. It falls into the family named
Rhizophoraceae []. It is a small evergreen tree and heights up
to 6 m and much branched [–]. Leaves of this plant are
imparipinnate; leaflets range between 3 to 5 per leaf. Leaves are
firm, 3.8-6.3 cm long, distant, alternate and suborbicular. The
plant has small flowers- pale yellow in axillary panicles and
shorter than the leaves. Pods are 3.8-10 cm long, lanceolate 
[].

Kandelia rheedii (locally known as Guria or Rasunia) is a wellknown
herbal cure to tuberculosis. Several small molecules, for
example Skyrin, Fusaric acid and Emodin, from the plants have
been reported up till now. Skyrin, a fungal bisanthroquinone,
exhibits functional glucagon antagonism by uncoupling the
glucagon receptor from adenylate cyclase activation in rat liver
membranes [] Fusaric acid is a picolinic acid derivative
(Supplementary ). It is typically isolated from various
Fusarium species, and has been proposed for a various
therapeutic applications. Fusaric acid is an important
antibacterial agent and can also be used to kill cancer cells 
[–]. It thus can be used as a biocontrol agent [16, 17]. Emodin is
a purgative resin, 6-methyl-1,3,8-trihydroxyanthraquinone.
Emodin is being studied as a potential agent that could reduce
the impact of type2 diabetes [].

The Casein kinase protein kinases are serine/threonineselective
enzymes. They function as regulators of signal
transduction pathways in most eukaryotic cell types [].
Estrogen receptors are a group of proteins found inside cells.
They are receptors that are activated by the hormone estrogen.
Once activated by estrogen, the estrogen receptor is able to bind
to DNA and regulate the activity of many different genes 
[].
Dopamine β-hydroxylase (DBH) is an enzyme that converts
dopamine to norepinephrine. It is expressed in noradrenergic
nerve terminals of the central and peripheral nervous systems,
as well as in chromaffin cells of the adrenal medulla.
Norepinephrine, released from sympathetic neurons, and
epinephrine, released from the adrenal medulla, participate in a
number of physiological processes including those that facilitate
adaptation to stressful conditions. The thymus, spleen, and
lymph nodes are richly innervated by the sympathetic nervous
system, and catecholamines are thought to modulate the
immune response. However, the importance of this modulatory
role in vivo remains uncertain []. The glucagon receptor is
activated by glucagon and is a member of the class B G-protein
coupled family of receptors, coupled to G alpha receptor 
[].

Several drugs are prevalent in treating tuberculosis. Most
common drugs used today are- Isoniazid [], Pyrazinamide
[–], Ethambutol [,
] and Rifampin 
[–]. Isoniazid,
which works as a prodrug, gets activated by bacterial KatG
(catalase-peroxidase) enzyme [] and works on bacterial enoylacyl
carrier protein/InhA. This hampers the mycolic acid, a
fatty acid in the Mycobacterium. spp. Cell wall, synthesis for the
bacteria and thus prevents further propagation of it [].
Pyrazinamide diffuses into M. tuberculosis and it is
enzymatically converted into active form pyrazinoic acid which
accumulates in the bacterial cell []. Pyrazinoic acid inhibits
fatty acid synthase (FAS) and also reported to inhibit translation
of the dormant bacteria []. Ethambutol also works by
obstructing the formation of cell wall. It inhibits
arabinogalactan synthesis by blocking arabinosyl transferase
enzyme and thereby inhibits cell wall synthesis [,
].
Rifampicin inhibits bacterial DNA-dependent RNA synthesis
by inhibiting bacterial DNA-dependent RNA polymerase 
[].

A tuberculosis drug may work specifically against the bacterial
proteins or may act to strengthen the host immune system itself.
Until recently the drugs targeting the bacterial proteins seemed
to be functioning well []. However, with rapidly emerging
resistant strains, it appears that the potential of drugs that
enhances host immunity by binding host proteins are also of
great import. The small molecules found here from natural
sources have been shown to bind to host proteins and thereby
strengthen host immunity. Natural plant extracts, in many
cases, have been reported to be strong agents that boost host
immunity [,
].

Methodology
A graphical representation of the methods applied in the study
has been illustrated ().

Ligand identification:
The ultimate goal of the study was to propose active
compounds in the plant extract and their molecular mechanism.
To find the abundant compounds in the plant several databases
and literatures were looked into. An online database titled
Medicinal Plants of Bangladesh (http://www.mpbd.info/)
was used to retrieve essential information on the plant. Several
encyclopedias were also used for the purpose. Among them
some notable ones were C. P. Khare edited Indian Medicinal
plants and Yifan Yang edited Chinese Herbal Medicine:
Comparisons and characteristics. Literature search and datamining
also revealed key information on the abundant
compounds of the plant.

Target identification:
The abundant small molecules were at first searched at
STITCH 3.1 (http://stitch.embl.de/) 
[] databases for their
corresponding interactors. The database returns probable
interactor targets on the basis of text mining. Therefore the not
much about the binding interaction of the ligand and the target
molecules can be predicted from the database results. Still the
results were helpful as a guide to carry out docking studies.
ImmPort (http://immport.niaid.nih.gov/) and KEGG (Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) (http://www.kegg.jp/)
[–] 
databases were used for characterizing the interacting
proteins. ImmPort database returns potential immune related
protein targets for the small molecule. Proteins with ability to
induce cellular immunity were chosen as the potential
candidate for having anti-tuberculosis activity. The Reactome
database [] retrieved the mechanism how the selected target
proteins may mediate their action.

Docking:
The 3D ligand structure was downloaded from online database
ChemDB (http://cdb.ics.uci.edu/) and was subsequently
docked to protein 3D structure of the macromolecule. Target
molecule sequences were collected from NCBI Proteins
database. The macromolecule 3D structures were simulated
using I-TASSER (zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/I-TASSER/)
online server. To ensure propriety of the docking results a
control experiment was run. In the control experiment random
small molecules were made to bind to a specific target or
random small molecules were made to bind to the specific
target molecule. If the binding values for the target and the
ligand was higher than that of the random controls the docking
scores were deemed to be significant.

Ligand and macromolecule was docked using two programs-
AutoDock Vina (Download link:
http:/vina.scripps.edu/download.html) and online tool
PATCHDOCK (http://bioinfo3d.cs.tau.ac.il/PatchDock/).

Analysis:
The ligand bound protein structures after docking were viewed
by RasWin and PyMol []. The AutoDock results were
analyzed using AutoDock tools -1.5.6rc3 and PyMol. Protein
pockets, candidates for ligand binding sites, were found by
DogsiteScorer and Pocket Finder tools.

Results
From text mining Skyrin, Fusaric acid, Emodin,
Norlichexanthone and Secalonic acid were found to be the
potential active compounds for the plant 
[–].
Norlichexanthone and Secalonic neither bound to any
Mycobacterium tuberculosis proteins nor did it bind to any host
proteins. Additionally, the STITCH 3.1 database search
predicted tentative target molecules for Skyrin, Fusaric acid and
Emodin. The found interactors were all host proteins and no
interacting Mycobacteria spp. specific target molecules were
found. Among the tentative target molecules found, the host
proteins that elicit cellular immunity were chosen as potential
targets [].

For the ligands, several tentative target molecules in host were
found. For Emodin Casein kinase, V-erb-b2 erythroblastic
leukemia viral oncogene homolog 2, Nuclear factor of kappa
light polypeptide gene enhancer in B-cells 1, Matrix
metallopeptidase 9, Estrogen receptor, Baculoviral IAP repeatcontaining
5, Tumor necrosis factor, RAD51 homolog, solute
carrier family 45, Jun oncogene were found to be potential
target molecules. For Fusaric acid Dopamine β-hydroxylase,
Thyrotropin releasing hormone Fragment, Gonadotropin
releasing hormone 1, Peptidyl-glycine alpha-amidating
monooxygenase Precursor, Dihydroorotate dehydrogenase,
Mitochondrial precursor protein was found to be potential
target molecules. For Skyrin only Glucagon receptor Precursor
was found to be a potential target molecule. However, only
Casein kinase and Estrogen receptor for Emodin, Dopamine β-
hydroxylase for Fusaric acid, Glucagon receptor Precursor for
Skyrin was known to showed any association with cellular
immunity. Cellular immunity plays central role in curing
tuberculosis. Therefore, these four tentative targets were
shortlisted for further docking study. The summary of the
found association for these four proteins are enlisted in 
[–]
(see ) and (). Most of these
predicted target molecules generally show good correlation
with inflammation process.

The docking studies help to predict specific target molecules
from the tentative ones. Emodin binds to casein kinase and the
binding affinity was -7.1 kcal/mol- a value much higher than
the control values. CSNK binding was further validated by
looking for active sites in the groove where the small molecule
binds. The groove turned out to fall into the active pocket as
predicted by DogSiteScorer. Emodin was also made to bind to
ERBB and the binding affinity score for that was -7.4 which is
higher than the control values  (see supplementary
material). Fusaric acid was made to bind to DBH and the
results found were surprising. For Fusaric acid binding the
scores were -6.2. The active site for Fusaric acid was also on the
most predominant pocket. However the area of Fusaric acid
binding was much lower than that of the available binding
space. The binding affinity of Skyrin to Gcgr gave good scores.
The random binding scores were too lower than that of the
Skyrin to Gcgr score of -7.7 (). The overall binding
affinities and binding affinities for the control is enlisted in
(). All docking results were duplicated using
PATCHDOCK online docking tool. The results of
PATCHDOCK correlated well with that of AutoDock 
().

The mechanisms of the four target molecules were predicted
using Reactome database. The database returned potential
interactors and the reactions carried out by the target molecules.
Based on the database information a molecular network was
generated for all the four predicted targets. Network for Casein
kinase revealed that it is responsible for inhibiting ceramide
transport from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi
apparatus. This results in an upregulation in Wnt pathway. Wnt
pathway causes the cellular immunity to improve 
 (see
supplementary material). On the other hand, Estrogen receptor
is directly linked to chemokine signaling pathway regulated by
YAP trabscription factor which causes an upregulation of
immune response  &amp; 
 (see supplementary material). It
also may act as pro-apoptic agent in infected cells ().
Dopamine β-hydroxylase (DBH) causes a general upregulation
in the cellular immunity by causing rapid neurostimulation
( &amp; ). The molecular networks reveal that Skyrin binds
to the glucagon receptor and triggers a G protein linked
signaling pathway.The G protein linked pathway then activates
an Adenylaye Cyclase (AC) which leads to cAMP production
and Protein Kinase A (PKA) production as a consequence. PKA
induces a wide array of cellular activities including ion channel
opening and transcription factor mediated gene induction. This
results in accelerated metabolic activity of the immune cells and
thus causes immunity against tuberculosis ( &amp; 
).

Discussion
The study selected abundant compounds of the herbal plant by
mining a wide array of literatures, encyclopedia as well as
databases and consequently predicts target molecules for those
selected molecules. Kandelia rheedii has long been found to have
anti-tuberculosis activity [,
]. There have been many
literatures that reported the active products of the plants.
However the molecular mechanism how the plants extract
mediates the action is still unclear. This study tries to answer
this question using computational analysis.

Tuberculosis (TB) is caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis- a
bacterial pathogen that can survive and persist in the human
host even amidst robust immune response. In tuberculosis the
bacteria infects one of the major immune cells- macrophage.
Since, this cell is a major inflammation mediator; in TB often
having robust humoral immune response does not improve the
situation for the patient. The most effective way of fighting this
disease has been to improve the cellular immunity as a whole
[].

Cellular immunity is the major immune pathway that is
activated to fight out tuberculosis infection. Major effectors of
cellular immunity are the T cells. T cells can be of two typesone
is of CD4+ and MHC-II recognizing TH cells and the other
one is CD8+ and MHC-I recognizing Tc cell. It has been shown
that both the cells play their parts in protecting host cells
against the bacterial infection [].

TH or T-helper cells are the lineage of T cells that secret several
cytokines and thus ameliorate inflammatory and antibody
mediated immune response against both infected cells and the
bacteria itself. On the other hand, TC or cytotoxic T cells are
responsible for killing infected macrophage cells 
[,
].

A prophylactic often blocks the specific enzymes of the
causative pathogens []. Drugs that are being used currently
against tuberculosis are also designed against bacterial proteins.
However, as an alternative mode of action the drug can also act
on the host proteins and bolster the host immunity 
[]. The
small molecules found here from natural sources have been
shown to bind to host proteins and thereby strengthen host
immunity. This paves the way for an alternative way of
designing prophylactic drugs against Mycobacteria tuberculosis
[].

Molecular network study has become a major way of
understanding the molecular mechanism of drug action
nowadays [–]. Network based drug discovery has become a
recurrent theme for natural compounds too; characterization of
the drug regulated genes and targets have been assisted greatly
by computational techniques [–]. Rational drug designing
from natural sources have made drug costs and required
resources to go down significantly over the years 
[–]. Hence
this study holds great implications for drug designing from
natural products [–].

The results suggest that the Emodin, one of the most copious
small molecules in the plant extract, binds to two target
molecule- Casein kinase and Estrogen receptor. Casein kinase is
responsible for up-regulating Wnt pathway and it consequently
improves cellular immunity. In addition it also binds Estrogen
receptor and hence accelerates chemokine signaling pathway
which results in a rapid upregulation of inflammatory
mediators (). Another small molecule- Fusaric acid, on
the other hand, binds Dopamine β-hydroxylase (DBH) and
causes a non-specific intensification of cellular immunity 
(). In a similar note, Skyrin binds to the Glucagon receptor
which triggers a cascade of reaction keeping G protein linked
receptor at the center of it (). All three proteins hence
play both specific and non specific roles in inducing the cellular
immunity. Their association to cellular immunity is enlisted in
().

According to the docking studies carried out, Emodin is
predicted to be a potential ligand of CSNK. Skyrin also seem to
be a potent ligand of Glucagon receptor. However, not much of
a specific correlation was was found between the target
molecule of Skyrin and tuberculosis. From these studies only
Emodin could have been predicted as the mediator molecule
without much doubt.

Docking study for herbal drugs has been applied successfully in
last few decades [–]. Since AutoDock has been used widely
for drug designing [,
], the predictions made in this study
seems to be computationally valid. However, only further in
vitro studies can absolutely confirm the predictions.

A significant revelation was made in case of Fusaric acid
binding in DBH. The depth to area ratio for the binding pocket
was (77.20/9149.91 =) 0.00843 (Data not shared). The area of the
groove was quite large with respect to the height. This may
open up a new perspective. Often ligands that are buried well
inside the protein have some sort of channeling process 
[–].
Emulating the channeling computationally could have
improved the docking score. However, in docking studies,
despite the flexibilities of induced fit, it is hardly possible to
emulate this effect as the experiment is done with one constant
structure. Only further in vitro studies can confirm whether
there is any channeling effect there in that protein or not.

The control small molecules were drawn at random from
PubChem database. The control target molecule structures too
were taken at random from PDB database. The random control
ensured the propriety of the prediction and ruled out high score
values generated due to discrepancies.

There have not been many studies to connect among ayurvedic,
allopathic and molecular medicines. Ayurvedic drugs put more
focuses on strengthening host immunity as a whole whereas
allopathic focuses on treating the pathogenic agent 
[–]. Both
the concepts are important in designing molecular medicines.
Designing drugs, against both host and pathogenic
macromolecules, on the basis of structure and function holds
momentous importance in molecular medicines []. However,
with a growing popularity of natural medicine this integration
has never been more likely in the coming days []. The study
tries to establish the molecular basis of the traditional herbal
extract and thus employs an integrated approach. The study
should further be useful for designing synthetic drugs against
Mycobacteria tuberculosis. It is to be noted that often promising
computational analysis fail to get reproduced in vitro and hence
the study must have to be further validated in vitro before a
conclusive remark.

Conclusion
The extracts from the plant Kandelia rheediihas has been
traditionally used in the treatment of tuberculosis. However,
the molecular mechanism of such action was not known for
compounds isolated from the plant extract. Here, it is shown
that Emodin binds to Casein Kinase (CSNK) and Estrogen
receptor (ERBB), Fusaric acid binds Dopamine β-hydroxylase
(DBH) and Skyrin binds Glucagon receptor (Gcgr) using
molecular docking and network analysis. There have not been
many studies to bridge among ayurvedic, allopathic and
molecular medicines. In this regard, the study attempts to fill
this gap. However, the results need to be tried in vitro for
conclusive proof of concept.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Zaman, Bioinformation 8(21): 1012-1020 (2012)

Graphical representation of the methods applied in
the study. From ayurvedi studies it has been reported that
Kandelia rheedii can cure tuberculosis. However, the ayurvedic
approach fails to explain the mechanism how it does so.
Structure based drug designing approach, as outlined in this
study, predicts how in the molecular level this action is carried
out.

Probable interactors for the ligands (A) Emdin can interacts to different molecules to either induce (arrowhead) or
suppress (flat line) them; (B) Skyrin can interacts with Glucagon receptor; (C) Like emoldin Fusaric acid too can interacts with
many different molecules.

Small molecules binding to the target proteins. (A) Fusaric acid binds to DBH in a grove that is larger in size than the
space required for the binding. Cartoon/ribbon representation of the structure is shown; (B) Fusaric acid structure is well
protruded inside the groove. The target molecule is shown in surface representation and the small molecule in stick; (C) Emodin
binds to ERBB protein in a groove surrounded with helixs structures. Many of the polar amino acid residues (R346, H279, E276) in
those helices regions are responsible for stabilizing the small molecule structure; (D) The protein is illustrated as cartoon structure
and the pocket is well visualized in this illustration.

