Background
Brain Derived Neurotrophic Factor (BDNF) function is with
development. It accelerates the differentiation of selected
neuronal populations of the peripheral and central nervous
systems. BDNF participates in axonal growth, path finding and
in the modulation of dendritic growth and morphology in many
regions of the Central Nervous Systems (CNS). The versatility
of BDNF has been proved for its contribution to a range of
adaptive neuronal responses including long-term potentiation
(LTP), long-term depression (LTD), certain forms of short-term
synaptic plasticity, as well as homeostatic regulation of intrinsic
neuronal excitability []. The Nerve growth factor (NGF) is a
protein which stimulates the differentiation and maintenance of
sympathetic and embryonic sensory neurons. It is known that
snake venoms are a rich source of NGF.

NGF acts as a survival factor in nerve cells and it has metal coordination
sites, primarily limited to Zn (II) and Cu (II). It has
been found in the brain with highest concentration of metal ions
to modulate the function of the nerve cells by efficiently
inhibiting the biological activities of NGF. NGF and BDNF are
two members of a family of neuro-trophic factors with
overlapping molecular function []. Three neuro-trophic factors
NGF, BDNF, NT3 are highly conserved being the member of the
NGF family in vertebrates reflecting molecular conservation
during evolution and speciation. It is shown that NT-4protein
from Xenopus and Viper has 50-60% amino acid identity with
NGF, BDNF, and NT-3 with an extended evolutionary
relationship []. The study shows that BDNF interacts with
TrkB. The involvement of BDNF in glucose metabolism in
diabetic and obese mice with sensitivity to the peripheral
neurons is shown [,
].

Active sites of proteins are characterized with evolving sidechains
known as hot spots for protein interactions []. BDNF has
been considered as an interesting molecule due to its possible
association with obsessive compulsive disorder [], Alzheimer
disease [], and dementia 
[]. It should be noted that Varanus
and the Naja atra belong to the same family. BDNF is common
and it acts as NGF in Varanus komodoensis. However, the
structure of BDNF from V. komodoensis is unknown. Therefore, it
is of interest to develop its homology model to compare with
NGF from Naja atra for establishing similar structural features.

Methodology
Sequence data:
The sequences of BDNF from Varanus komodoensis was
downloaded NCBI and that of NGF from Naja atra downloaded
from UniPROT (comprehensive, high-quality resource for
protein function related information) for this study. The
UniPROT database documents predicted function for BDNF
from Varanus komodoensis. Hence, it is of inertest to report the
homology model [] for inferring molecular function.

Template selection:
A suitable template (PDB ID: 1BND_A with resolution 2.3 Å)
was selected using BlastP (Protein Blast) against the PDB
(Protein databank) database for the BDNF query sequence with
calculated DOPE Score and molePDF Score ().

Homology model:
The homology model of BDNF () was developed using
Modeller [] and the model was further analysed for validation
using RAMPAGE [].

Cavity prediction and characterization:
The active site prediction server [] was used for the
calculation of cavities. The server outputs data with cavities for
PDB (protein databank) input files. The analysis shows 33
cavities in the BDNF homology model and NGF structure 
 (see supplementary material). The cavity residue stretch and
volume in both BDNF and NGF is shown in (). The
number of residues in the cavity is similar in both BDNF and
NGF. However, they differ in their volume. This explains
sequence () and structure 
() level similarity
between BDNF and NGF.

Discussion
The active site prediction server helped to identify the cavities
present in the BDNF protein. 33 cavities are found in the
structure with the residue sequence stretch, cavity point and
volume cavity to locate the active sites in BDNF for potential
ligand binding characterization (). Cavities in protein
surface create physiochemical properties which are required for
molecular functions. The sequence alignment between BDNF of
NGF is shown in  for inferring potential homology 
[].
 (see supplementary material) presents the protein
features of BDNF and NGF. Further, analysis shows that BDNF
and NGF have 51% sequence level similarity level. The
similarity level of BDNF for various vertebrates' species is at
93% and 77% in nucleotide and amino acid sequence,
respectively []. Reports in Xenopus suggest that leu90 is
replaced by a phenylalanine as a result of the transversion of C
to T []. It has been reported that all isolated sequences
contained an extra amino acid residue at position 96 compared
to that of NGF [].

BDNF show three anti parallel B sheets connected to form loops
(). BDNF and NGF activate the TrkA and TrkB
receptors, respectively and the TrkB receptors have high degree
of sequence similarity between them []. The interaction of the
TrkB receptor with that of BDNF is mediated by multiple
contacts. The BDNF structure model demonstrates the presence
of lysine 96, arginine 97 and glutamine 84 on its B sheet. This is
important for BDNF/ TrkB activity as shown elsewhere 
[].
Active sites in enzyme are usually determined by their
hydrophobic patches with the involvement of side chains. 
[]
Active site prediction by its size shows that there are 33 cavities
in descending order from 1252 to 162 for BDNF and 1520 to 176
for NGF (). These predictions have extended the identity
of the locations for ligand binding to evaluate the volumetric
extent of ligands []. It should be noted that the identification
and size characterization of some free cavities and the hidden
cavities are the initial step for ligand design [].

The BDNF and NGF ( &amp; ) show a domain
characterised by six conserved cysteine residues 
[]. The
sequence similarity between BDNF and NGF is shown in Figure
3 at 51%. It has been stated that vertebrate BDNF reached an
optimally functional structure very early in the vertebrate
evolution []. It is observed that BDNF evolution is
fragmentary in nature [,
] except for Zebra Fish. Thus, the
reported homology model of BDNF finds application in
understanding its function in relation to its evolutionary
molecular conservation.

Conclusion
It is of interest to characterize the structure of BDNF from
Varanus komodoensis. Hence, a structural model of the protein
was reported with its 33 cavities identified using prediction
methods. Comparison of the BDNF homology model with the
known NGF structure from Naja atra show structural similarity
inferring functional analogy. The model data presented with the
predicted cavities finds useful for further in-depth analysis of
BDNF from Varanus komodoensis.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Verma et al, Bioinformation 9(15): 755-758 (2013)

DOPE profile of the model with the template is shown
as a function of residue position number.

A homology model of BDNF Varanus komodoensis is
shown. The homology model [] was developed using modeler
version 9.0 [].

Sequence alignment of Varanus komodoensis BDNF and
Naja atra NGF is shown.

A qualitative visual comparison of NGF from Naja
atra and BDNF from Varanus komodoensis is presented.

