The dopamine receptor subtype in brain is DRD1. This receptor
modulates several cellular functions and its expression has been
studied in detail concerning extracellular signaling. A
publication [] indicates that there is also miRNA regulation
(suppression) of DRD1 transcription and translation due to
miR-142-3p interaction with the DRD1 3'-untranslated region
(1,277 bp) of the DRD1 mRNA. This affects dopamine- and
cAMP-regulated phosphoprotein of 32 kDa (DARPP-32)
expression as well, consequently [].

DARPP-32 is also known as Protein phosphatase 1, regulatory
(inhibitor) subunit 1B (PPP1R1B). This protein as well as DRD1
is expressed in medium spiny neurons and DARPP-32 is crucial
in a number of pathways relating to drug abuse and
neuropsychiatric disease. Discovery of DARPP-32 lead to the
award of the Nobel Prize to Dr. P. Greengard (Rockefeller
University, NY, NY) [].

Dopamine participates in reward and function in the brain and
dopamine pathway dysfunction is involved in drug abuse (e.g.
cocaine, amphetamine, nicotine, caffeine, LSD, PCP, ethanol
morphine, alcoholism, and smoking), gambling, novelty
seeking, and additional neuropsychiatric diseases including
schizophrenia, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder,
Huntington's disease, and Parkinson's disease. Dopamine
transporter (SLC6A3) is a participant as well. Signaling
pathways interconnect DARPP-32 and dopamine pathways.
The kinase, CK2 is also implicated among these pathways 
[–].
It is left as a puzzle for the interested reader to identify the
various genes and their functions in the ( &amp; 
) [,
,
].

Thus, the continued study of DARPP-32 and related pathways
may lead to cures for the many pathologies stemming from
diseases as mentioned above.

There are no financial conflicts.

Citation:Shapshak, Bioinformation 9(6): 274-275 (2013)

Network of input proteins (DARPP-32, Dopamine
receptor DRD1, Dopamine transporter SLC6A3, and casein
kinase 2 CK2) with input neighbors of these proteins. In this
figure, line-colors and various interactions with other genes are
red Down-regulation, green Up-regulation, beige Regulation,
purple Co-expression, brown Physical Interaction, turquoise
dotted Predicted Protein Interaction, and mauve dotted
Predicted TFactor Regulation [].

Network of input proteins (DARPP-32, Dopamine
receptor DRD1, Dopamine transporter SLC6A3, and casein
kinase 2 CK2) and additional neighbors of these proteins.
miRNA affects DRD1 expression and probably miRNAs affect
several additional proteins in the figure. The study of miRNAs
is a new field and much needs to be learned. In this figure, linecolors
and various interactions with other genes are red Downregulation,
green Up-regulation, beige Regulation, purple Coexpression,
brown Physical Interaction, turquoise dotted
Predicted Protein Interaction, and mauve dotted Predicted
TFactor Regulation [].

