Background
Genes contain exons which are regions coding for proteins and
introns which are non-coding regions. In transcription process,
introns are removed by RNA splicing and the exons are joined
together to form the functional messenger RNA (mRNA) 
[].
Accurate prediction of precise exon–intron boundaries in genes
is an essential step in the analysis of genomic sequences
[]. This gene structure is conserved between closely related
species for the majority of genes []. In evolution, gene structure
conservation may be a record of core events []. The aim of this
project is to develop a new pipeline to predict exon sequences
and their boundaries for novel species comparing a model
species by using the sequence similarity method.

Methodology
CEPiNS is a bioinformatics tool for large-scale exon prediction.
This application allows study of gene structure for model and
novel species by predicting exon boundaries and sequences.

Given the input of a set of gene sequences and their genomic
sequences for a model species, CEPiNS generates a table of exon
boundaries for these genes. CEPiNS uses BLAST [] to identify
the orthologous genes between the genes of a reference species
and the predicted genes from a novel species' assembled
transcriptome. Once this orthology has been established, the
exons in the genomic reference species can be transferred to the
novel species. The output is therefore the predicted exons in the
novel species. The workflow for CEPiNS is illustrated in 
().

Preprocessing of Dataset:
CEPiNS has preprocessing tool to remove alternate splicing and
to predict orthologous sequences by using BLAST. For both the
model and novel species, multiple copies of the same genes
within a genome are removed by identifying sequences with at
least 95% similarity at the nucleotide level using BLASTN and
retaining only the longest. Gene sequences in both model and
novel species with at least 60% similarity at protein level
CEPiNS treated as orthologous sequences using BLASTP.

Exon Prediction in Model Species:
SPIDEY is an mRNA to genomic DNA alignment program 
[].
When intron-exon boundaries are not already annotated in the
reference (model) species, SPIDEY gives the exon boundaries by
using a set of mRNA or cDNA sequences and their
corresponding genomic sequences. CEPiNS generates a table
with the gene ID, genomic sequence ID, exon boundaries in
genes and genomic sequences and length of exons by using the
table created by SPIDEY. It also creates a file of exon sequences
in fasta format.

Exon Prediction in Novel Species:
CEPiNS uses TBLASTX for the alignment at amino acid level in
all six reading frames for each predicted genes from
transcriptome assembly of the novel species and its
corresponding exon sequences of the reference species, which
has been created by SPIDEY. CEPiNS creates a table output
with cDNA ID of Reference species, cDNA ID of novel species,
exon Number, genomic coordinates, mRNA coordinates, length
and percent identity. It also creates exon sequences fasta file for
novel species.

Software Input and output
CEPiNS requires the input of a set of transcribed genes of a
model species, the genomic sequence of the same species and of
a predicted gene set from transcriptome assembly of a novel
species in fasta file format. The log screen keeps tracking the
steps performed and results can be viewed by clicking
corresponding buttons. The final outputs are the predicted
exons boundaries in a text file and exons sequences in a fasta
file of the novel species.

Conclusion
CEPiNS is a package for predicting large scale exons for novel
species with Graphical User Interface (GUI) so that biologists,
ecologists, geneticists and people from other backgrounds can
use it very easy way. The output data offer several
opportunities for further work &amp; other tool development.

Citation:Hasan &amp; Wheat, Bioinformation 9(4): 210-211 (2013)

Workflow in CEPiNS. CEPiNS uses Exon Table
obtained from SPIDEY to select the exon boundaries in cDNA
of GRS. Then the Exon Sequences of GRS are used to find exon
boundaries in Novel species. *GRS=Genomic Reference Species;
*WGS=Whole Genome Sequence.

