Background
The ability to collect and store data has grown at a dramatic
rate in all disciplines over the past decade or so with new
techniques being developed for effective storage and analysis.
Healthcare has been no exception. The shift toward evidencebased
research presents significant opportunities to extract
meaningful information and transform into the knowledge
from clinical data []. Interpreting data across multiple systems
is challenging, and various integration techniques, with
varying levels of complexity, have been proposed to solve the
problem of data integration and storage 
[]. However, research
reveals that current designs are not efficient for data sets with
large numbers of attributes that vary over time 
[]. The
architecture required for clinical data management has been
researched in applications such as clinical study data
management systems (CDMSs) and clinical patient record
systems (CPRSs). They both use an entity-attribute-value
(EAV) system as opposed to conventional database design 
[].
The EAV system has the advantage of remaining stable as the
number of parameters increases when knowledge expands, a
common situation in the basic sciences and in clinical trials 
[,
]. 
The characteristics of clinical data as it originates during the
process of clinical documentation - includes issues of data
availability and complex representation models, that can make
data mining process challenging. Therefore, data preprocessing
and transformation are required before one can apply data
mining algorithms on clinical data. The application of classical
data warehousing process should be thus able to answer the
queries being raised. It should also be able to mitigate issues
like appropriate storage structure of clinical data, varied
sources of data, reduce the dimensionality constraint, and
handle multiple data variables.

The stored data in the warehouse would provide a basis for the
analysis of risk factors for the disease. For example, we can
compare tumor with non-tumor patients to find patterns
associated with occurrence of brain tumor. This method has
been common practice in evidence-based medicine, which is an
approach where clinician is aware of the evidence in support of
clinical practice, and its associated strength 
[]. In general,
medical practitioners and researchers do not care how
sophisticated a data mining method is, but they do care how
understandable its results are []. Rules are a type of the most
human-understandable knowledge, and therefore it is most
suitable for deciphering new rules corresponding to data
associated with medical applications. Association rule mining
is a general purpose rule observation scheme that has been
widely used for observing rules in medical applications 
[]. The
Apriori association algorithm exploits the downward closure
property, which states that if an itemset is infrequent, all of its
supersets must be infrequent. Each itemset has an associated
statistical measure called support. For an itemset X ⊂ I,
support(X) = s, if the fraction of transactions in the dataset D
containing X = s. The classic framework for association rule
mining uses support and confidence as thresholds for
constraining the search space. The confidence or accuracy of an
association rule X =&gt; Y in D is the conditional probability of
having Y contained in a transaction, given that X is contained
in that transaction: confidence(X =&gt; Y) = P (Y | X) = support(X
Y) /support(X). This method has been used to find diseasedisease,
disease-finding, and disease-drug co-occurrences in
electronic health record data [,
]. Association rule mining
using objective measures and transitive inference for pruning
has also been done in the clinical domain to find associations
between medications and clinical problems using electronic
health record data []. 
Studies made by Brossette et al. 
[] &amp;
Ordonez et al. [], states about associative rules corresponding
to hepatitis &amp; heart.

The objective of this study is to propose for a data mining
process, which can be used for storage &amp; assessment of data for
patients of brain tumor (primary stage) and observe associative
rules based on clinical diagnostic parameters. The data
warehouse being designed in this study for storage of clinical
data, should be able to render the data in appropriate
structures, provide metadata that adequately records semantics
of data and reference pertinent medical knowledge. The data in
the warehouse is subject to association mining for observing
new rules. Based on the associative clinical parameters
deciphered, we propose for a predictive model which can be
used for an early prediction of brain tumor in suspected
patients independent of results from MRI, CT scan, arteriogram
or small dime craniotomy. Applying association rule mining to
a given clinical data set has the potential to confirm existing
knowledge regarding disease co-occurrences as well as to
discover new disease relationships that could potentially lead
to improved clinical health care.

Methodology
The path of knowledge discovery process is said to be complete
when knowledge has been extracted from pool of data. The
said path involves collection, cleaning and storage of data
followed by mining of knowledge from this pool. Considering
the same, this study focuses on deciphering the clinical
parameters which can be associated with the 'STATE' of brain
tumor by applying association rule mining algorithm. For a
patient not having tumor, 'STATE' is represented as 0 while for
diseased as 1. In (), it depicts approach followed for
this study. In this study a data warehouse was designed to
store temporal data for patients of brain tumor. The warehouse
acts as a data collector, data integrator and data provider for
the data mining process which could be used by doctors,
physicians and other health professionals. There is varied
dimensionality observed in clinical data. Based on consultation
with oncologists appropriate data forms were selected. The set
of clinical parameters selected for the study focuses on blood
analysis result, KFT (Kidney Functionality Test) result, LFT
(Liver Functionality Test) result, sugar level, triplets of blood
pressure and MRI/CT scan images. The warehouse currently
stores information about 550 patients from hospitals across
India. Based on the variability of data, the dimensional model
was designed considering the static &amp; measurable features. In
(), 
it depicts the logical data model, based on which the
structure was created in the warehouse. The functional schema
has date and time dimension which ensures historical data
storage for a patient. The model has been implemented and
developed as a data warehouse using MySQL 5.019 RDBMS.

Preprocessing of data in the warehouse was done using
STATISTICA DATAMINER 9.0, to select the features for
mining purpose, considering - 1) Missing value identification;
2) Selection of integrated forms of data; 3) Identification of
incorrect values based on prescribed scale (Marshall Clinical
Biochemistry, 2008); 4) Feature selection. Data of 200 patients
were selected for further analysis which included 124 cases of
brain tumor (primary stage) and 76 normal patients. From the
feature selection step, the parameters selected for the study are:
Haemoglobin_content, Total_Leucocyte_count (TLC),
Eosinophils, Neutrophils, Lymphocytes, Monocytes, Platelet
count, KFT_Creatinine (Kidney Functionality Test - Creatinine),
KFT_BUN (Kidney Functionality Test - Blood Urea Nitrogen),
LFT_Sr_Bilirubin (Liver Functionality Test - Serum Bilirubin),
LFT_ALP (Liver Functionality Test - Alkaline Phosphatase),
LFT_SGOT (Liver Functionality Test - Serum Glutamic
Oxaloacetic Transaminase), LFT_SGPT (Liver Functionality
Test - Serum Pyruvic Transaminase). Each of the said
parameter values was processed into qualitative form &amp;
labeled as HIGH, NORMAL or LOW based on prescribed
clinical ranges (Marshall 2008). STATISTICA DATAMINER 9.0
was used to calculate the frequency of each itemset with
support % criteria of atleast 30 along with head and body
iteration rate of 10. All the frequent item set obtained with
atleast 30% support criteria were subjected for the observation
of association rules. STATE was declared as the response
indicator and the remaining parameters were defined as
categorical indicators. The confidence to deduce rule was set to
atleast 85% and the process was executed with antecedent and
precedent iteration rate of value 10.

The parameters found to be associated with occurrence of
tumor were selected to build a predictive model using
normalized regression approach. Jackknifing was applied for
cross-validation on the model obtained and validated by R2
observed &amp; Y-randomization test to calculate the PRESS
(predicted residual sum of squares) value.

Results &amp; Discussion
Haemoglobin_content, TLC, Platelet Count, KFT_Creatinine,
KFT_BUN (Blood Urea Nitorgen), LFT_Sr_Bilirubin, LFT_ALP,
LFT_SGOT and LFT_SGPT are the parameters that showed
support of atleast 30%. Item sets satisfying the support % were
subjected to observation of association rules within the
specified mining criteria that showcased association of
high values of Creatinine, BUN, SGOT &amp; SGPT with
presence of tumor in patients.  (see
supplementary material) enlists various Association
Rules discovered within the defined criteria. Usually
high value of creatinine indicates any renal functional
impairment (intrinsic renal lesions, decreased perfusion
of the kidney, or obstruction of the lower urinary tract),
acromegaly and hyperthyroidism, while that of BUN
(Blood Urea Nitrogen) indicates acute &amp; chronic intrinsic
renal disease or post renal obstruction of urine because
of high protein intake. The SGOT (serum glutamicoxaloacetic
transminase) test, also known as an AST test,
measures the amount of a protein enzyme called
glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase occurring in blood.
The SGOT enzyme can be associated with functioning of
skeletal muscles, red blood cells, heart muscles, kidney
tissue and with the brain as well. An SGPT blood test is
used to measure the amount of the enzyme glutamate
pyruvate transaminase (GPT) in blood and usually
associated with occurrence of diseases like cirrhosis and
hepatitis. However the result of the study suggests that
the described factors can also be associated in a
combined form with occurrence of the disease - brain
tumor. Diagnostic value of Creatinine &amp; Urea nitrogen
(BUN) which are usually tested as part of Kidney
Functionality test and; SGOT &amp; SGPT which are usually
tested as part of Liver Functionality test were found to be
unusually high with no abnormalities reported for
Kidney or Liver for patients diagnosed by brain tumor in
the primary stage. The study suggest Creatinine, Urea
Nitrogen, SGOT &amp; SGPT based values can be associated
together and used for deterministic analysis for STATE
of the disease and its early screening. There are
significant associative rules observed corresponding to
the discovered parameters with respect to STATE
parameter of brain tumor. There is 100% confidence
observed corresponding to Creatinine and Blood Urea
Nitrogen association with the disease whereas 95%
confidence with SGOT and SGPT. Also the study
suggests that Haemoglobin content is usually normal
along with other blood related parameters in case of
patients suffering from brain tumor during the primary
stage with 100% confidence.

Based on the parameters identified among the
associative rules with 85% (Creatinine, BUN, SGOT,
SGPT) &amp; 75% confidence (Hemoglobin Content, Alkaline
Phosphatase and Serum Biliuribin), a predictive model is
proposed to predict the possible STATE of a individual
i.e whether suffering from tumor or not. Most significant
model obtained is:

STATE = 0.171 + 0.0491 Haemoglobin_content + 0.0652
KFT_Creatinine + 0.00171 KFT_BUN- 0.0504 LFT_Sr_Bilirubin + 0.000304
LFT_ALP
- 0.00007 LFT_SGPT+ 0.00806 LFT_SGOT
The cross-validation results obtained from Jackknifing -
R2(calculated) = 74.66% and PRESS = 1.67, indicates the
model to be significant.

Conclusion
This study primarily focuses on observation of clinical
parameters that can be associated with occurrence of
brain tumor which is rarely focused upon, by applying
association rule mining algorithm. The study highlights
four of the clinical factors, usually tested for Kidney &amp;
Liver functionality, to be directly associated with
occurrence of brain tumor for patients diagnosed in the
primary stage. Based on the discoveries made in this
study a predictive model is proposed for its early
diagnosis. For robustness &amp; higher accuracy, the model
proposed in the study needs to be further validated by
including data set of patients suffering from other kind
of tumors, renal functional impairment, kidney based
problems, metastatic brain tumor and other brain related
diseases.

Funding Source
Declared None.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors would like to thank Prof. (Dr.) M.C.Pant
from Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, Lucknow, India and
Dr. Ankur from King's George Medical College,
Lucknow, India who have provided the technical
guidance corresponding to aspects of brain tumor and
other clinical parameters during the course of this study.

Citation:Sengupta et al, Bioinformation 9(11): 555-559 (2013)

Flow chart representation of Knowledge Discovery
Process.

Tumor Data Warehouse Dimensional Model

