Background
tRNA is an intermediate molecule and it is a class of small RNA
being present in Bacteria, Archaea and Eukaryota [,
].
Generally it consists of 73 to 93 RNA nucleotides which are
involved in the translation process along with the complex of
ribosome, mRNA, tRNA with amino acids and co-factors
involved in the synthesis of proteins []. It has special segments
such as amino acid attachment site, TCC loop; variable loop,
anticodon loop and D loop thereby forming a tertiary structure
designated in the form of a cloverleaf model [,
,
]. In these
segments, several modifications occur resulting in
posttranscriptional modification of tRNA which influences the
tRNA folding, stability and accuracy of translation process 
[,
]. 
In 1960s, an RNA modification enzyme was first identified
by Borek and coworkers (1960) as the tRNA m5U54
methyltransferase and now it is being called as TrmA in
Bacteria and Trm2 in Eukarya [,
]. In tRNAs, more than 100
modifications have been identified particularly in the highly
conserved anticodon stem and loop (ASL) domain base at
position 37 which is next to the anticodon site and it is highly
prone to modification by tRNA m1G37 methyltransferase
(TrmD) which results an addition of methyl group (CH3) to
guanosine (G) base next to the anticodon [,
,
]. A modified
1-methylguanosine (m1G37) at position 37 plays a vital role in
tRNA function and it acts as a classical frameshift suppressor
that leads to the accuracy of translation []. The modified
nucleosides m1G37 position of tRNA are present in all
organisms including the smallest organisms like the Mycoplasma
genitalium and this modification occurs in chloroplast and
mitochondrial tRNAs as well []. The wobble position next to
the anticodon of 37th position is frequently modified with a
plethora of diverse nucleotides being found at those positions.

A modified m1G37 enhances proofreading in the ribosome and
aminoacylated tRNA selection in a tRNA dependent manner 
[,
]. All these suggest that m1G37 had been present in the tRNA
of the primitive organisms and it is a part of the minimal set of
genes required for life that existed before emergence of these
three domains namely the Bacteria, Archaea and eukaryota 
[,
].

tRNA binding protein - TrmD:
TrmD is one of the RNA modification enzymes which catalyze
the transfer of a methyl group from S-adenosyl methionine
(AdoMet) to the N1 atom of guanosine base at position 37 next
to the anticodon of tRNA subsets. TrmD is a member of the
TrmH methyltransferase family []. Most of this modification
occurs in selected amino acid tRNAs for example, tRNALeu;
anticodon CAG, GAG, UAG, tRNAPro; anticodon CCG, GGG,
UGG and tRNAArg; anticodon CCG [,
]. An in vivo method
has proven that the three modifications such as pseudouridine
(C), 1-methylguanosine (m1G) and 2-methylthio-N6-(4-
hydroxyisopentenyl) adenosine (ms2io6A) promote the
selection of aa-tRNAs for translation process. Hence, it is
believed that one of the modification m1G37 strongly influences
selection of tRNAPro and tRNAArg but not much on the selection
of tRNALeu such as specific tRNAs []. Deficiency of m1G37 in
tRNAPro and tRNAArg has reduced the selection of A-site on
ribosome-mRNA complex on the translation process []. The
first crystal structure of Haemophilus influenza TrmD was
introduced by Ann et al., (2003) which modifies the m1G37
position in tRNAs. The tRNA anticodon stem loop is possible to
make a tight fit on the active site of TrmD on both positions at
G36 and G37 [].

Bacterial TrmD enzyme recognizes the tRNA specifically
G36pG37 base nucleotides because at G36th position it might be
involved in stabilizing the enzyme-tRNA complex []. Aquifex
aeolicus TrmD enzyme recognizes and catalyzes the tRNA at
anticodon site in the presence of both G36pG37 and A36pG37
nucleotides (20). Mostly purine bases (G or A) at position 37 in
tRNA stabilize the codon-anticodon interactions in ribosome
attachment. Sequence analysis of more than 3000 tRNA genes
from various organisms confirmed that purine base A is found
at position 37 in ~80% and purine base G is found in ~20% 
[,
]. TrmD enzyme binds to tRNA subsets even in the absence
of GpG residues at positions 36 and 37. This enzyme-tRNA
binding complex might be stabilizing the tRNAs. Recently,
bacterial m1G37 has been found in tRNAs with G or A base at
position 36 []. In Archaea and eukaryotes, tRNA (m1G37)
methyltransferase called as aTrm5 and eTrm5 respectively, are
responsible for the m1G37 modification in all tRNAs [,
].
TrmD methylates G residues are nearer to the anticodon in
Bacterial, Archaea and Eukaryotes but TrmD, aTrm5 and eTrm5
structures, active sites and types of methylation are quite
different among them []. In bacteria, m1G37 has been found in
the amino acid specific tRNAs which are having anticodons, on
the base site, either G36 or A36. For instance, in tRNALeu
NAG,
tRNAPro
NGG, tRNAHis
GUG, tRNAArg
NCGand tRNAPhe
GAA
anticodons, the third bases are G36 and A36. In Eukaryotes and
Archaea, m1G37 occurs in broad tRNAs subsets with
corresponding anticodon base of G36 and A36, tRNALeuNAG,
tRNAProNGG, tRNAHisGUG, tRNAGlnNUG, tRNAArgNCG and
tRNAPheGAA, tRNASer
GGA/UGA/CGA, tRNATyrGUA, tRNACysGCA,
tRNATrpCCA, and tRNALeuNAA. Hence, these findings suggest
that tRNA anticodon positions at A36 or G36 promotes the
m1G37 in all organisms. When there occurs a defect in m1G37
modification, a frameshift mutation may occur which leads to
retarded growth in the organisms [].

Methodology
For the three domains, randomly 11 organisms were selected
and their tRNA gene sequences were retrieved from Genomic
tRNA database in the FASTA format []. BioEdit software has
been used for multiple sequence alignments and for
identification of the Guanosine base, next to the anticodon in
tRNA susbets at different positions such as at 36th, 37th, 38th, 39th
and 40th.

Results
Guanosine base next to the anticodon:
Previous studies reported that guanosine residue is being
present at 37th position next to the anticodon at three different
tRNA susbets such as tRNAArg, tRNAPro and tRNALeu 
[,
].
Contradictory to this fact, organisms belonging to Archaea and
eukayotes have been shown to contain G residue at different
positions (36, 37, 38, 39 and 40) next to the anticodon on various
tRNA subsets (tRNAArg, tRNALeu, tRNAPro, tRNAHis, tRNAGln,
tRNAPhe, tRNACys, tRNASer, tRNATrp, tRNATry and tRNAGlu) as
shown in  (see supplementary material) and thus the
tRNAs codons do not show consistent positions in all tRNA
subsets. Even at different positions of codons in tRNAs, the G
residues are present next to the anticodon . E. coli K12
and H. influenzae have only 3 types of tRNA subsets (tRNAArg,
tRNAPro and tRNALeu) and both organisms have G residue at 38
positions . Besides, M. tuberculosis H37Rv, S. aureus and
S. pneumoniae D39 revealed 6 types of tRNAs, tRNAArg,
tRNAPro and tRNALeu, tRNAHis, tRNAGln and tRNAPhe are
having G residue at 37th and 38th positions. A. phagocytophilum
has 5 types of tRNA subsets (tRNAArg, tRNAPro, tRNALeu,
tRNAHis, and tRNAVal) and its tRNAs have G residue at 37, 38
and 39 positions. Similarly A. aeolicus has 4 types of tRNAs
(tRNAArg, tRNAPro, tRNALeu and tRNAHis) and it is holding G
residue at the same positions. On the contrary B. Houston-1 is
having tRNAs (tRNAGln, tRNAHis, tRNAPro, tRNALeu) with G
residues at 36 and 38 positions. Analysis of eight bacterial
species, revealed the conserved three tRNA subsets (tRNAArg,
tRNAPro and tRNALeu) and to some extent other tRNA
sequences also contain G residue close to the anticodon and
may be susceptible for m1G modification . The M.
jannaschii and H. sapiens hg19 tRNAs are having numerous
tRNA subsets (tRNAArg, tRNALeu, tRNAPro, tRNAHis, tRNAVal,
tRNAGln, tRNAPhe, tRNACys, tRNASer, tRNATrp, tRNATry and
tRNAGlu) with their G residues at 36, 37, 38, 39 and 40th
positions. However, M. jannaschii tRNACys is the only tRNA
having G36 position present next to the anticodon. The hg19 of
H. sapiens does not have tRNA with G residue at 40th position
. 
Furthermore, a schematic structure () has been
depicted for m1G37 modification at various positions close to
the anticodon of tRNAs. The proposed m1G37 modification in
tRNAs at G36pG37 positions is shown in . Without
m1G37, modification in tRNAs occurs by +1 frameshift
mutation in mRNA codons (). Thus the, m1G37
modification is possibly found in tRNAs having A36pG37
segments (), Our analysis of tRNA sequence of these
structures confirm that m1G38, m1G39 and m1G40 modifications
are possibly present in tRNAs in their respective sites for their
functional significances ().

Distinct tRNAs codons and wobble position:
The various types of amino acid specific tRNAs and its GpG
sequences have been listed in . Eventually the GpG
sequence position is defined as the anticodon third residue
(wobble position) with NNG carrying the guanosine (N with
any one of four bases A, C, G, U) or G. This structural position
(GpG) is the hallmark of methylation site being present at
G37th position next to the anticodon [,
]. Escherichia coli K12
and Haemophilus influenzae have GpG sequences in the
anticodon position in the selected tRNAs subsets as in tRNAArg,
tRNAPro and tRNALeu. Furthermore Anaplasma phagocytophilum
HZ, Aquifex aeolicus, Bartonella henselae Houston-1, Mycobacterium
tuberculosis H37Rv, Staphylococcus aureus MRSA252 and
Streptococcus pneumoniae have GpG sequence on the additional
tRNAs such as tRNAArg, tRNAPro and tRNALeu, tRNAHis,
tRNAVal, tRNAGln, tRNAPhe
. Methanococcus jannaschii
and Homo sapiens hg19 has GpG sequences on various types of
tRNAs has been listed in the . Consequently it is
proposed that guanosine (G) residue can possibly be present
next to the anticodon, at the wobble position having G, C, A or
U. This structural sequence might be present on different
nucleotide numbers such as G35pG36, G36pG37, G37pG38,
G38pG39, G39pG40 and G40pG41. Staphylococcus aureus
MRSA252 and Streptococcus pneumoniae D39 tRNAPhe have GpG
and ApG sequences next to the anticodon. Similarly Archaea
Methanococcus jannaschii is having GpG, ApG, CpG structure
sequences in the tRNAs. Eukaryote, Homo sapiens hg19 tRNA
holds GpG, ApG, UpG residues having positioned next to the
anticodon in tRNA subsets. However, in bacterial population (8
species) there is a lack of A, C, U residues at the third position
of anticodon in all tRNA susbets. Conversely in Archaea like
Methanococcus jannaschii the m1G may possibly be in tRNAs
(tRNACysGCA, tRNATryGTA, tRNASerGGA, tRNASerTGA, tRNATrpCCA,
tRNALeu
TAG/TAA) at A35/37/38/39th positions and tRNAGluTTC
at C39 (third base of anticodon) . Similarly in eukaryotes
the m1G is found in tRNAs (tRNACysGCA, tRNATrpCCA,
tRNATyrGTA, tRNASer
AGA, tRNACys
GCA,tRNALeu
TAA,
tRNAPheGAA, tRNATyrATA, tRNASerAGA, tRNATrpCCA) at the
positions of A35/36/37/38 and tRNAArgCCT at C35.

Discussion
Computational analysis of tRNAs in three domains disclosed
that m1G37 modification might occur at different positions (36th,
37th, 38th, 39th, or 40th) and the anticodon position is not constant
in all the tRNAs. The above modification restricts its location
next to the anticodon. Furthermore the m1G37 modification can
occur in any of the four possible nuceltodies (G, A, C, U) at the
position 36 (anticodon). In the case of E. coli and H. influenza, it
has been reported that tRNAs m1G37 modification of G
residues occurs at 37th position []. The study also revealed
that the Escherichia coli K12 and Haemophilus influenzae tRNAs
(tRNAArg, tRNAPro and tRNALeu) are having the G residues at
38th position, thus confirming that the modification would be
possible at G38 also. Initially it was also believed that all three
domains the m1G37 are present in the three tRNA subsets like
tRNAArg, tRNAPro and tRNALeu [,
]. Analysis of tRNA
squences in bacteria, archaea and eukaryota reveals that m1G
modification may occur in other amino acid specific tRNA
subsets also. Sprinzl et al., (2005) and Goto Ito et al., (2008)
reported that A36 base at anticodon is possible in all three
domains [,
]. For instance, in bacteria, tRNAPheGAA with A36
has been identified and in the same way in archaea, m1G is
found in tRNACysGCA with A36. Similarly in eukaryotes the m1G
may exist in tRNAPheGAA, tRNASerGGA/UGA/CGA, tRNATyrGUA,
tRNACysGCA, tRNATrpGCA, tRNALeuNAA. Besides, the eukayotic
tRNAAspGUC contains m1G37 with C base at third position of
anticodon. As per the present study, it is evident that in
bacterial populations the m1G37 may occur in tRNAs with G
residue at 35, 36, 37 or 38 positions. Generally the m1G
preferably occurs on the GpG sequence and this implies that the
G residue usually occurs at third base of anticodon. In bacterial
populations it has been found that the tRNAs is holding GpG
sequence in diverse positions . In Archaea like
Methanococcus jannaschii the m1G might as well be in tRNAs
having GpG, ApG and CpG sequences. In eukayotes, the m1G
might exist in tRNAs containing GpG, ApG or UpG. The
sequence UpG is not mentioned in previous report and it is
unique as its (m1G37) mechanism can possibly be in tRNAArgCCT
(Homo sapiens hg19) at U35 position. Therefore it may be
concluded that in Archaea and eukaryotes, the m1G
modification might not be restricted to nucleotides G, A, C and
U which may be present on the third base of anticodon.
Furthermore, the position of m1G can occur at different
positions of tRNAs. Nevertheless in Archaea and eukayotes, the
m1G might possibly be without restriction for the three tRNA
subtypes (tRNAPro, tRNALeu, tRNAArg).

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Srinivasan et al, Bioinformation 9(9): 466-470 (2013)

Schematics of m1G modifications by TrmD at diverse positions of guanosine next to the anticodon in tRNAs.

