Background
One of the most significant biological discoveries of 20th century
was the discovery of structure and function of DNA molecule
that posed the tremendous impact on science and medicine 
[].
Identification of disease causing genes 
[] and the
pharmaceutics to cure the disease tremendously changes the
visage of future science. Science of modern medicine and
genetics are thoroughly based on the DNAs to diagnosis
disease, future genetic predisposition of disease, gene therapy
and new drug discovery are all based on individual genetic
profiles. It thus presents hope for past incurable genetic
diseases []. Additionally gene cloning for disease resistance
plants and animals [], to solve the various cases of forensic
science as one's true paternity, victim and crime suspects 
[]
and last but not the least DNA microarray based studies have
opened a new era of personal genomics etc. are being largely
solved because of the understanding and knowledge of DNA
structure and function.

In short, DNA molecules are used for purposes that go beyond
their functions in nature. The mother of all DNA based studies
is Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) 
[]. PCR is the involved at
any stage of the applications of DNA based studies. PCR
requires primers in any of its application starting from DNA
marker based studies to sequencing and Real Time PCR.
Primers are single stranded DNA molecules generated in
sequence specific manner to amplify only the DNA of interest.
Single strand DNA either in the form of primer or oligos
(microarray probes) molecules fold into specific threedimensional
conformations determined by nucleotides
sequence, thereby lowering the so-called “free energy” of the
molecule. The lower is the free energy; the stable will be the
secondary structure. Various interactions pose their role for
DNA confirmations forming hairpins, pseudoknots and triple
helices. Prediction of single stranded DNA structure can be
used for optimized primer design to avoid self folding. Such
predictions are also important for identification of single strand
conformational polymorphism, DNA tags and error prone
chemical and enzymatic interactions [].

Since bio-molecular function follows from its shape and
structure, knowing that shape is invaluable in endeavors such
as creating new drugs and understanding genetic diseases. Our
current physical methods (X-Ray Crystallography and Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance) are too expensive and time consuming, so
a hot topic in bioinformatics is structure prediction. The idea is
we take the sequences of bases which make up a biomolecule
such as single strand DNA words, and try to determine how
that sequence folds to form the final shape or structure.

Implementation of RDNAnalyzer
This RDNAnalyzer was designed after complete analysis of
existing DNA analysis tools. The major drawback of those
softwares is the web based application. That's why their access
is only on the availability of internet. It was designed as
desktop application to overcome this drawback. Moreover,
various routinely used tools (e.g. DNA secondary structure
prediction and primer looping [], replication, transcription,
translation [], GC content information in the given nucleotide
sequence [], etc.) were collected at single platform with ease
of use and requiring not any computer skills of user's or
knowledge seekers. It uses the Nussinov dynamic
programming algorithm [].

Different tools were used for the software development like
Microsoft Visual Studio 2008 (Professional Edition) and
Microsoft .Net and Visual C#. Microsoft Visual Studio 2008 has
self-generated code that in RDNAnalyzer and it saved time. The
.NET Framework provides applications for programmers to
work with languages, devices and services of their own choice. 
In this research project .Net 3.5 is used which is by-default
available with Microsoft Visual studio 2008. C# is a
programming language that is easy to use and have good
qualities. Many bioinformatics tools are developed in this
language. It can create windows applications by using
Microsoft Visual studio. The graphical user interface (GUI) of
RDNAnalyzer is designed in WPF (Windows Presentation
Foundation). It represents the basic features of a GUI
application, including main windows, dialog boxes, controls,
menu systems, and others. It is simple but powerful object
model.

RDNAnalyzer-Interface
RDNAnalyzer was basically developed for the secondary
structure analysis of the DNA generated from word generating
techniques. It finds suitable complimentary base pairs of the
available sequence. RDNAnalyzer interface was designed by
the XAML (Extensible Application Markup Language) coding.
The Home page of RDNAnalyzer has options like New (to start
a new work), Open (to open a sequence containing text file),
Open Fasta (to open Fasta format files) and Close (to close all
applications). DNA secondary structure prediction, replication,
transcription, translation, exact match, etc. are available in
services page. User can provide the DNA sequence of their
interest at new work at home page or can open the sequence file
via browse button or a FASTA file. Clean sequence button
cleans the DNA sequence info and provides ATGC's for further
analysis. DNA secondary structure can be predicted at
maximum base pairing or at minimized energies. The predicted
report can be saved as such in a text file or it can be further
extended to draw the structure where the respective bases form
complimentary structures and then respectively be saves as
image file for future use. Similarly other functions performed
with the RDNAnalyzer are shown in ().

Discussion
The objective of developing the RDNAnalyzer is to provide a
system based tool to allow researchers and users to quickly
perform various routinely used applications of DNA sequences.
The basic purpose of this software development is to predict the
secondary structure of DNA single strand. It can also
successfully replicate the DNA sequence, reverse compliment
generation, transcription, and translation. This software also
detects the maximum base pairs in a DNA sequence. It provides
a data structure that supports a fast and efficient analysis
method. The algorithms used in this software could also be
implemented in other areas of work.

The important application of RDNAnalyzer are prediction of
secondary structure by using sequence in FASTA format;
analysis of replication, transcription and translation of a DNA
sequence; analysis of GC content ratio and percentages of
nitrogenous base and to draw positions of base pairs. It works
in Microsoft Windows version and hence, provides user
friendly environment for sequence analysis. Some of the
important services provided by RDNAnalyzer are:

DNA secondary structure prediction:
The secondary structure prediction is shown in dot format in
which dots (.) represent the bases which do not have basepairing
and braces represent the nucleotides that form base pair
with each other (see ).

DNA to protein:
Conversion of nucleotide sequence to protein sequence is
routinely used application by the biological sciences
researchers. RDNAnalyzer can convert the DNA into RNA and
6 reading frames of proteins i.e. 3 forward frames and 3 reverse
frames.

Sequence Composition/sequence info:
Another important application of RDNAnalyzer is to provide
the detailed information about the nucleotide sequence of DNA
i.e. the total number of nucleotides and the number of bases and
their respective percentages. Information about the percentages
of bases is very important especially the GC contents for
optimized primer design.

The graphical user interface of RDNAlyzer is very simple,
straight forward and easy to follow, fast and gives efficient
output. It checks either user entered a valid sequence or not. It
can reduce time and effort as compared to other tools during
different research projects. Currently it can be downloaded in
format for window based applications. Our future
implementation of the software is to make it online with more
accuracy and functionality including the use of DNA sequences
in different formats, online search of the required sequences
and their downloading and respective uses in any of the
available format. Another important goal of the software is to
make it compatible for Linux environment to provide the
benefit to all types of researchers who prefers to work on
window, Linux or web pages.

Requirements
Project name: RDNAnalyzer; Operating system(s): Windows
based PC; Programming language: C # and Windows
Presentation Foundation.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors contributions
MA and AS designed the study. MA designed the tools and SN
helped in script coding. AS drafted the manuscript. AAS
supervised the research. AAS and TH critically reviewed the
manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final
manuscript.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Afzal et al, Bioinformation 8(14): 687-690 (2012)

Hierarchy of capabilities of RDNAnalyzer

