Background
Influenza A virus subtype H5N1, also known as “bird flu”, A
(H5N1) or simply H5N1 has been documented to cause an
outbreak of respiratory diseases in humans. This was initially
reported in poultry farms in Hong Kong in 1997 and was
eradicated by culling of all chicken. Thereafter, the disease
reemerged in Hong Kong prior to widespread throughout
Asian countries and subsequently in other countries of the
world. There is no evidence of human to human transmission to
date because they cannot easily jump among humans. But in
future, this strain might acquire ability to spread infection
among humans because of RNA segmentation into 8 separate
molecules. This segmentation allows frequent genetic exchange
by segment reassortment in hosts, coinfected with two different
influenza A viruses. Alternatively, this strain can spread
infection among humans via direct adaptation. H5N1 influenza
is a relatively novel disease with poorly understood pathology
and pathogenesis. Various factors are thought to be involved in
the pathogenesis of H5N1 influenza virus. For example
dysregulation of cytokines and chemokines may cause
pathogenesis of H5N1 influenza. Viral replication is also
implicated in the pathogenesis of virus. Moreover, H5N1 viral
proteins have various functions ranging from viral RNA
synthesis to receptor binding. Several of these proteins have
additional functions that may enhance pathogencity of H5N1
influenza viruses. For example cleavability of HA have relation
with virulence [,
]. In NA histidine to tyrosine substitution at
position 274 confers resistance to oseltamivir [,
]. Similarly,
Glutamic acid at position 92 of NS1 confers resistance to TNF-α
and interferons and thereby increases the pathogencity of virus
[]. Moreover, Glu-Pro-Glu-Val (EPEV) and Glu-Ser- Glu-Val
(ESEV) motifs at the C-terminus of NS1 may disrupt important
cell signaling pathways []. The NS gene also contributes to
dysregulation of cytokines and chemokines. In M2 serine to
asparagine substitution at position 31 confers resistance to
amantadine. In PB2 protein lysine at position 627 enhances
pathogenicity and promotes replication in the cells of upper
respiratory tract. Further, serine at position 66 of PB1-F2
increases the virulence of virus.

An increasing number of H5N1 viral genome has been
sequenced and structures of several influenza A viral proteins
have been solved in recent years. Therefore, there is an urgent
need to construct birdflu database that hosts sequences data
along with their computed physico-chemical properties data,
structural data and web-based analysis tools in one place for the
development of vaccines and drugs in order to prevent a
human pandemic, to predict pathogencity of the virus and to
pursue in depth study on the virus. Here, we report the
development and web implementation BFluenza database
which is a comprehensive, web-accessible, relational database
containing novel proteomic informations on H5N1 viral
proteins.

Methodology
Database Design and Contents:
The BFluenza was developed as a relational database using
MYSQL software on the Linux Server. The database is searched
by PHP script. The open source program Apache HTTP Server
was used to build HTTP Server. The sequence data of
individual gene was retrieved from NCBI database. These
sequences were further computed at expasy server choosing
Prot Param tool. Thus, sequence and first database hosts over
5,000 sequences data and their computed proteomic
information. The structure database contains 55 structures of
H5N1 virus proteins as well as details of structural related
information. This information was retrieved from RCSB Protein
Data Bank. The modeled structure of viral protein was
constructed using SWISS-PDB Server. The structure of H5N1
viral protein can be viewed by JMol viewer. Alternatively,
modeled viral protein structure could be visualized by
Discovery Studio.

The BFluenza shares some similarities with other databases 
[,
], 
in that it contains large number of nucleotide and protein
sequences data as well as structures of H5N1 proteins 
[,
]. The
BFluenza also shows other similarities to databases 
[,
] like
tools for aligning sequences, visualizing three-dimensional
structure [] 
and for predicting antigenic segments. The
BFluenza has several novel features not available in other
databases [,
] like it contains various physico-chemical
properties informations of solely H5N1 subtype such as protein
molecular weight, protein total length, isoelectric point,
extinction coefficient, No. of thiols, N-terminal and C-terminal.
Further, database contains several structural informations not
present in other database [] such as data on protein
coordinates, molecular descriptions of viral protein,
experimental details, and bibliography of H5N1 viral proteins
and structures of modeled H5N1 viral proteins 
[].
Additionally, database has tools for constructing molecular
model of viral proteins and for predicting various types of
protein motifs in viral proteins not available in other databases
[,
].

The BFluenza provides a powerful search engine for user to
retrieve different types of data hosted in database. There are
various ways to search the database. In one such search option
viral protein is searched by protein name 
(, see
supplementary material) and the result file shows sequence
and physico-chemical properties data. The Structure Database
(, see supplementary material) can be searched by
selecting search option protein name and result page displays
data on crystal structures and modeled structures of H5N1
protein, bibliography, website for viewing viral protein
molecule in JMol viewer, PDB text file containing protein
coordinates, molecular information on viral protein and
experimental details comprising information on experimental
parameters. For a more advance search (, see
supplementary material) user may search by specific host and
country. In this search option user can select various search
options simultaneously like Protein Name, Specific host and
Country from drop down menus. The search result displays
information on S.No, Protein Name, Specific Host, and Details.
The Details field contains information on sequence data, strain,
specific host, country and subtype as well as other proteomic
data.

Analysis of database
The proteomic data as well as sequences data present in
BFluenza database were subjected to analysis. The results show
that, in hemagglutinin (HA) protein total length varied in the
range of 543-568. This range was found most prevalent in the
database. Other physico-chemical properties data of HA
showed similar behavior. In neuraminidase (NA) protein total
length occurred mostly in the range of 429-449. Analysis of HA
and NA proteomic data suggest that these data were highly
variable among all H5N1 viral proteins present in the database.
Additionally, analysis of HA sequences in the database showed
the presence polybasic cleavage site. This suggests that H5N1
virus was highly virulent. The nucleoprotein (NP) displayed
less variations in physico-chemical properties data than HA and
NA proteins. The PB1-F2 protein shows variation in amino acid
sequences. The NS1 sequences contained Glutamic acid at
position 92 which confers resistance to TNF-α and interferons
and thereby increased the pathogencity of virus []. Further,
presence of Glu-Pro-Glu-Val (EPEV) and Glu-Ser- Glu-Val
(ESEV) motifs at the C-terminus of NS1 may disrupt important
cell signaling pathways []. RNA polymerase proteins (PA, PB1,
PB2,) essential for viral replication showed variations in
proteomic data. This observation validates lack of proof-reading
activity of RNA polymerases.

Utility to Biological Community
The important benefits of BFluenza are that from sequences and
structures data and from web-based tools built in database;
researcher can predict pathogencity of virus, design efficient
drugs and gain an insight into the structure-function
relationship of viral protein.

Future Developments:
The database contents in BFluenza will be updated routinely.
Using molecular docking tool like “Autodock” drug binding
site will be mapped in neuraminidase and hemagglutinin
proteins and binding site information along with binding
energy and other relevant informations will be included in the
structure database. Thus, these data will aid in designing new
potential drugs and antibodies with higher efficacies than
currently available drugs.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors acknowledge the facilities of Distributed Information
Sub-centre, Interdisciplinary Biotechnology Unit, A.M.U.,
Aligarh. Authors are also thankful to Prof. Alok Bhattacharya
for his kind suggestions on the data base.

Citation:Salahuddin &amp; Khan, Bioinformation 7(3): 147-151 (2011)

