Background
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is known as the leading cause of human deaths
the world over. Strategies encompassing drug docking using genome and
proteome interfaces and wet lab-based drug applications on animal models and
cells in vitro are underway in most of the laboratories as strategies to control
the disease. However, mortality rate of the affected human population due to
CVD is still high. Consequently, a better management of the disease is
required. Given the importance of cell signalling in the basic understanding of
a pathway and its involvement in the exploration of the disease, its applicability
in the identification of CVD hot-spots could precisely be pinpointed by
identification of novel protein targets and creating suitable drug leads to
modulate their expression. The disease management can be achieved better if
there is availability of a central repository of data comprising molecules which
are critical to the cause of such diseases. The created data-set will provide ease
in the planning and execution of experimental strategy for systematic testing
and prioritization of candidate molecules for drug discovery and allow in silico
creation of better lead molecules for targeting the disease comprehensively.
EPAC is a guanine nucleotide exchange factor catalysing exchange of GDP for
GTP and has been pivotal in controlling a number of cellular processes through
sensing the cAMP levels in cells involved in focal adhesion formation,
migration, apoptosis and axon growth and guidance [,
,
]. The factors
contributing to abnormal cAMP levels in the cells range from hyperactive
receptors (metabotropic receptors) [], 
aberrant expression of polycystin, which
is crucial in the cause of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease
(ADPKD) [] 
and various cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases (PDEs), of
which 11 families are known and which catalyze the hydrolysis of cAMP 
[].

In various Pubmed based data analysis criteria through a bioinformatic
approach carried out presently, EPAC emerged out to be a biomarker in some
CVD cases of myrocardial hypertrophy [,
] and hence had been the target for
lead molecule generation. Brefeldin, initially isolated as an anti-viral antibiotic
and a known drug for activating a GTPase of a GEF called Arf1p, which is
involved in the formation of transport vesicles by recruiting coat proteins to
intracellular membranes, was employed for generation of the pharmacophore.

Materials &amp; Methodology
There is a vast body of literature available in PubMed on the given subject.
Refinement in the searches were made by specific keywords, which make the
information more relevant to our requirement (). Data-sets comprising
Molecular Interaction, Receptor(s) (membrane-bound) involved, Critical
Interaction leading to over-expression or repression and the PubMed reference
link (PMID) were created on the excel sheet. The biomarker was identified
using the criteria of catalysed molecule and its case specific occurrence
manner. Pharmacophore was generated from the reported drugs for the
identified biomarker and side chain modifications were made based on logistics
worked out on the basis of the existing interactions of the natural ligand for the
biomarker (protein). For docking and refinement, online free wares such as
Patchdock [] 
and Firedock [,
,
]. were used, respectively. For
highlighting interactions, Ligplot [] was used as a tool.

Results and Discussion
Data Annotation criteria adopted for cataloguing the biomarker
molecules
A search in the Pubmed through the keyword “Signal transduction and
Cardiovascular disease” typically fetches over 13000 references, of which
around 4500 belongs to the review category, while the rest belongs to the
research articles. A careful reading of majority of such articles yielded data on
the above mentioned aspects.  &amp; 
 highlight the criteria adopted for
the purpose. All the molecules participating in the signalling network were
annotated as Molecular Interaction and the molecules associated directly or
indirectly with an effector for upregulation or downregulation of the effector
are considered as critical interaction. Of the critical interaction, protein-protein
interactions at the cellular and nuclear levels were annotated separately
considering the fact that they were crucial in the up-regulation or downregulation
of genes.

Data-set of proteins involved and their downstream effects
There are over 500 proteins annotated to be involved in molecular interactions
in CVD pathways. Of these, 320 protein categories are of G-protein coupled
receptor (GPCR) mediated responses, while rest belongs to the category of
receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) mediated and other or indirect receptormediated
effects. The GPCR-mediated response has been able to culminate its
effect primarily on GPCR-response Kinase (GRK) in isoform-specific manner,
NFAT and EPAC in the cell line based studies in CVD cases. The RTK
mediated response effects in activation of NFkB primarily for CVD cases
considered presently. The critical module of protein-protein interaction in the
present case envisage that kinase-kinase and kinase-transcription factor
(Elk/PAK-NFkB) are important interactions delineating the pathway of
signalling process, which leads to activation of the response genes.

Protein-Protein Interaction data-set
A total of 250 interactions of proteins out of 500 proteins annotated to be
involved in CVD pathways. The protein-protein interactions were divided into
two modules, such as kinase-kinase/adaptor/GEF interactions and kinasetranscription
factor interactions (). Of these, there were more than 200
interactions, which belonged to kinase-kinase/adaptor/GEF category and 30
interactions were of kinase-transcription factor category as regards CVD
pathways. Of these interactions, the modules considered critical in the sense
that they controlled the pathway execution in a specific manner and the
alteration in their expression was mainly responsible for cause of CVD.

Protein-transcription factor data-set
Of the total protein-protein interactions mentioned above, 30 interactions
belonged to protein-transcription factor category for CVD. In the CVD related
signalling pathway, 12 interactions were mediated upon GPCR activation,
while 18 interactions were the outcome of RTK activation.

Drug Docking of the Marker Molecule
In totality 3 molecules emerged as markers of CVD as per the criteria
envisaged in the present analysis, which are EPAC, GRK-2 &amp; GRK-5 as well
as NFkB. Drug Docking using Patchdock [] to identify the lead drug
molecules were performed with EPAC (3CF6) presently, which is a known
guanine exchange factor activated by cAMP. Brefeldin A, the currently known
natural inhibitor of EPAC [] 
was used as the template for generation of lead
molecule. There is binding of cAMP in the natural EPAC molecule 
().
The topology of 3 CF6 using PDBsum revealed the residues interacting with
SP12 E (a natural ligand, cAMP for 3CF6, Fig not shown) and the interactions
were refined using Ligplot []. The interacting atoms or groups available in
the binding sites of cAMP, the natural ligand for EPAC, were chosen as
reference for incorporating similar modifications in brefeldin (the chosen
ligand for the present work) to increase the hydrophobic interactions and
increase the binding efficiency of the generated brefeldin lead molecule (BR2).
Of the various interactions occurring in the docked interface and scored
through Ligplot [], hydrophobic interactions were prevalent, revealing the
stability of the interaction. In all, 12 different modifications were made and
BR2 molecule generated by replacement of -CH3 at C15 and -H at C2 with −
COOH and –OH, respectively yielded H- bond interactions between BR2 and
Ala 407 (E), which in turn induced additional H-bond formation between –OH
at C1 and C7 and Ala 416 and Cys 395, respectively. These interactions induce
further stability in the complex by improved hydrophobic interactions 
().

Molecular modelling approaches in designing and devising new drug leads
have been a recent approach in addressing the disease problems. Diseases such
as cancer [], 
gout [], cardiac 
damage [] and various others 
[,
] have
been the subject of studies on the lines of the present work. An emerging trend
is thus approaching towards dealing with the disease bioinformatically on the
first hand basis because of the ease and sufficiency of the technology involved
in data annotation process. However, the biomarkers identified and the drug
leads created need to be validated through targeted approaches by the support
of systems medicine approach [].
Conclusion
EPAC is the signalling biomarker identified in cardiovascular (CVD) cases
through a bioinformatic approach undertaken presently and drug leads were
generated using existing online softwares, which could be useful in synthesis of
chemical drugs for further analysis in controlling the disease. It is assumed that
the present work would contribute towards augmenting the repertoire of
knowledge available on formulations of drug for combating CVD.

Authors are thankful to the Lovely Professional University, Department of
Biotechnology for providing the infrastructural facilities. The software
LIGPLOT was used when it was freely available and is thus thankfully
acknowledged.

Citation:Bala et al, Bioinformation 6(5): 176-178 (2011)

Data curation protocol for cataloguing the signaling pathway
molecules

The criteria adopted for curating the signalling molecules.

PDB ID: 3CF6, Epac protein (Shown in Green is Epac2) is activated
by binding of the second messenger cAMP (Shown in Red,It is an analogue of
cAMP) and then act as guanine nucleotide exchange factors for Rap proteins
(Shown in Blue,It is Rap1B) [].

Figure 4(A): Structure of unmodified brefeldin; 4(B): Interactions between
unmodified Brefeldin and residues of Chain E of EPAC. Fewer groups are
found to be involved in hydrophobic interaction and no H-bond is observed;
4(C): Structure of modified brefeldin (BR2); 4(D): The interactions between
BR2 (modified brefeldin) and residues of Chain E of EPAC are shown. Of the
12 different modifications involving C2, C10 and C15 of brefeldin
pharmacophore, the replacement of -CH3 at C15 and -H at C2 with – COOH
and –OH, respectively yielded H- bond interactions between BR2 and Ala 407
(E) [highlighted as boxed area], which in turn induced additional H-bond
formation between –OH at C1 and C7 and Ala 416 and Cys 395, respectively.
These interactions induce further stability in the complex by improved
hydrophobic interactions.

