Background
Peptides have over time received a bad press, at least pharmaceutically 
speaking, gaining a reputation as very poor drug candidates. However, such 
criticism cannot eclipse their pre-eminent role in biological systems. 
Naturally-occurring peptides often have a limited half-life and thus 
therapeutic peptides are often delivered parenterally, which can be impractical 
and expensive. However, peptides can be highly specific, reducing unwanted 
side-effects, and have low toxicity.

QSAR has focussed on experimentally-determined partition coefficients as the 
main descriptor of lipophilicty or hydrophobicity, and thus of many other ADMET 
properties. [] 
Predicted partition coefficients are routinely used to filter or select 
compounds for screening and to develop QSARs. The partition coefficient, P, is 
the ratio between the concentration of a drug or other chemical substance in 
two phases: one aqueous, the other an organic solvent:

P = [drug] organic / [drug] aqueous

Traditionally, experimental logP measurement involves dissolving a compound 
within a biphasic system comprised of aqueous and organic layers and then 
determining the molar concentration of the compound in each layer. The organic 
solvent used is typically, but not exclusively, 1-octanol. The partition 
coefficient can range over 12 orders of magnitude, and is usually quoted as a 
logarithm: logP.

The experimental determination of logP values is expensive, time consuming, 
and labour intensive. Accurate methods for the prediction of peptide logP 
values would thus be most useful. During the past three decades, many methods 
for predicting logP have been reported. At present, the most widely used method 
is known as a fragmental, fragment-based, or additive approach: a molecule is 
dissected into fragments (functional groups or atoms) and its logP value is 
obtained by summing the contributions of each fragment. ‘Correction 
factors’ are also introduced to rectify the calculated logP value when 
special substructures occur in the molecule.

There have been various studies carried out on peptide logP prediction. The 
most convincing approach is based on the direct quantification of 
hydrophobicity for peptides. [
,] They carefully 
measured partition coefficients for many peptides, specifically targeting 
non-ionizable side chains and obtained different linear-regression models for 
different types of peptides, resulting in good correlations between observed 
and predicted logP values. This and subsequent work by 
Akamatsu was incorporated into PLOGP, a peptide LogP prediction program. 
[] Here, a training set 
of 219 peptides, varying between 2 and 5 amino acids, was used and the method 
tested using another 10 peptides.

In this paper we look at prediction of logP values for peptides. Our main 
motivation is to better understand basic physico-chemical properties in the 
design of peptide vaccines. [
] Using a data-set of experimentally-determined peptide logPs, we have 
developed a new logP prediction method, for both blocked and unblocked peptides,
 using Partial Least Squares (PLS) [] as implemented in GOLPE (Generating Optimal 
Linear PLS Estimations - version 4.5.12; Multivariate Infometric Analysis), 
based on molecular descriptors calculated using PreADME 
[], a web-based 
application able to calculate large numbers of diverse molecular descriptors 
including constitutional, topological, physico-chemical and geometrical 
descriptors for ADME prediction.

Methodology
Data-set
A set of peptides with known experimental logP values was compiled from the 
primary literature [], 
through exhaustive, semi-manual searching of a variety of databases: PubMed 
(
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi) , Web of Science 
(
http://wos.mimas.ac.uk/), Medline (http://medline.cos.com/), and 
ScienceDirect (
http://www.sciencedirect.com/). Both keyword and author searches, as 
well as retrospective searching, and citation matching of key authors, 
particularly those describing the development of an assay system, were used to 
identify papers detailing quantitative experimentally-derived values. The 
availability of measured LogP values for peptides was limited. Data consisted 
of 340 peptides (2-16 amino acids in length). The set included 141 blocked 
peptides, 158 unblocked peptides, and 41 cyclic peptides. See URL: 
http://www.jenner.ac.uk/Bioinformatics/peptide_structures.htm).

Peptide Additive Method
Individual .sdf files of amino acids were submitted to 
PreADME and corresponding descriptor values calculated. This information was 
imported into GOLPE and PLS calculations undertaken. PLS is a robust 
multivariate statistical extension of Multiple Linear Regression (MLR). 
Experimental logP values were used as the dependent variable. A variable 
selection procedure within GOLPE, known as “D-Optimal Selection”
, was chosen to evaluate the effects of individual variables on the 
model's ability to determine which variables are relevant to the 
problem. Initially, a small number of descriptors were extracted from a large 
amount of redundant information. Extraction of descriptors continues until a 
good statistical model is obtained. Model validity was explored using 
Cross-Validation (CV). Leave-One-Out Cross-Validation (LOOCV) was used to 
assess its predictive ability using the following parameters: cross-validated 
coefficient (q2) and by calculating the standard deviation of error 
of prediction (SDEP)45, which indicates the error distribution 
between the observed and predicted values in the regression models. The optimal 
number of components (NC) from LOO-CV is then used in the non-cross validated 
model which was assessed using standard MLR validation terms, such as r
2.

Results and Discussion
Fourteen carefully selected molecular descriptors were calculated for each 
whole peptide using PreADME: ten constitutional descriptors (molecular weight, 
number of rotatable bonds, rigid bonds, rings, aromatic bonds, single bonds, 
double bonds, aromatics, hydrogen bond acceptors and hydrogen bond donors) and 
four geometrical descriptors (2D-van der Waals surface area, 2D-van der Waals 
volume, 2D-VSA hydrophobic and 2D-VSA polar). LogP values for each amino acid 
residue, for both blocked and unblocked peptides, were related to a subset of 
these descriptors.

 For Blocked peptides: LogP = 0.04983 – 0.04222*molecular 
weight + 0.02717*single bonds + 0.09814*2D-VDW volume – 
0.04452*2DVSA hydrophobic – 0.04673*2D-VSA polar (2)

LOO-CV parameters are q2 = 0.814, SDEP = 0.485 and NC = 5, while 
the non-cross validation parameters are r2 = 0.836.

For unblocked peptides: Log P = -2.478 – 0.03751*molecular 
weight + 0.02338* single bonds + 0.08308*2D-VDW volume 
-0.03108* - VSA hydrophobic – 0.04204*2D-VSA polar (3)


LOO-CV parameters are q2 = 0.819, SDEP = 0.350 and NC = 5, while 
the non-cross validation parameters are r2 = 0.837.

The results from the PLS model are very promising statistically. Both final 
models contain the same descriptors: molecular weight, number of single bonds, 
2Dvan der Waals volume, 2D-VSA hydrophobic and 2D-VSA polar. To calculate logP 
values for other peptides, standard PreADME amino acid descriptor values are 
concatenated according to the peptide sequence and a correction applied if the 
peptide is unblocked. Using the two resulting models for the blocked and 
unblocked peptides, the non-CV method was validated for a total of 236 linear 
(86 blocked and 150 unblocked) peptides. Prediction accuracy for all peptides 
(r2 = 0.666) was good, but not excellent; for blocked peptides 
performance was relatively poor (r2 = 0.381); but for unblocked 
peptides performance was superior (r2 = 0.787). We then compared 
previouslydescribed LogP prediction methods [] with our method: 67% of the peptides were 
predicted within +/- 0.5 log units, and a further 21% between +/-0.5 
and 1.0 log units. 88% predicted within 1 log unit represents the best 
accuracy of all the methods we compared. []

There are clear failings in the work we report here. Our principal concern 
is the paucity of quality data for peptide partition coefficients; indeed, the 
lack of reported experimental studies prevents us from obtaining a data set of 
sufficient size. Moreover, we would like to obtain LogD rather than LogP 
values. Likewise, the peptides we examine here are short and have heavily 
biased sequence compositions. Longer peptides are of most interest, at least in 
terms of epitope design and discovery, yet they are under-represented here for 
experimental reasons. The average length of peptide studied was three amino 
acids. As many biologically important peptides are much longer than three amino 
acids, the data set is likely to compromise our ability to perform adequate 
QSAR analysis.

Conclusion
We have shown that the empirical relationship between the octanol-water 
partition coefficient of a peptide and its structure can be easily rationalised 
by properties of the whole peptide, such as volume and surface area, rather 
than by the more common fragmental approach. However, the data we analysed is 
both sparse, compared to the potential size of the dataset, and heavily biased 
due to experimental constraints. There is an obvious case for dedicated 
experimental work to be undertaken to support the development of accurate 
in silico methods. We need quality data to work with: existing 
data is seldom of sufficient quality. Computational chemists can no longer 
exist solely on morsels swept contemptuously from the experimentalists' 
table. What we require are experiments which specifically address the kind of 
predictions that need to be made. Such problems would be resolved by a properly 
designed training set. Our potential ability to combine in 
vitro and in silico analysis would allow us to 
improve both the scope and power of our predictions, in a way that would be 
impossible using solely literature data. To ensure we produce useful, quality 
in silico models and methods, and not poor models and methods, 
we need to value the prediction generated by them and conduct experiments 
appropriately.

The Jenner Institute (Formally, The Edward Jenner Institute for Vaccine 
Research) wishes to thank its erstwhile sponsors: GlaxoSmithKline, the Medical 
Research Council, the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council, 
and the UK Department of Health.


      Citation:Hattotuwagama &amp; Flower, Bioinformation 1(7): 257-259 (2006)

