Background
Despite a number of protein three-dimensional structures is
determined with NMR spectroscopic methods, the format of the
Protein Data Bank (PDB) files [,
] was designed to account for
crystallographic analyses. The crystallographic occupancy and the
atomic displacement parameters (adp; often referred to as B-factors)
are not computed in NMR structure determinations despite they are
declared in PDB formatted files. Here we present a computer program
that replaces the occupancy and adp fields with quantities that describe
the conformational homogeneity of the models deposited in the PDB
file. NMR protein structures are deposited in the PDB as ensembles of
models. If there are N models, it is thus possible to superpose the N(N-
1)/2 unique pairs of models and to compute distances Di between the
same atoms in all the superposed model pairs. These distances are then
used for calculating 
the RMSD of each atom and

the average RMSD between the equivalent atoms of the same residue in all the superposed models

. These two variables provide a quantitative
measure of the spatial dispersion of each atom and residue. By
inserting the atom RMSD and the average residue RMSD values in the
occupancy and B-factor fields it is then possible to provide the
quantitative information in a format compatible with molecular
graphics computer programs and, for example, color the molecule.
These computations can be performed with CARON, a program that
uses the Ying-Hunk et al. [] implementation of Kabsch algorithm []
for superposing pairs of molecules.

Implementation
CARON is a stand alone program written in C language and can be
compiled using any standard ANSI C compiler under Linux or
Windows. The input files are PDB files containing coordinates of
atoms. The output data are stored in PDB formatted files where the
occupancy and the B-factor fields of the ATOM lines report the
average RMSD of the atom and of the residue, respectively, computed
on the basis of the superposition of all the unique pairs of molecular
models. Although the PDB files of NMR structures contains hydrogen
atoms and often also non-protein atoms, these are disregarded by
CARON and are absent from the PDB formatted output files. The user
may decide to superpose all the non-hydrogen protein atoms or only
the Cα atoms. At the beginning of the PDB-formatted output file,
pertinent information is provided about the overall RMSD values and
their distribution. An additional parse feature enables user to dissect a
PDB file containing N models into N PDB files, each containing one
of the models.

Results
An example of the results obtained with CARON is shown in . The three-dimensional structures of the human epidermal growth
factor-like domain of heregulin-alpha was determined with NMR
methods and deposited in the PDB file 1HRF as an ensemble of 10
models []. It is apparent that the termini are conformationally illdefined
as well as the loop on the top-right corner (). This is
well shown by coloring the trace of only one model as a function of
the RMSD values of the residues (). An alternative method,
implemented in a script distributed with PyMol, allows one to depict
the trace of a single model according to its conformational dispersion -
segments with a very variable stereochemistry are large and red -
produces on the contrary different results, with a large conformational
dispersion in the middle of the molecule, which does not seem to be a
genuine structural feature (). Eventually, it is necessary to
remember that the conformational dispersion observed on the basis of
the PDB files does not depend necessarily on the intra-molecular
flexibility. The absence of experimental information might also be
responsible for the structural divergence of the termini and of some
loops. Moreover, work is in progress to use also other superposition
tools that might be appropriate to handle multi-domain protein
structures and to allow alternative selections of the atoms/residues that
must be superposed.

Funding from BIN-II, BIN-III (GEN-AU Austrian research program)
and a grant from the Ministry of Science, Republic of Croatia, number
036-0362214-1987 are gratefully acknowledged.

Citation:Sikic &amp; Carugo , Bioinformation 4(3): 132-133 (2009)

Trace of all 10 models of the 1HRF entry of the Protein Data Bank;

First model colored according to the B-factor putty script distributed with PyMol;

First model colored according to the average residues RMSD computed with CARON.

 All figures were created with
PyMol program (http://www.pymol.org).

