Background
The location of coding regions as well as its regulatory
sequences is an important task in theoretical analysis of a given
genome []. Gene regulation process is essential for
understanding cellular responses to environmental
perturbations and virulence mechanisms of pathogens 
[,
].
The information about gene regulation process underlies in
sequences as promoters, transcription factors binding sites and
terminators, which are located in non-coding regions []. In a
simplest way, a non-coding region (in bacteria) can be named as
intergenic region. That means, this region comprises a part of
genome located between the last nucleotide of a coding region
and the first nucleotide of a subsequent coding region. The
large-scale genome sequencing methods and high throughput
technologies increase the genomic within the last years 
[].
NCBI is considerate one of the largest and complete biological
database. Apart from it, there are specific databases dedicated to
store elements involved in prokaryotic gene regulation process
as, RegulonDB [], EcoGene 
[], among others. The databases
available have been provided input data for both motif discover
[] and predict genomic elements 
[,
,
,
] approaches.
However, none of these databases provide an easy-to-use way
to download only intergenic regions within their biological
information associated. For instance, the download of intergenic
regions from NCBI is carried out by using complex queries or
by developing an own computer program. The computational
background is not the same for all researchers who need to run
bioinformatic analysis. Hence, a specific intergenic database
remains as an important lacuna. In this context, IntergenicDB
(publicly database) was developed for studying intergenic
sequences. This database contains a myriad of intergenic
regions from 20 bacteria genomes, as well as the information of
coding regions related with it.

Methodology
IntergenicDB was developed as a free, structured and
searchable source of intergenic sequences.

Dataset:
The intergenic regions of microbial genomes were downloaded
from NCBI ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Bacteria/.

Database design:
The data was organized by using MySQL, a relational database
management system that serves as the backend for storing data.

Development:
IntergenicDB were developed using ASP.NET MVC (Model-
View-Controller) website architecture, C# as programming
language and IIS (Internet Information Services) as web server
for hosting IntergenicDB portal. The global updates to the
database take place every three months, but punctual changes
are managed when necessary. These updates are intermediated
by an administration user.

Database interface:
IntergenicDB general user interface is well organized and
managed at the following levels: the initial page presents the aims of the database;

the search page allows choosing the necessary information for intergenic sequences queries,

the pages with updates and publications related with intergenic sequences and

others pages must be accessed using login and password.


IntergenicDB has public, common and
administrator user types. The administration area is restricted to
the manager of the database. An overview of intergenicDB
functionalities is provided in .

Utility to the Biological Community
IntergenicDB allows to users an easy way to access the
information related to intergenic sequences. This forehand
version of IntergenicDB supports internalization encoding to
Portuguese and English languages, and it provides the search
engines as follows: 
all intergenic regions belonging a particular bacteria specie or family;

an intergenic region upstream a given gene identified by its name or symbol;

all intergenic regions upstream genes with specific GC nucleotide content or a given main role;

all intergenic regions with determined nucleotide length;

one or more intergenic regions in a specific range position at genome;

all intergenic regions located in the forward or reverse DNA strand.


Addittionaly, the user can execute queries with crossinformation
of the search options described above. To carry out
a search, it is not necessary to complete all the fields. If one or
some of they are unfilled, the returned result shows all the
available data for this/these particular field/fields.

By doing a user registration, the results of the queries can be
downloaded in the .txt, .xml or .csv file format. The user
registration is free of charge. It is required just for statistical and
database usage registration purposes. Besides the search,
common users can upload intergenic sequences under
supervision of database administrator. In addition to this
operation, the administrator can handle activities related to user
registration and management as well as database population
and upgrade.

Future Developments
As future implementations, we are committed in the
improvement of the search and download areas. In this case, the
user will have the option to refine even more the result
provided. Another aim is the integration of the database with
on line available tools which require a specific input format of
intergenic sequences.

The authors are grateful for the University of Caxias do Sul by
the support for this project.

Citation:Notari et al, Bioinformation 10(6): 381-383 (2014)

IntergenicDB scientific workflow.

