Background
Discriminating “drug-like” molecules from non-drug like
molecules is one of the prime focuses of current research in
the field of computer aided drug design. Concept of drug
likeness is important in both combinatorial chemistry and
high throughput screening which deal with synthesis of
libraries of molecules and their evaluation respectively [].
Combinatorial chemistry has emerged as a new paradigm
in the field of drug discovery as it provides a large library
of compounds at a time. Moreover the number of
commercially available compounds is also going on
increasing. So the process of compound selection and
prioritization is very crucial to reduce the time and
computational cost of screening the libraries of compounds
to get compounds feasible for synthesis and further testing
[]. In this scenario the concepts and methods to predict
drug-likeness of enormous number of molecules available
through miscellaneous sources in the libraries becomes
important.

Drug-likeness can be deduced as a delicate balance among
molecular properties affecting pharmaco-dynamics and
pharmacokinetics of molecules which ultimately affects
their absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion in
human body like a drug. Molecular properties include
molecular weight, electronic distribution, hydrophobicity,
hydrogen bond donors/acceptors, solubility, viscosity,
excess volume and other related properties. For
computational studies these molecular properties have to
be logically and quantitatively represented as molecular
descriptors in such a way that their complete chemical
information remains preserved []. Selection of suitable
molecular descriptors for correctly predicting the druglikeness
of a molecule is of prime importance for the
screening the drug-like molecules.

Methods for drug-likeness prediction include from simple
counting schemes like Lipinski's “rule of five” to machine
learning approaches like artificial neural network and
support vector machines []. Lipinski’s “rule of five” is a
heuristic approach for predicting drug-likeness stating that
molecules having molecular weight ≫500, log P ≫5,
hydrogen bond donors ≫5 and hydrogen bond acceptors
≫10 have poor absorption or permeation []. This rule
describes only the molecular properties related with
pharmacokinetics of molecules which refers to the
absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion
(ADME) of bioactive compounds in a higher organism.
There is no consideration for pharmaco-dynamics aspect of
molecules which deal with drug action on the body or on
microorganisms and other parasites within or on the body.
Moreover there are many violations of this rule among
existing drugs and vice versa, and therefore, qualifying the
“rule of five” does not guarantee that a molecule is “druglike” [].

Other methods include ‘knowledge based method’ by
Andrews et al., considering intrinsic binding energies and
structural fragments i.e., functional groups. This method is
based on intrinsic energies derived from 200 molecules [].
Walter et al., proposed ’REOS (Rapid Elimination of
Swill) approach‘ as a hybrid of simple counting method
and functional group filtering method. Functional group
filters used in this method identify reactive, toxic and
undesirable moieties []. Initial filtering is based on seven
properties including molecular weight, logP, hydrogen
bond donors, hydrogen bond acceptors, formal charge,
number of rotatable bonds and number of heavy atoms.
REOS also employs a set of more than 200 rules based on
presence of functional groups known to be problematic.

In addition, machine learning approaches are being used
most successfully for drug-likeness prediction []. Sadowski and Kubinyi designed a feed forward neural
network with 92 input nodes, five hidden nodes and one
output node to predict drug-likeness []. They
characterized the molecules using a set of 92 atom types
originally devised for the purpose of predicting logP by
Ghose and Krippen []. Their neural network classified
77% “drug-like” and 83% “non drug-like” molecules
correctly. Two important aspects to be considered in
machine learning based approaches are the choice of
appropriate descriptors and the number of descriptors to be
used at the time of creating the model. Representation of
chemical structures by appropriate descriptors is the key to
success in establishing useful relationships using machine
learning approaches []. Evidently, larger the number of
relevant descriptors more will be the efficiency for druglikeness
classification using machine learning approach
[]. These facts suggest the requirement of improvement
in classical approaches for predicting drug-likeness of
molecules by adding more suitable descriptors as
classifying parameters. In this context additional
descriptors were deterministically selected in our work to
account for pharmaco-dynamic properties of molecules.
Use of these descriptors as input into back propagation
network classifier appeared to be the possible cause of
improvement in overall classification efficiency. Thus it is
a tradeoff between requirement of additional descriptors
and removal of redundant descriptors for better prediction
of drug-likeness.

Methodology
Dataset
Data was downloaded from ZINC database []. Each
molecule in ZINC database is represented by its three
dimensional structure, SMILES representation and
corresponding molecular descriptors. Descriptor values
available in ZINC database are calculated using “Molinspiration MiTools” molecular processing toolkit
and were used as such for our study []. For this study
30000 “drug-like” and 30000 “nondrug-like” molecules
were used as working database. Within this database 20000
and 10000 molecules from both the groups constituted
training and test set respectively

Selection of molecular descriptors
Two different data sets were prepared depending upon the
choice of descriptors. In first data set molecules were
represented by a vector of nine descriptors representing
Molecular weight (MW), logP (LP), apolar desolvation
energy (ADE), polar desolvation energy (PDE), number of
H bond donors (HBD), number of H bond acceptors
(HBA), total polar surface area (TPSA), charge (Ch) and
number of rotatable bonds (RB). Second data set
comprised of same molecules represented by four
descriptors: molecular weight, log P, number of H-bond
donors, and number of H-bond acceptors. These four
descriptors are considered in Lipinski's “rule of five” and
were used for the purpose of benchmarking. Descriptors
considered in Lipinski's rule are directly related to
pharmacokinetic properties (Absorption-Distribution-
Metabolism-Excretion-Toxicity properties) of molecules.
Other five descriptors selected i.e., apolar desolvation
energy, polar desolvation energy, total polar surface area,
charge and number of rotatable bonds are related to
pharmacodynamic aspect of molecules. Thus the selected
descriptors cover both the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamics
aspects of drug action.

Preprocessing the data
Data was normalized to scale it down to the range between
0 and 1, using min max normalization method [].
Normalized values can be represented by equation 1 in
supplementary material.

Classification by back propagation Artificial Neural Network (ANN)
The classification decision was obtained with the help of a
feed-forward back propagation network where normalized
descriptor-vectors were used as input. Several neural
network architectures were tried for training using data
containing nine descriptors. The most efficient one was
chosen as final network architecture. It consists of two
hidden layers apart from input and output layers. While the
input layer comprises of nine nodes, first and second
hidden layers consist of seven and five nodes respectively.
Output layer contains one node to represent two classes of
our interest. Transfer function used in both hidden layers
was tan sigmoid and that used in output layer was linear.
Weights and biases of the neural network were optimized
during training using gradient descent method. Mean
square error was used as performance function. Similar
neural network architecture with only exception of four
input nodes was used for data set containing only
Lipinski's descriptors. For training set target output was
kept as 1 for “drug-like” molecules and -1 for “non druglike”
molecules. For testing the trained neural network an
error margin was taken as 0.10. Molecules giving output
≫0.90 were considered as “drug-like” and those giving
output ≪-0.90 were classified as “non drug-like”
molecules 

Assessment of efficiency of classification
As the classification of small molecules into “drug-like”
and “non drug-like” classes is a binary classification;
sensitivity, specificity and accuracy are appropriate
measures for assessing efficiency of classification [].
While sensitivity is the proportion of true positives
classified as positives, specificity can be defined as the
proportion of true negatives classified as negatives.
Accuracy is the proportion of true positives and true
negatives classified as positives and negatives respectively.
These measures were calculated for neural networks
trained with nine descriptor data set and four descriptors
data set separately.

Discussion
The study was aimed at comparing the efficiency of
different descriptor sets in classifying small molecules into
“drug-like” and “nondrug-like” classes, the result of which
is summarized in . There was consistent
improvement in all the considered measures of
performance of the network trained with all the nine
descriptors in comparison to the network trained with
Lipinski's four descriptors only. The improvements found
in sensitivity, specificity and accuracy were 9%, 18.29%
and 13.64% respectively, as visualized in histogram chart
in . The most significant improvement was found    
in specificity as there was a decrease of ∼3.5 times in the
number of false positives detected using nine descriptors
data set in comparison to Lipinski's descriptors data set.
The consistent improvement in efficiency measures of
classification as shown in  indicates that there is
further scope of improvement in building a protocol based
on addition of more descriptors for distinguishing between
“drug-like” and “non drug-like” molecules over that of
Lipinski's “rule of five”. Our study also supports the
studies done by Oprea (2000) and Frimurer (2000) which
concluded that Lipinski's “rule of five” has limitations in
distinguishing between “drug-like” and “non drug-like”
molecules [,]. The basis behind these findings is that
the distribution of descriptors considered in Lipinski's
“rule of five”, does not differ significantly between the
“drug-like” and “non drug-like” molecules most possibly
because of the consideration of their pharmacokinetic
properties only. Moreover, the contribution of a particular
input descriptor in the final decision making stage can be
evaluated by optimizing the weights of artificial neural
network classifier linking inputs with outputs where very
small value of weight will be assigned to the least
contributing input []. It is well documented in literature
that normalization of input data vector improves the
efficiency of neural network classifier []. Moreover we
considered the maximum error margin of 0.10. This makes
our classifier very stringent in comparison to traditional
neural network classifier where the molecules giving
output ≪0 and ≫0, would have been classified into “non
drug-like” and “drug-like” classes respectively. Thus our
classifier had very stringent criteria for classification of
molecules into their respective classes relaxing which a
further improvement in efficiency can be obtained at the
cost of degrading the reliability of decision. As discussed
in the methodology section all the parameters related to
neural network architecture were kept same for both the
data sets with only exception in input layer. This reduced
any chance of difference in efficiency of classifier due to
any factor related to the classifier other then the descriptor
set used in training and test sets.

Conclusion
Our approach dealt with the problem of drug-likeness
prediction in a different perspective. It showed that rule
based approach for drug-likeness prediction has scope for
improvement. Machine learning approach shows good
efficiency for drug-likeness prediction. Appropriate choice
and number of descriptors is of prime importance for
application of machine learning approaches for druglikeness
prediction. Another important aspect of this study
was consideration of the reliability of the classifier that
was achieved by keeping the permissible error margin of
output as 0.1. Such stringent considerations made the
classifier more reliable which most possibly helped to
eliminate false positives which is crucial for screening
“drug-like” molecules.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We hereby acknowledge the helpful discussion we had with Manish Kumar, Indian Institute of Information
Technology (IIIT), Allahabad, India. We are also grateful to Ministry of Human Resource and Development
(MHRD) and Department of Science and Technology (DST) for their joint financial support to Bioinformatics
Division of IIIT to continue this work.

Citation:Mishra et al, Bioinformation 3(9): 384-388 (2009)

Measures of efficiency of classification. Bars named as ’A‘ represent values for nine descriptor data set and bars named as ’B‘ represent values for Lipinski's descriptor 
data set.

