Background
Human saliva is secreted from three pairs of major salivary glands namely 
parotid gland, submandibular gland  and sublingual gland lying at the 
vicinity of oral cavity, and numerous minor salivary glands lying beneath 
the oral mucosa. It contains a large array of proteins, many of which can be 
informative for the detection of oral and systemic diseases. Saliva is an 
attractive diagnostic fluid because it has several key advantages for disease 
diagnosis and prognosis, for example low invasiveness, minimum cost, and 
easy sample collection and processing [].

Relaying on the significant advances  in mass spectrometry technologies, 
proteomics is widely envisioned as a useful and powerful approach for 
proteome research. Of particular note is the salivary proteomic biomarker 
discovery and validation, which  involved high throughput proteomic 
approaches [,
]. Recently, salivary proteomics has demonstrated a great 
potential for biomarker discovery and validation for various oral and 
systemic diseases. In this review,  the progress and prospects of salivary 
proteomics and its implications in oral and systematic diseases will be 
reviewed. In addition, the scientific  and clinical challenges pertaining to 
the approach will be discussed.

Salivary Proteomics
Different proteomic technologies have been used to analyze the protein 
composition of saliva qualitatively and quantitatively. Based on advanced 
mass spectrometry technologies, the capability of saliva protein 
identification has been greatly enhanced by combining different protein 
separation technologies. As for example, free-flow electrophoresis has 
been coupled with linear ion-trap  tandem mass spectrometry to identify 
salivary proteins. Multidimensional separation platform based on capillary 
isoelectric focusing and nano-reversed phase liquid chromatography has 
also been successfully utilized for salivary protein separation. Two 
dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE) coupled with matrix-assisted laser 
desorption/ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) 
or liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) has been used 
as a routine approach for salivary  protein separation, quantitation and 
identification []. Besides, non-gel based labeling methods such as iTRAQ 
[isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation] and label-free 
quantitation have been used for quantitative salivary proteome analysis. 
According to a recent consortium study, 1,166 proteins were identified in 
saliva (914 from the parotid fluid and 917 from the combined 
submandibular and sublingual fluids) and a high portion of these proteins 
was also found in serum [].

Applications
Oral and systemic diseases may affect salivary glands directly or 
indirectly, and may influence the quantity of saliva that is produced, as 
well as the composition of the fluid []. These phenomena have significant 
impact in biomarker discovery for disease by utilizing proteomic 
methodologies. A schematic diagram regarding the rationale for human 
salivary proteomics has been presented in .

Oral diseases biomarker discovery Salivary proteomics has been 
extensively used for oral diseases biomarker discovery, such as oral cancer 
and Sjögren's syndrome. Recently, 5 protein biomarkers  (Table 1 see 
) have been discovered by 2-DE/MS and 
validated by immunoassays for oral cancer detection  []. As for primary 
Sjögren's syndrome, dozens of salivary proteins were found to be downregulated 
or up-regulated in patients when comparing with matched 
healthy control subjects  (Table 1 see ). These 
proteins reflected the damage of glandular cells and inflammation of the 
oral cavity system in primary Sjögren’s syndrome []. 

Systematic diseases biomarker discovery Salivary proteomics has also been 
used for systematic diseases biomarker discovery, for example breast 
cancer. The soluble fragment of the c-erbB-2 oncogene was found to be 
significantly higher in saliva collected from patients with breast cancer 
compared to patients with benign tumors and healthy controls. A pilot 
study has indicated that the saliva test for this oncogene is sensitive, 
reliable, and potentially useful in initial detection of  and/or follow-up
screening for breast cancer  []. Efforts are being made to apply salivary 
proteomics for disease-specific biomarker discovery, such as lung, gastric 
and pancreatic cancer.

Challenges
Although there is increasing interest  in salivary proteome analysis, there 
are still some bottlenecks for salivary proteomic biomarker discovery. 
First, there are some high abundant proteins in saliva, such as amylase, 
albumin, and immunoglobulins, which become the hurdles for the 
detection and quantitation of low abundant proteins. Depletion of these 
interfering proteins prior to definitive analyses should improve the 
resolution and sensitivity of  salivary proteome analysis  []. Second, high 
throughput and quantitative validation methods are urgently needed for the 
confirmation of potential biomarkers  that lack available antibodies. The 
development of new technologies will accelerate the biomarker research in 
saliva. Third, and probably not the least, the mechanism behind the disease 
biomarker distribution in saliva should  be clarified for further clinical 
screening and detection. A recent study has shown that biomarkers can be 
secreted from lung cancer tumor to mouse saliva  [], which suggests that 
the salivary glands may be regulated by mediators released from remote 
tumors.

Conclusion
The proteomes in saliva have been characterized by different proteomic 
technologies, including qualitative and quantitative methods. Based on 
these platforms, salivary proteomic biomarker discovery has been carried 
out in selective oral and systematic diseases. Most importantly, when a 
saliva test could be easily conducted  in clinic for early detection of 
diseases, the life quality of patients  will be greatly improved. Although 
there are technical and mechanistic challenges, one can anticipate that the 
demands for clinical applications will be the great impetus for the salivary 
proteomics development.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank Dr. Jieping Yang and Dr.  Abu Nazmul-Hossain for critical 
review of the manuscript. This work was supported by NIH ⁄ NIDCR Grant 
U01-DE16275, U01-DE17790, R01-DE17593 and R01-DE17170 to DTW.

Citation:Xiao et al, Bioinformation 5(7): 294-296 (2011) 

The rationale for salivary proteomic biomarkers.

