Background
Mammalian signal transducers and activators of transcription
(STAT) is a family of 7 transcription factors (Stat1, Stat2, Stat3,
Stat4, Stat5a, Stat5b and Stat6) []. These transcription factors
are activated in response to cytokines and growth factors
including interferons (IFNs), epidermal growth factor (EGF),
interleukin 5 (IL5), IL6, hepatocyte growth factor (HGF),
leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) and bone morphogenetic
protein 2 (BMP2) which regulate various genes involved in cell
growth, proliferation, cell survival and other biological
processes []. The transcription factors of this family are
activated by growth factor receptor tyrosine kinases, Janus
kinases or Src family kinases through the phosphorylation of a
critical tyrosine residue which leads to the dimerization of two
phosphorylated monomers []. Phosphorylated dimers are
translocated to the nucleus where they bind to specific DNAresponse
elements in the promoter region of target genes, and
induce gene expression [,
]. It has been found that
constitutive activation of certain STAT family members,
particularly of Stat3 promote dysregulated growth, survival
and immune responses which contribute to tumor progression
and carcinogenesis [,
]. Stat3 dimerization relies on the
reciprocal binding of Src Homology (SH2) domain-binding
peptide (Pro-pTyr-Leu-Lys-Thr-Lys) of one monomer to
another []. It is a critical step in Stat3 activation which presents
an attractive target to abrogate Stat3 DNA-binding and to
inhibit its aberrant transcriptional activity []. Interest in
development of small molecule and peptide based inhibitors of
Stat3 dimerization in the last few years has led to the discovery
of inhibitors like Stattic, Sta21 and FLLL32 [,
].

Curcumin (diferuloylmethane) is a principal component of
Asian spice turmeric with wide range of pharmacological
properties which includes antioxidant, anti-inflammatory,
antimicrobial, and anticarcinogenic activities 
[]. Curcumin
has been reported to inhibit the Stat3 phosphorylation and
DNA binding activity in human cancer cells [,
]. It has been
found that curcumin is extremely safe even at very high doses
in various studies with animal models and human 
[]. In
addition to curcumin, turmeric plant contains several other
curcuminoids with broad spectrum of pharmacological
properties in which demethoxycurcumin and
bisdemethoxycurcumin are abundant []. In order to improve
the pharmacological properties, curcumin was conjugated with
various functional groups. Curcumin-amino acids conjugates
were also synthesized using different substitution schemes
which were tested for antioxidant, antimicrobial, antiviral,
antiproliferative and proteasome inhibition activities 
[–]. In
the present study we investigate the interaction of curcumin
natural derivatives and its conjugates with amino acids in the
pursuance of potential lead molecule for inhibition of Stat3
dimerization using molecular docking over the SH2 domain of
a Stat3 monomer.

Methodology
Preparing small molecules:
Curcumin natural derivatives (), its conjugates with
amino acids  (see supplementary material) and known
Stat3 dimerization inhibitors () were drawn and 3D
optimized by MarvinSketch (Free Academic License) and saved
in Protein Data Bank (PDB) file format. These small molecules
were prepared for molecular docking by merging non-polar
hydrogens, assigning Gastegier charges, and saving them in
PDBQT file format using AutoDock Tools (ADT) 1.5.6.

Preparing Target molecule:
To investigate the interaction of curcumin natural derivatives
and its amino acid conjugates, X-ray crystal structure of Stat3β
complexed with DNA (PDB ID: 1BG1) was obtained from the
Protein Data Bank (http://www.rcsb.org/pdb). For molecular
docking DNA and other hetero-atoms (water, ions, etc.) were
removed using PyMOL 0.99, Gasteiger charges were assigned
and macromolecule was saved in PDBQT file format using ADT.

Molecular docking:
Grid and docking parameter files were prepared using ADT
and molecular docking was performed with AutoDock 4.2.1
(Scripps Research Institute, USA) considering all the rotatable
bonds of small molecules as rotatable and macromolecule as
rigid. Grid box size of 80 × 80 × 80 Å with 0.375 Å spacing was
selected that include the whole SH2 dimerization domain of
Stat3 monomer. Empirical-free energy function and Lamarckian
Genetic Algorithm, with an initial population of 150 randomly
placed individuals, a maximum number of 2,500,000 energy
evaluations, a mutation rate of 0.02, and a crossover rate of 0.80
were used to perform molecular docking with macromolecule.
Hundred independent docking runs were performed for each
small molecule. Protein– small molecule complex for lowest
free energy of binding (ΔG) confirmation from the largest
cluster was saved in PDBQT format and converted to PDB file
format using UCSF Chimera 1.6.1. Docking results were
analyzed using PyMOL 0.99 for possible polar and hydrophobic
interactions. Docking studies were performed at Intel(R)
Xeon(R) CPU (3.2 GHz) with Linux-based operating system
Fedora 15.

Discussion
Stat3 monomer contains four domains, a protein interaction
domain which helps in cooperative DNA binding, all-alpha
domain comprises of a bundle of four antiparallel helices
connected by short loops, DNA binding domain comprises of
eight-stranded β-barrel and SH-2 dimerization domain
comprises of a central three-stranded β-pleated sheet flanked by
a helix and two strands. To predict the inhibition of Stat3
dimerization by curcumin natural derivatives and its amino
acid conjugates, these small molecules were docked over SH2
domain of a Stat3 monomer and their binding modes were
analyzed  &amp; 
 (see supplementary material).

Demethoxycurcumin bound to SH2 domain with ΔG of -7.80
kcal/mol and KI of 1.93 µM (). Methoxy group of
demethoxycurcumin was found to form polar interaction with
side chain of ARG-595 while the neighboring hydroxyl group
was in polar interaction range with main chain of LYS-591 and
side chain of ARG-595. Hydroxyl group present at the other
side of the molecule (methoxy group lacking) formed polar
interactions with SER-613. Both keto and hydroxyl group
present in the linker region were in polar interaction range with
SER-636.

It was found that hexahydrocurcuminol bound to SH2 domain
with ΔG of -7.69 kcal/mol and KI of 2.31 µM (). One
methoxy group of hexahydrocurcuminol was found to form
polar interaction with side chain of ARG-595 while the
neighboring hydroxyl group was in polar interaction range
with LYS-591 and ARG-595. At the other side of the molecule
methoxy group formed polar interactions with SER-613 while
hydroxyl group was in polar interaction range with GLU-612
and SER-613. In the linker region, one of the hydroxyl group
formed polar interaction with SER-636 while other interacted
with side chain of LYS-591. Amongst known inhibitors FLLL32,
static and sta21, FLLL32 bound to SH2 domain with lowest ΔG
of -6.69 kcal/mol and KI of 12.54 µM (). Keto groups
present in the linker region were found to form polar
interactions with LYS-591 and ARG-609 respectively.

Amongst the curcumin-amino acid conjugates curcuminproline
conjugate (1,7-Bis(4-O-L-prolinoyl-3-methoxyphenyl)-
1,4,6-heptatriene-5-ol-3-one) docked with lowest ΔG of -6.29
kcal/mol and KI of 24.55 µM (). Prolinoyl group at
one side of the molecule was in polar interaction range with
GLU-530 while at other side it interacted with VAL-637. The
hydroxyl group present in linker region of the conjugate formed
polar interaction with LYS-557. The peptide based known
inhibitor (Phpr-pTYR-LEU-cis-3,4-methanoPRO-GLN-NHBn)
docked with ΔG of -5.50 kcal/mol and KI of 93.10 µM and
formed polar interactions with LYS-591, ARG-595 and ARG-
609.

Curcumin natural derivatives and its amino acid conjugates
bound to SH2 domain through polar interactions with LYS-591,
ARG-609, SER-611, GLU-612, SER-613, SER-636 and VAL-637
among which LYS-591, ARG-609, SER-611 and SER-613 are the
amino acid residues which remain highly conserved in SH2
domain and play an important role in Stat3 dimerization by
forming polar interaction with pTYR-705 residue of other
monomer.

Conclusion
The present computational study provides insights into the
inhibition of Stat3 dimerization by curcumin natural derivatives
and its conjugates with amino acids. The involvement of
residues like LYS-591, ARG-609, SER-611, GLU-612, SER-613,
SER-636 and VAL-637 play an important role in binding of
curcumin natural derivatives and its amino acid conjugates
with SH2 domain. Demethoxycurcumin followed by
Hexahydrocurcuminol were predicted to be the most potent
inhibitors amongst all the curcumin natural derivatives and
known inhibitors (FLLL32, Sta21 and Stattic) docked. Amongst
the curcumin-amino acid conjugates curcumin-proline
conjugate (1,7-Bis(4-O-L-prolinoyl-3-methoxyphenyl)-1,4,6-
heptatriene-5-ol-3-one) was predicted to be the most potent
inhibitor of Stat3 dimerization.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Anil Kumar thank IITG and MHRD (Government of India) for
the fellowship to pursue Ph.D. We thank developers of the free
softwares used for this study and DBT, Govt of India for
providing funds for establishment of Institutional Biotech Hub
(BT/04/NE/2009) through which this work was carried out.

Citation:Kumar &amp; Bora, Bioinformation 8(20): 988-993 (2012)

Structures of curcumin natural derivatives and known Stat3 dimerization inhibitors used in the study.

Binding modes of (a) demethoxycurcumin (b) hexahydrocurcuminol (c) FLLL32 (d) curcumin-proline conjugate (1,7-Bis
(4-O-L-prolinoyl-3-methoxyphenyl)-1,4,6-heptatriene-5-ol-3-one) with Stat3 SH2 domain of a Stat3 monomer.

