Background
In the domain of biology and biochemistry interpreting the
evolutionary process of life is of great importance. Study of
molecular level evolution of proteins helps us to understand
the evolution of life. The journey of evolution assisted with
natural selection generates improved biologically functional
protein molecules []. Different organisms use different
adaptive strategy for existence in the adverse natural world.
From ancient times mankind was enchanted by the snakes and
their astonishing features. The process of evolution gifted a
precious thesaurus to the snakes, i.e., their venom. The primary
function of snake venom is to incapacitation and
immobilization of the prey of the snakes (as an offensive
armory). Evolved snake venom to aid in catching prey exhibits
fatal and enfeebling effect. The secondary function of venom is
to serve as defensive machinery against their predators. Snake
venom also assists in digestion of variety of diets of snakes 
[].
The evolution of venoms favors the survival of snakes in
different environment []. Snake venom is a cornucopia of
biologically active polypeptides and non-polypeptide
constituents []. Among the different venomic component
snake venom cytotoxins and short neurotoxins are nonenzymatic
polypeptide candidates with a molecular weight of
5-10 kDA []. In the cobra venom, fifty percent of the dry
weight accounts for its cytotoxin components []. The
characteristics of cytotoxins and short neurotoxins are i) three
β-strand loops ii) small globular hydrophobic core iii) four
conserved disulfide bridges and iv) 60-62 amino acid residues
[,
,
]. The lethality of cytotoxin is due to its pore formation
capacity into the biological membranes []. Short neurotoxins
exert their effect by blocking the neuromuscular transmission
through selective binding to muscle nicotinic acetyl-choline
receptors (nAChR) []. Cytotoxin and short neurotoxin are
enriched with disulfide bonds. As a family member of ‘Threefinger
protein’ superfamily, cytotoxins and short neurotoxins
exhibit ‘three-finger’ appearance which is a chief structural
characteristics feature of this superfamily. The name of threefinger
protein is for three loops of three-finger proteins that are
outstretched from the core region of the protein which is looked
like stretch out three fingers of a hand [,
]. For proper
structural maintenance three-finger proteins are rich in
disulfide bonds []. Three-finger protein scaffold is also present
in different chordates where they employed in diverse
biological functions. Plethodontid modulating factor (PMF),
Lymphocyte antigen 6H (Ly6H), CD59 glycoprotein (CD59),
Ly-6/neurotoxin-like protein 1 (Lynx-1) are different non-toxin
family members of three-finger protein superfamily.

These non-toxin family members are involved in diverse
physiological system namely pheromone system, complement
system, cellular communication system and central nervous
system etc [,
,
]. Snake venom proteins recruited into
venom proteome by a process of evolution in which genes of
normal body proteins that are engaged in key regulatory
process within the body are duplicated. Selective expression of
these duplicated genes in the venom gland produces deadly
cocktail of lethal toxin molecules []. Previously a study on the
physicochemical characterization and functional analysis of
snake venom toxin proteins &amp; related proteins (non-toxin) of
chordates was done to understand their compositional
differences, physicochemical properties and functions in a
comparative manner []. The aim of the present study was to
analyze the diversification profile of amino acid sequences,
polarity profile of amino acid sequences, conservation pattern
of amino acid residues and phylogenetic relationship of snake
venom toxin proteins and related non-toxin three-finger
proteins of different chordates like hagfish, bird, frog, mouse,
rat, human etc.

Methodology
Protein sequences of cytotoxins, short neurotoxins and related
non-toxin body proteins were retrieved from National Centre
for Biotechnology Information (http://ncbi/nlm/nih.gov) 
[].
Presence of signal peptide within the amino acid sequences and
cleavage sites of signal peptides was analyzed using SignalP 4.0
algorithm which is a neural network-based method
(http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/SignalP/) 
[]. Main chain
of protein sequences were selected for further analysis. For
simplicity a sequence ID code was given to each molecule.
Sequence related information's was mined from Protein
Information Resources (PIR) knowledgebase []. Multiple
sequence alignment is done with Clustal-X program, followed
by manual inspection for errors []. Aligned sequence sets
were represented in Clustal-X coloring scheme and polarity
coloring scheme using Clustal-X and Jalview tool respectively
[,
].

Sequence logos were generated using WebLogo application,
which helps to dictate the sequence conservation and relative
frequencies of the amino acid residues at each position 
[,
].
Family specific conserved pattern of amino acid residues in
toxin and non-toxin proteins were extracted using PRATT
version 2.1 []. Phylogenetic trees were re-constructed using
neighbor-joining method implemented in MEGA 4.0 version
[]. For Bayesian inference of phylogeny, MrBayes 3.1.2 was
used [].

Results &amp; Discussion
In this work, various snake venom cytotoxins and short
neurotoxins (naja annulifera and naja naja) and related chordate
specific non-toxin proteins were analyzed with the help of
different bioinformatical packages to address evolutionary
process of these molecules  (see supplementary
material). The number of amino acids of main chain of toxin
proteins and non-toxin proteins comprise of 60 to 90 amino acid
residues (). Multiple sequence alignment of protein
sequences (represented in polarity coloring schemes) shows
variable sites as well as conserved sites of these proteins which
demonstrate the sequence enrichment strategy of these
sequences for adaptation to different physiological systems
(). First residue of all sequences is a Leu (hydrophobic
amino acid) which is conserved in all peptides except in short
neurotoxins (replaced by Met), Secreted Ly-6/uPAR-related
protein 1 (SLURP1) of human (replaced by Phe) and Secreted
Ly-6/uPAR-related protein 2 (SLURP2) of human (replaced by
Ile).

In terms of polarity Leu, Met, Phe, Ile all were hydrophobic in
nature. These replacements of residues (non-synonymous
substitution) with a same polarity residues hint conservation
strategy at physicochemical characteristics level. Cysteine is
conserved in total seven sites, which act like an anchoring
residue for maintenance of the three-finger fold of the threefinger
protein superfamily (Supplement ). After last
Cysteine the successive amino acid is Asn which is conserved
in all sequences. These conserved residues help to create the
signature residues of three-finger protein domain. Substitutions
(point mutations) are high in number in toxin specific
sequences. Polarity shuffling and hydrophobic (aliphatic)
amino acid substitution are very prevalent in cytotoxins and
short neurotoxin sequences ().

In other related non-toxin proteins, substitutions of amino acids
at family level are slightly low in number. In xenoxin family the
observed substitution of amino acid in terms of polarity is from
a negative amino acid (Asp) to a hydrophobic amino acid (Gly)
and from a hydrophobic amino acid (Ile) to polar amino acid
(Thr). Presence of more amount of positively charged amino
acid residue than negatively charged amino acid is observed
throughout in xenoxin sequence stretch. In Hep21 protein
(HEP21) sequences negatively charged amino acid is equal in
number to positively charged amino acid. In PMF the presence
of negatively charged amino acid is greater in number then
positively charged amino acid. Very versatile amino acid
substitution profile is observed within the family members of
CD59. Within family members and at superfamily level CD59
has shown a diversified sequence profile. Low level of amino
acid sequence conservation of CD59 molecules of different
species result in vivid amino acid distribution profile of CD59
[]. In Ly6H and Lynx-1 amino acids substitution are
uncommon and these protein sequences are very conservative
in nature within their corresponding family ().

WebLogo program is used to create sequence logos. With the
help of Sequence logos the pattern in sequence conservation
has been addressed in a graphical form (). Stack of
letters in sequence logos represents the amino acid position.
The stack height (measured in bits) signifies the degree of
sequence conservation at that position and the height of each
letter depicts the relative frequency of the corresponding amino
acid [,
]. Multiple sequence alignment (represented as
sequence logo) of cytotoxins and short neurotoxins reveals that
despite of the difference in their mode of mechanism of actions
i.e., cytotoxin acts upon cell membrane and short-neurotoxin
exert action upon nAChR, 24 sites were conserved in their
sequences [,
]. Eighteen sites (amino acid residue) are
identical in nature and amino acid residues of 6 sites are
physicochemically conserved (non-synonymous substitution)
within the sequences (Supplement ). Sequence logo of
toxin and non-toxin proteins exhibits the pattern of sequence
conservation in toxin and non-toxin sequences of three-finger
protein superfamily (). It is noteworthy that the
conserved cysteine profile of all the sequences of toxin and nontoxin
proteins indicates their common evolutionary ancestry.
With the help of these cysteines the three-finger fold is well
maintained in three-finger proteins []. Variable sites signify
the diversification process of evolution where a single scaffold
is used in different system with distinct roles. Individual family
specific conserved pattern in protein sequences were tabulated
in  (see supplementary material).

Phylogenetic analysis of toxin and non-toxin protein sequences
using depicts the evolutionary relationship among cytotoxins,
short neurotoxins and related non-toxin proteins of other
chordates (Supplement ). Bayesian phylogenetic
analysis shows that cytotoxins and short neurotoxins are
entirely separate entities in terms of position in phylogenetic
tree (). Cytotoxin and short neurotoxin belong to two
separate groups but share a common branch point. Species
specific distribution of toxin molecules in phylogenetic tree was
observed (i.e., cytotoxins of naja annulifare and naja naja are not
mixed within each cluster). Related non-toxin proteins form an
entirely separate group of non-toxin body proteins. This can
logically be interpreted that Lynx1 and Hep21 share a common
branch point with toxin proteins which reasonably logical
because cytotoxins and short neurotoxins are originated from
an ancestral Lynx1 like molecule []. All other non-toxin
protein molecules i.e., HEP21, SLURP1, SLURP2, Ly6H,
Xenoxins, HMLP1, PMF and CD59 form separate clusters with
their corresponding family members.

Conclusion
Different results signify that cytotoxins and short neurotoxins,
which are two important components of snake venom, are
originated from simply body proteins enriched with different
sequence specific substitution strategy for biological needs.
Efficient utilization of hydrophobic amino acids, positively
charged and negatively charged amino acids and their
distribution profile in toxin sequence make them a tailored
killer element in snake venom. An enhanced amphipathic
nature added extra advantage to cytotoxins for exerting
harmful action upon biological membranes. Variations in
physicochemical properties of amino acid within the toxin
sequences gave additional opportunity for generation of
improved potent toxins. PMF is also efficient to use negatively
charged amino acids in sequence stretch for better receptor
attachment. Even distribution of negatively charged amino
acids at regular intervals helps PMF to provide better chance to
attach pheromone receptor in a specific manner. CD59
comprises of vivid amino acid residue distribution in their
sequences. Very conserved profile of amino acid sequences in
Ly6H and Lynx1 is for their involvement in two important
systems i.e., cellular communication system and central
nervous system. Within the nature these two systems are very
critical for any life form. Distribution of different amino acid
residues along the sequence length of three-finger proteins is
customized for their adapted biological functional needs. With
conserved cysteine these proteins maintain the structural
scaffold but at the same time variation of amino acid residues
in other parts of sequence facilitates different system dependent
necessities. Comparative sequence specific analysis of protein
sequences demonstrates how proteins are generated within the
nature's testing ground for tailor-made biologic needs. Tracing
the Natural protein engineering scheme of three-finger proteins
enrich our knowledge which in turn helps to generate biomolecules
with remedial properties.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are very thankful to Prof. Debesh Chandra Majumder,
Chairman, Trinity Trust, Asansol, West Bengal, Prof. Kalyan
Kumar Sen, Principal, Gupta College of Technological Sciences,
Asansol, West Bengal and The Head, Department of Zoology,
The University of Burdwan, Burdwan,West Bengal, for
providing infrastructure facilities for carrying out the research
work.

Citation:Panda &amp; Chandra, Bioinformation 9(5): 259-266 (2013)

Multiple sequence alignment of various snake venom toxin proteins and related non-toxin proteins of other chordates
(polarity coloring scheme).

Sequence logo representation of snake venom toxin proteins and related non-toxin proteins of other chordates. Sequence
logo was created by WebLogo program (http://weblogo.berkeley.edu/).

Bayesian phylogenetic analysis of various snake
venom toxin proteins and related non-toxin proteins of other
chordates.

