Background
An increasing number of immunocompromised patients 
[] suffering largely
from AIDS, cancer and undergoing organ transplants or immunosuppressive
therapy are getting afflicted with invasive fungal infections, better known as
mycoses. Such infections viz. Candidiasis, Aspergillosis, Histoplasmosis,
Coccidioidomycosis, Blastomycosis, Penicilliosis, Cryptococcosis and
Zygomycosis are caused by fungi belonging to different phyla, i.e.
Ascomycetes, Basidiomycetes and Zygomycetes. The disease management
involves treatment with antifungal drugs, and even surgery at times 
[].
However, drugs such as Amphotericin B, which is the first-line drug of choice
for invasive mycoses is nephrotoxic and hepatotoxic. Besides, the fungi are
acquiring recurrent resistance against the existing antifungal agents, rendering
them less effective. Therefore, there is a rapid requirement for the development
of effective antifungal drugs for mycoses at large, for which a potential drug
target could be found in the housekeeping genes which are highly conserved
throughout species and could be studied further to carry out thorough analyses
of the catalytic active site before a lead compound can be selected by the drug
discovery process.

The enzyme, Glucosamine-6-Phosphate (G-6-P) synthase [EC 2.6.1.16] is
ubiquitously present and highly conserved in mycoses-causing fungi. It is
known to catalyze the rate-limiting step of the fungal cell-wall biosynthetic
pathway and inhibiting it can delimit the growth of the fungus. The enzyme
consists of two domains, the Glutaminase (GATase II) domain and the Sugar
Isomerising (SIS) domain where the probable active site(s) can be identified.
For instance, previous studies in E. coli have suggested the active sites to lie
within the two domains of G-6-P synthase []. The drug discovery protocols
frequently consider selecting the highly conserved functional motifs against
which drugs could be designed. But the increasing ineffectiveness, toxicity and
fungal resistance towards existing antifungal drugs have raised an issue to find
inherent amino acid variations within the domains and its influence on the
active site(s) for mycoses-causing fungi. The amino acid sequences of various
mycoses-causing fungi were collected from various databases followed by their
phylogenetic analysis subsequent to multiple sequence alignment and further
detection of their functional residues. Consequently, this study will aid drug
discovery for mycoses-causing fungi in the near future. The availability of
sequenced fungal genomes has greatly contributed to this study.

Methodology
Amino acid sequences of G-6-P synthase of mycoses-causing fungi as obtained
from World Health Organization, listed in (see 
) 
were retrieved from Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard fungal
database [], NCBI fungal database 
[] and The DOE Joint Genome Institute
fungal database. A total of 20 sequences were retrieved and compiled from
these databases. The online server PFAM was used to investigate protein
domains present within the enzyme. Subsequently, the sequences were
manually separated according to the domains predicted by PFAM. Further, the
protein sequences were aligned using the offline software CLUSTALX2 
[].
MEGA v5.0 [] 
was employed to infer the evolutionary history using the
Neighbour-Joining method. The bootstrap consensus tree inferred from 1000
replicates is taken to represent the evolutionary history of the taxa analyzed.
The evolutionary distances were computed using the Poisson correction
method. All positions containing gaps and missing data were eliminated.
Additionally, the functionally important amino acids were identified using
ConSurf webserver.

Discussion
The online server PFAM yielded the inherent protein domains lying within G-
6-P synthase viz. two GATase II domains and two SIS domains in mycosescausing
fungi where the probable active sites are found. Subsequently, the
MSA results (showing partial results) obtained from ConSurf showed
few variable sites within the highly conserved regions which are being
investigated in the present study, along with the more evolutionary affected
regions. The GATase II domains comprised 48 and 140 amino acid residues
and the SIS domains comprised 127 and 146 residues. Position 18 of the first
GATase II domain and position 51 of second SIS domain observed
zygomycetous fungi having isoleucine replaced with a valine and valine
replaced with isoleucine, respectively. Hence, for drugs targeting zygomycosis,
it should be able to bind to these sites apart from the highly conserved residues
for a better efficacy. At position 21 of the first GATase II domain, threonine
has been replaced by asparagine in the case of C. albicans and C. dubliniensis.
During analysis of the second GATase II domain, it was found out that lysine
has taken the place of serine in all Candida species at position 24. Position 8
and 123 has asparagine instead of serine and glycine instead of alanine,
respectively for all Candida species except C. glabrata. Since, Candidiasis is
the most prevalent antifungal infection which is mainly caused by C. albicans,
it is possible that threonine, lysine, asparagine and glycine may play a pivotal
role in the pathogenesis of Candida species. C. tropicalis and Cryptococcus
neoformans do not encompass the first GATase II domain. Furthermore, the
only commonality found between zygomycetes and basidiomycetes is at
position 12 and 73 of the MSA of second GATase II domain, where methionine
and valine replaced isoleucine, respectively and at position 38 of second SIS
domain where isoleucine is present instead of valine. Sites 66 and 107 of
second GATase II domain and sites 35, 70 and 72 of second SIS domain
showed that all Aspergillus species share common residues with Penicillium
species, H. capsulatum, Blastomyces and C. immitis. Aspergillosis has been
known to be a fatal disease after Candidiasis, but it is not the case with
Penicilliosis, Blastomycosis, Histoplasmosis and Coccidiomycosis; hence,
these sites might not have a lethal role in the fungus. The first SIS domain is
observed to be a highly conserved region among all species with no variability
sites within the conserved regions. Hence, targeting this site can be upheld to
the drugs’ efficacy. According to literature, cysteine 1 of G-6-P synthase in E.
coli [] 
and cysteine 2 of the same enzyme in Volvariella volvacea 
[] have
significant role in the enzyme catalysis. The online server ConSurf predicted
the functional amino acid residues for R. oryzae RO3G_04247.3. Results reveal
that cysteine residue at position 1 is highly conserved and exposed on the
active site, making it easily targetable by drugs. Thus, it can be seen that
conserved residues generally comprising the active site are mostly functional
and central to drug binding.

Moreover, phylogenetic tree for individual domains was constructed as well
() using MEGA v5.0 with 1000 bootstrap replicates which helped in
understanding the evolutionary relationship of the various functional domains
in mycoses-causing fungi. All the four trees constructed individually for each
domain grouped Candida species together, with C. albicans and C. dubliniensis
being closer to each other than the rest suggesting that all the Candida species
could be targeted with one effective drug. A. niger 2 lies quite separately from
the rest of the Aspergillus species, implying that it might be more resistant to
antifungal drugs. Consequently, variations within the G-6-P synthase of A.
niger 2italic&gt; could reveal answers to increasing resistance to drugs, and accordingly,
newer lead compounds could be designed. Zygomycetes, R. oryzae and M.
circinelloides are grouped at the bottom of the tree and single drug needs to be
developed to be effective against zygomycetes causing zygomycosis.

Conclusion
Domain variability analyses of G-6-P synthase in mycoses-causing fungi were
carried out because of increasing fungal resistance towards antifungal drugs,
and consequently, there is a requirement for better and more effective drugs.
The current study was aimed to investigate the variable regions within the
conserved domains of the enzyme which might affect its active site and
subsequently, alter the drug binding, since a single amino acid residue can
augment or reduce the drug binding to the target enzyme. Our study revealed
specific residues which might play significant roles in the fungal pathogenesis.
Hence, variant analyses implicate the binding efficacy between the receptor
and ligand and direct the new direction in effective drug development through
pharmacophore modelling and structure-activity relationships. The work may
be enhanced by incorporating the ensemble approach of variability analysis on
target site for mycoses-causing fungi.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are thankful to Jaypee Institute of Information Technology, Noida for
providing us the necessary facility to conduct the study and Prof. G.B.K.S
Prasad, SOS Biotechnology, Jiwaji University, Gwalior, M.P. for his academic
support.

Citation:Gupta et al Bioinformation 6(5): 196-199 (2011)

ConSurf color-coded MSA of the first GATase II domain of G-6-P
synthase using amino acid sequences of mycoses-causing fungi. The pink to
blue color gradient represent highly conserved to variable regions of the
domain. The yellow marked amino acids indicate that the calculation for the
particular site was performed on less than 10% of the sequences.

A Neighbour-Joining phylogenetic tree from amino acid sequences
of (a) first GATase II domain and (b) first SIS domain of mycoses-causing
fungi, constructed using MEGA v5.0 with 1000 bootstrap replicates. The
evolutionary distances were computed using the Poisson correction method. All
positions containing gaps and missing data were eliminated.

