Background
The formation of protein complexes by two different proteins (heterodimers)
involves a stable interface. The driving force deterministic of their interface
features (chemical and physical) is essential for its molecular function.
However, our current knowledge on the molecular principles of protein-protein
binding is limited. Hence, the identification of a binding partner from sequence
alone is still a great challenge. Therefore, it is of importance to document
interface residue types in heterodimers using an updated yet non-redundant
dataset of structures determined by X-ray crystallography. The description of
interfaces using amino acid residues and their types help understand proteinprotein
interaction (PPI). The principles of PPI gleaned from the analysis of
protein complexes determined by X-ray crystallography have been documented
in the literature [–]. 
PPI was described using various structural (e.g.
interface area, interface size, gap index, volume, planarity, hydrogen bonds,
etc.) and sequence (e.g. protein size, residue type, residue frequency, conserved
interface patterns, etc.) property parameters in these studies. These studies
provide mean statistics on interface features for large datasets. This provided
valuable insights to the understanding of protein-protein interactions. However,
protein-protein interaction is specific and every interface is unique. Hence, it is
important to classify known protein complexes based on interfaces.

The classical work by Chothia &amp; Janin (1975) showed that protein interfaces
are dominantly hydrophobic []. 
It was later detailed by Jones &amp; Thornton
(1995) that interfaces have more hydrophobic residues than surface but less
than core []. 
The role of interface hydrophobic residues in binding was also
later acknowledged by Tsai et al. (1997) 
[]. It was found that large and strong
hydrophobic patches are dominating features at the interface 
[]. The use of a
hydrophobic mean-field potential for protein subunit docking was also
subsequently demonstrated []. Hydrophobic interfaces with few charged
groups have been described []. This study also documented that interface
residues are either “abundantly polar” or “abundantly hydrophobic”. The
presence of distinctly clustered yet conserved residues at the interface was
known []. 
Interfaces have also been described using features (e.g. protein size,
interface size, interface area, gap volume, gap index, planarity, hydrogen
bonds, salt bridges, residue propensity, etc.) based on mean statistics for large
datasets [,
,
,
,
,
]. Online web servers are also available for
studying PPI using these features [,
,
]. Thus, the progress on the
understanding of the molecular principles of protein-protein binding is
prominent. It should be stated that these studies use datasets consisting of both
heterodimers and homodimers. The formation of homodimers and their folding
through 2-state (2S - without intermediate) and 3-state (3S - with stable
intermediate) mechanisms is distinct from that of heterodimers 
[]. Therefore,
it is our interest here, to study and understand heterodimer complexes only,
using interface residue types. Moreover, it is known that non-specific interfaces
are less pronounced in heterodimer complexes and hence, the need to
distinguish true and false complexes is not compelling 
[]. We use percentage
polar residues to describe interface in comparison with core and surface for 209
heterodimer complexes to classify them into distinct classes.

Materials &amp; Methodology
Heterodimers dataset
We created an updated yet non-redundant heterodimer dataset from protein
databank (PDB) []. 
The availability of precompiled datasets are described in
ProtorP [] and PQS 
[] online servers. ProtorP provides no option for
download and PQS has not been updated since 1999. Therefore, it is essential
to create an updated yet non-redundant heterodimer dataset from PDB 
(Table 1 see ) 
using the procedure outlined in . In this
procedure, we downloaded 5,387 entries from PDBelite web interface using the
predefined keywords “hetero AND dimer” 
[]. However, this dataset was
redundant corresponding to about 28,525 sequence chains. This is more than
the expected 10,774 (5,387*2) due to the presence of multiple sequence chains
(&gt;2 chains) in several entries. Therefore, we extracted the PDB entries (984)
with just two sequence chains. Thus, a sequence set of 1,968 sequences
corresponding to 984 PDB entries was created. This dataset was redundant at
sequence level and hence, the dataset was subjected to CD-HIT (sequence
redundancy removal program) [] 
at 40% sequence similarity cut-off (with
step size n = 2). This resulted in 680 unique sequences corresponding to 457
PDB entries. It should be noted that the number of complexes is more than half
of the number of chains. This is because the interface is a combination of two
chains and thus, the interfaces are non-redundant. This set contained about 60
RNA/DNA, homodimer and HETATOM structures and these entries were
removed. The 397 protein complexes produced were further refined to remove
short peptides of chain length &lt;=50 residues and resolution &gt; 3.5 Å. This
resulted in a non-redundant dataset of 192 heterodimer protein complexes
(). 
The dataset was subsequently characterized for protein size
distribution ().

Source organism based grouping
Each heterodimer complex is made up of two protein monomer subunits. The
source for each protein subunit is either different (different organism (DO)) or
same (same organism (SO)) (). The formation of a protein complex
with interacting partners from DO is possible, often for a non-essential (nonobligatory,
e.g. inhibitory) role, only in heterodimers. Thus, the dataset is
divided based on organism source of interacting partners. The dataset also
consists of 5 (FIVE) complexes with at least one synthetic partner (SP).

Functional grouping of complexes
We extracted “descriptive” functional data (usually semantic) for each complex
from the PDB header annotation records. This data was manually curated (“by
domain expert decision”) through visual inspection using available literature
information. Thus, complexes were generally grouped based on function into
catalysis (enzymes), regulatory (cellular), assembly (structural), immunity and
inhibitory (). 
It should be noted that this exercise is not comprehensive.
However, we have taken reasonable effort on a case by case basis to classify
complexes into their respective functional groups. Manual inspection of PDB
description records suggests that DO complexes are often inhibitory (e.g. PDB
code: 1K9O) or immune (e.g. PDB code: 1GH6) related (Table 3 see
). However, SO complexes are associated with
catalysis, regulatory, assembly and immunity. The SP group consists of a
synthetic partner for in vitro inhibitory or regulatory studies. It is often possible
that a complex may align with two different functional groups, where such
complexes are grouped based an “expert decision” using known information.

Accessible surface area (ASA)
ASA was calculated using the WINDOWS software Surface Racer 
[] with
Lee and Richard (1971) [] 
implementation. A probe radius of 1.4 Å was used for ASA calculation.

Interface residues
Interface (I) residues in heterodimers are identified using change in accessible
surface area (ΔASA) from a “monomer-state” to a “dimer-state”. Residues with
ΔASA &gt; 0 Å are considered to be at the interface. Thus, interface residues
contributed by subunits A and B were identified.

Interface size and Interface area
The distribution of complexes with interface size (number of interface residues)
is given in . 
The relationship between interface size and interface area
is given in .

Interface property abundance
The interface between two interacting subunits is made of both polar and
hydrophobic residues. The number of polar and hydrophobic residues at the
interface varies from complex to complex. Some interfaces are rich in polar
residues, while some others are rich in hydrophobic residues. Therefore, we
calculated the percentage of polar and hydrophobic residues at the interface for
each complex. The difference in the percentages of polar (P) and hydrophobic
(H) residues at the interface is measured (). Thus, interface residues
have “polar abundance” when %P - %H &gt; 0 and “hydrophobic abundance”
when it is &lt; 0. This help to classify complexes with interfaces based on
“abundant polar” and “abundant hydrophobic” residues.

Surface residues
Surface (S) residues in heterodimers are identified using residue ASA values in
a “dimer state”. Residues with ASA &gt; 0 Å are considered as surface residues.
Thus, surface residues in the subunits A and B of the complex were identified.

Core residues
Core (C) residues in heterodimers are identified using residue ASA values in a
“monomer state”. Residues with ASA = 0 Å are considered as core residues.
Thus, core residues in the subunits A and B were identified.

Interface, surface and core polarity
A protein heterodimer complex consists of three distinct regions (core (C),
interface (I) and surface (S)) as shown in . Interface, surface, core
residues in a complex thus documented are further classified into polar and
hydrophobic residues. Thus, interface, surface and core residues are grouped as
polar {R, N, D, Q, H, K, S, T, Y, E} and hydrophobic {A, C, G, I, L, M, F, P,
V, W} based on residue type. We then estimated the percentage of polar
residues at interface (I), surface (S) and core (C) for each complex.

Classification of complexes
Complexes were grouped into four distinct classes based on the relative
difference in percentage polar residues (referred thereafter as polarity) between
interface and core (; Table 2 see 
).
Complexes with interface polarity greater than core but less than surface, such
that [S&gt;I&gt;C] are “class A”. Complexes with interface polarity greater than core
and surface, such that [S&lt;I&gt;C] are “class B”. Complexes with interface polarity
less than core and surface, such that [S&gt;I&lt;C] are “class C”. It should be stated
that “class D” are such that [S&lt;I&lt;C].

Statistical analysis
The statistical significance analysis was calculated using the GraphPad Prism
(version 5) software [http://www.graphpad.com/]. The F test for variance
comparison was used for calculating the significance of functional preference
between DO and SO group of complexes.

Results
The principles of PPI were studied using a dataset of 192 heterodimer
complexes () 
created using a procedure described in . The
dataset is divided based on the organism source of the interacting partners.
Thus, SO, DO, and SP group of complexes were identified 
(). The
distribution of complexes based on interacting protein size is given in 
.
This describes the size of interacting protein partners forming the complex.
These partners interact through interface residues. The distribution of interface
size among heterodimer complexes is given in 
. The interfaces have
interface areas which correlate with interface size (). The chemical
nature of interface residues in complexes is given in . This shows that
interface residues in complexes are either “abundantly polar” or “abundantly
hydrophobic”. However, majority of interfaces (121/192 – 63%) have
abundantly polar residues.

The classification of complexes using relative polarity between interface, core
and surface into classes A-D was shown (; 
). This grouping
shows that majority (191/192 - 99%) of interfaces have polarity greater than
core [I&gt;C] as shown in . 
However, interfaces in two complexes (1/192
– &lt;1%) have polarity less than core [I&lt;C]. We further found that 64%
(122/192) of complexes are grouped under “class A” having interface polarity
greater than core but less than surface. It was also noted that 36% (69/192) of
complexes are “class B” with interface polarity greater than core and surface.
Complexes having interface polarity less than core and surface (class C) are
rare (1/192 – &lt;1%) in the dataset. It should be stated that “class D” type of
complexes are absent in the dataset. Grouping of complexes based on source
organism of interacting partners shows that DO complexes are mostly
inhibitory and SO are usually associated with catalysis, regulation and
assembly (; 
). Thus, DO and SO group of complexes show
functional preference (p = 0.019). However, this is not true for classes (A–D)
as shown in  
(p = 0.12).  shows that complexes grouped in
classes A, B, C and D does not show significant difference for function
preference.

Discussion
Protein-protein interactions are vital for cellular function. Two different
proteins associate with one another for function (catalysis, regulatory and
assembly) that are often obligatory (essential for cellular activity). However,
this is not always true. They also interact for inhibitory and immune related
role, where their association is frequently non-obligatory (not essential for
cellular activity). The dataset shows that obligatory role is usually observed
among SO complexes and non-obligatory functions are common among DO
complexes. Thus, the functional role exhibited by complexes based on
organism source is significantly distinct (p value = 0.019). However, the
molecular principles for such associations are not clearly known. The
molecular forces for protein interactions are gathered through analysis of
known structural complexes. Hence, we describe the analysis of a dataset of
192 heterodimer complexes using polarity of the interface, surface and core for
classifying them into classes A - D.

Analysis of protein structural complexes showed that interfaces are either
“dominantly polar” [] 
or “dominantly hydrophobic” [,
,
]. It is also known
that the interface hydrophobic residues are more than surface but less than core
[]. 
Hydrophobic interfaces are similar to surface with few charged groups 
[].
Our analysis shows that class A complexes have interface polarity greater than
core but less than surface as reported elsewhere 
[]. Thus, this observation is
acknowledged in this study using an extended dataset. Interfaces are part of the
surfaces in the monomers, where the interface hydrophobic residues are more
than the rest of the surface and the partners interact through relative
hydrophobic forces. It should be noted that we identified an unusual complex
(PDB code: 2F95) under class C describing rhodopsin II/transducer interaction.
The core is made of more polar residues than the interface in this complex.
Thus, protein binding is hydrophobic, although, folding of the individual
monomers are driven by polar residues, as in several non-globular proteins. We
also identified class B complexes with interface polarity greater than both core
and surface. In this class, interface polar residues are more than the rest of the
surface and partners interact through polar interactions. Thus, relative polarity
is the driving force in class B complexes. This class of interfaces has not been
described in the literature and it is novel. The driving force for protein binding
is hydrophobic in class A and polar in class B complexes. These observations
using interface residue properties are imminent to the understanding of protein
binding in heterodimer complexes. This study should be extended using a
combined formulation of residue types and atomic features in future
investigation. It should also be noted that interfaces between partners are part
of surfaces in interacting monomers. These interfaces are clearly defined in
known structural complexes. However, there are often several binding sites in
an interacting monomer under in vivo conditions and these have not yet been
characterized. Therefore, experiments should be formulated to capture these
combined features in future studies.

Conclusion
Proteins associate with one another as a resultant effect of both polar and
hydrophobic residues at the interface. The unresolved challenge here is to
quantify their combined effect at the interface. Inter-subunit scoring functions
for polar and hydrophobic effects are available based on a limited set of
structural complexes and are always inadequate to describe new classes of
interfaces. It is known that interface residues are either “abundantly polar” or
“abundantly hydrophobic”. It is also known that interfaces are less hydrophobic
than core but more than surface in a class of complexes. We document a new
class of complexes with more interface residues than core and surface. Thus,
the driving force for protein-protein interaction is selectively either
hydrophobic or polar for different classes of interfaces.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Sowmya et al Bioinformation 6(4): 137-143(2011)

A flowchart for the creation of a non-redundant heterodimer dataset.
PDB = Protein databank.

Characterization of the dataset based on protein size.

Distribution of complexes based on interface size.

Relationship between interface size and interface area among
complexes.

Cumulative distribution of complexes based on interface property.
Complexes distributed in the positive X-axis have interfaces with polar residue
abundance and those distributed in the negative X-axis have interfaces with
hydrophobic residue abundance.

Illustration of surface (S), core (C) and interface (I) regions in a
heterodimer complex. The interface is the interacting region between the two
protein partners. The core is the buried region in the individual monomers. The
surface is the solvent exposed region in the complex state.

Grouping of the complexes based on their relative interface (I), core
(C) and surface (S) polarity. Interfaces often have more polar residues than
core in [I&gt;C] groups. The hierarchical grouping shows the abundance of class
A [S&gt;I&gt;C] and class B [S&lt;I&gt;C] complexes in the dataset. Class C [S&gt;I&lt;C] is
rare and class D [S&lt;I&lt;C] is absent in the dataset.

Distribution of complexes based on interface class. The distribution
shows that 64% of complexes have “class A” interface and 36% of complexes
have “class B” interface.

