Background
Bacterial blight (BB) of rice, caused by Xanthomonas oryzae pv.
oryzae (Xoo) is one of the oldest known diseases and was first
noticed by the farmers of Japan in 1884 []. BB is a vascular
disease resulting in a systemic infection []. The principle host
for Xoo is rice plant and enters its host through hydathodes or
wounds around leaf edges and then multiplies and spreads in
xylem vessels, causing disease []. Symptoms are observed at
the tillering stage, disease incidence increases with plant
growth, peaking at the flowering stage. Kresek is the more
destructive manifestation of the disease, wherein the leaves of
the entire plant turn pale yellow and wilt during the seedling to
the early tillering stage, resulting in a partial or total crop
failure []. The disease is known to occur in epidemic
proportions in many parts of the world, incurring severe crop
loss of up to 50%. Crop loss assessment studies have revealed
that this disease reduces grain yield to varying levels,
depending on the stage of the crop, degree of cultivar
susceptibility and the conduciveness of the environment in
which it occurs. The severity and significance of damages
caused by infection have necessitated the development of
strategies to control and manage the disease, so as to reduce
crop loss and to avert an epidemic. Many gram-negative
pathogenic bacteria are highly dependent on secretary systems
for virulence []. The secretary pathways mediate the secretion
of proteins (substrate virulence effectors) into the extracellular
milieu and into the host cells themselves, wherein the
effectors facilitate virulence []. Ablation of the secretary
pathway in plant pathogen systems often results in the loss of
pathogenesis or severe reduction of virulence []. Diffusible
signal factor (DSF) is a long chain fatty acid and chemical name
is ‘cis-11-methyl-2-dodecenoic acid’. The DSF -dependent
quorum sensing (QS) mechanism in Xoo allows sensing their
population density and synchronizing individual activity into
cooperative community behavior. This appears to provide
bacterial pathogens an obvious competitive advantage over
their hosts in pathogen-host interaction []. DSF family signals
have been reported in a range of plant and human bacterial
pathogens, including Xanthomonas oryzae pv. Oryzae (Xoo),
Xanthomonas campestris pv. Campestris (Xcc), Xyllela fastidiosa,
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia and Burkholderia cenocepacia. The
DSF signalling system comprises several key regulatory
proteins and a second messenger cyclic-di-GMP (c-di-GMP).
Among them, the RpfC/RpfG two component system is
involved in sensing and transduction of DSF signal through a
conserved phosphorelay mechanism in Xoo.

The putative enoyl-CoA hydratase RpfF is a key enzyme for
DSF biosynthesis. Functional analysis of RpfF or RpfC mutants
in different bacterial species suggests that the general role of the
DSF-signaling system in the modulation of virulence seems to
be conserved, but the regulatory mechanisms and DSFdependent
traits may differ among taxa []. Since the DSF QS
system is involved in the virulence to rice plant, the blocking
DSF synthase RpfF could be a possible target protein to control
the infection. The previous study elucidate that the threedimensional
structure (3D) of DSF synthase RpfF protein from
Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae is remains unknown. A number of
techniques have been developed to predict 3D structure of
macromolecules which may play a pivotal role to find out their
activity. Homology modelling is one of the techniques used to
predict the 3D structure of proteins, relying heavily on
resources such as pattern/function and sequence. In view of the
above, the present study was aimed to predict the three
dimensional structure of RpfF protein through homology
modeling method.

Methodology
GY Sequence retrieval:
The sequence of DSF synthase RpfF protein (accession no:
AAL06345; length: 289 residues), from Xanthomonas oryzae pv.
oryzae was retrieved from NCBI Entrez
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov.

Structure prediction and evaluation:
Template search was performed using BLASTP program
against PDB database http://www.rcsb.org/pdb. Sequence
analysis was performed using CLC Sequence viewer. RpfF
protein model was generated by MODELLER 9V9.
SWISSMODEL and GENO3D were also used to check the
structure reliability [,
]. Stereo chemical quality of predicted
models was improved by subjecting energy minimization
protocol to correct bond angles and bond lengths. Energy
minimization for 3D structures was performed by using
YASARA, which runs molecular dynamics simulations of
models in explicit solvent, using a new partly knowledge-based
all atom force field derived from Amber. Model quality was
assessed using variety of validation tools, such as RAMPAGE,
TM- Score and RMSD. RAMPAGE was used in validation of
protein structure and models by verifying the parameters like
Ramachandran plot quality. TM-score is an algorithm to
calculate the similarity of topologies of two protein structures.
A single score between 0-1 is assigned to each comparison
based on statistics. RMSD value indicates the degree to which
two three dimensional structures are similar 
[].

Ligand binding site prediction:
An analysis of the ligand binding pockets of the predicted
structure was performed using CASTp []. As determined by
CASTp using a 1.4 Å radius probe, the internal cavity surface
volume of the ligand binding sites were calculated.

Discussion
Protein Blast search against PDB data base revealed 96 percent
sequence identity with experimental structure of PDB ID:
3M6M with 2.5 Å resolutions, from Xanthomonas Campestris
Pv. Campestris. The pair wise sequence alignment shown in the
(). Homolgy model was constructed through three tools
viz MODELLER9v9, Geno3D and SwissModel. The predicted
model obtained by using three software validated by
RAMPAGE, TM-Score and RMSD, were reliable structures.
These results  &amp; 
 (see supplementary material)
revealed that the model generated through modeller was most
acceptable and it was used for further investigation. RpfF
model from Modeller showed psi and phi torsion angles 97.8%
and 1.6% residues in favorable and allowed regions respectively
and it showed TM-score and RMSD 0.7749 and 1.520
respectively. Topology analyses elucidated twelve α-helices and
eight anti- parallel β sheets (). Active site prediction
performed using CASTp server showed RpfF has 37 pockets.
Based on the high surface area (640.1) and volume (772.1),
pocket ID 37 was chosen to be a potential cavity in the
structure. The amino acid residues involved in potential ligand
binding site were LEU84, GLY85, GLY86, LEU88, PHE91, ILE95,
TYR106, ALA107, CYS110, VAL111, LEU136, GLY137, GLY138,
GLU141, PRO160, GLU161, LEU163, LEU164, LEU166, PRO168,
GLY169, MET170, THR255, TRP258, ALA262, LEU265, THR272,
MET273, LEU276 ().

Conclusion
The study of quorum sensing pathways to identify suitable
targets against infectious agents is an effective strategy. The
plethora of target enzymes is to be discovered for rice diseases.
Molecular model of DSF synthase RpfF from Xanthomonas
oryzae pv. Oryzae is predicted using three homology modeling
methods which are reliable and it may be proceed for further
drug designing studies. Blocking RpfF protein can inhibit the
DSF-dependent quorum sensing mechanism and production of
required DSF and bacterial population will be altered. This
mechanism could control bacterial infection in rice plants. The
predicted ligand binding sites in the model will help to develop
RpfF specific novel inhibitors that can control the disease
conditions.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Reddy et al, Bioinformation 8(11): 504-507 (2012)

Sequence alignment between target and template.

3D structure of DSF synthase RpfF protein from
Xanthomonas oryzae pv. Oryzae

Potential ligand binding pocket residues in RpfF
model from Xoo

