Background
Salt-bridges (SBs) (), bonds between oppositely
charged side chain atoms of acidic (acceptor atoms, red residue
in ) and basic (donor atoms, blue residues in 
) residues that are within 4~ distance, contribute to the
overall stability of native state of proteins []. Software for
determination of atomic intra- and inter-chain SBs and their
secondary structural distribution are now available for single
input of user choice per run [] and for multiple structure files
per run along with additional details on networked SB and
missing residues information []. However, further
development is sought for details on residue specific SB (but
not atomic ones as above) as to whether it is in core or surface
of protein, isolated or networked, single or multiple (bonds ≥ 2)
bonded, hydrogen or non hydrogen bonded, local or non-local
(if local, i→(i+n) typing) and intra- or inter-helical/strand/coil.
Each of this binary condition is known to modulate energetic
contribution of SBs []. Focus may also be paid on the fact that
helix and strand are permanent dipole in protein and thus
determination of orientation for intra type SBs (i.e. basic
residue is at N-terminal [orientation-I] or acidic residue is at Nterminal
[Orientation-II]) would be useful in understanding
structural stability as well as packing []. In this end SBION2
has been the first of its kind which not only display all the
above details in systematic manner along with others [] but
also store similar kind of data in excel format for
comprehensive post run statistical analyses involving a large
number of structural files.

Methodology
A detailed flow-chart of functioning of SBION2 is presented in
. It runs in three different modes such as mode-1,
mode-2 and mode-3 (). First two modes are for
extraction of information on surface and core location of SBs by
two alternative paths. Mode-3 utilizes different path ().
If the program is called with option 1 or 2, upon listing of PDB
files it checks for existence of ASA analytical software in the
local machine in specified directory (http:// sourceforge.net
/projects/sbion2/ files/ README.txt/ download) for
extraction of surface and core location of salt bridges along with
others (see below). Alternatively, if it is called with option 3
(), it performs step 1 through 6 () for
extraction of a total of 27 outputs of which 4 are on residue
specific general outputs (: list O-1), 11 are on isolated
SB (list O-2), 11 are on networked SB (list O-3) and one is for
supplementary table (O-4). Output lists in O-2 and O-3 are
designed for binary comparison as well as post run statistical
analysis and that in O-4 is for ready use of SB results. The run
is repeated the times the number of PDB files present in the
current directory.

Program input:
Users need to input PDB files, ion-pair distance, ASA and
Local/non-Local threshold (http://sourceforge.net /projects/
sbion2/). Crystal structures mixed with NMR files are screen
out. Execution of the program allows user to avail three
different modes (identified as 1/2/3) (). For mode 1
and 2, user needs to provide ion-pair distance (for salt bridge,
the distance is ≤ 4 ~) and ASA threshold (20 to 25) and
local/non-Local boundary (≥5 and ≤9). However, for mode 3,
only ion-pair distance and local/non-local threshold are
necessary.

Program output:
SBION2, like our earlier developments [,
], is meant for
automated analysis of single or multiple input(s). The program
possesses many new features over the existing ones. Firstly it
lists results in binary items of which 11 are for isolated 
() and 11 are for 
networked () SBs. Secondly,
within a given chain of protein, SBs could either be intrahelical/
strand/coil or inter-helical/strand/coil with i → (i+n)
type of connections. The program reports these result in excel
files (). Representative from these SBs are
presented in  (C1 through C12). Finally, the program
also performs analyses during scanning of topology of
structures and reports them as general outputs ().
While the first item is useful for post run statistical analyses
involving a large databases the last two items are in ready to
use form.

Caveats and future development:
Program is written in AWK programming language which can
preferably run in any C shell UNIX prompt including CYGWIN
and also be made work in B shell LINUX and WINDOWS
environment. Presently we are actively engaged in developing
web interface to integrate SBION2 and other related software
tools of our laboratory such as SBION [] and PHYSICO 
[]
such that their availability could reach to academic users within
an unique web service.

We thankfully acknowledge the computational facility
Laboratory of the Department of Biotechnology, The University
of Burdwan.

Citation:Gupta et al, Bioinformation 11(1): 039-042 (2015)

Flowchart of the functioning of the program SBION2. Upon start of the program it screens out NMR files if they are there
in the working directory followed by making a list of X-ray structure files. The program verify for accessibility calculation program
(ASA) in specified directory. If absent (i.e. NO), the program obtains atomic salt bridge pairs (step-1) and then converts them in
residue specific salt bridge pairs (step-2). At this level four outputs are redirected (O-1). Output details of isolated (O-2) and
networked salt-bridges (O-3) are separately reported (STEPs 3 to 6). A supplementary table (O-4) is prepared which includes both
isolated and networked salt-bridge information (STEPs 5 and 6). If ASA (STEP 7) is YES, SBION2 performs step 1 through 6 that
include core and surface location information of salt bridges along with earlier ones. Freq: Frequency; SMFS: Single bond
multiplicity frequency and sum; MMF: Multiple bond multiplicity frequency; MMS: Multiple bond multiplicity sum; HB_SB:
Hydrogen bonded salt-bridge frequency; non_HB: non-Hydrogen bonded salt-bridge frequency; SSD_SB: secondary structure
(helix, sheet and coil) distribution of salt-bridge; L_SB: local salt-bridges; non_L: non-local salt bridges; II:_HSCI: intra- and interhelix,
sheet and coil interactions; int_T: intervening residue table.

SBION2 execution (A), its outputs (B) and display of few of its output details on salt-bridges (C: 1 through 12) are
presented. Execution of the program with option “h” shows three modes of its operation (A). A total of 27 kinds of outputs relevant
for presentation and statistical calculation are obtained (B). The program extracts salt-bridge interactions such as INTRA-HELIX
(C1 and C2), COIL-HELIX (C3 and C4), STRAND-COIL (C5), INTRA-STRAND (C6), INTER-HELIX (C7), INTER-STRAND (C8),
ACID-NETWORK (C9), BASE-NETWORK (C10), HELIX-STRAND (C11) and LOCAL-COIL (C12) are shown with orientation-I (C1
and C3 with basic residue is at N-terminal) and orientation-II (C2 and C4 with acidic residue is at N-terminal) for representative
candidate SB pairs. Bond multiplicity (1, 2, 4 etc; white line), Average distance (Green letter in yellow shade), local/non-local
(L/nL) and residue separations (i →i+n) are highlighted.

