Background
The DNA sequences of many organisms are available through
different databases. Moreover, the easy access of many
sequenced genomes has enhanced the pace of research in the
field of bioinformatics []. Analysis of coding 
[] and noncoding
[] regions of some of the genomes has revealed the
underlying biological messages to some extent but this is like
touching the tip of the iceberg. Biological interpretations of non
coding sequences are rather more challenging due to their
abundance and nonspecific pattern of occurrence in genomes
[]. Genome wide studies usually require extraction of large
DNA sequences from a given data set. Normally, DNA
sequences are stored in specific formats in different databases
and users extract the related information according to the
experimental objectives. Different softwares available for DNA
sequence extractions have their own pros and cons and no
single software can fulfill all the requirements of a user at one
time [–]. The extraction of coding/non coding sequences from
the chromosome files stored in a database is a vital and basic
step in research plans in the field of bioinformatics. Sequence
maneuverer has been designed to resolve this problem which
takes GenBank file as input and generates FASTA lines. These
FASTA lines are used as input in sequence extractor which then
extracts the sequences accordingly.

Methodology
Sequence maneuverer basically consists of three modules
named as annotator, FASTA line generator and sequence
extractor. These modules could be used independently or in
combination depending upon the user's objectives. The main
interface is shown in (). This software has been
implemented in Java programming language. A system
requirement for this software is Java Virtual Machine (JVM).
The annotator deals with annotation files available in GenBank
formats. FASTA Lines Generator creates FASTA lines and
writes them in a text file which can be used as the input file for
sequence extractor. The software will extract the sequence
efficiently through sequence extractor.

Fasta Lines Generator:
The user can specify different attributes like, project name,
authors name and the project details. The resulting information
will be stored in a separate file named as Project Details.txt.
“Browse” button takes input from GenBank formatted files and
then by clicking on the “generate” button the user can get
FASTA file named as “FASTAz.txt”. This text file (FASTAz.txt)
contains FASTA lines for the annotation file of any chromosome
the user has specified as input.

Sequence Extractor:
The software package deals with the FASTA lines and the
chromosome files that user chooses in order to extract the
dataset for sequence analysis. Currently, there is a shortage of
publically available stand alone applications for extraction of
sequence upstream or downstream of the transcription start site
(TSS) or coding DNA sequences (CDS) that uses the FASTA
lines. An effort has been made in this regard; a desktop
application has been developed with a user friendly interface.
Moreover, its efficiency and effectiveness is evident from its fast
extraction process without RAM-intensive file loading
operations. The  (see supplementary material) shows
the system specification, extraction time and other details. Work
Flow of Sequence Extractor is shown in ().

Validation
The output generated by this program was tested manually by
checking the TSS location and its sequences from Arabidopsis
thaliana genome. Extracted sequence length was about 200
upstream and 50 downstream. The output was set of 251
nucleotides long sequences (TSS at +1). Furthermore,
comparison of the output with publically available datasets
revealed that our results substantially matched with the output
of published datasets (
http://linux1.softberry.com/data/plantprom/Links/PLPR_predicted_ATceres.seq). In addition to the validation of promoter
sequences, CDS results of this software also matched with the
results obtained from NCBI.

Utility
Efficient sequence extraction of any desired length from
genome of any organism; multiple sequences can be handled or
manipulated simultaneously; any raw sequence can be
converted into GenBank format using annotator.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The guidance provided by Dr. Ilham Shahmuradove (Head of
Bioinformatics Lab, Institute of Botany, Azerbaijan National
Academy of Sciences, Baku, Azerbaijan), Mr. Nadeem Malik
(Department of Biosciences, CIIT, Islamabad, Pakistan) and
Aahid Naeem Supra (Department of Biosciences, CIIT,
Islamabad, Pakistan) is highly acknowledged.

Citation:Yasmin et al, Bioinformation 8(25): 1277-1279 (2012)

The interface of Sequence Maneuverer.

Work flow of Sequence extractor.

