Background
Meningococcal disease is a major health problem worldwide. Neisseria
meningitidis is a major cause of meningitis and septicaemia globally,
predominantly affecting children and adolescents. Disease develops
rapidly and often difficult to distinguish from other febrile illnesses.
Meningococcal meningitis and sepsis are devastating diseases that kills
children and young adults within hours despite the availability of effective
antibiotics. Mortality and permanent disability rates are high, even under
optimal health care conditions []. 
Therefore, any further reduction in morbidity and mortality is most likely to be achieved 
through prophylactic vaccination. The sole ecological niche of Neisseria meningitidis 
is mucosa of the oropharynx of humans. Meningococcal colonization of the
respiratory tract, a phenomenon commonly referred to as carriage,
represents a successful commensal relationship between the host and the
bacterium, with the host experiencing no detectable pathology. On the
other hand disease represents a failed or dysfunctional relationship with the
host. Acquistion of Neisseria meningitidis demands person to person
transmission via direct contact or through dispersion of respiratory droplets
from an infected to a susceptible individual. Although, often protected by a
polysaccharides capsule, meningococci are particularly sensitive to
desiccation; thus spread from one individual to another requires close
contact [].

The causative agent, Neisseria meningitidis, is a Gram- negative
encapsulated bacterium classified into different groups according to the 
chemical composition and immunogenic properties of the capsular
polysaccharide. Serogroups A, B, C, W135, and Y account for &gt;95% of
infections. Effective vaccines consisting of capsular polysaccharide or
capsular polysaccheride-cojugates are available for the prevention of
infections caused by serogroup A, C, Y, and W135 strains [,
]. However,
no capsule-based vaccine is available for the prevention of infections
caused by N. meningitidis serogroup B, which is highly prevalent in
industrialized countries. This problem is caused by the poor
immunogenicity of the serogroup B capsular polysaccharide. It is likely
that the immune system tolerates the serogroup B capsular polysaccharide
because of its similarity or mimicry to the widely distributed human
carbohydrate α(2→8)N-acetyl neuraminic acid or polysialic acid, both
consisting of repeating units of two to eight linked sialic acid 
[].
Therefore, for the development of an effective vaccine against serogroup B
meningococci, researchers have focused on the proteins of the outer
membrane (OM).

Alternative vaccine candidates have been sought, which are based on
protein components being at the most advanced stage of development.
These are commonly presented as outer membrane vesicle (OMV)
formulations prepared by detergent extraction of meningococcal broth
cultures []. 
OMV vaccines have been used with some success in Norway
and Cuba [,
]
 and have recently been granted a provisional license in
New Zealand []. 
Outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) are released from the
outer membrane of N. meningitidis, which is a characteristic of many 
Gram-negative bacteria []. It has been demonstrated that they contain
outer membrane and periplasmic proteins and in some cases DNA or cellcell
signaling molecules [,
]. This makes OMVs an ideal structure to
transport hydrophobic compounds like membrane proteins into the host.
This clearly indicates the potential of OMVs to deliver membrane active
virulence factors into the host. OMV vaccine is not only composed simply
of OM proteins but contain a number of periplasmic, membrane-associated
and cytoplasmic proteins. OMV vaccines present the immune system with
a complex mixture of antigens, many of which are highly variable. In
OMV 236 non-redundant proteins have been identified out of which 15
proteins were predicted as to be located in the outer membrane and
represents only 6.4% of the total number of proteins 
[]. Present study
against serogroup B Neisseria meningitidis MC58 are based on
meningococcal outer membrane proteins present in OMV. We have
selected 13 out of 15 outer membrane proteins for the vaccine design, by
identifying its HTL and CTL epitopes from the protein sequence of these
proteins. This is because, two proteins fkpA and omp85 shows similarity
with the human protein, and their presence in the vaccine is likely to elicit
an autoimmune response

Major obstacles to the development of an effective vaccine against these
serogroup B are the complex mixture of OMV antigens and many of which
are highly variable as well as the HLA allelic diversity in human.
Activation of both Helper T-Lymphocytes (HTL) and Cytotoxic TLymphocytes
(CTL) requires recognition of specific peptides bound to
Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) molecules on the antigen
presenting cells (APCs) / target cell. Protein antigens inside the APCs /
target cell are degraded into small peptide fragments by the intracellular
proteases. After partial proteolysis some of the peptides bind to MHC
molecules and are transported to cell surface for recognition by the antigen
specific T-cell receptors called T-cell Epitopes. Thus, MHC binding is a
pre-requisite for a peptide to be a T-cell epitope. Bioinformatics
approaches allow for the design of peptide vaccines starting from the
prediction of all antigens in silico from the genome sequence of pathogens,
independent of their abundance and without the need to grow the
microorganism in vitro [–
].

Bioinformatics tools can be used to screen MHC-peptide complexes that
become potential T-cell epitopes used for the development of peptidebased
epitope vaccines []. A peptide which has a proteosomal
recognition site may not be useful as epitope vaccine candidate because it
is degraded during antigen processing []. Therefore methods for
predicting the proteasomal cleavage sites were incorporated in algorithms
used for predicting T-cell epitopes []. Four fundamental properties of
proteasomes are:
the broad cleavage-site specificity;

the enhanced preference for hydrophobic residues in a hydrophobic sequence context;

the excision of large numbers of peptide ≥ 8 amino acids;

the versatility of proteasomal processing resulting in overlapping peptide patterns. 


The aim of this study is to predict epitope peptides that bind with
class I and class II MHC molecules, and will be useful for the prediction of new peptide molecules for vaccine design. 



Methodology
Target protein sequence retrieval
A set of the 15 OM protein complements have been selected from the
OMV 236 non-redundant proteins and represents only 6.4% the total
number of proteins detected []. 
The complete genome and protein sequences of N. meningitidis serogroup B 
(MC58) were taken from Genbank (NCBI) and UniProtKB. The selected protein sequences were
retrieved in FASTA format and used for further analyses.

Vaccine candidate characterization
Theoretical isoelectric point (pI), molecular weight and amino acid
compositions were computed by using the Expasy’s ProtParam server 
[].
The antigenicity of the proteins is identified by the VaxiJen server 
[].
The prediction of the non-allergenicity is done by Algpred sever 
[]. The
similarity of human protein with OM proteins of OMV are searched
through BlastP.

Epitope prediction
The web servers ProPred and ProPred1 were used to predict HTL and CTL
epitopes respectively [,
]. Here, ProPred allow to predict MHC class II
binding peptides (HTL epitopes) for 51 alleles and ProPred1 to predict
MHC class I binding peptides (CTL epitopes) for 47 alleles. The ProPred
and ProPred1 implements matrix based prediction algorithm. The obtained
matrices are multiplication matrices, where the scores are calculated by
multiplying and summing the score of each position. For example, the
score for the peptide “PACDPGRAA” can be calculated using the
following equations:Score = P(1) x A(2) x C(3) x D(4) x P(5) x G(6) x
R(7) x A(8) x A(9);Score P(1)=P(1)+A(2)+C(3)+D(4)+P(5)+G(6)+R(7)+A(8)+A(9)
Where ‘P (1)’ is score of amino acid ‘P’ at position 1.

For the prediction of the MHC binders the score of these 9mer peptides
were calculated using quantitative matrix of selected MHC alleles. The all
peptides having scored greater than selected threshold score (at 4%) were
assigned as predicted binders for selected MHC alleles. For prediction of
proteasome cleavage site overlapping 12mer peptides were calculated
using weight matrix of proteasome. All peptides having score greater than
selected threshold score (at 5%) are considered as peptides having
proteasome cleavage site. Similar approach is used for prediction of
peptides having immunoproteasome cleavage site [,
].. In order to
calculate threshold score for each allele/matrix, the steps used were:

All proteins were obtained from SWISSPROT database for creating the
overlapping peptides of length nine. For example, a protein of length n will
have (n+1 – 9) overlapping peptides.

The score of all natural 9-mer peptides was calculated using the weighed
matrix of that allele. These peptides have been sorted on the basis of score
in descending order and top 1% natural peptides have been extracted. The
minimum score that we called threshold score was determined from these
selected peptides. Similarly, threshold scores at 2%, 3% … 10% were
calculated. The following threshold dependent parameters were used for
the evaluation of tools ProPred and ProPred1: Sensitivity= TP/(TP+FN);
Specificity = TN/(TN+FP); Accuracy = (TP+TN)/(TP+FN+TN+FP).
Where, TP and TN are correctly predicted binders and non-binders
respectively, whereas FP and FN are wrongly predicted binders and non
binders respectively from the database MHCBN 
[] 




The IC50 value of corresponding peptides is deduced by MHCPred 
[–].
IC50 value of allele HLA_A*0101 for MHC class I peptides and IC50 value
of HLA_DRB1*0101 for MHC class II peptides. The predicted output is given in units of IC50 nM

Discussion
The physiochemical properties of proteins are given in (Table 1.see
.) 
The pI values of all these OM proteins
indicated the stability of protein at that particular pI. The theoretical pI of
the proteins identified ranged from 4.79 to 9.71 and theoretical MW ranged
from 18.4 to 159.9. This information is useful for the proteomics study
especially for the 2D PAGE and is also useful for cataloguing OMV
proteins with emphasis on 15 OM proteins used in this study. Outer
membrane proteins are notoriously difficult to resolve by 2D PAGE. By
their nature, hydrophobic proteins are often difficult to solubilise and are
least soluble when focused at their pI. The antigenicity of all the OM
proteins predicted using VaxiJen server is given in 
( and Table 2
see ). 
The allergenicity of all OM proteins are
predicted by AlgPred server and all 15 OM proteins found non-allergens.
The antigenicity and non-allerginicity of OM proteins shows that they are
protective antigens. The BlastP result shows the similarity of two proteins
with human proteins, when OM proteins searched against translated human
genome through BlastP. The fkpA (NMB1567) has limited similarity to the
human FK506 binding proteins 2 (FKBP2) and AIP aryl hydrocarbon
receptor interacting proteins, and omp85 (NMB0182) has limited similarity
with human SAMM50 sorting and assembly machinery component 50
homolog, this give rises the possibility of immunological cross reactivity
between vaccine and host cell proteins, which could lead to autoimmunity.
Therefore 13 out of 15 OM proteins are being selected for the epitope
prediction.

The summary of the results of the prediction tools ProPred and ProPred1
used for the HTL and CTL epitopes identification respectively in the
present study are being made available at
(
http://www.bioinfoindia.org/epitopes/HTL_CTL_Table.pdf). 
According to the prediction results of MHCPred, peptides with the best predicted
binding affinities of HLA_A*0101 for MHC class I and HLA_DRB*0101
for MHC class II molecules are also presented therein. The predicted
output is given in units of IC50 nM. A lower value of peptide IC50 indicates
higher affinity towards MHC molecules. Peptides with IC50 values ≫
50nM, ≫ 500nM, and ≫5000nM are considered having high affinity,
intermediate affinity and low affinity towards MHC molecules respectively
(HTL_CTL_Table.pdf). In OMV 236 nonredundent proteins have been
identified out of which 15 (6.4%) proteins were predicted to be located in
the outer membrane. From BlastP results it is established that 13 out of 15
OM proteins are the most suitable for the vaccines and they contain
maximum promiscuous epitopes at many HLA alleles as these 13 OM
proteins didn't show any significant similarity with human proteins and
neglect the chances of autoimmunity response. A multiple promiscuous
target peptide epitopes would overcome the genetic restriction, low
immunological responsiveness and parasite evasion of the immune
response and provide support for developing a multistage, multivalent,
universal, safe, stable and effective meningococcal vaccine.

The OM proteins contain a porins, porA and porB, which are used for
serotyping and serosubtyping of meningococci. The most abundant of
these included proteins with important biological function, including the
porA and porB porins, opc is involved in the adhesion of the meningococci
to host cell-surface proteoglycan and therefore plays a part in colonisation
and invasion by bacterium. This protein associated with invasion of
epithelial and endothelial cells []. The rmpM protein, which may protect
against complement-mediated bactericidal attack [], mtrE is one of four
proteins encoded by the multiple transferable resistance mtrE locus and
forms outer membrane component of multidrug efflux pump [], outer
membrane protein nspA and pilQ which is essential for pilus assembly
[]. Two hypothetical proteins NMB0345 and NMB0088 are identified in
the outer membrane protein constituent of OMV. Some other major OM
proteins are also present like hap for adhesion and penetration, lptD
involved in the assembly of LPS in the outer leaflet of the outer membrane,
determines N-hexane tolerance and is involved in outer membrane
permeability, essential for envelope biogenesis, thpB acts as a transferrin
receptor and is required for transferrin utilization.

The peptides of 13 antigenic proteins are classified into binding and nonbinding
groups. The binding peptides signify the predicted epitopes and
non-binding peptide signifies the protein sequence of OM protein minus
binding sequence. Both dataset constructed for the MHC class I and class
II individually. Then amino acid composition is computed and results are
evaluated in three category of amino acid: hydrophobic, charged and polar
and other small amino acid. Our data illustrate 
(,) that
hydrophobic amino acids are found more frequently in binding group
(epitope) than in the non-binding group. The non binding group have more
polar amino acid compared to other amino acids. This condition is found in
both CTL as well as in the HTL binding and non binding dataset (Table 3
see ). 
Based on our analysis a computational protocol () 
has been proposed which will work as a model for
such further studies. The predicted epitopes in OMV proteins would be
useful for the earlier identification of meningitis and septicaemia, and will
be helpful for secure vaccine development against meningococcal diseases.

Conclusion
Predicted promiscuous HTL and CTL epitopes from the genome/proteome
sequences of the pathogens would greatly reduced the time as well as cost
and is useful for experiment planning in development of peptide-based
epitope vaccines. We have predicted numerous epitopes in OMV proteins
which would be useful for the earlier identification of meningitis and
septicaemia, the predicted epitopes may be used for safe vaccine
development against meningococcal diseases. Results indicate that porA,
porB, opc, rmpM, mtrE and nspA are more suitable vaccine candidates.
These six proteins are selected due to their smaller size and most important
thing is that they are present most abundantly in the OMV proteins as an
outer membrane proteins. We frequently found large number of
hydrophobic amino acid, certain polar and charged amino acids in binding
group. Hydrophobic protein regions may tend to be highly conserved
because of their importance for correct folding they may show epitopes
particularly effective for protective host immunity. Also they have variable
pI which is important for 2D study for separation of proteins. These results
have important propositions for the development and use of vaccines based
on epitopes of OM proteins after in vitro study and experimental
validation.

Supplementary material
Data 1

Authors acknowledges computational facility provided by Bioinformatics
Sub-DIC (funded by DBT, India), School of Biotechnology, DAVV,
Indore, India and bioinfoindia.org (http://www.bioinfoindia.org) for
providing web space for storing epitope data.


Citation:Chandra et al; Bioinformation 5(4): 155-161 (2010)

Antigenicity prediction score computed by VaxiJen server.

Amino acid preference of Binding and Non Binding group for HTL MHC class II.

Amino acid preference of Binding and Non Binding group for CTL MHC class I

Bioinformatical approach for epitope vaccine developmemt

