Background
Polycomb group (PcG) proteins have long been known to be 
part of the cellular memory of the cell [,
]. These proteins are 
transcriptional repressors which form well defined multimeric 
complexes and sustain the genes in an off state. Members of 
PcG proteins are highly conserved and contain histone methyl 
transferase activity on core histones [,
].

Polycomb Repressive Complexes (PRCs) 2/3/4 include histone 
methyltransferase Enhancer of Zeste protein-2 (EZH2), the 
Extra Sex Combs protein (EED), the Suppressor of Zeste-12 
protein (SUZ12), as well as the histone-binding proteins 
RbAP46 and RbAP48 [–
]. These proteins are expressed at high 
levels in embryonic tissues and are required for proper 
development. Mice lacking these components die during initial 
development [–
]. However, in normal adult tissues, the 
expression of SUZ12, EZH2, and EED is low []. Interestingly, 
it has been shown that these proteins are present at high levels 
in a variety of human tumors [,
]. It seems that these 
components may be implicated in conferring the neoplastic 
phenotype []. Although the misexpression of several 
Polycomb group proteins in different cancers has been 
reported, the role of these proteins in cancer development is 
still poorly understood. Thus, understanding of the way they 
function will provide important insights into the mechanisms 
of cancer initiation and progression.

An important question in PcG function revolves around the 
multiple mechanisms required for appropriate targeting of 
PRC2 complex in human genome. Hundreds of target genes 
have been identified in D. melanogaster 
[] and mammalian 
cells [,
,
]
by genome wide ChIP-assay and other means. 
Studies to disclose how PRC1 and PRC2 are recruited to target 
genes have focused on defining DNA sequence elements, called 
Polycomb Response Elements (PREs), and transacting factors 
that identify PREs. PREs have been recognized mainly from the
fly Hox genes based on their ability to give PcG silencing on 
reporter genes []. The PRE sequences are poorly conserved in 
mammals, specifically in the context of Hox genes, as analyzed 
by the PRE prediction program PREdictor []. Due to 
functional complexity of PRC2 and its interacting proteins, a 
strict and common target motif in different human cells and 
tissues has not been introduced yet. Some studies have been 
done to introduce some motifs similar to PREs. Woo et al. found 
a region named D11.12 in hESC (Human Embryonic Stem Cell) 
which can target PRC2 between HoxD11 and HoxD12 []. 
Also, Cuddapah et al. selected and tested three H3K27me3 
enriched regions near three genes in human T cells. They found 
that these regions can target PcG proteins []. Besides, 
Cabianca et al. introduced D4Z4 elements as sequences sharing 
several features with PREs [].

Using a variety of ChIP-chip approaches, Squazzo et al. have 
marked a large set of SUZ12 target genes in different human 
cell lines. They found that SUZ12 target promoters are cell type 
specific, with transcription factors and homeobox genes 
dominating in embryonic cells as well as glycoproteins and 
immunoglobulin-related proteins predominating in adult 
tumors. They found some target genes common to human 
cancer cell lines []. 
In current study, through in silico analyses, 
we focused on these common targets in cancer cell lines to find 
whether there is any overrepresentation of specific motifs in 
SUZ12-bound DNA sequences or not. These putative motifs 
may exert influence on the regulation of genes which have been 
considered as targets of PRC2. We might get better 
understanding of the mechanisms of PRC function by 
analyzing these motifs.

Methodology
According to the study of Squazzo et al. 
[], 
sequences of 50 target genes of SUZ12 (from -5kb to 
Transcription start site) were downloaded from NCBI database. 
Since Squazzo et al. detected SUZ12 in a region between 
-5kb to transcription start sites of target genes, we used 
this distance for all of the genes studied. Additionally, the 
list of 20 housekeeping genes and 40 tissue specific genes were 
selected randomly from a study by Eisenberg et al. 
[] and 
“Verygene” database respectively. Similar to target genes of 
SUZ12, 5Kb upstream regions of housekeeping and tissue specific 
genes were downloaded from NCBI. Tissue specific and housekeeping 
genes were considered as the control sets which are not targets of 
SUZ12. Repeatmasker program (http://www.repeatmasker.org/cgi-bin/WEBRepeatMasker 
Version: open-3.0.8) was employed to investigate all the repeat classes except 
simple/low complexity repeats. MEME program available at 
“http://meme.sdsc.edu/meme/website/meme-download.html” was used to search 
for motifs in downloaded sequences. Both one occurrence per sequence (OOPS) 
and zero or one occurrence per sequence (ZOOPS) models given in MEME were 
utilized for obtaining motifs. Further, MAST program 
(http://meme.sdsc.edu/ meme/website/meme-download.html) 
was used on the motif weight matrix obtained from the MEME program to 
search for the motifs in the control genes. An e-value cut-off of 0.01 
was applied for MAST. Fisher׳s exact tests were used to test the association 
of the motifs within upstream sequences of SUZ12 targets against control 
sets (housekeeping and tissue specific genes). Distinguished motifs were 
analyzed for the presence of known transcription factor binding site using PATCH program 
(http://www.gene-regulation.com /pub/programs.html).

Results
In order to find any motif overrepresentation between 
upstream sequences of target genes of SUZ12 in cancer cell 
lines, 50 genes were randomly selected from the study of 
Squazzo et al. These genes are common targets of SUZ12 in 
testis, breast, and colon cancer cell lines. As a control set, some 
housekeeping and tissue specific genes for the mentioned 
tissues were selected. The 5kb upstream sequences of their 
transcription start sites were repeat-masked for exclusion of 
complex repeats. Some sequences did not have any complex 
repeat sequences. In this step, simple repeats were not masked 
because some transacting factors could be targeted through 
DNA binding factors that recognize simple sequences [,
]. 
In order to find motifs in regulatory sequences of 50 genes, the 
masked sequences were taken as an input for MEME-Chip 
Program. There were three motifs identified by this analysis. 
These motifs are shown in  (see supplementary 
material).

Motifs 1, 2, and 3 were repeated in 19, 10, and 8 SUZ12 target 
genes respectively. The motifs identified in targets of SUZ12 
were submitted to MAST program to make comparison of them 
with randomly selected housekeeping and tissue specific genes. 
The frequency of occurrence for each motif in SUZ12 targets 
and non-targets sequences with e-value cut off 0.01 is in 
 
(see supplementary material).

All of the motifs showed significant differences between SUZ12 
targets and the control genes (). Furthermore, the 
analysis of the motifs for known transcription factors indicated 
the presence of binding sites for transcription factors such as 
Sp1 and GAGA factor.

Discussion
Attempts to reveal how PRC1 and PRC2 are recruited to target 
genes have focused on defining DNA sequence elements called 
Polycomb response elements (PREs), and transacting factors 
that recognize PREs. The best characterized PREs have been 
confined to several hundred base pairs, but there is no simple 
consensus sequence that can provide PRE function. Despite 
high homology of PcG proteins among different organisms 
[] 
and many identified target genes of the PcG proteins in human 
[,
], 
human PREs have remained elusive until recently [,
]. This can be attributed to the low conservation of recruiters 
of PRCs such as GAF, PSQ, and Zeste. Identification of more 
potential PREs in mammals will allow for functional analysis to 
explore whether transcription factor-mediated recruitment 
ensures PcG-PRE interaction in mammals.

The rules for targeting PcG proteins to their targets seem likely 
to vary among different cell types and contexts. Different 
studies have introduced several sequences which can be targets 
of PRC2 in different cells. Some of these sequences include 
D4Z4 and D11.12 [–
]. Because Failures in PcG function have 
intensive effects on cancer progression [], disclosing the role 
of PcG proteins and the mechanisms they serve in cancer cells 
is really essential. In this study, we have tried to discriminate 
the motifs which may potentially tether PRC2 complex onto its 
common targets in some human cancer cell lines.

Squazzo et al. have identified a large set of SUZ12 target genes 
in different human cell lines. They found some genes that are 
common targets of SUZ12 in cancer cell lines []. In this study, 
we found three motifs that are significantly overrepresented in 
the upstream sequences of the SUZ12 targets as against the 
non-targets of SUZ12 (including housekeeping and tissue 
specific genes) in specific tissues. The sequences were identified 
after masking the repeat sequences by Repeatmasker program. 
The significant overrepresentation of the motifs in the SUZ12 
target genes may propose functional importance of the motifs 
considering that the motifs identified here are drawn from 
noncoding sequences including simple repeats but excluding 
complex repeats through Repeatmasker. It is of note that our 
study was just restricted to cancer cell lines and some common 
target genes of PRC2 in them. Target genes of SUZ12 vary in 
different cell types and SUZ12 may be tethered through some 
other motifs or mechanisms in other cell lines. But regardless of 
different potential mechanisms and motifs which target PRC2, 
we can introduce the motifs identified in this study as potential 
recruiters of PRC2 complex in some human cancer cell lines.

We observed the occurrence of GAGA binding sites within 
one-identified motifs (Motif 2) by PATCH program. GAGA factor 
appears to be a multipurpose transacting factor which is a 
well known transcription factor [] 
and has also been shown to be a component of certain types of PcG 
complexes. In addition, the GAGA factor is recognized as a member 
of trithorax family of proteins []. 
The G(A)n motif, GAAAA, which is identified in motif 1 in our study, 
is recognized as a part of the PRE/TREs sequence for the engagement 
of PcG complex through DSP1 protein []. 
The Sp1/KLF binding sites, which are important for PRE activity in 
Drosophila, were also present in motifs 2 and 3. Sp1, which is also 
a known gene specific transcription factor, has been shown to 
interact with PRE of Engrailed gene. Sp1 has also contributed to the 
regulation of several genes in breast cancer cells associated with cell 
growth and cycle progression (cyclin D1, E2F1, c-fos-), angiogenesis 
(VEGF), and anti-apoptosis (bcl-2) []. 
According to our analysis, some functions of this factor may be potentially 
attributed to the tethering of SUZ12 to its targets. In a study by 
Bengani et al., GAGA factor and Sp1 factor have been introduced as potential 
transcription factors which may tether SUZ12 protein into its targets in 
embryonic cells []. Recognizing the 
binding potential of these transcription factors in identified motifs in 
our study supports the putative role of these motifs for the tethering of PRC2.

In summary, we predict that the identified motifs in our study 
could be potentially the sites of interaction of chromatin 
modifying complexes for epigenetic regulation. Our data could 
serve as a resource for experimental analysis of binding sites 
and transacting regulatory complexes interacting with these 
sites. To our knowledge, this study was the first to find some
common sequences as motifs which may potentially target 
PRC2 in human genome of some cancer cell lines.

Conflict of interest
None

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Hajjari et al, Bioinformation 10(4): 187-190 (2014)

