Background
Dengue disease, caused by dengue virus infection, has emerged as an 
endemic in over 100 countries, especially in the tropical and subtropical 
regions, with more than 2.5 billion people or 40% of the world population 
at risk. Transmitted mainly by the Aedes aegypti mosquito, dengue virus is 
maintained in a cycle that involves human and the mosquito  []. The 
infection produces clinical illness ranging from harmless typical fever (DF) 
to a fatal hemorrhagic fever (DHF) characterized by capillary leakage and 
thrombocytopenia. Moreover, it may manifest into failure of the circulation 
system and shock, termed as dengue shock syndrome (DSS) that may lead 
to death []. It is estimated that about 100 million dengue fever (DF) cases 
occur per year and about 250,000 ‐ 500,000 cases are of the severe form 
dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) []. 

Dengue virus is a member of the genus  Flavivirus and family Flaviviridae
that consists of four antigenically distinct viral serotypes, DEN-1, DEN-2, 
DEN-3 and DEN-4  []. Lifelong immunity to one serotype will prevent 
infection by the same serotype but does not provide protection from a 
secondary infection of a different serotype. The antibody-dependent 
enhancement (ADE) pathogenesis hypothesis proposes that secondary 
infection with a different serotype increases the risk of developing DHF 
and DSS []. 

The dengue virus genome is a single-stranded positive-sense RNA that 
consists of 10,723 nucleotides and encodes a single polyprotein precursor 
of 3,391 amino acids. The polyprotein is arranged in the order of 
C-prM-ENS1-NS2A-NS2B-NS3-NS4A- NS4B-NS5 consisting of three structural 
proteins (C, prM and E) and seven non-structural proteins (NS) that are 
cleaved co- and post-translationally  []. The correct cleavage of this 
polyprotein requires both host cell and virus protease. The NS3 protease is 
essential for the polyprotein processing which needs the presence of NS2B 
cofactor  for  its  optimal  catalytic  activity. It has been indicated that the  
catalytic triad of this protease is His51, Asp75 and Ser135, which is typical 
of a serine protease family [].

The conjugate NS3-NS2B has been shown to cleave the precursor 
polyprotein at the NS2A/NS2B, NS2B/NS3, NS3/NS4A, NS4A/NS4B, 
and NS4B/NS5 junctions as well as at internal sites within C, NS2A, NS3, 
and NS4A  []. These sites have two basic amino acid residues (Arg-Arg, 
Arg-Lys, Lys-Arg, or occasionally Gln-Arg) at the P2 and P1 positions, 
respectively  []. Other studies have indicated that the P1 position has a 
strong preference for basic amino acid residues (Arg/Lys), whereas the 
preference for P2 is Arg &gt; Thr &gt; Gln/Asn/Lys, while for P3 is Lys &gt; Arg &gt; 
Asn [] (see Schecter and Berger for the abbreviation of P1, P2, and P3). 
Until today, there is no vaccine or anti-dengue viral drug currently 
available in the market against dengue infection. Therefore, there is a need 
for the design of antiviral agents to fight this disease. One of the antiviral 
agent strategies involves blocking and inhibiting viral enzyme activity, 
thus preventing virus replication [,
]. 

Several groups have synthesized various types of compound to inhibit the 
NS3-NS2B protease activities. One of them is a peptidic  α-keto-amide 
compound Ac-FAAGRR-α-keto-SL-CONH2, with Ki value of 47 μM 
[], and some others include aldehyde compounds resulting in low 
micromolar Ki value of up to 1.5 μM []. Some natural compounds, such 
as 'chalcones, isolated from  Boesenbergia rotunda, have shown 
noncompetitive inhibitory activity against the NS3-NS2B protease. Its 
cyclohexenyl chalcone derivates, 4-hydroxypanduratin A and panduratin 
A, showed good competitive inhibitory activities against DEN-2 virus 
NS3-NS2B protease, exhibiting Ki values of 21 and 25 μM, respectively 
[].

In this  in silico study, we designed peptide-based cyclic inhibitors which 
showed  inhibitory  activities  toward  DEN-2  NS3-NS2B  protease. The  
binding interactions between these inhibitors and NS3-NS2B protease 
were studied by docking methods using AutoDock 4.0 software. The aim 
of this study was to get a better peptide-based drug ligand that could inhibit 
polyprotein processing of DEN-2, and also to better understand the 
interactions between the inhibitor and the enzyme's binding sites via 
computational docking methods. We hope that the results from this study 
will provide insight about the design of antiviral drugs for dengue virus. 

Methodology
Designing peptide-based ligands
The peptide ligands were designed based on substrate specificity for NS3- 
NS2B protease and the analysis of binding pocket of NS3-NS2B protease 
catalytic site. The specific binding site on the enzyme results in selectivity 
for positively charged amino acid residues of the substrates. Jun Li, et al., 
[] reported that the P1 
position of the enzyme's binding site has a strong 
preference for basic amino acid residues (Arg/Lys), whereas the preference 
for the P2 is Arg &gt; Thr &gt; Gln/Asn/Lys and for P3 is Lys &gt; Arg &gt; Asn. We, 
therefore, used this combination to determine our peptide ligands. Our 
ligands consist of five amino acid residues (pentapeptide) cyclized by 
an SS disulfide bridge. As a positive control, we used the standard ligand 
BzNle-Lys-Arg-Arg-H that has been experimentally tested and shown to 
exhibit Ki value of 5.8 µM [].

Building ligand structures
The peptide ligand structures were built using Hyperchem Pro 8.0 
software. Amino acid residues were chosen from the dialog box in the 
database menu to draw the two dimensional structure of the ligands and 
thereafter the ligands were modeled into three dimensional structures. 

Preparing enzyme structure
The NS2B cofactor is essential for the protease catalytic activity of NS3. 
The three dimensional structure of this protease associated with NS2B 
cofactor available in the Protein Data Bank (http://www.rcsb.org/pdb) 
(accession code: 2FOM) was used for this study. Water, chlorine atoms 
and glycerol molecules were removed from the crystal structure to reduce 
the complexities in the binding studies. 

Ligand structures optimization
The ligand structures were minimized with Hyperchem Pro 8.0 software using conjugate gradient Polak-Ribiere method to obtain the most stable 
structure geometry. 

Enzyme structure optimization
All hydrogen atoms were added to the enzyme structure to define the 
correct ionization and tautomeric states of amino acid residues such as 
Asp, Ser, Glu, Arg and His using HyperChem Pro 8.0 software  
[]. 
Enzyme structure was minimized with the same software using the steepest 
descent and conjugate gradient methods. This two-step procedure was set 
up to bring the energy level of the system to minimum and structurally 
stable.

Protein-ligand docking
The docking of ligands to the catalytic triad of NS3-NS2B protease was 
performed using AutoDock 4.0 software (http://autodock.scripps.edu/). 
AutoDock is reported to be the most popular docking program [] and is 
reliable []. Using the software, polar hydrogen atoms were added to the 
enzyme and its nonpolar hydrogen atoms were merged, whereas for the 
ligand, nonpolar hydrogen atoms were merged and Gasteiger charges were 
added. All rotatable bonds of ligands were set to be rotatable. All 
calculation for protein-fixed ligand-flexible docking was done using the 
Lamarckian Genetic Algorithm (LGA) method. A population size of 150 
and 10 millions energy evaluations were used for 100 search runs. The grid 
box with a dimension of 60 × 60 × 60 points and 0.375 Å grid spacing was 
used around the catalytic triad to cover the entire enzyme binding site and 
accommodate ligands to move freely. After the docking searches were 
completed, clustering histogram analysis was performed based on an 
RMSD (root mean square deviation) of not more than 1.5 Å. The best 
conformation was chosen from the most populated cluster with the lowest 
docked energy. The interactions of complex enzyme-ligand conformations, 
including  hydrogen  bond  and  other  interactions, were  analysed  
using  Viewerlite (www.accelrys.com) and UCSF Chimera software 
(www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera/). 

Discussion
Designing peptide-based ligands
The seven cyclopentapeptides that we designed are illustrated in . 
Despite the low stability, the peptides were suitable for design of drug 
inhibitors (ligands) because of their high activity and specificity. We 
cyclized our ligands by use of an S-S disulfide bridge in order to increase 
their stability  []. This cyclic formation is likely to increase the 
hydrophobic interaction within the peptides by lowering the hydrogen 
interactions with water (solvent), which as a result is likely to increase the 
total entropy and stability of the peptide. Cyclic peptide with a small size 
will be more stable to the enzymatic activity from lumen secretion in 
stomach and duodenum that can degrade the peptide ligand. 

Estimated docking energy
Overall, the free energy of binding (ΔGbind) for all the designed ligands 
were lower than the standard ligand with significant lowest value of -8.39 
kcal/mol, obtained for the ligand CKRKC (Table 1, see ). 
The negative and low value of ΔGbind indicates strong favorable 
bond between enzyme and ligand. The standard ligand showed the highest 
ΔGbind because the standard ligand has more rotatable bonds, thus 
increasing its torsional free energy and lowering its binding affinity. These 
ΔGbind values are parallel to the Ki values observed in  Table 1 (see 
). The ligand CKRKC showed the lowest Ki 
value, indicating that the reaction equilibrium shifted to the formation of 
complex. In general, all calculated Ki values were reasonably small (within 
micromolar range), indicating the formation of stable enzyme-ligand 
complexes. All the ligands showed reasonable low internal energy, 
indicating that the ligands were in their most favourable conformations. 

Binding interaction between enzyme and ligand
Ligand CKRKC
 provides a view of ligand CKRKC at the binding site of enzyme. 
The cumulative effect of many weak interactions within a complex 
enzyme-ligand could be very significant to the stability of the complex. 
Table 2 (see ) shows that there are 9 residues in 
the active site of NS3/NS2B protease that are involved in hydrogen 
bonding with the ligand CKRKC, in comparison to only 8 residues with 
the standard ligand, therefore contributing to the stronger bond of complex 
enzyme-ligand for CKRKC compared to the complex enzyme-standard 
ligand. The hydrogen bonding with His51 and Asp75 to ligand CKRKC 
could disrupt the enzyme activity. Henceforth, the ligand could act as a 
potential competitive inhibitor for NS3-NS2B protease. 

The contact residues of the enzyme to ligand CKRKC and the standard 
ligand are shown in  (see Table 3). As 
Table 2(see ) only accounts for hydrogen bond, 
 
provides all weak interactions within the complex enzyme-ligand, such as 
hydrogen bond, ionic bond, van der Waals interaction, and hydrophobic 
interaction. Both the CKRKC and the standard ligands interacted with the 
enzyme's catalytic triad (His51, Asp75, and Ser135). These interactions 
could interrupt electron transfer between the carboxyl group of Asp75 and 
nitrogen atom on imidazole group of His51, possibly disrupting the ability 
of His51 to activate nucleophilic attack of hydroxyl group (β-OH) of 
Ser135, which is essential for the initiation of proteolysis. Between the 
standard ligand and ligand CKRKC, the weak interaction of Tyr150 
residue was only observed to CKRKC (). We propose that  π
electron of aromatic group Tyr150 interacted with side chain of arginine 
residue of ligand CKRKC that has a conjugate π bond, so it could form π-π
interaction. 

The orientations of all the ligands in the binding site of NS3-NS2B 
protease are provided in  . The shape of the binding pocket of 
enzyme was observed to complement the shape or pose of the ligand 
CKRKC (). The side chain of the arginine and lysine residues of 
ligand CKRKC which had positive charge and long chain were located at 
the cleft of the binding pocket (), which was narrow and had 
negative charge. The different charge may result in electrostatic interaction
between the negative charge of the binding pocket and the ‐NH3+ group of 
the arginine and lysine residues of the ligand, thus increasing affinity of 
interaction and complex enzyme-ligand stability.

Surprisingly, the backbone pose of the ligand CKRKC  () was 
also in complement to the enzyme's binding site. The peptide backbone 
was protruded out toward the surface of the enzyme, while the side chains 
were embedded into the pocket of the enzyme. This orientation was 
contributed by the low free energy for binding, indicating the formation of 
a favourable stable enzyme-ligand complex. Overall, this showed that the 
conformation of the complex complemented the specificity of enzyme's 
binding pocket (lock-and-key model), therefore the ligand 
cyclopentapeptide CKRKC could be proposed as a potential inhibitor to 
the serine protease activities of DEN2 better than the standard ligand

Despite the significant sequence diversity between the dengue serotypes 
[], the binding pocket of the NS3-NS2B protease for the four serotypes 
share similar substrate specificities, suggesting that the ligand is likely to 
act as an inhibitor for NS3 proteases of the four serotypes  []. While 
these preliminary results are promising, further experimental investigation 
are necessary to validate the docking result. 

Conclusions
In this study, we designed seven cyclopentapeptide inhibitors against 
DEN-2 NS3-NS2B protease: CKRRC, CGRRC, CRGRC, CRTRC, 
CTRRC, CKRKC and CRRKC. Docking studies on these inhibitors 
against the protease showed that the free energy binding and estimated Ki 
values for all the inhibitors were small (within micromolar range), 
indicating that the ligands bind favourably to the binding site. The 
cyclopentapeptide CKRKC was observed as the best peptide inhibitor 
candidate, with value of free energy binding -8.39 kcal/mol and estimated 
inhibition constant Ki of 0.707 µM compared to the standard inhibitor. 
Several modes of weak interactions were observed between the 
cyclopentapeptide CKRKC and the active site of DEN-2 NS3-NS2B 
protease. Thus, the cyclopentapeptide CKRKC is a potential inhibitor to 
the NS3-NS2B protease activities of DEN-2.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are grateful to Ridla Bakri PhD, Chairman of Department of 
Chemistry, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Science, University of 
Indonesia for his support of this research.

Citation:Tambunan &amp; Alamudi, Bioinformation 5(6): 250-254 (2010)

Amino acid sequences of seven designed cyclopentapeptides.

View of ligand CKRKC (orange) at the binding site of enzyme (blue ribbons). Catalytic triads are shown as red sticks.

 View of ligand conformation at the binding site. (a) Standard ligand, (b) Ligand CKRKC. Contact residues of the enzyme that 
interact with the ligands are shown as grey sticks. Catalytic triads are shown as balls and sticks.

 All the ligands are superimposed at the catalytic site. DEN-2 NS3-NS2B protease is represented as blue ribbons. The catalytic  triads are 
labeled as His51, Asp75, and Ser135 and are shown as balls and sticks.

 (a) &amp; (b) View of ligand's side chain in the binding pocket from a different angle. (c) Connolly surface representation of ligand CKRKC at the 
binding site.

