Background
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is an ever-increasing health concern among the
aging population and is the most common form of dementia affecting more
than 25 million individuals worldwide []. 
While the cause of the disease is uncertain, there are two major neuropathological hallmarks present in the
brains of AD patients at autopsy: the extracellular senile plaques and the
intracellular neurofibrillary tangles []. 
Neurofibrillary tangles contain hyperphosphorylated microtubule-associated protein tau, 
while senile plaques contain a core of β-amyloid (Aβ) peptide. 
Current treatments for AD include cholinesterase inhibitors and glutamate antagonists 
[]. 
Although useful, these symptomatic treatments do not stop the disease process or prevent
neuronal degeneration []. 
There is an on-going need for the development of
new treatments for AD. Although the central role of Aβ therapy remains to be
proven in clinical trials, data over the past two decades place the
accumulation of Aβ peptides and, in particular, soluble forms of these
peptides as key molecules initiating the pathological cascade that eventually
leads to the full pathology of AD. Consequently, significant resources have
been allocated to the discovery of new pharmaceutical entities that have Aβ-
lowering properties.

Drug discovery is typically a complex multi step process that involves
screening of a large number of compounds for potential ‘hits’ in relevant
assays. Using information from these hits, medicinal chemists design and
synthesize compounds to identify novel molecules or optimize compounds
into suitable leads that can be tested in preclinical experiments. Available
chemical libraries are expanding at a rapid pace due to combinatorial
chemistry thus allowing exploration for inhibitors in new chemical space.
However, the cost of identifying hits from assay screens of vast libraries can
be cost prohibitive. One way to reduce cost is to limit screening to a focused
library of compounds that represent the chemical space of interest constituted
by related chemotypes. With advances in combinatorial synthesis technology,
several thousand compounds can be rapidly synthesized thus expanding the
relevant chemical space []. 
Hence, there is a need for predictive models like
QSAR (Quantitative Structure Activity Relationship) that will prioritize
compounds for screening, aid rational synthesis and facilitate lead
identification []. 
A QSAR model is useful in relating biological activity to
physico-chemical and structural descriptors of compounds. By applying
QSAR techniques, lead compounds have previously been identified for a
range of biological targets []. 
A 3D-QSAR model is built using the alignment of three dimensional conformers of 
active compounds and can be subsequently used to score a candidate compound on the basis of a fitting
function that evaluates the alignment of three dimensional chemical features
to the model [–
]. A pharmacophore is 
constituted by common chemical features (such as hydrogen donors, hydrogen acceptors,
 hydrophobic groups, charged groups and aromatic rings) that are distributed spatially to interact
with the biological target and exert activity 
[].Development of 3D
pharmacophore models based on the biological activity of compounds
enables ligand-based drug design that guides experimental chemical synthesis
of compounds with higher potency even when the 3D structure of the
biological target is unknown [].

During the course of the examination of risk factors for AD, such as
hypertension, it has become clear that certain anti-hypertensive compounds
may be protective, not just against stroke-related dementia, but also
independently against AD. For instance, in the Syst-Eur trial, which involved
active treatment with the dihydropyridine (DHP) calcium channel blocker
(CCB) nitrendipine in over 2,400 patients, there was a 55% reduction in the
incidence of AD []. 
Nitrendipine and nilvadipine are closely related DHPs
that provide clinical protective signals against AD whereas amlodipine and
nifedipine do not confer such protection. Clearly then, the AD protection
afforded by some of the members of the DHP class of antihypertensive drugs
appear to be unique to a subgroup of the class and is not related to the
antihypertensive activity of the compounds. Since Aβ is implicated in
Alzheimer's disease, we set out to explore whether DHP-like compounds can
inhibit Aβ production in an engineered mammalian cell that over expresses it.
Although some of the DHPs inhibited Aβ production, the exact target is
unknown, therefore, we used a ligand based approach to build a 3D QSAR
model using few model compounds. Using a DHP-like model set (MS) of
compounds we built a QSAR model with Phase software (Schrodinger, USA)
to predict the activity of compounds in a small library set (LS) 
().
We describe here our 3D-QSAR model building approach, the application of
the model to screen for hits in a DHP-like compound library and its ability to
identify potent new hits in a compound library of DHP like structures.

Methodology
Measurement of Aβ inhibition
A cell based assay was used for screening of the DHP and DHP-like
compounds using Chinese Hamster Ovary cells stably transfected with wildtype
APP751 (7W cells) overproducing human Aβ [] 
that we previously used to identify Aβ lowering compounds 
[]. Briefly, 7W cells were grown
in DMEM (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), 1× Penicillin–Streptomycin
Fungizone mixture (Cambrex, Rockland,ME, USA) and 0.3% Geneticin
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Cells were plated on 96 well-culture plates
at a density of 5×104 cells per well in 200 μL of culture medium. Culture
medium was replaced in each well with 200 μL of fresh culture medium
containing the vehicle (DMSO) or 5 μM of the compound, 24 hours after
plating. On each 96 well-plate, 8 wells were used as control to determine the
basal Aβ production and up to 80 compounds per plate were tested.
Following 24 hours of incubation with the compounds, Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42
levels were evaluated using commercially available Aβ ELISAs (EMD
Biosciences Inc., CA, USA). Toxicity of the compounds was evaluated by
monitoring the release of lactate-dehydrogenase release in the culture
medium using a cytotoxicity detection kit (Roche, Inc.). Compounds showing
cellular toxicity were discarded from further analysis.

Calculation of IC50 for selected compounds
Twenty four seed compounds that contain a DHP core (4-phenyl-1,4-
dihydropyridine [Smiles: C1(C=CNC=C1)C2=CC=CC=C2] ) were tested in
quadruplicate at 0.1; 0.5; 2.5; 5;10 and 50 μM in 7W cells for their effects on
Aβ. These seed compounds were selected based on ready commercial
availability during our initial screen and have different potency towards Aβ
inhibition. The half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) of the
compounds for Aβ was calculated with the software Graphpad Prism V5 for
Windows.

Development of a 3D-QSAR model
Our model set (MS) contained twenty-one “seed” compounds and were
determined to have IC50s for Aβ40 lowering ranging from 200nM to 20 μM.
All IC50s were converted to a logarithmic scale using the formula,
pIC50 = -log10IC50. We used the MS compounds to build and validate a
suitable QSAR model using Phase software available in the Schrordinger
Package (release 2009). Phase uses a multi-step approach to model build.
First, 2D chemical formulas were processed using LigPrep, to convert 2D
into 3D conformers. Each of these conformers were energy minimized using
MacroModel by applying an OPLS 2005 force field. The library of energy
minimized conformers was used as input to the Phase program. We randomlyselected 
70% (17) of the MS compounds as a training set to build the model
while the remaining 30% (7 compounds) served as a test set to evaluate the
robustness of the model. An extensive list of atomic groups and bond patterns
are available within Phase to map pharamacophore features such as Hydrogen
Acceptor (A), Hydrogen Donor (D), Hydrophobic (H), Charged groups (N or
P) and Aromatic ring (R). Features were mapped for each of conformer using
the default list of SMARTS pattern to identify spatial distribution of
pharmacophore features in different conformers. A group of common
physico-chemical features aligned in 3D space forms the basis for site point
and a set of site points forms the basis for a pharamacophore. In the Phase
program a site point is identified as one of the several possible conserved
chemical features and a specific combination of site points (or features) form
hypotheses variants to define a pharmacophore []. 
Thus a pharmacophore consists of a set of pharmacophore site points found common among active
ligands. In order to find a common pharmacophore, a tree-based partitioning
technique is applied to group intersite distances of all active compounds in a
16Å box. The minimum distance between two sites was kept at 2 Å to reject
closely positioned pairs of features. The maximum depth of the tree was set
to 4 branches. For this study we identified a five point pharmacophore,
AADHR () consisting of two distinct 
hydrogen acceptor sites (A), one hydrogen donor site (D), one hydrophobic site (H) and one aromatic
group feature (R). The geometrical features of the hypotheses can be
extracted as a set of intersite distances and angles connecting every three
sites. For example, the intersite distance between A1 and A4 is 7.158 Å,
between A2 and D1 is 4.938 and D1 and A1 was 4.839 Å. The angle between
D1, A2 and A1 is 42.4°. The feature AADHR had the highest specificity and
survival score among all competing hypotheses. The AADHR was used to
build a QSAR model derived from a regular grid of cubic volume elements
that span the space occupied by the training set of ligands. The
pharmacophore features that were present in the 3D cubic grid were scored
for all compounds. The entire workflow is shown in 
.

Focused Chemical Library for DHPs
We performed an in vitro screening of the 1043 DHPs and DHP-like
compounds in our cell based assay to measure the inhibition of Aβ. We
applied our 3D-QSAR model based on the AADHR pharmacophore to
predict compound activity and rank them based on their predicted potency.
The model was built using a maximum of three partial-least squares factors.
The model's robustness was tested for its ability to predict both the training
set and the test set. The R2 value of training pIC50 prediction was 0.81
(significance p≫0.05) and the model had a large F-score of 18.6 (p-value
5.45x10-5) indicating a high confidence in the model (). 
The test compound activities were predicted with an R2 of 0.56. We used this 3DQSAR
model to predict and rank the 1043 LS compounds. We further
compared the rank of predicted potency using our model with experimentally
observed inhibition of the LS compounds.

Activity based classification of Compounds
We empirically classified LS compounds based on the % inhibition as Strong
(SH), Medium (MH) and Weak hits (WH). There was a strong correlation
between Aβ 40 and Aβ 42. Since the dynamic range of Aβ 40 inhibition due
to abundance is greater than Aβ 42, we classified the compounds based on Aβ
40 inhibition. SH compounds are those that inhibited 90% Aβ 40 production
at 5 μM. MH compounds inhibited Aβ 40 production between 60% and 89%
at 5 μM, while WH compounds inhibited Aβ 40 production between 40% and
59% at 5 μM. Any compound lower than 40% was considered inactive for the
purpose of this study. There were a total of 56 SH, 146 MH, 173 WH and 668
inactive compounds in the LS.

Results &amp; Discussion
Three dimensional QSAR model
We developed a ligand-based 3D QSAR model for predicting Aβ lowering
activity of DHP-like compounds using the Phase program (Schrödinger
Modeling Package) []. 
Phase uses a conformational sampling and a scoring
technique to match physico-chemical features of the atoms of a compound
that may be critical for its biological activity. The 3D QSAR model is based
on the spatial alignment of the chemical features of a training list of
compounds using a virtual 3D lattice. To this 3D lattice, a weighted list of
physico-chemical features (hydrophobicity, partial-charges, hydrogen donor,
hydrogen acceptor, geometry) that are common among active compounds
was calculated and the distribution of the features in a 3D space was
extracted as vectors. We selected a model set of 24 DHP and DHP-like
compounds that display a range of potencies for Aβ inhibition and calculated
their corresponding pIC50 (-logIC50). We randomly selected 17 of those
compounds as a training set to build the QSAR models. The best model was
selected based on its ability to predict the Aβ lowering activity of the training
set (correlation coefficient of 0.9). This model was applied to predict the
theoretical potency or pIC50 of the remaining seven compounds and the
model predicted the pIC50 correlation coefficient of 0.75 
(). The chemical features of the model 
consists of two hydrogen acceptor vector sites(A1 &amp; A2), one hydrogen donor vector 
(D1), one aromatic ring vector (R1) and one hydrophobic group (H1). 
Table 1 (see )
provides a list of distance and angle separations that are characteristics of
spatial chemical feature distribution in the 3D grid.

Distribution of hits in DHP-like chemical library
In our in vitro screen of LS compounds at 5 μM, there were 56 SH
compounds that inhibited Aβ by more than 90% (random probability of
finding, Pr = 0.054), 146 compounds had medium potency or MH (Pr =
0.14), 173 compounds were WH (Pr=0.17) and 668 compounds were
classified as inactive (Pr=0.64). A model with true predictive power must be
able to identify potent compounds in the top ranking compounds based
predicted potency. Enrichment of potent hits among top ranked compounds
based on predicted potency will significantly reduce cost and save time in
screening large chemical libraries.  
shows the distribution of inhibitors based on the % inhibition of Aβ 
40 production at 5 μM in a cell based assay for the chemical library of 1043 compounds.

Predicting DHP-like hits using in silico screen
We applied our 3D-QSAR model to predict the Aβ lowering activity of the
compounds in a focused DHP library and selected the top and bottom 
100compounds based on their predicted potency. Among the 100 bottom
compounds selected by the model, 99% showed no Aβ lowering activity and
only one compound displayed marginal Aβ lowering activity (20% inhibition
at 5 μM). Within the top 100 compounds, the model identified over 66% of
active compounds, among them 18 were the most potent Aβ lowering SH
compounds in the library. The probability of finding SH compounds in the
top 100 is three times greater using the QSAR model compared to finding
them by chance. In the bottom 100 compounds we found just 1 of the SH
compounds and 66% of the inactive compounds, implying our method
selectively depleted active compounds in the bottom ranking 
().
Thus our prediction model enriches potent compounds in the top 10%
ranking based on predicted potency while depleting potent compounds in the
bottom 10%. By screening top 30% of compounds as predicted by our model
we demonstrate that one must be able identify 73% of all potent compounds
that inhibit Aβ 40 production at least 90% at 5 μM.

Our data show, despite limited information that it is possible to build a
working 3D QSAR model to predict the Aβ lowering activity of DHP
compounds and hence perform an in silico screening of a focused library.
Although, a model built with a large training set of compounds may refine
predictive power, even a limited number of compounds fitted in the model is
sufficient to allow an enrichment of a focused library for active compounds.

3D-QSAR model prediction performance
Screening for hits in large chemical libraries to identify inhibitors of Aβ
production is an expensive proposition. Based on in house experiments
(unpublished) that demonstrated DHPs were able to ameliorate AD
pathology, we set out to screen a small focused library of DHP like molecules
and determined their IC50s for Aβ production. Currently there are more than
35,000 compounds with DHP like cores available from public databases.
Screening such vast libraries in vitro is an expensive process due to the cost
of the ELISA used in quantitating Aβ. We set out to build a 3D-QSAR model
using Phase with a limited set of compounds for which the IC50s for
inhibition of Aβ production were known from our in vitro cell based assay.
The best 3D-QSAR model was able to predict the test set with a correlation
coefficient of 0.7. We applied this model to predict the inhibitory potency of
an intermediate sized focused DHP library and to test the feasibility of
applying an in silico screen to prioritize compounds for in vitro screening.
Using an iterative screening and model building process the performance ofthe 
model can be improved further. To accomplish this, we intend to apply
3D-QSAR modeling to screen a larger library of DHP and DHP-like
compounds from several other commercial and public sources.

Conclusion
We demonstrate here that a simple 3D-QSAR model is able to enrich for
biologically potent compounds in the top 10% arranged by predicted potency
while depleting them from predicted low activity compounds. Our approach
can be combined with other predictive models for ADME properties and
linear 2D based models to rapidly screen large chemical libraries in order to
prioritize potent compounds for further in vitro screening.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank Robert and Diane Roskamp for funding this work.

Citation:Mathuraetal; Bioinformation 5(3): 122-127 (2010)

Workflow followed in this study

A five point pharmacophore model (AADHR) predicted by Phase 
for DHP and selected for our study. The 3D-geometric features associated with the
model are detailed in Table 1. Underlined alphabets identify different
 features like Hydrogen Acceptor (A1,A2), Hydrogen Donor (D1), Aromatic Ring (R1)
and hydrophobic group (H1).

Predicted vs Observed pIC50 of 24 DHP like compounds with test 
sets shown in filled circles and training set in open squares. The correlation
coefficient of predicted vs observed pIC50 is 0.9 (p≫0.05) for the training set 
and for test set it is 0.75 (p≫0.05).

Distribution of active compounds in the LS based on % inhibition 
of Aβ40 production at 5 μM

Enrichment of different classes of active compounds in the 
top 100 predicted compounds. SH compounds are highly enriched (factor of 3.35) in the
top 100 while inactive compounds are depleted. Overall active compounds 
(sum of compounds in SH, MH, WH) were enriched by a factor of 2 in the top 100
predicted by our QSAR model.

