Background
Infectious diseases caused by various pathogenic bacteria are
considered to be a major public health problem globally. Several
pathogens have been reported to challenge the existing treatment
regime by developing drug resistance and in several cases effective
vaccines are yet to be developed. Although, researches are going on to
develop effective drugs and vaccines, the efforts are not yet successful
due to the dynamic adaptability, frequent phase and antigenic
modifications, variations in major virulence factors, and adoptive
mutations. The advent of several microbial complete genome
sequences along with development of various bioinformatics tools,
made it faceable for in silico analysis of the genomes and subsequent
drug discovery against deadly human pathogen. To date, NCBI
genome database has listed approximately 2491 fully sequenced
microbial genomes including pathogenic bacteria [] and
computational approaches based on subtractive genomics have
successfully been used to identify drug targets in many pathogenic
bacteria [,,]. However, 
structured data for genomic drug targets
for any human pathogen do not exist []. Therefore, we developed a
Genomic Target Database (GTD) to provide putative genomic drug
targets categorized into pathogen specific unique metabolic pathways,
host-pathogen common metabolic pathways, and membrane/surface
localized drug targets for ten most common human pathogenic
bacteria. It is hoped that GTD will serve as a readily available resource
for both drug and vaccine development for the respective pathogen, its
serotypes, family members, and pathogens containing homologous
sequences of these drug targets.

Methodology
Data collection
Available drug target data have been collected from various literature
sources viz. PubMed [], ScienceDirect [], Google Scholar 
[] etc. Pathogens, for which no data are available, were identified using
subtractive genomics approaches as described elsewhere by Saharkar
et al. (2004) []. These are based on the assumption that an essential
survival gene of a given pathogen that is non-homologous to human
host is a candidate drug target [,].

Identification of genomic drug targets
Complete genome and proteome sequences of selected pathogens from
NCBI [], BLAST tools, and databases such as Database of Essential
Genes (DEG) [] (http://tubic.tju.edu.cn/deg) and Kyoto Encyclopedia
of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) [] pathway database were used to
identify putative drug targets. Each functional gene and corresponding
protein sequence of the bacteria were subjected to standard BLAST-X
and BLAST-P respectively against DEG. Pathogen homologs that
showed significant hits against DEG listed essential genes were
selected as putative essential genes for the pathogen under
consideration based on the BLAST-P scores [cut off values for bit
score (≫100), E-value (≪ E-10), and percentage of identity at amino
acid level (≫35%)]. Genes encoding for ≪ 100 amino acids length were
purged out. Each identified essential gene and corresponding protein
sequence of the pathogen were analyzed for sequence homology with
human genome using standard human BLAST-X and BLAST-P in
NCBI server. Non-homologous essential genes considered as putative
drug targets were selected based on the selection criteria that a drug
target should not show any similarity with any human sequence. The
function and sub-cellular localization of each drug target was analyzed
with Swiss-prot protein database [] and by using sub-cellular
localization prediction tools, CELLO [], PSORTb [], PSLpred
[], and SOSUI-GramN []. The KEGG database [] was used for
comparative pathway analysis and to identify proteins/enzymes that
are involved in host-pathogen common and pathogen specific unique
pathways. Targets were listed according to the pathways where they
are involved. The membrane or surface proteins (candidate vaccine
targets) were grouped separately.

Features, design, and contents of GTD
The GTD is a HTML based database and is represented in table
format. The screenshot of the database is shown in . For each
genome, four pages are there. The first page contains the brief
description of the pathogen, its taxonomy, virulence, and genome
information etc. At the end of this page, three links (Drug targets in
pathogen specific unique metabolic pathways, Drug targets in host
pathogen common metabolic pathways, and Membrane and surface
localized drug targets) are given. Each corresponding link page
contains list of identified gene/protein targets for that particular
category. At the top of this page pathogen specific links to the main
genome project, other publicly available DBs, search option, pathway
links, and various BLASTs are given for subtractive genomics
analysis. Below that literature references are mentioned (if available)
for corresponding drug targets. Each entry in GTD is a potential drug
target for the corresponding pathogen and links are provided for their
various properties and other publicly accessible databases. In silico
predicted sub-cellular localization is denoted as (P). Two separate
pages have been allotted that contains downloadable data of GTD and
links to various resources for drug and vaccine designing.

Data statistics and future development
The objective to develop GTD is to list out drug targets of 10 most
common human pathogenic bacteria. Currently GTD contains 58 drug
targets for four pathogens. There are targets, specific to unique
metabolic pathways in Burkholderia pseudomallei K96243 (27),
Aeromonas hydrophila ATCC 7966 (18), and Vibrio cholerae (3). Ten
membrane/surface localized drug targets have been listed for
Helicobacter pylori. Listing of targets for other pathogens is in
progress.

Utility
The GTD is designed to provide a readily available resource of putative genomic drug targets in most common human pathogenic bacteria.

All listed targets in GTD are essential genes for the pathogen. Therefore, GTD will help in designing mutagenesis study to validate essential genes of the organism.

The data can be used for both the drug and vaccine development for the respective pathogen, its sub-types, family members, and other similar species. 

Screening of functional inhibitors against these listed targets may also result in discovery of novel therapeutic compounds that can be effective against antibiotic resistant 
strains.




Author contributions:
DB: Conceived collected, analyzed data, designed GTD, entered data
and prepared the manuscript. AK and ANM provided inputs and
reviewed datasets, analysis and database.

We acknowledge www.webs.com for the free server and all the
database providers whose links are taken to develop GTD. We also
thank all members of IIOAB for their continuous support and
encouragement in developing the database. AK and ANM
acknowledge the facilities of DBT's Bioinformatics sub-centers hosted
at respective University Departments for review, analysis and
feedback on database development.

Citation:Barh et al, Bioinformation 4(1): 50-51 (2009)

Screenshot image of Genomic Target Database (GTD)

