Background
Mango (Mangifera indica) is a fruit that grows in tropical regions 
belonging to Anacardiaceae Lindl., the cashew family which includes more 
than 700 species in 82 genera that are primarily distributed pantropically. 
Mangifera indica L. originated in a region including the north-eastern part 
of India (Assam), the western part of Myanmar, and Bangladesh. Mango 
was domesticated in this region and has been cultivated in India for 4000 
years. Cultivation spread first to Malaysia and South-East Asia, supposedly 
expanded by Buddhist monks. Purseglove suggested that Phoenicians and 
Arabs spread the crop from India to East-Africa where it has been 
cultivated since the 10thcentury. The global spread of mango outside its 
original centres of domestication probably did not occur until the 
beginning of the European voyages of the 15thand 16thcenturies, when the 
Portuguese took the mango to West-Africa and from there to Brazil at the 
beginning of the 18th century, and when the Spanish introduced 
polyembryonic mango types from The  Philippines to Central America 
through the Pacific trading ports of Mexico and Panama.

A regional inventory of fruit genetic resources has recently been 
undertaken in the French West Indies (FWI). The objective is to conserve 
the FWI fruit variability in-situ and ex-situ, as well as to try local varieties 
under standard conditions. The project includes a genetic diversity study of 
collected material in comparison with the diversity observed in the 
germplasm bank maintained locally in Guadeloupe [].

Different markers have been used to study mango diversity: RAPD 
markers in Florida  [], 
India  [], 
[] Venezuela  
[] and Brazil  
[], AFLP 
[], and ISSR 
[], 
[] 
Nevertheless, these molecular markers are dominant
and they do not permit the differentiation of heterozygous from 
homozygous accessions.

The first co-dominant markers developed were isozymes  
[], 
[], 
[]. 
More recently three research groups chose to develop SSR markers  
[],
[] including our own  
[]. These molecular markers are co-dominant, 
specific and highly variable. These qualities make them highly suitable to 
study diversity in supposedly related populations or cultivars. The present 
work was taken up to identify a tool in identifying the mango species at the 
molecular level.

Materials and Methodology
Plant materials and DNA isolation
Fresh leaves of Mango, Mangifera indica L.var.totupura used in this study 
for DNA extraction were collected from Nuziveedu, Krishna District, 
Andhra Pradesh, India. Plant tissue was ground in one of the ways: by 
hand with a mortar and pestle or in tubes with sterile glass beads and sand 
placed in a tissue disruptor.

DNA extraction
DNA was extracted from fresh young leaves using a MATAB (Methyl 
ammonium Bromide) protocol described by Risterucci et al.,  (2000)  
[]. 
Fresh leaves were grounded to a fine powder in liquid nitrogen, and 
incubated for 30 min at 74°C with extraction buffer (1.4 M NaCl, 100 mM 
Tris HCl pH 8.0, 20 mM EDTA, 10 mM Na2SO3, 1% PEG 6000, 2% 
MATAB). After being cooled to 20°C, an equal volume of chloroformisoamyl 
alcohol (24:1 v/v) was added, 20-µl reaction mixtures followed by 
emulsification. The tube was then centrifuged at 10000 g for 20 min and
DNA was precipitated from the supernatant with cold isopropanol. DNA 
concentrations were estimated on a 0.8% agarose gel stained with ethidium 
bromide.

DNA amplification and sequencing
The chloroplast  trnL-F regions were amplified from extracted total 
genomic DNA using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method. The 
universal primers 1, 2, 3 and 4 (Helini Biomolecules, Chennai) of Taberlet 
et al., 1991[] 
(Table 1 see ) 
() were 
used to amplify  trnL-F. Thermal cycling parameters were an initial 
denaturation of 2 minutes at 97°C; 30 cycles of 94°C for one minute, 
annealing at 48°C for two minutes, and elongation at 72°
C for two minutes; followed by an elongation step of 72°C for 16 minutes.

Eluting DNA from agarose gel fragments
Ethidium bromide stained agarose gel was visualized under a 
transilluminator. The fragment of interest was excised with a clean razor 
blade. After removing the excess liquid, the agarose fragment was placed 
in the spin column. The tube was centrifuged at 5500 rpm for not more 
than 45 seconds for the elution of DNA.  The  eluent was checked by 
running on an agarose gel and observed on a transilluminator for the 
presence of ethidium bromide stained DNA. The eluted DNA was used 
directly in manipulation reactions.  This DNA fraction was subjected for 
sequencing (Helini Biomolecules, Chennai).

Sequencing and Phylogenetic placement
The eluted PCR product was directly sequenced using  trnL-F specific 
primers at Ohmlina Centre for Molecular Research, Chennai. Sequencing 
reactions were carried out with ABI PRISM Dye Terminator Cycle 
Sequence Ready Reaction Kit (Applied Biosystems Inc., USA). The 
obtained sequence was compared to the sequences in GenBank using the 
BLAST algorithm [] 
to search for close evolutionary relatives.

GenBank accession numbers
The representative sequence of the Mangifera indica species was deposited 
in GenBank of National Centre for Biotechnology Information (NCBI).

Results and Discussion
Collection of Plant material
Fresh leaves of Mango,  Mangifera indica  L.var.totupura were collected 
from Nuziveedu, Krishna District, Andhra Pradesh, India were used in this 
study for DNA extraction.

Amplification of DNA coding for trnL-F
The genomic DNA of the Mangifera indica was subjected for the isolation 
of the DNA coding for  trnL-F  () by using Polymerase chain 
reaction. The bands were cut and  eluted and the DNA so obtained was 
subjected for sequencing.

Sequence analysis
The sequence analysis demonstrated that all the corresponding bands on 
agarose gel belonged to  Mangifera indica.  Upon sequencing of the 
amplified DNA, the data obtained corresponds to 514 bases for Mangifera 
indica. The sequence so obtained was as follows.
CCAAATTGATTGAGCTTGGTATGGAAACCTACTAAGTGATAACT
TTCAAATTCAGAGAAACCCTGGAATC 
AAAAATGGGCAATCCTGAGCCAAATCCTATTTTACGAGAACAA
AAACAAACAAGGGGTCAGAACGGGAGA 
AAAAAAGGATAGGTGCAGAGACTCAATGGAAGCTGTTCTAACA
AATGGAGTTGATTGCCTTTTTTGGGTA 
AAGAAAGGAATTCTTCTATCGAATATCGAAAGGCCATAACGGA
TGAAGGATAAGCCTATATACACTATGT 
ATAAGTAATGAAAAAATACACTATGTATACGTAATGAAAAAGG
ATCTCAAAAATGACGACCCGAATCCTT 
TTTTGTTTTTCTTTTGAAGAACTAATTAATCAATCGGACGAGAAT
AAAGATAGAGTCCCATTCTACATGC 
CAATATCAATACTGGCAACAATGAAATTTATAGTAAGAGGAAA
ATCCGTCGACTTTAGAAATCGTGAGGG 
TTCAAGTCCTCCTATCCCCCAAAA

Phylogenetic affiliation of the  Mangifera indica based on the ITS 
sequences
Sequence of the dominant DGGE bands revealed that Mangifera indica in 
tested leaves was Mangifera indica (100% similarity to the ITS sequences 
of Mangifera indica) with the accession no. GQ927757. This sequence can 
be found in NCBI Genome Databank. The phylogenetic tree was shown in 
.

The dataset consisted of 514 characters (100%) were parsimony 
informative. The matrix was easily manually aligned. Coding gaps as 
binary characters, missing data had no affect on the topology and very little 
affect on branch support. The 100% bootstrap consensus tree is shown in 
. 
The trnL-F gene of mango was amplified and it was sequenced. 
The sequence was blasted againt nr database and the top hits were taken 
and aligned by multiple sequence alignment. The picture shows the 
phylogenetically related sequences.  As our sequence is the first entry in 
genbank, there was no homologous sequence for mango. In future if 
mango sample was searched in database, our sequence will be the first hit. 
The topology is consistent with the maximum parsimony tree, which is 
more resolved within the Anacardiaceae clades.

The chloroplast DNA (cpDNA) trnT-F region in land plants consists of the 
transfer RNA genes  trnTugu,  trnLuaa, 
and  trnFgaa arranged in tandem and
separated by noncoding spacer regions. The region is positioned in the 
large single copy region, approximately 8 kb downstream of rbcL. The trnL
gene of cyanobacteria and a number of chloroplast genomes, including that 
of all land plants, contains a group I intron positioned between the U and 
the A of the UAA anticodon loop. This intron is inferred from phylogenetic 
analysis to have been present in the cyanobacterial ancestor of the plastid
lineages of Rhodophyta, Chlorophyta, and Glaucocystophyta and to have 
been subsequently vertically transmitted [].

The succession of conserved trn genes and the apparent absence of gene 
rearrangements in the  trnT-F region made the design of plant universal 
primers possible []. 
As a consequence, the trnL-F region, comprising the 
trnL intron and  trnL-F spacer, has become one of the most widely used 
chloroplast markers for phylogenetic analyses in plants  
[]. The 
accumulation of an increasingly large number of sequences of the trn(T-)LF 
region from a wide range of plants has allowed further study of 
structures, functions, and evolution in different orders of flowering plants 
[], in basal angiosperms 
[], in land plants 
[], in bryophytes 
[], and 
in Gnetales [].

Sequences from the trnL-F region (excluding the trnT-L region and trnL 5' 
exon) have recently been used, in combination with those from further 
chloroplast markers  rbcL and  matK, as a source of characters for 
phylogenetic reconstruction in the tropical flowering plant family 
Annonaceae Juss. These phylogenies have been used to answer questions 
about morphological character evolution  [], 
classification (Mols  et al., 
2004), biogeography  [] 
[], and molecular dating  
[]. These markers 
appeared to contain complementary phylogenetic signals, as is expected 
from different sequences sampled from the plastid genome 
[], and were 
thus applied in combined analyses. The combined analyses yielded better 
resolved phylogenies, subject to higher levels of support, than those derived 
from individual markers.

Conclusion
The above study can be utilized in identifying the Mango species directly 
by using any part of the tissue in live form or even from the fossil 
specimens. The gene sequences of trnL-F will be the same in any part of 
the plant because of the presence of  chloroplast and its genome is same 
throughout.  The sequence as reported in this present work is of Mangifera 
indica L.var. totupura. There was no sequence available in the database for 
mango till now and hence it can be exploited for the identification of 
mango species up to the level of varieties as the sequences will be more or 
less conserved with minor variations.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Sankar et al, Bioinformation 5(10): 405-409 (2011)

Approximate location of trnL-F primers used in this study

Agarose gel showing amplified trnL-F DNA of Mangifera indica L.var.totupura. Lane 1 and 2: Amplified DNA; Lane 3: 1 kb DNA Ladder

Phylogenetic affiliation of Mangifera indica based on trnL-F.

