Background
The P. falciparum genome has been published. [] However, known 
      structures for P. falciparum proteins are limited. [] 
      3D structural information for Plasmodium proteins is critical for the identification of suitable drug targets. The use of protein 
      modeling techniques produces modeled structures for annotated Plasmodium proteins. Nonetheless, automatic modeled proteins are 
      error prone and further validation is required. Therefore, modeling of Plasmodium proteins is performed in a semi-automated manner 
      with a series of manual error checking. A database containing the Plasmodium protein models is described in this article. 

Methodology
Plasmodium protein sequences
The annotated protein sequences for the P. falciparum genome were obtained from PlasmoDB  (http://PlasmoDB.org). []

Molecular modeling
Modeling of target proteins was performed using MODELLER (a comparative protein modelling program for protein structure 
      modeling). []

Plasmodium proteins (target) and template selection for modeling

					P. falciparum annotated proteins with known structural templates in PDB (protein databank) were identified 
      using BLASTP (basic local alignment search tool for proteins). This exercise selected 476 Plasmodium proteins 
      with one or more known structural templates (≥ 40% identity) for modeling.

Alignment of target and template sequences
The alignment of target and template sequence was performed using align2D (a sequence alignment module in MODELLER). Align2D 
      performs global alignment of sequences using dynamic programming. This program uses variable gap penalty for structural loops and 
      core regions using information derived from template structures. [] 
      Subsequently, the alignment was manually checked for mismatch.  

Energy refinement
The modeled structures were energy minimized in AMBER force field for 500 steps using steepest descent and conjugate gradient 
      minimization algorithms. [] The stereo-chemical qualities of the generated 
      protein models were assessed using PROCHECK. [] Models were then 
      superimposed with the templates using SWISS-PDB viewer and RMSD (root mean square deviation) was calculated for each model. 
      [] The modeled structures thus constructed were stored in a public 
      domain database and the models can be viewed visualization tools such as RasMol [] and SwissPDBviewer and MDL/chime. []

Utility to the biological community
This database is a collection of P. falciparum protein models. All the models were manually curated and 
      verified. Comparison of host and parasite protein structures will provide insights into host­parasite interaction for the 
      identification of potential drug targets.

Figures and Tables
A database for
        Plasmodium falciparumprotein models. The database snapshot and visual models are shown


      Citation:Gowthaman
      et al., Bioinformation 1(2): 50-51 (2005)

