Background
Patients' records are rich in biomedical information to be analyzed,
investigated and interpreted for application to clinical use in translational
informatics. Translational informatics has a recently emerging research domain
targeting computationally analysis of genomic information on individual
patients in association with the clinical patients' data extracted from electronic
medical records (EMRs) in hospitals. Translational informatics shall discover
a clue to prediction and prevention of diseases by the use of personal genomic
information, to provide better medication optimized person by person and
healthy life for an individual patient.To facilitate translational informatics,
there is a need of collection of clinical patients' data formalized ready for
computational analysis. However extraction of the biomedical information
from electronic medical records often requires expert knowledge and manual
handling. Most of the biomedical information is buried in texts of doctors'
comments (‘clinical findings’ in technical terms in medicine) in medical
records. Much of the information leaves behind extracted and integrated into a
database to be available for further scientific analysis.The computational
infrastructure called 'Informatics for Integrating Biology and the Bedside'
(i2b2) [,
] 
has been developed in US to facilitate the use of the clinical
patients' data in the translational informatics. It is an open-source database
system on the basis of object-oriented database schema and ontology-based
knowledge definition. The system also provides statistical data analysis
facilities and Natural Language Processing (NLP) tools for term extraction
from free texts in EMRs. The i2b2 project has been funded by NIH in five
years from the fall of 2004 by 20 million dollars in total 
[]. Masses of clinical
patients' data have already been accumulated by hospitals participating in this
project which medicate and study multifactor diseases such as asthma,
hypertension, type 2 diabetes, Huntington's disease, depressive disorder,
rheumatoid arthritis, and obesity.

In this study, we constructed the i2b2 database with 392 clinical patients' data
collected in a university hospital of Tokyo Medical and Dental University
(TMDU). The patients' data includes biomedical information extracted from
carcinoma and non-carcinoma specimens of cancer patients recorded in
‘Integrated Clinical Omics Database’ (iCOD) 
[]. The clinical patients' data
includes 8,580 English and 54,579 Japanese descriptions mostly uncategorized.
In order to deal with the uncategorized description, we developed our original
ontology to represent a conceptual structure of the TMDU data and also
extraction of disease names from doctors' comments in Japanese. Such
modification was necessary to fill the gap between the iCOD data and the
original i2b2 ontology which is composed of ICD (International Statistical
Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems) 
[] and LOINC
(Logical Observation Identifiers Names and Codes) [].

Methods and results
Installation of i2b2 database server and clients
Our i2b2 database server is constructed following the instruction provided at
i2b2 web site [] 
(). Oracle 10g is used for the backend database and
built our application server on JBoss, Tomcat, Apache and Eclipse on the base
of VMware and CentOS 5.

Analysis of the i2b2 database schema
The data model provided in the i2b2 database is called ‘star schema’ where
tables are connected as a star. The star schema plays an important role bridging
object-oriented ontological data model and physical data representation on a
relational database.  shows the star schema consists of Observation
Fact surrounded by Patient Dimension, Visit Dimension, Concept Dimension,
and Provider Dimension. In this schema, the Observation Fact table represents
a patient object and other four dimensions represent its attributes such as who
(patient information), when (dates), what (ontology for clinical patients' data)
and where (hospital and doctor names), respectively.Generally, sets of
polynomial relations called ‘tables’ represent a data model of a target domain in
an ordinary relational database system. In the i2b2, however, ontology
represents a data model of a target domain. Various biomedical attributes of
individual patient data can be retrieved indirectly by tracking linkages to
ontology that systematizes all the attributes in the i2b2. Ontology is stored in
Concept Dimension table, which contains a symbolic name of an individual
attribute (Attribute ID) and a path from a root of ontology to an individual
attribute (Ontology Path). Every attribute is allowed to have only one
conceptual path, so that ontology in the i2b2 includes no multiple inheritance.

i2b2 with Japanese character set
The i2b2's availability with Japanese characters is crucial when it is applied to
collect Japanese patients' data in Japanese medical environment. Practically
speaking, it is almost impossible to write all patients' records in English or any
language other than Japanese at ordinal Japanese hospitals. Therefore, we
investigated the availability of Japanese character set in the i2b2
system.According to our investigation on eight application modules on the i2b2
system, the i2b2 web client can handle Japanese characters in all the modules
but the i2b2 workbench fails in half of the modules in default (Table 1 see
). 
This means that careful modification of the i2b2
source codes is necessary to handle Japanese characters in the i2b2 database.

Clinical patients' data collected in TMDU university hospital
Tanaka's group of TMDU had developed the iCOD 
[] for integration of
clinical patients' data and genome-wide molecular data measured in carcinoma
and non-carcinoma specimens from cancer patients. The iCOD provides not
only biomedical information on patients but also information on patients'
lifestyle in detail such as dietary, smoking, and toiletry habits. All the clinical
patients' data were collected manually by experts having licenses of hospital
nurses. The iCOD currently includes clinical patients' data on hepatic
carcinoma, intestinal caner, and oral cancer. It is planned to collect patients'
data from all the kinds of carcinomas in the future. It currently contains 392
patients in Japanese description, of which 130 patients have their descriptions
also in English. It consists of five schemas and 52 tables, of which 34 tables
contain clinical patients' data.

Data transfer from the iCOD to the i2b2
As the first step of our data transfer from the iCOD to the i2b2 system, 25
tables out of 34 tables are transferred. We eliminate nine tables mainly because
they include only Japanese texts and have nothing to do with our feasibility
study. The tables containing only English characters and numeric values can be
transferred automatically. However, care must be taken for the tables which
contain Japanese free text such as Past_history_of_disease field of Medical
history table in the iCOD which contains very informative information to
identify patients' diseases in detail. In order to deal with this issue, we
conducted to use NLP technologies to extract disease names from the medical
history texts automatically.The example of data conversion is demonstrated in
. 
The differences of the iCOD and the i2b2 data are the following:
Direct linking in table property in the iCOD is converted to an indirect link
represented by Attribute ID (e.g. ‘capsule_formation’) in the i2b2. It is also
regarded as a conversion from the third norm form to the fourth norm form in
the relational database theory. Note that the semantics of Attribute ID can be
represented by an ontology path which locates the position of the term in the
i2b2 categorical hierarchy. According to our implementation, 8,580 indirect
links are generated from the 25 iCOD tables. In the 8,580 links, 7,973 links
were generated from manual translation from Japanese words to English words,
and 607 links were extracted and translated by our NLP operations. 684
Attribution IDs are used for representing the 8,580 links in the i2b2.

Development of an ontology for the iCOD data
In order to handle 684 attributes newly generated from iCOD database, iCOD
ontology must be added to the i2b2 ontology. In order to solve this issue
systematically as much as possible, we adopt the strategy to use the iCOD table
names as categories of the iCOD ontology in the i2b2. The table names were
then summarized into upper concepts and 684 attributes were systematized
under the upper concepts by refereeing to ICD10 if applicable. The final iCOD
ontology consists of eight levels of depth is available at Supplementary File
1(available in http://bio-omix.tmd.ac.jp/disease/i2b2/). The top two levels are
shown in 
(available in http://bio-omix.tmd.ac.jp/disease/i2b2/). 
The comparison of the iCOD ontology and other standard
ontologies in clinical medicine is the following. More than half of the iCOD
categories are consistent with either ICD10 or LOINC. However, several
categories such as Prognosis, Pathology, Molecular information, and
Occupation diet lifestyle are the iCOD original. We must say that our ontology
is not formally systematized in the sense of explicit specification
conceptualization []. 
In the i2b2 system, ontology primarily plays a role of
representing a data model so as to navigate a user to individual entries. The
primarily role makes it difficult for us to build ontology being consistent with
established ontology like OBO Foundry in the biomedical domain 
[] based on
SNAP and SPAN model.

Term extraction by NLP from doctors' comments
NLP is one of plausible information technologies to extract technical terms
useful for translational research from doctors' comments in text form. In case of
the iCOD, 10 tables contain plain texts in Japanese. There are two approaches
to extract English technical terms from Japanese texts. One is to translate
Japanese technical terms extracted from Japanese texts with Japanese NLP
tools. The other one is to apply English NLP tools such as GATE to English
texts translated from Japanese text. GATE is an open-source NLP framework
including tokenizing, Part-of-Speech tagging, and noun phrases parsing 
[].
Extracting technical terms from doctors' comments in EMRs has been reported
with customized GATE []. 
However, we gave up this approach due to the
technological difficulty to translate Japanese doctors' comments to English
ones correctly.Our proposed method to analyze Japanese texts of doctors'
comments consists of the computational pipeline of part-of-speech tagging,
morphological analysis and dictionary search of technical terms. MeCaB 
[]
was adopted for morphological analysis with Japanese clinical dictionary
(MEDIS) of ‘Standard Disease Names in Japan corresponding to ICD10 for
electronic medical record‘ []. 
MEDIS provides 22,439 of relations between
ICD10 codes and corresponding Japanese names covering all over ICD10
domain.

In our feasibility study, 225 records of the doctors' comments on past histories
of diseases were computationally processed. The 225 records had been
manually collected from EMRs by experts having licenses of hospital nurses.
Our NLP operation results in 66% recall (421 terms / 641 terms) and 73%
precision (421 terms / 578 terms) in Japanese term extraction from Japanese
texts. According to the careful investigation of 220 terms of true negatives, the
low recall rate resulted from the following four reasons: A) Use of synonyms
for standard disease names defined in MEDIS dictionary (177 terms), B)
Mismatch of 1byte and 2byte characters in alphabets (six terms), C) Typing
mistakes in iCOD entries (three terms), and D) Use of clinical terms not
included in ICD10 (34 terms). We further investigated cases of A) and
classified them into three sub-categories: A-1) Use of common names instead
of scientific names, A-2) Use of obsolete names, and A-3) Alphabetical
variations in Japanese words (Hiragana, Katakana, and Kanji notations for the
same word).According to our post processing investigation, the call rate was
dramatically improved (from 66% to 95%) by just expanding term dictionary
and pre-processing of the doctors' comments with regard to 2 bytes characters
in alphabets and typographic errors. However, care must be taken for the
handling of clinical terms. We found that 34 terms are still failed in automatic
term extraction after tuning due to the mismatch with ICD10. These terms
seem to either disease names of ambiguity or not disease names but symptoms.
We shall further investigate the terms in our next study.

As for the precision rate, 157 terms of false positives resulted from the
following two reasons: (1) Duplicated extraction of disease names from one
compound noun (156 terms) and (2) Failure in tokenizing with regard to the
two character word ‘shou-jou’ in Japanese which means ‘symptom’ in English.
Typical example of duplicated extraction is ‘abdominal aneurysm’ and
‘aneurysm’. This problem can be easily removed by checking if a compound
noun including a clinical term and the clinical term is extracted from the same
sentence.The latter case is rather special and specific to Japanese sentences.
The two character word ‘shou-jou’ consists of two Kanji characters ‘shou’ and
‘jou’. The Kanji character ‘shou’ is often used as the last character of disease
names. Therefore, wrong disease name may be extracted if tokenizer separates
‘shou’ and ‘jou’ instead of one word ‘shou-jou’ in parsing of Japanese
sentences, in precisely, in wakachi-gaki analysis. One of the ad-hoc ways to
solve this problem is to check the occurrence of ‘jou’ after the detected disease
name in Japanese texts in post-processing.

Finally, with the extended dictionary (Supplementary File 2 available in
http://bio-omix.tmd.ac.jp/disease/i2b2/) 
and the post-processing program, we
have succeeded to extract 607 terms out of 641 terms (recall 95%) without
false positive (precision 100%) for 225 records of the doctors' comments on
past histories of diseases (Supplementary Table 2 available in 
http://bioomix.tmd.ac.jp/disease/i2b2/). 
This indicates that automatic extraction of
English clinical term from Japanese texts would be possible if appropriate
dictionary and translation rules are provided. We shall further study so as to
extract all the clinical terms from doctors' comments contained in the
iCOD.The extracted 607 Japanese terms are translated into English terms using
ICD10 codes with MEDIS dictionary. A pair of English and Japanese terms
with the same ICD codes can be considered as the same terms in the medical
domain. Applying this rule, we automatically obtained 607 English terms from
the extracted Japanese terms. The conceptual hierarchy is available at

http://root/Patient_background/Medical_history/Past_history_of_disease/ in our i2b2
ontology.

Application of the patients' clinical data contained in the i2b2
We have not yet established a security policy that meets the requirements of
protection rules of personal privacy in accepting public access to our i2b2 data.
Our i2b2 is currently used only by the authors of this paper. This paper,
instead, shows an instance of how to apply our data to translational research
(Supplementary Figure 1 available in 
http://bio-omix.tmd.ac.jp/disease/ i2b2/).
A research paper reported on a combined effect of metformin (a drug for
diabetes) and doxorubicin (a drug for breast cancer) on mice 
[]. The
combined treatment caused a significant decrease of breast cancer stem cells.
This paper indicates a possibility that this combination of the drugs can be
effective also for patients of breast cancer. We then investigated the
comparable incidents contained in our i2b2 database. Such incidents shall help
us in better designing clinical tests for the combined therapy, because we can
utilize information on patients who had chances to take both the drugs at the
same time. Such patients' information enables us to make clinical trials
efficient, less expensive, and short-term successful.We retrieved data of
‘patients diagnosed as cancer and have medical histories of diabetes’ from our
i2b2 database (). Since our i2b2 database contains no data for breast
cancer patients, we retrieved data for other cancers as a test case. 50 patients
were retrieved (Supplementary Figure 1 available in 
http://bioomix.tmd.ac.jp/disease/i2b2/). 
The i2b2 accepts queries of any combination of
attributes consisting ontology, so that you can investigate a variety of combined
conditions in clinical patients' properties.

Discussion
We discussed with medical doctors before our construction of the i2b2 in
Japanese environment. The issues were 1) linguistic problem and 2) security
problem.If the i2b2 can process both English and Japanese, which language we
should use in constructing the i2b2 database in Japanese environment. Our
conclusion was Japanese. We use Japanese in hospitals everyday. Giving
consideration to the fact that medical doctors occupy themselves in heavy
duties in hospitals, clinical patients' data should be collected in the same
language as the medical doctors use everyday. That is Japanese in Japan. On
the other hand, there is a need to develop the database in English so as to share
and reuse Japanese patients' data with people overseas. We shall be able to
solve this linguistic problem by a strategy as we tried in this study: building an
i2b2 database with Japanese data first, and then translating the data into
English. We will apply NLP technologies to translate the Japanese data into
English.

Security is always a big issue whenever developing a database containing
personal information. At present, it is impossible to open clinical patients' data
in public at any countries in the world because of protection of personal rights.
Actually, data in the i2b2 databases developed in US are shared only by the
i2b2 project members of hospitals and research institutes in a closed network.
SHRINE is a secured network technology developed in the i2b2 project to
establish a secured data retrieving environment for the membership hospitals
[]. 
The ‘avatar patient’ is another idea to tackle the security issue. The ‘avatar’
means imaginary patients' data created by random sampling from a prior
distribution of a certain patient's attribute. There can be no problem to open the
imaginary patients' data to the public regardless of protection of personal rights.
Despite such an attractive idea, there should be many studies conducted on how
to find appropriate prior distributions to certain clinical patients' attributes.

In our next step, we shall develop a pipeline that automats all the operations of
transporting data to the i2b2. We should integrate processes of term extraction
from doctors' comments, translation of Japanese terms into English, making
associations with patients' IDs, conversion of data formats, and uploading the
data to the i2b2 server. We shall also further investigate what combinations of
attributes have significant effects on prognosis of cancer patients using
statistical tests by R software, after our preliminary analysis using the i2b2
data. We have already studied a significant correlation between intake a drug
for atherosclerosis and recurrence of colon cancer (manuscript is under
preparation).

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank Dr. P. Tonellato, Dr. S. Murphy, Dr. P. Kos, Dr. V. Fusaro, Dr. D.
MacFadden, Dr. M. Palchuk, Dr. P. Emerson, and Dr. E. Rubin for giving us
much useful information on the i2b2. We thank Dr. Y. Natsumeda, Dr. Y.
Yamaguchi, Dr. A. Nemoto, Dr. S. Inoue, and Dr. M. Yamada for useful
discussion on how to practically apply the i2b2 in Japanese hospitals.
Educational Program for Bio-Medical OMICS Information was supported by
Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan.

Citation:Takai - Igarashi et al, Bioinformation 6(2): 86-90 (2011)

System configuration of the i2b2, the star schema, and an example of data conversion. A: System configuration of the i2b2 we installed in Japanese
environment. Solid lines indicate transporting routs of a user's query to database. Dot lines indicate transferring routes of clinical patients' data from the iCOD to
the i2b2. Because our gateway server allows only SSH protocol in communication from the Internet for security reasons, we used SSH port forwarding to access
the server. Modified IP address of the i2b2 web server is used for the feasibility study so as to meet the SSH port forwarding protocol. Global IPs must be needed
to make the i2b2 database publicly accessible. B: Star schema. This figure shows the entity relationship diagram of five tables composing the star schema. PK
stands for ‘Primary Key’. C: An example of data conversion from the iCOD to the i2b2. We take an entry in Tissue_finding table of the iCOD as an example. A
direct relation between a primary key (i.e. record_id) and an attribute (i.e. capsule_formation) was converted into a quadruplet relation among patient_id (i.e.
0011122), record_id (i.e. 117656), attribute (i.e capsule_formation), and attribute value (i.e. (+)), so as to be transferred into Observation Fact table. The attribute
(i.e. capsule_formation) was assigned a semantic location in ontology and transferred into Concept Dimension table with its ontology path (i.e.
\icod\pathology\tissue_finding\capsule_formation\).

