Background
The glycine rich proteins (GRPs) belong to a group of super
family that is characterized by the presence of semi-repetitive
glycine-rich motifs. These groups of proteins have a glycine
content of 20 to 70% that are arranged in (Gly)n-X repetitions.
Although the first genes encoding GRPs have been isolated
from plants, they have been reported in a wide variety of
organisms from cynobacterias to animals []. GRPs are broadly
classified into four major groups based on conserved motifs
and the arrangement of glycine repeats. The class I GRPs
contain a signal peptide followed by a high glycine-content
region with (GGX)n repeats. These proteins are attributed with
structural function due to their cell wall localization 
[]. Class
II GRPs may or may not have a signal peptide. They carry a C
terminal cysteine rich region following the glycine rich region
and characterized by the presence of universal (GGXXXGG)n
repeats. Class III GRPs may carry a signal peptide and have the
lowest glycine content as compared to other classes. They are
charactrized by the presence of GXGX repeats and show a high
degree of structural diversity. The class IV includes the RNA
binding GRPs which has the characteristic RNA recognition
motif (RRM) or a cold shock domain in addition to the glycine
rich domain. A few of the RNA binding GRPs are also
characterized by the presence of CCHC zinc-fingers in their
structure.

In the past few years, functional characterization of several
plant GRPs has been investigated. It is believed that, they are
developmentally regulated as well as modulated by biotic and
abiotic factors. Although most of the GRPs are attributed with
a structural function owing to their cell wall locations, recent
development suggest that GRPs are indeed diverse in their
location and function, the only similarity being the presence of
glycine rich repeats []. In plants, the genes encoding GRPs are
induced by physical, chemical and biological factors such as
temperature, wounding, pathogen infection, salinity, drought,
flooding, light, salycylic acid etc []. This diverse functionality
suggests that, GRPs are components of different multimolecular
complexes where glycine rich domains are required
for maintaining stability and flexibility of molecular
interactions []. Several GRPs has been characterized in
different plants such as Arabidopsis, rice, sugarcane and
Eucalyptus. The differential modulation and sub cellular
localization together with broad structural diversity suggest
that GRPs do not represent the same family of proteins, but a
group of protein that share a common structural motif [].

Curcuma longa L. (turmeric) of the family Zingiberaceae is one
of the most important crop with great medicinal and economic
significance. Its medicinal uses are indeed diverse, ranging
from cosmetic face cream to the prevention of Alzheimer's
disease. Turmeric is also qualified as the queen of natural Cox-
2 inhibitors []. India is the world's largest producer, and
exporter of turmeric followed by China, Indonesia, Bangladesh
and Thailand []. However, turmeric is completely sterile and
propagated exclusively by vegetative means using rhizome.
This seems to have eroded their genetic base making them
suceptible to major biotic and abiotic stresses. Characterization
and comparative analysis of GRPs in turmeric can provide a
wide array of informations on the regulation of different stress
responses in vegetatively propagated plants. Recent advances
in Curcuma genomic technologies have generated a large
number of expressed sequence tags (ESTs) that has been made
available in public database, thereby offering an opportunity to
classify and compare glycine rich protein sequences in
turmeric. As of July 2010, GenBank had released 12593 EST
sequences from Curcuma longa. In the present study, we
describe the isolation, classification and characterization of
glycine rich proteins in Curcuma longa EST database using
known GRP sequences.

Methodology
A basic local alignment search tool (BLAST) TBlastN search 
[]
was performed using protein sequences of reported plant
GRPs as baits against the Curcuma longa expressed sequence
tag (EST) database. 12593 Curcuma longa EST sequences were
mined consisting of two tissue libraries of rhizomes 6870
(DY395309-DY388440) and leaves 5723 (DY388439-DY382717).
The EST sequences were screened against the UniVec database
from NCBI (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/pub/ UniVec/) for
detecting vector and adapter sequences by using the program
Cross_Match. CAP3 program was used to assemble the EST
sequence into contigs for creating a non-redundant dataset.
The GRP sequences used as baits includes those reviewed by
Sachetto-Martins [], rice GRPs 
[,
], wheat GRPs [,
],
Arabidopsis GRP rich RNA binding proteins [],a nodule
specific GRP from Medicago [], a root specific GRP from Zea
mays [], sugarcane GRP sequences 
[], Eucalyptus GRPs 
[]
and a Petunia cold shock GRP sequence [].

All the turmeric GRPs isolated was subsequently translated to
obtain their putative protein sequences. The Open Reading
Frames (ORFs) for each searched contig was predicted using
the Expasy Translate Tool (bo.expasy.org/tools/dna.html).
Protein sequences obtained were used in a second round of
TBLASTN search against the non-redundant protein database
at the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) to
identify their closest homologues. Additional domains were
detected using the Prosite (http://bo.expasy.org/prosite) and
Pfam (http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Software/Pfam/search.shtml)
prediction programs. The signal peptides were predicted using
signalP server (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/SignalP).
ClustalX program [] was used to align GRPs deduced from
the turmeric EST database. The phylogenetic tree was
constructed using the Molecular Evolutionary Genetics
Analysis (MEGA) software package version 2.1 []. The
neighbor joining distance method was used with pair wise
deletion to treat the amino acid gaps during multiple
alignment of turmeric GRPs. For construction of the
phylogenetic tree, the confidence levels for the nodes were
determined with 1000 replications using the internal branch
test [].

Results and Discussion
Typical GRP protein sequences were used to search the
Curcuma longa EST database for genes encoding glycine–rich
proteins. Fifty-one potential turmeric GRP gene sequences
were isolated and distributed into four distinct classes- class I
(GGGX); class II (GGXXXGG); class III (GXGX and class IV,
RNA binding GRPs)  (see supplementary material).
Similar in-silico approach has also been utilized earlier to
identify GRPs in other important plants such as sugarcane 
[]
and eucalyptus [].

The turmeric GRP sequences were almost equivalent to the
other monocotyledonous GRP sequences already published.
Fourteen sequences encoding GRPs with GGGX repeats were
identified in the Curcuma longa EST database. The sequences
were quite different and related to previously known GRPs
from monocots and dicots. Four sequences showed high
similarity with AtGRP6, the cold shock glycine rich protein
from Arabidopsis. Likewise, four and three sequences showed
high similarity with GRPs from Oryza sativa and Zea mays
respectively. Eleven of the 14 class I GRPs showed the presence
of a signal peptide at their N-terminal end suggesting their
location in the cell wall or cell membrane. Ten sequences
encoded GRPs that were highly enriched in histidine having a
GGGH repeats. Similar results were also retrieved in
Eucalyptus GRPs [].Searching the turmeric EST database
using the previously reported GRPs with cysteine rich domans
and C terminal homology to nodulins resulted in the
identification of five GRPs with GGXXXGG repeats. The
tripeptide between the glycine residues were composed of Y,
N and R amino acid. One among the five-class II turmeric
GRPs- CL.CON.1727 showed high homology with Triticum
aestivun predicted protein grp having a distinct signal peptide.
The remaining four appears closely related to HvGRP1 of
Hordeum vulgare. The class II GRPs has been found to interact
with cell wall associated kinase molecule that initiate the
recognition of various environmental signals in response to
external stresses and to transduce them into the cell [].

The class III GRPs with GXGX repeats consists of the lowest
glycine content of only 20%. In turmeric, twenty-one different
sequences were identified encoding this type of GRP. These
GRPs were also rich in alanine and arginine amino acids
besides having the glycine rich domains. The GRP sequences
were highly diverse representing heterogeneous groups of
proteins with no significant sequence similarity except within
the glycine rich motif. Five GRPs with GHGH repeat showed
highest homology to a Zea mays aluminium induced GRP.
Likewise, two turmeric GRPs-CL.CON.1712 and CL.CON.1872
exhibited highest similarity with a cold-drought regulated grp
from Medicago sativa. This suggests that classes III group of
GRPs from turmeric must be getting expressed in response to
abiotic stresses. Five out of the 21 class III GRPs possessed
signal sequence in the N-terminal end reflecting their extra
cellular localization. Many GRPs isolated from other plants
had signal peptide and found to be located outside the cell
[,
]. No Oleosin GRPs were isolated from turmeric as like other
monocotyledonous plants. As the Oleosin GRPs are meant for
tapetal development in dicots, the absence of Oleosin GRPs in
turmeric further supports the existing difference in the anthers
and pollen grain development between monocots and dicots
[].

The class IV GRPs consists of a RNA binding motif in the Nterminal
end followed by a C-terminal rich in glycine repeats.
It is broadly classified into four sub-classes- sub class I with
RNA recognition motif (RRM) in the N-terminal end, sub-class
II with RRM conserved motif and a CCHC zinc finger motif
within the glycine rich region, sub-class III with a cold shock
domain in the N terminus and CCHC zinc fingers within
glycine rich motif and sub-class IV with two RRM motifs in the
N terminus [,
,
]. 
Eleven Curcuma longa sequences
encoding RNA binding GRPs were identified and classified
according to their domain organizations. Five sequences from
turmeric EST database, CL.CON.447, CL.CON.794,
CL.CON.1078, CL.CON.1582 and CL.CON.3068 showed
highest homology with Oryza sativa Japonica group, putative
RNA binding glycine rich protein. All the five GRPs encoded a
RRM conserved motif in the N-terminus and a CCHC zinc
finger motif within the glycine motif classifying them as the
sub-class II RNA binding GRPs. Three sequences exhibited
homology with an absisic acid inducible RNA binding GRP
from Zea mays. They were classified as the subclass I type
RNA binding GRPs due to the presence of a single RNA
recognition motif in the N-terminus of the protein sequence.
The rest of the three sequences were classified as subclass IV
RNA binding GRPs. They showed homology with different
sequences from Medicago sativa, Sorghum bicolor and Triticum
aestivatum respectively each having atleast two RRM motif
followed by C-terminal glycine rich region. No subclass III
GRPs were identified in Curcuma longa EST data bank. Absence
of subclass III GRPs has also been reported in other
monocotyledonous plants []. However, Fusaro et al 
[] has
reportedly isolated ten RNA binding GRPs of subclass III in
the sugarcane EST data bank. The greater diversity among the
GRPs of turmeric suggests their origin through DNA
recombination. The high GC contenet in the grp genes make
them as ctive site for recombination events resulting in high
variability in different classes of turmeric GRPs. The existance
of high recombination in glycine rich regions has been already
proved in mammals []. Alignment conducted with turmeric
EST encoded GRPs using MEGA ver 2.1 resulted in a distinct
unrooted tree (). Four well-separated cluster groups
were obtained in the phylogenetic tree each representing the
member of the particular classes of GRPs. The GRPs with
GGXXXGG repeats and the RNA binding GRPs were relatively
closure as compared to other classes. Likewise, the turmeric
GRPs with GGGX repeats formed a completely separated
cluster as compared to other three classes.

Conclusion
Turmeric is a sterile monocot, exhibit high stigmatic
incompatibility and undergoes vegetative means of
reproduction. It has a smaller triploid genome with n=21 that
exhibit secondary polyploidy. Thus, it can be effectively used
as a model plant for characterizing and analyzing various
genes that are expressed in response to different stresses in
asexually reproducing monocots. In the present study, we
identified fifty-one Curcuma longa glycine-rich protein
sequences from the EST database of the plant. Although
several genes encoding GRPs has been isolated from different
species, only a few has been cloned and characterized and their
functions determined. With the availability of large number of
in-silico derived GRPs from different plants species, greater
information on the role of GRPs in diverse processes such as
stress responses, signal transduction and developmental
regulation can be determined. The greater diversity in
structure, modulation and localization among the grp genes
expressed from turmeric suggest that they are directly or
indirectly involved in several physiological processes. Thus,
the in-silico derived GRPs isolated in the present study will act
as a starting point towards isolation, cloning, characterization
and functional validation of different glycine rich proteins that
are expressed in response to various stresses in turmeric as
well as other asexually reproducing plants.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are grateful to Dr. Manoj Ranjan Nayak, President,
Siksha O Anusandhan University for his encouragement and
support

Citation:Kar et al, Bioinformation 8(3): 142-146 (2012)

Unrooted dendrogram of glycine rich protein
sequences encoded by Curcuma longa ESTs. The relationships
were calculated using MEGA (p distance, neighbour joining
method and bootstrap test with 1000 replications, pairwise
deletions). The analysis was based on the ClustalX alignment
of sequences

