Background:
Motifs are frequently observed in biological sequences, such as 
transcription factor binding sites in DNA sequences and 
catalytic sites in protein sequences. The purpose of our tool is to 
allow users to simultaneously search for a sequence motif and 
its secondary structure assignments. Because a protein sequence 
motif is identified on the basis of sequence similarity and 
without the knowledge of the function that is conferred by the 
structural conformation represented by its assignment, it is 
important to determine where the conserved amino acids lie in 
the three-dimensional (3D) structure and to what extent these 
conserved amino acids represent known functional regions. 
There are many sequence motif search engines available online, 
but they have varied limitations. Most search functions in motif 
databases are limited to previously identified motifs such as 
InterPro [], BLOCKS 
[] and PRINTS 
[]. The majority of the 
motif search tools and databases do not have 3D visualisation 
and present their results as sequences. The position of the motif 
in the spatial arrangement is either visualised using third party 
tools, such as Jmol or using a mash-up that combines sequence 
searching and 3D visualisation, such as ScanProsite for 
PROSITE [] and Motif3D for PRINTS 
[]. However, 
ScanProsite only displays a static GIF image of the motif, 
whereas Motif3D does not have the ability to query the ultrashort 
linear motifs typically found in SLiM [] and Mini Motif 
Miner []. Recent developments of 3D motif visualisation tools 
allow interactive 3D visualisation within the conformational 
structure; these tool include seeMotif [], 3MATRIX and 
3MOTIF [], and PDBeMotif 
[]. However, PDBeMotif only 
allow users to add secondary structure patterns and not to 
specifically assign secondary structures to the amino acids in 
their motif queries.

Database development:
Data downloaded from Protein Data Bank (PDB) was stored on 
a single server that serves as the web server and perform the 
search function. Powered by Ubuntu 9.04 Server Edition, the 
server runs on top of Lighttpd 1.4.19 with FastCGI in addition 
to a backup web server of FastCGI-enabled Apache 2.2.4. 
Development uses Perl (version 5.10) with MySQL for database 
management, JavaScript, Yahoo User Interface (YUI), AJAX, 
JSON and Perl DBIx::Class. The website was built modularly, 
following a Model-View-Controller (MVC) framework as a 
FastCGI application. The server also acts as a PDB file server 
catering to Jmol requests and PDB files are streamed to the Jmol 
applet for each successful query through MySQL table. 

Software input:
A user will enter a sequence motif and its corresponding 
secondary structure for the amino acids into the submission 
box. The queries will then be searched against PDB structure 
files, which are continuously updated. There are several 
variables that can narrow the search possibilities. An example 
search for the sequence motif “PEEL” that exists in beta sheets 
requires the user to enter “PEEL” in the sequence query and 
EEEE (or H for helices) in the secondary structure assignment to 
search for all occurrences of the sequence and its corresponding 
secondary assignment. Users can use the wildcard “O” for any 
type of secondary structure or the wildcard “X” for unassigned 
secondary structures, which are usually found in undefined 
regions of the protein.

Software output:
The results page () shows the query on the top half of 
the page and highlights the number of matches against the PDB 
structural data from the RCSB. A brief description of the protein 
is provided and the users can also download all of the matching 
structures in FASTA format. The results page also shows a 
sequence alignment of the match and its corresponding 
secondary structure. We also added visualisation capability 
using Jmol in which the structure is loaded in a new window, 
and the position match highlighted in the structure 
(). Users can explore and export the structure using Jmol 
functionalities. An application programming interface (API) for 
Protein Short Motif Search was created to allow other 
developers to parse their data.

Caveat:
The search is conducted against PDB files downloaded weekly 
from the PDB.

Conclusion:
Protein short motif search unique functionality is the ability to 
search short motifs where the secondary structure of each 
amino acid in the motif can be specifically assigned. It is aimed 
to complement other search tools with the API allowing users to 
automate parsing high throughput data.

Future Development:
We intend to improve by adding functionalities and 
annotations such as solvent accessibility value cluster, the 
results according to SCOP or CATH classification and link to 
other protein database.

The authors acknowledge the Malaysian Ministry of Science, 
Technology and Innovation (MOSTI) and its E-Science Fund 
grant no. 02-01-06-SF0302 for supporting of the development of 
Protein Short Motif Search.

Citation:Venkataraman et al, Bioinformation 7(6): 304-306 (2011)

(a) Protein SMS Search Results and (b) Jmol Visualisation of the Results.

