Background
DNA microarray technology has enabled us to measure expression
levels of thousands of genes simultaneously under certain condition
and has yielded various biological applications such as functional
analysis of genes or identification of up- and down-expressed genes in
complex diseases like cancer. An important step of microarray data
analysis is to identify groups of genes showing similar expression
patterns across multiple samples (e.g., normal/disease cells) in a gene
expression dataset. Although traditional clustering algorithms like
hierarchical clustering provide natural solutions to this problem, these
are constrained by the limitation that all dimensions of samples are
used to compare pair of genes even if those genes actually exhibit
relevance only in a subset of samples.

On the other hand, a new clustering technique called biclustering has
focused on finding gene expression modules (“modules” for short)
with locally similar expression pattern across a subset of samples in a
gene expression dataset [–]. A module is defined as a subset of genes
with a common expression pattern across a subset of samples. We
previously developed an exhaustive and efficient biclustering
algorithm (BiModule) for module search, and reported that it shows
the highest enrichment of gene function sets as well as the fastest
running time among salient algorithms in yeast dataset and human
cell/tissue dataset [].

So far, existing module search methods including BiModule have
targeted single class dataset, but there has been no application to
multiple classes. We expect that such extension can be useful for
identifying genetic subtypes of medically similar but different disease
classes as well as for screening for biomarker candidates. In this paper,
we propose a novel method that discovers differentially expressed
modules between different two classes in gene expression dataset. The
major contribution of this paper is to provide a new module ranking
approach based on specificity score (“specificity” for short) that
represents the discriminative powers in two classes, and verify the
usefulness of the method. In this study, our method is applied to two
public cancer datasets, and its performance is evaluated through
functional enrichment analysis for obtained discriminative modules
and comparison with the traditional t-test-based approach.

Methodology
We search for modules separately from respective classes by using a
biclustering method and then extract discriminative modules based on
their specificity scores.

Module extraction by biclustering
In this study, BiModule [] is utilized to extract modules from each
class. Typically, biclustering requires high computational complexity
due to combinatorial searches for both of genes and samples, whereas
BiModule can search for maximal modules exhaustively from
normalized and discretized expression data in real time by using a
closed itemset mining algorithm called LCM []. This tool requires the
number of the discretization bins and the minimum size of modules as
the input parameters. In this study, we use 7 as the discretization bins,
and specify 10 genes and 4 samples as the minimum size of modules.

Module ranking by the specificities
As the candidates of discriminative modules, we pick up only the
constant modules in which discretized values all have an identical
sign. Here we define the specificity score that represents the
discrimination power between the classes. The specificities of the
constant modules are calculated in each class separately. Hereinafter
the targeting class and another class are respectively referred to as
class A and class B, where the targeting class means the class in which
the specificity calculations are performed. Now, we consider
calculating the specificity of a constant module X in class A. First, in
class B, we enumerate all combinations of modules Yi (i=1,2,..,c) in
the same genes and the same size of samples as the module X. Next
the specificity of the module X is calculated by the expression in
equation 1 (see )

Discussion
Experiments
To evaluate the usefulness of our method, we use the two-class gene
expression datasets: breast cancer [] and leukemia []. The breast
cancer dataset includes gene expression values for 7,129 genes in
samples of 25 positive and 24 negative statuses. The leukemia dataset
is composed of gene expression values for 12,582 genes in 24 ALL
(Acute Lymphocytic leukemia) samples and 28 AML (Acute Myeloid
Leukemia) samples.

We evaluate if the genes composing each discriminative module
(called “module genes” below) reflect properly known biological
functions. In this study, the functions of module genes are identified
by using a functional enrichment analysis tool called GeneCoDis [].
GeneCoDis provides a statistical probability (p-value) that a certain
biological function occurs x-times by chance in a given list of genes.
This tool enables functional analyses in terms of the various biological
themes. In this paper, we test on the following four themes: Gene
Ontology biological function annotations (GO), KEGG molecular
interaction annotations (KEGG), InterPro Motif annotations (IPM) and
transcription factors from TransFAC (TF).

Module ranking and biological functions
To examine correlation between the module ranking and the biological
functions, we use the top 50 discriminative modules in descending
order of the specificities, and conduct functional enrichment analyses
for each discriminative module. Subsequently, we generate the pvalues
of statistically over-represented functions in those modules.
 shows the p-values judged to be significant functions
(p less than 0.0001) in the respective rank orders for the breast cancer () and leukemia datasets (), where the p-values for the four
biological themes are plotted all together. From these two figures, we
can see that discriminative modules with larger specificities are
characterized by more significant functions. This result suggests that
our scoring method reflects successfully the functional enrichments of
the discriminative modules.

Comparison with the t-test-based approach
In addition, we compare our method with the t-test-based approach
(called t-test approach below) that has been widely used in
differentially expressed gene analysis. The t-test approach used here
consists of the following steps; first, t-test is applied to each gene
separately, and only genes with smaller p-values than a certain
significant level are selected. Next, these selected genes are grouped
into gene clusters showing similar expression patterns by using a
hierarchical clustering. After that, we utilize the cluster boundary
discovery tool ASIAN [] to obtain the optimal cluster separation.
Finally, functional enrichment analysis for each cluster is conducted
by GeneCoDis.

The significant functions of discriminative modules are compared to
those of the clusters generated by the t-test approach. The comparison
test is performed using the relative frequency distributions of p-values
for the four biological themes.  shows the results for breast
cancer () and leukemia datasets (), where the gray
bar and the white bar show the results for our method and the t-test
approach, respectively. In the breast cancer dataset (), our
method shows significant functions in all of the themes. In contrast,
the t-test approach presents no significant functions except for GO. As
for the leukemia dataset (), although the both of two
approaches exhibit significant functions in all themes, we cannot see
obvious differences between them. However, from these two figures,
we can see that our method shows better results than the t-test
approach in the KEGG functions. Namely, this suggests that our
method outperforms the t-test approach in the ability of finding
unknown genetic pathways of the actual living cells.

Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed a new method for extracting differentially
expressed gene modules from two-class gene expression dataset and
applied it to the breast cancer and leukemia datasets. The results of
functional enrichment analysis revealed that the discriminative
modules show significantly over-represented biological functions at
the multiple genetic levels compared to clusters generated by the
traditional t-test approach. From these results, we conclude that our
method would become a promising approach for not only discovering
differentially expressed gene sets in different classes but also
identifying candidates of gene biomarkers in intractable diseases like
cancer.

However, in this paper, we have not provided any valid criteria for the
threshold of specificities. Thus the top 50 discriminative modules used
in this study might include indifferent modules. In the future work, we
will develop a method to detect automatically the valid threshold for
specificity. In addition, we will extend the method to a new
classification approach based on the discriminative modules.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work was supported by Grant-in-Aid for Young Scientists (B)
No.21700233 from MEXT Japan and A Research for Promoting
Technological Seeds from JSTA.

Citation:Okada &amp; Inoue , Bioinformation 4(4): 134-137 (2009)

Correlation between the specificity scores vs. module ranking

Relative frequency distribution of p-value in four biological themes

