Background
The growth and productivity of crop plants depend largely on
their vulnerability to environmental stresses. High salinity,
water deficit, and temperature stress are the major constraints
that limit agricultural production [,
]. Plants respond to these
conditions with an array of biochemical and physiological
adaptations, which involve the function of many stress-related
genes. Proline accumulation has been well documented during
drought [], high salinity 
[], high light and UV irradiation 
[],
heavy metals [], oxidative stress 
[] and in response to biotic
stresses [,
]. Several functions are proposed for the
accumulation of proline in tissues exposed to stresses. These
include abiotic and biotic osmotic adjustments, C and N reserve
for growth after stress relief, detoxification of excess ammonia,
stabilization of proteins and/or membranes and scavenger of
free radicals [,
,
].

Accumulation of proline in plant cells under stress environment
could be due to either its de novo synthesis or decreased
degradation or both. Synthesis of proline in plants occurs in the
cytosol and in the plastids (like chloroplasts in green tissues)
and involves the sequential action of pyrroline-5-carboxylate
synthetase (P5CS) and pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase
(P5CR), which convert glutamate to pyrroline-5-carboxylate
(P5C) and P5C to proline, respectively [,
]. Several studies
have indicated that P5CS is the critical enzyme in proline
biosynthesis under salt and water stress [,
]. Proline
biosynthesis is controlled by the activity of two P5CS genes in
Arabdopsis, encoding one housekeeping and one stress-specific
P5CS isoform. Arabidopsis P5CS1 is induced by osmotic and salt
stresses and is activated by H2O2-derived signals and abscisic
acid (ABA)-dependent pathway [,
]. P5CR is encoded by
only one gene but the enzyme seems to be active in chloroplasts
and cytosol [,
].

Proline is oxidized by sequential action of proline
dehydrogenase (PDH), which converts proline to P5C and D1 -
pyrroline-5-carboxylate dehydrogenase (P5CDH), which
converts P5C into glutamate [,
]. The oxidation of proline
generates NADP/NADPH cycling or redox balance therefore,
important for the cell. The enzyme PDH is bound to the inner
membrane of mitochondria. An alternative source of substrate
for the PCDH enzyme can be derived from the conversion of
arginine to ornithine and subsequent catabolism to P5C by
ornithine aminotransferase []. P5CDH is a single copy gene in
Arabidopsis and the encoded protein is mitochondria localized
[].

Whereas proline biosynthesis is upregulated by light and
osmotic stresses, proline catabolism is activated in the dark and
during stress relief [,
]. P5CS1 gene activation and proline
accumulation is promoted by light and repressed by
brassinosteroids [,
]. Under non-stressed conditions,
phospholipase D (PLD) functions as a negative regulator of
proline accumulation [], on the other hand, calcium signaling
and phospholipase C (PLC) trigger P5CS transcription and
proline accumulation during salt stress. However, in some
halophyte PLD functions as positive regulator, whereas PLC
exerts a negative control on proline accumulation [,
].
Calcium signals can be transmitted by a specific CaM4
calmodulin, which interacts with the MYB2 transcription factor
and upregulates P5CS1 transcription []. Conversion of P5C to
proline is not a rate-limiting step in proline biosynthesis, yet the
control of P5CR activity implies a complex regulation of
transcription, which was shown to be under developmental and
osmotic regulation []. Promoter analysis of Arabidopsis P5CR
identified a 69-bp promoter region that is responsible for tissuespecific
expression []. However, trans-acting factors that can
bind to this promoter region have not yet been identified.
Downregulation of PDH expression during stress is widely
accepted as one control point that can promote proline
accumulation under stress [,
,
]. PDH transcription is
activated by rehydration and proline, but repressed by
dehydration; thus, preventing proline degradation during
abiotic stress []. Promoter analysis of PDH1 identified the
proline and hypo-osmolarity-responsive element (PRE) motif
ACTCAT, which is necessary for the activation of the PDH gene
[]. Basic leucine zipper protein (bZIP) transcription factors
(AtbZIP-2, -11, -44, -53) have been identified as candidates for
binding to this motif []. The P5CDH gene is expressed at a
low basal level in all Arabidopsis tissues, and can be upregulated
by proline []. A short sequence similar to the PRE motif has
been identified on the promoters of P5CDH genes in Arabidopsis
and cereals [].

Although the importance of proline accumulation conferring
hyperosmotic stress tolerance has been demonstrated well, the
regulatory molecules as well as the molecular signals involved
in the expression of proline biosynthetic genes are not
understood. Comprehensive studies are required at
physiological, molecular and genetic levels to explore the signal
transduction events of proline synthesis and degradation. An
insight into proline metabolism would be of interest to both
those seeking to better understand plant stress physiology as
well as those seeking to understand metabolic regulation. In the
present study, we aim to analyze promoters of genes involved
in proline metabolism in order to improve the understanding of
the underlying physiological, biochemical and molecular events
in stress tolerance by the plant.

Methodology
Genes involved in proline biosynthesis and osmoregulation:
Sequences of seven genes (Delta1-pyrroline-5- carboxylate
synthytase 1, Pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase, Proline
oxidase, Putative / osmotic stress-responsive proline
dehydrogenase, Delta-pyrroline-5- carboxylate dehydrogenase,
Proline transporter 1, Proline transporter 2, Proline transport3)
of proline biosynthesis in Arabidopsis thaliana were retrieved
after mapping the Locus IDs to the ATIGRS gene identifiers
 (see supplementary material).

Promoter sequence analysis of differentially expressed genes of proline biosynthesis:
Promoters sequence analysis of differentially expressed genes
of proline metabolism was done using BIOBASE Knowledge
Library Plant Edition (BKL-Plant) and ExPlain Plant Analysis
system. The promoter window of -1,000 to +100bp was
uploaded into ExPlain PlantAnalysis System, F-Match module
was used to identify transcription factor binding sites
overrepresented in differentially expressed proline biosynthesis
gene sets against a background set of 200 ubiquitously present
genes. The Composite Module Analysis was then used to
determine which combination of binding sites, or Composite
Module, was most commonly found within the sets of genes.
Matrices with a Yes/No score &gt;1.3, pvalue &lt;0.05, and Matched
promoters p-value &lt;0.1 from F-Match analyses were selected
for the composite module analysis (CMA).

Results and Discussion
Regulation of gene expression plays an important role in a
variety of biological processes such as development and
responses to environmental stimuli including biotic and abiotic
stresses. These responses are modulated by transcriptional
regulation of various genes. One of such plant responses to
environmental stresses is the accumulation of proline. Although
proline metabolism has been studied for very long time in
plants, little is known about the signaling pathways involved in
its regulation. Proline biosynthesis is activated and its
catabolism repressed during dehydration, whereas rehydration
triggers the opposite regulation [,
]. Based on the literature
and genome information, Arabidopsis genome was parsed for
the proline biosynthetic genes by using mapviewer. In general,
cellular concentration of compatible solutes can be regulated by
increasing biosynthesis, decreasing degradation, and/or
modifying rates of uptake or release of these compounds.
Therefore, the genes were divided into three sub-groups
according to the metabolic functions. Group 1 of pyrroline-5-
carboxylate synthetase (P5CS) and pyrroline-5-carboxylate
reductase (P5CR). There are two P5CS gene loci in the nuclear
genome of Arabidopsis thaliana. Out of these, AtP5CS1 is
reported to be involved in stress tolerance. Group 2 of osmotic
stress-responsive proline dehydrogenase (PO/PDH) and
pyrroline-5-carboxylate dehydrogenase (P5CDH). Group 3 of
proline transporter with affinity for glycine betaine, proline and
GABA (AtProT1), proline transporter 2 (AtProT2) and Proline
transporter 3 (AtProT3) .

Composite Module Analysis of proline biosynthetic Genes:
A large number (&gt;1,500) of transcription factors (TFs) in plants,
control the expression of tens or hundreds of target genes in
various, sometimes intertwined, signal transduction cascades.
Transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) are the functional
elements that determine the timing and location of
transcriptional activity. In plants and other higher eukaryotes,
these elements are primarily located in the long non-coding
sequences upstream of a gene, although functional elements in
introns and untranslated regions have been described as well.
The discovery of regulatory motifs and their organization in
promoter sequences is an important first step to improve
understanding of gene expression and regulation. Since
coexpressed genes are likely to be regulated by the same TF, the
identification of shared and thus overrepresented motifs insets
of potentially co-regulated genes may provide an insight to the
regulation of expression of whole metabolic pathway.

F-Match analysis compares the number of sites found in a query
sequence set against the background set and provides, as
results, the Position Weight Matrices (PWMs) whose
frequencies are higher in the query sequence set compared to
the background set. The F-match analysis results showed over
represented TFBS in the proline biosynthetic gene set ().
The composite module analysis was used to determine the
combination of binding sites most commonly found within the
sets of genes. Upon analysis, the binding sites matching
matrices for Opaque 2 (O2) and Ocs element binding factor
(OCSBF-1) appeared most commonly in differing combinations
within the promoters of proline biosynthesis genes (
and  (see supplementary material).

The presence of O2 and OCSBF-1 consensus binding sites
occurring in combination within the promoters of proline
biosynthetic genes suggests a role for bzip family proteins in
the regulation of expression of this gene set. These proteins are
of particular interest because they represent a group of plant
transcriptional regulators that are similar to Fos 
[] and CREB
[] families of proteins which act by way of conserved DNA
binding domains and diverged effect or domains []. The
information available on O2 and closely related monocot genes
indicates that they regulate seed storage protein production by
interacting with the PBF protein. The data derived from
monocot and dicot species suggest that homologues of group S
bZIPs are transcriptionally activated after stress treatments 
[].
The presence of O2 and OCSBF-1 consensus binding sites in the
members of proline metabolism genes set suggests common
sensor for the concerted regulatory control of proline
metabolism. Similar regulatory control of proline metabolism is
seen upon illumination, where proline biosynthesis upregulated
by light and osmotic stresses while proline catabolism is
downregulated [–]. The blast analysis showed O2 and
OCSBF1 show homology to the members of C and S groups of
Arabidopsis AtbZIP transcription factor family, respectively.
Blast results showed transcription factors closest to O2 are
AtbZIP10 and AtbZIP25 and to OCSBF1 are AtbZIP53 and
AtbZIP2.

Weltmeier et al. [] used chromatin immunoprecipation (ChIP)
assay to show that ProDH is a direct target of the group S bZIP
transcription factor AtbZIP53 and group C AtbZIP10. Promoter
analysis of Arabidopsis P5CR identified a 69-bp promoter region
that is responsible for tissue-specific expression []. The transacting
factors that can bind to this promoter region, however,
have not yet been identified. The regulation of other genes in
proline metabolism by specific transcription factor is yet to be
studied.

Composite module analysis also showed consensus binding
sites of MYBAS1 in P5CS1 and P5CR, SBF-1 in PDH and GT-1 in
P5CDH promoters (Supplementary data) suggesting that the
proline metabolism gene cluster is likely to be under the
combinatorial control of more than one class of transcription
factors. Plant MYB proteins have been shown to regulate
diverse developmental processes, as well as being involved in
environmental signaling and secondary metabolism []. SBF-1
(SET binding factor 1) is a pseudo-phosphatase related to the
myotubularin family of dual specificity phosphatases and binds
to the silencer region of a chalcone synthase promoter []. The
consensus sequence resembles the binding site for the GT-1
factor in light-responsive elements of the pea rbcS-3A gene
suggesting that they may have similar functions []. Plant
transcription factor GT-1 was identified by its specific binding
activity to Box II, a promoter cis-element with the core DNA
sequence 5′-GGTTAA found initially in light-regulated genes
and may activate transcription through direct interaction with
the transcriptional pre-initiation complex [].

The F-Match and CM analyses with the published literature
suggest involvement of both trans- and cis- acting regulatory
elements that sense proline levels either directly or indirectly.
Therefore, to determine the precise regulation mechanism of
proline metabolism, reverse genetic approaches (random or
specific gene disruption, overexpression of strong activators or
repressors or their inducible counterparts) in combination with
microarray technology may be done. Such studies with the
metabolomic analyses should pave the way towards a better
understanding of the functional diversification of plant TFs and
regulatory molecule under stress conditions.

Conclusion
The composite module analysis was used to determine the
combination of binding sites most commonly found within the
sets of proline metabolism genes. Upon analysis, the binding
sites matching matrices for O2 and OCSBF-1 appeared most
commonly in differing combinations within the promoters of
proline biosynthesis genes. O2 and OCSBF1 showed homology
with the members of C and S groups of AtbZIP transcription
factor family, respectively. The presence of MYBAS1 consensus
binding sites in combination with O2 and OCSBF1 in the
promoters of genes of proline biosynthesis pathway and GT1
and SBF-1 consensus binding sites occurring in combination
with O2 and OCSBF1 in the promoters of genes of proline
catabolic pathway genes suggest involvement of these
transcription factors in the regulation of cellular levels of
proline in plants exposed to abiotic and biotic stresses.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors acknowledge UGC, Ministry of Human Resource
Development, Government of India for the financial assistance
and UGC-SAP, Government of India for providing the
infrastructure for doing the computational work.

Citation:Kiran &amp; Abdin, Bioinformation 8(18): 886-890 (2012)

Composite Module Analysis of proline biosynthesis
pathway genes.

Over represented Transcription factor binding sites
(TFBS) in Proline biosynthesis promoter set using F- MATCH
Analysis.

