Background
Carcinoma of the breast is the most widespread malignancy
among women and is the second leading cause of deaths after
lung cancer. It is a highly heterogeneous pathology involving
disproportionate propagation and inadequate apoptosis of
cellular differentiation that induces the mutant cells to
accumulate []. Estrogens play a key role in the etiology of
mammary carcinoma. Women's having breast cancer that test
positive for estrogen receptors (ER+) suggest that estrogen
promotes the growth of cancer cells. The anti-estrogen drug
tamoxifen block the receptor and hence slows or stops the
growth of cancerous cells []. The extensively used high density
oligonucleotide microarray technology is playing a crucial role
in biomedical research in the identification of disease markers.
The technique measures the expression intensity of thousands
of genes concurrently allowing the investigation of
differentially expressed genes under diverse conditions of
disease state or treatment [].

A range of studies showed that microarray analysis is a reliable
tool for the improvement of diagnosis. Molecular profiling of
breast cancer has classified the tumor into various subtypes
based on their gene expression pattern to better understand the
biology of multifaceted disease []. The expansion of highthroughput
technologies and the exponential propagation of
data generated by these methods led to the emergence of
systems biology that analyze a problem applying
computational and mathematical tools to sum up massive
amounts of information in a biological perception which later
helps to understand multifarious biological systems 
[–].

In our present study, a systems biology approach is aimed to
examine the association of diseased-genes with other genes
involved in the carcinoma. We first analyzed the expression
pattern of genes involved in breast cancer through high
throughput expression information and subsequently
constructed a network of Gene Interaction Map (GIP) from the
differentially expressed and non-cancerous genes. Furthermore,
Gene Ontology was performed on both cancerous and noncancerous
genes to examine their functions and pathways.

Methodology
The in-silico investigation of the expression pattern of genes
accountable for Breast Cancer was retrieved from Stanford
Microarray Database (SMD). The data comprises of two
experimental conditions when the cell line (MCF-7) was
supplemented with Estrogen Receptors after making it
deprived for many hours and when they were treated with an
anti-cancerous drug, Tamoxifen.

Normalization:
Prior to the analysis the data was made comparable to locate the
actual biological changes by processing it with the techniques of
normalization. It is an imperative step in the analysis and helps
to eradicate the differences in RNA qualities and the
fluctuations generated by the technique so that the intensity
level may not vary from one replicate to other 
[].

The gene expression median ratio values (log2 values) were
processed by following the neutral method []. An in-house
program was developed to remove the experimental bias via
following steps: (a) Calculating the row-wise mean and
standard deviation for each gene in the data files. (b) Averaging
the replicates. (c) Replacing the missing (empty) columns with
the average values across the row.

Clustering:
Clustering is a vital step in microarray data analysis to infer
group of data and locate co-regulated and functionally related
groups. It was first applied in the late 1990s and has become an
important device to elucidate patterns hidden in the expression
data for an enhanced understanding of functional genomics. It
reveals internal structures and identifies patterns in a data set
applying an unsupervised learning approach [].

The k-means clustering of the normalized dataset was carried
for further investigation value of K was set 10% of the total
number of genes present in both experimental conditions. The
method resulted in a variety of clusters comprising genes
having similar functions. Hierarchical clustering was further
performed for both the conditions to assure whether both these
clustering methods contain clusters with similar genes. The
cancerous genes retrieved from the Breast Cancer gene database
[] were mapped in the clusters.

Differentially Expressed Genes (DEGs):
Differentially expressed genes with significantly different
expression levels in the two conditions were identified 
[].
These genes are relevant to identify potential drug targets and
biomarkers. The expression pattern of genes in each cluster
were plotted to explore their differential expression ( &amp;
).

Gene Interaction Map (GIP):
Interaction maps of differentially expressed genes were
constructed with Cytoscape 2.8.0 [], software for network
analysis and visualization. Union of the networks was
performed to end up with a vastly connected interactome of
cancerous and non-cancerous genes forming an extremely
linked hub.

Gene ontology studies:
The understanding of the complex biological process from
differential expression of genes was obtained through a
computational approach that determines the Gene Ontology
(GO) terms for the categories biological process, cellular
component and molecular function. The method takes a list of
differentially expressed genes and uses a statistical measure to
identify the GO terms that are over or under represented 
[].
Functional characterization of the novel genes with their Gene
Ontology was identified through BiNGO [], a plug-in of
cytoscape. BiNGO does a hyper geometric test using the
Benjamini Hochberg False Discovery Rate (FDR) correction
method to analyze the over representation of the GO categories.
The test yields p-values indicating significant genes.

Results and Discussion
The proposed methodology is illustrated on a subset of a
microarray study of Breast Cancer data.

Analysis of Expression Pattern of Genes:
The K-mean clustering resulted in clusters containing the genes
having similar or related functions. The expression of the genes
were analyzed by setting the criterion that one cluster must
share at most 4 to 15 genes. The analysis came up with the
number of genes that have been up and down regulated
simultaneously  (see supplementary material). Such a
group of genes which follows the similar expression pattern are
referred to as co-expressed. Applying the expression values of
genes and experimental conditions for a particular cluster, a
gene expression plot ( &amp; ) have been created which
shows the expression pattern of the genes belonging to that
cluster, Y-axis of this plot shows the variation in gene
expression level (Expression ratio), X-axis shows the ID of
different experiments which were performed at different
experimental conditions. These plots shows that according to
time period and provided experimental conditions, the
expression level of gene changes and this change becomes
observable. This fluctuation seems to be same for most of the
genes that are in same cluster and are known as co-expressed
genes. Analysis of expression profiles from psoriasis patients
discovered various novel targets based on their topological
properties and suggests the development of network-based
approach for the treatment of wide range of diseases 
[].

 shows the expression pattern of gene, BRCA2,
responsible for Breast Cancer in Estrogen-Receptor Starved data
with other co-expressed genes. It was observed that the gene is
over-expressed when the cells are starved of Estrogen Receptors
for 48 hours and after that are supplemented with the
Receptors. Other genes are also showing the same pattern
accept the gene CDA which is under-expressed.  shows
the expression pattern of gene BRCA2, responsible for Breast
Cancer, in Tamoxifen treated data with other co-expressed
genes. It was observed that the gene is highly under-expressed
when the cells are treated with different concentration of drug;
other genes are also showing the same pattern. Expression and
network based studies has revealed perturbation in the four
novel significant pathways in type 2 diabetes [].

Analysis of Gene Interaction Map:
The approach of reductionism has influenced science over the
past two centuries and has furnished insights about the
components of the living organisms but has failed to explain the
complex interactions of these components. The substitute of the
divide and conquer method that has gained recent attention
known as systems biology uses an integrative approach that
combines high throughput tools, computational and
mathematical models to solve a problem []. Rapid advances
in the tools of network theory have increased the focus on the
study of molecular interactions to better understand the
dynamics of a cell. Protein interaction networks were used to
identify potential drug targets in the resistant strains of
Mycobacterium Tuberculosis. Incorporation of such concepts into
medicine may enhance its therapeutic potential [].

Biological networks are scale free that is they follow a power
law distribution []. A Gene Interaction Map is an undirected
graph G (N, E), which constitutes of number of nodes N and
edges E. The degree of a node is the total number of nodes
adjacent to a given node. The network of the 62 differentially
expressed cancerous genes was constructed where the reference
gene is centered by all other genes.  shows
interaction network of the gene AKT2, the circles and lines
indicates the nodes and edges. An edge is drawn if both genes,
say A and B, participate in an interaction and the reaction is
undirected.  shows interaction network of the gene
PTP1B. These interaction networks were further merged and
the common genes, the genes that interact with all other Breast
Cancer Genes but are not responsible for the disease, were
located by performing the union.  shows the merged
network of the genes AKT2 and PTP1B; both the networks are
linked with three nodes shown by yellow color. The two nodes
represent the genes ESR1, AKT1 which are responsible for
Cancer and the third node represent the gene GSK3RB which
interacts with both the genes in some process but is not
responsible for the disease. Therefore any alteration in this gene
or the pathway in which it interacts with other genes can make
it a cause for the disease. All the genes are merged in the same
manner and the common genes were found out. Total of 38
genes () were determined that interact with the Breast
Cancer genes and these genes can be considered as biomarkers
for Cancer.

Analysis of Interaction Network of Cancerous and Non-Cancerous Genes:
The integration of high throughput expression profiles and
clinical data leads to the development of diseased networks that
allows an extensive knowledge of the disease and its pathways
[]. 
The network comprises of total 83 genes () of
which 12 more genes were verified as cancerous from curated
literature based information, 45 consisted of the Breast Cancer
Genes and 26 were novel genes that were correlated with
cancerous genes. When the interaction network of the Breast
Cancer and Novel Genes was analyzed it was observed that
most of the Breast Cancer genes like TP53, SRC, ERBB2, ESR1,
BCL2, IGF1R, KIT, PTP1B, MET, HRAS, MYC are extremely
interacting with the reported genes PIK3R1, GRB2, HSP90AA1,
MAPK3, IRS1, NCOA1, CAC1, PTK2 and with the novel genes
MAPK14, CASP3, INSR, CREBBP, STAT3, STST5A and CHUK.

The idea of Gene Ontology (GO) has been utilized to examine
breast cancer datasets (Draghici, 2003). The categories that are
significantly overrepresented in the GIP comprising
differentially expressed cancerous genes connected with the
non-cancerous were obtained by statistical analysis employing
hyper geometric test. The test calculates the significance value
i.e., p-value for each category  (see supplementary
material). The p-value indicates the probability that a gene is
significant not by chance keeping the value of FDR at the
significance level of 0.05. It was found out that majority of the
Breast Cancer genes were involved in 5 main functions
particularly enzyme binding, receptor signaling protein activity,
signal transducer, molecular transducer and transcription
regulator activity. Further it was determined that the 12 novel
but reported genes are also involved in the same function as the
cancerous genes with some other significant functions that is to
say nucleotide binding, phosphotransferase activity, alcohol
group as acceptor, transcription cofactor activity.

Also, examining the functions and pathways of the novel genes,
we found that the 3 novel genes INSR, CREBBP and CHUK are
also involved in the same function as Breast Cancer and
Reported Genes. Thus, we may conclude that our novel genes
INSR, CREBBP and CHUK can also be said to be responsible for
the disease. The gene STS5A is highly interacting with the
cancerous genes ESR1, KIT, PTP1B, and BRCA2. But, till now no
functions and pathways are clearly determined for this gene,
which can further be understood with animal model studies of
knocking in and out.

Conclusion
An important goal in cancer research is the mapping of
pathways that are responsible for the emergence and
progression of the disease. The analysis of expression pattern of
genes involved in a disease using microarray data analysis is of
paramount importance as it imparts a snap-shot of global
expression pattern of the genes and the approach is used for the
identification of cancer biomarkers and therapeutic targets. We
can also figure out which cellular systems, (signaling) pathways
and/or cellular compartments are targeted by a set of genes, i.e.
the identification of processes in the cell that are deregulated or
altered in consequence of differentially expressed genes. The
application of network-based approach identifies makers as sub
networks taking into account the information of other
interacting partners that are not differentially expressed.
Analysis of the GIP suggests that the genes INSR, CREBBP and
CHUK were found to be highly interacting with the breast
cancer genes TP53, SRC, ERBB2, ESR1, BCL2, IGF1R, KIT,
PTP1B, MET, HRAS, MYC and were also involved in the same
pathway and function hence, these genes can also be
responsible for the cancer. The gene STS5A is found to be
interacting with the breast cancer genes for which no function
and pathway has been known yet. Hence, integration of
genome wide expression data and the properties of systems
biology may have an impact on the future of medicine.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Chand &amp; Alam, Bioinformation 8(23): 1132-1138 (2012)

Expression pattern of BRCA2 in ER starved data files.

Expression pattern of BRCA2 in Tamoxifen treated
data files.

(A) Interaction network of cancerous gene AKT2; (B) Interaction network of cancerous gene PTPIB; (C) Merged network
of cancerous AKT2 and PTP1B.

Union of interaction networks showing cancerous gene as the central node

Gene Interaction Map of cancerous and non-cancerous genes.

