Background
Cellular reprogramming is the process of conversion of adult
stem cells to embryonic-like stem cells. Four factors are
involved in this process of reprogramming say the yamanaka
factors-Oct4, Sox2, Klf4 and c-Myc []. Oct4 is an indispensable
component for this conversion. But the success of
reprogramming depends on several factors such as amount of
factors used and the time period of exposure. Over exposure
may result in dangerous results such as generation of
tumorigenic cells []. Later it was discovered how long an adult
cells need to be exposed to reprogramming factors before they
get converted to an embryonic-like state []. They defined the
sequence of events that occur during reprogramming [,
]. This
finding informs that the duration of exposure on the cells is
important for the programming to be effective. High expression
of Oct4 and Klf4 combined with lower expression of c-Myc and
Sox2 produced Induced Pluripotent Stem (iPS) cells []. In order
to maintain the pluripotency, glycolysis is decoupled from
oxidative phosphorylation (OxPhos-which includes Krebs cycle
and ETC) [,
]. Now, Oct4 being an indispensable element in
reprogramming, understanding its functions is of great
importance []. Oct4 forms a hetero dimer with Sox2 and the
complex binds to the DNA. Sox2 binds to the consensus motif
CATTGTT, and Oct4 binds to ATTTGCAT. Oct4 –Sox2 complex
binds to thousands of regulatory sites in the ESC genome and
positively regulate Nanog []. It was found that, Oct4 bind to a
factor called PSBP (pluripotential cell-specific Sox elementbinding
protein), which in turn binds to Sox2 and control
Nanog expression. At the same time both Oct4 and Sox2 binds
to DNA [,
]. Oct4 interacts with thousands of other proteins
which are of importance for maintaining the pluripotent state of
the cell []. Several factors act as positive or negative
regulators for Oct4 [].

Methodology
There are thousands of genes with which Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog
interacts for inducing pluripotency. Out of these thousands of
interactions, there are 404 genes interacting with Oct4 and Sox2.
According to Boyer et al, [], 353 of these genes were cooccupied
by Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog. These 353 genes are of
importance because all the three factors play major role in
inducing pluripotency []. These 353 genes were classified
based on their interaction with Nanog and later based on the
location of interaction. Some of the genes interact with Oct4 and
Sox2 using the same site whereas others interact with different
locations. The functions of these genes were identified by
database searching. Using a tool GOEAST (Gene Ontology
Enrichment Analysis Software Toolkit) [], genes were
clustered based on their molecular functions. Out of the several
categories, those genes showing transcription regulation
activity were separated and the domains of their translated
products were identified from Uniprot. The interaction
networks of the transcription regulation genes were studied
using a tool STRING [].

Genes were further classified based on their domain nature.
Multiple sequence alignment was performed using MultAlin on
clusters of domains to identify the occurrence of any
functionally important consensus regions in the sequence.
Later, the influence of Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog on these genes
were determined and drugs were identified that can induce the
same effect, by using a tool X2K (Expression 2 Kinases) 
[].
Attempts were also made to find phytochemical analogs for
those drugs, which may serve as an alternative factor for Oct4.

Results and Discussion
Classification:
353 genes co-occupied by Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog and reported
by Boyer et al, [] were used for analysis. These genes were
then classified in to two categories based on their type of
interaction with Oct4 and Sox2, after retrieving them from
Uniprot database []. Among 353 genes, 187 genes exhibited
interaction with Oct4 and Sox2 at different location and 166
genes at same location. In real time, Oct4 and Sox2 form a
hetero dimer before interacting with DNA for inducing
pluripotency. This implies that, Oct4 and Sox2 cannot interact
with genes on same location at the same time. This make the set
of same location interaction less important compared to
different location interactions. 29 out of above mentioned 187
genes and 20 out of 166 genes were found not to interact with Nanog.

Clustering and interaction network analysis:
These genes were then clustered based on their molecular
function using a tool GOEAST Transcription factors are
essential for the regulation of gene expression and hence are
important in any network [,
]. From the cluster, 46 out of 353
genes were involved in transcription regulation. The interaction
networks of these 46 transcription regulation genes were
studied STRING.

Domain wise clustering and multiple sequence alignment:
These 46 were then clustered based on the nature of the domain
of their translated products. Different types of domains starting
from homeo domains to coiled coils, zinc fingers; transmembrane
helices etc. were involved. These clusters were then
used to perform multiple sequence alignment using the tool
MultAlin [] for the identification of consensus regions in the
sequence. Identification of functionally important consensus
regions is of great significance because these could be the region
with which Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog are interacting for inducing
pluripotency. By finding alternative factors that can bind to
those regions and induce the same effect as that of the trio
elements will help in deriving new factors for inducing
pluripotency. A domain wise classification created several
clusters. Out of the different clusters, the cluster of homeo
domain transcription factors having 13 members exhibited
some consensus in their sequence (). The amino acids
tryptophan, phenylalanine, asparagine and arginine are
conserved throughout in homeo domain containing proteins.
This consensus was found to be functionally important because,
while analyzing the functions of genes, those having this
consensus region in their sequence exhibited sequence-specific
DNA binding transcription factor activity whereas the others
didn’t. This enunciates the importance of this consensus region
in the sequence.

Gene regulation:
The influences of Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog on the genes were
identified. Out of the 46 transcription factors, 26 were down
regulated by Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog action and 14 were up
regulated. And out of the 13 homeo domain containing
transcription factors, 8 of them were down regulated. This
implies that majority of the homeo domain transcription factors
favors differentiation and hence their down regulation 

(see supplementary material) is favored by Oct4, Sox2 and
Nanog for maintaining the cell in pluripotent state.

Drug interaction and phytochemical analogs:
Later using a tool X2K– Expressions 2 Kinases, drugs that can
induce the same effect as that of Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog on these
genes were identified. Attempts were made to identify
phytochemical analogs of the drugs. Most of them belonged to
the family of Boraginaceae, compositae, Leguminosae and
Euphorbiaceae.

Conclusion
The above study has helped in identifying alternate factor for
inducing pluripotency for a subclass of genes. In the above
analysis, a sub class of genes, say 13 homeo domain containing
transcription factors that are involved in plurpotency network
out of the 353 genes interacting with all the three factors could
be replaced by some phytochemical products. Identification of
some consensus region for all the genes involved in
pluripotency and determining the effect of Oct4, Sox2 and
Nanog on those regions, and identifying an alternate factor that
can induce the same effect as that of the trio elements will help
us in replacing these tumor inducing components with safer
methods for inducing pluripotency. This emphasizes the fact
that identifying functionally important consensus regions in all
the genes involved in pluripotency can help us find an alternate
factor for Oct4 for inducing pluripotency without the risk of
tumor formation. Finding an alternate factor for inducing
pluripotency without the risk of tumor formation can
revolutionize reprogramming and widen the scope of its use in
saving human lives. Phytochemical analogs identification
should be encouraged because this can bring down the cost of
reprogramming and equip its wide spread implementation.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors express their heartfelt gratitude to Dr. Rama
Shanker Verma, Professor, Stem Cell and Molecular Biology
laboratory, Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of
Technology, Chennai, for his valuable ideas.

Citation:Gangadaran &amp; James, Bioinformation 8(19): 912-915 (2012)

Multiple sequence alignment of homeo domains
Transcription factors

