Background
Antibiotics are widely used to treat bacterial infections.
However, bacteria have now become increasingly resistant to
conventional antibiotics resulting in a major issue in clinical
settings.

Antibiotic resistance in bacterial strains have disseminated
widely and posed a great threat to public health. β-lactam
antibiotics are the most commonly prescribed drugs as the
mainstay for the treatment of many bacterial infections. These
antibiotics contain β-lactam ring and inhibit synthesis of
peptidoglycan layer of bacterial cell wall []. However, bacteria
have developed several strategies to resist antibiotic action
among them the most effective is the production of β-
lactamases which catalyze hydrolysis of β-lactam antibiotics 
[]
thereby opening the β-lactam ring and rendering it inactive 
[].

In addition, administration of β-lactamase inhibitor, such as
clavulanic acid, together with β-lactam antibiotic is an effective
method to treat β-lactamase producing infections.The latter
strategy effectively blocks β-lactamase activity while the β-
lactam antibiotic is free to inhibit the bacterial transpeptidases.

Classification of β-lactamases have been based on either
primary structure such as conserved amino acids and protein
sequence motifs [] or the functional characteristics of the
enzymes [,
]. The simplest classification scheme depends
upon protein structure, whereby the β-lactamases are classified
into four molecular classes, A, B, C, and D [, 
–]. The
structural approach is the easiest way to classify these enzymes.
Ambler originally proposed two classes:class A, the active-site
serine β-lactamases; and class B, the metallo-β-lactamases that
require a bivalent metal ion, usually Zn2+, for activity. Shortly
after, a new class of serine β-lactamase was found that bored
little sequence similarity to the then-known class A enzymes.
Designated as class C, its members are also known as the
‘AmpC’ β-lactamases. Finally, another class of serine β-
lactamases such as OXA β-lactamases, was discovered that bear
little resemblance to either class A or class C and was
designated as class D. These A, C, D classes of enzymes show
sufficient structural homology indicating that they might have
arosed from a common ancestor []. Class B consists of metallo
beta-lactamases and is perhaps the most heterogeneous class
among all of the classes of beta-lactamases. This class of
enzyme has been further divided into a number of sub-classes
including B1, B2 and B3 [,
].

Horizontal gene transfer and duplication are some of the most
common mechanisms of evolution by which beta-lactamases
genes have evolved. Horizontal gene transfer event can be
detected by incongruency between gene tree and species tree
and duplication can be determined provided homologous
sequences from the same species occupy the same clade in a
phylogenetic tree.

Structure-based sequence alignment of proteins can provide a
wealth of information on structure-function relationship 
[].
Using Clustal-O and ESPript 2.2 programs [,
] we have
constructed and displayed structure-based sequence alignment
of class A, B and D beta-lactamases and thereby we have
determined structure- function relationships. We have also
analyzed effect of deletion of signal peptide on secretion
process. Studies on class C enzyme namely AmpC was omitted
because of heterogeneity in data due to the presence of several
long insertions and deletions of amino acids. The phylogenetic
trees of class A, B and D beta-lactamases were constructed
using Phylip 2.37 [] and origin of resistant gene and
mechanism of evolution were determined.

Methodology
Structure-based sequence alignment:
The sequences of different beta-lactamases were retrieved from
NCBI (
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). The sequences of betalactamases
selectd for this study are aligned using Clustal O
[,
] and displayed using 
ESPript 2.2 [] (Figures &amp;
Supplementary Materials).

Phylogenetic Tree:
Alignments of the selected sequences of beta-lactamase were
performed by Clustal-Omega: multiple sequence alignment
program with default parameters [,
]. Phylogenetic tree
was constructed using Phylip 2.37 program []. Distance
matrix from protein sequences was constructed using phylip
3.67: protdist program. Phylogenetic tree was built by
Neighbour joining [] and was drawn by Phylowidget
program []. Bootstrap was set to 1000 and bootstrap value of
all internal nodes of all phylogenetic trees were obtained by
performing computation in the following sequence of order
using phylip programs []: Seqboot→Protdist→Neighbour
Joining Consensus. Values of bootsrap from consensus tree
were manually plotted on to phylogenetic tree. The species tree
was builded using server 
http://www. ncbi.nlm.nih. gov/nTaxonomy/CommonTree/www.cmt.cgi). Finally, species tree
was opened and saved using phylodendron server
(http://iubio.bio.indiana.edu/treeapp/). Cases of horizontal
gene transfer were inferred by comparing species tree and gene
tree and incongruency in the data suggest occurrence of
horizontal gene transfer.

Results &amp; Discussion
Structure-function studies of class A beta-lactamases:
We have retreived those sequences of beta-lactamases from
NCBI that shows 85% to 100% conservation. Thereafter, we
have constructed and displayed structure-based sequence
alignment of beta lactamases using Clustal O and ESPript2.2
programs [,
,
]. The program ESPript, Easy Sequencing in
PostScript, generate figures of aligned sequences with
secondary structure information. ESPript reads text outputs
from multiple sequence alignment programs such as Clustal O
[,
]. Residues are boxed according to their similarity score
and secondary structure elements are adorned at the top of
sequences blocks. From structure-based sequence alignment the
effect of mutations or indels on structural integrity of betalactamase
was determined and from these data their function
was inferred.

The TEM-1 enzyme is the best known member of the class A β-
lactamases [,
], that efficiently hydrolyzes β-lactam
antibiotics, particularly penicillins, and thus provides a
mechanism of resistance against them. The structure-based
sequence alignment data of TEM-1 is depicted in Figure S1, S2,
S3 (Available with authors) and is found to be 85.31%
conserved. Inspection of four conserved motifs, S-X-X-K, S-X-N,
K-T/S-G, and the Ω-loop commonly found in the vicinity of the
active-site pocket of TEM-1 isolates [] suggest hundred
percent conservation. However, ABD61074 and YP_001966135
variants of TEM-1 bored Phe to Leu and Ala to Ser mutations at
signal sequence. Similarly, ADL40245 variant contains
hydrophobic Ala to polar Ser mutations at the signal sequence.
These substitutions may affect secretion process of these
variants of TEM-1. Additionally in four isolates Met1 was
deleted from signal sequence which might also affect secretion
process. Besides this, in several variants part of α-helix 8 is
missing whereas in other isolates entire α-helix 8 and β-sheet 9
segments were deleted from the C-terminus. Recent studies
have shown that enzyme TEM-1 β-lactamase was broadly
tolerant to the deletion mutations sampled. Infact variants
analyzed retained activity towards ampicillin, with deletion
mutations observed in helices and strands as well as regions
important for structure and function []. But in our analysis
we found an entire helical segment as well as β-sheet deleted.
Therefore, it is highly likely that catalytic efficiency and
substrate hydrolysis profile of these variants of TEM-1 will be
affected.

The SHV-1enzyme belongs to the molecular class A serine β-
lactamases and share extensive structural and functional
similarity with TEM β-lactamases. The SHV-1 β-lactamase
behaves as a typical penicillinase hydrolyzing penicillins and
early generation cephalosporins.The SHV-1 beta lactamase was
found to be 90.56 % conserved. Like TEM-1 enzyme, SHV-1
enzyme did not harbored mutations at or near sequence motifs
S-X-X-K, S-D-N and K-T-G and Ω-loop (). Rest of the
part of polypeptide of most of the SHV-1 variants was found to
be fully conserved. However, our data indicate that AAF34333
variant contains Leu 170 →Phe170 substitution and lacks signal
peptide sequence and part of the C- terminal helical structure.
Due to deletion of signal peptide, this variant of SHV-1 will be
secreted but because of deletion of C-terminal helix and
mutation the structure of the variant is altered since deletion
mutations are considered to be lethal to structure and function
of proteins [,
].

CTX-M enzyme (derived its name from being highly active on
CefoTaXime and isolated in Munich) exhibits greater hydrolytic
activity against cefotaxime in comparison to ceftazidime 
[].
However, it has been reported that some clinical isolates show
a significant degree of resistance towards ceftazidime as well
[]. 
The () contain structure-based sequence
alignment data of CTX-M-15 and its homologue TOHO-1
respectively. The alignment data of CTX-M-15 and TOHO-1
suggest 93.25 % and 100 % conservations. Analyses of CTX-M-
15 alignment file indicate motif sequences are essentially
conserved (shown in boxes) (). In several variants of
CTX-M-15 signal sequence is absent while in other variants it is
present. Those variants lacking signal sequence will be
secreted. Upon close observation we found that AFN068021
variant of CTX-M-15 from Escherechia Coli bore only one
mutation near motif sequence. However, that mutation was
found to be conservative. Hence, it will not affect the structurefunction
of the enzyme. Similarly, inspection of alignment data
of TOHO-1 (), a close homologue of CTX-M-15,
suggests 100% conservation. Therefore, these variants of
TOHO-1 possess native-like structure and normal hydrolytic
activity towards beta-lactam antibiotics.

Structure-function studies of class D beta-lactamases:
OXA-10 beta-lactamase is so named because of avid hydrolytic
activity of oxacillin. It lacks overall sequence similarity to class
A enzyme and confers high levels of resistance to broad
spectrum of antibiotics []. Examination of alignment file
suggests 98.87% conservation. The sequence motifs (shown in
boxes) Figure S2 (Available with author) are strictly conserved
in OXA-10 and among class D enzymes []. However, B9W1Z5
variant harbored conservative mutation Ala111 to Val111 in α-
helix 4 and non-conservative mutation Asn216 to Ser 216 in an
unstructured region which will not alter structure and function
of the enzyme. Additionally, the B6D9D4 variant bored nonconservative
mutation where Lys138 was mutated to Asn138 at
the end of alpha helix 5. Since Asn residue is present at the
beginning and end of the helix. Its role can be thought as
“capping” the hydrogen bond interactions. Therefore, this
mutation may stabilize the structure of the enzyme. This result
is supported by the findings that alpha-helical structure is
stabilized by end capping [].

Structure- function studies of class B beta lactamases:
Metallo-beta-lactamases are based on functional characteristics
and are classified as group 3 enzyme because they hydrolyze
penicillin, cephalosporins and carbapenems but are resistant to
almost all conventional beta-lactam inhibitors. According to
ambler classification scheme they are classified as molecular
class B enzymes. Despite low sequence similarity between
various metallo-beta-lactamases, the general tertiary structure
of these enzymes is very similar. The alignment file of VIM-2
and SIM-1 showed 100% conservation (Figure S3 &amp; Figure S4
(Available with author). Therefore, these beta-lactamases
possess native like structure with normal catalytic activity.
Analysis of structure-based sequence alignment of IMP
suggests 95.93% conservation. One variant such as CAK55562
harbored Arg76Pro and Val155Leu substitutions. First
substitution Arg76Pro signifies the termination of helix-1 where
as second mutation increases the hydrophobicity of β-sheet 10.
Thus, overall structure of this variant is stabilized. Further, the
structure of IMP-1 indicates that zinc ion (Zn1) is coordinated
by His116, His118, and His196, and second zinc (Zn2) is
coordinated by residues Asp120, Cys221, and His263 [].
Upon further analysis we found that catalytic residues such as
His116, His 118, Asp120 and K224 are conserved Figure S5
(Available with author). But in all isolates of IMP-1
substitutions occurred at other positions critical for the catalytic
activity including His196Ser and Cys221Ser. Hence the
geometry of the active site is altered and hydrolysis profile and
specificity towards antibiotics is affected [].

NDM-1 showed lower sequence identity with other metallo
beta-lactamases, and the most closely related metallo betalactamases
are VIM-2 and IMP-1 with which it shows 32%
sequence identity. The structure-based sequence alignment
data indicate 91.48% conservation. NDM-1 contains an
additional insert between positions 162 and 166 not present in
other MBLs. The active site of NDM-1 is located at the bottom
of a shallow groove enclosed by 2 important loops, L3 and L10
[]. Variant such as AEQ39156 possess Gly178 to Ser178
substitution in the turn segment which will restrict flexibility of
this region. Furthermore, the C terminus fragment containing
catalytic His 250 is also absent. Thus, structure and catalytic
activity of this variant is altered. Besides this, in other variants,
an unstructured C-terminus region containing catalytic His 250
and α-helix-6 were absent. Therefore, in these variants of NDM-
1 antibiotic hydrolysis and specificity will be profoundly
affected. These findings are validated by mutagenesis studies
that showed mutation of active site residues of NDM-1 resulted
in loss after catalytic activity []. Thus, like IMP, NDM-1 is less
conserved Figure S6 (Available with author). Our data clearly
indicate that class B enzyme such as IMP-1 and NDM-1 are less
conserved than VIM2 and SIM-1 studied here because mutation
occurred at the critically important region such as active site.
Thus, A, B and D classess of beta-lactamases showed structurefunction
relationship. Additionally, one important aspect of our
data is deletions and active site mutations of amino acids have
leaded to loss of beta-lactamases structures and functions. Since
indel mutations and active site mutations are subjected to
purifying selection in coding regions []. Therefore, these betalactamases
lactamases are subjected to purifying selection.

Phylogenetic tree analysis of class A beta-lactamases:
Phylogenetic tree or evolutionary tree is a branching diagram
or “tree” showing the inferred evolutionary relationships
among various biological species or other entities based upon
similarities and differences in their physical and/or genetic
characteristics. The phylogenetic tree of beta-lactamase was
constructed using Phylip 2.37 []. One of the most commonly
used tests for the reliability of phylogenetic tree is Felsenstein's
(1985) [] bootstrap test, which is evaluated using Efron's
(1982) bootstrap resampling technique with replacement of
informative sites thus in particular resampling results in some
sites to be ignored while other taken into account [].
Surprisingly, with bootstrap 1000 we have obtained 100%
bootstrap value for all internal nodes of all phylogenetic trees of
beta-lactamases. This implies that phylogenetic trees
constructed here are reliable.

The TEM-1 enzyme phylogenetic tree is clustered into four
distinct subgroups. The phylogenetic tree of TEM-1 was rooted
using ACJ43252 from Escherichia Coli as an outgroup Figure S7
(Available with author). The data indicate three occasions of
gene duplications. Further, upon comparision of gene tree and
species tree Figure S8 &amp; S7 (Available with author) we have
obtained incongruency in phylogenetic data. This implies
occurrence of horizontal gene transfer where Escherichia Coli
(ADL40232 ) gene was transferred to Pseudomonas Aeruginosa
(ADL40245) [].

Inspection of phylogenetic tree Figure S9 (Available with
author) of class A enzyme including CTX-M-15 ant TOHO-1
suggest that AFN06802 variant from Escherichia Coli is an
outgroup. One instance of HGT was noted in TOHO-1 where
Escherechia Coli containing BAA07082 gene was transferred to
Shiegella Flexneri (AAT76431). This implies TOHO-1 enzyme
evolved via horizontal gene transfer which is also supported by
recent studies that showed occurrence of HGT of TOHO-gene.
[,
]. The phylogenetic tree of SHV-1 enzyme Figure S10
(Available with author) shows that natural isolate AFN82169
from Klebsiella Pneumonia is an outgroup and gene
duplication occurred in three instances. However, horizontal
gene transfer was not observed in our analysis. Contrary to our
findings, recent studies indicate that in 12 clonally distinct
isolates of other variants of SHV-1, HGT occurred 
[].

Phylogenetic tree analysis of classD beta-lactamases:
The phylogenetic tree of OXA-10, a class D enzyme, reveals
P14489 isolate from Pseudomonas Aeruginosa is an ancestor of
all OXA-10 variants Figure S11 (Available with author). We
noted two instances of HGT where uncultured bacterium
(Q79R56) acquired the gene from Pseudomonas Aeruginosa
(B6D9D4). In a similar vein, Pseudomonas Aeruginosa
(B9W1Z5) acquired the gene from Providencia Stuartii
(H6URT6). These observations are supported by occurrence of
horizontal gene transfer in other variant of OXA-10 such as
blaOXA-24/40 plasmid []. Gene duplication event was not
observed for OXA-10 enzyme. Thus, our data conclusively
suggest that OXA-10 enzyme evolved by horizontal gene
transfer mechanism.

Phylogenetic tree analysis of class B beta-lactamases:
Examination of phylogenetic tree of VIM-2 Figure S12
(Available with author) demonstrate ACH43053 variant from
Pseudomonas Aeruginosa is an outgroup. The phylogenetic data
also indicate that Achromobacter Xylosoxidans containing
AAT94165 gene was transferred to Pseudomonas
Pseudoalcaligenes (AT90390 ). Recent studies have also reported
the emergence of multidrug-resistant Pseudomonas Putida by
horizontal transfer of VIM-2 resistance genes []. Hence VIM2
evolved by HGT mechanism.

Inspection of phylogenetic tree of IMP Figure S13 (Available
with author) indicate CAK55562 variant from Pseudomonas
Putida is an outgroup. The phylogenetic data also display one
case of gene duplication. However, HGT was not observed in
IMP-1 phylogenetic tree. Conversely, horizontal gene transfer
has been recently reported in IMP-1 gene [].

Investigation of SIM-1 phylogenetic tree Figure S14 (Available
with author) demonstrate that Acinetobacter Baylyi producing
AER61546 variant is an outgroup and gene duplication
occurred but horizontal gene transfer event was not observed.
Contrary, to our findings HGT of SIM-1 resistance gene has
been described []. The phylogenetic tree of NDM-1 enzyme
Figure S15 (Available with author) was rooted using variant
AFP49131 from Citobacter Freundii as an out group. Three
instances of gene duplication occurred. We did not observed
horizontal gene transfer of NDM-1 gene. However, recent
findings indicate occurrence of HGT of NDM-1 resistant gene
among different bacterial species []. These results imply that
A, B and D classess of beta-lactamases evolved by different
mechanisms.

Conclusion
These studies have demonstrated structure-function
relationship of three classes of beta-lactamases. The
phylogenetic studies suggest that different classess of betalactamases
evolved by different mechanisms.

Authors acknowledge the facilities of Distributed Information
Sub-centre, Interdisciplinary Biotechnology Unit, A.M.U.,
Aligarh, India.

Citation:Salahuddin &amp; Khan, Bioinformation 10(5): 308-313 (2014)

Structure-based sequence alignment of SHV-1 variants.

A) Structure-based sequence alignment of CTX-M-15 variants; B) Structure-based sequence alignment of TOHO-1
variants.

