Background
Elastin and collagen are the structural proteins responsible for 
the formation of Extra Cellular Matrix (ECM) and also imparts 
tensile strength to it. Maturation of these proteins occurs 
through cross linking of lysine residues. This process is 
catalysed by Lysyl Oxidase (LOX), wherein, it modifies an 
epsilon amino group of lysine. LOX is a copper-dependent 
amine oxidase, characterised under the oxidoreductase class of 
enzymes. LOX by its oxidative deamination action, converts the 
lysine residue to allysine (α-aminoadipidic-δ-semialdehydes) 
which then forms random cross link with other lysine or 
allysine group, thereby bringing about the maturation of elastin 
and collagen [,
].

LOX is also involved in a spectrum of biological functions 
which include developmental regulation, tumour suppression, 
cell migration, adhesion, apoptosis, and cellular senescence 
[].
LOX expression is known to be regulated by hypoxia inducible 
factor-1, transforming growth factor β, tumour necrosis factor 
α, platelet derived growth factor and fibroblast growth factor 
[]. 
LOX levels are reported to be increased in hepatic fibrosis, 
Wilson׳s disease, liver granuloma, lung fibrosis, cardiovascular 
disease, metastatic breast cancer, plaque deposits in 
Alzheimer׳s disease, keloids and scleroderma []. Its expression 
is decreased in Type IX Ehlers Danlos syndrome and Menkes 
disease []. It is well established that LOX is involved in many 
of the normal biological functions and also in diverse 
pathophysiological conditions.

The total sequence length of human LOX (Uniport Accession 
ID: P28300) is 417 residues comprising of three region; A) signal 
peptide (1-21), B) propeptide (22 - 168) and C) mature LOX (169 
- 417). Enzymatically active mature LOX is 249 amino acid 
residues in length, devoid of signal peptide and propeptide. 
Copper serves as a prosthetic group in the catalytic domain of 
LOX. Here, copper exhibits a unique binding pattern when 
compared with other amine oxidases. In the case of mature 
LOX, the copper ion is found to be harboured in the talon 
shaped loop, whereas in other amine oxidases it spans in-
between two beta sheets. The talon loop structure in LOX is 
comprised of four histidine residues, of which three contribute 
for coordinated covalent bond interactions with the copper ion 
[]. The C – terminal of LOX is referred to as a Cytokine 
Receptor Like (CRL) domain as it shares homology with the N 
– terminal of cytokine receptor proteins [].

The normal and pathological functions of LOX and its isoforms 
has been the subject of many research over the past two 
decades. However, there is a significant dearth of information 
reported on the 3D structure of LOX and its family members. 
Though few of the previous studies discuss the theoretical 
structure of LOX the structural orientation of the catalytic site is 
less discussed and needs to be explored further. In the present 
study, we have endeavoured to predict a geometrically optimal 
theoretical structure of LOX and also deduce the proper 
orientation of the copper ion in the catalytic domain. In the 
latter part, we have also modelled the copper ion interactions at 
the copper binding cavity. We have validated the predicted 
structure and molecular docking studies were conducted to 
infer the mechanism of its action and binding to the pseudo 
substrates and experimentally proven inhibitors. It is hoped 
that the information provided by this study will aid in better 
understanding on inter and intra molecular interactions of LOX 
with eventual development of therapeutic applications in LOX 
mediated diseases.

Methodology
Sequence retrieval and Modelling:
In this study, we have employed Ab initio structure prediction 
approach to model the 3D structure using the ROBETTA server 
[], as there are no significant structural templates for 
homology modelling. Further, this structure was energy 
minimized and used as a template to generate 1000 models 
with different conformations using MODELLER 9.10 
[].

Among these 1000 models, the best model with a significant 
QMEAN score [], and with no residues in the disallowed 
regions of Ramachandran plot was selected. Further, this model 
was fixed for protonation states of histidine residues and its 
orientation was flipped using Maestro 9.3 (Maestro, Version 9.3, 
Schrödinger, LLC, New York, NY, 2012) in order to achieve 
optimal geometry. Similarly, asparagine and glutamine 
residues were also flipped to achieve optimal geometry.

Copper co-ordination Modelling:
The optimal model was visualized in Maestro 9.3 for observing 
the orientation of histidine residues (292, 294 and 296) spanning 
the conserved copper binding site; as documented by previous 
studies []. It was observed that the proximity of the imidazole 
rings favored copper binding. Hence, we implemented 
constrained molecular dynamics simulation coupled with 
multiple cycles of energy minimization by OPLS 2005 force 
field towards achieving the orientation favoring copper ion 
binding in LOX. Further, we summed up the Cartesian 
coordinates of copper binding histidine atoms (292Nδ, 294N€
and 296N€) and the mean average for X, Y and Z positions were 
assigned as Cartesian coordinates for the Cu2+ ion as described 
in the following equation: (Please see  
for equation 1 and explanation)

The Cartesian coordinates for Y0 and Z0 were also similarly 
derived and assigned to the copper ion. A water molecule was 
added to the copper ion to satisfy the valence and also to 
achieve the tetrahedral symmetry as discussed by Ryvkin et al.,
[]. Further, the copper ion fixed model was subjected to bond 
length analysis in order to validate the permitted range of 
distance (1.9 – 2.1 Å) [].

Model Validation and Refinement:
The geometry of the copper ion fixed model was assessed for 
stereo chemical qualities through PROCHECK [] and 3D 
check validation servers []. Overall protein topology and 
domain architecture were also analyzed using the PDBsum 
server [].

Molecular Dynamics (MD) Simulation of Homology Models:
To infer the stability of the structure predicted, constrained 
MD simulations were carried out using the Desmond package 
(Desmond Molecular Dynamics System, version 3.1, D. E. Shaw 
Research, New York, NY, 2012; Maestro-Desmond 
Interoperability Tools, version 3.1, Schrödinger, New York, NY, 
2012) with an inbuilt OPLS 2005 (Optimized Potentials for 
Liquid Simulation) force field. As an initial step, the system was 
prepared for simulation using a predefined water model 
(simple point charge, SPC) as a solvent in a cubic box with 18 Å 
× 18 Å × 18 Å dimension as periodic boundary condition. 
Further, the system was neutralized by adding two Na+ counter 
ions and energy minimized. Finally, the production run was 
initiated under NPT ensemble conditions for 4 nano seconds. 
The temperature was set to 300K and maintained throughout 
by implementing Nose–Hoover thermostat [] with the 
pressure set to 1 atm and maintained through Martyna–Tobias 
Klein pressure bath []. Smooth Particle Mesh Ewald method 
[] was applied to analyze the electrostatic interactions with a 
cut-off value of 9.0 Å distance. The Cu2+ ion, histidine residues
involved in Cu2+ ion interactions and the water molecule bound 
to Cu2+ ion were completely constrained during the simulation 
process. The trajectory sampling was done at an interval of 1.0 
pico seconds [].

Electrostatic potential calculations and Binding pocket prediction:
Illustration of the charge distributions of molecular structures is 
typically rendered through electrostatic potential maps. These 
maps aid in the identification of sites within the structure to 
facilitate molecular recognition. The electrostatic interactions 
between the molecules are generally resolved by the classical 
Poisson–Boltzmann (PB) equation. In this study, the potential 
surface for the copper ion fixed model was generated by 
implementing PB equation through Schrödinger maestro 
interface. Further, the active site residues were predicted using 
CASTp server []. Finally, contour map for the modelled 
protein was generated and analyzed for hydrophobic and 
hydrophilic regions spanning the active site.

Setting up the Protein-Ligand Docking simulation:
The 2D structural coordinates of Diaminopentane (DAP), a 
pseudo-substrate for LOX [], was obtained from PUBCHEM 
in Mol2 format. Similarly, the structural coordinates of reported 
LOX inhibitors, such as β-Amino propionitrile (βAPN) 
[],
Homocysteine (Hcys) [] and Homocysteine thiolactone 
(HCTL) [], were also procured. Further, these structures were 
prepared for docking using LigPrep 2.6 (Schrödinger, LLC, 
New York, NY, 2012) module of Schrödinger suite, which 
verifies proper ionization states, tautomeric forms, 
stereochemistry, ring conformation and chirality.

The Induced Fit Docking (IFD) of the small molecules on to the 
predicted active cavity atoms was performed using 
Schrödinger suite. The final protein model with optimal 
geometry was imported into Maestro 9.3. Here, the atoms of the 
active cavity residues (predicted by CASTp) were set as flexible 
and were assigned as binding site for grid box generation. The 
ligands were prepared using LigPrep and were docked to the 
receptor by soften-potential docking with van der Waals radii 
scaling of 0.70 Å. The resulting 20 best docked conformations 
with at least one atom within the distance of 5 Å were selected 
and subjected to geometry optimization, conformational 
searches and energy minimization. The active cavity residues 
beyond the range of 5Å, in terms of ligand interactions were set 
as rigid and those within the 5Å range were set as flexible. 
Further, the 20 best ligand poses conformations sampled in the 
initial docking step were re-docked on to the flexible residues 
within the range of 5Å as followed above. This re-docking was 
performed using Glide (Extra Precision) XP by soften-potential 
docking with van der Waals radii scaling of 1.0. Finally, 
docking score based on OPLS 2005 force field was used to infer 
the binding affinity of selected small molecules to the receptor. 
Additionally, Molecular Mechanics Generalized Born Surface 
Area (MMGBSA) was also calculated to measure the binding 
free energy (ΔGbind) of small molecules to the LOX model using 
Prime/MM–GBSA method []. Binding free energy was 
calculated using the equation: (Please see 
 for equation 2 and explanation)

Results
Modelling and Refinement:
The initial LOX 3D structure was predicted using ab initio 
method implementing ROBETTA. Further, a total of one 
thousand models with varied conformations were generated 
using MODELLER 9.10 with the initial LOX 3D structure as 
template. All the models were validated for Ramachandran plot 
and QMEAN score. Among these, the top ranking model with 
92 % of residues in favored region of Ramachandran plot 
() and a significant QMEAN score of 0.602 was chosen 
as the best model.

Then, best model was subjected to refinement by rectifying
stereo chemical errors using Schrodinger suite. The refined 
model was visualized for orientation of histidine residues at the 
copper binding site and multiple steps of manual minimization 
by OPLS 2005 were performed to orient these residues such 
that the copper can form coordinated covalent bonds from His 
292Nδ, His 294N€ and His 296N€ favoring tetrahedral symmetry 
(). As a next step, the copper ion was placed in between 
the interatomic space as per the method discussed by us in the 
copper co-ordination modelling section. The optimal metal 
geometry was validated and valence was fixed by adding a 
water molecule using chimera tool []. Finally, the copper 
fixed LOX model was subjected to multiple steps constrained 
energy minimization using prime with OPLS2005 as force field. 
The resultant model was found to have coordinated covalent 
bond lengths within the allowed distance (1.9 Å-2.2 Å).

The copper fixed model was assessed with the Ramachandran 
plot which showed 90.7 % of residues in favored region with no 
residues in disallowed region () and overall secondary 
structure topology analyzed by PDBsum (). Further, 
this model was subjected to constrained molecular dynamics 
simulation for 4 ns wherein, the copper and its interacting 
residues were constrained throughout the simulation process. 
The potential energy of the protein after 4 ns simulation was -
307193.771 kJmol-1. The RMSD trajectory stabilized about 5.5 -
6.0 Å after 2 nano seconds of simulation and did not increase 
significantly after 2 nano seconds. This indicates that the 
system has evolved into a stable state and has reasonably 
converged over the production run (). The radius of 
gyration analysis showed 0.86 Å of deviation inferring 
improved relaxation and structural stability of the modelled 
protein. RMSF graphs also suggest higher flexibility at the C-
terminal with few residues showing higher degree of 
fluctuation ().

Electrostatic potential graph:
Electrostatic potential surface of the copper fixed LOX model 
was calculated by Poisson-Boltzmann equation and was 
visualized in Maestro. The charge distribution in the active site 
cavity was found to be profoundly negative charge which 
would favor the interactions with positively charged substrates.

Induced fit Docking:
The copper fixed model was subjected to induced fit docking 
with DAP and a group of 3 inhibitors (βAPN, HCys and HCTL) 
for LOX. The docked complexes were analyzed for docking 
score, MMGBSA and molecular interaction maps. The substrate 
and inhibitors were docked to active cavity and the resulting 
conformations with significant docking score were chosen as 
probable binding mode (). In the docking results, DAP 
was to found to bind with LOX with a significant docking and 
MMGBSA score of -7.511kcal/mol and of -41.381 kcal/mol, 
respectively. DAP also forms hydrogen bonds with Asp170, 
Asp169, Asp353 and Cys351 of LOX.

In comparison with DAP, the order of binding efficiency for the 
three inhibitors as follows Hcys &gt; βAPN &gt;HCTL, based on our 
docking and MMGBSA score  (see supplementary 
material). Our docking results indicate that HCys can be an 
efficient inhibitor for the LOX enzymatic activity. These results 
also reveal that aspartic acid residues spanning the active cavity 
region may play the key role in small molecule interactions as it 
was observed to be a major contributor in hydrogen bonding 
interactions to all the ligands studied.

Discussion
In this study, we have attempted to predict the 3D structure of 
human mature LOX by Ab initio method and also fixed the 
optimal coordinated covalent interactions of Cu2+ at the copper 
binding region. The predicted structure was found to be a valid 
model as per SAVeS evaluation (
http: //nihserver.mbi.ucla.edu/SAVES/). 
The Root Mean Square Deviation (RMSD) of
protein backbone and RMSF (Root Mean Square Fluctuation) of 
individual residues sampled at periodic intervals during the 
MD simulation were plotted against the time scale to assess the 
stability of the model. Here, RMSD plot showed backbone 
displacement within a range of 0.5 Å after 2 ns and maintained 
till the end of production run which suggests the stability of the 
predicted model. Moreover, the radius of gyration plot also 
infers the compactness of the model. The N – terminal region 
(169 – 220 amino acid residues) of the modelled LOX formed 
random coil as it was rich in helix breaking residues namely
tyrosine and proline. The C – terminal of the modelled LOX 
was found to form the structural topology with beta strands as 
similar to that N – terminal of cytokine receptors, which 
corroborates with the earlier report [] 
().

Generally, in copper amine oxidases like LOX, the copper ion 
plays a crucial role in the structural stability and also in 
catalytic activity. This region was found to occur in the buried 
core of most of the crystal structures of copper amine oxidases. 
Similarly, the copper binding site in the modelled LOX was also 
found to be in the buried region. Moreover, the copper binding 
site forms a talon shaped cavity in the LOX model 
synchronizing to the documented reports []. Additionally, we 
have also modelled the optimal coordinated covalent 
interactions of Cu2+ with the histidine residues at the copper 
binding site with allowed bond lengths ranging from 1.9 – 2.2 Å 
and a water molecule interaction in the tetrahedral geometry 
which corroborates with the reported crystal structure of E.Coli 
amine oxidase [].

In amine oxidases, the substrate binding and positioning are 
mainly guided by charge – charge interactions. These substrates 
are generally cationic and found to interact with the key anionic 
residues at active cavity. Similarly, the active cavity of the 
modelled LOX structure was observed to be anionic. Further, 
the proton abstraction is usually catalyzed by aspartic acid in 
case of all amine oxidases [,
]. In this study, the IFD results 
for LOX with pseudo substrate DAP and all the inhibitors also 
strongly infer Asp residues as major contributors of hydrogen 
bonding interactions. All these findings strongly suggest the 
plausibility and reliability of the modelled structure and it inter 
molecular interactions. Till date, the paucity of information on 
structural aspects of LOX remains as a limiting factor for 
understanding its role in cellular processes. Hence, the 
outcomes of this study shall evoke new dimensions towards 
exploring structure-function relationships of LOX.

Conclusion
In this study, we predicted the optimal structure of LOX with 
coordinated covalent orientation of copper ion at its catalytic 
cavity. IFD was performed to understand the molecular 
interactions of LOX with its modulators which inferred aspartic 
acid residues as the key contributors towards intermolecular 
interactions. The predicted structure was validated by stereo 
chemical checks, MD studies and leads from the literature. All 
these findings reinforce the higher plausibility of the predicted 
structure and its intermolecular interactions. The insight of this 
study will pave way for design and development of novel 
therapeutic molecules potentially modulating LOX activity.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank the Indian Council of Medical Research, New Delhi, 
for supporting this project. We also acknowledge 
Mr.Shivashanmugam Muthukumaran and Mr.Modamed 
AlAmeen M for their technical support and valuable suggestion 
in the in silico modelling.

Citation:Bhuvanasundar et al, Bioinformation 10(7): 406-412 (2014)

Initial structure of mature LOX modelled using 
ROBETTA model as template. Secondary structure represented 
in different colour (Helix in red, sheets in cyan and loop in gray).

 Histidine Orientation in mature LOX: A) Same planar 
orientation of Imidazole rings before copper binding; B) The 
tetrahedral copper coordination geometry showing allowed 
covalent bond lengths between 292Nδ, 294N€ and 296N€ atoms.

Optimized mature LOX model with Cu2+ ion. 
Secondary structure represented in different colours (Helix in 
red, sheets in cyan, loop in gray and copper ion as blue sphere).

Overall topology (N to C terminus) of mature lox 
generated from PDBsum [].


Constrained MD Simulation results of mature LOX 
for 4 nano seconds: A) RMSD plot of backbone atoms showing 
the system stabilised after 2 nanosecond and remaining stable 
till the end of 4 ns; B) Time dependent RMFS fluctuation of 
individual residues of mature LOX in 4 nano seconds, C-
terminal showing maximum fluctuation.

2D interaction graph of mature LOX with its 
modulators: A) Diamino pentane forms hydrogen bonding 
with the negatively charged ASP169, ASP353 &amp; ASP170 and with 
hydrophobic Cys351 respectively; B) Homocysteine forms 
hydrogen bond with the negatively charged ASP169, positively 
charged ARG251 and Polar HIS289; C) βAPN forms hydrogen 
bonds with the negatively charged ASP353 and hydrophobic 
TYR352; D) Homocysteine thiolactone forms hydrogen bonds 
with negative charged ASP353 and ASP170 and hydrophobic 
TYR352.

CRL domain of predicted LOX structure (C-Terminal) 
superimposed to Erythropoietin (N-terminal, PDB ID: 1ERN). 
Predicted LOX depicted in cyan and Erythropoietin in green.


