Background
Farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase (FPS; EC 2.5.1.10) is an
important chain elongation enzyme of the terpenoid
biosynthetic pathway and belongs to the E-family of the
prenyltransferases []. It catalyzes the condensation of
hydrocarbon moieties of DMAPP (C5) and GPP (C10) to IPP
(C5) and furthermore to produce FPP (C15) []. Formation of
FPP is a branch step responsible for directing carbon flow
towards sesquiterpenes, triterpenes, steroids and farnesylated
proteins in the isoprenoid pathway. FPS gene has been
characterized from several plants [–] and human 
[]. In plants
a number of reports have shown the physiological role of FPS in
secondary metabolite biosynthesis. Transgenic plants with overexpression
of FPS gene showed that FPS plays a regulatory role
in sesquiterpenes biosynthesis []. However, in other report it
was suggested that FPS supplied the carbon flow into
phytosterol and carotenoids biosynthesis in tobacco overexpressing
yeast FPS []. Three dimensional structure
detemination of proteins is a foundation for many biological
aspects. Bioinformatics and computational biology provide an
important contribution in protein structure prediction.
Biophysical techniques like X-ray diffraction and NMR always
remain choices for structure determination of biomolecules for
researchers. However, due to technical intricacy, the numbers of
proteins are modeled by computational methods to interpret
the biological functions. Crystal structures of FPS from various
species including G. gallus [], humans 
[], Trypanosoma cruzi
[] and Plasmodium vivax 
[] have been solved. Some related
protein structures were also investigated in plants such as
Arabibopsis polyprenyl pyrophosphate synthase 
[] and
tobacco 5-epi-aristolochene synthase [], but little structural
information about plant FPSs is available.

T. cruzi FPS has been characterized by homology modeling and
molecular dynamics studies and it has been proposed as a
model for the active site dependent design of novel inhibitors
for the treatment of Chagas' disease []. In other report,
Leishmania donovani and Leishmania major, FPSs have been
characterized for development of potential anti leishmanial
drug through homology modeling and docking studies [].
Bisphosphonates are class of drugs that prevent the loss of bone
mass and, used to treat osteoporosis and similar diseases.
Nitrogen containing bisphosphonates inhibits the growth of
various disease causative agents []. The bisphosphonates
mainly bind to the DMAPP binding site and competitively
inhibit the binding of DMAPP [].

B. monniera is an important medicinal herb in Ayurvedic
medicine, used as a “memory booster”. The medicinal property
of this plant is mainly attributed to triterpene saponins
bacosides. Bacosides are synthesized via isoprenoid pathway
and FPS plays a key regulatory role. In this study, we modeled
three dimensional structure of BmFPS based on comparative
modeling approach to establish a basis for its biological role and
interaction properties. Molecular interactions with substrates
and inhibitors were also studied by docking simulations, which
could certainly provide mechanistic insight in development of
mutants for better understanding of reaction mechanisms.
These structural studies will give an authoritative approach to
study catalysis mechanism of BmFPS and its potential use for
pathway engineering in plants for altered medicinal value and
to develop the drugs not only for bone related disease but also
to inhibit the growth of different disease causative agents.

Methodology
Sequence analysis, alignment, and secondary structure prediction:
Farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase protein sequence of B.
monniera, BmFPS (NCBI GenBank Ac. No.GU385740) was
retrieved from NCBI GenBank database
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). BLAST algorithm against
protein data bank (PDB) was used to carry out the sequence
homology searches. The sequence and 3D structure of template
proteins were extracted from the PDB database []. Multiple
alignments of the amino acid sequences were carried out with
the Clustal W 1.8 program (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/clustalw/).
Conserved domains in BmFPS were detected using Conserved
Domain Database search tool (CDD) on NCBI server
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/structure/cdd/wrpsb.cgi). The
PSIPRED V.3 programme was used to predict secondary
structure of BmFPS amino acid residues [].

Comparative modeling of BmFPS:
Comparative modeling was used to build the three dimensional
model of BmFPS using template amino acid sequences of closest
homologues for which X-ray crystal structures are available. An
X-ray crystal structure of G. gallus FPS (PDB code: 1UBY) was
used as a template []. BmFPS homology models were
generated using software Modeller 9v10 []. The coordinates
of two Mg2+ atoms in the models were obtained from template
and positioned in target protein. Out of 50 models generated,
the model with the lowest DOPE scores was taken as the final
model. The protein model was imported to maestro window
and energy was minimized using the protein preparation
wizard by applying OPLS_2005 force field (Schrödinger, Inc.).
Minimizations were performed until the average root mean
square deviation (RMSD) of the non-hydrogen atoms reached
0.3 Å.

Model evaluation:
Stereochemical analyses of the BmFPS homology model was
carried out using Ramachandran plot obtained from
PROCHECK [], overall quality factor by ERRAT analysis 
[],
Verify3D [] and ProSAII programs 
[]. Superimposition and
calculation of the (RMSD) between model and template, was
made by Chimera software [] using the Carbon alpha fitting
method. Diagrammatic representations of the structures were
generated using PyMOL 1.3 software [].

Docking studies of BmFPS model with substrates and inhibitors:
The structure data files (SDF) of the substrates and inhibitors
(ligands) were obtained from the PubChem database. Protein–
ligand docking simulations were conducted using Glide
module of Schrödinger, Inc. [–]. After ensuring that protein
and ligands are in correct orientations for docking, the receptorgrid
files were generated using grid-receptor generation
program. To alleviate the potential for non-polar parts of the
receptor, we balanced van der Waals radii of receptors by 1.00
with partial atomic charge 0.25. A grid box dimension was
generated at the centroid of the active site. The ligands were
docked with the modeled BmFPS active site using the “xtra
precision” Glide algorithm. The OPLS-AA force field was used
for the refinement of docking results including torsional and
rigid-body movements of the ligand. The final energy
estimation was done with Glide score (GScore) and a best
orientation was taken as the output for a particular ligand. The
interactions of the ligands with protein were visualized and the
figures were formed using PyMOL 1.3.

Results
BmFPS showed significant sequence identity with four
prospective templates for comparative modeling that is, G.
gallus (PDB ID-1UBY, identity- 47%), Human (4DEM, 45%), T.
cruzi (1YHK, 38%) and P. vivax (3MAV, 36%). Multiple
sequence alignment with templates showed highly conserved
two aspartate rich motifs (DDXXD) called FARM
(100DDIMD104 in BmFPS) and SARM (239DDYLD243 in
BmFPS), and residues important for catalytic activity 
( Green and Red highlighted). FARM is highly conserved
and has been designated as chain length determination (CLD)
region []. In most FPSs, the 4th and 5th aromatic amino acids
before FARM motif are involved in the product chain length
specificity of the enzyme [,–]. In case of BmFPS, Tyr95
and Phe96 residues are supposed to be involved in chain length
specificity.

The crystal structure of G. gallus (PDB ID- 1UBY, resolution
2.4Å) with maximum sequence identity was considered as a
best hit (E-value 4e-105) and used as a template to generate 3D
model of BmFPS. CDD search at NCBI showed specific hits
with Trans_IPPS_HT and superfamily of Isoprenoid_Biocyn_C1
(). The secondary structure of BmFPS predicted by
PSIPRED server showed only 14 α-helices and 15 coils without
any β-sheets (Supplementary ).

BmFPS model structure and analysis:
Total 50 models of BmFPS were generated with template 1UBY
and their discrete optimized protein energy (DOPE) was
calculated. The model No.14 (BmFPS.B999900014.pdb) having
lowest DOPE score (-44021.3125) was considered as the best
model of BmFPS. The RMSD value of alpha carbon (Cα) of the
BmFPS model was calculated by superimposition with
templates on Chimera and it was found to be 0.953 Å. The
overall conformation of the model was very similar to the
template. The final 3D BmFPS model and its superimposition
with template are shown in ().

PROCHECK analysis of the modeled BmFPS protein showed
that 92.1 % of the residues are located in the most favored
region, 7.3 % in additional allowed region and 0.6 % in
generously allowed region of the Ramachandran plot 
(; 
 
(see supplementary material). The overall quality
factor of modeled BmFPS in ERRAT analysis was 88.235,
expressed as the percentage of the protein for which the
calculated error value falls below the 95 % rejection limit
(Supplementary ) and the Verify 3D score was 90 %.
Z-plot analysis (ProSA) of the modeled protein measures
compatibility between its sequence and structure. Z score value
obtained for BmFPS model (−10.16) indicated its location within
the space of protein related to X-ray (dark black point 
). This value was quite comparable with template 1UBY
(−10.72) suggested that the obtained model was reliable.
Finally, the resultant energy minimized BmFPS model
satisfying evaluation criteria's was further used for docking
analysis with ligands.

Molecular interactions of ligands with modeled BmFPS:
Obtained BmFPS model was docked with substrates IPP,
DMAPP and GPP; and with inhibitors, N-containing
bisphosphonates (NBPs; risedronate, alendronate zoledronate
and pamidronate). When IPP was docked with BmFPS model,
Asp (100, 104) of FARM and Asp (171, 257, 260) ()
showed interactions; whereas in case of DMAPP, apart from
Asp (100, 104, 171), Arg109 and Lys197 () play an
important role in catalysis. When GPP is docked with modeled
BmFPS, the amino acid residues involved were Asp (100, 104,
and 171), Arg109 and Lys (197, 262) (). The docking
interactions of the substrates and modeled BmFPS imply that
the DMAPP and GPP have more negative binding energy of -
90.976 kJ/mol and -98.420 kJ/mol respectively, while IPP shows
binding energy of -74.978. The Glide score represents docking
energy, and therefore a low Glide score indicates strong
binding. DMAPP shows lowest Glide score (-5.509) than GPP (-
5.390) and IPP (-2.764), suggested that DMAPP and GPP have
strong affinity with BmFPS over IPP  (see
supplementary material). Docking simulations of BmFPS with
substrates are quite similar as that of previously observed for
other homology models [,
] and the structure of other FPSs
[,
]. Furthermore, docking conformations displayed key
interactions of Lys197 and Lys262 residues with substrates,
different from catalytic aspartate motif. Recently, Fisher et al.
[] showed that the loss of FPS activity and cell death of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae was observed when mutations were
subjected at position Lys197 and Lys254. Thus, apart from Asp
(100, 104 and 171), Lys197 and Lys262 residues play pivotal role
in catalysis mechanism of BmFPS.

Docking of modeled BmFPS with NBPs showed similar
interacting residues as with IPP, DMAPP and GPP ().
Thr175 and Asp260 residues form electrostatic interactions
with alendronate and zoledronate. Furthermore, Phe261 was
found to be involved in binding of zoledronate  (see
supplementary material). Gabelli et al. 
[] showed that, when
risedronate and alendronate bind with FPS enzyme, it
undergoes conformational change and usually DMAPP is
replaced. This conformational change in FPS structure leads to
death of the parasite. On the basis of Glide scores and Glide
ligand efficiency, we can conclude that all four nitrogen
containing bisphosphonates (NBPs) having almost same affinity
(slightly higher for pamindronate) for BmFPS.

Conclusion
FPS is an important regulatory enzyme in isoprenoid
biosynthesis pathway which directs carbon flow towards
sesquiterpene and triterpenes. Drugs like bisphosphonates are
used to treat bone diseases and act as a competitive inhibitor of
FPS, and cause the death of different disease causative
parasites. In the present study, homology model of BmFPS was
generated using G. gallus FPS as a reference structural
homologue. Docking analysis with substrates and inhibitors
(NBPs) illustrated important catalytic residues, and results were
corroborated by experimental results from other sources.
Asp100 and Asp104 residues of FARM, and also Lys197 and
Lys262 are found to be important for catalysis of BmFPS.
Further biochemical and in vivo investigations of in silico
interpretations will provide an authoritative approach for novel
drugs design and development; ultimately an application in
medicinal chemistry for human welfare and society.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors thank National Chemical Laboratory for providing all
the necessary facilities for completion of the work. This work
was supported by grant from Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research (CSIR), New Delhi, India

Citation:Vishwakarma et al, Bioinformation 8(22): 1075-1081 (2012)

A) ClustalW alignment of BmFPS (ADV03080.1) with
templates Gallus gallus FPS (PDB ID-1UBY), Human FPS
(4DEM), Trypanosoma cruzi (1YHK) and Plasmodium vivax
(3MAV). The FARM and SARM (DDXXD) motifs are
highlighted in green color and boxed in rectangle. Single
conserved residues are highlighted in green, and those in red
are important catalytic residue. Yellow highlighted residues
(Tyr-Phe in BmFPS) play an important role in determining the
product specificity; B) NCBI conserved domain database search
(CDD) showing different motifs involved in catalytic activity.

A) Ribbon diagram of BmFPS homology model
showing α-helices and coils; B) Superimposition of modeled
BmFPS (lemon yellow) and template G. gallus FPS (PDB:1UBY,
green color).

A) Ramachandran plot (PROCHECK) showing the
dihedral angles Psi and Phi of amino acid residues, in which
residues lie in most favoured regions are in red curves (ABL)
and additional allowed regions are [a,b,l,p] in dark yellow
curves; B) Z plot analysis (ProSA) of modeled BmFPS. The dark
black spot represents the Z-score of the BmFPS model and is
located within the space of protein related to X-ray.

Molecular interactions of modeled BmFPS with ligands. (A) IPP, (B) DMAPP, (C) GPP, (D) Alendronate, (E)
Pamindronate, (F) Risedronate and (G) Zolendronate. Ligands are shown in yellow, whereas red coloured spheres denotes Mg2+
molecules. Dotted black line represents H-bonding.

