Background
Staphylococcus aureus, a gram-positive bacterium, causes various
mild as well as life-threatening diseases to human and other
animals []. Numerous virulence factors are synthesized in this
organism by the co-ordinated action of multiple regulators. To
exterminate the S. aureus infections, several antibiotics (that
block the synthesis of cell wall, DNA, RNA, and protein) had
been administered from 1943. Sadly, S. aureus strains with the
resistance to multiple antibiotics were evolved gradually
worldwide. Currently, vancomycin, linezolid, daptomycin, and
tigecycline are being used in clinics to eradicate the multi-drug
resistant S. aureus strains []. These agents are, however, either
not completely safe for use or associated with the development
of staphylococcal resistance. The S. aureus vaccines, so far
developed by different groups, failed in the clinical trials
though they yielded promising results in the animal models 
[].
Bacterial viruses or bacteriophages (or simply phages) that
usually kill the host bacteria have been presumed to substitute
antibiotics as these agents showed promising results in the
treatment of various bacterial infections including
staphylococcal infections []. Over 250 staphylococcal phages
have been reported so far []. Of the staphylococcal phages,
relatives of phages K, G1, and Twort exhibited therapeutic
potentials []. All these phages belong to Myoviriade family and
are virulent in nature. Therapeutic potentials of other
staphylococcal phages, particularly those belonging to the
families Podoviridae and Siphoviridae have not been
demonstrated yet [].

Synonymous codon usage biases had been determined in
numerous living organisms and in viruses [–]. The results
unanimously demonstrated that codon usage is species-specific
and even varies gene to gene of the same species. Codon usage
is usually positively co-related with the GC base composition of
the genome. Several other factors such as mutational pressure,
translational selection, secondary structure of protein,
replication-translation selection, environmental factor, etc. were
reported to influence the codon usage bias. Codon usage
analysis has enriched both the basic and applied biological
sciences in number of ways. It has assisted in understanding the
expression levels of the genes, provided clues about the
evolution of the genes and genomes, maximized protein
expression in the heterologous system, enhanced
immunogenicity of vaccines, etc. [–]. In addition, codon
usage analysis also identified virulent phages having prospects
in therapy [–]. The complete genome sequences of the fifty
one staphylococcal phages (including phages K, G1 and Twort)
are available in different viral databases (as of December 2011).
Previously, codon usage biases were investigated in the twelve
of these phage genomes []. The results suggested that phages
K, 44AHJD, and P68 are extremely virulent in nature and may
be useful in therapy. Currently, very little is known about the
codon usage bias and the lytic ability of the rest thirty nine
phages. In the present study, we performed codon usage
analysis in the genes of forty staphylococcal phages (including
phage K) at length. Our results revealed that phages G1, Twort,
66 and Sap-2 are extremely virulent in nature, indicating that
these phages could be used in curing staphylococcal infections.

Methodology
Complete genome sequences of forty staphylococcal phages
were downloaded from different databases [available in NCBI
(USA) and EMBL (UK) web pages]. The forty phages whose
genomes were downloaded are 187, 2638A, 29, 47, 52A, 53, 69,
71, 85, 88, 92, 96, X2, 37, 3A, 42e, 55, 66, 80alpha, CNPH82, EW,
G1, K, P954, PH15, PT1028, ROSA, SAP-2, SAP-26, Twort,
phiETA2, phiETA3, phiMR11, phiMR25, phiNM1, phiNM3,
phiPVL-CN125, phiPVL108, phiSauS-IPLA35 and phiSauSIPLA88.
Phage K was included in the study in order to compare
its codon usage bias with those of other staphyloccal phages,
particularly, phages G1 and Twort. The basic characteristics of
all forty phages were presented in  (see supplementary
material). While phages PH15 and CNPH82 infect S.
epidermidis, other phages infect S. aureus. Except phages P954,
PT1028, ROSA, and phiPVL-CN125, all other phages are
distributed across the three major families, namely, Myoviridae,
Podoviridae and Siphoviridae. Gene number in the 40 phages
varies from 20 to 214. Genome sequence of S. aureus USA300
[] were also downloaded for a comparative study. Coding
sequences of all forty phages were extracted by a program in in
EMBOSS 6.4 [] designated ‘Coderet‘. Coding sequences
carrying less than 50 codons were not considered in this study.
Hence a total of 2722 protein coding genes from 40 phages were
utilized for all analysis. All coding sequences of S. aureus
USA300 were also extracted by similar manner. The relative
synonymous codon usage (RSCU) in all forty phages was
determined to understand the overall codon usage variation
among the genes and genomes. RSCU is defined as the ratio of
the observed frequency of codons to the anticipated frequency
if all the synonymous codons for those amino acids are utilized
uniformly []. The RSCU values greater than 1.0 denote that
the corresponding codons are more often used than expected,
whereas, the opposite is true for the RSCU values less than 1.0.
G3s, A3s, T3s, and C3s are the frequencies of G, A, T, and C and
GC3s is the frequency of (G+C) at the synonymous third
positions of codons. Nc, the effective number of codons used by
a gene, is usually used to measure the bias of synonymous
codons and independent of amino acid compositions and codon
number []. The values of Nc vary from 20 (when one codon is
used per amino acid) to 61 (when all the codons are used
equally). The highly-biased genes are generally expressed
highly []. As gene expression levels of the phages are not
known with certainty, we have considered the highly-biased
genes as the highly expressed in case of staphylococcal phages
under study. The correspondence analysis [] and the
determination of all the parameters (mentioned above) were
performed by the program CodonW 1.4 []. The copy number
of tRNA species in S. aureus USA300 and corresponding
anticodon sequences were determined by a program, namely,
tRNAscan-SE []. The Sau3AI cut site in the genomic DNA was
determined by ‘Webcutter 2.0’ program [].

Discussion and Conclusion
Synonymous codon usage variation in 40 staphylococcal phages
To study the codon usage variation in the forty staphylococcal
phages, the overall RSCU values in 2722 protein-coding genes
of these phages were determined (data not presented). As
expected from the AT-rich phage genomes, A and T ending
codons appeared to be predominant in all the phages (data not
shown). To determine the possible codon usage variation in the
above phage genes, both Nc and GC3s were determined and
found to vary from 36.52 to 48.44 (with a mean of 44.39 and
standard deviation 3.061) and from 0.159 to 0.29 (mean 0.244
and standard deviation 0.033), respectively. Such results are
indicative of the marked variations in synonymous codon usage
in the genes of all 40 staphylococcal phages. Several factors
including mutational bias seem to be responsible for the codon
usage alternation in the staphylococcal phages.

Effect of mutational pressure on the codon usages variations
To determine the factors responsible for the codon usage
variation in different organisms, both Nc plot (a plot of Nc
versus GC3s) and correspondence analysis (CA) were employed
extensively []. Genes were suggested to fall on the continuous
curve between Nc and GC3s, if GC3s were the only determinant
of Nc. Secondly, comparison of the actual distribution of genes
with the expected distribution under no selection could indicate
whether codon usage bias is influenced by the factors other
than mutational bias []. The Nc plot reveals that a small
fraction of 40 staphylococcal phage genes lie on the expected
curve towards GC poor regions (), suggesting their
origination from the extreme mutational bias. In contrast,
majority of the genes with low Nc values lie well below the
expected curve (), indicating that these phage genes
possess an additional codon usage bias which does not depend
on GC3s. Interestingly, genes of phages K, G1 and Twort are
mostly overlapped, lie far away from the expected curve and
tend to be separated from the rest phage genes. The data
suggest that the effect of mutational bias on codon usage
variation in the phages G1, K, and Twort is very weak.

To verify the suggestions made from the Nc plot,
correspondence analysis of the RSCU values of the 2722
protein-coding genes of the above 40 phages were performed as
described in Methodology. The distributions of the genes along
the first two major axes were shown only as they accounted for
6.64% and 5.44% of the total variation, respectively ().
An analysis between the positions of genes along first as well as
second major axis ( generated by CA) with the nucleotide
composition at the third codon position revealed that the first
major axis is negatively correlated with A3s and T3s but
positively correlated with G3s and C3s
 (see
supplementary materials). Interestingly, second major axis
does not show any correlation with A3s, T3s, G3s and C3s. The
results suggest that A and T ending codons are clustered on the
negative side, whereas, G and C ending codons are located on
the positive side of first major axis. To determine the differences
between these two clusters of genes, codon usage of 10% genes
located at the extreme right side of axis 1 was compared with
the 10% of genes located at the extreme left side of axis 1. As
evident from  (see supplementary material), there are
24 over-represented codons in the genes located at the positive
side of the first major axis. Out of 24 predominant codons, there
are 10 A ,13 T ending codons and 1 C ending codon, which
actually represent 41.67% A, 54.17% T, and 4.17% C ending
codons. The results suggest that genomic GC composition has a
powerful effect in separating the genes along first major axis
according to their RSCU values. The data from correspondence
analysis therefore supports the data from of the Nc plot and
together they indicate that mutational bias plays a major role in
shaping the codon usage variation in the genes of 40
staphylococcal phages.

Effects of translational selection and gene length on the codon usage variation
To ascertain whether translational selection or gene length also
influence synonymous codon usage bias of the forty
staphylococcal phages, correlation coefficients were determined
between the positions of the genes along the first major axes
with both Nc and gene length  (see supplementary
material). Apparently, only first major axis is positively
correlated with Nc. A scatter plot () between the
position of the genes along the first major axis and Nc values
also revealed that several genes of the phages SAP-2, 66, K, G1
and Twort possess lower Nc values and seemed to be separated
from the other phage genes. The phage genes with lower Nc
values therefore carry comparatively AT rich codons. The data
together suggest that a balance between mutational bias and
translational efficiency is strongly contributing to the codon
usage variation in the genes of staphylococcal phages. Besides,
phages SAP-2, 66, K, G1, and Twort are seemed to be composed
of the highly expressed genes primarily. Synonymous codon
usages in the highly expressed genes are usually influenced by
the cellular tRNA abundance [, 
–]. In most organisms,
cellular tRNA abundance was found to be directly proportional
to the corresponding tRNA copy number. To see whether there
is any positive correlation between host tRNA abundance and
synonymous codon usage of the phages G1, K, Twort, Sap-2
and 66, a comparative analysis was made between the tRNA
copy numbers of S. aureus USA300 and the over-represented
synonymous codons of these phages separately  (see
supplementary material). Of the 18 abundant synonymous
codons of phage Sap-2 or 66, 10 codons were found to be paired
by those USA300-specific tRNAs whose copy numbers are
greater than two or more per cell. Considering the standard
base pairing rules of codon-anticodon, 7 additional overrepresented
codons of sap-2 or 66 appeared to be interacted by
the abundant host tRNAs  (see supplementary
material). In contrast, 13 out of 18 over-represented codons of
G1 or Twort or K were recognized by the over-represented
tRNAs in USA300. Most of the genes of phages G1, Twort, K, 66
and Sap-2 therefore seemed to possess a high translational
efficiency. Further analysis also shows that first axis in CA is
negatively correlated with the gene length of the protein coding
genes of the 40 phages  (see supplementary material).
This indicates that gene length influences codon usage variation
to some extent in the above phages.

Synonymous codon usages of 40 staphylococcal phages are distinct
The data presented above clearly show that the synonymous
codon usage of phages G1, K, Twort, 66 and Sap-2 are different
from other staphylococcal phages being studied here 
(). 
To determine whether synonymous codon usages of all the
40 staphylococcal phages differ from each other,
correspondence analysis was also carried out on RSCU values
on genes grouped according to their corresponding genomes.
The data reveal that the positions of the genes along the first
major axis clearly separated the genomes according to their
genomic AT composition (). Additional statistical
analysis (using F statistics) on the RSCU values of all 18 amino
acids, which are coded by two or more synonymous codons of
the 40 staphylococcal phages, revealed that usages of each 59
synonymous codons differed significantly from genome to
genome. The data together indicate that codon usages of the
staphylococcal phages vary phage to phage. To study the
variation in the codon usage of the 40 staphylococcal phages
more accurately, a cluster analysis was performed on overall
codon usage data of these phages by D-squared (D2) statistic
approach []. D2 statistic values were determined by the
following equation: D2 = sum of 64 codons of: (frequency (codon,
) 
–frequency (codon ))
2; where frequency indicates the
relative synonymous codon usage values. A lower D2 value
indicates a strong resemblance in the codon usage. A matrix
containing the D2 value of each set was undertaken to generate
clusters. The clustering (dendrogram) produced by UPGMA
(unweighted pair group method using arithmetic averages)
procedure [] shows that phages belonging to the Myoviridae
(such as G1, K, and Twort) and Podoviridae (e.g., Sap-2 and 66)
families are clustered in two distinct branches, whereas,
Siphoviruses and unclassified viruses are clustered in different
other branches (). Such distribution of the phages not
only supports the correspondence analysis data () but
also reveals that the synonymous codon usage is dissimilar
even among the phages of each branch.

Identification of the staphylococcal phages possessing therapeutic potentials
To identify the staphylococcal phages suitable for therapy, we
carried out an additional analysis of the data presented in
() and in 
 (see supplementary material). It
appears that the Nc values of the genes of phages G1, K, Twort,
Sap-2 and 66 mostly vary from ~20 - 40. Secondly, phages G1,
K, and Twort harbor nearly 72% highly expressed genes,
whereas, phages 66 and Sap-2 carry about 94% highly
expressed genes. The results together suggest that the genes of
the above five phages would be expressed rapidly by the
translational machinery of the pathogenic S. aureus strain
USA300. Based on such translational efficiency, two podoviruses
(66 and Sap-2) seem to possess higher lytic ability than those of
the three myoviruses (G1, K, and Twort). Interestingly, all
podoviruses or myoviruses here might be similarly lytic in nature.
These five phages carry no or very few GATC sites and also do
not harbor any pathogenic factor-encoding / antibioticresistance
gene. The results together indicate that all the five
phages may be inducted in clinics for curing staphylococcal
infections. Phages similar to G1, K, and Twort were already
shown to have medicinal properties [,
]. Very little have been
done yet to test the efficacy of the podoviruses as the remedies
of staphylococcal diseases.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors thank Mr. S. Gupta (Bose Institute) for helping us
to construct the dendrogram presented here. The work was
supported partly by a grant [37 (1529) /12/ EMR-II] from the
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (Government of
India, India) to KS.

Citation:Bishal et al, Bioinformation 8(24): 1187-1194 (2012)

Nc plot of 40 S. aureus phage genes. The genes are
represented as different colored dots or as indicated colored
shapes.

Positions of the genes of 40 staphylococal phages
along the two major axes of variation in the correspondence
analysis on RSCU values. The genes are presented by the same
symbols as in .

Scatter plot of S. aureus phages and Nc values. The
genes are presented by the same symbol as in .

Position of the genes along the first two major axes
produced by correspondence analysis on RSCU values of 40
staphylococcal phage genomes. The genomes are represented as
different colored dots or as indicated colored shapes.

A dendrogram showing the codon usage variation of
40 staphylococcal phages constructed by the UPGMA method.

