Background
Retinoblastoma (RB) is the most common primary intraocular
malignancy of children []. Chemotherapy is the treatment of
choice following enucleation in patients with optic nerve and
choroids invasion and also orbital extension []. One of the
major problems related with chemotherapy drugs in RB is
resistance against anticancer agents []. Over-expression of Pglycoprotein
(P-gp), Multidrug Resistance-associated Protein 1
(MRP1), and Lung Resistance-related Protein (LRP) are
associated with development of multi drug resistance (MDR) in
various cancer cells []. MRP belongs to the ATP-binding
cassette (ABC) transporter family []. The MRP family consists
of nine members (MRP1-9), all these proteins contain
hydrophobic membrane spanning domains (TMDs) and
cytoplasmic nucleotide-binding domains (NBDs), wherein,
NBD is responsible for ATP binding/hydrolysis []. Earlier
studies have reported that MRP1 expression is associated with
the rare failure of chemotherapy in RB tumor despite the use of
cyclosporine []. It was also reported that cells which highly
express MRP1 show resistance to anti-cancer drugs like vinca
alkaloids, anthracyclines and epipodophyllotoxins
[].Chemotherapeutic treatments have been associated with
adverse side effects and dose limiting toxicity 
[]. Many natural
compounds have been reported to interact with the
transmembrane transporters and also found to sensitize cancer
cells to anti-cancer drugs []. In the recent decades, extensive
research has been done on curcumin to establish its biological
and pharmacological activities. It has been reported that
curcumin confers therapeutic and chemo-sensitization effect,
and also reported to have modulating role on MDR proteins
[]. These findings suggest the curcumin`s interaction with the
conserved functional domains of the drug resistance proteins,
thereby inhibiting their function. However, the molecular
mechanism behind the physiological effects of curcumin is not
well-studied. Hence, in this present study, we have selected Y79
RB cells as an in vitro model for RB cancer and studied the effect
of curcumin on MRP1 expression and function. Further in silico
approaches have also been studied to deduce the inhibitory
binding mode of curcumin on MRP1 protein.

Methodology
Reagents:
Curcumin (Sigma) were dissolved in dimethyl sulphoxide
(DMSO) and stored at ­20°c. Cell culture materials were
purchased from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA, USA). All other
chemicals and reagents were of the highest grade commercially
available.

Cell culture:
The Y79 cell line was obtained from the American Type Culture
Collection (Manassas, VA, USA) and maintained in a RPMI-
1640 medium supplemented with 20% fetal bovine serum with
50ng/mL of streptomycin and 1.25ng/mL of Amphotericin B at
370c in a humidified atmosphere with 95% O2 and 5% CO2.

Effects of curcumin on MRP1 expression in RB cell line:
RT-PCR studies for MRP1 on curcumin treated (2-10µM) &amp;
untreated Y79 RB cells were performed with 2µg of total RNA
from each sample. The cDNA products were amplified for 35
cycles using specific primers and the amplification product was
fractionated by electrophoresis using 2% agarose gel containing
0.5% Ethidium Bromide (, see supplementary material).
Further, for protein expression studies, the curcumin treated
and untreated cell lysates (50µg) were loaded onto 8%
polyacrylamide gels and the western blot for MRP1 (1:2000) and
β-actin (1:4000) was performed. Protein bands were visualized
using a chemiluminescence kit. The relative amount of MRP1
mRNA and protein expression was determined by
densitometer.

MRP1 functional study using calcein-AM by flow cytometry:
The accumulation of calcein-AM, which is a fluorescent
substrate for MRP1, was used for the functional study. 5×104
Y79 cells were collected and 0.5µM of calcein-AM was added in
the presence and absence of 10µM curcumin and incubated at
37°c in the dark for 30 minutes. Similarly, the inhibitors of
MRP1 (1mM probenecid and 100µM indomethacin) was added
and the accumulation of calcein was measured. After the
incubation period, the cells were pelleted by centrifugation at
5000rpm for five minutes. To the pellet, 500µl of PBS containing
0.1% BSA was added and analysed immediately by flow
cytometry.

ATPase activity of MRP1:
ATPase activity of MRP1 in Y79 RB cells was measured by the
end point Pi release assay. 100µg/ml concentration of protein
was incubated 2.5mM sodium fluoride and 0.2mM beryllium
sulfate for 5 minutes at 37°C. Following incubation, different
concentration of curcumin in the presence and absence of
quercetin (10µM) was added and incubated for 3 minutes at
37°C. The reaction was initiated by the addition of 5mM ATP
and terminated with 2.5% concentration of SDS after 20 minutes
of incubation. The amount of Pi released was quantified using
colorimetric method. MRP1-specific activity was recorded as
the BeFx-sensitive ATPase activity.

Photoaffinity labelling of MRP1 with 8-azido-ATP-bitoin:
Crude membranes of MRP1 expressing Y79 RB cells (100µg
protein) were incubated with 5mM Mgcl2 and 100µM 8-azido-
ATP-biotin in the dark on ice for 5 min in the presence and
absence of 10µM curcumin. The mixture was photolinked using
UV light for 10 minutes. Immunoprecipitation of the
photolinked sample was performed using MRP1 monoclonal
antibody linked to protein A immobilized on agarose. Further,
the immunoprecipitated protein was blotted and visualized
with streptavidin horseradish peroxidase.

Statistical analysis:
All experimental data were expressed as the mean ± Standard
Deviation (SD) from triplicate samples of three independent
experiments. Statistical analyses were performed by one-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA) using SPSS 11.0 software. Values
of p&lt;0.05 were considered statistically significant.

In silico Analysis:
Three dimensional structure of MRP1 have not been elucidated
yet. Hence, homology search was performed for MRP1 amino
acid sequence (UniProt ID: P33527) using BLASTp against
Protein Data Bank (PDB) to identify the suitable templates
towards modelling of MRP1 structure. Homology search results
revealed that homodimeric multidrug exporter Sav1866 (PDB
ID: 2HYD) of Staphylococcus aureus 
[] as a suitable template,
as it shared an overall sequence identity of 28% and similarity
of 49% with MRP1. Further, for generating the homology model
of MRP1, sequence alignment with Sav1866 was produced
using ClustalW2 with default parameters. Further, based on
this alignment, the three dimensional structure of MRP1 was
generated using Modeller9v8 []. Among the 100 decoys
generated for MRP1, the one with significant molecular
Probability Density Function (PDF) and Discrete Optimized
Potential Energy (DOPE) [] was subjected to refinement.
Further, the modelled structure was energy optimized through
GROMACS 4.3.1, molecular dynamics package [,
]. The
optimized model was evaluated for the stereo chemical aspects
using PROCHECK [] and for the energy profile using ProSA
II server []. The structural quality of the protein was further
evaluated by comparing the topology of the protein through
structural superposition. The more sensitive TM-score was
generated using TM align to check the probability of proteins
sharing the same fold at the structural level. TM-Score &gt; 0.17 is
suggestive of a model and template sharing the similar
topology [].

The possible ligand binding cavities within the generated
model was predicted using castP server []. The structural coordinates
of curcumin (ACD0022) was retrieved from Indian
Plant Anticancer Compound Database [] and geometry
optimized using PRODRG2 sever [].

Molecular Docking simulation was carried out using AutoDock
4.2. Initially, the energy optimized protein and the ligand were
prepared for docking by adding polar hydrogens. Further, the
protein and the ligand were also optimized by adding Kollman
united atom charges and Gasteiger charges, respectively.
Flexibility of the ligand was assigned based on its torsional
degrees of freedom through Autotors, with the protein fixed to
rigid throughout the process of docking simulation [,
].
Grid box covering the complete binding cavity as predicted
using CASTp for MRP1 (104×104×104; 0.667Ǻ) was built and
the same was used for docking process. Further, Grid maps
were generated for each atom within the ligand of MRP1 using
Autogrid. Docking calculation was performed using
Lamarckian genetic algorithm with default parameters, except
for the number of GA runs which was set to 100. Further,
cluster analysis was performed with a threshold RMSD set to
2.0Ǻ to find the optimal binding orientation of the ligands.
Potential binding pose of curcumin with MRP1 was predicted
based on the binding energy and inhibitory constant. Finally,
bonded and non-bonded interactions were also analyzed and
visualized using PyMOL []. All the major structural
bioinformatics tools used in this study were run on Open
Discovery Linux platform [] installed in Dell Precision
workstation.

Results
Effect of curcumin on MRP1 expression in RB cell line:
The Y79 RB cells treated with different concentrations of
curcumin (2, 5 and 10µM) for 72 hours were detected by RTPCR
and western blot. It was found that the mRNA and protein
level of MRP1 was similar to that of DMSO treated control RB
cells, indicating absence of curcumin's effect on MRP1
expression ().

Effect of curcumin on MRP1 function by flow cytometry:
The effect of curcumin on the MRP1 transport was tested by the
accumulation of the fluorescent substrate calcein-AM using
flow cytomtery. The Y79 cells were incubated with calcein-AM
and the intensity of fluorescence substrate accumulated was
measured by FACS. Accumulation of fluorescent substrate was
found to be increased (to nearly 50%) in the curcumin treated
cells, when compared with the controls ().
Similarly, indomethacin and probenecid (MRP1 inhibitors)
caused a significant increase in calcein accumulation at different
time intervals in Y79 cell lines, which shows the involvement of
MRP1 calcein efflux [], and the results were also found
to be statistically significant with p&lt;0.05.

Effect of curcumin on ATPase activity of MRP1:
ATPase activity of MRP1 in the presence of curcumin was
studied to assess the effect of curcumin on this transporter. Our
results show that curcumin was able to stimulate the basal
ATPase activity of MRP1 at very low concentration, but
inhibited the activity at higher concentration. This is indicative
of curcumin's direct interaction with the MRP1. Moreover, we
also observed the inhibition of quercetin stimulated ATP
hydrolysis by MRP1, mediated by curcumin in Y79 RB cell lines
[].

Effect of curcumin on photoaffinity labelling of MRP1 by 8-azido-ATP-biotin:
To determine the interaction sites of MRP1 with curcumin,
photoaffinity labelling of MRP1 was performed using 8-azido-
ATP-biotin. Curcumin had no effect on 8-azido-ATP-biotin of
MRP1 at 10µM concentration in Y79 RB cell line. The cross
linking of 8-azido-ATP was inhibited in the presence of 10mM
ATP. This suggests that curcumin produce their effect most
likely by interacting at the substrate binding sites rather than at
the nucleotide-binding sites of the MRP1 protein 
[].

Homology Modeling of MRP1:
Among the experimentally determined structures of ABC
transporter super family, SAV1866 (PDBID: 2HYD) of
Staphylococcus aureus was found to be an appropriate template
for human MRP1 with optimal query coverage (300-1531). Thus,
three dimensional structure of human MRP1 was generated
based on the molecular modeling protocol implemented by M.
K. DeGorter et al [].
The generated structural co-ordinates of
human MRP1 was geometry optimized with a potential energy
of ­1.6761530e+05 kJ/mol. The resultant 3D structure of human
MRP1 is predominantly helical in TM domains and β-sheets in
the NBDs (). The overall stereo chemical aspects of
MRP1 were inspected through Ramchandran plot, in which
91.0% of the residues in the most favoured region with no
residues in disallowed region. Moreover, the overall quality of
the model was further ascertained to be good with a Z-score of -
6.02 as calculated using ProSA. TM-score of 0.93037 was
calculated using the more sensitive structural alignment
algorithm, TM-align. This score was suggestive of the generated
model to share the same topology of the template with high
probability. Hence, the model validated at the geometrical and
energetic aspects ensure the plausibility for future analysis.

Binding cavity analysis:
Binding site residues of MRP1 were predicted using CASTp
( see supplementary material). The binding cavity of
volume and area with 25694 and 9954.7, respectively were
considered for the study. The amino acids residing in this cavity
were documented to be involved in binding and transport of
substrates [].

Molecular Docking of MRP1 with curcumin and ATP:
Molecular docking studies were performed for the optimized
three dimensional structure of MRP1 with curcumin using
LGA, to infer its binding mode. Among the conformers
generated, potential pose with lowest binding energy and
highest binding affinity was selected for analysis. Curcumin
showed bonded and non-bonded interactions with the substrate
binding site of MRP1 with the binding energy and inhibitory
constant of ­7.39 kJ/mol and 3.82µM, respectively. Further,
interaction analysis of MRP1 with curcumin showed hydrogen
bonding interactions Tyr384, Gln450 and Arg1249 and non
bonded interactions with Tyr324, Phe385, Met443, Ser446,
Ala447, Ile598, Val1194, Trp1198, Val1248 and Ser1252 
() 
(, see supplementary material).

Discussion
Curcumin is a polyphenolic compound derived from turmeric.
Its ability to affect gene transcription and induce apoptosis in
various animal models with particular relevance to cancer
chemoprevention and chemotherapy patients is well
documented []. It has been studied that curcumin also serve
as inhibitors of ABC transporters []. Recent studies have
shown that curcumin significantly lowered the MDR1 gene
expression in KB-V1 cervical carcinoma cell line. Similarly, it
increased the accumulation of Rhodamine 123 and inhibited it's
efflux in cells which over-express P-glycoprotein []. In the
present study, we investigated the effect of curcumin on MRP1
expression and function in Y79 RB cells.

In our earlier study, we have performed MTT assay to
determine the relative cytotoxicity of curcumin in the Y79 RB
cell line (data not shown; []). The concentrations that were
less toxic to cells were chosen for further experiments. When 2-
10µM curcumin was added to the Y79 for 72 hours, no effect
was observed on MRP1 mRNA and protein expression. Similar
results were observed by Wanida et al, where no change in the
expression of MRP1 was observed after curcumin treatment in
HEK-293 cells []. Cellular accumulation and the efflux studies
were performed in Y79 RB cells employing calcein-AM as
substrate for MRP1. This substrate is a non-fluorescent and
lipophilic acetoxymethyl ester of calcein that rapidly diffuses
through the plasma membrane into cells. In the cytosol,
calcein-AM is metabolized by esterase to calcein which is
effluxed by the MRP1 protein. In a previous study, curcumin
was also found to inhibit MRP1 transport by increasing the
accumulation of fluorescent substrate calcein-AM and fluo4-
AM using flow cytometry HEK-293 cells []. In the present
study, we also found that there was a 30% increase in the
accumulation of fluorescent substrate calcein-AM on curcumin
treated Y79 cells by flow cytometry analysis. Similarly,
indomethacin and probenecid (MRP1 inhibitors) caused a
significant increase in calcein accumulation at different time
intervals in Y79 cell lines, which show that MRP1 is involved in
the efflux of calcein. Exposure to drug substrates can lead to
stimulation or inhibition of ATPase activity of the ABC
transporters []. Similar to P-gp 
[], we found that curcumin
was able to stimulate the ATPase activity of MRP1 at low
concentration, but there was an inhibition of activity at higher
concentration, which can be attributed to curcumin's interaction
with MRP1's binding site. Further, our results also showed the
inhibitory activity of curcumin on quercetin stimulated ATP
hydrolysis by MRP1 in a dose dependent manner. Recently,
Heleen et al also showed the inhibitory activity of curcumin on
both MRP1 and MRP2 mediated transport in MDCKII cells, and
it was also demonstrated that glutathione dependent
metabolism of curcumin to play an important role in MRP1
inhibition []. To ascertain the probable curcumin interaction
sites on MRP1, photoaffinity labeling of MRP1 was performed.
This was done using 8-azido-ATP-biotin, an analog of ATP,
which has been already to bind specifically to the nucleotide
binding domain of P-gp and MRP []. Subsequently, in the post
labelling experiments we found the lack of curcumin's effect on
8-azido-ATP-biotin binding to MRP1 at 10µM concentration in
Y79 cell lines. This suggests that curcumin produces its effect
most likely by interacting at the substrate binding sites rather
than at the nucleotide-binding sites of the MRP1 protein to
modulate ATP hydrolysis.

It has been documented through mutational studies that the
residues spanning (Transmembrane) TM11 (Ile598) and TM17
(Val1248) are the regions involved in substrate binding and its
transport. Further, retention in the transport activity was
observed on mutating Phe385, Trp1198 and Arg1249, which
signifies the biological importance of these residues on
substrate transport []. In the present study, docking
interaction analysis of MRP1-curcumin complex showed
network of bonded and non bonded interactions with
Curcumin to the amino acid residues residing in the
documented substrate binding region. Docking studies also
inferred that oxygen atoms of phenolic and methoxy functional
groups spanning terminal phenyl rings of curcumin to play a
crucial role for inhibitory action.

Conclusion
Multi-drug resistance in tumour cells is a significant
impediment to the success of chemotherapy in many cancers.
Curcumin, a natural polyphenolic compound has led to
scientific interest in its ability as a chemotherapeutic agent. Our
in vitro results showed the potential of curcumin in modulating
the function and expression of multi-drug resistance proteins
MRP1. Furthermore, in silico molecular docking studies of these
MDR proteins with curcumin provides an insight on the active
binding mode of curcumin. Thus, curcumin can be used as a
promising MDR chemosensitizer in modulating the multidrug
resistance property in various cancers.

Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The present work was supported by grant from Indian Council
of Medical Research (5/13/25/04/NCD-III).

Citation:Sreenivasan et al, Bioinformation 8(1): 013-019 (2012)

Effect of curcumin on MRP1 mRNA and protein
expression in RB cell line: Dose-dependent effect of curcumin
(2, 5, 10µM) after 72hrs on the MRP1 mRNA and protein
expression in Y79 RB cells. (A) MRP1 and GAPDH expression
in the Y79 RB cells. (B) MRP1 and beta actin expression in RB
cells. Lane 1: Control cells, Lane 2: 2µM curcumin, Lane 3: 5µM
curcumin, Lane 4: 10µM curcumin and Lane 5: Molecular
weight marker. Both mRNA and protein level of MRP1 in
curcumin treated was similar to the DMSO treated control,
indicating that curcumin did not affect the expression level of
MRP1.

MRP1 functional activity in the Y79 RB cells: (2A)
Effect of curcumin on MRP1 function was assessed by
measuring the accumulation of fluorescent substrate calcein-
AM. Histogram showing peak in pink color represents
(unstained cells), green color (control cells) and blue color
represents (10µM curcumin treated cells). (2B) Calcein
accumulation is shown as bar diagram for n=3 experiments and
are expressed as the mean ± S.D. &lt; p&lt;0.05, significantly different
from the control.

Effect of MRP1 inhibitors on calcein accumulation in
Y79 RB cells: Y79 cells were incubated with and without
inhibitors (100µM indomethacin and 1mM probenecid) and the
calcein accumulation was observed at different time intervals.
Data are expressed as the mean ±S.D for n=3 experiments.&lt;
p&lt;0.05 significantly different from the control.

Effect of curcumin on basal and quercetin stimulated
ATPase activity and photoaffinity labeling of MRP1 with 8-
azido-ATP-biotin: (4A) Y79 cells expressing MRP1 (100µg of
protein/ml) were incubated with increasing concentration of
curcumin in the presence and absence of quercetin in the
ATPase assay buffer. The reaction was initiated by the addition
of 5mM ATP and terminated with 2.5% concentration of SDS
after 20 minutes of incubation; the amount of Pi released was
quantitated by colorimeter. (•) MRP1 basal activity; and (▄)
quercetin-stimulated MRP1 ATPase activity in the presence of
different concentration of curcumin. Value represents ±SE from
at least three independent experiments. (4B) Crude membranes
of (100µg protein) were incubated with 100µM 8-azido-ATPbiotin
in the dark on ice for 5 min in the presence and absence
of 10µM curcumin. The proteins were then immunoprecipitated
with MRP1 antibody linked to agarose protein A beads. The
immunoprecipitated protein was blotted and visualized with
streptavidin horseradish peroxidase. The addition of 10mM
ATP prevented photlabeling. Lane 1: 8-azido-ATP-bitoin, Lane
2: 10µM curcumin and Lane 3: 10mM ATP.

Homology based three dimensional model of MRP1.

Molecular interaction observed between MRP1 with
Curcumin. Binding site residues (RED) of MRP1 and Curcumin
(Yellow) represented in sticks. The bonded and non- bonded
interactions are visualized through PyMOL with H-bonded
interaction represented through yellow color dashed lines.

