Background
Janus Kinases (JAKs) belongs to the family of non receptor
tyrosine kinase consisting of JAK1, JAK2, JAK3 and TYK2
which are activated after cytokine receptor activation. JAK
activation results in phosphorylation of the STAT transcription
factor members and translocated into a nucleus, binds DNA
and promotes transcription [–
]. The mutation or increased
localized concentration of cytokines causes over activation of
JAK-STAT signalling, which leads to various inflammatory
diseases [,
], autoimmune disease 
[], cancer 
[,
] and graft
rejection []. Among the JAK family, JAK3 is abundantly
expressed in hemopoietic cells and plays an important role in
normal lymphocyte development and function, whereas JAK1,
JAK2 and TYK2 are ubiquitously expressed in vertebrates 
[,
].

The drug that is under the clinical trial for JAK3 inhibitor is
tofacitinib for rheumatoid arthritis [,
] which was found to
have adverse reactions due to less JAK3 selectivity [,
].
R348, another potent JAK3 inhibitor for inflammatory skin
disease such as psoriasis, but there was no reported clinical
trials [].Therefore selective targeting of JAK3 may have a
therapeutic benefit over broader JAK signaling inhibition for
the treatment in various areas like oncology, organ
transplantation and autoimmune diseases [,
].

In the present study, pharmacophore model was generated for
Human JAK3 inhibitors using Phase module 3.5 (Schrödinger
module). Subsequently an atom based 3D-QSAR model was
obtained and database screening was done in search of novel
lead compounds. The lead compounds were then docked with
JAK3 to study the interaction of inhibitors with the protein.

Methodology
Dataset:
A total of 116 JAK3 inhibitors were collected from the literature
[,
,
–] 
and the pIC50 (pIC50 = -logIC50) values were
calculated. The dataset contains different chemical classes,
namely phenyl aminoprymidines, Nphenylmethanesulfonamide,
nitrile carboxamide, Ncyanomethylbenzamide,
2-aminoethylketone, 2-
Benzimidazolyl-9-(chroman-4-yl)-purinone, di-substituted
pyrimidine, tri-substituted pyrimidine and 5H-pyrrolo(2,3-b)
pyrazine-2-phenyl ethers. The structures were drawn using
Build panel of Maestro version 9.4 and prepared using LigPrep
2.6 modules. Different conformer was generated using rapid
torsion search of Macromodel. Energy minimization was done
using OPLS 2005 with an implicit distance-dependent dielectric
solvation treatment.

The Generation of Pharmacophore hypothesis and 3D-QSAR model building:
The pharmacophore and 3D-QSAR model was generated using
Phase version 3.5, Schrödinger suite 9.4 []. There are six builtin
pharmacological features in Phase, namely hydrogen bond
receptor (A), hydrogen bond donor (D), hydrophobic group
(H), negatively ionisable (N), positively ionisable (P) and
aromatic ring (R). The pharmacophore model was developed
using a set of pharmacophore features to generate sites for all
the compounds. The alignment was measured using survival
score [] and the default values have been used for the
hypothesis generation.

A total of 116 molecules were ranked based on pIC50 values.
Every 5th compound was chosen as a test set, so 19 were
selected as a test set and remaining were used as training set to
generate atom-based QSAR models. This type of test set
selection procedure was employed to represent the range of
biological activities similar to the training set molecule. To
encompass the space occupied by the aligned training set
molecules the rectangular grid was generated with the spacing
of 1.2Å. Each model contains five or more partial least square
(PLS) factors tend to fit the pIC50 values beyond their
experimental uncertainty. The statistical parameters R2
(coefficient of determination) and SD (standard deviation of
regression) were calculated to evaluate the overall significance
of the model.

Virtual screening:
Virtual screening was carried out using ZincPharmer
(zincpharmer.csb.pitt.edu ) which uses the pharmacophore to
efficiently search the ZINC database of fixed conformers 
[].
We also used constraints that included maximum of 0.7 Root
Mean Square Deviation (RMSD), 10 rotatable bond cut-off and
molecular weight range of 180–500 Dalton to get the best
similarity hits from ZINC database. The hit compounds were
subsequently subjected to the addition of hydrogen, removal of
salt ionization and generation of low energy ring conformation
using LigPrep.

Protein Preparation:
The X-ray crystallographic structure of JAK3 complexes with
inhibitor was downloaded from the PDB database (PDB ID:
4HVD []) and prepared using the protein preparation wizard
of Schrödinger Module by retaining the water molecule within
5 Å of ligand. OPLS-2005 force field was used for energy
minimization. Hydrogen atoms were added to the protein to
correct ionization and tautomeric states of amino acid residues.
The receptor grid was generated using Receptor Grid
Generation Panel.

Docking study:
The Virtual Screening Workflow in Maestro was used to dock
and to score the lead-like compounds to identify potential
ligands. It provides the different level of docking precision,
namely High Throughput Virtual Screening (HTVS), Standard
Precision (SP) and Extra Precision (XP) 
[–]. We first carried
out HTVS calculation, and then SP and finally XP mode for
further refinement of good ligand pose. The screened
compounds were also filtered by Lipinski׳s rule of five
(QikProp version 3.6 []). And also XP docking was carried
out for 116 ligands which were used to build the 3D-QSAR
model.

Post Docking Analysis:
The free energy of binding was calculated for the best scoring
pose of the Glide-XP docking results using Multi-ligand
bimolecular association with energetic (eMBrAcE) of the
Macromodel module. It uses physics-based rescoring procedure
to calculate binding energies between ligand and proteins using
OPLS force field for docked conformation. For each ligand, the
protein–ligand complex (Elig–prot), the free protein (Eprot),
and the free ligand (Elig) were subjected to energy
minimization in implicit solvent (water) using the OPLS_2001
force field with a constant dielectric electrostatic treatment of
1.0 Å. A conjugate gradient energy minimization protocol was
performed. The energy difference mode was used for the
calculation of Glide output and it was calculated using the
following equation.


▲E= Ecomplex − Eligand − Eprotein

All computational and molecular modelling were done on the
centOS Linux platform in HCL Intel Xeon Server with 4GB
RAM and using the Maestro window of Schrödinger version
9.4, LLC, New York 2012 and 2013.

Results &amp; Discussion
Structural Analysis of JAK3:
The available 3D structure of JAK3 in the PDB databank
(www.rcsb.org) was analyzed to see the critical amino acid for
JAK3 inhibitor. All the ligands in complex structures were
found to interact with Glu903, Leu956 and Leu905 either by
hydrogen bonding or hydrophobic interactions 
 (see
supplementary material). For the present study, based on the
resolution 4HVD (1.85 Å) was selected as target protein.

JAK3 exhibits bilobed structure which is conserved among the
catalytic domain of all protein kinases. JAK3 is having N and C
lobe, C helix, glycine rich loop or P-loop and hinge regions. It
also has additional helix between the residues 1029 to 1038
named as a FG helix. The residues in the active site region are
Leu828, Phe833, Val836, Ala853, Lys855, Met902, Glu903,
Cys909, Arg953, Leu956, Ala966 and Asp967. JAK3 shares the
high sequence similarity with JAK2 and JAK1. The sequence
difference between JAK3 and JAK2 that are proximal to the
catalytic cleft are Ser828, Leu838, Arg 916, Gln 988 Cys909 and
Ala966 in JAK3 which is substituted by Gln, Met, Lys, Glu, Ser
and Gly respectively in JAK2. The two important differences
are Cys909 and Ala966 which are in the ATP binding site of
JAK3 [].

Validation of docking:
Water molecules are considered as an important factor in the
docking process, i.e. the binding affinity of the ligand molecule
is improved and stabilized by hydrogen-bonded network of
water molecules with protein [–
]. We have carried out two
methods of protein preparation for the target protein 4HVD:
one by removing all water molecules and other by retaining
water molecules within 5 Å of ligand. Further, the results of XP
docking was validated by re-docking the co-crystallized ligand
(2-Cyclopropyl-5H-pyrrolo [2, 3-b] pyrazine-7-carboxylic acid
((S)-1, 2, 2-trimethyl-propyl)-amide) to the binding site of JAK3.
The protein structure prepared by retaining water molecules
within 5 Å of ligand has generated lowest RMSD (0.296 Å) than
without water molecules (1.68 Å) when superimposed with
experimental structure (). Hence, the target protein
JAK3 was prepared with water molecules to find the best
pharmacophore hits.

Determination of Common Pharmacophore:
In order to identify common pharmacophores, the collected
dataset was divided into active (pIC50&gt;7.2), inactive (pIC50&lt;5)
and moderatively active (pIC50 between 5 and 7). In Phase,
common pharmacophores are identified from a set of variants.
For defining variants, the maximum number of sites to be
included in the hypothesis was selected as 5 and a minimum
number of sites to be 4. With the above said criteria, 28
compounds were matched out of 30 active compounds. Among
the 12 variants listed out, seven was found to have common
pharmacophore (ADHR 3, DHRR 3, AHRR 18, ADRR 6, AAHR
73, AADH 4 and AADR 8). Then 115 pharmacophores were
subsequently scored by scoring with respect to active and
inactive using default score. The scoring procedure provides a
ranking of the different hypothesis, allowing us to make
rational choice. The scoring algorithm includes the alignment of
site points and vectors, volume overlap, number of ligands
matched, selectivity, relative conformational energy and
activity. A total of 14 hypotheses survived the scoring processes
which were used to build an atom based QSAR model.

Building and Validation of 3D-QSAR:
An atom based 3D-QSAR model was generated for the
pharmacophore hypothesis. The best QSAR model was
identified and validated by predicting activities of 19 test set
compounds. Regression was constructed for a series of model
with the increasing number of Partial Least-Square (PLS factor).
As the number of PLS factors increased, the statistical
significance and predictive ability of the model was also
incrementally increased up to 7. It was found that AAHR.92 has
higher R2 value (0.9422), predictive power q2 value of 0.6023,
Pearson R value of 0.8178 and lower Standard Deviation (SD) of
0.2666  (see supplementary material). Larger the value
of F (186) with the smaller value of p (8.8e-47) indicates a
statistically significant regression model with high degree of
confidence. The small value of SD of 0.2666 and Root-Mean-
Square-Error value (RMSE) of 0.6472 indicates that the data
used for the analysis of the QSAR model was good even though
QSAR model was generated using the different set of chemical
class compounds. Besides all these, the best QSAR model
should have high predictive ability, so the best model should
have a high cross validated correlation coefficient. The q2 value
is more reliable since it is obtained by external validation of the
test set model. AAHR.92 has q2 value of 0.60 indicates the
goodness of the model. A graph of actual versus predicted
pIC50 value of the test and training set is shown in 
.

The selected pharmacophore hypothesis included the following
features (): the hydrogen bond acceptor (sphere with
arrow A2 and A3), hydrophobic group (H9 green sphere) and
the aromatic ring (R15 circle). The alignment generated by the
best pharmacophore model for active and inactive compound is
shown in . The key pharmacophore element of the
AAHR.92 hypothesis: the aromatic ring (R15), which is mapped
into the benzene ring of benzimidazole or azobenzimidazole of
all active compounds, the hydrogen bond acceptor (A2 and A3)
features are in N of prymidine, N and O of Purinone and O of
the chroman ring and the hydrophobic groups are featured on
alkyl substituent.

Virtual Screening:
AAHR.92 was used to search 3D database for structures that
match the pharmacophoric features of the model. A total
2,26,248 compounds were retrieved as hits from ZincPharmer
and were placed through virtual screening workflow. A total of
107 compounds with XP docking score ranged between -12.96
and -9.00 were obtained. Finally, we selected 10 ligands which
have good interaction with active site of JAK3 and are shown in
 
(see supplementary material) and .

The pharmacophore model was developed using pyrimidine,
pyrrolo pyrimdine, pyrolopyrazine, purinone with chromane
substitution and naphyl ketone. The best ten lead compounds
were found to have these groups. CP-690550 (Tofacitinib) a
potent JAK3 inhibitor was also included as a reference
compound in the docking protocol. The docking score and
binding energy of CP-690550 was found to be -9.86 and -150.29
respectively.

The Chemical name of the leads are, lead 1: 2-{[4-(2-amino-6-
methoxypyrimidin-4-yl)-1H-pyrrolo[2,3-b]pyridin-6-
yl]amino}ethanol, lead 2: 4-(2-amino-6-methoxypyrimidin-4-
yl)-N-(2-methoxyethyl)-1H-pyrrolo[2,3-b]pyridin-6-amine, lead
3: N-(1,3-dihydroxy-2-methylpropan-2-yl)-2-[(5-hydroxy-4-
oxo-2-phenyl-4H-chromen-7-yl)oxy]acetamide, lead 4: 4-(2-
amino-6-isopropoxypyrimidin-4-yl)-N-methyl-1H-pyrrolo[2,3-
b]pyridin-6-amine, lead 5: N~4~,N~4~-diethyl-6-[6-
(methylamino)-1H-pyrrolo[2,3-b]pyridin-4-yl]pyrimidine-2,4-
diamine, lead 6: N-[4-(2-amino-6-methoxypyrimidin-4-yl)-
1H-pyrrolo[2,3-b]pyridin-6-yl]glycine, lead 7: N4-(3-
methoxypropyl)-N6-(5-quinolyl)pyrimidine-4,5,6-triamine,
lead 8: 1-Hydroxypyrene beta-D-Glucuronide Methyl Ester,
lead 9: N-benzyl-N-isopropyl-2-[[(7S)-7-methyl-5,6,7,8-
tetrahydrobenzothiopheno[2,3-d]pyrimidin-4-yl]oxy]ace and
lead 10: (2S)-N-(3-acetylphenyl)-2-[(3,5-dimethylisoxazol-4-
yl)methylamino]-2-phenyl-acetamide.

Post Docking Scoring:
In the present work, the post docked scoring approach, namely
eMBrAcE was used to evaluate the molecular docking of JAK3
with inhibitors  (available with authors). The Multiligand
Bimolecular Association with Energetics (MBAE) of the
best active compounds 64 and 105 was found to be -145.34 and -
172.38 respectively. The binding energy of the least active
compound 46 was found to be -67.43. The MBAE energy of the
lead compounds ranged from -80.78 to -157.68 ().

ADME Analysis:
Lipinski׳s rule of five is based on the physicochemical
properties of drugs and candidate drugs in clinical trials to
evaluate drug likeness. The rule includes molecular weight,
logP, Hydrogen bond donor and acceptor. The molecules that
pass through the Lipinski׳s rule of five are expected to be active
after oral administration in human. The percentage of the
human oral absorption of selected lead compounds was found
to be 52 to 100%. For selected lead compounds, the partition
coefficient (QPlogPo/w) and water solubility (QPlogS) was
within the permissible range of -2.0 to 6.5 and -6.5 to 0.5
respectively. All the pharmacokinetic parameters analysed
were found to be within the permissible range  (see
supplementary material).

Conclusion
JAK3 is an important component associated with sensitivity
towards cytokine signalling and its deficiency is associated
with severe combined immunodeficiency phenotype. JAK3
inhibitors are immunomodulatory agents with
immunosuppressive, anti-inflammatory, anti-allergic, antithrombotic
and anti-leukemic properties. The preclinical trial
drug tofacitinib found to have an inhibitory effect also on JAK1
and JAK2. The identification of selective JAK3 inhibitor may
effectively act as immunomodulatory agent. In this study,
pharmacophore based virtual screening and molecular docking
approach was carried out to identify JAK3 inhibitor. A series of
phenylaminopyrmidines, napthylketones, di and tri-substituted
pyrmidines and pyrole pyrazines compounds were used for
3D-QSAR analysis. A four-point pharmacophore model
AAHR.92 was developed which comprises of two hydrogen
bond acceptor, one hydrophobic group and aromatic ring.
AAHR.92 was used as 3D query and a total of 2,26,248
compounds were obtained as hit. These compounds were taken
for high throughput virtual screening. Finally, ten lead
compounds with good docking score (-12.96 to -11.18) and
ADME properties were identified. All the lead compounds
were within the acceptable range defined for human use,
thereby indicating their potential as drug-like molecules.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Rajeswari et al, Bioinformation 10(3): 157-163 (2014)

Superposition of co-crystallized ligand 2-Cyclopropyl-
5H-pyrrolo [2, 3-b] pyrazine-7-carboxylic acid ((S)-1, 2, 2-
trimethyl-propyl)-amide in experimental binding mode (in
maroon) with redocked pose a) without water molecules
(RMSD 1.68 Å) and b) with water molecules (RMSD 0.296 Å).

A graph of actual vs predicted pIC50 value of the test
and training set of AAHR.92

Pharmacophoric features of active ligands

Alignment of active a) and inactive ligands; b) to the pharmacophore model AAHR.92

Structure of lead compounds

