Background
The accumulation of vast amount of protein sequences and
interaction data has not only accelerated study of cellular processes,
but also revealed the underlying complexity of protein interactions.
Previous protein interaction network (PIN) studies have
demonstrated a characteristic distribution of interacting proteins,
where the majority of them have a low number of connections,
while there are few proteins that are involved in the majority of
network interactions []. Those highly-connected proteins are
referred as ’hubs‘ ­ the name that emphasizes a central role of such
proteins in cellular processes. Naturally, such hub proteins represent
attractive study objects helping our understanding of cellular
interactions and promising new and intriguing opportunities for
therapeutics development. Identification of high PIN interactors is
straightforward when there is a large amount of interaction data
available for a given proteome. However, the task of finding hubs in
species that lack protein interaction information appears to be
difficult. Many computational methods have been proposed for
predicting pairwise protein interactions []. Those predictors
demonstrate different degrees of accuracy, but none of them have
actually been focused on explicit identification of protein hubs.
Thus, it remains mostly unknown which structure­ and/or sequencerelated
features can distinguish hubs from other proteins.

In our previous work [], we have constructed a classifier capable of
distinguishing hubs and non-hubs with reasonable accuracy by
utilizing the Gene Ontology (GO) annotations for hub prediction.
Although the developed hub classifier has demonstrated suitable
performance (28% sensitivity and 90% specificity), it was limited to
the extent of available GO data and relied on the expert knowledge
on proteins. In continuation of that work we have also had some
success in employing a QSAR (quantitative structure-activity
relationship) approach that utilized 75 physical and chemical
descriptors to predict hub proteins in Methicillin-Resistant
Staphylococcus aureus MRSA252 proteome []. Although the study
was focused on a small subset of MRSA252 proteins, it has
demonstrated the possibility of relatively accurate hub
characterization based on physicochemical properties. The aim of
the current study is to further improve our understanding of hub
proteins through the use of a comprehensive set of 1300 protein
descriptors reflecting their physicochemical properties (quantified
through QSAR descriptors), as well as their domain and fold
composition, cellular function and sequence similarity. We focused
our efforts on determining common and distinctive features of the
protein hubs in four model organisms: Escherichia coli,
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Drosophila melanogaster and Homo
sapiens. Furthermore we have demonstrated the feasibility of
combining numerous protein descriptors to construct boosting treesbased
hub classifiers.

Methodology
 illustrates the entire process for the characterization and
prediction of hub proteins.

Acquisition of protein-protein interaction data
Experimental protein interaction data used in constructing hub
classifiers were obtained from the IntAct database [] for the
following four species: Escherichia coli K 12, Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, Drosophila melanogaster, and Homo sapiens (dated by
Sep. 25th, 2007). Proteins were ranked based on their number of
interactions within the same species, with the top 10% interactors
considered as hubs (the same hub parameters in our previous studies
[,]).

Calculation of protein descriptors
To fully characterize each protein in our dataset, over 1300
descriptors have been calculated and grouped into following five
categories

Gene Ontology (GO) annotations
GO data [] were obtained from the Uniprot Retrieval System
 []
using unique UniProt protein accession numbers. To achieve a
reasonable level in GO data hierarchy, we adapted a generic GO
annotation level determined by the “GO slim” project. The resulting
GO descriptor had a binary form, where ’1‘ indicates that a protein
has a certain GO annotation, while ’0‘ indicates its absence. More
details can be found in [].

Sequence conservation
We compared the constituent proteins to 10 selected reference
proteomes (2 Archaea, 4 Bacteria and 4 Eukaryota species) with
protein sequences obtained from the UniProt database [] and
RefSeq database []. The presence of similar sequences was
determined based on the following BLAST criteria: e-value ≤ 105,
similarity ≥ 50%, and alignment coverage ≥ 80%. Each of the 10
reference proteomes served as a binary protein descriptor, where ’1‘
indicates that a given protein has a homolog in a reference
proteome, while ’0‘ indicates its absence.

Number of Pfam protein domains
Each protein in the training set has been associated with Pfam
domains [] through the Uniprot Retrieval System [] (dated by
Oct. 1st, 2007). Descriptors were used to record the total number of
Pfam domains for each protein. Among all identified Pfam domains
a subset had the iPfam association representing interacting domains
identified specifically from known protein complexes. The iPfam
characteristics were obtained from the iPfam database [] (version
20).

Protein threading scores and SCOP protein domain composition
Descriptors in this category were derived in two steps. First, each
protein sequence in the training set was compared against 8,539
PDB structural templates implemented by the THREADER 3.5
program [] (threading template library obtained on Feb. 7th,
2008). The Z-score, which represents the fitness measure, was
calculated for each pair of the query protein and each structural
template. In the second step, each template in the library was linked
to a specific SCOP domain classification number [] (version
1.73). To achieve a manageable number of descriptors, the protein
templates were grouped at their first (Class) and second level (Fold)
levels of the SCOP classification. As a result, 8,539 PDB templates
were classified into 1,105 folds resulting in 1,105 SCOP descriptors
for this category.

Physicochemical properties
A total of 75 sequence-based physical and chemical descriptors
were calculated and used for training hub classifiers. Those
descriptors quantify such protein properties as molecular weight, net
charge, isoelectric point, hydrophobicity, surface area, solvent
accessibilities, electronegativity, secondary structure composition,
surface coils and flexibility, among others. The protein descriptors
calculated by the QSAR approaches are described in more details in
our previous work [].

Training and testing hub classifiers by boosting trees
We have applied two rounds of training to select descriptors that
were more capable of differentiating hubs and non-hubs. During
both rounds each hub classifier was trained individually for each of
the four species, and a four-fold cross-validation strategy was used
(75% training and 25% testing). Each training and testing set had
the constant hub to non-hub (1:9) ratio. The models were trained
and tested by using the boosting trees method as implemented in
STATISTICA version 8 [].

In the first round of training, all descriptors (≈1300) were used, and
the top 20% descriptors with the highest predictor importance
values were selected for the second round of training. Four
classifiers were built for each species (one for each of the four
cross-validation samples) and compiled in the C++ language under
Linux. A final consensus hub classifier was built for a given species
(by a consensus voting method where a hub is predicted if it has two
or more votes) and tested on the other three species, which were
used as an external validation set.

Discussion
Prediction performance of the hub prediction classifiers
Table 1 (see ) show the classification
statistics for the hub classifiers trained and tested on E.coli, S. cerevisiae, D. melanogaster, and H. sapiens proteomes respectively.
When the classifiers were tested on the same species using the fourfold
cross-validation procedure, they all have shown improved
prediction performance in comparison to our previous GO-based
classifier. For instance, the E. coli hub classifier has achieved
51.40% sensitivity and 32.59% PPV and the S. cerevisiae hub
classifier has reached 62.99% sensitivity and 33.37% PPV on the
testing sets; these values are significantly higher than 28.10%
sensitivity and 22.00% PPV that we have reported in of our
previous work [].

However, when a classifier trained for one species is applied to
another one, its prediction accuracy decreases. On one hand, these
results suggest that hub proteins within the same species have
enough commonality so the species-specific hub predictors
demonstrated reasonable accuracy. On the other hand, the diversity
among hubs from different species appears to be much greater;
therefore, it is not always feasible to apply the hub classifier trained
from one species to another.

Comparing hub prediction with a traditional approach based
on sequence conservation
We have investigated a traditional hub prediction approach based on
the idea that if a hub protein from one species is conserved in the
second species, then it is likely that the conserved protein is also a
hub. By examining the degree of sequence conservation in the
studied data sets, we found conserved proteins do not necessarily
behave like hubs in the other species. Our analysis has shown that
the percentage of conserved hubs (homologous proteins that are
hubs in both species) is relatively low (1.05% ∼ 10.00%). Thus,
such a hub prediction strategy solely based on sequence
conservation has produced a very low sensitivity (0.48% ∼ 11.59%).
We suspect that there are two contributing factors: 
lack of complete protein interaction data and 

natural differences in PIN of the species that might have occurred as the result of evolutionary
network rewiring.




Thus, the above results indicated that our prediction models based
on the protein descriptors are more capable of determining hub
proteins than the traditional sequence conservation approach.

Characteristics of hub and non-hub proteins
The utilization of the 1300 protein descriptors has enabled not only
construction of hub classifiers but also allowed characterization of
hub proteins in each of the four species: E. coli, S. cerevisiae, D. melanogaster, and H. sapiens.

Notably, different descriptor categories have shown different
contributions to the final descriptors set. For example, only a small
percentage of Gene Ontology descriptors (5∼12%) and SCOP fold
descriptors (17∼18 %) have been selected, while Pfam descriptors
(25∼100%) and physicochemical parameters (60∼75%) were among
the most relevant ones. The sequence similarity descriptors also
showed a high contribution rate. In the next sections, we report the
similarities and differences between hubs and non-hubs among the
four species by focusing on some of the more relevant protein
descriptors.

Gene Ontology (GO) annotations
The advantage of using the GO terms in hub prediction is in
availability of GO information for proteins in hundreds of species,
and that they can provide useful insight into their cellular functions
and locations. However, we have observed that the level of GO
annotations could vary greatly among the species. For instance,
among the four studied species, S. cerevisiae had the highest
percentage of the proteins with GO annotations (87.8%), while only
48.2% of the proteins in E. coli could be related to a particular GO
term.

Our results have indicated that certain GO terms tend to appear
more frequently for hubs. For instance, the GO term, [protein
binding], appears to be the most frequent one. Several others such
as [cytoplasm], [protein complex], [nucleolus], [nucleobase,
nucleoside, nucleotide and nucleic acid metabolic process],
[nucleoplasm] and [response to endogenous stimulus] are also
associated with highly interacting proteins.

Sequence similarity
In this category of the descriptors, one of the most notable
observations is that hubs in general have higher sequence
conservation compared to non-hubs. We have conducted two
sample t-tests comparing hubs and non-hubs in terms of their
occurrence of homologous proteins in the 10 reference proteomes,
and the difference is significant within E. coli, S. cerevisiae, and H.
sapien, except for D. melanogaster.

Number of Pfam protein domains
Previous studies have suggested that the presence of multiple
interaction interfaces on a protein surface can be an indication of its
hub role []. In this study, we have observed that hubs in E. coli
and S. cerevisiae indeed contain more Pfam domains than non-hubs
(p-values = 0). However, the difference in the number of Pfam
domains between hubs and non-hubs in D. melanogaster and H.
sapiens appeared to be not significant.

Protein threading scores and SCOP protein fold composition
One of the main advantages of SCOP classification as descriptors is
in the general availability of these structural parameters for any
protein sequence as they can be obtained easily from the threading
program. It is notable that many SCOP descriptors have shown a
good ability to distinguish hubs and non-hubs. However the
majority of such SCOP descriptors did not follow a simple trend
across all of the 4 species but instead have complex characteristics
where hubs might be associated with a certain SCOP fold more
frequently than non-hubs in some species but not in the others. Two
notable examples are the ’PDZ domain-like‘ and ’beta-Grasp
(ubiquitin-like)‘ folds. The hubs are associated with the two folds
more often than the non-hubs in E. coli and H. sapiens, but not in S.
cerevisiae, and D. melanogaster.

Physicochemical properties
The descriptors in this category have contributed greatly to the
discriminative power of the hub classifiers due to the unbiased
characterization of all the studied proteins in terms of their physical
and chemical properties. One of the observed trends is that the
average hydrophilicity of hubs is significantly higher than that of
non-hubs in all four species. This can be explained perhaps by the
fact that hubs tend to contain more polar residues on the surfaces,
which facilitate protein-protein interactions.

Another protein descriptor, fraction of flexible coil residues, also
demonstrated higher values for hubs in all four species. This
observation agrees with previous studies [] that suggested that
structural disorder is a common feature of hub proteins. The
hubs/non-hubs discriminative power of others physicochemical
descriptors such as surface area and average surface polarizability is
also high. However, the observations are more complex for these
descriptors because their values are higher for hubs than non-hubs
in some species, but lower in the others. It is also notable that the
absolute values of average hydrophilicity of E. coli proteins are the
smallest among the studied species. This in turn can be related to
the fact that E. coli proteins have the smallest average surface area
among the studied proteins. The above results showed that the
physicochemical descriptors allowed us to derive meaningful
observations, interpretable from the stand point of protein biology.
In addition, these descriptors also demonstrated the complexity of
hub characteristics among the different species.

Conclusion
The use of a comprehensive set of sequence- and structure-derived
descriptors has enabled in-depth characterization of hub proteins.
On one hand, hubs in E. coli, S. cerevisiae, D. melanogaster, and H.
sapiens generally have demonstrated higher sequence conservation,
tend to be more hydrophilic and possess higher fraction of flexible
coil residues. On another hand, hubs have exhibited several speciesspecific
characteristics including certain associated GO terms,
occurrence of Pfam domains, more frequent SCOP folds, and
surface area.

Thus, the descriptor analyses have indicated (somewhat
surprisingly) that highly connected proteins are much more different
across the species than previously anticipated. Thus, it has become
clear that hub proteins cannot be characterized easily by only a few
descriptors, but the use of a complex set of protein descriptions is
required. Nonetheless, by integrating both bioinformatics and
physiochemical protein descriptors, the species-specific hub
classifiers have still shown improved prediction accuracy over their
GO term-based and sequence similarity-based predecessors. We
anticipate that the developed hub classifiers can be used for
determining new hubs in the four studied species to assist future
proteomics experiments and PIN analyses.

Supplementary material
Data 1
MH was supported by the Michael Smith Foundation for Health
Research (MSFHR) and the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council (NSERC). MH, KB and AC were funded by
Genome Canada and Genome BC through the PRoteomics for
Emerging PAthogen REsponse (PREPARE) project.

Citation:Hsing et al, Bioinformation 4(4): 164-168 (2009)

A flow chart for the characterization and prediction of hub proteins.

