Background
Mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway refers to a 
module of three kinases which are activated by sequentially 
phosphorylating each other in response to a diverse range of 
stimuli, such as cytokines, growth factors, neurotransmitters, 
cellular stress and cell adherence []. Accordingly, the pathway 
plays a pivotal role in many key cellular processes, ranging 
from growth control in all its variations, cell differentiation 
and survival to cellular adaptation to chemical and physical 
stress. Augmentation in activity or mutations in receptor 
tyrosine kinases, that leads to neoplasia [,
]. Receptor
linked tyrosine kinases such as the epidermal growth factor 
receptor (EGFR) are activated by extracellular ligands. Binding 
of epidermal growth factor (EGF) to the EGFR activates the 
tyrosine kinase activity of the cytoplasmic domain of the 
receptor. The EGFR becomes phosphorylated on tyrosine 
residues. Docking proteins such as GRB2 contains an SH2 
domain that binds to the phosphotyrosine residues of the 
activated receptor []. GRB2 binds to the guanine nucleotide 
exchange factor SOS by way of the two SH3 domains of GRB2.
When the GRB2-SOS complex docks to phosphorylated EGFR, 
SOS becomes activated. Activated SOS then promotes the 
removal of GDP from a member of the Ras subfamily (most 
notably H-Ras or K-Ras). Ras can then bind GTP and become 
active []

In between all these signaling process there is a role of 
scaffolding proteins for the activation of Raf [,
]. Scaffolds 
are defined as proteins with several domains that bind two or 
more components of a signaling pathway simultaneously. 
They bring signaling partners in close proximity to each other, 
link them in a multi-enzyme complex and facilitate their 
functional interaction. Within this complex, the kinases are 
shielded from the deactivating phosphatases, and interference 
with other signaling cascades is minimized [,
].

Kinase Suppressor of Ras (KSR1) is a molecular scaffold that 
interacts with the core kinase components of the ERK cascade, 
Raf, MEK, and ERK and provides spatial and temporal 
regulation of Ras-dependent ERK cascade signaling. CK2 is a 
component of the KSR1 scaffold complex that contributes to 
Raf kinase activation []. Raf-1 is a ceramide-activated kinase 
and that its C1 domain is involved in the ceramide-mediated 
response, Whereas KSR1 and its C1 domain is not getting 
activated in the same manner []. Unlike Raf-1, however, the 
kinase domain of KSR1 appears to be non-functional, 
suggesting that KSR-1 does not promote Ras signaling by 
phosphorylating target molecules [,
,
]. So instead of 
targeting kinase domain, ligands directed at the cysteine rich 
C1 domain would have better functional activity in preventing 
Ras signaling upon inducing conformational changes along the 
scaffold protein preventing Raf-1, ERK binding to their site on 
KSR1. The crystal structure of cysteine rich C1 domain of 
kinase suppressor of Ras is shown in the (). The 
conserved KSR1 domains include a 40 residue region unique to 
KSR1 proteins (CA1), a proline-rich region (CA2), a cysteine
rich C1 domain (CA3), a serine/threonine-rich region (CA4), 
and a putative kinase domain (CA5). Similar to the domain 
organization of Raf-1, the smaller conserved domains of KSR1 
are found in the N-terminal region, while the kinase-like 
domain occupies the C-terminal half of the protein. Unlike Raf
1, however, the kinase domain of KSR1 appears to be non
functional, suggesting that KSR1 does not promote Ras 
signaling by phosphorylating target molecules. C1 domains 
are defined as regions of approximately 50 amino acid residues 
that contain the motif HX10-12CX2CX11-19CX2CX4 HX2-4CX5-9C 
[]. C1A and C1B are the two repeat C1 domains located 
within the same protein. C1 domains were initially identified 
as the phorbol ester and 1, 2-dialyglycerol binding moieties of 
the protein kinase C (PKC) family of serine/ threonine kinases 
[]. Ligands antagonizing the KSR1 scaffold activity and 
thereby interrupting the MAPK signaling pathway are not 
available yet. But researches were started focusing on to 
analyse its potential in binding with small molecules like 
flavonoids and other phytoconstituents. Present study focuses 
on binding affinity of some selected anthocyanidins and 
flavones on the basis of existing reviews []. Rare flavonoids 
like 2'-Hydroxygenistein was found to occupy the Raf binding 
site of KSR [].


In silico studies like protein-ligand docking has been carried out 
in order to find out a lead molecule for antagonizing the effect 
of KSR1. In this study latest version of Auto Dock 4.2.6 was 
utilized. AutoDock 4.2.6 features improved input checking and 
an output format suitable for automated analysis. Multiple 
search methods can be used in a single 4.2.6 job. Auto Dock 
4.2.6 is an advanced docking platform which utilizes monte 
carlo simulated annealing and Lamarckian genetic algorithm 
(LGA) to create a set of possible conformations. LGA is used as
a global optimizer and energy minimization as a local search
method. For the evaluation of possible orientations, AMBER 
force field model in conjunction with free energy scoring 
function is used. Coordinate files preparation, atomic affinities 
(AutoGrid) calculation was made. Semi empirical free energy
force field is used to evaluate conformations during docking. 
The Ligand and protein stay in an unbound conformation. 
Then binding is evaluated in two steps by force field. Force
field evaluates intramolecular energetics during the translation 
from their unbounded states to the conformation of both
ligand and protein into the form of bound state [,
]

Methodology
The crystal structure of the scaffold protein cysteine rich C1 
domain of kinase suppressor of Ras was downloaded from 
RCSB protein data bank bearing the PDB code – 1KBE. 
Molecular docking was performed with MGL (Molecular 
Graphics Laboratory) tools–latest version of AutoDock 4.2.6 
(release date: 2014-08-01), ligands were designed using Chem 
sketch []. Energy minimization was done with Chem Office 
package- Chem 3D ultra []. Interactive Graphic visualizers 
like Accelrys Discovery studio visualizer 4.0 [], PyMol 
visualizer [] was used.

Enzyme preparation and Ligand preparation:
Investigational ligands have designed and the ligands were 
optimized for energy minimization using MM2 force field 
[].
The optimized ligands were shown in .The ligands 
were selected according to the Lipinski's rule of five 
[].
According to the drug likeness properties, the ligands showed 
zero violation of the Lipinski rule of five. Macromolecule has 
to be prepared, prior to docking process. Preparation involves 
removal of water molecule and any unwanted hetero atoms, 
because these will interfere in docking process. After refining 
enzyme macromolecule is saved as .pdb execution file.

Validation of molecular docking:
To know the accuracy of molecular docking, the co-crystallized 
ligand was retrieved and again re-docked on to the binding 
site of ksr domain. If the RMSD value of the docked ligand is 
found to be less than 2.0Å, then the docking methodology is 
reliable []. 
Still current investigation is a prediction studies, 
we have retrieved the ligand (2-hydroxygenistein) from crystal 
structure as reported from the literature quoted in background 
section of this article from our previous findings and validated 
their docking efficiency.

Docking methodology:
Molecular docking was performed in making enzyme 
molecule rigid and ligand to get flexible, in this way different 
conformation arises during each run and the best conformer 
fits with lowest binding energy (kcal/mol). Auto Dock 
4.2.6was used to automatically dock the ligands to the enzyme. 
In the latest version of Auto Dock 4.2.6 under windows 
platform, cygwin interface is not needed to perform the 
docking study. Rigid docking was performed using latest 
version of AutoDock 4.2 (4.2.6). The enzyme molecule is
loaded and stored as ksr.pdb after assigning hydrogen bonds 
and kollman charges. The investigation ligand was loaded and 
their torsions along with rotatable bonds were assigned and 
the file is saved as ligand.pdbqt. Grid menu is toggled, after 
loading enzyme.pdbqt the map files were selected directly 
with setting up grid points with 106 × 124 × 74 dimensions for 
the searching of ligand within the active site of the enzyme 
molecule. This way the grid parameter files are created with 
setting up of map files directly. Followed by, setting up of 
docking parameter files with search parameter as genetic 
algorithm and docking parameter utilizing Lamarckian genetic 
algorithm. The Lamarckian genetic algorithm (LGA) was 
applied to deal with the protein– inhibitor interactions. These 
so-called state variables are the inhibitors genotype, and the 
resulting atomic coordinates together with the interaction and 
the intra-molecular energies are the inhibitors phenotype. The 
environmental adaptation of the phenotype is reverse
transcribed into its genotype and become heritable traits. Each 
docking cycle or generation, consists of a regimen of fitness 
evaluation, crossover, mutation, and selection. Following up of 
grid parameter files (gpf) and docking log files (dlg), the 
command prompt is toggled and commands are typed in step 
wise for autogrid and autodock execution. The docked 
structures of the inhibitors are generated after a maximum 
number of evaluations [].

Results &amp; Discussion
Validation of molecular docking:
The actual (native) conformation of co-crystallized ligand (2'-
hydroxygenistein) and re-docked conformation of the same 
ligand (2'-hydroxygenistein) is shown in . The RMSD 
of all atoms between these two conformations is 1.7430Å. From
that validation, investigating ligands are concluded to run for 
docking calculations.

Binding affinity and dissociation constant:
AutoDock 4.2 uses a semi-empirical free energy force field to
evaluate conformations during docking simulations. The force 
field was parameterized using a large number of protein
inhibitor complexes. The force field evaluates binding in two 
steps. The ligand and protein start in an unbound 
conformation. In the first step, the intramolecular energetics is 
estimated for the transition from these unbound states to the 
conformation of the ligand and protein in the bound state. The 
second step then evaluates the intermolecular energetic of
combining the ligand and protein in their bound conformation. 
 
list out the lowest binding energy of ligands at the 
gorge of the C1 domain of scaffold protein (KSR1). Among the 
investigated ligands cyanidin, Chrysin and Apigenin showed 
free energy of binding (ΔG) values -6.73, -6.56, -6.08 kcal/mol 
with a dissociation constant of 12.0uM, 15.66uM, 35.04uM 
respectively. Whereas ligands like delphinidin, acacetin and 
taxifolin possessed a considerable free energy of binding (ΔG)
5.74,-5.69, and -4.86 respectively.

Crystal structure of kinase suppressor of Ras-1 and its specificity :
The cysteine rich C1 domain is the investigational target site 
for the prediction on binding affinity character of flavonoids. 
KSR is an essential scaffolding protein to co-ordinate the 
assembly of Raf-MEK-ERK complexes in MAPK pathway of 
cellular proliferation []. The cysteine rich C1 domain 
containing amino acid chains extend from Gly 330 to Arg378. 
Aminoacids exposed at the active site gorge where Cys 346, 
Lys365, Gln344, Gln356, Trp341, Ile354, Phe355, Lys358, 
Lys365, Asn368 and Lys369, Lys365, Phe366. The crystal 
structure of C1 domain of KSR1 was found to contain cysteine 
residues at Cys377, Cys370, Cys366, Cys362, Cys 359, Cys349, 
and Cys 346.

Interaction analysis of flavones and anthocyanidins:
Occupancy of acacetin flexed their C7 hydroxyl groups 
towards Asn368 (2.04 Å) formed a hydrogen bonding but the 
opposite strand containing Thr338 ( &amp; 
) doesn't 
involved in interaction even though oxygen atom of acacetin is 
in near vicinity. But in case of delphinidin, C7 hydroxyl group 
was replaced with a trihydroxyl phenyl group interacted at 
Thr338 (2.03 Å) through hydrogen bonding but that was absent 
in acacetin where it favored against Asn368. Where asC7 
hydroxyl groups of taxifolin Hbond with the Thr338 (1.04 Å) at 
their catalytic site. Apigenin at its lowest binding energy (-
6.08kcal/mol) showed its interaction at Lys369 (2.03Å) where 
interaction was found to be absent through repeated docking 
studies and even in different poses generated during their run. 
This shows the Lys369 directed interaction of C7 hydroxyl 
groups of apigenin. Cyanidin with its free energy of binding (-
6.73kcal/mol) has a differential interaction at Phe355 and 
Val357 as a fragmentation type. On analyzing their 
hydrophobic interaction, they found to interact with Trp341 
(5.22 Å) and Lys365 (3.15 Å). This makes their affinity stronger 
than other ligands under investigation. Bioflavonoids 
investigated in this study were found to interact with amino 
acids like ASN368, LYS365. Table 4 shows the amino acids 
involved in hydrogen bond interaction with the investigating 
ligands. Aminoacid residues at beta sheets β1, β4 was found to 
interact with the bioflavonoids and this gorge is the potential 
area of interaction.

Ligands structural specificity:
Experimental analysis on structure of KSR1 C1 domain 
showed that the lower two thirds of the protein surface are 
composed largely of positively charged residues. Located at 
the top of the C1 domain is a local hydrophobic region formed 
by residues in the hairpin structure; namely, L342, V345, M353, 
I354 and F355. These hydrophobic residues constitute the 
predicted ligand-binding pocket of the KSR1 C1 domain. The
functional specificity and the structural features of the KSR1-
C1 regulatory domains can provide valuable insight into their 
ligand-binding properties []. On analyzing ligand's 
structural specificity towards the hydrophobic site of ksr1, it 
explains the role of hydroxyl groups at C7 of flavone nucleus 
was found to interact through hydrogen bonding with most of 
the amino acids along the beta sheet ARG 363, LYS365, 
ASN368, and LYS369 (). Some of the ligands showed 
fragmental binding (GLY356 and PHE355; LYS369; THR338) 
with the aminoacid residues. Lowest free energy of binding 
was shown by cyanidin which contains C7 hydroxyl group 
doesn't have any interaction at the gorge area. But instead the 
C4'substituted hydroxyl groups has its interaction through 
hydrogen bonding with Gly356 (1.919Å). Chrysin and taxifolin 
showed major interaction with ASN 368 and LYS 365. Over all 
from these binding affinity studies, the amino acids along the 
beta sheet (β4 and β5) has most of the interaction with the 
ligands and this might elicit conformational changes in the 
scaffold. This way these ligands can interrupt in Raf binding 
prior to ERK and Ras activation in Neoplasia through 
interaction at cysteine rich C1 domain of kinase suppressor of 
Ras-1.

Conclusion
Computational designing and docking studies of potential bio
flavonoids and anthocyanidins exhibited better binding 
affinity with kinase suppressor of Ras, the scaffold protein of 
MAPK signaling pathway. The binding energy evaluation 
shows the importance of hydroxyl groups at various positions 
on the flavone and anthocyanidin nucleus. Over all binding 
interaction shows these ligands occupied the essential area of 
Cysteine rich C1 domain of kinase suppressor of Ras-1. These 
ligands can be evaluated for in-vitro ksr-1 binding affinity 
studies and can be added as lead molecules in the 
development of drugs on targeting neoplasia through 
inhibition of MAPK signaling pathways.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Karthik et al, Bioinformation 10(9): 580-585 (2014)

A) The schematic diagram shows the domains of 
knase suppressor of Ras with their terminals. The cysteine rich 
C1 domain − CA3 is emphasized to show their protein 
structure makup. The marking ( ) shown in the image indicates 
the respective beta sheets; B) Secondary structure showing the 
beta sheets (β1, β2, β3, β4, β5) containing amino acid residue at 
the gorge. The mesh diagram with encircled areas shows the 
gorge of KSR C1 domain. (Images have been visualized using 
Accelrys discovery studio 4.0 and Pymol viewer). The 
schematic diagram is created based on the information as per 
the literature.

Energy minimized 3D-ligands used for docking 
study visualized in accelrys discovery studio 4.0

Validation of molecular docking. Surface image 
showing the native conformation and docked conformation of 
co-crystallized ligand (Image generated using Pymol Version 
1.1)

Image showing the binding interactions of the 
ligands used in the study along with their hydrogen bond 
length (Å). Images generated using MGLtools AutoDock 4.2.6 
package (release date: 2014-08-01)

The gorge occupied area of cyanidin (left) has been 
emphasized (right), showing the non-bonding interactions 
(hydrophobic and hydrogen bond interactions) at the gorge of 
cystein rich C1domain of kinase suppressor of RAS. Image 
generated using acclerys discovery studio 4.0. Pale blue colour 
indicates the hydrophobic interaction and yellow colour 
indicates the hydrogen bonding.

The ligands (1 to 6 as shown in table 1) above the 
crystal structure shows the hydroxyl groups (black dotted 
circles) involved in interaction through hydrogen bonding at 
the receptor site. A) Most of the interactions were with the 
amino acids along the beta sheet ARG 363, LYS365, ASN368, 
and LYS369 and B) Surface image with ligand (acacetin) 
positioning at its lowest binding energy (ΔG) at the gorge 
along the β4 and β5.

