Background
Epilepsy is a complex neurological disorder characterized by
spontaneously occurring seizures; affecting 50 million people
around the world; more than 85% people suffering with this
disease belongs to developing countries [,
]. Epileptic state
represents a dramatic imbalance between excitatory and
inhibitory activity; a seizure activity due to altered γ-amino
butyric acid type-A receptor (GABAAR) trafficking and/or
subunit expression in animal models of temporal lobe epilepsy
(TLE ), Status epilepticus (SE) and in patients [,
]. The
GABAAR is a ligand gated ion channel receptor which mediates
quick inhibitory synaptic transmission into the central nervous
system (CNS) and is a potential target of numerous essential
neuroactive drugs [,
]. But, different molecular mechanisms
regulating the trafficking and function of GABAAR are yet not
clear. The GABAAR associated protein (GABARAP) is mainly
localized in the Golgi apparatus, indicating its central role in
the intracellular trafficking of GABAAR [,
]. The GABARAP
binds with the intracellular domain of γ-2 subunit of GABAAR
in vitro and in vivo [,
].

Due to a mutation in the C-terminal (G116A), the cleavage of Cterminal
of GABARAP could be blocked, that could distort the
phospholipids addition to GABARAP which is quite essential
in controlling the trafficking of GABAAR []. In comparison to
the wild type GABARAP, its co localization and binding with
GABAAR was significantly reduced that caused a decreased
expression of GABAAR in the plasma membrane []. Studies
have elucidated that GABAAR expression at cell the surface was
prohibited due to G116A mutation when checked in oocytes.

These findings have revealed that glycine 116 is vital for
GABARAP C-terminal processing, necessary for GABARAP
localization and its trafficking ability []. Few drugs such as
vigabatrin can enhance the level of inhibitory neurotransmitter
particularly gamma-amino butyric acid (GABA) or can reduce
the level of excitatory neurotransmitter such as glutamate 
[].
Although seizures are controlled with currently available AEDs
but more than 30% patients still have medically refractory
epilepsy []. Moreover, about 30-40% epileptic patients are still
affected by many side effects []. These conditions have
motivated the researchers to develop novel approaches to treat
epilepsy like antiepileptic constituents from herbal medicines
[]. Five medicinal compounds with antiepileptic/
anticonvulsant properties including Aconitine extracted from
Aconitum species, Berberine from Berberis vulgaris, Montanine
from Hippeastrum vittatum, Raubasine from Rauwolfia
serpentine and Safranal from Crocus sativus L were selected to
check their binding ability with different residues of
GABARAP. The docking study was carried out by selecting the
GABARAP as a drug target because it acts as a receptor by
regulating cell surface expression of GABAAR.

Methodology
Template Search:
Template search with Blast and HHBlits has been performed
against the SWISS-MODEL template library (SMTL, last
update: 2014-11-12, last included PDB release: 2014-11-07). The
BLAST was used in search of target sequence [] against
primary amino acid sequence contained in the SMTL. Total
thirteen templates were observed. An initial profile of HHblits
has been built using the outlined procedure [], followed by
an iteration of HHblits against NR20. Afterwards, attained
profile has been searched against all the SMTL profiles. Total,
forty templates were observed.

Template Selection:
Quality of each of the identified template has been predicted
from the features of target-template alignment. Highest quality
templates have then been selected for building the models.

Model Building:
Based on the alignment of target-template, the models have
been built using Promod-II. The coordinates that are conserved
between the target and template have been copied from the
template to the model. The insertions as well as deletions have
remodeled through fragment library, and the side chains were
also rebuilted. Geometry of the final model was regularized
using a force field. If the satisfactory results were not achieved
through loop modelling with ProMod-II []; then, an alternate
model is needed to build with the MODELLER [].

Model Quality Estimation:
Global as well as per-residue model quality was assessed
through QMEAN scoring function []. For an improved
performance, the weights of individual QMEAN terms have
been trained specifically for SWISS-MODEL.

Ligand Modeling:
Ligands in the template structure have been transferred to the
model on fulfilling the following criteria: (a) Ligands are
annotated as biologically relevant to the template library, (b)
ligand-model should be in contact, (c) should be no clash
between the ligand and protein, (d) interacting residues with
the ligand are conserved between the template-target. The
ligands not satisfying the above mentioned criteria will be
excluded from the model. Summary of the model includes
information why and which ligand has not been included.

Oligomeric State Conservation:
Homo-oligomeric structure of the target protein has been
predicted depending upon the analysis of pairwise interfaces of
identified template structures. For each relevant interface
between polypeptide chains, the QscoreOligomer [] has been
predicted from the features like similarity to the target and the
observing frequency of this interface in the recognized
templates. Moreover, whole complex QscoreOligomer was
calculated as the weight-averaged QscoreOligomer of the
interfaces. Oligomeric state of the target has predicted to be the
same as in the template when QscoreOligomer is predicted to
be higher or equal to 0.5.

Protein simulation and validation:
The obtained protein structure was refined geometrically to
decrease the steric hindrances from side chain using online tool,
the Mod Refiner. Mod Refiner is an algorithm for highresolution
protein refinement simulations where the initial
starting models closer to their respective native state in terms of
backbone topology, hydrogen bonds and side chain
positioning. Potential energy of the model was analyzed before
and after the minimization. The output have further taken for
the loop refinement and the stereochemical quality of the
structure that was validated by PROCHECK.

Active site prediction:
The stabilized macromolecule was validated using tools such as
protein quality predictor (ProQ) and Q-site finder to determine
the binding site and analyze the protein flexibility, and
electrostatic property.

Ligand identification and minimization:
Ligands used for this study were selected on the basis of
antiepileptic constituents of medicinal plants given in the 
 
(see supplementary material). Compounds 2D structure and
their molecular weights were obtained from PubChem. Using
ACD/ChemSketch software, the drugs structures were
sketched and MOL file was generated followed by subsequent
generation of 3D structures using Web lab viewer program, a
molecule converter from MOL file to PDB. By using the Argus
Lab 4.0, optimization of the ligand was achieved by applying
appropriate force field.

VEGA-QSAR:
Virtual models for property evaluation of chemicals within
global architecture-quantitative structure-activity relationship
(VEGA-QSAR) program analyzed the selected ligands to
determine the relationship of physiochemical properties and
biological activities of descriptor molecules in various classified
QSAR models  (see supplementary material). Toxicity,
ecotoxicity and physiochemical predicted properties of ligands
such as logP (version 1.1.2), bioconcentration factor (BCF)
(CAESAR-version 2.1.13), carcinogenicity model (CAESAR
2.1.8), mutagenicity model (CAESAR version 2.1.12), skin
sensitization model (CAESAR-version 2.1.5), developmental
toxicity model (CAESAR-version 2.1.6), fathead minnow LC50
96hr (lethal concentration to 50% of the test animals)
(Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)-version1.0.6),
daphnia magna LC50 48hr (EPA-version 1.0.6), BCF read across
(version-1.0.2), ready biodegradability model (version 1.0.8)
were determined [,
]. The VEGA-QSAR models were
initially derived from CAESAR models, and other models were
added to stimulate the already available models, one such
model is EPA (US Environmental Protection Agency). The used
input formats were SMILES and SDF files.

Molecular Docking:
Potential docking between GABARAP and different ligands
was carried out by Molegro Virtual Docker (MVD); Software
used for drug discovery with graphical user interface. Prior to
docking; ligands and target protein was prepared. Best possible
interactions were selected; different parameters including
MolDock score, docking scores, RMSD values and total number
of interactions between ligands and protein residues, and
torsions were assigned to get their values  (see
supplementary material). The MVD tools were utilized to
create grid, calculate the dock score, and evaluate conformers.
The non-polar hydrogen atoms have been removed from the
receptor file and their partial charges were added to the
corresponding carbon atoms. Two types of dock scores such as
Mol Dock score and Re-rank score of ligands were calculated in
docking []. Docking was performed by following the steps in
MVD user manual. Various poses were created for each
compound; best pose-wise as well as docking score compound
was selected as an effective inhibitor of GABARAP ().

Results
Modeled Template:
The SWISS-MODEL template library (SMTL version 2014-11-12,
PDB release 2014-11-07) has been searched with Blast [] and
HHBlits [] for evolutionary related structures similar to the
target sequence (). The template search details have
been explained in materials and methods. Overall 67 templates
have been found (). Predicted residue numbers for
similarity and quality of chain A and the Z-score of the
modeled protein is shown in .

ProQ and Q site finder results:
The LG score [] and MaxSub scores for the mutated
GABARAP were obtained from the ProQ server [] indicating
a very good (3.785) and fairly good (0.3790) quality,
respectively. The conserved region in GABARAP protein and
its three dimensional modeled protein is shown in .

Ramachandran plot:
Ramachandran plot of mutated GABARAP showed 95.2%
residues in most favored regions; 4.8% residues were observed
in additional allowed region, 0.0% residues were present in
generously allowed region and 0.0% residues were seen in
disallowed region as shown in .

Ligand structure:
Five antiepileptic constituents from medicinal plants were
selected as targeted ligands. Structure of all compounds, their
molecular weight and potential functions are given in 

(see supplementary material).

QSAR study:
VEGA-QSAR study was carried out for the prediction of
different biochemical properties of ligands. Results attained
through QSAR models could be effective to evaluate the
chemical properties of chosen compounds by decreasing
animal tests. Different models were tested against antiepileptic
compounds  (see supplementary material). The
selected compounds have shown positive predictions being
non-mutagenic and non-carcinogenic. Fathead minnow LC50
was predicted less than 6.5 [−log (mol/L)] for all the
compounds. All the compounds have been found toxicants
except Raubasine (). Three ligands are non-ready biodegradable
whereas Berberine and Safranal are ready biodegradable.
Skin sensation model predicted sensitizes for
Berberine, Montanine and Safranal. The log P value is a
valuable parameter to understand the behavior of drug
molecules; log P value is higher in Safranal (3.22 log units),
Raubasine (2.95 log units), Montanine (1.57 log units), Berberine
(-0.97 log units), and Aconitine (-1.62 log units)  (see
supplementary material).

Molecular docking:
Five antiepileptic constituents from medicinal plants were
selected. The results of interaction between GABARAP and
compounds (a) Aconitine (b) Berberine (c) Montanine (d)
Raubasine (e) Safranal have shown in  (see
supplementary material) and . Raubasine have shown
best interaction carrying 4 H-bonds with GABRAP residues
such as: Arg28-O, Arg22-N, Pro26-O and Pro26-N; followed by
Aconitine with H-bond interactions: Leu76-N, Thr87-O and
Leu76-N. Montanine have shown 3 interactions at Phe78-O,
Phe78-N and Thr87-N. Berberine have shown 2 interactions at
Thr87-O and Pro72-O. Docking energy of Raubasine was much
less compared to other compounds due to heavy ring like
structure. The aconitine has maximum number of torsions
compared to all other compounds. It can be concluded that
Raubasine could be the best fit ligand in the binding pockets of
modeled GABARAP protein exhibiting four H-bond
interactions within the active sites of GABARAP.

Discussion
Currently, molecular docking studies have been frequently
done in drug designing through an understanding between
drug-receptor bindings. Prior studies have revealed that
computational analysis could be helpful in making the new
possible inhibitors through various mechanisms of interaction
between drug and receptor []. Current docking study have
been carried out for five herbal antiepileptic compounds
toward GABARAP. For the analysis of best interaction between
protein and ligands; root mean square distance (RMSD) value
was used. Maximum 4-hydrgen bonds were observed between
Raubasine and GABARAP whereas Aconitine and Montanine
either showed 3-H bonds. Binding of these compounds toward
GABARAP was observed to be strong in docking models.

Aconitum alkaloids belong to diterpene alkaloid neurotoxin
series which bind with voltage dependent Na+ channel. These
channels have an essential role in the neuronal excitability.
Studies have shown antiepileptic activities of aconitum
alkaloids on an in vitro rat hippocampal slices [,
]; these
studies have depicted that benzoyl ester is an active center of
anticonvulsant activities. Aconitine, an important plant alkaloid
of Aconitum species comprises of benzoyl ester on C-14
position, it could inhibit normal neuronal activity and
epileptoform activity [,
]. The two other compounds;
Montanine and Berberine have been investigated against
seizure inducing chemicals, pentylenetetrazole (PTZ), kainic
acid (KA), bicuculline and maximal electroshock (MES). Both of
these compounds have shown anticonvulsant activity through
neurotransmitter modulation [,
]. Another compound, the
Raubasine reduced bicuculline as well as PTZ induced
convulsions into the mice; it might be due to its interacting
activity with benzodiazepine []. Safranal is another
monoterpene aldehyde of Crocus sativus L; it also showed
inhibitory effect toward the PTZ induced convulsions in mice
through an interaction with GABAA benzodiazepine receptor
complex [,
].

Based on docking score and H-bond interactions, the Raubasine
has strong interaction in comparison to other compounds
which reveals its highest interacting ability with GABARAP
and it can be considered as a possible ligand of GABARAP.

Conflict of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Author contributions
Performed experiments: SM, MF, and IQ; Analyzed data: SM;
Planned and conceived experiments: SM, MF, and IQ;
Reviewed the article: SM, MF, IQ, AA, and TK; Wrote the
article: SM, MF. Financial support of this work was provided
by the KACST large grant 162-34 to Ishtiaq Qadri.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Mathew et al, Bioinformation 11(4): 189-195 (2015)

Interaction of GABARAP residues with various
ligands. (A) Aconitine have shown three interactions; Thr87-O,
Thr87-O and Leu76-N; (B) Berberine have shown two
interactions; Thr87-O and Pro72-O; (C) Montanine showed
three interactions; Phe78-O, Phe78-N and Thr87-N; (D)
Raubasine showed four interactions; Arg28-O, Arg22-N, Pro26-
O and Pro26-N; (E) Safranal showed one interaction with
Phe77-N.

The predicted Z-score and quality of the modeled
protein. (A) Z-score of the model compared with nonredundant
set of PDB structures; (B) Predicted residue numbers
for similarity and quality of chain A

GABARAP protein (A) Structure of GABARAP and
its conserved regions; (B) The three dimensional structure of
modeled protein.

Ramachandran plot of mutated GABARAP.
Ramachandran plot of mutated GABARAP have shown 95.2%
residues in most favored regions, 4.8% residues in additional
allowed region, 0% residues in generously allowed region and
0% residues in disallowed region.

