Background
The number of abstracts for biological articles at the PubMed
[] 
database has increased over timeline due to steady
advancement in biomedical research. There are a number of
online servers that extract information in a specific manner
from abstract archived databases. The MedlineRanker web
server allows a flexible ranking of Medline for a given topic of
interest []. MedEvi imposes positional restriction on
occurrences matching multi-term queries, based on the
observation that term with semantic relations 
[]. The FNeTD
method for clustering achieved PubMed abstracts using
revealing frequent “phrases” or “words” and identifying
“nearer terms” of the domain []. The MiSearch is an adaptive
biomedical literature search tool that ranks citations based on a
statistical model []. Genomics researches are having a major
impact on biological and medical sciences although the
function of many genes remains unknown. In recent times,
PubMed database search shows about 285 thousand articles
associated with breast cancer researches. While, one of causes
of tumorigenesis is the suppression of gene expression via
microRNAs (miRNAs) []. There are more than 2500 human
miRNAs and some of them are potential therapeutic targets for
neoplastic diseases []. Database search shows more than 32
thousand articles devoted to miRNAs. Short nucleotide
sequences of miRNAs can be used as biomarkers for cancer
diagnostics as they circulate in biological liquids. Therefore, it
is important to reveal comparative information about each
studied miRNA in the literature. It should be noted that more
13 thousand articles are associated with miRNA participation
in tumourigenesis as per the PubMed database search. Thus,
specific search for refined information from archived databases
is often time consuming and tedious in nature. Hence, we
describe miRAFinder and GeneAFinder scripts written in
python to simplify such tasks during biological investigations.

Software development and usage
Python was used to write scripts for this purpose.

Software execution command:
The following commands were used for execution.
cd folder/python miRAFinder.py -g pathway_1 -f pathway_2
&gt; file.txt Where pathway_1 is directory to gene dictionary file
(genedic.txt) and pathway_2 is directory to file with abstracts
(abstract.txt).

Note: 1 - Preparation of “abstract.txt” file throught the
downloading the abstracts from PubMed's site in text format; 2
– treatment of each abstract text; 3 – search for keywords in
different groups (gene, miRNA, specific word, etc.); 4 – use of
dictionaries with gene data; 5 – identification different miRNA
types (mir- or let-); 6 – definition of data presentation depend
on miRAFinder or GeneAFinder script.

Input data:
The article abstracts at PubMed [] were downloaded in text
format and was saved as “abstract.txt” (). The list of
human genes was extracted from the HGNC [] database and
was saved as “genedic.txt” file. The lists of keywords of each
word group are make up in depend on subject of research.

Output:
The miRAFinder script processes information of abstracts from
the PubMed database. This script allows to find miRNA names
and keywords as shown in . The result of searching for
contents of the following data: PMID (publication medicine
identification number) of the article, miRNA name, disease
localization (organ or tissue), keywords (methods, change fold,
cellular processes, functions, animal species, types of cells,
biological liquids, etc.) and genes. Some examples are shown in
 (see supplementary material). The obtained data on
gene names are important as they can be mentioned in abstract
as host or target genes of miRNAs. The script uses the list of
genes from HGNC database for the correct identification of
gene names in the abstract (for an exception of different
abbreviations). Thus, the quantity of the found genes is
regulated by keyword structure of the dictionary created for
each separate searching (human genes, mouse genes, rat genes,
etc.). The GeneAFinder script is similar to miRAFinder 
() and it allows to find specific information and gene names in
the abstract of PubMed. It is possible to find the list of
important keywords for general characteristic in the text of
abstract using the GeneAFinder script. Some examples are
shown in  (see supplementary material). The PubMed
database was used in this study due to its comfortable data
type format for application in the scripts. There are a
possibility to use various gene dictionaries and their
characteristics to retrieve a different data set.

Caveat &amp; future development:
The need for the effective analysis of miRNA data using
computer scripts is gaining momentum in recent times. The
miRAFinder and GeneAFinder scripts described in this article
help to extract specific information from archived abstracts in
NCBI PubMed. We showed that the scripts scan through
thousands of abstracts within reasonable time frames. The
information gleaned through such approach finds utility in
miRNA analysis of specific diseases (e.g. cancer).

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Berillo et al, Bioinformation 10(8): 539-543 (2014)

The scheme of miRAFinder and GeneAFinder scripts.

