Background
The pyruvate decarboxylase enzyme (PDC, EC 4.1.1.1) can be
found in plants and fungi, but is very rare in prokaryotes and absent
in animals []. This enzyme requires thiamine diphosphate (ThDP)
and Mg2+ cofactors for its function in catalyzing the non-oxidative
decarboxylation of 2-keto-acids, of which its preferred substrate is
pyruvate. Catalytically active ThDP, called ylide-ThDP is formed
by deprotonation of the C2 atom of the thiazolium ring. This ylide
attacks the pyruvate C2 atom forming lactyl-ThDP, followed by
release of carbon dioxide and formation of a resonance-stabilized
enamine. Proton addition to the enamine gives hydroxyethyl-ThDP,
which releases acetaldehyde and regenerates ylide-ThDP []. The
acetaldehyde produced by PDC pyruvate decarboxylation is then
converted to ethanol by alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH, EC 1.1.1.1).
In addition, PDC decarboxylates 2-keto acid [], catalyzes acyloin
(benzoin)-type condensation reaction of the aldehyde to form chiral
2-hydroxyketones [], and has pharmaceutical application in
synthesis of the L-ephedrine intermediate 2-hydroxyketone (R)-
phenylacetylcarbinol ((R)-PAC).

Given the importance of the PDC enzyme in ethanol and chiral 2-
hydroxyketone production, homoethanol-producing microorganisms
are the focus of research in different aspects. Among them, Gramnegative
Zymomonas mobilis, Zymobacter palmae and Grampositive
Sarcina ventriculi possess PDC enzymes, ZmPDC, ZpPDC
and SvPDC respectively. The only available PDC crystal structure
of a homoethanol-producing bacterial species is from Z. mobilis
ATCC29291 (resolved at 1.9 Å, PDB ID: 1zpd []). The structure
shows extensive interactions in the subunit-subunit interface, which
are significantly different from the other PDCs, and might be
responsible for the variation in biochemical properties between
these species[,]. Therefore, in this study, the three-dimensional
structures of the ZpPDC and SvPDC were generated using the
homology modelling technique in order to compare the quaternary
structures of these bacterial PDCs with respect to the enzymesubstrate
interactions, and subunit-subunit interfaces that might be
related to the different biochemical characteristics.

Methodology
Modelling of PDC of Z. palmae and S. ventriculi
The amino acid sequences of ZpPDC and SvPDC (GenBank
accession numbers: AAM49566 and AAL18557, respectively)
along with the X-ray crystal structures of ZmPDC ( PDB ID: 1zpd),
indolepyruvate decarboxylase of Enterobacter cloacae (EcIPDC;
PDB ID: 1ovm) [], and Saccharomyces cerevisae (ScPDC form-
A;PDB ID:1pvd) [] were used as inputs for homology modelling
by Modeller version 9v3 []. ZpPDC shares 62%, 31% and 32%
sequence identity with ZmPDC, ScPDC and EcIPDC, respectively;
while SvPDC shares 32% 38% and 40% sequence identity with
ZmPDC, ScPDC and EcIPDC, respectively ().

Different models were generated based on the sequence alignment
data and the X-ray crystallography templates. Two scoring
functions, DOPE (discrete optimized protein energy) [] score and
RAPDF (residue-specific all-atoms conditional probability
discriminatory function) [] score were used to select the final
models. The best model, with the lowest DOPE and RAPDF scores,
was subjected to energy minimization by the NAMD program
without water molecules using conjugate gradient []. The quality
of the final model was checked using PROCHECK version 3.5.4
[]. Docking of the ThDP and Mg2+ cofactors into the homology
models was performed by superimposition with the template by
using the protein structure visualization program DeepView
(SWISS-PdbViewer, version 3.7) [] Since template structures do
not contain cocrystallized substrate, the substrate analog
pyruvamide was taken from the X-ray crystal structure of ScPDC
form-B (PDB ID 1qpb) [] to elucidate substrate interaction in the
active site. Protein interface analysis was carried out using the
Protein-Protein Interaction server [].

Calculation of ligand volume
The volume of the ligand was calculated using Mol_Volume
version 1 []. The van der Waals radii for each atom type was
derived from the CHARMM 22 force field. The radius of the
spherical probe (R_PROBE) was set to 2.0 Å, and the GRID_STEP
was set to 0.5 Å.

Protein-ligand docking
The AutoDockTools version 1.4.6 [] was used to prepare the
ligand and the protein structures, and to generate the grid parameter
and docking parameter files. The 2-keto acid structures were
generated using ChemDraw Ultra 7.0 []. The ThDP and Mg2+
were included in docking calculations. The whole protein was
treated as a rigid body while the ligand was allowed to move freely in the grid box during the docking process. The grid box was
generated using AutoGrid version 4 []. The size of the grid box
was set to 40 x 40 x 40 points on each side with the distance of
0.375 Å between each point.

Docking simulations were carried out using the AutoDock version 4
[] with the Lamarckian genetic algorithm (LGA). Each docking
calculation was derived from 100 different runs that were set to
terminate after a maximum of 2 500 000 energy evaluations. The
population size was set to 150. The other parameters were set to the
default value provided in the AutoDock4. AutoDock4 calculates
Inhibition constant, Ki as “exp [(ΔG X 1000)/ (Rcal X TK)]” where
ΔG is docking energy which is a sum of intermolecular energy and
internal energy of ligand, Rcal is 1.98719 cal K-1 mol-1 and TK is
298.15 K. The equilibrium dissociation binding constant, Kd is
calculated as “1/Ki” that is commonly used to describe the affinity
between a ligand and a protein.

Discussion
Homology models of ZpPDC and SvPDC
In general, the homology models of ZpPDC and SvPDC are similar
to the X-ray crystal structure templates. The root mean square
deviation (RMSD) between the Cα of ZpPDC and ZmPDC, and
between the Cα of SvPDC and EcIPDC were 2.27 and 2.93 Å
respectively (). For ZpPDC, 90.4% of the residues were in
most favorable regions; only two residues (Ser73 from each
subunit) were in disallowed regions giving a PROCHECK score of -
0.32. For SvPDC, 88.7% of the residues are in most favorable
regions with only four residues (Arg187, Arg494, and Thr520 of
subunit A and Lys333 of subunit B) in disallowed regions, with a
PROCHECK score of -0.33. However, these residues were not
involved in cofactor or substrate binding according to the equivalent
residues in other species. After a short energy minimizaton, these
residues were in the generously allowed regions.

Each subunit of both models consists of three domains, namely
PYR, R and PP domains. All share the same α/β topology common
to all thiamine dependent enzymes. The PYR and PP domains have
six parallel beta sheets flanked by six α helices, whereas the R
domain contains four parallel beta sheets (Rβ4-7) with a pair of
adjacent anti-parallel beta sheets (Rβ2-3) comparable to ZmPDC []
().

In all PDCs, two PDC monomers interact to form a dimer which
plays a vital role in the catalytic mechanism of the enzyme since it
comprises the active site. In both models, most of the interface
residues come from the PYR and PP domains, while only 6 residues
are from R domain. The contribution of interface residues by each
domain reflects the average mobility of the domain in the resolved
PDC crystal structure: e.g. for EcIPDC the PYR domain has the
lowest average B-factor, 23 Å2 whereas the R domain has the
highest overall B factor, 37 Å2 []. The ZpPDC interface accessible
surface area is similar to ZmPDC (19%), but different from SvPDC
(16%). Fewer H-bonds are present in the SvPDC model (30)
compared with the ZpPDC model (44) and ZmPDC (66); in contrast
the EcIPDC has the fewest (26). The number of hydrogen bonds at
the interface between subunits was found to be proportional to the
subunit interface area for experimentally determined structures with
correlation coefficient of 0.75 (). Extrapolation of this
relationship was used to determine interface areas for ZpPDC and
SvPDC, which were 3587 Å2 and 3284 Å2 respectively. These
interfaces are much smaller than the ZmPDC interface area, and are
comparable with ScPDC form-B and EcIPDC, suggesting some
conformational changes in ZpPDC and SvPDC upon substrate
binding.

Binding modes of the cofactors
In our homology models, the pyrimidine ring of ThDP interacted
with the PYR domain of one subunit, and the rest of the molecule
interacted with the PP domain of the other subunit giving “V”
conformation of ThDP [] that is in agreement with resolved X-ray
crystal structures of PDCs [,
]. Only few acidic and basic
residues that were in close contact with the cofactors among the Xray
crystal structures and the models were similar i.e. Glu50, Asp27,
His113, Glu473 ().

Substrate binding sites of the homology models
In the ZmPDC X-ray crystal structure, the substrate atoms are
surrounded by the side chains of Asp26, His113, His114, Tyr290,
Thr388 and Glu473 (all conserved except Tyr290) which might be
involved in substrate binding and catalysis []. Superimposition of
three X-ray crystal structures (ScPDC form-B [], ZmPDC and
EcIPDC) and the two homology models of ZpPDC and SvPDC
showed equivalent conserved residues were also present in
homology models with similar orientation, while Tyr290 of ZmPDC
and ZpPDC was replaced by smaller residue, Thr288 in SvPDC and
EcIPDC (). Conversion of Thr288 to its ZmPDC analogue
would decrease active site volume of SvPDC and subsequently
decrease Km value for pyruvate. The two conserved histidine
residues (His113, His114 for ZmPDC and SvPDC; His112, His113
for ZpPDC) that have crucial roles in catalysis [] and are in very
close proximity to the pyrimidine ring of ThDP are orientated
similar to X-ray crystal structure of ZmPDC ().

Pyruvamide interacts with ThDP and side chains of Asp26, His113,
Glu468 of ZpPDC, and Asp27, His114 of SvPDC. The distances
between pyruvamide and these structures are within 4 Å(
and ). The orientation of bulky residues in the active site is
similar in ZmPDC and ZpPDC (Trp392 and Trp387, respectively)
() while Tyr384 is found in SvPDC model at equivalent
position with different orientation. This residue is replaced by
alanine in ScPDC (Ala392) and EcIPDC (Ala387). The type and
position of these residues indicate that ZpPDC and SvPDC may
have similar carboligation activity as of ZmPDC, since the second
aldehyde molecule in the carboligation reaction is accommodated in
this region [].

Substrate activation of homology models
SvPDC has been shown to display allosteric activation by the
substrate with a Km value of 4 to 6 mM [], similar to the fungal and
plant PDCs, while ZmPDC, ZpPDC [] and EcIPDC [] follow
Michaelis-Menten kinetics. Superimposition of the ScPDC form-B
with the homology model of SvPDC revealed Tyr155, Tyr321,
Gln158, Ala221, Arg220, Lys225, within 5 Å distance of
pyruvamide. Hydrogen bonds are formed between the amide group
of pyruvamide and the side chain hydroxyl oxygen atom of Tyr155
and the main chain oxygen atom of Arg220 of same subunit ( and ), which are similar as in ScPDC form-B. Comparison
of X-ray crystal structures of non-activated ScPDC form-A and
activated ScPDC form-B showed significant changes in three
interfaces: between the R and the PYR domain, between monomer
subunits, and between dimer subunits, suggesting the interaction of
pyruvamide with ScPDC leads to large scale conformational
changes during catalysis []. The SvPDC model suggests that
similar conformational changes upon substrate binding at regulatory
site could occur in this model. Another theory of activation by
covalent binding of substrate to Cys221 which then interacts with
His92 of ScPDC form-B [] seems implausible for SvPDC since
these residues are replaced by Glu216 and Asn91 at the equivalent
positions respectively.

Affinity of ZpPDC and SvPDC towards other 2-keto acids
PDC homologues across species have conserved cofactor binding 	 
residues but different substrate preferences. The experimentally-	 
determined Km values for four different 2-keto acids binding to 	 
ZmPDC []
 suggest a relationship between molecular volume of 	 
substrate and Km (); therefore, dissociation values (Kd) for 	 
various 2-keto acids of varying molecular volumes docked with 	 
crystal structure of ZmPDC, ZpPDC and SvPDC models were 	 
determined. The larger 2-keto acids bind with higher Kd than those 	 
of the smaller 2-keto acids to both homology models (), suggesting that the substrate binding 	 
preferences of the ZpPDC and SvPDC enzymes are similar to 	 
ZmPDC. Ile472 and Thr382 residues proposed to be responsible for 	 
making substrate binding site volume small in ZmPDC [] are 	 
conserved in SvPDC (equivalent residues Ile464, Thr382) and 	 
ZpPDC (equivalent residues Ile467, Thr380). While in EcIPDC and benzoylformate dehydrogenase whose preferred substrates are
aromatic 2-keto acids, the equivalent residues at same positions are
Val467, Gln383 and Ala460, Leu403, respectively. Therefore, we
speculate that mutation of Ile467 of ZpPDC and Ile464 of SvPDC to
small residues like alanine or valine might produce variants capable
to use aromatic 2-keto acids as substrate.	 


Conclusion
In this study, the homology models of the pyruvate decarboxylase
of Z. palmae and S. ventriculi were generated to explore the
structural similarities and differences among bacterial PDCs at the
atomic level. The homology models and the X-ray crystal structure
of ZmPDC were similar in terms of cofactor binding modes, substrate binding residues, and active site volume. The mechanism
of allosteric activation shown by SvPDC could be similar as in
ScPDC form-B which needs further experimental verification. A
relationship was found between the molecular volume of 2-ketoacid
substrates and calculated dissociation constant Kd values,
demonstrating preference of ZpPDC and SvPDC enzymes for
aliphatic 2-ketoacids.

Authors' contributions:
AS performed modelling, docking and wrote the first draft of the
manuscript. SD helped with data analysis and provided suggestion
on manuscript. EJ supervised the project, provided mentorship and
helped with drafting and revising of the manuscript. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This investigation received financial support from the Joint
Graduate School of Energy and Environment (JGSEE), King
Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi, Bangkok, Thailand.
The authors are grateful to Philip Shaw, Sissades Tongsima, Pavita
Tipsombatboon, Alisa Wilantho and Wanwimon Mokmak for their
technical support and valuable comments.

Citation:Shrestha et al, Bioinformation 4(8): 378-384 (2010)

Multiple amino acid sequence alignment of ZmPDC, ZpPDC, SvPDC, EcIPDC and ScPDC (1pvm). Identical, functionally
conserved and semi-conserved amino acid residues are shaded. Dashes indicate gaps introduced in alignment. The ThDP-binding motif is
underlined with broken lines. Secondary structural motifs are indicated above the alignment according to the X-ray structure of ZmPDC [].
(Δ) are residues within 3 Å of ThDP in ZmPDC.

Superimposition of the Cα of the X-ray crystal structure of ZmPDC (Green) and the homology model of ZpPDC (Red) (A), and
the X-ray crystal structure of EcIPDC (Yellow) and the homology model of SvPDC (Blue) (B). The ThDP and Mg2+ are shown in spacefilled
model in magenta and dark blue, respectively.

Correlation of interface area and number of hydrogen bonds of crystal structures of ZmPDC (1zpd) []; Pyruvate oxidase from
Lactobacillus plantarum (1pox) []; EcIPDC (1ovm) [] ; ScPDC form-B (1qpb) []; ScPDC form-A (1pvd) [] and phenylpyruvate
decarboxylase of Azospirillum brasilense (2nxw) [].

Superimposition of crystal structures of ZmPDC (Red), EcIPDC (Yellow), ScPDC form-A (Pink), and homology models of
ZpPDC (Blue) and SvPDC (Green) showing different orientation of first Histidine residue of two consecutive Histidine residues. Residues
are numbered according to ZmPDC. Residues labeled with (*) are from the other monomer. Figure generated using DeepView / Swiss-
PdbViewer 3.7.

Putative active sites of homology models of ZpPDC (A) and SvPDC (B). Asp27* in figure B is shown in line structure for clarity.
The regulatory site of SvPDC is shown in (C) and in close detail in (D). Cofactors, ThDP (Green) and Mg2+ (Blue), pyruvamide (PYM)
(Red) at the regulatory site of SvPDC are shown in space-filled model in figure C. Residues labeled with (*) are from the other monomer.
Potential H-bonds are indicated as red dotted lines.

Correlation of ZmPDC experimental Km values for four 2-keto acids; pyruvate, 2-ketobutanoic acid, 2-ketopentanoic acid, and 2-
ketohexanoic acid, [] and their calculated molecular volume.

