Background
The KCNH2 (human ether-a-go-go related gene, hERG) gene
encodes the rapid component of the delayed rectifier potassium
current, whose mutations are linked to QT prolongation in the
ECG. Long QT syndrome predisposes to life-threatening
arrhythmias, and therefore, it seems important to identify
individuals in the population who are more vulnerable to this
effect [,
]. The in vitro patch clamp methods are considered to
be the “gold standard” for assessing the difference between the
currents encoded by the WT version of the gene and its
mutations [].

K897T – an amino acid polymorphism of the hERG channel, in
which basic lysine (K) is changed into neutral threonine (T) at
position 897 counting from the N-terminus, which changes the
electrical charge of the protein. A study carried out by Bezzina
and colleagues with use of different mathematical model
indicates that individuals who are homozygous for the abovementioned
polymorphism exhibit shorter QTc [], although
other study indicates its prolongation [].

The aim of this study was to assess the possibility of simulating
the changes in cell electrophysiology, which arise due to the
genetic mutations in the background of the entire population of
healthy Caucasians.

Methodology
The frequency of mutation – population data:
The available literature on the frequency of mutations in the
hERG gene have been reviewed, which showed that K897T is
one of the most commonly occurring polymorphisms in the
Caucasian population. Nordic populations were excluded as a
separate subpopulation in terms of frequency of the K897T
polymorphism. The remaining data was used to calculate the
percentage of homozygotes present in the Caucasian
population [,
–].

Model for the iKr current (WT and K897T):
The  (see supplementary material for description)
describes the rapid delayed rectifier current was extracted from
the ten Tusscher model of a single cardiac cell []. Then, the
parameters of the equations describing channel gating were
fitted to the experimental data obtained from the experiment
carried out by Bezzina and colleagues, after graphs digitation
with the use of the GetData software  (see
supplementary material). The fitting procedure was done with
the use of the BerkleyMadonnaTM system [,
]. The
population data and parameters of the equations describing the
action of the hERG channel have been combined and
implemented to the in vitro – in vivo extrapolation system
ToxComp [].

Simulations:
In the next part of the experiment, 10 groups with 10 healthy
Caucasians in each of them, aged 18-65 years, have been
simulated using the ToxComp system []. 50% of individuals
were female. The result of the simulations was APD90 for the
midmyocardial cells of each individual. For each person, the
data was generated for the situation before and after the
administration of moxifloxacin. The operational concentration
of the drug was set to 5.73 µM. This concentration was chosen
on the basis of the clinical study conducted by Hulhoven and
colleagues []. The IC50 value (the concentration of an agent
blocking the iKr current at 50%) for moxifloxacin, determined by
Chen and coworkers, was 35.7 µM []. Moxifloxacin was
chosen as a positive control due to its effect on the ionic
currents responsible for evoking the AP, especially on the rapid
component of the delayed rectifier potassium current. The drug
influence on the iKr ionic current was simulated as the dose
dependent maximal conductance reduction (Hill equation,
n=1). The concentrations of potassium, sodium and calcium
were respectively 5, 140 and 2 mM, the simulation time was 10
000 ms. to apply for inter individual variability; the coefficient
of variation around the mean value was set to 10% 
[–]. The
chosen time of the day when the moxifloxacin effect was
simulated was set at 8.00 am [].

The purpose of the simulation was to assess the duration of the
action potential of the single cardiac cell, depending on the
genetic constitution.

Statistical analysis:
In the present study the mean APD90 of two groups were
compared: 1) individuals with the WT version of the hERG
gene and 2) homo- and heterozygotes with the K897T
polymorphism. Statistical analysis was performed using the
Student's t test. The significance level was set to 0.05.

Discussion
Population data – calculations:
Based on the publication it was calculated that the percentage
of homozygotes in the Caucasian population is 5.9 [4-12, 14].

Fitted parameters of the ten Tusscher's equations:
The activation gate (xr1) is described by the steady-state
activation (xr1inf) and activation time constants - activation (αxr1)
and slow deactivation (βxr1). Whereas the inactivation gate (xr2)
is described by the steady-state inactivation (xr2inf) and
inactivation time constants - recovery from inactivation (αxr2)
and inactivation (βxr1).

Simulation results:
The mean APD90 for the entire population is 352.05 ms (SD =
21.69 ms). The mean APD90 for the 80 individuals with the WT
version of the hERG gene and for the 20 K897T homo- and
heterozygotes is, respectively, 349.08 ms (SD = 21.09 ms) and
363.95ms (SD = 20.41 ms).

Statistical analysis:
The Student's t-test analysis was used to test the significance of
the differences between WT and K897T groups (with a
confidence interval of 95%). The alternative hypothesis stated
that the true difference in means is not equal to 0. The mean
difference was 14.87 (4.38; 25.37). It has been proven that there
is a statistically significant difference among the groups (pvalue
= 0.006995).  presents the results plot for the
K897T and WT comparison: median, lower and upper quartile
of the distribution, minimal and maximal value of APD90.

The data on the frequency of mutations in the gene encoding
the hERG channel, in the Caucasian population, and the data on
the effects of the K897T polymorphism on the ionic channel
behavior, were collected and merged in the ToxComp system.
Subsequently, the software was used to simulate a group of 100
individuals randomly selected from the Caucasian population
[].

A significant prolongation of APD90 for the K897T group in
comparison with the WT group was observed. The APD90
prolongation is linked to the long QT in the ECG, and therefore
the presented results may be applied to the clinical study
carried out by Pietilä and co-workers, which shows a QTc
prolongation in homozygous individuals []. The potential
sources of errors come from two main areas. One of them is the
graphs digitization process and the second one is the fitting
procedure. To minimize the human influence factor on data
taking, the digitization procedure was repeated twice,
independently by both authors. There were no differences
regarding the final values.

The proposed methodology of modeling the impact of changes
in the genes on APD90 is obviously a simplification. The data
used comes from studies done on the whole cell patch clamp
experiment on HEK-293 cells, which have been transfected with
the previously prepared genetic constructs, isolated from
humans with WT or the K897T version of the gene. Such
settings do not fully mimic human cardiomyocytes in the in
vivo situation. Another problem is that the studies were
conducted in vitro, which does not allow observation of the
impact of all factors on the results. However, there is no
available data from studies carried out on human cardiac cells
derived from individuals with a specific mutation in the gene
encoding the hERG channel, and therefore we have decided to
apply the described methods.

Conclusion
The presented results indicate that the in vitro - in vivo
extrapolation system ToxComp can be used to predict the
impact of drugs on cardiac cell electrophysiology, also taking
into account the genetic variation in the population.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Glinka &amp; Polak, Bioinformation 8(22): 1062-1065 (2012)

Results plot for the K897T/WT comparison: median,
lower and upper quartile of the distribution, min and max
value of APD90.

