Background
Bacillus sp. strain SJ-101 isolated from soil, is a nickel
(Ni)-tolerant strain with intrinsic potential of plant growth
promotion, Ni biosorption and bioaccumulation [–]. This
non-pathogenic and culturable microorganism is amenable
to reverse genetics for functional analysis and regarded as
a model system for numerous industrial, medical, and
ecological applications. Overall 88% of Bacillus genome
has been predicted to be either translated into protein or
transcribed into stable structural RNA []. The
involvement of rRNA in the transcription regulation and
translation process apart from its major role in the
organization of ribosome structure is quite intriguing [–].
Although, the ribosomal RNA (rRNA) genes are among
the most actively transcribed genes in eubacterial cells, the
ubiquity of rRNA in living systems plays an important
unique role as a general probe of evolutionary history [].
It is established that the ribosomal gene rich region of both
the prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomes comprise of
sequences that are conserved during evolution, interspersed
among divergent regions. The very efficient and
coordinated transcription of rRNA molecules ensures the
delicately balanced constitution of the protein biosynthesis
machinery. In addition to the well known infrastructural
RNA types, such as tRNA, rRNA, and snRNA, the RNA
molecule performs multifarious biologic functions as
micro­(miRNA), small interfering­(siRNA), Piwi
interacting­(piRNA) and small modulatory­(sm RNA) [].

The structure of transcription regulatory regions and their
specific recognition by combinations of transcription
factors (TF) is critical to genetic expression. Lately, the
development in computational techniques and availability
of whole genome sequences have promoted the in­ silico
prediction and identification of the putative cis and/or
trans acting elements involved in transcriptional regulation 
of functional genes. Recently, several regulatory elements
within 16S and 23S spacer region have been identified in
eubacteria using in-silico tools [–]. Also, the in vitro
translation studies in E. coli have demonstrated the region
within 16SRNA gene encoding for small proteins, and
sequence elements characteristics of prokaryotic promoters
have been reported []. This has prompted us to conduct
the computational analysis of 5' region of 16SrRNA gene
for the (i) identification of regulatory elements such as ‐10
and ‐35 sequences, transcription factors and their
corresponding binding sites using BPROM tool, (ii)
presence of SD sequence and putative ORF with
transcription start site and stop codon, and (iii)
functionality of ORF through translational tool using
ExPASy Proteomics server. This study has, therefore,
integrated the pre­existing biological knowledge to predict
the putative cis­ and trans­ acting regulatory elements and
a coding sequence within the rrn gene.

Methodology
PCR amplification and sequencing of 16S rRNA gene
Genomic DNA from freshly grown culture of strain SJ‐101
was isolated and purified by a cetyltrimethylammonium
bromide (CTAB) miniprep procedure []. Total genomic
DNA (50 ng) was used as a template for amplification of
16SrRNA gene employing primers, fD1 (5´‐
AGAGTTTGATCCTGGCTCAG‐3´) and rD1 (5´‐
AAGGAGGTGATCCAGCC-3´) complementary to the 5´
and 3´ regions of eubacterial 16S rRNA genes,
respectively. The amplicon was gel purified using a Gel
Extraction kit (Qiagen, USA) and sub‐cloned into pGEMTEasy
vector (Promega, USA). The selected clone was
subjected to sequencing of 16SrRNA gene fragment with
SP6 and T7 sequencing primers using ABI prism 3730
sequencer.

In-silico prediction of regulatory motifs
The Blastn analysis of a partial 564 bp sequence of
5´region obtained from the annotated 1436 bp 16S rRNA
gene (Accession No. EF378657) of strain SJ‐101 was
performed using the sequences available in NCBI
Genbank. The homologous 16S rRNA gene sequences
were subjected to the multiple sequence alignments []
The selected 5´region of 16S rRNA gene of strain SJ‐101
was probed through computational tools viz. BPROM []
and UniProt/SwissProt [] for prediction of the putative
promoter elements (‐10 box and ‐35 box), and transcription
factor binding sites as well as their functions. Translation
and homology search of putative ORF was performed
using the translation tool through ExPASy Proteomics
server [] and FUGUE v2.s.07 server [], respectively.

Discussion
The 16SrRNA gene of bacterial strain SJ‐101 has been
amplified to obtain a product of 1436 bp using universal
primers fD1and rD1. The amplicon was cloned in pGEMTEasy
vector and sequenced from both the 5´and 3´ends
using T7 and SP6 sequencing primers, respectively.
Computational analysis of 16SrRNA gene fragment for
prediction of TF and other vital regulatory motifs
suggested the presence of cis-acting sites of promoter
sequence, and transcription factors binding sites within 5´ region of the gene. Sequence analysis through
bioinformatics tools revealed the genetic map of promoter
elements viz. the -35 box (TTACGG) and -10 box
(TGCTACAAT) at positions 392 and 397, respectively
(). Multiple sequence alignment of these
regulatory motifs suggested their highly conserved status
(). Furthermore, the transcription factor (TF)
binding sites and their probable functions have been
predicted by comparing the entries in protein database Uni-
Prot/Swiss-Prot, which has high quality annotations. The
three putative TF binding sites have been identified at
positions 413 and 416 for cpxR and argR factors,
respectively (). The details of each TF
binding sites and their probable functions with Swiss-Prot
ID are summarized in Table 1 ().
The results corroborate with the observations of Berg et al.
[], who have reported the in vivo translation of a
segment of E. coli rrnB 16SrRNA gene. Brosius et al. []
have also suggested the presence of ribosome binding site
(Shine-Dalgarno [SD] sequence), an ATG start site codon
and a 252 bp (84 codon) ORF starting at position 1187 in
the rrnB sequence. In vitro translation has also been
reported for the general region of rrnB gene of E.coli []
and homologous region with 16S gene of Caulobacter
crescentus []. Our results of in-silico analysis of rrn 16S
gene in Bacillus sp. strain SJ‐101, predicting the regulatory
elements at the 5´ region of the 16SrRNA gene are in
accordance with earlier reported in vitro translation studies.
These regulatory elements within highly conserved
16SrRNA gene may be responsible for synthesis of some
small RNA (sRNA) molecules, as suggested by the in vitro
and in vivo translation techniques in many eubacteria.
However, the significance of sRNAs is still elusive.
Recently, Morita and Aiba [] suggested that sRNA not
only act through base-pairing mechanism but also serve as
an mRNA template for small functional proteins to deal
with metabolic stress. Nevertheless, many such ’RNA
within RNA‘ (sRNAs) molecules warrant further
investigations in order to understand their cryptic
functions.

In this investigation, the presence of transcription start site
(AAC) and stop codon (TGA) at positions 426 and 465,
respectively revealed the existence of a conserved short (42
bp) ORF within the rrn gene. The Blastn analysis of 5´
region of 16SrRNA gene sequence showed the homology
of the short ORF with members of the genus Bacillus,
Pseudomonas, Stenotrophomonas, Variovorax, Delftia and
Escherichia (). The presence of a canonical
ribosome binding site (Shine‐Dalgarno sequence) (SD)
upstream of transcription start site as shown in 
and  provide a strong evidence for a coding sequence
within 5´ region of rrn gene. It has been confirmed through
translation of the ORF using translation tool at ExPASy
Proteomics server, which has resulted in a product of a 13
amino acid long peptide. It is interesting to know as to
whether the protein encoded by the predicted ORF exhibits
any similarity to other proteins available in database.
Homology search of the short protein encoded by the ORF
within 5´ region of 16SrRNA gene of Bacillus sp. strain
SJ‐101 against Fold library HOMSTRAD database through
FUGUE v2.s.07 showed maximum similarity with Prolyl‐4
hydroxylase of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii with 4.11
ZSCORE within 95% confidence limit (Table 2 in
). Thus, in spite of apparent
structural differences, the ORF within the ribosomal RNA
showed a high degree of conservation, which suggests
some important role of the putative ORF in genetic
regulatory mechanisms in eubacteria.

Conclusion
It is concluded that the 5´ region of 16SrRNA of Bacillus
sp. strain SJ‐101 contains a functional ORF with essential
regulatory motifs. The in-silico translation of a 42 bp ORF
decoded a short peptide, which has exhibited maximum
similarity with Prolyl‐4‐hydroxylase of Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii with 4.11 ZSCORE. It would be interesting for
molecular biologists to further experimentally probe the
functional role of such a short peptide being encoded
within the rrn 16S gene. This computational study has
integrated the existing biological information for prediction
of regulatory elements, TF binding sites, transcription start
sites, and coding regions within specified region of
16SrRNA gene. The molecular information unfolded in
this study will be important for understanding the role of
the novel short coding RNAs and corresponding proteins
originating from rrn operon, in the genetic regulatory
network. Nevertheless, careful integration between the insilico
analysis and wet‐lab biological approach is crucial
for elucidation of the intricate gene regulatory
mechanisms.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Financial support through the DNA Research Chair program, King Saud University, Riyadh, KSA is greatly acknowledged.

Citation:Singh et al, Bioinformation 3(9): 375-380 (2009)

(A): Structural organization of ribosomal operon depicting distal 5´region containing regulatory motifs; (B):
nucleotide sequence of functional ORF; and (C): output file indicating the predicted promoter elements and transcription
factor binding sites within 5´ region of 16S rRNA gene of strain SJ‐101.

Multiple clustalW alignment of -35 box, -10 box, and Shine‐Dalgarno (SD) sequence upstream of ORF identified within of 5´ region of 16SrRNA gene of strain SJ‐101.

Multiple sequence alignments of putative ORF and its corresponding short peptide identified within 16SrRNA gene of strain SJ‐101.

