Background
Expressed sequence tags (ESTs) represents short, unedited and
randomly selected single-pass reads derived from cDNA
libraries provides an alternative to whole genome sequencing of
organisms. The analysis of EST data enable gene discovery,
complete genome annotation, gene structure identification,
establish the viability of alternative transcripts, guide single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) characterization and facilitate
in proteomic exploration [].

The ubiquity of microsatellite or simple sequence repeats (SSRs)
in eukaryotic genomes and their usefulness as genetic markers
has been well established over the last decade. SSRs are short
(1-6 bp) repeat DNA motifs that are usually single locus
markers with characteristics of hypervariability, abundance,
reproducibility and ease of detection by polymerase chain
reaction with unique primer pairs that flank the repeat motif
[]. 
The availability of ESTs greatly accelerates the systematic
identification of SSRs and corresponding marker development
based on computer analytical approaches 
[]. EST-SSR and
genomic SSR markers are considered as complementary to
plant genome mapping, with EST-SSR being less polymorphic
but concentrated in the gene-rich regions 
[].

Several EST assembly and annotation pipelines viz. EST analysis
pipelines (ESTAP) [], 
EST pipeline system [], ParPEST 
[] etc.
are available with their own objectives, provides cleansing EST
sequences and annotating them using public databases. The
mining of SSRs from ESTs requires different high-throughput
computational tools that need to be executed individually
which are computationally intensive and time consuming. To
reduce the time lag and to streamline the cumbersome process
of SSR mining from ESTs, we have developed EST-SSR Marker
Pipeline: ESMP for mining of putative SSRs from EST
sequences. ESMP accomplish EST pre-processing, clustering,
assembly and subsequently mining of SSRs from assembled
EST sequences. Cross_match [], Trimest 
[], CAP3 
[] and
MISA [] 
analytical tools has been integrated into ESMP for
their respective applications to perform the process of ESTs
assembly and mining of putative SSRs.

ESMP has a three-tier architecture system. Presentation tier
helps the user interact with ESMP through a web browser,
whereas the business tier performs different analytical services
associated with user specific options. The data generated in the
business tier is then deposited into the data tier. For the use of
this pipeline it does not require any database or any application
installation on user machine. Instead the user simply uploads
the fasta formatted EST sequence data into the server to run the
pipeline with default parameters. It also has the options to
choose the user defined parameters which makes the pipeline
more interactive, user friendly and flexible.

Implementation
ESMP interface has been developed using HTML, CSS,
JavaScript and PHP. MySQL has been used to store input EST
data, intermediate data of the pipeline and mined SSRs
statistics. The database schema is available at ESMP website.
The backend system is a Linux machine with Intel ® Core(TM)
2Duo@3.33GHz CPU and 3GB RAM. Architecture and
workflow of the pipeline is depicted in .

Software input
The ESMP web interface allows the user to submit EST
sequences in the fasta format with “reads” extension. It also
asks the user to upload vector sequences in a plain text format
which can be obtained from FTP site UniVec database
(ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/pub/UniVec/) of NCBI. Although most
EST projects produces a large number of chromatogram files,
ESMP cannot accept chromatogram files due to file-size
limitations of web-based uploading. Accordingly,
chromatogram files have to be converted into DNA sequence
files using a base-calling program such as phred 
[].

Software output
The ESMP output is stored in a MySQL database. All the output
files are stored in “rar“ extension which can be downloaded by
the user as well as can be viewed in the current web page. The
statistics files contains the statistics of putative SSRs i.e., total
number of sequence examined, total size of examined sequences
(bp), total number of identified SSRs, number of SSRs
containing sequences and number of sequence containing more
than one sequences, number of SSR present in compound
formation about the putative SSRs mined in the run. The
statistics file can be transferred into an excel file for better
visualisation of putative SSRs.

Conclusion
ESMP pipeline is the integration of multiple tools which are
individually used for their respective applications to
accomplish the mining of putative SSRs from ESTs.

Caveat and future development
ESMP currently supports pre-processing, assembly and
putative SSR detection from EST datasets. This web-based ESTSSR
pipeline reduces time lag and streamline the cumbersome
process of SSR mining from ESTs, which is user-friendly. Our
goal is not just to limit this pipeline for EST-SSR mining but to
extend further for annotation and detection of suitable primer
pairs which will flank the repeat motif. The mining of SSRs
from ESTs provides valuable information on the abundance of
SSRs in ESTs and will facilitate the development of markers for
genetic analysis and related applications.

The authors thankfully acknowledge the financial support for
Agri-Bioinformatics Promotion Program by Bioinformatics
Initiative Division, Department of Information Technology,
Ministry of Communications &amp; Information Technology,
Government of India, New Delhi as well as to BTIS Net, DBT,
and Government of India. Also the authors are grateful to
Assam Agricultural University, Jorhat, Assam for providing the
necessary facilities, constant support and encouragement
throughout the study.

Citation:Sarmah et al, Bioinformation 8(4): 206-208 (2012)

Architecture and workflow of ESMP pipeline.

