Background:
Protein sequence encodes the fundamental structural unit of
life: “protein structure” and protein structure defines its
biological function [–
]. Knowledge of the structure and
function of proteins is, therefore, important in the area of
biomedical sciences. Protein structure prediction from
sequence information has been a grand challenging problem in
molecular biology for the last forty years. Nature conserves
structure core, due to convergent evolution, and the number of
unique structural (domain) folds in nature is possibly limited.
The probability for a protein sequence to have a native-like
structural fold in Protein Data Bank (PDB) 
[] is estimated to be
60-70%. Various fold recognition methods based on
mathematical, statistical, and computational algorithms have
been developed to predict possible from sequence information.
For example, contact map model-based pseudoenergy function
incorporating pairwise residue interaction potential by allowing
variable gaps have been developed and implemented to predict
protein 3D structure through fold recognition method. The
ability of these fold recognition methods to accurately
distinguish the correct, folded structure from moderately
distorted (misfolded) structures is limited 
[–].

In this manuscript, we propose a new method called as Higher
Order Residue Interaction Based ALgorithm for Fold
REcognition (HORIBALFRE). We incorporated potential
contributions not just from one-body and two-body terms, but
also from the three-body (triplet interactions) and the four-body
(quadruple interaction) interactions, to improve the
performance of fold prediction using sequence data. Core of
HORIBALFRE includes the potentials generated from a
structure library derived from CAMPASS database [] of
structure based sequence alignment. We used Fischer's dataset,
with 68 templates and 56 target sequences, derived from SCOP
database and performed one-against-all sequence alignment
using T-Coffee []. These potentials were incorporated into
HORIBALFRE algorithm. Currently, the algorithm was applied
to the Fischer's dataset with 68 template-target pairs.

Sequence databases are experiencing an unprecedented growth
in the post-genome era due to automated sequencing
techniques. Annotation of the sequences by computational
approaches using structure and sequence based methods are
getting increasingly important [–, , 
, –]. As attempts to
sequence entire genomes increases the number of protein
sequences by a factor of two each year, the gap between
sequence and structural information stored in public databases
growing rapidly []. To fill the sequence-structure-function
gap and to completely understand the function role of a protein
and its multitude of cellular interactions, the knowledge of 3D
structures is very crucial. As the cost of sequencing technologies
are decreasing at an increased rate, the experimental
approaches for high–throughput characterization of protein
structures using X-ray crystallography and NMR spectroscopy
remains a challenge due to cost and laborious nature and often
unsuccessful experimental processes. As an alternative,
theoretical and computational methods to predict the structure
from sequence such as homology, ab initio, and fold recognition
are widely employed. Homology (comparative) modeling,
attempts to predict protein structure on the strength of a protein
sequence similarity to another proteins with known structures.
Even though it has been the most reliable technique for protein
structure prediction, its dependence on alignment quality and
the existence of good homologue, indicate it is not applicable to
a large fraction of protein sequences which are not within
‘structural distance’ in sequence space and only 10% of the
sequences are modeled [,
,
]. Ab initio method
encompasses any means of calculating co-ordinates of protein
structure for a protein sequence from physical principles.
Despite a few recent successes on small proteins and short
peptides, this method is still not a practical proposition for
predicting protein structure due to limitations in computing
power and poor understanding of the biophysical forces
driving protein folding. The third category of protein structure
prediction, falling somewhere between Homology modeling
and ab initio prediction, is fold recognition.

Methodology:
Conceptual idea behind fold recognition method came from the
estimate that there is an ˜70% chance that a newly characterized
protein with no obvious common ancestry to proteins with a
known structure will in fact turn out to share a common fold
with at least one protein of known structure in the database[,
]. The objective of fold recognition approach was that given a
sequence and a library of structure templates; discover which
fold is best compatible with the given sequence 
[,
,
,
,
–]. 
If the target protein shares significant sequence similarity to
a protein of known 3D structure, the fold recognition problem is
trivial – simple sequence comparison will identify the correct
fold. Threading based approaches could detect structural
similarities that are not accompanied by any detectable
sequence similarity, and thus, fold recognition is the protein
structure prediction method of choice when (1) the sequence
identity to any sequence with a known structure, and (2) one or
more structures from the structure library represents the true
fold of the sequence. Based on the pseudoenergies derived from
the statistical analysis of observed protein structures
(knowledge - based approach), existing computational methods
for fold recognition can be grouped into two major classes: First
class of methods employ residue local environments and do not
include residue interaction potentials explicitly 
[–,
–,
,–
]. 
In this kind of method, the prediction speed is fast, but
they were not effective in detecting structural similarities
between divergent proteins, and between proteins sharing a
common fold through convergent evolution (analogous folds).
The reason for these limitations is down to the loss of structural
information due to residue interactions []. Second class of
methods includes pairwise residue interaction potentials 
[,
,
,
,
]. However, pairwise residue interactions cannot
capture regularities of protein structure and found statistically
inadequate to explain the frequency distribution of residue
interactions, and consideration of cooperative interactions of
higher order may improve the quality of structure prediction
[,
,
,
,
–]. In this manuscript, we introduce the
architecture of a new fold recognition algorithm,
HORIBALFRE, which employs higher order residue interaction
potentials and an integrated approach that also include local
environments of residues. We recently showed that a webserver
which can compute higher order residue interactions can be
used for in-depth structure analysis []. HORIBALFRE is an
extension of HORI server and utilize pre-computed amino acid
interaction data derived using higher order residue interaction
programs developed for HORI server.

Description of HORIBALFRE algorithm:
HORIBALFRE is a multi-step fold recognition algorithm with 5
major steps. A flow-chart of the algorithm is given in .
The following consecutive steps form the core of HORIBALFRE.

(1) Library of target-template (derived from Fischer's dataset):
Target-template library is sourced from Fischer's benchmark
dataset [] comprising of 68 unique probe sequences and 56
unique target structures (PDB identifiers of proteins in Fischer's
dataset is provided in supplementary material)

(2) Alignment of target sequence to the template sequences:
T-Coffee [] is used for the alignment of the target sequence to
the template sequence. T-Coffee is used in Global alignment
mode and global-local alignment method has been employed to
align one target sequence to one template sequence []

(3) Computation of potentials due to mutation, gap penalty,
secondary structure and solvent accessibility, pairwise
interactions, triplet-interactions and quadruple interactions:
Core part of the algorithm includes computing set of potentials
that feed into the final score. The potentials were generated
using different set of methods. The mutation potential values
score for the amino acid sequence similarity between the probe
sequence and the target fold. The values were computed by
summing up the scores over the aligned, conserved secondary
structural regions in the template. This gives a score for the
substitution of an amino acid residue in the template sequence
with that in the probe sequence. This score is obtained from the
BLOSUM62 matrix [,
].

Mutation potential incorporated in HORIBALFRE was
calculated using  (see supplementary
material). The alignment between the sequence and structure
will have gaps and a gap penalty was assigned after the
alignment. An empirical gap opening penalty of 11 is chosen
after examining the scores assigned to amino acid exchanges,
while a gap extension is given a lesser penalty. The gaps in the
secondary structure regions were penalized for more than a gap
introduced in loop regions using  (see
supplementary material).

Unlike comparative methods, which compare proteins based on
sequence similarity and concept of homology, fold recognition
methods take advantage of the extra information made
available by 3D structure. A sum over the amino acid structural
environment preferences over the entire sequence is a good
indicator for the recognition of native-like folds []. The
secondary structure details were mapped to the template
sequence that is aligned to the probe sequence. The solvent
accessibility values were mapped to the template sequence,
according to the JOY-based structural feature definition 
[].
The secondary structure and solvent accessibility values were
paired to give a single score at each residue position.
Eisenberg's 3D-1D substitution table [] is then used to assign
a score for the occupancy of 20 different amino acid residues at
all the residue positions in the template. Hence, a score is
obtained for the occupancy of an amino acid in the probe
sequence into the corresponding, aligned residue position in the
template. These values were summed up over the conserved
and aligned regions between the sequence and the
template. Hence, the combination of secondary structure and
solvent accessibility values at different residue positions gives
an environment score that is considered as a parameter. The
results obtained only using environment scoring potential
proves that subsets of sequence-structure pairs were not
detected when the total potentials were considered. This
explains the need for using weight factors for each of the
parameters that were used for scoring. The potentials obtained
for interactions between all residues. This interaction score thus
depends on the observed frequency of interaction between two
residues in already known protein structures. Pairwise
potentials of mean force computed for a subset of protein
structures derived from CAMPASS database is given in the
additional material URL.

Pairwise, triplet and quadruple interactions were computed
using HORI programs explained in our previous study 
[].
The potentials were derived from a standard library of protein
structures compiled from CAMPASS database []. The SCOP
identifiers of the structures used to derive the potentials were
given in supplementary material. Three-dimensional structure
and amino acid sequence of proteins were related by an
unknown set of rules that is often referred to as the folding
code. This code is significantly influenced by non-local
interactions between the residues []. If we approximate each
residue as a sphere centered on its location, accordingly it is
possible for three or even four closely packed spheres to make
mutual contact, thus giving rise to three- or four-way
interactions. Just as no more than four same-sized spheres can
be in mutual contact in 3D space, no more than four–way
interactions generally be expected to occur. We hypothesize
that an interaction exists between two residues if the spatial
distance between their Cβ atoms is within 7 Å and residues
should be ≥4 residue positions apart in the template sequence. It
is generally believed that the interactions involving loop
residues can be ignored, as their contribution to fold recognition
is relatively insignificant. In the current version of
HORIBALFRE implementation, we consider only interactions
between residues in the cores. It is observed that the scores
obtained depend on the possible interactions within 7 Å and
also all the interactions possible, depending on the residue
pairs. For example, a positive potential was expected for Pro-
Glu residue pair because the number of interactions possible
within 7 Å for this pair is limited; only 0.8% of the total Pro-Glu
interactions in the dataset. Similarly, as the number of possible
Ala-Ala interactions is high, the potential is expected to be
negative. In some sequence-structure pairs, no quadruple
interaction potential value was obtained. But all protein
structures showed pairwise interactions as expected, as the
impact of constraints were less. Hence, inclusion of higher order
interactions can make a distinction between sequence-structure
pairs in the algorithm. Higher order residue interactions in
HORIBALFRE algorithm were calculated using 

and  (see supplementary material).

Calculation of potentials of mean force using log-odds ratio:
Potentials of mean force were defined using pseudopotentials
calculated from protein structures, pre-computed from a
database using the inverse Boltzmann principle. Pairwise
potentials of mean force have been used to study
conformational ensembles [,
] .The potentials were obtained
from the manually curated structures from the CAMPASS
database. The formula used to calculate the log odds ratio is
given in  and 
 (see supplementary material).

(4) Sum of Potentials (HORIBALFRE score):
The success of theoretical methods depends on the accuracy of
the underlying scoring function that should be capable of
discriminating between correct (i.e. native) and incorrect
configurations of the native polypeptide sequence 
[,
].
HORIBALFRE score (see  in supplementary
material) is derived using the summation of various potentials
described earlier using the following equation. Additional
weight factors were incorporated before the calculation of final
HORIBALFRE score, and the values of the weight factors were
determined based on the data available on the contribution of
various potentials in protein structures [].

(5) Ranking compatibility scores for sequence-fold pairs:
The benchmarking was performed using the Fischer's dataset
that consists of 68 sequence-structure pairs []. The templatetarget
pairs were analyzed to find out the considering only the
mutation potential values. The mutation potential values
obtained were comparatively lower in the cases where the right
fold was identified. The mutation potential values showed
dependence on the length of the sequences. In general, the
potential values were high for sequences that differ hugely in
length and with a poor sequence identity. As the difference in
length increases, the negative values of mutation potentials
were not observed. Mutation potential for a subset of templatetarget
pairs is given in additional material URL.

(6) Statistical evaluation of HORIBALFRE algorithm::
Sensitivity and specificity analyses were performed at class
level and at the superfamily level, with and without higher
order residue interactions to illustrate the impact of higher
order interactions in predicting the correct fold. Sensitivity and
Specificity were calculated using  and 
 (see
supplementary material).

Discussion:
HORIBALFRE score, an objective-scoring method introduced in
this manuscript is calculated for 68 template-target members in
the Fischer's dataset using a one-against-all method. Potentials
explained in methods sections (See equations 1-10) were
computed and used to derive HORIBALFRE score. Following
the calculation of the HORIBALFRE score, a comparative
analysis is performed using the scores without and with
quadruple interactions. Representative template-target pairs
without and with quadruple interactions are provided in 
and . (See supplementary materials) Some of the
sequence pairs were not observed amongst the top hits when
quadruple interactions were not included. Here, we illustrate
that higher order interactions contribute towards discriminating
the correct fold amongst other folds, which give a similar
score. The set of template-target pairs given in 
, (See
supplementary materials) identified to have the corresponding
fold pair amongst the top ten scores obtained for the sequence.
From the class-wise distribution of the results, we observed that
most of the folds that were predicted correctly (true positives)
were belong to the mixed class of α/β. Further analysis will be
required to elucidate whether quadruple interactions were
biased towards specific SCOP classes. We had earlier shown
that it is possible to discriminate between two folds of similar
composition of supersecondary structures, the singly wound
α/β barrels and doubly wound dehydrogenases, using higher
order interactions [, also See additional Material URL].

We used statistical validation that compared sensitivity and
specificity analyses at the class level and superfamily level and
analyzed the impact of the presence and absence of higher
order residue interactions. For the sequence - pairs that were
amongst the top 10 hits obtained using raw scores we calculated
sensitivity and specificity. As expected, at the class level, the
number of sequences that identified other structures that
belonged to the same class as the native fold was higher than
that obtained at the superfamily level. Class level with higher
order interactions included, and superfamily level with higher
order interactions are provided in . As expected, at the
class level, the number of sequences that identified other
structures that belonged to the same class as the native fold was
higher than that obtained at the superfamily level. The same
data, when analyzed without the inclusion of quadruple and
triplet interaction scores, it was seen that there were lesser
number of sequences that identified other structures, belonging
to the same class as the class of the native fold. The sensitivity at
the class level also dropped to below 30%, while with the
inclusion of higher order potentials, a higher sensitivity was
obtained.

HORIBALFRE utilize three type of higher order residue
interaction for characterizing correct fold for a given query
sequence from a database of folds. We introduced various
parameters incorporated in the algorithm and discussed pilot
results in this manuscript. In an earlier study we showed that
higher order residue interactions could delineate between
closely related folds using two members from α/β folds from
SCOP database [, 
, also See additional Material URL]. The
current results using 68 template-target pairs from Fisher's
dataset used in HORIBALFRE indicates that fold recognition is
being improved by the addition of higher order residue
interaction potential due to quadruple interaction. The
performance in the current analysis could be improved by
inclusion of additional features. We will be applying
normalization techniques and linear programming based
function to improve the algorithm. Further, the algorithm will
be tested on larger benchmark data sets to derive the coverage
of algorithm and an integrated web server will be developed for
fold prediction using higher order residue interactions.

Conclusion:
In this manuscript, we introduced and demonstrated results
obtained from a novel fold recognition algorithm developed for
protein fold recognition from sequence information. Fold
recognition is an important problem in the current era of
exponentially increasing sequenced genomes. Function and fold
level annotation of newly sequenced genomes remains to be a
priority. We designed a new fold recognition approach
“HORIBALFRE” that utilize higher order residue interactions.
The algorithm was tested using Fischer's dataset and performed
a statistical evaluation. Preliminary results suggest that
inclusion of higher order residue interactions, specifically
quadruple interactions improves fold prediction.

Additional Material:
Additional datasets (PDB identifiers, Fischer's dataset,
CAMPASS database derived structures), HORI-based pairwise,
triplet and quadruple interaction scores and various parameters
associated with HORIBALFRE scores and related programs are
accessible from the URL:
http://caps.ncbs.res.in/download/horibalfre/.

Supplementary material
Data 1
S.P. was a Senior Research Fellow funded by the Ministry of
Human Resource Development, Government of India and R.S.
was a Senior Research Fellow funded by the Wellcome Trust,
U.K. We would like to thank Department of Biotechnology,
India for partial financial support. We also thank Indian
Institute of Technology Roorkee and National Centre for
Biological Sciences (TIFR) for infrastructural support.

Citation:Sundaramurthy et al, Bioinformation 7(7): 352 - 359 (2011)

Flowchart of HORIBALFRE algorithm. Algorithm
derive parameters from multiple features like gap penalty,
mutation potential, secondary structure and solvent
accessibility potential, higher order residue interactions. Precomputed
potentials from CAMPASS dataset and BLOSUM 62
matrix were also incorporated.

Sensitivity (x-axis) vs. Specificity (y-axis) plots based
on HORIBALFRE results.

