Background
While the ‘-ome’ researches such as genome, transcriptome, proteome and 
metabolome, need the technologies to analyze thoroughly in the organism, 
the metabolome is much different in analyte from the others. The analyte 
in metabolome analysis is a group of the chemical compounds with various 
chemical characteristics and their precise identification is a crucial problem 
of metabolomics research.

Liquid Chromatography Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometry (LC-TOF-MS) 
is widely used for profiling metabolite compounds  []. LC-TOF-MS is a 
chemical analysis technique that combines the physical separation 
capabilities of high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) with the mass 
analysis capabilities of Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometry (TOF-MS) 
which utilizes the difference in the flight time of ions due to difference in 
the mass-to-charge ratio. In the identification of compounds by LC-TOFMS, 
contemporaneously analyzed reference standards are commonly 
required for mass spectral matching and retention time matching. 
However, reference standards are not always available because there are 
far fewer reference standards than there are compounds in the organism. 
Acquiring reference standards for amino and nucleic acids, which are 
related to synthesis and degradation pathways, is especially difficult. 

In this paper, we describe our development of a system for predicting the 
retention time of compounds without reference standards. There have been 
several studies on retention time prediction for peptides [] 
[] and organic 
compounds  [] 
[]. They have used the artificial neural network (ANN) 
and the heuristic method (HM) as prediction methods. Our targets are more 
general (proteins, sugars, nucleic acids, etc.) and we chose Multiple Linear 
Regression (MLR) as well as Support Vector Regression (SVR), whose 
performance was reported to be better than that of HM []. Mihaleva et al. 
[] proposed a method to predict Kovats retention index using both SVR 
and MLR. It selects features by using a genetic algorithm and successfully 
reduced a hit list by 41-60 %. However, their research target is Gas 
Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry (GC/MS) and deals with different 
sets of features. In addition, the method completely differs from ours in the 
way of combining SVR and MLR and selecting features. We also applied 
our system to E. coli metabolome analysis.

Methodology
Outline of metabolome analysis system
 shows our metabolome analysis system. The system first searches 
for candidate compounds whose masses are equal to the mass measured by 
LC-TOF-MS from databases such as PubChem  [], ChEBI  
[], MetaCyc 
[], and EcoCyc  
[]. Next, it predicts the retention times of these 
candidate compounds and selects the compounds whose measured 
retention times are most similar to the predicted retention times. 

Material
The authors of Genaris, Inc. performed an LC-TOF-MS experiment for 
150 compounds in the reference standards and used the data obtained from 
it. The experimental conditions are as follows: The ACQUITY UPLC 
chromatography system was used with the column ACQUITY UPLC HSS 
T3 2.1 mm×50 mm (Waters). Column temperature was 40 °C and flow rate 
was 0.4 ml/mm. The gradient condition was distilled water and acetonitrile 
(2% of acetonitrile for 1.5 minutes and 2-100% of acetonitrile for 1.5 to 
8.25 minutes). 

Feature extraction
For each of the above 150 compounds, atom additive calculation of 
octanol/water partition coefficient (XLogP) [] approximate polar surface 
(Topological Polar Surface Area, TPSA), structural complexity index 
(Complexity), the number of Hydrogen Bond Acceptors, and Hydrogen 
Bond Donors (HB) were obtained from the PubChem database. These 
indexes represent various physical and chemical properties 
(hydrophobicity, electricity, stereo chemistry, etc.). In addition to these 
existing indexes, we calculated a solvent-accessible surface area (ASA) of 
each compound by using its 3D coordinates. We propose a hypothesis that 
the solvent-accessible surface of a compound to the direction of the 
chromatography column mainly affects the interaction between the column 
and the compound. We obtained 3D coordinates from the PubChem 
database and determined the direction that maximizes the interface area 
between the column and the compound. 

Retention time prediction method
Our retention time prediction method uses a machine learning algorithm, 
Support Vector Regression (SVR) and a statistical method, Multiple Linear 
Regression (MLR). The former is an algorithm for creating regression 
functions of arbitrary type from a set of training data by using a support 
vector machine. We implemented the program using the LIBSVM library 
[].

SVR and MLR are combined as follows. When the measured retention 
time of LC-TOF-MS is less than the threshold T, we use SVR. A radial 
basis function (RBF) is used as a kernel function and a combination of 
Complexity, TPSA, and HB is used for the input features of SVR. For 
retention time larger than or equal to T, we use MLR by using ASA and 
XLogP as independent variables. As for the threshold, we use a value of 
1.5 minutes, as we will discuss in the next section. 

Discussion
We examined various features for retention time prediction. 
shows the prediction results of a five-fold cross validation test when using 
SVR with an RBF kernel and a combination of three indexes: Complexity, 
TPSA, and XLogP. The Pearson correlation coefficient is 0.607 and is 
especially low for retention time of less than 1.5 minutes (0.170 for 
retention time ≫ 1.5 and 0.521 for retention time ≥ 1.5). In this range of 
retention time, the chromatography solvent is largely water and only 
hydrophilic compounds are eluted. We thus decided to use different 
methods whether the retention time is less than 1.5 minutes or not 
(threshold T in the previous section is defined as 1.5 minutes).

For retention time ≫ 1.5 minutes, the interaction between compound and 
water is important. Therefore, in this case we used another index (i.e., HB) 
in place of XLogP. This combination (Complexity, TPSA, and HB) gave 
the best result (i.e., correlation coefficient = 0.714). However, for retention 
time ≥ 1.5 minutes, the correlation coefficient for the same combination of 
features was only 0.116. Therefore, in this case we used a linear kernel 
function instead of RBF, and obtained a good result (i.e., correlation 
coefficient = 0.824). This suggests that the retention time has a near-linear 
relationship to the above indexes except for cases of short retention time.

We further examined various combinations of indexes and proved that the 
best combination is ASA and XlogP, in which case the correlation 
coefficient was improved to 0.875. ASA and XLogP are directly related to 
the structure and hydrophobicity of compounds. Since these compound 
indexes and the hydrophobicity of the chromatography column have 
substantial influence on the interaction between the column and the
compound, they are important for retention time prediction. As the 
retention time becomes short, the influence of the column's hydrophobicity 
decreases and the interaction between compound and solvent becomes 
more dominant

Since the retention time may have a near-linear relationship to ASA and 
XLogP for longer retention time, we also used MLR as a prediction 
method. It was found that MLR provided higher correlation (correlation 
coefficient = 0.896) than SVR (correlation coefficient = 0.875). 
Accordingly, we decided to combine SVR (for retention time of less than 
1.5 minutes) and MLR (retention time of over 1.5 minutes). By using this 
combined method we obtained a strong correlation (correlation coefficient 
= 0.974) between measured and predicted retention times (). This 
correlation value is high compared with the existing work [] although the 
target of prediction is different (GC/MS).

We then applied our prediction system to  E. coli metabolome analysis, 
choosing a target compound (PubChemID 191) in the reference standards. 
Measurements taken with LC-TOF-MS showed that the target compound 
has mass of 267.0989 and retention time of 1.1338.  shows the 
results for candidate compounds obtained by mass-based database search. 
We predicted the retention time of each compound and this is also shown 
in the table. The table is sorted by the difference between the measured and 
predicted retention times. The fourth compound listed is the only one 
registered in the E. coli compound database EcoCyc and was successfully 
identified as the target compound. We also applied our metabolome 
analysis system to 22 other compounds in the reference standards and 
succeeded in narrowing more than ten candidates down to at most five 
compounds, including the target compound. 

Conclusion
Our retention time prediction system achieved very high accuracy (i.e., 
correlation coefficient = 0.974) and was proven to be useful for identifying 
compounds that cannot be identified by precise mass alone. Since our 
system does not use reference standards it can be widely applied to 
compounds relevant to metabolomics. Using retention time prediction, it 
can also be used for predicting compound specifications such as extent of 
ionization with the electrospray ionization method. The method utilizes 
various properties of chromatography and its framework  () is 
applicable to other metabolome analysis. To do so, however, parameters 
such as the threshold of retention time should be tuned to individual LCTOF-MS systems and experimental conditions. 

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Shimizuet al, Bioinformation 5(6): 255- 258 (2010)

 Metabolome analysis system. The system first searches for candidate compounds 
whose masses are equal to the mass measured by LC-TOFMS from the compound databases. Next, 
it predicts the retention times of these candidate. When the measured retention time is less than the threshold T, 
SVR is used (a combination of Complexity, TPSA, and HB are used for input features) and when the measured retention 
time is larger than or equal to T, MLR is used (ASA and XLogP are used as independent variables). 
The compounds whose measured retention times are most similar to the predicted 
retention times are selected for identificatio

Prediction performance of SVR. The figure shows correlation between the measured retention time and predicted retention time when SVR is 
used for all range of the retention time. The blue line indicates the threshold T.

 Prediction performance of the combined method 
This figure shows correlation between the measured retention time and predicted retention time when combining SVR (for retention time of less than 1.5 
minutes) and MLR (retention time of over 1.5 minutes)

