Background
Plant-parasitic nematodes, especially root-knot species,
including Meloidogyne incognita, infect a wide range of
cultivated plants, and are responsible for billions of dollars in
crop losses annually [,
]. The genus Meloidogyne comprises
more than 80 species [] and has a crucial role in damaging
most of the crop production economically. On a worldwide
basis, it causes yield loss in a range of crops and cost growers
worldwide &gt;$75b each year, despite control measures 
[]. The
impact of these species is enhanced by their wide host ranges
and is estimated to infect more than 5500 plant species 
[].
Chemical control of nematodes requires relatively large amount
of nematicides and there are tremendous environmental as well
as health issues associated with the production and application
of synthetic nematicides. The need for more sustainable and less
toxic methods of nematode management has increased research
on alternative control measures to synthetic chemical control.
This led to the search for eco-friendly and cost effective control
of nematodes by natural steps.

Glutathione S-transferases (GST) are a large family of
multifunctional dimeric enzymes involved in the
metabolization of a broad variety of xenobiotics and reactive
endogenous compounds []. The complete machinery of
glutathione (GSH) system such as GSTs (glutathione-Stransferase(
s)) and GSHPx (glutathione peroxidases) are major
defense systems of nematodes. The mechanism of action of
GST(s) (E.C.2.5.1.18), enzymes includes defense against
oxidative attack via conjugation of electrophiles to glutathione
and reduction of lipid hydroperoxides [,
]. GST has been
exploited as potential target for many chemotherapeutic agents.
An active GST is a homodimer of a 208 residue long monomer
consisting of two domains (smaller α/β domain and larger α
domain). The N-terminal small domain (residues 1 to 74) is a
α/β structure with the folding topology βαβαββα arranged in
the order β2, β1, β3and β4with β3 anti-parallel to the others,
forming a regular β-sheet with a right-handed twist surrounded
by three α- helices. The C terminal, large domain 2 (82–208
residues) is α-helical. The residues that interface the two βαβ
and ββα motifs are Trp38, Phe8, Val33, Cys47, Leu52 and Leu43
in human π GST []. 
The secondary structure of M. incognita GST is shown in 
().

Historically, herbs, shrubs and spices have enjoyed a rich
tradition of use for their flavor enhancement characteristics and
medicinal properties. The emphasis on medicinal plants, herbs
and spices as herbal remedies are being lost due to lack of
awareness and deforestation. As a result many valuable
medicinal herbs as well as precious information are lost. Spices
hold the promise of providing both significant clinical benefits
and have potential for use as antibiotics. Spices are
antimicrobial. This study was conducted with the objective of
exploring the nematicidal activity of phytochemicals against M.
incognita.

Methodology
Database screening and activity prediction:
Comprehensive reviews of plants with nematicidal
phytochemicals were initially made and this led to the selection
of nematicidal phytochemicals from different spices. The
nematicidal phytochemicals were screened and collected from
Dr. Duke's phytochemical and ethno-botanical databases
(http://ars-grin.gov/duke/) and through literature search.
PASS server [] 
was used to predict nematicidal activity and
GST substrate activity of the phytochemicals
(http://195.178.207.233/PASS/AP.html). PreADMET server
(http:/preadmet.bmcrd.org/) was used to predict the druglikeness
and ADME-Tox (Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism
Excretion and Toxicity) properties []. The ADME-Tox
properties of a compound together with its pharmacological
properties such as drug likeness are conventionally identified as
part of drug development. Those compounds obeying the
ADMET rules and druglikenes rules were short listed for
docking studies. A total of 16 nematicidal compounds were
selected and these 16 compounds were reported to have
nematicidal activity in an earlier docking study and in vitro
assay conducted in our laboratory in animal parasite Dirofilaria
immitis, the canine filarial nematode 
[].

Ligand Structure:
The canonical smiles notations of phytochemicals predicted to
have nematicidal activity were collected from PubChem
(http://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/),ChemSpider
(http://chemspider.com) 
and DrugBank (http://www.drugbank.ca/). The
3D structures of compounds were developed by 3D Structure
Generator CORINA [,
] using canonical smiles of the
compound. Energy minimization and molecular optimization of
all compounds were done using Arguslab 4.0.1 
[]. Geometry
optimization was carried out using AM1 (Austin Model 1)
semi-empirical quantum mechanics force field in Arguslab
4.0.1. The best conformer thus obtained was based on energy
minimization and geometry optimization. The final structures
exhibiting lowest energy were saved in *.pdb format for input
in to MVD environment.

Modelling of target protein structur:
Glutathione-S-transferase of M. incognita has been selected as
the target for docking study. There were no experimental
structures for GST of M. incognita; hence we modeled 3D
structure of GST by using Modeller9v8 software []. An active
GST is a homodimer of a 208 residue long monomer consisting
of two domains, smaller α/β domain and larger α domain. In
this study we modelled a 3D structure of GST by X-ray Crystal
Structure of a major nematode C. elegans specific GST (CE01613)
(PDB ID: 1ZL9, Chains A) used as the template. The modeled
structure revealed that GST predominantly consists of α helix.
The secondary structure of modeled protein was viewed by
PyMolv1.4.1 software []. The target and template was
superimposed by DaliLite pairwise comparison of protein
structure [] and the backbone RMSD value was found to be
3.9 A°.

Target structure validation:
The Ramachandran plot is probably the best indicator for
assessing the quality of experimentally and theoretically
designed determination of three dimensional protein
coordinates []. Ramachandran plot was identified by
Procheck program [] of Structural Analysis and Verification
Server (http://nihserver.mbi.ucla.edu/SAVES/) and
Ramachandran Z-score was determined through Structure
validation server of WHAT IF Web Interface []. Further,
modeled protein is validated by molecular dynamics and
mechanics by using various empirical forcefields such as
ANOLEA [], GROMOS 
[], VERIFY-3D 
[] and Errat
protein structure verification algorithm [] to identify overall
quality factor of the model.

Molecular Docking:
Molecular Docking study was carried out by using Molegro
Virtual Docker []. MVD performs flexible ligand docking, so
the optimal geometry of the ligand will be determined during
the docking. MVD includes MolDock Score [] and PLANTS
Score [] for evaluating docking solutions. MVD returns
multiple poses representing different potential binding modes.
Here, clustering has been used to reduce the number of poses
found during the docking run and only the most promising
ones was reported. During docking, both protein and ligands
were prepared for which bonds, bond orders, explicit
hydrogens, charges, flexible torsions, were assigned at the
missing region by the MVD program for both the protein and
ligands. From the docking wizard ligands were selected and
Moldock score scoring function has been used. The intact
protein structure was loaded on to MVD platform for docking
process. Potential binding sites (also referred to as cavities or
active sites) has been identified using the built-in cavity
detection algorithm of MVD. To reduce overall computing time,
Ignore distant atoms option is used to ignore atoms far away
from the binding site. The Enforce hydrogen bond directionality
option is used to check if bonding between potential hydrogen
bond donors and acceptors can occur. If hydrogen bonding is
possible, the hydrogen bond energy contribution to the docking
score is assigned a penalty based on the deviations from the
ideal bonding angle. Using this option can significantly reduce
the number of unlikely hydrogen bonds reported also Moldock
score, Rerank score, total interactions and number of hydrogen
bonds were identified from the pose by enabling the ligand
evaluation terms. The search algorithm is taken as Moldock SE
and numbers of runs are taken 10 and max iterations were 2000
with population size 50 with an energy threshold of 100. At
each step least ‘min’ torsions/translations/rotations were tested
and the one giving lowest energy was chosen. After the docking
simulation was over, the poses which were generated were
sorted by rerank score. The Rerank Score uses a weighted
combination of the terms used by the MolDock score mixed
with a few addition terms (the Rerank Score includes the Steric
(by LJ12-6) terms which are Lennard-Jones approximations to
the steric energy – the MolDock score uses a piecewise linear
potential to approximate the steric energy) 
[]. The reranking
score function is computationally more expensive than the
scoring function used during the docking simulation but it is
generally better than the docking score function at determining
the best pose among several poses originating from the same
ligand []. While the rerank-score in MVD provides an
estimate of the strength of the interaction, it is not calibrated in
chemical units and it does not take complex contributions (such
as entropy) into account. The scoring function used by MolDock
is derived from the piecewise linear potential (PLP) scoring
functions []. The scoring function used by MolDock further
improves these scoring functions with a new hydrogen bonding
term and new charge schemes []. Based on evolutionary
algorithms (EAs) classification moldock algorithm may be
classified as an Evolutionary simulator (ES), since it employs
direct ranking of the solutions and the crossover operators.
MolDock showed better overall performance in docking
simulations when compared with other software.

In vitro GST Assay:
Based on the availability of compounds, those compounds with
least dock score and high interaction with active-site was taken
for in vitro studies. The phytochemicals β-caryophyllene,
capsaicin, cinnamic acid, citronellol, curcumin, eugenol,
geraniol, isoeugenol, linalool, myristicin, neral, α-pinene,
piperine, terpineol, vanillin and strychnine were purchased in
the pure form from Sigma Chemicals, USA; glutathione (GSH)
and 1-chloro-2, 4-dinitrobenzene (CDNB) were purchased from
Sisco Research Laboratories Pvt. Ltd., (Mumbai, India). M.
incognita; used for the in vitro study was cultured in the Indian
Institute of Spices Research, Nematology laboratory, Calicut.

GST crude enzyme was obtained by centrifuging an aliquot
containing ~2000 nematodes at 1000 rpm for 2 min, and
washing twice with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) at pH 7.4.
The nematodes were ground with micro pestle and glass
powder. The solution was centrifuged at 10000 rpm at 4 °C for
30 min. Supernatant was dialyzed against PBS overnight and
made up to 2 ml. The following phytochemicals were used to
study their GST inhibitory activity, at a concentration of 0.001
mg/ml in ethanol: β-caryophyllene, capsaicin, cinnamic acid,
citronellol, curcumin, eugenol, geraniol, isoeugenol, linalool,
myristicin, neral, α-pinene, piperine, terpineol, vanillin and
strychnine (dissolved in water).

The dialyzed enzyme fraction (0.1 ml) was incubated in the
presence of 1 ml of 0.001 mg/ml concentration of the
phytochemicals listed above, in the presence of 1 mM
glutathione reduced (GSH), and 0.1 M phosphate buffer, pH 6.5,
for 1 hour at room temperature. A control containing ethanol
was also maintained. GST activity was measured using the
method of Habig et al. [], by initiating the reaction with the
addition of 1 mM 1-chloro-2, 4-dinitrobenzene (CDNB) and
following the change in absorbance at 340 nm, in a Shimadzu
1601 UV-Visible spectrophotometer. The GST activity was
expressed as change in absorbance at 340 nm per minute per ml
crude enzyme extract. Two replicates of each treatment were
maintained.

Bioassay of selected compounds for nematode inhibition:
In vitro bioassay has been conducted to determine differences in
the ability of M. incognita populations to survive 24 hours in
exposure to different phytochemical concentrations.
Phytochemicals with good dock score and those with good
percentage of inhibition in in vitro GST assay have been taken
for in vitro bioassay based on the availability of compounds.
Bioassay was conducted with 4 phytochemicals namely beta-caryophyllene,
eugenol, norvalinamide and cinnamic acid.
Compounds were taken in four different concentrations such as
200 µg/ml, 100 µg/ml, 
50 µg/ml and 25 µg/ml, three replicates
for each phytochemical were maintained. M. incognita, 100 in
numbers were taken in each well containing 1 ml of
phytochemical in specified concentrations. Phytochemical were
dissolved in 0.3% Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) in sterile distilled
water (SDW), with control of 0.3% DMSO in SDW. After 24
hours of incubation, the mortality rates of nematodes were
noted.

Result &amp; Discussion
Target structure Modeling and validation:
Target structure was modeled by Modeller9v8 and 3D structure
validation was done to identify overall quality factor of
modeled protein. The secondary structure of M. incognita GST is
shown in () and the electro negative and electro
positive regions are given in (), respectively.
Ramachandran Z-score was identified which express how well
the backbone conformations of all residues in the model
correspond to the known allowed areas in the Ramachandran
plot () is within expected ranges for modeled
structures. Stereochemical validation shows that residues in
allowed region of Ramachandran plot is 98.8%, disallowed
region in Ramachandran plot is 1.1%, Ramachandran Z-score is
1.906. The overall quality factor of the model was identified to
be 69.43% by further validation of modeled protein using
molecular dynamics and mechanics methods such as various
empirical force fields such as ANOLEA, GROMOS, VERIFY3D,
and Errat protein structure verification algorithm.

Molecular docking:
The entire protein structure was loaded on to MVD platform for
finding potential active sites or cavities. A total of three cavities
() were detected in modelled GST enzyme by using
Molegro Virtual Docker cavity prediction and were named
cav1, cav2 and cav3 the volume and surface area details are
given in  (see supplementary material).

Docking study has been conducted with entire protein structure
loaded on to MVD platform. All the three cavities were selected
in the MolDock GRID radius 35 A° for docking simulation. Out
of the three cavities, all 16 compounds were docked in to Cav1
of the modelled GST protein. Selected compounds exhibited
good dock scores and hydrogen bonds interactions in docking
studies. alpha pinene (PubChem CID: 6654, MW: 136.234040
g/mol), alpha terpineol (PubChem CID: 17100, MW: 154.249320
g/mol, beta caryophyllene (PubChem CID: 5281515, MW:
204.351060 g/mol), capsaicin (PubChem CID: 1548943, MW:
305.411880 g/mol), cinnamic acid (PubChem CID: 444539, MW:
148.158620 g/mol), citronellol (PubChem CID: 8842, MW:
156.265200 g/mol), curcumin (PubChem CID: 969516; MW:
368.380 g/mol), eugenol (PubChem CID: 3314 , MW: 164.201080
g/mol), geraniol (PubChem CID: 637566, MW: 154.249320
g/mol), isoeugenol (PubChem CID: 853433, MW: 164.201080
g/mol), linalool (PubChem CID: 6549; MW: 154.249 g/mol),
myristicin (PubChem CID: 4276, MW: 192.211180 g/mol), neral
(PubChem CID: 638011, MW: 152.233440 g/mol ), piperine
(PubChem CID: 638024, MW: 285.337660 g/mol), Nvanillylnonanamide
(PubChem CID: 2998, MW:
293.401180g/mol) and vanillin (PubChem CID: 1183; MW:
152.147 g/mol) are promising hits as GST inhibitors of natural
origin. All of the selected 16 phytochemicals showed good dock
score with the target. Docking results showed that all the
selected compounds docked satisfactorily to the GST enzyme
with good docking scores. Hence these phytochemicals, with
less docking energy and greater number of hydrogen bond
interactions, were selected as promising nematicidal
compounds against M. incognita after docking studies; 

(see supplementary material). Shows the number of H-bond
interactions, MolDock score and rerank score between target
and phytochemicals.

Docking view showing hydrogen bond interaction of ligands
with the GST enzyme is shown in (). Pictures were
generated using Molegro Virtual Docker; hydrogen bond
interaction of these nematicidal compounds with target is
shown as green dashed lines in the figure. Ligands are shown in
stick model and the target is displayed as secondary structure
backbone.

In vitro GST assay:
Compounds with the lowest dock score and high interaction
were taken for in vitro studies based on the availability of the
compound. All of the selected 16 phytochemicals showed good
dock score. Hence all of them were taken for in vitro studies.

In vitro studies indicate that beta caryophyllene (99.860%),
myristicin (99.442%), eugenol (98.607%), capsaicin (94.707%),
alpha terpineol (94.150%), geraniol (92.757%), curcumin
(92.479%), neral (92.201%), cinnamic acid (92.201%), Nvanillylnonanamide
(89.415%), piperine (89.136%), linalool
(89.136%), isoeugenol (88.301%), vanillin (87.465%), alpha pinene
(85.515%) and citronellol (74.930%) have good potential as
nematicidal compounds against M. incognita GST Table 3 (see
supplementary material). The compounds which are found to
be quite effective inhibitors of GST in in silico had been
validated by alternate methods such as in vitro GST assay and in
vitro bioassay experiments. The reason why there is a slight
variation in in-silico docking and in vitro activities could be
because, inside a living system, and in experimental conditions
binding of target protein and compound tend to deviate from
their in silico behavior in an unpredicted way. However, we
cannot detect whether all the residues in the target to which the
compound is making bonds in in silico environment is accessible
to the compound in vitro. Moreover, in silico computational
tools such as in silico docking provides visual inspection of the
binding modes of target and protein. The slight difference in the
correlation between the in silico and in vitro results could be
attributed to chemical conditions and environmental differences
in each case.

The results for in vitro studies proved that sixteen lead
molecules selected by virtual screening and docking studies
were able to inhibit the GST enzyme isolated from Meloidogyne
incognita, in vitro. Thus the above in vitro study largely validates
the results obtained from in silico docking studies. Hence these
compounds beta caryophyllene, myristicin, eugenol , capsaicin ,
alpha terpineol , geraniol, curcumin , neral, cinnamic acid,
norvalinamide, piperine, linalool, isoeugenol, vanillin, alpha
pinene and citronellol can be considered for novel nematicidal
compounds through inhibition of GST enzyme. This has been
validated by in vitro studies. Based on the availability of
compounds and live nematodes, those compounds showed
good activity against M. incognita GST has been taken for in
vitro bioassay studies.

Bioassay of selected compounds for nematode inhibition:
Bioassay of selected compounds for nematode inhibition by
four of the selected compounds based on their availability viz.
Beta- caryophyllene, cinnamic acid, eugenol and (N vanillylnonanamide)
NVA at four different concentrations was
evaluated in an in vitro bioassay on M. incognita. After 24 hours
of incubation, the mortality rates of nematodes were noted in
numbers. Among the four compounds the maximum mortality
was observed with the highest concentrations (200 µgml−1) of
Beta- caryophyllene (78%) followed by eugenol (61.6%),
cinnamic acid (55%) and N-vanillylnonanamide (49%) in 
 
(see supplementary material). The mortality of nematodes
was directly proportional to the concentration of the
compounds.

Potential nematicidal value of phytochemicals has been studied
in order to find out natural nematicidal compounds and their
efficacy. Phytochemicals have been initially tested by in silico
docking studies with GST and then carried on to in vitro GST
assay and finally validated by in vitro bioassay using live
nematodes. Mode of action of selected phytochemicals on
nematodes and percentage of inhibition of nematode GST by
each phytochemical is understood by the study. The beneficial
effects of natural compounds on nematode control and
management have been revealed. This study offers a promising
area of non-chemical control and management against plant
parasitic nematode. Further work in this area may result in the
development of a potent nematicidal molecule from spices.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors would like to thank the facilities provided by
Director, Indian Institute of Spices Research (IISR), Calicut and
DBT, New Delhi for funding.

Citation:Babu et al, Bioinformation 8(7): 319-325 (2012)

Secondary structure of M. incognita GST – Pymol
visualization [], 
helices is shown in red, sheets in yellow and
loops in green.

(a) and (b) Argus lab [] representation of the
electrostatic surface potentials of M. incognita GST showing the
highly acidic and basic regions of the protein (a) and a view of
the same molecule turned 180 about the x axis (b). The negative
potential (colored red) and the positive potential (colored blue)
respectively.

Ramachandran plot for modeled M. incognita GST

Three cavities detected in Modelled GST of M.
incognita

Docking view showing Hydrogen bond interaction of
ligands with GST enzyme.(a) Alpha pinene, (b) Alpha terpineol,
(c) Beta caryophyllene, (d) Capsaicin, (e) Cinnamic acid, (f)
Citronellol, (g) Curcumin, (h) Eugenol, (i) Geraniol, (j)
Isoeugenol, (k) Linalool, (l) Myristicin.

