Background
in silico approaches include homology modeling, Docking,
quantitative structure activity relationships, virtual ligand
screening, similarity and pharmacophore searching, data
mining, and data analysis tools are becoming increasingly
important in new drug design and have been frequently used in
the discovery and optimization of novel molecules with
enhanced affinity and specificity for the selected therapeutic
targets [–]. Today there is a considerable increment in the
application of in silico molecular modeling and docking studies
to predict potential inhibitors (drugs) for the treatment of
several diseases []. Further computational prediction of
pharmacokinetic parameters like Absorption, Distribution,
Metabolism and Excretion (ADME) &amp; toxicity studies have
become increasingly important in drug selection and promotion
process and are promising tools for early screening of potential
drug candidates []. Despite numerous studies carried out on
the pharmacologic therapy of various sodium channel opathies
and other related diseases, the application of Computer Aided
Drug Design (CADD) and Quantitative Structure-activity
Relationship (QSAR) study on the design and development of
new drugs for these diseases is scarce. The sodium
channelopathies include a variety of inherited human disorders
affecting heart rhythms, skeletal muscle contraction and
nervous system [].

The human voltage gated sodium channel proteins play a
fundamental role in the propagation of action potential in
electrically excited cells []. They are assumed to be the site of
action for many types of drugs, such as local anesthetics,
anticonvulsants, and anti-arrhythmic. These drugs elicit their
effects by interfering with the rapid influx of sodium ions,
which is responsible for the generation of action potential in
excited cells.

Disopyramide and its mode of action:
Systematic (IUPAC) name: 4-[bis (propan-2-yl) amino]-2-
phenyl-2-(pyridin-2-yl) butanamide. Formula: C21H29N3O.
Disopyramide is a type I anti-arrhythmic drug that has been in
wide use for several contractility. Disopyramide is a myocardial
depressant which can depress contractility.Disopyramide does
not reverse or attenuate cardiac hypertrophy in patients with
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) but the beneficial effects
of Disopyramide are largely attributable to its negative
inotropic effects. It is a potential alternative drug regimen for
treatment of obstructive HCM [,
]. It slows down
conduction, increases refractory periods and decreases cardiac
automaticity []. Therefore it is highly effective in HCM
patients with significant left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT)
obstruction. Data from previous studies show that
approximately two third of the patients with LVOT gradient
can be managed with Disopyramide in combination with betablockers
[]. It may have a superior effect on exercise tolerance
compared with beta-blockers. However they are, best used in
combination because Disopyramide alone tends to accelerate
atrio-ventricular node (AV) node conduction and increase the
potential risk from supra-ventricular arrhythmias.

Many cardiac anti-arrhythmic drugs and local anesthetics have
the ability to block sodium channels in axonal and cardiac
sarcolemmal membranes []. Disopyramide is similar in action
to Quinidine without the adrenergic effects. It has the ability to
block sodium channels in axonal and cardiac sarcolemmal
membrane []. It targets sodium channels to lengthen their
action potential. It depresses the increase in sodium
permeability of the cardiac myocyte during Phase 0 of the
cardiac action potential, in turn decreasing the inward sodium
current.

Undesired effects of Disopyramide:
The most significant side effects of Disopyramide are its anticholinergic
effects. Studies have shown that long term therapy
of this drug is associated with a low rate of serum enzyme
elevations and is a rare cause of acute liver injury. Main side
effects are Ventricular tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation, QT
interval prolongation, myocardial depression, hypotension, AV
block; anti-muscarinic effects including dry mouth, blurred
vision, urinary retention, gastrointestinal irritation.
Contraindications of disopyramide include second and third
degree heart block and sinus node dysfunction (unless
pacemaker fitted) cardiogenic shock severe uncompensated
heart failure [,
]. Main drug interactions comprise increased
risk of ventricular arrhythmias with amiodarone, antiarrhythmics,
torsadogenic agents, diuretics (due to
hypokalemia) increased plasma concentration with macrolides
decreased plasma concentration with rifampicin; increased
myocardial depression with anti-arrhythmics and beta-blockers.

In this study, we designed eighty possible structural analogues
of Disopyramide by changing ‘R’ (= CH2CH3CH3) functional
group as shown in the () and thirty analogs were
checked for their binding affinities with the target site. All the
thirty analogues showed better affinity and interaction with the
Human voltage-gated sodium channel (HVGSC) protein type 5
subunit alpha (PDB ID: 2KAV) but five of the 30 analogs
showed highest affinity with the target 2KAV comparatively to
Disopyramide drug. These results have been confirmed by the
G Scores obtained from Grid – based Ligand Docking with
Energetics (GLIDE) of Schrödinger 2011 [,
]. These five
inhibitors with highest dock scores are probable potent drugs
which can be considered for further invitro studies. Further
these top five analogs are docked with other HVGSC proteins
with PDB IDs: 2KBI, 4DCK, 4DJC &amp; 2L53 and also the predicted
ADME and toxicity studies of these analogues were evaluated.

Methodology
Preparation of ligands:
The chemical structure of Disopyramide molecule was retrieved
from drug bank database into two-dimensional MDL/SDF
format. Further 30 Disopyramide analogues were drawn in
Osiris property explorer and checked for drug likeliness
whether it followed Lipinski rule or not by modification of the
‘R’ position of Disopyramide drug (as shown in ).
These analogs are further designed and geometrically
optimized with the help of Hyperchem 8.0 software using the
Bio+Charmm force field, RMS gradient of 0.01 kcal/(mol-
Angstrom), maximum cycles upto 2000, in vacuum and Polak-
Ribiere algorithm as parameters. The molecules were then
loaded into Discovery Studio 2.5 for structure refinement such
as energy minimization for 2000 steps with CHARMm force
field.

The energetically minimized analogs  (see
supplementary material) are obtained in .mol2 format from
Discovery studios 2.5 and are used as input structures for
processing in LigPrep 2.5 which is run from maestro9.2. The
LigPrep 2.5 process consists of a series of steps that perform
conversions, apply corrections to the structures, generate
variations on the structures, eliminate unwanted structures and
optimize the structures.

LigPrep protocol of Schrodinger 2011 generated all 30 as valid
ligand conformations using Epik 2.0 in the pH range of 7±2. The
LigPrep produces a single, low-energy, 3D structure with
correct chiralities for each successfully processed input
structure. It also produce a number of structures from each
input structure with various ionization states, tautomers,
stereochemistries, and ring conformations, and eliminate
molecules using various criteria including molecular weight or
specified numbers and types of functional groups present. The
resulting structures are saved in either SD or Maestro format.

Protein Preparation:
Prior to docking, it is important to identify the binding site in
the target protein, information for which is available many
times through the structures of the complexes of the protein
with its substrate. Possible pockets in the set of sodium channel
protein structures were first identified by detecting binding
sites in all the proteins and then by identifying unique pockets
that could serve as feasible targets for inhibitors.

Multiple Sequence alignment and Active site prediction:
The binding pockets of proteins 2KBI, 4DCK, 2KAV, 2L53 and
4DJC were identified using the Computer Atlas of Topography
of Proteins (CASTp), a program for identifying and
characterizing protein active sites, binding sites and functional
residues located on protein surface.

The protein sequences of human voltage gated sodium channel
protein type 5 were obtained from PDB in FASTA format. To
identity the conserved residues in all the 5 proteins, they were
subjected to the Clustal W. The multiple sequence alignment of
2KBI chain A, 4DCK chain A, 2KAV chain A, 2L53 chain B
and 4DJC chain B sequences showed five conserved residues
as shown below in ().

The PDB structure files of the proteins are imported. The
processing, optimization and minimization of these proteins is
carried out in the protein preparation wizard of the Schrodinger
2011 by applying the OPLS_2005 force field. The conserved
residue Alanine is found to be the active site amino acid in all
the five proteins and is specified in the receptor grid generation
 (see supplementary material).

Docking:
Docking refers to the optimal positioning of a ligand molecule
with respect to the binding site of a target structure. GLIDE
offers the full spectrum of speed and accuracy from highthroughput
virtual screening of several compounds to
extremely accurate binding mode predictions, providing
consistently high enrichment at every level.

A site of 20x20x20 Å around the centric of pocket residues were
exploited to check docking interaction with Disopyramide
analogs. All the 30 analogs were subjected to docking in GLIDE
of Maestro 9.2 with the protein with 2KAV. All 30 ligands
docked with negative XP G Score and the compounds were
ranked by the interaction energy. Overall, the Vander Waals
energy contributed most to the interaction energy, but the
electrostatic energy showed the greatest variation and was
therefore the major factor for the ranking of molecules. Top five
lead molecules were obtained after docking of 30 Disopyramide
analogs with 2KAV which had comparatively higher binding
efficiency than Disopyramide drug  (see supplementary
material).

The XP form of G Score is more physically accurate. The XP
protocol includes ligand flexibility by docking multiple
conformers in a rigid receptor, and the resulting complexes
were ranked by XP G Scores.

These five top ranked compounds were selected for Glide XP
docking with the other four similar proteins with PDB IDs:
2KBI, 4DCK, 2L53 &amp; 4DJC. The docking results for these five
leads are tabulated in the following  (see
supplementary material).

ADME &amp; Toxicity studies:
Most of drug candidates fail in clinical trials due to poor ADME
properties. Thus, an important aspect of drug discovery is to
avoid compounds not having drug likeliness and good ADME
property. So to streamline the virtual screening, drug likeliness
and ADME properties of all the thirty compounds were
predicted using QikProp, version 3.4 of Schrodinger 2011 
[].
Lipinski filter and reactive filter were applied before virtual
screening to avoid false positive lead molecule using OSIRIS
Property explorer. Lipinski filter rejected ligands not following
Lipinski rule of five and reactive filter rejected ligands with
reactive functional groups.

Results and Discussion
All the thirty designed disopyramide analogs with chemical
substitutions at the R' (= CH2CH3CH3) position were found to
have zero violation towards Lipinski rule. In the present study,
five lead molecules with CH2NH2, OCH2CH3, OSO2,
CH2CH2CH3, and OSO2CH3 substitutionswere showing higher
XP G Scores of -3.6, -3.2, -2.87, -2.76 &amp; -2.74 respectively than
Disopyramide (G Score = -2.63) as a result of docking of 30
analogs and Disopyramide with 2KAV protein. These five
leads along with Disopyramide when further docked with
2KBI, 4DCK, 2L53 &amp; 4DJC have shown better dock scores
compared to Disopyramide. Hence these are expected to bind
strongly onto voltage gated sodium channels binding pockets
and the docking interaction of all the five leads with protein
2KAV shown in the ().

Drug likeliness, log P, log S, molecular weight and toxicity risks
may be used to judge the compound's overall potential to
qualify a ligand as potential drug candidate. All thirty ligands
have appropriate logP (octanol/water) value for biological
efficacy. Each of them had zero Lipinski violation and satisfying
pharmacological properties of 95% available drugs with high to
medium predicted oral absorption availability. Molecular
weight of each ligand falls within the range of 297-404 Daltons.
The ligands are having no toxic functional groups. Log S values
of these ligands are within the acceptable range of 95% of
existing drugs. The overall pharmacological properties (Table
VA &amp; VB) of these ligands justify that the molecules are
biologically active without any toxic functional groups.
Hydrophobic compounds have relatively poor solubility, high
log P, and high serum protein binding, but good cell
permeability; whereas the opposite is true for hydrophilic
compounds. This dichotomy was responsible for the classic lead
optimization struggle of solubility versus permeability. Poor
oral availability and permeability may lead to drug failure. The
five lead molecules reported in the present study are well
within the hydrophobic and hydrophilic extremes at the same
time percentage of oral availability is also high. The five lead
compounds have better pharmacological properties and can be
considered as potential lead molecules for invitro drug
discovery targeting HVGSC protein.

Conclusion
A thorough study was carried out over thirty computationally
designed Disopyramide analogs using various software
programs with the goal of identifying potential lead molecules
that bind to the human voltage-gated sodium channel
protein(VGSC) type 5 relying on computational docking and
pharmacological properties prediction with GLIDE of
Schrodinger 2011 and QikProp 3.4 respectively. The
comparatively higher XP G Scores of five analogs compared to
Disopyramide when docked with 2KAV protein at the
conserved active site residue suggest these novel leads would
potentially bind more strongly to the pockets of VGSC proteins.
Further, the five leads are docked with 2KBI, 4DCK, 2L53, and
4DJC proteins to predict their binding efficiencies with other
similar sodium channel proteins apart from 2KAV. All proteins
except 2KBI showed high XP G Scores for the analogs compared
to Disopyramide. Also, these five novel lead molecules have
better pharmacological properties compared to Disopyramide.
Thus, it is hoped that these five Disopyramide analogs
identified in this study if synthesized and tested in animal
models would hold promising results for new drug discovery.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank Raghu Rangaswamy, Senior Director and
VinodDevaraji IT consultant from Schrodinger for providing
free academic evaluations software and continuous support to
undertake this research work.

Citation:Meraj et al, Bioinformation 8(23): 1139-1146 (2012)

Structure of Disopyramide depicting the ‘R’ position

Clustal 2.1 multiple sequence alignment using jalview editor. Multiple sequence alignment of 2KAV with 4DJC, 2KBI,
4DCK and 2L53 sequences showed five highly conserved regions and the one highlighted region in red denotes the conserved
active site residues.

Docking maps of five lead compounds &amp; Disopyramide showing hydrogen bonds with 2KAV protein residues.

