Background
A dataset is imbalanced if the classification categories are not
equally represented []. Class imbalance or skewed dataset
mainly arises when most of the instances are labeled as one
class (majority class), while very few are labeled as the other
class (minority class). Traditional classifiers utilizing the entire
training set for prediction are not suitable to deal with
imbalanced dataset because they show bias towards the
majority class due to over-prevalence. Particularly in case of
disease related dataset (like ours) - miRNA dataset associated
with cancer, the number of experimentally validated miRNAs
are much higher than the number of miRNAs not associated
with cancer. The main problem in training a classifier with
high imbalanced dataset is that the minority class is often
considered as noisy dataset and hence overlooked by the
majority class.

Performance of the classifier constructed with a certain level of
class imbalance is always unpredictable or deteriorating in
many cases. Hence, to overcome the problem of class
imbalance, machine learning algorithms generally utilize two
methods viz., resampling at the data level i.e. either
oversampling the minority class e.g. Synthetic Minority
Oversampling Method (SMOTE) [] or under sampling the
majority class e.g. Easy Ensemble and Balancing Cascade
method []. Utilizing a resampling method is entirely a data
driven process. On the other hand, class imbalance is ignored
at the algorithm level by adjusting the cost of the classes to
counter imbalance, adjusting the probabilistic estimates (in
case of decision trees) and adjusting the decision threshold. In
certain cases, both cost and resampling methods are used in
combination, i.e. individual models are adjusted with these
methods and combined as an ensemble to provide better
performance [].

Generally in oversampling technique, class imbalance is
overlooked by generating new instances with replacement
from the minority class. But, generating similar instance at a
specific region will overpopulate the minority class and results
in bias during actual prediction []. Hence, in SMOTE, new
synthetic samples are generated based on two parameters − the
nearest neighbors (k) and the number of instance (n) required.
In undersampling, multiple subset of majority class similar in
size to the minority class is generated and trained. Since only a
part of the dataset is utilized the computation cost and the time
associated with this training is very less and efficient than the
oversampling methods. However, undersampling methods
ignore a large part of the training set making them vulnerable
to miss many discriminative features present in them [].

Most learning algorithms attempt to minimize the error rate in
the classification by ignoring the difference between the types
of misclassification errors. However, for real world problem
this assumption wont hold true. Hence, to overcome the
problem, cost-sensitive method is preferred generally over
other class imbalance methods. Cost-sensitive method along
with misclassification cost considers other cost like instance
and attribute cost, active learning cost and computational cost.
Among the cost, misclassification cost is more important in
cost-sensitive learning and it can be either stationary
(assigning a cost matrix) or dataset dependent. Thus, in the
present study, we compare the effectiveness of two methods to 
overcome class imbalance in terms of precision and recall to
construct an efficient classifier in predicting miRNAs
associated with cancer.

Methodology
Dataset Preparation:
Dataset preparation was carried out for positive and negative
set individually. For training purpose, 239 experimentally
validated miRNAs obtained from our previous work would
serve as positive dataset []. For negative dataset,
precautionary steps were undertaken to avoid randomness in
the dataset, i.e. randomly generated and predicted dataset
were completely avoided. Only experimentally validated 32
miRNAs obtained from TargetMiner were considered as
negative dataset []. For evaluating the effectiveness of the two
methods compared in the study, we constructed an
independent test dataset not utilized in training purpose. A 10-
fold cross-validation method is used as a standard method for
revalidation during training [].

Feature Extraction :
A list of 60 features were extracted from experimentally
validated miRNA sequences, miRNA-mRNA interaction data
and thermodynamics of miRNA-mRNA binding as obtained
from RNAhybrid [,
,
]. We utilized Pairfinder, a perl script
to parse the various features from the miRNA-mRNA
hybridized structure []. In this present study, a two-step 
classifier (viz., miRSEQ and miRINT) was constructed.
MiRSEQ preliminarily predicts the miRNA associated with
cancer based on 26 sequence-based features; whereas miRINT
utilized 34 miRNA-mRNA interaction-based features to
confirm the association of miRNA with cancer.

Learning Algorithm:
The choice of learning algorithm plays a critical role in
overcoming class imbalance. In this present study, we
employed Support Vector Machines (SVM) with Radial Basis
Function (RBF) as kernel function for training the miRNA
dataset []. In a binary classifier, SVM classifies two classes by
constructing a hyperplane in three dimensional space
separated by margins. We utilized LIBSVM package in
Waikato Environment for Knowledge Analysis (WEKA) 
[].
Random search method was employed to identify optimum
algorithm parameter cost (c) and gamma (λ) rather than
computationally expensive grid based method.

Both SMOTE and cost-sensitive method packages available
within the WEKA environment were utilized to handle the
class imbalance during the training process. For SMOTE, we
considered the nearest neighbor to be five (k=5) and the
percentage of instances generated (n) in each iteration to be
100. The number of iterations was limited till there is a shift in
the class distribution. In a typical class imbalanced problem,
cost-sensitive algorithms require a cost-matrix to represent
costs for different misclassification types. The method tends to
minimize the number of high cost error and then further
generates a model with low misclassification cost.
Misclassification cost can be assigned to both binary and multiclass
classification problems. We constructed a 2×2 cost matrix
for reweighing the data space. Cost for the correctly classified
instances are assumed zero (i.e., the cost associated with the
True Positive (TP) and True Negative (TN) is zero) 
[]. The
main aim of utilizing cost-sensitive method is to construct a
model with minimum misclassification cost and is given by the
equation (1)
Cost = FN rate × C(0,1) + FPrate × C(1,0) (Equation 1)
Where, C(0,1) and C(1,0) are the costs associated in prediction
of False Positive (FP) and False Negative (FN) respectively.

Performance Evaluation:
 (Equation 2)
 (Equation 3)


Results &amp; Discussion
The focus of the study is to obtain an efficient method for
handling class imbalance in miRNA dataset associated with
cancer. MiRSEQ and miRINT classifiers were constructed with
both SMOTE and cost-sensitive method with SVM as the
learning algorithm. Only experimentally validated miRNA
were used for training purpose. Randomly generated,
predicted miRNA sequences were neglected completely in
order to avoid randomness in the dataset during the training
process. Prior to training process dataset was normalized, since
significant difference in the variance will dominate the RBF
function and does not allow learning the dataset from other 
features. Utilizing mean value for missing attribute during the
feature extraction was also avoided.

The performance of the constructed models were evaluated
based on precision and recall. Usually in training machine
learning algorithms, performance is evaluated using confusion
matrix. However, for problems with high class imbalance,
evaluating the performance of the classifier directly based on
confusion matrix is not preferred. Alternatively, measures like
precision and recall would reveal the actual predictive
performance of the classifier. In disease related dataset,
particularly miRNA dataset associated with cancer (like ours),
precision would provide an exact measure of predictive
performance of the constructed model since a single false
prediction in disease related dataset would be catastrophic.

The predictive performance evaluated during the training
process was marginally similar between the two methods
being compared. However, when challenged with test dataset,
cost-sensitive method performed better than the SMOTE. The
underlying problem for poor predictive performance with
SMOTE is due to overfitting (precision &gt; 0.9 in all independent
test runs are shown in  See supplementary material).
One possible reason for overfitting with SMOTE is that the
method centers more on the specific region in the feature space
as the decision region for the minority class, than increasing
the overall number of instances. Further, new instances are
synthesized based on the number of the nearest neighbors
chosen and also based on the number of new instances
required per iteration. Thus SMOTE overpopulates a specific
region rather than increasing the overall instances. Further, the
classifier constructed with SMOTE method misclassified every
instances as the minority class due to over-prevalence in the
specific region during the independent test dataset prediction.

On the other hand, cost-sensitive method seamlessly
performed better than SMOTE because it considers
misclassification cost based on the dataset utilized in the
training (precision 0.52 for miRSEQ and average precision 0.4
in all seed based models for miRINT) (). 
From (), 
it is evident that SMOTE method tends to overfit the dataset
in both miRSEQ and miRINT classifier, whereas cost-sensitive
showed significantly a steady performance in all test runs.
Further, in order to boost the performance of classifier with
SMOTE method, we reduced the number of instances
generated per iteration. This will avoid over populating the
minority class in a specific region. However, it was observed
that there was no significant improvement in the performance
measurement. For miRINT, the dataset was segregated based
on the number of seed region formed in the hybridized
structure. Similar to miRSEQ performance, the SMOTE method
did not show much improvement in terms of precision, rather
they tend to overfit (precision &gt; 0.9) the dataset and thus left
no room for further improvement. 

Conclusion
The work presented in this paper gives an empirical
comparison of two methods to overcome class imbalance (viz.,
SMOTE and cost-sensitive method) in prediction of miRNA
associated with cancer. Among the two methods compared the
SMOTE handles class imbalance at the data level and costsensitive
method at the algorithm level. Handling class
imbalance at the data level for disease related prediction (like
ours) would induce several synthesized instances. Even
though, oversampling method provide a good performance
measure at the training step, when challenged with
independent test datasets the performance of the classifier
deteriorated completely. To further support the hypothesis, the
prediction obtained from classifier constructed show
overfitting of the test dataset. 

On the other hand, cost-sensitve method provided a steady
performance measure in each of the independent runs and
thus acts as an effective method in handling class imbalance in
miRNA dataset. The performance of cost-sensitive method can
be further enhanced by utilizing appropriate feature selection
method like Recursive Feature Elimination method (RFE) prior
to the training process. Prioritizing most discriminative
features would increase the performance of the classifier with
cost-sensitive method. Further, utilizing different learning
algorithm along with cost-sensitive method would boost the
performance significantly and such a work is under progress
in our group. Thus, we conclude that for prediction of miRNA
associated with cancer with high class imbalance in dataset,
cost-sensitive method performs better than the oversampling
method.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Ram Kothandan was supported by a scholarship from Council
of Scientific Research and Industrial Research, Govt. of India.

Citation:Kothandan, Bioinformation 11(1): 006-010 (2015)

Comparison of SMOTE and cost-sensitive method to overcome class imbalance in the miRNA dataset associated with
cancer: A) Comparison of SMOTE and cost-sensitive method with miRSEQ classifier trained with sequence based features only; (B,
C &amp; D) Comparison of SMOTE and cost-sensitive method with miRINT trained with miRNA-mRNA interaction based features. In
both the classifier, SMOTE method tends to overfit the test dataset. SMOTE and cost-sensitive methods were tested with five
independent test datasets (Run 1 to 5).

