Background
Plasmodium falciparum is a protozoan parasite, and one of the
species of Plasmodium that causes malaria disease in humans 
[].
It is a life-threatening disease and carried through female
Anopheles mosquito []. It causes high mortality and morbidity
rate in human malarial infections (98% in Africa) and more
dominant in Sub-Saharan Africa. It strikes around 100 tropical
countries of the world, almost 1 million people die due to
malaria annually []. Maximum death due to malaria is caused
by P. falciparum species. Resistance developed in this species
against antimalarial drugs has significantly hampered malaria
control process in the last 50 years [,
]. Extensive analysis of
the new target and new inhibitors to control malarial infection is
needed. Simultaneously target should be non-human
orthologous along with small or no effect on human []. Target
should be essential protein for pathogen, and should be nohomologous
to the human host [,
]. Objective of this study is
to identify potential drug target as well as novel inhibitors also
for treatment of malaria. Recent protein-protein interaction
(PPI) studies have suggested that conservation of molecular
networks provides the information that proteins with high
degrees of connection are more probably to be essential for
survival than proteins with lesser degrees. In this work MEP
pathway is taken into consideration which is absent in humans
but plays essential roles into mosquitoes. 1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-
phosphate reductoisomerase (DXR) is a fundamental enzyme of
MEP pathway and described as target of fosmidomycin drug of
malaria []. Ligand-binding site was predicted, which is a key
step in order to look into the function and molecular mechanism
of a protein. Ligand-binding sites give key information about
drug designing process through computational and Structural
analysis []. All of this information about the potential drug
target and new inhibitor would assist the drug discovery
process.

Methodology
Protein-protein interaction network:
Protein-Protein Interaction (PPI) Networks, where proteins are
nodes and their interactions are edges. PPI networks are the
most intensely studied networks in biology. In this respect lot of
PPI detection methods are available to identify such
interactions. Protein interaction and network analysis of 1-
deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate reductoisomerase (PF14_0641)
protein was performed and represented by using Cytoscape
software (http://www.cytoscape.org/).

3D Structure of potential drug target:
The structure for 1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate
reductoisomerase (Gen Bank ID: AAN37254.1) from Plasmodium
falciparum was acquired in the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein
sequence database Accession no. Q8IKG4 (DXR_PLAF7).
BLASTp [] was performed against Protein Data Bank (PDB) 
[,
]. 
BLASTp was used to optimize specific similarity measures.
A 100% similar structure of Plasmodium falciparum protein was
found in the Protein Data Bank (PDB ID: 3AU8_A). The
sequence was downloaded from protein data bank, which is an
archive for crystal structures of biological macro molecules.
After downloading structure 3D coordinates from PDB database
validation of the structure was done by using Ramachandran
plot.

Active site prediction:
Active site is the region of the target protein responsible for its
activity and made up of different kinds of amino acid residues.
Active site prediction was done by web server operated
software Pocket Finder (http://www. modelling.leeds.ac.uk/pocketfinder/), 
DoGSite Scorer (http://dogsite. zbh.unihamburg.de/) 
[] and CASTp 
(http://sts-fw.bioengr.uic.edu/castp/calculation.php) 
[]. Pocket Finder is used to detects
and compare pocket with ligand binding site. DoGSite Scorer
detects binding site and pockets in the protein structure;
simultaneously they analyze its druggability by taking into
consideration of its geometric and physiochemical properties
[]. CASTp is used for detection and location of protein surface
topography and measure pockets and voids on the 3D structure
of the protein [].

Protein preparation:
The Open Eye module “Make Receptor” prepares the protein
structure as receptor site for virtual screening of ligands. Active
site within protein was detected and put into box of dimensions
15.89 Å × 22.87 Å × 32.28 Å and a total volume of 11732 Å3.

Ligand preparation:
11826 lead and drug like molecules were downloaded between
a range of mol. Wt. 35 to 350 and xlogP -4 to 3.5 from Zinc
database [] in mol2 format. These molecules used for virtual
screening and docking further [].

Virtual screening:
FRED module of the Open Eye software uses exhaustive search
algorithm for virtual screening of the ligands to bind the protein
receptor []. The Top-10 molecules were accepted as the best
docked molecules against the receptor and once again rescored
with high optimization along with true short poses.
Chemgauss4 scoring function observes the shape and hydrogen
bonding interactions on the protein, although the chemgauss4 is
an amended version, more previous observes hydrogen bond
geometry with hydrogen bond networks [,
]. It is based on
FRED 3.0 chemgauss4 scoring and lowest score of chemgauss4
results as the best docked molecules with hypothesis used as
drugs in the future into account.

Molecular docking:
The Molecular docking study employed to identify the binding
affinity and interaction energy of the molecules with the target
protein. Molecular docking was carried out by using AutoDock
4.0 software. Based on predicted binding residues 
[], grid
box was constructed and molecular docking was performed
using tools like Autogrid and AutoDock. Applying AutoDock
4.0, top five molecules were docked to the 3AU8_A. By
removing all the water molecules, co-factors and ligands from
the protein structure and checked the macromolecule for the
polar hydrogens and assigns atomic Kollman charges and
atomic solvation parameters. Torsion bonds of the ligands were
selected and defined. To evaluate the binding energy on the
macromolecule coordinate a three dimensional grid box of 74 ×
88 × 84 Å3 with spacing of 0.3 Å was created using Auto Grid
which calculates the grid map representing the bound ligand in
the actual target site [].

Ligplot:
It is a computer based program that automatically gives
schematic 2-D representations of protein-ligand complexes
interactions for a given PDB file. Only those interactions are
shown, which was mediated by hydrophobic contacts and by
hydrogen bonds. Hydrogen bond interactions are showed by
dashed lines, while hydrophobic interactions are symbolized by
an arc with spokes radiating towards the ligand atoms. The
contacted atoms are shown with spokes radiating back.

Toxicity Prediction:
The toxicological investigation of top five virtually screened
molecules were carried out through OSIRIS Property explorer
(http://www.organic-chemistry.org/prog/peo/), it provides drug
relevant property such as cLogp, Molecular weight, Solubility,
Drug Likeness, Drug Score, Mutagenicity, Irritancy, and
Reproductive effect etc. []. Top five screened molecules were
subjected to the toxicity prediction and results were analyzed by
keeping in view of drug like parameters.

Results
Protein-protein interaction network:
In PPI network maps, nodes represent protein and edges
represent a physical interaction between two proteins 
().

Structure validation of Target protein:
Blast search was performed for Gen Bank ID: AN37254.1 against
Protein Data bank (PDB), and 100% similar sequence was
received as PDB ID: 3AU8_A (). It belongs to 1-deoxy-
D-xylulose 5-phosphate reductoisomerase from Plasmodium
falciparum species. Therefore there was no need to model the
structure but the structure was validated by the Ramachandran
plot which shows the details of the stability of the protein
structure. According to the Ramachandran plot analysis 92.7%
residues are falling in the most favorable regions.

Active Site Prediction:
Comparative studies for active site residues were done by
Pocket Finder, CASTp and DoGSite Scorer. The residues were
observed common in the ealier repoted literature 
[,
] also
 (see supplementary material).

Virtual Screening:
The protein structure was prepared as a receptor site by
preparing the active sites in the protein and defining its inner
and outer contours. A library of lead and drug like molecules
was screened with the help of FRED module of Open Eye
software against receptor molecule 3AU8_A. The results are
depicted in  (see supplementary material) according to
their chemgauss4 scores to evaluate the complementarity of
ligand poses within the binding site. After virtual screening
against DXR active site, top ten molecules from 11826
molecules were selected based on chemgauss4 score 
().
ZINC00200163 [N-(2,2-dimethoxyethyl)-6-methyl-2,3,4,9-
tetrahydro-1H-carbazol-1-amine] placed in top position because
of its least chemgauss4 score -13.075439, hydrogen bond energy
-6.14 with 98% better scores. From selected top ten molecules,
top five molecules have been selected for, further detail docking
study with target protein by Autodock 4.0 software.

Molecular Docking and validation:
Molecular docking was performed between DXR and top five
selected screened molecules. Reference molecule like
Fosmidomycin, Artemether, Mefloquine, and Quinidine was
taken for Comparative analysis  (see supplementary
material). It was found that ZINC00200163 [N-(2,2-
dimethoxyethyl)-6-methyl-2,3,4,9-tetrahydro-1H-carbazol-1-
amine] molecule showed the best interaction with least
binding energy (-6.43 KJ/Mol), which was better than other
molecules. The H-bond interaction was studied through PyMol
software. The numbers of H-bonds were calculated with bond
length between atoms of protein-ligand docked complex. The
molecular docking of the hits showed the binding and
interaction energy. H-bond pattern and confirmed inhibition of
1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate reductoisomerase was
analyzed which is directly linked to the antimalarial activity.

LigPlot:
The LigPlot analysis was used to understand the exhaustive
interaction pattern between the docked ligands and the active
site residues. LigPlot is a requisite tool to understand
hydrophobic interactions as well as hydrogen bonding pattern
[].  
shows LigPlot analyses for the top five virtually
screened molecules which were discussed previously in
docking simulations. The same H-bond interactions as seen in
docking results were obtained for the five molecules. Thus,
Ligplot analyses were particularly useful in knowing the
hydrophobic interaction pattern.

Toxicity Prediction analysis:
The toxicological studies of top five virtually screened drug
candidates  (see supplementary material) suggest
encouraging results. While analyzing the toxicological outputs
by OSIRIS Property explorer (
http://www.organicchemistry.org/prog/peo/), among all five proposed drug
candidates, ZINC00200163 is found to be best because it does
not show any toxic property. In addition, this drug candidate
was found to be preeminent in terms of cLogp, Molecular
weight, Solubility, Drug Likeness, Drug Score, Mutagenicity,
Irritancy, and Reproductive effect etc.

Discussion
Novel drug targets are needed in order to design new effective
drugs against Malaria. Potential drug target should be a
molecule essential for pathogens and non-essential for human,
therefore inhibition of essential proteins would kill the
pathogen but have no effect on human []. Isoprenoids is crucial
for respiration, membrane structure, allelochemical interactions,
and growth regulation [,
]. Isopentenyl diphosphate is a
precursor of isoprenoids and is produced by the 2-C-methylderythritol
4-phosphate (MEP) pathway in plastids of plant and
protozoa [,
]. DXR is a fundamental enzyme of MEP
pathway which is absent in human and reported as the drug
target for fosmidomycin drug molecule of malaria []. The 3D
structure of DXR from Plasmodium falciparum was downloaded
from PDB database (PDB ID: 3AU_8) and validated by
computational tools viz. PROCHEK, ERRAT, VARIFY 3D and
WHATCHECK. Overall validation results confirmed that the
3D structure was good. Active site of the DXR was predicted
with the help of Pocket Finder, CASTp and Dog-Site Scorer and
it was compared with the already reported literature 
[]
showing ALA 203, ASN 204, GLU 206, ASP 231, SER 232, GLU
233, LYS 301, ILE 302, ASP 305 amino acids residues in the
active site in the DXR protein. Our prediction with various
active site prediction software are corroborating. Virtual
Screening was performed for DXR protein against the database
collected from ZINC database. Screened molecules were
subjected to the docking with the DXR protein. Some of the
commercially available inhibitors like Fosmidomycin,
Artemether, Mefloquine, and Quinidine were taken as reference
molecules for comparative analysis with the screened
molecules. Molecular docking result of the DXR with the
screened molecules and reference molecules were analyzed. Top
five screened inhibitors showed comparatively lesser binding
energy as compared to the commercially available molecules.
Out of five screened molecules, ZINC00200163 [N-(2,2-
dimethoxyethyl)-6-methyl-2,3,4,9-tetrahydro-1H-carbazol-1-
amine] has proved as best ligand because of its least binding
energy (-6.43 KJ/Mol) followed by ZINC19797274 [6-(3,5-
dimethylphenyl)-3H,4H-thieno[3,2-d]pyrimidin-4-one],
ZINC00074780 [2-(quinolin-8-ylcarbamoyl)benzoic acid],
ZINC19797275 [6-(3-methylphenyl)thieno[3,2-d]pyrimidin-
4(3H)-one], and ZINC02127191 [N'-(1,3-dimethylbutyl)-1Hindole-
2-carbohydrazide]. The in-silico toxicological studies
were carried out for above said virtually screened proposed
drug candidates () and different parameters were
analyzed and found ZINC00200163 is not showing any toxicity
to humans.

Conclusion
This study documents the identification ZINC00200163 [N-(2,2-
dimethoxyethyl)-6-methyl-2,3,4,9-tetrahydro-1H-carbazol-1-
amine] as potential candidate for the inhibition of 1-deoxy-Dxylulose5-
phosphate reductoisomerase (DXR) using structure
aided docking based virtual screening tools and databases.
ZINC00200163 is characterized with low binding energy and
better binding for further consideration.

Conflict of interest statement
We declare that we have no conflict of interest.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are thankful to Mr. Sunil Chawla for giving Open
Eye software academic license and his support.

Citation:Chaudhary &amp; Prasad, Bioinformation 10(6): 358-364 (2014)

Graphical representation of protein interacting with 1-
deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate reductoisomerase (PF14_0641)
protein highlighted in green. All yellow circles represent its
interaction partners release of STRING database. This
representation was performed using Cytoscape software

3D structure of 1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate
reductoisomerase

LigPlot analyses results: Schematic 2D representation
of ligand–protein interactions were analyzed among receptor
and reference top five molecules (a) Fosmidomycin (b)
ZINC00200163 (c) ZINC19797274 (d) ZINC00074780 (e)
ZINC19797275 (f) ZINC02127191. Hydrogen bond forming
residues were shown in lines with hydrogen bonds shown as
dotted lines and residues interacting by hydrophobic
interactions were represented as lines in red.

