Background
Tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) fruit is an important source of antioxidant
(mainly pigment) compounds, as well as lycopene, β-carotene, ascorbic
acid and polyphenols []. Tomato ripening involves a number of
physiological processes which include the visible breakdown of
chlorophyll and build-up of carotenoids, with massive accumulation of
antioxidant components such as lycopene and β-carotene 
[] within the
plastids. Microsatellites are abundant across prokaryotic and eukaryotic
genomes []. 
Here microsatellites were extracted from unigene. The
unigene database was used to identify molecular markers used in the
identification of genes of different plants. Expressed Sequence Tag (EST)
databases were also mined for SSR markers. These SSR motifs would
serve as locus-specific markers. But a major disadvantage of EST-derived
microsatellites is the sequence redundancy that yields multiple set of
markers at the same locus. Unigene derived microsatellite (UGMS)
markers have the advantage of assaying variation in the expressed
component of genome with unique identity and positions 
[]. Therefore the
simple sequence repeat (SSR) or microsatellite marker is currently the
preferred molecular marker due to its highly desirable properties 
[] and
can serve as efficient and cost effective alternative markers in such species
[]. Several studies to 
identify microsatellites in rice, barley, wheat, maize,
soybean, grapevine, sunflower and Brassica sp. Have been reported 
[,
].
In-silico microsatellite marker studies have also been done in
commercially important medicinal and aromatic plants 
[,
].

Microsatellites or simple sequence repeats (SSRs) are stretches of DNA
consisting of tandemly repeated short units of 1-6 base pairs in length 
[,
]. They are ubiquitous in prokaryotes as well as eukaryotes and can be found both in coding 
and non-coding region []. 
The elevated frequency of length polymorphism associated with microsatellite provides the basis
for the development of a marker system that has broad application in
genetic research including studies of genetic variation, linkage mapping,
gene tagging and evolution []. 
The microsatellite markers have become a valuable tool for genetic studies, as they are able to efficiently screen large
population sizes []. 
The uniqueness and the value of microsatellites arise
from their multiallelic nature, codominant transmission, ease of detection
by PCR, relative abundance, extensive genome coverage 
[].

In this study, SSRs were mined from unigenes. Various types of SSRs and
their percentage distributions were determined. SSR markers developed
from Solanum lycopersicum unigene sequences are used as marker tags to
other plants. The primer sequences are the complementary sequences of
the flanking ends of a stretch of simple sequence repeats (SSRs). The
functional perspectives of the SSRs suggest that microsatellites are more
than mere repetitive sequences and their role have been attributed to many
biological functions [].

Methodology
Sequence data source
The assembled and functionally annotated
sequences of ESTs i.e. unigene sequences of solanaceous plant Solanum
lycopersicum were retrieved from unigene database of NCBI
(ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/repository/UniGene/Solanum_lycopersicum/). There
were 18,228 unigenes available in the database. These unigenes are nonredundant
datasets used to identify microsatellites, primers and gene
ontology characterization.

Microsatellite identification
The unigene sequences were mined for
microsatellites using a program MISA (MIcro Satellite) identification tool
[] written in the 
Perl scripting language.This tool analyses microsatellite
repeats in FASTA formatted unigene sequences. The minimum motif
repeat size were set to 10 for mononucleotide, 6 for dinucleotide, 5 for
trinucleotide, tetranucleotide, pentanucleotide and hexanucleotide in
locating the microsatellites. The analysis of SSRs was done on the basis of
their types (mono-hexanucleotide), number of repeats, percentage
frequency of occurrence of each SSR motif and their distribution in the
sequence. The results were cross checked through CUGI’s SSR server
[].

Gene ontology classification
Though unigenes are functionally annotated
sequences have known or putative function. The unigene sequences were
characterized through gene ontology terms using Amigo
(http://amigo.geneontology.org) 
[]. The ontology classification was done
in terms of their biological process, molecular function and cellular
component. This characterization of unigenes has been done on the basis of
analyzed SSR repeats.

Marker development
For the development of microsatellite markers, we
designed primer pairs for all the identified microsatellites 
[].The
microsatellites (excluding monomers) containing unigenes were used for
designing primers pairs. The primers were designed from the flanking
sequences having microsatellite repeats using PRIMER3 software
(Whitehead Institute, USA). Forward and reverse primer pairs were
designed for marker development. The optimum and maximum primer
sizes were set to 20 and 25 nucleotides, respectively. The GC % was set to
40.0 to 60.0 and the Tm value between 50°C to 70°C.

Discussion
18,228 unigene sequences were reported in Solanum lycopersicum. The
unigene derived microsatellite (UGMS) markers have the advantage of
unique identity and positions in the transcribed regions of the genome.
With the availability of large unigene databases, it is now possible to
systematically search for microsatellites in the unigenes 
[]. The SSR
repeat motifs were analyzed from these unigenes. Out of 18.228 unigene
sequences (22.2 Mb), 12,090 showed the presence of simple sequence
repeats (SSRs) suggesting that 66.32 % of unigenes contained SSRs. The
average density of SSRs was 1(one) SSR per 1.3 kb of unigene sequence
screened.

The study of occurrences of different types of SSR repeats revealed that
the percentage of occurrence of mono-nucleotide SSR (89.36 %) was the
highest followed by tri-nucleotide SSR (6.38 %) 
(). Among
mononucleotide repeats, polyA/polyT repeats were predominant while
polyC/polyG repeats were rare (). 
As reported earlier, A-T repeatmotifs are the most abundant type of SSRs in plants 
[]. All dinucleotide
repeat combinations excluding homomeric dinucleotides can be grouped
into six unique classes, namely, (AG)n, (AT)n, (AC)n, (GT)n, (TC)n and
(GC)n. It is evident that AT/TA dinucleotide repeats were more frequent,
followed by TC/CT and AG/GA combinations. It is also important to note
that GC/CG combination was the least frequent ().

Among 10 unique trinucleotide repeat classes,
AAG/AGA/AGG/GAA/GAG/GGA (19.5%) was the most frequent. The
lowest frequency of trinucleotides was observed with
TGC/TCG/GTC/CGT/CTG (2.86%) (). Similarly,
AAAT/AATT/TAAT/TTAA/TTTA/ATTT motif showed maximum
frequency within tetranucleotide (51.72%) followed by
AGTG/ATGT/TATG/ATAG/TTGA (20.69 %). This also depicts the
abundance of adenine and thymine dominance over other counterpart
nucleotides. TTCA, TTTG and GAAG (3.45%) showed the least
occurrence ().

Four different pentanucleotide SSR motifs AAAAT, AGAAA, CATCA,
GGATT, and TTGTT are present in equal proportions. Their contribution
with respect to the motifs stands for 20% each, respectively (). In
hexanucleotide SSR motifs ACCAAG/AGCAGG/CCAAAG/GGGACA
(40%) showed maximum distribution ().

Codon Repetitions
The trinucleotide SSRs are triplet codon that code for a particular amino
acid. It was observed that out of all triplet codons GAA (encoding
Glutamic acid) repetitions are predominant followed by AAG (encoding
Lysine) and TTC (encoding Phenylalanine) repeats. The triplet codons
form an open reading frame (ORF) translated to proteins 
().

Amino acid distribution
The trinucleotide microsatellites code for 21 types of amino acids that
includes stop codon. It was observed that out of all coded amino acids
Serine (Ser) demonstrated the highest percentage of occurrence followed
by Leucine (Leu). In Solanum lycopersicum serine occur in
Serine/threonine-protein phosphatase 5 and is involved in biological
process such as intracellular signaling cascade, lipid metabolic process,
protein amino acid dephosphorylation. Serine protease show biological
process such as negative regulation of catalytic activity, proteolysis.
Methionine (Met) and Aspartic acid (Asp) showed the least occurrence
().

The analysis of data revealed that the majority of amino acids were polar
(56.67%) in nature (). 
The hydrophilic (50.91 %) amino acids occurred than more frequently 
hydrophobic (49.09 %) ().
Similarly, frequency of aliphatic amino acids (76.92 %) were more than
aromatic amino acids (23.08 %) (). 
The distribution study of chemical nature of amino acids gives an insight that neutral amino acids
occurred more frequently with 75.47 % occurrence in comparison to basic
and acidic amino acids 16.98 % and 7.55 % participation 
(). (): 
a Percentage frequency of polar &amp; non-polar amino acids. b.
Percentage frequency of hydrophilic &amp; hydrophobic amino acids. c.
Percentage frequency of aromatic &amp; aliphatic amino acids. d. Percentage
frequency of neutral, basic &amp; acidic amino acids.
When we consider the mutation caused due to change in the last nucleotide
of triplet codon, one amino acid changes into other. Percent frequency of
occurrence of mutation was also tabulated. The analysis of the data
revealed that mutation of Stop codon to Tyrosine and vice versa was the
highest (Table 1 see ).

Study of functional protein of unigene having polymorphic condition
Microsatellites present in the transcribed regions of the genome have the
potential to reveal functional diversity []. 
SSR motifs showing variation in their tandem repeats, multiple occurrences within same unigene and
replacement of SSR motifs give a special account of polymorphism. Due to
the polymorphic study there was change in the function of corresponding
proteins. The SSR motifs could be utilized as molecular markers according
to gene or protein of interest. Out of whole unigene sequences, 3 unigenes
have dinucleotide SSR (Table 2 see ) and 8
unigenes having trinucleotides SSR repeats showed change in the protein
function. The change in coding amino acids were also listed with
corresponding trinucleotide SSRs (Table 3 see ).
Some amino acids such as Threonine, Lysine and Glutamine are
responsible for homeodomain protein. Cysteine is for zinc-finger like
protein. The findings support the theory that SSRs are randomly distributed
in genomes and generally showed direct or indirect role in protein
regulation [].

Change in gene ontology characterization has also been studied with
reference to changes in functional proteins due to polymorphism of
dinucleotide and trinucleotide SSRs 
(Table 4 see  ). 
It was observed that the proteins involved in polymorphism
belong to transport, ovule development, metabolic process, defense
response, regulation of transcription and biosynthetic process of biological
category. The cellular components for these proteins were mostly
cytoplasm, plastids, plasma membrane and mitochondrion. These proteins
were DNA, GTP protein and zinc ion binding type and some have
transcription factor activity, trypsin inhibitor activity and defensin protein
in their molecular function.

The function of protein changes due to the change in amino acids repeat
encoded by SSR repeats. The physicochemical properties of amino acids
also vary due to conversion of amino acids 
(Table 5 see ). 
It was observed that in almost all the cases the changeover was
from hydrophilic amino acids to hydrophobic amino acids. Two unigenes
were found in which hydrophilic amino acid transformation remains the
same property i.e. Glutamine and Glutamic acid converts to lysine which is
hydrophilic in nature.
Gene ontology classification
Unigenes with corresponding SSRs were assigned GO terms of biological
process, cellular component and molecular function (Table 6 see
). 
It was observed that some unigenes have
known function but some show similarity with proteins of other plants.
Some show no function or are putative. It was observed that most of the
SSR containing unigenes belong to transport category of biological
process. This indicates the development of SSR markers for proteins and
enzymes involved in transport of lipid, potassium ion, and phytohormones
in the metabolic pathway. Group of proteins were reported which played
enzymatic roles in folic acid derivative, gibberellins and malate pathways.
Identified transcription factors such as Homeodomain/Homeobox protein,
auxin response factor 8 and NAC domain associated with these SSR have
been identified that have role in gene regulation process. There were other
proteins identified as regulatory gene category such as Myb-related
transcription factor protein, glycine rich protein and homeodomain protein.
Superoxide dismutase [SOD], carbonic anhydrase and telomere binding
protein, CTR1 like kinase protein, WRKY transcription factor 2 and
Isochorismate synthase are the prominent proteins that figured out under
different heads of defense and stress response. Different class of enzymeslike transferase, oxidase, oxidoreductase, synthase, kinase, aminopeptidase
and most importantly fructofuranosidase and nitrilase involved in different
synthetic pathways are also of worth mention to the findings. Beside this,
single SSR corresponding to enzymes with catalytic role in chloroplast
only was reported. Unigenes having SSRs corresponding to cell
metabolism showed their localization in endoplasmic reticulum, cytosol,
plastid, and chloroplast pertaining to different functional pathway was
identified. It was also revealed that predicted unigenes possess some
important role in following molecular functions i.e., regulation of
transcription and translation, phosphorylation, transport regulation,
signaling, defense response, stress and biosynthesis of pigments.

Primer designing
The primer designing have been done for PCR amplification of the desired
microsatellites using Primer 3.0 software. The primers flanking the
microsatellites repeat-motifs could be designed for 877 (47.02%) of the
1,865 microsatellites in the analyzed plant species 
[]. It was observed
that the forward and reverse primers obtained from trinucleotide SSRs
were (628) maximum followed by dinucleotide (227). The primers from
tetranucleotide and hexanucleotide SSRs were 14 and 8.

Conclusions
This study is a step forward towards the utilization of in-silico approaches
to analyze microsatellites (SSRs) from unigene sequences of plants.
Unigene database provide a valuable resource for the development of SSR
markers which are associated with transcribed genes. Our study revealed
the analysis of microsatellites in UniGenes of Solanum lycopersicum.
UGMS markers identified and characterized in this study provided insight
about the abundance and distribution of SSR in the expressed organeller
genome of Solanum lycopersicum. SSR markers are very informative
because they show co-dominancy and highly polymorphic. SSRs markers
are highly mutable loci, can be used for scanning of genome by genotyping
and a particular region can be identified in the genome.

The development of SSR markers from unigene sequences saves both cost
and time, once sufficient amount of data is available. It is also interesting
to note the mutational changes among trinucleotides SSRs due to change in
last triplet codon. This helps in deducing markers of own choice to study.
Out of the unigenes investigated, some possessed more than one SSRs.
Flipping of one SSR to another led to the change in function of protein.
Microsatellites have proved very useful as molecular markers in diverse
areas of genetic research including genome characterization and mapping.

This study demonstrated the utility of computational approaches for
mining SSRs from ever increasing repertoire of publicly available plant
unigene sequences present in different databases. Computational
approaches provide an attractive alternative way to conventional laboratory
methods for rapid and economical development of SSR markers by
utilizing freely available genomic sequences in public databases.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Funding by Department of Biotechnology, New Delhi under BTIS network
programme is gratefully acknowledged. The help of Dr. Feroz Khan,
Scientist, CIMAP, at various stages of manuscript preparation is also
acknowledged.

Citation:Guptaetal; Bioinformation 5(3): 113-121 (2010)

a) Percentage distribution of different SSRs. b) Percentage distribution of mononucleotide SSRs. c) Percentage distribution of dinucleotide SSRs.
d) Percentage distribution of trinucleotide SSRs. e) Percentage distribution of tetranucleotide SSRs. f) Percentage distribution of pentanucleotide SSRs. g)
Percentage distribution of hexanucleotide SSRs.

Frequency of distribution of triplet codons

Percentage distributions of amino acids

a Percentage frequency of polar &amp; non-polar amino acids. b) Percentage frequency of hydrophilic &amp; hydrophobic amino acids. c. Percentage
frequency of aromatic &amp; aliphatic amino acids. d. Percentage frequency of neutral, basic &amp; acidic amino acids.

