Background
Gram positive bacteria Streptococcus sanguinis is member of the viridans
group of streptococci []. 
S. sanguinis serves as a tether for the attachment
of other oral microorganisms that colonize the tooth surface, form dental
plaque, and contribute to development of caries and periodontal disease
[]. Pathogenicity 
of this organism may not remain limited to oral
infections but extended to cause life‐threatening endovascular disease
infective endocarditis, a serious infection of the valves or lining of the
heart []. Like most 
oral streptococci, this bacterium produces alphahemolysis
on blood agar, a characteristic linked to the ability of viridians
streptococci to oxidize hemoglobin in erythrocytes by secretion of H2O2
[].

Advances in field of biotechnology and bioinformatics had accelerated the
progress of medical research in combating such diseases. Recently genome
of Streptococcus sanguinis had been sequenced 
[]. Therefore a lot of
information regarding Streptococcus sanguinis cellular machinery and
tools of its pathogenicity can be elucidated using wealth of knowledge
available in data bases. Here we report an explicit approach to model
Streptococcus sanguinis putative DNA repair protein 3‐methyladenine
DNA glycosylase. A potential drug target. The repair mechanism involves
replacement of damaged nitrogenous purine and pyrimidine bases 
[].
Furthermore putative DNA repair proteins possess high degree of sequence
conservation with prokaryotic genomes []. 
Therefore due to important role of 3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase enzyme in DNA repair
mechanism in Streptococcus sanguinis, but lack of its 3D structure
motivated us for proposed investigation. The protein sequence for 3‐
methyladenine DNA glycosylase is available on website

http://www.sanguinis.mic.vcu.edu/. In the present work, we will develop
the putative 3D structure model of 3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase
protein from Streptococcus sanguinis by comparative homology modeling
method. In addition, we will subject the modeled structure to functional
site prediction servers to find putative active site residues which will
validate by molecular docking approach.

Methodology
The genome sequencing of Streptococcus sanguinis has been completed by
Virginia Commonwealth University (http://www.sanguinis.mic.vcu.edu).
We selected protein sequence coding for putative 3-methyladenine DNA
glycosylase enzyme. The structure prediction and analysis was done in
following steps: (1) Comparative homology modeling by Swiss model
software [] 
and ESyPred3D server [] for obtaining computational 3D
model structure for 3‐methyladenine DNA glycosylase protein. (2) The
energy minimization of modeled structure by GROMOS96 implemented in
Swiss model software. (3) Putative functional sites prediction for modeled
structure of 3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase enzyme (4) Validation of
functional site by molecular docking studies.

Structure Modeling
The Swiss model is the automated modeling software which develops the
3D structure model of unknown structure protein based on the sequence
homology with the known structured protein. It is important to note that for
structure prediction, the sequence homology must be higher than 30%.
ESyPred3D server predicts the putative 3D modeled structure of 3‐
methyladenine DNA glycosylase via Modeller ( version 6v2) software
where it performs the multiple sequence alignments of the query protein
sequence (unknown structure ) with known structured protein sequences by
using different alignment tools such as Matchbox, Clustal W, Dialign and
PSI‐BLAST etc. In next step, the best alignment subjected to model
building. On the other hand, Swiss model software performs the homology
modeling and develops the putative 3D model of 3‐methyladenine DNA
glycosylase. Here we used default parameters for developing the modeled
structure. The 3D modeled structure of 3‐methyladenine DNA glycosylase
so obtained was further analyzed by PROCHECK software.

Energy Minimization via GROMOS96
After obtaining the putative 3D modeled structure of 3‐methyladenine
DNA glycosylase enzyme, the structure was subjected for energy
minimization step in order to get more optimized structure. 
Theminimization has been done by GROMOS96 force field implemented in
Swiss model software. The GROMOS96 helps in minimization of bond
stretch energy of the modeled protein. It incorporates both bonded and non
bonded form of energy occupied in the protein molecule.

Functional site prediction
The minimized structure then subjected to different functional site
prediction servers PINTS [], PROFUNC 
[], FIRESTAR 
[] and QSITE
FINDER [] 
in order to obtain putative active site residues. These
servers predict the putative active site residues which may act as ligand
binding site or reaction site.

Validation of functional site
The functional sites finding was further validated by molecular docking via
PATCHDOCK [] and AUTODOCK4 
[] softwars 
(see  for over all methodology). 
The ligand was extracted from the template proteins, detected in BLAST with lower 
e value and template pdb matched by Swiss model. The whole modeled protein was taken 
as centre (without location of any specific amino acid residue) and generated the grid map.
The affinity between the ligand and the modeled protein was calculated by
measuring the score for PATCHDOCK and docking energy analysis in
AUTODOCK4. All the parameters were set to be default in both the
docking process.

Results
The 3D modeled structure for 3‐methyladenine DNA glycosylase protein
from Streptococcus sanguinis has been generated by Swiss model and
ESyPred3D softwares. The Swiss model selected known 3‐methyladenine
DNA glycosylase protein (PDB ID: 1BNK (A)) as template pdb from
Homo sapiens for generating the putative 3D modeled structure for 3‐
methyladenine DNA glycosylase protein. . The target‐template showed
sequence identity of 34.50 % with e‐value 0.00e‐1. On the other hand
ESyPred3D searched known DNA glycosylase protein (PDB ID: 1F4R
(A)) as template pdb from Homo sapiens. We subjected both the modeled
structure for PROCHECK analysis. The Ramachandran plot analysis
revealed that 89.0% of amino acid residues from modeled structure
generated by ESyPred3D via Modeller (6v2) are incorporated in the
favored regions (A, B, and L) of the plot (Table 1, see 
). 
Apart from that 7.1% of residues are in allowed regions (a, b, l,
and p) of the plot. On the other hand, modeled structure by Swiss model
projected 81.8% of amino acid residues in favored regions (A,B,L) of the
Ramachandran plot and 12.3% are in allowed regions (a,b,l,p) of the plot.
This analysis concluded that ESyPred3D software more accurately
predicted the 3D modeled structure of 3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase
() protein as compare to Swiss model. Therefore we selected
ESyPred3D modeled structure for further analysis. Individual study of all
20 amino acid residues distribution on Ramachandran plot revealed that
most of the amino acid residues located in the shaded area (favored
regions) of plot. Some residues covered the unflavored regions of plot such
as AA97, DA167, CA165, QA40, GA18 and TA164. The Ramachandran
plot quality assessment analysis showed that at 2.0A° the most residues are
above 90% (favoured+allowed) regions and bad contacts are 5 residues per
100 residues. The modeled structure was further subjected to energy
minimization by GROMOS96 program, implemented in swiss model
software. The modeled structure was stabilized from initial energy of +
63.012 KJ/mol to final minimized energy of ‐6509.863 KJ/mol. The
BLAST and PSI‐BLAST search from pdb database searched 1F4R (A),
1BNK (A) and 1EWN (A) as template proteins with score 88.6‐87.4 and evalue
of 1e‐18 to 3e‐18. Dali also produced greater structure homology
with 1F4R (Z=33.7, rmsd =0.7), 1EWN (Z=33.1, rmsd=0.7), 1F60
(Z=31.9, rmsd=1.1) and 1BNK (Z=31.6, rmsd=1.0). Functional site
prediction servers detected the putative functional site residues in modeled
structure of 3‐methyladenine DNA glycosylase protein. Q‐site finder also
found largest cavity on modeled structure with volume of 229 cubic A°.
(Table 2, see ).

Functional site finding was further validated by Patchdock and Autodock
4.0 software. Here the ligand molecules were extracted from matched
known DNA glycosylase template proteins (1F4R, 1BNK, 1EWN) and
their 3D structure generated by CORNIA server. These ligands were
screened against Modeled structure of 3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase
via Patchdock and Autodock 4.0. Note that the whole modeled structure
was taken as docking target (Blind docking). The docking analysis
revealed that the ligand EDA (3‐ [2‐ Deoxyribofuranosyl]‐ 
3H‐ 1,3,4,5A,8‐ Pentaaza‐ Asindacene‐5‐monophosphate) 
bound at the cavity of Modeled structure with highest Patchdock score of 3966 
and lowest docking energy of ‐10.30 Kcal/mol and containing the 
following residues EA49, YA51,SA57, AA58, CA59, HA60, SA61, KA69, MA73, YA81, YA83, QA84,
IA85, HA86, MA90, NA92, LA105, RA107, RA160, IA161, GA162,
VA163, TA164 at 6A° of radius (). 
The residues YA51, LA105, RA107 are complementary to the residues predicted by PROFUNC
functional site prediction server at ligand binding site domain finding.
Firestar also confirmed our finding of functional sites residues.

Discussion and Conclusion
Here we report 3 D model of novel DNA repair protein 3-methyladenine
DNA glycosylase from Streptococcus sanguinis whose 3D structure is still
unknown using homology modeling. The knowledge gained about the
structure of DNA repair protein 3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase from
treptococcus sanguinis may be helpful in discovering drugs against this
pathogen. The modeled structure by ESyPred3D (Modeller 6v2) showed
high accuracy as compare to structure from Swiss model. The structure
was further verified by PROCHECK. The energy minimization via
GROMOS96 produced optimized structure for the modeled structure.

The novel DNA repair protein 3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase is
playing important/vital role in survival of oral pathogen Streptococcus
sanguinis in humans. The prediction of modeled structure for novel protein
DNA glycosylase from oral pathogen Streptococcus sanguinis may provide
greater insight for understanding the structure similarity with DNA
glycosylase of other organisms. We have also predicted ligand binding
sites in modeled structure of DNA glycosylase and also validated by
docking method which may be useful for biologist to understand specific
role of functional site residues during DNA repair mechanisms. The
functional site finding also implicated role in structure based drugdesigning 
against DNA glycosylase protein of oral pathogen Streptococcus
sanguinis.

Supplementary material
Data 1
AS and AN sincerely acknowledge CSIR and AICTE respectively for
fellowship.

Citation:Sharmaetal; Bioinformation 5(3): 136-140 (2010)

Schematic of methodology: (1) Homology modeling of 3-methyladenine 
DNA glycosylase protein from Streptococcus sanguinis.(2) Procheck
analysis of modeled structure (3) Matching with selected template pdb 
(4)Extraction of ligand from template pdb (5) Screening of ligand against modeled
protein (6)Binding analysis of ligand on modeled protein (7) Residues 
content at 6A° of radius with ligand as center (8)Passed modeled structure through
functional site prediction servers (9)Predicted functional sites 
from servers (10)Matching of putative Active site residues from step 7 and step 9.

Modeled structure of 3‐methyladenine DNA glycosylase from 
Streptococcus sanguinis by ESyPred3D.

Docking analysis of EDA on modeled 3‐methyladenine DNA glycosylase from 
Streptococcus sanguinis : EDA bound at the cavity of modeled
3‐methyladenine DNA glycosylase with (a) Patchdock score of 3966 and 
(b) lowest Autodock4 docking energy of ‐10.30 Kcal/mol.

