Background
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are classes of small non-coding RNAs (˜22 nt) 
which normally function as negative regulators of target mRNA expression 
at the posttranscriptional level. They bind to the 3'UTR of target mRNAs 
through base pairing, resulting in target mRNAs cleavage or translational 
inhibition. It has also recently been demonstrated that miRNAs may 
function as positive regulators in some cases. It is estimated that 1‐4% 
genes in the human genome are miRNAs and a single miRNA can regulate 
as many as 200 mRNAs [].

The first discovered miRNA genes were lin-4 and let-7, which were 
identified in the tiny nematode model  Caenorhabditis elegans 
[–]. At 
present, the functions of only a fraction of the identified miRNAs are 
known. In addition, multiple bioinformatics approaches  have predicted 
target mRNA transcripts to suggest candidate genes regulated by miRNA 
interactions. Moreover, there is compiling evidence that suggesting that 
miRNAs might play critical roles in regulating key biological processes, 
such as cell growth, tissue differentiation, cell proliferation, embryonic 
development, and apoptosis [,
,
].

At the present time, nothing is known about  the role of miRNAs during 
aging in mammals, although the aging process has previously been shown 
to be associated with changes in the transcription of several protein coding 
genes  [,
]. 
In contrast, studies in the nematode worm  C. elegans have 
shown that alterations in the expression of miRNAs are associated with 
aging []. 
For example, over-expression of lin-4 leads to extended lifespan, 
while loss of lin-4 resulted in a reduced lifespan in  C.elegans 
[]. In 
addition, another study reports an overall age-related decline in miRNA 
expression with aging in worms []. 
However, it is currently unclear how these findings translate to aging in vertebrate organisms in the context of 
both senescence and disease.

Can MicroRNAs act as biomarkers of aging?
C. elegans has been the premier model organism for studying the genetics 
of aging, and an excellent predictor of genes that also control mammalian 
aging  []. 
Moreover, it is a highly suitable model for testing hypotheses 
regarding miRNA impact on aging biology because of its short lifespan 
and availability of exhaustive worm specific resources  
[]. Instead, 
miRNAs can profoundly affect the expression of genes that do encode 
proteins by post-translational operation on the  mRNA produced by such 
genes (). The potential of miRNAs to influence aging has not been 
widely addressed, although recent studies have elegantly demonstrated 
how the developmental timing regulator miRNA lin-4 affects  C. elegans
lifespan []. 
Research in worms have shown that expression of various 
miRNAs change in abundance during adult life, suggesting significant 
potential to modulate health span and lifespan 
[]. Indeed, miRNA lin-4 
has been elegantly shown to influence lifespan and healthspan via its lin-14 
mRNA target and the insulin signaling pathway [].

Most of these C. elegans age-regulated miRNAs have sequence similarity 
with both fly and human miRNAs  []. Understanding how they control 
the signaling networks that modulate aging in the worm should provide 
major insights into the aging process of mammalian species, including 
man. It is fascinating that miRNAs known as lin-4 and lin-14 have already 
been shown to regulate lifespan and developmental cues. Reducing the 
activity of lin-4 shortened life span and accelerated tissue aging, whereas 
over expressing lin-4 or reducing the activity of lin-14 extended life span. 
Lifespan extension conferred by a reduction in lin-14 was dependent on the 
DAF-16 and HSF-1 transcription factors, suggesting that the lin-4-lin-14 
pair affects life span through the insulin/insulin-like growth factor-1 
pathway. This work reveals a role for microRNAs and developmental 
timing genes in life-span regulation [].

The question of course, is whether there are evolutionary-conserved 
homologs of lin-4 and lin-14 that control human longevity? A great many 
other miRNAs are similarly evolutionary conserved and are found in 
diverse species including worms, flies, zebrafish, mice and humans.  It 
appears that when evolution finds a biological pathway that works for 
certain essential life functions in primitive species, when possible it carries 
these pathways forward with minimum required tinkering as it evolves 
higher species.  This seems to be a general principle in genomics where 
many genes are the same in us and in yeast cells 
[].

Perspectives and speculations
Aging and death have fascinated philosophers and scientists for centuries. 
Aging is subject to regulation by genes that reside in pathways that have 
been conserved during evolution. The IGF-1/mTOR/p53 pathways are 
among those conserved pathways that impact upon longevity and agingrelated diseases 
[]. 
Our understanding of how miRNAs work in humans is just getting off the ground.  
As indicated by recent research in field of microRNAs and aging, using worms as a 
model to investigate this correlation might not be a bad idea  
[]. Let us fully exploit the fact that 
evolution carries biological machinery forward from species to species, 
including possibly machinery that controls aging.  If we can thoroughly 
investigate various combinations of miRNAs already suspected or known 
to keep  C. elegans young, and find homologs in humans of the same 
miRNAs, they may well keep us young too. We already know that the 
normal lifespans of nematodes of 20 days can be extended to 125 days by 
genetic manipulation [,
]. If that life extension factor of more than six 
could be translated to humans, it would mean normal lifespan of around 480 years.

This work was published and supported by the Ellison Medical 
Foundation/AFAR Postdoctoral Fellows in Aging Research fellowship to 
Luv Kashyap.

Citation:Kashyap, Bioinformation 5(9): 396-397 (2011)

MicroRNAs mediated regulation of gene expression adapted from []. MicroRNA (miRNA), a group of short non-coding RNA that modulate 
the stability and translational efficiency of target messenger RNA via segments of dsRNA called dicer, which further get assembled into RISC, and are 
then targeted to mRNAs with perfect complementarity, and hence causing silencing by cleavage and degradation of the RNA or by formation of 
heterochromatin.

