Background
Head and neck cancer is the sixth common malignancy and is the major cause 
of cancer morbidity and mortality worldwide. In India, cancers of Head and 
Neck comprise ˜24.1 % of total cancers seen at Tata Memorial Centre, 
Mumbai of these ˜13.2 % are from the oral cavity [K.A. Dinshaw and B. 
Ganesh, Annual Report 2002-2005, Hospital based cancer registry, Tata 
Memorial Hospital, 2008]. Research on oral cancer is receiving increasing 
attention and it is often reported under Head and Neck cancer. In the post 
genomic era, efforts to understand oral cancer are aimed at obtaining genomic 
and proteomic profiles and correlating them with clinical presentation. This has 
generated enormous data, which needs to be organized effectively in the form 
of a database, to optimally utilize the information for diagnosis, prognosis and 
treatment. In the present database the genes which are listed are reported to be 
altered in oral cancer. 

Methodology
The database published in 2007 [] was updated by adding 132 new genes 
searched from the PubMed database using the MESH words “genes AND oral 
cancer”. Genes which are not mentioned in the PUBMED abstracts were 
obtained from 10 full-text articles for proteomics studies retrieved using MESH 
words “oral cancer AND proteomics” and “oral cancer and autoantibodies” 
[–] 
as well as from “head and neck cancer AND proteomics” and “head and 
neck cancer AND autoantibodies” 
[–]. The genes are presented in 
alphabetical order in the gene-list, with links to the 
gene-info page wherein 
detailed information of the gene is available through hyperlinks which connect 
to specific databases for complete information.  summarizes the 
databases used for mining information presented in the gene-info page. The 
detailed procedure for mining is provided as supplementary information on the 
website http://www.actrec.gov.in/OCDB/ Supp_Info.htm. The searchable 
content of all the genes is stored in the MySQL database at the back-end and 
queries are handled by PHP at the front-end. The database is hosted on Linux 
operating system run by an Apache server. The interaction network of the 374 
genes was obtained by submitting the genes to the FATIGO tool which 
classifies the genes according to biological processes and molecular functions 
on the basis of gene ontology []. The genes involved in particular biological 
processes and molecular functions were submitted to ‘String 8.3’ tool to 
generate functional protein-protein interaction networks using the ‘Text 
mining’ parameter and the default score was increased so as to obtain 
interaction networks with higher confidence []. The interaction network for 
each biological process and molecular function was downloaded in SVG 
format and edited using Inkscape software to add the hyperlink for the PubMed 
abstract depicting the functional relationship between two interacting genes / 
proteins. 

Database features
The gene-list page shows the list of all 374 genes alphabetically arranged with 
gene symbol, gene description and two hyperlinks to the PubMed references 
for each gene. The first link has the keyword ‘Oral Cancer’ and second link is 
with ‘Head and Neck Cancer’. This ensures that information related to the 
molecule under consideration is retrieved from both the headings where it is 
generally reported. Clicking on the name of the gene on the gene-list page, 
opens up the gene-info page, which provides detailed information on aliases, 
description, chromosomal location, mutations and SNPs, mRNA expression, 
protein information, pathways involved and interacting proteins, expression of 
genes in different tissues, and clinical correlates. 

The second part of the database is Keyword search from which specific 
features of the genes can be retrieved by querying the database and the results 
are displayed dynamically. Features include 1) Gene name: Since there are 
alternative names for the genes, a search can be performed by any gene symbol 
or alias or gene name of a particular gene. 2) Chromosomal location: On the 
basis of the chromosome number a search can be performed which provides the
list of genes with their location on a particular chromosome. 3) CGH: The 
percentage of gains and losses on a chromosomal region can be used as input 
parameters (in a given range) to locate the genes responsible for the 
aberrations. 4) Molecular weight: A range of molecular weights (in dalton) can 
be used to list out the genes in the required range. 5) Advanced search: A 
multiple search can be performed using chromosomal region, CGH data and 
molecular weight options to obtain a list of genes matching all options. 

The special feature of the database is the interaction network. 
The proteinprotein interaction networks of the genes involved in various biological 
processes and molecular functions provide clues to genes / proteins which 
regulate a given biological process. The earlier database 
[] has been cited for 
its application in predicting the possible role of differentially expressed 
markers in cell transformation identified by Govekar et al. 
[]. The markers 
identified have now been analyzed using String 8.3 database alone and in 
combination with the genes listed in the apoptosis process. The interaction 
networks so obtained are provided as supplementary information on the 
website http://www.actrec.gov.in/OCDB/Supp_Info.htm. Each node represents 
a gene and the lines connecting the nodes indicate the probable relationship 
between them in the apoptosis process. By clicking on the line connecting the 
genes, a link is provided to one PubMed reference as an example, although a 
similar search through the String database will fetch more articles. This 
network shows several interacting proteins involved in the apoptosis pathway 
and broadens the scope for further investigations related to oral carcinogenesis. 
In conclusion, this database provides the scientist information and external 
links for the genes involved in oral cancer, interactions between them, and their 
role in the biology of oral cancer along with clinical relevance. The external 
links ensure that new information is continuously available. 

We acknowledge Cynthia Martin, Ashwathy Sebastian, Jissy Jose, and 
Poornima Rathod who helped in the data mining. The database was generated
using the infrastructure available in the BTIS facility, funded by Department of 
Biotechnology, Govt. of India, at ACTREC. 

Citation:Gadewal &amp; Zingde, Bioinformation 6(4): 169-170 (2011)

The list of databases used for mining the information for the genes on the gene-info page. 

