Background
There are two main types of research methodologies that lead
to the identification of hundreds of genetic variants associated
with disease onset. One of them is GWAS, which has emerged
as a powerful and successful tool to identify common human
disease alleles by using high-throughput genotyping
technology []. GWAS aims to detect common variants with
small effects. The other is linkage analysis, which aims to
establish linkages between genes using family relationships
[]. The linkage approach is often used in discovering rare
variants with major effects. However, low-frequency variants
with intermediate effects have not been captured by GWAS
and linkage analysis, due to insufficient frequencies and effect
sizes []. These variants are expected to have complex
interactions with environmental factors called geneenvironment
interactions (GxE). GxEs are not mere additive or
synergistic interactions, but are complex interactions. For a
very specific GxE interaction, the association p-value and risk
of disease is high. Le Marchand et al. showed that the relative
risk of colorectal cancer was 8.8 for specific combination of
environmental factors (smoking and preference for well-done
meat) and metabolic enzymes (CYP1A2 or NAT2 rapid or slow
metabolizers), unlike conventional methods where the risk is
calculated by the product of individual factors [].

As opposed to GWAS where the disease risk is attributed to
genetic factors, Butte et al. proposed an environment-wide
association study (EWAS) approach []. In addition to using
both the environmental risk factors obtained from EWAS and
the risk SNPs from GWAS, the combination of SNP
(rs13266634) and trans-β- carotene was a significant GxE item
correlated to type 2 diabetes. The per-risk-allele effect sizes in
subjects with low serum levels of trans-β- carotene were 40%
greater than the marginal effect size. EWAS offers an unbiased
consideration of environmental and genetic factors that is
useful in identification of larger and more relevant effect sizes
for disease associations []. 
However, Butte et al. showed a
Manhattan plot for genome-wide genetic factors, but for very
limited environmental factors.

We describe a prediction model using 3D Manhattan plot
called GxE landscape plot, in negative logarithm of
significance values associated with disease pathogenesis for
genotype factors and environmental factors with their
hierarchal clustering as a prediction model. The GxE landscape
plot enables us to comprehensively visualize negative
logarithm of p-values for combinations of associated genetic
and environmental factors. This is a useful model to predict
similarity of genotypes and environments in the context of
association p-values with disease using hierarchical clustering.

Methodology
Overview of methodology for creating GxE landscape plot:
There are 4 steps to create the GxE landscape plot ().
(Step 1) Dataset creation. A data set should contain a disease
status, gender, environmental exposures and genotypes for
each subject. In this study, to prove validity of our prediction
model, we generated a data set by using simuGWAS, which
was developed in simuPOP [] and GENS2 program 
[]. We
iterated this simulation 20 times using GENS2. (Step 2) The
association p-values with disease were calculated for all the
possible combinations of genetic and environmental factors by
using the Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel chi-squared test on 3 × 2 ×
2 contingency tables. (Step 3) Clustering analysis was applied
for calculated negative logarithm of p-values for genotypes
and environmental factors. (Step 4) The GxE landscape plot
was generated plotting negative logarithm of significance level
for all possible combinations of genotype and environmental
factors. In the GxE landscape plot, significant p-values are
reflected as peaks, and insignificant p-values as plateaus.

Training dataset creation by simulation of gene-gene and gene-environment interactions:
GENS2 is a program based on data with realistic patterns of
linkage disequilibrium, and exerts no constraints on the
number of individuals to be simulated or the number of nonpredisposing
genetic/environmental factors to be considered.
GENS2 tool can simulate gene-environment and gene-gene
interactions.

We simulated interactions among genetic loci and
environmental factors using GENS2. Population data for the
genomic model (JPT+CHB chr7) was downloaded from the
HapMap3 [] database and converted by simuGWAS for use in
the GENS2 program. This population data for the simulation
of genomic factors was set to be the initial population. In the
simulation process, we utilized 170 sample sizes. Also a geneenvironment
model was used, with the following parameters:
disease predisposing loci (DPL): rs1881690, rs1979600,
rs4960568, rs6972501, rs7793905, rs936997; high and low risk
allele; dominance parameter; relative risk for high risk
homozygote; environmental parameters odds ratio; and
disease environmental variable distribution parameters: mean,
standard deviation, disease penetrance. If the disease status
value is greater than that of 75th percentile, we set the value to
1; otherwise, 0. We removed 23,277 SNPs not possessing the 3
genotypes, out of 75,320 SNPs. In total, 100 SNPs were used for
our analysis; 6 SNPs were associated with disease and the
other 94 SNPs were randomly selected.

We iterated this simulation 20 times to obtain 20 populations.
We assumed that 20 populations were divided into two major
population groups, and we made each major population group
have a specific gene-environment interaction to cause disease.

Calculation of p-values:
To detect SNPs associated with environmental factors, we
applied Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel chi-squared test to estimate
the statistical significance of gene-environment interaction
using the R 3.1.2 statistical software with the Bioconductor
package [,
]. For each statistical test, we obtained p-values
from multiple hypothetical tests that were adjusted by a false
discovery rate (FDR) [].

Creating GxE landscape plot:
We created a novel 3D Manhattan plot, called a GxE landscape
plot, of the negative logarithm of associated significance values
with disease pathogenesis for genotype factors and
environmental factors with their hierarchal clustering as a
prediction model. Hierarchical clustering was applied on 100
genetic factors (SNPs) and 20 environmental factors,
performed using the R statistical software with Pearson׳s
correlation coefficient as a similarity index and using the
complete linkage method as an agglomeration. Negative
logarithms of p-values were corrected for multiple
comparisons by using Benjamini and Hochberg׳s method.

Discussion
 shows a prediction model with a 3D Manhattan plot
called GxE landscape plot showing negative logarithm of pvalues
for all the possible combinations of genotypes and
environmental factors. The genotypes and environmental
factors were hierarchically clustered. The genetic and
environmental factors were roughly clustered into two groups
in combination of genetic and environmental factors depicted
as two peaks surrounded by yellow ellipse in  and
. We iterated GENE2 simulation 20 times to obtain 20
populations. The 20 populations were divided into two major
population groups. This is simulated to make each major
population group with specific gene-environment interactions
to cause the disease.

All SNPs (6 SNPs) except 2 SNPs were clustered into two
groups for genetic factors; 4 SNPs out of 6 SNPs (66.6% of
SNPs) were correctly clustered on GxE landscape plot.
Clustering of genetic factors is considered to reflect linkage
disequilibrium among genes. It is observed that all the
environmental factors were clustered into two groups clearly;
20 environmental factors out of 20 environmental factors (100%
of environmental factors) were correctly clustered on GxE
landscape plot. Thus, our model can predict underlying cluster
of populations with high accuracy (100% for environmental
factors, 66.6% for genetic factors). It showed that the model
predicts similarity of genetic factors and environmental factors
associated with the disease. It should be noted that the pvalues
obtained in this study are based on the pretext that the
confounding factors between the genotype and the
environment are removed. The model GxE landscape plot
allows us to clearly visualize the distinctive features of the
populations, and also allows us to detect novel genetic and
environmental factor interactions.

The Butte׳s EWAS approach is a comprehensive testing and
screening manner for gene-environment interactions 
[], but is
a limited visualization for environmental factors based on
Manhattan plot. On the other hand, this method is a
comprehensive visualization of association p-values for all the
possible genomic and environmental factors. The GxE
landscape plot enables us to overview landscape of association
significance level for GxE.

There is a limitation in the process of data analysis at the 75th
percentile. It should be noted that the value is set at 1 if the
disease status value is greater than the value of 75th and 0
otherwise for the statistical test. However, for a more accurate
representation of the data, it would be more desirable to use
dispersion values instead. Dispersion values provide more
detailed information about the disease status.

The slope of the landscape is equivalent to the rate of change of
the p-values. It is possible to infer the disease pathogenesis
using the change of slope in the landscape. For example, if the
peak of the landscape is steep, and the others low; it can be
recommended for the subject to refrain from partaking in the
environmental factor that results in high peaks.

Conclusion
GWAS and linkage analysis have identified many SNPs related
to several diseases. However, there remain many unknown
SNPs whose MAFs are low having intermediate effects. Low
frequency variants having intermediate effects on disease
pathogenesis are believed to have complex GxE. We describe a
model using 3D Manhattan plot called GxE landscape plot to
visualize association p-values for GxE. We used GENS2 to
simulate interactions between two genetic loci and one
environmental factor, and p-values were calculated by
Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel chi-squared test on simulation data.
We thus created a 3D GxE landscape plot of negative
logarithm of the association p-values for all the possible
combinations of genetic and environmental factors with their
hierarchical clustering. The GxE landscape plot is a valuable
model to predict similarity among genotypes and
environments in the context of association p-values with
disease pathogenesis.

This work was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific
Research from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports,
Science, and Technology of Japan.

Citation:Nagaie et al, Bioinformation 11(3): 161-164 (2015)

Overview of methodology for creating GxE landscape plot. Chart of the 4 steps that have been used to generate GxE
landscape plot with simulated data using GENS2 program: (1) preparation of data set by GENS program, (2) calculation of pvalues
by Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel chi-squared test on 3 × 2 × 2 contingency table, (3) hierarchical clustering for genetic and
environmental factors, (4) visualization of association p-values for all the combinations of genetic and environmental factors.

GxE landscape plot. 3D GxE landscape plot of negative logarithm of the association p-values for all the possible
combinations of genetic and environmental factors with their hierarchical clustering. Genetic and environmental factors were
roughly clustered into two groups in combination of genetic and environmental factors, depicted as two peaks surrounded by
yellow ellipse. (A) GxE landscape plot with hierarchical clustering for genetic and environmental factors. (B) Hierarchical
clustering of genetic factors (SNPs) and 20 environmental factors. The data are shown in a table format, in which rows represent 
individual environmental factors and columns represent individual SNPs. The color in each cell reflects the negative logarithm of
the association p-values for combinations of genetic and environmental factors. As for genetic factors, except for 2 SNPs, other
SNPs were clustered into two groups surrounded by blue and red squares. As for environmental factors, all the environmental
factors were also clustered into two groups clearly surrounded by blue and red squares.

