Background
The last few decades have seen spectacular developments in the growth of protein sequence and structure data and in tools to 
      analyse them. Large-scale experimental determination of the biochemical roles of proteins is a phenomenal exercise. Bioinformatics 
      shows exciting promise in the development of methods that allow quick resolution of newly sequenced proteins to their closest 
      experimentally verified relatives. Sequence search procedures such as PSI-BLAST [
      ], can detect protein relationships effectively when sequence similarities are high. However, when sequence similarities become 
      poor (20-30%), such detection becomes a non-trivial task.

Proteins dissimilar in sequence can adopt similar structure, perform similar functions and also be homologous. This is 
      exemplified in structural databases, which classify proteins with high similarity in sequence, structure and function into 
      families and group families of similar structure and function into superfamilies. For superfamily members, which show poor 
      sequence similarity, it is difficult to determine evolutionary relationship in the absence of structure. Such proteins, related 
      despite low sequence similarity, lie in the ‘twilight zone’ and are termed ‘remote homologues’. 

Structure-based approaches can detect such relationships since protein structures are less perturbed by sequence changes. Some 
      approaches consider overall structural similarity in defining relatedness while others such as Bhaduri et al., 
      [] have shown that conserved spatial interactions in a protein superfamily are excellent 
      constraints in the identification of more members in the superfamily.

Description
Sequence analysis based approaches for remote homology detection
Methods like PSI-BLAST build profiles iteratively during searches in sequence databases. [] The use of ‘intermediate protein sequences’ that share sequence features of more than one protein is quite effective 
      in detecting distant protein similarities. [] As seen in , such 
      sequences populate sequence space and relate proteins, traditionally difficult to relate, due to poor sequence similarities. 
      ‘Intermediate sequences’ that share high similarities with more than one protein, if detected and employed in profile generation can 
      improve effectiveness of sequence analysis-based approaches. Sandhya et al., [] 
      discuss an application of such sequences in PSI-BLAST searches in fold-specific databases to detect relationships not evident through 
      simple sequence searches.

Several exciting and interesting efforts in remote homology search methods have been made in the Indian sub-continent in the 
      last few years. These methods () show promise and effectively detect such deep relationships in proteins. In this review, 
      we highlight salient features of these approaches.

Cascade PSI-BLAST: Hops through intermediates detect remote homologues
Sandhya et al., [] have recently reported the development of a method 
      called Cascade PSI-BLAST that propagates PSI-BLAST searches in a non-directed manner to detect distant similarities between 
      proteins. In this method, that extensively employs intermediate sequences, a PSI-BLAST search termed “first generation” is 
      initiated for a query in a database. Hits detected are allowed to propagate independent searches in the same database to detect 
      more new hits (“second generation” search etc.). Typically, the authors recommend up to three generations of search for better 
      coverage and detection of relationships. An assessment of the approach on the detection of existing relationships from the PALI 
      database [] shows that the coverage in detecting relationships in protein 
      families is improved by 15% and in protein superfamilies by ˜35% over traditional use of PSI-BLAST. This method is being made 
      available for use in public domain through a web server (http://crick.mbu.iisc.ernet.in/~CASCADE)(manuscript communicated).

MulPSSM: A database of multiple family profiles corresponding to a constant alignment
Searches against sequence databases using PSSMs or profiles are effective in identifying distant relationships compared to 
      searches involving pair wise sequence alignments. [] The effectiveness 
      of any profile-based search depends on the quality and diversity of sequences in the multiple sequence alignment used in profile 
      generation.

Anand et al., [] demonstrate that generating multiple family profiles 
      enables the reliable detection of distant relationships in protein family and superfamily. In order to assess the effectiveness 
      of multiple family profiles, they have generated a database of multiple and single-family profiles and profile-HMMs for all 
      structural families from integrated sequence-structure database from PALI [].
      Searches against these three databases were assessed and compared in terms of Sensitivity, Specificity and Error rates as functions 
      of E-values. All three parameters support that generating multiple family profiles improves detection of more superfamily 
      relationships. The CPU time for searches in a multiple family profile database is also economical. This database is available at 
      http://crick.mbu.iisc.ernet.in/~mulpssm []

FASSM: Enhanced Function Association in whole genome analysis using Sequence and Structural Motifs
Motif-based approaches use patterns or features unique to a class of proteins to detect remote similarities. Gaurav et al., 
      [] have developed a neural network-based method called ‘FASSM’ that 
      employs the positional conservation of sequences and ordering and positions of family specific inter-motif lengths, in a scoring 
      scheme to guide family associations. Their assessments of the approach in detecting over 30 superfamily level relationships 
      indicate an improved performance over other methods. An exciting application of this method is its ability to detect relationships 
      in proteins despite discontinuous domains and circular permutations. 

SCANMOT: A simultaneous scan of multiple sequence motifs to search for similar sequences
Motif-based search methods that are available in the public domain often scan for a single pattern at a time. Chakrabarti et 
      al., [] have developed a multiple motif-based search engine ‘SCANMOT’ 
      that combines multiple-pattern searching and a search for hits with statistically significant sequence similarity to detect 
      relationships between proteins sharing a common set of motifs. This method is available through a web-based server interface 
      
      (http://www.ncbs.res.in/~faculty/mini/scanmot/scanmot.html). 

PLHOST: Peptide Library based Homology search tool
Brahmachari and Dash [] have developed a tool for whole genome 
      comparisons that can compare several thousand proteins of a genome with proteins of other genomes. The principle belying their 
      method is that proteins use a limited set of peptide modules in various genomes. They show in comparisons of octa-peptide 
      libraries of individual organisms that some invariant peptides are present in related proteins from multiple organisms. Such 
      invariant peptides of variable lengths distributed over a large number of functionally vital proteins can serve as signatures in 
      functional annotation of hypothetical ORFs. They suggest that such a peptide-library based approach can overcome problems 
      associated with low sequence similarity and in identifying polypeptide stretches unique to an organism.

Conclusion
In this review, we have highlighted the recently developed remote homology detection methods from India. These methods apply 
      either intermediate sequences in profile-based searches or motif-based principles to expand protein families and help identify 
      novel evolutionary relationships between proteins. The methods described in this review offer at least a partial solution to the 
      problem. Continued progress in the development of sequence and structure alignment methods will increase the sensitivity of remote 
      homology detection.

The authors wish to gratefully acknowledge R. Sowdhamini and N. Srinivasan for discussions. The authors also thank R. 
    Sowdhamini for critical reading of the manuscript. S.S thanks CSIR and NCBS for financial and infrastructural support.

Figures and Tables
A superfamily of proteins whose members share poor sequence similarity (&lt;20%). ‘Intermediate sequences’ (in yellow) 
          populate protein space and owing to their high similarities with more than one protein (40­50%) can effectively detect such 
          remote homologues. Methods developed recently in India address the problem of remote homology detection effectively with 
          patterns/ intermediate sequences. 


					Citation:Gowri &amp; Sandhya, Bioinformation 1(3): 94-96 (2006)

