Background
Lipoxygenases (LOX) are non-heme, iron-containing lipidperoxidizing
enzymes that use molecular oxygen for the
dioxygenation of arachidonic acid. They catalyze the formation
of hydroperoxides as the first step in the biosynthesis of several
inflammatory mediators like leukotrienes and lipoxins 
[–].
The protein consists of a small N-terminal PLAT domain and a
major C-terminal catalytic domain containing the active site.
The iron atom in LOX is bound by four ligands among which
three are histidine residues. Six histidines are conserved in all
lipoxygenase sequences, five of them are clustered in a stretch
of 40 amino acids. The structure of soybean lipoxygenase-1,
determined by X-ray diffraction methods, reveals that 839
amino acids in the protein are organized in two domains viz.
beta-sheet N-terminal domain and helical C-terminal domain
[]. 
LOX are classified according to their positional specificity of
the dioxygenation of their most common substrates linoleate (C-
18) in plants, and arachidonic acid (C-20) in mammals 
[]. In
mammals, LOX have been classified as 5-, 8-, 12-, and 15-LOX.
These LOX oxygenate at carbon 5, 8, 12 or 15 of arachidonic
acid, forming 5S-, 8S-, 12S-, or 15S-hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic
acid (5-, 8-, 12-, or 15-HPETE) respectively. HPETEs are further
reduced by glutathione peroxidase to 5-, 8-, 12-, 15-HETE,
which are the hydroxy forms. 15-LOX exists as two isozymes,
15-LOX-1 and 15-LOX-2. The substrate for 15-LOX-1 and 15-
LOX-2 are linoleic acid and arachidonic acid, respectively 
[,
].
15-LOX-2 is recently cloned human lipoxygenase that shows
tissue-restricted expression in prostate, lung, skin, and cornea.
The protein level and enzymatic activity of 15-LOX-2 have been
shown to be down-regulated in prostate cancers compared with
normal and benign prostate tissues []. Since, 15-LOX-2
structure is not available in any protein structure database so
far to understand the functional behavior of this protein, so an
in-silico study, mainly comparative homology modeling, of the
target sequence 15-LOX-2 can be helpful to investigate
sequential-structural-functional relationship. 3D structure of 15-
LOX-2 was predicted based on available homologous template
structure in Protein structure Data Bank resources. Template
selection was performed using Protein Data Bank (PDB)
advanced BLAST []. Retrieved template structure was used for
comparative homology modeling of 15-LOX-2 protein.

Methodology
Retrieval of the target protein sequence:
The protein sequence of 15-lipoxygenase B isoform d (15-LOX-
2) from Homo sapiens was obtained from the protein sequence
database of NCBI (Accession No: NP_001132.2) 
[]. Since three
dimensional structures of 15-LOX-2 for Homo sapiens is not
available in Protein structure database (PDB) 
[], hence an
attempt has been made in the present study to determine the 3D
structure of 15-LOX-2 to decipher the functional role of
structural motif and secondary elements. ProtParam server 
[]
was used for computation of various physical and chemical
parameters for selected protein.

Template Identification:
The NCBI BLAST was used to identify the template for
modeling the three dimensional structure of 15-LOX-2 from
Homo sapiens. The result of NCBI BLAST against the PDB
database was used for selection of a suitable template for 3D
modeling of the target protein.

Sequence alignment:
15-LOX-2 amino acid sequence was used for alignment with
template protein using BLAST (bl2seq) []. Default parameters
were applied and the aligned sequences were inspected and
adjusted manually to minimize the number of gaps and
insertions.

Homology modeling and Structure refinement:
The three dimensional structure of 15-LOX-2 has been predicted
using DS MODELLER. A rough 3D model was constructed
based on sequence alignment between 15-LOX-2 of 
Homo sapiens and the template proteins using Discovery studio 3.1
[] with selected parameters. Loop refinement and structural
simulation were done using LOOPER and CHARMm forcefield,
respectively. Finally, predicted 3D model was subjected to a
series of tests for testing its internal consistency and reliability.
The Quality of the model was checked with verify3D 
[],
Profile 3D [] and Errat 
[] and the stereochemical properties
based on backbone conformation were evaluated by inspection
of Psi/Phi/Chi/Omega angle using Ramachandran plot of
PDBSum database [,
]. Quantitative analysis was done
using accessible surface area prediction using Volume Area
Dihedral Angle Reporter (VADAR) [,
]. Standard bond
lengths and bond angles of the model were determined using
WHAT IF [
,
&amp;]. ResProx (Resolution-by-proxy) 
[] was
also used for quality and quantity measurment using Standard
deviation of χ1 pooled, Ramachandran outside of most favored,
Deviation of Θ angles, Bump score, Mean H-bond energy, χ1
score, Radius gyration score, Percentage of generously allowed
Ω angles, Percentage of packing defects, Percentage of 95%
buried residues, Percentage of bad bond length, Percentage of
bad bond angles and Ramachandran plot outliers.

Structure Submission:
Successfully modeled, verified and the most reliable structure
of 15-LOX-2 was used for deposition in PMDB (Protein Model
Database) database [].

Active Site Prediction:
After complete modeling, simulation and refinement of the
structure of 15-LOX-2, it was used for prediction of the possible
binding sites using Q-SiteFinder []. Ten binding sites were
predicted for the target protein. These binding sites were
further compared to the active sites of the template.

Prediction of Protein- Protein interaction network:
Protein–Protein functional association network was predicted
using STRING database version 9.0 [].

Results
The selected protein 15-lipoxygenase B (NP_001132.2) has 676
amino acids in length with molecular weight of ~75 kDa. It is
12.4% highly Leucine rich with theoretical pI 5.73. On the basis
of sequence similarity analysis, Arachidonate 15-Lipoxygenase-
B isoform d showed 62% sequence similarity and 42% identity
with template structure (PDB ID 3O8Y). Since the template
showed a good level of sequence identity it was used to obtain
high quality alignment for structure prediction using homology
modeling. A PDB ID 3O8Y crystal structure of stable-5-
Lipoxygenase from Human was specifically selected on the
basis of BLAST result and was utilized as a template for
structure modeling of 15-LOX-2. Structural model was built
based on the atomic coordinates of 3O8Y using modeling and
simulations program of DS MODELER []. The loop refined
model, which was selected with minimum CHARMm energy
40839.47232 kcal/mol based on conjugant gradient
minimization, was considered for quality and quantity
evaluation.

3D predicted model was analyzed using energy minimization,
refinement and simulation programs of Discovery studio 3.1.
PROCHECK of PDBSum server was employed for the
evaluation of stereochemical quality of predicted model.
Ramachandran plot analysis showed 90.3 % of amino acid
residues within the most favoured and 9.7% residues in
additional and generously allowed regions, whereas no residue
was found in disallowed region (,). The structural
model of 15-LOX-2 is shown in (). The comparable
Ramachandran plot characteristic and G-factor score confirmed
the good quality of the predicted model. Based on main-chain
and side-chain parameters study, we found that the
confirmation of the predicted model was very much favourable,
stable and reliable. The 15-LOX-2 model consists of two
domains: N-terminal contains Polycystin-1, Lipoxygenase,
Alpha-Toxin (PLAT; 4-119) domain, totally arranged with beta
sheets and C-terminal has Lipoxygenase homology (LH2; 197-
668) domain, with α-β fold type mainly contains alpha helices.
Structural classification of the predicted model revealed that
PLAT domain contains only beta sandwich with CATH ID
1.20.245.10 and LH2 domain has mainly alpha fold of up-down
bundle type with CATH ID 2.60.60.20. In this predicted 3D
model 4 sheets, 7 beta hairpins, 5 beta bulges, 15 strands, 34
helices, 52 helix- helix interacs, 53 beta turns and 7 gamma turns
were analyzed using PDBSum. The LOX-motif contains only
helical arrangement ().

Qualitative and quantitative study of predicted model:
VERIFY 3D details lie between 0.01 – 0.74 representing the best
verified and reliable model (). Overall quality factor
was calculated with ERRAT server [] and the modeled
structure was found to have 74.738 % quality factor ().
VADAR that included accessible surface area, excluded volume,
backbone and side chain dihedral angles, secondary structure,
hydrogen bonding partners, hydrogen bond energies, steric
quality, solvation free energy as well as local and overall fold
quality yielded good results (). Using atomic radii from
Shrake method, we observed 41% residues were involved in the
formation of helices, 18% in beta sheets, 40% in coils and 19%
residues formed turns. Observed mean hbond distance and
energy value were closely similar with expected values in
hydrogen bond statistics. The obtained expected residues with
hbond were 75% and we observed 74% for the predicted model.
Dihedral angle statistics also represented approximately similar
score with that of the expected values  (see
supplementary materiel). Normality test of the predicted
structure checked using WHATIF was found to have fine
packing quality with Z-score of 0.06. Resprox result infer that
the resolution of the predicted model was 2.695 Å. Deviation of
Θ angles, Bump score, χ1 score and Radius gyration Z- score
indicate better quality of the model  (see supplementary
materiel)). It was found that the overall quality and quantity on
the basis of secondary elements of the predicted model was
good and reliable. Predicted and completely analyzed model of
15-LOX-2 was successfully deposited in PMDB (Protein Model
Database) [] database with PMDBID PM0078035. The RMSD
(Root Mean Square Deviation) between predicted model and
template is 0.34 Å with Z-score 1.9122E+02 using AuStrAliS
server [] 
().

Active site analysis:
Active site identification of 3D predicted model 15-LOX-2 with
PMDBID PM0078035 from Homo sapiens was done using QsiteFinder.
10 possible active binding sites were localized in the
predicted model (, ). All 10 predicted site volumes
with their active binding residues are reported in 
 (see
supplementary materiel).

Protein–Protein functional association network:
Protein–protein interactions occur when two or more proteins
interact together to carry out their biological functions. These
interactions are important for every biological process in a
living cell. Protein-protein interaction helps in understanding of
systems biology at structural domain and motif level and
provides the basic knowledge for the application of therapeutic
drug targets. In this in-silico investigation, 15-LOX-2
(NP_001132.2) protein was used to find out the association
network with similar function of proteins. It was found that 15-
LOX-2 has 19 major association networks with 7 types of
protein families, including LOX gene family. IL (4), GPX (2 and
4), PPARG, PTGS (1 and 2), CYP (2J2, 2C8, 4A11 and 2B6), PLA
(2G2A, 2G4A, 2G1B and 2G6) and A LOX (5, 15, 12 and 12B)
gene families were found to have maximum STRING score
0.900 with highest confidence level 
() 
[].

Discussion
Protein structural modeling and simulations of 15-LOX-2
protein was successfully completed. The Ramachandran plot
statistics resulted that 100% residues were found in allowed
regions whereas not even a single residue was present in
disallowed or in outlier regions. Qualitative and quantitative
analysis of the predicted model represented the best quality
model which was reliable and stable. In the predicted model,
hydrogen bonds (mean hbond distance, mean hbond energy
and residues with hbonds) were arranged with good
confirmations. Resolution of the predicted model was 2.695 Å.
After complete qualitative and quantitative analysis, predicted
model has been successfully deposited in PMDB Database with
PMDBID PM0078035. In LOX motif GLU369, ALA370, LEU371,
THR372, HIS373, LEU374, HIS376, SER377, HIS378, THR385, LEU389,
HIS394, PHE399, LYS400, LEU401, ILE403 and PRO404 residues were
found to be prominent active binding sites for protein-protein,
protein-drug and protein-cofactor interactions.

The STRING based protein–protein interactions elucidated that
7 different protein families were associated in network with 15-
LOX-2. Amongst which Interleukin 4 (IL-4) is known to
participate in several B-cell activation. It is also a co-stimulator
of DNA-synthesis which induces the expression of class II MHC
molecules on resting B-cells. Whereas, Glutathione peroxidase
(GPX) protects cells against membrane lipid peroxidation and
cell death. It is required for normal sperm development, male
fertility and is essential for embryonic development. Another
interacting protein Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
gamma (PPARG) is a receptor that binds peroxisome
proliferators such as hypolipidemic drugs and fatty acids, thus
controlling the peroxisomal beta-oxidation pathway of fatty
acids. Prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 1 (PTGS) plays an
important role in regulating/promoting cell proliferation in
some normal and neoplastically transformed cells, whereas
PTGS2 functions as a mediator of inflammation and/or plays a
role in prostanoid signaling in activity-dependent plasticity.
Cytochrome (CYP) P450, family2, subfamilyJ, polypeptide2 is
an enzyme that metabolizes arachidonic acid, predominantly
via a NADPH-dependent olefin epoxidation, to all four
regioisomeric cis-epoxyeicosatrienoic acids. Phospholipase A2,
group IIA (platelets, synovial fluid), belonging to PLA family of
proteins, participates in the regulation of phospholipid
metabolism in biomembranes including eicosanoid
biosynthesis. PLA2, G-IVA (cytosolic, calcium-dependent)
selectively hydrolyzes arachidonyl phospholipids in the sn-2
position releasing arachidonic acid. PLA2, G-IB (pancreas)
catalyzes the calcium-dependent hydrolysis of the 2- acyl
groups in 3-sn-phosphoglycerides and PLA2, G-VI (cytosolic,
calcium-independent) catalyzes the release of fatty acids from
phospholipids. Arachidonate 15-lipoxygenase (A LOX) converts
arachidonic acid to 15S- hydroperoxy-eicosatetraenoic acid and
acts on C-12 of arachidonate as well as on linoleic acid.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are grateful to the Department of Biotechnology for
Financial support provided in the form of a project to Dr. Shashi
Pandey. They also wish to acknowledge the facility provided by
Department of Biotechnology funded Sub-Distributed
Information Centre, Centre for Bioinformatics, School of
Biotechnology, Banaras Hindu University, and Varanasi, India.

Citation:Arora et al, Bioinformation 8(12): 555-561 (2012)

Ramachandran plot graphical representation with plot statistics

1D representation of residues found in most favoured, allowed and generous allowed region

(a) Modeled structure of Arachidonate 15-
Lipoxygenase-B isoform d where α-helices have been
represented by red color, ß-sheets by cyan, loops in green and
the blue color indicates the LOX motif; (b) Figure depicting the
sheets, beta hairpins, beta bulges, strands, helices, helix- helix
interacs, beta turns and gamma turns present in the model; (c)
1D sequence of LOX motif where red color represents
conserved histidine residues

Showing VERIFY 3D interpretation

Quality factor obtained from ERRAT server

Stereo/ Packaging Quality index of predicted model

Superposed structure of Target (Green) and Template (Red)

Figure showing the 10 possible active sites (in
different colors) in the predicted 3D model

1D protein sequence representation of active sites in
red color

(a) Protein-Protein interaction network with highest confidence with no more than 50 interactions; (b) Tabular
representation of the interacting partners of 15-LOX-2 protein.

