Background
Antibiotic-resistant Gram-negative bacilli belonging to
Enterobacteriaceae and Non-fermentors are the major cause of
concern in clinical problems in current human healthcare [,
]
Beta-lactams have been the mainstay of treatment for serious
infections in humans []. Among Gram-negative bacteria, the
most common beta-lactam resistance mechanism involves betalactamase
mediated hydrolysis which results in inactivation of
antibiotics which are used in the treatment of infection caused
by these organisms and are being reported in increasing
frequencies []. One of the last lines of treatment against high
level drug resistant infections is the carbapenems and are
metallo-beta-lactams (MBL) class of antibiotics, which was
developed to resist the beta-lactamase mediated resistance
posed by infection causing microbes [,
]. Recent studies has
proved the inactivation of these carbapenams (meropenem,
imipenem, doripenem, ertapenem) by a number of metallobeta-
lactamases which poses extended spectrum activity against
all beta-lactam antibiotics, including carbapenems [–]. One
such highly emerging dreadful MBL's is New Delhi metallobeta-
lactamase (blaNDM-1). This blaNDM-1 is a novel MBL's
conferring resistance to almost all beta-lactam antibiotics,
including carbapenem [–]. Many reports are emerging on the
existence and prevalence of blaNDM-1 throughout the world 
[,
,
,
]. 
Microorganisms carrying blaNDM-1gene are E. coli,
K. pneumoniae, K. oxytoca, Enterobacter cloacae, Proteus spp.,
Citrobacter freundii, Morganella morganii, Providencia spp.
Pseudomonas aeroginosa [,
,
] and also in Acinetobacter
baumannii [,
]. Presence of blaNDM-1 gene was also
detected among bacteria isolated from seepage samples and
public tap waters in New Delhi, India []. Many reports have
revealed the spread of blaNDM-1 through renal or bone marrow
transplantation, dialysis, cerebral infarction, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, pregnancy, burns, road traffic accidents,
and cosmetic surgery [] Hence, the microorganism carrying the
blaNDM-1 gene will be extensively resistant to antibiotics and
susceptible only to colistin and, less consistently, tigecycline,
leading to scarcity of antibiotics for treatment [,
].
Acinetobacter baumannii is a common nosocomial pathogen
reported worldwide []. Infections caused by A. baumannii are
associated with adverse clinical outcomes, including high rates
of morbidity and mortality, prolonged hospital stay, and
substantial health care expenses. Many reports on emergence of
blaNDM-1 among A. baumannii have been reported [,
]. In
our previous study, we have isolated blaNDM -1 carrying A.
baumannii with high drug resistance was isolated from a
multiorgan donor. []. Though reports on the three
dimensional structures of blaNDM-1, active site regions,
molecular docking and ligands complex molecular dynamic
simulation studies in different microbial pathogenic organisms
synthesis different protein length of blaNDM-1 exist, in this
study we aimed to correlate the microbiological investigations
carried out to screen its level of drug resistance with that of in
silico studies of drug interactions using bioinformatics tools.

Methodology
A. baumanii, isolated from a conjunctival swab collected from a
23 years old multi organ donor, died in a road traffic accident
was utilized for this study, after validation through
documented bacteriological methods []. Further, the isolate
was screened for the presence of blaNDM-1 at clinical
microbiology laboratory of L &amp; T Microbiology Research Centre
from Sankara Nethralaya, Chennai. The bacterium was found to
harbor the blaNDM-1 by PCR based DNA technique and was
further sequenced for confirmation. The sequence obtained was
submitted to Genbank [Accession no: JF836807].

Biofilm production detection:
Detection of Biofilm production by Tissue culture plate method:
Biofilm production of A. baumanii isolate was carried out
aerobically in 96 well round bottom tissue culture plate as
described earlier [,
] with slight modifications. The
adherent biofilm producing cells was released by adding 160 ml
33% acetic acid (SRL, India). The sterile uninoculated brain
heart infusion broth media served as medium control to check
sterility. Carbapenem susceptible K. pneumoniae ATCC BAA-
1706 and carbapenem resistant K. pneumoniae ATCC BAA-1705
served as the inoculum control. Optical density (OD) of stained
adherent bacteria was determined with a micro ELISA (ELX808,
Biotek, India) auto reader at a wavelength of 520 nm. These OD
values were considered as an index of bacteria adhering to
surface and forming biofilms. The experiment was performed
in triplicate and the average was derived. To compensate the
background absorbance, OD readings from sterile medium,
fixative, dye were averaged and subtracted from all the test
values. The mean OD value obtained from media control well
was deducted from all the test OD values.

Interpretation of bacterial adherence:
The bacterial adherence was interpreted based on OD values as
obtained for A. baumanii isolate 
[]. The mean OD values
derived is shown below in  (see supplementary
material)

Detection of viability of biofilm producing bacteria after antibacterial treatment:
Production of biofilm:
The bacterial isolate was allowed to produce biofilm by
inoculating 200µl of 1:10 diluted A. baumanii isolate onto three
96 well round bottom tissue culture plate and incubated
aerobically at 37°C for 24 hours as described earlier 
[,
].
After 24 hr of growth, the biofilm production was checked out
in one of the plate by procedure described above.

Antibacterial treatment of Biofilm:
After confirming the production of biofilm, the remaining
plates were subjected for antimicrobial susceptibility testing by
microbroth dilution method. The medium was first removed by
aspiration from the wells and subjected for antibiotic treatment
with ceftriaxone (Alkem, India), cefepime (Zuventus, India),
cefoperazone (Pfizer, India), imepenum (Ranbaxy, India) and
meropenum (Blue cross, India). The bacteria were then treated
with various concentrations of the antibiotics ranging from
1280mg/L – 10mg/L and incubated for 24 hours at 37°C
(carried out in duplicates). After overnight incubation, the
medium containing the antimicrobial agent was gently
aspirated out.

Assessment of cell morphology by pseudo- confocal microscope:
The reduction in the amount of bacterial cell count was
observed under Axio Observer fluorescent microscope (Carl
Zeiss, Berlin, and Germany). The images were processed using
Axio Vision 4.7 software (Carl Zeiss, Bangalore, India).

MTT assay:
Following this, the viability of the bacteria in each of the
antibiotic concentration was tested by MTT (3-[4, 5-
dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide,
Invitrogen, India) assay according to the method described by
Kairo et al (1999) []. Briefly, after 24 h lasting antibiotic
treatment, the wells of micro plate were aspirated out and filled
with 150 µl of PBS per well, then 50µl of MTT solution (0.3% in
PBS) was added. Plates were incubated for 2 h at 37°C. At the
end of incubation period, MTT was replaced with 150 µl of
DMSO (Merck, India). To enable complete dissolving of formed
purple formazan crystals, the plates were incubated for 15
minutes at room temperature followed by a gentle agitation for
5 min. The optical density of the wells was calculated through
micro ELISA auto reader at wavelength of 550 nm. Cell viability
(or cell survival) was calculated as: (Test OD/Control OD) ×100.
The 50% inhibitory concentration (IC50) of the five drugs
(ceftriaxone, cefepime, cefoperazone, imepenum and
meropenum) was computed using polynomial regression
analysis using Microsoft Excel.

Conjugation experiment:
To obtain the transconjugant, 0.2 ml of an exponentially grown
culture of the test strain A. baumanii (donor cells) was mixed
with 1.8 ml of an overnight culture of E. coli XL-1 Blue (recipient
cells) in LB broth (Hi media, India). Mixtures were incubated
without shaking at 37°C for 18 h. Transconjugants were selected
by their ability to resist streptomycin 65 µg/ml (Oxoid),
tetracycline 100 µg/ml (Merck, India) and cefotaxime 2 µg/ml
(Himedia, India) incorporated in LB agar [,
]. The
transconjugants were preceded further for the antibiotic
susceptibility testing with the same antibiotic which was used
for testing parental isolates.

Sequence Retrieval:
The Protein sequence for blaNDM-1 in Acinetobacter baumannii
(UniProtKB accession number: F8UNN7) was retrieved from
UniProtKB []. BLASTP search was carried out for this protein
against the PDB [] to detect the most suitable template for
modeling, wherein, E. coli blaNDM-1 crystal structure (PDB id:
3S0Z) was found to have 100% identity. So, the PDB structure
3S0Z was retrieved from the Protein Data Bank and the same
was used for structural studies. However, the crystal structure
had a missing loop region [167-170] which was modeled and
validated by different structural assessment studies [].

Structure validation:
The crystal Structure (3SOZ) was fixed for missing loop, and
was examined by using Q-MEAN SERVER, which estimates
quality of a model, whereby, it gives two different scores:
Global score, which includes Q-Mean Score which is a global
score of the whole model reflecting predicted model reliability
ranging from 0 to 1, Z-Score which is calculated by relating QMean
score to scores of a non-redundant set of high-resolution
x-rays structures of similar size. Local Score includes Residue
Error which was estimated per residue []. Ramachandran plot
validation was also performed using Structure Analysis &amp;
Verification (SAVES) server [].

Molecular Dynamics (MD) Studies of blaNDM-1 protein:
MD Simulation was performed for the modeled protein on
OPEN DISCOVERY Linux Platform with pre-installed
GROMACS software [] to analyze the stability of the protein.
GROMOS96 43al [] force field was used. Periodic boundary
conditions were applied with 0.9nm of cubic box. The protein
was solvated with SPC water model which added 11619 SOL
molecules to the system. System was neutralized by replacing
water molecules with 10 NA+ counter ions. Steepest Descent
algorithm was used for energy minimization which converged
in 283 steps. Equilibration of the NVT and NPT ensembles was
conducted separately each with 100ps and with 2 fs of
integration time steps. The final production run was performed
for 5ns. Finally, the decoy with least potential energy was
chosen for further studies.

Prediction of Active site:
The binding pocket for the target protein was predicted using
computed atlas of surface topography of proteins (CASTP) [].
Further, all the binding pockets residues were compared with
the documented active site residues the protein 
[]. Binding
Pocket from CASTP was selected which covers all the active site
residues of the protein. Finally, this binding pocket was used
for further docking studies.

Retrieval of Ligands:
The structural coordinates of the ligands were retrieved from
Ligand Depot, Pubchem and Drug Bank based on availability.
The ligands are Ceftriaxone (Pub Chem: CID 5479530);
Cefepime (Pub Chem: CID 5479537); and Cefoperazone (Pub
Chem: CID 44185) Carbapenems which includes Imipenum
(Drug Bank: DB01598) and Meropenum (PDB ID: 3q82);
Optimisation of all the ligands were done in ProDrg server 
[].

Molecular Docking Studies:
Auto Dock 4.0 [] 
was used for carrying out docking studies of
blaNDM-1 protein with all the five different types of ligands.
Semi-flexible docking was done in which protein was kept as
rigid and the ligands as flexible []. For all the ligands, the
possible torsion angles were set to rotate freely. In the
preparation of protein, polar hydrogens were added and
kollman united partial charges were also assigned. Gasteiger
charges were also assigned to the ligands. Auto Dock 4.0 was
compiled and run under Linux operating system. Auto Dock
requires pre assigned grid maps, and grid must surround the
region of interest in the protein. In this study, binding site
residues were generated by CASTp server, which includes all
the active site residues were used for setting the grid. The grid
box size was set at 100, 100 and 100 Å (x, y and z) and grid
center 3.0, 3.0, 3.0 for x, y and z- coordinates for all ligand
molecules. The spacing between grid point was 0.375 Å for
active site in such a way to surround the entire given binding
site residues. The Lamarckian Genetic Algorithm parameter
was used for the best docking conformers. The following
parameters were followed for all the compounds. A maximum
of 10 conformers were considered for each compound, the
population size was 150, maximum number of evaluation was
set to 2,500,000, maximum number of generations was 27,000,
rate of gene mutation was 0.02, rate of crossover was 0.80, GA
crossover mode two pt (two point), mean of Cauchy
distribution for gene mutation was 0.0, variance of Cauchy
distribution for gene mutation was 10.0, and number of
generation for picking worst individual was set to 10.

Results
Results of in vitro biofilm production:
The isolate from the donor corneal rim specimen produced high
level of biofilm with an OD of 0.361 at an absorbance of 520nm.
Biofilm produced by the A. baumannii isolate is shown in
().

Results of viability of biofilm producing bacteria after
antibacterial treatment:
The viability of biofilm producing A. baumanii isolate reduced
on exposure to antibiotics and was inferred by reduction in the
bacterial cell count after antibiotic treatment. (Observed
through Axio Observer fluorescent microscope (Carl Zeiss,
Berlin, and Germany). The degree of biofilm formation and
percent of viability of bacterial cells after antibiotic treatment
were analyzed by MTT staining. Higher degree of resistance
was observed for all 5 drugs (ceftriaxone, cefepime,
cefoperazone, imepenum and meropenum) after 24 hours of
antibiotic treatment. The IC50 of ceftriaxone, cefepime,
cefoperazone, imepenum and meropenum to be 80 mg/L, 80
mg/L, 80 mg/L, 80 mg/L, and 80 mg/L, respectively. Effect of
imepenum on A. baumannii at various concentrations is shown
in ().

Sensitivity of A. baumanii cells to increasing concentrations of antibiotics:
 presents the percentage viability of A. baumannii at
various concentrations of antibiotics ie. ceftriaxone, cefepime,
cefoperazone, imepenum and meropenum at increasing
dosages higher than their respective IC50 at 24 h of treatment.
However, at highest dosage, of all five antibiotics at 1280mg/L
significant decrease in the cell viability was not observed.

Results of conjugation experiment:
Successful transconjugation was noted with the A. baumannii
isolate that harbored blaNDM-1 gene. The transfer of blaNDM-1
gene to the E. coli XL-1 Blue was confirmed by both PCR and
MIC testing. PCR targeting blaNDM-1 proved that the
transconjugants carried the blaNDM-1 gene and MIC results
showed similar antibiotic results when compared to the
parental donor strains tested. Transconjugants grown in LB
medium incorporated with antibiotics is shown in 
().

Cells Molecular modelling:
As discussed earlier, the missing residues (167-170) 
()
of 3SOZ_A [] 
was modeled using Swiss model beta server
with advanced modeling option with 3SOZ_A as template. The
modeled structure was refined, validated and was utilized for
further docking studies.

Structure validation:
The loop fixed model of blaNDM-1 was subjected to further
structural validation through Q-mean server. This server
predicted a structure score of 0.68. The PROCHECK analysis
shows 92.1% residues in favored regions, 7.9% in allowed
region and 0% in disallowed region. The final refined structure
of blaNDM-1 was used for further molecular dynamics
simulation studies ().

Molecular dynamics studies:
Molecular Dynamics simulation for 5 nanoseconds revealed the
conformational changes and stability of the protein in response
to optimal ensemble conditions as shown in (). The
Potential energy traces a reliable drop in value over 5ns of MD
simulation, with the lowest potential energy structure observed
at 2000ps as shown in ().

Active site prediction:
Active site pocket idenitification was performed using CASTP
Server, which predicted 26 different pockets with varied Area
and Volume. Each pocket conformation presents residues that
matched with the structure of blaNDM-1 in E. coli [PDB id:
3SOZ_A] []. Overall documented active site residues of
blaNDM-1 were corresponding to the 26th pocket (Met21, Phe24,
Val27, Ala28, Trp47, His74, His76, Asp78, Leu102, Glu106,
His143, Thr146, Gly161, Cys162, Ile164, Lys165, Asp166, Lys168,
Ala169, Lys170, Ser171, Leu172, Asp177, Tyr183, Met202,
Ser203, His 204, and Ser205) as shown in ().

Ligand optimization:
All the ligands were retrieved from Ligand Depot, Pubchem and
Drug Bank based on availability. These ligands were
minimization using for using GROMOS forcefield option of
PRODRG Server and was further used of docking studies.

Docking studies of blaNDM-1:
Docking studies of the chosen ligands were performed on the
predicted active site region of blaNDM-1. The binding energy of
all the interactions reveal that, among all the ligands, the
highest binding affinity of (-6.17Kcal/mol) was observed for
Cefoperazone. The detailed hydrogen bonding interactions and
inhibitory constant value of blaNDM-1 with all the ligands are
shown in (), and 
 (see supplementary material)
respectively. The docking studies show hydrophobic
interactions, and hydrogen bonds, which very well correlated
with the documented studies.

Ceftriaxone:
Lys 165, Ser 203 and Asp 177 were found to form 3 hydrogen
bonds with that of ceftriaxone (). These hydrogen
bonds were found to stabilize the binding of ceftriaxone. The
IC50 of the drug was found to be 144.25µM.

Cefepime:
The result of cefepime docking into the reported active site of
blaNDM-1 is shown in (). Under careful observation
three hydrogen bonds were found to be formed with the
following residues: Lys 165, Ser 203 and Ala 28. The IC50 of the
drug was found to be 166.4µM.

Cefoperazone:
Cefoperazone was found to dock into the reported active site of
blaNDM-1 is shown in (). A through examination of
the binding pocket indicated that cefoperazone formed three
hydrogen bonds with the residue of Ser 205, Lys 165 and His
204. The IC50 of the drug was found to be 123.90µM.

Imepenum:
Lys 165, Ser 203, Gly 161, Asp 78 and Ser 205 were found to
form 5 hydrogen bonds with that of Imepenum is shown in
(). These hydrogen bonds were found to stabilize the
binding of imepenum. The IC50 of the drug was found to be
267.24µM.

Meropenum:
The result of meropenum docking into the reported active site
of blaNDM-1 is shown in (). Under careful observation
six hydrogen bonds were found to be formed with the
following residues: Lys 165, Ser 203, Gly 161, Asp 78, Ile 164
and His 204. The IC50 of the drug was found to be 208.62µM.

Discussion
Over the past decade, increased prevalence of multidrugresistant
strains of A. baumannii (MDR-AB) has been reported.
The prevalence of strains resistant to the usually potent and safe
β-lactam antibiotics, such as ampicillin-sulbactam and
carbapenems, had increased substantially [–]. Since the new
antimicrobial agents for Gram-negative pathogens shrinks, the
longevity of existing compounds becomes a matter of primary
concern []. 
Many Acinetobacter are now resistant to commonly
used antibacterial drugs, including penicillins, expandedspectrum
cephalosporins [,
] cephamycins,
aminoglycosides [] chloramphenicol, and tetracyclines 
[].
Carbapenems have become the drugs of choice against
Acinetobacter infections in many centers but are slowly being
compromised by the emergence of carbapenem-hydrolyzing βlactamases
[]. Most potent emerging carbapenemase gene is
New Delhi metallo-beta-lactamases (blaNDM-1). The first clue
for the presence of a carbapenemase was inferred from the
increased minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) especially to
imipenem, or meropenem. In our previous study, MIC results of
A. baumannii isolate showed resistance to Ceftazidime,
Ceftriaxone, Cefoperazone/Sulbactum, Cefepime, Imipenum
and Meropenum (Data not shown for reference). In the current
study, the MIC data and the docking results were in
concordance and resistance could be attributed to the biofilm
production. The reproducibility of obtained experimental
results confirmed the predictive accuracy. Yong et al., 2009
documented cephalosporins group of antibiotics as most
potential inhibitors of blaNDM1, which was observed in our
study in terms of Biofilm production and inhibitory mode of
interactions. However, carbapenem group of antibiotics studied
were proven to be more significant when compared to
cephalosporins. Liang Z, (2011) et al. 
[] has reported blaNDM-
1 contains an additional insert between residues 162 and 166,
which is not present in other MBLs. Since the insert is in the
opposite side of the active site, with a distance of around 20 Å,
its role in the hydrolysis reaction is still unknown. Interestingly,
in our study we found both cephalosporins to interact with LYS
165, whist, carbapenem group was found to interact with
GLY161 and LYS165. However, this prediction needs to be
confirmed by other structural biology methods.

Conclusion
We have demonstrated the correlation between blaNDM–1
positivity, and biofilm production with molecular interactions
inferred through in silico docking studies which have attributed
to high level resistance. Further by this study, we also highlight
the importance of 162-166 region of blaNDM-1 as a potential site
for drug targeting.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors thank Vision Research Foundation, Sankara
Nethralaya, and Chennai for their financial support.

Citation:Sowmiya et al, Bioinformation 8(10): 445-452 (2012)

Tissue culture plate showing Biofilm production by A.
baumanii isolate.

Morphology of A. baumanii cells at various
concentrations of imepenum are seen under Axio Observer
fluorescent microscope (A) Control, B) At an imepenum
concentration of 40 mg/L, C) At an imepenum concentration of
80 mg/L and D) At an imepenum concentration of 160 mg/L).

Line graph representing percentage of viability of A.
baumanii cells to increasing concentrations of antibiotics.

Conjugation experiment showing the growth of
transconjugants confirming the ability of transferring genetic
material carrying drug resistance genes to competent

(A) Crystallized 3D structure of blaNDM-1 in E. coli.
Magenta color circle show missing loop region in this structure;
(B) 3D Structure of blaNDM-1. In this figure red color indicate
helix, yellow color indicate beta strand, green color indicate coil,
blue color indicate missing loop region of template structure
using USCF – CHIMERA; (C) C-alpha Backbone residue-wise
root mean square deviation (RMSD) of blaNDM-1 at 5ns; (D)
Potential energy graph over 5ns. The lowest potential energy
was noted at 2000ps, marked with a Magenta circle.

Active site pocket of blaNDM-1. Wire frame
illustrated in overall protein and Green color ball illustrated in
active site residues.

Docking studies of blaNDM-1 protein with all the
inhibitors. Green color sticks indicates ligand, Green color
doted lines hydrogen bond.

