Background
The most common result of analysis of high-throughput data in
molecular biology represents a global list of genes, ranked
accordingly to a certain score. The score can be a measure of
differential expression, distance from a cluster center,
contribution to a classifier or any other score. Many methods
were developed for estimating a statistically justified threshold
for the score value used to select a number of top-scored genes,
using purely statistical approach without taking into account
the functional relations between genes, such as physical
interactions between their products. The derived in this way
gene signatures are used, for example, for predicting outcome
of treatment in cancer therapies [–]. A predictive signature is
capable to give a prognosis on whether a patient will develop
metastases or not after the surgery and chemio-, radio- or other
forms of adjuvant therapies. One of the major problems with
computing predictive gene signatures is in observation that
various signatures obtained on different cohorts of patients
studied in similar conditions, but in different hospitals, have
little overlap []. This reduces their cognitive value since one
can not claim that the genes selected for the signature represent
molecules driving the disease.

Several efforts have been made in attempt to take into account
physical interactions between gene products at the top of the
ranked list of genes. For example, in [] network signatures of
breast cancer metastases were derived using protein-protein
interaction (PPI) database in combination with differential gene
expression values. Various machine learning frameworks were
developed in order to include network information into the
analysis of gene expression data [–]. Several attempts of metaanalysis
of gene signatures were made for multiple cancer
studies [,
] 
and for breast cancer in particular [,
],
finding recurrent patterns appearing in them (for example, the
role of proliferation, RNA splicing, immune response genes).
Here we suggest a new method, called Optimally Functionnaly
Enriched Network (OFTEN) for associating a ranked list of
genes with a network of protein-protein interactions. The genes
forming this network are not necessary the most top-ranked
genes in the list, but they represent a compact functionally
related group of genes having relatively high scores.

OFTEN-analysis is inspired by the idea of percolation in graph
theory. Given a connected graph and k randomly selected
nodes, one may estimate the expected size of the largest
connected component formed by these genes. For many type of
graphs, the typical behavior is the following: at some critical kcrit
number of nodes, most of them start to be connected in a large
connected component. Our own estimation of the critical value
kcrit for the graph of protein-protein interactions of the Human
Protein Reference Database (HPRD) [] approximately equals
1500 nodes. This means that if the first k &lt;&lt; kcrit top-ranke genes
form a relatively large connected component (compared to the
randomly expected), their distribution on the graph of proteinprotein
interactions is highly non-random and they form a
tightly connected functional group. We estimate the statistical
significance of appearance of such a connected component,
using proper random sampling strategy which conserves the
degree distribution of the selected genes in the PPI network.

Finding OFTEN network associated with a ranked list of genes
allows solving two important problems: (1) Detect the optimal
number of genes to select based on their distribution in the
global PPI network; (2) Detect the functional “core” at the top of
the ranked list of genes which, however, not necessarily formed
by the most ranked genes (which can be located at the very top
because of pecularities of the statistical method or
irreproducible features of biological sample collection). As a
result, we expect OFTEN networks obtained for datase
representing independent cohorts of patients to be more
reproducible than the gene signatures obtained by naive
selection of the most top-ranked genes. We show that this is the
case using four independent breast cancer datasets and
computing ranked lists of differentially expressed genes
between the therapeutic success (absence of metastases and
death from cancer in 5 years after the treatment) and the
therapeutic failure (appearance of metastases and/or death
from cancer in the first 5 years after the treament).

Our meta-analysis is based on finding the overlap between
OFTEN networks found in independent datasets and provides
a highly reproducible network which contains many known
cancer driver genes involved in developing metastases and also
new genes which are “guilty by association” in malignant
tumorigenesis. We believe that this META-OFTEN network is a
valuable tool for interpreting predictive gene signatures of
breast cancer treatment.

Methodology
Four publicly available microarray gene expression datasets
(GSE1456, GSE2034, GSE2990, GSE3494) were used to compute
the ranked lists of differentially expressed genes between those
tumours that developed metastases and those that did not in
five years following the treatment. In one dataset (GSE3494),
only the survival clinical data were available. In this case, we
assumed that the death caused by cancer was the result of
appearance of metastases: an assumption which is justified by
high co-occurence between 5-years survival and 5-years
appearance of metastases: an assumption which is justified by
high co-occurence between 5-years survival and 5-years
apperance of metastases in two other datasets where boht data
were available. We used HPRD version 9 database as a source
of protein-protein interactions in human cells. For constructing
the interaction graph, we used all binary protein interaction
part of the database. In addition, the protein relations inside
protein complexes were used. A complex was represented as a
full clique of interactions between its components which added
additional 9% of connections to the graph. The largest complex
with id=COM_2971 was excluded from the database because of
its anomalously big size. The whole interaction graph was
prepared as a file which can be imported into Cytoscape
software [].

OFTEN analysis:
For k top-ranked genes, we map them on the interaction graph.
Let us assume that k' of them are found in the interaction graph.
All connections between them are extracted, forming a
subnetwork. (1) The largest connected component is extracted
from the subnetwork and its size C(k') is recorded; (2) k' genes
are randomly sampled from HPRD preserving the connectivity
distribution of the k' genes from the ranked list. R(k') is the size
of the largest connected component; (3) Step 3 is repeated 10000
times. As a result, the following percolation score is computed,
S = (1/k')(C(k')-Mean(R(k'))), where Mean(R(k')) is the mean
value of the randomly formed largest connected component
size; (4) Steps 1-3 are repeated for a range of values of k, and kopt
is estimated, which corresponds to the end of the plateau after
which the score goes down (); (5) OFTEN network is
the largest connected component of a subnetwork formed by
kopt top-ranked genes; (6) OFTEN analysis is implemented as a
part of BiNoM Cytoscape plugin []. Example of the S(k)
dependence for one of the dataset is shown in ().

Four OFTEN networks were constructed for the datasets
described earlier. The META-OFTEN network is formed by
those nodes which appear at least in two OFTEN networks out
of four (). Genes of the META-OFTEN network were
used to derive a simple score to predict development of
metastases in unsupervised manner, as in 
[]. We computed
the first principal component of gene expression data matrix,
using the META-OFTEN genes. The risk of metastases risk
score for a sample is the contribution of this sample to the first
principal component. The patients were separated in three
groups, with low, intermediate and high score values. Kaplan-
Meyer survival curves for these three groups for the GSE2034
dataset are shown in ().

Discussion
OFTEN networks represent the functional “cores” found in the
ranked lists of differentially expressed genes. We can say this,
because interaction between gene products or their
participation in the same complex is a natural indicator of
functional proximity. Unlike the standard enrichment analysis,
the OFTEN network does not use pre-defined borders of
pathways and ontology gene sets but uses the whole global
protein-protein interaction network. OFTEN-analysis
automatically detects the optimal number of genes to select
from the ranked gene list.

Four OFTEN networks computed for four independent breast
cancer datasets show significant overlap: in average, 65% of
nodes of each OFTEN network are found in at least one another
OFTEN and 25% of nodes are found in at least two others
OFTENs. Gene signatures extracted from the lists of
differentially expressed genes using the standard statistical
approach usually show much more modest overlap (not more
than few percents, see []). For example, in our analysis there
are only 2 genes (RACGAP1 and RRM2) found in common
between the top 100 (average size of the extracted OFTEN
network) differentially expressed genes, and another 4 genes
(DTL, NEK2, UBE2S and ZWINT) are found in at least three
datasets.

Nodes of the META-OFTEN network are organized into several
functional subgroups, represented by network modules and
containing many genes known to be implicated in
tumorigenesis. The most evident component, as expected, is
related to the regulation of cell cycle, especially in its G2 and M
phases: CDK1, CCNB1/2, CCNA2, CDKN3, CDC20, AURKA
are the classical cell cycle genes mentioned as frequent
components of prognostic breast cancer signatures 
[]. In the
same component one can find various genes involved in cell
cycle checkpoints and DNA replication such as MAD2L1,
BUB1B, TOP2A, RRM2, PTTG1, MCM2/6. Most of the genes in
the central cell-cycle related component are upregulated in
metastatic tumours, indicating at more intense proliferation. At
the same time, few genes are downregulated such as potential
tumour suppressor and cell motility regulator STARD13 and
two genes MEF2C and ITPR1 whose role in breast cancer is not
yet well-established (however, they have known associations
with other genetically transmitted disorders).

Another component, connected to the central one through
BIRC5 protein (regulator of apoptosis) contains many stressresponse
genes, in particular, related to heat-chock response
(HSP90AA1, HSPA4, STIP1), nuclear receptor signaling
(NR3C1, KPNA2, SMARCA4), redox reactions (TXN, TXNIP),
various regulators of transcription and epigenetic regulation
(RUNX1T1, STAT5B, TCF4, ID1). The role of many of these
genes in tumorigenesis is not yet clearly established though few
are known to be associated with breast cancer (such as ID1 and
STAT5B). Another component of the META-OFTEN network
contains only downregulated components of the major
histocompatibility complex (CD74 and various HLA-genes)
responsible for presenting antigens to the immune system.
Apparently, this indicates an importance of escaping immune
response by tumor cells during distant tissue invasion:
however, this mechnism seems not to be well characterized.
Recently, CD74 was suggested as a promising therapeutic target
for cancer treatment [].

A rather misterious component of META-OFTEN contains
upregulated genes PRPF40A and U2AF2, and downregulated
GAS7, PECAM1, MECP2 and INPP5D. Some of these genes are
expressed only in hematopoetic cells, and many are involved in
blood cell differentiation and migration. The role of this
component in metastasation is obscure. The remaining
components are small ones and represent some single
reproducible interactions and individual genes. Among the
most reproducible, there is involved in cytokinesis interaction
between PRC1 and RACGAP1. Nodes of the META-OFTEN
network can be ranked with respect to their role in forming the
structure of the graph. For example, genes CCNB2, TPX2, CD74
have the highest relative connectivity (ratio of the connectivity
in the network and the global connectivity in the global PPI
network []), while CDK1, HSP90AA1, BIRC5 have the highest
inbetweenness values (they can be classified as “routers” or
“bottlenecks” as in []).

The survival analysis we have performed, using the METAOFTEN
genes and the score from unsupervised analysis, shows
that the set of genes in the network has significant prognostic
potential. For example, if the same score as ours is derived from
the set of 70-gene signature by van't Veer 
[], then the METAOFTEN
set shows clear superiority. Comparison with other
survival curves for multiple prognostic signatures 
[] shows
that it is also competitive with more elaborated supervised
procedures.

Conclusion
The main contribution of this paper is a method allowing to
associate a network of molecular interactions with a ranked list
of genes, called OFTEN-analysis. The analysis allows finding a
functional core of a set of genes located at the top of the list but
not necessarily formed by the most top-ranked genes. An
advantage of the method is in that it does not use any predefined
pathway or ontology bordersin the global PPI network.
This is why OFTEN is more informative than the standard
enrichment analysis and can lead to the discovery of not yet
known molecular mechanisms. OFTEN-analysis can become a
standard tool in high-throughput data analysis in molecular
biology: therefore, we have implemented it in BiNoM
Cytoscape plugin []. OFTEN-analysis can be applied to a
ranked list of genes which can be produced by any type of
statistical methods (for example, from Principal Component
Analysis or regression).

We applied the method to four ranked gene lists produced from
analysis of differential gene expression between metastatic and
non-metastatic breast tumours. We show that the sets of genes
forming OFTENs are characterized by larger overlap than the
sets of the most differentially expressed genes. We derive a
META-OFTEN network representing the most reproducible
part of four OFTENs and show that it contains known cancer
and metastases driver genes as well as new mechanisms whose
role in metastatic development is to be understood. We show
that the genes of the META-OFTEN network compose a gene
signature with significant prognostic value.

AZ is a member of the team “Computational Systems Biology of
Cancer,” Equipe labellisee by the Ligue Nationale Contre le
Cancer. UK was supported by governmental grant from the
Ministry of education and science, Republic of Kazakhstan.

Citation:Kairov et al, Bioinformation 8(16): 773-776 (2012)

OFTEN analysis and META-OFTEN network of genes differentially expressed between metastatic and non-metastatic
patient samples. A) Example of the percolation score S behavior with respect to the number of chosen top-ranked differentially
expressed genes (GSE2034 dataset). B) META-OFTEN network constructed for four breast cancer datasets. Different edge types
correspond to different evidences of protein-protein interactions as described in HPRD. Color shows average t-test values over
those datasets where the gene is included in OFTEN network. Size of the node signifies the number of OFTEN networks in which
the gene is found: small circles correspond to two datasets, average – to three, big nodes appear in all four datasets. C) Survival
analysis made on the genes of the network, using unsupervised scoring strategy. The plot shows percentage of metastases-free
survival for three groups of patients: with high, intermediate (within one standard deviation around the mean value) and low score
values.

