Background
Infectious diseases remain a significant threat to public health,
even with the development of antimicrobial chemotherapy. The
extensive use of antibiotics has contributed to the emergence of
antimicrobial resistance and the reduced efficacy of the
available antimicrobial agents []. Therefore, identification of
novel antibiotics is urgently required to overcome the
challenges presented by the emergence of multiple drugresistant
microorganisms [].

Natural molecules provide a much wider and larger chemical
space than that covered by synthetic molecules. Moreover,
Natural molecules often have surprisingly beneficial properties
in terms of penetration, absorption, and solubility 
[].
Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) originating from natural
resources have been recognized as a novel class of antibiotics to
treat antibiotic-resistant bacterial infections 
[]. AMPs, which
are typically less than 50 amino acids in length, are naturally
occurring molecules that play a central role in the innate
immune system and have specific physicochemical properties,
such as charge, isoelectric point (pI) and aggregation 
[].

Organisms living in germ-filled environments, such as liver
flukes, are considered as an abundant source of antimicrobials
[]. Such organisms make these natural molecules for their own
needs; thus, these molecules may be deficient in certain
medicinal properties required in humans. After ingestion by
mammals, the metacercariae of the liver fluke excyst in the
duodenum and larval flukes then migrate up into the small
intrahepatic bile ducts []. Based on this life cycle, flukes are
vulnerable to microbes from both the external and internal
environment. Indeed, a previous study showed that there is a
diverse microbial community associated with liver flukes and
that some species are specific to the biliary system 
[],
suggesting that liver flukes may have the ability to produce
various AMPs.

Currently, bioinformatic techniques are used to predict peptide
sequences by a theoretical survey of the target transcriptome
[]. 
The search for peptides using in silico analysis is performed
by correlating the characteristics of AMPs previously reported
in the literature with amino acid sequences. However, further
studies are needed to optimize methods for in silico analysis.

Therefore, the aim of this study was to identify novel AMP
candidates through refined computational methods.

Methodology
Identification of suitable candidates based on physicochemical properties and a machine learning algorithm:
AMP candidates were picked according to the previously
observed physicochemical properties of reported AMPs. All of
the protein-coding genes were calculated using EMBOSS
PEPSTATS [] in terms of molecular weight (MW), number of
residues (≤ 80-mer), pI (8 ≤ pI ≤ 12) 
[], and a net positive
charge []. 
In vitro and in vivo aggregation levels were
calculated with default parameters using TANGO (AGG ≤ 500,
0 ≤ HELIX ≤ 25, 25 ≤ BETA ≤ 100) 
[] and AGGRESCAN (-40 ≤
Na4vSS ≤ 60) [], respectively. The continuous sequence of
residues in each AMP candidate was determined using AMPA
[]. These properties reflect the binding of AMPs to negatively
charged microbial cell membranes, which results in bacterial
cell death via a pore or carpet mechanism []. In order to
exclude non-AMP candidates, all Clonorchis sinensis protein
sequences were examined using the artificial neural network
(ANN) algorithm of CAMP at the default value [].

In vivo stability:
To enhance in vivo stability, C. sinensis protein sequences that
had proteolytic cleavage sites were excluded. Proteolytic
cleavage sites were identified using PeptideCutter
(http://web.expasy.org/peptide_cutter/) for chymotrypsin
and EMBOSS EPESTFIND [] for PEST motifs, mainly enriched
in proline (P), glutamic acid (E), serine (S), threonine (T).

Results &amp; Discussion
Parasites as a potential source of antimicrobials:
The development of microbial resistance to AMPs is unlikely
because it is difficult for microbes to alter cell-structural
elements. Differences in membrane composition between
microbes and higher eukaryotes are important for selectively
targeting microbial membranes, reducing toxicity, and
improving therapeutic use []. Recent research on multidrug
resistant bacteria has shown that organisms living in germfilled
environments have developed means of protecting
themselves against microbial pathogens []. Such organisms
could be very good sources of antimicrobials. Therefore, based
on the life cycle of the liver fluke C. sinensis, this worm could be
an untapped source of new antimicrobials.

Stepwise identification of novel antimicrobials:
Because of the low sequence similarity of AMPs, novel AMP
candidates from C. sinensis (CsAMPs) were identified by a
computational approach following typical features of known
AMPs []. From all of the protein-coding genes collected,
CsAMP candidates were screened for antimicrobial effects
based on the following criteria (). First, CsAMP
candidates were examined for physicochemical properties of
known AMPs, i.e., length (≤ 80-mer) [], pI (8 ≤ pI ≤ 12), no
aggregation in vitro but aggregation in vivo 
[], and a positive
charge []. Second, CsAMP candidates were examined based
on in vivo stability of peptides, wherein CsAMP candidates
having either chymotrypsin or PEST motifs as proteolytic
cleavage sites were excluded.

Predictions based on physicochemical properties:
Based on the average length of known AMPs, we selected 317
sequences that were less than or equal to 80 amino acids in
length. This was a stringent feature that dramatically reduced
the number of possible CsAMPs. Subsequently, 230 sequences
were selected based on their positive charge, another feature of
most known AMPs. Further analysis of pI yielded 198
sequences having a pI between 8 and 12 [].

In vitro and in vivo aggregation is important for the formation of
aggregates on cell surfaces, an essential step required for AMP
activity, similar to the carpet-like mechanism []. Peptide
aggregation on the bacterial outer membrane could help clear
bacteria. Recent studies have shown that AMP aggregation
decreases in solution but increases at the bacterial membrane,
conditions that are more hydrophobic. Thus, we examined
aggregation in solution and bacteria using TANGO [] and
AGGRESCAN [], respectively. Through these two
predictions, only six sequences remained.

Within the sequence of each CsAMP candidate, it is important
to identify continuous fragments that exhibit antimicrobial
activity. Using the AMPA server, we found four CsAMPs with
at least one antimicrobial fragment  (see supplementary
material). The AMPA server applies an algorithm to assign an
antimicrobial index to each amino acid and builds a model for
the entire protein sequence through a sliding-window
approach []. The antimicrobial index is calculated from the
half-maximal inhibitory concentration values and is
experimentally affected by the individual substitutions in
bactenecin 2A []. The predicted continuous fragments were
confirmed to exhibit antimicrobial activity for the entire
sequence [] and could be a valuable starting point for the
development of novel AMPs [].

Finally, we tested CsAMP candidates using the ANN algorithm
of CAMP [], which applies the linear association of
independent variables to predict the group membership for
each of the dependent variables. All four CsAMP candidates
were classified as AMPs using this analysis.

In vivo stability:
AMPs often exhibit limited bioavailability because they can be
aggregated or degraded by proteases []. It appears that most
known AMPs have proteolytic cleavage sites for some
proteases, such as SUMO protease, furin protease, or 3C
protease. Trypsin, proteinase K, and pepsin do or do not affect
the antimicrobial activity under different experimental
conditions. However, some endopeptidases induce a dramatic
reduction in antimicrobial activity. The α-chymotrypsin attacks
internal basic residues, as an essential feature of antimicrobial
peptides []. PEST motifs are known to elevate the
degradation of polypeptides containing them []. In some
cases, conserved binding motifs, such as lanthionine rings, may
enhance the stability of AMPs against proteases []. None of
the three CsAMP candidates contained protease cleavage sites
for chymotrypsin or PEST motifs, except for one CsAMP
candidate (Acc. No. GAA53434.1). Nonetheless, after partial
removal of the problematic region, the
‘SRHCRVCSNRHGLIRK’ peptide was confirmed to be
antimicrobial based on the previous stepwise analysis (data not
shown).

Conclusion
In this study, we have suggested a refined computational
approach to discover new AMPs from the liver fluke C. sinensis.
The procedure can be divided into two distinct but
complementary parts: rational data-driven predictions and in
vivo stability predictions. We used a prediction strategy based
on physicochemical properties to reduce the huge amount of C.
sinensis protein fragments. Following this theoretical screening
few CsAMP candidates were selected, and their in vivo stability
was analyzed. Eventually, four high-activity, high-stability
peptides were identified. These could serve as the starting
material for further development of new AMPs via structural
modification and optimization. We believe that the strategic
computational approach proposed in this study can also be
applied to other bioactive peptide design.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This research was supported by a fund (4800-4847-311) by
Research of Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Citation:Yoo et al, Bioinformation 11(1): 017-020 (2015)

Schematic representation of AMP predictions based
on physicochemical properties and predictions of their in vivo
stability to discover AMP candidates from the entire genome of
C. sinensis.

