Background
Trichomonas vaginalis is a unicellular, anaerobic, flagellated protozoan 
[].
Infection with T. vaginalis cause of trichomoniasis, number one nonviral and
second most sexually transmitted disease (STD) resulting in more than 250
million infections in women each year in the world 
[]. T. vaginalis transmitted
mostly by sexual contact. Adverse consequences to women with trichomoniasis
include enhanced risk for human immunodeficiency virus transmission 
[];
other complications resulting from infection are cervical cancer and bad
pregnancy outcomes []. 
The recently published draft genome sequence of T.
vaginalis by The Institute of Genomic Research (TIGR) reveals an abnormally
large genome size of 160 Mb which is ten times the previously predicted size
of this genome []. 
It is not still clear why T. vaginalis possesses such a large
genome, and how such massive gene expansion happened. There are two
possible important mechanisms which may be responsible for large scale
genome expansion. It may be either through lateral gene transfer or through
large scale gene duplication events. Lateral transfer is the process by which
genetic information is passed from one genome to an unrelated genome, where
it is stably integrated and maintained []. 
This genome is bigger than those of
many other medically important protists but is characteristic of trichomonads.
One reason for the large Trichomonas genome is the presence of hundreds of
DNA transposons []. 
But in case of gene duplication a non functional copy of
a gene get incorporated in the host genome. Many protein families underwent
massive duplication. Pseudogenes are DNA sequences that were derived from
a functional copy of a gene but which have acquired mutations that are
deleterious to function. This duplicated copy of original functional gene gets
incorporated into a new chromosomal location may leading to expansion of the
existing gene family []. 
The genome also gives the platform to construct and
analyze some important signal, secretary and metabolic pathway to identify and
validate novel targets, which can be harvested to designed new drug molecules.
Sequence similarity search methods provide some insights into putative
functions for most gene products. Huge number of pseudogenes was thought to
be present in T. vaginalis due to massive gene duplication. In case of T.
vaginalis TIGR predicted that there are about 50,000 genes in T. vaginalis but
did not mention about pseudogenes. It was speculated that a significant portion
of the 50,000 genes might be pseudogenes. Proteins are generally comprised of
one or more functional regions, commonly termed domains. Aims of the study
were: 
Identification of paralogous proteins,

Prediction of families,
domains and repeats of identified paralogous proteins and

To investigate the role of paralogous proteins in the genome expansion 
of evolution of T.vaginalis.




Methodology
Identification of Paralogous proteins
The complete set of proteins predicted from the T. vaginalis genome was
retrived from the FTP server of the TrichDB database
(http://trichdb.org/trichdb/) and TIGR 
(
ftp://ftp.tigr.org/pub/data/Eukaryotic_Projects/t_vaginalis/annotation_dbs/FTP directory) 
[]. Around 50,000
proteins in the FASTA format retrieved from the database were used to carry
out the all against all database searches by using the genomic BLAST-P
available at NCBI server []. 
In case of all against all search, a comparison
was made in which every predicted protein sequence was used as a query in a
similarity search against a database composed of the rest of the self-proteome,
and the significant matches are identified by a low E-value. The T. vaginalis
proteome database is present at NCBI. Protein sequence was searched at EValue
0 or less than 0. Since many proteins comprise different combinations of
a common set of domains, proteins that align more than 80% of their lengths
for query and subject were selected []. After this filtration only those
alignment were selected which give the sequence identify more than 60%.

Prediction of families, domain and repeats in paralogous proteins
For the purpose of functional annotation and to investigate the gene family
expansion, the identified set of paralogous proteins was used to search the
protein families by using the Pfam search. The Pfam database is a large
collection of protein domain families. Each family is represented by multiple
sequence alignments and Hidden Markov models (HMMs). The paralogous
protein dataset was submitted at Pfam server which predicted the protein
families, motifs, repeats and clans at the default pfam parameter
(http://pfam.sanger.ac.uk/) 
[].

Results and Discussion
After using rigid selection criteria for BLASTP search (very low E-value,&gt;60%
sequence identity and &gt;80% alignment length) 2700 protein sequences were
found to be paralogous proteins and around 47,200 proteins were identified as
non paralogous proteins as they do not match with any protein of the proteome.
The various protein families, domains, repeats and clans for the paralogous
protein were identified with the help of Pfam sequence search. Total 1496
paralogous protein were found in different pfam families (collection of related
proteins), 1027 sequences contains different pfam domain (structural unit
which can be found in multiple protein contexts), 3 sequences have pfam motif
(short unit found outside globular domains) and 60 proteins contains different
pfam repeats (short unit which is unstable in isolation but forms a stable
structure when multiple copies are present)(see 
&amp; 
). 
Total 1092 paralogous protein sequences contain pfam clan
(collection of families that have arisen from a single evolutionary origin) and
1494 proteins does not belong to any clan.

Some of significant protein families are Adeno_E4 (362), CDO_I (71),
DUF1111 (357), PAT1 (75), VirE (339) followed by domains Alpha-2-
MRAP_C (213), Pox_D5 (282), RNA_helicase (193), Lipid_DES (64),
Ketoacyl-synt (92), Apolipoprotein (55) and significant repeats are PT (15),
Collagen (44) . 
Similarly some of significant predicted clan are
CL0318 (356), CL0123 (280), CL0023 (209), CL0046 (92), CL0029 (79),
CL0194 (19) and CL0044 (17) . Some other clan also present but not
in significant value are CL0028 (5), CL0219 (5), CL0125 (4), CL0236 (3),
CL0281 (3), CL0020 (3), CL0063 (1), CL0119 (1), CL0072 (1), CL0183 (1)
and CL0295 (1). Here we can clearly see the evidences of evolutionary
relationship among paralogous protein in the form of sequence motifs, protein
families, domain and repeats [].

There are other protein families were only one member of paralogous protein is
present. Some of such protein families found in T. vaginalis genome are
Adeno_E3_CR2, 3H, AnfG_VnfG, Dak2, Dor1, DUF1151, DUF1524,
DUF2078, DUF3508, DUF357, DUF562, DUF752, DUF912, DUF947,
FliD_C, FliS, Glycophorin_A, KiIA-N, Mid2, MtrF, MyTH4, PfUIS3,
Phage_30_3, Podoplanin, Rabaptin, Roughex, T4SS, Tobravirus_2B, Tom37,
Transposase_1, and Transposase_7. Similarly CRM1_C, CTP_transf_2,
Hat1_N, KorB, MetRS-N, NurA, PAS, PBP5_C and Ribosomal_L30_N are the
domains where only single member of paralogous protein is identified. The
CCT is the only identified pfam motif having three members of paralogous
proteins.

Large number of pseudogenes were already reported in many families of
protein for example, ankyrin repeat proteins, hypothetical protein, conserved
hypothetical protein, adenylate cyclase, vsaA, surface antigen BspA, ANKrepeat
protein, CG1651-PDrelated, ABC transporter protein, kinases, major
facilitator superfamily protein, leucine rich repeat family protein, and
Transmembrane amino acid transporter protein [,
]. These pseudogenes
may be playing active role in the formation of paralogous protein. The New
gene functions are thought to be gained by duplication of an existing gene
creating different tandem copies. Functional differentiation then occurs
between the copies by mutation and selection.

We found 2700 paralogous protein which is present across wide range of
different protein families, domain, clan and repeats. This clearly reflects that
many protein families underwent massive duplication in the T. vaginalis
genome. The expansion of genetic material and amplification of specific gene
may be the example of adaptations of the T. vaginalis during its transition to a
urogenital environment from enteric environment (the habitat of most
trichomonads) [,
]. We hope that after a larger survey on individual
duplicated protein families and having more experimental data on the
paralogous protein, we could shed light on biological issues like, how genes
were duplicated and their evolution histories.
The presence of different domains in varying combinations in different proteins
gives rise to the diverse repertoire of proteins found in genome. Identifying the
domains present in a protein can provide insights into the function of that
protein. Such identification of paralogous proteins and their functional
annotation will not only give insight into the biological mechanism of genome
but also help in identification of the novel drug targets. The identified
paralogous proteins can be excluded from the possible list of drug targets, as
paralogous proteins represents non functional product of duplicated genes
known as pseudogenes [].

The identified paralogous proteins and their sequence in the FASTA format can
be retrieved using the T. vaginalis protein accession number from
http://trichdb.org/trichdb/
for future analysis. The amino acid sequence of the
predicted hypothetical proteins encoded by the predicted genes can be used as a
query of the protein sequence databases in a database similarity search. A
match of a predicted protein sequence to one or more database sequences not
only serves to identify the gene function, but also validates the gene prediction.
The genome sequence can further be annotated with the information on gene
content and predicted structure, gene location, and functional predictions 
[].

Conclusion
Collectively, these data suggest the presence of a very large number of
paralogous proteins in unicellular eukaryote T. vaginalis. Presence of
paralogous proteins across wide range of protein families, domain, repeats,
clans and motifs reflects large scale gene duplication events leading to gene
family expansion. The identification of paralogous proteins indicates the
possible role of gene duplication in the evolutionarily expansion of the T.
vaginalis genome because organisms considered to be deep-branching have
both paralogs. For further investigation the paralogous proteins can be
subjected to cluster analysis in order to identify the most closely related groups
of proteins.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are grateful to the Sam Higginbotom Institute of Agriculture,
Technology &amp; Sciences, Deemed University, Allahabad for providing the
facilities and support to complete the present research work.

Citation:Singh et al, Bioinformation 6(1): 31-34 (2011)

Significant pfam HMMs Type Found In Paralogous Proteins.

Pfam Clan predicted for paralogous proteins.

