Background
In the past decade, gene expression analysis has been applied on a colorectal
carcinoma data in order to identify groups of genes that characterize each stage
during the progression of this particular disease or provide clues for the
possibility of malignancy. Colorectal carcinoma has three common stages
called the TNM system, which stands for Tumor/Node/Metastasis system.
Previous study in gene expression analysis for colorectal carcinoma
predominantly focuses on identifying these three groups: presence of tumor,
lymph node metastasis, and distant metastasis 
[]. Existing approaches utilize a
single clustering algorithm in order to identify the groups of colorectal
carcinoma during gene expression profiles analysis. One of the most popular
clustering methods for unveiling underlying features of gene expression
profiles is hierarchical clustering []. The shortcoming of using hierarchical
clustering analysis is that it needs subjective interpretation to determine the
number of clusters produced; a consequence that arises from the fact that
hierarchical clustering lacks valid statistical evaluation measures. Gaussian
Mixture clustering is another powerful clustering method that offers promising
results for identifying differential gene expression linked to malignancy of
human colorectal carcinoma []. Unfortunately, the last method has lack of
stability in finding the cluster structures.

Consensus clustering has emerged as a powerful method for improving both
robustness as well as stability of unsupervised classification solution 
[]. In its
early development, a consensus clustering algorithm was built by performing
consensus among multiple runs of a single clustering algorithm while using a
re-sampling technique []. 
Another different approach of consensus clustering
was to find a consensus among different clustering algorithms, coupled with
using simulated annealing to introduce a small change in each run, to find the
best consensus clusters solution []. Other approaches built consensus
clustering by combining partitions generated by weak clustering algorithms 
[].

We propose a consensus clustering algorithm that employs different parametric
clustering algorithms with a similar property: they are all centroid-based
clusterings. Our consensus strategy employs a majority vote scheme that uses
cluster validation techniques to examine the cluster quality. Centroid-based
clusterings require the initialization of initial centroid, which may lead to a
different clustering result in each different run. Hence, we introduce an
approach to find a consensus initial centroid. The consensus initial centroid is
then used as the initial parameter of each centroid-based clustering algorithm
that participates in the consensus clustering framework. By applying a
systematic selection to find a consensus initial centroid, we are able to produce
stable and robust clusters among different runs of the algorithm.

Methodology
Our proposed method enhances existing consensus clustering schemes as it
produces robust and distinctive clusters. The robust property indicates that it
produces stable result. That is, clusters structure is kept consistent in each run
of the consensus clustering. We implement three centroid-based clustering
algorithms to participate in the consensus clustering: K-means, K-medoids, and
Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM). The proposed consensus clustering consists
of three steps as shown in . The first step in the proposed consensus
clustering algorithm is to search for a consensus initial centroid. This step is
prerequisite to go further as we use three centroid-based clustering as the basis
of our algorithm, where each needs an initial centroid configuration as a
parameter. We use systematic selection on the furthest objects to generate
initial centroid candidates. Finally, K-means clustering is used to evaluate each
initial centroid candidate. The initial centroid candidate that is able to produce
clusters with minimum sum distance is then selected as the consensus initial
centroid. Since the consensus initial centroid is obtained by a systematic
selection process rather than a random process, it is able to guarantee the
structure of resulting clusters to be similar among clustering algorithm
participants, and the result of the clustering is consistent for each run. The
second step is to apply majority vote strategy to build consensus among the
result of single clustering algorithms. The majority vote strategy determines the
cluster of each single element by considering the majority number of clustering
algorithms, which agree to put the element in the same cluster. The rest of
elements that have insufficient agreement during majority vote are then
assigned based on the result of certain single clustering algorithm, which is
able to produce better cluster validation score. We use Davies-Bouldin index as
the cluster validation technique. The consensus clustering refinement step
evaluates the clusters of consensus clustering result. The refinement procedure
does cluster reassignment of any element with Silhouette index less than a
certain threshold, to another cluster which is able to produce better cluster
quality score. The cluster quality score is measured by R2 method as shown in
Equation (3) in the  
[]. The refinement procedure is
then repeated until the number of elements under the threshold is unchanged.

Discussion
We employ our proposed consensus clustering method on a real gene
expression dataset of human colorectal carcinoma provided by Muro et al. 
[].
This dataset consists of 341 selected informative genes out of 1536 genes from
111 samples (100 cancerous and 11 normal). Since the human colorectal
carcinoma dataset contains missing values, we perform data imputation to fill
the missing value using k-nearest neighbor method with k = 15. Using our
consensus clustering method, where parameters are set at: k = 3, r = 6, t = 10,
and ts = 0.25, the resulting clusters are similar to the result of Gaussian Mixture
Model by Muro et al. [] and Wasito et al. 
[]. The outcome consists of two
clusters with a large number of genes (i.e. the blue and green clusters) and one
cluster with a small number of genes (i.e. the red cluster). For further
discussion, we label the blue cluster as cluster A, the green cluster as cluster B,
and the red cluster as cluster C. Based on the measurement of the tightness of
clusters using R2 score, our consensus clustering method has R2 score of
28.5421 out of 100, which outperforms the result by Muro et al. 
[] that scored
of 18.1277 out of 100. A higher value of R2 score implies a higher quality of
clusters. Moreover, the visualization of cluster in 2-D graph, , shows
that the result of our consensus clustering is more separable as it contains less
overlapping elements between clusters. To assess the usefulness of our
algorithm, we perform Correlation Ratio (CR) analysis on cluster A and B with
the cancer clinical parameters. Cluster C, which contains small number of
genes, is analyzed using a different correlation technique. There are three
clinical parameters used in this analysis: the presence of tumor or normal
tissues, presence or absence of distant metastasis, and presence or absence of
lymph node metastasis. The results of correlation analysis are shown in 



.

&amp;

as the result of correlation ratio analysis on cluster A and B show
that both clusters have significant correlation with the first two clinical
parameters, which are the presence or absence of tumor and presence or
absence of distant metastasis. However, cluster A and B have no correlation to
lymph node metastasis as shown in . On the other hand, cluster C,
which consists of 16 genes that are listed in Tumor Classifier (TCL) genes,
appears to correlate with the existence of tumor. We calculate the average
value of 12 informative genes out of 16 in cluster C, sort them, and split these
genes into two groups. The first group has an average gene expression level of
greater than zero while the second group has an average gene expression level
of lower than zero. The plot is shown in , which shows that cluster C
correlates to the third colorectal carcinoma clinical parameter (i.e. the distant
metastasis).

Conclusion
In this work, we explore the combination of systematic selection of initial
centroid, majority vote scheme, and cluster validation technique to build a
stable and robust consensus clustering method. The proposed method
successfully combines and improves the performance of centroid-based
clustering algorithms used in the consensus. The proposed method has robust
property that is able to produce consistent cluster structures and memberships
for each run.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work was supported by a research grant from University of Indonesia, No.
2548/H2.R12/PPM.001.01/2010

Citation:Wahyudi et al, Bioinformation 6(7): 279-282 (2011)

The flow chart of the proposed consensus clustering algorithm

Clustering result comparison on human colorectal carcinoma (a)
Gaussian Mixture Model by Muro et al 
[] (b) Proposed consensus clustering

Correlation of gene expressions with cancer phenotype. Vertical axis
represents the correlation ratio of the different between tumor and normal
tissues. (a) Genes within cluster A (b) Genes within cluster B.

Correlation of gene expressions with cancer phenotype. Vertical axis
represents the correlation ratio of the presence or absence of distant metastasis.
(a) Genes within cluster A (b) Genes within cluster B.

Correlation of gene expressions with cancer phenotype. Vertical axis
represents the correlation ratio of the presence or absence of lymph node
metastasis. (a) Genes within cluster A (b) Genes within cluster B.

Linkage of the clusters of expressed genes to the existence of
distance metastasis in cluster C.

