Background
An outstanding facet of metabolism is the congruence of the
key metabolic pathways amongst diverse species. It might have
taken place as a result of their early advent in evolutionary
history as well as the process possesses high efficiency. One
thus looks for an opportunity for carrying out comparative
analysis of metabolic pathways among widely diverse species
with an aim to extract information about the functional relation
of organisms [,
]. The pentose phosphate pathway or hexose
monophosphate shunt exemplifies one such important
metabolic pathway which meets the need of all organisms for
providing reducing power in the form of NADPH to execute
anabolism. Apart from generating NADPH for use in reductive
biosynthesis reactions, the pentose phosphate pathway
generates pentose sugars which is utilized by actively growing
cells to put together nucleic acids, aromatic amino acids, cell
wall constituents, vitamins and coenzymes like NADH, ATP
and others [–]. Biochemically, the pentose phosphate pathway
has two distinct phases – the irreversible oxidative phase which
generates pentose phosphates and NADPH, and the reversible
non-oxidative phase that recycles pentose phosphates to
glucose 6-phosphate. In enteric bacteria such as Escherichia coli
pentose phosphate pathway is the sole route for utilizing sugars
like D-xylose, D-ribose and L-arabinose [,
] whereas, in many
ascomycetous fungi, mainly yeasts, pentose phosphate pathway
defends the cell from oxidative stress. From the medical
perspective, pentose phosphate pathway is of immense
significance and mutations in different genes connected with
this pathway results in metabolic disorders which includes at
least three congenital deficiencies [,
].

There are overall ten enzymatic reactions in the bi-phasic
pentose phosphate pathway with most of the consequent
enzymes being subdued by the final products of the reaction
[]. 
The reactions of the oxidative phase is concerned with the
oxidative NADPH generation and formation of the five carbon
sugar ribose 5-phosphate. These reactions are catalyzed by the
enzymes glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase, lactonase and 6-
phosphogluconate dehydrogenase. On the other hand, in the
non-oxidative phase, the enzymes phosphopentose isomerase,
phosphopentose epimerase, transketolase and transaldolase
catalyzes the interconversion of three to seven carbon
containing monosaccharides in a chain of non-oxidative
reactions. This may result in the synthesis of five carbon
containing sugars for nucleotide biosynthesis. Further,
conversion of these excess five carbon sugars into intermediates
for glycolytic pathway may occur. The enzymes transketolase
and transaldolase are vital enzymes in this regard as they
create a reversible link between glycolysis and pentose
phosphate pathway.

In view of the immense significance of the pentose phosphate
pathway and the multitude of functions this pathway performs,
we have undertaken an in-depth bioinformatic analysis of the
pentose phosphate pathway in 10 different organisms
representing diverse metabolic niche as well as habits and
include prokaryotes as well as eukaryotes. In this study, we
have attempted a comprehensive and comparative codon usage
analysis of the pentose phosphate pathway genes of a diverse
group of organisms representing different niches and the
related factors affecting codon usage with special reference to
the major forces influencing codon usage patterns.
Correspondence analyses of codon usage and amino acid usage
was performed to investigate the major trends in codon and
amino acid variations existing in the pentose phosphate
pathway genes. We have also tried to correlate the codon usage
bias with the tRNA content and analyze codon adaptation
index to predict the potential expression level of some of the
genes related to the pentose phosphate pathway. Along with
this we have also undertaken an elaborate amino acid profiling
of a key pentose phosphate pathway enzyme transketolase of
the ten different organisms featured in our study to find out if
there is any significant difference in the amino acid usage
pattern among diverse groups that might have cropped up as a
result of adaptation.

Methodology
The complete genome sequences of 10 organisms including
both prokaryotes and eukaryotes were downloaded from the
Integrated Microbial Genomes website 
(http://www.img.jgi.doe.gov) 
[]. These life forms epitomize diverse metabolic
niches ranging from mesophilic plant and animal pathogens,
free livings, halotolerants to methylotrophs. They include
organisms like Eremothecium gossypii ATCC 10895 (= Ashbya
gossypii ATCC 10895) [], 
Aspergillus fumigatus Af293 [],
Bacillus cereus 03BB102, Debaryomyces hansenii var hansenii
CBS767 [], Escherichia coli 
55989 [], Homo sapiens 
[], Pichia
pastoris GS115 [], Saccharomyces cerevisiae S288C 
[],
Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhimurium SL1344,
and Schizosaccharomyces pombe 972h []. Detailed information
regarding the organisms including NCBI sequence id, habitat,
relevance etc., is listed in  (see supplementary material).

The nucleotide sequences along with their corresponding amino
acid sequences encoding the information for the production of
proteins and enzymes of pentose phosphate pathway were
sorted out using references from KEGG database 
[–]. The 10
organisms included in the study, a total of nearly three hundred
gene sequences along with their amino acid counterparts was
sorted out. The gene sequences of the various enzymes
employed in pentose phosphate pathway of Escherichia coli
55989 and Saccharomyces cerevisiae S288C was taken as the
prokaryotic and eukaryotic standard model respectively. The E.
coli genome has 31 different gene sequences coding for the
different enzymes of the pentose phosphate pathway, whereas
there are about 28 different gene sequences for the same
purpose in S. cerevisiae.

The effective number of codons (ENc or Nc), which is a
measure of synonymous codon usage bias [], was calculated
for each nucleotide sequence encoding enzymes of the pentose
phosphate pathway. Further, the frequency of guanine and
cytosine at the synonymous third position of codon, known as
GC3 content was calculated. CodonW (http://www.codonw.sourceforge.net//) 
was employed to carry out both these
calculations. Nc plots were further constructed by plotting the
Nc values against the corresponding GC3 values obtained.
Codon Adaptation Index or CAI [], a commonly used and
well-accepted measure for calculating the expression levels of
gene sequences was calculated using the CAI Calculator present
in the E-CAI server (http://www.genomes.urv.es /CAIcal/) 
[].

A multivariate statistical analysis technique, called
correspondence analysis was performed. In this technique,
high dimensional data are reduced to a limited number of
variables or axes and the most prominent axes contributing to
the codon usage variation among the gene sequences is
considered []. Correspondence analysis, based on the pentose
phosphate pathway was employed to identify the relation and
distinction existing among the different organisms included in
our study. Correspondence analysis based on codon usage
pattern, relative synonymous codon usage or RSCU and amino
acid usage was done to find out the similarities and
dissimilarities in terms of synonymous codon usage and amino
acid usage pattern.

Results &amp; Discussion
Degeneracy due to the presence of synonymous codons is an
imperative virtue of the genetic code. The existence of
preference or biasness for a certain subset of codons within
organisms is governed by different factors which include
expression level [], protein structure and composition 
[],
tRNA abundance [], GC composition 
[], strand specific
compositional bias [], and gene length 
[]. The Nc index is a
simple measure of overall codon bias and ranges from twenty
to sixty one, where 20 is the value obtained when only one
codon is used for each amino acid (i.e., the codon bias is
maximum) and 61 is the value obtained when all synonymous
codon for each amino acid are equally used (i.e., no codon bias).
In our study of the pentose phosphate pathway genes, covering
10 different organisms spanning across diverse metabolic niches
we observed that in the prokaryote E. coli the effective codon
number (Nc) ranges from 29.9 to 52.4 with an average of 42.52,
whereas in case of S. cerevisiae the effective codon number lies
within 25.9 to 58.8 with an average of 45.  (see
supplementary material) lists the effective codon number range
of the pentose phosphate pathway coding sequences of the
different organisms along with the mean Nc scores. From this
table it is quite clear that the mean effective codon number of
the prokaryotic eubacteria is less than that of the eukaryotes
like fungi and H. sapiens. The Nc average for the pentose
phosphate pathway genes is lowest in terms of B. cereus (40.88)
whereas it is highest in the case of A. fumigatus (54.86) preceded
by H. sapiens (51.80). The observation that prokaryotic
eubacteria returns a lower Nc score is crucial in terms of the fact
that it implies they have a higher codon bias compared to the
eukaryotes.

Two crucial factors, considered to have strategic effect on codon
usage patterns of organisms are natural selection and mutation
pressure []. In order to explore whether the determinative
factors for codon usage variation in pentose phosphate pathway
genes is mutation pressure or natural selection, we carried out a
correlation analysis between Nc score and GC3. In conjunction
with this we put together the Nc plot for a better understanding
of the forces shaping codon usage distinction.

The Nc plots of the different organisms selected for the study
were separately constructed. Looking at the Nc versus GC3
plots (), we observed that in the case of prokaryotic
eubacteria, a genus specific clustering of the pentose phosphate
pathway genes is prevalent. This is a clear indication of the fact
that organism specific codon usage bias percolates into vital
metabolic pathway genes irrespective of their near universality.
Superimposing the individual Nc plots of the three eubacterial
genera, a striking feature emerged showing a clear distinction
between the codon usage pattern of gram positive Bacillus cereus
03BB102 and gram negative Escherichia coli 55989 or Salmonella
enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhimurium SL1344. This
discrete clustering of the pentose phosphate pathway genes on
the Nc plot based on their gram nature, which is a major
classification criterion for bacteria, is a significant upshot of this
study. The Nc plots in all these cases indicate the presence of
translation selection as a major force in shaping codon usage.

Analyzing the Nc plots of the eukaryotic fungal genera in
, it is observed that barring S. cerevisiae and D.
hansenii, all the other genera display a certain degree of
mutational pressure acting on some of their pentose phosphate
pathway genes. Apart from these two genera, many of the gene
sequences coding for pentose phosphate pathway enzymes in
Eremothecium gossypii, Debaryomyces hansenii var hansenii,
Schizosaccharomyces pombe, Pichia pastoris and Aspergillus
fumigatus indicate G+C compositional constraints, as they are
found to lie on or immediately below the null hypothesis curve.
The gene sequences coding for the enzymes of the pentose
phosphate pathway genes in H. sapiens forms a distinct
constellation on the Nc plot where we observe a significant
positive correlation (r=0.79; p&gt;&gt;0.01) between the Nc and GC3
values. Moving forward, we worked out the degree of
correlation existing between the Nc and GC3 values of the
pentose phosphate pathway genes and plotted this against the
number of tRNA genes employed by each of this eukaryotic
organism for decoding the standard twenty amino acids 
[]. It
was observed that there is a marked increase in the number of
tRNA genes decoding the twenty standard amino acids with
respect to increasing degree of positive correlation between Nc
and GC3 values (). This points to the fact that as
codon bias decreases, large amount of tRNA coding genes are
required to carry out translation. In this case, we find that the
fungal species S. cerevisiae encodes the largest number of amino
acid decoding tRNA genes, about 286, whereas in comparison
only 178 tRNA genes for the same function is present in A.
fumigatus. In H. sapiens we find the highest number of tRNA
genes, about 506 in number employed for decoding the twenty
standard amino acids. This observation is thus in line with our
general observation regarding the other eukaryotes, where, an
increase in positive correlation between Nc and GC3 values
point towards reduced codon bias, thus employing higher
amount of tRNA genes to encounter base sequence mutation in
tRNAs for proper translation.

Correlation analysis of effective codon number and codon adaptation index:
A correlation between the Nc score, which is a measure of
codon bias and the potential expression level of the gene or CAI
was calculated. CAI is a numerical value associated with each
gene of a given genome which expresses its synonymous codon
bias and helps us to study the effect of translational bias on
gene expression. The Codon Adaptation Index ranges from 0 to
1.0, with higher CAI values signifying that the gene of interest
has a higher degree of expressivity []. Generally, genes with
biased codon usage are potentially highly expressed and in the
case of E. coli, we observed a significant anti-correlation
between Nc and CAI (r= -0.85; p&gt;&gt;0.01) corroborating the fact
that biased genes are potentially highly expressed. Similarly,
the correlation between Nc and CAI was calculated in case of S.
cerevisiae and similar degree of anti-correlation was obtained (r
= -0.85; p&gt;&gt;0.01). We worked out the correlations between Nc
and CAI in the other test organisms and there also we found the
existence of significant anti-correlation. This anti-correlation
clearly suggest the tendency of nature to conserve gene
sequences related to vital functions like pentose phosphate
pathway metabolic reactions which is crucial in terms of
supplying reducing power to the cell along with pentose
phosphates, the building blocks of nucleic acids.

Correspondence analysis on relative synonymous codon usage (RSCU):
To investigate the major trend in relative synonymous codon
usage and amino acid usage variation, CodonW was used in
carrying out the correspondence analysis. For precisely carrying
out the correspondence analysis across the 10 diverse genera
selected for this study we meticulously sorted out only those
gene sequences which are present in all the organisms or at
least in 75% of the organisms subjected to the tests. It was
observed that there are nine such sequences present in all the
organisms and three sequences present in at least 3/4th of the
test subjects, coding for some of the important pentose
phosphate pathway enzymes. These include 5-phospho-ribosyl-
1(alpha)-pyrophosphate synthetase, 6-phosphogluconate
dehydrogenase, fructose 1,6-bisphosphate aldolase, fructose-
1,6-bisphosphatase, phosphofructokinase, phosphoglucose
isomerase, ribokinase, transaldolase, transketolase, gluconate
kinase, phosphoglucomutase and ribose-5-phosphate ketolisomerase.
 (see supplementary material) lists the
different functions catalyzed by some of these enzymes.

Correspondence analysis of about three hundred coding
sequences encoding pentose phosphate pathway enzymes of
the ten organisms were carried out along with correspondence
analysis of their amino acid counterparts. Correspondence
analysis on RSCU detected a single major trend of codon usage
variation and in comparison to all the axes generated, the first
axis and second axis accounted for 26.25% and 17.07% of the
total variations respectively, which are the highest among all
the axes. The position of the genes along the first and second
major axes was plotted in (). Correspondence analysis
on RSCU clearly shows a clear and distinct organism-specific
clustering of the pentose phosphate pathway coding sequences.
In line with our previous observation, we find that here also
there is a clear distinction between the gene clusters of gram
negative and gram positive eubacteria. The two gram negative
eubacterial genera in this study are found to remain together in
an inseparable cluster on the upper left quadrant of the plot,
whereas the gram positive B. cereus remain in a tight cluster on
the lower right quadrant of the plot ().

From this plot we also find that A. fumigatus clearly possesses a
distinct codon usage pattern among the eukaryotes and forms a
separate group in comparison with other eukaryotes, including
H. sapiens which forms an overlapping core cluster of
eukaryotic pentose phosphate pathway coding sequences at the
junction of the upper and lower quadrant on the right side of
the plot. Correspondence analysis performed on codon usage of
the pentose phosphate pathway enzyme coding sequences
detected a single major trend of codon usage variation and in
comparison to all the axes generated, the first axis and second
axis accounted for 28.78% and 19.31% of the total variations
respectively. The position of the genes along the first and
second major axes was plotted in (). This further
substantiate our findings clearly, earmarking the gram positive
genus from the gram negative eubacterial genera. The codon
usage pattern of A. fumigatus was found to be in line with our
previous observation. A major feature was the separation of the
H. sapiens genes in a separate cluster on the right hand side of
the plot, a fact that is primarily attributed to the significantly
different codon usage pattern in this genus along with its longer
gene length. All the remaining fungal yeast genera shared a
similar pattern of codon usage as is evident from the
correspondence analysis on codon usage.

Estimation of relative amino acid usage (RAAU):
Protein function is essentially a virtue of its structure and in
order to perform a function with fidelity and efficiency,
conservation of structural property is a pre-requisite. The
degeneracy prevailing at the order of gene sequences is reduced
at the amino acid level significantly to achieve this purpose. In
order to find out whether at the level of primary structure there
is an organism-specific distinction among the enzymes, we
carried out correspondence analysis on relative amino acid
usage along with the study of individual amino acid and codon
usage configuration of a vital pentose phosphate pathway
enzyme. Correspondence analysis on relative amino acid usage
of pentose phosphate pathway proteins and enzymes detected a
major trend of amino acid usage variation and in comparison to
all the axes generated, the first axis and second axis accounted
for 8.77% and 8.52% of the total variations respectively, which
are the highest among all the axes. The position of the genes
along the first and second major axes was plotted in 
(). From the correspondence analysis on amino acid usage
study we find that though there is a degree of separation in
terms of the amino acid usage pattern among the different
enzymes of the oxidative and non-oxidative phases of pentose
phosphate pathway (), but when comparing among
organisms spread out across two different domains of life there
is no significant distinction in the amino acid usage pattern of
any single enzyme ().

Amino acid configuration of transketolase:
We want to scrutinize the fact that if there exists any speciesspecific
amino acid configuration in the pentose phosphate
pathway enzymes, we made an in-depth study of a key enzyme
in the non-oxidative branch of the pentose phosphate pathway
that transfers a two-carbon glycoaldehyde unit from ketosedonor
to aldose-acceptor sugars, called transketolase. This
enzyme is also involved with Calvin cycle in photosynthetic
plants as well as bacteria. Transketolase, in mammals, links up
the pentose phosphate pathway to glycolysis, feeding surplus
sugar phosphates into the core carbohydrate metabolic
pathways. Its presence is necessary for the production of
NADPH, especially in tissues actively engaged in biosyntheses.
Transketolase enzyme activities have also been found to be
related to neurodegenerative diseases, diabetes, and cancer 
[].
The codon composition of the enzyme transketolase was
analysed in all the ten test organisms and it was observed that
the amino acid serine and leucine, which are coded by six
triplets have lesser bias in terms of usage of codons. In serine,
except AGU, the remaining five triplets AGC, UCA, UCU, UCG
and UCC are used randomly, whereas in leucine all the six
triplet codons CUG, UUA, CUC, CUU, CUA, and UUG are
used without discretion. The scenario is quite different in the
case of arginine, the last of the three amino acids coded by six
triplet codons where in all the organisms concerned ranging
from eubacteria to H. sapiens there is a higher degree of bias
towards CGU and AGA codons and decreasing order of
preference for the other four codons CGC, AGG, CGG and CGA
respectively. The inclination among all the test organisms
towards the GGU triplet coding for glycine is an interesting
finding and these observations justify the fact that in all these
organisms, there is a stronger codon-anticodon binding. The
binding arising due to formation of five to six hydrogen bonds
between codon and anti-codon is preferred []. The role of
translational selection in shaping codon composition in vital
metabolic pathway gene sequences is thus evident.

Inter-generic amino acid profile comparison of transketolase:
Further, analysis of the amino acid profile of about 15
transketolase primary protein structures reveal that the
concentration of polar amino acids vary considerably among
organisms which might have an effect on the hydrophillic
nature and may have a bearing on the habitat or environment of
the organism. A. fumigatus and H. sapiens exhibit a significantly
different amino acid usage pattern than A. fumigatus having
higher levels of non-polar aliphatic amino acids and positively
charged amino acids. Supplementary findings from the amino
acid composition study of transketolase reveals that—(i) alanine
is the most preferred amino acid among all organisms, (ii)
tryptophan is the least used aromatic amino acid, (iii)
methionine is the least preferred non-polar aliphatic amino
acid, (iv) cysteine is the least used amino acid among all
organisms, (v) glycine is evenly distributed among all
organisms, and (vi) Homo sapiens has elevated levels of the
amino acids phenylalanine, tyrosine, leucine, isoleucine and
serine. Comparing the amino acid distribution in 15
transketolase protein primary structures from ten different
organisms we find that () there is a certain degree of
predictability in the composition profile of all the organisms
barring A. fumigatus and H. sapiens, where few exceptions are
notable, including spiked levels of amino acids with polar side
chain and aromatic side chain in H. sapiens. In A. fumigatus, we
observe a significantly different pattern of amino acid family
composition with higher concentration of amino acids with
non-polar aliphatic side chain, polar side chain and positively
charged side chain.

In the case of A. fumigatus, a mesophilic human pathogen
fungus responsible for invasive aspergillosis, we consistently
observed a different codon usage pattern which finally
translated in to its amino acid composition model portraying a
unique profile for one of its crucial pentose phosphate pathway
enzyme, transketolase. Apart from this exception, all our
findings substantiate the fact that, in a vital and core energy
metabolism pathway genome-specific codon usage bias is
overridden or not translated into amino acid degeneracy where
purifying selection plays a significant role in safeguarding the
form and function of an enzyme.

Conclusion
The analysis of various codon usage parameters and their interrelationship,
points to the fact that organism-specific codon
usage bias is a virtue of an organism. A clear distinction in the
codon usage pattern of gram positive and gram negative
bacteria in terms of pentose phosphate pathway was an
important observation of this study. In the case of eukaryotic
fungi, where the genera are quite related some degree of
distinction is evident in term of codon usage, but the degree of
distinction is less. In the case of Homo sapiens, we find a specific
and distinct clustering of the pentose phosphate pathway genes
in terms of codon usage pattern which may be attributed to its
unique codon usage nature and greater gene length. The results
of correspondence analysis clearly show that even in the case of
a vital life support pathway like pentose phosphate pathway,
carrying out important metabolic functions, like generation of
reducing power and pentose phosphates for nucleotide
synthesis, organism-specific codon usage pattern is clearly
evident. Both in terms of codon usage and RSCU pattern, a clear
specificity is present that delineates organism. In the human
pathogen A. fumigatus Af 293, a different codon usage pattern
was observed, which finally translated into its amino acid
composition model portraying a unique profile in a key pentose
phosphate pathway enzyme called transketolase. The functions
of a core pathway are universal and functions are a property of
enzyme structure, at the level of amino acid usage a distinction
among organism specific enzymes is quite blurred, a fact
attributable to purifying selection and conservation.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We would like to acknowledge the Department of
Biotechnology, Government of India for its two grants
BT/BI/04/026/93 and BT/BI/010/019/99.

Citation:Pal et al, Bioinformation 9(7): 349-356 (2013)

(A) Nc plot of the three eubacterial genera where the markers indicate pentose phosphate pathway gene sequences of E.
coli=Escherichia coli 55989; Sal=Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhimurium; and Bacillus=Bacillus cereus 03BB102. The
continuous curve represents the null hypothesis that the GC bias at the synonymous site is solely due to mutation but not selection;
(B) Nc plot of the six fungal genera where the markers indicate pentose phosphate pathway gene sequences of
Eremo=Eremothecium gossypii ATCC 10895; Sacch=Saccharomyces cerevisiae S288C; Asper=Aspergillus fumigatus Af293;
Debaro=Debaryomyces hansenii var hansenii CBS767; Pichia=Pichia pastoris GS115; and Schizo=Schizosaccharomyces pombe 972h. The
continuous curve represents the null hypothesis that the GC bias at the synonymous site is solely due to mutation but not selection.

(A) Scatter plot showing exponential increase in the number of tRNA genes (within parentheses) decoding the twenty
standard amino acids with respect to increasing degree of positive correlation between Nc and GC3 values in EG= Eremothecium
gossypii ATCC 10895; AF= Aspergillus fumigatus Af293; SP= Schizosaccharomyces pombe 972h; DH= Debaryomyces hansenii var hansenii
CBS767; SC= Saccharomyces cerevisiae S288C; and HS=Homo sapiens; (B) Organism wise correspondence analysis on RSCU of pentose
phosphate pathway gene sequences in all the test organisms. Organism abbreviations as mentioned in .

(A) Organism wise correspondence analysis on codon usage of pentose phosphate pathway gene sequences in all the test
organisms. Organism abbreviations as mentioned in Table1; (B) Enzyme wise correspondence analysis on amino acid usage of
twelve different enzymes of pentose phosphate pathway in all the test organisms where, E1=5-phospho-ribosyl-1(alpha)-
pyrophosphate synthetase; E2=6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase; E3=Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate aldolase; E4=Fructose-1,6-
bisphosphatase; E5=Phosphofructokinase; E6=Phosphoglucose isomerase; E7=Ribokinase; E8=Transaldolase1; E9=Transketolase;
E10=Gluconate kinase; E11=Phosphoglucomutase; and E12=Ribose-5-phosphate ketol-isomerase.

(A) Organism wise correspondence analysis on amino acid usage of pentose phosphate pathway enzyme sequences in all
the test organisms. Organism abbreviations as mentioned in ; (B) 3-D area plot for comparing the amino acid type
distribution in 15 transketolase protein primary structures from ten different organisms (organism abbreviations as mentioned in
). ARO=aromatic amino acids; N-ve and P-ve=amino acid with negatively and positively charged side chains respectively;
POL=amino acids with polar side chains and NPA=non-polar aliphatic side chain amino acids.

