Background
With the advent of whole genome shotgun sequencing (WGS),
metagenomics is attracting more and more attention from
microbiologists, from characterizing one particular species to
understanding the dynamics of a whole microbial community,
including assessing the coding potential of environmental organisms,
quantifying the relative abundances of known species, and estimating
the amount of unknown sequence information. Microbes constitute
the vast majority of marine biomass and account for the majority of
genetic variations in the oceans. However, the genetic diversity,
community composition, relative abundance, and distribution of
microbes have challenged microbiologists [], largely because ˜99%
of naturally occurring microbes are not easily isolated in pure culture
[] and analysis of metagenomic data will produce a significant
number of sequences that cannot be correctly assigned to known taxa.
A practical question emerging from environmental sequencing projects
is the extent to which the data are interpretable in the absence of
significant individual genome assemblies, especially those
uncultivated prokaryotes.

Reference databases, methods for sequence comparison, and a widely
accepted taxonomy are three key elements in metagenomics studies.
Improvements in cloning and sequencing technologies (e.g., WGS and
454 tag sequencing) have made DNA sequencing feasible for a wide
range of microbial communities. Several novel models, based on
either sequence homology or composition, were developed to support
comprehensive analysis of species composition in complex mixtures
such as water, soil, and feces [–].

Cloning and sequencing ’marker genes‘ is a common approach to
metagenomics classification. Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) genes (e.g.,
16S/18S small subunit rRNA) extracted from large-scale
environmental shotgun sequencing data are commonly used to
quantitatively estimate the community composition, including those
uncultivated microbes, such as Crenarchaeota and Acidobacteria from
different habitats, by using BLAST alignment [,]. However, a
homology-based BLAST search depends on the completeness and
balance of the reference databases. Many sequences from lowabundance
community members cannot be assigned to the most likely
phylogenetic neighbors due to lack of homologous marker genes in the
databases.

Another approach to characterizing metagenomic sequences is based
on the analysis of the genomic composition of oligonucleotides of
different lengths (i.e., motifs), called genomic signatures [,]. By
using a classifier constructed based on genomic signatures,
comprehensive analyses of nucleotide frequencies in a wide variety of
genomes provides fundamental knowledge of individual genomes [–]. For example, GC content or the relative abundance of dinucleotides
has been used as a fundamental characteristic of individual
genomes [,,,]. Genomic signatures not only carry
phylogenetic information but also are capable of identifying
horizontally transferred genes (HGT) in bacteria []. Based on a
naïve Bayesian [9] or an unsupervised neural network algorithm, a
self-organizing map (SOM) [], di-, tri- and tetra-nucleotide
frequencies in a wide variety of prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomes
were used to predict the most probably genomic origins of
metagenomic sequences []. In ’PhyloPythia‘, a composition-based
program [], sequence compositions were used to phylogenetically
classify sequence fragments, based on a multiclass support vector
machine (SVM). These programs accurately improved the
phylogenetic assignment of query sequences to known taxonomic
clades. However, either these analyses are based on very complicated
algorithms or the predicted results could not be efficiently applied by
microbiologists.

In the present study, we introduce a new program, named
GSTaxClassifier (Genomic Signature based Taxonomic Classifier), for
metagenomics study. Our program includes 
a simple but effective model, a modification of the Bayesian method that was proposed by Sandber et al. [], to predict 
the most probable genomic origins of metagenomic sequences at different taxonomical levels (i.e., kingdom, phylum order, etc.), on the basis of the reference genome databases;

a function to generate genomic signature profiles of reference sequences with tri-, tetra-, penta-, and hexa-nucleotide motifs for setting a user-defined database;

two different formats (tabular- and tree-based summaries) to display taxonomic predictions with improved analytical methods; and

effective ways to retrieve, search, and summarize results by integrating the predictions into the NCBI treebased taxonomic information.


The simulation results demonstrate that our approach can be applied to metagenomics sequencing projects.

Methodology
The algorithm used in the GSTaxClassifier is a modification of the
Bayesian method proposed by Sandberg et al. []. Sun et al. []
mathematically proved that the Bayesian method is equivalent to the
nearest neighbor classifier assigning each query sequence to the
species whose genomic signature is closest, among the species of
interest, to the normalized motif occurrence frequency profile of the
query sequence, with respect to the Kullback-Leibler distance. The
GSTaxClassifier assigns sequences to the most probable genomic
origins by calculating the probabilities of query sequences to belong to
all available genomes with Baye's rule. After each sequence is
classified into reference species, the number of hits of each species
after normalization can be regarded as the relative population density
of the species.

To generate genomic signature, a sliding window of a specified motif
size was used to scan reference and query sequences and the
frequencies of all short oligo-nucleotides (motifs) were counted. If a
given motif contains any character other than the characters of A/a, T/t,
G/g, and C/c, this motif will not be included. The taxonomic
predictions of query sequences were based on the reference genome
databases containing 500 bacteria, 40 archaea, and 79 eukaryotes
retrieved from NCBI, JGI (DOE Joint Genome Institute), and the
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard. The genomic signature profiles
of genome sequences were generated at the motif lengths of tri-, tetra-,
penta-, and hexa-nucleotides and can be updated when new genome
sequences are available. The GSTaxClassifier was implemented with
JSP and the MySQL database and accessible by a web interface. It
includes two major functions:

Generating a user-defined database based on reference sequences
The input includes the reference sequences and the motif length. The
reference sequences are nucleotide sequences in FASTA format and
can be pasted into the input form or uploaded from a local disk. The
output of each submission is a genomic signature profile of the
reference sequences in text format. This file can be downloaded from
the server and uploaded from a local disk as a reference database for
sequence prediction.

Predicting taxonomic origins of the query sequences
The processing pipeline for sequence prediction includes several
phases. The first step is verifying the input contains valid nucleotide
sequences, using a criterion that 80% of the characters of each
sequence are ’A‘, ’C‘, ’G‘, ’T‘, ’N‘ or ’X‘. The next step is generating
a genomic signature profile of the query sequences with the userdefined
motif length. The third step is calculating the probabilities of
the query sequences assigned to each genome in the selected reference
databases with the modified Bayesian model. The final step is
filtering results with a user-defined threshold and saving the results in
the relational database with a user-defined project name. The
threshold here is defined as the minimum probability of a query
sequence assigned to a reference genome to keep the prediction in
database.

The input are nucleotide sequences in FASTA format, and can be
directly pasted in the input form or uploaded through a plain text file
from a local disk. The user is required to create a project name and
specify a threshold for retaining results in the database. In addition,
GSTaxClassifier provides options for selecting the reference databases,
including the databases based on NCBI genomes (e.g., Bacteria,
Archaea, and Eukaryota), and a user-defined database, specifying a
desired motif length (tri-, tetra-, penta-, and hexa-nucleotides), and
choosing an output format. GSTaxClassifier displays results in the
context of taxonomic predictions either in a tabular format or in a
graphical view. A tabular representation of predictions is displayed on
the web page and the results file can be downloaded from the server.
In the graphical view, GSTaxClassifier integrates predictions into the
tree of life of the NCBI-based taxonomy. The relative sequence
abundances at each taxonomic level are represented in terms of the
number of the sequences assigned and a total of the prediction
probabilities of those assigned sequences. Also, the server provides
advanced options, such as searching and summarizing the predictions
for a specific taxon. In addition, two other functions were
implemented in GSTaxClassifier for dealing with prediction results.
The function of ’Retrieve Results‘ enables user to retrieve and search
the predictions with different formats, while the function of ’Delete
Project‘ enables user to remove a project and its results.

Discussion
In order to validate our algorithm we conducted simulation studies
using six data sets, each set containing 1,000 known genomic DNA
sequence segments. The test sequences were taxonomically assigned
using GSTaxClassifier as a test of prediction accuracy, based on the
reference databases in the server. The prediction accuracy is defined
in terms of true positive and false positive rates. Sequences assigned
to correct taxa are considered true positives, while incorrect
assignments are false positives. A threshold of 40% minimum identity
(or probability) between query and hit genome is used in our
simulation studies.

Three simulation experiments were performed to validate our
approach. The first experiment was based on six test data sets, each
containing a total of 1,000 sequences that were randomly generated
from individual genomes of bacteria, archaea, or eukaryotes. Three
data sets were generated with sequence length of 400 bps (base pairs),
and three additional data sets contained sequences of 1,000 bps each.
The prediction accuracy was estimated by comparing each of the six
test data sets against the reference genome databases, based on the
motif length of hexa-nucleotides. Overall, GSTaxClassifier showed
robust accuracies in bacteria and archaea, with accuracies of 79.8%-
89% input sequences assigned at the Order level, 82%-92% at the
Phylum level, and 89%-95% at the Kingdom level. We also observed
that sequences as short as 400 bps in eukaryotes can be correctly
classified with 66.6%-82.1% accuracy from Order to Kingdom.
Analysis of all data sets indicated that the amount of correctly assigned
sequences correlated strongly with the sequence length. The
prediction accuracy of 1,000 bp sequence segments is relatively higher
than that of 400 bp sequences.

To further demonstrate how well our method assigns query sequences
to the correct taxonomic units, we did cross-validation analyses. In the
second experiment, we compared each of the six test data sets against
the specially constructed reference genome databases that excluded the
genomes used to generate the test data sets. Each of the test data set
query sequences could be assigned to either one of the ancestral or
sisterhood nodes of the genome species (the true positives), another
node (the false positives), or not be assigned to any node (unknown) if
the best prediction probability was below the threshold. The estimated
accuracies of the test data sets based on a hexa-nucleotide motif length
revealed that, even when the genomes were excluded from the
reference database, the classifier is still sensitive for detection as well
as specific for discrimination between the species and their near
relatives (Table 1 in). For the ranks from
Order to Kingdom, the assignment accuracies were significantly
increased across all test data sets, by 63.2%-95.3 % in bacteria, 61.9%-
96.4% in archaea, and 54.3%-76.5% in eukaryotes. The lower
prediction accuracy in eukaryotes could be attributed to few eukaryotic
genomes in the reference database and a loss in sensitivity across more
distantly related species. The third validation experiment was to
estimate the influence of tri-, tetra-, penta-, and hexa-nucleotide motiflength
on estimation accuracy, by using the six test data sets. The
results suggested that longer motifs produced more accurate estimates
of taxonomic contents (). Genomic signatures based on hexanucleotides
exhibited the best performance, coinciding with early
reports [,]. We demonstrated that genomic signature allows
accurate characterization of genomic DNA sequence fragments based
on the reference genome databases, but it is important to note that the
simulated data sets were explicitly intended as examples for a
benchmarking study.

Conclusion
We present a web server capable of assigning metagenomic sequences
to taxonomic clades. The simple but efficient algorithm used allows
fast and reliable identification of metagenomic sequences. The key
characteristics of the server are the ability to accurately identify the
likely origin of query sequences at high phylogenetic ranks as well as
integrating predictions into the NCBI tree of life based on taxonomic
information. The web interface is simple and easy to use.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We would like to acknowledge A. Gardner and J. Warfield for help in
server design and support. This research has been supported by the
ICBR (Interdisciplinary Center for Biotechnology Research) of the
University of Florida.

Citation:Yu et al, Bioinformation 4(1): 46-49 (2009)

Influence of motif lengths on prediction accuracy of sequences from bacteria.

