Background
Diabetes represents one of the most challenging health
problems in the 21st century due to the tremendous increase in
the number of diabetic patients in past few years as announced
by International Diabetes Federation (IDF) []. According to
World Health Organization (WHO) the increase in the
prevalence of diabetes is occurring more in the developing
countries than in the developed countries []. India, China and
USA are the top three countries with highest number of diabetic
patients []. Diabetes is defined as a group of heterogeneous
metabolic disorders with the common symptoms of
hyperglycaemia and glucose intolerance, due to insulin
deficiency, impaired insulin action, or both []. Based on the
insulin dependence, diabetes has been classified into two main
types i.e. Type I diabetes (T1DM) or insulin dependent diabetes
mellitus (IDDM) and Type 2 diabetes or non-insulin dependent
diabetes mellitus (NIDDM).

T1DM is an autoimmune disorder resulting from a complex
interaction of both genetic and environmental factors. In The
T1DM condition, inflammation of the pancreatic β cells occur
which leads to impaired insulin secretion to an absolute deficit
of insulin in the body []. The impaired insulin secretion results
in disrupted glucose homeostasis, and if not treated properly it
further cause micro- and macrovascular complications [].
Although only 5-10% of total diabetic patients suffer from
T1DM, it affects more than 5.0 million people all over the world.
Moreover, there is marked rise in the incidence of T1DM in both
developed and developing nations, and there is a clear
indication of a shift towards T1DM occurring in children at
earlier ages [].

Approximately 60–80% of the global population relies on plantbased
medicines as their primary health care system [].

Particularly, in the area of diabetes more than 1200 plants are
being used worldwide in traditional system of medicine as
antihyperglycemic therapeutics with very less or no adverse
side effects. The bioactive phytochemical components that exert
specific biomedical effects on the human body are the reasons
behind the high medicinal value of these plants []. Momordica
charantia (Mc) or bitter gourd is one such plant that has been
extensively used and reported for its antihyperglycemic effects
[–]. 
It has been commonly used as a traditional remedy in
Asia, Africa, England, India and Sri Lanka []. Many studies
have been carried out reporting its anti-diabtic potential using
extracts from different parts of the plant such as fruit pulp,
leaves and whole plants in experimental diabetic animal models
such as alloxan/ streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetic 
[–].

Earlier studies from our laboratory resulted in identification of
an active anti-hyperglycemic proteinaceous fraction from the
seed extract of Momordica charantia, significantly reducing the
fasting blood glucose levels in alloxan induced type 1 diabetic
rats on 24 h basis (once daily intraperitonial administration)
[]. Further fractionation of this proteinaceous fraction has led
to the identification of a novel protein designated as ADMc1
[]. The detailed structural analysis of this protein has not been
done so far. Also, the antihyperglycemic activity of this protein
was established by inducing diabetes in animals, and not in
non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice, the spontaneous model of type
1 diabetes. The NOD mice represent one of the primary
experimental models of T1DM for screening of therapeutics as
these mice share many immunological and pathophysiological
similarities to human insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus 
[].
The present study reports comparative sequence analysis,
prediction of secondary structural components, 3-dimensional
structural model using in silico homology modeling and antihyperglycemic
activity of the rADMc1 in non-obese diabetic
(NOD) mice.

Methodology
Sequence analysis and structure prediction of ADMc1:
The amino acid sequence of the ADMc1 protein of M. charantia
was used for homology modeling [], the gene sequence
submitted to GenBank with WEBIN ID Hx2000033195]. The
ADMc1 genes encodes for a protein of 138 amino acid residues
which after processing gives rise to a protein of 96 amino acid
residues []. The secondary structures of full length (96 amino
acid sequence) ADMc1 protein were predicted by PSIPRED
(http://bioinf.cs.ucl.ac.uk/psipred/) and JPRED 
[].
Prediction of putative disulfide bonds was performed using the
Dianna 1.1 web server (http://clavius.bc.edu/~clotelab/DiANNA/). The NCBI BlastP server was used to
find structural templates for ADMc1 protein. PSI Blast was
carried out against Protein Data Bank (PDB) (http://www.rcsb.org /pdb /home /home. do). Suitable templates
were found for homology modeling on the basis of high score,
lower e-value and maximum sequence identity. To ensure the
high accuracy of the structure, sequence alignment between
query and template was done using ClustalW []. Homology
based modeling of the ADMc1 protein of Momordica charantia
was performed using automated homology modeling server
EsyPred 3D [] using the template structure PDB ID: 1SM7 of
the corresponding protein napin of B. Napus []. The generated
3D structural models were visualized by Swiss PDB Viewer
(SPDBV) [].

Structure validation:
The modeled structure predicted using EsyPred 3D was
submitted to different servers for structure validation. The
stereo-chemical qualities of the modeled structure and
Ramachandran plots were generated using PROCHECK 
[].
PROCHECK assesses the various parameters of the generated
model such as bond length, bond angle, residue by residue
properties, main chain properties, side chain properties, RMS
distance from planarity and distorted geometry plots. The Root
Mean Square Deviation (RMSD) value was computed by the
superposition of the predicted model and the template protein
structures to analyze the structural similarities between the two
structures, and overall quality of predicted model. SPDBV
server [] was used to generate, analyze and represent the
superposed structures. ProSA [] was employed for the
analysis of structural errors and making plot of residue scores
and calculating Z scores. The residue profiles of the three
dimensional model were further checked by VERIFY3D 
[]
and stereochemical parameters of the residues were evaluated
by WHAT_CHECK [].

Evaluation of blood glucose lowering ability in diabetic animals:
NOD mice, (25–30 g), were obtained from Centre for Cellular
and Molecular Biology (CCMB), Hyderabad, India. The animals
were kept under standard environment conditions at 12-h
light:dark cycle at a temperature of 22–24°C, in the Small
Animal Facility of the Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi,
India and given laboratory chow diet and water ad libitum.
Spontaneously diabetic NOD mice of either sex showing blood
glucose levels above 250 mg/dl (diabetic condition) were
selected for study and grouped into two groups of 5-8 animals
per group. Animals were treated with the recombinant ADMc1
(rADMc1; intraperitoneal administration, i.p.) in PBS (produced
in Pichia pastoris as described earlier) 
[] at a dose of 15 mg/kg
body weight. The control animals were administered with
equivalent volume of PBS. Before administration of the
recombinant protein, food was removed from the cage and mice
were fasted for ~ 6h and during the course of the experiment.
Drinking water was provided to mice throughout the
experiment. Fasting glucose concentrations in blood drawn
from tail vein were measured at indicated time intervals using
an Accu-Chek glucometer. Statistical analysis of the data to
determine the significance of the effect of the treatments was
carried out by Student's t-test.

The animal experiment presented in the study has the due
approval of the the Institutional Animal Ethics Committee of
the University, and the guidelines prescribed by the
Institutional Animal Ethics Committee, JNU, New Delhi, were
followed while handling animals.

Results &amp; Discussion
Comparative sequence analysis and secondary structure of ADMc1:
BlastP analysis of the amino acid sequence of the ADMc1 with
the entries in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) revealed it to share
maximum similarity with the napin of Brassica napus (PDB entry
1SM7). Amino acid sequence alignment of the ADMc1 and
napin of B. napus is shown in (). Detail analysis of
amino acid sequence of the ADMc1 indeed shows it to contain
the characteristic features of 2S albumin family of proteins such
as presence of eight conserved cysteine residues in a common
pattern of ­­­­C­­­­­C­­­/­­­­CC­­­­CXC­­­­C­­­­C­­­ 
().
In the 2S albumin family of proteins these cysteine residues are
involved in the formation of two disulfide linkage between the
two chains of the protein derived from a single polypeptide
precursor and two additional ones between cysteine residues in
the large chain []. The common pattern of eight cysteine
residues has also been reported in other small seed proteins
unrelated sequentially with napins. These include nonspecific
lipid transfer proteins (ns-LTP) [] and the hydrophobic
protein from soybean (HPS) [], which represent the diversity
of the 2S albumin family of seed storage proteins. Amino acid
composition analysis revealed that the protein does not contain
any lysine, threonine, and tyrosine. The secondary structure
prediction of the ADMc1 protein showed it as an all-helix
protein (~ 61% alpha helices) with loops or turn like
conformations (~ 39%) (). Since the protein has been
reported to have anti-hyperglycemic activity, its sequence was
also compared with the amino acid sequence of insulin.
However, no significant similarity was found between the
amino acid sequence of the two (data not shown).

3D structure model of rADMc1 protein:
Determination of the three-dimensional structure of ADMc1
constitutes a fundamental first step in the direction of structural
characterization of this protein with a diverse function from the
other proteins that share sequence similarity with napins.
 shows the predicted structure in the form of ribbons
as a Swiss PDB viewer representation. The predicted 3D model
of ADMc1 also confirmed it as all-alpha helix linked with beta
turn. The template 1SM7 is made up of two chains with
disulfide bridges between the cysteines present in the two
chains. Therefore, the presence of 8 cysteine residues in the
sequence prompts us to identify the disulfide bond
arrangements in the protein. The prediction of disulphide
bonds by Diaana server showed the ADMc1 to contain four
predicted disulfide bonds, between cysteines 7-52, 19-41, 42-87,
54-94. The front and side views of the predicted model showing
the disulfide bonds between the two chains are shown in
( &amp; ), 
respectively. The physicochemical analysis on
the protein shown that, presence of disulfide bridges in the
protein provide much more stability to the helical structure and
without these bonds the helical structure unfolds into a
random, disoriented strand in the solution. The presence of four
disulfide bonds in ADMc1 protein makes it more stable in
solution form (unpublished data).

Assessment of model quality:
Validation of the quality of the predicted model of the ADMc1
using PROCHECK showed the model to be good. The
Ramachandran plot for the model of ADMc1 shows that the
modeled ADMc1 has 81.9% residues in most favorable regions,
16.8% residues occurring in allowed regions and 1.2% residue
(only one residue i.e. Glu 49) were found in the disallowed
regions . The quality of the predicted model is also assessed by
determining the G-factor which takes in account the observed
distribution of stereochemcial parameters and is a log odds
score based on the distribution. A predicted model with a score
for G- factor above -0.5 is considered reliable. The observed
overall G-factor score for the present model was -0.24. Also, all
the planar groups were within the limits. A small root mean
square deviation (RMSD) of 0.6Å, as resulted by superposition
of the modeled structure of ADMc1 protein and the NMR
structure of the template napin of B. Napus (PDB ID: 1SM7)
showed the high structural similarities between target and
template as well as good quality of generated structure model
(). The quality of the generated model of ADMc1 was
also evaluated by ProSA provided a z-score of -5.57, which falls
within the range of values, observed for the experimentally
determined structures of similar lengths (). The
quality of the predicted model of ADMc1 was also verified by
other structure verification servers like WHAT_CHECK and
Verify-3D. Verify-3D showed 100 % of the amino acid residues
had an averaged 3D-1D score &gt; 0.2 in the modeled structure of
ADMc1 which also passed the quality parameters assessed by
WHAT_CHECK and overall results suggested that the
generated model of ADMc1 can be used for further studies in
the absence of experimentally driven structure.

Blood glucose in NOD mice treated with rADMc1:
Blood glucose levels were determined prior to and after
administration of a single dose of the recombinant ADMc1 at
different time intervals. As evident from the (), a
significant decrease in the blood glucose levels in NOD mice
treated with the recombinant ADMc1 was observed after 2 h of
treatment. The blood glucose levels reduced by ~ 50% as
compared with the initial levels prior to treatment. The control
animals administered with PBS showed only a very slight
decrease from initial blood glucose levels. It is interesting to
note that the blood glucose lowering effect of the rADMc1
protein in NOD mice was persistent and up to ~ 75% reduction
in blood glucose levels (from the pre-treatment levels) was
observed 8 h post administration, in comparison to control mice
treated with vehicle which showed only a reduction of ~5-8% at
8 h when compared to the blood glucose levels in this group
prior to treatment. Unlike insulin that needs to be administered
before every meal, the rADMc1 maintains the lower blood
glucose level for longer periods and needs to be administered
only once a day. It is important to note that ADMc1 brings
down the glucose levels slowly and maintains them for longer
period. Thus, unlike some other known hypoglycemic/antihyperglycemic
agents, there is no risk of sudden hypoglycemia
with ADMc1.

Conclusion
M. charantia is a well known medicinal plant used for
antidiabetic treatment and isolation of various active
compounds with antidiabetic activity. The amino acid sequence
of the protein ADMc1 isolated from the seed extract of M.
charantia was used for comparative sequence analysis and
homology modeling. The results showed common disulfide
linkage pattern and structural conservation with 2S albumin
family proteins. The protein ADMc1 was predicted as a novel
small protein of two chains consisting of four disulfide bonds.
The proteins of this family primarily act as storage proteins but
diverse functions have been reported for many proteins of this
family. The present investigations demonstrate the blood
glucose lowering ability of the ADMc1 in NOD mice.

The Department of Biotechnology, New Delhi is acknowledged
for the research grant to AD. The Indian Council of Medical
Research, New Delhi is acknowledged for senior research
fellowship to GC.

Citation:Chhabra &amp; Dixit, Bioinformation 9(15): 766-770 (2013)

(A) CLUSTALW multiple sequence alignment
between amino acid sequences of ADMc1 of M. charantia and
napin of B. Napus showing common cysteine residues pattern.
(*) represent single fully conserved residues whereas
conservation of strong and weak groups are denoted by (:) and
(.), respectively; (B) Predicted secondary structural components
using ADMc1 amino acid sequence, Blue bars represent
confidence of prediction (conf); pink cylinders and “H” denote
alpha helix; and the solid line and “C” denote coils.

(A) The homology-modeled structure (Ribbon
structure) of ADMc1 linked with two chains (Short chain; blue,
long chain; red) showing N and C terminal using NMR
structure of Napin of B. Napus (PDB entry 1SM7_A), as a
template as visualized by Swiss PDB Viewer. (B &amp; C) The
predicted disulfide bonds between the two chains of the
homology modeled structure of ADMc1. Panels B and C shows
the front and side views, respectively.

(A) Superimposition of homology modeled structure
of ADMc1 of M. charantia onto a napin of B. Napus (PDB entry
1SM7). ADMc1 is shown in red and Napin of B. Napus in blue.
(B) Protein Structure Analysis (ProSA) energy plot of homology
model of ADMc1of M. charantia.

Effect of rADMc1 protein of M. charantia seed on
blood glucose levels (mg/dL) in non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice
in comparison to control NOD mice. Data represent mean±S.D
for 5-8 mice per group. **, p&lt;0.01; ***, p&lt;0.001.

