Background
Restriction endonucleases (REnases) are part of restriction and
modification (RM) systems, ubiquitous among bacterial DNA [,
].
RM systems were originally suggested to evolve as a defense
mechanism against phage infection and other type of DNA invasion.
Type II REnases are intensely studied enzymes from the structurefunction
perspective [,
]. The main criterion for the classification of
type II REnases is their high specificity of cleavage within or close to
their recognition site and they do not require ATP hydrolysis for their
nucleolytic activity []. This group of enzymes constitutes one of the
largest families of enzymes with the same basic function, which makes
type II REnases ideal objects to manipulate biological sequences in
molecular biology and biotechnology [].

REnases are robust, cheap, and widely available tools for analyzing
and manipulating DNA sequence. Main function of REnases is to
defend their host against foreign DNA, which is achieved by cleaving
incoming DNA that is recognized as foreign element at defined sites
within the recognition sequence [,,]. Such cleavage and resulting
DNA fragment extraction is an important and common activity of
genetic engineering. Restriction-site mapping involves locating certain
restriction sites on some sequence of DNA [,
]. There is a
continuous need to generate restriction site, recognition sequence, and
other related information to generate restriction map for specific DNA
sequences.

Description
Here, I develop a web server (WebFARM) that work on the principle
of finite automata and recognize REnases for a given DNA sequence
based on the recognition sequence of the respective REnases. It gives
all possible REnases and their respective recognition sites for the given
DNA sequence. Additionally it gives the position of recognition and
total number of recognition sites for a particular REnase. Flowchart
representing the working principle of WebFARM is shown in .

The main interface of the WebFARM is a graphical display with all
options and menu available in one screenshot (). WebFARM
accepts as input a set of DNA sequence and REnases. Only DNA
sequence can be typed or pasted in the given text box or can be
provided as a file input in FASTA format. Name of all REnases are
given which can be selected as a single, multiple or all REnases from
the given list.

WebFARM initially does a simple pattern matching job and looks for
sequences which resemble with recognition sequences of the selected
REnases. It will work on the principle of finite automaton matcher
[], and will look for a particular pattern as REnase for the given
DNA sequence as shown for Restriction Enzyme Matcher (see  ).

It will scan REBASE [] for REnases and enables the detection of
respective recognition sites as well as recognition sequences for all or
selected REnases. It will also provide frequency of restriction for each
REnase. Final tabular output of WebFARM will provide name(s) of
REnase, recognition sequence and site of restriction, expanded
recognition sequence for ambiguous nucleotide characters, and the
frequency of restriction for each REnase.

An online manual is provided that describes all the operations and
methodology in detail. This can be accessed through help and
overview options in the menu of WebFARM.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Singh et al, Bioinformation 4(8): 341-343 (2010)

Flowchart representing the working principle of WebFARM.

A screenshot of WebFARM with options and menu items. This page allows the user to input DNA sequence or sequence file and to select REnase(s) for restriction site information

