Background
Marine ecosystems represent a large explored reservoir of
biodiversity that clearly impose a number of constraints on the
cellular processes of the microorganisms, living and surviving
within them []. Marine sponges are one such unique
environmental niche, with sponges playing host to numerically
vast and phylogenetically diverse bacterial communities. In
fact, sponges are thought to live in a symbiotic relationship
with unicellular organisms such as prokaryotes, bacteria,
primarily cyanobacteria, eukaryotes, zooxanthellae (yellow
symbiotic dinomastogotes) or zoochlorellae (green symbiotic
algae). Sponges are sessile filter feeders, provide an ideal
habitat for microorganisms and are probably an extreme
example of “infested” organisms because, unlike most other
invertebrates, there are no sterile areas in a sponge.

With the world-wide increase in antibiotic resistance and the
emergence of multidrug-resistant strains of bacteria, the
scientific community is facing new challenges to identify and
develop novel therapeutic approaches to combat the spread of
infectious diseases. Recently, this has induced an increased
focus on as-yet under explored environments, such as marine
sponges, which are among the animal kingdom׳s most
important producers of bioactive metabolites [,
]. While many
of these compounds have been isolated from marine sponges
themselves, there is ever increasing evidence to suggest that a
proportion of them actually originate from bacterial symbionts
of these marine invertebrates [,
,
]. During the past two
decades, marine natural product chemists have described
wonderful array of pharmacologically-active metabolites from
marine sponges. Recently, there have been numerous
suggestions that these potential pharmaceuticals may be
produced by symbiotic microorganisms rather than by the
sponges to which they have been attributed. These findings of
interesting natural products in marine sponges and the
indication that some of them are produced by bacteria
associated with sponges but not by the sponge cells themselves
prompted the suggestion that microbial symbionts play a role
in the defense of their sponge. As a result, a large number of
culture-dependent and culture-independent studies have been
undertaken to increase our understanding of the abundance,
diversity and specificity of the microbial population associated
with marine sponges, with a view to identify and potentially to
exploit novel bioactivities [,
,
,
,
]. The isolation of
endospore-forming bacteria from different sponge samples has
been frequently reported, but their abundance seems to vary
widely between sponges.

In recent years, several studies have been focused on the
isolation of cytotoxic molecules from sponges having active
secondary metabolites against broad spectrum of clinical and
marine pathogens []. More in details, these authors
demonstrated that bacteria isolated from sponges have been
found to exhibit antibacterial activity. The secondary
metabolites of host sponge D. granulosa have confirmed
significant antimicrobial activity and inhibited the growth of
clinical pathogens [].

In this context, the 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene provides a
powerful tool for the classification of microbes and their
phylogenetic analysis because a large number of species occur.

In the present study we examined the composition of the
microbial signature of the marine sponges Ircinia muscarum and
Geodia cydonium (belonging to the class of Demospongiae) as
potential source of potentially therapeutic compounds by 16S
ribosomal RNA and performed a phylogenetic analysis of
obtained sequences to classify them.

Methodology
Sponge collection:
The marine sponges Ircinia muscarum and Geodia cydonium
analyzed in this work belong to the class of Demospongiae. I.
muscarum samples were collected in the bay of Naples by the
fishing service of our Institute at a depth of 7; G. cydonium was
provided by the “Parco Sommerso di Baia” in Naples.
Individual specimens were placed separately into plastic bags
and kept in seawater basins at a temperature of 15-20°C.

Genomic DNA extraction from sponges:
Genomic DNA was extracted from the internal part of the
sponge body to avoid contamination of associated epibionts.
Sponges were cut into small pieces and 5g of tissue were
ground in liquid nitrogen and dissolved in buffer NaCl 100
mM, EDTA 50 mM pH 8. Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)
solution (20%) was added to a final concentration of 2% and the
mixture heated to 60°C for 30 min. Proteinase K (3 h at 50°C)
and RNAse (3 h at 37°C) treatments were done. Nucleic acids
were extracted with phenol/chloroform, and chloroform
/isoamyl alcohol and after precipitation with NaAc 3M pH 5.9
and ethanol. Extracted DNA was dissolved in TE (10 mM Tris-
HCl, EDTA 50 mM pH 8), checked on an ethidium bromidestained
0.7 % agarose gel and visualized on GelDoc 2000
(Biorad) and quantized using a spectrophotometer UV/Vis
Spectometer Lambda Bio40 (Perkin Elmer).

Amplification and sequencing of prokaryotic 16S rDNA:
The amplification of prokaryotic 16S rDNA on genomic DNA
from both sponges was done using the universal bacterial
primers 8f-798rn [–
] and 27F-1385R that amplify
approximately 800-bp and 1400-bp fragments of bacterial 16S
rRNA gene sequences, respectively. A 25 ng aliquot of DNA
was amplified, using 25 pmol of each primer, 10x buffer, 2 mM
dNTP and 2.5 U of Taq High Fidelity PCR System (Roche) in
GeneAmp PCR System 9700 (Perkin Elmer). Cycling conditions
were as follows: initial denaturation at 95°C, 35 cycles of 94°C
for 1 min, 55°C for 1 min and 72°C for 1 min, final elongation at
72°C for 10 min. The amplified fragments were purified from
agarose gel using QIAquick Gel extraction kit (Qiagen) and
specificity of PCR products was checked by DNA sequencing.
Sequences were compared to those in databases using the Basic
Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) algorithm (available at
www.ncbi.nih.nlm.gov) to identify known sequences with a
high degree of similarity. Multiple alignments of the sequences
and the related trees were performed by Clustal W. The related
sequence identity percentages were evaluated by FASMA tool,
developed in our group [].

Results &amp; Discussion
The bacterial population which lives associated with I.
muscarum and G. cydonium were investigated. The 16S rRNA
was amplified with the primers reported in Materials and
Methods and sequenced. Blast similarity search revealed that a
high diversity of bacterial phylotypes was present within the
two sponges  (see supplementary material). The
sponge I. muscarum presented a bacterial population enriched
in Bacillus species. In fact, we isolated from this sponge nine
bacterial clones, of which six showed the highest percentage of
identity with Bacillus species, Bacillus hwajinpoensis (ImB1),
Bacillus pumilus (ImB2), Bacillus kochii (ImB8), Bacillus
baekryungensis (ImB9), Bacillus sp. CNJ828 PL04 (ImB14) and
Bacillus sp. 4014 (ImB15); whereas the other three bacterial
clones showed the highest identity with Vibro natriegens (ImB5),
Marinobacter sp. H-244 (ImB6) and Uncultured pseualteromonas
CI17 (ImB11). On the other hand, G. cydonium harbored a more
diverse bacterial population, enriched in Proteobacterium
species. In fact, this sponge revealed the presence of ten
bacterial clones, of which five presented the highest identity
with Proteobacterium species, Uncultured gamma proteobacterium
HOC2 (GcB9), Uncultured gamma proteobacterium HOC27
(GcB10), Alpha proteobacterium D323 (GcB5), Alpha
proteobacterium MBIC3368 (GcB11), Alpha proteobacterium HPC9
(GcB6); whereas the other five bacterial clones showed the
highest identity with Bacillus arsenicus HLS844 (GcB7), Bacillus
hwajinpoensis XJSL2 (GcB4), Pseudoalteromonas sp. (GcB8), Vibrio
sp. OS53(GcB12) and Vibrio sp. BWDY-62 (GcB13).

All these clones for both sponges were subjected to
phylogenetic analysis. The results in  indicated for I.
muscarum the presence of two clusters of which one comprised
six clones within Bacillus (ImB1, ImB2, ImB8, ImB9, ImB14 and
ImB15), and the other one comprised three clones
phylogenetically closest (ImB5, ImB6 and ImB11). Concerning
G. cydonium (see ) two clones clustered within the γ-
subdivision of the Proteobacteria (GcB9 and GcB10) and were
phylogenetically closest, two clustered in Vibrio (GcB12 and
GcB13), GCB6 and GcB7 even if belonging to different group
were phylogenetically closest, as in the case of GcB5, GcB8 and
GcB11. GcB4 seems to be the more distant by phylogenetic
point of view.

One of surprising findings that come out of this study was the
discovery of a sponge-specific, yet phylogenetically diverse,
microbial community. The molecular taxonomic analysis of
sponge-associated bacteria from I. muscarum and G. cydonium
indicated that there was a diverse assemblage of bacteria
residing within these sponges, reflecting also an adaptation to a
specific ecological niche in which the two sponges live.

Sponges with enormous diversity of microorganisms have been
considered an explicit source of pharmaceutical products 
[]. A
very interesting result of our work was the fact that the
bacterial populations identified from I. muscarum and G.
cydonium were able to produce secondary metabolites with
potential biotechnological and biopharmaceutical applications.
Phelan et al. [] reported that a bank of aerobic spore-forming
bacteria was isolated from the marine sponge Haliclona
simulans, belonging to the class of Demospongiae. A large
diversity of endospore-forming bacteria was distributed
through a variety of Bacillus species, including ubiquitous
species, such as B. subtilis, B. pumilus (found by us in I.
muscarum), B. licheniformis and B. cereus group, as well as
species that are typically associated with marine habitats, such
as B. hwajinpoensis (found by us in I. muscarum and in G.
cydonium), B. aquimaris, B. algicola, B. baekryungensis (found by
us in I. muscarum). These endospore-forming bacteria were able
to produce proteases and antibiotics with potential
biotechnological, biopharmaceutical and probiotic applications.
Moreover, species of the genus Bacillus are renowned for either
the production of chemical agents with antimicrobial properties
or enzymes that are of biotechnological interest 
[]. Interest in
endospore-forming bacteria, particularly Bacillus, has seen a
comeback in recent years, as spore probiotic preparations are
currently being used in human therapy, animal production and
aquaculture [].

We isolated clones that clustered within Vibrio and Pseudovibrio
species both in I. muscarum and in G. cydonium. Recently
Esteves et al [] determined the bacterial richness cultured
from two irciniid sponge species, Sarcotragus spinosulus and
Ircinia variabilis, and Pseudovibrio and Vibrio were classified as
the most dominant genera in these two sponges. Several
Pseudovibrio genotypes showed the presence of polyketide
synthase genes. These genes represent a family of multi-domain
enzymes or enzyme complexes that produce polyketides, a
large class of natural products with diverse biological activities
and pharmacological properties. Polyketide antibiotics,
antifungals, cytostatics, anticholesteremic, antiparasitics,
coccidiostats, animal growth promoters and natural insecticides
are in commercial use.

Concerning Pseudoalteromonas bacterium found in this work in
both sponges, it produces as secondary metabolite the
prodigiosin, a well-known tripyrrole red pigment with
immunosuppressive and anticancer activities, mainly in human
breast cancer []. Also Proteobacteria species, that we found
associated with G. cydonium, resulted widespread in the marine
environment. In fact, the freshwater sponge Geodia barretti
harbors bacteria from phylum Proteobacteria, corresponding to
6.9% of the microbial biomass []. The microbiome of the
endemic marine sponge Arenosclera brasiliensis, a
Demospongiae, was enriched for Betaproteobacteria and
Gammaproteobacteria, compared with the surrounding
planktonic microbial communities [] (Trindade-Silva et al.
2012). Moreover, White et al. [] characterized the bacterial
symbiont community biodiversity of seven different
individuals of the Caribbean reef sponge Axinella corrugate,
consisting of differentially abundant classes of Proteobacteria.

Conclusion
The advances in molecular biology have provided new and
important diagnostic possibilities, not only for the classification
of prokaryotes but also for the determination of phylogenetic
relationships among animals. The gene sequences, which most
commonly have been used, are 16S rRNA for the analysis of
bacteria.

In conclusion, this work opens very important perspectives
thanks to the world-wide increase in antibiotic resistance and
the emergence of multidrug-resistant strains of bacteria.
Therefore, the scientific community is facing new challenges to
identify and to develop novel therapeutic approaches in order
to combat the spread of infectious diseases. Recently, this has
resulted in an increased focus on as-yet under explored
environments, such as marine sponges, which are among the
animal kingdom׳s most important producers of bioactive
metabolites [,
,
,
]. While many of these compounds have
been isolated from marine sponges themselves, there is ever
increasing evidence to suggest that a proportion of them
actually originate from bacterial symbionts of these marine
invertebrates [,
].

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank the Fishing Service of our Institute for providing I.
muscarum; Fabrizio Campili for providing primers for PCR
experiments and Elvira Mauriello for PCR products sequencing
of Molecular Biology Service; Davide Caramiello of the Marine
Resources for Research Service for his technical support in
sponge maintenance. Many thanks are also due to “Parco
Sommerso di Baia” in Naples for providing G. cydonium.

Citation:Zuppa et al, Bioinformation 10(4): 196-200 (2014)

Phylogenetic tree obtained for the bacterial sequences
from A) I. muscarum and B) G. cydonium by Clustal W.

