Background
Methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus, or MRSA is a grampositive
bacterial pathogen which is resistant to methicillin and
other beta-lactum antibiotics. It is a major causative agent of
skin and soft-tissue infections (SSTIs), endovascular infections,
pneumonia, septic arthritis, endocarditis, osteomyelitis, foreignbody
infections, and sepsis [,
]. The original MRSA infections
associated with exposure in the health care setting, particularly
in hospitals are referred to as hospital-acquired MRSA (HAMRSA)
[]. 
In 1990s, a new strain of MRSA emerged in the
community setting occurring among young healthy individuals
with no exposure to the healthcare setting. The infections
caused by these strains are called community-acquired MRSA
(CA-MRSA) [,
]. Since then, this community-acquired MRSA
strain (CA-MRSA) has quickly spread across the globe 
[–].
Outbreaks of CA-MRSA have been reported among children
[], athletes 
[], nurseries 
[] and obstetrical wards 
[]. The
CA-MRSA strains have been involved in skin and soft tissue
infections including furuncles, abscesses, folliculitis, impetigo,
cellulitis, and, more rarely, in cases of severe sepsis, necrotizing
fascitis, and necrotizing pneumonia []. The CA-MRSA strain
is commonly known as the Staphylococcus aureus subsp. aureus
MW2. Popovich et al. reported that CA-MRSA may be replacing
the traditional hospital-acquired MRSA (HA-MRSA) []. The
spread of resistant CA-MRSA strains across the globe becoming
more common and posing potential threat to the life of
community []. Because of multidrug resistance, particularly
among CA-MRSA, alternative and effective therapeutic options
are urgently needed. With the availability of complete genome
sequences of CA-MRSA [], it has now paved the new way for
identifying the novel drug targets. Through the complete
genome analysis of the pathogen, it is possible to compile a list
of potential gene products and their functions which are nonhomologous
to the proteome of Homo sapiens. In the present
work novel potential theapeutic drug targets have been
identified through the metabolic pathways analysis in the
community acquired-methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus.

Methodology
The entire genome of Staphylococcus aureus subsp. aureus MW2
(CA-MRSA), was sequenced in the year 2002. It is available on
the website http://www.genome.jp (Accesion No. NC_003923)
which contain 2820462 base pairs and 2624 protein encoding
genes. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)
pathway database [] was used
http://www.kegg.jp/kegg/pathway.htm for the retrieval of
metabolic pathways for the community-acquired methicillin
resistant Staphylococcus aureus (Entry no. T00086). The metabolic
pathway of CA-MRSA was analyzed which was containing 76
different types of metabolic pathways. All enzymes involved in
the different metabolic pathways were listed in a table. The
most important criteria for selecting any enzyme or protein as a
potential drug target in a pathogen is that it should be nonhomologous
to the host i.e. Homo sapiens. The gene products
involved in different metabolic pathways of CA-MRSA genome
were subjected to the database searching against the proteome
of the Homo sapiens using the BLASTp program []. The
threshold of E-value (expect value) was set to as 0.001. The
similar protein sequences which were having less than 30%
identity or less than 80% query coverage to the Homo sapiens
proteome were considered as the non-homologous to the
human. Those enzymes can be considered as the unique
potential therapeutic drug targets for the drug designing. After
performing the database searching of all metabolic enzymes
(gene products) of CA-MRSA against the human proteome, 220
targets were identified as non-homologous to Homo sapiens.
These enzymes were involved in 50 different metabolic
pathways. Further analysis for all 220 targets was carried out
and it was found that some duplicate targets were involved in
more than one metabolic pathway. The list of all putative
targets was further refined and duplicates were removed.
Finally 152 targets were identified as unique putative drug
targets. After identifying the novel potential drug targets from
metabolic pathways of CA-MRSA, the genes coding for the
important enzymes were further searched in the DEG 6.8
database [] 
to identify the essentiality or non-essentiality of
the genes for the survival of the pathogen. DEG provides the
database of essential genes which are indispensable for the
survival of an organism (http://www.essentialgene.org/). DEG
database has been classified in to two categories prokaryotes
and eukaryotes. In the pathogens, essential gene products
provide unique potential drug targets for antimicrobial targets.
Among all 152 putative drug targets, 39 genes which encode for
potential drug targets were identified as essential for the
survival of the CA-MRSA.

Discussion
Community acquired-methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus
(CA-MRSA) strains are now becoming nosocomial pathogen to
the human race. In comparison to hospital acquired MRSA,
these strains cause infections suddenly, quickly, and with great
severity in patients which leads to worse clinical outcome. CAMRSA
strains are more virulent than other strains and have
very bad impact on conventional therapy particularly with
beta-lactum antibiotics which are becoming ineffective for a
variety of common staphylococcal infections especially for skin
&amp; soft tissue infections []. Therefore, we have to find the
alternative approach to combat the menace of drug resistance of
CA-MRSA. In the present work, post genomic approach has
been applied for the identification of potential drug targets for
the CA-MRSA. The genes involved in different metabolic
pathways of CA-MRSA were analyzed and it was found that
total 76 pathways were present in KEGG pathway database.
KEGG is the largest database resource consisting 17 different
types of databases. For identifying the putative drug targets in
the genome of any pathogen, it should be present in the
organism and posse’s crucial functional role but absent in the
Homo sapiens. Using the BLASTp program, database searching
was performed for all the gene products involved in different
metabolic pathways of CA-MRSA against the proteome of
Homo sapiens. The threshold of E-value was given 0.001 which
measures the significance of similarity to the host. Apart from
the E-value threshold, the % identity and % query coverage was
also considered as the parameter for identifying the putative
drug targets non-homologous to the proteome of Homo sapiens.
The protein sequences which were having more than 0.001 Evalue
and less than 25% sequence identity and/or less than 80%
query coverage, were considered as non-homologous drug
targets. Total 220 putative drug targets were identified 

(see supplementary material). Out of 220 targets, it was found
that some targets (proteins) were involved in more than one
metabolic pathway. All the duplicate targets were removed
from the list and total 152 unique putative drug targets were
identified. The genes encoded for 152 unique putative targets
were again searched against the DEG (Database of Essential
Genes) database to identify the essentiality of the genes for the
survival of CA-MRSA. DEG is the database of essential genes
which are indispensable for the survival of any organism. After
searching all 152 putative targets, 39 genes were identified as
the essential for the survival of CA-MRSA 
 (see
supplementary material). All 39 essential gene products
(targets) were analyzed and it was found that 20 putative drug
targets were involved in more than one metabolic pathway.
These 20 putative targets can be used as potential therapeutic
drug targets for CA-MRSA. Out of 20 putative drug targets, it
has been reported in literatures that 7 targets may be used as
potential therapeutic drug targets. These targets are Fructosebisphosphate
aldolase (EC: 4.1.2.13), Phosphoglyceromutase
(EC: 5.4.2.1), Purine nucleoside phosphorylase (EC: 2.4.2.1),
Uridylate kinase (EC: 2.7.4.22), Tryptophan synthase subunit
beta (EC:4.2.1.20), Acetate kinase (EC:2.7.2.1) and UDP-Nacetylglucosamine
1-carboxyvinyltransferase (EC:2.5.1.7).

Fructose-bisphosphate aldolase (EC: 4.1.2.13):
Fructose-bisphosphate aldolase (FBA) enzyme is encoded by
fbaA gene (ID: MW2049). This gene has been found essential in
DEG database (DEG10020239) for Staphylococcus aureus N315,
Bacillus subtilis, Mycoplasma pulmonis and Escherichia coli. FBA
has been reported as potential therapeutic drug target in
Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Candida albicans 
[,
]. These
FBAs are involved in second reversible step of the glycolytic
pathway, which supplies glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate for
downstream enzymes in the pathway and fructose 1, 6-
bisphosphate (FBP) for gluconeogenesis. Together, the
substrates and products of the FBA reaction are crucial for the
supply of these precursor molecules to other biochemical
pathways essential for the survival of CA-MRSA. This enzyme
is also involved in three other metabolic pathways i.e. pentose
phosphate pathway, fructose and mannose metabolism &amp;
methane metabolism.

Phosphoglyceromutase (EC: 5.4.2.1):
Phosphoglyceromutase (PGM) enzyme is encoded by pgm gene
(ID: MW0737). This gene has been found essential in DEG
database (DEG10020010) for Bacillus subtilis, Mycoplasma
pulmonis, Mycoplasma genitalium and Salmonella enterica. PGM
interconvert 2-phosphoglycerate and 3-phosphoglycerate in the
glycolytic and gluconeogenic pathways. This enzyme is also
involved in glycine, serine, threonine metabolism, and methane
metabolism in CA-MRSA. PGM has been reported as important
drug target in Wolbachia endosymbiont from the filarial
nematode, Brugia malayi (wBm) 
[].

Purine nucleoside phosphorylase (EC: 2.4.2.1):
Purine nucleoside phosphorylase (PNP) enzyme is encoded by
pnp gene (ID: MW0110). This gene has been found essential in
DEG database (DEG10020139) for Staphylococcus aureus N315, E.
coli and Acinetobacter baylyi. PNP plays a crucial role in the
phosphorolysis of purine nucleosides and deoxynucleosides to
generate purine bases. This enzyme is also involved in
pyrimidine, nicotinate and nicotinamide metabolism. PNP has
been reported as potential therapeutic drug target in M.
tuberculosis and Streptococcus mutans 
[,
].

Uridylate kinase (EC: 2.7.4.22):
Uridylate kinase or UMP kinase (UMPK) enzyme is encoded by
pyrH gene (ID: MW1141). This gene has been found essential in
DEG database (DEG10170157) for Staphylococcus aureus
NCTC8325, M. tuberculosis, Mycoplasma pulmonis, Streptococcus
pneumoniae, Pseudomona aeruginosa, Salmonella typhimurium, V.
cholerae etc. UMP kinase catalyses the phosphorylation of UMP
by ATP to yield UDP which is involved in cell wall and RNA
biosynthesis. UMPK is conserved in almost all prokaryotic
organisms and has been reported as potential therapeutic drug
target in Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pneumoniae 
[,
].

Tryptophan synthase subunit beta (EC: 4.2.1.20):
Tryptophan synthase subunit beta (TrpB) enzyme is encoded by
trpB gene (ID: MW1259). This gene has been found essential in
DEG database (DEG10020152) for Staphylococcus aureus N315,
M. tuberculosis, Streptococcus pneumonia, Haemophilus influenzae
and Acenetobacter baylayi. TrpB enzyme catalyzes the last step of
the tryptophan biosynthetic pathway which is commonly
present in almost all prokaryotic organisms but absent in
mammals. This enzyme is also involved in the biosynthesis of
phenylalanine and tyrosine as well as in the metabolism of
glycine, serine and threonine amino acids. TrpB has been
reported as potential therapeutic drug target in Mycobacterium
tuberculosis and Salmonella typhimurium [,
].

Acetate kinase (EC: 2.7.2.1):
Acetate kinase (ACK) enzyme is encoded by ackA gene (ID:
MW1654). This gene has been found essential in DEG database
(DEG10020202) for Staphylococcus aureus N315, Mycoplasma
pulmonis, Mycoplasma genitalium and E. coli. ACK enzyme is
involved in the formation of acetate from acetyl-CoA as a
metabolic end product. It is involved in many metabolic
pathways of CA-MRSA e.g. Taurine &amp; hypotaurine, pyruvate,
propanoate and methane metabolism. This enzyme is present in
prokaryotic organisms and some eukaryotic organisms e.g.
parasites but absent in mammals and it has been reported as
attractive drug target for the development of anti-parasitic
drugs [].

UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 1-carboxyvinyltransferase (EC:2.5.1.7):
UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 1-carboxyvinyltransferase enzyme is
encoded by murA gene (ID: MW2024). This gene has been
found essential in DEG database (DEG10020231) for
Staphylococcus aureus N315, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Bacillus
subtilis, Salmonella enterica, Francisella novicida, Helicobacter pylori,
E. coli and Acenetobacter baylayi. MurA enzyme catalyses the
biosynthesis of peptidoglycan polymer, consisting of Nacetylglucosamine
(NAG) and N-acetylmuramic acid (NAM).
Peptidoglycan is an integral constituent of bacterial cell wall
which is indispensable for the survival of bacteria. UDP-Nacetylglucosamine
1-carboxyvinyltransferase (murA) enzyme
catalyses the transfer of the enolpyruvyl group of
phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) to the 3'-hydroxyl group of uridine
diphospho-N-acetylglucosamine (UNAG). Furthermore, this
enzyme is also involved in amino sugar &amp; nucleotide sugar
metabolism. MurA is essential enzyme present in all
prokaryotic organism but absent in mammals. It has been
reported as potential therapeutic drug target in Haemophilus
influenzae, Escherichia coli and Streptococcus pneumonia 
[,
,
]. 
Furthermore, except uridylate kinase all above potential
therapeutic targets were involved in more than one metabolic
pathways of CA-MRSA which underlines the importance of
these targets. These drug targets can be used for the discovery
of novel drugs which might potentially inhibit the growth of
CA-MRSA.

Conclusion
The metabolic pathway of nosocomial community acquiredmethicillin
resistant Staphylococcus aureus (CA-MRSA) strain
was analyzed from the KEGG database. All the gene products
involved in different metabolic pathways of CA-MRSA were
searched against the proteome of Homo sapiens and 152 putative
targets were identified. 39 genes encoding for important targets
were identified as the essential from the DEG database which
are indispensable for the survival of CA-MRSA. After extensive
literature review, 7 targets were identified as potential
therapeutic drug target. These targets are Fructosebisphosphate
aldolase (EC: 4.1.2.13), Phosphoglyceromutase
(EC: 5.4.2.1), Purine nucleoside phosphorylase (EC: 2.4.2.1),
Uridylate kinase (EC: 2.7.4.22), Tryptophan synthase subunit
beta (EC:4.2.1.20), Acetate kinase (EC:2.7.2.1) and UDP-Nacetylglucosamine
1-carboxyvinyltransferase (EC:2.5.1.7).
Almost all these putative targets were involved in more than
one metabolic pathways of CA-MRSA. These potential
therapeutic drug targets can be exploited for the discovery of
novel inhibitors for CA-MRSA using the structure based drug
design (SBDD) strategy.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors would like to acknowledge the facilities provided
by the Sam Higginbottom Institute of Agriculture, Technology
&amp; Sciences (Deemed University), Allahabad, India.

Citation:Yadav et al, Bioinformation 8(14): 664-672 (2012)

