Background
metabolic pathway represents a topical description of a
network metabolites and enzymes. These enzymes are coded by
genes. Thus the advent of post-genomic era has enhanced our
understanding on the function and importance of the enzymes;
further several genome-scale efforts are underway to
reconstruct metabolic networks for a variety of organisms such
as Escherichia coli, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Homo sapiens. The
mammon of information pertaining to the biochemical reactions
that take place within a cell and the enzymes responsible to
catalyze these reactions are being stored in several online public
databases like KEGG [], Eco-Cyc 
[], etc. These repositories
collect and maintain information about complex cellular
processes, such as metabolism, signal transduction and cell
cycle by storing the corresponding networks of interacting
molecules in digital forms, often as graphical pathway
diagrams.

There has been exponential increase in availability of pathway
information. This has enabled the cross species comparison at
the functional level. As the basis for such studies, pathway
alignment has been proven to be an effective technique that
provides a clear indication of specific differences between
pathways [].

Pathway alignments is performed at two levels; firstly between
the enzymes that participate in the aligned pathways, and
secondly, the orientation between their topologies 
[].
Comparing analogous pathways reveals intricate insights into
individual functional differences among species. For
implementing this study, the pathway under study from
different organism should be brought under unified
framework, Further; an appropriate strategy needs to be built to
study their co-evolution.

Comparative analysis of metabolic pathways in different
genomes yields important information on their evolution, on
pharmacological targets and on biotechnological applications.
Sequence alignment is a well-established tool for investigating
and comparing proteins from different species and for
identifying characteristic gaps, insertions and dissimilarities.
The availability of full genomic sequences and the increasing
body of biochemical data open up higher-order possibilities for
comparative analysis []. The alignment of biochemical
pathways from different species is an important step towards a
more global comparison from a physiological viewpoint 
[,
].

Here we present a computational approach for pathway
reconstruction and studying its evolution. This approach can be
used for building phylogenies and for pointing out specific
differences that can then be analyzed in depth. Also, this
approach can be used for detecting co-evolutionary
relationships between metabolic pathways.

For the current study, melanogenesis pathway is taken as
example and the study is carried out taking Mammals, Plants,
Fungi, Bacteria and Archea as representative taxa.
Melanogenesis is a pathway for melanin synthesis. Melanin
polymers are high molecular weight formed by oxidative
polymerization of phenolic or indolic compounds. These
reactions are catalysed by copper based enzymes [,
].
Production of melanin is one of the most universal phenomena,
but at the same time there exist enigmatic adaptations of living
organisms to the variable environmental conditions 
[]. In a
number of fungi, pigments related or identical to melanin are
produced which are either located on cell walls or exist as
extracellular polymers. Melanins have very diverse roles and
functions in various organisms. The role of melanin in human is
photo protection [], whereas in plants they are essential for
pigmentation and are important factors in browning reaction.
For pathogens and herbivores melanin production is related to
wound healing, stress and primary immune response 
[].
Melanized microorganisms inhabit some remarkably extreme
environments including high altitude, Arctic and Antarctic
regions. Melanins also protect microorganisms against cell
damage by solar UV radiation or generation of reactive oxygen
species. Further it also guards from high temperature,
chemicals (e.g. heavy metals and oxidizing agents) and
biochemical (e.g., host defences against invading microbes)
stresses. Therefore, in many pathogenic microbes (for example,
in Cryptococcus neoformans, a fungus) melanins appear to play
important roles in virulence and pathogenicity by protecting
the microbe against immune responses of its host.

The presence of various kinds of melanins in representatives of
almost every large taxon suggests an evolutionary importance
of melanogenesis. The use of melanin pigment differ in
different taxa, hence the evolution of this pathway can be
described in correlation with the role of this pigment in various
organism. The phylogenetic analysis of melanogenesis pathway
was performed by using alignment tools for metabolic
pathway's enzymes sequences. Phylogenetic alignment study
for analysing evolutionary relationship among groups of
organisms was done with the help of Clustal W and Phylip
tools. This study of pathway evolution gives an overview on the
application of the melanin in different taxa.

Methodology
There is plenty of information available pertaining to melanin
synthesis in different species. The first and the most important
step for the study was to collate this data and reconstruct a
comprehensive pathway incorporating variations from different
taxa. Further the evolution of the melanogenesis path was
studied under the following heads: (1) Reconstruction of the
pathway; (2) Collection of enzyme details; (3) Phylogenetic
study for each enzyme involved in the process; (4) Pathway
evolution.

Reconstruction of pathway:
The term “melanin” originates from melanos- a Greek word for
black. Melanin is a high molecular weight pigment, ubiquitous
in nature, with a variety of biological functions 
[]. The
melanin production can begin from either L-tyrosine or
secondary metabolite. Melanogenesis begins with the
production of DOPA-Quinone, a highly reactive o-Quinone.
Path from tyrosine to DOPA-Quinone is common among
mammals, plants and some fungi. However these first two steps
are catalyzed by enzyme tyrosinase in case of mammals and
Polyphenol oxidase (PPO) enzyme in plants and fungi.

The most commonly available melanogenesis pathway
proceeds from the amino acid L-tyrosine though a series of
enzymatic and chemical steps initiated by tyrosine
hydroxylation to yield DOPA and DOPA oxidation to DOPAQuinone.
Both the reactions are catalyzed by tyrosinase
(monophenol monooxygenase, EC 1.14.18.1, a melanocytespecific
copper-containing glycoprotein) in mammals and PPO
in plants []. In the absence of low molecular weight thiolic
compounds, DOPA-Quinone cyclizes rapidly and is converted
to DOPA-chrome. This latter compound is a relatively unstable
intermediate that undergoes spontaneous decarboxylation to
yield 5,6-dihydroxyindole (DHI) which, in turn, can be
oxidized either spontaneously or enzymatically by tyrosinase,
ultimately leading to the formation of the melanin polymer.
This is the common Mason-Raper-derived scheme of
melanogenesis (). However, it has recently been
proved that mammalian melanocytes contain a second
melanogenic enzyme, termed DOPA Chrome Tautomerase
(DCT) (EC 5.3.3.12, that can efficiently catalyze the
tautomerization of DOPA-chrome to the highly stable
carboxylated product DHI-2-Carboxylic Acid (DHICA). At this
level, the synthesis of Eu-Melanin can be carried out according
to two pathways. DHI is oxidized, under the action of
tyrosinase or of a peroxidase, to indole-5,6-quinone, while
DHICA, under the action of TYRP-1, gives 5,6-dihydroindole-2-
carboxylic acid. The indole-5,6-quinone and the 5,6-
dihydroindole-2-carboxylic acid polymerize so as to form
melanochromes and then Eu-Melanin. In mammals this process
occurs in highly specialized cells called melanocytes that are
present in the bottom layer (the stratum basale) of the skin's
epidermis [].

Pheo-Melanin synthesis proceeds in three distinctive steps. The
initial step is the production of sulfur compounds (Cysteinyl-
DOPA) by the rapid addition of glutathione and of cysteine to
DOPA-Quinone, which continues as long as cysteine is present.
The second step is the oxidation of Cysteinyl-DOPA to
alanylhydroxybenzothiazine and then to Pheo-Melanin 
(). 
Pheo-Melanin is orange-yellow melanin whereas Eu-
Melanin is darkbrown in color. The ratio of Eu- to Pheo-
Melanin is determined by the tyrosinase activity and cysteine
concentration [].

There are alternative pathways for melanin production present
in fungi and bacteria beginning from tyrosine. In bacteria,
tyramine (4-hydroxyphenethylamine) is produced by tyrosine
decarboxylation. Further, tyramine is converted to dopamine
which is then auto-oxidised to highly unstable
dopaminochrome and finally to Neuro-melanin []. Another
path occurs in fungi and some bacteria wherein phenylalanine
forms tyrosine which is further utilised for catabolism to
acetoacetic &amp; fumaric acids or biosynthesis of melanin and
ochronotic pigment. This ochronotic pigment or Pyo-Melanin is
produced by degradation of L-tyrosine to HGA that can
polymerize to Pyo-Melanin () 
[,
].

Many fungi are able to synthesize black or brown pigments
derived from L-tyrosine via DOPA. The DOPA-Melanin
pathway, in which tyrosinases or laccases hydroxylate tyrosine
via DOPA to DOPA-Quinone, which then auto-oxidizes and
polymerizes, is the best-characterized melanization pathway
from L-tyrosine. However, brown pigments may also be
produced from L-tyrosine via a pathway involving the
accumulation and auto-oxidation of intermediates of tyrosine
catabolism. For instance, Pyo-Melanins are synthesized from
tyrosine through p-hydroxyphenylpyruvate (HPP) and
homogentisic acid (HGA). Pyo-Melanin and Alkapto-Melanin
are merely different designations for the same pigment.
However, the pigment produced by microbes is often referred
to as Pyo-Melanin, and the pigment produced by humans is
called Alkapto-Melanin. The term Pyo-Melanin was first
introduced by Yabuuchi and Ohyama, who described a water
soluble brown pigment produced by the bacterium Pseudomonas
aeruginosa [].

All brown and black fungi can also synthesize their pigments
through the dihydroxynaphthalene (DHN)-Melanin pathway,
in which hydroxynaphthalene (HN) and tetralone polyketides
are the common intermediates. DHN-Melanin biosynthesis
starts with polyketide synthase using acetate as a precursor
(). An HN reductase then converts 1,3,6,8-
tetrahydroxynaphthalene (1,3,6,8-THN) to scytalone.
Dehydration of scytalone forms 1,3,8-trihydroxynaphthalene
(1,3,8-THN), which is converted to 1,8-DHN after an additional
reduction and dehydration step. Finally, oxidative
polymerization of 1,8-DHN gives the end product, DHN(1,8-
dihydroxynaphthalene)-Melanin () 
[].

In bacteria, HPQ (1,4,6,7,9,12-hexahydroxyperylene- 3,10-
quinone) melanin is synthesized by the condensation of
malonyl-CoA to yield THN by the action of RppA. Subsequent
aryl coupling of THN occurs to yield unstable HPQ by the
action of P-450mel. HPQ then autopolymerizes to form HPQMelanin
(dark green pigment) () 
[].

Collection of Enzymes details:
In this study, protein sequences of enzymes were considered
since they lead to a much greater sensitivity. All the enzymes
involve in melanin production (starting from tyrosine or
secondary metabolite) were taken for study. List of all the
enzymes considered along with their availability in different
taxa are shown in  (see supplementary material). To
search for accurate enzyme sequences, firstly corresponding
exact E.C numbers were extracted from BRENDA [] database.
Further, using these E.C numbers, protein sequences from
different taxa were taken from Uniprot database []. 

(see supplementary material) illustrates information on the
details of protein sequences along with the species of the taxa of
which the sequence was dug out of the database. Subsequently,
presence of all the listed enzymes were checked in all 5 taxa
considered and the corresponding results are elucidated in
().

Phylogenetic analysis of the enzymes:
For each enzyme involved in melanin synthesis, its sequences
(if available) from 5 different families were extracted. For
example - tyrosinase enzyme is present in all 5 taxa, thus giving
us 5 sequences of tyrosinase from different taxa. Later, Multiple
Sequence Analysis (MSA) for these enzymes was performed via
Clustal W []. Following MSA evolution of individual enzyme
was studied using Phylip tool []. In Phylip the executable
packages seqboot was used for bootstrapping, prodist for distance
computation, neighbour.exe for tree prediction and consensus.exe
was employed for consensus tree generation using neighbourjoining
method.

Bootstrapping is a statistical estimate for testing the reliability
of the tree produced. Here bootstrapping process with (1000)
replicates was used for tree evaluation. These replicates support
the data for each node of the tree under consideration. For
viewing trees generated by phylip, MEGA [] application was
used.

Pathway Evolution:
The final step of the study involves the prediction of pathway
evolution model. On the basis of evolutionary analysis of
individual enzyme, pathway phylogeny was analyzed.

Discussion
Various pathway databases were searched and online literature
was studied to arrive at a detailed pathway for all types of
melanin synthesis in humans, plants, fungi and bacteria. In
humans, there are two extra enzymes DCT and TYRP1 present
for synthesis of Eu-Melanin. Further Pheo-Melanin is also
produced depending on cysteine or gluthione concentration in
the body. Moreover, Alkepto-Melanin is also produced which is
generally known as Pyo-Melanin in fungi. This is because all
the enzymes responsible for this melanin production are
present in humans. In case of plants, function of tyrosinase is
performed by PPO enzymes. These two enzymes show high
sequence similarity. However, other than this the DOPA
melanin synthesis pathway is similar to other taxa. Fungi have
three kinds of melanin production namely DOPA melanin
(from Tyrosine), DHN-Melanin (from secondary metabolite)
and Pyo-Melanin (from tyrosine). Other than this, fungal
melanin is also produced from dopamine using laccase enzyme.
Laccase is third enzyme having tyrosinase domain other than
tyrosinase and PPO. These three enzymes show similar
functions in different species which are also represented by
their sequence similarity. These enzymes show similar domain
for tyrosinase activity and are extremely important for melanin
production. In bacterial species, melanin is produced by either
tyrosine via tyramine path or HPA or by secondary metabolite
like malonyl-CoA. The melanogenesis pathways in bacteria are
usually derived from fungal paths. However, presence of
melanin in Archea is an issue of ongoing debate, but our study
reveals that the presence of tyrosinase and TYDC enzymes will
aid in production of melanin pigment which can help the
organism for protection against radiation and extreme climatic
conditions.

Comparing tyrosinase, PPO and laccase enzymes:
Tyrosinase is a copper monooxygenases that catalyzes the
hydroxylation of monophenols and the oxidation of odiphenols
to o-quinols. This enzyme, found in prokaryotes as
well as in eukaryotes, is involved in the formation of pigments
such as melanins and other polyphenolic compounds.
Tyrosinase binds two copper ions (CuA and CuB). All
tyrosinases have this binuclear type 3 copper centers within the
active site. Each of the two copper ions has been shown to be
bound by three conserved histidines residues. It is the rate –
limiting enzyme for controlling the production of melanin 
[,
]. 
On a similar note, the PPO and Laccase enzyme have three
histidine residues conserved. Alignment of these three enzymes
w.r.t the histidine conservation is shown in (). It was
thus evident that tyrosinase, PPO and laccase perform similar
functions but are activated under different condition in
different species.

Pathway evolution:
There has been considerable evolution in melanogenesis from
bacteria to humans as indicated by tyrosinase enzyme that is
present in all the taxa. The phylogenetic analysis suggests the
evolution of this enzyme from bacteria to humans. However,
tyrosinase of Archea showed considerable similarity with plant
PPO (). In all species, other than human melanin,
production is solely handled by tyrosinase but in humans there
are TYRP 1 and 2 enzymes that help tyrosinase. In plants and
humans there is one main path for melanin synthesis, whereas
in fungi and bacteria there is more than one pathway for
melanin production; depending on its use and application.

Conclusion
We demonstrate that distance measures that are based on the
topology and the content of metabolic networks are useful for
studying evolution and co-evolution. In addition, such studies
allow us to further improve pathway alignment techniques by
pathway reconstruction strategies, besides; they also help us
study co-evolution of metabolic pathways. The availability of
complete genome sequences has enhanced our understanding
of ancestral relationships. Further progress in protocols for
sensitive database searches, combined with cross-genome
sequence comparisons and phylogenetic analysis, should
significantly improve our ability to decipher functions of
individual proteins encoded in these genomes. All this data can
then collectively use to decode the mechanisms of cell function.
Classification of protein families and domains as per
INTERPRO [] database provides a useful tool for such crossgenome
sequence analysis and metabolic pathway
reconstruction at enzyme level. We assume that the exponential
increase in the number of completely sequenced genomes will
result in improved functional assignments to hypothetical
proteins and will ultimately result in a reliable evolutionary
system of protein classification [].

Supplementary material
Data 1
This project is supported by the M.P. Council for Science and
Technology (MPCST), India, under Endt No.
6087/CST/BTAC/2011. The authors gratefully acknowledge
Maulana Azad National Institute of Technology, Bhopal
(INDIA) for its facilities and support.

Citation:Singh et al, Bioinformation 9(2): 094-100 (2013)

(A) represents the melanin synthesis in human, plants,
fungi and bacteria starting from tyrosine whereas; (B &amp; C)
shows melanogenesis from secondary metabolites in fungi and
bacteria respectively.

Alignment of active site with three histidine residues conserved of tyrosinase, PPO and laccase

Phylogeny of tyrosinase enzyme.

