Background
Lectins are glycoproteins that specifically recognize diverse sugar structures
and mediate a variety of biological processes such as cell–cell and host–
pathogen interactions, serum–glycoprotein turnover, and innate immune
responses []. 
Although originally isolated from plant seeds, they are now
known to be ubiquitously distributed in nature 
[]. As their role in several
cellular processes has begun to become increasingly evident, there has been
simultaneous progress in various areas of lectin biology and chemistry 
[].
The successful completion of several genome projects has made amino acid
sequences of several lectins available. Amino acid sequences of lectins and
their tertiary structures (where available) provide a good framework upon
which all other data can be integrated enabling the pursuit of the ultimate goal
of understanding these molecules at the atomic level also 
[]. They also
provide a basis for a unique classification of this class of proteins 
(http://www.cermav.cnrs. fr/lectines). 
Furthermore, chemical and biological data on
lectins, as in the case of any family of proteins, when interpreted through their
tertiary structures provide the greatest insight into their function and their role
in biological systems []. 
The vast numbers of sequences, a significant amount
of biochemical data as well as several crystal structures reported in the
literature, in fact, demand a simultaneous analysis of all known members of the
family to develop a broader perspective of the functionalities as well as
potential uses of these lectins. The number of animal lectins and their
biological roles continue to increase with the new researches going on in the
field of lectin biology and allied fields. It has also been shown that some of the
newly described lectins are similar to previously investigated lectins, whereas
others represent new structural groups. Progress has been made in
understanding structure-function relationships for several lectins in both the old
and the new categories. In the present work the efforts have been made to
develop an integrated knowledge based animal lectins database together with
appropriate analytical tools which we named as “AnimalLectinDb”.

Materials and Methodology
Data collection
Initially, a search with keywords “animal lectin” or “agglutinin” as source
limits was carried out on all protein databases available through National
Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). Repeated searches were made
with the same keywords but with an additional source keyword pertaining to
each of the animal lectin individually, obtained in the first list through the
NCBI search engines, using GenBank, Swiss-Prot 
[], and, Protein Data Bank
(PDB) []. 
These searches were carried out through the Internet and results
were downloaded onto local machines, along with other available associated
details. This data was filtered through RDBMS (Relational Database
Management System) technique by assigning primary key and foreign key to
ensure there is no duplication of data. Unless otherwise explicitly stated, all
further processing was carried out locally using default parameters. Any
previously unidentified redundancies were removed. For each entry, basic
information pertaining to the lectin name, source, protein, amino acid sequence
length, molecular weight, carbohydrate specificity, and PDB identifiers was
parsed from the respective entries in various databases.

Database schema
An organized database schema was designed to serve as a repository for animal
lectins. The database was implemented using HTML, XML. For some modules
JavaScript and Java applets were used. The schema has been designed to
accommodate basic information about lectins viz. the structural details: fold,
family classification, primary structure of their proteins, the corresponding
nucleotide sequences and also the details of the carbohydrate specificities.
Derived data features such as domain boundaries, active site residues, structure
prediction, fold classification, and phylogenetic results are stored in various file
formats. Many of the links are connected to different databases to acquire more
recent data. The database schema also enables easy addition of new
information about animal lectins in the future. Moreover, it can also support
addition of information on lectins from other sources such as plants, fungi,
bacteria, and viruses that are planned to be integrated in the future as a
“Comprehensive Lectin Database”.

Database assembly
A flowchart depicting the methodology used in constructing AnimalLectinDb
is illustrated in . 
The pipeline to construct the database has been
automated in parts and also manually checked at specific stages, to ensure of
minimizing errors in the database.

Results
Using keywords “animal lectin”/ “agglutinin” search through NCBI resulted in
an initial list of animal lectins = 1372 and agglutinin = 887 
(). Further
information was collected by repeated searches for each animal lectin
individually using different databases. The database assembly was designed as
discussed in “Material and Methods”. It is then run and contents were analyzed.

Database content
There are some specific databases which may provide information on animal
lectins, but all these databases need to be updated with latest information as per
requirement of scientific community. The Animal lectin Database,
‘AnimalLectinDb’ provides all required information on animal lectins such as
Express Sequence Tags and mRNA detail along with complete nucleotide
sequence and Protein sequence from different databases. It also provides the
microscopic details of protein such as visualization of dihedral angles ψ against
φ of amino acid residues in protein structure, ligand information and domain
etc, not available in any other lectin database. This database integrates
information about lectins such as, Nucleic acid and protein sequence databases
from Swiss-Prot, GenBank, EMBL and DDBJ; Taxonomy database; Protein
structure database from PDB; Structural classification databases from CATH,
SCOP; Ramachandran Plot from PROCHECK and Interaction with other
molecules from MSD. Besides these, it has functional information for all
lectins fetched from literature, functional annotations derived from Swiss-Prot
and GenBank function cards as well as from Protein Information Resource
(PIR). The functional information pertaining to carbohydrate specificities,
blood group specificities, and biological processes have been mapped.
Furthermore, each lectin entry in the database has been tagged with structural
annotation in a layered fashion, depending upon the extent of information
available about them. The next level of information in the database pertains to
the known function(s) of the lectins. Here again, the information spans a wide
hierarchical range, starting from individual monosaccharide specificities to
larger roles in various cellular events. Carbohydrate specificities obtained from
the literature have often pertained to specific animal lectin and a general
functional annotation to lectins of a given animal has also been provided. In our
database some of the functions of lectins and the broad potential applications
they lead have been provided as a different section of the database.

Discussion and Utility
Our studies with analysis of databases for cystic fibrosis and mutational
analysis of H5N1 and H1N1 were found significant for ascertaining test
systems [,
]. 
Lectins bind to various sugars in a highly selective manner. This
selectivity enables lectins to display many significant biological activities such
as blood group specific agglutination, preferential agglutination of tumor cells,
and a variety of other functions. Molecular recognition is indeed a key event in
many biological processes. It is also known that almost all cells carry
carbohydrates on their surfaces, providing them the ready recognition sites for
various proteins interacting with them. Lectins form an important class of these
carbohydrates containing molecules. Hence, studies with lectins have proved
invaluable in the understanding of molecular mechanisms of various cellular
processes and deciphering the code contained within the sugar molecules 
[,
]. 
In the laboratory, lectins are also attractive biotechnological tools because
they are highly stable, exquisitely specific for carbohydrate determinants and
amenable to chemical modification and conjugation 
[]. AnimalLectinDb
provides an easy-to-use web interface with flexibility to select for an entry or a
collective set of entries matching users criteria such as name of the animal,
sequence class etc. In the pursuit of all the applications, it is our belief that this
database will serve as a useful repository of manually curetted information
pertaining to sequence, structure, and function, all integrated into a single
framework similar to our previously developed phyto chemical database for
diabetes “Phyto-Mellitus” [].

Conflict of interest
The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.

Citation:Kumar &amp; Mittal, Bioinformation 6(3): 134-136 (2011)

A schematic representation of the pipeline used in the development of AnimalLectinDb.

Statistcis of Animal Lectins in Database

