Background
Despite rapid advances in the diagnosis of bacterial infections and the
availability of effective antibiotics, Lyme disease, the most common vector
borne disease continues to represent a substantial public health problem for
most countries like United States and Europe []. 
Borrelia burgdorferi, the
causative organism is a gram negative, fastidious spirochaete, an obligate
internal parasite that is vectored between the vertebrate hosts by hard bodied
ticks of lxodes ricinis complex []. 
It remains in zoonotic cycle for its survival
in nature since neither the vertebrates nor the vectors can transmit
B.burgdorferi from one generation to another []. In most cases, infection is
marked by erythema migrans. Other signs of early infection are nonspecific and
include fever, myalgias, arthralgias, and fatigue []. It is a helical-shaped
bacterium with outer and inner membrane and flexible cell wall. The outer
membrane proteins are key components in transmission of bacteria 
[].
Common antibiotic therapy includes tetracycline for the early manifestation
and high doses of erythromycin and penicillin for children and pregnant
women []. Prevention and cure can be accomplished by vaccine preparation
involving antigenic surfaces that trigger humoral immune response which has
long been found to be protective against Borrelia burgdorferi infections 
[]. In
the present study, insilico subtractive genomics approach has been carried out
to identify non homologous essential membrane proteins of Borrelia
burgdorferi ZS7. These membrane associated proteins could be effective
candidates for new vaccine epitope design and for screening of potential antiborellioses
drugs.

Methodology
The essential proteins of Borrelia burgdorferi ZS7 were identified using
subtractive genomics approach and further analysed for identification of
potential drug targets []. The flow chart describing the detailed methodology
for identification of pathogen specific essential proteins using subtractive
genomics approach is shown in . The complete proteome of
Borrelia burgdorferi ZS7 was retrieved from NCBI 
[]. Each protein sequence
of the bacteria was subjected to BLAST-P, specifically against DEG (Database
of Essential Genes) available at 
http://tubic.tju.edu.cn/deg/ for the screening of
essential genes []. 
Cut off for E-value, bit score and percentage of identity at
amino acid level were considered &lt;E-10, &gt;100 and &gt;35% respectively.
Matches of length &lt;100 amino acids were not considered for further studies.

Selection of non homologue essential gene
The essential proteins were subjected to human BLASTp in NCBI server.
Sequences that did not show similarity with any human sequences were
selected.

Identification of membrane localized candidate drug targets
Sub-cellular localization of each identified non homologue essential gene was
determined by Specialized Sub Cellular Localization Server v2.5 (PA-SUB)
[].

Metabolic Pathway Analysis
Metabolic pathway analysis of the essential proteins of Borrelia burgdorferi
ZS7 was done by KEGG Automatic Annotation Server (KAAS) 
[].
Comparative analysis of the metabolic pathways of the host and pathogen was
performed by using Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)
pathway database for identification of pathogen specific metabolic pathway
associated proteins.

Homology modeling for 3D structure of putative drug targets
Modeling of the target proteins were performed using MODELLER Version
9.9. A template search has been performed through BLAST and PSI-BLAST
programs []. 
Global alignment method was used for comparison between the
target-template sequences []. Gaps with variable gap penalty function are
included for structural loops and core regions, in order to get maximum
correspondence between the sequences. Alignment file for MODELLER was
prepared by CLUSTALW []. Fold recognition was done through
GenThreader and LOMETS server for fold assignment 
[]. Energy
minimization of generated 3D-model was done through GROMACS (OPLS
force field) by using Steepest Descent and Conjugate Gradient Algorithms
[]. 
Parameters like covalent bond distances and angles, stereochemical
validation, atom nomenclature were validated using PROCHECK and overall
quality factor of non-bonded interactions between different atoms types were
measured by ERRAT program []. RMSD (root-mean-square deviation) and
RMSF (Root Mean Square Fluctuation) was calculated for modeled structures.
Functionally important residues (Active-site) were identified through
comparative result of POCKETFINDER and SURFACE RACER 4.0. The
generated 3D model of target proteins was checked by Ramachandran plot
through PROCHECK program.

Result and Discussion
A subtractive genomics approach utilizes the whole proteome of host and
pathogen to identify proteins exclusively present in the pathogen by deducing
the homologous proteins []. Based on the similar approach as mentioned in
materials and methods, 272 essential genes in Borrelia burgdorferi genome
were found to be non homologous to human (putative drug targets). 
 
shows the comparative analysis between the total number of proteins to
the number of essential &amp; membrane bound proteins respectively. These non
human homologous targets identified were further analysed for sub-cellular
localization prediction which detected 15 membrane localized proteins.
Membrane localized proteins represent largest group (70%) of effective drug
targets in any organism [] and can also act as potential epitopes for vaccine
design. Table 1 (see ) gives the details of function,
cellular localization and KEGG biochemical pathways of membrane localized
proteins of Borrelia burgdorferi ZS7. Modeling was a tedious task due to very
low sequence similarity and coverage and only five models could be obtained.
Three dimensional model of drug targets were generated through identified
templates along with fold fitting. Fold recognization was done through
GenThreader and LOMETS server for fold assignment. Helices have
dominance over other secondary structure. Ramachandran plot of all the five
proteins analysed using PROCHECK with the description of the allowed
regions are shown in . Our results yielded kinases namely
phosphoglycerate kinase, chemotaxis histidine kinase, that are likely to be
involved in cell cycle control, differentiation and response to stress during their
complex life cycle. Kinases have been reported to be the drug targets 
[]. In
our study three of the proteins are penicillin binding proteins, role of these
proteins as drug targets have also been studied []. Preprotein translocase
plays an important role in extracellular transport and also as drug target 
[].
ATP-dependent protease La is involved in catalysis of damaged or senescent
proteins and short-lived regulatory proteins and therefore serves as drug target.
Although most of the proteins mentioned are not validated as drug targets they
are putative by virtue of their essentiality using bioinformatics tools and
deserves further studies.

Conclusion
The large scale genome sequencing projects have increased the availability of
completely sequenced genomic and proteomic data in public domain. Use of
the DEG database is more efficient than conventional methods for
identification of essential genes and facilitates the exploratory identification of
the most relevant drug targets in the pathogen. The present study has thus led to
the identification of several proteins that can be targeted for effective drug
design against Borrelia burgdorferi ZS7. The drugs developed against these
will be specific to the pathogen, and therefore will be less or non toxic to the
host. Since the number of essential genes in the metabolic pathways of Borrelia
burgdorferi ZS7, has been identified in the present study, these can be further
characterized and their role in the survival of the bacteria can be verified.
Homology modelling of these targets will help identify the best possible sites
that can be targeted for drug design by simulation modelling. Virtual screening
against these novel targets might be useful in the discovery of novel therapeutic
compounds against Borrelia burgdorferi ZS7.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We acknowledge the Department of Bioinformatics, Karnataka State Women
University, Bijapur, DBT- BIF facility under BTIS (Biotechnology information
system), DBT (Department of biotechnology), Ministry of Science and
Technology, Government of India, for providing all the facilities for carrying
out the research work.

Citation:Madagi et al, Bioinformation 6(9): 356-359 (2011)

(a) Flow chart describing the detailed methodology for identification
of pathogen specific essential proteins using subtractive genomics approach;
(b) Comparative Bar Chart between total number of proteins and membrane
associated essential proteins.

Ramachandran plot of modeled drug targets using PROCHECK (1)
Preprotein translocase; (2) SecA subunit penicillin-binding protein; (3) UDPN-
acetylmuramate--alanine ligase; (4) phosphoglycerate kinase; (5) V-type
ATP synthase subunit; (6) Percentage of amino acids in allowed regions of the
target proteins.

