Background
Websites which impart information pertaining to health should
be designed keeping the user in mind. User­focused sites must
not only be designed with good utility and usability, but must
also address the functional literacy of the general population.
This involves ensuring that the website text and cognitive
artifacts such as graphs are not only readable, but understandable
at a level that enhances the decision making of the consumers1.
The major goal in the development of usable web interfaces is to
design interfaces that match user capabilities. Along with the
user analysis, the analysis of the environment specifies the
conditions in which the site is used. Several aspects of the
physical environment are important for the design of the
interface. The place and conditions in which the interface is used
can be a deciding determinant for the type of interaction the user
has with the interface. Websites are accessed all around the
world therefore social and cultural issues are an integral part of
the analysis. The social environment of the users can impact the
success or failure of a website []. The assessment of functions
and overall navigation of the site is also very important. The
content and visual criteria used into the functional analysis help
to identify the structure of the website. The hereby reported
comparative analysis of the various healthcare interfaces,
examines different aspects of similar websites and their
applications on the World Wide Web. It compares the various
websites in terms of functionality, navigation, usability aspects
of the interface screens, and user platforms. It assists in defining
alternative representations, and can provide design ideas and
determine efficacy of similar existing applications or websites
[].

There are various health related websites so that user can find
comprehensible and reliable information pertaining to health
issues. The commonly used databases have been summarized in
Table 1 (see ). The website wrong
diagnosis [] contains information regarding commonly
occurring diseases, their symptoms and signs, differential
diagnosis, causes, diagnostic tools, treatment and associated
research work and available statistics .’Symptom checker‘ enlists
the causes of a particular symptom and a combination of
symptoms thus narrowing down the search to few limited causes
of that disease. It is associated with a description of those
diseases and their suggested treatment. There is a questionnaire
in ’Diagnosis checklist‘ for the time, location, pattern and
duration of a particular symptom. It elicits any relevant past
history, personal history, family history, treatment history and
suggests a plausible diagnosis. Health guidance relevant to
specific age groups (pediatric and geriatric age groups) and
system wise discussion of symptoms (Cardiovascular,
Respiratory and Gastrointestinal tract etc) has been covered.
’Disease centre‘ discusses details of some most commonly
occurring diseases and some rather rare diseases. The website
also contains information on Top 100 misdiagnosed diseases.
There are numerous medical conditions that are overlooked in
diagnosis, misdiagnosed as another disease or diagnosed too
often. Certain conditions are over diagnosed or under diagnoseddelayed,
missed, underlying disease are missed, disease
complications are missed or wrong subtype of disease is
diagnosed. This website looks into those subtle differences,
evaluates the most common misdiagnosed condition and prompts
the key features which help to differentiate them from the correct
diagnosis. This can be of value to the clinician when faced with
a confusing set of differential diagnosis of a particular disease
and also of value to the patient to realize these subtle differences
and give a more accurate history or cooperation in the
examination so that the practitioner can arrive to a more
conclusive and accurate diagnosis.

In medicinenet [] there is an alphabetical list (A to Z) of disease
condition. There is an alphabetical list of signs and symptoms,
procedures and tests (when are they performed and what do they
signify) and medications (uses, how to use, dosage, route of
administration, side effects and contraindications).There is also a
feature on medical news, health and living and medical
dictionary. Then there are websites pertaining to specific
diseases like ArthritisInsight [].This gives easy to read factual
Information on osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, fibromyalgia,
gout and other types of arthritis. There are around 1000 pages of
information In addition one can find lots of support from other
patients with arthritis, tips for better living and the latest arthritis
news. There is a website on Cystic Fibrosis [] .Cystic fibrosis
mainly affects the Caucasian population .This is a website
mainly focused on its symptoms ,foundations ,pictures and
treatment therapies .Alternative therapies, news article , research
and latest developments in the field of cystic fibrosis are also
available.

Health related websites can apprise the patients of information
related to disease or how to keep good health. It can also help to
improve General Practitioners use of the internet for the purposes
of gathering valid and clinically useful medical information
depending upon his/her information management skills, search
skills, structuring clinical questions, navigating through a
selection of reputable clinical databases, and case studies. If
trained properly, significant differences can be found in GPs'
knowledge about pre­appraised evidence-based medicine
resources, frequency of use of the internet for clinical purposes,
search skills and confidence, and perceived competence in using
clinical databases. Qualitative data have indicated that GPs are
more likely to put the training into practice outside consultation
times (rather than during consultation) as clinical searches take
too long and can detract from doctor/patient rapport. GPs
reported that they mainly use the internet to perform occasional
quick searches for unfamiliar medications or illnesses.

The internet can also help keep GPs up to date with new
findings. Traditional approaches of continuing medical education
(e.g. attendance at educational meetings) are based on the
assumption that something learned now can be applied in
practice in the future (so­called ’just in case‘ learning). An
alternative approach, which is facilitated by the use of the
internet, is to solve clinical queries as they arise in practice,
possibly while the patient is still present. This on­the­job method
has been called ’just in time‘ learning []. Health related
websites thus benefit both the patient and clinician alike. The
whole focus is to make these sites more informative, more
authentic and more comprehensible to the user. The websites can
provide a better clinical decision support so that the user can
have a detailed and easy access to health information and thus
can deal and live with his/her disease condition in a better way.
Also the goal is to develop web servers from where the patient
can upload or access his health records. He can get a computer
generated opinion or his health information is transmitted to a
healthcare specialist at a far off location to get his opinion. The
goal is to identify how to build health related systems that help
consumers who wish to understand and contemplate their health
records and information and integrating them with an overall
program of IT for consumer empowerment.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Tripathy &amp; Singh, Bioinformation 4(2): 87-89 (2009)

