Background
Historically, the function of biomaterials has been to replace diseased or 
damaged tissues []. 
Whereas first generation biomaterials only aimed to 
match the physical properties of the replaced tissues with the lowest toxic 
response in the host (i.e. being ‘bioinert’), second generation biomaterials, 
which include glasses, ceramics, glass-ceramics and composites, form a 
strong bond to bone and connective tissues []. Further advancements in 
material science and nanoengineering have led to third-generation 
‘bioactive’ biomaterials. This  means eliciting specific molecular 
interactions with cells, enhancing cell and/or extracellular matrix 
proliferation, cell differentiation and organization, and activating genes to 
stimulate these activities. Thus, tissue regeneration can be programmed by 
a well-characterized biomaterial-cell interaction [].

Examples of programmed tissue response after the interaction with 
biomaterials are currently emerging in dental research, with a special focus 
on the osseointegration process [,
]. We propose here functionalized 
anodic porous alumina (APA) as a third generation biomaterial for the 
programming of cell growth in oral tissues.

Anodic porous alumina
APA is a nanostructured material that can be prepared in macroscopically 
extended (i.e. cm2 scale) surfaces []. APA is a rigid matrix of porous 
aluminum oxide (Al2O3), obtained by controlled anodization of a high 
purity (∽99.999%) aluminum electrode in an acid electrolytic bath, after 
prior surface smoothing by electropolishing. The pore diameter is upper 
limited by the pore cell size, which is determined in a coarse way by the 
type of acid, and in a fine way by the applied potential during 
potentiostatic anodization. Typically, pores of  ∽20,  ∽40, and  ∽200 nm 
diameter can be obtained. The pore diameter can be increased and made 
closer to the whole cell size (2-3 times the pore diameter) in a subsequent 
etching step. The pore arrangement can also be made locally ordered in 
hexagonal lattice domains of 1-3 µm diameter, mainly by finding the 
proper anodization voltage.

APA is an inert, hard, refractory and chemically resistant material. It is 
biocompatible, is not destroyed when in contact with biological fluids and
is not toxic. On the other hand APA  is not biodegradable, meaning that 
after being inserted in living tissues it cannot be dissolved in situ over time.

Potential applications in biology and medicine
Some possible applications of APA are summarized in  Table 1 (see 
). Free-standing APA membranes are used for 
the purification of water from pathogens []. APA has also been proposed 
as a scaffold for microarrays, a tool  used to evaluate gene expression of 
different tissues []. 
All these applications can  be enhanced if APA pore 
functionalization is further exploited. In fact, by filling APA with either a 
polymer solution or nanoparticles, a “negative” nanocomposite (with 
inorganic matrix surrounding polymer “filler” units) or a composite with 
inorganic rigid matrix can be obtained, respectively. These options pave 
the way to promising biological applications. One of the authors (MS) has 
currently two project proposals under  evaluation for applications of the 
above concepts in the field of biosensors and bioelectrodes, respectively. 
Another APA application that could take advantage of pore filling is its use 
as a substrate for living cell attachment and growth. In this case the largest 
possible pores are required (diameter≥300 nm), because cells could find 
better grasp on roughness features of this size []. Both bulk alumina and 
alumina zirconia ceramics are already used as implant materials for 
artificial joints, due to  their excellent mechanical properties and wetting 
capability, which allows for effective lubrication []. Conversely, due to its 
porosity APA does not show the same favourable properties. However, 
proper pore functionalization could change this scenario.

Possible applications of APA in dentistry
APA pores can be filled with any appropriate medium, e.g. cell nutrient 
solution and specific adhesion or growth factors such as proteins or 
peptides, and/or ions. Release of this content may be driven by 
environmental parameters such as temperature, pH, or concentration of 
synergically acting chemicals. In this way APA could be used to trigger 
cell adhesion and/or growth, and therefore influence tissue organization.

This functionalized APA may also be used as a scaffold for the generation 
of new tissue, which will be especially promoted by highly interconnected 
pores. This property can be achieved during industrial fabrication of APA
by letting the pores arrange in an unstructured (or ‘random’) fashion, 
different from the laboratory-made ‘ordered’ APA required e.g. for 
optoelectronic devices. The high interconnectivity of pores in disordered 
APA makes this material a real 3D scaffold throughout its whole thickness.

APA thickness is typically lower than 100 µm, which makes APA not 
appropriate for the replacement of massive tissue. Furthermore, even the 
largest APA pores obtained so far are ≫1 μm in diameter, thus being a 
severe limitation for tissue vascularization []. Despite these limitations 
APA can be used as a coating of  other non porous, passive, restorative 
filling materials, such as bulk ceramics or metal/metal alloys, an approach 
previously proposed for bioactive glasses []. In the case of APA, the pores 
can act as pinning points for the integration of the new tissue around the 
implant. This approach could be particularly effective if the pores are filled 
with protruding structures (e.g. collagen fibers) to mimic natural dentin, 
which has been shown to support material bonding [].

The proposed application requires a large inter-disciplinary effort: 
proteomics, genomic and bioinformatics/data-mining will be necessary to 
develop appropriate functionalization strategies, along with deeper
understanding of APA wettability, and possibly lithographic patterning 
capabilities. Our multi-centric group is now exploring such a multi-faceted 
approach.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Salerno et al, Bioinformation 5(7): 291-293 (2011)

