Background
Cry proteins of Bacillus thuringiensis, a Gram positive soil
bacteria has been used to control insects by transgenic Bt Cotton
approach. There are numerous strains of B. thuringiensis, each
toxin was highly selective to Lepidoptera, Coleoptera and Diptera.
Genetically Modified crops have been accepted as animal feed
in several countries like European countries and Japan []. Prior
to the release of Boll Bollgard cottons I &amp; II in market, the food,
feed and environmental safety were evaluated by standard
regulatory agencies []. But,Bt cotton has some risks on
environment and to living organisms. A very few in vitro, in
vivo and in silico research on the Cry proteins were reported so
far based on safety assessment and impact of Bt crops over
living organisms.

There has been a previous in silico study of the motif regions in
aminopeptidase N which is a receptor for Cry1Ac []. There
were many subtypes of crystal proteins; out of these the three
Cry proteins namely Cry1A, Cry1F and Cry1J formed a cluster
for domain II. Moreover, it was found that these proteins have
similarities in the domain II region []. Here, we report
inclusive and exhaustive sequence and structure based analysis
on the Cry1Ac and Cry2Ab proteins of the B. thuringiensis for in
silico based identification of cross affinity of Cry1Ac toxin with
receptor enzyme in cow (Bos taurus) was performed.

Methodology
Sequence:
Cry1Ac (ABY83188.1) and Cry2Ab (ABC95996.1) protein
sequences were retrieved from NCBI protein database. BlastP
was used to search most of the similar protein sequences.
Protparam tool was used to predict physico &amp; chemical and
bio-chemical properties. PSORTb v3.0.2 was used to predict the
cellular localization of the proteins. PRED-CLASSv 1.0 was used
to classify the proteins. Conserved Domain Database (CDD), a
protein annotation database was used to identify conserved
regions, motifs and family of the proteins 
[].

Structure:
The biological macromolecular protein structures were obtained
by sequences from RCSB protein databank. Protein structure
server SWISS-MODEL was used for homology-based modeling.
Mistral web server was used for determining the p-Value,
Z_score and sequence identity of the compared structures 
[].

Docking:
To understand the cross affinity in the active site region for
Cry1Ac with procarboxypeptidase from H. armigera and
Leucine aminopeptidase from Bos taurus were performed using
the Hex, Autodock and ClusPro, online docking protein-ligand
servers [].

Results &amp; Discussion
Sequence analysis:
Meta-analyses was performed to compare non-target
invertebrates which were exposed to Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt)
Cry proteins under laboratory studies and the results were
showed of non-target invertebrates from independent field
studies []. BlastP analysis of the Cry1Ac protein sequence
(ABY83188.1) showed maximum identity with insecticidal delta
endotoxin [B.thuringiensis serovar kurstaki] (AAA73077.1),
pesticidal crystal protein cry1Ac [B.thuringiensis serovar kurstaki
str T03a001], Cry1Ac [B. thuringiensis] and toxin crystal protein
[B.thuringiensis] respectively. Cry2Ab protein (ABC95996.1)
showed maximum identity with pesticidal crystal protein
Cry2Ab [B.thuringiensis serovar kurstaki str]. There has been an
earlier report of Blastp analysis of Cry2 genes of B.thuringiensis
isolated from soil [].

The stability index of Cry1Ac (35.80) was high compared to
Cry2ab (31.42), but aliphatic index was high in Cry2ab (83.92)
than Cry1ac (81.32) respectively. More or less both Cry proteins
have very similar stability and aliphatic index value. Grand
average of hydropathicity index values (-0.408 and -0.287)
indicate their solubility and hydrophilic nature as disulphide
bridges play an important role in determining the
thermostability of the proteins, so it indicate that cry proteins
has less number of disulphide bonds in the structure. This may
be the reason of insecticidal crystal proteins persist in the
rhizosphere soil. The insecticidal activity of B.thuringiensis
serovar kurstaki in soil even after persists for 234 days and their
aliphatic index values of Cry proteins were high thermo stable
[]. 
There has been reported earlier that the Bt crystal proteins
were mostly located in cytoplasm and distribution density was
larger in the cytoplasm than in the intercellular space of Bt
transgenic cotton []. Here in our study the sub-cellular
localization prediction indicated that Cry1Ac is an extracellular
protein. Cry1Ac and Cry2Ab were predicted to be membrane
and globular proteins respectively. CDD analysis of Cry1Ac has
showed the presence of putative metal binding site, a
delta_endotoxin_C domain of Cry1Ac. Cry2Ab has at its C
terminal, a delta_ endotoxin domain. This domain has been
reported earlier with carbohydrate binding function. This
region of delta endotoxin has 3 structural domains. Domain I is
responsible for pore formation in the target insect, the
remaining II and III domains are involved in receptor binding
and Carbohydrate binding module region (CBM6). Functional
partner analysis of Cry proteins indicated that β-Lactamase
domain containing protein as their functional partner based
upon the Neighborhood parameters in the STRING. There has
been an earlier report of expression of β-lactamase in the culture
supernatant of Cry negative strain of B.thuringiensis 
[].
Functional homologs search of Cry1Ac and Cry2Ab proteins
were found to be present in Brevibacillus brevis and
Bacillus weihenstephanensis.

Structure analysis:
Structure of Cry1Ac and Cry2Ab proteins were predicted by
homology based approach ( ). The templates
were used for the structure prediction of Cry1Ac and Cry2Ab
proteins. The templates were used for the structure prediction
of Cry1Ac and Cry2Ab proteins were 1CIYA- CryIA(a)
insecticidal toxin [] and 1I5P- Cry2Aa insecticidal crystal
protein []. Aligned region, percentage of identity and QMean
Z_score were found to be significant. Ramachandran plot of
Cry1Ac protein indicated fully aligned region of 110 residues
(55.56%), additionally allowed region of 49 residues (24.75%),
generously allowed region of 26 residues (13.13%) and outside
region of 13 residues (6.57%). α-helix region comprise of 35
residues (31.02%) and β-sheet region comprise of 75 residues
(68.18%). Ramachandran plot of Cry2Ab protein indicated fully
aligned region of 467 residues (74.01%), additionally allowed
region of 120 residues (19.02%), generously allowed region of 25
residues (3.96%) and outside region of 19 residues (3.01%). α-
helix region comprise of 245 residues (52.46%) and β-sheet
region comprise of 214 residues (45.82%). The predicted
structures of Cry1Ac and Cry2Ab proteins were compared and
the p-value was 5.04e-01 with Z_score as -0.2. The homology
modeled phylogenetic tree of Cry1Ac and Cry2Ab proteins
were constructed based on the PDB structure of Cry1Ac
(1CIY_A). Cry1Ac forms a clade with 3EB7_A (Chain A, crystal
structure of insecticidal delta-endotoxin Cry8eA1 from
B.thuringiensis). Cry2ab forms a Clade with 3EB7_A (Chain A,
crystal structure of insecticidal delta-endotoxin Cry8eA1 from
B.thuringiensis).

Docking:
A protein–protein docking study is based on the number of
hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic interactions, aromatic–aromatic,
aromatic–sulphur, cation–pi interactions and binding energy. A
previous report had showed that Cry1Ac fusion proteins with
the aminopeptidase N (APN) of Manduca sexta rationalized the
higher binding affinity of the fusion protein with the APN
receptor was compared []. Docking of tertiary structure of
Cry1Ac protein with 1JQG - crystal structure of
procarboxypeptidase from H. armigera was performed 
[].
Here the docking of tertiary structure of Cry1Ac protein with
1LAM Leucine aminopeptidase (Bos taurus) 
()
was performed and the active site for former at Try 125 and
latter at Leu 125. This indicated that procarboxypeptidase A
and leucine amniopeptidase showed the 125th amino acid
position to be the preference site of Cry1Ac protein.

Structure superposition:
The structure of carboxypeptidase A (H.armigera) (1JQG) and
Leucine aminopeptidase (Bos taurus) (1LAM) were compared.
The 5 % of identity between these two structures in particular to
the preference site could be the reason for the cross affinity
nature of Cry1Ac protein. The structure of Cry1Ac and Cry2Ab,
a protein was superimposed and shows the aligned regions in
particular to the active site. Earlier report showed that
fragments of recombinant cry1Ab gene were detected in the
gastrointestinal contents of the Bt11 cotton fed pigs but not in
the control pigs [].

Conclusion
This study was performed to find out the possibility of cross
affinity Cry1Ac with leucine aminopeptidase of Bos taurus to
prove the recent news of cattle grazing Bt cotton crops into the
fields of Adilabad district of Andhra Pradesh, India
(http://farmwars.info/wp-content/uploads/2011/09/BTCotton-
Animal-Deaths). The results confirmed that even a 5%
of identity would affect the cattle and genetically modified Bt
cotton have an impact even to non-target animals. This work
may be helpful to animal and plant ecologist to do further
research over on Bt cotton grazing cattles.

Authors are greatly acknowledged to Prof. Dr. P. Gunasekaran,
Vice chancellor, Thiruvalluvar University, Vellore and Former
Head, Department of Genetics &amp; Coordinator for UGC-NRCBS,
Madurai Kamaraj University for giving visiting fellowship to
complete the research. We also thank Dr. S. Shiek Asraf and Dr.
K. Sujatha for assistance in the acquisition of research article.

Citation:Ebenezer et al, Bioinformation 9(15): 792-795 (2013)

Three dimensional structures of Cry1Ac and Cry 2Ab. A) The template used for the structure prediction of Cry1Ac was
1CIYA- Cry1A insecticidal toxin; B) The template used for the structure predicition of Cry2Ab proteins was 1I5P- Cry2Aa
insecticidal crystal protein. The structure visualization and modeling was done using the Discovery Studio from Accelerys
software. A Ramachandran plot, against a background of phi-psi probabilities was constructed. Black shaded portion indicate fully
Allowed region. Dark grey shaded portion indicate additionally allowed region, light grey shaded portion indicate generously
Allowed region. Black triangles indicate glycine residues, white triangles indicate proline residues, and small black squares
indicate other residues.

Docking of Cry1Ac protein tertiary structure. A)
Cry1Ac protein with crystal structure of procarboxypeptidase A
(Helicoverpa armigera) indicated that 125th aminoacid position
(TYR-Tyrosine) to be preference site of the Cry1Ac protein; B)
Cry1Ac protein with crystal structure of Leucine
aminopeptidase (Bos taurus) indicated that 125th aminoacid
position (Leu-Leucine) to be preference site of the Cry1Ac
protein. Red color dots indicates water molecules.

