Background
The Cereal cyst nematode (CCN) is a composite group of 12
species that infects graminaceous cereals and grasses resulting
in high crop losses and distributed worldwide 
[]. Among
them, the most economically important species is H. avenae
(Wollenweber, 1924) that can resist harsh environmental
conditions and spread through the means by which soil is
disseminated [,
]. Although chemical nematicides are the
most reliable means of controlling CCN; their use is consistently
being discontinued due to their toxicity to humans and the
environmental safety. Novel and specific targets are thus
needed to develop new strategies against these CCNs 
[].

Neuromuscular system plays critical role in the location and
penetration of host roots, secretory activities, migration,
alimentation, and reproduction of plant parasitic nematodes
(PPNs). Neuropeptide signaling system has been proposed to
be the potential target for the management of plant parasitic
nematodes []. FMRFamide-like peptides (FLPs) have shown to
be widely expressed in the nervous system of the cyst-forming
nematodes, H. glycines, Globodera pallida, and G. rostochiensis 
[].
The largest families of neuropeptides in nematodes are the
FLPs, which possess a C-terminal Arg-Phe-NH2 signature and
play a central role in motor activities. There are 28 flp genes
reported in Caenorhabditis elegans encoding at least 72 distinct
peptides []. In addition, 21 FLPs have been identified in
another very economically important species of the root knot
nematode, Meloidogyne incognita []. Functions of flp genes are
regulated by MicroRNAs (miRNAs) and flp-12 and flp-16 were
identified as potential targets in pine wood nematode,
Bursaphelenchus xylophilus []. Although studies on role of FLPs
on behavior of plant parasitic nematodes are limited, a series of
RNA interference studies of flp genes in G. pallida revealed
aberrant behavioral phenotypes and migrational abilities 
[].
flp-12 is predicted to be crucial for the normal muscular
function in G. pallida and M. incognita as it has interfered with
the nematode migration in a sand column in response to the
root defusates [].

In C. elegans, some flp gene knockouts have induced multiple
aberrant behavioral phenotypes [] and each flp gene is
expressed in a unique set of neurons [] consistent with FLPs
roles in a wide array of different motor behaviors. While
expression patterns of FLPs in plant parasitic nematodes (PPN)
do not appear to reflect those seen in C. elegans, a similar
restricted and unique neuronal expression pattern was reported
for five flp genes examined in G. pallida 
[]. CCN genomic
information is completely nonexistent and in the present study
for the first time, we have cloned and characterized two genes,
flp-12 and flp-16 from Indian isolates of H. avenae using
orthologous sequences present in M. incognita. These two
neuropeptides of H. avenae could be useful to design strategies
for its management.

Methodology
Nematode collection and multiplication on wheat plants:
Cysts of CCN were collected from wheat roots growing in the
fields of Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi,
India. Genetic homogeneity of the population was characterized
by sequencing and PCR - RFLP of ITS (Internal transcribed
spacers) of rDNA (ribosomal DNA). Genetically homogenous
populations were multiplied on wheat plants growing in pots
under green house conditions and mature brown cysts were
collected. Wheat plants were infected with juveniles and after 4
– 8 weeks, feeding females protruding out of the wheat roots
were collected, frozen and used for RNA extraction.

cDNA library construction, PCR amplification, cloning and sequencing of flp genes of H. avenae:
Total RNA was extracted from approximately 500 mg of frozen
feeding females of H. avenae. Poly (A+) mRNA was purified and
a cDNA library was constructed using Clontech's smart cDNA
synthesis protocol as per manufacturer's instruction. Flp-12 and
flp-16 were PCR amplified from the cDNA library using the
primers designed based on the published nucleotide sequence
of flp-12 and flp-16 genes from M. incognita, (Accession No:
AY804187 and Accession No: EU549831 respectively). The
sequences of the primer sets were forward primer: 5'-
CCCAAGTTTGAGCTCTAAAAACAC 3'; reverse primer: 5'-
TCATCGTCCAAATCGAATGA3' for flp-12 and forward
primer: 5'ATTTGATTGCCTCCTTAACACG3'; reverse primer:
5'- GTTTTGAATCTCTCCCAAATCG - 3' for flp-16.

PCR amplification reactions were performed in 25 µl reaction
volumes containing 2.5 µl 10 x assay buffer (100mM Tris-HCl
(pH 8.8 at 25°C), 500 mM KCl, 15 mM MgCl2, 0.1% gelatin,
0.05% Tween 20 and 0.05% NP-40), 200 µM each of dATP,
dCTP, dGTP and dTTP (Fermentas), 16 ng primer, 1 unit of Taq
polymerase (MBI Fermentas, Genetix, India) and 1 µl cDNA
library. The PCR cycles consisted of initial denaturation at 94°C
for 4 min, followed by 35 cycles of amplification, denaturation
at 94° C for 60 s, annealing at 55°C for 30 s and extension at 720C
for 1 min with a final extension at 72°C for 10 min. The
amplified product was run on 1.0% Agarose gel electrophoresis
to confirm the size of the amplified product.

The fresh PCR product was cloned into pGEM-T cloning vector
(Promega, USA) using standard protocol. Freshly prepared
competent cells of Escherichia coli DH5α were transformed with
the recombinant plasmids. Positive clones were selected by
using ampicillin, blue white colonies and colony PCR. Inserts
were confirmed by restriction digestion with EcoRI. The positive
clones were custom sequenced by ABI solid sequencing
platform.

Computational Sequence Analysis:
The amino acid sequences were deduced from the
corresponding nucleotide sequences by using ExPASy
translates available at http://expasy.org/. In order to find the
homology with the plant parasitic nematodes, we performed
the protein BLAST for the protein sequence and nucleotide
BLAST for the nucleotide sequences using default parameters
[]. Comparison with the homologous sequences was done
with ClustalW []. Theoretical isoelectric point (pI) and
molecular weight (mw) for the conceptually translated protein
sequences were calculated by the Expasy Protparam tool. Gene
ontology term was assigned through AmiGO BLAST. Signal
peptides were predicted by the SignalP server [].

Phylogenetic tree was plotted by the maximum likelihood
method based on the Jones-Taylor-Thornton model of amino
acid change using Bioedit software package 
[].

Discussion
Cloning of flp genes from cDNA of H.avenae:
The coding sequences of the two FLPs (flp-12 and flp-16) were
amplified from the cDNA library of feeding female stage of H.
avenae. PCR amplification gave 349 bp and 310 bp for flp-12and
flp-16 respectively (). Amplified flp genes were cloned
into pGEM-T TA cloning vector and recombinant plasmids
were confirmed by colony PCR using specific gene primers.
Further the plasmids were prepared for the positive
recombinants and inserts were confirmed by restriction
digestion with EcoRI. The cloned genes were sequenced using
ABI solid sequencing platform and sequences are given in
().

Characterization of the sequences:
Sequence of the partial cDNA of flp-12 (349 bp) and flp-16 (301
bp) obtained from cDNA library of H. avenae were submitted to
Genbank sequence database (Accession Nos: JF437713 and
JF437714). The percentage of the GC content was 35.2% and
39.2% for flp-12 and flp-16 respectively which were similar to
the previously reported GC content for other plant parasitic
nematodes []. BLASTN was carried out to determine the
homology against non-redundant Genbank database. flp-12
and flp-16 showed 96% and 95 % identity respectively with that
of M. incognita. The nucleotide sequences conceptually
translated into the corresponding amino acids resulting in 107
(flp-12) and 99 (flp-16) amino acids were submitted to Genbank
(Accession no AEN71840 -flp-12) and AEN71841 -flp-16).
Further, Protparam results showed a molecular weight (mw) of
12562.5 daltons (Da) and a Theoretical pI of 7.92 for flp-12 while,
mw for flp-16 was 11765.1 Da and pI was 9.86. SignalP server
was used to identify the signal peptide in both the FLPs.
SignalP result of flp-12 predicted 22 residue long signal peptide
at N-terminal (1-22) and no significant hits were obtained for
flp-16. This indicates that flp-12 could be involved in extra
cellular function like signal transduction.

Sequence comparison:
Six in case of flp-12 and four for the flp-16 protein sequences of
closely related species were retrieved from Genbank database
using protein Blast Search. Best hits obtained with the M.
incognita for both FLPs were aligned pairwise to find the
similarity with H. avenae. Pairwise alignment of the flp-12
between H. avenae and M. incognita revealed the substitution of
Q-R,F-L,T-A,T-A and M-I at 6, 12, 20, 49 and 60th positions
respectively. However, in case of flp-16 the substitution of I to K
at 25th amino acid position and deletion of E at the 52nd position
was observed in H. avenae sequence compared to M. incognita.
Further, the homologous sequences aligned using multiple
sequence alignment (MSA) suggested that flp-12 is
comparatively more conserved than flp-16 among the closely
related species. In addition, COOH terminal of flp-12 is found to
be highly conserved with the motif, KFEFIRF ().
Whereas, MSA of flp-16 sequences revealed that [Y/F] [L/V]
RFGK motif has two repeats at COOH Terminal. However,
FVRFGK motif is conserved in the flp-16 of both M. incognita
and H. avenae, whereas YLRFGK motif is conserved in the flp-14
of free living nematodes (C. brenneri, C. elegans and C. briggsae)
(). This strongly suggests that these conserved motifs
are essential in signal transduction mediated by GPCR (Gprotein
coupled receptor) [,
]. Analysis of flp-12 and flp-16
of H. avenae suggested that flp-12 to be more conserved across
parasitic nematodes with higher similarity to root knot
nematode species rather than the cyst nematodes. It has
diverged from the free living nematodes suggesting its vital role
for parasitism. Even though flp-16 is found to be homologous
with free living counterparts, it is again highly similar to flp-16
of M. incognita. Further, AmiGO BLAST hit confirmed flp-12
involvement in receptor signalling pathway resulting in axon
guidance (GO: 0007411) and negative chemotaxis (GO: 0050919)
whereas, flp-16 is involved in negative regulation of striated
muscle contraction (GO: 0045988).

Phylogenetic analysis:
Extending this study, we carried out phylogenetic analysis
among closely related species of H. avenae. We constructed the
phylogenetic tree of both flp-12 and flp-16 gene with parasitic as
well as free living nematodes. Phylogenetic tree grouped flp-12
of H. avenae with all PPNs. However very interestingly, it
showed more closeness to the two root knot nematode species,
M. incognita and M. minor than the cyst nematode species, G.
pallida and H. glycines confirming the results of BLAST.
However, Ascaris suum and C. brenneri formed two independent
out groups suggesting their evolutionary distance ().
Phylogenetic analysis of flp-16 indicated that H. avenae and M.
incognita were grouped together with high level of similarity.
Additionally, it was also related to flp-14 of three free living
nematodes (C. elegans, C. briggsei and C. brenneri) 
().
Significantly, phylogenetic analysis is in excellent agreement
with the MSA result confirming the similarity.

Conclusion
Present results indicate that FMRFamide like peptides are
important for both plant parasitic and free living nematodes
since they are conserved across different genera in spite of
evolutionary pressure for diversification. The observed results
confirm the phylogenetic relationship of these two genes
determined by MSA thus, enhancing the confidence. However,
flp-12 is more conserved between the parasitic nematodes and
diverged from free living nematodes indicating their possible
role for parasitism. The application of RNAi to the identified
neuronal genes in H. avenae could open the door to unraveling
the underlying biology of these two flp genes in CCN. Work is
in progress on functional validation of these two neuro
peptides-encoding flp-12 and 16 genes of H. avenae by RNAi
through soaking in double stranded RNA solution under in vitro
conditions.

We would like to thank Department of Biotechnology,
Government of India for the financial support and ICAR and
IARI for infrastructure facility to carry out the Research work.

Citation:Thakur et al, Bioinformation 8(13): 617-621 (2012)

PCR amplification of flp-12 and flp-16 genes from
cDNA library of Heterodera avenae. Lane 1:100 bp DNA marker;
2- flp12: 4- 100 bp DNA marker; 5- flp16

cDNA sequence in lower case of flp-12 (a) and flp-16;
(b) with the translated open reading frame. The deduced amino
acid sequence is shown in one-letter symbols.

MSA of the predicted amino acid sequence of the flp-12 (a) and flp-16 (b) from H. avenae with flp sequences from other
nematodes. The sequences are denoted by their Genbank identifier followed by the species abbreviation. Species abbreviations: Ha,
Heterodera avenae; Mi, Meloidogyne incognita; Mm, Meloidogyne minor; Gp, Globodera pallida; Hg, Heterodera glycines; As, Ascaris suum;
Cbe, Caenorhabditis brenneri; Ce, Caenorhabditis elegans; Cbi, Caenorhabditis briggsae.

Phylogenetic relationships of the predicted flp-12 (a)
and flp-16 (b) from H. avenae and FLP sequences from other
nematodes. The same homologous sequences as in 
were used in this analysis. Abbreviation: PPNs-Plant parasitic
nematodes.

