Background
HIV (Human Immunodeficiency Virus) is still becoming global
health major concern. More than 34 million of people were
estimated living with HIV in 2011. Its infection could develop
into AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome), marked as
one of the most destructive disease in modern era. UNAIDS
had estimated 1.7 million adult and child deaths due to AIDS
in 2011 alone. HIV has high resistance characteristic due to its
high rate of replication (109-1010 virions per person per day)
and error-prone polymerase, and 5-10 mutations estimated to
occur in each HIV life cycle [,
]. Unless some steps in the
cycle are interrupted by specific treatment, the infection will
spread throughout the body leading to deterioration of the
host׳s immune system [].

Maturation is an essential step in HIV life cycle, triggered by
proteolytic cleavage of polyproteins by viral protease 
[]. The
critical role of HIV protease in the virus cycle was
demonstrated as early as 1988 and within a decade, the first
inhibitor of the enzyme, saquinavir, was already licensed for
use in the treatment of HIV infection [,
]. As for 2012, not less
than 9 protease inhibitors were approved by FDA to be used as
medication to HIV []. The development of those protease
inhibitors were a notable example of structure aided drug
design and suggest there are more to be attained from it. New
lead of protease inhibitor could be developed using this
approach, including lead from natural product. Indonesia is
recognized for its biodiversity, ranked second after Brazil. It
consist more than 30,000 plant species out of 40,000 species
known all over the world. At least 9,600 species have
pharmacological activity []. Previous research has gathered
some of the three dimensional data of Indonesian herbal
compounds and published it as Indonesian Herbal Database
(HerbalDB) (http://herbaldb.farmasi.ui.ac.id) 
[].

In this research, we applied virtual screening as one of in silico
structure aided drug design method to HerbalDB. This
research employed structure-based screening (molecular
docking) with AutoDock [] and PyRx 
[]. Top ten
compounds obtained from the virtual screening of HerbalDB
will be considered as hits and will be represented in ranks. The
aim of this research is to find feasible AutoDock virtual
screening parameter as HIV-1 protease inhibitor and to search
the potential candidates from HerbalDB using the parameters
obtained.

Methodology
This research was done using literature study and virtual
screening by molecular docking (structure-based virtual
screening). The experimental design for our experiment was as
follow:

Preparing the HIV-1 PR Protein Structure:
The macromolecule (HIV-1 PR) three dimensional structure
were obtained from the Protein Data Bank website
www.pdb.org 
[]. The inclusion criteria for our target
macromolecule were wild type / non-mutant protein and in a
complex with ligan. The exclusion criteria were having
resolution &gt;2.5 Å and incomplete chain. Macromolecule was
downloaded with the *.pdb format for further processes. The
chosen macromolecule then has to be optimized for virtual
screening preparation. The macromolecule cleaned from
solute, marker and cofactor molecules. Gasteiger partial
charges and AutoDock forcefield were applied.

Preparing Ligand Structure:
Ligands used for this research were classified into two groups.
The first group consists of ligands that were obtained from
DUD []. We specifically downloaded controls for HIV-1
protease. It is consisted of 62 positive controls (simply called as
DUD ligands) and 2038 negative controls (called as decoys).
The data have *.mol2 format. The second ligands groups used
in this research was obtained from HerbalDB. It contains
known molecules from some plants that were used for herbal
medicine in Indonesia. The molecules have *.mol and *.mol2
format. It were converted to *.pdbqt format so it will be
available to use by AutoDock. All ligands (controls from DUD
and ligands from HerbalDB) were converted from *.mol2
format into *.pdbqt format using Open Babel [].

Optimizing the Virtual Screening Parameter:
Validation of Virtual screening using DUD database ligands
and decoys was done using AutoDock 4.2 in PyRx [,
]. The
screening result will be tabulated and analyzed from its
Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve and
Enrichment Factors (EF) to search for feasible parameters
which will gives accurate prediction without compensating too
much times and computer costs.

Virtual Screening of Indonesian Herbal Database:
After obtaining the parameter from the optimization, virtual
screening was done to all structures of HerbalDB using
AutoDock in PyRx.We sorted the screening result based on
binding affinities and then ranked it to get top ten compounds
that will be considered as hits in this reseach. Visualization
was also done using AutoDockTools and PyMol to see the
interaction between the ligand and HIV-1 protease.

Result &amp; Discussion
The virtual screening target chosen for this research is wild
HIV-1 protease with pdb identity 3OXC []. It meets our
inclusion criteria as the virtual screening target. After it was
downloaded from the protein data bank website, it was all
cleaned from water molecules and other ligand chemical
components such as saquinavir, formic acid and sulfate ion.

The ligand binding site was determined from the position of
3OXC ligand saquinavir. The XYZ coordinates is 5.192, -4.557,
14.799 for x-axis, y-axis, and z-axis, respectively. We varied
gridbox parameter to see which one that gives the best EF1%
and ROC AUC. We also compare the result of the screening if
it was done completely without water molecule and retaining
water molecules in the scope of macromolecule binding site.
The enrichment and ROC AUC of DUD database virtual
screening using AutoDock was shown in  (see
supplementary material). The best EF1% was obtained with
the parameter as follow: retaining water molecules, maximum
energy of evaluation 1,000,000 and gridbox 50 × 50 × 50 units
(spacing 0.375 Angstrom per unit). The EF score is better than
the EF shown in the DUD site, 11.9 vs 4.7, respectively. The
best AUC was obtained from the 60×60×60 gridbox and 250,000
maximum energy of evaluation. Parameter that gives best
AUC and best EF both have better AUC (0.7275 and 0.6992,
respectively) compared to the AUC from previous research
(0.69 for AutoDock). The screening using AutoDock also
suggest us that retaining water molecules in binding site could
give better Enrichment Factor. The ROC curve of AutoDock
screening result was shown in . We prefer to use the
parameter that gives best EF rather than the parameter that
gives the best AUC for virtual screening of herbal database.
This is given that early EF will be more useful than AUC as the
whole compounds of database was rarely synthetized or
extracted. The compounds that were highlighted as the top
ranks from the screening result will be synthetized and
extracted instead.

Virtual screening of HerbalDB using AutoDock results were
given on the  (see supplementary material). The top
ten ranked compound were listed as hits from this screening.
The binding energy of the top ten ranked compounds were
varies from -18.74 kcal/mol to -11.79 kcal/mol. The first and
second compounds are flavone glycosides that come from the
fruit of Helicteres isora [, 
[]. Otake and colleagues have done
research to examine anti HIV-1 activity of 30 plants extract.
They concluded that water extract of Helicteres isora fruit have
anti HIV-1 activity, but the compound and mechanism of
action wasn׳t determined from the research []. Amaranthin,
the compound that was ranked third, is a lectin group pigment
that could be found in Amaranthus caudatus, A. tricolor, Celosia
argentea and C. cristata seed [, 
[]. Ursonic acid in the fifth
rank is a member of pentacylic triterphene that could be found
in Angelica ursica Maxim, Ficus macrocarpa, Cordia multispicata,
Myrica rubra, and Lantara camara Linn [, 
[, 
[, 
[, 
[, 
[].
From literature search, we haven׳t found any research about
the activity of amaranthin and ursonic acid as protease
inhibitor or anti HIV-1. 5-Carboxypyranocyanidin 3-O-(6"-Omalonyl-
beta-glucopyranoside) and 5-Carboxypyranocyanidin
3-O-beta-glucopyranoside were in rank 6 and 10, respectively.
Both are flavonoid glycoside from Allium cepa [, 
[]. Allium
cepa has been patented to be used in HIV/AIDS treatment by
Goldman et al []. Oleoside in the rank 5 is secoiridoid
glucoside from Oleaceae familia plants [, 
[]. The leaf extract
of this plant has been used to suppress the acute infection and
HIV-1 cell to cell infection [].

In the eighth rank is jacoumaric acid, a triterpene compound. It
can be found in Jacaranda caucana and Psidium guajava 
[, 
[, 
[]. There isn׳t any research for anti HIV activity for the
compound yet. Platanic acid is found in Syzigium claviflorum,
Platanus occidentalis, Melaleuca ericifolia, Melaleuca leucadendron
[, 
[, 
[, 
[]. Fujioka and Kashiwada (1994) have researched
the effect of betulinic acid and platanic acid as anti-HIV agent
from Syzigium claviflorum plant. Platanic acid shows anti HIV
activity with EC50 6.5 µM [].

From this research, we concluded that the optimum result for
HIV virtual screening by AutoDock were given by the
parameter gridbox 50 × 50 × 50 units, 0.375 Angstrom per unit,
gridbox centre at 5.192, -4.557, 14.799 for x-axis, y-axis, and zaxis,
respectively, 1,000,000 numbers of evaluation and
retaining water molecule near the binding site. The parameter
gives better EF1% than the benchmark EF1%. We also done
virtual screening from HerbalDB and we obtained top ten
compounds as hits. Some of the compound, such as 8-
Hydroxyapigenin 8-(2",4"-disulfatoglucuronide),
Isoscutellarein 4'-methyl ether, and oleoside came from the
plant that have been studied before and shows anti-HIV
activity but there isn׳t any research about the mechanism or
the contributing compound. From this research, we could get
some insight about the compound and they need to be assayed
in vitro to search more about its potential.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are grateful for funding provided by the Directorate
General of Higher Education, Ministry of Education and
Culture Republic of Indonesia through the National Strategic
Research Project 2013 to Arry Yanuar.

Citation:Yanuar et al, Bioinformation 10(2): 052-055 (2014)

Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve of DUD
Database Virtual Screening using AutoDock. K = kilo
(thousand), NR = Not retaining water, RW = Retains water at
binding site.

