Background
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a large family of ~22 nucleotide long
endogenous non-coding RNAs that play important
posttranscriptional regulatory role in diverse organisms 
[].
Mature and functional miRNA have characteristic secondary
structure (hairpin like) and develops from palindrome repeats
[]. 
There are a number of methods for predicting miRNAs such
as biochemical method, direct cloning, sequencing method and
computational method. Apparently a distinct advantage of
computational method is to identify even those miRNAs which
are expressed only at a certain developmental stage of a cell that
was not possible with other approaches of sequencing and
cloning []. The computational method of miRNA prediction
depends largely upon the conservedness of miRNA sequences
from organism to organism, that paved a strong approach of
homology search method for predicting potential miRNAs. One
of the most effective and rapid computational method of
miRNA prediction is by EST analysis []. C. roseus is a medicinal
plant containing a number of alkaloids like Vincristin and
Vinblastin that are effective against Leukemia []. Plant extract
has also been successfully used to develop effective drug
against Diabetes mellitus []. Since the first discovery of the
miRNAs, miRNA abundance in the genomes of various
organisms [] including insects, plants [], viruses and higher
vertebrates has been reported []. The miRNAs of closely
related species and to some extent of distant species are
generally present as conserved sequences []. miRNAs acts as
a regulatory element in various cellular and developmental
processes viz. cell division [], cell death 
[], hormone
secretion [] and neural development 
[]. Recent evidences
suggest that miRNAs also functions as tumour suppressors and
oncogenes []. They operate by binding to the 3'UTR region of
an mRNA sequence with antisense base pairing and cleave the
target mRNA or strangle its translation into protein. One
miRNA can suppress various different mRNAs and a single
mRNA may be bound by several assisting miRNAs []. A
number of approaches have been used to predict miRNAs in
various organisms. Initially, miRNAs were identified using
genetic or biochemical methods []. Later, direct cloning and
sequencing of total small RNAs with appropriate size from
isolated tissues or whole organisms enabled the identification of
hundreds of miRNAs in plants and animals []. In majority of
recent experiments for miRNA prediction, computational
approaches were firstly used to predict miRNAs followed by
molecular techniques such as Northern blotting for validation
[]. Evidently, computational approaches have played a
progressively important role in miRNA identification. A
discrete advantage of computational approaches is that the
miRNAs which are expressed in specific tissues, at destined
levels of development or at less copy number, can be readily
identified by computational searching, whereas the approaches
such as cloning and sequencing finds difficulty and often miss
to identify miRNAs []. The principles of computational
approaches are based on the major characteristic features of
microRNAs: hairpin-shaped stem-loop secondary structure
with minimal folding free energy [] and high evolutionary
conservation from species to species []. Accumulating
evidence shows that many miRNAs are evolutionarily
conserved in animals from worms to humans [], suggesting a
powerful strategy to predict potential miRNAs by using
homology search. In fact, homology search as a computational
approach has been developed to identify miRNA genes in both
plants and animals [].

Methods
C. roseus EST dataset
As of April 27, 2011 dbEST [database of Expressed Sequence
Tags]; contained 69,231,200 in the database. Among that there
are 19,899 EST's of Catharanthus roseus, which were downloaded
from the dbEST database of NCBI. The ESTs database has the
highest set of impurities associated with them of 1.63%, which
has to be removed before the further processing []. SeqClean
software was used to trim out the redundant sequences and
removing the impurities. SeqClean [] utilizes BLAST 
[] to
remove sequence highly similar (by default minimum 94%
identity) to a given list of vectors, linkers, adaptors, or primer
sequences that is located within 30% of total EST from the 3' or
5' end of the sequences to be trimmed []. SeqClean also
removes polyA repeats and applies low complexity filtering (in
addition to performing sequence alignment) to identify similar
vector segments in the target EST []. The cleaned and
trimmed ESTs obtained from the SeqClean were then processed
via Repeatmasker (for masking the repeated sequences) and
TGICL (for clustering) [].

microRNA sequence dataset:
miRBase is a database of validated and published miRNAs.
miRNAs of B. rapa (closest homolog of C. roseus whose
experimentally validated miRNAs were present) were
downloaded from the miRBase.

Searching miRNA homologs and their secondary structure prediction:
Each processed and clustered EST contigs obtained as output of
TGICL were used to BLAST against the miRNAs dataset of B.
rapa to identify ESTs having at least 60% identity. Secondary
structures of resulting ESTs were calculated and their MFE
(minimal folding energy) scores were recorded [].

Hybridization using miRanda:
The non redundant human UTRs were downloaded from
UTRdb database. The targets for the putative miRNAs were
then scanned in the 3' UTRs with the help of miRanda software.
Hybridization energy as well as percentage identity were
calculated for each EST with the help of Vienna RNA package
[]. ESTs having good hybridization energy along with all the
previous criteria were finally considered as putative miRNAs of
C. roseus. All the possible targets genes for each putative
miRNAs were predicted with the help of KEGG database of
NCBI and their function was studied. () describes
flowchart of the steps followed for the identification of miRNAs
in C. roseus

Discussion
ESTs refinement:
Out of total 19,899 ESTs, 31 ESTs were trashed and 5,963
sequences were trimmed out resulting into a total of 19,868
ESTs. Now, the output obtained from SeqClean was processed
as an input for Repeatmasker that masked the repeating
sequences. Out of 10196333 bp (base pairs) 93026 bp got masked
means only 0.91% of bp got masked and the result was found
satisfactory as it clears the cut off range. Similar procedure was
used for refining the contaminant vector sequences present in
ESTs by Chen Y.A. et al. [].

The matured and validated miRNAs of B. rapa were
downloaded from the miRBase database to predict the putative
miRNAs by local BLAST in local contig database of C. roseus.
Ueno S. et al. used similar activity for clustering and assembly
Oak tree ESTs [].

Prediction of putative miRNAs:
The miRNAs of Brassica rapa were compared with the
assembled ESTs of Catharanthus roseus to identify regions in the
Helianthus genome where experimentally validated miRNAs of
B. rapa shows its presence in the contigs of C. roseus. Both
mature and precursor miRNA matches were checked out in the
resultant clustered contigs and singletons. This step generated
filtered ESTs based on score and identity.  (see
supplementary material) shows MFE (Minimum Folding
Energy) value of 10 best putative miRNAs. The query that
whether the miRNAs are blocking or repressing any of the
human genes was solved by hybridizing putative miRNAs with
the 3' UTRs of human through miRanda software. Peng G et al.
used miRanda to find the regulating activity of let 7 miRNA
during apoptosis []. 7 out of 10 putative miRNAs were found
to hybridise with the potential targets with a probability to
block the action of those genes.  depicting the result of
local BLAST between the miRNA and UTR sequences,
minimum identity (63%) was found with the cath-7 miRNA and
its related UTR.  (see supplementary material) shows
the comparative account of finally selected 7 miRNAs on the
basis of hybridization energy, Identity, Maximum score and the
gene getting blocked. miRanda was used in order to hybridize
the human UTRs with the filtered and screened ESTS dataset
ultimately leading to the generation of 10 putative miRNAs,
that were again filtered on the basis of the possible ability to
silence the genes, traced back with the help of KEGG brite
pathway.

Cath-miR1 was found to hybridize with the IL15RA and
MGC104179 genes responsible for enhancing cell proliferation
and expression of apoptosis inhibitor BCL2L1/BCL2-XL and
BCL2 []. cath-miR 2 hybridizes with CHRM1, HM1, M1R and
MGC30125 genes that are responsible for mediating slow
excitory post synaptic potential at postganglionic nerve 
[].
PARVG gene hybridized by cath-miRNA 3 is responsible for
coding Parvin protein (are actin binding protein found to be
associated with focal contacts) [], cath miRNA 4 was found to
be responsible for silencing various signal transducting and
apoptotic genes. BMPR1B, ALK-6 and CDw293 genes
hybridized by cath miRNA 5 encodes BMPR1B receptors
involved in forming phalenges []. Cath miRNA 6
hybridization products i.e. CDKL2, KKIAMRE and P56 encodes
an enzyme Cyclin dependent Kinase like 2 related with ser/thr
protein kinase activity []. Cath-miR7 hybridizes with
PIP5K1A ( type I phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate 5-kinase
alpha protein) take part in synthesis of phosphatidylinositol-
4,5-bisphosphate and related functions []. The secondary
structures and free energy values of the final 7 miRNAs are
shown in  (see supplementary material)

Conclusion
The C. roseus is a very important medicinal plant for human
against various diseases. The miRNAs predicted from it were
found to target various genes related with apoptotic, signal
transduction and CDK pathways, therefore, they may prove
helpful for either curing or preventing various diseases related
to the genes they are targeting. The final predicted miRNAs
may surve as potential resources to initiate experimental
validation that may provide valuable information for functional
analysis of miRNA regulated pathways.

Supplementary material
Data 1
I would like to thank management of our college and colleagues
for providing me the environment and necessary support to
finish my work.

Citation:Omer et al, Bioinformation 8(2): 075-080 (2012)

An overview of the used methodology during miRNA
prediction of C. roseus.

Showing the percentage of Identity between the
predicted miRNAs and Query sequence possibly found to be
involved in silencing particular target gene

