Background
PTP's are attributed a cardinal role in numerous physiological
functions []. Owing to difficulty in crystallizing, computational
methods are employed to predict the PTPs as the basis for
structure based drug design.

Bestrophin being a PTP is encoded in the gene VMD2.
Mutations in the VMD2 gene causes BVMD, an inherited
progressive macular dystrophy, first identified in 1905 by a
German ophthalmologist Frederich Best. BVMD advances with
juvenile onset causing loss of visual acuity due to atrophic
macular changes or choroidal neovascularization associated
with sub retinal hemorrhages and fibrosis []. Early stages of
the disease are characterized by abnormal depositions of
lipofuscin-like material at the level of the RPE classically
resembling an egg yolk []. Disintegration of the central yellow
lesions progressively leads to vision loss at a later stage. The
elemental cause of the Best disease is the BEST1 gene
(previously called VMD2, currently as hbest1), identified in
1998 [].

Determining the three-dimensional structures of PTPs remains
a challenge, although they constitute 15-30% of the entire
genome. Bestrophin being a plasma membrane protein has a
molecular weight of 68 kDa and consists of 585 amino acids 
[].
Computationally, bestrophin is predicted as a transmembrane
protein with four membrane-spanning α helical domains, while
presence of atleast five helices are reported by few studies 
[].
An ecumenical outcome suggests that Bestrophin functions as a
chloride ion channel []. The homology modeling of Asp-rich
domain of hbest1 identified two calcium binding sites, yet the
complete structural details of the transmembrane protein are
not available []. Obtaining the protein structure is crucial to
understand protein function which eventually leads to drug
designing [,
]. Hence the hbest1 protein was modeled using
the Robetta web server (http://robetta.bakerlab.org) 
[].

Natural compounds are tangible as therapeutic drug targets.
More significantly, anthocyanins belonging to the flavonoid
group are beneficial in curing visual acuity 
[]. Anthocyanins
are water-soluble pigments, pre-eminent in a variety of plants
mainly imparting colour to flowers and fruits 
[]. Innumerable
reports exist for the rich resource of anthocyanins in the fruits of
Syzygium cumini (L.) Skeels (Black Plum) 
[,
]. Our study
also involves quantification of anthocyanins from the fruit skin
by ESI – MS/MS Mass Spectrometer. Small molecular structures
of the separated anthocyanins were obtained from publicly
available chemical databases and used for molecular docking
with hbest1. According to the literature, Resveratrol and
Niflumic acid found to be useful in combating retinal damages
was also used in our docking studies 
[].

Methodology
Retrieval of Target Sequence:
The FASTA format of human Bestophin-1 (hbest1) with
Accession number O76090 was obtained from the UNIPROT,
database []. 
The protein sequence contains 585 amino acid
residues.

Secondary structure Prediction:
The secondary structure of hbest1 was predicted using
PSIPRED v3.0 [,
]. Neural nets are used to convert PsiBlast
profile data to secondary structure propensities. A putative
secondary structure is obtained for each residue associated with
a confidence value for the prediction.

Prediction of Transmembrane regions:
The predictors available are inaccurate in predicting the ends of
TMHs, or TMHs of unusual length []. MemBrain, a predictor
based on machine learning approach was used to predict the
TMHs of hbest1.

Ab Initio modeling:
Pertaining to lack of suitable structural template for hbest1, we
resorted to Ab initio modeling of the hbest1 using Robetta, a full
chain Protein prediction server. The primary sequence was
submitted to the server, and the generated models were
received by email.

Structure Validation:
Five structures were obtained from Robetta server. The qualities
of the models were evaluated using the ProQ webserver 
[].
The models were validated using PROCHECK program 
[].

Experimental:
Fruit sample:
Mature fruits of Syzygium cumini were collected from Sirumalai
hills of Dindigul, Tamilnadu, India and identified by Dr P.
Eganathan, M. S. Swaminathan Research Foundation, Chennai.
Rotten, damaged fruits were removed; skin was peeled from
fruits without pulp and shade dried under room temperature
(31°C) until complete disappearance of moisture. Dried skin
was stored for further analysis.

Solvents and Reagents:
Analytical grade chemicals and solvents purchased from Sigma
Aldrich (Saint Louis, MO) were used in the present
investigations.

Preparation of extract for ESI- MS/MS analysis:
SCFS was ground to a fine powder using a Thomas Wiley
Machine (Model 5 USA) at room temperature. Subsequently,
50g of powdered plant material was extracted with 1.5 L
methanol using soxhlet apparatus at 65°C for 4 hours
consecutively. The solvent was removed in vacuo using a Buchi
Heating Bath (B-490) rotavapor to yield dried methanol (purple
color) extract. The extract was filtered and evaporated to
dryness in a vacuum at 40°C with a rotary evaporator.

ESI - MS/MS Analysis:
Crude methanol extract of SCFS was diluted with methanol and
filtered with 0.22μm nylon membrane filter and subjected to
ESI-MS/MS analysis. Anthocyanin identification was
performed on a 3200 QTRAP instrument (ABSciex Instruments,
Singapore) equipped with Linear Ion Trap Quadrupole Mass
Spectrometer and electrospray ionization (ESI) source. Mass
parameters DP was adjusted to get the maximum sensitivity.
Data was generated by Analyst 1.4.1 software. The MS-MS
conditions are : positive ion mode; gas (N2), curtain gas was set
to 15 psi, heater gas and nebulizer gas were set to 10 psi and
source temperature maintained at ambient.The positively
identified compounds (cyanidin,petunidin,malvidin) were
subjected to MS-MS analysis to study the fragment patterns and
were found to match with that of the earlier reported
compounds.

Docking:
The active site residues are Cys69, Cys42, Cys23, Phe80, Phe84,
Val86, Pro77, Leu82, Tyr85, Gly83, Arg92, Trp94, Trp93 
[,
].
Cyanidin 3, 5 Diglucoside, Malvidin 3, 5 diglucoside Petunidin
3, 7 diglucoside were docked with hbest1. In addition, other
compounds included in docking were peonidin, delphinidin
(other anthocyanins). Niflumic acid 
[] and resveratrol 
[]
were included as positive controls in our docking studies for
standardization.

Preparation of protein and ligands:
Glide (Grid-based Ligand Docking with Energetics) software,
developed by Schrodinger running on Red Hat Enterprise
Linux 5 (RHEL 5) workstation, was used for Protein, Ligand
preparation and Induced Fit Docking.

The hbest1 structure was prepared with Protein Preparation
module Wizard of Glide software. Water molecules were
removed, the hydrogens atoms were added to the protein and
all atom force filed (OPLS -2001) charges and atom types were
assigned.

The CID files of the ligands Cyanidin 3,5 Diglucoside (CID
441688), Delphinidin 3,5 glucoside (CID 10100906), Malvidin 3,5
diglucoside (CID 441765), Petunidin 3,7-diglucoside (CID
44256973), Peonidin 3,5-diglucoside (CID 44256843) Niflumic
acid (CID 4488), Resveratrol (CID 445154) were acquired from
the NCBI Pubchem database []. Using the Impact module of
glide the ligands were minimized with 1000 cycles of steepest
gradient and 5000 cycles of conjugate gradient.

IFD protocol:
Induced fit docking combines Glide and Prime modules to
arrive at accurate prediction of ligand binding modes and
concomitant structural changes in the receptor 
[]. Systematic
and Simulation methods are adopted by glide for searching
poses and ligand flexibility. Incremental construction for
searching is employed by the systematic method, with Gscore
being the empirical scoring function 
[]. The calculation of
GScore in Kcal/mol is: G-Score = H bond + Lipo+ Metal + Site +
0.130 Coul + 0.065vdW – Bury P – RotB. Where Hbond=
Hydrogen bonds, Lipo = hydrophobic interactions, Metal –
metal binding term, Site = Polar interactions in the binding site,
vdW = Vander Waals forces, Coul = coulombic forces, Bury P=
penalty for buried polar group, RotB= freezinf rotatable bonds.
The prepared protein was docked with the minimized ligands.
The active sites in the protein hbest1 were selected to be docked
with the ligand. IFD was performed and best conformations
were selected based on Glide Score, Glide energy, and Glide emodel
scores.

Hydrophobic interactions:
Ligplot was used for analyzing the hydrophobic contacts of the
protein and ligand []. The best pose for each ligand was
submitted to Ligplot server and results obtained.

Results &amp; Discussion
The percentage of secondary structures predicted by PSIPRED
showed that 35.90% of the total structures were alpha helices,
3.07% were beta sheets and 59.48% were random coils within
the target sequence. The protein was predicted to have 16
helices, 18 coils and 4 beta sheets (). The percentage of
coils is more than the helices in the sequence. The C-terminal
region of the hbest1 is composed of about 150 residues
indicating the presence of a randomly coiled region. The Nterminal
region, predicted to have signal peptide region has
also a coiled region. Secondary structure prediction provides
valuable information about the content of the protein which
provides insights into the tertiary structure of hbest1.

Prediction of TMHs in helical membrane proteins provides
valuable information about the protein topology when the high
resolution structures are not available. The predictors available
are inaccurate in predicting the ends of TMHs, or TMHs of
unusual length []. The prediction accuracy of MemBrain is
97.9%. N-terminal signal peptides were also detected. Five
Transmembrane helices were predicted by MemBrain 
().

The models obtained for hbest1 from Robetta server were
evaluated by the ProQ program with the following results:
model-1 (ProQ-LG=1.267, ProQ-MX=0.080), model-2 (ProQLG=
1.088, ProQ-MX=0.075), model-3 (ProQ-LG=1.171, ProQMX=
0.061), model-4 (ProQ-LG=1.852, ProQ-MX=0.062) , model-
5 (ProQ-LG=2.310, ProQ-MX=0.104). The cutoffs to finalize the
best model are ProQ-LG &gt; 1.5 or ProQ-MX &gt;0.1 Model-5 is in
complete agreement with the cutoffs providing a good modeled
structure ().

Validation of the model by PROCHECK presented a
Ramachandran plot analysis rendering 98.1% residues in the
most favoured regions, 1.9% in the additionally allowed regions
indicating the efficacy of Ab initio modeling. Secondary
structural elements of the predicted hbest1 were found to be
almost similar to the PSIPRED server results of the primary
sequence.

Docking studies suggest the ability of the three anthocyanins to
bind to active and additional active sites around hbest1. The
binding poses and interactions were analyzed by Glide 

(see supplementary material) &amp; 
(). The glide energy,
glide score and glide emodel score for Cyanidin 3, 5 glucoside
were -64.34 Kcal/mol and -11.80 Kcal/mol -71.60 Kcal/mol
respectively. The compound interacts with Leu 82, Gln59,
Arg105, and Arg47 that are the active sites within 20 Å distance
of the literature cited residues. Hydrophobic contacts are with
Phe82, Phe48, and Thr66. Malvidin 3, 5 diglucoside generated
glide energy of -71.61 kcal/mol, glide score of -5.15 Kcal/mol
and glide emodel score of -92.42 Kcal/mol. Interacting residues
are Arg92, Arg461, Arg534, and Thr 87. Arg92 is the active site
in interaction with Malvidin. Residues Ile129, Thr 91, Pro152,
Asn 136 are in the hydrophobic pockets of docked structure.
Petunidin 3, 7 diglucoside provided glide energy of -68.39
Kcal/mol, a glide score of -7.98 Kcal/mol and glide emodel
score of -94.47 Kcal/mol. Asn136, Thr87, Arg461, are the
residues in interaction besides Arg92 and Trp94 that are the two
active sites involved in the interactions. Hydrophobic
interactions comprise of Pro152 and Val90. Peonidin 3, 5
diglucoside resulted in a glide energy of -58.82 Kcal/mol, glide
score of -8.47 Kcal/mol and glide emodel score of -85.17
Kcal/mol. Hydrogen bond interactions were exhibited with
Asn133, Arg 534, and Gln460. Trp94, Val90, Pro406 residues
were found in hydrophobic contacts. A glide energy of -77.17
Kcal/mol, glide score of -9.18 and a glide emodel score of -
107.57 Kcal/mol was generated by delphinidin 3,5 diglucoside.
Hydrogen bond interactions include Gly159, Glu382, Ile49,
Arg461, and Gln 96, while hydrophobic interactions involve
active sites at Arg92, and Trp93. All anthocyanins have
favourable binding potential with the involvement of the active
site or neighboring residues.

Resveratrol rendered glide energy of -30.89 Kcal/mol, glide
score of -8.25 Kcal/mol and glide emodel score of -48.71 with
one interaction at Tyr131. Similarly the glide energy for
Niflumic acid was -38.19 Kcal/mol, glide score of -8.80 and
glide emodel score being -49.34 Kcal/mol. Niflumic acid has
three interactions including an active site interaction at Arg92.

ESI-MS/MS, an accomplished method [] for determining
anthocyanins shows the presence of cyanidin, petunidin,
malvidin in the methanolic extract of SCFS (). In
accordance to earlier studies [,
], the chromatographic
profile displays the domination of anthocyanins in the sample.
The identified compounds were Malvidin diglucoside at peak
655, Cyanidin 3, 5 diglucoside at peak 611 and, peak 641
corresponds to Petunidin 3, 7 diglucoside. Anthocyanins from
other berries, amenable for oral intake, are reported to cure
visual acuity []. Our study indicates the potential of the three
anthocyanins as inhibitors for BVMD, whereas, pronounced
results are not obtained with other compounds. The inherent
capability of anthocyanins to protect the retinal pigment
epithelium from age related macular degeneration has been
reported []. The tangibility of anthocyanins as antioxidants
has been substantiated by many authors [,
]. In conclusion,
we imply that anthocyanins are safe [] to use for BVMD and
similar retinopathies.

Conclusion
Mutations in bestrophin causes age related macular
degeneration eventually leading to loss of central vision.
Currently no specific drug is available. Anthocyanin
compounds are known to exert a positive effect in the treatment
of visual acuity. Our present work provides an understanding
into the structure of hbest1, identification of anthocyanins in the
Syzygium cumini fruit skin, and docking of hbest1 with the
compounds. The efficacy of anthocyanins demonstrates that
natural compounds may serve as ideal therapies for diseases
affecting the retinal pigment epithelium.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors thank Bioinformatics Infrastructure Facility (DBTBIF),
University of Madras for providing computational
facilities.

Citation:Priya et al, Bioinformation 8(16): 742-748 (2012)

(A) Secondary structure prediction of hbest1 sequence using PSI-PRED server; (B) Graph representing propensities of TM
helices. Numbers circled in red are the positions of TM helices; (C) Robetta modeled structure of hbest1

Protein-ligand interaction 2D map of hbest1 and inhibitors (A-G) using Ligplot diagram. Green dotted lines are
Hydrogen bond interactions and red semicircles are amino acid residues of the protein showing hydrophobic interactions. (A)
cyanidin 3,5 diglucoside; (B) Malvidin 3,5 diglucoside; (C) Petunidin 3, 7 diglucoside; (D) Delphidin 3, 5 diglucoside; (E) Peonidin
3, 5 diglucoside; (F) Niflumic acid; (G) Resveratrol.

ESI-MS/MS chromatographic profile of anthocyanins separated from Szygium cumini fruit skin. Compounds circled in
red are: (A) Malvidin 3, 5 diglucoside, (B) Cyanidin 3, 5 diglucoside and (C) Petunidin 3, 7 diglucoside.

