Background
Plants form the main ingredients of medicines in traditional systems of
healing and have been the source of inspiration for several major
pharmaceutical drugs. The use of plants as medicines has involved the
isolation of active compounds, beginning with the isolation of morphine
from opium in the early 19th century [] and subsequently led to the
isolation of early drugs such as cocaine, codeine, digitoxin and quinine, of
which some are still in use [,]. Isolation and characterization of
pharmacologically active compounds from medicinal plants continue
today. Investigation into the chemical composition of medicinal plants and
especially secondary metabolites is a dynamic research field worldwide
and is the base for Drug discovery. There is an increasing demand to
identify and analyze the target proteins with their active sites and potential
drug molecules that can bind to these sites specifically.Many databases are
available today to describe the medicinal plants and compounds [,,].
Most of the documentation in those databases is focused on the basic
information about the plants and compounds and their targets. Our focus is
to provide the complete pharmacophore analysis of active principles
possessing antidiabetic, antimicrobial, anticancerous and antioxidant
properties from medicinal plants and the interaction of the compounds with
their target proteins. So as an additional effort to decipher research into
technology this data base is created to document the complete research
literatures about the medicinal compounds and the active site of their target
proteins available and docked results of the compounds and their target
proteins.

Methodology
Data collection
Scientific literatures related to the medicinal plants were collected using
Pubmed (NCBI) [], ScienceDirect 
[], Biomed Central [], Springerlink
[], 
Scirus [] Wiley journals []. 
Databases such as Floridata [],
Plants for A Future database [] and Germplasm Resource Information
Network [] were also used to retrieve information about the plants. The
database includes 163 active compounds having antidiabetic (32
compounds), anti-cancerous (83compounds), antimicrobial (43
compounds) and anti-oxidative (5 compounds) effects. The databases are
organized in a hierarchical classification that simplifies the process of
finding the active principles having a particular effect.

Ligand and target analysis for docking
Physicochemical and chemical properties of the compounds were
calculated using chemsketch tool and cross-checked with pubchem data
entries. Two dimensional structure was drawn using Arguslab. ADMET
properties of the active principles were predicted using Accord for Excel
6.1, an accelry's product. It tends to focus on application of plant drugs,
their properties and their ADMET (Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism,
Excretion and Toxicity)nature. The three dimensional structure of the
proteins were retrieved from protein Data Bank (PDB) which is a
repository for the processing and distribution of 3D- structure data of large
molecules of proteins and nucleic acids. The docking analysis of the
compounds was carried out by Libdock of Discovery studio 2.3 Version
(Accelrys Software Inc).

Content organization
Based on the biological activity the data documentation is organized in the
database. Each section contains a list of active principle index and with
five pages for each active principle. The first page provides brief
descriptions of the plant source including its taxonomic classification,
common name, other active principles, distribution and its medicinal use
with appropriate references. The second page includes data regarding
active principles, its physicochemical properties, mechanism of action
with its pubmed ID,2D structure of the active principles. The third page
lists the ADMET values of active principles includes solubility, intestinal
absorption, blood brain barrier penetration level, inhibiton on Cytochrome
P450 enzyme, carrier protein binding level, hepatoxicity values and the key
notes for interpreting the predicted values. Protein target name, synonym,
sequence length, PDB structure ID, domain and the Sequence in FASTA
format are given in the fourth page. Protein-Ligand interactions details
including their binding site, pose number, grid volume, Libdock score,
contact information (van der Waals radii) and their docked complex image
are presented in the fifth page.

Conclusion
In the current research scenario there is an increasing demand for the data
regarding the active principles with their target sites. The database
provides the botanical, taxonomic classification, biochemical as well as
pharmacological properties of medicinal plants. Data on anti-diabetic,
antimicrobial, anti oxidative, anti tumor and anti inflammatory compounds,
and their physicochemical properties, SMILES Notation, Lipinski's
properties are included in our database. One of the proposed features in the
database is the predicted ADMET values and the interaction of bioactive
compounds to the target protein. We hope that this data base will provide
complete details about most potent drug like molecules for diabetes,
microbial infections, cancer and oxidative stress. This database finds utility
to the scientific community for a quick review on bioactive compounds for
drug development research and provides enormous scope for development
of drugs.

Future development
We plan to refine and keep updating this database and hopefully a link
solely for indigenous plants will be made available in the nearest future.
The database will also be modified to develop provisions to search the
database to identify plants of interest using keywords.

This project is funded by BTIS (Biotechnology information system), DBT
(Department of Biotechnology), Ministry of Science and Technology,
Government of India, India.

Citation:Pitchai et al, Bioinformation 5(2): 43-45 (2010)

Web pages of the database

