Background
Protozoan parasites from the order of Kinetoplastida cause 
diseases in humans as well as animals. Eleven genus of 
Trypanosomatidae have 565 species. Out of these, only 
Leishmania and Trypanosoma cause disease in humans. 
Trypnosoma brucei, Trypanosoma cruzi and various species of 
Leishmania are responsible for African Trypanosomiasis, 
Chagas disease and Leishmaniasis, devastating diseases that 
afflict millions of victims, largely in the tropical regions of the 
globe. So a comprehensive study of these genomes is expected 
to generate better comparative protein studies which may lead 
to more efficient drug designing. These single cell eukaryotes 
occupy a very ancient position on the evolutionary tree which 
diverged from the ancestor of the main eukaryotic branch 
[,
]. 
Trypanosomatids have unique mechanisms for gene 
expression, such as poly-cistronic transcription, trans-splicing, 
and the involvement of Pol I in the synthesis of mRNA and 
RNA editing [].

Comparative genomics provides a gateway to understand the 
evolutionary and functional relations between different 
species. Codon usage bias (CUB) is one of the useful analytical 
methods for comparative genomics. Codon usage bias is 
needed for the selection of translational efficiency and hence 
gene expression. Several steps in the gene expression process 
may be modulated, including transcription, RNA splicing, 
translation, and post-translational modification of a protein. 
More than one triplet of nucleotides (codon) may code an 
amino acid. These codons are known as synonymous codons. 
The unequal usage of a particular codon is termed codon usage 
bias. [].
The analysis of CUB may aid in understanding the 
expression of genes and pathogenesis of any organisms and 
allow re-engineering of the target genes to improve their 
expression for gene therapy []. The Codon Adaptation Index 
(CAI) value is useful in the study of gene expression level of a 
particular gene in an organism. The value of CAI nay be used 
to study of the gene expression level within species, the level 
of heterogeneous gene expression, and comparison of the 
codon usage in different organisms and identification of the 
protein coding reading frames [].

David Horn [] had studied the codon usage pattern of some 
tandem highly expressed genes of Trypanosomatids. He found 
the codon usage patterns of L.major, T.bruei and T. cruzi to be 
similar. Since one cannot determine the behavior of the entire 
genome on the basis of a particular group of genes, this study 
follows a more general approach. This is now possible due to 
more data for the coding sequences (CDS) and whole genome 
sequences being available.

Generally three basic questions are addressed in this research 
work. First-is the codon distribution of all CDSs conserved 
among species or not; second-is the translational selection in 
Trypanosomatids on the basis of cognate copy number of t-RNA 
or not; and third-is the distribution of codon usage and amino 
acid frequency for CDSs, highly expressed genes, low 
expressed genes and essential genes in Trypanosomatids similar 
or not.

It is found that the pattern of codon usage bias is more or less similar 
between all highly expressed, less expressed genes and complete CDS for a 
given genome, but the difference of CUB of different genomes is enough to 
distinguish the genomes at the sub- genus level. Principal Component Analysis 
(PCA) was used to compare the CUB of all five Trypanosomatid species, with 
Plasmodium vivax, an Apicomplexan genome taken as an outlier with GC% value 
close to that of T. brucei. The resulting plot clearly differentiates CUB 
signature of L.braziliensis from that of L.major, and T.brucei and 
T.cruzi are also shown well-separated as different species. However 
L.major Friedlin and L.infantum, the old world species, that have 92 % identity even 
at amino acid level [] cannot be distinguished. This behavior 
is as expected and they may be treated as a single species.

Methodology
We have chosen five species to work on, namely- Leishmania 
major Friedlin, Leishmania infantum JPCM5, Leishmania 
braziliensis MHOM, Trypanosoma brucei brucei 927 and 
Trypanosoma cruzi CL Brener. We have also taken Plasmodium 
vivax as as outlier genome for PCA calculation.

Materials:
All the coding sequences for generating the codon usage table 
are obtained from NCBI (http: //www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) and 
TriTrypDB (http://tritrypdb.org/tritrypdb/). The numbers of 
CDSs analyzed are 8102 in L.major, 7932 in L.infantum, 7834 in 
L.braziliensis, 8663 in T. brucei and 8990 CDSs of T.cruzi (see 
). The frequency of codons is calculated using 
CALCULATION OF PARAMETERS server 
(http://genomes.urv.cat/CAIcal). 
Only those sequences which are less than ten thousand nucleotides are considered because 
longer sequences contain repetitive regions with an in-built 
bias, and therefore are excluded from this study []. The DNA 
sequences of some factors which play a central role in 
replication and transcription process were downloaded from 
(http: //www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/)

Methods:
t-RNA sequences of Trypanosomatids are obtained from 
GeneDB (ttp://www.genedb.org). Anti-codons are predicted 
by using TFAM Webserver 1.3 (http://tfam. lcb.uu.se/) for 
analyzing the copy number of t-RNA of the corresponding 
codon [].). The codon adaptation index (CAI) is used to 
predict gene expression levels and their value calculated by 
CAI CAL (CAI) (http://genomes.urv. cat/CAIcal/) for these 
factors. Codon frequency for highly expressed genes and low 
expressed genes are calculated by CODONW 1.3 (John Peden 
and fttp://molbiol.ox.ac.uk/cu/codonW.tar.Z/).

PCA is a useful statistical technique that finds patterns in data 
of high dimensionality. It reduces the variables by using 
suitable coordinate transformations without losing relevant 
information. Codon usage of sixty one codons (excluding the 
three stop codons) of the above five species and P.vivax have 
been taken as input variables in PCA analysis by SPSS 16.0.

Results &amp; Discussion
Codon usage bias analysis:
The genome size of Trypanosomatids is very large, average 
genome size in four species is 30 Mb but T.cruzi has a larger 
size of about 90 Mb  (see supplementary table) because 
50% of its genome contains repetitive elements []. Overall 
codon frequencies of Trypanosomatids are listed in  (see 
supplementary table). The dominant codons referred to in 
 are those that are at least 1.25 times more frequent than
the expected frequency of synonymous codons that code a 
specific amino acid. High codon usage bias in Leishmania 
species and comparatively lesser codon usage bias in 
Trypanosoma species are seen (). Bias of cognate codon 
of the Trypanosoma species are not conserved as much as in the 
Leishmania species.

Translational selection in Trypanosomatids:
Transfer RNA plays a very important role in decoding the genome in protein 
synthesis. All amino acids are coded by the three letter code of 
t-RNA called an anticodon. It is usually composed of adenosine (A), 
guanosine (G), cytidine (C) and uridine (U) []. Specific t-RNAs are 
responsible for encoding the multiple codons that differ only in the third 
position and give rise to the wobble hypothesis []. In Trypanosomatids 
t-RNA genes are present only for 43 to 45 codons (). The total copy 
numbers of t-RNAs show variability in the Trypanosomatids. There are 66 in 
L. infantum, 66 in L. braziliensis and 64 in T.brucei. But the number of 
t-RNAs is 83 in L. major and 115 in T.cruzi.

Of the four nucleotides in any DNA sequence, C and T are 
pyrimidines and A and G are purines. There are three different 
types of wobbling possible of an anticodon in the process of 
translation. Case 1 is when wobbling occurs between 
pyrimidine and pyrimidine; Case 2 occurs when wobbling is 
between purine and purine; Case 3 involves wobbling between 
pyrimidine and purine. About 13-16 codon pairs follow Case 1. 
The preponderance of pyrimidines at the third position of a 
codon as observed by Wald is seen in this study also 
[].

It is noteworthy that only three types of wobbling codon pairs 
are observed out of eight possiblities of wobbling between 
pyrimidine and purine the details of which are given in 
(). 

Comparison between codon usage pattern of complete CDSs and other genes:
Highly expressed genes tend to use only a limited number of 
codons and display a high codon bias due to translational 
selection []. 
High value of CAI of any gene represents higher 
expression of that gene. The value of 1.0 for CAI indicates the 
maximum usage of these codons and lower value shows the 
usage of less preferred codons []. The CAI is used to find out 
whether the expression of selected genes is low or high. The 
codon usage of some replication and transcription factors 
which are coded by essential genes is also analyzed. The study 
of essential genes is helpful in drug designing because these 
genes are important for the survival of organisms.

CUB largely reflects the differences in the selection pressure on 
synonymous codons and this selection pressure leads to a 
substitution in nucleotides composing the codons. This 
nucleotide substitution is inversely proportional to the degree 
of codon bias []. The rate of substitution is less in coding 
sequences as compared to non-coding regions. It is still lesser 
in highly expressed genes []. Codon usage frequencies of 
different types of genes are shown in (). All CDS and 
essential genes show similar frequency of codons but highly 
and less expressed genes show different result in both 
Leishmania and Trypanosoma species. In Leishmania the
frequencies of codons of highly expressed genes are higher 
than the value for overall CDSs [].

Amino acids frequencies in all CDS and other genes:
Amino acid frequency is defined as the total frequency of their 
respective codons. It is almost the same in both the genus but 
that of Proline(P), Alanine(A), Asparagine(N), Lysine(L) and 
Glutamic acids are observed to vary. The frequencies are 
higher for Proline(P) and Alanine(A) in the Leishmania as 
compared to the Trypanosoma. But frequencies of Asparagine 
(N), Lysine (K) and Glutamic acid (E) in the Trypanosoma 
species are higher than in the Leishmania species (). The 
frequencies of amino acids have similar distribution in CDSs 
and essential genes.

At the level of properties, the amino acids are divided into four 
classes, hydrophobic, charged, polar/uncharged and special 
amino acids []. Charged and Polar amino acids may be 
grouped together as hydrophilic and are shown as such in 
 (see supplementary table). Frequencies of hydrophilic 
amino acids are slightly higher than hydrophobic amino acids 
in all chosen Trypanosomatids.

Principal Component Analysis is a very useful method for 
multi-variate analysis. There are 61 variables for the six species 
chosen. The method uses coordinate transformations to reduce 
the components to a few principal ones. The first component, 
PC1 and the second component, PC2 have subsumed 98.5% 
property of whole 61 variables in every species. The role of 
PC1 may be deduced to be related to the GC% of the CDS since 
the CUB values of outlier genome of P. vivax lies close to that 
of the T.brucei as expected and shown in (), and GC% 
is found to be one of the controlling parameters shaping CUB 
[].

Conclusions
t-RNA abundance, shared specific mutational bias, gene 
expression level, amino acid composition and GC composition 
are different factors influencing codon usage bias
[–].The 
occurrence of codon usage varies from species to species. The 
codon usage bias is more conserved in the Leishmania than in 
the Trypanosoma. There is a significant variation in overall 
trends between T. brucei and T.cruzi. It is probably due to at 
least 50% of the T. cruzi genome being composed of repeats, 
consisting mostly of large gene families of surface proteins, 
retro-transposons, and subtelomeric repeats []. The two 
species of Trypanosoma genus T.brucei and T.cruzi belongs to 
two sub- genus Trypanozoon and Schizotrypanum. It is found 
in this study that the two sub- genus are differentiated at every 
level of analysis. The use of PCA identified the differences at 
species level.

Analysis of amino acids cannot give information about 
mutational selection because it may be possible that the amino 
acids will not change due to mutation in one nucleotide. 
Mutation in third position of codon cannot change the amino 
acid but mutation at the first and second position may change 
the amino acid. Because of the high degree of conservation at 
the amino acid level, we may conclude that for Leishmania, 
mutation occurs only at the third or synonymous position of 
codons. But in the Trypanosoma species studied here a 
mutation in the first and second position of the codon changes 
the amino acid. Therefore we can say that difference in 
frequency of these amino acids in Trypanosoma is the result of 
mutation of first position on that cognate codon. For example, 
lysine frequency is high in T.brucei but frequency of glutamic 
acid is high in T.cruzi. Lysine is encoded by AAA and AAG, 
and glutamic acid by GAA and GAG, showing that a mutation 
of first position of the codon can change the amino acid. It is 
affirmed that difference in frequency of these amino acids in 
Trypanosoma is the result of mutation of the nucleotide in the 
first position of that cognate codon ().

If the frequency of a particular codon in a genome is very high, 
then the copy number of the corresponding t-RNA is also high. 
A direct correlation in these variables is found (result not 
shown). In this study it is found that few codons of 
Trypanosomatids are highly preferred but their cognate t-RNA 
is absent. This indicates that wobbling plays a very important 
role in translational selection but it may also be possible that 
the data is incompletely represented or the database used is 
not comprehensive. The positive correlation between amino 
acid and t-RNA shows that translational selection is a major 
force affecting codon usage bias in Trypanosomatids.

The essential genes of Leishmania and Trypanosoma are 
homologs. But codon preference in essential genes of 
Leishmania is different from that of Trypanosoma. This is found 
to be primarily due to the difference in GC% (PCA result).The 
codon usage table is used as a reference table for calculation of 
CAI and estimating the gene expression from it. In other 
words, preferred codons of all essential genes and highly 
expressed genes are not similar in different species of 
Trypanosomatids, exception being L.major and L.infantum. 
Sequence conservation between Leishmania species is high, the 
average amino acid identity between L. major and L.infantum is 
92%, and the average nucleotide identity is 94% [].The study 
here also confirms that the variation of all properties including 
the two principal components in the PCA for L.major and 
L.infantum are almost identical. For all intents and purposes 
they can be taken to be one genome. All CDSs, essential genes, 
highly expressed genes and less frequently expressed genes 
have been analyzed and it is clear that the result is different 
from the previous study of D. Horn [] and his deductions. It is 
confirmed that the CUB or codon usage bias may be used as a
tool for detecting differences at the species level, and is 
therefore a useful tool for comparative genomics.

Supplementary material
Data 1
MR gratefully acknowledges the award of Junior Research 
Fellowships from the Council for Scientific and Industrial 
Research, India, which aided in conducting this study.

Citation:Rashmi &amp; Swati, Bioinformation 9(18): 912-918 (2013)

Plot of frequency of codon usage per thousand in all CDSs of length of less than ten thousands in L.major 
Freidlin(Orange), L.infantum JPCM5(Yellow), L.braziliensis MHOM(Green), T.brucei 927(Brown) and T.cruzi CL Brener (Blue).

Plot of frequency of codon usage per thousand for different types of genes in Leishmania major(Lm), Trypanosoma 
brucei(Tb) and Trypanosoma cruzi(Tc).

a) Plot of frequency of amino acids versus amino 
acids in L.major Freidlin(Orange), L.infantum JPCM5(Yellow),
L.braziliensis MHOM(Green), T.brucei 927(Brown) and T.cruzi 
CL Brener (Blue); b) Plot of frequency of amino acid per 
thousand for different types of genes in Leishmania major(Lm), 
Trypanosoma brucei(Tb) and Trypanosoma cruzi(Tc).

PCA plot for six species by using codon frequency 
per thousand.

