Background
The genus Chlamydia was established in 1966, Chlamydiaceae
family consists of obligate intracellular gram-negative
bacterium, which possesses a distinctive and a composite
biphasic developmental cycle []. C pneumoniae was separated
as a distinct species in 1992 []. It is perhaps one of the most
successful Chlamydial species, which have established a forte in
a range homoeothermic and poikilothermic hosts, including
humans, animals, amphibians and reptiles []. C pneumoniae is a
common cause of upper respiratory tract infections and
pneumonia and has been associated with several chronic
inflammatory conditions such as atherosclerosis [] and COPD
[]. It is a very common bacterium worldwide, and almost
everyone is infected at some point of their life. In some cases,
acute C pneumoniae infection can become chronic. The molecular
mechanism of chronic infections is poorly understood, which
has lead to a major setback in combating these pathogens. C
pneumoniae infection has also been reported as a cause of lower
respiratory tract infection. The lower tract infection has a direct
impact on the pathogenesis, diagnosis and prognosis of COPD
in several ways. Several recent group studies suggest that lung
growth is impaired by childhood lower respiratory tract
infection, in making these individuals more susceptible to
develop COPD. Several recent group studies suggest that lung
growth is impaired by childhood lower respiratory tract
infection, making these individuals more susceptible to develop
COPD. This chronic colonization of the lower respiratory tract
by bacterial pathogens could induce a chronic inflammatory
response with lung damage.

C pneumoniae, usually regarded as a human respiratory
pathogen, has been demonstrated to cause intracellular
infections of the upper and lower respiratory tract respiratory
tissue worldwide. C pneumoniae infections are often
importunate, and an acute infection may sometimes turn
chronic. Acute C pneumoniae infection can cause bronchitis,
emphysema and pneumonia, in addition, more serious diseases
such as atherosclerosis and stroke [] myocarditis, Alzheimer's
disease [] and multiple sclerosis 
[]. COPD have been
associated with chronic C pneumoniae infection, Chronic
infection with C pneumoniae is being seriously investigated as a
cause of several systemic diseases, studies reveal the elevated
incidence of C pneumoniae infection in COPD[].

These chronic infections of respiratory tissues could contribute
to the pathogenesis of COPD by altering the host response
which has proven to be extremely difficult to diagnose and
impossible to treat with current antibiotics. Thus, development
of safe and effective vaccines represents a cost-effective
approach that would have a greater impact on the high
prevalence of Chlamydia infections and the prevention of
severe long-term sequelae. Thus, new antichlamydial drug
targets are urgently needed to be identified. The first identified
case of C pneumoniae infection was reported in Taiwan. It was
identified as TWAR organism, originally derived from the
names of the two isolates - Taiwan (TW-183) and an acute
respiratory isolate designated as AR-39. By the availability of
genome sequence of C pneumoniae AR-39 [], we considered
AR-39 as a reference species as all the C pneumoniae strains
share ~99.5% genome in common but comparably AR-39 has
more number of coding genes and gene products. Availability
of the whole genome sequence which was first sequenced in
1999 and has been deposited in Genbank database has paved a
way to this research.

By the application of newer molecular and genomics research
techniques/tools with the modern approach like Synteny Based
Comparative Genomics(SBCG) is helping us to find precisely
the important genes which are conserved and play a role of
bacterial infection in COPD which can be identified as potential
drug targets.

Methodology
Reference organism selection and genome retrieval:
C pneumonia AR39, the reference species was selected based on
literature survey, database availability of complete genomic
information, moderate genome size in comparative to other
strains of C. pneumonia pathogens (share ~99.5% identical
genes). The genome sequence of the C pneumonia was retrieved
from Syntebase, which is a prokaryotic genome database, and
holds a relational database as the raw data retrieved from
public genome databanks (GenBank/EMBL/DDBJ). The raw
data are organized into two tables, genome table contain the
information about the prokaryotic genomes compared and the
gene/protein table contains many features like amino acid
sequences, length, species name, location of gene, etc.

Genome comparison of reference organism with other selected Chlamydial species:
SynteView 1.0 is an inbuilt tool available in Syntebase at
http://www.synteview.u-psud.fr/, which was designed to
visualize conserved synteny blocks in a large number of
prokaryotic genomes after choosing C pneumonia AR39 as a
reference organism. It was employed to identify the nonorthologous
synteny blocks in all the Chlamydial pathogens
considered in this study. In the present study Web service mode
was used to retrieve and analyze the data from SynteBase. The
reference species was selected by using “Reference” tab and the
“Compared” tab was used for selecting and adding the
compared species, includes 8 species of Chlamydia viz.,
Chlamydia trachomatis, Chlamydia psittasi, Chlamydia muridarium,
Chlamydia pecorum, Chlamydophila caviae, Chlamydophila abortus,
Chlamydophila felis, Candidatus Parachlamydia acanthamoebae
().

The “Start retrieval process” tab was used for genome
comparison and identification orthologous synteny blocks. The
program compares each pair of proteomes based on the criteria
like E-values &lt;10-5, the alignment extended for at least 80% of
the length of the shorter matching protein [].

Prediction of non-orthologous (uncommon) genes / proteins:
The tool displays the strict conservation of gene order, in
comparing to a reference species with compared species. Each
gene present in the genome of the reference species is depicted
by a rectangle with a color code. The blue, yellow and grey
colored rectangles represents positive strand, negative strand
and genes without orthologs belonging to a synteny block in
another species. Based on the color code the non-orthologous
gene was selected and used for further analysis. Gene
information panel located on the left hand side of the tool was
used for retrieving the sequence related information like its gi
number - Identifier, the name of its species - Species, Gene
name, function, its location–Chromosome and sequence
information. The sequence information was used to retrieve the
protein sequence data and used for further study ().

Insilico identification of non-orthologous essential genes and their localization:
The predicted non-orthologous protein sequence of the C.
pneumonia was subjected to BLASTP at
http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ 
[] specifically against DEG 7.0
(Database of Essential Genes) at http://tubic.tju.edu.cn/deg/
[] for screening of essential genes. The DEG database,
compiles literature and sequences of experimentally verified
essential genes and proteins from Gram-positive and Gramnegative
bacteria. The cut off value for database search used
was E-value &lt;E-10, bit score &gt;100 and percentage of identity
&gt;35% at amino acid level were considered.

Insilico prediction of non-host genes and prediction of toxigenesis:
The BLASTP analysis was carried out between host and
pathogen, for the identification of non-host proteins from C.
pneumonia. The database search was made against protein
database of H. sapiens (taxid: 9606), through an option available
under the BLASTP parameters. The protein hits showing Evalue
&lt;E-10 and sequence identity &lt;35% were selected.
Localization of the predicted non-host, non-orthologous, and
essential genes was searched using CELLO at
http://cello.life.nctu.edu.tw/ 
[]. The bacterial toxin
producing genes have been identified and classified into
exotoxins and endotoxins using BTXpred tool at
http://www.imtech.res.in/raghava/btxpred/ 
[], further the
proteins were subjected to Interpro server 41.0 at
http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/ 
[] to extrapolate the
domains, signatures, functions and pathways in which they are
involved.

Testing the druggability and prediction of therapeutic targets:
The druggability of the predicted non-orthologous essential
genes involved in production of toxin in pathogenic systems
was analyzed using Drug Bank database at
http://www.drugbank.ca/ 
[] by using Pharma search.
Proteins were subjected to BLAST against KEGG database
http://www.genome.jp/kegg/ 
[] to know in which pathway
they are involved. It was found that all the putative therapeutic
targets predicted were present in the unique metabolic
pathways of C. pneumonia (Unpublished data).

Results &amp; Discussion
Genome comparison and Non-Orthologous gene prediction:
C pneumoniae was the reference organism which encloses 1128
synteny blocks and it was compared to identify organism
specific synteny blocks as they lack the ability to cause COPD in
human beings. Out of these, 354 non-orthologous synteny
blocks were identified and protein sequences were retrieved
(). Out of the 354 synteny blocks hypothetical proteins
were filtered to avoid the noise.

Non-Orthologous Essential gene prediction and localization:
Protein coding sequences were searched for identifying nonhomologous
proteins, against human proteome using BLASTP
and 60 proteins were identified as non-homologues to the
human proteome and were subjected to Protein BLAST against
DEG database with E-value cutoff score of 10-10 and 35%
identity 18 proteins comprising 1% of the total number of
protein coding sequences in C pneumoniae AR39 were found to
be essential and non-host ().

Non-Host gene prediction and Bacterial Toxins prediction:
Bacterial protein toxins are the most potent poisons known and
may show activity at very high dilutions where toxins are the
major determinant of virulence, usually virulent strains of
bacterium produce range of toxins which is not observed in
non-virulent strains. The protein toxins are soluble proteins
secreted by living bacteria which are essential proteins for their
survival, attack and defensive mechanism. We have been
successful in identifying these toxins in C pneumoniae which can
be classified into exotoxins and endotoxins where the latter is
specific to Gram negative bacteria's like Chlamydia.

Among the 18 putative uncharacterized essential proteins
predicted toxins were analyzed using the BTXPred tool which
predicts the bacterial toxins based on the protein sequence and
it classifies them into exotoxins and endotoxins, 5 proteins were
identified as bacterial exotoxin proteins and 2 as bacterial
endotoxin proteins which are involved in toxigenesis with the
help of Lipopolysaccharide components attached to produce
cytotoxicity and play an important role in pathogenesis.

Testing Druggability and prediction of Therapeutic targets:
We report these bacterial toxins as potential candidate targets.
As no specific drugs are available when checked in the Drug
Bank, so there is a urgent need to develop specific inhibitors of
these targets as these are the primary cause for the pathogenesis
of the C pneumoniae and related organisms which are involved
in causing diseases in humans.We extrapolated the remaining
proteins using Interpro, which helps in analyzing the given
protein's function and classifies based on their family and
domains involved, and also it provides information on
important sites of protein and integrates the protein signature's
information from the member databases.

We successfully predicted 1 RNA binding protein, 6 DNA
binding proteins, 4 proteins involved in catalytic activity, 3 ATP
binding proteins, 1 chaperonine protein, 1 protein involved in
Oxidoreductase activity,1 protein involved in hydrolase
activity, 1protein involved in proteolysis. We recommend 4
proteins namely signal recognition particle protein FtsY and
cysteinyl-tRNA synthetase which are endotoxins involved in
pathogenesis, serine protease and Clp Protease are proteins
which are ubiquitous and serves as virulence factor in causing
the disease.

Conclusion
The SBCG analysis of C pneumoniae, have led to identification of
several proteins in the C pneumoniae genome that can be
targeted for potential drug design and vaccine development. As
various identified drug targets have been reported to play a
vital role in the important metabolic pathways that regulate
bacterial pathogenicity and necessary nutrient uptake, a novel
systematic approach to develop drugs against these targets
would likely be very promising for the treatment of COPD.

The present study has thus led to the identification of several
proteins which are present in unique metabolic pathways of C
pneumoniae (data not shown, unpublished data), and identified
drug targets in the present study are relatively small in number
which can be targeted for effective drug design and vaccine
development against C pneumoniae. It is expected that the drugs
developed against the identified targets will be specific to the
pathogen and less or not toxic for the host. Homology Modeling
of these target proteins will facilitate for identifying crucial sites
which can be targeted for drug designing.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Ravindranath et al, Bioinformation 9(10): 506-510 (2013)

Screen shot showing the Synteview tool view with selected organisms for comparison, and grey colored synteny blocks
indicates non-orthologous regions predicted.

Showing classification of synteny blocks into putative
drug targets.

