Background
The number of mitochondria in a cell is regulated to match the cell's
requirements for ATP, while fusions and fissions play a functional role in
maintenance of proper inner membrane electrical potential. The main problems
associated with mitochondrial disease, such as low energy, free radical
production and lactic acidosis, can result in a variety of symptoms in many
different parts of the body, including the nervous system, digestive tract, eyes,
skeletal muscle, heart, liver, kidneys, and pancreas. After years of intense
studies, a considerable number of scientific researches demonstrated the
important role of mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress to
development of the more common neurogenerative diseases, like Alzheimer's
disease, Parkinson's disease and Huntington's disease 
[–]. Recent studies
have shown that mitochondria are significantly reduced in Alzheimer's disease
(AD), supporting a topographic and probably temporal relationship between
neuronal oxidative damage and mitochondrial abnormalities 
[]. Scientists used
brain tissue from cases with a diagnosis of AD 
[,
], as well as control cases
with no clinical or pathological history of neurological disease, applying
cytological in situ hybridization, immunocytochemistry and morphometry 
[]
techniques, showing that the area of intact mitochondria is significantly
decreased in AD. While AD can be genetically classified as familiar or
sporadic, researchers proposed that the case of sporadic AD is not caused by
the accumulation of amyloid-β (Αβ), but instead is a consequence of a decline
in mitochondrial function with age [,
]. Additionally, the overexpression of
Αβ causes an alteration in the mitochondrial fission and fusion proteins
resulting in mitochondrial dysfunction, mitochondrial fragmentation, increase
in reactive oxygen species (ROS) and ATP production and reduced
mitochondrial membrane potential []. In the brain, mitochondrial function
declines with age and this functional decline associates with increased
mitochondrial biogenesis. In various neurodegenerative disease states brain
mitochondrial function declines even further, perhaps to the point where
mitochondrial biogenesis can no longer compensate for functional declines. It
should be taken into consideration that at some point neurons with impaired
mitochondria may reach a point where mitochondrial biogenesis pathways
deactivate []. 
Mitochondrial dynamics allows mitochondria to interact with
each other; without such dynamics, the mitochondrial population consists of
autonomous organelles that have impaired function 
[]. In a wild-type cell,
high rates of fusion and fission are independent events, which constantly
change the identity of individual mitochondria. Therefore fusion and fission
seems to be required to maintain mitochondrial function, as independent and
different mechanisms. Fusion is likely to protect function by providing a
chance for mitochondria to mix their contents, thus enabling protein
complementation, mtDNA repair and equal distribution of metabolites, helping
the isolation of damaged mitochondrial segments and promoting their
autophagy []. 
In contrast, fission acts in order to facilitate equal segregation
of mitochondria into daughter cells during cell division and to enhance
distribution of mitochondria along cytoskeletal tracks. The failure in this
biological machinery may also promote apoptosis 
[]. A further two important
aspects of mitochondrial dynamics beyond fusion and fission is the motility of
mitochondria and mitophagy. It has been proved that perturbations in
mitochondrial dynamics can lead to distinctive defects in neurons 
[]. Even
though, these four processes are independent, it is clear that any interactions
will be critically important in neurons. For example defects in both fusion and
fission have been shown to decrease mitochondrial movement. The large tangle
of highly interconnected mitochondria in fission-deficient cells prevents
efficient movement, especially into small pathways such as neuronal processes
[,
]. 
While mitophagy denotes the degradation of mitochondria through
autophagy, recent findings indicate that mitophagy can selectively degrade
defective mitochondria [].

While it is not possible to have a direct measure of mitochondrial current, we
are able to express the electric potential across the inner membrane in terms of
radioactive 42K+ ions, using the Nernst equation (see equation 1 in
supplementary material). We can also calculate the proton motive force (pmf)
in millivolts using equation 2 (see supplementary material). By taken into
consideration the significant voltage gradient across the mitochondrial
membrane we shall move towards to support in mathematical terms our
hypothesis, that inner mitochondrial membrane is a natural superconductor.

Methodology
See  for detailed description.
Discussion
Mitochondria provide most of the ATP for cellular reactions. ATP production
in mitochondria is coupled to an electron transport system in which the passage
of electrons down the various electron carriers is associated with the transport
of protons from the matrix into the inter membrane space. The majority of
these protons re-enter the mitochondrial matrix by the ATP syntheses, thereby
generating ATP. However, approximately 20% of mitochondrial oxygen
consumption is not coupled to ATP production, and protons enter the matrix
through the phospholipids’ bilayer and through uncoupling proteins, generating
heat []. 
From a geometrical point of view, it is quite obvious that a number
of (un) correlated factors can affect the mitochondrial shape. There is a more
complex problem, as morphological changes in mitochondrial structure are
associated with biological dysfunctionalities and electrophysiology problems.
These effects are directly or indirectly correlated with human
neurodegenerative diseases. While fusions and fissions contribute to the wide
variety of mitochondrial morphologies, a discrete mitochondrion at one point in
time will be changed at a later time by the addition of new mitochondrial
material through fusion or by the removal of material through division. It is a
logical consequence of high probability that after a certain period of successful
events (fusions and fissions) the inner structure will totally lose its initial
characteristics in a non-reversible way, restricting the inner space and reducing
the corresponding area and energy. It is obvious that any failure in inner
membrane mitochondrial fissions can easily generate unstable electric
potential, effecting functionality and reduce voltage gradient.This inappropriate
intra-structure is followed by high level transmembrane proton concentration,
actually blocking the natural pathway of producing ATP. Due to the action of
complexes during the flow of electrons, protons are unequally distributed on
both sides of the inner mitochondrial membrane. Therefore, the mitochondrial
matrix becomes poorer in protons. Due to the action of the respiratory chain
complexes, the energy of electrons is temporarily stored in the form of
electrochemical energy potential. This form of energy will be restored via the
returning of protons through particular channels of the internal membrane in
the matrix and will be used to cover energy needs. In other words, the
electrochemical potential, or proton-stimulatory power, corresponds to the
tendency of the protons to be restored to their initial locations, in order to
achieve equilibrium and reset the imbalance of the protons. The size of this
energy is proportional to the size of the difference between the concentrations
of protons on both sides of the membrane. This phenomenon can be
characterized as an ‘electric thromboses’ and the superconductivity in the flow
of electrons will be cancelled (). The superconductivity of electrons is
destroyed and no pair of electrons are transferred when ‘electric thromboses’
occurs where the final reaction in the respiratory chain is given by equation 10
(see ). 
It is obvious that the existence of electric
complexes can be either temporary or permanent, with adverse impacts on
nerve cells.

Conclusion
Since many neurodegenerative diseases cause mitochondria to malfunction, it
may be important to focus on developing methods to repair and restore
mitochondria. Already a few strategies are being developed that open up ways
for manipulating mitochondrial functions and may allow for the selective
protection or eradication of neurons in the treatment of neurodegenerative
diseases []. 
While recent studies have already prove the significant
connection between mitochondrial dysfunction and human diseases and the
disruptions of energy production due to inappropriate topological structure, a
new model is presented in this paper concerning the formulation of the high
energy concentration in mitochondrial inner membrane, characterizing the
internal mitochondrial membrane as a natural superconductor, where electrical
resistance of exactly zero occurs in certain temperature. Based on this model, a
first solving approach should be the use of large electrical load or a larger
potential difference to impel electrons into the transmembrane space. Future
research will proceed to the statistical analysis and computational simulation
providing clear experimental results. A complete and integrated picture of our
hypothesis model requires the study of the critical point of local temperature T,
where inner mitochondrial membrane's superconductivity occurs. These
observations will definitely lead to alternative pharmacological manipulations
of neurogenerative diseases.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Alexiou et al Bioinformation 6(5): 173-175 (2011)

The phenomenon of ‘electric thromboses’, slow down the synthesis
of ATP. While the reduction of O2 to H2O need 4e­ and 4H+, the existence of
electric complexes prevent any pair of electrons to react with O2 and therefore
any form of superconductivity in the membrane's electric potential expires.

