Background
Exposure to stress agents such as ionizing radiation that cause
formation of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species leads to
activation of cellular anti-oxidant systems for protecting cells from
damage or apoptosis. One of these anti-oxidant systems is the
thioredoxin system containing thioredoxin (Trx, a small protein
with two redox active cysteine residues in its active center) and two
enzymes thioredoxin peroxidase (TPx) and thioredoxin reductase
(TrxR). In response to oxidative stress, oxidation of Trx by the TPx
enzyme is used for reduction and detoxification of hydrogen
peroxide, peroxynitrites and a wide range of organic hydroperoxides
(ROOH + 2e- → ROH + H2O). As a result, TPx may play
important role in countering the cellular oxidative stress. For
example, overexpression of certain isoforms of TPx as observed in
several cancers [–] has been shown to inhibit stress-induced
increase in intracellular hydrogen peroxide [] and is also associated
with tumour resistance to radiotherapy [] or chemotherapy [].

The TPx family of proteins is classified into three distinct classes
(based on the nature of their active site), viz., 1-Cys TPx, atypical 2-
Cys TPx and typical 2-Cys TPx. While the 1-Cys TPx contains only
one cysteine residue for peroxidation at the active site, the 2-Cys
TPx's contain two cysteine residues. In Atypical 2-Cys TPx, the two
cysteine residues, peroxidatic and resolving, are present on the same
polypeptide. However in typical 2-Cys TPx dimerization is essential
for formation of active site, since one of the monomers contains
peroxidatic cysteine (CP) while the other contains resolving cystein
(CR) residue. The conformation of typical 2-Cys TPx is regulated
by its oxidation status and intracellular oxidant level, and shifts
between dimer and decamer conformation, the latter conformation
being less efficient in peroxidase activity []. In the event of H2O2
flux, sulfenic acid on the peroxidatic cysteine residue (CP) at active
site is oxidized to sulfinic acid (SOH). The sulfinic acid on CP then
reacts with the conserved resolving cysteine (CR) to yield an
intersulfide bond that is eventually reduced by thioredoxin reductase
(TrxR). Since insects do not possess significant glutathione
peroxidase activity, it is understood that TPx might play important
role in the enzymatic removal of reactive oxygen species (ROS)[]. While the role of TPx in elimination of H2O2 and other
organic peroxides coupled with prevention of cell death has been
demonstrated in insects, yet the nature and function of insect TPx is
not generally very well understood.

We have been studying Lepidopteran insect cells since these cells
display 50-100 times higher radioresistance than the mammalian/
human cells despite showing significant structural/ functional
homologies. These are also evolutionarily closest to the human
system amongst all the highly radioresistant organisms known.
Apparently, reduced DNA damage [] possibly contributed by
soluble radioprotectors and chromatin organisation, enhanced DNA
repair [], resistance against radiation-induced apoptosis [], and
a stronger cytosolic [] and mitochondrial [] antioxidant
machinery seem to play dominant role in the radioresistance of
these cells. Reports available so far do not present a conclusive
picture of the antioxidant machinery of Lepidopteran insect cells.
While catalase and glutathione peroxidase activity was previously
reported to be absent in these cells [], activity/ expression of
superoxide dismutase, ascorbate peroxidase, glutathione reductase,glutathione peroxidase and catalase were reported later in
Spodoptera littoralis []. Therefore, the antioxidant machinery of
this highly radioresistant model system needs to be understood
further. In our recent study on mitochondrial antioxidant system, the
thioredoxin system of Lepidopteran insect Bombyx mori predicted a
considerably higher mitochondrial localization potential (Mitoprot
scores) compared to the human system []. In the present study,we describe the thioredoxin system in Spodoptera (Insecta;
Lepidoptera) while utilizing the components of Drosophila
thioredoxin system, i.e., thioredoxin (Trx), thioredoxin reductase
(TrxR) and thioredoxin peroxidase (known as Jafrac1  &amp; Jafrac2)
and identifying their orthologs available in S. frugiperda EST
database. Possible implications in stress/radiation resistance are
discussed.

Methodology
Sequence data retrieval and BLASTp
Protein sequences of Trx, TrxR and TPx of various insect species
were retrieved from GenBank by using appropriate key words.
Drosophila Trx, TrxR and Jafrac1  &amp; 2 sequences retrieved from
GenBank were used as query sequences in BLASTp of
http://butterflybase.ice.mpg.de
[] against ’Spodoptera frugiperda
predicted proteins database‘. The sequences showing lowest E
values were selected for further analysis.

Sequence analysis and secondary structure alignment
Two sequences were selected as mentioned above and were aligned
with Drosophila Jafrac1 and Jafrac2 using BioEdit
(http://www.mbio.ncsu.edu/BioEdit) and Secondary structures
mentioned in pdb files were manually depicted along with sequence
alignment. TPx sequences from other insect species namely Bombyx
mori, Apis mallifera ligustica and Helicoverpa armigera along with
two putative Sf-TPx and Jafrac1 and 2 were aligned by using
ClustalW in BioEdit to study sequence conservation across species
of insects.

Intracellular localization signal prediction
Sequence of TPx from various insect species derived from GenBank
as well as EST database BLAST results was used for prediction of
intracellular localization signal score by the online tool WoLF
PSORT [] available on http://wolfpsort.org.

Modeling monomer and dimer
Protein sequences of Jafrac1 &amp; 2 and putative Sf-TPx 1 &amp; 2 were
used to generate tertiary structure by Modweb. Dimers were
generated by superimposing modeled monomer structures onto
individual monomers of known dimer structures from PDB using
Combinatorial extension program ( http://cl.sdsc.edu/ce.html).1QMV for fully folded (FF)
conformation and 1QQ2 for locally unfolded conformation [] was
used. We used UCSF Chimera [] for building the multimer and
Insight II ( www.accelrys.com) for optimizing the structure and
removing the clashes. To remove the steric clashes between the side
chains of the mutated and neighboring residues, energy
minimization was performed for 10000 steps using conjugategradient
method employed in the Discover3 module of Insight II.
The force field used to set the potentials was CVFF force field.
Swiss PDB Viewer was used to visualize the active site of dimer
model and measurement of distance between cysteine residues of
active site was calculated by using PyMol.

Protein-protein interaction study
To study the interaction of Jafrac1 &amp; 2 with DIAP1 and Sf-TPx1 &amp;2 with Sf-IAP-1, we used BIR2 domains of both DIAP1 and Sf-
IAP-1 respectively. Tertiary structures of BIR2 domains predicted
by SwissModel were used for protein-protein interaction on
PatchDock []. The docking results were analyzed and structures
with highest scores were used for calculation of ETotal by Hex5a.

Discussion
Two isoforms of typical 2-Cys TPx detected in S. frugiperda
As mentioned, we used the sequences of Drosophila Trx, TrxR and
TPx (Jafrac1/ Jafrac2) as queries for search in ’ Spodoptera
frugiperda predicted proteins database‘ of Butterflybase
(http://butterflybase.ice.mpg.de). BLASTp failed to show homology
with Trx and TrxR (results not shown(. However, orthologs of
Jafrac1 and 2 were identified with very high bit score. Jafrac1 best
hit sequence (accession number SFP00903_3) showed an E-value of
1x10-90 and identity of 82% (Sf-TPx1) and Jafrac2 best hit
(accession number SFP07707_2) showed an E-value of 6X10-77
with an identity of 64% (Sf-TPx2). These results indicate the
presence of two putative TPx's in S. frugiperda, viz., Sf-TPx1 and
Sf-TPx2. Absence of any hits for Trx and TrxR only suggest that
the non-exhaustive EST database still remains to identify such
proteins in Spodoptera. Our ClustalW analysis of TPx sequences of
some other insect species along with Jafrac1/2 and newly identified
Sf-TPx1/2 showed that GGLG and YF motifs, active site cysteine
residues (CP and CR) are well conserved in all insects investigated
and that newly identified Sf-TPx1 &amp; 2 belong to the typical 2-Cys
TPx family of proteins ().

Dimer models of Sf-TPx1 and Sf-TPx2 predict disulphide bond formation in LU conformation
We report herein the modeled dimer structures of newly identified
Sf-TPx1 &amp; 2 as well as of Drosophila Jafrac1 &amp; 2 ().
Sequence identity for 1QMV monomers with Sf-TPx1 and Sf-TPx2
is 71.1% and 63.7%, respectively; and 70.0% and 68.4%with
Jafrac1 and Jafrac2. Sequence identity for 1QQ2 monomers with Sf-
TPx1 and Sf-TPx2 are 75.3% and 64.7%; and 71.2% and 67.6%with Jafrac1 and Jafrac2, respectively. The length of alignment
between template individual monomers and models after
superimposition to generate dimers was found to be high as well
(data not shown). The rmsd for 1QMV monomers and models of Sf-TPx1 and Sf-TPx2 was 1.4 Å and 0.5 Å, while for the models of
Jafrac1 and Jafrac2 it was 1.2 Å and 0.5 Å, respectively. The rmsd
for 1QQ2 monomers with models of Sf-TPx1 and Sf-TPx2 was 1.1
Å and 0.4 Å, and 1.0 Å and 0.3 Å with the models of Jafrac1 and
Jafrac2, respectively. In agreement with the TPx's of other
eukaryotes [], these modeled dimer structures indicate that in the
Fully Folded (FF) conformation, cysteine residues of active site CP
and CR are buried under GGLG and YF motifs ()
while being separated far away from each other () to
facilitate prevention of disulphide bridge formation and enzyme
activity. In contrast,when these proteins are in Locally Unfolded
(LU)conformation, the two cysteine residues come significantly
close to each other () and move towards the surface of
protein () in order to become available for the
peroxidatic activity and to make the enzyme active. Comparison of
distance between the cysteine residues () revealed that CP
(Cys48 in Sf-TPx1 and Cys113 in Sf-TPx2) of one monomer and CR
(Cys169 in Sf-TPx1 and Cys233 of Sf-TPx2) of the other monomer
are at a distance that is suitable for intersulphide bond formation
(2.01Å in Sf-TPx1; 2.05Å in Sf-TPx2) in LU conformation.
Therefore, both Sf-Tpx1 and Sf-TPx2 predict formation of
intersulphide bond. Contrary to this, in Jafrac1 and Jafrac2 LU
conformation,the active site cysteine residues are at a distance (5.21
Å in Jafrac1; 5.73Å in Jafrac2) () that is higher than the
natural distance required for disulphide bond (2.03Å), and hence
less likely to form a disulphide bridge. Therefore, it is very likely
that Sf-TPx1 and Sf-TPx2 may have different peroxidatic activity
than Jafrac1 and Jafrac2.

Secondary structure analysis of LU conformation supports disulphide bond formation in Sf-TPx's predicted from tertiary structure
To gain further insight of dissimilarities in the tertiary modeled
structures, we aligned peptide sequence along with secondary
structures predicted for the modeled dimer (LU and FF
conformation) of putative Sf-TPx1 and Sf-TPx2 with those of
Jafrac1 and Jafrac2, respectively (). In LU
conformation, many N-terminal residues of Jafrac1 are in sheet
structure though same was not evident in Sf-TPx1. One of the
cysteine residues (CR) within the active site of Jafrac1 is present in
helix structure but not in Sf-TPx1. Two motifs (GGLG and YF) that
are responsible for covering active site make a sheet-helix structure
in LU conformation in Sf-TPx1 but not in Jafrac1 though both attain
same structure in the FF conformation. Therefore, it appears that in
Jafrac1, the formation of four extra sheets in N-terminus and the
presence of CR in helix prevents S-S bond formation at the active
site in LU conformation, which is not the case with Sf-TPx1. In
Jafrac2, modeled LU conformation revealed that GGLG motif is in
sheet structure and that there is an extra sheet at C-terminus which
is dissimilar to Sf-TPx2; however in FF conformation, the Cterminal
extra sheet disappears and GGLG motif attains same
structure in both Jafrac2 and Sf-TPx2. These structural motifs may
affect active site conformation of Jafrac2 and result in increased
distance between CP and CR, preventing disulphide bridge
formation. However, the absence of these structures in Sf-TPx2
favours disulphide bridge formation in its active site. Taken
together, the analysis of secondary and tertiary structures indicates
that the absence of certain structural motifs of Jafrac1 and Jafrac2 in
both Sf-TPx1 and Sf-TPx2 may result in closely apposed active site
Cys residues in these Sf-TPx's.

Spodoptera exhibits stronger antioxidant defence system than Drosophila
In Drosophila, Jafrac1 and Jafrac2 show distinct functions in
antioxidant defence mechanism and apoptosis regulation. Jafrac1
localizes to cytoplasm and plays crucial role in the detoxification of
ROS whereas Jafrac2 is present in endoplasmic reticulum and is
rapidly released into cytoplasm on induction of apoptosis [].
When translocated to cytoplasm, Jafrac2 interacts with BIR2
domain of DIAP1 (Drosophila Inhibitor of Apoptosis Protein-1) and
causes liberation of DRONC (Caspase). In this way Jafrac2 bridges
between antioxidant system and apoptosis regulation. Since Jafrac1
and 2 are localized in different compartments of Drosophila cells we
analyzed predicted localization signals of Sf-TPx1 and Sf-TPx2 by
WoLFPSORT (). Our analysis
shows that Jafrac1 and Sf-TPx1 are localized to cytoplasm while
Jafrac2 exhibits secretary signals and SfʭTPx2 resides mainly in the
mitochondria. We have recently reported higher mitoprot score of
Trx as well as TPx in the Lepidopteran insects as compared to
insects of other orders []. In the present study, detailed analysis of
localization of TPx revealed that in Lepidopteran insects, i.e., B.
mori,H. armigera and S. frugiperda, TPx exists either in cytosol or
in mitochondria which may result in stronger antioxidant defence
system and resistance against stress induced death. However,in the
Dipteran insect Drosophila, mitochondria are devoid of TPx, which
in turn may enhance cellular sensitivity to oxidative stress.

Since BIR2 domain of DIAP-1 is known to interact with IAP
binding motif (IBM) of Jafrac2 and contributes in regulation of
apoptosis, we predicted the protein-protein interaction of DIAP1
BIR2 domain with Jafrac1 &amp; 2 and Sf-IAP-1 BIR2 domain with Sf-
TPx1 &amp; 2. We used both LU as well as FF conformations of Jafrac1
&amp; 2 and Sf-TPx1 &amp; 2 for the interaction study. Our observations
suggest that DIAP1:Jafrac2 (LU) complex (E total -388.46) and Sf-
IAP-1: Sf-TPx1 (LU) complex (E total -341.91) have minimum
ETotal (). Since lesser ETotal is
indicator of the most likely forming complexes, these results
indicate that there are potential cross-talks possible between the
antioxidant systems and apoptosis signaling in Spodoptera as well,
which predict distinct mechanisms compared to Drosophila. While
the Jafrac2 present in ER of Drosophila translocates to cytosol and
interacts with DIAP-1 BIR2 domain upon apoptosis induction,
regulation of interaction between Sf-IAP-1 BIR2 domain and the
constitutively cytosolic Sf-TPx1 predicted here needs further
investigation.

Conclusion
In the present study, we report evidence of existence of two
isoforms of TPx (Sf-TPx1 and Sf-TPx2) in Spodoptera frugiperda,
and also demonstrate structural features that may be important in
determining their antioxidant activity and apoptosis regulation. Each
of these isoforms predicted different intracellular localization, viz.,
mitochondrial localization for Sf-TPx2 that is important for
antioxidant activity, and cytoplasmic localization of Sf-TPx1 along
with predicted interaction with Sf-IAP-1 important for regulating
apoptotic activity. Models of both Sf-TPx1 and Sf-TPx2 show
significantly higher possibility of formation of disulphide bridge at
active site than their orthologues in Drosophila Jafrac1 and Jafrac2.
Based on these observations, we hypothesize that the Spodoptera
thioredoxin peroxidase might be a stronger anti-oxidant system as
compared to that of Drosophila, and may potentially contribute in
the relatively higher radioresistance of Lepidopteran insects. Since
our protein-protein interaction study predicts that Sf-TPx1 localized
in cytoplasm can actively interact with the anti-apoptotic Sf-IAP-1,
we are further investigating its role in the regulation of
Lepidopteran apoptosis.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Hambarde et al, Bioinformation 4(9): 399-404 (2010)

Multiple sequence alignment, using ClustalW, of amino acid sequence of thioredoxin peroxidases of various insect species
indicate high conservation in C-terminal region (with black background). Box showing conserved GGLG and YF motifs and arrows
showing conserved Cystein residues (CP and CR) of active site in various insect TPxs. Helicoverpa armigera (Cotton ballworm) Acc No.
ABW96360.1, Bombyx mori Acc. No. NP_001040464.1, Apis mellifera ligustica AAP93584.1, Drosophila Jafrac1 Acc. No. AAF42985.1,
Jafrac2 Acc No. AAF42986.1

Comparison of active site conformation in modeled dimer structure of (A) Jafrac1 with Sf-TPx1 and (B) Jafrac2 with Sf-TPx2 in
FF and LU conformation. GGLG and YF motifs (G ‐ Black color, L ‐ Blue, Y ‐ Green, F ‐ Sky blue) bury active site cysteine residues (in
Red sticks) in FF conformation but not in LU conformation. Sf-TPx1 predicted to have disulphide bond between Cys49 of one subunit with
Cys169 of other subunit of the dimer. (C, D) Primary and secondary structure alignment depicting comparison of helix and sheet structures
in FF and LU conformation (derived manually from pdb files) of Jafrac1 versus Sf-TPx1 and Jafrac2 versus Sf-TPx2. The blue horizontal
bars representing sheets and checkered horizontal bars representing helices. Areas with dissimilar structures are indicated with pink arrows.
(E) Distance (in Angstroms) between cysteine residues (CP and CR) of active site in FF and LU conformation.

