Background
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) related liver disease is a global health
problem []. Though there are several options for the treatment
of chronic hepatitis B infection, management of HBV still
remains a major challenge [,
]. Antiviral resistance is
considered to be one of the most important factors associated
with HBV treatment failure []. Antiviral resistance is primarily
mediated by mutations in the antiviral target sites thereby
altering the drug interactory mechanism. Identification and
characterization of these resistant mutations is important for
appropriate tailoring of therapy and the design of newer drugs
to challenge the resistant strains []. Adefovir, a nucleotide
analogue of adenosine is one of the therapeutic options for
chronic hepatitis B infection. The nucleotide analogues lack the
3-hydroxyl group and the incorporation of these analogues
prevents the formation of phosphodiester linkage that is
essential for DNA elongation. It inhibits the enzymatic action of
HBV reverse transcriptase (HBVrt) and thus acts as a chain
terminator of DNA synthesis []. The primary adefovir-resistant
mutations significantly associated with treatment failure are
rtN236T and rtA181T/V [,
]. The role of rtI233V mutation and
adefovir response remains contradictory. Some studies have
shown rtI233V mutation to be associated with adefovir
resistance [,
]. In another study, it was not shown to affect
adefovir response [].

Computational methods like molecular modeling and docking
studies have helped researchers understand the structural
features of protein, drug-protein interaction and the effect of
resistance mutations and drug interaction [–]. Knowledge
of HBV reverse transcriptase (HBVrt) structure would thus be
valuable for understanding the molecular basis of drug
resistance. We have previously reported the putative rtI233V
mutation in 4 treatment-naive subjects []. It has been
documented that rtI233V mutation occurs in approximately 2%
of treatment-naive chronic hepatitis B virus carriers 
[]. The
three-dimensional (3D) polymerase model of HBV has shown to
assist in understanding the interactions between HBV
polymerase and the antiviral agents [–]. We attempted to
study the impact of this putative rtI233V substitution and
adefovir binding by molecular modeling and docking studies.

Methodology
Study subject:
Blood sample was collected from treatment-naive chronic
hepatitis B subject after obtaining written informed consent to
participate in the study. The subject was recruited as a part of
the investigation to characterize HBV antiviral resistance
mutations. The study was approved by the institutional review
oard of Christian Medical College, Vellore.

HBV polymerase/rt gene PCR and sequencing:
HBV polymerase gene covering the entire rt region was
amplified and sequenced as described previously 
[]. Obtained
bidirectional sequences were analyzed using BioEdit v7.0.9 and
the consensus was generated. The nucleotide sequence has been
deposited in GenBank with the accession number GU799007.

Homology model of hepatitis B virus polymerase/rt:
Homology model of HBVrt was built in MODELLER 9v8 using
the crystal structure of HIV-1rt template [Protein Data Bank
(PDB) code: 1RTD chain A]. The nucleotide sequences were
translated into the amino acid sequences using BioEdit v7.0.9.
The amino acid sequence containing rtI233V mutation was
substituted with valine for the construction of wild type model
for comparison. The translated target sequences were aligned
with HIV-1rt template using ClustalW
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalw2/). The target-template
alignments were used to build the three-dimensional model of
target protein. At least five models were generated and the
model with lowest Discrete Optimization Protein Energy
(DOPE) is selected. The structure validation was performed in
PROCHECK using the Structure Analysis and Verification
Server (http://nihserver.mbi.ucla.edu/SAVES/).

Molecular docking studies:
To the modelled protein, the two magnesium (Mg2+) ions and
the template primer DNA duplex [d (GCXCCGGCGCTC)-
d(GAGCGCCGG)] were located based on the co-ordinates of
PDB: 1RTD chain A of HIV-1rt. The ‘X’ in the DNA duplex was
substituted to the complementary base of the rt inhibitor
adefovir (adenosine analogue, X=G). The docking studies of
HBV polymerase/rt wild type and mutant models with
adefovir were performed using Autodock (v1.5.2). All the
possible torsion angles in the ligand molecules were set to
rotate freely and polar hydrogen molecules were added.
Kollman united atom partial charges were assigned for the
receptor. Grid box was generated at the centre of the protein
with the grid box size of 46, 40 and 40 Å for x, y and z
respectively.

Lamarckian genetic algorithm was used for docking analysis
with the population level of 200 and number of evals set to
long. All other parameters were set to default and
the best docking complex was identified using root mean
square deviation (RMSD) cluster analysis. Based on the binding
free energy best binding pose was identified. PyMOL molecular
visualization tool was used to analyze the interactions between
entecavir and the target protein [].

Results and Discussion
Initially for model building, protein BLAST of the query (target)
sequence showed close identity to HIV-2 rt (PDB: 1MU2 B) and
Moloney murine leukemia virus (MULV) rt (PDB: 1NND A).
The query coverage (39% and 58% respectively) and identity
score (E value: 0.009 and 0.022 respectively) for these templates
were good when compared to previously described template of
HIV-1rt [PDB: 1RTD A (query coverage 22% and E value 0.75)].
However, the three aspartate amino acids that form the catalytic
sites in HIV-1 rt is well conserved in HBVrt amino acid
positions 85 (A domain), 203 and 204 (C domain). Likewise,
most of the amino acids interacting with the template primer
and the incoming dNTP substrates are conserved in both HIV-
1rt and HBVrt []. Moreover, the nucleos(t)ide analogues
lamivudine, adefovir and tenofovir used for chronic HBV
treatment were initially developed for HIV infection and their
drug interactory mechanisms are very well documented [,
].
Therefore, modeling and docking studies of HBV using HIV-1rt
template would be a suitable model for the prediction of drug
resistance as demonstrated previously [–].

Homology model of HBV polymerase/rt:
As described for HIVrt the modelled HBV polymerase has
fingers, palm and thumb subdomains. According to the
nomenclature of Stuyver et al. 
[] the fingers subdomain covers
the HBVrt codons 1 to 55 and 121 to 171, palm region extends
between 56 to 92 and 172 to 265 and thumb subdomain occupies
position 266 to 344. The two magnesium (Mg2+) ions, thymidine
triphoshate and the DNA template were located using the coordinates
of PDB: 1RTD A of HIV-1rt.

Structure validation:
The model was evaluated by PROCHECK and the
stereochemical quality of the structure was good with the
overall G factor of -0.22. The Ramachandran plot shows the phi
(φ)-psi (ψ) torsion angles for all residues except glycine and
proline in the structure []. The distribution of φ, ψ angles
showed 82% residues in the most favourable core region 13.8%
of residues in allowed region and 3.4% residues in the generous
region. Overall 99.1% of the residues were within the allowed
region.

Effect of rtI233V mutation and adefovir action: Molecular modeling and docking analysis:
The modelled structure showed the amino acid position rtI233
to be located away from the drug interactory site. The
substitution of isoleucine to valine did not show to affect the
catalytic sites of aspartate residues at HBVrt positions 83, 205
and 206 respectively. However, as observed in the wild type
(rtI233) model rtD83, rtD205 and rtN33 did not participate in
the H-bond interaction with the ligand molecule and instead
rtK32 formed H-bonds in the mutant model (). The
wild type model exhibited the best docking energy of -5.97
Kcal/mol and the rtI233V mutation decreased the docking
score to less than 1 Kcal/mol (-5.19 Kcal/mol; 
 (see
supplementary material). Therefore rtI233V mutation does not
show any significant changes in the binding of adefovir.

It has been proposed that residues 235 to 240 form a bent
structure and stabilizes the binding of incoming dNTPs 
[].
The wild type isoleucine (rtI233) is just located three amino
acids away from the crucial adefovir resistance amino acid
position asparagine (rtN236), which in-part forms the bent
structure. It was further attempted to study whether rtI233V
substitution would alter the relative positions of neighbouring
residues and alter the conformation. In wild type model the
relative distance of the bent structure formed by the HBVrt
amino acids L235, N236, P237, N238, K239 and T240 is 7.8
angstrom (Å). Substitution of valine reduced its relative
distance to 7.7 Å. The overall conformation of the bent structure
is maintained and the 0.1 Å difference in relative distance may
not impose a spatial constraint to dNTP binding ().
Therefore, it was predicted that rtI233V substitution in the
reverse transcriptase domain may not affect the antiviral action
of adefovir and dNTP binding. Furthermore, two subjects with
pre-existing rtI233V mutation at baseline (treatment-naive)
responded to lamivudine and entecavir subsequently in our
center (unpublished data). This again shows that rtI233V
mutation does not alter the antiviral efficacy to any of these
drugs.

Conclusions
The rtI233V amino acid substitution did not show to alter the
catalytic sites and adefovir binding. In addition, the
conformation of bent structure formed by residues 235 to 240
that stabilizes the binding of dNTPs is maintained. Our
prediction model enabled to identify the impact of rtI233V
mutation which has been debated in the recent years. Adding
evidence to the findings of Curtis et al. 
[] we show that
rtI233V mutation cannot affect the antiviral efficacy of adefovir.

Conflicts of interest
None declared

Supplementary material
Data 1
The sequences were generated as part of HBV antiviral
resistance mutations characterization study supported by
Indian Council for Medical research (ICMR Grant
No.5/8/7/7/2008-ECD-I).

Citation:Ismail et al, Bioinformation 9(3): 121-125 (2013)

Impact of HBV rtI233V mutation and adefovir binding. Binding conformation of A) wild type (rtI233) and B) mutant
(rtI233V) protein-ligand complex derived from Autodock. The ligand (adefovir) and interacting residues are shown in stick format
and red dotted lines represent H-bond. The image was prepared using Chimera 1.6.2 software.

A) Homology model of HBV polymerase/rt wild type rtI233 was compared with; B) rtI233V mutation. The relative
distance between the residues 235 to 240 crucial for dNTP binding that form the bent structure is shown as yellow dots.
Substitution of valine for isoleucine (rtI233V) reduced its relative distance by only 0.1 Angstrom.

