Background
Our understanding of the regulation of functional genes responsive to
stress signals is still nascent. Multiple signalling pathways regulate the
stress responses of plants and there is significant overlap between the
patterns of gene expression that are induced in plants in response to
different stresses. Many genes induced by stress challenges, including
those encoding transcription factors, have been identified and some of
them have been shown to be essential for stress tolerance []. Many
studies have also revealed some of the complexity and overlap in the
responses to different stresses and are likely to lead to new ways to
enhance crop tolerance to disease and environmental stress.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a highly conserved class of small
noncoding RNAs that regulate gene expression by posttranscriptional
degradation or translational repression []. They play important roles
in multiple biological and metabolic processes, including
developmental timing, signal transduction, cell maintenance,
differentiation and diseases [,]. Recently, there has been strong
evidence leading to the proposal that miRNAs are hypersensitive to
abiotic or biotic stress as well as to diverse physiological processes.
More and more evidence has shown that gene silencing is widely
adopted in plant immunity. In the past, studies often focused on
transposon or siRNA-mediated RNA silence [,] . Since miRNAs and
siRNAs share many features in common, it is supposed that miRNAs
may also be involved in silencing invaders. This was supported by the
observation that siRNAs functioned as miRNAs and miRNAs
interacted with mRNA in the same way as siRNAs []. A family of
Arabidopsis mRNAs encoding SCARECROW-LIKE (SCL)
transcription factors is cleaved by an RNAi-like process directed by
miR171 []. In plant embryo extracts, an endogenous miRNA that
lacks perfect complementarity to its RNA targets acts as a siRNA [].
In other words, the data reveals an interchangeable functional role
between miRNA and siRNA. Plant virus-derived small RNAs in the
gene silencing (VIGS) process were generally considered to be
siRNAs. The prevalence of imperfect hairpin structure prompts a reevaluation
of their biochemical nature. In fact, many of these
molecules might be akin to miRNAs, because their hairpins have
greater similarity to miRNA precursors than to the perfect dsRNAs
that produce siRNAs [,]. Plant virus infections resulted in a
dramatic increase in miRNA whereas virus infected vertebrate cells
increased siRNA content [].

There have been many studies to identify plant miRNAs and numerous
miRNAs have been discovered in Arabidopsis thaliana. Currently, a
variety of biochemical, molecular, and bioinformatics approaches and
technologies have been developed for miRNA analysis and detection.
Using tiling path microarray analysis as a tool, it is now possible to
perform high-throughput profiling of the expression of all the known
miRNAs to examine their expression profiles under different
environmental stresses []. In a recent report the effects of 117
miRNAs under high-salinity, drought, and low-temperature stress
conditions were analyzed using miRNA chips representing nearly all
known miRNAs cloned or identified in Arabidopsis thaliana [].
Seventeen stress-inducible miRNAs were detected and the results were
further confirmed by detecting their expression patterns and analyzing
the cis-regulatory elements in their promoter sequences []. In our
work, we analyzed the nucleotide base frequencies at each position of
the 123 miRNA sequences that have been reported for Arabidopsis.
These 123 sequences obtained from the miRBase include the 117
sequences that were analyzed by Han-Hua L. and coworkers [] and
6 newly reported miRNA sequences in Arabidopsis thaliana. We also
calculated the base density for each nucleotide in these 123 sequences.
This same approach was then used for analyzing groups of miRNA
sequences which have been reported to regulate 3 types of abiotic
stresses ‐ high salinity, drought and low temperature. A graphical
comparison and trend analysis was done to observe differences in
frequencies of nucleotide bases between the stress-regulated miRNAs
and all miRNA sequences as a whole.

Methodology
The microRNA sequence database miRBase was used to create a
dataset of 123 non redundant miRNA sequences reported in
Arabidopsis thaliana (see ). We grouped the
miRNA sequences into 5 groups, 1st containing all the 123 sequences,
2nd containing all the sequences induced by high salinity stress, 3rd by
drought stress, 4th by cold stress and 5th by all the three stresses.
Further we calculated the relative frequency of each nucleotide base at
each position in the miRNA sequence in each of the groups.

miRBase: the microRNA sequence database
The miRBase Sequence database is freely accessible primary
repository for published microRNA (miRNA) sequence and annotation
data. miRBase provides a user-friendly web interface for miRNA data,
allowing the user to search using key words or sequences, trace links
to the primary literature referencing the miRNA discoveries, analyze
genomic coordinates and context, and mine relationships between
miRNA sequences. miRBase also provides a confidential gene-naming
service, assigning official miRNA names to novel genes before their
publication [].

Calculation of position specific nucleotide frequencies
All sequences were divided into no. of cells corresponding to their
length with each nucleotide in each cell of an excel sheet. The
sequences were then aligned in the above mentioned five groups
respectively. The following function was used to count the no. of each
nucleotide at each position.

COUNTIF (range, criteria)
Counts the number of cells within a range that meet the given criteria.

Calculation of position specific relative frequencies
The relative frequency of each nucleotide at each position of the
sequence was calculated by dividing the absolute frequencies (position
specific nucleotide frequencies) by the no. of sequences having a
nucleotide base at that specific position. To find out the no. of
sequences having a nucleotide base at each position we sum up the
absolute frequencies of all the nucleotide bases at each position by
SUM (number1, number2...) ­ Adds all the numbers in a range of cells.

Finding out nucleotide content in a group of sequences
The absolute frequency of each nucleotide at all positions of a group
of sequences was summed up using the above mentioned SUM
function. The total no. of sequences at each position was also summed
up using the same function. The percentage content of each nucleotide
in a given group of sequences was calculated by the following
formula.

Percentage content of N = 100 * Sum of absolute frequencies of N / Sum of total no. of sequences at each position
Line graphs were plotted to compare the variations in the pattern of
position wise nucleotide frequency distribution between stress
regulated miRNAs and all miRNAs (). Then TREND LINEs
were added to these line graphs to compare the trend of nucleotide
frequency distribution for each nucleotide base in stress regulated
sequences and all miRNAs ().

Discussion
There is a significant increase in the GC content of the sequences
regulated by the three stresses. The average GC content of Arabidopsis
thaliana genome has been reported as just 36% due to the large
intronic regions present which contain large stretches of A-T base
pairs. The average GC content of all miRNAs reported for Arabidopsis
thaliana is calculated to be 43% by our analysis. On the other hand the
GC content of stress induced sequences calculated by our method is
significantly higher 51-52% (Table 1 in ).

Within a long region of genomic sequence, genes are often
characterized by having a higher GC-content in contrast to the
background GC-content for the entire genome. The high GC-content
content is also a feature of genes coding for transcriptional activators
or repressors which regulate gene expression under various stress
condition. The promoter sequences of many stress regulated genes
have also been reported to have a high GC content []. Since the
miRNAs which were induced by stress were also found to have a
higher GC content like the coding regions, it may be hypothesized that
the GC content may play a significant role in the interaction of these
miRNAs with their target genes for regulating gene expression under
stress conditions. The high GC content may be significant because of
two reasons ‐ firstly the higher GC ratio gives a higher chance of
complementarities with the coding regions also having a higher GC
ratio, secondly since GC pair is bound by 3 hydrogen bonds, these
bonds are more stable, so the miRNA binding and degradation of the
target genes may be more probable.

The AUGC frequency distribution at each of the nucleotide positions
was analyzed for all miRNAs and compared with that for the stress
regulated miRNAs by plotting line graphs from the data calculated
from these sequences (). When these graphs were compared
for the normal and stress regulated sequences, the stress graph was
seen to have a considerable variation (degree of randomness) at each
position and for each base pair (A,U,G,C) thus proving that under
stress, cell responds in a different way which can be studied further to
understand its importance.

Trend Analysis
The trend analysis graphs were plotted for normal and stress sequences
to visualize the trend of frequency distribution for each nucleotide
base. For nucleotide “A” the trend analysis showed to some extent a
concave downward curve for stress regulated sequences, whereas a
marginal linear increase graph for normal sequences (). The
trend for nucleotide “U” showed a concave upward graph for stress
regulated sequences, whereas a marginal linear decrease graph for
normal sequences. Also the curve for stress lies below the trend line
graph corresponding to normal sequences ().

Nucleotide “G” showed an altogether different trend of a significant
concave downward curve for stress regulated sequences, indicating
higher frequencies of this nucleotide in the mid positions of these
sequences. The trend of normal sequences for this nucleotide showed a
more or less constant graph (). For nucleotide “C” the trend
of stress regulated sequences was opposite to that for G, as it showed a
significant concave upward curve for stress regulated sequences,
indicating higher frequencies of this nucleotide at the two ends of the
sequences. Also curve for stress lies above the trend line graph
corresponding to normal sequences. A slight linear increase graph was
observed for the normal sequences (). These trends
noticeably indicate that since the frequency of nucleotide “G” is higher
in the mid positions and that of nucleotide “C” is higher at the two
ends of the stress regulated sequences, the average GC content
becomes high altogether for these sequences.

Conclusion
Our results suggest that the GC content may play a important role in
the interaction of miRNAs with their target genes. The significance of
the degree of randomness of nucleotide frequency distribution in stress
regulated miRNAs can be identified by future studies. An overall
increase in the GC content of the stress regulated miRNAs further
extends the view that high GC can be a critical parameter for
prediction of stress regulated miRNAs in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Akash et al, Bioinformation 4(4): 151-154 (2009)

Nucleotide frequency distribution of miRNAs: (a) The nucleotide position wise AUGC distribution of all miRNAs. (b) The nucleotide
position wise AUGC distribution for stress regulated miRNAs. The degree of randomness in the position wise nucleotide frequency distribution is
more in the stress regulated miRNAs.

Position based trend analysis of nucleotide frequency (a), (b), (c), (d) show the comparison between stress regulated and normal
miRNAs for frequency distribution of nucleotide A, U, G and C respectively at each position of the corresponding sequences. The group of
normal sequences corresponds to the 1st group of sequences which includes all 123 sequences of the dataset consisting of both the stress
regulated sequences as well those not regulated by stress.

