Background
Next to lactic acid bacteria and the probiotic yeast Saccharomyces
boulardii, the non-pathogenic and human faecal isolate which
despite exhibiting a serotype (O6:K5:H1) E. coli strain nissle
1917 (EcN) is one of the best characterized probiotics and
effectively colonize in the gut []. The gut microorganisms form
a complex and dynamic ecosystem that constantly interacts
pollutants through contaminate food and water, that may have
toxic effects on body results induction of a variety of stress
proteins. Heavy metals are one of the major hazard pollutants,
constantly added into the environment due to anthropogenic
activities. This is especially true for developing countries like
China and India [].

When organisms or cells are exposed to low or high levels of
heavy metals they adapt various types including physiological
or genetic changes in response to heavy metals. So, metalinduced
toxicity involves multifactor mechanisms, suggests that
the toxicity of metal ions binding for metal sensitive group,
especially those with high atomic numbers, e.g. Hg2+, Cd2+ and
Ag+2, tend to bind SH or His moieties. Regarding health issues,
Cd, Pb, Hg and as have been identified as the most toxic.
Mercury (Hg), is a high potential contaminant because of its
toxic nature. It exhibits neurotoxicity, nephrotoxicity and
gastrointestinal toxicity [–].

A comparison of protein patterns from stress conditions versus
controls allows the detection of specific changes in the protein
[]. As result examining the protein expression that are up or
down regulated could be useful for gaining insight into the
molecular mechanisms of stress response []. Most of the
proteomic investigate that have been performed to study the
toxicity of heavy metals in different organisms have shown that
proteins associated with antioxidative defense mechanisms 
[–]. 
MALDI-MS has been successfully applied for
characterizing multi protein complexes. Two of the important
mass spectrometry “bottom-up” and the less widely used “topdown”
methods are the frequently applied. The bottom-up
strategy involves enzymatic digestion of intact proteins to
generate peptides that are analyzed by the mass spectrometer
[–].

Research on the stress response has increased greatly, most of
its aims at understanding the structure and function of stress
proteins. Protein structures are primarily determined by using
X-ray crystallography or nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy. Even though these methods not possible for all
proteins, the rate of newly discovered sequences grows much
faster than the number of structures solved. The huge gap could
possibly be resolved by computational methods. Homology
modelling often provides a useful to predict 3-D model for a
protein that is related to at least one known protein structure
based on protein sequence and aligned to one or more proteins
of known structure [–]. Functional domain (FD) is the core
of a protein that plays the major role in its function. As stated in
Mizianty and Kurgan [] having a wide range of potential
applications including predicting protein subcellular location,
protein (un) folding rates, DNA binding sites.

Little is known about the effect of heavy metals on the protein
profile of E. coli strain nissle 1917. Therefore, the objective of
this work is to, in combination with 2D electrophoresis,
MALDI-MS is in particular applied as downstream analytical
methods for protein identification. Protein structure predictions
of differentially expressed proteins are formulated under
mercury stress by using homology modelling.

Methodology
Bacterial strain and minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of mercury:
Escherichia coli strains nissle 1917, (serotype O6:K5:H1) were
obtained from the culture collection of Ardeypharm, GmbH,
Herdecke, Germany and was used and cultivated on LB using
the streak plate method. The bacterial culture of E. coli nissle
1917 were grown in 5 ml Luria-Bertani (LB) broth (10 g/L
tryptone, 5 g/L NaCl and 5 g/L yeast extract, pH 7.2)
supplemented with 100 mg/L ampicillin at 37°C, 150 RPM for
overnight. The minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of
mercury (Hg+2) was determined by macrodilution method.

Protein extraction and two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2DPAGE):
In preparation of protein extraction was performed and Protein
content was estimated by Bradford method using Bangalore
Genei Kit. For the detection of stress-induced proteins in E.coli
nissle 1917, 2D-PAGE was carry out by using IPG strips with
pH- ranges of 3-10 and followed second dimension SDS PAGE
and the procedure was followed as per Bio-Rad instruction
manual. In-gel digestion of the excised gel pieces was
performed using sequencing grade trypsin. A basic overview of
the methods is presented in ().

Peptide mass fingerprinting MALDI-TOF- MS:
Spots were excised from sypro ruby stained gels and destained
for 30 minutes peptide mixture was mixed with an equal
volume of matrix solution (10 mg/ml -cyano-4-
hydroxycinnamic acid matrix in 50% acetonitrile containing
0.1% TFA) and the mixture was analyzed on MALDI-TOF MS
(Model Voyager-DE STR, Applied Bio systems, Foster, CA,
USA). Spectra were collected over the mass range of 800–3500
KDa and integrated with the MASCOT 2.2 search engine
(Matrix Science, http://www.matrixscience.com) was used for
spot proteins identification by querying the trypsin digested
peptide fragment data using the reference database NCBI with
E. coli. A partial modification of proteins by
carbamidomethylation of cysteines and oxidization of
methionines was allowed. Protein homology was assigned, if at
least four peptide masses with a sequence coverage 15% or
higher were matched within a maximum of 100-ppm error
spread across the data set. The number of missed cleavage sites
was allowed up to 1. Search result scores which are greater than
48 was considered to be of significant difference (p&lt;0.05).

Homology Modelling:
The sequences of mercury stress proteins were obtained from
mass spectroscopy data. The modelling step can be carried out
by searching the metal stress expressed protein sequences
against the databases of well-defined template sequences was
identified by the BLAST program [] against PDB.
(http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/), which shows the maximum
identity with high score and less e-value designated as a
template. All sequence alignments were completed using
ClustalW. The 3D model was generated by using the academic
version of MODELER9v7 (http//:www.salilab.org/modeller),
based on the information obtained from sequence alignment
[]. The 3D structure obtained from modeller were further
refined through molecular dynamics and calibration methods
using NAMD 2.5 with CHARMM 27 force field and the system
contains the TIP3P water model. The energy of the structure
was minimized with 10,000 steps with cutoff of 12 Å for vdW
interactions. The equilibrated system was simulated with 1
picoseconds (PS); to hold back the original conformation, for
that (NPT) constant pressure and 310K constant temperatures
has been choosed []. Finally, the structure having the least
energy with low RMSD was used for further studies. The final
structure obtained, was analyzed by Ramachandran's map
drawn using PROCHECK v.3.0 and Verify3D. These programs
accessed from the SAVES online server and the model
satisfying all the parameters after the evaluation was
considered for the further process. The functional domains of
modelling proteins could identify by using SBASE server. A
basic overview of modelling represented in .

Results and Discussion
Characterization of proteins using Peptide Mass Fingerprinting:
In this study we examined differential stress responsive
proteome of E.coli nissle 1917 before and after the exposure to
mercury to identify differentially expressed proteins. Cells were
treated with 0.02 mM mercury, by using 2D-PAGE and the
entire differential expressed spots were subjected to peptide
mass fingerprinting. After the treatment of E.coli nissle 1917
cells with mercury stress many proteins were up or down
regulated these proteins are called stress proteins showed in
( &amp; ). 
Spot nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 are differentially
expressed in mercury treated cells is given in  (see
supplementary material). Mercury-responsive proteins were
Hypothetical UPF0169 lipoprotein yfiO precursor, conserved
domain protein, 50S ribosomal protein L31 type B 1, 50S
ribosomal protein L31, uncharacterized HTH-type
transcriptional regulator yihW and beta-lactamase SHV-24
respectively.

Homology modelling of mercury stress expressed proteins:
Three homology models were obtained for the mercury stress
proteins based on published X-ray structures of templates.
These include (i) β-lactamase protein (ii) Ribosomal L31 protein
(iii) Yfio proteins.

For β-lactamase, ribosomal L31 protein and Yfio proteins the
results of BLAST search against PDB, SHV-1 betalactamase
complex (PDB ID 3D4F), ribosome from E. coli (PDB ID 2AW4)
and E. coli BamCD complex (PDB ID 3TGO) were selected as
template proteins for homology modelling, which have high
level of sequence identity with the β-lactamase domain (31%),
ribosomal L31 (33%) and Yfio (34%) respectively. The alignment
was done with the ClustalW program (). This is a
good result given that, according to the literature, a sequence
similarity above 25% between the protein and template is
satisfactory to build a homology model []. The final stable
structure of the beta lactamase, ribosomal L31 and Yfio proteins
obtained by the help of SPDBV and it is evident that β-
lactamase has 10 helices, 11 sheets; Ribosomal L31; 11sheets, 2
helices; Yfio proteins 4 sheets and 11 helices as shown in the
( ). The structure having the least energy with
low RMSD (Root mean square deviation) which was obtained
by the NAMD. The final structure was further checked by
verify3D graph and validation of the model was carried out
using Ramachandran plot calculations computed with the
PROCHECK. Altogether 99.6% β lactamase; 96.3% ribosomal
L31 and 94.1% Yfio proteins of the residues were in favoured
and allowed regions. The functional domains (FD) were
identified by SBASE server and visualized by SPDBV software
it has been shown that beta lactamase having one FDs namely
betalactamase domain; Yfio proteins having four FD including
three tetratricopeptide region and Sec1- like protein domain
and ribosomal L31 protein having one FD is ribosomal protein
L31 domain ().

Conclusion
In the present study, we described the protein profile
experimentally by 2D- PAGE and mass spectroscopy to
understand mercury stress. Our findings provide novel insights
into the physiological role of stress proteins in probiotic E. coli.
The growth rate of E. coli nissle 1917 arrest and loss of
culturability was observed, and elimination of mercury ion is
the most important defense mechanism of the cells against
mercury stress. This is significant because, resources for a cell
are limited in stress, in order to adapt that conditions probiotic
E. coli increased synthesis of new constitutive proteins like
ribosomal proteins involved in the energy metabolism protein
synthesis and antibiotic and metals resistant proteins. These
proteins could allow the bacteria to contend with mercury
stress. Further, homology modelling performed for three
unknown structures of mercury stress proteins, we got higher
sequence similarity with template proteins. All the results
obtained from RMSD, verify3D and PROCHECK assembled
together showed the best results for homology modelling.

Supplementary material
Data 1
My special thanks to University Grants Commission (UGCMRP),
New Delhi for their financial support and my heartfelt
thanks to Dr. Ulrich Sonnenborn, Ardeypharm, GmbH,
Germany, for providing Escherichia coli nissle 1917 (EcN Strain).

Citation:Seshapani et al, Bioinformation 9(9): 485-490 (2013)

A basic overview of proteomic flow

Classical work flow Homology modelling

2D gel images of E.coli nissele 1917 cells. (a) 2D profile
of E.coli nissle 1917 showing the protein expression when
grown in the presence without metal i.e control; (b) 2D profile
of E.coli nissle 1917 showing the differential protein expression
when grown in the presence of 0.02 mM.

Zoomed 2D gels in specific locations of protein
derived from cells exposure to 0.02 mM Hgcl2 in E.coli nissle
1917. (a) Hypothetical UPF0169 lipo protein yfio precursor; (b)
Conserved domain protein; (c) 50S ribosomal protein L31 type B
1; (d) 50S ribosomal protein L3 1; (e) Uncharacterized HTH-type
transcriptional regulator yih W; (F) Beta-lactamase SHV-24

Pairwise alignment between the mercury stress proteins from E. coli nissle 1917 with respect templates. (a) Pairwise
alignment between β-lactamase and template SHV-1 beta-lactamase complex (PDB ID-3D4F); (b) Pairwise alignment between
Ribosomal L31 protein and template ribosome from Escherichia coli (PDB ID - 2AW4); (c) Pairwise alignment between Yfio protein
and template ribosome from E. coli Bam CD complex (PDB ID: 3TGO).

Computed 3D structure of homology models of
mercury stress protein visualized by SPDBV software and
domains identified by SBASE server. (a) β-lactamase has 10
helices, 11 sheets; (b) Beta-lactamase - like domain (Red colour);
(c) Ribosomal L31: 11 sheets, 2 helices; (d) Ribosomal L31- Like
domain (Green colour); (e) Yfio protein 4 sheets, 11 helices; (f)
Three tetratrico peptide region = (Blue colour) and sec 1 = like
protein = domain (red colour).

