Background
Fruits are good source of beneficial health effects, namely
vitamins, minerals, trace elements, dietary fiber, proteins of
vitamins. Here, we describe the development of a database
containing information for fruit crops diseases improvement.
Though a great deal of information has been acquired about
fruit crops diseases, diseases type, its causal organism, images,
symptoms, their control, possible sequences 
[–] and
phytochemicals much of this information is highly dispersed
and of limited accessibility, often being confined to specialized
textbooks, obscure government documents or subscriptionrequiring
scientific journals. Fortunately, over the past few
years a number of web-accessible databases have started to
appear, such as the pubchem and chembank phytochemical
database and so on. They focus on providing information on
either chemical property, structure, ambiguous mode of action
or only about the source of phytochemicals. A few databases
were reported for biological applications, which are mostly
focusing on particular aspects of dietary phytochemicals 
[–],
which are based on experimental and published secondary data
from the scientific reports. However, the lack information on
fruit crops diseases, diseases type, its causal organism, images,
symptoms, their control, phytochemicals. It is important to
develop strategies to improve fruit crops diseases productivity.
Fruit crop diseases improvement involves systematic
monitoring of parameters essential for crop development. This
could be achieved by developing databases containing
information similar to many other crop databases 
[–]. This
Fruit Crops Diseases Database (FCDD) was developed to be
useful in finding effective chemical entities in drug discovery.

Methodology
Data on fruit crops diseases, diseases type, its causal organism,
images, symptoms, their control, phytochemicals, 2D images
and their possible sequences were manually collected from
online databases [–] 
and from peer-reviewed scientific articles
and various literatures [–
]. From 25 commonly consumed
fruit crops in India, 162 details on fruit crops diseases, diseases
type, its causal organism, images, symptoms, their control 171
phytochemicals, their 2D images and their 20 possible
sequences were collected and this data was compiled using
Microsoft Access®. The 2D molecular structures as .sdf file of
the phytochemicals were rendered from online small molecular
databases namely, Pubchem and Chembank. Primary 

(see supplementary material) consists of twelve data fields
(fruit crops scientific name, family, common name, hindi name,
gujarati name, phytochemical, sequences, diseases type, its
causal organism, images, symptoms and their control). Finally,
data were exported from Microsoft Access® to Microsoft SQL
server, which is used as the web interface. The front end of the
database was designed constructed using PHP, HTML and
JAVA and can be accessed at http://www.fruitcropsdd.com/.

Utility to the biological community
The database finds utility in fruit crops diseases improvement.
FCDD emphasizes the information of fruit crops diseases,
diseases type, its causal organism, images, symptoms and their
control. It contains phytochemicals from fruits, their 2D images
and their possible sequences also. The database finds utility to
the scientific community for a quick review on the number of
fruit crops diseases and phytochemicals for diseases research
and provides enormous scope for development of drugs. The
database is freely available in public domain.

Caveat and Future Developments
The database website has a provision for updating and adding
new in future by the database manager. All data fields will be
curates and then accepted by the built in program. Database
will be extended for phytochemicals present in fruits.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Chauhan et al, Bioinformation 10(9): 595-598 (2014)

(A) Basic architecture of FCDD is shown; (B),(C),(D),(E),(F) A screen shot of the Fruit Crops Diseases Database (FCDD).

