Background
Ras, a family of protooncogenes (N‐Ras, H-Ras and KRas) codes for small
proteins of 189 amino acids with 21 kDa molecular weight. [] To be
biologically active, RAS proteins are localised to the inner face of the
plasma membrane, where they effectively interact with their upstream
activators and downstream targets. The RAS gene proteins exist in two
states: an active state, in which GTP is bound to the molecule and an
inactive state, in which GTP is hydrolysed to GDP. In physiologic
conditions, the active isoform initiates cell proliferation through the RAS
dependent kinase cascade. The RAS proteins possess intrinsic GTPase
activity, which normally leads to their inactivation and the control of cell
growth. In tumours, a point mutation resulting in loss of the intrinsic
GTPase activity is associated with transforming activity of the protein,
which does not stop anymore to send the signal stimulating cell
proliferation. []

Mutational activation transforms Ras into an oncogenic form, which
results in the loss of intrinsic GTPase function and therefore the protein is
constitutively in the active, GTP-bound state and is continuously sending
signals for cell growth. [,
]
Statistics reveal that 10‐25% of all human
malignancies in clinics are found to harbour a variety of Ras mutations
[,
]
 making Ras one of the most important targets to suppress tumour
cell growth[,
]
According to the recent surveys of the WHO
(www.who.int/cancer/resources/incidences/en/), bladder cancer is rated
within the five most common cancers in males in North America, Northern
and Western Europe, and other developed countries. Transitional cell
carcinoma (TCC) is a tumour that occurs mostly in the urinary bladder and
has been linked to multiple and accumulated aberrations in oncogenes (e.g.
H-ras mutations) and cancer‐suppressor genes (e.g. p53 inactivation) 
[–]
Mutational activation of the H-ras oncogene was first reported 
[,
]
in human T24 TCC cell line that played an essential role in urothelial
carcinogenesis. Molecular epidemiological studies conducted within
different geographic regions in different races and tumour stages/grades
have revealed that up to 84% of bladder TCC carry activated HRas. 
[–] The amino acid position which corresponds to effector region on the
H-Ras is 32-40 [] The selection of this effector region as a binding site
will act as potential site for docking studies. This selection has been
confirmed by two following experimental evidences. Ras is known to
induce activation of c‐Raf‐1 and MAP kinase or extracellular signal
regulated kinase (ERK). Such signal transducing activities are abolished by
presence of mutations in the effector region Tyr32 ‐ Tyr40. Mutations in
the effector region affect neither guanine-nucleotide binding nor GTPase
activity, so the effector region is considered to be the region that interacts
with the target effectors of the Ras protein 
[] In second, the
experimental results of x-ray crystallographic and nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) analyses have shown that the three-dimensional
structure of the Ras protein changed upon GDP to GTP exchange. In
particular, the conformations of the Asp30-Asp38 and Gly60-Glu76 regions
change significantly, and these regions are called switch‐I and switch‐II,
respectively [] The switch I region essentially overlaps with the effector
region. Some mutations in the switch I region of Ras have been reported to
diminish the interaction with GAPs, Raf‐1. The significant regions of Raf
that bind to Ras protein have been identified as 80 amino acid N-terminal
region, the so-called Ras binding domain (RBD) []

The objective of this work is to find a suitable drug (ligand) molecule for
the mutated state of H-Ras protein to prevent complex formation with Raf
protein. Antagonists of the Ras‐Raf interactions that are likely to inhibit
the Ras-stimulated signal transduction pathway are of great potential value
to anti-cancer therapy.Flavonoids are a group of more than 4000
polyphenolic compounds that occur naturally in foods of plant origin.
These compounds possess a common phenylbenzopyrone structure (C6‐C3‐C6), and they are categorized according to the saturation level and
opening of the central pyran ring, mainly into flavones, flavanols,
isoflavones, flavonols, flavanones, and flavanonols. The weight of the
epidemiological evidence for a protective effect of flavonoids against
cancer is impressive. A growing number of epidemiological studies
suggest that high flavonoid intake may be correlated with a decreased risk
of cancer [] This study has identified flavonoids as potential drug
molecules and provides a way towards target-based drug discovery.

Methodology
Softwares and data sources
All softwares used for this analysis are freely available for academic use.
Table 1 provides the source of availability of data used for the study.The
Protein Data Bank (PDB) (www.rcsb.org) is a worldwide repository for
processing and distribution of 3D biological macromolecular structure data
[] The protein structure of H-RAS P21 mutant (521P) and Ras-binding
domain (1WXM) were downloaded from Protein Data Bank. The Drug
Bank (http://redpoll.pharmacy.ualberta.ca/drugbank/) database 
[] is aunique bioinformatics and cheminformatics resource that combines
detailed drug (i.e., chemical, pharmacological and pharmaceutical) data
with comprehensive drug target (i.e., sequence, structure, and pathway)
information. The database contains nearly 4300 drug entries including
&gt;1000 FDA-approved small molecule drugs, 113 FDA‐approved biotech
(protein/peptide) drugs, 62 nutraceuticals and &gt;3000 experimental drugs.
Additionally, more than 6000 protein (i.e., drug target) sequences are
linked to these drug entries. Each Drug Card entry contains more than 80
data fields with half of the information being devoted to drug/chemical
data and the other half devoted to drug target or protein data. All the
flavonoid molecules and clinical anticancer drugs were downloaded from
this database (). 
PyMol (version 1.2), is a Python-based visualization software 
[] The PDB files of proteins obtained from the
Protein Data Bank can be visualized using PyMol. Pymol has been
selected for the analysis of docking results. The docking experiments were
performed using the docking software AutoDock 4.2 (The Scripps
Research Institute, "www.scripps.edu") [], with the help AutoDockTools
(ADT)‐an accessory program that allows the user to interact with
AutoDock from a Graphic User Interface (GUI). AutoDock is a suite of
automated docking tools designed to predict how small molecules/ligands
such as substrates or drug candidates, bind to a receptor/protein of known
3D structure.

Molecular docking
Molecular docking was performed for getting the drug-receptor binding
energy. The detailing of the procedure is as follows:

Preparing the ligand and macromolecule files for AutoDock
The PDB files obtained from the World Wide Web repository are often far from perfect
for docking study and present with potential problems like missing
hydrogen atoms, multiple molecules, added waters and related problems.
Using the GUI of ADT, following files were prepared.

The Macromolecule file
The downloaded PDB file of H Ras (PDB ID 521P) was first read in ADT,
added waters removed and polar hydrogens were added. Kollman charges
were added. Finally file was saved with .pdbq extension (where ‘q’
represent charge).

The Ligand File
In a similar procedure, the ligand files were read in ADT, all hydrogens
added, charges added and non-polar hydrogens merged and saved with
.pdbqt extension. ADT then automatically determined the best root. The
ligand files were then saved with .pdbqt extension (q representing charge).

Preparing The Grid Parameter File
For the calculation of docking interaction energy, a three-dimensional box
(grid) was created in which the protein molecule is enclosed. The grid
volume was large enough to allow the ligand to rotate freely, even with its
most fully extended conformation. The parameters required to create such
a grid were stored in the Grid Parameter File with .gpf extension.

Running Autogrid
Autogrid4 creates one map for every type of atom in the ligand. For
example a molecule having C, N, O, H, maps will be created as
molecule.C.map molecule.N.map, molecule.O.map, molecule.H.map.
These are grid maps in ASCII format for readability by AutoDock.
AutoGrid also generates corresponding output of the macromolecular file
with the extension .glg .

Preparing The Docking Parameter File
The docking parameter file, which instructs AutoDock about the ligand to
move, the map files to use, and other properties defined for the ligand was
created. AutoDock's search methods include the Monte Carlo simulated
annealing (SA) method, the Genetic Algorithm (GA), local search (LS)
and the hybrid genetic algorithm with local search (GALS). The latter is
also referred to as the Lamarckian genetic algorithm (LGA) because
offsprings are allowed to inherit the local search adaptations of their
parents and this was the chosen algorithm for our analysis.

Running Autodock
Finally, AutoDock was run from the GUI of ADT and the docked ligand
files were used for study. The dlg files were read in ADT as well as in
PyMol to calculate the binding energies in the docked ligand‐protein
complexes.

Discussion 
In order to find effective inhibitor(s) for mutant H-Ras, the binding energy
of H-Ras and Raf interaction was initially predicted and it was compared
with binding energies of the chosen ligands. The mutated H-Ras and RBD
of Raf protein showed a minimal binding energy of +1.23 kcal/mol 
(). 
The detailed structure of H Ras with RBD is shown in 
.
Selecting effector region (residues 32-40) of H-Ras as binding site, all the
ligands were docked to it. The binding energy of mutated H-Ras into each
of the ligand molecules is shown in . Corresponding figures
mentioned in Table 3 demonstrates the receptor ligand interactions
().

The docked results showed that the flavonoids Naringenin, Daidzein, and
Hesperetin had the highest affinity for the receptor (most negative ΔG).
Rutin showed no affinity towards the receptor. Known anticancer agents
(Erlotinib, Letrozole and Exemestane) showed binding energies in the
range of ‐1.11 to ‐5.51 kcal/mol demonstrating efficacy of the flavonoids
in the treatment of cancer with little or no cytotoxicity 
(). The
ligand interactions were stronger (energetically lesser) as compared to HRas-
RBD interaction.

The ligand molecules also suitably acted as drug molecule by their
adherence to the properties such as Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism,
and Excretion (ADME) as per the Lipinski's “rule of five”. From the
inspection of ligand molecules, it was observed that all the ligand
molecules except Rutin were found to obey Lipinski's rule-of-five 
(). 
Rutin has more than 5 hydrogen bond donors and more than 10
hydrogen bond acceptors. Many in vitro studies have been conducted on
the potential anticancer activity of flavonoids in diverse cell systems.
Hirano and co‐workers examined anticancer efficacy of 28 flavonoids on
human acute myeloid leukemia cell line HL‐60, and compared differences
between antiproliferative activity and cytotoxicity of these compounds
with four clinical anticancer agents. Eight out of 28 flavonoids showed
considerable suppressive effects on HL‐60 cell growth with IC50s ranging
from 10‐940 ng/ml [] Kuntz et al. screened more than 30 flavonoids for
their effects on cell proliferation and potential cytotoxicity in human colon
cancer cell lines Caco‐2 and HT‐29. Almost all compoundds 
displayedantiproliferative activity without cytotoxicity. 
[] An array of 55 flavones
having a variety of substituents was evaluated by Cushman and
Nagarathnam for cytotoxicity in five cancer cell cultures, A-549 lung
carcinoma, MCF‐7 breast carcinoma, HT‐29 colon adenocarcinoma,
SKMEL-5 melanoma, and MLM melanoma. Fifteen out of the 55 flavone
derivatives were significantly active against at least one of these cell
cultures. [] In addition, seven out of the 27 examined Citrus flavonoids
were observed to inhibit the proliferation of tumor cells, while less active
against normal human cells. []

Conclusion
The study concludes that flavonoids (particularly Naringenin, Daidzein,
and Hesperetin) would be effective drugs in arresting the function of
mutant H-Ras P21 protein. Further, these flavonoid molecules can be
studied in the wet lab and incorporated into the drug development phases.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank the Research Centre, College of Applied Medical Sciences, King
Saud University, Saudi Arabia, for financial support of this work. We are
also thankful to Dr. Noor Ahmadh and Umar Karar of the College of
Applied Medical Sciences for their valuable support during the study

Citation:Masoodi &amp; Alhamdanz; Bioinformation 5 (1): 11-15 (2010)

Mutated H-Ras-Ras Binding Domain (RDB) Complex Structure

Ligand molecules docked onto H Ras (Green) in their lowest energy docked conformation. Ligands are shown in red.

Ligand molecules in the active site of H Ras.

