Background
Oral lichen planus (OLP) is an immune mediated chronic disease[,]. 
It usually affects muco-cutaneous tissues although it may affect any
part of the oral cavity []. It is a T cell mediated autoimmune disease
that leads to destruction of the basal cell layer of the oral mucosa.
Clinically, OLP may present in the mouth in reticular, erosive,
papular, plaque-like, atrophic or bullous form [,]. The use of
molecular approaches to study the pathogenesis of OLP is increasingly
recognized diagnostic tool, and molecular approaches should further
elucidate and characterize OLP pathogenesis. T cell signaling plays a
key role in the pathogenesis of OLP []. The src family of kinases
includes Lck and Fyn, that signal downstream of T cell receptors [,] 
these molecules play a key role in T cell differentiation, survival and
activation []. Lck contributes actively to the phosphorylation of ZAP-70 
[]and may regulate the PI-3K/Akt pathway 
[,].

Lck is considered pro-apoptotic [,
] and may be involved in the
basal cell apoptosis associated with the pathogenesis of OLP.
However, several studies found no apoptotic evidences in the basal
cells of OLP cases[,]. Here, we hypothesize that a regulatory
loop of T cell activation and anti-apoptotic forces are involved at the
oral basal membrane and that may be associated, at the molecular
level, with possible OLP transformation to squamous cell carcinomas
(SCCA). To test this hypothesis, we studied Survivin, a critical cancerspecific
protein [], whose expression in tissues stimulates T cells.
Survivin belongs to inhibitor of apoptosis family and is currently a key
molecular target in anticancer therapy. Lck ultimately leads to
activation of the PI-3K pathway in T cells. PI-3K/Akt pathway
regulates cell growth and proliferation. Several studies have
demonstrated the deregulation of this pathway in several cancers[,]. 
PI-3K is needed for normal T cell development []. However,
altered and unrestrained PI-3K signaling causes auto-immunity, an
important determinant in OLP.

SCCA of the oral tissues makes up over 90% of the oral cancers [].
It may occur spontaneously particularly in the presence of risk factors
such as tobacco, alcohol, and chronic inflammatory irritations []. It
may also develop from established pre-malignant lesions. OLP may in
some cases be a pre-malignant lesion for SCCA [,], but a full
consensus about OLP potential for cancer transformation is still
lacking. Issues complicating the understanding of OLP transformation
to SCCA include the uncompleted definition of diagnostic criteria for
OLP [], and the current limits in understanding the biology of this
disease. Taken together, we speculate that molecular profiling may be
a promising approach to further investigate the pathogenesis of OLP
and SCCA. The purpose of this study was to characterize, contrast
and compare the molecular biomarker profiling of Lck, Survivin and
PI-3K in OLP, chronic interface mucosities (CIM), epithelial dysplasia
(EpD) and SCCA patients. Moreover, this study was aimed to achieve
further molecular insights into the biology of these diseases, and
specifically to provide additional clarification through molecular
means on OLP ‐ cancer transformation. The results shown suggest a
molecular-driven approach to the management of OLP patients.

Methodology
Patient Sample
Paraffin blocks of fifty clinically diagnosed patients with OLP, EpD,
CIM or SSCA were obtained from the University of California, Los
Angeles (School or Dentistry, Oral Pathology archive), with IRB
approval. Thirteen patients (fourteen samples) had OLP, six patients
CIM, four patients epithelial dysplasia, and twenty-seven cases were
diagnosed with SCCA ().

Tissue micro-array
The patient samples were coded to construct tissue micro-array (TMA;
UCLA tissue array core facility). Core size was 0.6mm. Each sample
has three panels on the TMA. The oral pathologist (RC) examined the
patient samples, confirmed the diagnosis, and located the ideal
segment for use in TMA construction, which was also verified by a
second rater.

Antibodies and other reagents
Antibodies were from Abcam, USA (www.abcam.com). Rabbit antihuman
Lck protein was used at the recommended dilution of 1:250.
This Lck antibody does not cross react with any other Src family
members. Rabbit anti-human Survivin protein was used at 0.5µg/ml.
Rabbit anti-human PI-3K protein was used at the recommended
dilution of 1:50. Biotinylated secondary goat anti-rabbit antibody was
used with the Vectastatin avidin-biotin complex (ABC) kit (Vector
Laboratories, USA www.vectorlabs.com). Color was developed with
the Vector Nova Red Substrate kit.

Immuno-histochemistry protocol
Immuno-histochemistry (IHC) was performed as previously described 	 
[], using the specific antibodies described above. Paraffin embedded 	 
TMA slides were deparaffinized (60° C, 30 min), xylene washed, re-	 
hydrated by progressive washes in decreasing concentrations of 	 
ethanol, and rinsed copiously in double-distilled water. Endogenous 	 
peroxides were inhibited (H2O2 3%, room temp, 10 min), and antigen 	 
retrieval obtained with citrate buffer (0.01M, pH 6.0, microwave). 	 
Slides were blocked for 1 hour in blocking solution (2% normal goat 	 
serum [NGS] in Tween-20-supplemented Tris buffered saline [T-	 
TBS]). Samples were incubated at 4°C overnight with the primary 	 
antibodies (see above) diluted in blocking solution. Following copious 	 
washes in T-TBS, the anti-rabbit specific secondary antibody diluted 	 
in blocking solution was applied for 30 min, and washed off with 	 
copious T-TBS, before treatment with the ABC kit (30 min). 	 
Following color development, the slides were counterstained with 	 
hematoxylin (Vector Laboratory), rinsed, dehydrated in graded 	 
alcohols, mounted with Vector Permanent mounting medium, sealed, 	 
and stored (room temp) until viewing and analysis.

Computer scanning, analysis and scoring
Slides were scanned at 40x magnification. The aperio imagescope 	 
software (Version 9.1.19.1569) was used for scoring, additional 	 
analysis and subsequent magnification at 8X. Two independent 	 
assessors evaluated the expression (signals) of each epitope based on 	 
the nuclear and cytoplasmic stains. A circle of tissue on the TMA was 	 
scored from 0 to 100 numerical points, based on the extent of stain 	 
signals over the tissue. A score of 50 was interpreted as staining 	 
covering half of a circle of tissue, score of 75 means ¾ of the tissue 	 
were stained, while a score of 10 simply covers a small arc of a circle 	 
of tissue. Expressions of markers were ranked as low (signal scores: 	 
11-24), negative (signal scores: 0-10), and high (signal scores ≥ 25) 	 
[]. Biopsy samples with signal 
scores for each marker ≥ 25 were 	 
identified for OLP, CIM, EpD and SCCA. The numbers of biopsy 	 
samples identified for each marker was transformed to percentage 	 
ofthe total number of biopsy samples per disease group.

Results
High expression of Lck found in biopsies from OLP patients
Lck expression was rated high in 78.6% of the OLP samples,
compared to 3.7% of SCCA, 33.3% of the CIM samples and 25.0% of
the EpD samples (, ). The pattern of Lck
immunostaining in the OLP cases was peculiar in that a well distinct
dense band-like appearance extended from the sub-epithelial boundary
deeper into the mucosa (). This pattern of sub-epithelial
band prominence staining was absent in SCCA biopsies ()
and EpD cases. Evidence of this particular staining pattern in CIM
was inconsistent.

Survivin expression levels high in OLP despite Lck pro-apoptotic activity
Survivin expression was observed in 64.3% of biopsies from OLP
patients (Figures, ,) and 50.0 % of CIM cases showed high
expression of survivin. All EpD biopsies (100%) and 96.3% of SCCA
biopsies presented high Survivin levels ((Figures, ,).
Regardless of how the Lck-T cell signaling apoptotic loop operates,
the molecular signature of Survivin was clearly prominent in OLP.

PI-3K expression high in SCCA and some OLP cases
Results revealed that 35.7% of the OLP biopsies ()
demonstrated high expression of PI-3K, which was observed
respectively in 100% and 63.0% of the EpD and SCCA biopsies.
None of the CIM biopsies showed PI-3K convincing immunostaining,
as they were either low (≥ 11-24 expression signal scores) or negative
(0-10 expression signal scores) ( ). OLP cases with negative,
low and high expressions of PI-3K are shown in , respectively. Overall, five OLP biopsy samples 
( ) showed
high levels of PI-3K (). SCCA cases with negative, low and high expressions of PI-3K are shown in 
respectively.

Molecular Voting identifies four high risks OLP cases
Identifying high-risk patients requires assessment of disease entities
beyond the molecular signature of a single gene, RNA or protein. A
panel of biomarkers must be used, whose votes (molecular signatures)
are interpreted or counted together, and should be taken into
consideration []. Using this rationale we identified those samples
that had high expressions across the three markers, particularly the
samples that were high in PI-3K and Survivin. Based on this approach,
four OLP samples were identified and are regarded as high risks
().

Molecular factors are suggested to be acting in advance of histopathology
A few SCCA biopsy samples with well differentiated and moderately
differentiated histomorphology also showed high expression levels of
Survivin and PI-3K (). It is remarkable that all
histomorphologically described EpD biopsy cases ( ) showed
high expression levels of PI-3K and Survivin, a molecular signature
similar to SCCA biopsy cases. All (100%) of the identified high-risk
OLP biopsies were high in PI-3K, and Survivin, and suggested an OLP
molecular signature similar to that of SCCA, despite the fact that the
histomorphology of these lesions were characteristic of OLP.

Discussion
Our current data reveal high (≥ 25 expression signal score) Lck 	 
expression in OLP biopsies. The expression follows a sub-epithelial 	 
band pattern of staining. Sub-epithelial dense mononuclear infiltrates 	 
of T cells have been previously described in OLP. By contrast, in CIM 	 
biopsy samples, Lck staining appears randomly distributed. The 	 
percentage of biopsy samples with high expression levels of Survivin 	 
in EpD and SCCA is greater than that of OLP and CIM biopsy 	 
samples. High PI-3K expression characterizes SCCA and EpD 	 
biopsies. Notably, all but one OLP samples with high expression 	 
levels of PI-3K also express high levels of Survivin and Lck. Taken 	 
together, our data suggest that concurrently elevated expression of PI-	 
3K and Survivin in OLP lesions suggest an unfavorable molecular 	 
signature, one that appears typical for SCCA. By pooling the votes of 	 
the three markers together (biomarker voting), we identified four OLP 	 
biopsy samples that we concluded to be high-risk OLP lesions for 	 
transformation to cancer.

Molecular complementation of histopathology
The identification of OLP biopsy samples that appears to have similar
molecular signatures to SCCA biopsy samples may be highly
suggestive, since these OLP lesions may represent heightened risk for
transformation to SCCA. Histopathology remains a valued and viable
diagnostic tool. However, in order to achieve a molecular targeted
approach in diagnosis, prognosis and therapy, histopathology needs to
be complemented with reliable molecular tools. Case in point,
histopathology of breast cancer is complemented with molecular tool,
and has become valuable in the selection of patients for appropriate
therapy and management [,]. Taken together, our results lead us
to propose that OLP lesions that are in the process of transforming to
SCCA present histomorphologically as OLP, but possess a certain
molecular signature that represents the specific factors that drive
progression to cancer. Our results demonstrate that we now have the
capability of reliably identifying this characteristic molecular
signature. The four EpD biopsies tested as control in this study
revealed molecular signatures similar to SCCA. Of note, EpD is
currently recognized as a premalignant lesion []. Therefore, and
despite the limitations of a small sample size, our findings suggest that
the above-mentioned molecular factors are preceding the phenotypic
alterations in tissue histopathology. It follows that the histomorphological
changes that may be caused by high expression levels
of Survivin and PI-3K may lag behind their established molecular impact,
and may be predictive of OLP and EpD lesions as they progress to cancer.

Molecular differentiation between OLP and other lichenoid reactions
To test the possibility that molecular tools may help characterize
between OLP and other lichenoid reactions, we evaluated and
compared six CIM and fourteen OLP samples. Our current preliminary
findings with this small sample size suggest some degree of molecular
differentiation between OLP cases and other lichenoid reactions. Case
in point, Lck expression levels were high in 33.3% of the CIM
samples compared to the 78.6% in OLP samples, 3.7% in SCCA and
25% in EpD biopsies. Lck expression revealed a random pattern in
CIM lesions, compared to an almost seamless sub-epithelial band-like
pattern in OLP biopsies. By contrast, none of the CIM biopsy samples
showed high PI-3K expression levels. Further molecular analysis with
more samples will possibly assist in a clearer description of these
related inflammatory-driven entities.

Chronic inflammation, autoimmunity and cancer transformation: Is there any role for the Lck-PI-3K-Survivin molecular loop in OLP?
Recent studies have shown the role of chronic inflammation in the
generation of cancer []. At the molecular level, we need to
determine at which stage inflammation ceases to be protective and
becomes harmful, including the promotion of cancer transformation.
Lck is a non-receptor src kinase, and studies have shown the role of
non-receptor src kinases in cancer generation []. PI-3K may be
involved in the autoimmunity described in OLP since unrestrained PI-
3K activation leads to auto-immunity and leukemia []. In T cells,
Lck ultimately activates PI-3K. The deregulation of the PI-3K/Akt
pathway is responsible for several cancers [], which is in part the
rationale for current anti PI-3K clinical trials in cancer management
[]. Acting downstream to PI-3K is Akt (protein kinase B). Akt
functionally inhibits apoptosis and promotes cell growth. A
modulatory switch at the PI-3K/Akt level may be hypothesized for this
molecular loop. Therefore, it is critical to elucidate the role of Lck in
OLP as a prototype for chronic inflammation with activated T cell
signaling. In this context, our group has additional data-mining results
that support the Lck-PI-3K-Akt link (Giacomelli et al.,-paper II in this
series). Taken together, the Lck-PI-3K/Akt-Survivin molecular loop
may play an important role in the spectrum of chronic inflammation,
autoimmunity and cancer transformation in OLP. This loop may also
act indirectly through activation of other pathways such as the mitogen
activated protein kinase[].

This model raises the next important question in OLP pathogenesis: 	 
Could the molecular imbalance of T cells and the local tissue 	 
environment in OLP itself determine whether chronic inflammation 	 
will be protective or lead to cancer? Interleukins, particularly 	 
interleukin 2 (IL-2), may be vital to the effects of chronic 	 
inflammation at the OLP tissue microenvironment. Our data-mining 	 
results supports such a possible role for IL-2 in this proposed 	 
molecular loop (Giacomelli et al.,-paper II in this series). This 	 
molecular loop involving IL-2 may further explain increase T cell 	 
proliferation with IL-2 [] and subsequent continuous T cell signaling 	 
and activation.

Conclusion
In conclusion, our data to date suggest that histopathological
assessment of OLP, CIM, EpD and SCCA should be complemented
and enhanced with molecular approaches. Taken together, our findings
lend support to the proposition that OLP lesions may be pre-malignant,
and that molecular assessments that involve an auto-proteomic
approach [] may provide novel and critical information on these
disease entities and their natural history. This may help clarifying the
complexities in diagnosis, further clarify the potential progression
from OLP to SCCA, and, in the future, suggest a patient-driven,
personalized, and molecular-based therapy. Future work based on the
results shown here will elucidate the putative role of Lck inhibitors,
such as A770041[], for the management of OLP.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Oluwadara et al, Bioinformation 4(6): 249-257 (2009)

The expression levels of LCK in patients with Oral lichen planus (OLP), chronic interface mucosities (CIM), epithelial dysplasia
(EpD), and Squamous cell carcinoma (SCCA) of the oral tissues are shown. The percentages of patient is plotted with the expression levels
designated by signal score (Scale of 0-100, negative = ≤10, Low =11-24, high = ≥25). LCK is markedly expressed in OLP samples but low or
lack of LCK expression is found in SCCA samples. LCK may be high or low in CIM cases as well as EpD, though CIM cases express more LCK
than EpD.

The expression levels of survivin in patients with OLP, CIM, EpD, and SCCA of the oral tissues are shown. The percentage of patients
is plotted with the expression levels designated by signal score (same scale as ). Survivin expression is considerable high in OLP, CIM,
EpD and SCCA. 100% SCCA and EpD cases exhibited high survivin expression; 70% and 50% of OLP and CIM samples, respectively, showed
high expression of survivin.

The expression levels of PI-3K in patients with OLP, CIM, EpD, and SCCA of the oral tissues are shown. The percentage of patient is
plotted with the expression levels designated by signal score (same scale as ). PI-3K expression is high in 63% of SCCA, all cases of
epithelial dysplasia and about 35.7% of OLP cases.

LCK tissue micro-array immunohistochemistry staining for OLP (panels A, B, C, D and I) and SCCA (panels E, F, G, H and J). All
OLP cases show high expression of LCK (≥25). Panel A represents mild high LCK expression of the right lateral tongue, B moderate-high
expression of LCK in left buccal mucosa, C marked high expression of LCK in right buccal mucosa. Panel D refers to OLP of the right buccal
mucosa and is used as negative control (not stained with LCK primary antibody). Panel E shows mild or no expression of LCK in SCCA
(moderately differentiated) of the left buccal mucosa F indicates moderate LCK expression in SCCA (poorly differentiated) of right
lateral/ventral tongue while panel G is a case of marked LCK expression in SCCA (moderately differentiated) of right retromolar pad. Panel H is
SCCA of right retromolar pad used as negative control. Panel I is 40x magnification of the box area in panel C; panel J is 40x magnification of
the box area in panel G.

Survivin tissue micro-array immuno-histochemistry staining for OLP (panels A, B, C, D and I) and SCCA (panels E, F, G, H and J).
High expressions of survivin further categorized as mild, moderate and marked in OLP and SCCA. Panel A shows mild expression in right buccal
mucosa OLP; B indicates moderate survivin expression in OLP of left buccal mucosa. Panel C suggests marked expression in OLP of gingival
tissues. Panel D shows a negative control. Red arrow in C and D indicates site of subepithelial tissue attachment to the surface epithelium. Panel
E represents mild survivin expression in SCCA of right ventral lateral tongue; F shows moderate expression in SCCA of left buccal mucosa,
while G indicated marked survivin expression in SCCA of left lateral tongue. Panel H shows a negative control. Panel I is 40x magnification of
box area in C showing prominent nuclear and cytoplasmic survivin staining in OLP; panel J is 40x magnification of box area in G showing robust
cytoplasmic survivin expression.

PI-3K tissue micro-array immunohistochemistry staining for OLP (panels A, B, C, D and I) and SCCA (panels E, F, G, H and J).
Expression signal scores were used to identify negative, low and high expression (same scale as ). Panel A indicates negative expression of
PI-3K in OLP of posterior buccal mucosa; B shows low expression of PI-3K in OLP of the left vestibule, C represents OLP of the left buccal
mucosa. Panel D shows a negative control. Panel E indicates negative PI-3K expression for SCCA of the floor of the mouth, F shows low
expression in SCCA of right posterolateral tongue, while G is high expression in SCCA of right retromolar pad. Panel H presents a negative
control. Panel I is 40x magnification of box area in C with red line showing the transition from the epithelium to the subepithelial area in OLP,
while panel J is 40x magnification of the box area in G.

