Background
Cannabis Sativa is one of the most used drugs in the word.
However currents researches are focused on its use in
medicinal application as a medication in order to relieve
specific symptoms such as : AIDS, cancer, multiple sclerosis,
and neurological disorders []. The THCA synthase belongs to
the oxygen-dependent FAD-linked oxidoreductase family
containing 1 FAD-binding domain and has homology to several
oxido-reductases including the berberine bridge enzyme (BBE).

This enzyme catalyzes the oxidative cyclization of the
monoterpene moiety in cannabigerolic acid (CBGA) to produce
Δ9- tetrahydrocannabinol (THCA) which is the major
cannabioid in drug-type cannabis plants []. The THCA
synthase is an aggregation of two domains (domains I and II)
consisting of eight α -helices in addition of eight β -strands and
two subdomains (Ia and Ib). Subdomain Ia comprises three α -
helices surrounding three β –strands and subdomain Ib
comprising five antiparallel β –strands surrounding five α –
helices. Whereas domain II contains eight antiparallel β -
strands surrounded by six α –helices () 
[]. A recent
study [] based on the mutational analysis of THCA synthase
enzyme showed the implication of several residues in the
binding to the ligand (CBGA/FAD), as well as residues which
are essential for the enzyme activity: His114, His 292, Tyr 484.
The His 292 is hypothesized to be involved in essential
substrate binding of CBGA. The Tyr 417 might also contribute
to the substrate binding but not to be essential for catalysis, the
residues His114 and Cys 176 are involved to bind covalently
the FAD [].

Most studies performed until to date were focused only on the
determination of the kinetic parameters in recombinant THCA
synthase [] or the determination of kinetic parameters in wildtype
and mutant THCA synthase enzymes []. However no
studies have been carried out to correlate between the affinity
of the THCA synthase to CBGA or FAD and the production
level of the THCA. Therefore, it is interesting to use the
computational approach to study the affinity of the THCA
synthase to the substrate. The computation of the THCA
synthase affinity to their substrates CBGA and /FAD will allow
us to determine how strongly the CBGA and FAD binds to the
active site pocket and correlate the enzyme biological response
to THCA production levels. In ‘fiber type’ cannabis, the content
of THCA dose not exceed 0.2 % while in the ‘drug type’ the
content on THCA is more than 2. 1 % and could exceed 4.1%.
Therefore, molecular docking calculations could be interesting
to explore enzyme affinity to CBGA/FAD and could be
extended to search the binding conformation of the substrate in
the active site pocket. These calculations could give an
explanation of the behaviour of the others residues in the
binding site in both ‘drug type’ and ‘fiber type’. To elucidate the
THCA synthase interaction energy to CBGA and their
structural basis for improving the affinity, a computational
approach was used. In our study, we used molecular modeling
techniques and Docking calculations of the CBGA using
DockingServer []. The objectives were: (1) Modeling of THCA
synthase proteins from the sequences of ‘drug type’ and ‘fiber
type’ THCA synthase proteins (2) Structure refinement and
evaluation of the modeled proteins in order to identify their
quality (3) Docking of CBGA with the modeled proteins to
examine the binding energy in the tow types (drug/fiber) (3)
Propose an experiment design to explore the binding energy in
the tow types drug-fiber to correlate between the enzyme
affinity and THCA level production ().

Methodology
3D structure prediction:
The three dimensional homology models of the targets 
() 
were constructed using the X-ray structures of the template
(PDB code 3VTE) assuming alignment between targets and
template, all steps of homology modeling and refinement were
accomplished by the program MODELLER9 []. MODELLER
program generated several preliminary models which were
ranked based on their DOPE scores. Some models with the
lowest DOPE score were selected and the stereochemical
properties of each model were assessed by PROCHECK 
[],
and Errat []. The secondary structure of the modeled targets
were visualized using discovery studio V3.1 [] 
().

Structure refinement and models evaluation:
The structural refinement of the THCA synthase models was
checked for stability and energy minimization to avoid
overlapping atoms using Gromacs software []. The refined
structure was further evaluated to predict the overall quality of
the minimized geometries by the software program
PROCHECK [] and web server ProSA 
[]. The graphical
displays were generated with the Discovery Studio Visualizer
V3.1 [].

Structure superimposition:
Multiple sequence alignment was carried out to superimpose
the obtained models and to identify the conserved regions by
aligning the target with the templates structures. we
superimposed and aligned homologous structures using
discovery studio V3.1 [].

CBGA-THCA synthase docking:
Crystallographic structures of the protein THCA synthase were
retrieved from the RCSB database with PDB ID:
3VTE.Computational analysis was done to compute ligand
protein binding affinity of the compound. Docking calculations
were carried out using DockingServer []. The MMFF94 force
field [] was used for energy minimization of ligand molecule
(CBGA) using DockingServer. Gasteiger partial charges were
added to the ligand atoms. Non- polar hydrogen atoms were
merged, and rotatable bonds were defined.

Docking calculations were carried out on each modeled protein
 (see supplementary material). Essential hydrogen
atoms, Kollman united atom type charges, and solvation
parameters were added with the aid of AutoDock tools.
Affinity (grid) maps of 20×20×20 Å grid points and 0.375 Å
spacing were generated using the Autogrid program [].
AutoDock parameter set and distance- dependent dielectric
functions were used in the calculation of the van der Waals and
the electrostatic terms, respectively. Docking simulations were
performed using the Lamarckian genetic algorithm (LGA) and
the Solis &amp; Wets local search method []. Initial position,
orientation, and torsions of the ligand molecules were set
randomly. Each docking experiment was derived from 10
different runs that were set to terminate after a maximum of
250000 energy evaluations. The population size was set to 150.
During the search, a translational step of 0.2 Å, and quaternion
and torsion steps of 5 were applied [].

Results
Assessment of resultants structures:
Results of the evaluation of different generated models attested
for their high quality and the overall model quality of the
targets proteins is shown in (). 
 is showing one
of the generated models. Indeed, the overall calculated quality
factor of ERRAT in all modeled proteins were ranging from
73 .624 to 80.998, thus indicating the errors values are negligible
for individual residues (). The z-score for the modeled
THCA synthase proteins indicates overall model quality score
 (see supplementary material). The z-score of the
studied targets is ranging from-9. 72 to −9. 47, while the z-score
for template was -9.26 which fill in the range of scores typically
found for experimentally determined (X-ray, NMR) structure
for native protein. Therefore, the 3D structure of modeled
THCA synthase proteins is reliable. Structural identity of the
obtained models based on different RMSDs for C-alpha atoms,
main-chain atoms, side-chain atoms and all atoms between the
modeled structures and the corresponding template are
indicated in  (see supplementary material). The RMSD
values were ranged between 0.290Å to 1.252 Å which reflects
the accuracy of the structures generated by homology
modeling. Ramachandran plot of all obtained models indicated
that 90.8%(GenBank : AB212839 ) to 92.5% (GenBank : JQ437482
and AB212830) of the residues have psi/phi angles falling in
the most favoured regions () and 6.5% (GenBank :
AB212830 ) to 8.8% (GenBank : AB212829 and AB212839) of
the residues were in the additional allowed region. On the
other hand 0.0% (GenBank: AB212833; AB212839) to 1.0%
(GenBank: AB212830) of the residues were in generously
allowed region and 0.0% (GenBank: JQ437482; AB212829;
AB212837; AB212830) to 0.4% of the residues were in the
disallowed region (GenBank: AB212839) (). 

shows the 2D sequences alignment of the superimposed
proteins models with template.

Molecular Docking:
The molecular docking analysis indicated that for ‘drug types’
proteins the energy of binding fluctuate between -7.16 kcal/mol
to -6.76 kcal/mol. On the other hand, the ‘fiber types’ protein
had a energy of binding ranging from -4.29 kcal/mol to -5.95
kcal/mol  (see supplementary material) demonstrating
that the affinity to CBGA for the ‘fiber types’ is lower than the
‘drug types’. The differences observed in the binding energy
computed maybe corroborated with the existing data
concerning the level of the THCA production in ‘fiber types’
and ‘drug types’ cannabis. In ‘fiber type’ cannabis, the content
of THCA does not exceed 0.2 % while in the ‘drug type’ the
content on THCA is more than 2. 1 % and could exceed 4.1%.
Probably if the affinity of the protein to the CBGA is high, the
level of the THCA will increase and vice versa, hence the
necessity to confirm this finding using the proposed
experiment (). The predicted binding pocket of (CBGA)
cannabigerolic acid in all target proteins were successfully
recognized using computational approach.  shows one
of the target proteins (GenBank code: JQ437482). Residues
involved in the binding of the CBGA in the THCA synthase
protein are indicated and the residues involved in the binding
of FAD (His114; Cys176) were successfully determined. The
obtained results allowed us to propose an experiment design to
explore the binding energies of the THCA synthase regarding
the precursor and/or the cofactor and for the correlation
between the THCA synthase-FAD/CBGA affinity and the level
of the THCA production ().

Discussion
In this paper, we have explored for the first time the affinity of
six modeled THCA synthase proteins (three ‘drug type’ and
three ‘fiber type’) to CBGA, the precursor of the major
cannabinoid in Cannabis Sativa .L plant which is THCA. The
binding site of CBGA was successfully recognized and the
calculated binding parameters confirm that the level of the
THC produced in ‘fiber type’ and ‘drug type’ maybe explained
by the affinity of the protein regarding the CBGA. The only
data available to date, is the in vitro measurement of the
enzymatic activity in wild-type and mutant THCA Synthase
[]. Separating inherited variation in cannabinoid content from
environmental variation [,
]. The 3D structures generated
using (PDB code 3VTE as template) from sequence data of
different Cannabis Sativa varieties representing a variable
THCA level will help to understanding better the functional
conformations of the THCA synthase binding pocket regarding
their ligand and maybe will improve:(i) The behaviour of the
other residues regarding the ligand [] (ii) Differences in the
active pockets geometry that will affect the binding energy of
the ligand and consequently the level of the THCA produced,
(iii) the correlation between THCA level and the binding
energy computed, (iv) understanding the differences between
THCA synthase potency in Cannabis Sativa drug type varieties.

The alignment of the studied THCA synthase amino acids
sequences as well as other sequences retrieved from GenBank
(data not shown) shows a conservation of the key residues
implicated in the catalytic process, the substrate binding and
the enzyme selectivity. This result fails to explain the difference
in level of THCA between the Cannabis Sativa species. The
results from homology modeling and docking study of the
THCA synthase proteins with CBGA demonstrate that the
active site pocket was successfully recognized using
computational approach. The key residues involved in the
catalytic process: (Tyr175, Tyr417), as well as the residue
(His114) involved in the binding of the precursor FAD were
successfully recognized (). In order to correlate the
THCA synthase activity and the level of the THCA synthase
produced in different Cannabis Sativa varieties, we propose an
experimental design starting from Cannabis Sativa plant
material for the investigation of the enzyme affinity using a
combined study which involve the chemical analysis [i.e., the
level of THCA], the genetic analysis [the THCA synthase
sequencing], the homology modeling and the dynamic study
[interaction energies of the protein-ligand complexes] 
(). The data generated from the computational study of the
protein-ligand interaction and the chemical analysis such as
High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) will be of
great interest to understand better the functional conformations
of the substrate-binding pocket and to correlate affinity and
activity of the enzyme with THCA level produced. The ultimate
goal of the THCA synthase prediction is to demonstrate that
the binding pocket of THCA synthase can reach an accuracy
comparable to the results achieved experimentally 
[]. It also
allowed performing mutational studies on the generated
models and dynamic simulation using computational
approaches.

Conclusion
In this study THCA synthase of ‘fiber type’ and ‘drug type’
Cannabis Sativa were modeled based on the existing structure
of THCA synthase X ray diffraction in order to perform a
molecular docking of the CBGA on the tow types and to
explore the binding energy between and within cannabis type.
We demonstrate that the computational approach of protein
ligand interaction using molecular docking calculations can
reach almost the same results obtained experimentally. In this
research we have proposed an experimental methodology for
investigating the correlation between the protein affinity of
THCA synthase with FAD/CBGA using accurate docking
techniques and the THCA level production in the absence of
any information regarding the binding energy of the THCA
synthase to their substrate. These parameters can be a key to
know more about the crucial interactions affinity in the binding
pocket of the THCA synthase enzyme and THCA content in
Cannabis Sativa plant material.

Conflict of Interest
The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thankfully acknowledge DR .Abderrahman El Kharrim, TIC
Division /National Computing Grid (MaGrid) at the National
Center for Scientific and Technical Research (CNRST), for his
technical assistance. We acknowledge support from Volubilis
(French-Moroccan Grant) to AI. This work was also supported
by a grant from the NIH for H3Africa BioNet to AI.

Citation:Alaoui et al, Bioinformation 10 (1): 033-038 (2014)

A schematic model of the THCA synthase (GenBank:
JQ437482); α-helices are colored in cyan, β -strands are in red,
and loops are in green.The two domains (I and II) and the two
subdomains (Ia and Ib) are indicated.

Proposed experimental design for the correlation between THCA synthase binding energy (CBGA and/FAD) and THCA
level determination. BE (Binding energy); BP (Binding pocket).

Alignment and secondary structure of the six modeld targets with the template. The deep blue color shows conserved
residues in all sequences (α-helix are indicated in red and β-sheets in blue arrows).

Predicted binding pocket of (CBGA) cannabigerolic
acid in the target (GenBank code: JQ437482) Residues involved
in the binding of the CBGA in the THCA synthase protein are
indicated with a red circle. Residues involved in the binding of
FAD (His114; Cys176) are indicated with a green circle.

