Background:
It is often of interest for the researcher to ascertain rapidly
the location of genes on various human chromosomes. We
present a table of genes involved in various neuropsychiatric
diseases [,
] listed by chromosome number and banding.
There is no selection of specific disease category. It should be
noted that many diseases (e.g. deafness, Parkinson's disease,
epilepsy, etc.) appear at many bands among the
chromosomes. Similarly, many bands harbor more than one
disease.

Methodology:
Public databases of genes related to chromosome locations
were examined [–] Results were tabulated by human
chromosome and banding as given in the excel dataset
(Please see available URL to download). The gene functions
are described in detail in the databases. The information
relating to gene locations for neuropsychiatric diseases is
readily accessible on these web-sites. The numbers of sites
and diseases on each chromosome arm are shown in 
(supplementary material).

Future developments
The purpose here is to present the chromosome and band
locations for genes involved in neuropsychiatric diseases.
Several bands are associated with more than one
neuropsychiatric disease and will be investigated in future
studies. This list does not include genes that currently
discovered by recent GWAS and other molecular
methodologies. Future reviews of the literature and web
sites will examine in detail the large number of newly
identified genes with their SNP locations and pathways that
are involved in these and additional neuropsychiatric
diseases.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We acknowledge the Editors for advice. We acknowledge
public website databases at the following institutions: NCBI
(Bethesda, MD), OMIM (Bethesda, MD), GeneCards
(Rehovoth, Israel), and UCSC (Santa Cruz, CA). We thank
Dr. P. Wang at NCBI (Bethesda, MD) for advice in this study.
Support for this work included: NIH Grants (PS) DA 14533,
DA 12580, GM 056529 and (ES, DC, AJL, PS) 1U01MH083500
and NS 38841. PS also thanks the Division of Infectious
Diseases and International Medicine (USF, Tampa, FL) for
support. The authors report no conflicts of interest.

Citation:Shapshak et al, Bioinformation 7(7): 366-368 (2011)

