Background
Immunogenicity manifests itself through both humoral (mediated through
the binding of whole protein antigens by antibodies) and cellular
immunology (mediated by the recognition of proteolytically cleaved
peptides by T-cells). Mechanistically, protein immunogenicity arises from
many synergistic factors. These include host-side properties and pathogenside
properties. Properties mediated by the host include the density of Tcell
or B-cell epitopes and how easily it is degraded; while pathogen
mediated properties include protein expression levels and sub-cellular
location. Thus a viable candidate vaccine should be highly expressed,
available for immune surveillance, and possess epitopes that the host
recognises. Other properties, mostly intrinsic to the protein, include
molecular size, aggregation status, and possession of so-called dangersignals,
typically chemical modifications, post-translational in origin,
which are recognised by pattern recognition receptors of the innate
immune system. An alternative hypothesis replaces such complexity with
the simple, straightforward idea of phylogenetic distance as the chief
determinant of immunogenicity. This notion finds its most eloquent
advocate in the work of Kundac et al. []. In previous work [], we have
examined a restated variant of this concept: that non-redundancy at the
sequence level is crucial to the accurate prediction of antigen-based
candidate vaccine antigens. When examining bacterial antigens, both
antigens and non-antigens lacked equally similarity to host proteomes.
Moreover, both were as dissimilar as the background distribution offered
by a complete bacterial genome. We were unable to find an appropriate
and useable threshold capable of differentiate antigens from non-antigens
on the basis of similarity to the host's proteome. In the present work, we
extend our analysis of “immunogenicity as phylogenetic distance” to
embrace the full scope of life, pushing to the limits of Woese's three
domains of life and beyond. As there is little or no evidence for archaea
acting as pathogens, though some are implicated as commensals with
pathogen-mediated disease, we look at two other kinds of widely
phyletically distributed pathogenic organism, namely viruses and
fungi.Viruses are structurally-simple, quasi-organisms that straddle the
boundary between complex chemical entities and true living organisms.
Most would agree that bacteria are alive yet a piece of DNA is not. Viruses
give rise to diverse infections: for example, over 300 distinct viruses cause
upper respiratory infections bracketed as the common cold, while others
are responsible for diseases as different as chickenpox, influenza, HCV,
and AIDS. Fungi are complex, eukaryotic organisms distinct from plants
and animals. Some fungal species are very pathogenic, and can infect all
exposed individuals, i.e. Coccidioides immitis and Histoplasma
capsulatum. Others are opportunities pathogens, such as Candida
Albicans, which give rise to disease only in immunocompromised hosts.
Importantly both have very different mechanisms of pathogenesis when
compared to each other and also to bacteria. Thus both are distinct, and
distinct also from prokaryotic bacteria. Compared to viral infections,
fungal diseases are less harmful but more tenacious. Fungi such as
Candida typically colonise external and mucosal surfaces, such as the
intestines. Overtly harmless, such fungi can induce local infections of the
skin, nails, mouth, vagina, or sinuses: they are seldom serious, except in
the immune deficient. Occasionally, infections occur when habitual
suppression of fungi is disturbed. For example, bacteria found in the
vagina or alimentary canal usually limits fungal growth. Antibiotics can
kill such helpful bacteria, allowing fungi to grow unchecked, and thus
cause symptoms, which are typically mild. Certain fungal infections, such
as blastomycosis, may be more serious.By using the sequence similarity
search tool BLAST [] we expand our sequence similarity discrimination
of non-antigen from antigen, again also seeking a value that can separate
these classes. More specifically, we analysed the similarity between sets of
known fungal and viral antigens and the Human Genome and Mouse
Genome, compared with a control group of non-antigens, and likewise
made an assessment versus the similarity evinced by a background
distributions, namely fungal genomes and large sets of viral sequences.
Our primary outcome establishes a systematic benchmark for the success
of “   immunogenicity as phylogenetic distance” as a concept useful in
antigen hunting.

Methodology
Datasets of known antigens obtained previously from the literature were
analysed [,
,
,
].
 Non-antigens were selected from SWISSPROT
so that they mirrored the antigen sets, being selected at random from the
same set of species[,
].
 Fungal and Viral antigens used here are listed
below in . Additionally, genomes corresponding to Human,
Mouse, and Fungus were downloaded from FTP sites at National Center
for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) [    http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/]  
European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) [    http://www.ebi.ac.uk/]   and
Ensembl [   http://www.ensembl.org/ ]   Since viral genomes rarely exceed a
few hundred sequences, and are thus of a comparable size to our datasets,
we obtained a larger compilation of viral sequences from the Viral
Bioinformatics Resource Center (http://www.biovirus.org/). All the peptide
sequences obtained were in FASTA format.

As before [], antigen datasets, non-antigen datasets and various
pathogenic genome sequences to the Human and Mouse Genome were
analysed using a local, standalone version of BLAST [] which afforded
full management of E-value cut-offs. E-value thresholds were raised from
10 to 6000 to identify best matches even when these lacked statistical
significance. We also analysed (log10E-value)+1 values obtained from
BLAST. By using the statistical package Minitab, Release 14.1, we
compared antigen and non-antigen sets, as random samples of two larger,
independent populations, utilising a Mann‐Whitney test.

Discussion
Following a protocol established earlier for analysing the similarity of
bacterial and eukaryotic proteomes [] sets of antigens and non-antigens
from both fungi and viruses were compared to the Human and Mouse
proteomes, producing lists of highest scoring similarities. Proteomes and
pseudo-proteomes of fungal and viral origin were also compared to the
human and mouse proteomes. Antigen sets derived from the literature
contained 100 viral antigens and 33 fungal antigens respectively; similarly
sized sets of non-antigens for the two types of pathogen were also
obtained, selected at random from the same sets of species.

Results obtained for viruses were even more extreme than those observed
previously for bacteria []. For the case of viruses, apart from rare
anomalies such as mimivirus, few available genomes contain more than a
few hundred sequences, which is not sufficient to give a reference
background to the analysis. Instead, we used a composite viral pseudogenome
comprising sequences from many viral species. Score histograms
for antigen and non-antigen sets, and the viral pseudo-proteome, versus the
human proteome are shown in . Overall, viral antigens show no
overt similarity to the human or mouse genomes. All the protein sequences
were found to be in the range of 0 to 10 when compared the human
proteome, while comparison to the mouse proteome yielded sequences
with values between -10 to 10, indicating high dissimilarity of viral
antigens compared to host proteomes. Values for non-antigenic protein
sequences were found to lie between -40 to 10 when compared to human
and mouse proteomes. Only 2 non-antigenic protein sequences were less
than -40. Again, any signal here is too weak to stand as a useful threshold.

Results obtained for fungal antigens and non-antigens were very similar to
those obtained for Bacteria and viruses, despite the smaller sample size.
This reduced prevalence reflects the small number of known fungal
antigens available at the time of the study. A similar analysis for four
fungal proteomes (Aspergillus fumigatus, Candida albicans,
Encephalitozoon cuniculi and Saccharomyces cerevisiae) versus Human
and Mouse proteomes was also undertaken. All sets analysed were
similarly distant to both mouse and human genomes. Score histograms for
antigen and non-antigen sets, and the Aspergillus fumigatus proteome
versus the human proteome are shown in . It is clear that the three
distributions strongly overlap, and that no clear cut-off point presents
itself. However, we did observe five fungal antigens with high similarity to
human and mouse proteomes. These proteins were characteristically
highly-conserved over evolution, such as enzymes or heat shock proteins.
Looked at overall, the observed ranges of score (–70 and 10 for antigens
versus -80 to 10 for non-antigens) could not be easily differentiated thus
stymieing attempts to use this as a tool for predicting whole-protein
antigens.

We also used statistical significance testing to quantify the commonality
between observed score distributions. Since our distributions were not
normally distributed, we used the straightforward, non-parametric Mann‐
Whitney Test for this assessment, since it is more robust for skewed
distributions such as these, rather than using, say, the 2 sample
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test to compare distributions. The Mann-Whitney
test was undertaken at the 95% confidence interval. The p-value for
comparison of the viral distributions was 0.322. The corresponding p-value
for fungal sequences was 0.381. As the p-value was greater than 0.05 in
both cases, the null hypothesis was accepted for both viruses and fungi.
Note that the p-value for the bacterial comparison []was 0.239. Thus
there was no statistically significant difference in any of the three cases.

 We cannot use these values to determine a reliable threshold able to
distinguish antigen from non-antigen when compared to against the
background distribution for whole genomes: what difference there is
statistically insignificant. BLAST is seen by many as very much a blunt
instrument, particularly for the fine-detail analysis of large and/or complex
protein families. Even if a wholly correct and validated match can be
discovered, BLAST can struggle to distinguish orthologues from
paralogues. Future work could thus include more sophisticated approaches
to quantifying sequence similarity beyond that offered by BLAST.

Conclusion
Despite the negative outcomes observed in this study, which though
disappointing are not altogether unexpected, given prior results [] there is
still an urgent and pressing need for the development of robust techniques
for the identification of whole protein antigens. The problem is not that
bacterial or viral or fungal proteins are not clearly different from the
human genome: indeed they are. No, for both fungi and viruses, the
problem is that antigens and non-antigens are different to the same degree;
as with bacteria [] we cannot calibrate a useful threshold able to separate
them.

Lack of transparent variation in measured similarity and the inability to
locate thresholds that split positives from negatives is by no means unique
to the present problem. An illuminating example is chemical similarity
searching []. Bit-string representations of molecular structure have long
been applied to small molecule similarity searching. Despite the simplicity
of the approach, such bit-string patterns have been unexpectedly
successful. Yet, we currently have no generally applicable similaritymetrics and structural similarity thresholds able to indicate reliably
equivalent biological activity.

It is an old maxim in management consultancy that 20% of the total effort
generates 80% of the total result; how true this assertion is, in quantitative
terms, we leave to your discretion, yet the sentiment it embodies carries
with it much sagacity. Our current results show the inadequacy of this
approach, despite the gallimaufry of countervailing caveats of which one
could conceive to counter this conjecture. The clear lack of a signal
apparent here is not likely to be modulated much by fiddling round with
parameters or even using different but similar approaches.

Citation:Ramakrishnan et al Bioinformation 5(1):35-38 (2010)

Protein sequences compiled and annotated in-house as fungal and viral antigens

Viral Sequence Comparison. A sequence similarity comparison with the E-value as 6000 and BLOSUM 62 matrix, between the Antigen,
Non-antigen and viral genome sequences. Two separate scales were used as the number of matches to the Human Genome varied from the antigen and
non-antigen datasets to the genome. The blue line with the star marker corresponding to the genome is plotted on the scale to the right hand axis (Y axis).

Fungal Sequence Comparison. A sequence similarity comparison with the E-value as 6000 and BLOSUM 62 matrix, between the Antigen,
Non-antigen and Aspergillus fumigatus genome sequences. Two separate scales were used as the number of matches to the Human Genome varied from
the antigen and non-antigen datasets to the genome. The blue line with the star marker represents the genome is plotted on the scale to the right hand axis
(Y axis).

