Background
A large group of “Carbohydrate Active enzymes” that hydrolyse
polysaccharides have been divided into the glycoside hydrolase (GH) families
of the CAZy database [] 
based on their amino acid sequence similarity.
Members of the GH13, GH70 and GH77 families, being part of the same clan
(GH-H), are believed to share a common ancestor and catalytic mechanism 
[–]. 
Further, these enzymes also share the A-, B- and C-domains. In addition to
α-(1→4)- and α-(1→6)-linkages, even α-(1→1)-, α-(1→2)- and α-(1→3)-
linkages are acted upon by members of the GH-H clan 
[]. The enzymes of
GH13 family have a wide range of substrate specificities and catalytic
activities. This “polyspecificity” of the GH13 family has led to further division
of this family into 35 subfamilies []. Most of the subfamilies of GH13 are
apparently monospecific, however some also belong to polyspecific
subfamilies. Amylolytic enzymes with different substrate specificities have
poor overall sequence similarity in the domain A except for four regions of the
conserved residues [–
]. An evolutionary tree constructed on the basis of
these four conserved regions showed that α-(1→4)-hydrolases, α-(1→6)-
hydrolases and transferases form distinct groups [].

There are also regions wherein the sequence similarity is rather high; although
strict conservation of the residues is not observed in these regions. These are
region V (173LPDLD177), region VI (56GFTAIWITP64), and region VII
(323GIPIIYAGQ331; through out the introduction residue number is given
according to 6TAA (TAKA α-amylase), unless stated otherwise) 
[]. Of these,
region V is at the C-terminus of the domain B of these enzymes. A sequence
analysis of 79 experimentally characterized proteins has suggested that the
signature sequence QpDln and MPKln (single letter amino acid symbols are
used; upper case letters indicate total conservation whereas lower case letters
indicate partial conservation) define the oligo-1,6-glucosidase and
neopullulanase subfamilies, respectively, in the region V. The signature
sequence MPDLN characterized the intermediary group which includes
enzymes with mixed specificities of α-amylase, cyclomaltodextrinase and
neopullulanase []. 
Currently, the catalytic triad residues Asp206, Glu230 and
Asp297 seem to be the only residues that are absolutely invariant among all the
GH-H clan members []. In addition, a few residues such as Gly56 and Pro64
[] (flanking the second β-strand), Tyr82 
[], His122 and His296 
[] are
present in most of the members. However, Arg204 has been found to be
conserved only in the amylolytic members [,
].

A larger number of residues are conserved within subgroups of enzymes such
as neopullulanases and oligo- α-1,6-glucosidases 
[]. For example, Lys or Arg
are conserved at position 209 in 91“ of the α-(1→4)-linkage specific members
of the GH13 and GH77 family []. Similarly, Gly207 and His210 are present in
many α-(1→4)-linkage-specific enzymes. In some of the enzymes, Gly207 is
replaced by an aromatic residue and mimics the interactions of His210.
However, in case of archaeal and plant α-amylases His210 is replaced with a
Gly. Trp and Tyr/Phe are found at positions 231 and 232 in CGTases and one
maltogenic amylase but not in other GH13 family members 
[]. Enzymes
which act on α-(1→6)-linkages (e.g., pullulanases, isoamylases, glycogen
debranching enzymes) have a conserved aromatic residue in the loop that links
the second β-strand and second helix. On the other hand, the enzymes that act
on α-(1→4)-linkages, have a conserved aliphatic residue in this position
(Ala120) suggesting that such regions provide the enzyme with a distinct
“activity” and/or “substrate” specificities. Certain fungal proteins of the GH13
family, some of which are involved in cell wall synthesis, share a few
conserved residues that are absent in α-amylases from other phyla (plant,
animals and bacteria) []. These residues are His (Thr41 in Taka-amylase),
Arg (Gly44), Cys (Thr66), Leu (Ala120), Tyr (Val231), Trp (Leu232), Cys
(Ile326) and Leu (Glu332). The sequence motifs that are responsible for the
reaction specificity of the enzymes of the GH13 family are not very well
understood. So, the identification of the sequence motif of α-amylase, CGTase,
branching enzymes and CDase subfamily of the GH13 family was performed.

All these motifs are in continuation with the conserved region III and are in
almost same position with respect to each other. These sequence motifs belong
to the region that has not been explored so far, and include residue number 225
to 264. This analysis identifies sequence motif that is responsible for reaction
specificity of the GH13 family. The newly discovered sequence motif along
with the previous analyses of the structures of these enzymes 
[,
] will not
only help in the understanding of structure-function relationship of these
enzymes but also in the identification of the GH13 family members.

Materials and Methodology
Databases and software
The experimentally characterized sequences of the GH13 family were taken
from the UniProt database (http://www.uniprot.org/) 
[]. This analysis was
carried out on sequences retrieved from UniProt database in November 2008
and hence, the results of this analysis correspond to the database status of that
period. Multiple sequence alignment was performed by using the locally
installed T coffee (version 6.92) []. Multiple aligned sequences were
visualized by using BioEdit []. The conserved part of the aligned sequences
was used as a seed to generate the hidden Markov model (HMM) profile by
using hmmbuild module of the HMMER (version 2.3.2) [] and hmmcalibrate
module used to calibrate E-value scores. The hmmsearch module was used to
search the Swiss-Prot database (4,00,771 sequences; version 56.4; 4 Nov.
2008) at E value cutoff of 0.1. Sequences having highest sequence similarity
with the profile were given a score and ‘Expect value’ (E) by HMMER
program. The E-value of a sequence with a score z indicates the number of
sequences that are expected to score z by chance, when searching a sequence
database with the given size. Sequence logos were created using WebLogo
(version 2.8.2) []. 
All parameters of different softwares had default values
unless specified.

Generation of dataset and analysis strategy
The analysis was performed on those members of the GH13 family that use the
α‐glucan as a substrate and produce disaccharides to polysaccharides as a final
product. 90% sequence identity cutoff option present on the UniProt database
(http://www.uniprot.org/) 
was used to retrieve the sequences and only reviewed
Swiss-Prot sequences for α‐amylase, branching enzyme and cyclodextrin
glycosyltransferase (CGTase) were selected. For CDase enzymes all the
reviewed Swiss-Prot entries were chosen, as the number of the sequences was
very low. Analysis was performed on the experimentally characterized
sequences rather than computationally annotated sequences (having larger size
of data set), because; despite of having high overall sequence similarity,
changes in key residues may confer different activity or no activity at all. All
the peptides and exceptionally large sequences were ignored to ensure the
proper alignment. This selection criteria lead to generation of the dataset
consisting of 59 α‐amylases, 12 CGTases, 166 branching enzymes, 3
maltogenic α‐amylases, 3 neopullulanases and 2 cyclomaltodextrinases
(CDase) (Supplementary Table 1 - available with author). The CDase,
neopullulanase and maltogenic α‐amylase enzymes are considered together in
CDase subfamily as these enzymes have similar enzymatic activities 
[].

The conserved region of α‐amylase, CGTase, branching enzyme and CDase
subfamily was obtained by multiple sequence alignment and was further used
for generation of sequence logos. The conserved region was selected by
visualization in BioEdit. While selecting the conserved region, the length and
region were kept same as far as possible. A sequence logo shows the relative
frequencies of the various residues at a given position. This is indicated by
proportionally varying the size of the symbol. The order of predominance of the
residues at a given position are indicated by showing the most frequently
occurring residue at the top of the heap and least frequently occurring residue at
the bottom of the heap. The height of the logo at a given position is
proportional to the degree of conservation at that position.

Sensitivity and specificity
Sensitivity is a parameter that reflects the ability of a profile to detect true
positive sequences, while specificity reflects their ability to reject false positive
sequences.
Sensitivity = TP/(TP+FN), where TP is true positive, FN is false negative.
Specificity = TP/(TP+FP), where FP is false positive.

Results and Discussion
The conserved region of α‐amylase, CGTase, branching enzyme and CDase are
present in equivalent position in the multiple sequence alignment
(Supplementary Figure 1 - available with author) and also includes conserved
region III. Some of the residues of these motifs constitute the −1 to +3
catalytic subsites in 3D structure of the enzymes (that is present within the
4.5Å from the ligand, data not shown).

α‐amylase
Searching by the HMM profile of α-amylase sequence motif against Swiss-Prot
database, the α-amylase enzymes with sensitivity of 95% and specificity of
99% were identified (). The four false positive hits included two
CGTases and two uncharacterized glycosyl hydrolases. The E-values of
CGTases are 0.0023 and 0.014; while that of uncharacterized glycosyl
hydrolases are 4.5e-05 and 0.0085. The results suggest that the similar
sequences present in both the α-amylase motif and false positive CGTases may
be responsible for the α-(1→4) hydrolytic activity. However, the role of these
residues needs to be experimentally investigated. The low E-value for the
uncharacterized glycosyl hydrolases hit indicates these enzymes to be α-
amylase. The sequence logo of this motif suggests that, besides catalytic
glutamate, this motif also contains three highly conserved residues (Glu, Arg
and Tyr and Trp as aromatic residue) that are absent in other enzymes at
equivalent positions. It has been seen that mutations in the α-amylase of
Bacillus stearothermophillus (A271Y, A271F) 
[] and Bacillus licheniformis
(V271F) [] 
(; P04745 residue number, position 59 in sequence
logo) caused an increase in transglycosylation reaction as compared to the
wild-type enzymes. Interestingly, the mutant A271Y performed
transglycosylation reaction more efficiently than A271F. In case of human
salivary α-amylase the introduction of bulkier tryptophan residue in place of
Phe271 (; P04745 residue number, position 59 in sequence logo)
caused a disruption of the water chain involved in hydrolysis leading to
reduction in hydrolytic activity by 70 folds []. Thus mutational analyses
suggest that residues of this motif may contribute to the hydrolytic activity in
α-amylases ().

CGTase
CGTase specific motif was identified from 12 experimentally characterized
sequences. Searching by the HMM profile of CGTase sequence motif against
Swiss-Prot database, CGTase enzymes with sensitivity of 100% and specificity
of 89% were identified (). The lower specificity of this motif is due
to the two false positive hits (α‐amylase and maltogenic α‐amylase). Both of
these false positive hits have a very low E-value with 4.7e-28 for α‐amylase
and 3.2e-06 for maltogenic α‐amylase. However, the bit score for maltogenic
α‐amylase is low and aligns with the short stretch of the query motif. As
CGTase can perform both hydrolysis and transglycosylation reactions of α‐
(1→4) linked polysaccharide, it might have lead to picking of these false
positive hits. Maltogenic α‐amylase can efficiently catalyze both hydrolysis
and transglycosylation reactions, suggesting that the similar sequences in
CGTase motif and false positive maltogenic α‐amylase may be responsible for
hydrolytic and/or transglycosylation activity. The role of these residues needs
to be experimentally validated. The sequence logo of this motif shows the
presence of highly conserved sequence in different positions. Mutation,
W286V, in Bacillus stearothermophillus CGTase 
(; P26827 residue
number, position 8 in sequence logo) leads to a decrease in the cyclization and
amylase activity [] 
of CGTase. On the other hand, mutations in CGTase of
Bacillus stearothermophillus (F287I) 
[–
], Bacillus sp.1011 (F287L) 
[],
Bacillus circulans strain 251 (F287N) 
[] and Thermoanaerobacterium
thermosulfurigenes (F287/N/L/I/E) [,
] 
(; P26827 residue
number, position 9 in sequence logo) caused a decrease in cyclization and
disproportionation reactions along with increase in hydrolytic activity. These
mutational analyses suggest that these residues are central for cyclization
reaction []. The replacement of E292A 
(; P26827 residue number,
position 18 in sequence logo) in Bacillus circulans strain 251 implies that this
residue may be involved in disproportionation reaction 
[]. Thus, the above
mutational analyses suggest that this CGTase specific motif may be conferring
the reaction specificity in this enzyme.

Branching enzyme
The sequence logo of 166 multiple aligned sequences show the presence of a
highly conserved sequence. On searching the HMM profile of branching
enzyme sequence motif against Swiss-Prot database, the branching enzymes
with a very high sensitivity and specificity of 100% were identified 
(). There are many residues like Ala, which are highly conserved and might
be responsible for the reaction specificity of the branching enzymes. Unlike
other enzymes where an aromatic residue or a hydrophobic residue is present
next to the catalytic Glu, the branching enzymes have an acidic residue like Glu
or Asp present. Thus, the conserved residues of this motif may be responsible
for the reaction specificity of the enzyme.

CDase
CDase subfamily includes cylcomaltodextrinase (CDase), maltogenic α‐
amylase and neopullulanase. Despite of having different EC number, these
enzymes have similar enzymatic activities [], and hence are treated together
in the present analysis. Searching by the HMM profile of CDase subfamily
sequence motif against Swiss-Prot database, the enzymes of CDase subfamily
with sensitivity of 100% and specificity of 53% were identified 
().
The false positive hits include four amylopullulanase and one maltodextrin
glucosidase. The sequences similar in CDase motif and false positive
amylopullulanase may be responsible for the hydrolytic activity. I355W
(; Q08751residue number, position 8 in sequence logo) mutation in
the CDase of Bacillus stearothermophillus reduced the affinity of this enzyme
for α- (1→6) glycosidic linked substrate. It also lead to reaction specificity
similar to that of typical starch-saccharifying α-amylase 
[]. However, I355V
mutant have high affinity for α- (1→6) glycosidic linked substrate. A mutation,
W356A, of Thermoactinomyces vulgaris neopullulanase II suggests that W356
(; Q08751residue number, position 9 in sequence logo) is crucial for
the binding of different substrate and it does so by making stacking interaction
[]. 
However, to make this stacking interaction possible, Y374 residue is
required. The replacement of Y374A (; Q08751residue number,
position 36 in sequence logo) results in a decrease in Km value for the pullulan
as a substrate []. 
Y374 residue also helps in the hydrolysis of the different
substrates by providing catalytic water near the catalytic site. It has been
observed that on replacing Y374 with hydrophilic residue (D/S) in Bacillus
stearothermophillus neopullulanase, there was a decrease in transglycosylation.
Further, M372L and Y374F (; Q08751residue number, position 34
and 36 in sequence logo) mutants have been observed to have higher
transglycosylation activity than the wild-type enzyme 
[]. Thus, above
mutational analyses clearly indicates that the residues of CDase motif may
govern the reaction specificities in enzymes of this subfamily.

Conclusion
Sequence variation in the α‐amylase enzyme is higher as compared to rest of
the enzyme of GH13 family members. This may be due to the presence of α‐
amylase in diverse variety of organisms and it may have evolved earlier than
rest of the enzymes of the GH13 family. Thereby, during the evolution more
mutations may have occurred in α‐amylase to perform its activity in diverse
variety of biological systems or environment. As suggested by a number of
mutational studies the replacement of residues belonging to one motif with
sequence of another motif at equivalent positions may have changed the
reaction-specificities of the enzyme. Hence, these motifs can be used as a guide
for the inter-conversion of the GH13 family. Residues of these motifs
constitute the −1 to +3 catalytic subsites of the GH13 family members,
suggesting that these four subsites are mainly responsible for the reaction
specificities of the enzymes of the some of the GH13 family members.

The author is grateful to University Grants Commission (UGC), India, for
providing the senior research fellowship and Indian Institute of Technology
Bombay, India, for providing the computing facility.

Citation:Kumar. Bioinformation 6(2): 61-63 (2011)

Sequence logo of (a) α‐amylase, (b) CGTase, (c) branching enzyme
and (d) CDase. These sequence logos were generated from the conserved
region of multiple sequence alignment of experimentally characterized
enzymes (Supplementary Table 1 - available with author). The number above
the sequence logo is according to P04745, P26827, A0PUI6, Q08751 and
Q08751 Uniprot Id for α‐amylase, CGTase, branching enzyme, amylase
subfamily and CDase, respectively. The numbers along the abscissa indicate
the position of residues within the conserved region. The ordinates are in units
of bits and are indicative of the information content at each position (Schneider
&amp; Stephens 1990) [].

