Background
TCM are usually used in the form of an aqueous decoction. An
herb soup has many chemical components which are not
necessarily well understood. A single purified TCM compound
isolated from a TCM can be either too toxic or without
therapeutic efficacy []. The toxicities of a number of TCM
have been reported in many reports [–]. However, it is
impossible to experimentally measure toxicities for all TCM
due to the costs. Developing in silico approach to estimate the
cardiovascular toxicity of a TCM is an only practical solution
for pushing a TCM to international markets.

Principle for the cardiovascular toxicity prediction of TCM
TCMCardioTox is a web based program implemented in
ASP.net and C# on a Microsoft server. The client program of
TCMCardioTox is an Internet browser, such as, Internet
Explorer (IE), with the installation of Java Run Environment.
TCMCardioTox is actually a web-based knowledge-based
system, which collects all the chemical structures that have
been identified as human cardiovascular toxins. The main
principle for the cardiovascular toxicity prediction is that if one
of the chemical components in a TCM has the structural
similarity against one of the known cardiovascular toxins in
the database of TCMCardioTox system, the TCM will be
alerted for cardiovascular toxicity.

TCMCardioTox consists of three components: (1) TCM
cardiovascular adverse reactions reported in literatures; (2)
TCM and corresponding known chemical structures; (3)
chemical structure similarity algorithm. The chemical structure
data and cardiovascular toxicity data are stored in a Microsoft
Access Database. The chemical structure data are saved in the
form of SD format.

When TCMCardioTox receives a TCM query, it will translate
the TCM name into a set of chemical structures known as its
compositions. These structures will be sent to a software
module which checks them against a set of known
cardiovascular toxins by substructure matching. At least one of
the structures is matched; the TCM will be reported as
potential a cardiovascular toxin. Otherwise, these structures
will be sent to structural similarity algorithm to calculate
structure similarities between the TCM chemical structures
and the known cardiovascular toxic structures in the TCM
CardioTox knowledge base. If one of the structure similarities
is greater than a given threshold (such as, 80%), the TCM will
be reported for cardiovascular toxicity. If a TCM is reported
for cardiovascular toxicity, TCMCardioTox will reported the
reasoning details in a spreadsheet, such as, the referenced
structures, literatures, and experimental descriptions (if it is
available) etc. However, if the spreadsheet is not displayed, it
means that the TCM is not found being cardiovascular toxic.

Features Functions
The principle of predicting cardiovascular toxicity in
TCMCardioTox is to figure out if a TCM contains compounds
that are structurally similar to known cardiovascular toxic
molecules or contains key toxic substructures. The more
cardio-toxic molecules existing in a TCM, the TCM will be
more potentially cardiovascular toxic.

When users retrieve a TCM in TCMCardioTox, similarity
search will be done in a few seconds. The results depend on
the similarity threshold. Usually, the threshold can be set to
85%. Higher similarity threshold will result in fewer hits (the
number of cardiovascular toxicity hits means more risky). If a
user wants to see more possible hits, he/she can lower the
similarity threshold. The detailed principle is articulated in
().

User Interface
TCM CardioTox is a web based system, which can be accessed
through an internet browser at
http://rcdd.sysu.edu.cn:8080/home.aspx.
A query for TCMCardioTox can be a string for a TCM name, a
compound structure drawing, or a SDF file for a number of
chemical structures that are in a TCM herb as active
components.

For example, Gambirplant stem is a TCM herb. TCMCardioTox
predicts this herb that has cardiovascular toxicity for
arrhythmia, hypotension and even carcinogenicity. Animal
model experiments showed that this herb could cause
arrhythmia. Some TCM cardiovascular adverse effects 
[–]
testing results are listed in .

Discussion
Current version of TCMCardioTox predicts cardiovascular
toxicity based only structure similarity to toxins; this is a
ligand based prediction. The advantage of this approach is
simple and fast. The disadvantage is that it cannot explain the
mechanism of actions.

The correct predictions rely on the coverage of the knowledge
base in the system and the structure similarity algorithm.
TCMCardioTox allows an administrative user to expand the
knowledge base. But, the similarity algorithm is not
changeable at this time. Currently, the structure similarity
algorithm is based upon a simple structural fragment
comparison using Tanimoto schem. In the future, three
dimensional structure similarities can be implemented for
alternative solutions.

In order to reach more precise prediction, the target structure
based models are necessary. This requires the knowledge of
mechanism of actions. The structure-based models demands
for high performance computing, therefore, the new version of
TCMCardioTox will need parallel computing technology, such
as CUDA-based GPU technology.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work was funded in part of the major scientific and
technological special project by the Ministry of Science and
Technology of China (2009DFA31530, 2010ZX09102-305),
Guangdong Recruitment Program of Creative Research
Groups, the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central
Universities, the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(No.81001372, 81173470). The editors are appreciated for their
valuable comments and continuously encouragement.

Citation:Lu et al, Bioinformation 8(2): 110-113 (2012)

Flowchart for the principle of TCM cardiovascular
toxicity. First, a TCM is translated in to a set of composition
structures; then the similarity algorithm computes the
structure similarities between TCM structures and the
structures of cardiovascular toxic compounds; meanwhile, a
substructure match algorithm checks if the TCM structures
contain pre-defined cardiovescular toxic fragments (toxin
substructures); finally, the system reports the results based
upon the similarity threshold and the substructure matching.

