Background
Phytoremediation [] can be defined as “the efficient use of plants to
remove, detoxify or immobilize environmental contaminants in a
growth matrix (soil, water or sediments) through the natural biological,
chemical or physical activities and processes of the plants” . The plants
can be subsequently harvested, processed and disposed. Heavy metal
ions such as Cu2+, Zn2+, Mn2+, Fe2+, Ni2+ and Co2+ [] are essential
micronutrients for plant metabolism. These ions when present in
excess, along with non-essential metals such as Cd2+, Hg2+ and Pb2+,
can become extremely toxic. Thus mechanisms must exist to satisfy
the requirements of cellular metabolism but also to protect cells from
toxic effects. High levels of metals in the soil interfere with the uptake
of essential ions, biosynthesis of chlorophyll and nucleic acids and
lipid metabolism, thus profoundly affecting nutrition, respiration and
photosynthesis. Wide ranges of gene families are involved in
transition/heavy metal transport. These includes the heavy
metal ATPases (HMAs), the natural resistance associated
macrophase proteins (Nramps), the cation diffusion facilitator
(CDF) family, the ZIPs (ZRT,IRT- like proteins) family, and
the Cation anti-porters. Complexation of toxic metal ions by
peptides or proteins also helps in detoxification process. One recurrent
general mechanism for heavy metal detoxification in plants and other
organisms is the chelation of metal by a ligand. Plants make two types
of peptide metal binding ligands: Metallothioneins (MT's) and
Phytochelatins (PC's) []. PCs are enzymatically synthesized peptides,
whereas MTs are gene-encoded polypeptides.

In the current work, an attempt was made to look for putative metal
binding motifs responsible for phytoremediation in plants especially
MAP's []. Medicinal and aromatic plants appear to be a good choice
for phytoremediation since these species are mainly grown for
secondary metabolites thus eliminating the possibility of the
contamination of the food chain with heavy metals. Aromatic and
medicinal plants also have demonstrated ability to accumulate heavy
metals. Research has shown that heavy metals accumulated by
aromatic and medicinal plants do not appear in the essential oil and
that some of these species are able to grow in metal contaminated sites
without significant yield reduction []. Multiple sequence alignment of
representative proteins from different plant species helps in identifying
such conserved regions. These can further be characterized as
sequence motifs or patterns. Generating a functional motif involves
identifying residues in a protein sequence that impart functional
properties to the protein. Motifs when used to probe sequence
databases help to find and annotate members belonging to a particular
family of proteins. These family of proteins of motifs were subjected
to binding site prediction software [] that shows binding site
capability of metal ion ligands. PROSITE is a database for motifs and
patterns. PROSITE includes heavy metal associated domain signatures
and profiles with PROSITE and ATPase signature bearing IDs. These
are broad spectrum motifs. In this study, specific putative metal
binding motifs have been designed for the ions nickel, lead,
molybdenum, copper, manganese, cadmium, zinc, iron, cobalt,
aluminium, magnesium and xenobiotic compounds.

Methodology
SWISS PROT
Based on gene name search, metal ion binding, protein sequences
belonging to bryophytes, pteridophytes, gymnosperms and
angiosperms against the genes involved in phytoremediation were
retrieved from the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (release 55.3) database.

CLUSTALX
Sequences of the proteins for the respective genes were subjected to
multiple sequence alignment to generate conserved regions of
evolutionary importance.

Bioedit
The alignments obtained were run on Bioedit for manipulation and
editing purpose in order to generate consensus sequences. Motifs were
designed (Table 1 in ) keeping in mind that
carboxylic acids and amino acids such as citric acid, malic acid,
histidine, glutamic acid, aspartic acid and cysteine are potential ligands
for heavy metals. Therefore, they could play a role in tolerance and
detoxification []

Prosite Scan Tool
The designed motifs were run on Scan Prosite tool at Prosite database
to detect functional and structural intra-domain residues. The hits
obtained were recorded for each class of proteins. Representative
structures were obtained from the Protein Data Bank and the motifs
were correlated with the metal binding residues.

Discovery Studio
Binding site prediction for the PDB ID’S obtained for the motifs
designed for metal binding site was done by using the Discovery
Studio 1.6 full version binding site module [].

CASTp Server
CASTp server was used to validate probable binding site visualized
through Discovery Studio.

Discussion
Motifs were designed and validated for each protein family.
Conserved motifs/putative metal ion binding motifs
corresponding to heavy metals with respective genes are given
in Table 1 (see ). Site directed
mutation studies which confirm the involvement of the
residues in certain motifs were also recorded []. The 3D
structure of these motifs were generated and analyzed. The
patterns generated out of motifs gives an indication of
probable binding sites as visualized through Discovery Studio
() for phytoremediation. These were further
validated out through CASTp server []. CASTp web server
was used to study surface features, functional regions and specific
roles of key residues of proteins out of the designed motifs. The motifs
designed give an insight into the physicochemical properties needed
for a protein to perform its function. Pocket 3 and Pocket 19 are
involved in Nramp1 protein which imparts its binding properties. The
results reveal its binding as hydrophilic in nature. Similarly Pocket 25,
51, 85 and 93 are involved for Laccase protein and Pocket 46, 50, 87
and 119 are involved for MGT protein.

ATP driven P-type heavy metal pumps represent a class of proteins
that translocate toxic and essential metal ions across biological
membranes. They are also called as the CPx type ATPases and form
the ion translocation subclass of P-type ATPases. They contain a
conserved CPC or CPX motif and varying number of C-Xaa-Xaa-C
motifs in the N-terminal domain of the proteins []. They contain a
conserved aspartate as phosphorylation site. One signature has been
designed for the ion translocating P-type ATPases in this study. The
motif [ND]L[QLRF][HY][DP][PS] designed for MGT protein is part
of a hinge motif in P-type ATPases and site directed mutagenesis
studies have shown that the conserved aspartate and proline residues
are important for catalytic activity []. Some of the motifs could not
be validated due to the lack of structural data. However, since most of
these motifs have residues considered to be important for metal
binding, that could have a role in metal binding or structural integrity.

CastP server (1b) is used to validate the results obtained from
Discovery studio. The figure shows that in PDB 1IFS-A, large no. of
binding cavities are present on the basis of topographical geometry.
Binding cavities 3 and 19 depicts the involvement of similar residues
E and L from the motif “LVELS”, as observed within the sequence
below the three dimensional figure. Similar residues are conserved in
pdb structures involved in the binding of Iron (Fe) and Manganese
(Mn) within the protein structures 1IFS-A corresponding to genes
Nramp1. This gene is reported to be involved in Fe and Mn uptake
(Maser P et al.,2001, L. E. Williams et al.,2000 []. Similiarly all
those motifs are identified in plants which are involved in
phytoremediation of heavy metals , with having knowledge og
particular genes involved in the process even if the genes are not
known in that plants.

On the left hand side bar of CASTp server, lists of all the atoms from
these residues are tabulated which provides interaction or forms the
structure of these metal ion binding cavities. It also gives an account of
the hypothetical motifs that shows a binding cavity in its vicinity and
suggests its important role in phytoremediation within plants
especially in those plants where it is conserved in the sequence
through evolutionary history.

Table 1 (see ) gives an account of all the
proteins involved in phytoremediation along with the references. It
also gives descriptive information of the metals that are involved in
binding the proteins. Detailed information of the important amino acid
residues required to bind the protein to form a metal binding complex
is also quoted. The following table shows the entries obtained for the
sequences obtained in UniProt/SwissProt which is preceded by the hits
obtained through Scan Prosite for motifs search. In most cases, the
motifs were able to retrieve all instances of the corresponding protein.
In cases where the number of hits obtained by a motif search is higher
than the instances of the protein in UniProtKB, the additional hits were
either related proteins or hypothetical proteins. In some cases where
the motifs missed some of the UniProtKB entries, some of the entries
were fragments and it is plausible that the motif designed does not fall
in the fragment. The last two columns gives a note of the PDB id’s
available, generated out of the Scan Prosite result which finally
terminates into the CastP results giving account of the binding pockets
involvement.

Parallel approach
All the EST related to corresponding heavy metal uptake genes are
retrieved and assembled through CAP3 assembler []. Orthologous
EST matches were determined in plants related to MAPs family
through blast. As a result large number of EST were determined in
MAPs which share orthologous relationship with metal uptake specific
EST. The results led to the involvement of Artemisia annua and
Allium cepa plants for xenobiotic phytoremediating genes; Helianthus
annus for manganese uptake and Hordeum vulgare, Brassica napus
and Helianthus annus for zinc uptake. E-value adjusted ≤ 0.001 for all
blast hits with percentage ≥ 85%. Similarly, with this approach large
number of plants were studied with context to genes related to large
number of heavy metal uptake viz Nickel, cadmium, Copper, Cobalt,
Iron, Manganese and Xenobiotics (Table 2 in ). Datasets reveals the orthologous relations amongst contigs
related to genes EST dataset for Xenobiotic uptake of genes with
almost more than 85% similarity in case of Artemisia annua .Similar
results were obtained for Allium cepa.

Conclusion
The motifs represent conserved regions that lie in protein structural
core and are formed by three-dimensional structural topology of amino
acids. All the motifs that have been constructed in this study retrieved
the corresponding metal binding proteins from UniProtKB indicating
that they are all specific to the protein families taken into
consideration. The specificity of amino acids plays a pivotal role in the
process of phytoremediation. A clear hypothesis can be drawn that the
amino acids and its various associations are important for the process
of phytoremediation. The efficiency of some of the possible amino
acids those possessing with same physico-chemical properties useful
as a ligand can be targeted for more uptake of toxic metals. The dual
role of several motifs conserved cannot be ignored. Specific motifs can
be effectively used for functional annotation of proteins. Probing nonredundant
databases with such motifs will help catalog plants with a
potential for metal tolerance, metal resistance, metal accumulation,
metal transport &amp; metal detoxification. This knowledge can be used for
developing efficient bioremediation strategies in future.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Sharma et al, Bioinformation 4(2): 66-70 (2009)

(a) Predicted motif for Nramp1 (LVELS, PDB Id 1IFS-A). The above (a) depicts the presence of binding cavities in the vicinity of
metal binding motifs LVELS in pdb 1IFSa (binding site module in Discovery studio). Here binding crevices are depicted as binding point ranges
in large proportions that can be seen preferentially around valine, Glutamine and leucine amino acid. (b) Validation of the motif for Nramp1
protein through CASTp server.

