Background
Bacillus anthracis secrets a number of enzymes capable of
hydrolyzing the cell wall peptydoglycan. The hydrolysis of the cell
wall imparts an important role in maintaining its structure. The
structure of the cell wall therefore continuously undergoes
modifications such as hydrolysis, insertion and release of old
molecules [,,]. 
Some enzymes, called autolysins cause cell lysis
where processes like cell separation, cell wall turnover and
competence occur. Autolysins also play an important role in the
amplification of inflammatory responses []. These hydrolyzing
enzymes are divided into N-acteylmuramidases, Nacetylglucosaminidases,
and N-acetylmuramoyl-L-alanine amidases based on substrate specificity []. The etiologic agent of anthrax,
Bacillus anthracis contains two virulent plasmids pXO1 and pXO2
causing cutaneous, gastrointestinal and inhalation anthrax. B.
anthracis produces protective antigen (83 kDa), edema factor (84
kDa) and lethal-factor (83kDa) causing inflammatory response with
the release of toxic compounds and mediators []. The genome
sequencing and annotation shows the presence of several amidases
like proteins in the B. anthracis genome. The most studied amidase
gene from B. anthracis is amiA, belonging to class amidase-03 of
autolysins []. Many autolysins usually increase the inflammatory
response. However, amidase-03 decreases the inflammatory
response in host by hydrolyzing the bond between glycan and
peptide thereby reducing the amplification to response []. So the
structure stability of amidase-03 is important to assess its function
and role during infection. Therefore, it is important to construct its
protein structure for amidase-03 to glean functional information
using modeling methods described elsewhere [–]. It should be
noted that the structural analysis and molecular dynamics simulation
of the predicted structure is described in detail elsewhere by the
authors [].

Methodology
Template Selection
Template selection was done using BLASTp for the query sequence
against PDB (Protein Data Bank) available at NCBI [].
BLOSUM62 was applied as matrix. The target subsequently
selected was the x-ray crystal structure with PDB code 1XOV with
resolution 1.8 Å and R-value 0.122. Sequence alignment for
template 1XOV and query () was done by using python
script align2d.py in Modeller [].

Generation of the initial structures and model evaluation
Sequence alignment was used to generate several 3D models of
amidase-03 using auto-model class. Five models were built by
Modeller default routine in which initial coordinates are randomized
and evaluated by pseudo-energy parameter. If several models are
calculated for the same target, the best model can be selected in
several ways. We evaluated the model with the lowest value of the
Modeller objective function and PROCHECK statistics, which is
also recognized by ADIT tool at PDB Server []. The stereochemical
properties were assessed using PROCHECK [].

Energy minimization of the structure: Molecular Dynamics 
 Energy minimization of the selected model was done by using
steepest descent for removing the bad vander-waal contacts from
the model. The calculations were done by using GROMACS 3.2
[] software with G43a1 force field with flexible SPC water model
in cubic box of size 1 Angstrom instead of rigid SPC model.

Visualization and structural analysis
Structure analysis and visualization were carried out with Visual
Molecular Dynamics (VMD) [] software. Structural alignment
and RMSD calculation with template and several models were also
done with VMD.

Discussion
BLAST results had shown higher similarity with the crystal
structure of 1XOV and 1JWQ, while the template was selected on
the basis of greater identity. 1XOV template showed 35% sequence
identity, 47 conserved residues and 55% of sequence similarity with
amidase-03, while the 1JWQ showed 26% sequence identity and
55% sequence similarity. A putative domain was also found against
pfam database entry pfam01520, a family of hydrolase enzyme
consisting of catalytic domain which cleaves peptidoglycan of the
bacterial cell wall by MurNAc-L-alanine linkage and has 51
conserved regions in BLASTp results (). So, the 245 amino
acids protein from B. anthracis genome encoded by GenBank
accession NP_844822 consists of amidase-03 domain known to
have catalytic functions to hydrolyze the cell wall. This protein in
this study is referred as amidase-03 hereon.

The template structure 1XOV consists of two domains, a Cterminus
and N-terminus while we used only N- terminus of the
protein to build the model. The  shows the alignment of 171
residues of amidase-03 with 316 residues of 1XOV. After 175
initial residues, Modeller put a long gap with C-terminal of the
template as we used only N-terminus of the protein to build models
of amidase-03. Due to the high target and template similarity, there
are only two gaps inserted at 96th and 97th position in the Nterminus
of the sequence alignment. Using crystal structure for
Homology modeling provides high quality structure alignment for
structure prediction []. Phi and Phi torsion angles of predicted
models were checked by PROCHECK. A comparative table can be
found with supplementary data (Table 1). In Ramachandran plot
analysis, one residue of each model was found in disallowed region.
For a conformational asset, a PROCHECK analysis was done with
template 1XOV, which also confirmed one residue in disallowed
region of template. So, the probable error can be negotiated here.
The total number of residues in selected model was found as: 94.3%
residues in most favored region, 3.8% in additional allowed region
and 1.3% in generously allowed region of the Ramachandran plot.

Structural alignment was done using VMD to calculate the structure
deviation between template (1XOV) and selected model of amidase-
03 of B. anthracis (). The RMSD between template and
selected model showed a value of 0.0976 nm, which is an indicative
of a good quality predicted model. However, all predicted models
had less than 0.15 nm RMSD values. The predicted model of
amidase-03 consists of six α-helices and six β-sheets. All β-sheets
are surrounded with helices forming inner core of the protein and
providing the amidase moiety. The overall confirmation of the
model was found similar to N-terminal of 1XOV (), which
is an enzymatically active autolysin as reported in Listeria
monocytogenes bacteriophage PSA endolysin PlyPSA []. These
autolysins have unusual substrate specificity and high activity
towards degradation of the murein layers and lysis of susceptible
cells []. Based on their antimicrobial properties and substrate
specificity, these enzymes show great potential to be effective
therapeutic agents []. The increasing resistance to the known
antibiotics has driven attention towards finding newer ways to
combat pathogenic organisms and thus the investigation of the
structures for the development of new drugs/ drug targets from the
molecules like amidases have become reasonably essential
especially for pathogenic organisms like B. anthracis.

Conclusion
We described the model structure for 245 amino acids amidase-03
from Bacillus anthracis using x-ray crystal structure of Listeria
monocytogenes bacteriophage PSA endolysin PlyPSA (PDB ID:
1XOV) as template. The predicted structure was submitted to
Protein Data Bank (PDB-id 2IR0). Molecular dynamics simulation
of the model is described elsewhere [].

We wish to express our sincere thanks to Professor Tasneem Fatma,
Department of Bioscience, Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi. We
also thank Dr. S. T. Pasha, National Institute of Communicable
Diseases (NICD), Delhi for suggestions and support in the study.

Citation:Sharma et al, Bioinformation 4(6): 242-244 (2009)

Sequence alignment of amidase-03 (PDB ID: 2IR0) with template 1XOV

Sequence alignment of amidase-03 with pfam database (amidase family) as a BLASTp output

 Superimposition of structures of amidase-03 (Red-new cartoon selection) on N-terminal of 1XOV (Ribbon selection)

