Background
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a major health concern among the aging
population and is the most prevalent form of dementia. While the cause of the
disease remains uncertain, the extracellular senile plaques and the intracellular
neurofibrillary tangles constitute the two major neuropathological hallmarks
present in the brains of AD patients. Neurofibrillary tangles contain
hyperphosphorylated microtubule-associated protein tau, while senile plaques
contain a core of β-amyloid (Aβ) peptides. Although the central role of Aβ
remains to be proven in clinical trials, data accumulated during the past two
decades place Aβ peptides and in particular soluble forms of the peptide as
being the main molecule triggering the pathological cascade that eventually
leads to AD and initiates tau pathology []. 
Aβ peptides are derived from the
cleavage of the β-amyloid precursor protein (APP) by β- and γ-secretases. The
major β-secretase is an aspartyl protease termed BACE-1 (β-site APP cleaving
enzyme) [–]. 
BACE-1 cleaves APP within the extracellular domain of APP,
resulting in the secretion of the large ectodomain (APPsβ) and generating a
membrane-tethered C-terminal fragment CTFβ or C99 which serves as a
substrate for γ-secretase []. 
The multimeric γ-secretase complex cleaves at
multiple sites within the transmembranous CTFβ generating C-terminally
heterogeneous Aβ peptides ranging between 38 to 43 amino-acid residues in
length that are secreted []. 
In addition to BACE-1 and γ-secretase, APP can be
cleaved by α-secretase within the Aβ domain between Lys16 and Leu17,
releasing APPsα and generating CTFα or C83 which is further cleaved by γ-
secretase to generate an N-terminally truncated Aβ termed p3. Genetic ablation
of BACE-1 completely abolishes Aβ production, establishing BACE-1 as the
major neuronal enzyme responsible for initiating the amyloidogenic processing
of APP [].

Current treatments for AD include cholinesterase inhibitors and glutamate
antagonists. Although useful, these symptomatic treatments do not stop the
disease process or prevent neuronal degeneration. There is an on-going need
for the development of new treatments for AD. It has been suggested that a diet
rich in polyphenols including flavonoids may have beneficial effects in AD 
[].
Flavonoids are plant metabolites that are dietary antioxidant, and it has been
hypothesized that this activity may account for their beneficial effects against
dementia []. 
The Ginkgo biloba extract EGb761 which contains essentially
flavonoids (quercetin, kaempferol and isorhamnetin) and terpene lactones
(ginkgolides A,B,C and bilobalide) has also been suggested to have positive
effects against dementia and AD [,
]. Recently, several flavonoids have
been shown to regulate Aβ production and it has been suggested that these
compounds act by directly inhibiting BACE-1 activity 
[]. As BACE-1 is the
rate limiting enzyme responsible for Aβ production and is considered to be a
prime target for AD, we further investigated whether flavonoids can lower Aβ
production in whole cells by directly inhibiting BACE-1 activity. We tested the
effects of different flavonoids on Aβ production and APP processing using a
cell line overexpressing human APP and attempted to correlate the Aβ
lowering activity of the flavonoids with their BACE-1 inhibitory activity.
Moreover, we investigated the binding affinity of flavonoids for the BACE-1
catalytic site using thorough docking simulations to determine whether
flavonoids hold promise as BACE-1 inhibitors.

Methodology
Flavonoids
Daidzein (4',7-Dihydroxyisoflavone, 7-Hydroxy-3-(4-hydroxyphenyl)-4H-1-
benzopyran-4-one, 7-Hydroxy-3-(4-hydroxyphenyl)chromone), genistein
(4',5,7-Trihydroxyisoflavone, 5,7-Dihydroxy-3-(4-hydroxyphenyl)-4H-1-
benzopyran-4-one), luteolin (3',4',5,7-Tetrahydroxyflavone), kaempferol
(3,4',5,7-Tetrahydroxyflavone, 3,5,7-Trihydroxy-2-(4-hydroxyphenyl)-4H-1-
benzopyran-4-one), apigenin (4',5,7-Trihydroxyflavone), quercetin (2-(3,4-
Dihydroxyphenyl)-3,5,7-trihydroxy-4H-1-benzopyran-4-one, 3,3',4',5,6-
Pentahydroxyflavone), α-naphthoflavone (7,8-Benzoflavone), β-
naphthoflavone (5,6-Benzoflavone), acacetin (5,7-Dihydroxy-4'-
methoxyflavone), taxifolin (3,3',4',5,7-Pentahydroxyflavanone hydrate),
PD98059 (2-(2-Amino-3-methoxyphenyl)-4H-1-benzopyran-4-one) were
obtained from Sigma Chemicals (MO, USA). Aminogenistein (4'-Amino-6-
hydroxyflavone) and baicalein (5,6,7-Trihydroxyflavone) were obtained from
Calbiochem (EMD Chemicals, CA, USA).

Aβ enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
7W CHO cells stably transfected with human APP751 
[] were maintained in
DMEM (ATCC, VA, USA) medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum
(Invitrogen, CA, USA), 1X mixture of penicillin/streptomycin/fungizone
mixture (Cambrex, ME, USA) and 0.3% geneticin (Invitrogen, CA, USA) as a
selecting agent. Cells were cultured in 96-wells culture plates and treated for 24
hours with different doses of flavonoids as indicated in the figure legend. All
flavonoids were diluted in DMSO before being exposed to confluent 7W CHO
cells so that the final concentration of DMSO in the culture medium was 0.1%.
The control wells were treated with 0.1% DMSO. Human Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42
were analyzed in the culture medium by using commercially available
sandwich ELISAs (Invitrogen, CA) according to the manufacturer's
instructions. All experiments were repeated 3-4 times.

Evaluation of APP processing by Western-blots
The impact of flavonoids on APP processing was evaluated using 7W CHO
cells as we previously published []. Briefly, confluent 7W CHO cells were
treated for 24 hours with 10 and 20 µM of flavonoids in 24-well plates.
Cellular proteins were extracted with 80 µL of ice-cold M-PER Reagent
(Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL, USA) containing 1mM
phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride, 1X of protease cocktail inhibitor (Roche, Inc.,
USA) and 1mM sodium orthovanadate. Samples were sonicated, denatured by
boiling in Laemmli buffer (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) and resolved onto 4−
20% gradient polyacrylamide gels (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). After
electrotransfering onto polyvinylidene difluoride membranes, western-blots
were immunoprobed with a 1:1000 dilution of an anti-APP C-terminal (751−
770) antibody (EMD Biosciences Inc., San Diego, CA, USA), with an antiactin
antibody (Chemicon, Temecula, CA, USA) used as a reference antibody
to ensure that equal amount of proteins were electrotransferred. Additionally,
sAPPα was detected by Western-blot in the culture medium surrounding 7W
CHO cells using the antibody 6E10 (Signet Laboratories Inc., MA, USA)
which recognizes amino acids 1−17 of Aβ and sAPPβ was detected in the
culture medium using an anti-human sAPPβ antibody (Immuno-Biological
Laboratories Co. Ltd., Gunma, Japan).

β-secretase activity measurements
β-secretase activity was measured using human recombinant BACE-1
(Calbiochem, CA, USA) with a commercially available chemoluminescent
assay (Discoverix, CA, USA) following the recommendations of the
manufacturer. The β-secretase inhibitor IV (BACE IV) inhibitor was used as a
positive control in the assay and was purchased from EMD Chemicals (CA,
USA). Briefly, BACE-1 enzymatic reactions were carried out for 2 hours at
room temperature with 10 ng/µl of BACE-1 recombinant enzyme in 96-well
plates in a final volume of 100 µl. Chemoluminescent signals were quantified
on a HTS Synergy multiplate reader from Biotek (VT, USA).

NFκB luciferase activity
NFκB activation was quantified using a stable NFκB luciferase reporter cell
line of HEK293 cells with chromosomal integration of a luciferase reporter
construct regulated by 6 copies of the NFκB response element (Panomics, CA,
USA). Cells were grown in DMEM containing 10% serum, 1%
penicillin/streptomycin/fungizone and 100 µg/ml of hygromycin B. Confluent
cells were treated with 20 ng/ml of TNFα (Sigma, MO, USA) to induce NFκB
activation and with a dose range of the different flavonoids for 3 hours.
Luciferase activity was detected with the Luc-Screen Extended-Glow from
Applied Biosystems (CA, USA) and a Synergy HT Biotek chemoluminescent
reader (VT, USA) as we previously described [].

Evaluation of BACE-1 transcription
Confluent SH-SY5Y cells (ATCC, VA, USA) grown in DMEM/F12 medium
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1X mixture of
penicillin/streptomycin/fungizone mixture were treated with 20 ng/ml of
TNFα, or with 20 µM of apigenin, luteolin, quercetin and daidzein either alone
or in combination with 20 ng/ml of TNFα for 30 minutes at 37°C, 5% CO2
(control wells received the same volume of vehicle used to dissolved the
flavonoids). After 30 minutes of incubation, RNA was extracted as we
previously described []. The quality and purity of the RNA obtained were
tested on agarose gels and spectrophotometrically at 260 nm and 280 nm. All
RNA samples had an A260/280 absorbance ratio between 1.9 and 2.1. Real
time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) were performed as we previously described
[]. 
Briefly, to quantify the transcript levels of the BACE-1 gene by RTqPCR,
a protocol using FastStart TaqMan Prob Master Mix (Roche) reaction
was performed in duplicates. All reactions contained 2 µL of cDNA (20 ng), 10
µL of the 2× Master Mix and 0.5 µL of 20 µM of each BACE-1 primer
(ttcatcaacggctccaact and ctccagggagtcgtcagg), 250 nM of BACE-1 gene
specific probe (#04688058001), 500 nM reference (HPRT) gene primer mix
(cgtgattagtgatgatgaaccag and cgagcaagacgttcagtcct), 250nM reference HPRT
gene probe (# 05046157001) and DEPC-treated water to a final volume of
20µl. The reaction protocol started with a 2-min activation step at 50°°C, a 10
min template denaturation step at 95°C, followed by 50 cycles of 95°C for 15
sec and 60°C for 20 sec, BACE-1 mRNA fold change (relative to the
hypoxanthine-phosphoribosyl-transferase (HPRT) mRNA was calculated as
previously described [].

Molecular docking study of flavonoids
Information regarding selected Flavonoids 2D structure was obtained as
SMILES notation from Pubchem database 
(http://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/)
for: Genistein, Quercetin, Taxifolin, Kaemferol, PD98059, Luteolin, Apigenin,
Daizein, Aminogeneistein, alpha- and beta-napthofalvone. Each of the 2D
ligand string was converted into 3D conformers using LigPrep tool and each
conformer was further energy minimized by applying OPLS_2005 force field.
Low energy conformer for each ligand was retained and subsequently used for
docking experiments. We used GLIDE XP (eXtra Precision release 2010,
Schordinger Inc, USA) to perform docking against two different crystal
structures of BACE-1 from the PDB files 2B8L and 2QMF. The ligand bound
active site pocket in the two crystal structures were identified and a grid map
was generated using the centroid of the bound ligand. We used a Vander-Waals
radius scaling factor of 1.0 and a partial charge cutoff of 0.25 to soften the
potential of non-polar atoms in the BACE pocket and no other explicit
constraints were specified. Each docking run samples a variety of poses for the
ligand in the BACE active site pocket. An energetic and empirical scoring
criterion is used to rank several thousand docked conformations. The scoring
algorithm rewards (favorable interactions) or penalizes (unfavorable
interactions) the Glide XP score (scoring function) which can be used to further
rank the docked pose. A Van der Waals scaling factor of 0.8 for the ligand was
used in order to soften the potential for non-polar ligand atoms. We also
performed a post-dock minimization run to obtain favorable conformations and
to reduce any strain. We applied a strain correction factor (to account for
excessive strain due to conformational restriction upon binding to the pocket)
to the Glide XP score whenever the observed strain energy of bound ligand
exceeds 4 kcal/mol. A docked pose with a low Glide XP score was considered
to be the most favorable state and ranked as the top conformer.

Statistical analysis
Data were expressed as means ± S.E.M of n experiments. The statistical
significance of the differences between treatment groups was determined by
one-way ANOVA and post-hoc comparisons where appropriate using SPSS
12.0.1 for Windows. The half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) for the
different assays was determined using GraphPad Prism 5 (GraphPad Software,
Inc., CA, USA).

Results
Effect of flavonoids on Aβ, sAPPβ and sAPP± production
The impact of flavonoids on Aβ production was evaluated using 7W CHO cells
overexpressing wild-type human APP. Following 24 hours of treatment with a
dose range of flavonoids, the amount of human Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42 in the
culture media surrounding the 7W CHO cells was measured by ELISAs. A
dose dependent inhibition of Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42 production was observed for
β-naphtoflavone, aminogenistein, luteolin, apigenin, quercetin, acacetin and
PD98059 whereas genistein, ±-naphtholavone, kaempferol baicalein, daidzein
and taxifolin were inefficient for the dose range tested (). The
calculated IC50 for Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42 were as follows for the most potent
flavonoids identified; β-naphtoflavone (0.9 and 1.1 µM)&lt;aminogenistein (5.7
and 5.8 µM)&lt;luteolin (6.5 and 8.8 µM)&lt;apigenin (7.1 and 10.8 µM)&lt;quercetin
(10.2 and 10.2 µM). Interestingly, a statistically significant correlation was
observed between Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42 values showing that active flavonoids
are inhibiting Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42 with the same potency 
().

We next investigated the effects of flavonoids on sAPPβ and sAPP± secretion
by 7W CHO cells. None of the flavonoids tested appear to stimulate sAPP±
production suggesting that these compounds do not stimulate the ±-secretase
cleavage of APP (). Among the flavonoids tested, quercetin,
kaempferol, luteolin, apigenin and β-naphtoflavone appear to reduce sAPPβ
production suggesting an inhibition of the β-cleavage of APP (). We
did not observe a significant impact of PD98059 and aminogenistein (at 10 and
25 µM) on sAPPβ production, however a reduction in sAPPβ secretion was
observed with a 50 µM dose of PD98059 but not for aminogenistein, daidzein,
genistein and aminogenistein () suggesting that among the flavonoids
tested only luteolin, apigenin, quercetin, β-naphthoflavone, taxifolin,
kaempferol and PD98059 impact the β-cleavage of APP. We analyzed the
effect of some of the flavonoids on APP C-terminal fragments and observed
that daidzein, aminogenistein and genistein which were unable to inhibit
sAPPβ production do not inhibit APP-CTFβ generation, and to the contrary
induce an accumulation of APP-CTF± and CTFβ suggesting inhibition of the
γ-secretase cut (). A decreased APP-CTFβ production as well as an
inhibition of sAPPβ secretion was observed for luteolin, quercetin, apigenin
and kaempferol () suggesting that these flavonoids lower Aβ
production by impacting the β-cleavage of APP.

Effects of flavonoids on BACE-1 activity
As many of the flavonoids tested appear to inhibit the β-cleavage of APP, we
determined whether these flavonoids were direct inhibitors of the β-secretase
(BACE-1) using a chemoluminescent cell free assay. We selected a
chemoluminescent assay over a fluorescent based assay for measuring BACE-1
activity since flavonoids are fluorescent (data not shown) and may interfere
with the detection of BACE-1 activity by fluorescence. Among the flavonoids
tested, baicalein appears the most potent for inhibiting BACE-1 activity with an
IC50 around 10 µM (), however this compound is unable to
significantly lower Aβ or sAPPβ production in whole cells 
().
Luteolin, quercetin, kaempferol and apigenin dose dependently inhibited
BACE-1 activity (). Overall, the flavonoids tested appear weak
inhibitors of BACE-1 activity in the cell free assay and the calculated IC50
values were as follows; baicalein (10.2 µM)&lt;kaempferol (27.7 µM)&lt;quercetin
(30.2 µM)&lt;apigenin (34.2 µM)&lt;luteolin (56.5 µM). To further evaluate the
possible interaction of the flavonoids with BACE-1, we performed in silico
docking simulations. The results of our docking experiments along with the
Glide XP score is summarized in . We observed that the independent
docking experiments based on two X-ray structures gave different rank orders
of the flavonoids tested. As such, we observed a correlation coefficient of 0.33
(p =0.12) showing no significant relationship between the Glide XP score of
the docked flavonoids from the two different docking experiments 
().
We further aligned the docked structure of flavonoids from the different
docking experiments and found that the docked poses do not align. We
observed that the highest docking score difference was for apigenin which had
a Glide XP score of -9.01 while docking to 2B8L and -3.18 while docking to
2QMF. The best score among flavonoids observed while docking to 2B8L was
for taxifolin (XP score -10.49) and worst for daizein (XP score -2.91). While
docking flavonoids to 2QMF, we found that the best score was observed for
baicalein (-8.81) and the worst for apigenin (-3.18). Based on the observed
BACE-1 IC50 in a cell free assay, we found that the docking experiment with
2QMF had a better score for active flavonoids that inhibited BACE-1 at submicromolar
range. Overall the flavonoids tested appear to be only weak
BACE-1 inhibitors. In addition, only a weak correlation between the inhibition
of BACE-1 activity and the inhibition of Aβ production by flavonoids in whole
cells () was observed 
and their IC50 for inhibiting BACE-1 activity in a
cell free assay is higher than their IC50 for inhibiting Aβ production in whole
cells suggesting these compounds mitigate Aβ production via additional
mechanisms independently of direct BACE-1 inhibition.

Effect of flavonoids on NFκB activity and BACE-1 transcription
We next investigated the effect of flavonoids on NFκB activity since
flavonoids are known to display anti-inflammatory properties 
[] and since we
have shown previously that compounds of unrelated structure that inhibit
NFκB activation can lower Aβ production by targeting the β-cleavage of APP
[,
]. 
We observed that all of the flavonoids unable to significantly lower
Aβ level in whole cells for the dose range tested (PD98059, taxifolin, genistein,
daidzein and baicalein) were also unable to reduce NFκB activation induced by
TNF±, whereas Aβ and APPsβ lowering flavonoids (kaempferol, quercetin,
acacetin, apigenin and luteolin) dose dependently inhibited NFκB activation
(). Interestingly, we found a strong correlation between the amount of
NFκB inhibition and the level of Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42 inhibition for the
different doses of the flavonoids tested, suggesting the Aβ lowering activity of
the flavonoids is mediated via NFκB (). We next investigated the
possible impact of daidzein, apigenin, luteolin and quercetin on BACE-1
transcription using human neuronal SHSY cells and confirmed that NFκB
lowering flavonoids (apigenin, luteolin and quercetin) inhibit BACE-1
transcription stimulated by TNF± whereas daidzein, which does not
significantly inhibit NFκB activity, does not affect BACE-1 transcription
().

Discussion
Several studies have revealed that natural flavonoids can reduce Aβ
neurotoxicity [–] 
possibly via an antioxidative mechanism and inhibition
of Aβ oligomerization []. 
In addition, several flavonoids have been shown to
lower brain Aβ accumulation in transgenic mouse models of AD 
[,
].
Flavonoids have been proposed to act as BACE-1 inhibitors, the rate limiting
enzyme responsible for the production of Aβ peptides 
[,
]. In our study,
some of the Aβ lowering flavonoids that we tested decreased sAPPβ
production suggesting an inhibition of the β-cleavage of APP. However, these
flavonoids only weakly inhibited BACE-1 activity in a cell free assay and we
found only a weak correlation between their effect on BACE-1 activity and
their ability to lower Aβ in whole cells suggesting their Aβ lowering properties
are mediated principally via other mechanisms. We also investigated the
binding of flavonoids to the BACE-1 catalytic site employing docking
simulations. Careful mining of the Protein Data Bank (PDB) for BACE-1
revealed that there are 144 entries including apo and complexed structures with
several different inhibitors. When we analyzed these structures using a
molecular visualization tool, we observed that the active site of BACE-1
possesses a high conformational flexibility upon ligand binding. The active site
consists of aspartyl residues (32 and 228) encompassed by two highly flexible
loop regions (Loop1: 9-13 KSGQG and Loop2: 71-74 YTQG) that undergo
both side chain and backbone rearrangements. For example, in the structure
2B8L the SER10 and its corresponding residue SER71 in the structure
2QMFA, the distance between the backbone atom C-± is 6.83 Ǻ whereas the
distance between the side chain atom O-γ is 7.68 Ǻ. The distance between
2B8L:72THR and 3KMXA:133THR for CG2 atom is 5.74 Ǻ and between the
backbone C-± atoms is 4.38 Ǻ. The active site pocket is plastic and different
structures can be aligned to understand conformational changes due to induced
fitting of the ligand. BACE-1 possesses a large active site pocket typical of
aspartyl proteases and further adopts conformational changes upon ligand
binding that may include both side-chain rearrangement and backbone
movement of residues in the active site 
[–]. 
Due to this fact, docking studies do not adequately reproduce ligand binding and may possibly over or
under rank a ligand upon docking resulting in false positives. In our study, we
used two different structures for BACE-1 and performed multiple docking
studies. We observed that as a function of the different structures selected for
BACE-1, the docking score/rank for the flavanoids was different. As a matter
of fact, we found no correlation between the observed IC50 for BACE-1
inhibition in the cell-free assay and the Glide XP Score in the docking
experiments. Energetic calculations from our BACE-1 docking studies also
reveal that the flavonoids only weakly bind the BACE-1 catalytic site; in
agreement with the weak inhibition of BACE-1 activity we observed with
flavonoids in a BACE-1 cell free assay. Docking studies of BACE-1 do not
adequately reproduce the native structure when ligands are cross-docked and
hence further studies that combine docking with Monte Carlo/Molecular
Dynamics methods may be required []. 
Our data suggest the Aβ lowering
flavonoids we tested are only poor BACE-1 inhibitor and must therefore
regulate Aβ production in whole cells by other mechanisms. This conclusion is
different from past studies [] 
in which docking results on a single BACE-1
structure were presented as evidence to support the hypothesis that flavonoids
directly inhibit BACE-1 activity explaining their Aβ lowering properties in
whole cells. Using docking experiments with two different crystal structures
for BACE-1, we demonstrate that the docking score of flavonoids is different
for the two BACE-1 structures tested and do not correlate with the inhibition of
BACE-1 activity observed with flavonoids in a cell free assay . It is therefore
inaccurate to classify active from inactive flavonoids as BACE-1 inhibitors by
simply using docking simulations alone. The Aβ lowering activity of
flavonoids cannot be explained solely by their effect on BACE-1 activity. We
found a lack of correlation between the amount of BACE-1 inhibition observed
and the ability of the compounds to lower Aβ production in whole cells. In
addition, their IC50 for inhibiting BACE-1 activity in a cell free assay was
higher than their IC50 for inhibiting Aβ in whole cells suggesting that additional
mechanisms besides direct BACE-1 inhibition also contribute to their Aβ
lowering properties. We assessed the impact of flavonoids on NFκB activation
since we have previously identified that compounds inhibiting NFκB activation
can prevent the β-cleavage of APP and Aβ production 
[]. We observed a
strong correlation between the NFκB inhibition potency of the flavonoids and
their ability to inhibit Aβ production suggesting that the preponderant
mechanism responsible for the Aβ lowering properties of the flavonoids is
related to their effect on NFκB activation. Interestingly, many flavonoids are
known to inhibit tyrosine kinases and hence may regulate NFκB activity via
their inhibitory action on multiple tyrosine kinases upstream of NFκB. NFκB
has been shown previously to regulate the production of Aβ by regulating the
β-cleavage of APP []. 
Others studies have shown that NFκB inhibition can
directly regulate BACE-1 expression level [, 
–]. We effectively
observed that apigenin, luteolin and quercetin inhibit BACE-1 transcription in
human neuronal SHSY cells.

Conclusion
Altogether our data suggest a multimodal mechanism of action of flavonoids
towards Aβ production as the direct inhibition of BACE-1 activity by
flavonoids appears to only marginally account for their Aβ lowering properties.
We suggest that the Aβ lowering properties of flavonoids are mainly mediated
via their effect on NFκB signaling which in turn affects the regulation of
BACE-1 expression.

Authors' contributions
DP conceived of the study, developed the methodology for studying APP
processing and NFκB activity, performed BACE-1 activity measurements, the
statistical analyzes and drafted the manuscript. VM performed the molecular
docking simulations. GA realized the RTQ-PCR experiments. DB and NP
performed the western-blots and ELISAs. CB contributed to the NFκB
luciferase activity measurements and helped in writing the manuscript. MM
critically evaluated the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.

Competing interest
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We would like to thank Diane and Robert Roskamp for their generosity in
helping to make this work possible. We thank Dr. Michael Wolfe (Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA) for providing the 7W CHO APP
overexpressing cells.

Citation:Paris et al, Bioinformation 6(6): 229-236 (2011)

Dose dependent effects of flavonoids on Aβ production. The effect
of a dose range of flavonoids on Aβ1-40 (A) and Aβ1-42 (B) production was
investigated using 7W CHO cells overexpressing human APP after 24 hours of
treatment. ANOVA reveals a significant main effect of the treatments
(P&lt;0.001) and doses (P&lt;0.001) on both Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42 production. Posthoc
comparisons show significant differences for Aβ1-40 production between
the control conditions and the β-naphthoflavone (P&lt;0.001), kaempferol
(P&lt;0.04), quercetin (P&lt;0.001), aminogenistein (P&lt;0.001), luteolin (P&lt;0.001),
apigenin (P&lt;0.001) and acacetin (P&lt;0.001) treatments but no significant
differences between the control conditions and baicalein, α-naphthoflavone,
daidzein, genistein, PD98059 and taxifolin (P&gt;0.05) treatments. Post-hoc
comparisons show significant differences for Aβ1-42 production between the
control conditions and the β-napthoflavone (P&lt;0.001), quercetin (P&lt;0.001),
aminogenistein (P&lt;0.001), luteolin (P&lt;0.001) and apigenin (P&lt;0.008) but no
significant differences between the control conditions and baicalein, α-
naphthoflavone, kaempferol, daidzein, genistein, PD98059, taxifolin and
acacetin (C). Graph showing a correlation between Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42 values
obtained following treatments with different doses of the Aβ lowering
flavonoids. A strong correlation between Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42 values was
observed (Pearson correlation coefficient=0.911; P&lt;0.001) showing that
flavonoids inhibit Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42 with similar potency.

Effects of different flavonoids on APP processing in 7W CHO cells
overexpressing human APP. (A) Effect of a 24 hour treatment with different
flavonoids (10 and 25 µM) on sAPPβ and sAPPα production by 7W CHO
cells. Luteolin, apigenin, β-naphthoflavone, quercetin and kaempferol appear to
reduce sAPPβ production. (B) Effect of a 24 hour treatment with different
flavonoids at a concentration of 50 µM on sAPPβ and sAPPα production by
7W CHO cells. An inhibition of sAPPβ production was observed with
quercetin, taxifolin, kaempferol, PD98059, luteolin, apigenin and β-
naphtoflavone, however genistein, aminogenistein, baicalein and daidzein did
not impact sAPPβ production. (C) Impact of a 24 hour treatment on APP Cterminal
fragments with different flavonoids at a concentration of 20 µM. A
reduction in APP-CTFβ production was observed for luteolin, quercetin,
apigenin whereas an accumulation of APP-CTFα and APP-CTFβ (suggesting
an impact on γ-secretase activity) was observed for daidzein, aminogenistein
and genistein. Altogether these data suggest that quercetin, taxifolin,
kaempferol, PD98059, luteolin, apigenin and β-naphtoflavone inhibit the β-
cleavage of APP.

Effects of flavonoids on BACE-1 activity in a cell free assay.
ANOVA reveals a significant main effect of the treatment groups across the
doses tested (P&lt;0.001). Post-hoc comparisons show statistical significant
BACE-1 activity inhibition across the doses tested for baicalein (P&lt;0.001),
apigenin (P&lt;0.02), luteolin (P&lt;0.02), quercetin (P&lt;0.001) and kaempferol
(P&lt;0.001) but no significant effect of α-naphthoflavone, β-naphthoflavone,
genistein, daidzein, taxifolin, PD98059 and aminogenitein on BACE-1 activity
(P&gt;0.05).

(A) Graph showing the docking scores (Observed Glide XP score)
correlation for the flavonoids between two crystal structures for BACE-1
(2B8L and 2QMF). The Different flavonoids used in this study are indicated on
the graph by the first two letters as bolded here: Genistein, Quercetin,
Taxifolin, Kaemferol, PD98059, Luteolin, Apigenin, Daizein,
Aminogeneistein, alpha- and beta-Napthofalvone. No significant correlation
(P&gt;0.1) was observed between the two scores. In addition no correlation
between the different docking scores and the amount of BACE-1 inhibition
induced by flavonoids was observed showing that docking simulations do not
predict accurately the affinity of flavonoids for the BACE-1 catalytic site. (B)
Overlay of several different BACE-1 PDB structures revealing flexible loops
(Loop1 and Loop2) in the active site pocket. Different ligand binding sites
(using the following PDB structures: 2B8L, 2QMF, 3CIB, 3L5F, 3KMX) in the
BACE-1 catalytic site are indicated by space fill dot representation. The active
site aspartyl residues (Asp 32 and Asp 228) are represented in red space fill in
the left. (C) Docking of kaemferol to BACE-1 structures. Overlay of crystal
structure of BACE-1 from PDB file 2B8L (brown ribbon) and 2QMF (green
ribbon) along with the top ranked docked pose of kaemferol. Left Side is a
zoom of the active site showing differences in the docking orientation of
kaempferol in 2B8L (ligand represented by pink sticks) and 2QMF (white
sticks). (D) Docking of quercetin to BACE-1 structures. Overlay of crystal
structure of BACE-1 from PDB file 2B8L (brown ribbon) and 2QMF (green
ribbon) along with top ranked docked pose of quercetin. Left Side is a zoom of
the active site showing differences in the docking orientation of quercetin in
2B8L (ligand represented by pink sticks) and 2QMF (white sticks).

Graphs representing the correlation between the inhibition of BACE-
1 activity observed in a cell free assay and the inhibition of Aβ1-40 (A) and
Aβ1-42 (B) production in whole cells for the different flavonoids tested. Only a
weak correlation was observed between Aβ production and BACE-1 inhibition
(Pearson correlation coefficient=0.471; P&lt;0.05).

(A) Dose dependent inhibition of NFκB activity by Aβ lowering
flavonoids. HEK293 cells stably expressing an NFκB luciferase reporter
construct were co-treated with 20 ng/ml of TNFα and different doses of the
flavonoids for 3 hours before measuring NFκB luciferase activity. ANOVA
reveals a significant main effect of the flavonoid treatments (P&lt;0.001) and of
the doses used (P&lt;0.001) on NFκB activity. Post-hoc comparisons show
statistically significant differences between the control conditions and the
treatments with kaempferol, quercetin, luteolin, apigenin and acacetin
(P&lt;0.001) on NFκB activity. Graphs representing the correlation between the
inhibition of NFκB activity and Aβ1-40 (B) and Aβ1-42 (C) production
observed for the different flavonoids tested. A strong correlation between Aβ
values and the amount of NFκB inhibition induced by flavonoids was observed
(Pearson correlation coefficient=0.872; P&lt;0.001).

Effect of daidzein, apigenin, luteolin and quercetin on BACE-1
transcription in human neuronal SH-SY5Y cells. BACE-1 transcription was
quantified by RT-PCR in SHSY cells following treatment with flavonoids for
30 minutes in presence and abscence of 20 ng/ml of TNFα. A strong induction
of BACE-1 mRNA was observed in SH-SY5Y cells challenged with the NFκB
inducer TNFα and an approximate 10 fold reduction in BACE-1 transcription
was observed following treatments with apigenin, luteolin and quercetin
showing that these flavonoids can mitigate BACE-1 expression induced by
NFκB stimulation. No inhibition of TNFα induced BACE-1 transcription was
observed with daidzein. ANOVA reveals a statistically significant main effect
of TNFα (P&lt;0.001), apigenin (P&lt;0.001), luteolin (P&lt;0.001) and quercetin
(P&lt;0.001) on BACE-1 mRNA level but no significant main effect of daidzein
(P=0.323). Post-hoc comparisons show significant differences between TNFα
and TNFα+apigenin (P&lt;0.001), TNFα+luteolin (P&lt;0.001) or TNFα+quercetin
treatments (P&lt;0.001) but no statistically significant difference between TNFα
and TNFα+daidzein (P=0.805) treatments on BACE-1 mRNA level.

