Abbreviations
ANN - artificial neural network, MHC - major histocompatibility complex, Aroc - area under receiver operating characteristic,
CC - correlation coefficient, IEDB - immune epitope database.

Background
A major task of the immune system is to identify cells that have been infected by pathogens and discriminate them from healthy cells. 
This is realized by the MHC class-I and II antigen processing and presentation pathway and the duty is assigned to helper T-lymphocytes 
(HTL) and cytotoxic T-lymphocytes (CTL). The activation of CD8+ cytotoxic T-cells in the immune system requires presentation of 
endogenous antigenic peptides by MHC class-I molecules []. The activation of 
CD4+ helper T-cells is also essential for the development of adaptive immunity against pathogens. A critical step in CD4+ T cell 
activation is the recognition of exogeneous peptides presented by MHC class-II molecules []. 
The peptides bound to MHC molecules that trigger an immune response are referred as T-cell epitopes. Identifying T-cells epitopes is of 
high importance to immunologists, because it allows the development of diagnostics, peptide based vaccine and immunotherapy 
[]. Therefore, the computational prediction of MHC class-I and II binding 
epitopes is of immense importance as their experimental identification is costly and time consuming 
[,].

A number of prediction methods for MHC binding peptides have been developed using peptide binding data from different databases such 
as SYFPEITHI [], MHCBN [], 
AntiJen [] and IEDB []. 
The first method was based on the identification of allele-specific anchor residues []. 
This simple motif-based method was later replaced by various weight matrix-based methods [,
]. Similarly, other methods were based on scoring matrices derived from multiple 
peptide alignments such as RANKPEP [] and the contribution of different 
residues in a peptide binding based on quantitative binding data such as ARB [] 
and SMM-align []. The accumulation of more epitope data resulted into the 
development of different types of machine learning algorithms for prediction, including support vector machines 
[] and artificial neural networks []. 
The other methods are also available based on structural template information for the prediction of MHC binding peptides 
[,]. In order to assess the 
current state of the MHC class-I and II binding peptide predictions, a number of research groups have established a systematic and 
quantitative benchmarks [,].

Despite, the large number of available computational methods, prediction of MHC class-I and II restricted epitopes remains a 
challenging problem even today. An essential step in developing accurate prediction tool is to gather a set of experimentally consistent 
training and validation dataset. In present study, we compiled a large IEDB dataset for training and blind datasets for validation to 
the fourteen MHC class- I and II molecules (seven for each class) that were experimentally determined under uniform conditions collected 
from Dana-Farber Repository (http://bio.dfci.harvard.edu/DFRMLI/). 
The computational methods like, Gibbs motif sampler [], sequence weighting 
schemes [,] and feed-forward 
backpropagation ANN [] were used to predict the peptide binding to MHC 
molecules. The Gibbs sampler and weight matrix approaches are well suited to describe sequence motifs of fixed length. For MHC class I 
and II, the peptide binding motif is in most situations assumed to be of a fixed length of 9 amino acids. The weight-matrix approach is 
only suitable for prediction of a binding event in situations where the binding specificity can be represented independently at each 
position in the motif and this assumption can only be considered to be an approximation. In the binding of a peptide to the MHC molecule 
the amino acids might for instance compete for the space available in the binding grove. The neural networks with a hidden layer are 
designed to describe sequence patterns with such a higher order correlations. The superiority of these sequence based approaches to the 
structure are believed to be the consequence of two main features, i.e. the flexibility in optimizing the Gibbs motif sampling parameter 
and sequence weighting schemes and also in optimizing the ANN training parameter according to the dataset. Finally, the developed 
prediction models would predict the HTL and CTL epitopes, which shall provide better insight into further research of peptide based 
vaccine and diagnostics against diseases ranging from malaria to cancer.

Methodology
Data collection
We assembled dataset of peptide binding and nonbinding affinities for fourteen MHC class-I and II molecules (seven for each class) 
from DRFMLI repository (http://bio.dfci.harvard.edu/DFRMLI/
). These dataset of high quality MHC binding and nonbinding peptides were taken from IEDB database 
[] (Table 1 and 2, 
see ). The binding affinities (IC50) of these peptides were 
quantitatively measured by immunological experiments. They were then scaled to binding scores ranging from 0 to 100 using linear 
transformation [], where score &gt;=99 are strong binders, 90-98 are moderate 
binders, 33-89 are border cases and &lt;33 are non-binders. These dataset were used as the training data to develop computational models 
based on Gibbs sampler, sequence weighting and ANN to predict MHC binding peptides.

Three sets of validation data were used to evaluate the prediction performance of MHC class-I binding peptides. First, referred as 
survivin dataset derived from a full overlapping study of 134 nonamer peptides spanning the full length of the tumor antigen survivin, 
second, CMV dataset contains 42 peptides spanning a 50 amino acids long construct containing cytomegalovirus (CMV) internal matrix 
protein pp65 peptides and third, combination of survivin and CMV dataset referred as combined-I dataset contains 176 peptides for each 
seven human MHC class-I molecules. One hundred three binding and nonbinding peptides were derived from four protein antigens, i.e. bee 
venom allergen, LAGE-1, dog allergen Can f1 and Nef protein for each seven MHC class-II molecules, referred as combined-II dataset for 
the validation of predictions. The original binding scores were measured by iTopiaTM Epitope Discovery System and then scaled to scores 
ranging from 0 to100 (Table 1 and 2, see ). In an attempt 
to check the ability of Gibbs sampler method to predict the 9-mer peptide cores revealed in crystal structures 
of MHC-peptide complexes, a total of 10 structures were compiled from Protein Data Bank for DRB1 alleles 
(Table 3 in ).

Algorithms used for the prediction of MHC binding peptides Gibbs motif sampler
MHC class-II binding peptides have a broad length distribution complicating the development of prediction methods. Identifying the 
correct alignment of a set of peptides known to bind the MHC class-II molecule using Gibbs motif sampler is a crucial part of the 
algorithm to identify the core of an MHC class-II binding peptide []. Here, we 
used the default Gibbs sampling parameters to find the 9-mer motif in a set of MHC class-II binding peptide data using the web-server 
EasyGibbs available at http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/biotools/EasyGibbs/


Sequence weighting
Three different sequence weighting methods i.e. Henikoff and Henikoff 1/nr [], 
clustering at 62¢ identity [] and no clustering are available, which can be 
used to weight 9-mer peptide sequences. The Henikoff method is fast as the computation time only increases linearly with the number of 
sequences, whereas in the Hobohm clustering algorithm, computation time increases as the square of the number of sequences. Here, we 
used the web-server EasyPred available at 
http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/biotools/EasyPred/ to generated the weight matrix for the prediction of MHC binding peptides by 
applying all three sequence weighting schemes with weight on pseudo counts is 200.

Artificial neural network
Here, we used a conventional feed-forward neural network [] with an input 
layer (180 neurons), one hidden layer (2 neurons) and a single neuron output layer using the web server Easypred available 
at http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/biotools/EasyPred/. 
The default setting parameters (one bin for balanced training, running upto 300 training epochs and top 80¢ of the training set) 
were used to train the neural network.

Evaluation parameters
Based on these datasets and algorithms, we have developed computational models which could predict the binding affinity between MHC 
molecules and peptides. The efficiency of algorithms was determined by discrimination between binders and nonbinders. A predicted 
peptide belongs to one of the four categories, i.e. True Positive (TP); an experimentally binding peptide predicted as a binder, False 
Positive (FP); an experimentally nonbinding peptide predicted as a binder, True Negative (TN); an experimentally nonbinding peptide 
predicted as a nonbinder and False Negative (FN); an experimentally binding peptide predicted as nonbinder. Here, we used non-parametric 
performance measures, area under receiver operator characteristic (Aroc) curve and Pearson correlation coefficient (CC) to evaluate the 
predictive performance of the applied algorithms. The ROC curve is a plot of the true positive rate TP/(TP+FN) on the vertical axis vs 
false positive rate FP/(TN+FP) on the horizontal axis for the complete range of the decision thresholds and the Pearson correlation 
coefficient (CC) is used to measure the association between pairs of values i.e. predicted and experimental 
[].

Discussion
We assembled a dataset of peptide binding and nonbinding affinities for fourteen MHC class-I and II molecules (seven for each class) 
from DRFMLI repository (
http://bio.dfci.harvard.edu/DFRMLI/). The Table 1 and 2 (shown under ) 
gives an overview of the training and validation dataset, encompassing a total of 16,771 peptide 
training data determined experimentally including 10,303 MHC class-I and 6,468 MHC class-II binding affinities 
[]. Compared to the training datasets publicly available on the IEDB database 
[], our evaluation dataset expands the number of measured peptide-MHC 
interactions, 1,232 for MHC class-I from Survivin and CMV whereas, 712 for MHC class-II molecules from four protein antigens bee venom 
allergen, LAGE-1, dog allergen Can f1 and Nef protein. As the validation dataset not included in IEDB database, it is equivalent to a 
blind test. From the experimental data, peptides were classified into binders (IC50&lt;1000 nM) and nonbinders 
(IC50&gt;=1000 nM) based 
on measured affinities. From these dataset, the performance of the prediction methods were then measured by area under ROC curves 
(Aroc) and Pearson correlation coefficient (CC). The calculation of Aroc provides a highly useful measure of prediction quality, which 
is 0.5 for random predictions and 1.0 for perfect predictions and correlation coefficient value of one corresponds to a perfect 
correlation, a value of zero corresponds to a random prediction and a value of minus one to a perfect anti-correlation.

The prediction performances of the weight matrix are better than the non-linear predictor (ANN) for the MHC class-I molecules using 
all the validation datasets measured in terms of Aroc and CC (). The weight matrix 
performance in term of Aroc and CC is maximum (1.0, 0.69) using CMV validation dataset and the minimum (0.85, 0.51) using combined-I 
validation dataset for allele HLA-A*1101 (). The prediction performance of the Gibbs 
motif sampler for the DRB1*1301(MHC class-II) molecule is maximum (Aroc=0.71, CC=0.32) using Henikoff and Henikoff 1/nr weighting scheme 
() which is lower than the minimum performance of MHC class I binding prediction 
(). The average performance of MHC class-II predictor based on Gibbs sampler (Aroc=0.62, 
CC=0.19) is also lower than the MHC class-I predictor based on sequence weighting (Aroc=0.95, CC=0.56) and artificial neural network 
(Aroc=0.73, CC=0.25).

From the above results it is clear that the size of training dataset may be an important factor contributing to better performance 
of sequence weighting and artificial neural network methods for the prediction of MHC class-I binding peptides. A key difference between 
MHC class-I and MHC class-II molecule is that the binding groove of class-II molecules is open at both ends. As a result, the length of 
peptide binding to class-II molecules can vary considerably, typically ranges 13-25 amino acids long. Therefore, a requisite for all 
MHC class-II binding prediction approaches is the capacity to identify the correct 9-mer core residues within longer peptide sequences 
that mediate the binding interaction. For Gibbs sampler method, we compared the predicted cores with the true cores extracted from 
crystal structures (Table 3 under ). Gibbs sampler methods had limited 
success (40¢) as shown in the Table 4 (see ), although they still perform 
above random prediction (the probability to randomly guess the right core for a 15-mer peptide is 1 out of 7 or 14¢). Thus the 
Gibbs sampler and weight matrix approaches are only suited to describe sequence motifs of fixed length e.g. 9-mer amino acids and 
suitable for prediction of a binding event in situations, where the binding specificity can be represented independently at each 
position in the motif This assumption can only be considered to be an approximation and in the binding of a peptide to the MHC molecule 
the amino acids might for instance compete for the space available in the binding grove where artificial neural networks with a hidden 
layer are generally used to describe sequence patterns. Overall, these data suggest that there is a substantial room to improve the 
quality of the core predictions using novel approaches that capture distinct features of MHC-peptide interactions.

Conclusion
As, the identification of MHC class-I and II restricted epitopes using wet lab experiments are expensive and time consuming, 
the computational methods can be used as a fast alternatives. Although the prediction of peptide that bind to MHC class-II did not 
perform well as the MHC class-I molecules, however, it is able to identify the 9-mer cores of a binding peptide with limited accuracy 
(40¢) above the random prediction (14¢). Therefore, the size of dataset (training and validation) and the correct 
identification of the binding core are the two main factors limiting the performance of MHC binding prediction and thus, there is a 
substantial room to improve the quality of the core predictions. Finally, we hope that novel approaches that capture distinct features 
of MHC class-I and II peptide interactions could lead to more useful predictions than the current approaches.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are grateful to Mr. Akhilesh Singh, Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University, Lucknow campus for their critical 
reading of the manuscript and valuable suggestions.We are also thankful to U.P Technical University, Lucknow and Amity University 
Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow for their laboratory support to research work.

Performance of the MHC class I binding peptide predictor based on sequence weighting schemes and ANN using the validation 
datasets Survivin, CMV and Combined-I. Vertical axes shows the values of Aroc (a for weight marix, b for ANN) and 
CC (c for weight matrix, d for ANN) while horizontal axes shows HLA class I alleles and validation datasets.

Performance of the MHC class II binding peptide predictor based on Gibbs motif sampler and sequence weighting schemes using 
the validation dataset combined-II. Vertical axes shows the values of Aroc (e) and CC (f) while horizontal axes shows HLA class II 
alleles and sequence weighting schemes.

