Background
The disease, gonorrhea is a wide spread sexually transmitted disease
caused by infection and transmission of N. gonorrhoeae. It is a drastic
disease responsible for developing acquired immune deficiency syndrome(AIDS). Several attempts have been made for the development of vaccines
for drastic diseases like AIDS [] and flue viruses []. Vaccine
development for gonorrhea, an age old disease is not in sight. However,
several vaccine targets viz. protein-I B (porB) [], opacity protein (opa),
lipo-oligosaccharides, protein-I, lactoferrin-1 and -2 (lbpl, lbp2),
Immunoglobulin A1 (IgA1) proteases [], phospholipase A (pldA) [],
transferrin-binding protein -A and -B (tbpA and tbpB) [–], 2C7
oligosaccharide [] have been identified for N. gonorrhoeae and few of
them viz. pili (US4443431), T-cell stimulating protein-A and -B (tspA and
tspB) (US6861507) have been patented. However, the problem still
remains unsolved. Candidate vaccines identified and tested from these
targets are only partially successful perhaps due to wide adoptability of the
gonococcus, lack of proper animal models for the disease, cell lines to
produce the vaccine, and inadequate immune response of used epitopes
derived from these target proteins.

Secreted and surface proteins of any
given pathogen are mostly antigenic and are responsible for pathogenicity
[]. Hence, these are good vaccine candidates. B-cell epitopes are parts of
proteins that are antigenic and therefore are recognized by the antibodies.
Identification of B-cell epitopes is useful development of diagnostic tests
and can be employed as the first step in vaccine designing []. Similarly,
effective immune response depends on specificity and diversity of the
antigen binding to the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) alleles [] class I
(recognizes CD8+ T-cells) and class II (recognizes CD4+ T-cells) [,].
The HLA molecules are highly polymorphic and according to IMGT/HLA
Database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/imgt/hla/stats.html), there are 4,633 HLA
alleles (Class-I =3,411 and Class-II = 1,222) []. Among these,
DRB1*0101, DRB1*0301, DRB1*0401, DRB1*0701, DRB1*1801,
DRB1*1101 and DRB1*1501 of Class-II HLA alleles are most frequent
(20-50%) []. Evidences are that gonococcal infection decreases the
CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell counts [,] and Pili proteins modulate initial
CD4+ T-cell proliferation and regulatory T-cell activation thereby may
evoke immune responses []. Therefore both these T-cells mediated
immunities should be considered in designing peptide vaccines against N.
gonorrhoeae. A list of previously reported T-epitopes is given in  ).

Compared to the conventional vaccines, peptide or epitope based vaccines
are easy to produce, more specific, and also safe. The advent of human
genome project, sequencing and functional annotation of several
pathogenic bacteria has boosted peptide based vaccine designing. Efficacy
of computational prediction of effective B-cell and T-cell epitopes forms
pathogenic genome as the key success to develop such vaccines. It is
recommended to get an overview of various computational approaches in
this regard [].

Previously, we have reported several membrane associated essential
proteins of the gonococcus using computational approaches that can be
used in designing new vaccine (s) against the pathogen [] In the present
study, four such membrane associated essential gonococcal proteins are
explored for designing peptide vaccine (s) using a novel in silico strategy
combined with simulation and fold level verification to identify best
possible and most effective epitopes that can produce both the B-cell and
T-cell mediated immunity.

Methodology
Prediction of antigenic B-cell epitopes
 Four essential membrane proteins
namely D-alanine­­D­alanine ligase (ddl), Sulfate transport permease
protein C (cysW), Competence lipoprotein (comL), and Type IV pilin
protein (pilV) of N. gonorrhoeae virulent strain FA 1090 earlier identified
as best vaccine candidates [] were selected for the current study and a
novel approach of epitope designing was adopted where an epitope should
produce both the B-cell and T-cell mediated immunity.

The complete amino acid sequence of each protein was retrieved from
Swiss-Prot protein database (http://us.expasy.org/sprot) and analyzed using
VaxiJen v2.0 antigen prediction server []. The default parameters
(threshold=0.4, ACC out put) were used against bacterial species to check
the antigenicity of each full length protein. Proteins having antigenic score
&gt;0.5 were selected. Each selected full length amino acid sequence was then
subjected to transmembrane topology analysis using TMHMM v0.2
prediction server [] in order to identify exo-membrane (surface exposed)
amino acid sequences of each protein.

For prediction of B-cell epitopes, each full length protein sequence was
subjected to BCPreds analysis [] and all predicted B-cell epitopes (20
mers) having a BCPreds cutoff score &gt;0.8 were selected. Selected B-cell
epitopes were then subsequently checked for membrane topology by
comparing with TMHMM results for exo-membrane amino acid
sequences. Surface exposed B-cell epitope sequences having the cutoff
value for BCPreds (&gt;0.8) were selected and further analyzed using VaxiJen
(threshold=0.4, ACC out put) to check the antigenicity. Finally 2-3
epitopes with top VaxiJen scores were selected for use in prediction of Tcell
epitopes.

Prediction of T-cell epitopes from B-cell epitopes
T-cell epitopes were predicted from the selected B-cell epitopes. Both the
sequence based and structure based QSAR simulation approaches were
taken into account to predict T-cell epitopes and two screening steps were
adopted. In the first screening, the selection criteria were: 
the sequence should bind to both the MHC class-I and class-II molecules and minimum
number of total interacting MHC molecules should be &gt;15,

the sequence must interact with HLA-DRB1*0101 of MHC class-II, and

should be antigenic based on VaxiJen score.

Propred-1 (47 MHC Class-I alleles) [] and 
Propred (51 MHC Class-II alleles) [] servers that utilize
amino acid position coefficients inferred from literature employing linear
prediction model [], were used to identify common epitopes that bind to
both the MHC class molecules as well as to count total numbers of
interacting MHC alleles. For QSAR simulation approach, the half maximal
(50%) inhibitory concentration (IC50) and antigenicity of common epitopes
predicted by Propred-1 and Propred was calculated using MHCPred v.2
[] server (selecting DRB1*0101) and VaxiJen, respectively. Epitopes
with highest antigenicity and those bind more than 15 MHC molecules
comprising of both the MHC class I and II alleles and less than 100 nM
IC50 scores for DRB1*0101 were selected. The second screening was
structure based and QSAR simulation methods using T-Epitope Designer
(http://www.bioinformation.net/ted/) 
[] and MHCPred, respectively. Tepitope
Designer predicts HLA-peptide binding based on virtual binding
pockets using X-ray crystal structures of HLA-peptide complexes followed
by calculation of peptide binding to binding pockets. The server can screen
peptides for &gt;1000 HLA alleles. In the second screening, the criteria were:
binding prediction with large number of HLA alleles (&gt;1000),

the peptide should bind &gt; 75% of total HLA molecules,

must bind with high scores to A*0201, A*0204, and B*2705, and

must bind to DRB1*0101 and DRB1*0401.

  T-epitope Designer was used for criteria i),
ii), and iii) and MHCPred was used for selection of DRB1*0101 and
DRB1*0401 binding peptides. The final list of epitopes was made with
non overlapping peptide sequences that pass these above mentioned
criteria and VaxiJen and IC50 scores. Selected epitopes were further
analyzed for fold level topology.

Epitope analysis
Homology modeling for each full length protein was carried out using
Phyre version 2.0 web servers [] and best models were selected based on
super families and E-values of templates. The 3D folding and clusters of
epitopes in folded protein were analyzed to confirm the exo-membrane
topology of these epitopes using Pepitope server []. Pepitope was fed
with Phyre derived 3D structures of each protein and all identified epitopes
from the same protein to analyze the linear alignment of epitopes on the
corresponding protein and to determine the epitope clusters and exomembrane
position of epitopes in the folded proteins. The detailed method
has been represented in .

Results
Antigenicity and topology of selected proteins
VaxiJen analysis of exo-membrane full length proteins selected for this
study exhibited various degree of antigenicity ranging from 0.3986 to
0.6091 ( ). Out of the four
essential membrane proteins, cysW showed highest antigenicity (0.6091).
Although comL exhibited the lowest score (0.3986) and predicted to be
non-antigenic by VaxiJen, it was also considered for further analysis. The
basic criterion of a good epitope is that it must be exposed to cell outside.
The transmembrane topology analyses of these proteins were done using
TMHMM and the result revealed that ddl (1- 304 amino acids) and comL
(1- 267 amino acids) are fully exposed to outside of the membrane. The
exo-membrane amino acid sequences of cysW are 42 ― 66 and 129 ― 137,
and for pilV, the sequence is 30 - 129 (Table 2, column 6) ( ).

Antigenic B-cell epitopes
A peptide should be hydrophilic and produce both the B-cell and T-cell
mediated immunity for becoming a good vaccine candidate []. Therefore
to identify such epitopes, full length proteins were first subjected to B-cell
epitope prediction using BCpreds and all B-cell epitopes were listed from
each protein ( ). Best epitopes were
selected based on the criteria as mentioned in methods. In general,
epitopes having BCpreds and VaxiJen cutoff values respectively &gt;0.8 and
&gt;0.4 were selected except epitope from cysW where only one 20 mers
epitope was found exposed to cell out side that has the BCpred and
VaxiJen scores respectively 0.056 and 0.6316 ( ). Therefore, two epitopes each from ddl, comL,
and pilV and one from cysW were finally selected for further analysis
( ).

B-cell epitopes derived T-cell epitopes
Each selected B-cell epitope was analyzed for identification of T-cell
epitopes within the B-cell epitope sequence. For the first level screening,
Propred-I (47 MHC Class-I alleles), Propred (51 MHC Class-II alleles),
and MHCPred (DRB1*0101 allele) were used to identify common T-cell
epitopes that share B-cell epitope sequence, can interact with both the
MHC classes with highest number, and specifically interact with
DRB1*0101 (as the DRB1*0101 is commonest bound allele, therefore the
interaction epitope should produce better antigenic response) [] 
(). At the second level of screening, identified peptides in the first screen
were used to predict their binding abilities to &gt;1000 MHC alleles using TEpitope
Designer and epitopes that bind to &gt;75% alleles were selected
(). Similarly, as A*0201, A*0204, and B*2705 alleles are mostly
used in various prediction methods [], we set the cut off that selected
peptides must bind to these three HLA molecules and T-epitope Designer
was also used for this purpose ( ).
Since the frequency of DRB1*0101 and DRB1*0401 alleles of MHC
class-II is 20-50% [], we selected T-epitopes that interact with these two
HLA molecules using MHCPred as described in methods ( ). The final list of epitopes was made with non
overlapping peptide sequences that confirm the above mentioned criteria
and VaxiJen and IC50 scores ( ).
Finally, one epitope from each ddl, comL, cysW, and pilV are found to be
prospective candidates for vaccine design ( ). Selected epitopes were further analyzed for
fold level topology.

Clusters and folding of epitopes
There is every possibility of the identified epitopes getting folded inside
the tertiary structure of the corresponding protein. Therefore, a fold level
analysis of all identified epitopes was carried out to determine the position
of epitopes in folded proteins and to confirm their exo-membrane
topology. Homology based 3D structures of all four proteins were carried
out using Phyre server as described under Methods. The Table 7 ( ) represents the summary of Phyre results.
Analysis of the epitope clusters and positions of epitopes with in the folded
protein by Pepitope showed that identified all epitopes are situated within
clusters having acceptable scores, located at the surface of the
corresponding protein, and exposed to cell out side ( , bold highlighted in last column, and  ).
Therefore, these results confirmed the suitability of all identified epitopes
as prospective vaccine candidates.

Discussion
Bioinformatics approaches have been successfully used for identification
of vaccine candidates in several pathogenic bacteria viz. Bacillus anthracis
[], Helicobacter pylori [] and computer assisted epitope designing and
peptide vaccine have been reported for many bacterial and viral pathogens
including HIV [], malaria []. In the present study, various
bioinformatics tools have been used to identify and characterize potential
epitopes from four vaccine targets of N. gonorrhoeae that might be
effective to produce both the B-cell and T-cell mediated immunity. The
identified epitopes are highly expected to bind both the class of MHC
molecules specifically, A*0201, A*0204, B*2705, DRB1*0101, and
DRB1*0401, that are most frequent MHC alleles in human population.

VaxiJen [] that predicts antigenicity based on auto cross covariance
(ACC) transformation of protein sequences into uniform vectors of
principal amino acid properties with 82% accuracy, 91% sensitivity, and
72% specificity for bacterial species based on leave-one-out crossvalidation
(LOO-CV) was used in this study to identify antigenicity of
proteins and peptides. Strategically, B-cell epitope identification can be
adopted as first step in vaccine designing [] and BCpreds [] that uses a
novel method of subsequence kernel was used to predict linear B-cell
epitopes from each protein. A good peptide vaccine must be exposed to
cell out side and to predict the exo-membrane topology of amino acid
sequences, TMHMM v0.2 prediction server [] was used. In silico
quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) [] based T-cell
epitopes have been reported recently. MHCPred [] that uses additive
method for binding affinity prediction of MHC molecules and the
Transporter Associated with Processing (TAP) generates allele specific
QSAR models using partial least squares (PLS) were used in the present
study. MHCPred has been used to identify T-cell epitopes for malarial
merozoite surface protein-1 [] and a combination of SYFPEITHI,
NetMHC. The MHCPred has been used for Epstein-Barr virus latent
membrane protein-2A []. Similarly, Propred and Propred-1 have been
also used for the same purpose and these two server based T-cell epitope
prediction have recently been reported for development of dengue virus
vaccine []. To select MHC molecule binding peptides from a large
number of MHC pool, we have also used T-Epitope Designer that predicts
HLA-peptide binding calculated from structure based virtual binding
pockets of HLA-peptide complexes []. We have also used two screening
strategies to select T-epitopes in this study. The identified epitopes have
been further characterized with Peptiope server [] that predicts
discontinuous epitopes based on a set of peptides that were affinityselected
against a monoclonal antibody or peptides extracted from a phage
display library. It also aligns a linear peptide sequence onto a 3D protein
structure. Therefore, pepitope is helpful to identify epitopes based on
physicochemical properties and spatial or fold level organization.

Considering the highest number of MHC allele binding epitope at the first
level of T-epitope screening, “LNSSNYTRA” from comL cluster-I (Score:
18.045, Residue No: 10) is found to bind total 31 MHC alleles. Although it
showed an antigenicity score of 0.8605, because of its high IC50 value for
DRB1*0101 (216.77 nM), it may not be considered as a good vaccine
candidate. Another epitope “LNKLASQDW” from comL Cluster-III
(Score: 10.899, Residue. No: 10) that binds total 18 MHC molecules has
antigenicity and IC50 scores 0.7699 and 36.39 nM, respectively. Therefore,
this epitope is a better option than the previous one. The third epitope
“DELNSSNYT” from comL cluster-I is found to bind total 11 MHC
molecules but does not interact with any MHC-II alleles as per the Propred
analysis. But the epitope has antigenic and IC50 (DRB1*0101) scores
1.0744 and 52.84 nM, respectively. Therefore, it is evident that epitope
prediction differs according to different algorithms and the epitope
“DELNSSNYT” may not be a good candidate for use as vaccine ( ). Based on the second level screening, it has
been found that epitope sequence “LNKLASQDW” can probably interact
with all the HLA alleles (&gt;1000) and specifically binds to our selected
HLA molecules (A*0201, A*0204, B*2705, DRB1*0101, and
DRB1*0401) with acceptable scores based on T-Epitope Designer,
MHCPreds, and VaxiJen analysis ( ,  
, and  ). 
Therefore this “LNKLASQDW” epitope is finally selected from
comL.

Three epitopes from pilV are selected based on antigenic scores and IC50
values at screening-I. Epitopes “TCTVTLNDG” and “ETCTVTLND” of
cluster-II (Score: 24.626, Residue. No: 13) showed antigenic scores 0.8669
and 1.1813, respectively. However, similar to the comL “DELNSSNYT”
epitope, these two epitopes do not interact with any MHC-II alleles as per
the Propred analysis but have IC50 values 5.66nM and 40.64nM,
respectively for DRB1*0101 as analyzed with MHCpred. Therefore, these
two epitopes may not be considered as vaccine candidates based on the
same ground similar to comL. The third epitope “FEKYDSTKL” in
cluster-I (Score: 43.692, Residue No: 17) is found to bind total 25 MHC
molecules comprising of both the classes. The epitope has antigenicity and
IC50 values 0.8655 and 8.73, respectively. Therefore, this epitope can be
considered as best epitope among all epitopes derived form pilV ( ). Results from the second level screening
(  and  ) also support its usefulness
to be potential peptide vaccine.

Although the full-length protein is non-antigenic, one epitope
“WDLYLKSLS” from cysW Cluster-I (Score: 46.051, Residue No: 13) is
found antigenic (VaxiJen score: 1.3624) and can bind total 20 MHC
molecules comprising of both the MHC classes. The IC50 value of this
epitope for DRB1*0101 is 11.69 nM which indicates good inhibition of a
given biological process by half (Table 4 see ).
The epitope has also been found to bind selected MHC molecules
(A*0201, A*0204, B*2705, and DRB1*0401) and more than 80% HLA
molecules selected for second level T-epitope screening in this study
(  and ). Therefore this epitope can
be considered for vaccine development.

Among the identified epitopes from ddl, “YGEDGAVQG” of cluster-III
having VaxiJen and IC50 scores 2.6304 and 20.18, respectively binds total
20 MHC alleles comprising of both the classes. This epitope is found to be
best epitope having highest antigenicity among all epitopes identified from
four proteins under study. Another epitope “YAFDPKETP” from ddl is
also found suitable that has antigenicity and IC50 scores 0.6362 and 51.29
nM, respectively. This epitope is located in cluster-I (Score: 12.871,
Residue No: 9) and interacts with 13 MHC class-I and 8 MHC class-II
alleles ( ). However, in the second
screening, “YGEDGAVQG” peptide fails to bind A*0201, and A*0204
with positive scores (Table 6 see ) and is also
capable to bind only 70% HLA molecules ( ) based on T-Epitope Designer analysis. Therefore this epitope
may not be suitable for designing a vaccine against the pathogen.

Conclusion
In this study, by using computational approaches based on sequence,
structure, QSAR, simulation, and fold level analysis, we identified four
potential T-epitopes derived from antigenic B-cell epitopes of four exomembrane
essential proteins of N. gonorrhoeae. Selected T-epitopes
[“LNKLASQDWȍ from coml., “FEKYDSTKL” from pilV,
“WDLYLKSLS” from cysW, and “YAFDPKETP” from ddl] are antigenic
and have much potential to interact with most common human HLA alleles
(A*0201, A*0204, B*2705, DRB1*0101, and DRB1*0401). These
epitopes are also found to interact with &gt;75% of HLA molecules in a
binding screening using T-Epitope Designer (that contains &gt;1000 HLA
molecules). Therefore these selected epitopes are likely to induce both the
B-cell and T-cell mediated immune responses. Homology and simulation
results also support the suitability of these epitopes as vaccine candidates.
However, there are several pitfalls in developing a good vaccine and
moreover there is lack of proper experimental disease model for
gonorrhea; suitable animal model should be used for experimental
validation of these epitopes to confirm these in silico results.

Financial disclosure
This work was carried out without any grant or financial support. There is
no conflict of interest regarding this work.

Author contributions
DB: analyzed data and wrote the paper. ANM and AK provided inputs,
reviewed analysis, and edited the article.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We duly acknowledge the motivation and encouragement of all IIOAB
members throughout the study. 

Citation:Barh et al, Bioinformation 5(2): 77-85 (2010)

Flow chart of the overall epitope designing methodology employed in this study

Fold level characterization of cluster and topoloty of best epitopes using Pepitope (in white). Cluster numbers are also represented. A) ddl, B)
cysW, C) ComL, and D) pilV.

