Background
Protein aggregation has been considered as an unwanted and unproductive
phenomenon in biological applications involving proteins 
[]. It can be defined
as a process by which a homogeneous protein solution separates into two
phases comprising aggregate phase having significant intermolecular
interactions and the other one having dilute supernatant of isolated protein 
[].
Like crystallization, aggregation is governed by details of structure of protein
and chemical and physical conditions of environment i.e., protein solution 
[].
Aggregates may be formed by various mechanisms and may be classified in
several manners into soluble/insoluble, native/denatured, covalent/noncovalent
and reversible/irreversible etc 
[]. Aggregation is generally accompanied by
conformational change of protein, which can be induced by thermal, enzymatic
or chemical perturbations affecting the native folded structure of protein 
[].

Several studies have been done which show specificity of aggregates. Study
done by Bohr et al., indicates that given some conditions, aggregates are
strongly affected by shape of each protein molecule 
[]. As per another study
protein monomer surface characteristics profoundly affect the structure and
morphology of protein aggregates. Physicochemical nature of protein surfaces
including distribution of hydrophobic and hydrophilic sites on the monomer
surface controls the organization of aggregates 
[]. Some evidences regarding
specificity of aggregates, show that a minor change in amino acid sequence of
protein can prevent or increase aggregation of protein. In a study done on viral
coat proteins, King et al., found that mutant viral coat protein having a single
amino acid change, folded at low temperatures normally, but at higher
temperatures it self-assembled into aggregates. This aggregation at high
temperatures was not found in normal protein 
[]. Another study done by
David Brems et al., on bovine growth hormone, showed that mutation
prevented its aggregation but did not affect its folding 
[]. These studies gave
rise to concept that aggregation may also be preprogrammed into amino acid
sequence just like folding and aggregates should not be considered as just a
nonspecific mess []. 
We started our work considering that, as protein folding
and aggregation both are linked to amino acid sequence, pattern of protein
folding and aggregation should be considerably specific to concerned protein.
In our previous studies, we showed that multifractal property of heat denatured
aggregates ‘Intensity level based Multi-Fractal Dimension’ (ILMFD) of
different proteins differ from each other and can be used to discriminate them
[,
].
In this work the scope of ILMFD has been extended by including four
different fractals viz., perimeter fractal dimension giving ILMFDP, perimeterarea
relationship giving ILMFDPAR, area fractal dimension giving ILMFDA,
and, perimeter-area fractal dimension defining ILMFDPA.

Taking cue from the published works on nature of aggregates showing
specificity to their seed proteins, in this work we have put our effort to
investigate whether multifractal property, i.e., ILMFD features derived from
microscopic images of heat denatured protein aggregates (HDPA), are linked to
the surface geometrical property of its seed protein represented by surface
roughness index (SRI). We utilized recurrent backpropagation network to
generate mapping function to derive SRI as a function of ILMFD with
subsequent clustering of its outputs. Finally the largest cluster center of the
outputs was utilized to derive SRI. Accuracies of methods utilizing different
ILMFD features were compared. The result of our approach indicated that the
estimated function can be utilized as an experiment support system to derive
information about surface property of proteins for which no folded structure is
available yet.

Methodology
Preparation of Heat Denatured Protein Aggregates
Proteins viz., albumin, cytochrome c, ferritin hemoglobin, insulin and
lysozyme were obtained from Sigma Aldrich (USA). Protein solutions were
prepared in milipore water at concentration of 25 mg/cc and put in hot water
bath having temperature 100°C for 15 minutes to obtain Heat Denatured
Protein Aggregates (HDPAs).

Microscopic Visualization of Aggregates and Image Collection
Suspension of HDPAs kept at hemocytometer slides (Model: Neubauer
Chamber, Marienfeld, Germany) and covered with thin microscopic glass
cover slip, was visualized at 400X magnification using phase contrast
microscope (Leica Model DML-B2). Digital images of aggregates were
captured using a camera (Canon PowerShot S50) at optical zoom 2X. Thus
cumulative optical zoom of the microscope and camera was 800X. 50 images
of different HDPAs were captured for each protein.

Image Processing
Each aggregate image converted to grey scale and was resized from original
size of 2592x1944 pixels was resized to 1/3rd of the original size to ease
further processing. Portion of image having aggregate was segmented out from
each image making the background pixel intensity zero. Each segmented image
having intensity range from 0 to 255, was splitted into 10 binary images on the
basis of fixed intensity-ranges by applying the rule described by Singh et al.
(2005) [].

Intensity level based Multi-Fractal Dimension for Aggregate Images
Four types of ILMFD features were calculated for each of the aggregate image
using box counting method [,
]. Areas (A), perimeter (P) of aggregates
were measured at different box sizes (S) of pixel unit for 10 binary images
representing each aggregate image. Area was measured as the number of boxes
required to cover the aggregate part of image. Similarly, perimeter of aggregate
was measured as the number of boxes making the periphery of the aggregate
part of segmented aggregate images. Perimeter fractal dimension was measured
as the slope of the linear regression plot (LRP) between log (P) and log(S), at
different scales (box size), for 10 binary images derived from segmented
aggregate image. Perimeter-area relationship was calculated as slope of LRP
between log(P) and log(A) at different scales. Area fractal dimension was
calculated as the slope of LRP between log(A) and log(S), considering different
scales i.e., box sizes. Similarly perimeter-area fractal dimension was calculated
as slope of LRP between two variables derived from P, A, and S as x= log(P/S),
and y=(log(A))/2 - log(S). Thus each aggregate image was represented by 10
fractal dimensions, cumulatively referred to as ILMFD (see 
). 
As we had measured four different types of fractal dimensions for
each binary image, four different types of ILMFD parameters were obtained as
ILMFDA, ILMFDP, ILMFDPA, and ILMFDPAR from area fractal dimension,
perimeter fractal dimension, perimeter area fractal dimension and perimeter
area relationship respectively.

Computing SRI for proteins
Surface property of folded native proteins was represented by surface
roughness index (SRI) which was computed following published protocol 
[].
PDB files representing native folded structure of proteins were procured from
Protein data bank (PDB). PDB coordinates were changed into orientation
invariant coordinate system (ICS) to represent molecules in uniform manner.
First the centre of gravity (CG) was calculated by taking the mean of
coordinates of the atoms. Calculated CG was taken as the origin O of ICS. The
point on molecule surface that was placed at maximum Euclidian distance from
O was taken as Z point and the line connecting O and Z was taken as Z axis.
For fixing X and Y planes, a slice of thickness ΔZ, chosen by trial and error,
was considered. The point at maximum distance in the slice was fixed as T
point and the line joining O and T was considered as X axis. The Y axis was
deduced as the axis perpendicular to both the X and Z axis. After calculating x,
y, and z axes of ICS, the Cartesian coordinates of proteins were transformed to
invariant coordinates. Finally surface of each protein was divided into eight
octants and standard deviations of distances of Cα atoms of surface residues in
each octant from ICS origin were calculated. This set of eight standard
deviations constituted SRI for concerned protein as shown in Table 1(see
).

Mapping of ILMFD to SRI using Neurocognitive Protocol
We used a protocol employing a recurrent backpropagation neural network
(RBPN) supported by a two tier clustering of decisions obtained through RBPN
to predict SRI for 4 ILMFD types. Each of the four ILMFD features was used
separately for prediction of SRI of constituent proteins, up to first tier
clustering of decisions. Decisions obtained from different ILMFD features
through first tier of clustering, were combined (details given in latter section) to
get a combined mapping efficiency of all the four ILMFD features. The
clustering method was however adopted from the work of Wallis and Bülthoff
[], 
who attributed human cognitive success to its capability to combine
decisions obtained from temporal inputs. In our work we have converted the
idea of temporal inputs into input ensemble or multiple inputs, assuming inputs
followed Ergodic hypothesis [].

The ILMFD data obtained from six proteins, comprised of 50 images for each
protein. ILMFD data for 35 images of each protein was used as training input.
Data for remaining 15 images for each protein was used as test set. SRI values
of these proteins were used as target output for training. Training ILMFD data
was normalized by subtracting their respective column mean from them. For
the purpose of mapping the output data (i.e., SRI data having a set of 8 surface
roughness indices) the target was scaled to the range 0 to 1 by dividing each of
them by their corresponding index-maximum. 8 such maxima thus constitute
the SRImax. For initial mapping ILMFD to SRI, we used Elman network, which
is a recurrent backpropagation network (RBPN) having a feedback connection
from the output of hidden layer to its input with delay of one time step. The
network architecture used in our work comprised of three layers viz., input,
hidden and output layer comprising 10, 12 and 8 neurons respectively. Hidden
layer was the recurrent layer. Transfer functions in the hidden layer and output
layer were tan sigmoid and log sigmoid respectively. Mean square error was
used as a performance function. Trained Elman network was simulated with
test data normalized using mean derived from training input data. Outputs of
network for test data were reverted from 0-1 range to original range by
multiplying with corresponding index-maximum. To improve the results of
RBPN, SRI values mapped for each protein using different ILMFD features
were clustered separately to evaluate the general tendency of the mapping
decisions. For this purpose hierarchical clustering was applied and hierarchy
was chosen as 4 after certain trials. Center of the largest cluster was considered
as the output decision of first tier of clustering. Then largest clusters obtained
for decisions from each of the 4 ILMFD features were combined and again
clustered using hierarchy level as 2. Finally the predicted SRI was calculated as
mean and median of decisions clustered in the larger cluster.

Computing Efficiency of Mapping of ILMFD to SRI
First, output of RBPN was converted to mapped SRI (SRI mapi) for any i-th
ILMFD data by multiplying it with SRImax. Mapping deviation (i.e., the error in
mapping) for i-th data of each protein was calculated as given in
.

Discussion
Mapping Efficiency of RBPN and clustering of decisions protocol
Initially RBPN was utilized for mapping ILMFD into SRI. Its average mapping
efficiency for training set was found to be 95.93%, 88.57%, 90.18%, and
98.08% for ILMFDP, ILMFDA, ILMFDPA, and ILMFDPAR respectively. Table 1
shows a comparative profile of mapping efficiencies by RBPN and first tier of
clustering for test set (). 
 shows mapping efficiency by
application of second tier of clustering. The result of application of second tier
of clustering shows improvement in mapping efficiency as compared to that
obtained without clustering on test set (Table 2 see 
).
For further validation, target SRI and mapped SRI values obtained at second
tier of clustering were compared graphically ().

Potential applicability of ILMFD based protocol
Current methods for deriving proteins' surface proper-ties predominantly rely
on its evaluated structure. Structure evaluation by X-Ray crystallography,
NMR methods and all other methods including comparative model based
methods has typical shortcoming of nearly 10% applicability among the
proteins with known sequences. Therefore for rest of the proteins having no
known and reliable structural model, it still remained a difficult task if not
impossible to derive information about its structural properties. In this
situation, we propose an Experiment Support System (ESS) to derive crucial
information from simple but universally applicable experiments which were
not apparent from the firsthand outputs of these experiments. We made the
target as a protein surface geometric property, SRI and, first hand output,
ILMFD of experiment on microscopic image of HDPA as input-feed to the
ESS template [,
,
]. 
Since importance of rough part of a protein surface
to attach small molecules was already known, we have chosen SRI as our target
parameter []. 
This is further justified because it was already reported that
SRI represented scale and rotation independent profile of protein surface
roughness and was capable to predict SCOP family of protein 
[].

Aggregates as starting point of protocol
The question of using aggregates as the starting point of our ESS can be
answered considering, first, one of the factors governing protein aggregation is
protein surface and secondly, like ordered assembly of proteins (crystals),
disordered and irregular aggregate patterns are also worth investigation by the
commonly available tools, e.g., fractal dimensional analysis. For this reason,
we have considered scale and rotation independent intensity level multifractal
dimension of aggregate images obtained from standard and same experimental
condition. As we have utilized hemocytometer slides under transmission light
microscopy, the images formed could be considered as 2 dimensional
projections of the aggregates as shown in . Our basic assumption was
that there was a statistically comprehensible homogenous spread of the
aggregate mass within its microenvironment and therefore its intensity
distribution would reflect the same within its image. Moreover the raw
intensity profile could be non-specific in nature because of presence of various
sizes of aggregates. To solve this problem, we have considered the scale
dependence of aggregate mass represented by its corresponding intensities at its
different levels by calculating fractal dimension at each level of intensity.

Handling of noisy data with clustering of decisions
There was presence of noisy data due to possible accumulation of errors at each
level of the overall experimental steps however simple it is, and its
manifestation to form and give raw images of aggregates. Moreover, since both
of the parameters ILMFD and SRI were extracted from irregular or rough
objects, success in getting a robust approximation of their derived values was
difficult to obtain. This further pointed out presence of ambiguous or confusing
data especially for ILMFD and also showed difficulty involved in designing a
function for one to one mapping from ILMFD to SRI. To rule out the
contribution of these noisy data in the overall mapping process we introduced
the concept of “use of multiple test data” to predict general tendency of the
mapped values as obtained through the ESS-outputs based on RBPN. In this
context, we assumed that there should be fewer occurrence of noisy data and
therefore if we cluster the mapped outputs obtained from multiple test data, the
smaller clusters should contain those noisy data. On the contrary, applying
same logic we may expect that the largest cluster should hold the information
of the general tendency of the larger section of the data which were assumed as
predominantly set of correct data only. Although this argument points existence
of only two such clusters but after several trials we found best result of
mapping for 4 clusters. Probable explanation of more than 2 clusters might be
due to presence of different amount of noise within the set of data, whereas
largest cluster showed the data with least noise and the remaining smaller 3
clusters represented data of higher noise levels.

Conclusion
In this work, we have shown that a simple experiment on heat denatured
protein aggregation can be made more effective in drawing useful information
on protein surface roughness with the help of Experiment Support System
based on the computational strategy proposed by us. In this direction, our study
shows the specificity of protein aggregate feature, intensity level based multi
fractal property of heat denatured protein aggregates, to accurately predict
Surface Roughness Index of the single seed protein without using its already
evaluated structure. It also indicates that structural information of a protein may
be conserved in its aggregates.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are thankful to MHRD, Govt. of India and ICMR, Govt. of India for
approval of grants (No.F.26-14/2003.T.S.V.Dated 14.01.2004 and No.
52/8/2005-BMS, dated 4/2/10) for this work.

Citation:Mishra &amp; Lahiri, Bioinformation 6(4): 158-161 (2011)

Graphical representation of original SRI (triangles connected by
dotted lines) and predicted SRI (squares connected by solid lines) values
obtained from cluster median after application of second tier of clustering.
Plots A-F represent proteins albumin, cytochrome c, ferritin, hemoglobin,
insulin, and lysozyme respectively.

Representative HDPA images of A) albumin, B) cytochrome c, C)
ferritin, D) hemoglobin, E) insulin, and F) Lysozyme

