Background
Comprehensive data for protein interactions have been
accumulating based on large-scale hybridization methods 
[,
]
and make it possible to understand the evolution of cellular
networks at the system rather than the gene level. Protein
interaction networks are known to show remarkable global
structures, with scale-free and small-world properties. A scalefree
structure is a network structure that exhibits power-law
distributions of connectivity; most network components have a
few connections while some components are extremely highly
connected. In contrast, a small-world structure is a network
structure that exhibits high clustering coefficients 
[]. To
explain the evolutionary processes of protein interaction
networks possessing scale-free and small-world structures,
preferential attachment and duplication-divergence models
have been proposed as mathematical models. A preferential
attachment model was proposed to generate a power-law
distributed network of proteins []. In this model, new nodes
are added to a pre-existing network, and are connected to each
of the pre-existing nodes with a probability proportional to the
number of connections for each of the original nodes. This
model has showed that hub proteins having a high connection
degree are evolutionarily old []. Duplication-divergence
models have also been proposed to generate a scale-free and
small-world network of proteins [] that assumes gene
duplication plus re-wiring of the newly created proteins. In
contrast, as molecular evolutionary analysis, yeast proteins
have been classified into isotemporal categories according to
their molecular evolutionary histories []. It showed that two
proteins tend to interact with each other if they are in the same
or similar categories, but otherwise to avoid each other. This
observation suggests that synergistic selection is at work
during network evolution and provides insights into the
hierarchical “modularity” of cellular networks.

A modular structure is a third remarkable structural
characteristic of a protein interaction network [,
]. Yook et al.
showed yeast protein interaction networks exhibit scale-free 
and hierarchical modularity, and suggested that modules
should appear as distinct group of nodes that are highly
interconnected with each other but have only a few links to
nodes outside of the module []. Fernandez showed the trend
toward increasing modularity associated with evolutionary
change in the yeast protein interaction network 
[].We herein
propose a hypothesis of modularity in the evolution of yeast
protein interaction network based on an examination of
relationships between the evolutionary ages of yeast proteins
and their connection degrees.

Methodology
Data collection:
We collected yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) protein interaction
data from the MIPS (Munch Information Center for Protein
Sequences) CYGD (Comprehensive Yeast Genome Database)
at 
http://mips.gsf.de/genre/proj/yeast/index.jsp 
[], which
includes integrated data from Y2H (Yeast 2 hybrid), TAP
(tandem affinity purification), and immunocoprecipitation
experiments. We extracted maximum component of yeast
protein interaction network which contains 3,801 proteins and
9,742 physical interactions. Functional annotations of yeast
proteins based on the Gene Ontology (GO) were retrieved
from the Saccharomyces Genome Database at 
http://www.yeastgenome.org/ 
(Oct 28, 2006). We collected amino acid
sequences of 379 bacterias, Arabidopsis thaliana,
Schizosaccharomycespombe, Saccharomyces cerevisiae (these are
from the NCBI RefSeq Release 19 database at 
ftp. ncb .nih. gov/ genomes), 
Dictyosteliumdiscoideum (from dictyBase at 
http://dicty base .org/) 
and Plasmodium falciparum (from the
PlasmoDB 5.0 at http://plasmodb.org /).

Phylogenetic profile:
To assign yeast proteins into the evolutionary ages, we
constructed a phylogenetic profile, which is a molecular
evolutionary profile that indicates presence/absence of
orthologous genes. To construct the phylogenetic profile, we
first run a BLASTP [] search with yeast proteins as query
sequences against amino acid sequences of 379 bacterias,
Plasmodium falciparum (plasmodium), Arabidopsis thaliana
(plant), Dictyosteliumdiscoideum (social amoeba) and
Schizosaccharomycespombe (fission yeast, fungi). P.
falciparum, A. thaliana, D. discoideum and S. pombe are species
whose genomes are completely sequenced between bacterias
and yeast. The E-value threshold for screening was set to
1.0×10-10. Second, the sequences of hit proteins were globally
aligned using the ClustalW multiple alignment program 
[].
Among the aligned sequences, proteins with over 60% global
similarities were finally identified as computational
orthologues. Finally, we summarized the presence/absence of
orthologous proteins to the correspondent yeast proteins as
phylogenetic profiles.

Functional modules:
We retrieved functional annotations of proteins from the
Saccharomyces Genome Database at 
http://www.yeastgenome. org based on the Gene Ontology (GO)
biological processes. Based on these GO annotations, we
identified 598 functional modules composed of interacting
proteins for which the functional annotations are identical.

Topological modules:
We identified 43 topological modules whose maximum
numbers of member are fewer than ten proteins, by cutting
interactions in decreasing order of shortest-path betweenness.
A shortest path is a path between two nodes such that the sum
of the hops of its constituent edges is minimized. Shortest-path 
betweenness indicates the importance of interactions, which is
the number of shortest paths between all pairs of nodes.

Evolutionary rates of proteins:
We retrieved evolutionary rates of 3,035 yeast proteins (genes)
from the work by Hirsh et al [], which were obtained from
calculations of nonsynontmous (dN) and synonymous (dS)
rates by comparison of orthologous gene sequences among
four species of the genus Saccharomyces (S. cerevisiae, S.
paradoxus, S. mikatae, and S. bayanus).

Discussion
All the hub proteins are not evolutionarily old:
We first assigned yeast proteins into six evolutionary ages by
constructing a phylogenetic profile. A phylogenetic profile is a
profile of the presence/absence of orthologous proteins to the
correspondent protein. The numbers of proteins of six
evolutionary ages (bacteria, plasmodium, plant, social amoeba,
fission yeast and yeast) are shown in (). We
examined relationships between the evolutionary ages of yeast
proteins and their connection degrees (). We found
that the distribution of connection degrees of the newest age
proteins (yeast age proteins) is similar to that of the oldest age
proteins (bacterial age proteins). This result contradicts the
preferential attachment model, in that old proteins should

Show high connection degree []. Moreover, almost half of
high- degree proteins are evolutionarily new. In fact, rates of
high-degree proteins (&gt;30 connection degrees) in bacterial
(oldest) and yeast (newest) age are 0.0026 (14/1,530) and 0.0079
(10/1,267), respectively. To explain these results, newly
emerged proteins are considered to prefer to connect not to
already-existed proteins but to newly emerged proteins in the
same evolutionary age. It suggests a hypothesis of modularity
in the evolution of yeast protein interaction network that hub
proteins appeared and interacted with other simultaneously
emerged proteins that form what we call “modules”.

Protein complexes, functional modules and topological modules:
What are the correspondences with “modules”? We
considered that protein complexes, functional modules and
topological modules correspond with “modules”.We examined
1,142 protein complexes, 598 functional modules and 43
topological modules, and inferred the evolutionary processes
of them by assigning each evolutionary age to member protein.
We identified the firstly and secondly evolutionarilypopulated
(FSEP) proteins in each module defined by proteins
of the top-two populated evolutionary ages. That is, we
identified the firstly and secondly largest groups of member
proteins in each module which appear in the same
evolutionary ages. We then examined their compositions to
form protein complexes, functional modules and topological
modules (). Our results showed that the FESP
proportion is remarkably concentrated at 1. This tendency does
not result from the background bias in the numbers of proteins
of each evolutionary age;67.2% of complexes, 56.0% of
functional modules and 45.5% of topological modules are
significantly biased in their evolutionary compositions (χ2 test
of goodness-of-fit, p-value&lt;0.05).These results suggest that
protein complexes, functional modules and topological 
modules tends to be formed by proteins that appeared in only
one or two evolutionary ages, therefore they did not appear in
all six ages continuously and incrementally, but instead in only
one or two evolutionary ages simultaneously.

Low evolutionary rates of proteins in modules:
If the yeast protein interaction network evolved by“module”,
proteins in modules should be more conserved than those not
in modules. We examined the differences of the evolutionary
rates of proteins between them. In fact, proteins in modules
showed significantly low evolutionary rates than those not in
modules, in both protein complexes(Wilcoxon rank sum test,
p-value &lt; 2.2×10-16) and topological modules (p-value &lt;
0.0027).On the other hand, proteins in functional modules did
not show low evolutionary rates. To exclude the effect of low
evolutionary rates of more interactors (hub proteins) 
[], we
conducted Wilcoxon rank sum test on module proteins that do
not contain hub proteins (&gt;30 connection degrees). Proteins in
modules, even not containing hub proteins, also show
significantly low evolutionary rates than those not in modules,
in both protein complexes (p-value &lt; 2.2×10-16) and topological
modules (p-value &lt; 0.004577). It shows that proteins in
modules will be more conserved than those not in modules.

Modularity in the evolution of yeast protein interaction network:
As described above, we proposed a hypothesis of modularity
in the evolution of the yeast protein interaction network. This
modular evolution hypothesis is consistent with the finding by
Qin et al. that two proteins tend to interact with each other if
they are in the same or similar evolutionary categories 
[].
Moreover, this modular evolution model is also consistent
with the finding by Fernandez that modularity (Q-measure)
was increased associated with evolutionary change in the yeast
protein interaction network []. Van Dam et al. showed the
evolutionary dynamics of protein complexes are, by and large,
not the result of network rewiring, but mainly due to genomic
acquisition or loss of genes coding for subunits 
[]. Proteins
do not function by themselves and need to form modules.
Modularity is a remarkable characteristic of biological network
[, 
–], 
and we also saw it in the yeast protein interaction network.

Conclusion
We here propose a hypothesis of modularity in the evolution
of yeast protein interaction network based on molecular
evolutionary evidence. We found that all the almost half of
hub proteins are evolutionarily new. Newly emerged proteins
are considered to prefer to connect not to already-existed
proteins but to newly emerged proteins in the same
evolutionary age. It suggests that hub proteins appeared and 
interacted with other simultaneously emerged proteins that
form what we call “modules”. Examining the evolutionary
processes of protein complexes, functional modules and
topological modules, we also found that member proteins of
these modules tend to appear in one or two evolutionary ages.
Moreover, proteins in protein complexes and topological
modules show significantly low evolutionary rates than those
not in these modules. Our results suggest a hypothesis of
modularity in the evolution of yeast protein interaction
network as systems evolution.

Conflict of interests
No conflict of interest was declared.

This work was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific
Research from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports,
Science, and Technology of Japan.

Citation:Ogishima et al, Bioinformation 11(3): 127-130 (2015)

A) Six evolutionary ages (bacterias, plasmodium, plant, social amoeba, fission yeast and yeast)and number of proteins in
each evolutionary age; B) Connection degree distributions of yeast proteins in six evolutionary ages (bacterias, plasmodium, plant,
social amoeba, fission yeast and yeast).

Modularity in the evolutionary process of protein complexes, functional modules and topological modules. Horizontal
axes indicates the proportion of the FSEP proteins to all member proteins (FSEP proportion), vertical axes indicates the proportion
of the complexes having the designated FESP proportion to total complexes.

