Background
Dengue viruses (DENV) are enveloped positive-single stranded
RNA viruses, classified in the Flaviridae family, Flavivirus genus.
After virus cell entry, the RNA genome is translated into a
single polyprotein which is processed by cellular and virusderived
proteases in three structural proteins (C, M and E) and
seven non-structural proteins (NS1, NS2A, NS2B, NS3, NS4A,
NS4B, and NS5) [–]. 
Dengue viruses' infection is the most
important viral disease transmitted by arthropods in the world
[–]. 
The disease is endemic in more than 100 countries
throughout Africa, America, Eastern Mediterranean, South-East
Asia and Western Pacific areas. There are four distinct serotypes
of DENV and each of them can cause the same disease
symptoms ranking from self-limited febrile illness called
dengue fever (DF) to dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) and
dengue shock syndrome (DSS). In fact, infection with one
serotype confers protective immunity against that serotype but
not against the others, and there is neither a specific treatment
nor an approved vaccine for these viral infections 
[–].
Therefore, there is a need to develop therapeutic agents to treat
such diseases. We propose the use of short interfering RNAs
(siRNAs) to target highly conserved regions among the four
DENV serotypes to silence the viral genome. The RNA
interference mediated by siRNAs, is now being widely used to
knockdown gene expression in a sequence specific manner, and
is a promising new antiviral therapy for many viral infections,
such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B and
C viruses (HBV, HCV), Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus
(VEEV), and some respiratory viruses, including influenza
virus, among others [–].

Methodology
To identify highly conserved regions in the genome of the four
DENV serotypes, a multiple alignment with ClustalX program
was carried out, using only the reference sequences for the four
serotypes available at NCBI data base
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). A highly conserved sequence
among the four serotypes was found to be located in the region
encoding for the NS4B and NS5 proteins. Moreover a total of
2,893 complete DENV sequences were downloaded.
Fingerprints for each sequence was calculated by using the
virtual hybridization program [] and then, clustered in order
to discard identical genome sequences [].

After removing the redundant sequences a total of 220 genomes
were left. The complete genomes were edited to select only the
encoding region for NS4B and NS5 proteins (nucleotides 6,827-
10,217 for DENV-1, 6,826-10,269 for DENV-2, 6,821-10,264 for
DENV-3 and 6,828-10,262 for DENV-4). Then, a multiple
alignment with ClustalX was built to obtain a consensus
sequence using the GeneDoc software. For the siRNA design,
three servers were used: Invitrogen RNAi Designer
(https://rnai.designer.invitrogen.com/rnaiexpress), Dharmacon
siRNA Design Center
(http://dharmacon.com/sidesign/default.aspx), and Ambion, Inc.
(http://ambion.com/techlib/misc/siRNA_finder.html). All the
resulting siRNAs were aligned to find out the most prevalent
siRNAs; finally the resulting siRNAs were manually analyzed
according to the Reynolds' criteria 
[] to choose the siRNAs
with the higher probability to silence the four DENV genomes.
Prediction of the DENV genome secondary structure for each
serotype was obtained with the RNAstructure program 4.6
(http://rna.urmc.rochester.edu/RNAstructure.html) 
[] and gene
Bee (http://www.genebee.msu.su/services/rna2_full.html). The
genome structure was analyzed as target for the predicted
siRNAs.

Result and Discussion
To design the siRNAs for DENV genomes silencing, a consensus
sequence representing all DENV genomes available at GenBank
data base was proposed. For that, the four reference DENV
genome serotypes were analyzed by a multiple alignment
procedure, finding a highly conserved region among the four
DENV serotypes, which was located in the genome region
codifying for the NS4B and NS5 proteins (approximately 3,400
nt) (). Then, a total of 2,893 completes DENV genomes
stored at NCBI GenBank database available as of October 2011,
were downloaded: 1,268 genomes were for serotype 1; 872 for
serotype 2; 655 for serotype 3 and 83 genomes for serotype 4.
The viral genomes were depurated to eliminate identical
genomes or redundant sequences, ending with 220 complete
DENV genomes, 100 of them were serotype 1, 57 serotype 2, 47
serotype 3 and 16 serotype 4. These genomes were edited to
work only with the encoding sequences for NS4B and NS5
proteins, and after carrying out a multiple alignment, a
consensus sequence was proposed. The consensus sequence was
loaded to design the siRNAs using three servers (). A
total of 60 siRNAs were obtained. To find out which siRNAs
were the most prevalent, all the proposed siRNAs were subject
to a multiple alignment, finding 14 different siRNAs.

A final selection of the 14 siRNAs was done by manual analysis
based on the Reynolds' criteria [] for an effective RNA
interference with siRNA, 1)30-52% of G/C content, 2) at least 3
A/Us in positions 15-19, 3) absence of internal repetitions, 4) A
in position 19, 5) A in position 3, 6) U in position 10, 7) No G/C
in position 19, and 8) No G in position 13. At the end, three
siRNAs met most of criteria proposed for RNA silencing, one
targeted the genome region that codifies for NS4B protein and
the other two; targeted the region for NS5 protein. To assure
that the siRNAs were specific for DENV, we performed a
BLAST analysis against Homo sapiens and viral databases. To
confirm the interaction of the siRNAs with the four DENV
genome serotypes, we used as a target the predicted the
secondary structure of each DENV genome serotypes obtained
with the RNA structure 4.4 and GeneBee programs, finding that
the proposed siRNAs were able to form double-chain structures
with the viral genome, which are necessary to activate the
silencing system. The DENV genome secondary structures we
chose was the one for each DENV serotype with the lowest free
energy obtained with the RNAstructure program, which it is the
most probable structure. Even that the RNAstructure program
shows a graphical structure it was unable to analyze a complete
DENV genome (approximately 10,700 nucleotides), therefore for
this analysis we input only the NS4B and NS5 region ().
We confirmed that the proposed siRNas could form a double
stranded RNA structure with the target region of DENV
genome by analyzing the results provided with the GeneBee
program, which does not display a graphical structure, but it
takes in account the full genome sequence and gives numerical
data indicating positions of loops and stalks. All these results
suggest that is possible to silence the four DENV genome
serotypes by using siRNAs directed against the genome
sequences encoding for the NS4B and NS5 proteins. Moreover,
the designed siRNAs seemed to be specific for DENV viruses,
according to the BLAST analysis performed. Furthermore, until
now, siRNA technology has been mainly used to study DENV
infections, mainly by silencing cellular genes which might affect
viral infection such as the CD14 monocyte receptor, genes
involved in processes of endocytosis, cytoskeletal dynamics and
endosome trafficking [], and also, targeting DENV genome in
the highly conserved 5' cyclization sequence (5'CS) region, preM
and E genes [–], but in this paper we proposed siRNAs as
novel therapeutic approach for DENV infections by silencing
the encoding region for NS4B and NS5 proteins.

Conclusion
Three siRNAs were predicted to be able to silence the four
DENV genome serotypes by targeting the viral NS4B and NS5
sequences, forming double-chain structures with the viral
genome, which are necessary to activate the silencing system.
Therefore, these siRNAs will be synthesized and their inhibitory
effect will be tested in vitro against the four DENV serotypes.

We thank Secretaría de Investigacion y Posgrado, Instituto
Politecnico Nacional for all the support and facilities to carry
out this work.

Citation:Villegas-Rosales et al, Bioinformation 8(11): 519-522 (2012)

Design of siRNAs against DENV NSB4 and NS5 coding regions. A) Multiple alignment of the four DENV serotypes
showing a fragment of the highly conserved NS4B encoding region (nt position 6910-7360) depicted in black. B) Alignment of the
proposed siRNAs with the DENV consensus sequence (obtained by alignment of 215 DENV sequences). C) Three regions of
DENV-2 genome structure showing the interaction sites with the proposed siRNAs (red circles). The arrows indicate the initial site
of interaction.

