Background
Solanaceae family represent important family in agriculture as it 
is one of the major source of edible fruits Solanum lycopersicum, 
Solanum tuberosum and Nicotiana tabacum. Tomato fruits are the 
second most consumed vegetable after potatoes, and are a 
globally important dietary source of lycopene, beta-carotene, 
vitamin C, and fiber. Potato contributes to dietary intake of 
starch, protein, antioxidants, and vitamins. In addition to its 
agricultural value and due to its diploid genetics and 
inbreeding potential, tomato is a widely used model species for 
fundamental research on subjects including fruit development 
and pathogen response [].

The developments in sequencing technologies are providing 
genome sequences of different species. Deciphering a genome 
sequence, that is, determining the linear order of nucleotides for 
each chromosome in the genome, allows molecular biologists to 
understand and manipulate this blueprint. For plants in 
particular, this in turn enables breeders to more efficiently 
engineer solutions for crop improvement to respond to the 
growing demand for food and energy from modern society 
[].

The genome draft of Tomato and Potato is now available in 
plant databases. The nuclear genome of potato and tomato 
consists of twelve chromosomes. Their genomes are expected 
to measure approximately 840 Mb and 950 Mb in size, 
respectively [–].

The availability of their genome sequences will provide the 
community with a first glimpse into genome evolution of 
Solanaceae (and Asterids in general) and will impact both 
fundamental research and breeding strategies in these species 
for the coming years.

The aim of the present research work was to predict paralogous 
proteins in Tomato proteome and to carry out comparative
genome analysis of Tomato and Potato to uncover various 
genomic features of two genomes and to gain insight the 
similarity and differences between two genomes.

Methodology
The genomic data of S. lycopersicum is available at, NCBI, 
EMBL, DDBJ and KEGG. The nucleotide and amino acid data is 
retrieved in the FASTA format from FTP server. These 
databases and tools are freely available for computational 
analysis.

The Sol Genomics Network (http:// solgenomics.net) is a 
database for comparative genomics platform for Solanaceae 
species.

Computational tools are required for data processing, data 
visualization, interpretation and interrogation to analyze flood 
of new sequence data that is being produced. The comparison 
of Tomato and Potato genome was performed by sing VISTA 
server. VISTA (http://genome.lbl.gov/vista/index.shtml) is a 
comprehensive suite of programs and databases for 
comparative analysis of genomic sequences [].

The genomic data retrieved from above server was used for 
selected objectives. The retrieved genomic data was analyzed 
with the help of different computational tools, software and 
online servers.

Prediction of Paralogous Proteins in S. lycopersicum and S. tuberosum Genome:
The reviewed set of proteins sequences of S. lycopersicum and S. 
tuberosum was retrieved from the Uniprot Database in FASTA 
format. The all against all database searches by using the 
genomic BLAST-P available at NCBI server was used to predict 
paralogous protein in the selected set of protein sequences 
[–]. 
In case of all against all search, a comparison was made in 
which every predicted protein sequence was used as a query in 
a similarity search against a database composed of the rest of 
the self-proteome, and the significant matches were identified 
by a low E-value. Since many proteins comprise different 
combinations of a common set of domains, proteins that align 
more than 80% of their lengths for query and subject were 
selected. After this filtration only those alignments were 
selected which give the sequence identity more than 60%.

Families, domain and repeats for paralogous protein sequences in S. lycopersicum and S. tuberosum:
For the purpose of functional annotation and to investigate the 
gene family expansion, the identified set of paralogous proteins 
was used to search the protein families by using the Pfam 
search. Each family is represented by multiple sequence 
alignments and Hidden Markov models (HMMs) []. The 
paralogous protein dataset was submitted at Pfam server which 
predicted the protein families, motifs, repeats and clans at the 
default pfam parameter (http://pfam.sanger.ac.uk/).

Results and Discussion
After performing the all against all searches for all reviewed 
protein sequences of S. lycopersicum and S. tuberosum it was 
found that 60 paralogous proteins present in S. lycopersicum and 
while 110 were present in S. tuberosum. All predicted 
paralogous proteins of S. lycopersicum and S. tuberosum can be 
retrieved by using accession number given in  &amp; 
 (see 
supplementary material). The predicted paralogous proteins 
belong to different family having different domain and repeats. 
For the purpose of functional annotation and to investigate the 
gene family expansion, the identified set of paralogous proteins 
was used to search the protein families by using the Pfam 
search.

Pfam analysis of S. lycopersicum and S. tuberosum protein sequences:
It was found that most of the identified proteins belong to 
different families, domains and clans in S. lycopersicum and S. 
tuberosum protein sequences  (see supplementary 
material). But also there are proteins having no clans (). 
Proteins contain functional units known as domains and 
various combinations of domains results in different protein 
formations. Therefore identification of domains in proteins is 
essential for giving insights into their function. Pfam also 
generates higher-level groupings of related families, known as 
clans. A protein belongs to different families, domains and clans 
may be due to proteins family expansion and adaptations by 
the genomes [].

It was found that S. lycopersicum proteins belong to more 
families, domains and clans in comparison with S. tuberosum. 
But also there are proteins having no clans.

Comparative genomics Solanum lycopersicum and Solanum tuberosum:
The comparison of the genomic regions of S. lycopersicum and S. 
tuberosum was performed. It was found that the genome of two 
selected plants have conserved, non conserved and also 
different genomic compassions and different levels. But there 
are other areas also where difference in conservation was noted.

It was found that mostly intergenic regions are conserved in 
two genomes followed by exons, intron (they are found in the 
genes of most organisms and many viruses, and can be located 
in a wide range of genes) and UTR (untranslated region) 
().

An Intergenic region (sometimes also referred to as junk DNA) 
represent stretch of DNA sequences located between genes. 
Their function is still unknown but sometime they are involve 
in regulation of gene expressions (these regions do contain 
functionally important elements such as promoters and 
enhancers).

The comparative alignment of genomic regions of S. 
lycopersicum and S. tuberosum revealed that it was found that 
there are regions where only conserved part is present in two 
genomes (). Along with this there are regions were 
conserved regions, untranslated region (UTR) exons present 
together without any non aligned region (). Non 
aligned Genomic region are also found in the alignment two 
genomes ().

Once the elements in a genome sequence have been identified, 
the next step is to assign to them a plausible biological function. 
Computational inference of the function of a particular 
sequence can be achieved either directly through sequence 
similarity searches, or indirectly through the identification of 
common motifs or domains between groups of functionally 
related sequences. 

Presence of Intergenic region in large number may be due to a 
higher repeat content in tomato genome than the potato 
genome. There are many protein families that represent a large 
gene superfamily in plants, these genes are involved in the 
biosynthesis of secondary metabolites 
[–].

Alignments between genome sequences of multiple accessions 
or varieties of a single species allow for the study of genome 
diversity, evolution and insertion/deletion polymorphisms 
(InDels). Moreover, alignments between the genomes of related 
species, for example from the same genus, can be generated to 
identify structural variation such as translocations, inversions, 
The identified sequence variation from both approaches can be 
utilized to study the evolution of genomes, and to generate 
molecular markers that can be exploited to screen large 
populations [–].

The general availability of genome sequences for crop plant 
species is having a tremendous impact on the genetics and 
breeding of these organisms. Future comparative sequence 
analyses of the completed tomato and potato genome sequences 
will address many of the unresolved questions related with 
genome-wide profiles of specific multigene families 
[].

Conclusion
The large scale analysis of tomato and potato revealed many 
interesting structural and functional differences between two 
genomes. It was found that tomato genome is more repetitive 
than the potato genome also the composition of repeat is 
different in these genomes. Taken together, the present will 
help in understanding the contents, structure and organization 
of the tomato and potato genomes, which will be of great value 
to plant breeders and researchers in the years to come. 

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are grateful to the Sam Higginbottom Institute of 
Agriculture, Technology &amp; Sciences, Deemed University, 
Allahabad for providing the facilities and support to complete 
the present research work.

Citation:Lall et al, Bioinformation 9(18): 923-928 (2013)

Pfam comparison of S. lycopersicum and S. tuberosum protein sequences.

Genomic region comparison of Tomato and Potato.

Conserved region present in two genomes.

Genomic regions with conserved, UTR and exons.

Non aligned Genomic region.

