Background
Infectious diseases are influencing the world with their
morbidity and mortality. Tuberculosis is one among the major
infectious diseases caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
[,
]. It
remains the leading cause of mortality due to a bacterial
pathogen. WHO estimated that there were 8.8 million new cases
of tuberculosis in 2020. About one-third of the world
population is infected with M. tuberculosis, 10% of which will
develop the disease at some point in their lives 
[]. Four
prescribed drugs named as Isoniazid (INH), Rifampin,
Pyrazinamide, and Ethambutol, are currently used for the
treatment of active TB for a period of at least 6 months. Due to
long time period, patients generally failed to complete the
therapy which leads to the emergence of multidrug resistant TB
(MDRTB) and extensively drug resistant TB (XDRTB). The
susceptibility of active TB increases rapidly because of human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infections, which exacerbated
the situation. World Health Organization (WHO) has declared
TB a global public health emergency []. Therefore, the
development of new drugs with activity against multi drugresistant
(MDR) TB, extensively drug-resistant (XDR) TB, and
latent TB is a priority task. New drug agents that will shorten
the duration of current chemotherapy are also needed. Due to
these factors however, tuberculosis still remains a leading cause
of death world-wide. Natural products, or their direct
derivatives, play crucial roles in the modern day chemotherapy
of tuberculosis []. There is currently a re-emerging interest in
natural products as being able to provide novel structures for
the drug discovery effort and being particularly effective as
antibacterial lead [–
]. In the present study we cover the
literature published on natural products or their direct
derivatives that exhibit growth inhibitory activity towards
mycobacteria, and in particular the causative pathogen of
tuberculosis, Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Current natural
product and related derivative antimycobacterial agents exhibit
wide-ranging in vitro potency towards M. tuberculosis, with
minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC) from 0.2 µg/ml
(rifampicin) through 10 µg/ml (cycloserine) 
[]. The main
objective of the present study was the search for novel natural
compounds that would show a promise to become useful
antimycobacterial agent. A series of compounds of Phenolics
and quinines, Peptides, Alkaloids, Terpenes: Monoterpenes,
Diterpenes, Sesquiterpenes, Triterpenes, Steroids and their
synthetic, semisynthetic derivatives were selected as novel
antimycobacterial agents for 2D-QSAR studies. In the present
study, we screen out potential anti-tubercular activity through
quantitative structure activity relationship (QSAR) for which a
multiple linear QSAR regression model was developed which
successfully establishes the anti-tubercular activity of different
compounds in accord with the in vitro experimental data. The
2D-QSAR model provides the activity dependent structural
descriptors and predicts the effective dose of other derivatives,
and suggests their possible toxicity range. The relationship
correlating measure of QSAR model was 74% (R2 =0.74) and
predictive accuracy was 72% (RCV2 = 0.72). Using Lipinsky's
‘Rule of Five’ Druggability of studied compounds was
evaluated and in silico ADME analysis was done through
bioavailability filters. QSAR studies indicate that dipole energy
and heat of formation correlate well with anti-tubercular
activity. These results could offer useful references for
understanding mechanisms and directing the molecular design
of new lead compounds with improved antitubercular activity.

Methodology
The natural and synthetic drug compounds exhibiting the
potent antimycobacterial Activity was taken from the reported
work [–].
The literature values and general structure of the
molecule are given in (Table 1, see )
The activity data given as MIC values. The biological activity
value [MIC (µg/ml)] reported in literature are converted to -log
scale and subsequently used as the dependent variable for the
QSAR analysis. The ­log values of MIC along with the structure
of the 24 compounds in the series is presented in (Table 2, see
), the chemical structures of known
drugs were retrieved through the PubChem compound
database at NCBI (
http://www.pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov),
while others are drawn in chem-axon /marwin sketch software.
All the computational studies were performed using the
Scigress Explorer v7.7.0.47. The optimization of the cleaned
molecules was done through MO-G computational application
that computes and minimizes an energy related to the heat of
formation. The MO-G computational application solves the
Schrodinger equation for the best molecular orbital and
geometry of the ligand molecules. The augmented Molecular
Mechanics (MM2/MM3) parameter was used for optimizing
the molecules up to its lowest stable energy state. This energy
minimization is done until the energy change is less than 0.001
kcal/mol or the molecules are updated almost 300 times. Then
optimized molecules were selected for calculation of the
physiochemical descriptors by inserting biological activity as a
dependable variable. Various 2D descriptors were calculated
for optimized structures of the molecules using QSAR module
of Scigress Explorer v7.7.0.47. A large number of descriptors
were generated like structural, topological, electro topological
and thermodynamic descriptor. The descriptor pool was
reduced by removing invariable column in Scigress Explorer.
The remaining physicochemical descriptors were taken into
account for the reported analysis. Manual data selection
method was used for data selection and variable selection.
Forward feed multiple linear regression mathematical
expression was then used to predict the biological response of
other derivatives. QSAR analysis is a mathematical procedure
by which the chemical structures of molecules is quantitatively
correlated with a well defined parameter, such as biological
activity or chemical reactivity. For example, biological activity
can be expressed quantitatively as in the concentration of a
substance required to give a certain biological response.
Additionally, when physicochemical properties or structures
are expressed by numbers, one can form a mathematical
relationship, or quantitative structure-activity relationship,
between the two. The mathematical expression can then be used
to predict the biological response of other chemical structures.
QSAR's most general mathematical form is; Activity = f
(physiochemical properties and/or structural properties)

A QSAR model attempts to find consistent relationships
between the variations in the values of molecular properties
and the biological activity for a series of compounds which can
then be used to evaluate properties of new chemical entities 
[,
] 
Some of the important chemical descriptors used in multiple
linear regression analysis are: atom count (all atoms), atom
count (carbon), atom count (hydrogen), atom count (oxygen),
bond count (all bonds), conformation minimum energy
(kcal/mole), connectivity index (order 0, standard), connectivity
index (order 1, standard), connectivity index (order 2,
standard), dipole moment (debye), dipole vector X (debye),
dipole vector Y (debye), dipole vector Z (debye), electron
affinity (eV), dielectric energy (kcal/mole), steric energy
(kcal/mole), total energy (Hartree), group count (amine), group
count (carboxyl), group count (ether), group count (hydroxyl),
group count (methyl), heat of formation (kcal/mole), HOMO
energy (eV), ionization potential (eV), lambda max UV-visible
(nm), lambda max far-UV-visible (nm), LogP, LUMO energy
(eV), molar refractivity, molecular weight, polarizability, ring
count (all rings), size of smallest ring, size of largest ring, and
solvent accessibility surface area (Å2). Lipinski's rule of five
pharmacokinetics filter was used as a drug likeness test 
[].
Briefly, this rule is based on the observation that most orally
administered drugs have a molecular weight (MW) of 500 or
less, a logP no higher than 5, five or fewer hydrogen bond
donor sites, and 10 or fewer hydrogen bond acceptor sites (N
and O atoms). In addition, the bioavailability of all derivatives
or test compounds was assessed through topological polar
surface area analysis. Molinspiration offers free on-line
cheminformatics services
(
http://www.molinspiration.com/cgi-bin/properties). The
structures of the molecule were sketched in Molinspiration, and
the physicochemical properties such as logP, polar surface area,
number of hydrogen bond donors and acceptors and bioactivity
scores such as GPCR ligands, kinase inhibitors, ion channel
modulators etc. were predicted [].

Results and Discussion
Quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) modeling:
Structure activity relationship has been denoted by QSAR
model showing significant activity-descriptors relationship
accuracy of 74% (R2 = 0.74) and activity prediction accuracy of
72% (RCV2 = 0.72). Initially a total of 79 drugs were used for
QSAR modeling against 42 chemical descriptors. Only two
descriptors were found to be significant and seem to be
responsible for in vitro anti- tubercular activity (Table 4, see
). A forward feed multiple linear
regression QSAR model was developed using leave-one-out
approach for the prediction of biological activity of anti
tuberculosis drug molecules. We looked for a simpler descriptor
for the prediction of biological in vitro activity for studied class
of compounds. QSAR studies indicate that dipole energy and
heat of formation correlate well with biological activity (Table
4, see ). The QSAR mathematical
model equation derived through multiple linear regression
method is given below, showing relationship between in vitro
experimental activity (MIC) and dependent two chemical
descriptors: The best 2DQSAR and the statistics obtained are
listed below:

Predicted log MIC) (µg/ml) = +2.4116*Dielectric Energy
(kcal/mole)­0.00395099*Heat of Formation (kcal/mole)
+1.64401

[RCV2 = 0.72 (72%) and R2 = 0.74 (74%)]

Eighteen drug molecules with reported anti-mycobacterial
activity were included in the training data set for comparison
and six molecules used as test set for evaluation of prediction
accuracy of QSAR model. Results showed that predicted
activity of Oleanolic Acid and Betulin were comparable with
experimental activity. A plot between experimental activity and
predicted activity for both training and test set, is shown as
fitness plot (). Results indicate that Betulin molecule
had higher anti −tubercular activity than Oleanolic Acid.
Compliance of studied compounds also verified by Lipinski's
rule-of-five for drug likeness (Table 3, see 
). 
Results indicate that compounds follow most of the
ADME properties, thus leading to a good drug candidate for
antimycobacterial and antitubercular activity. This helped in
establishing the pharmacological activity of natural compounds
for their use as potential drugs. Moreover, when we calculated
the topological polar surface area (TPSA) as a chemical
descriptor for passive molecular transport through membranes,
results showed lower TPSA of natural compounds than
standard drugs (Table 3, see ). TPSA
allows for prediction of transport properties of drugs and has
been linked to drug bioavailability. Generally, it has been seen
that passively absorbed molecules with a TPSA &gt; 140 Å2 are
thought to have low oral bioavailability []. On the basis of
bioavailability scores, we concluded that natural compounds
have marked antimycobacterial activity but higher log P as
compared to standard drugs.

Model 1
C=+2.28525*Q-0.00361321*T+1.6501 rCVע=0.66622
rע=0.703016.

Model 2
C=+2.22983*Q-0.00324021*T+1.66726 rCVע=0.681594
rע=0.72418

Model 3
C=+2.40735*Q-0.00423825*T+1.6047 rCVע=0.700135
rע=0.723656

Model 4
C=+2.4116*Q-0.00395099*T+1.64401 rCVע=0.72135
rע=0.744826

Conclusion
Twenty four natural and synthetic drug compounds are
evaluated for antimycobacterial activity by 2D QSAR studies
with oleanolic acid and betulin exhibiting good activity. The 2D
technique indicates the importance of dielectric energy and heat
of formation of the compounds on activity. ADME and Tox
Predictions indicate that these compounds do not violate the
Lipinski's rule of five. In this sequence, dielectric energy, heats
of formation physico-chemical parameter are common in all
four models. These parameter show positive contribution in all
four models. Therefore it is considered as desirable properties
of MTB inhibitors. Comparison of different statistical
parameters and validation parameters for models 1-4 suggests
model 4 for further consideration. It has good correlation
between biological activity and parameters as RCV2 = 0.72
(72%) and R2 = 0.74 (74%) variance in inhibitory activity. The
low standard error demonstrates accuracy of the model.
Descriptors used in the Significant QSAR Model-4 with value is
given in Table-4. QSAR model with reliable predictive power
for MTB inhibitory activity has been successfully demonstrated.
The good correlation between experimental and predicted
biological activity for compounds in the test set further
highlights the reliability of the constructed QSAR model. The
finding of the study will be helpful in the design of the potent
MTB inhibitors which are useful for anti-tubercular activity.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are grateful to Prof. S.P. Gupta, Department of
Pharmaceutical Technology, MIET, Meerut, U.P., India for
providing an expert opinion for 2D-QSAR model development.
We are also thankful for his generous help and encouragement
during the course of experimental work and manuscript
preparation.

Citation:Dwivedi et al, Bioinformation 7(2): 82-90 (2011)

Fitness plot between experimental and predicted
activity (log MIC) of training and test set.

