Background
Accurate predictive success of transmembrane proteins by
applying hidden markov model [HMM] is frequently used in
biological research. This is fully machine learning approach in
which genome structure and proteins topology prediction are
the fascinating and most demanding subject in bioinformatics.
The body of a HMM is closely compatible to the biological
entities which is being simulated by the model. Looking the
feasibility of HMM by going through the recent research
articles, is totally statistical approach that compiled by the set of
states which have potentially able to emit symbols on the basis
of probability [,
]. These states are estimated by model
parameters. Model parameters consist of three probabilities i.e.
initial probability, transition probability and emission
probability.

In the context of accurate prediction method of transmembrane
topology many workers had obtained results with more than
five helices were predicted at a significantly lower accuracy
than proteins with five or fewer and in addition the estimation
of the standard procedure to resolve the prior work and
presented novel trends that may impact the analysis of entire
proteomes []. Furthermore, some workers were addressed a
method to reduce the number of false positives, i.e., proteins
falsely predicted with membrane helices []. Previously the
workers had worked on the effectiveness of model
regularization, dynamic model modification and optimization
strategies of model and validated through experimentally 
[].
Several workers were developed five different prediction
method, these are TMMOD [], PHD, HMMTOP, MEMSAT,
and TOPPRED for comparatively better result in
transmembrane topology prediction []. Although the
prediction of transmembrane helices can be analyzed with good
enough score plot but this idea was not successful for other
helices. Recently the hydrophobic property of transmembrane
helices was used for the prediction []. But after some time one
feature was taken into account i.e. abundance of positive charge
residues [,
,
]. Due to better incorporation of helix length,
compositional bias and grammar constraints, HMM is suitable
for the prediction of transmembrane helices. Helical membrane
proteins are specified a “grammar”, in which cytoplasmic and
non-cytoplasmic loops have occurred alternate fashion.
Therefore this feature provides the efficient information, even
performs better result in prediction [,
]. TMHMM approach
is applied here because these days mostly membrane protein is
predicted through this method and result is more accurate. For
better understanding of model we applied here MATLAB.
MATLAB is widely used to visualize and analyze the biological
data. MATLAB provides a bioinfo tool box in which various
bioinformatics tools are available for technical computing and
scripting. This language is a high-level matrix/array language
with control flow statements, functions, data structures,
input/output, and object-oriented programming features 
[]. It
was experienced that MATLAB shows better feasibility with
HMM rather than other bio-statistical packages.

In this work we present our model performance, based on
hidden markov model, by taking approach from previous
research on TMHMM []. We have reviewed the previous
TMHMM model architecture which has specialized modeling of
different regions of membrane proteins like inner, middle and
outer region []. These regions are collectively divided by 7
locations. The states are connected to each other and transitions
may be possible between adjacent states. Best possible
transition of a state recruits on the basis of high transition
probability value, known as transition probability and further
20 amino acids are emitted by probability distribution of each
state.

Methodology
Dataset:
We have downloaded two types of dataset from the TMHMM
website in which second dataset has 160 transmembrane
sequences. Most protein pattern of these dataset was
determined by experimentally. The dataset is labeled by three
main locations, these are transmembrane helix (m), inside (i)
and outside loops (o) on the basis of the existence of deferent
amino acids pattern within a transmembrane region. 10-fold
cross validation was applied for the validation of model 
[,
].

Method:
In this work, we have introduced the probabilistic framework of
the HMM for transmembrane helix prediction. Well known
architecture of TMHMM was considered and three main
locations in dataset were further divided into seven different
super states as shown in TMHMM model architecture
[] 
.
Conversion from three to seven super states was decided on the
basis of position and length of strings location. In the context of
outer region of transmembrane topology, five residues length of
cap cytoplasmic was used to fix the boundary between helix
and loop region. These seven super states were also labeled. For
outer loop, either it was short (S) or long (O) region of noncytoplasmic,
was considered the length of 20 residues and
similarly the loop (L) of cytoplasmic side was counted as 20
residues. The cap non-cytoplasmic (N) was considered the
length of 5 residues (). The length of helix core (M)
region was, determined previously, and considered 25 residues.
() The seventh super state, rest part of the
transmembrane architecture was treated as 1 or may be more
than 1. Same text of the state was considered same region. Each
super state has an associated probability distribution over the
20 amino acids characterizing the variability and pattern of
amino acids in the region. Here the every single position of a
super state was considered as individual state of the model.

In this work we have considered the number of states of a
region on the basis of number of amino acid positions []. For
similar reasons, a loop's first and last 10 residues are explicitly
modeled, and the each residue corresponds to an individual
state in the model. All other residues in the middle of a loop are
collectively represented by one “globular” state, which has a
transition back to itself thus can repeat as many times as the
loop length dictates. But in the case of loop apart of other here
we have considered all loop regions for 20 residues including
long and short loop. Short and long loops were separated here
on the basis of the prediction of adjacent regions by possible
state transitions. Since long loops outside the membrane
appear to have divergent properties than short loops, two
separate chains of states are introduced, as expressed in figure1.
The transmembrane helix model was constructed exactly like
TMHMM [,
], by two cap regions of 5 residues each, including a
core region of length 25 residues. Therefore the total length for
membrane helices was 35 residues, if we were considered the
length including cap regions, covering the real size range
observed for transmembrane domains. The state diagram for
the overall transmembrane topology collectively was
considered minimum 96 states by converting these 7 super
states on the basis of length corresponding to its transitions. The
entire states model is thus 20+5+25+5+20+20+1 = 96. Therefore
the IP (Initial probability), STP (State transition probability) and
REP (Residue emission probability) matrices were 96×1, 96×96
and 96×20 respectively. Each state should be emitted single
amino acids.

HMM Training and Scoring:
In the first stage the aim is to fix the boundaries of
transmembrane helices. Previously many worker were
suggested for boundary correction [] in labeled dataset, like M,
I and O. ‘M’ represents membrane region, ‘I’ is for inside region
(cytoplasmic) and ‘O’ means outer region (non-cytoplasmic).
Therefore we were compiled the MATLAB script for converting
these 3 labeled dataset sequences to 7 labeled sequences on the
basis of TMHMM model architecture (). New model
estimation was done using the relabeled sequences. In Second
step for estimating the HMM model parameters, posterior
probability method were applied. Each state of the model has
been predicted by forward-backward algorithm, called as
posterior probability method. Previously the scoring method
described in the article was implemented using N-best
algorithm [], was also very effective but here it was found
that the posterior probability method is more convenient and
compatible for the estimation. This HMM model parameter is
estimated in 7 super states and the training was performed by
estimating the maximum likelihood []. As usual we have also
applied the traditional method (posterior probability) for
estimating the HMM and its transmembrane model parameter
θ. Here the joint probability of a set of sequence P (x1,…….,xn)
being emitted the symbol using a particular state of path [,
]
P (x1,x2,……., xn/ θ).

The parameter θ contains all the STP (State Transition
Probability), REP (Residue Emission Probability) and IP (Initial
probability) matrices. Probability of a residue for a particular
state has been evaluated by posterior probability method [,
].
Baum-Welch algorithm is standard method for maximum
likelihood estimation of HMMs, in which posterior probabilities
were performed by utilizing both forward and backward
algorithms. These algorithms were used to compile the STP and
REP matrices. The program was set to 15 iteration time to
converse the values. Initial probability was arbitrary taken for
the initializing the parameter θ calculation. Here we were used
dataset sequences for the model estimation and training. The
procedure used for training a model was the same regardless of
the scoring method used and in most aspects identical to the
procedure used by Krogh et al. (2001) 
[]. Here, both training
and scoring was done using the original data set of 160, which
we have divided it into subset of 16×10.

Validation:
Since 160 dataset have been reported. For ten cross fold
validation we were divided 160 sequences set into 10 subset.
Created 10×16 data and put newly estimated HMM parameter
on this 10 subset. In the result, MATLAB calculated the scores
for each sequences of every subset. We have found the score for
each sequences of all subset. Test set were evaluated by original
test structure taken from dataset [].

Discussion
Labeled 160 sequences were recruited, measuring the accuracy
of model whose topology and locations of transmembrane
helices are correctly predicted by TMHMM. The score of each
sequence was calculated by posterior probability method of
HMM for each sequence of 160 dataset. The 16×10 score plot is
showing in . Legend of figure shows the 160 stars of
different sequences. Each subset of 16 sets of amino acid
sequences possesses 10 sequences. Plot was represented the
scores of 16×10 data. Position of a star indicates the score of a
sequence and the aggregate prediction was calculated by
following equation on MATLAB. We were obtained
approximately 74% accuracy on average. The higher score value
is observed at 98.6. In addition, the 63 times have observed the
score values above 80.

Aggregate prediction = mean (sum (score, 2)/16)

This HMM-based method embodies many conceptual and
methodological aspects of previous methods. The main realities
are that the model architecture closely to the transmembrane
pattern and that everything is done in the probabilistic
framework of HMMs, so we do not have to develop a
specialised dynamic programming algorithm or posterior
probability method. Our model prediction is helpful for better
understanding of existing model.

Conclusion
All transmembrane sequences for validation of model were
accessed from TMHMM site indicating that they are all
recruited to the transmembrane helices. Specific transmembrane
topology prediction is helpful for protein functional annotation.
Along with other documented programming languages,
MATLAB was also taken into consideration because the
MATLAB performed better compatibility with biological
entities. Therefore the hidden markov model could perform
crucial role in transmembrane helices prediction on MATLAB
platform and it could also be useful for drug discovery strategy.
Since there are many various statistical approaches are using by
several workers in biological sciences but HMM is well known
for higher accuracy result in the area of protein topology
prediction. Meanwhile there should be more work yet to be
explored for higher result accuracy and low level of
redundancy for transmembrane proteins prediction.

Citation:Chaturvedi et al, Bioinformation 7(8): 418- 421 (2011)

Architecture of TMHMM consists of 7 boxes and each
box indicates the particular region. Same text box treats as same
region. Here we have denoted each box by symbols to its
corresponding region. Each box may be one or more states in
HMM with same parameters.

Expended structure of globular, loop and helix cap
cytoplasmic region. Possible transitions between the states are
shown. Therefore we have considered maximum 10 states for
loop on the basis of length of amino acid and same maximum 5
states as for helix cap region.

Here representation the detail structure of helix core
and all possible transitions between 25 states.

Prediction Score plot for each 10 sequence of 16 set.
Dataset sequences were helpful for the validation of model and
we have treated them as a unified set in order to find general
principles.

