Background
Aflatoxins are a group of mycotoxins with potent toxicity and
carcinogenicity toward mammals. They are produced by some
strains of Aspergillus flavus, Aspergillus parasiticus,
Aspergillus nomius and Aspergillus tamarii and they can be
found as contaminants in a wide variety of food and feed
commodities. Aflatoxin contamination in agricultural products
is a serious problem from the viewpoint of food safety, and also
that of economical loss [,
]. However, it is difficult to resolve
the problem because of the lack of an effective method to
control aflatoxin production. The recent advances in cloning
several aflatoxin pathway genes revealed that most of these
genes are clustered within a 60-kb DNA region in A. parasiticus
and A. flavus. [,
]. This finding has spawned renewed interest
in the study of the regulation of aflatoxin biosynthesis. Previous
studies have suggested that one of these genes, aflR, is involved
in some aspect of the regulation of aflatoxin biosynthesis. In the
present study, 3D-Structure of AFLR-Protein was performed
using Robetta Server. The constructed model was further
validated by Ramachandran plot. The refined model was again
subjected to energy minimization using GROMOS and
evaluated for quality assessment.

Methodology
Sequence retrieval alignment and Protein structure prediction:
3D-Structure of AFLR-Protein was performed using Robetta
Server. The amino acid sequence of AFLR-Protein was retrieved
from NCBI (accession number: AAW32195.1). The Robetta
server is an automated protein structure prediction service for
ab initio and comparative modeling 
[]. Initially server searches
for structural homologs using BLAST or PSI-BLAST, 
[]
and then it breaks down the target sequence into its individual
domains, or independently folding units of proteins, by
matching the sequence to structural families in the Pfam
database. Domains with structural homologs then follow a
template-based model (i.e., homology modeling) protocol. The
final structure prediction is selected by taking the lowest energy
model as determined by a low-resolution Rosetta energy
function. The backbone conformation of the modeled structure
was calculated by analyzing the phi (F) and psi (ψ) torsion
angles using Rampage [].

Molecular Dynamics Simulations:
The GROMACS 4.5.4 package [] was used to run Molecular
Dynamics simulations with the GROMOS96 43a1 force field
and the SPC216 water model. The modeled AFLR-Protein was
energy minimized to discard the high-energy intramolecular
interactions. The overall geometry and atomic charges were
optimized to avoid steric clashes. Then the whole system was
gradually heated from 0 to 300 K over 500 ps using the NVT
ensemble run with the Berendsen procedure and, subsequently
in 500 ps NPT ensemble run at pressure of 1atm. The Parrinello-
Rahman pressure coupling has been used. Finally, a 10 MD
simulation was carried out to examine the changes and
dynamic behaviour of the protein was analyzed by calculating
the RMSD and energy.

Protein functional site:
Q-Site Finder [] server was used to predict the structure based
protein functional site.

Discussion
Sequence retrieval alignment and Protein structure prediction:
Robetta server is an automated protein structure prediction
service for ab initio and comparative modeling 
[]. The server
searched for structural homolog using PSI-BLAST, and then it
breaks down the target sequence into three individual domains.

Then the Domains with structural homologs follow a template
model (3coqA). The final structure prediction was done using
3coqA as template model (). Geometric evaluations of
the modeled 3D structure were performed using Rampage 
[]
by calculating the Ramachandran plot (). The plot
() of our model shows that 98.2% of residues were
found in the favored and 1.4% allowed regions and 0.5% were
in the outlier region.

Simulations of AFLR-Protein:
Molecular dynamics aimed to explain protein structure and
function problems, such as structural stability, folding and
conformational flexibility. In the simulations, we monitored the
backbone atoms and the C-α-helix of the modeled protein. The
RMSD values of the modeled structure’s backbone atoms were
plotted as a time-dependent function of the MD simulation. The
results support our modeled structure, as they show constant
RMSD deviation throughout the whole simulation process. The
time dependence of the RMSD of the backbone atoms of the
modeled protein during a 10 ns simulation is shown in 
(). 
The graph clearly indicates that there is a change in the
RMSD from 2.0 Å to 4.0 Å in the AFLR-protein during the first
1000 ps, but after that it reaches a plateau. The RMSD values of
the backbone atoms in the system tend to converge after 2000
ps, showing fluctuations of around 1 Å. The low RMSD and the
simulation time indicate that, as expected, the 3D structural
model of AFLR-protein represents a stable folding
conformation.

Identification of functional site:
Q-Site Finder server was used for the prediction of functional
sites in the modeled AFLR-protein. These servers detected the
following putative functional site residues in the modeled
protein: LEU-255, THR-270, VAL-273, ILE-274, ASN-277, LYS-
278, THR-281, LEU-307, LEU-310, ALA-311, TYR-313, ALA-314,
ALA-317, THR-319, GLN-320, CYS-321, THR-322, SER-323, and
THR-324 with significant matches.

Conclusion
The three-dimensional model of AFLR-protein has been
generated using Robetta server. The model generated by using
the template 3coqA proved to be the best model generated as
compared to the other templates. The modeled AFLR-Protein
was further optimization and validation using Rampage by
calculating the Ramachandran plot. The plot () of our
model shows that 98.2% of residues were found in the favored
and 1.4% allowed regions and 0.5% were in the outlier region.
In the simulations, we monitored the backbone atoms and the
C-α-helix of the modeled protein. The low RMSD and the
simulation time indicate that, as expected, the 3D structural
model of AFLR-protein represents a stable folding
conformation. The present study would aid in detailed
molecular mechanism of inhibition of aflatoxin in future.

Citation:Kasoju et al, Bioinformation 8(14): 684-686 (2012)

Modeled structure of the AFLR-Protein.

Ramachandran plot for the modeled

RMSD of the backbone atoms of the modeled protein
over a time period of 10 ns

