Background
Snakes are a group of amazing reptiles which have fascinated
human being since beginning of mankind. There are about
3000 different snake species described on earth, of these, only
about 350 are regarded as poisonous and dangerous for
humans. Although snakes are an important parameter of our
ecosystem and have tremendous importance in
biopharmaceutical research, that been ignored for proper
recording possibly due to the danger and panic of handling of
this mysterious reptiles. In snakes, venom is very important
which is produced and stored in highly specialized venom
glands and used mainly for defense or to immobilize prey 
[].
Each of these proteins and peptides has profound effect on
various physiological systems of victim [,
]. More than a
century of research has shown that snake venom is a rich
resource for pharmacologically active proteins and peptides 
[]
and good natural source of drug lead compounds. A number
of drugs are currently available in the market derived from
snake venom proteins and hundreds are in the different stages
of developmental pipeline []. For example, Captopril® is the
most extensively used drug to control blood pressure and
cardiac diseases, was developed from one of the venom
components of pit viper snake (Bothrops jararaca). Scientists and
clinicians in the pharmaceutical development field utilize the
molecules of snake venom as therapeutic agents for several
pathologies such as hypertension, cancer, thrombosis 
[]. In
spite of such huge importance there is no separate database
available for snake venom proteins. ‘The Reptile Database’ 
[]
is the only snake related database which merely covers the
descriptive and taxonomical aspect of different snake species
of the world. Nevertheless, the venom components which have
great pharmacological interest are not included in the
database. Searching of a specific venom component with
particular interest and specific physiological function from
NCBI, PDB or public databases are time consuming and
troublesome because these databases contain huge amount of
data entries. These facts forced to develop a separate database
for the snake venoms proteins.

Bangladesh is a country in South Asia, located on the fertile
‘Bengal delta’ with rich flora and fauna. Despite of having
great promise, snakes received no appropriate attention from
the planners and professionals of this country. Snake
population in Bangladesh is at high risk due to overwhelming
population growth and reclamation of forest and wildlife
habitat to mitigate the increasing land requirement for
accommodation and food. Only a few documentations are
present for snakes in Bangladesh. According to the report
published by IUCN in 2000 there are about 98 species of snakes
in Bangladesh, although over a dozen of these have not been
reported during the last few decades. Therefore, there is an
imperative need to have a database covering the venom
components of the snake along with their structural and
functional information. These facts motivated to develop a
secondary database titled “ISOB: A Database of Indigenous
Snake Species of Bangladesh with respective known venom
composition” with detailed information available so far for
seventy-eight indigenous snake species covering description of
snakes along with the information of available regarding the
venom proteins. It has a set of search tools that permit the
users to extract data and carry out specific queries.

Database description
The aim of ISOB is to offer a unique assortment of data
extracted from both public databases and published reports
which help to retrieval of information and the analysis of
stored data. This database supplies hyperlinks to the
corresponding entries of the related external databases. The
ISOB database contains information of 78 species of snakes
exhibiting relevant information about them. Since January
2013, it contained a total of 405 of snake toxins.

Data collection resources
Data of snakes found in Bangladesh were collected from
various resources such as list of Dr. Ali Reza Khan 
[], IUCN
Red List [] and Reptile Database. Research papers and Case
reports from Bangladesh, India, Pakistan, Bhutan, Nepal, and
Sri Lanka were retrieved, as were significant papers from other
Asian countries and also from different available informative
websites. Moreover, the entries of venom components have
been compiled from different public databases such as
PubMed [], Genbank 
[], Swissprot and TREMBL 
[] and
PDB []. The number of entries extracted from several sources
is given in  (See Supplementary material).

Database design
ISOB is developed using PHP (Hypertext preprocessor) as
server-side scripting language and embedded in HTML.
MySQL is applied as back-end database management system
[], 
because of its capability to maintain very large databases.
It is a user-friendly web-based application which connects to
the database of the wide-ranging indigenous snake species of
Bangladesh. The web application has been constructed with a
simple and advanced search options. In simple search
approach, one can search for a snake for its general
information along with their venom components including
their three-dimensional structures (either from PDB or
predicted by molecular modeling) by directly using its family,
genus, species or scientific name while the advanced search
option has been built to search for venoms of any particular
class those are present in available venomous snake species of
Bangladesh. For selection of multiple sequences from each
class a checkbox has been created beside each of the sequence.
Using these selected sequences can be exported in a text file as
FASTA format which will ease various bioinformatics analysis
such as multiple sequence alignment, similar protein search
using BLAST etc. The grouping of snake toxins provides a
basis for extending and clarifying the existing structural and
functional classification. Among all these venom components,
102 numbers of three dimensional structures were retrieved
from protein databank and remaining 253 number of new
unsolved protein structures were predicted using molecular
modeling method SWISS-MODEL []. SWISS-MODEL is an
entirely automated protein structure homology-modeling
server, accessible through the ExPASy web server, or from the
DeepView (Swiss Pdb-Viewer) program. The use of this server
is to make Protein Modeling accessible to all biochemists and
molecular biologists worldwide []. The models were created
with the help of Rasmol software by using the PDB template
generated from SWISSMODEL. This will ease the
bioinformatics analyses for identification of sequence patterns
associated with specific structural or functional properties of
snake toxins. The internet browser accessible interface ISOB
database is shown in .

Features of the ISOB database records
The ISOB database exists in as an open access, public domain
secondary web database. This database acts as a complete web
source for seventy-eight indigenous snake species of
Bangladesh along with the information regarding their venom
components. Out of 78, 31 snake species are venomous, 42 are
mildly venomous and 5 are non-venomous. Among these 31
venomous snake species of Bangladesh, 405 venom
components from 13 species are available to date. All the
venom protein sequence information was systematically
arranged in this database. Each of the records in the ISOB
database has a unique documentation of each snake species
encloses information about (1) Images with their sources (2)
Common name (3) Local name (4) Scientific Name (5) Venom
presence (6) Scientific Classification (7) Synonym (8)
Distribution (9) Size (10) Structural features (11) Habitat (12)
Diet (13) Reproduction (14) Behavior (15) Venom
characteristics (16) Key characteristics for identification and
(17) Venom (The proteins can be queried by suggesting the
accession number). This venom section further has sub sections
and is designed by taking eight important parameters into
consideration viz. (i) Image (ii) Venom title (iii) Class (iv)
Accession (v) Reference (vi) Protein sequence (vii) Structural
description and (viii) Related snake. Snake toxin proteins are
grouped into two main superfamilies: enzymatic and nonenzymatic
proteins []. The non enzymatic venom
components includes Three-finger toxins, C-type lectin-related
proteins, Kunitz type-serine proteinase inhibitors,
Sarafotoxins, Cysteine-rich secretory protein (CRISP), C-type
lectins, Disintegrins, Waprins, Veficolins, Vespryns,
Helveprins and Myotoxins. On the other hand enzymatic
proteins in venom include Phospholipase A2 enzymes,
Proteinases (Serine proteinases and Metalloproteinases),
Nucleotidases, Amino acid oxidase and Acetylcholinesterase.
So far, different classed venom components present in
different venomous snake species from Bangladesh are
integrated in this database. A representative entry of the entire
data record is given as a flowchart ().

During this investigation, several errors were revealed in data
from public sources and discrepancies of information supplied
for the same toxins between different sources. However, In
ISOB venom gallery, each of the venom has a unique accession
number of the sequences of the snake database entries have
that have corresponding entries in public databases such as
Genbank, Swissprot and PDB and provides hyperlinks to the
corresponding entries in these source databases. A
representative entry of the overall data record is given in
. Protein table consists of the protein sequence with
snake wise specific classes are unique feature of this database
(). Snake venom contains wide ranges of several
structurally distinct families of peptides those have
miscellaneous functions. As, snake bite is a burning public
health issue and second most common cause of un-natural
fatality in Bangladesh, ISOB included information regarding
snake bite treatment in local language. Apart from the
technical information, the database also gives the up to date
state of the availability status of snakes in Bangladesh.

Discussion
Venomous snakes are found in the family׳s Colubridae
(boomslang, vine snake), Elapidae (cobra, krait, mamba,
taipan, tiger snake, coral snake), Hydrophiidae (sea snakes),
Viperidae (old world vipers found in Europe, Africa, Asia but
not in America or Australia, saw scaled viper, Russell's viper,
puff adder, Gaboon viper), and Crotalidae (pit vipers, found in
America, Asia and Europe, copperhead, cotton mouth,
rattlesnakes []. In this current study mainly focused on the
snakes found in Bangladesh. These snakes are mostly from the
Elapidae,Viperidae, Hydrophiidae and colubridae families.
Venom is a complex mixture of proteins and peptides (most of
which reveal enzymatic activity), amines, lipids and other
components which targets specifically different physiological
systems of victim or pray []. Due to high activity and high
specificity of venom components, they are useful for the study of
highly complex biological mechanisms. A wide array of animals
including terrestrial: ants, wasps, scorpions, spiders and snakes
and marine organisms: Jellyfish, sea anemones, puffer fish, cone
snails, sea snakes and octopuses produced venom. Rough
estimates of the number of different venom components from
individual snake, scorpion or cone snail is in the range of 50–200
different toxins [] with the growing number of newly
characterized toxins, their arrangements will require updating
and need better data management. Till now information relating
venom-toxin sequences and the features, structure and function
of venom-toxins is scattered across multiple sources. Only basic
sequence information is found in Primary databases such as
GenBank or SWISS-PROT. These public databases contain huge
amount of data entries which may be unnecessary for
bioinformatics analysis of snake venom components with
particular interest. For example, a basic search for all snake
venom Phospholipase A2 (svPLA2) in the GenBank and
SWISSPROT databases results 55% of irrelevant and redundant
sequence entries (including pancreatic PLA2, bacterial PLA2 and
PLA2 from other non venomous sources) and required to be
filtered out before the analysis. Therefore, a fresh and
comprehensive database comprising the description on the
snakes supplemented with structural information of the relevant
individual venom components available so far will be of special
interest for the bioinformatics researchers. As far as our
knowledge, only particular venom databases are at present as
major sources for the study of venom toxin. The databases
include entries collected from different sources, cleaned,
organized, analyzed and classified in keeping with their
structure–function relationship. The SCORPION database 
[] of
just about 300 entries of scorpion toxin sequences are annotated
and classified along with their structural and functional
properties. The Mollusk [] database comprises over 450
peptides from the cone snail venoms where each entry has a
distinctive field to make easy comparison of conotoxin entries.
Functionally interpreted entries of svPLA2 toxins are found in
the svPLA2 database []. However, currently there is no
separate database for snake venom components. Therefore, the
Database titled ISOB; a secondary database has been developed
in the current project with detailed information available so far
for 78 available snake species of Bangladesh. In this database,
the venom has been grouped in different classes for the easy of
searching a particular type of venom component among and
across species. Three dimensional structures (3D) of a molecule
have enormous implication and importance in Biological
Sciences which offer a complementary approach to sitedirected
mutagenesis for identification of functional residues
in venom toxins [] aid in structure-function studies and also
help in rationale drug designing. Structure determination by
NMR is limited only to small peptide molecules whereas
macromolecules crystallization is a slow and complex process,
which involves optimization of various interdependent
physical, chemical and biological parameters. Therefore, the
prediction of 3D structures of proteins from primary structures
by comparative protein modeling techniques is an attractive
alternative for large number of toxins.

Conclusion
A database for the indigenous snakes of Bangladesh is created
and for the first time all available information regarding the
snake venom proteins have been integrated and arranged
under one umbrella. Three dimensional structure of 253
unsolved venom protein structure using homology modeling
are also incorporated in the database. Such a huge number of
predicted 3D structure will help in studying structure-function
relationship, pharmacological action, protein evolution,
developing mini protein scaffold and in numerous other
bioinformatics analysis. This secondary database is a great
initiative and it is strongly believed that scientist throughout
the world will be benefited from the database and that will
contribute in different bioinformatics investigations. We
envision this database as a template for management of
molecular data of toxins of various venomous snake species.
Thus, this database is specialized for molecular analysis of
snake toxins which will serve multidimensional research
purposes. This database will serve as a basic guideline for
future field based wild-life survey on reptiles of Bangladesh
and it will be easier for the field researcher for identification of
the available snake species of Bangladesh. It also assists to
build up awareness of peoples for primary management and
treatment during snake bite.

Future Development
In future, refinement and periodical update of the database
will be carried out so as to ensure that users get the latest
information. It is also intended to include more sophisticated
Bioinformatics tools into the database for facilitating in-depth
structure–function studies, characterization of toxin interaction
sites and drug discovery.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors would like to thank the Higher Education Quality
Enhancement Project (HEQEP) for financial assistance (HEQEP
CP no. 492) and technical support. The authors would also like
to thank Professor R.M. Kini, Department of Biological
Sciences, National University of Singapore for his valuable
comments and suggestions and the Snake Rescue and
Conservation Centre (SRCC) of Darusha, Rajshahi, Bangladesh
for a number of valuable information.

Citation:Roly et al, Bioinformation 11 (2): 107-114 (2015)

Home page of the database (http://www. snakebd. com)

Flow chart

An example of snake database overview (a) Total data record of specific snake species (b) Retrieved PDB protein structure and (c)
Predicted new protein structure.

An example of advanced search page showing
protein sequence of a particular class of protein from different
snakes.

