Background
A common problem confronted by bioinformaticians is the need to resolve
whether two or more identifiers are identical, i.e., are aliases of each other. A
number of aliasing services have attempted to resolve the differing naming
conventions created by both computational and manual labelling methods
(AliasServer, DAVID, HGNC, SEGUID, MagicMatch, NCBI, ENSEMBL) 
[–]. 
These services differ by their technology and solutions with the general
strategy of 1) using either in-house generated unique identifiers (NCBI,
DAVID, ENSEMBL), or 2) the generation of unique fingerprints (AliasServer,
MagicMatch, SEGUID) by way of cryptographic hashing algorithms which
digest large arbitrary blocks of data (e.g., sequence) and returns a fixed-size bit
string []. 
As each of these systems is designed with a specific goal in mind,
none of them are optimized for specifically answering the single root question:
are two identifiers the same? ()

In the course of designing a comprehensive data warehousing and comparison
application called Booly [], 
we recognized a need for a dedicated aliasing tool
designed to efficiently and flexibly resolve alias identities. One of the main
tasks of Booly is to mix and match datasets together using combinations of the
Boolean operations. A common usage of such a tool is data aggregation
between multiple sources (e.g. the aggregation of Gene Ontology data to that of
a home brew spreadsheet table for annotation). When identifiers from both
datasets are in the same format (e.g., gene symbol), the process of integrating
the data can be performed trivially. However, the process of integrating the
data becomes more challenging when converting formats is needed, thus
becoming an unwieldy aliasing problem. This aliasing problem is compounded
when comparing multiple datasets with differing identifier formats.
Furthermore, Booly was created to compare content that extends beyond
sequence data (e.g., databases of pharmaceutical drugs, human diseases, or
other web-based content). With these requirements in mind, we designed an
aliasing system (Booly-hashing) that can quickly resolve heterogeneous
identifiers from multiple sources while maintaining flexibility to handle aliases
from multiple entities.

Booly-hashing is an aliasing database resource that utilizes a 160-bit Secure
Hash Algorithm (SHA) hash key to generate unique fingerprints of sequences
and their identifiers represented as a 40 character hexadecimal number 
() 
[]. 
Our streamlined approach requires the storage of only the hash key
and its associated identifier. Current aliasing methods utilizing the hashing
technology require the source of the identifiers to be known (AliasServer,
SEGUID) [,
]. 
This limits the ability to find aliases of identifiers from
heterogeneous sources. Our simplified technique is more broadly applicable as
it allows for conversion to known hash keys for any identifier regardless of
originating source. Another aliasing approach is to convert aliases into known,
reference identifiers (e.g. RefSeq, Genebank Gene ID) such that one can then
easily ascertain whether two identifiers are the same (DAVID) 
[]. However,
this approach is insufficient as some reference databases are incomplete and
lack the overlap required to be inclusive of all known sequences and their
identifiers (see ). In contrast, our aliasing
approach utilizes the sequence hash key as a singular point of conversion.
Finally, unlike other sequence-related aliasing technologies, we have developed
our Booly-hashing infrastructure to accommodate aliases from other sources
such as pharmaceutical drugs or keyword aliases. As an example, in the case of
pharmaceutical drugs, the unique fingerprint is the chemical formula that
remains intact despite multiple branding names. A comparison table of the
differences in features among our approach and other aliasing tools can be
found in . 
In aggregate, our aliasing method allows one to efficiently
and accurately ascertain whether two or more identifiers are aliases of each
other. Furthermore, our streamlined approach is flexible and easy to modify
and update. We have incorporated this aliasing model as part of a core
component in Booly, our data integration platform designed to aid researchers
in making new connections leading to novel discoveries in the laboratory. This
generalized aliasing system should be of similar utility for development of
other comparative tools that also have the simple requirement of rapidly
deciding whether two identifiers are the same. Additionally, we have created an
online tool that simply takes as input a list of identifiers and groups them
accordingly into similar gene or protein sequence clusters.

one and the same? Booly-hashing utilizes a 160-bit SHA-1 hash key to
generate unique fingerprints of sequences and their identifiers represented as a
40 character hexadecimal number. Identifiers with the same hash-keys are
considered as aliases of each other. Other approaches require knowledge of the
source of the original identifier or knowledge of a conversion format requiring
additional steps that increase complexity and programming (b) Comparison of
two commonly used aliasing tools in bioinformatics (AliasServer and DAVID
Gene Conversion Tool) against the Booly-hashing resource.

Summary
The process of determining whether two or more identifiers are aliases of each
other is a common recurring problem in bioinformatics. To this end, we have
created a streamlined aliasing method that utilizes a fingerprint such as a
sequence or chemical formula for the purpose of creating unique hash-key
identifiers. Our approach affords us a number of advantages over existing
aliasing solutions, including a reduction in run time complexity, increased
flexibility, flexible alias clusters, and simplicity in addition of new data,
updating, and maintenance. In addition to performing well for Booly, these
advantages should allow better integration of data containing heterogeneous
identifiers leading to new connections and novel discoveries within many fields
of science.

Author Contributions
EB advised on the study and helped write the manuscript. LHD conceived of
the study, was responsible for its design and coordination, implemented the
Booly aliasing resource, and wrote the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank Francisco Esteves and Vipul Bhargava for insightful discussions on
this manuscript. Funding: NIH RO1 AI070654 and NS29870

Citation:Do &amp; Bier Bioinformation 6(2): 83-85 (2011)

Booly aliasing resource. (a) Difference between other aliasing
approaches and the Booly-hashing method. The single question we wish to
answer efficiently is, whether two identifiers (e.g., FBgn0000055 and ADH) are

