Background
Starch is an important carbohydrate and the primary energy
source in plants. It has numerous industrial applications as
reviewed in Slattery et al. [,
]. Starch biosynthesis occurs
mainly by the participation of three enzymes: ADP-glucose
pyrophosphorylase (AGPase), starch synthase, and branching
enzymes [,
]. The first enzyme in starch biosynthesis is the
AGPase that catalyzes the conversion of Glc-1-P and ATP to
ADP-glucose and pyrophosphate (PPi). ADP-glucose is then
used by starch synthase for the synthesis of polyglucans. Many
researchers have revealed that the AGPase catalyzes the rate
limiting step in starch biosynthesis in higher plants [,
,
].
AGPase from higher plants has a heterotetrameric structure
(ά2β2) composed of pairs of small (SS) and large (LS) subunits
encoded by at least two different genes []. The large subunit
(LS) plays a major role in allosteric regulation through its
interaction with the small catalytic subunit (SS). The LS is
encoded by the shrunken-2 (Sh2) and the SS by brittle-2 (Bt2)
[]. Both Sh2 and Bt2 genes show considerable amino acid
identity (43.2%) and similarity (61%). Maize (Zea mays) and rice
(Oryza sativa), the two major cereals, show 93% identity in the
amino acids sequence for the LS of AGPase enzyme. In case of
wheat both large and small subunit show only 49 % identity in
their amino acid sequences.

Wheat, Rice, maize, barley, and potato are important amongst
staple crops as these are primarily consumed by humans
otherwise also these are the cheapest source of carbohydrates
and proteins used as food by one third population of the world.
Economically, wheat is one of the major food crops both in
terms of area and production. Wheat is grown in diverse
environments, from cool rain-fed to hot dry-land areas around
the world. This wide spread cultivation of the crop all along the
globe is largely due to high versatility of its genome. The seed
number and seed weight are important yield components of
wheat for determining wheat production. Particularly starch,
which accounts for 65-75% of wheat grain dry weight and
composed of glucan chains, amylopectin and amylase, a major
determinant of yield. This has rendered the use for comparative
analysis of ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase in selected plants.
In addition, phylogenetic analysis was also performed to know
the evolutionary relatedness among AGPase.

Methodology
Protein sequence retrieval:
Protein sequences of small subunit (SS) and large subunit (LS)
of AGPase from wheat, rice, maize, potato and Arabidopsis
were retrieved from protein database of NCBI (National Center
for Biotechnology Information,
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein/) in FASTA format.

Physico-chemical characterization:
The ProtParam tool (http://web.expasy.org/protparam/) of
ExPASy was used to compute amino acid composition (%),
molecular weight, theoretical isoelectric point (pI), number of
positively and negatively charged residues, extinction
coefficient, instability and aliphatic index, Grand Average of
Hydropathy (GRAVY).

Secondary structural properties:
Secondary structural properties of the protein including alpha
helix, 310 helix, Pi helix, beta bridge, extended strand, beta turns,
bend region, random coil, ambiguous and other states were
computed by using SOPMA (Self Optimized Prediction Method
with Alignment,
http://npsapbil.ibcp.fr/cgibinnpsa_automat.pl?page=/NPSA/
npsa_sopma.html) tool of NPS (Network Protein Sequence
Analysis).

Prediction of functional properties:
The motif prediction analysis was carried out with the help of
Expasy's prosite tool. For functional analysis, the motifs of the
AGPase protein sequences were identified by using Prosite
(http://prosite.expasy.org/). Input data type was in FASTA
format and motifs were scanned against prosite patterns.

Identification of Signature Logo using Web tool:
Logo of AGPase was generated using Web Logo tool
(http://weblogo.berkeley.edu/). In this overall height of the
stack indicates the sequence conservation at that position, while
the heights of the symbols within the stack indicate the relative
frequency of each amino acid at that position.

Phylogenetic analysis:
Twelve sequences of both large and small subunits of wheat,
rice, maize, barley, potato and Arabidopsis were aligned by
ClustalW tool and output file of this program was used for
generation of phylogenetic tree
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalw2/).

Results &amp; Discussion
For all the AGPase physicochemical characterization, secondary
structure properties, motif and phylogenetic analysis was
carried out by using various computational tools. In maize
additional tyrosine and serine residues increases the seed
weight 11-18% without increasing or decreasing the percentage
of starch []. From ProtParam result, it was observed that for all
the residues on average the percentage of serine was higher
than the other residues but the percentage of tyrosine was
average. The percentage of serine was higher as compare to
tyrosine in all subunits analyzed however it was highest in
large subunit of Arabidopsis thaliana and lowest in small subunit
of maize. In contrast to this the percentage of tyrosine was
approximately equal in all the sequences except small subunits
of wheat and maize ().

The total number of positively (Arg + Lys) and negatively (Asp
+ Glu) charged residues of AGPase members were observed
 (see supplementary material). For all members, the
total number of negatively charged residues exceeded the total
number of positive charged residues except large subunit of
potato and Arabidopsis thaliana. This possible variation might be
due to their isoelectric point in acidic range. For the remaining
members, the isoelectric point was within alkaline range.
Extinction coefficient for all AGPase was observed higher
almost with in a same range. High extinction coefficient means
higher concentration of lysine, tryptophan and tyrosine. This
prediction is useful to study protein-protein interaction studies.
Stability of protein is described in terms of its stability index
whether a protein is stable or not, can be described by its
instability index. Instability index for large subunit of wheat,
barley, Arabidopsis and small subunit of potato and rice is
higher than 40 and thus describing these proteins unstable. It is
noteworthy that high aliphatic index was observed for small
subunit of all plants as compare to large subunit. The higher
aliphatic index indicates higher concentration of alanine, valine,
isoleucine and leucine occupying the relative volume of a
protein [].

In addition to this higher aliphatic index also provides higher
thermo stability. The results obtained in case of instability index
and aliphatic index were contradictory while compared for
AGPase analysis in rice, potato and Arabidopsis. According to
instability index, these proteins are unstable but their aliphatic
index is high enough to say that they are stable. These finding
are in consistent with earlier research []. Grand Average of
Hydropathy (GRAVY) was computed for all the members. A
range of GRAVY value was observed from -0.253 to -0.131'for
AGPase in selected plants. SOPMA analysis was done for all
AGPase members and it showed a high value for random coil in
all the members  (see supplementary material) while
alpha helix were found approximately equal to extended
strands.

High value for random coil bears important significance in the
study of protein tertiary structure and related functions.
Functional analysis of these proteins includes identification of
important motifs  (see supplementary material). These
motifs were 10 to 20 amino acids in length arise because specific
residues and regions proved to be important for the biological
function of a group of proteins, which are conserved in both
structure and sequence during evolution. In this study, a
signature logo of ADP glucose pyrophosphorylase was also
generated by web logo tool. The overall height of the stack
indicates the sequence conservation at that position, while the
height of the symbols within the stack indicates the relative
frequency of each amino acid at that position ().
Phylogenetic analysis depicts two main clusters ().
Cluster I encompasses large subunits (LS) while cluster II
contains Small subunits (SS). This study will provide a good
foundation for further functional analysis of AGPase of other
crops. However, the outcome of this study needs further
validation by experimental approach.

Conclusion
In this study, we compiled detailed comparative information
about ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase in selected plants by
analyzing their structural features e.g. amino acid content,
physico-chemical properties, secondary structural features and
phylogenetic classification. Present investigation will provide
an insight for the biologists working with ADP-glucose
pyrophosphorylase in order to understand the functionality of
AGPase.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work was supported by the UGC sponsored Rajiv Gandhi
National Fellowship sponsored by University Grants
Commission to SR, Agri Bioinformatics Promotion Program,
Department of Information Technology, Ministry of
Communications &amp; Information Technology, Government of
India, New Delhi to RC and Indian Council of Agricultural
research of New Delhi, India to PS. The authors are thankful to
Project Director, DWR, Karnal for providing facilities for this
work.

Citation:Rani et al, Bioinformation 9(11): 572-576 (2013)

Serine and tyrosine percentage of AGPase in selected
plants

WebLogo representation of motif of ADP Glucose
pyrophosphorylase. The amino acid type and position are
shown on the x axis. The overall height of the amino acid stacks,
plotted on the y axis, indicates the sequence conservation at a
given position, while the height of individual symbols within a
stack indicates the relative frequency of an amino acid at that
position. Amino acids are color coded according to their type as
basic (blue), hydrophobic (black), polar/nonpolar (green), and
acidic (red).

Phylogenetic tree of ADP Glucose Pyrophosphorylase
obtained using ClustalW.

