Background &amp; Description
The Health Care Reform Act of 2010 advocates innovative
health care modalities whose foundations rest on translational
science. The Act proposes dynamic transactions between
translational researches − the bridge between the patient and
the fundamental clinical and biological evidence obtained from
the samples and biopsies of the patient − and translational
effectiveness − the utilization of the best available evidence
obtained by research synthesis in specific clinical settings.

In the context of translational effectiveness, it is now generally
accepted that a patient's health literacy reflects the individual's
ability to read, understand, comprehend and use healthcare
bioinformation. The importance of health literacy is widely
accepted because it empowers the patient to become an active
participant (i.e., locus of control, motivation) in the process of
understanding the seriousness of the diagnosis, of making
decisions (i.e., self-efficacy) regarding treatment protocols, and
of following instructions for treatment (i.e., compliance).

The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services defines
health literacy as “…the degree to which individuals have the
capacity to obtain, process and understand basic health information
needed to make appropriate health decisions and services needed to
prevent or treat illness…” 
[]. Several variables modulate health
literacy, starting from socio-educational status, to age, ethnicity,
gender, language proficiency and comprehension in certain
cultural groups. In fact, even in the wake of the health Care
Reform Act of 2010, which has expressly called for patient
centered outcomes research (PCOR), low health literacy
remains among one of the most formidable and largely underaddressed
public health issues and it still form a barrier to
clinical practice that aims to improve health care quality and
outcomes. In fact, low health literacy still forms today a
gargantuan barrier to clinical practice that aims to improve
health care quality and outcomes. In addition, the lack of
precision to predict health literacy, the administrative burden
and the inability of existing measures to estimate health literacy
at a population level, continues to hamper its rigorous and
robust assessment.

Research has shown that multivariate models permit a more
accurate estimation of the meta-construct of health literacy than
single predictors. While complex, these approaches can be
applied effectively to readily available administrative or census
data to produce estimates of average health literacy and
identify communities that would benefit most from appropriate
targeted interventions in specific clinical settings, and to
address poor quality care and outcomes related to low health
literacy []. 
Standardized and targeted training strategies can be
effective in building stronger relationships with stakeholders,
particularly when designed to customize practice-based content
and curriculum delivery to patient's optimal cognitive learning
mode and preferences [].

Case in point, the Rapid Estimate of Adult Literacy in Medicine
(REALM) was developed to incorporate dental and medical
terms into an 84-item Rapid Estimate of Adult Literacy in
Medicine and Dentistry (REALM-D) measure, and was
validated against a 48-item health beliefs and attitudes survey
in a sample of 200 culturally diverse dental clinic populations in
the Los Angeles area. This survey evinced that minority nonwhite
participants have significantly lower REALM-D as well as
a lower total scale scores at each level of difficulty compared to
white participants. Also, participants whose main language was
not English had significantly lower REALM-D scores compared
to those with higher level of education and more robust oral
health literacy []. 
In brief, it is evident that health literacy
requires a multi-pronged approach for the assessment of: 1)
appropriate dissemination of relevant and appropriately
packaged bioinformation; 2) skills to gather and comprehend
health bioinformation; 3) comprehension of at least some degree
of bioinformation, health and medical glossary; 4)
understanding diversity of means and platforms for public
reporting and dissemination of bioinformation.

A distinct conceptualization of health literacy assessment, the
National Assessment of Adult Literacy (NAAL), a US nationally
representative assessment of English literacy among American
adults age 16 and older defines functional health literacy as the
ability to read, understand, and act on health information in
everyday life. In the NAAL categorization format, patients may
be: 1) Proficient if able to perform the complex activities
involved in searching and comprehending health information
(10-12% of the US adult population); 2) Intermediate if capable of
conducting moderately difficult tasks for finding basic healthrelated
facts (about 50% of the US adult population); 3) Basic if
only able to comprehend the information in a clearly written
pamphlet; and 4) Below Basic, if barely capable to follow a set of
short instructions. These individuals have limited English
literacy.

NAAL confirms that language and culture are serious barriers
to health literacy for at least 5% of the US adult population (and
larger proportions in certain States, such as California, and
certain city neighborhoods, such as East Los Angeles, the San
Fernando Valley, etc.). Qualitative and quantitative
assessments, derived from the NAAL rating scale and adapted
specifically to health literacy, can be useful and sensitive
measures of health literacy [].

In brief, the context of patient-centered outcomes research
renders it is unavoidable and critical to have fully validated and
reliable instruments to measure health literacy, and to followup
interventions that target its increase. It is primarily for this
reason that current trend of health care research have led to the
development of several paradigms designed to increase health
literacy through structured and systematic bioinformation at
the national level, such as the AHRQ Center for Education and
Research on Therapeutics (CERTS).

The 2004 goal set by President Bush on universal Electronic
Health Records (EHRs) was followed, within less than a decade,
by the recent Health Care Reform Act of 2010. Taken together,
these political efforts are witnessed of the extraordinary
emphasis that has been given to efficiency, patient-centered
outcomes research, and comparative efficacy and effectiveness
research modalities in the first part of the XXI Century. Thus
today, the best available evidence is integrated into
appropriately revised clinical practice guidelines and standards
of care and eventually evidence-based health care policies. The
focal point of patient-centered outcomes research consists of the
systematic scientific process that is characterized by
comparative effectiveness and efficacy research and review for
practice and policy, often represented by the acronym CEERAP.

Emanating from the CEERAP core is the process of evidence
based decisions, which always benefits from active
participation by all stakeholders, including the patient and the
caregivers. In order to empower the stakeholders to fully
participate in this essential stage of health care, the best
available evidence obtained through CEERAP must be
effectively disseminated in a manner that enriches the cognitive
schemata of the patients, or in other words, significantly
increases the patient's health literacy. Certain blocks and
limitations still exist that hinder the process ().

Novel and improved modes of dissemination of the best
available bioinformation could be designed and tested. We have
proposed a system based on the principle of the web
architecture [], 
as one possible means to provide fast, reliable
and global dissemination service []. Nevertheless, the fact
remains that the challenge of reporting and disseminating
science and health care bioinformation to the public is as
complex and unresolved as critical current trend of health care
is to this date, as it is a critical current trend of health care.

In conclusion, it is fair to recognize that the “science of public
reporting” has a noble history that begun at least a quarter
century ago [], although traces of its importance can be found
in the work of Paracelcus and Galen. But, our efforts in this
domain are far from being exhausted, and much work remains
to improve seamless public reporting.

The challenge of public reporting of bioinformation today refers
to the concerted process to provide specific bioinformation,
such as the best available evidence emerging from CEERAP in a
patient-centered outcome research modality, to stakeholders
and health care consumers, in order to empower them to rate
and compare providers, interventions and health care variables
ranging from standards of quality, cost, coverage, risk, success
rate, and etc. The science of public reporting has now evolved
into a process that must include systematic data collection and
analysis, and final dissemination to a public audience 
[–].
Current trends dictate that public reporting not only must be an
instrument of dissemination of the best available evidence
obtained through the CEERAP protocol, but must also ensure
increased health literacy.

No funding or grants have been received, and no conflict of interest is
present in this study. The authors thank the Evidence-Based Decisions
Active Groups of Stakeholders (EBD-AGS) of the EBD-Practice-Based
Research Network and the EBD Study Group for the invaluable critical
contributions to this work.

Citation:Barkhordarian et al, Bioinformation 8(7): 293-295 (2012)

Patient-Centered Outcomes Research (PCOR): Implications of
Public Reporting for Health Literacy Outcomes: Crafting a consensus
statement via the PICO question, driven through a systematic scientific
process that is characterized by comparative effectiveness and efficacy
research and analysis for practice (CEERAP) in a patient-centered
outcome research (PCOR) modality leads to the Best Available Evidence
by a mechanism that involves feedback from the stakeholders. The
process ensures that the resulting best available evidence will optimally
serve patients and caregivers in empowering them in the clinical
decision-making process. This usually involves engaging them to
compare different interventions and strategies. The best available
evidence must be effectively disseminated through a bioinformation
Public Reporting/Dissemination step, which can involve systemic data
collection, analysis and final dissemination to public audience. The best
available evidence obtained through the CEERAP protocol and
dissemination leads to increased health literacy, which in turns will
enhance efficacy and effectiveness in evidence-based health care,
because the consensus of the best available evidence feeds into
evidence-based practice guidelines, standards of care and policies. In
this concerted process there are potential barriers that hinder the final
outcomes, and now require active study. These may include validation
issues (i.e. training, standardization), risk factors (i.e. design,
implementation) and integration (i.e. cost, feasibility).

