Background
Salmonellosis is one of the most common and widely
distributed food borne diseases caused by Salmonella serovars.
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi is a human-specific pathogen
causing enteric typhoid fever, a severe infection of the
reticuloendothelial system. The early administration of
antibiotic treatment has proven to be highly effective in
eliminating infections, but indiscriminate use of antibiotics has
led to the emergence of multidrug-resistant strains of S. enterica
serovar Typhi [–]. The emergence of multi drug resistant
strains has become a threatening public health problem.
Salmonella is responsible for an estimated 3 billion human
infections worldwide and killing 217,000 people every year 
[].
Since typhoid is becoming difficult to treat with conventional
drugs, information about the whole genome sequence and
genes of S. enterica serovar Typhi will help to reveal more
specific targets for drugs aimed at disease treatment and
vaccines for prevention. Targeting unique effectors of this
pathogen can be considered as a powerful strategy for drug
design against bacterial variations to drug resistance 
[]. Over
the past few decades the nucleotide and protein sequence data
have been accumulated and available in number of public
databases [,
]. However, such databases are broad in scope
and there is a gap between the public databases and the small
curated databases focusing on a particular organism or a type of
data. Therefore we have developed SalmonellaBase, an online
database with the data required for the structural and
functional studies of Salmonella serovars’ druggable targets.

Methodology
The database consists of the records of nucleotide sequences,
protein sequences, biological pathways, determined 3D
structures, and the predicted druggable protein targets of 16
different strains of Salmonella species. They are organized to
simplify the task of finding relevant data for proteins in the
related strains (). Complete genome and proteome
sequences sequence data was collected from NCBI. The protein
records include all the functionally assigned protein sequences
as well as the hypothetical proteins; each record when accessed
returns the primary sequence in fasta format. Databases such as
Database of Essential Genes (DEG) []
(http://tubic.tju.edu.cn/deg) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes
and Genomes (KEGG) [] pathway database were used to
identify putative drug targets for the individual strains
respectively. SalmonellaBase was constructed with standard
HTML and JavaScript. The database used PHP as the frontend
and MySQL as the backend. The database is available online
with user-friendly search methods and graphical browsers
().

3D Structures of druggable targets
One of the main focuses of the database is to provide the
structural information of the druggable targets found in the
completely sequenced genomes of Salmonella strains. The
database has a record of predicted structures of proteins which
could serve as targets for novel drug design. The target proteins
were identified by differential genomics approach and the
structures are modeled using comparative and homology
modeling approaches and are refined by energy minimization
and validated by Ramachandran plot. Along with the predicted
structures of protein targets, structure files of the
experimentally determined proteins obtained from PDB are also
curated. These structures were made available for download
from respective pages in the database.

Features of the database
The database consists of the collection of the primary sequences
of all hypothetical proteins, functionally assigned proteins,
complete genome sequences, biological pathways and the
tertiary structure files of protein targets. The important feature
of SalmonellaBase is the integrated availability of data. The
completely sequenced genomes of over 16 strains of Salmonella
serovars, are incorporated in this database 
(see
supplementary material). Moreover, each of the protein record
shows, 
The start position and end position of the protein in the genome;

The length of the nucleotide sequence and the length of the amino acid sequence;

Displays the primary protein sequence in fasta format;

The protein summary page also has the hypothetical protein sequences of all the strains with their position in the genome;

The database also allows the users to search the protein of interest from the data by giving a keyword in the filter option;

The biological pathway record includes all the pathway names with its image.



Conclusion
The three dimensional structural information of several
undetermined proteins will give an in-depth understanding
which in turn paves ways to novel drug design strategies.
Screening of functional inhibitors against these targets may also
result in discovery of novel therapeutic compounds that can be
effective against multidrug resistant strains of Salmonella. The
data on hypothetical proteins will be helpful to annotate the
genes of interest and to predict functional regions.

Future development
We plan to further refine and update this database with links to
known drug related data in the near future.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The bioinformatics computational facilities available at
Department of Bioinformatics, Sathyabama University are
greatly acknowledged. The authors also thank the database
providers whose links have been used and the anonymous
reviewers for their valuable comments and suggestions.

Citation:Pushpa &amp; Suresh, Bioinformation 8(15): 734-737 (2012)

Organization of data in SalmonellaBase

Homepage of SalmonellaBase and filter option in protein summary page.

