Background
Pathogen attack has caused an estimated 12% loss of the global crop
production in the last decade with up to 80% loses accounted from the tropical
countries []. 
The most important group of genes that has been used by
breeders for disease control is the plant resistance (R) genes. Resistance genes
which are members of a very large multigene family are highly polymorphic
and have diverse recognition specificities. As many as 70 different R genes
showing resistance to major plant pathogens has been isolated, cloned, and
characterized in different plants in the last 15 years 
[]. These can be classified
into five categories based on their predicted protein structure 
[,
]. Of the
cloned plant disease resistance (R) genes, approximately 75% encode
cytoplasmic receptor-like proteins characterized by an N-terminal nucleotidebinding
site (NBS), leucine-rich repeat (LRR) domain and a leucine zipper
(LZ), Toll interleukine 1-receptor (TIR) or a coiled-coil (CC) sequence 
[]. The
LRR region recognizes the pathogens, the TIR and CC regions are involved in
signal transduction during many cell processes [], while the NBS usually
signalizes for programmed cell death []. Many genes encode proteins of this
class: I2 [] and Sw5 
[] from tomato; 
RPM1 [], RPS2 
[] and RPS4 
[]
from Arabidopsis thaliana; Pib [], 
Pi-ta [] and Xa1 
[] from Oryza sativa
(rice); Hero [], R1 
[] and Rx2 
[] from potato, L 
[], and P 
[] of flax,
N [] 
of tobacco etc. Infact, the whole-genome sequence analysis revealed
that there are 150–175 NBS–LRR genes in the Arabidopsis genome 
[] and
approximately 600 NBS–LRR genes in the rice genome 
[]. Curcuma longa
L. (turmeric) of the family Zingiberaceae is one of the most important crop
with great medicinal and economic significance. Turmeric rhizome is valued
world over and has been in use from ancient time as a spice, food preservative,
coloring agent, and in the traditional systems of medicine. India is the world's
largest producer, and exporter of turmeric followed by China, Indonesia,
Bangladesh and Thailand []. The International Trade Centre, Geneva, has
estimated an annual growth rate of 10% in the world demand for turmeric.
Continuous domestication of the preferred genotypes coupled with their
exclusive vegetative nature seems to have eroded the genetic base of these
crops and as a result, all of their cultivars available today are equally
susceptible to major diseases such as rhizome rot caused by Pythium
aphanidermatum, leaf blotch caused by Taphrina maculans and leaf spot
caused by Colletotrichum capsici. Moreover, turmeric is completely sterile and
is propagated exclusively by vegetative means using rhizome. In this context,
characterization of resistance-related sequences may provide a lead towards
retrieving resistance specificities suitable for the improvement of this crop.
Recent advances in Curcuma genomic technologies have generated a large
number of expressed sequence tags (ESTs) that have been made available in
public database. As of July 2011, GenBank had released 12,593 EST sequences
from Curcuma longa. This database can be used as a starting material for the
characterization of NBS-LRR class R gene sequences in turmeric. Thus, our
objective is to perform a data mining-based identification of plant NBS-LRR
class R-genes in Curcuma longa EST database, by using well known R-genes
sequences as template, comparing the identified sequences with known R-genes
deposited in public DNA and protein databases.

Methodology
Curcuma longa transcriptome database was searched for NBS-LRR R-gene
homologues using Amino-acid sequences of known genes as query. Accession
numbers of sequences used at NCBI (National Center for Biotechnology
Information; 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) are shown in Table 1 (see
), together with sequences features and accession
numbers. They are grouped according to the conserved domains previously
described. All turmeric sequences used during this work were obtained from
Curcuma longa EST database. EST database of NCBI contains 12953
Curcuma longa express sequence tag data. We have mined 12593 EST
sequences consisting of two tissue libraries of rhizomes 6870 (DY395309-
DY388440) and leaves 5723 (DY388439-DY382717). The EST sequences
were screened against the UniVec database from NCBI
(
ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/pub/ UniVec/) for detecting vector and adapter sequences
by using the program Cross_Match. CAP3 program was used to assemble the
EST sequence into contigs for creating a non-redundant dataset. The program
TBLASTN [] 
was used to perform reverse alignment on Curcuma longa
contigs. The clusters frame of the TBLASTN alignment was used to predict the
Open Reading Frames (ORFs) for each searched contig. For this purpose, the
Expasy Translate Tool (
bo.expasy.org/tools/dna.html) was used, which predicts
the correct ORF for a DNA sequence in the corresponding amino acid FASTA
sequence. The obtained ORFs were subsequently submitted to a Reverse
Position Specific BLAST (RPS-BLAST) against Conserved Domain Database
[] 
aiming to identify patterns or motifs in predicted cluster products.
Reciprocal alignments were conducted for ORFs by using the nr databank and
stand-alone BLAST package from NCBI. Matched sequences were annotated
for latter comparison.

Results and Discussion
R-genes are quite abundant in higher plants but the most functionally defined R
genes belong to a class that encode cytoplasmic receptor-like proteins
characterized by an N-terminal nucleotide-binding site (NBS) and a leucinerich
repeat (LRR) domain. A set of 28 non-redundant NBS sequences were
retrieved through TBLASTN alignment of 4035 Curcuma longa contig
sequences. They have been annotated for one or more than one R-gene (data
summarized in Table 2 (see ). Earlier, five resistance
gene analogues (RGAs) have been already isolated and characterized in
Curcuma longa []. 
However, all the five RGAs isolated were of the CCNBS-
LRR class without exhibiting significant variations in the NBS type R gene
domain characterization. In contrast, it was expected that some similar
genes grouped at the same class should cause some level of redundancy 
[].
Contigs representing exclusive NBS type R genes with variability were (I) XNBS–
LRR: 10; CC-NBS-NBS-LRR: 2; CC-NBS-LRR: 9; NBS-LRR: 2; NBS:
3 and CC-NBS: 2 () In 21 out of 28 NBS genes, all the motifs
characteristic of the NBS domain were conserved and categorized as regular
NBS genes. The others were very different in their structures from the majority,
or were simply truncated and categorized as non-regular NBS genes. Two nonregular
NBS genes yielded higher P values when they were hit by TBLASTN
in the NBS regions and had standard LRR regions while 3 genes had only some
of the conserved NBS motifs. Two non-regular NBS genes encoded a coiled
motif but were highly divergent in NBS region and lacked LRR regions. In the
N-terminal region, 10 regular NBS genes contained some unknown motifs,
which were symbolized as X. 11 regular NBS genes encoded the CC motif
(CNL and CNNL) while the rest where without the CC motif (XNL). No genes
were encoded with the TIR motifs. TIR motif is supposed to be absent in
monocotyledonous plants [], being present in all dicotyledonous taxa actually
studied. Sizes of Curcum longa contig aligned to NBS-LRR R-genes varied
from 1256 (CL.CON.1529) to 452 nucleotides (CL.CON.1267). The prediction
of contig coding regions revealed that ORFs were coded in both forward and
reverse reading frames, with an average of 279 amino acids (aa) in length. ORF
sizes varied from 361 (CL.CON.3566) to 112 amino acids (CL.CON.1267).
The search for conserved domains (CD-Search) revealed conserved motifs in
all the analyzed contig clusters. All the 28 contig Curcuma longa clusters
represented the NB-ARC domain. In the LLR region, Pfam software detected
32 LRR motifs in the 28 NBS genes. This number is higher than the number of
Curcuma longa contigs with NBS-LRR R genes, due to their occurrence in
tandem repetitions. Sometimes these LRR sequences are imperfect and may be
difficult to recognize with available insilico tools, so it is possible that a larger
number may be identified manually. Two of the contig clusters CL.CON.1267
and CL.CON.3620 with a poorly developed NBS motif represented very short
ORFs of 112 and 123 amino acids respectively. Considering the best matches
to the 28 Curcuma longa NBS-LRR contigs identified, 9 were from plants of
dicotyledenous families such as Arabidopsis thaliana, Populus trichocarpa,
Pyrus communis, Glycine max, Cajanus cajans and Medicago sativa. From
monocots, rice (O. sativa) sequences appeared as best matches (9 contig
clusters) followed by Zingiber officinale (3 contig clusters). A comprehensive
list of all the sequences that aligned with Curcuma longa NBS-LRR contig
clusters are represented in table 2 (see ). The
comparison of our results regarding the organization of detected Curcuma
longa NBS-LRR genes was mainly with rice and ginger. It has been observed
that most of the information regarding R-genes available in databases refers to
herbaceous model and crop plants such as rice and Arabidopsis, may be
because most identified and sequenced R-genes were a consequence of
mapping approaches that have been abundantly performed in these plants. The
larger number of sequences from Oryza sativa representing best alignments to
Curcuma does not represent a higher similarity to this plant species, but it
reflects the large number of sequences of this model plant deposited in
GenBank. Barbosa-da-Silva et al., 2005 [] has also found that Eucalyptus
even being a woody plant exhibited maximum alignment of R-genes with
herbaceous Arabidopsis thaliana. There can be other arguments as well such as
Curcuma belongs to the same family as ginger (Zingiberaceae) and

bothCurcuma and rice are monocots and exhibit similar levels of complexity.


However, we cannot also rule out the fact that significant sequence similarity
was also detected with dicot plants. This suggests that, Curcuma longa might
be positioned at the transition point between dicots and monocots as far as
resistance genes are concerned. However, detail characterization of the NBS–
LRR gene in turmeric has to be made before making a valid conclusion on its
evolutionary aspect. The number of NBS type R-genes identified here is quite
low considering the total size of the EST database. However, there can be other
types of R-genes in Curcuma longa, which were not targeted in this study.
Moreover, the EST database has not been obtained under pathogen stress
condition. This may suggest that the identified NBS sequences are expressed
constitutively but also leads to the supposition that a higher number of R-genes
may be present in Curcuma under other experimental conditions. Thus, the
generation of additional ESTs especially under infection by pathogen, can
make it possible to detect many new NBS genes from Curcuma longa.

Conclusion
Using bioinformatics tools, it was possible to detect and characterize NBS type
R-genes from Curcuma longa transcriptome. Twenty eight (28) NBS type R genes
were detected with distinct NB-ARC domain, 21 of which were regular
NBS genes. This insilico method of detecting NBS-LRR type R genes in
Curcuma longa has been done for the first time in this study. The identified
sequences will be valuable resources for the development of markers for
molecular breeding and identification of RGAs (resistance gene analogs) in
Curcuma and other related species. A few of the NBS type R-genes of
Curcuma isolated in this study may also be used for fluorescent insitu
hybridization (FISH) on Eucalyptus chromosomes, also helping in the
comparison of different parental species and the respective hybrids. Further,
these insilico detected NBS type R-genes will reveal furthers insights on the
organization, function and evolution of the NBS–LRR-encoding resistance
genes in asexually reproducing plants.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are grateful to Dr. Manoj Ranjan Nayak, President, Siksha O
Anusandhan University for his encouragement and support.

Citation:Joshi et al, Bioinformation 6(9): 360-363 (2011)

Graphical representation of the NBS-LRR R-genes retrieved from
Curcum longa EST database.

