Background
The pollution of the environment with toxic heavy metals is spreading
throughout the world along with industrial progress. Microorganisms and
microbial products can be highly efficient bioaccumulators of soluble and
particulate forms of metals especially dilute external solutions. Microbe related
technologies may provide an alternative or addition to conventional method of
metal removal or metal recovery. Waste water is a significant environmental
problem. Wastewaters from the industries and sewage sludge applications have
permanent toxic effects to human and the environment 
[,
]. Cadmium (Cd) is
nonessential but poisonous for plants, animals, and humans. Cadmium is one of
the most toxic pollutants of the surface soil layer, released into the environment
by mining and smelting activities, atmospheric deposition from metallurgical
industries, incineration of plastics and batteries, land application of sewage
sludge, and burning of fossil fuels. Lead (Pb) a major pollutant that is found in
soil, water and air is a hazardous waste and is highly toxic to human, animals,
plants and microbes []. 
Tanneries, oil refineries and metal industries are
causing depletion of surface and ground water quality. The discharge of various
sub processes of tanneries like bathing, pickling, tanning, dyeing and fat
liquoring may cause water pollution severely. The pollution of a particular
water body can always be link to an industry or sewage or agricultural runoff.
Likewise, contamination of soil by the release of heavy metals as a result of
industrial and anthropogenic activities is a threat to human health and
ecosystem. Presence of heavy metals in soil is known to have potential toxic
impact on environmental quality and on human health via ground water and
surface water [,
]. The genus Pseudomonas includes many species of
environmental, clinical, agricultural, and biotechnological interest 
[].
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a ubiquitous environmental bacterium that is one
of the top three causes of opportunistic human infections. A major factor in its
prominence as a pathogen is its intrinsic resistance to antibiotics and
disinfectants [,
].

Methodology
Isolation of bacteria
The bacteria were identified based on colony characteristics, gram staining
methods and by various biochemical tests as given by Bergey's (1984) Manual
of Determinative Bacteriology.

16s rRNA SEQUENCING
Isolates are sub cultured on agar plate. A single colony was obtained from a
fresh subculture and resuspended in master mixture. A 380-bp fragment of the
16S rRNA (universal primer) used as the target. For 50μlreaction,
1μlof200mMdNTPs, 5µl of Reaction buffer (TriswithMgcl2)
“10pMforwardprimerRW01 (FP) 5'AACTGGAGGAAGGTGGGGAT-3'”
“10pMReverseprimerDG74 (RP) 5'AGGAGGTGATCCAACCGCA-3'”
1.2u/µl of Tag Polymerase were used, amplification was carried out in Thermal
Cycler PTC 200(MJ Research), and a standard three-step protocol used for all
reactions, including 35 cycles for each reaction with an annealing temperature
of 55°C and 10-min extension time.

Nucleotide sequencing and Molecular characterization
The amplified product purified by Bio basic Inc, Bangalore Genei, India.
Cyclic PCR carried out using Big Dye Terminator Ver 3.1. Each purified
template sequenced on both strands, reaction done by Genetic Analyzer
3130(ABI System). A comparison of the 16s rRNA sequence of the strain with
sequence in the non-redundant collection using blast database have been done.

Computational studies on Bacterial isolates
The occasional exceptions to the usefulness of 16S rRNA gene sequencing
usually relate to more than one well-known species having the same or very
similar sequences. Computational studies have evolved to include the creation
and exploration of sequence alignments, the estimation of sequence divergence,
the reconstruction and visualization of phylogenetic trees, and the testing of
molecular evolutionary hypotheses. To understand more information about 16s
rRNA sequence, the study is extended to identification of promoter position
() and secondary structure prediction 
() [,
,
,
].

Discussion
The isolates obtained were identified by morphological, and biochemical
characteristics (see ). 
[,
,
,
]. The
evolutionary history was inferred using the Neighbor-Joining method 
[,
,
,
]. 
The optimal tree with the sum of branch length = 112.96911444 is shown
in . 
The evolutionary distances were computed using the Maximum
Composite Likelihood method [,
,
,
] and are in the units of the
number of base substitutions per site (see ).
Phylogenetic analyses were conducted in MEGA4 
[,
]. Standard error
estimate(s) are shown in the plot (D=44.63; S.E=23.21) and were obtained by a
bootstrap procedure. The probability of rejecting the null hypothesis that
sequences have evolved with the same pattern of substitution, as judged from
the extent of differences in base composition biases between sequences. A
Monte Carlo test was used to estimate the P-values, which are shown below the
diagonal. P-values smaller than 0.05 are considered significant the estimates of
the disparity index per site are shown for each sequence pair above the
diagonal. The difference in base composition bias per site is indicate the larger
differences in base composition biases than expected based on evolutionary
divergence between sequences and by chance alone.

Conclusion
The nucleotide frequencies are 0.234 (A), 0.213 (T/U), 0.238 (C), and 0.316
(G). The transition/transversion rate ratios are k1 = 14.587 (purines) and k2 =
16.07 (pyrimidines). The statistic is calculated for numbers of synonymous and
nonsynonymous substitutions per site, respectively. The variance of the
difference was computed using the bootstrap method. There were a total of 75
codons and positions counted by Nei-Gojobori method. The Tajima test
statistic was estimated for the 7 strains to identify the segregating sites. The
relationship between the two estimates of genetic variation at the DNA level,
namely the number of segregating sites: 326 and the average number of
nucleotide differences estimated: 4.839163 from pairwise comparison and
mutation are occurred in random, is investigated. Upstream region of 16S
rRNA gene of Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain MPC 1, Promoter position are -
10 box at pos. 60 GGTTAGACT; Score 63; -35 box at pos.41 TGGTAA; Score
10. As well as secondary structure and plot have predicted, which reveals the
fold information of 16s rRNA gene sequence.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors thank to Marudupandiyar Institutions, Thanjavur and Aravind Medical
Research foundation, Madurai and Tannery Industry in Trichy were helped to
sequence the bacteria.

Citation:Senthil et al, Bioinformation 6(5): 187-190 (2011)

Computational Studies on Pseudomonas aeruginosa MPC1 sp.: (A)
Evolutionary relationships of different strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa sp
with pseudomonas aeruginosa MPC1; (B) Estimates of evolutionary
divergence between sequences; (C) Prediction of Promoter position using
BPROM.

Result of Chromatogram with upstream region of 16S rRNA gene of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain MPC 1, Promoter position are -10 box at pos.
60 GGTTAGACT; Score 63; -35 box at pos.41 TGGTAA; Score 10 is
highlighted.

Fold of Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain MPC1 16s rRNA sequence.

