Background
Widely accepted view related to phylogeny of snakes that they
evolved during the era of dinosaurs in the Jurassic period from
a family of terrestrial lizards about 200 million years (Myr) ago
[,
]. Venom, the advanced thesaurus of secretion of venom
gland is usually used by snakes in defense and in assault.
Within the natural world the venom system of snakes is an
example of ultimate sophistication of integrated armory 
[].
Natural selection gives the birth of venom which is a naturally
engineered lethal admixture of peptides and proteins. The
venom helps snakes to affect different prey or victim by
exerting action upon different vital system []. Snake-bites are
one of the serious public health problems in many countries of
the world. At global level there are 5 million snake-bites, 2.5
million envenoming and over 125,000 mortality annually 
[]. In
India the incidence of snake-bites is nearly 200,000 and 35,000-
50,000 people are died every year []. The deadly venom
contains plethora of polypeptide and non-polypeptide
constituents. Cytotoxins and short neurotoxins are the nonenzymatic
polypeptides (Molecular weight 5-10 kDA) within in
the snake venom []. Interestingly the cytotoxins and short
neurotoxins are the family members of ‘Three-finger’ protein
(TFP) superfamily. The naming of ‘Three-finger’ is for its
appearance of three loops (finger like) projected from the core
region of the protein. Three finger appearances are maintained
by three disulfide bridges within the loops []. Cytotoxin exerts
their effect upon the target cells by formation of pore within the
cell membrane []. Short neurotoxins block the neuromuscular
transmission by selective binding to muscle nAChR 
[]. Other
non-toxin family members of Three-finger protein (TFP)
superfamily are xenoxin, CD59, Ly-6, Lynx-1 [,
]. Xenoxin is a
skin secretory protein of Xenopus laevis frog, CD59 is a
complement regulatory protein plays a role in complement
system in human, mouse and rat []. Lynx-1 is a neuronal
modulator acts on CNS in mouse []. Venom proteins of
snakes evolve from the genes of normal body proteins which
are responsible for key regulatory processes within the body.
These genes are duplicated and selective expression of these
duplicated genes facilitates the synthesis of venomous
composition of venom gland. In this process the ancestral
function is converted into a derived one []. The objective of the
present study is a comparative compositional, physicochemical
characteristics and functional analysis of snake venom toxin
proteins and non-toxin proteins of other chordates like hagfish,
frog, mouse, rat and human etc. These comparative analyses
will help us to understand the occurrence of diversification of
different protein sequences in these toxin proteins and nontoxin
proteins of other chordates. This also hints the systemlevel
adaptability of these three-finger proteins in different
physiological milieu. From the applicability view point, the
results will provide information necessary for generation of
engineered therapeutic proteins from the natural toxins.

Methodology
Amino acid sequences of proteins were obtained from National
Centre for Biotechnology Information
(http://ncbi/nlm/nih.gov) 
[]. SignalP 4.0 server was
employed for detection of signal peptide within the amino acid
sequences (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/SignalP/) 
[].
After processing only main chain of peptides were used for
further analysis. Detailed information regarding sequences was
mined from Protein Information Resources (PIR)
konwlwdgebase and literatures []. Protein Information
Resources (PIR) is an integrated public bioinformatics resource
which helps the genomic and proteomic research. For better
understanding a sequence ID code was given to each molecule.
Physicochemical characterization including number of amino
acids, molecular weight, theoretical isoelectric point (pI), amino
acid composition (%) profile, number of positively charged
(Arg + Lys) and negatively charged (Asp + Glu) amino acid
residues, instability index and Grand Average of
Hydropathicity (GRAVY) value were calculated with the help
of Expasy ProtParam tool
(http://expasy.org/tools/protparam.html).

Discussion
In the present study, snake venom toxins (cytotoxins and short
neurotoxin of naja annulifera and naja naja) and related nontoxin
proteins of other chordates were analyzed with the help of
bioinformatical tools  (see supplementary material).
The analysis of amino acid composition of each sequence
depicts that conservation of cysteine amino acid took place in
different molecules in different organisms  (see
supplementary material). Cytotoxins, short neurotoxins and
related non-toxin proteins are similar in their cysteine profile
but substantially different in composition of other amino acids.
Cysteine profile is conserved because it is responsible for
disulphide bridging which is crucial for maintenance of internal
core structure of three-finger proteins []. Positively charged
lysine amino acid is present in very high percentage in
cytotoxin, short neurotoxin and in xenoxins. Lysine with the
help of ionic bonds interacts with other charged biomolecules of
cells, increasing the reactivity of the protein. Lethality of
cytotoxins is facilitated by an invariant lysine residue of these
(cytotoxins) peptides []. Short neurotoxin binding to nAChR
is governed by positively charged amino acid lysine [,
].
Arginine is also present in high amount in short neurotoxin
which is another positively charged amino acid, is responsible
for the receptor binding mechanism. Both Lysine and Arginine
and their adequate presence help cytotoxin and short
neurotoxin to become an effective lethal bio-molecule.
Additionally short neurotoxins also manage negatively charged
amino acid efficiently than cytotoxins. Negatively charged
aspartic acid and glutamic acid assisted proper attachment to
membrane receptor []. Very high amount of negatively
charged amino acid is also present in other three-finger proteins
like Plethodontid modulating factor (PMF) and Lymphocyte
antigen 6H (Ly6H) molecules of different organisms. In PMF
the high amount of negativity is contributed by the presence of
Aspartic acid and Glutamic acid residues in the sequence.

Three -finger proteins function mainly by binding to other
proteins. The PMF also follows that direction by binding to
positively charged female receptors for pheromone attachment
[]. More negativity of PMF by presence of negatively charged
amino acid accelerates the binding mechanism of pheromone to
a receptor in very expeditiously way. Other non-toxin protein
of chordates contains a balanced proportion of positively and
negatively charged amino acids. It is because these proteins
play different key regulatory cellular processes within the
internal physiological system (cellular communication system,
complement system and nervous system). Large perturbation in
amino acid composition affects the system in a detrimental
path, although they evolved efficiently for better adaptation to
system []. Family members of a particular family of threefinger
proteins present in different species show same
conservation of amino acid composition profile (e.g., Lynx-1).
Moderate deviations were also evidenced in complement
system proteins (CD59). Involvement in different biological
functions is one of the driving forces which contribute the vivid
amino acid composition profile of these proteins.

 (see supplementary material) furnishes details of the
physicochemical characterization, which shows that the
minimum amino acid residue containing protein is snake
venom cytotoxins and maximum amino acid residue containing
protein is Lynx-1, a neuromodulator. Computation of Isoelectric
point (theoretical pI) and molecular weight (Mw) of an amino
acid sequence is worthy because these data dictate the
approximate area of a 2D-gel where a protein of interest may be
detected. The cytotoxins and short neurotoxins are highly basic
in nature (pI 8.69 - 9.48) where as other related protein
molecules are acidic or basic. PMF is one of the chief acidic
molecules with a pI range of 3.74 to 3.96. Instability index
shows that Xenoxins, HLMP1, HEP21 and Lynx-1 are stable in
nature (instability index &lt;40). The relative volume of a protein
occupied by its aliphatic side chains is termed as Aliphatic
index (AI). Aliphatic index plays role in protein thermal
stability. With a high Aliphatic index proteins are more
thermally stable. Aliphatic amino acids also are hydrophobic in
nature. The aliphatic index of cytotoxins in the range of 66.5 to
84.33 indicated that these proteins are thermally stable as well
as they contain high amount of hydrophobic amino acids. Copresence
of hydrophobic and polar (charged) residues within
cytotoxins generates amphipathic nature of cytotoxins. For
biological membrane perturbation this is an important criterion
for a molecule. Short neurotoxin ranges an aliphatic index of
30.33 to 54.26. All different family of three-finger proteins
exhibit family specific aliphatic index profile. All proteins
included in this study are hydrophilic (negative GRAVY value),
whereas exceptionally SLURP1 and SLURP2 are slightly
hydrophobic in nature. Short neurotoxin with GRAVY value of
-1.213 is the most potent hydrophilic molecule.

Conclusion
In the post-genomic era not only the generation of data but also
proper assimilation of knowledge from these data is a
significant deed. Development of different computational
resources for exploration of biological data thrusts the
discoveries of new insights into the different areas of biological
sciences. Comparative physicochemical characterization of
proteins from its sequence of a protein superfamily portrays the
family specific molecular compositional strategy for improve
system adaptability. The present study on snake venom toxin
proteins and non-toxin body proteins help to understand what
kind of compositional biasness and differences plays role for
adaptation to different biological systems namely venom
system, pheromone system, complement system and cellular
communication system. Notably the exploitation of a protein
scaffold which is involved in diverse biological function, used
in snakes as venom architecture describes the uniqueness of
process of evolution. Physicochemical characterization of these
proteins describes within the Laboratory of Nature how
proteins are engineered for customized biological needs. This in
turn assists to generate therapeutic molecules of medicinal
importance.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Panda &amp; Chandra, Bioinformation 8(18): 891-896 (2012)

