Background
Insects are one of the best examples of micro-miniaturization.
The number of neurons involved in the olfactory processing for
most species of insect varies between 102 and 105 
[], which is
multiple order of magnitudes fewer than that in the smallest of
mammals. The numerical simplicity of the olfactory system of
insect might allow an in depth circuitry, cellular and overall
computation analysis involved in sensory processing. Given the
rich history of Drosophila melanogaster research and the
availability of the plethora of experimental tools, it is one of the
best systems to study genetics, behavior, molecular signaling,
and epigenetics. Apart from all the benefits of studying adult
Drosophila that also hold true for larval stage, the latter has the
added advantage of smaller number of sensory neurons than
adults. Larvae also have a translucent body wall, which might
make neural imaging more tractable, if the issues of instability
of larval preparation due to peristaltic motion can be
completely overcome.

Many species in the animal kingdom rely heavily on detection
and response to air-borne volatile chemicals, i.e., odorants, to
assess features of environment such as food sources,
conspecifics, and predators, etc. As a result of this, many
species have evolved a sensitive and selective olfactory
apparatus. Correspondingly, a significant amount of the
nervous system is devoted to process and extract information
from this sensory modality. Hence, the olfactory system is an
excellent platform for studying information coding, pattern
detection, pattern separation, learning and memory, sensory
representation and sensory processing. Given the numerical
simplicity of the insect nervous system they offer significant
advantages over many other organisms for researchers who
wish to study the olfactory system.

Although olfactory receptors show a high divergence in insects
and mammals [], many second-messenger signaling pathways
involved in the sensory processing are conserved [,
].
Interestingly, many computational modules in the insect
olfactory system appear to be similar to those in mammals, as
might be the case for the reported similarities between
glomeruli in olfactory bulbs of mammals and antennal lobes of
adult Drosophila melanogaster. Apart from the applicability to
mammals, it is a reward in itself to learn about insects, the most
diverse members of animal kingdom. Diptera, i.e., flies,
constitute 10 to 15% of all known animal species. We expect
that many computational modules in insects would lead to
efficient biology-inspired machines.

Although its use in olfactory studies precedes the development
of genetic and molecular tools [–
], Drosophila melanogaster has
become a favored insect model organism for studying olfaction
after the onset of molecular biology revolution. Seymour
Benzer׳s group first started with the neurogenetic analysis of
Drosophila melanogaster, opening a vastly enriching avenue of
neuroscience. Obaid Siddiqi at the height of success in bacterial
and fungal genetics chose to change the direction of his
scientific research to join Benzer׳s burgeoning group and start
Drosophila neurophysiology. After returning back from
Benzer׳s lab, Obaid turned to the sense of smell and his lab
opened up the new field of chemosensory genetics 
[–].
Members of Benzer׳s lab, especially William G Quinn, went
forward to explore olfactory learning with equal zeal, now
making Drosophila olfactory conditioning one of the most
popular models for learning and memory studies. This
enterprise has resulted in a plethora of molecular and genetic
information, with mutants in olfactory signaling and olfactory
conditioning pathway continuously added to the list. However,
systems level understanding of the olfactory computation is
still relatively missing. Only in a small nervous system, can one
image the whole neural network, instead of focusing on a small
component microcircuit. We suspect that the translucence of
the larval stage potentially offers the added advantage of
imaging the nervous system without dissection. Increasing
efforts on the epigenomic and metabolomic studies using fruit
flies can make larvae as the pioneering system for a
comprehensive understanding of the olfactory information
processing. Before we review literature on larval olfaction, we
briefly describe the olfactory apparatus of adult Drosophila for
dual purpose of comparative analysis of the adult and larval
stage and also to provide a placeholder until certain
information becomes available for the larval stage.

Olfactory system in the adult Drosophila
Olfactory recognition in the adult Drosophila melanogaster is
accomplished by sensory hairs called sensilla, distributed over
the surface of the third antennal segment and maxillary palp.
There are four types of sensilla on antenna namely sensilla
basoconica, sensilla coeloconica and sensilla trichoidia 
[,
]
and an intermediate one with properties of both trichoid and
basoconic sensilla [].

Different sensillae respond to different set of odorants [, 
–]. 
Each sensillum has 1 to 4 neurons. Olfactory neurons
expressing a given olfactory receptor gene within sensory hairs
sends projections to one or two of the loci [, 
–], known as
glomeruli, within the antennal lobe of the insect brain. The
majority (five-sixths) of olfactory neurons sends axons that
branch and innervate both the ipsilateral and contralateral
antennal lobes; the remaining neurons project only ipsilaterally
[]. The glomeruli are innervated by dendrites of projection
neurons, which in turn project to the protocerebrum. Another
site for olfactory reception is maxillary palp. It extends from the
proboscis and contains only 120 olfactory receptor neurons
(ORNs), housed in 60 sensilla basiconica [,
]. Projections
from the maxillary palp reach antennal lobe through the
labiomaxillary nerve.

The adult protocerebrum includes the mushroom bodies (MB),
the central complex (CX), the pars intercerebralis, and the optic
lobes. The CX function is likely related to an integration of
information from the right and left halves of the brain,
multisensory integration and to the global control of fly
walking activity including speed and straightness 
[–]. The
MB and CX structures and their function are well conserved
throughout the insect kingdom. Exploration of involvement of
protocerebrum in the olfactory responses and olfactory
conditioning responses has been the subject of many studies
especially, conditioning studies, with most attention focused on
mushroom bodies. In insects, mushroom bodies play an
important role in the associative learning of olfactory
information [,
]. The MBs of Drosophila melanogaster
comprise of about 2500 neurons per brain hemisphere. The cell
bodies of these neurons are situated in the dorsal posterior
brain region and extend axons bundles together to form
peduncle and then give rise to the alpha/beta, alpha׳and
gamma lobes of MB. These lobes are neuropile regions that
contain the MB cell axons and other processes that synapse
with MB neurons.

Olfactory system in the larvae
The chemosensory apparatus of the larval head is formed
during late embryogenesis [,
]. Each of the two dorsal
organs (DO) contains 21 olfactory neurons. Previous
morphological and cytoarchitectural work, have helped in the
determination of the olfactory function of DO and it has been
supported by data obtained from toxin inactivation and
electrophysiological studies [,
,
,
]. The dorsal organ
remains connected to the larval antennal lobe (LAL) by
antennal nerve (AN). The antennal nerve has projections from
21 dorsal organ neurons and 12 gustatory projections from DO
and Terminal Organ (TO). The AN is also joined by an entirely
gustatory labral nerve. This compound nerve bifurcates to
project to the midline of tritocerebral identity of LAL and CNS.
Another maxillary nerve with purely gustatory projections does
not fuse with antennal-labral nerve. Some of the details of
olfactory and gustatory projection are yet unknown and it will
be very useful to explore whether the close association of
gustatory and olfactory projections in larvae has any
physiological and behavioral significance.

LAL is not bigger than a single glomerulus of the adult lobe 
[–,
]
and has been reported to consist of structural subunits 
[–,
].
The input and output fibers have been found to be
associated with the subunits of the LAL rather than with its
entire neuropil. It raises the possibility that LAL may be
organized in a somewhat similar way to the adult AL. The total
number of subunits have been estimated and is found to be
approximately 30, a smaller number than adult [,
,
,
].
Their average size of 5 to 10 micrometer diameter is only
approximately one fifth of that of an adult glomerulus. This
raises ultrastructural questions whether these structures are
composed of multisynaptic contact zones considered typical of
glomerular organization. In holometabolous insects, adult
glomeruli form de novo, from an aglomerular neuropil [,
,
]. 
Hence, there is no direct correlation between larval
subunits and adult glomeruli.

The larva possesses a miniature form of mushroom body (MB).
One Drosophila mushroom body is derived from four
indistinguishable cell lineages, development of which involves
sequential generation of multiple distinct types of neurons [,
–, 
]. 
A small dendritic domain in the adult MB calyx
remains as a fourfold structure, which is similar to the entire
larval calyx and receives dendritic inputs from all four MB
clones [, –
, 
].

The flow of information shows divergence at the level of
projection from the dorsal organ to the larval antennal lobe and
from the larval antennal lobe to the mushroom body. At the
level of projection from sensilla to larval antennal lobe, the
principles of sensory coding seem to be very different than that
of adult, where information from thousands of sensilla
converge on 43 glomeruli. The sizes of the glomeruli in larvae
are much smaller than adults, possibly reflecting smaller
number of synapses involved. It is not obvious how the larvae
have rich repertoire of olfactory responses [,
,
,
]
despite having only 21 olfactory neurons in the dorsal organ.
Thus, recoding from the olfactory neurons may hold a great
potential of studying the temporal pattern of action potentials
at sensory periphery.

Although the first two instars of larvae have been examined by
a few researchers, a detailed characterization of the differences
in larval olfactory abilities as a function of development is
currently missing. This can be a valuable tool to assess the role
of different structures in olfactory responses, discrimination
and conditioning. Towards the end of third instar, the larvae
start exhibiting a negative geotactic response and move out to
the surface of media to pupate. What is the role of olfaction in
fruit fly with regard to such kind of responses still remains to
be assessed. Given that larvae have far less number of neurons
than adult fruit fly, understanding of the coding of odorants
and mixtures at periphery and transformation of this code at
multiple levels of sensory processing is going to be easier in
larvae than adult fly. Many other systems like C. elegans offer a
similar simplicity of anatomical organization but it is not
known whether other simple systems have the richness of
olfactory response repertoire as D. melanogaster larvae.

Olfactory Signal transduction
Majority of information on olfactory signaling comes from
studies in the adult stage. Limited studies in the larval stage
suggest overwhelming similarities across the two
developmental stages. Unless otherwise stated the following
information comes from studies on adult Drosophila. Odors
must reach the dendrites of olfactory receptor neurons in order
to convey the olfactory message, where the G-protein coupled
olfactory receptors are located. This step is speculated to be
protein-assisted given that dendrites, which are surrounded by
sensillar lymph and odors are largely hydrophobic in nature.
Odorant binding proteins, (OBPs) of unknown function are
present at high concentration in the sensillar lymph. These
proteins may solubilize hydrophobic odorants in the aqueous
sensillum lymph, present these odorous ligands to the receptor
or assist in terminating the odor response by removing ligands
from the receptor [,
,–].
Possibility of OBPs in direct
odor recognition has been suggested [–,
,
] as they are
present in small subdomains of antenna. The first functional
evidence that OBPs indeed participate in olfactory responses
comes from the analysis of Drosophila mutants that lack the
LUSH OBP [,
] and fail to respond to ethanol.

In diverse species, a large family of odorant receptor genes,
each encoding a different seven-transmembrane domain G
protein-coupled receptor, mediates molecular recognition of
thousands of distinct odorants. The first candidate odorant
receptor genes were identified in the rat by a degenerate
polymerase chain reaction approach using primers capable of
identifying members of the G protein-coupled receptor
superfamily []. Subsequently, several odorant receptor genes
have been identified in other mammals, fish and birds using
homology-based approaches with rat sequences used as a
reference point.

Candidate Drosophila olfactory receptor (DOR) genes were
identified by a combination of difference cloning 
[] and
analysis of Drosophila genomic sequence databases [,
,
].
The completion of the Drosophila genome sequence has
permitted an analysis of the complete repertoire of DOR genes.
The fly genome has a total of 60 genes with homology to the
DOR gene family [,
,
]. Although these genes are
extremely divergent, sharing on average only 20% amino acid
identity, conserved sequences in the putative seventh transmembrane
domain are a signature of this family and are found
in all 60 DOR genes.

Action potential generated by olfactory receptor neurons
(ORN) in response to odorants travels down to antennal lobe.
The coding of odor quality and quantity may be in the form of a
spatial map or a temporal code or a combination of both.
Calcium imaging measurements made on mushroom body
neurons revealed that the activity pattern of an odor induced
population response is specific for the chemical identity of an
odorant and its concentration []. Increasing the concentration
of an odor did not increase activation of one area or increase the
area being activated. It was found to change the distribution of
activation []. An interesting indication in this study was that
different flies have different activity patterns for different
odors, while in the same animal the pattern for the same odor
was similar after different trials [].

In recent years, expanding work on behavioral, genetic and
neurophysiological studies on larval olfaction and application
of olfactory assays to other fields, such as alcoholism, learning
and memory [, 
, 
, 
–] suggest a very bright future of
studies on this model system.

Conclusion
Drosophila olfaction is an expanding field with an opportunity
to understand a sensory modality, integrating behavioral,
molecular and physiological approaches. This system may
present the first opportunity of a comprehensive understanding
of the sensory coding, its transformation at each successful level
and finally the motor output.

Citation:Bose et al, Bioinformation 11(4): 185-188 (2015)

