Background
The structure function relationship of proteins is generally more
reliable than the sequence-function relationship, for function
annotation. Structure based identification of proteins are often
superior to sequence based approaches because the folding
pattern is retained even if the sequence similarity drops 
[].
There are several methods for structure based protein function
prediction ranging from the analysis of the overall fold to
identification of highly specific three-dimensional clusters of
functional residues []. Proteins with similar functions have
similar folds and hence finding the structural neighbours is the
first step for structure based function prediction. There are
several existing methods for structural alignment with best
known like DALI [], and others that include SSM 
[], GRATH
[], VAST 
[] and CE 
[], each having different algorithms for
structural alignments. A new faster approach has been recently
developed called FAST [] uses a directionality-based scoring
scheme to align structures at the residue-residue level rather
than by secondary structure.

Fragment library is collection of representative fragments of a
particular length. These libraries are constructed by clustering
the fragments of CA traces (of particular length) of 200
accurately determined structures and taking representative
fragment from each cluster []. Fragment libraries have been
shown to model protein structures accurately by representing
the polypeptide chain by a sequence of rigid fragments,
concatenated without any degrees of freedom []. The main
concept behind fragment library based modelling is to
discretize the protein conformational space so that any chain
has a finite number of spatial arrangements. This discretization
is characterised by the accuracy with which it models the native
protein conformations as well as number of allowed states per
residue. Inbal Budowski-Tal et al. also used the same fragment
libraries for retrieving the structural neighbours of the protein
using an algorithm called FragBag []. It has been also shown
that a protein structure can be described by a sequence of 12,903
clusters or conformational types of overlapping peptide
fragments prepared from 1.2 million amino acid residues in
4849 PDB structures. These conformation types can be
considered equivalent to building blocks that is used by nature
to build protein structures []

SVM (Vapnik, V. N., 2000) has gained popularity in comparison
to other machine learning techniques for pattern recognition
and prediction in biological data 
[–] because of their ability
to very effectively handle noise and large datasets. In this
present study, a novel Support Vector Machine (SVM) based
algorithm has been developed for structure based function
prediction using fragment libraries. As an example, this
algorithm was applied for prediction of Cell Adhesion
Molecules (CAMs). CAMs are proteins through which direct
cell-to-cell contacts are made between cell surfaces and between
cells and extracellular matrix. These contacts are required for
the differentiation of cell structures during development, tissue
formation and various interactions with cells like immune
responses etc. Most of the CAMs belong to group of proteins
called immunoglobulin superfamily (IgSF) having the
characteristic immunoglobulin like domain []. These domains
mainly have a similar core structure with two β-sheets packed
face-to-face. Multiple libraries of different sizes and fragment
lengths were investigated for obtaining the best prediction
accuracy for identification of CAMs.

Methodology
Dataset:
A training set containing well curated high resolution structures
100 CAMs and 132 NonCAMs were compiled from the Protein
Data Bank (PDB) []. All the proteins were single subunit
proteins having only one chain. In case of multi-subunit CAMs,
the subunit annotated with “Cell Adhesion” as function was
extracted. An independent test set was prepared containing 20
CAMs and 20 NonCAMs which were previously not included
in the training set.

Fragment Libraries:
Fragment libraries are collection of representative protein
fragments of particular length. All the fragment libraries were
taken from previous study []. There the fragment libraries are
prepared by following algorithm. Extract all overlapping CA
traces from 200 accurately determined protein structures of a
particular length; Cluster the resulting fragments using kmeans
simulated annealing technique; Prepare a library by
selecting a representative from each cluster.

In total of 34 libraries of fragment lengths ranging from 4 to 12
and sizes ranging from 4 to 400 were investigated for searching
best CAM prediction model. The number of input features in
each model were equal to the number clusters corresponding to
that library.

Fragment library frequency vectors generation:
Each protein in the training dataset is broken down into
collection of overlapping CA fragments. Then, for a particular
fragment library, each fragment from the collection is compared
to each library fragment using RMSD as a measure of similarity.
This procedure is used to define a vector that counts the
number of occurrences each library fragment in a given protein
(). Hence, the given protein can be described by this
frequency vector which can be used as input features training
and classification. The maxcluster
[http://www.sbg.bio.ic.ac.uk/maxcluster/index.html#toc]
program was used to calculate RMSD between the fragments
and the whole procedure was automated using C code
developed in house.

SVM training and classification:
SVMs are a class of machine learning algorithms based on the
theory of statistical learning and the principle of structural risk
minimization [,
] that are used for pattern recognition and
regression. SVM attempts to find an optimal hyperplane that
maximally separates the training datasets by maximizing the
margin between them. It non-linearly transforms the original
input space into a higher-dimensional feature space by means
of kernel functions to make the data linearly separable in higher
dimensional feature space.

The training dataset is of the form {(xi, yi)} i=1, 2. . . N. Here xi is
the vector representing the features (count of each fragment in
the given library) for the i-th protein in the training dataset, yi is
the corresponding class of the protein and N is the total number
of proteins in the training dataset. For CAMs yi=+1 and for
NonCAMs yi=-1.

The SVM-based classification is dependent on the sign of f(x),
which is calculated as

f(x)= mΣi=1yiαiK(xi,x)+b

Where m is the number of input data having non-zero values of
Lagrange multipliers (αi) (usually less than N) obtained by
solving a quadratic optimization problem, K (xi, x) is the kernel
matrix and b is the bias term. Kernel matrix calculations were
performed with kernel functions. The Gaussian Radial Basis
Function (RBF) kernel was used model building and
optimization. LIBSVM software [] was used for training and
testing the SVM classifiers. The user defined parameters for
RBF kernel viz. gamma and regularisation parameter C were
optimized for obtaining the best 10-fold Cross Validation (CV)
accuracy using the grid search method with gamma ranging
from (0.0001-1) and C ranging from (1-10). The performance of
the model with maximum CV accuracy was tested on unseen
test dataset after training with optimal parameters.

Discussion
The SVM classifier models were built for structure-based
prediction and classification of CAMs using each type of
fragment library. The RBF kernel parameters were optimised
using the grid search method for obtaining the maximum 10-
Fold CV accuracy. The results were grouped according to
fragment sizes and are shown in table 1-7. Any specific trend
was not observed in %CV accuracy with increasing library size
for fragment length of 4 (). The %CV accuracy
increased by increasing the library size, for fragment size 5
(). This trend was also observed for fragment sizes 7,
9,10,11,12 (). This result is consistent with the fact
that increasing the library size increases the complexity
(Number of allowed states per residue) which is able to model
protein structure more accurately []. Libraries of low
complexity tend to have a lower accuracy than libraries of high
complexity []. Highest CV accuracy of 95.2586% was obtained
for the library of size 400 and fragment length 10 with γ =
0.0025 and Regularisation parameter C = 2. This classifier was
used for testing the model on unseen test data consisting of 20
CAMs and 20 NonCAMs. The test accuracy was 87.5 % with 5
misclassifications out of 40. The sensitivity and specificity were
0.80 and 0.95 respectively.

Conclusion
Fragment libraries can be used describe the protein structures
accurately, by discretization of protein conformational space.
The structural features derived using fragment library of size
400 and fragment length 10, can be effectively used for structure
based classification and function annotation of proteins as the
function is correlated to the structure. Fragments smaller than
or equal to 4 cannot represent the structural information
accurately, even if the library size is increased. This approach
can be reliably used for structure based classification for other
classes of proteins. The classification accuracy can be further
improved by selecting the top ranking features for training.

Dr. VKJ gratefully acknowledges Department of Science and
Technology, New Delhi for financial support.

Citation:Yadav &amp; Jayaraman, Bioinformation 8(19): 953-956 (2012)

For illustration, we consider a library of 6 fragements. Each (over lapping) contiguous CA segment in the backbone is
associated with its most similar library fragment appeared in the bag.In this example, feature vector = (12, 15, 10, 8, 4, 18),
corresponding to the fragments (A, B, C, D, E, F). The last coordinate in the feature vector is +1 for CAMs and -1 for NonCAMs.

The variation of 10-fold Cross Validation % accuracy as a function of library size for fragment length 4 (A), fragment
length 5; (B), fragment length 7; (C), fragment length 9, (D), fragment length 10; (E), fragment length 11 (F) and fragment length 12
(G). The X axis represents the library size and the Y-axis represents the 10-fold Cross Validation % accuracy.

