Background
The near-absence of genetic recombination and high mutation rate
with some selectivity in mitochondrial DNA makes it a useful
source for analyzing microsatellite or STR (simple tandem repeat)
or simple sequence repeat (SSR) dynamics on the archaeological
time scale. Difference between the mean repeat sizes of two
lineages is a linear function of the time since they diverged [].
Since some factors prevent allele from becoming staying large
(since they cease to behave like microsatellite [], so there is a
maximum threshold value of SSR allele size beyond which alleles
starts shrinking in size because of background mutation and
repaired by DNA polymerase I up to minimum threshold allele size
and again it starts increasing in its size as a function of time. Thus
it's cyclical in nature in terms of elongation and shrinkage of
repeats over evolutionary passage of time. The flanking region
constancy has been found to be extensively conserved across distant
taxa. For example, presence of homologous loci in each test of
marine species within two families (Cheloniidae and
Dermochelyidae), as well as in a freshwater species (Emydidae and
Trachemys scripta) is the indication for this constancy
approximately over 300 million years of divergent evolution [].The
flanking region is conserved and perpetuates down in evolution but
the SSR loci reflects cyclical (shrinkage and expansion) variation in
size over time which has been well documented in case of nuclear
SSR [].

Though earlier attempt has been made to relate the major cereal
crops viz. rice, wheat, maize and sorghum phylogenetically using
organellar genomes (mitochondria and chloroplast) SSR [] but no
such attempt has been made in case of animals. Unlike these crops,
the relative abundance of type of repeat motif and dynamics across
species in case of domestic animals are not documented with
comparative study. In case of advanced eukaryotes these repeats are
almost all in intronic (non-coding) regions but does similar
situation exists in organellar SSR or not? It is yet to be known. Do
these genomes have universal flanking regions bracketing SSR loci
is not known. Like the case of crop studies [] can we have a
phylogenetic tree using SSR data of organellar genome are not
known. The cyclical dynamism of repeat length over the
archaeological time line has also not been studied in organellar
genome.

The present in silico work in which five domestic animal species
viz. buffalo, cattle, goat, sheep and yak has been taken as model, to
investigate relative abundance of type of repeat motif, their
distribution in coding and non coding regions, evaluation of
mitochondrial SSR data for appropriateness of phylogenetic tree,
dynamism of length and repeat motif and extent of conservation of
flanking regions across loci with respect to time.

Methodology
Mining of mitochondrial genomes
The mitochondrial genomes of five species viz. cattle (NC_005971),
Sheep (NC_001941), Yak (NC_006380.3), Buffalo (NC_006295),
and Goat (NC_005044) were downloaded from GenBank
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov).

Mining of STR from mitochiondrial genomes
For mining of microsatellite data especially type of repeat and motif
viz di-, tri-, tetra, penta- and hexa- online programme SSRIT
(Simple Sequence Repeat Identification Tools) were used [].
An off line software FastPCR ([],
(http://www.biocenter.helsinki.fi/bi/programs/fastpcr.htm) was
used further to generate data on mono motif with iterative repeats
&gt;4. The existing annotations in GenBank were used while
generating data on coding and non-coding regions of respective
mitochondrial genomes (Table 1 in ). For
a particular repeat motif in each specific genome, corresponding
alleles in other genomes were identified by the presence of same
flanking sequence.

Designing of universal primers
SSR regions were identified in all the five mitochondrial genomes
using FastPCR. A set of universal primers were designed (using online software Primer 3 
([], http://fokker.wi.mit.edu/primer3/input.htm) across flanking 
regions of these identified SSR (Table 2 in ).
While designing the universal primers across species the null alleles
(mutations in 3' end region of primer) encountered were bursted by
locking one primer and increasing the expected PCR product length
to get its counterpart compatible primer. Before using the designed
primers for ePCR, in silico evaluation of primer quality was done
on three parameters viz. self dimer, cross dimer and self hairpin
loop of each of the primer pair. The delta G values of these
evaluations are shown in (Table 2 in ).

ePCR on mitochondrial genomes
All the five mitochondrial genomes subjected to analysis were at par
in terms to become focal species for cross species electronic PCR
amplification. For primer designing of two sets each from buffalo
and yak (alphabetically ascending and descending in order) were
treated as focal species to evaluate and further design the universal
set of primer in remaining four ’heterologous‘ species. While
designing the compatible universal primer in heterologous species,
the estimated PCR products size(s) were treated as species specific
allelic data for length polymorphism and microsatellite dynamics.

Microsatellite dynamics analysis across species
The generated data of both SSR loci (Table 2 in ) in five species were used to establish allele size dynamics
(shrinkage/expansion) as a function of time ().The
established relationship of organelle SSR is compared with
dynamism of nuclear SSR on time line which has been reported [].
Comparative analysis of extent of mitochondrial SSR constancy
across five species was done to observe magnitude of allelic size
dynamism with respect to time.

Phylogenetic tree construction
Phylogenetic tree was constructed using algorithms of both
structural polymorphism as well as length polymorphism. Both
rooted ( and ) structural tree was
constructed by TreeTop (http://www.genebee.msu.su/services/phtree_reduced.html) and
unrooted ( and Figure ) structural tree was
constructed by Phylodendron (http://iubio.bio.indiana.edu/treeapp/treeprint-sample1.html). The
relative allelic length difference is calculated from the generated
data and is further used to make rooted tree ( and
) on the basis of length polymorphism by using
UPGMA method.

Discussion
The in silico mining of SSR in mitochondrial genomes of five
species reveals that they are more abundant in coding region unlike
the nuclear genomes where SSRs are usually present in intronic/non
coding regions []. The percent of SSR in coding regions of buffalo,
cattle, sheep, goat, and yak mitochondrial genomes are 65.28 %,
68.59 %, 65.01 %, 64.40 % and 65.58 %, respectively. An average
of 29.66 % of whole genome in these 5 species (28.95 %, 29.59 %,
29.45 %, 30.31 % and 30.01 % in buffalo, cattle, sheep, goat and
yak, respectively). Contrary to nuclear genome SSR interestingly,
the organellar SSR shows more abundancy in coding region than
non coding region in all the mitochondrial genomes. Such SSR
abundance in coding region has been reported in lower eukaryotes
like []. This might be because of prokaryotic origin of
mitochondria (endosymbiont hypothesis) or evolutionary legacy in
lower eukaryotes.

The microsatellites mined from whole genomes were classified in to
two classes viz. class I containing only mono­ repeat motif and class
II containing di­ to hexa­ motif repeats. The density of class II
microsatellites was found to be 108 bp­113 bp per kbp in exonic
region and 118 bp­129 bp per kbp in intronic region. Di­motif
repeats are abundant in each case (Table 1 in ). Maximum number (754) of di-motif repeats were found
in goat and minimum is 704 in buffalo in coding region. In noncoding
region it was relatively less abundant (maximum 396 in goat
and min 350 in cattle). Least frequent repeats were of penta and
hexa motifs. Goat mitochondrial genomes were with maximum
number of penta­ (50) and hexa­ (24) motif repeats. Maximum
numbers (155) of tetra­ motif repeats were found in sheep and least
(126) in cattle. Among the di­motif repeats (CA)n were abundant
where n varies from 148 to 204. Our data shows that hexa­ and
penta­ repeat motif are less abundant which is because of
selectivity involved on maintaining microsatellite within certain
range. A similar size constraint in repeat number and length over the
period in different taxa has been reported [].

The mutational differences amongst different motifs di­ ( and 
), tri­( and ) and tetra­
( and ) between 5 species were compared in
both coding and non coding region of genomes. Among non coding
region di motifs were having faster mutation and in coding region
tri motifs were with high mutation rate ( and ). This is in contrary to human STRs where tetra repeats shows
hyper mutation []. Interestingly in rare cases in human coding
region triplet repeat slippage event gives rise to copy number
mutation or dynamic mutation example ‐ Fragile X syndrome [].
Microsatellite mutation processes have been inferred by direct
observations both on artificial constructs in yeast [] and in human
pedigrees []. The general conclusion from these studies is that
there is an exceptionally high rate of mutation adding or subtracting
a small number of perfect repeats. In humans, the average overall
mutation rate for 28 di­ and tetra­ nucleotide microsatellites was
estimated at about 0.001, with the tetra nucleotide repeats
significantly more mutable than the dinucleotide repeats. The most
popular explanation for the high mutation rate is polymerase
slippage [], a hypothesis that received considerable support from
an elegant in vitro analysis showing that polymerase tends to
miscopy repeated tracks of DNA []. A sub set of SSRs namely
trinucleotide plays important role in eukaryotes because of
expansion of these triplet repeats, where the rate of mutation
depends on the number of tandem units within the repeat, this is the
basis of dynamic mutation [].The designed primer to generate
SSR allelic data by electronic PCR using two sets of universal
primers shows that the flanking regions are well conserved in all the
5 species. Such conservation of flanking regions of SSRs has been
reported over a longer evolutionary period of time which is as high
as 300 million years []. Though the flanking regions are conserved
but STR loci shows differential alleles in all the five species
investigated.

In all the five species, generated data of allele size dynamics
(shrinkage/expansion) as a function of time () shows
simple harmonic motion (SHM) pattern. This pattern is similar to
established dynamism of nuclear SSR []. This is because of
distinct mutational processes ([,]), slippage mutation which
involves the addition or subtraction of one repeat unit. SHM was
shown by SSR but not by flanking region of SSR, the cause for this
phenomenon is that, the mutation rate of SSRs which is 10-3/cell/generation that is hyper mutation which is 106 times more
(addition of repeats &gt;&gt; deletion of repeats) where as in flanking
region mutation (mutation rate is 10-9/cell/generation i.e. back
ground mutation rate) which works on both SSR region (concerning
single simple repeats into compound interrupted repeats) as well as
in flanking region [].

Evaluation of mitochondrial SSR data for appropriateness of
phylogenetic tree based on length polymorphism and structural
polymorphism revealed that the trees are not in conformity with
established phylogenetic relationship of these five taxa. The
structural polymorphism based rooted () and unrooted
tree () and length polymorphism data (allelic length
difference) UPGMA based rooted tree () all were not in
conformity. A second set of generated STR data for same set of tree
shows same unusual pattern (,  and ). Though the UGMA based tree of 
both set of data shows differences but again non-conformity with established phylogenetic
relationship among five model species studied. SHM was shown by
SSR but not by flanking region of SSR, the cause for this
phenomenon is that, the mutation rate of SSRs which is 10-3/cell/generation that is hyper mutation which is 106 times more
(addition of repeats &gt;&gt; deletion of repeats) where as in flanking
region mutation (mutation rate is 10-9/cell/generation i.e. back
ground mutation rate) which works on both SSR region (concerning
single simple repeats into compound interrupted repeats) as well as
in flanking region [].

Conclusion
Present study revealed the relative abundance and motifs of SSR in
mitochondrial genomes of five domestic species. Contrary to
eukaryotic nuclear abundance of SSR in non-coding region, we
found abundance in coding region. Like nuclear SSR, most hyper
mutable repeats were found in non coding region having dinucleotide
motifs of mitochondrial genome but contrary to human
having high mutable tetra­ repeats in case of mitochondrial genomes
this was found to be with tri­motif repeats. SSRs of mitochondrial
genomes also show cyclical expansion and shrinkage in pattern of
SHM with respect to long evolutionary time which is non- linear.
Because of such SSR data are not appropriate for phylogenetic
analysis though the flanking regions of these SSRs also conserved
like nuclear SSR. Lengths of SSRs obtained are much useful in
predicting the influence of transcriptional activity in promoter
region.The present work does not take account of intra-species
variation in each species which can be further verified with
reasonable sample size in wet lab work to revalidate the work
further, hitherto not done.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors are thankful to Director, NBAGR for kind permission and
facilities for this work. The help and encouragement of Dr Utpal
Bora, and Dr Pranab Goswami, Chairman, Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Assam,
India is thankfully acknowledged. The financially support of
Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India is thankfully
acknowledged.

Citation:Shakyawar et al, Bioinformation 4(4): 158-163 (2009)

Allelic size variation on archaeological time line. (a) primer set I; (b) primer set II.

Rooted and rooted trees based on structural and length polymorphism for primer set I and II.

Repeat motif change in (a) coding region; (b) non coding region

Di-motif repeat variation on archaeological time line (a: coding region b: non-coding region); Tri-motif repeat variation on
archaeological time line (a: coding region b: non-coding region); Tetra-motif repeat variation on archaeological time line (a: coding region
b: non-coding region)

