Background
Pesticide is potential chemical pollutants, designed to 
selectively eliminate variety of pests. The mode of action is 
strongly connected to their chemical structures which are 
widely diversified. Indeed, pesticides in our surroundings do 
not appear singly and usually occurs as complex mixtures and 
their combined effect may exhibit toxicity to the targeted and 
non targeted organisms including humans []. In India, the 
pesticides were introduced in sixties and extensively used for 
agriculture and vector control purposes due to low cost and 
high effectiveness. Pesticides, especially α-HCH, parathion 
methyl and Carbofuran are widely used in most of the states of 
India []. In 1990, India banned α-HCH for agricultural use but 
allow its use for vector born disease eradication programme. 
These pesticides have carcinogenic risk and cause various 
degrees of toxicological effects on targeted as well as non 
targeted organisms []. Moreover, cases of acute pesticide 
poisonings account for significant morbidity and mortality 
worldwide, especially in developing countries like India, 
where the pattern of pesticide use is different []. Some authors 
have described several endocrine disruptions, oxidative stress, 
mutations and chromosomal alterations or DNA damage due 
to pesticide exposure at very low environmental concentration 
[].

Non-linear dose-response toxicity can be observed and 
combinations with other pesticides or differences in individual 
susceptibility may increase the effect. As a consequence, effect 
of pesticides and their combination have to be studied 
carefully at low concentration. Moreover, we do not know how 
much environmental exposure of α-HCH, parathion methyl 
and carbofuran pesticides and their combination at low
concentration influence the oxidative stress level and 
genotoxicity of non targeted organisms. Naturally pesticides 
are rarely found as single compound. Till date only a few 
studies have been published relating to the cytotoxic and 
genotoxic effects of low doses of pesticide mixtures. Hence, the 
main aim of this study was to evaluate the intracellular ROS 
generation, cytotoxicity and genotoxicity of the α-HCH, 
parathion methyl and Carbofuran pesticides in individual and 
mixed condition using human keratinocyte (HaCaT) cell line.

Methodology
Chemicals:
All pesticides including α-HCH; parathion methyl (PM) and 
carbofuran (CN) (purity &gt; 98%), were purchased from Sigma−
Aldrich, and diluted in DMSO (Dimethyl sulfoxide). 
Antibiotics and antimycotics were purchased from Sigma−
Aldrich. All the chemicals and reagents were of analytical 
grade.

Cell line and their maintenance:
Toxicity test was performed for evaluation of cytotoxicity by 
using human keratinocyte (HaCaT) cell line. The cell line was 
grown in DMEM F-12 HAM culture medium supplemented 
with 10% FBS, antibiotics and antimycotic solution (1.5%) at 
5% CO2 and 95% relative humidity at 37°C.

Sample treatment and quantification of ROS:
Cells were grown in 96-multiwell black plates (2 × 104 
cells/well) and treated with seven types (three from each 
pesticide and four from their possible mixture (C-1: α-
HCH+PM; C-2: α-HCH+CN; C-3: PM+CN; C-4: α-
HCH+PM+CN) of samples. Cells were then incubated for 30 
min at 37 0C with 10 µM carboxy H2-DCFDA in HBSS and 
exposed. Cells were incubated through the culture medium 24 
h postplating with 0.26, 0.6 and 0.2 µM of each pesticide or 
their mixture having same concentration prepared in DMSO, 
giving a final concentration of 0.05%. The chosen doses were
adapted to cell culture just above of acceptable daily intakes 
(ADI). Controls received similar amounts of DMSO alone. ADI 
for α-HCH, parathion methyl and Carbofuran were 0.0013, 0.03 
and 0.001 mg/kg of BW/day, respectively. After treatment 
cells, fluorescence of DCF was measured by using 485 nm 
excitation and 520 nm emission wavelengths. The generation 
of intracellular ROS was further substantiated by the 
administration of NAC (N-acetyl cysteine) (10 and 100 µM) as 
specific quencher []. These experiments were performed in 
triplicates.

Cell viability assay by MTT:
Cells (2 × 104) were seeded per well in 96-well plates and kept 
in CO2 incubator for 48 hrs. The treatments were performed 
with three type pesticides (50µL) by complete medium (200µL) 
and incubated for 24 hrs. Media was replaced by 3-(4,5-
dimethylthiozolyl-2)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide (MTT) 
(5 mg/mL). The absorbance was recorded at 530 nm by using 
multiwell micro plate reader.

Genotoxicity assessment (Comet):
The exposed cells were harvested with 0.06% trypsin. Olive tail 
moment (OTM) and percent tail DNA were selected to 
measure DNA damage. Images from 50 random cells (25 from 
each replicate slides) were analyzed for each experiment.

Data analysis:
Statistical analyses were performed with Student׳s t-test (one
tailed test). Statistical analysis was performed with the SPSS 
Software. Error bars represent standard error of the mean.

Results
Intracellular ROS generation:
In this study, intracellular ROS levels generated by different 
pesticides were measured using DCF assay on human cell line 
(). The generation of ROS is as following order C-4&gt;C-
2&gt;C-3&gt;C-1&gt; α-HCH&gt;CN&gt;PM (). Further, quenching 
of intracellular ROS generation of C-4 by different 
concentrations of NAC (10 and 100 µM) showed that DCF 
fluorescence decreased as the concentration of NAC increased 
(). 
 exhibited DCF-fluorescence 
photographs of different pesticide samples which also support 
the above results.

Cytotoxicity:
The cytotoxicity of pesticides was performed through MTT 
assay. The minimum reduction in cell viability was recorded in 
control. The result of MTT showed highest reduction in cell 
viability (60%) in mixture of pesticides (C-4) compare to 
control. However the C-3, C-2 and C-1 showed reduction in 
cell viability in 40, 57 and 27%, respectively than control. MTT 
assay of selected pesticides and their combination visualized in 
.

DNA damage:
The data obtained from alkaline comet assay confirmed that 
these pesticides were genotoxic in nature (). The 
OTM and percent DNA in comets formed by medium control 
(MC) was 0.49±0.03 AU and 6.89±0.48%. The OTM and tail 
DNA% was 5.01±0.21 AU and 28.09 ±1.40% for C-2; 3.53±0.08 
AU and 19.00±0.39% for C-3; 2.01±0.07 AU and 11.4±0.42 for 
Carbofuran, respectively  (see supplementary 
material). The C-4 has highest OTM (6.06±0.04AU) and percent 
tail DNA (31.13±0.45%), respectively which is the greatest 
among all pesticide mixture. There was no significant changes 
were observed in reduction in cell viability as well as DNA 
damage in cell line exposed by individual pesticides except α-
HCH.

Discussion
Nasal, oral, dermal and ocular, are four possible routes for 
pesticide exposure. Skin or dermal exposure account for about 
90 % of all pesticides exposure users received from non 
fumigated pesticides []. It may occur any time a pesticide is 
mixed, applied or handled, and is often undetected. Dry 
material-dusts and granules as well as liquid pesticides can be 
absorbed through skin. Therefore, it is important to assess the 
toxic response of different pesticides by using human skin cell 
line as a model. Several studies have described pesticides as 
potentially harmful for target and non organisms 
[]. In this 
study, three pesticides (α-HCH, Parathion methyl and 
Carbofuran) and their four possible combinations were 
selected for in vitro toxicological investigations at low doses. 
The doses were based on their persistence in the environment 
and AID which was recommended by different national and 
international agencies USEPA, 2006. The individual doses of 
pesticides showed slight reduction in cell viability compared to 
control illustrating that single pesticides are less toxic then bi 
(C-1 to C- 3) and tri-mixture (C-4) of these pesticides. The bi 
and tri-mixture of these pesticides showed higher toxicity with 
calculated reduction in cell viability at 57 and 60%, 
respectively. This result indicates that mixture of these three 
pesticides cause maximum toxicity and is more hazardous for 
the human. Mechanism of pesticides inside the cell, 
intracellular ROS and Comet assay were performed to observe 
the ROS generation and DNA damage []. Generally toxicants
increase the reactive oxygen species (ROS) level inside the cell 
which damage different cell organelles which further promote 
apoptosis []. The DCFDA fluorescence is very sensitive
method to detect the ROS level inside the cell. Our results of 
DCFDA on HaCaT cell line showed that as the concentration of 
pollutants increases, the intracellular ROS also increases 
thereby increasing the fluorescence. The individual pesticides 
α-HCH and Parathion methyl showed lesser fluorescence 
whereas Carbofuran showed minimum fluorescence by 
DCFDA. This result revealed that Carbofuran are less toxic 
than all selected pesticide. On other hand mixture of all four 
possible combinations of pesticides showed maximum 
fluorescence due additive response of pesticides. Further 
pretreatment with NAC significantly attenuate the 
fluorescence intensity of DCF, which confirmed the 
involvement of ROS in cytotoxicity. Our results were 
corroborating with that of Jose et al. 
[] and Graillot et al. 
[]. 
Data obtained from alkaline comet assay illustrates that the 
exposure of pesticides in individual and mixed condition 
causes DNA strands break. In our study, two controls were 
used, positive control (PC) (data not shown) and medium 
control (MC). Positive control was used to compare the 
effectiveness of toxicity and medium control was used to 
observe the effect of the process of comet assay. Hear the all 
possible combination of pesticides showed higher OTM and 
percent tail DNA than individual pesticides and medium 
control. This might be due synergistic effect of different 
pesticides which enhanced the toxicity. The magnitude of 
synergistic effect of pesticides was varied from 2 to 3 fold.
Regarding the mixture toxicities caused by pesticides in non 
targeted species, a number of studies have different 
interactions were recorded. Liang and Zhou [] found that 
interaction between two pesticides exhibited a synergic toxic 
effect on non targeted organisms. Stepic et al. 
[] found that 
binary combinations of two pesticides atrazine and cyanazine 
with the organophosphate chlorpyrifos had synergism effect 
on non target organism. These findings call for more research 
to be promptly undertaken in order to understand the 
mechanisms behind the synergy observed and quantify the 
extent of its environmental impacts.

Conclusion
Humans have a great risk of a cocktail of pesticides exposure 
at low concentration through several competing pathways. In 
this context, we tried to appraise a possible link between low 
dose of three pesticides and their induced toxicity on HaCaT 
cell line. The intracellular ROS, MTT and comet assay revealed 
that maximum toxicity was found in mixed pesticide condition 
compare to individual pesticides and more hazardous to 
humans. This study helps in better understanding of links 
between metabolic perturbations of pesticides at low 
concentration, thus improving the evaluation of the risks to 
human health posed by exposure to mixtures of pesticides.

Conflict of interest
None

Supplementary material
Data 1
Funding from Council of Science and Technology, Uttar 
Pradesh is gratefully acknowledged.

Citation:Abhishek et al, Bioinformation 10(12): 716-720 (2014)

 Intracellular ROS generation on HaCaT cell line after 24 hrs incubation: A) Quenching of intracellular ROS by different 
concentrations of N-acetyl-L-cysteine (10-100 µM) (a). Qualitative analysis of DCF fluorescence under different condition; B) C-1: α-
HCH+PM; C-2: α-HCH+CN; C-3: PM+CN; C-4: α-HCH+PM+CN; PM: parathion methyl; CN: carbofuran.

Cytotoxicity A) and genotoxicity; B) assay after incubation of 24 hrs. C-1: α-HCH+PM; C-2: α-HCH+CN; C-3: PM+CN; C-4: α-HCH+PM+CN; PM: parathion methyl; CN: carbofuran.

