Abbreviations
AD - Alzheimer's disease, 
Aβ - amyloid beta peptide, 
APP - Amyloid precursor protein, 
MPT - Mitochondrial permeability transition, 
MPTP - Mitochondrial permeability transition pore, 
ANT - adenine nucleotide translocase, 
CypD - cyclophilin-D, 
VDAC - voltage dependent anion channel.

Background
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a common neurodegenerative
disease that affects cognitive functions of the brain. The
cardinal features of AD include the formation of
extracellular protein deposits in the brain consisting
predominantly of aggregates of amyloid beta (Aβ),
intracellular neurofibrillary tangles, and disturbances in
calcium homeostasis and degeneration of synapses and
neurons []. Despite these observable changes in the
morphology and physiology of the brain the mechanism of
neurodegeneration in AD is not clearly understood. An
inflammatory process in the central nervous system is
believed to play an important role in the pathways leading
to neuronal cell death. In addition to inflammatory
pathway (extracellular pathway of neurodegeneration), the
Aβ mediated mitochondrial dysfunction and induction of
intrinsic cell death has been recently realized as an
important contributor in AD related neurodegeneration.
Mitochondria play central role in the bioenergetics of cell
and mitochondrial permeability transition pore (MPTP) has
a central role in the regulation of both necrotic and
apoptotic modes of neuronal cell death. Mitochondrial
permeability transition (MPT) is described as an abrupt
increase of inner membrane permeability to solutes with
molecular mass of &lt;1500 Da, which leads to dissipation of
the mitochondrial membrane potential and influx of
cytosolic solutes, causing expansion of matrix and finally
the release of cytochrome-c leading to caspase activation
and cell death []. Structurally the MPTP is thought to
involve VDAC (voltage dependent anion channel) in the
outer membrane, the ANT (adenine nucleotide translocase)
in the inner membrane and CypD (Cyclophilin D) in the
mitochondrial matrix. MPTP spans through both the inner
and outer mitochondrial membranes. VDAC is a porin
known by its role in metabolite transport across
mitochondria and acts as entry for molecules from cytosol
to mitochondria. Administration of specific anti-VDAC
antibodies prior to Aβ-peptide uptake has been observed to
prevent neurotoxicity, which suggests the role of MPTP in
regulation of Aβ toxicity []. The other two major proteins
of MPTP, CypD and ANT, have regulatory functions.
CypD, which is a peptidyl prolyl cis-trans isomerase has
been reported to regulate the MPTP. Oxidative and other
stress promote CypD translocation to the inner membrane
and this translocation acts as a key factor to trigger the
opening of calcium-sensitive non-specific channels and
subsequent change in mitochondrial calcium level. CypD
deficiency has been recently reported to attenuate Aβ-
induced mitochondrial and neuronal perturbation,
suggesting that its interaction with Aβ contributes to
development of AD []. The other regulatory molecule
ANT is located at the inner membrane and is known to switch its function from ADP/ATP transporter to a poreforming
channel during apoptosis. ANT is also proposed as
a target for oxidative radicals that may finally lead to
induction of pore opening []. Advancements in the
molecular, cellular and animal model studies have revealed
that Aβ enters mitochondria and induces the generation of
free radicals. Aβ is a small peptide derived from regulated
proteolysis of amyloid precursor protein (APP) in
ER/Golgi compartments as well as in lysosomes and on the
cell surfaces. Two complex proteases β- and γ- secretase
are found involved in the generation of these toxic
fragment []. Aβ molecules at higher concentration can
directly disrupt mitochondrial function and the interaction
of Aβ with mitochondrial proteins (e.g. CypD)
significantly enhances the accumulation and production of
mitochondrial reactive oxygen species. Our present study
offers an important advancement in the present
understanding of MPTP opening and mitochondrial
dysfunction in AD. In this study we have clearly
demonstrated the predicted processing of APP as well as
the interacting partners of Aβ in the cytoplasm,
mitochondria and extracellular matrix. Our study strongly
suggests that Aβ can interact with ANT (besides CypD) in
the mitochondrial inner membrane, and this interaction is
crucial for AD related pathophysiology.

Methodology
Data set and Sequence retrieval
Amyloid beta keyword was used as input in the STITCH
(protein-protein interaction resource database,
http://stitch.embl.de). STITCH is a sister project of proteinprotein
interaction server STRING and is a resource to
explore known and predicted interactions over 1.5 million
proteins from 373 species. ’Homo sapiens‘ was selected as
the species of interest. The default setting for 20 outputs
was changed to 50 interacting partners. We selected
amyloid-beta A4 protein precursor. Out of the 50
interacting proteins, 12 proteins (with &gt;0.910 STITCH
Score) related to the processing of APP with known role in
AD development were selected for further study. We
selected the interacting proteins based on their involvement
in APP processing and proteolysis (Evin and Weidemann
2002 [] and http://www.uniprot.org). We also confirmed
the interactions of these proteins with the database of
predicted human protein-protein interactions PIPs
(http://www.compbio.dundee.ac.uk/www-pips). In addition
to these proteins, two proteins of MPTP, ANT and CypD
were also selected and used for in silico interaction study.
The related protein sequences were retrieved from the
Entrez protein database (available at
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) using the protein name as
keyword. Accession number for each sequence used for
analysis is given (Table 2 in ).

Prediction of sub-cellular localization
All selected proteins were subjected to sub-cellular
localization prediction using WolfPSORT server
(http://wolfpsort.org) to know the relative abundance of
these proteins in different sub-cellular compartments. The
protein sequences retrieved from Entrez protein database
were taken as input sequence. WolfPSORT predicts the
sub-cellular localization sites of proteins based on both
known sorting signal motifs and some corrective sequence
features such as amino acid content with prediction
accuracy of &gt;80%. Further, the relative localization of different AD related proteins was correlated with proteinprotein
interaction information available from STITCH.

Protein-Protein interaction studies
The structural details of interactions between Aβ
(1IYT_A), ANT (NP_001142) and CypD (NP_005029)
were elucidated by molecular docking experiments. 3D
models were constructed by automated protein structure
homology-modeling Swissmodel server model 8.05
(http://swissmodel.expasy.org/workspace). Protein-protein
interaction simulation (docking) experiments were
performed using RosettaDock server
(http://rosettadock.graylab.jhu.edu). RosettaDock is a
structure-prediction-based program based on SVM
(support vector machine), which searches the rigid-body
and side-chain conformational space of two interacting
proteins to find a minimum free-energy complex structure.
Further we also used Hex-5.1 software using solid surface
docking simulations. In these docking calculations, each
molecule is modeled using 3D expansions of real
orthogonal spherical polar basis functions to encode both
surface shape and electrostatic charge and potential
distributions. All docking experiments were replicated
1000 times and best Etotal for the interaction was taken as
key parameter to evaluate the significance of interaction.
Etotal was represented in terms of KJ/mol.

Discussion
Prediction for presence and synthesis of Aβ in the mitochondria
First we performed sequence-based subcellular localization
of some important proteins involved in APP processing,
interaction and Aβ production. List of these proteins was
obtained from STITCH database. WolfPSORT-based
prediction for the sub-cellular localization indicated that
neither amyloid precursors (APP) nor Aβ fragments are
localized in the mitochondria (Table 1 in ). Interestingly, presence of secretase-β (beta-A
and beta-B) involved in Aβ processing is predicted in
mitochondria, indicating a possibility of Aβ processing
inside the mitochondria. It was previously suggested that
APP interacts with TOM and TIM proteins and gets a
partial entry into the mitochondria via dual leader sequence
[]. Partially internalized APP may produce reduction of
permeability of mitochondrial membranes due to
engagement of TIM and TOM systems and it is suggested
as a possible mechanism of mitochondrial dysfunction. It
was also shown that amyloid portion of the APP resides
outside of mitochondria, thus there is no internal
generation of Aβ. Recently Hansson-Petersen et al. have
shown that Aβ molecules are imported to mitochondria
directly via TOM mechanism []. Presence of Aβ in the 
insoluble fraction suggests the integration of Aβ with lipid
bilayer of inner membrane. It was suggested that its import
is driven by hydrophobic interaction with receptors of
TOM complex. As it has no classical signaling sequence it
may interact with its hydrophobic domain but could not
pass through inner membrane to mitochondrial matrix.
Aβ1-42 has α-helical hydrophobic c-terminus sequence
(residues 29-42) and is partially integrated in lipid layer.
Integration of Aβ in the lipid bilayer forms ion channel like
structures which are considered important in disrupting
membrane potential. In vitro studies suggest that its
integration into lipid layer is dependent on length and helix
forming potential of hydrophobic sequence and is also
regulated by metal ions, pH and constituents of lipid layer []. Due 
to this the possibility of incorporation of Aβ1-42
is greater than Aβ1-40. In many experiments the Aβ1-42
has been reported more toxic than other amyloid fragments
[]. Further, we also wanted to study the localization of
Aβ interacting proteins into the mitochondria, and we
found the significantly higher score for mitochondrial
localization of insulin protease, TGF-β, CypD and ANT
(Table 1 in ). Since the CypD
and ANT are known to regulate the mitochondrial
membrane potential, we further explored the interaction of
CypD, ANT with Aβ.

Interaction between Aβ, CypD and ANT
We hypothesized that amyloid beta may interact with
ANT, an inner membrane transporter protein and may
disrupt its function. We used interaction simulation with
docking program RosettaDock server. The RosettaDock
server performs a local docking search for a set of
conformations for the optimal fit between the two proteins.
Plot of 1000 simulated complexes shows a hallmark of a
successful run in which low-energy structures clustered
around a single position (). We also performed
solid surface based docking simulation with software Hex
5.1 and found that Aβ forms a very stable complex with
ANT (Etotal= -577.65 kJ/mol) (). Hydrophobic
helix of Aβ chain is interacting with the hydrophobic
transmembrane region of ANT. Also Aβ is abundant in the
inner membrane, the localization site of ANT, indicating
that possibility of its interaction with ANT is high. Interestingly, in our Hex interaction simulation, the
binding of ANT (Etotal= -577.65 kJ/mol) with Aβ is
stronger than that of CypD (Etotal= -454.21 kJ/mol)
suggesting that binding of Aβ with ANT may even have
pathogenic consequences. Our computer simulation based
study shows that Aβ interacts with both ANT and CypD.
Recently it was reported that stress induced by Aβ induces
ROS generation and translocation of CypD to inner
membrane, which results in mitochondrial swelling and
cell death []. Genetic removal of CypD significantly
protected the cells in this study. Authors suggested that Aβ
interacts with CypD although its role in ROS generation
was not clear. We sought to analyze the interaction with
Aβ to understand role of Aβ in translocation of CypD and
the opening of MPTP. Interestingly, our predictions of subcellular
localization as well as the results of Hansson-
Peterson et al. clearly rule out the presence of Aβ in the
soluble or matrix fraction []. Therefore, this interaction is
most likely possible in the inner membrane only.

It is reported that under oxidative stress CypD is
translocated to inner membrane and induces opening of
MPTP [], although the regulation of its translocation not
clear. CypD and Aβ interaction is reportedly involved in
the induction of oxidative stress and it is suggested that
oxidative stress induced through CypD-Aβ may inhibit
functioning of mitochondria and also induce cell death by
other mechanisms such as Ca++ independent signaling
pathways, oxidative stress induced kinase system and
activation of transcription factors. High abundance of Aβ
in the inner membrane and its interaction with CypD may
facilitate its anchoring in inner membrane, and in
consequence its interaction with ANT may result in disturbance of mitochondrial membrane potential,
mitochondrial swelling and cell death. Current evidences
show that regulation of MPTP is very complex. Studies
reveal that CypD binds tightly to VDAC-ANT and it seems
more likely that the VDAC-ANT-CypD complex is a
permanent feature of healthy cells and several mechanisms
have been postulated to explain the MPTP opening [,
].
These mechanisms include changes in protein-protein
interactions such as Bcl-2 or Bax binding, modulation of
expression levels of pro- or anti-apoptotic components of
MPTP, and modifications of the lipid microenvironment in
mitochondrial membranes. Recent reports show that ANT
has regulatory function rather than only the formation of
structural transmembrane pore []. Our results show that
Aβ tightly binds with ANT and may alter the interactions
with pro- or anti-apoptotic factors. Also its localization and possible interaction with other proteins in the inner
membrane may affect the lipid microenvironment. Aβ
interaction with mitochondrial proteins namely ABAD
(amyloid binding alcohol dehydrogenase) [] and CypD
[] were found to produce reactive oxygen species (ROS)
which can also alter the fluidity and permeability of
membrane and may enhance mitochondrial dysfunction
and synaptic dysfunction [].

ANT transports ADP/ATP through an exchange-diffusion
mechanism with a one-to-one stoichiometry and maintains
the adenine nucleotide pool at a constant level in the
matrix. During oxidative phosphorylation, external ADP
enters into matrix and in exchange ATP is released into the
inter-membrane space. Nucleotides are transported in free
form, thus the charge is not compensated and transport is
driven by membrane potential at the cost of high energy
consumption []. Interaction of Aβ with ANT may affect
the physiological function of ANT and leads to dysfunction
in energy metabolism prior to induction of cell death. Also
ATP is directly involved in long term potentiation, a
phenomenon involved in synaptic plasticity []. Our
hypothesis is in line with the observation that
mitochondrial dysfunction and in consequence synaptic
dysfunction occurs much earlier than the neuronal loss 
[,
].

Conclusion
In this study we predicted the interaction between Aβ,
CypD and ANT. We found that Aβ may bind tightly with
ANT which suggests that the interaction may alter
regulation of MPTP and is involved in mitochondrial
dysfunction. We also hypothesize that Aβ would interact
with CypD and ANT in the inner mitochondrial membrane.
Our prediction shows that the Etotal for ANT-Aβ interaction
is significantly less than CypD-Aβ interaction, which
shows that binding of Aβ with ANT is likely stronger than
that with CypD, possibly affecting the normal
physiological function of ANT. Hence we conclude that
interaction of Aβ with ANT alone may induce
mitochondrial dysfunction independent of MPTP.
Dysregulation in ADP/ATP transport directly affects the
physiological processes of cells and may further result in
synaptic dysfunction.

Supplementary material
Data 1
PS acknowledges Senior Research Fellowship provided by
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, New Delhi,
India.

Citation:Singh et al, Bioinformation 3(10): 440-445 (2009)

Models of ANT-Aβ (A) and CypD-Aβ (C) complexes predicted by RosettaDock server along with plots of scores
(energy) versus distance from the starting structure of full set of 1000 structures created in docking run of Aβ with ANT (B)
and CypD (D). In both the cases low energy structures are clustered around a single position as shown in dot plot. Most
stable complex models of ANT- Aβ (E) and CypD-Aβ (F) predicted by Hex 5.1. Aβ is bound in hydrophobic region of ANT
and low Etotal of ANT-Aβ complex showing its stability.

