Background
Systems Biology involves the study of the interactions of
biological systems and ultimately their functions.
Understanding the structure of the system, such as gene
regulatory and biochemical networks, dynamics of the system
involving both quantitative and qualitative analysis and
construction of theory/model with powerful prediction
capability, control methods of the system and design methods
of the system are the key milestones to the Systems Biological
study []. 
Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) are a group of
related neuro-developmental disorders characterized by
delayed or abnormal language development, deficits in social
interaction and restricted, repetitive behaviors and interests
(Valerie W.Hu. 2009) []. They are pervasive developmental
disorders that include Autistic disorder, Asperger syndrome,
Pervasive Developmental Disorder- Not Otherwise Specified
(PDD-NOS) and the rare disorders that include Rett disorder
and Childhood Disintegrative Disorder (CDD). These
conditions are complex, behaviorally-defined syndromes with
variable, severity and highly diverse symptoms and etiologies
[]. 
The most recent survey data estimates that, more than 1 in
150 children in the US may have an ASD diagnosis. Most
estimates are based on population and there has been little
evidence of variation based on geographic region. This makes
ASDs the third most common developmental disorders 
[].

Bipolar disorder (BP) is another common psychiatric disorder
categorized under the Mood Disorders. It is characterized by
mood alterations, with recurrent depressive and manic episodes
in lifetime. Extreme changes in energy, activity, sleep, and
behavior go along with these changes in mood. An overly joyful
or overexcited state is called a manic episode, and an extremely
sad or hopeless state is called a depressive episode. Manic
episode is characterized by elated mood, grandiosity, pressure
to keep talking, flight of ideas, hyperactivity and diminished
need for sleep. Depressive episode is characterized by
depressed mood, loss of interest, appetite loss, sleep
disturbance, psychomotor retardation, feelings of worthlessness
and suicidal ideation []. Zutshi A et al. (2011) 
[] has indicated
that diagnosis of BP changed from 2.5% in 2004 to 3.3% in 2008.
There was a significant increase in the prevalence of BP in 2008.
Carroll and Owen (2009) [] showed with evidences that ASDs,
schizophrenia and BP have a convergence on the specific
processes involved in the development and regulation of
synaptic transmission. It has been hypothesized that the neural
systems responsible for the regulation of circadian rhythm,
synthesis of neurotransmitters such as dopamine and GABA
can play a significant role in the etiology of disorders. Also,
Rudan Igor (2010) [] has indicated that although psychiatric
disorders are highly heritable, identifying their genetic basis has
so far been challenging, with most discoveries failing to be
replicated. A few studies have elucidated the comorbidity of the
two psychiatric disorders and their relation, but a clear insight
into the concept has not been established as yet.

DeLong R (1994) [] suggested that the pattern of affective and
cognitive symptoms showed notable similarities across an
entire group with ASD, with a family history of BPAD or major
depression. Munesue T et al. (2008) 
[] has emphasized BP as a
comorbidity in high functioning ASD. He also speculated that
the major comorbid mood disorder in patients with high
functioning ASD is BP and also referred that both may share
certain common vulnerability genes. Depression is the main
psychiatric co-morbidity reported in individuals with ASD. It is
considerably clear that lacunae pertaining to the comorbidity of
ASD and BP exist at the genomic level. Thus, we have made an
attempt to discover, understand, and interpret the relevance of
comorbidity of the two disorders, carrying out in silico studies
at the genomic level, contributing to the research that has
progressed rapidly over the past few years due to the
advancement of Bioinformatics applications.

Methodology
Dataset Collection
A rigorous search for genes associated with autism spectrum
disorders and bipolar disorder performed manually from 8
sources viz., PubMed, Reactome [], Genetic Association
database [], Huge Navigator 
[], ENSEMBL 
[], Cytoscape
[] and Sequence Retrieval System 
[]. Around 714 genes and
675 genes were collected for BP and ASD respectively. The
collected genes were then validated using the databases-
GENECARDS [] and UNIPROTkb.

Analysis
A bottom-up approach (exploring the pathways involved in the
disorders from the list of genes that were collected, rather than
the usual pathways to gene approach) was employed to build the
further methodology of the experiment. GeneGO Pathway
maps (METACORE, GeneGo, Inc.) and CONSENSUSPATH
database [] 
was used for identifying the pathways to which
the genes were associated. MetaCore (Thomson Reuter Inc)
provides highly extensive grounds for analyzing pathways,
building networks, analyzing expression profiles and many
more. GeneGo Pathway Maps facility was chosen since it
supports extensive analysis of pathways for gene lists imported
by the user with an additional facility of Enrichment analysis.
Pathways were ranked based on the P-Values and the enriched
pathways were then listed with their Log P Values. Such
efficient and extensive pathway analysis feature is considered
the crux of the study. Consensuspath Database 
[] offers an
extensive integration of pathways from various manually
curated pathway databases. Therefore, it could be considered to
be a central hub of pathways. With regard to the study taken
up, this database was observed to be very useful and efficient.
Thus, it was chosen for the study. NAViGaTor 
[] provides an
efficient representation of the networks. It was chosen as the
visualization tool for the study to depict the common and
unique genes involved in the chosen pathways. The gene lists
were submitted to the two tools individually and their
corresponding pathways were recorded. An enrichment
analysis was performed by the two tools and statistically
significant pathways were noted. The common pathways
involved in both the disorders, as recorded by the two tools
were individually shortlisted. As many as 33 pathways were
recorded from metacore and 60 pathways from consensuspath
database. A manual comparative study of the common
pathways listed by both the tools was carried out and they were
consolidated using knowledge from literature. Four pathways
were identified to be common to both the disorders and are
strongly associated with the basic etiology of the disorders.

Network Construction
The genes involved in these four pathways were then identified
and a network for each of the 4 pathways was constructed
using the tool NAViGaTOR [] 
(). Finally, the common
genes associated with the two disorders were keyed out.

Results
The initial data collection yielded around 675 genes for Autism
Spectrum Disorder and 713 genes for Bipolar Disorder. The
pathways associated with the genes have been recorded from
both the consensuspath database and Metacore. A brief study
on the pathways revealed that they are being regulated by 4
primary pathways and those pathways are indispensable for
the other pathways to function properly. They are: Neroactive
Ligand Receptor Interaction Pathway (); Circadian
Rhythm Pathway (); Synaptic Transmission 
(); 
Catecholamine Biosynthesis (); Thus, those 4
pathways were selected and networks were constructed using
NaViGaTOR.

Discussion
Autism Spectrum Disorders and Bipolar disorder continue to
prove a great challenge to the medical community due to their
heterogeneity and gaps, in diagnosis. The chances of comorbidity
of the disorders are also considerably strong with
validated literature support [,
,
]. ASDs and BP have also
been shown to implicate a few common symptoms viz., sleep
deprivation, depression, anxiety and social-behavioral
problems. This similarity between the 2 disorders could be due
to disturbances in their common pathways that may involve
commonalities and uniqueness in the contributing genes.
Taking into account the gaps in diagnosing the disorders and
perplexities in identifying the chances of their co-morbidity and
unclear and polygenic factors, they have been chosen as case
studies for the work. Out of the 50-60 common pathways (as on
April 28, 2011) that were recorded from the 2 methods, 4 major
pathways were chosen since they were found to mediate the
other pathways. Moreover, 70% of those pathways were
observed to be derived from any one of the above mentioned
four pathways namely, Neuroactive Ligand receptor interaction
pathway, Circadian rhythm pathway, Synaptic transmission
and Catecholamine biosynthesis.

The Synaptic transmission pathway was observed to be
extremely significant as it is the pathway through which the
neurotransmitters- dopamine, serotonin, acetylcholine, Gamma
Amino Butyric Acid, Glutamate, Substance P are synthesized
and released to perform the highly important function of
transmitting signals from a neuron to the target cells. Thus, any
disturbances in the pathway can lead to a constellation of
complexities in the system. The Neuroactive Ligand receptor
interaction pathway was ranked as the pathway with the
highest score (involving the greatest number of genes
implicated in the two disorders) for both ASD and BP by the
ConsensusPath database. The pathway utilizes the
neurotransmitters glutamate, dopamine, serotonin, noradrenaline
as its starters and regulates certain crucial pathways
that maintain mood and regulate stress such as, Long-term
potentiation, Long-term depression, GnRH (Gonadotrophin
Releasing Hormone) signaling and synthesis of Gap junction.
The Circadian Rhythm pathway, is a key pathway to maintain
the biological clock in our body and the CLOCK genes holds
strong implications to be a factor for the disorders 
[,
].
Catecholamines are the “flight-fight” hormones that are
released in response to stress. They include dopamine,
epinephrine, and nor-epinephrine. The end product of this
pathway nor-epinephrine mediates the synthesis of the
corticosteroid- Cortisol by activating the Corticotropin-
Releasing hormone (CRH) along-with Adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH) in the pituitary gland. Cortisol is very
important to regulate and handle stress and has innumerable
functions in the body including mediating other hormones such
as insulin, thyroxine, etc.

In addition, cortisol content in the plasma might also play a
pivotal role by influencing the production of Serotonin, which
is the precursor for Melatonin, a hormone synthesized in the
pineal gland. Both serotonin and melatonin are very significant
to maintain an individual's appetite, muscle movements, bone
formation, memory, circadian rhythm cycle and many other
activities. Cortisol content is observed to increase up to 2-3 folds
in the morning and decrease gradually with the day's progress.
During the night hours, cortisol content drops down and the
synthesis of serotonin and melatonin takes place. This process is
a routine in our body and only when it occurs normally, our
body can maintain its balance and handle stresses throughout
the day. Elevated cortisol level hinders the synthesis of
serotonin and thus decreases the serotonin and melatonin
levels. This undesirable process can lead to implications such as
stresses, depressions, abnormal mental states which are the
symptoms of ASD and BP. Based on a careful study of the four
pathways and subsequent examination of the other pathways
involved in the list, the above mentioned 4 pathways were
selected for further analysis. The chances of comorbidity of ASD
and BP can be speculated by the genes involved in the
pathways. Although, the 4 pathways were observed to be
associated with both the disorders, the fate of the disorders can
be determined by the genes that get involved. While
scrutinizing the list of genes involved in each pathway that are
implicated as candidates for both the disorders separately,
certain common and unique features were observed. As
represented by the 4 networks, both disorders have their own
unique genes and share common genes too. This can lead us to
the speculation that when a disruption occurs in the genes
common to both the disorders in a pathway, the chances of comorbidity
of ASD and BP can be considerably high. However,
when there is a mutation in the genes associated with only one
disorder, the susceptibility rate of a person with any of the
ASDs to BP can be considerably low. Thus, though certain
pathways have been observed to be similar to both ASD and
BP, the chances of their co-occurrence in an individual can
depend on the nature of the genes which get disrupted. The
results obtained indicate that, any disturbance in the Circadian
rhythm pathway (), the chances of comorbidity of BP
and ASD in a person can be higher as ASD shares all its genes
with BP (, see supplementary material). But, a person
can be diagnosed with BP only, in his later life if there is any
disruption in the genes unique to BP in the pathway. However,
disturbances in the Neuroactive Ligand Receptor Interaction,
Synaptic Transmission and Catecholamine Biosynthesis
pathways () could increase susceptibility to
any of the ASDs, if the genes identified as unique for ASD are
disrupted, or might be affected by BP alone, if the genes
identified as unique for BP are disrupted. However,
commonalities among the genes of the 2 disorders raise a
speculation that the chances of co-morbidity of ASD and BP can
be higher if disruptions occur in those genes.

Conclusion
A systems biology study of Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD)
and Bipolar Disorder (BP) proved to yield important insight on
the genetic basis of comorbidity between the two disorders.
The networks constructed for the selected 4 pathways leads to a
hypothesis that the comorbidity of ASD and BP can be
correlated to the genes involved in the pathways common to
the two disorders and a further examination can pave way to
the identification of the specific genes that contribute to
comorbidity. Such knowledge would help in devising a novel
management technique or developing therapeutics.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Ragunath et al, Bioinformation 7(3): 102-106 (2011)

Networks for the chosen 4 pathways showing genes
which are associated with ASDs or BP or common for both. (A)
Network for Neuroactive Ligand Receptor Interaction Pathway
(B) Synaptic Transmission (C) Circadian Rhythm Pathway (D)
Catecholamine Biosynthesis

Methodology employed is depicted.

