Background
Malaria, which is caused by protozoan parasites of the genus
Plasmodium, disables and kills more people than any other
infectious disease. Malaria due to Plasmodium falciparum is a
disease which can involve almost every organ and tissue in the
body even though malarial parasites infect only red cells and
occasionally platelets. Plasmodium falciparum is the causative
agent for the cerebral malaria which includes the features such
as loss of consciousness, unresponsiveness to pain,
sequestration in cerebral microvasculature, localized
hypoglycemia and lactic acidosis, coma and subsequent death
[]. 
Plasmodium falciparum, being an erythrocytic parasite has
limited capacity for de novo amino acid synthesis and rely on
degradation of host hemoglobin (Hb) to maintain protein
metabolism and synthesis in the erythrocyte. Within the
erythrocytes, the malarial parasite consumes as much as 75% of
the cellular Hemoglobin []. Hemoglobin is initially degraded
by the concerted action of cysteine-, aspartyl-, and metalloendoproteases,
and a dipeptidase (cathepsin C) within a
digestive vacuole (DV) to di- and tripeptide fragments 
[].
These fragments are suggested to be exported to the parasite
cytoplasm, where further hydrolysis to release free amino acid
takes place. The release of amino acid involves metalloexopeptidases
such as alanyl aminopeptidase (PfA-M1)
regulating the intracellular pool of amino acids required for
growth and development inside the red blood cells 
[]. These
enzymes are essential for parasite viability inside the
erythrocyte and are validated therapeutic targets 
[].

Although aminopeptidase has been recognized since the 1980s,
the three-dimensional structure of this enzyme had been
determined only recently []. This enzyme is well conserved in
a variety of species such as mammals, insects, plants, and
bacteria []. 
Mc Gowan et al., 2009 [] functionally characterized
Plasmodium falciparum Aminopeptidase -M1 and validated it as
a target with demonstration of the inhibitory activities of
Bestatin and PheP[CH2]Phe. They presented the 3D structure of
M1 alanine aminopeptidase alone and in complex with both of
the inhibitors.

In the present study, M1 alanine aminopeptidase enzyme, the
validated drug target of Plasmodium falciparum is subjected to in
silico screening using low molecular weight protease inhibitors.

Methodology
The three dimensional structure of the M1 Alanine
aminopeptidase (PDB ID = 3EBG) of Plasmodium falciparum was
downloaded from the Protein Data Bank. The quality check of
the structure is performed through WHAT IF server. The
possible molecular interactions of the substrate with M1 alanine
aminopeptidase was predicted by docking the known substrate
with the enzyme M1 alanine aminopeptidase. Ala- β-
naphthylamide (βNA) was used to assay aminopeptidase and
to determine Michaelis constant (Km). In the present study, the
km of the Enzyme with the substrate, DL – Alanine β
Napthylamide Hydrochloride was found out in silico with the
Docking server. The low molecular weight protease inhibitors
were screened for their efficacy to inhibit the action of M1
alanine aminopeptidase. About 100 low molecular weight
protease inhibitors were downloaded from DrugBank,
PubChem and MEROPS.

Docking server offers a web-based easy to use interface that
handles all aspects of molecular docking from ligand and
protein setup. The active site of the enzyme was defined in the
server prior to docking. The knowledge about the active site
was obtained from the structural data provided by Mc Gowan
et al., 2009 []. 
The Docking server was used to further identify
the inhibitors of the active site for M1 alanine aminopeptidase.
Computational docking was carried out using DockingServer.
Gasteiger partial charges were added to the ligand atoms. Non
polar hydrogen atoms were merged, and rotatable bonds were
defined. Docking calculations were carried out on the protein –
ligand interaction models. Essential hydrogen atoms, Kollman
united atom type charges, and salvation parameters were
added with the aid of AutoDock tools []. Docking simulations
were performed using the Lamarckian genetic algorithm (LGA)
and the Solis &amp; Wets local search method 
[]. Initial position,
orientation, and torsions of the ligand molecules were set
randomly. All rotatable torsions were released during docking.
Each docking experiment was derived from 10 different runs
that were set to terminate after a maximum of 2,50,000 energy
evaluations. The population size was set to 150. During the
search, a translational step of 0.2 Å, and quaternion and torsion
steps of 5 were applied and the docking were performed.

Results &amp; Discussion
km Estimation and proposed Mechanism of Action:
In the present study, km (av) for the enzyme M1 alanine
aminopeptidase for the substrate DL – Alanine β Napthylamide
Hydrochloride was found as 322.05µM which is the average of
km obtained due to binding of substrate in all possible
configurations. Ito et al., (2006) 
[] has reported km for E.Coli
aminopeptidase with the substrate Alanyl β Napthylamide as
304 ± 10 µM. In the current studies, computed km (avg)
(322.05µM) is closely correlating experimental data 
[].

The active site incorporate the zinc-binding motif
H496EYFHX17KE519 and the well-conserved G490AMEN motif
involved in substrate recognition [,
,
]. The substrate
Alanyl β Napthylamide is observed to be oriented antiparallel
to the β strand defined by residues of the G460AMEN motif,
with the N-terminus anchored by the zinc moiety and Glu526.
The free amine group of the substrate donates one hydrogen
bond to the carboxyl group of Glu526. The catalytic zinc ion is
coordinated by N2 atoms of His496 and His500, the carboxyl O
atom of Glu519, and a water molecule that acts as the
nucleophile that attacks the carbonyl carbon of the substrate 
[].
This water molecule forms a slightly longer metallo bond with
the zinc ion and is also coordinated by Glu497 and Glu463 
[]. Ito
et al., 2006 [], proposed that amide carbonyl oxygen of the
substrate Ala-p-NA is bound to the Zn2 ion, and the carbonyl
carbon is at a suitable position for attack from a water molecule
activated by Glu296 in E. Coli aminopeptidase. Correspondingly,
the carbonyl oxygen of the scissile bond interacts with the zinc
ion [] and forms a polar interaction between the NH2 atom of
the Arg 489 and hydroxyl group of Tyr580.

This positions the scissile peptide bond optimally for catalysis,
presenting the carbonyl carbon to both Glu497 and the
nucleophilic water. Together with Tyr580 and the zinc ion
polarize the carbonyl bond of the scissile peptide bond. This
increases the electropositivity of the carbonyl carbon,
facilitating the nucleophilic attack of a water molecule.
Presumably, the bound peptide displaces the water molecule,
and the absence of a charged Glu497 prevents a new water
molecule from binding when substrate is present. The possible
mechanism of enzyme action is depicted in .
The molecular interactions between the amino acids and the
substrate are shown in .

Role of Glu526:
The N-terminal specificity of aminopeptidases suggest the
presence in these enzymes of an anionic binding site which
involves a negatively charged carboxylate side chain, expected
to be located at the end of the S1 subsite, allowing recognition
of the free amino group of substrates and inhibitors. The
negative charge of the glutamate side-chain carboxylate may
constitute the anionic binding site. Glu526 is ideally positioned in
the structure to bind the N terminus of the substrate DL –
Alanine β Napthylamide Hydrochloride. In addition, this
residue, or any equivalent functionality, is absent in the
structure of thermolysin, a classical zinc endopeptidase that
accommodates peptide substrates of any length 
[]. Mc Gowan
et al., (2009) [] 
observed that Glu526 side chain that moved away
from the active site, removing what would otherwise form a
close contact with P1 position of inhibitors. The position of
Glu526 in M1 alanine Aminopeptidase is within hydrogen
bonding distance (2.87 Å) to the terminal amino group of the
substrate. This data imply that Glu526 acts as an N-terminal
recognition site for peptide substrates.

Role of Glu497:
Hydrophobic environment around Glu298 is supposed to be
important for the activation of the E.coli Aminopeptidase 
[]
which is equivalent to Glu497 in M1 alanine aminopeptidase.
Presumably, the bound peptide displaces the water molecule,
and the absence of a charged Glu497 prevents a new water
molecule from binding when substrate is present. To create a
good leaving group, allowing the peptide to break apart, the
leaving amine must acquire an additional proton. Based on
mutagenesis, Tyr383 in leucotriene hydrolase was previously
proposed to act as an acid catalyst for this purpose 
[].
However, Tholander et al., (2008) 
[] found that Tyr383 is too far
from the amine nitrogen in leucotriene hydrolase. They
proposed that the most obvious acid catalyst is Glu298 which is
equivalent to Glu497 in M1 alanine aminopeptidase, protonated
as a consequence of the previous catalytic step. In this way, the
newly formed glutamic acid shuffles a proton to the leaving
amine. This is equivalent to a proposed function for the
corresponding Glu residue as a catalytic base in thermolysin
[].

Role of His496, Glu497, His500 and Glu519:
Zinc coordination geometry appears to be critical for ligand
binding and is basically maintained throughout the reaction.
Thus, bound substrate, inhibitor, or reaction intermediates must
provide the fourth zinc binding ligand at a distance close to 2Å
and a fifth, slightly more distant ligand. Pentahedral zinc
coordination, rather than the tetrahedral geometry observed in
the unbound structure, is required for the transition state of the
enzyme that exists after the nucleophilic attack at the carbonyl
carbon of the substrate [].

The catalytic zinc ion is coordinated by N2 atoms of His496 and
His500, the carboxyl O2 of Glu519, and a water molecule that acts
as the nucleophile that attacks the carbonyl carbon of the
substrate []. This water molecule forms a slightly longer
metallo bond with the zinc ion and is also coordinated by Glu497
and Glu463 [] which are required for the transition state of the
enzyme.

Role of Tyr580:
Site directed mutagenesis of Tyr383 in LTA4 hydrolase
corresponding to Tyr580 in M1 alanine aminopeptidase resulted
in inactive mutants towards peptidase activity []. Tyr471 in
Aminopeptidase A seems to stabilize the transition state of the
catalytic process acting as an electrophilic catalyst through
interaction of the tyrosine hydroxy group with the oxyanion
[]. Tyr 580 is well conserved in peptidase family M1; the
corresponding residues are Tyr381 in E.coli aminopeptidase 
[]
and Tyr383 in leukotriene A4 hydrolase [].

Role of Gly460, Ala461, Met462, Glu463 and Asn464:
The GAMEN motif is a substrate recognition motif in M1
alanine aminopeptidase. For all ligands, the peptide backbone
binds as an extended β strand antiparallel to the β strand
defined by the GXMEN motif, which is conserved among M1
Aminopeptidases []. In the present study the GAMEN motif is
found between Gly460 to Asn464.

Role of Thr492:
The substrate specificity of mono zinc aminopeptidases
depends not only on interactions occurring in the Michaelis
complex between the residues of the enzyme and the side chain
of the substrate but also on the optimal positioning of the
substrate during catalysis, thereby optimizing the hydrolysis of
the substrate scissile peptide bond.

Nishiyama et al., (1991) [] performed random mutagenesis of
malate dehydrogenase from a thermophilic bacterium, Thermus
flavus AT-62 and revealed that the replacement of Thr190 with Ile
replacement near the essential catalytic residue His187 caused
marked modulation of the catalytic properties.

Claperon et al., (2009) [] postulated that in Aminopeptidase A,
Thr348 adjusts the position of the substrate in the APA active
site, strengthening, together with Glu215 and Glu352, the
polarization of the catalytic water molecule to optimize the
nucleophilic attack on the scissile peptide bond of acidic
substrates.

In the present study, proximity of Thr492 to the catalytic residues
such as His496, Glu497, His500 and Glu519 suggests that similar role
can be played by Thr492. The amino terminal of the substrate
binds with Thr492 along with Glu526 enabling the optimal
positioning of the substrate during catalysis and may contribute
substrate specificity.

Enzyme inhibition:
The inhibitor Bestatin was docked with the M1 alanine
aminopeptidase and molecular interactions are shown in
(). 
The ki of M1 alanine aminopeptidase for Bestatin as
an inhibitor in its best orientation is found to be 98.81µM. The ki
were 1830µM and 6860 µM in other two orientations and so the
ki (avg) is 1005.4 µM.

According to Mc Gowan et al., 2009, 
[] the Bestatin interacts
with the catalytic zinc ion. The carbonyl carbon (O3) of the
Bestatin form hydrogen bonds with the side chain of Tyr580,
stabilizing this reaction intermediate. A cis-peptide (Glu319-
Ala320) allows the side chain of Glu319 to extend into the active
site, where it forms a hydrogen bond with the N2 atom of
bestatin. The GAMEN recognition motif residues also
contribute hydrogen bonds to ligand binding with the side
chain of Glu463 and main-chain amide of Gly460 was also found
to interact with bestatin. It also forms a hydrogen bond with the
main chain amide of Ala461.

According to the docking results in the present study, Bestatin
interacts with Glu 319, Ala461, Met462, Glu 463, Arg 489, His 496, Glu497, 
His 500 and Tyr 580. The amino acids His 496, Glu 497, His 500
form a part of Zn recognition motif. The inhibitor forms
hydrogen and polar interactions with Oε2 of Glu497 and forms
hydrophobic interaction with CD2 of His 496. The amino acid
Ala461, Met462, Glu 463 contributes a part of GAMEN substrate
recognition motif. The inhibitor Bestatin interacts with the
backbone carbon of Ala461, Carboxyl group of Glu 463 and forms
hydrophobic interaction with sulfur in Met462. The inhibitor
forms many interactions with Tyr 580 which is a stabilizing
amino acid in the reaction intermediate.

In the present study, ki of M1 alanine aminopeptidase for
Bestatin as an inhibitor in its best orientation (Shown in 
) is 
found to be 98.81µM and the ki avg is 1005.4 µM. The km in
the best orientation of the substrate and the km (avg) for the
enzyme M1 alanine aminopeptidase for the substrate DL –
Alanine β Napthylamide Hydrochloride are found as 278.6µM
and 322.05µM respectively. Though the km is higher than the ki
in the best orientation of the ligands, the undesirable aspect is
the much lower value of km (avg) than ki (avg). Thus, there is a need
for the inhibitors with desired properties.

In the docking studies, the ki of M1 alanine aminopeptidase for
inhibitors such as Sitagliptin , Chloridoxipoxide, Alprazolam,
Ergotamine, Dihydroergotamine, 4,7 dimethyl 1,10
phenanthroline, 9,4 hydroxy phenyl phenanthroline and
Camptothecin are found to be lower than Bestatin in their best
orientations. The values are tabulated in  (see
supplementary material).

To cite specifically, the ki of M1 Alanine aminopeptidase for
Sitagliptin in its best orientation is 0.152 µM which is much
lower than the ki of the enzyme for bestatin (98.81µM ) and km
(278.60 µM). The ki (avg) for sitagliptin is 2.0055µM which is
much lower than the ki (avg) of the enzyme for bestatin (1005.4
µM) as well as kmavg (322.05µM) for the substrate DL – Alanine
β Napthylamide Hydrochloride. The molecular interactions
between Sitagliptin and the enzyme Alanine aminopeptidase
are shown in .

Sitagliptin phosphate was approved by the US FDA for the
treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus in October 2006. It is the
first in a new class of drugs that inhibit the proteolytic activity
of dipeptidyl peptidase-4, thereby potentiating the action of
endogenous glucoregulatory peptides, known as incretins. It
reduces blood glucose levels without significant increases in
hypoglycaemia.

The present study reveals that Sitagliptin interacts with the
aminoacids such as His496, Glu497 and Glu526 (which are the
components of the essential Zn binding motif) by forming
hydrogen bonds, polar interactions or hydrophobic interactions.
The halogen bond interaction of sitagliptin with Ala461 which is
the amino acid present in substrate recognizing GA461 MEN
motif, may inhibit the function of the motif. The hydroxyl
group of Tyr580 forms halogen bond with F1 of Sitagliptin
besides its hydrophobic and pi-pi interactions thus, stabilizing
this reaction intermediate. Sitagliptin binds with the amino
acids such as Asp581, Val493, Val523, Val459, Arg489, Thr492 and
Leu546 which are present at the vicinity of the active site. The
enzyme activity not only depends on interactions occurring in
the Michaelis complex between the residues of the enzyme and
the side chain of the substrate but also on the optimal
positioning of the substrate during catalysis, thereby optimizing
the hydrolysis of the substrate scissile peptide bond.

Conclusion
Sitagliptin shows higher binding affinity towards the active site
of M1 alanine aminopeptidase than its substrate Ala- β-
naphthylamide (βNA) and any inhibitors that has been used in
the study. Hence, sitagliptin competes with the substrate for the
binding at the active site. Thus, sitagliptin may serve as a potent
competitive inhibitor for the enzyme M1 alanine
aminopeptidase of Plasmodium falciparum, thus may serve as a
potent drug candidate. Further studies are required in the wet
lab to confirm these results which are predicted. Also, target
specific drug delivery system has to be developed that the
infected erythrocytes are specifically recognised and destroyed
on the release of the drug.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Mohana &amp; Achary, Bioinformation 9(6): 293-298 (2013)

(A –D): Possible Reaction mechanism for hydrolysis of the substrate Alanine β Napthylamide Hydrochloride by M1
alanine aminopeptidase (A) The Substrate displaces the zinc associated water molecule and the absence of a charged Glu497
prevents a new water molecule from binding when substrate is present .The substrate chelates the zinc ion by its free amine group.
Together with Tyr580, the zinc ion polarizes the carbonyl bond of the scissile peptide bond (Represented by an arrow mark). This
results in the increase in the electro positivity of the carbonyl carbon facilitating the nucleophilic attack; (B) The polalized carbonyl
carbon is prone to nucleophilic attack. Glu497 acts as a base for the nucleophilic attack. Pentahedral zinc coordination is required for
the transition state of the enzyme that exists after the nucleophilic attack at the carbonyl carbon of the substrate. There is initiation
of proton shift from the Glu497 to the amino terminal of the leaving group which is indicated by double headed arrow; (C) Upon the
formation of the reaction intermediate the substrate becomes slightly shifted, leading to the exchange of zinc coordinating groups
and strengthened H bonds to nearby residues. The amino moiety H bonds tighter to Glu497 and the oxyanion which is bound to the
carbonyl carbon forms two strong bonds, a co ordinate bond with zinc ion and low barrier hydrogen bond to Tyr580. As a result of
previous base catalysis, a proton resides on the carboxylate oxygen of Glu497. To create a good leaving group, allowing the peptide
to break apart, the leaving amine acquires an additional proton which resides on the carboxylate oxygen of Glu497 by direct
shuffling. As a result, the scissile peptide bond is prone to hydrolysis which is indicated by an arrow mark; (D) The products along
with the amino acids participating in the enzyme catalysis. Also, the tetrahedral geometry of the Zinc ion is seen which is
coordinated with N2 atoms of His496 and His500, the carboxyl O2 of Glu519, and a water molecule which forms a slightly longer
metallo bond also coordinated by Glu497.

A) Molecular interactions of M1 alanine aminopeptidase with DL – Alanine β Napthylamide Hydrochloride; B) Bestatin
and C) Sitagliptin.

