The progressive and relentless accumulation of amyloid beta
(Abeta) protein in the brain is a key component of memory loss
and dementia in Alzheimer's disease. This process also occurs
and is considered a component of aging, HIV dementia, and
other dementias. Abeta is processed from Amyloid precursor
protein, APP. Under conditions still under investigation,
anomalous Abeta protein fragments are produced that although
initially soluble, become insoluble deposits during an
oligomerization process. This progression affects neurons and
glia (e.g. astrocytes) in the brain and results in the toxic effects
that contribute to loss of cognitive performance. Therapies are
being developed to reduce the production of toxic Abeta
fragments from APP [,
].

Many proteins interact with APP and several proteins and their
interactions are shown in () including APP amyloid
beta (A4) precursor protein, BACE1 beta-site APP-cleaving
enzyme 1, APBA1 amyloid beta (A4) precursor protein-binding,
family A, member 1, APBA2 amyloid beta (A4) precursor
protein-binding, family A, member 2, APBA3 amyloid beta (A4)
precursor protein-binding, family A, member 3, APBB1 amyloid
beta (A4) precursor protein-binding, family B, member 1 (Fe65),
APBB2 amyloid beta (A4) precursor protein-binding, family B,
member 2, APBB3 amyloid beta (A4) precursor protein-binding,
family B, member 3, APPBP2 amyloid beta precursor protein
(cytoplasmic tail) binding protein 2, PSEN1 presenilin 1, an
enzyme that processes the APP, Lipid binding proteins APOE
apolipoprotein E, APOA1 apolipoprotein A-I, Transcription
factors CREBBP CREB binding protein, JUN jun protooncogene,
JAK2 Janus kinase 2, STAT5A signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5A.

Mutations in the genes for presenilin (PSEN) or APP cause
familial Alzheimer's disease (FAD). Such mutations show
increased production of amyloid β (Aβ) 42 oligopeptide
compared to levels of Aβ40. These mutations may entail gain or
loss of function mutations exhibited by the γ-secretase enzyme,
of which PSENs are key components. NOTCH processing may
be involved as well, especially in development. Thus, PSENs
have multifactorial effects.  shows interactions and
genes associated with APP, NOTCH1, and the protease PSEN1.
Reactions and interactions such as these need great study, as
they will lead to pinpointed mechanisms in the defeat of
dementias involving APP [].

There are no financial conflicts.

Citation:Shapshak, Bioinformation 8(14): 644-645 (2012

APP interactions. APP interactions with 99 other gene
products are shown. In this figure, line-colors and various
interactions with other genes are red Down-regulation, green
Up-regulation, beige Regulation, purple Co-expression, brown
Physical Interaction, turquoise dotted Predicted Protein
Interaction, and mauve dotted Predicted TFactor Regulation.
(GenePro SA Biosciences, http://www.sabiosciences.com/).

APP, NOTCH1, and PSEN1 interactions. APP,
NOTCH1, and PSEN1 interactions with other gene products are
shown. In this figure, line-colors and various interactions with
other genes are red Down-regulation, green Up-regulation,
beige Regulation, purple Co-expression, brown Physical
Interaction, turquoise dotted Predicted Protein Interaction, and
mauve dotted Predicted TFactor Regulation. (GenePro SA
Biosciences, http://www.sabiosciences.com/).

