Background
Viral infections constitute a very important issue for human and
animal health and there are very few available antiviral drugs
to fight these infections. Even more, emerging and re-emerging
viruses have further emphasized the efforts to accelerate
antiviral drug discovery. The design of peptides to study the
fusion process of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1
(HIV-1) corresponding to both heptad-repeat regions HR-1 and
-2 of the HIV-1 gp41, demonstrated that this type of peptides
were able to block viral entry and lead to the development of
the first antiviral peptide (AVP) the Fuzeon®, approved by the
FDA for treatment of HIV-1 infected patients []. This AVP
approach has been extended to other viruses such as, SARSCoV,
HRSV, HPIV-3, APV, NDV, SV-5, HMPV, Measles virus
[,
].

Currently available drugs against HSV infections are nucleotide
analogues, which block viral DNA replication; and even though
antiviral resistant strains are rare in immunocompetent patients
(0.1-0.7%), they are very common (7-14%) in
immunocompromised hosts. Furthermore, drug-resistant HSV
are becoming a threat especially for the immunocompromised
population which has been increasing around the world, either
due to viral infections such as AIDS or immunosuppression
related to cancer, organ transplants, and chronic diseases
treatments []. For influenza A virus infections, the only
effective antivirals nowadays are the neuraminidase inhibitors
zanamivir and oseltamivir, but in recent years the emergence of
influenza A virus strains resistant to this type of inhibitors has
been demonstrated [].

These findings support the need to develop new antiviral drugs
using other viral targets. The viral glycoproteins involved in the
entry event to the cell are an attractive target, because they are
essential proteins for viral penetration and require
conformational changes mediated by protein-protein
interactions to carry out their function. HSV entry requires
several viral glycoproteins (gD, gH/gL, gB) and begins with the
binding of gD to specific cell receptors. Receptor binding
triggers displacement of the C-terminus of gD to expose a
previously hidden region of gD, which has been proposed
interacts with gH/gL. This interaction results in a
conformational change in gH/gL that enables it to promote the
fusogenic state of gB. Insertion of the gB fusion loops into the
cellular membrane and an interaction between the ectodomains
of gB and gH/gL results in fusion of the viral envelope with the
cell membrane and releasing of the viral nucleocapsid into the
cytoplasm of the host cell [].

Influenza virus HA, is a homotrimeric protein that controls two
critical aspects of viral entry: virus binding and membrane
fusion. To carry out these functions, HA must undergo a
proteolytic cleavage, to generate two distinct subunits (HA1
and HA2), which renders it fusion competent. The HA trimeric
structure comprises a large membrane-distal, globular domain
formed by HA1 that binds to glycan receptors on host cells, and
an elongated membrane-proximal domain (stem region)
dominated by intertwined and interconnecting α-helices. The
stem region is the main component of the HA fusion machinery
and is comprised of HA2 (F fusion subdomain) and the N- and
C-terminal segments of HA1 (F´ fusion subdomain). The
connecting loop between the antiparallel helices of HA2, the B
loop, has a high propensity for a helical conformation and this
loop-to-helix transition enables extension of the central coiledcoil
and facilitates relocation of the fusion peptide toward the
target membrane. Membrane fusion begins inside the
endosome after a drop in lumenal pH leading to the release of
influenza virus nucleocapsids into the cellular cytoplasm 
[].

Despite the immense potential of this field, there is no virus
specific AVP prediction algorithm []. Our hypothesis is that
the viral glycoproteins required for the entry of enveloped
viruses by a fusion mechanism, should have conserved amino
acid sequences in their functional regions. Due to the nature of
the membrane fusion process, we propose that the functional
regions in these viral glycoproteins should be accessible
(surface exposed), hydrophilic, flexible, and have an overall
charge, since these properties have been found to be important
for the protein-protein interactions, necessary for the activation
of the fusion event. Therefore these regions could be used for
AVPs design, and furthermore, we hypothesized that by
analyzing different strains belonging to the same species, the
derived AVPs should have antiviral activity against the
different strains of the viral species analyzed. For AVPs design
using bioinformatics tools we select the HSV viral glycoproteins
gB and gH, and the HA of influenza A viruses.

Methodology
Protein sequences. The viral amino acid sequences for HSV-1
and HSV-2 gB, and gH proteins were downloaded from the
GenBank NCBI data base (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/);
and for influenza A virus hemagglutinin (HA), the Influenza
virus resource was used
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/FLU/).

Multiple protein alignments:
The proteins gB, gH and HA (HA1 and HA2 subdomains) were
separately analyzed, using a series of multiple alignments to
search for conserved sequences. We started with ClustalX2
(http://www.clustal.org/), then, T-Coffee Expresso, which
aligns protein sequences using structural information
(http://tcoffee.crg.cat/apps/tcoffee/index.html), and
PRALINE, which is a multiple sequence alignment program
that integrates homology-extended and secondary structure
(www.ibi.vu.nl/programs/pralinewww/). The results were
evaluated by sum of pairs, minimum entropy, Coffee (Core and
IRMSD-APDB).

Consensus sequence:
With the results of the multiple alignments a consensus amino
acid sequence was obtained for each protein using WebLogo
(http://weblogo.berkeley.edu/) or GeneDoc
(http://www.nrbsc.org/gfx/genedoc/).

Physicochemical analysis:
Several physicochemical parameters were evaluated for each
consensus sequence using a 10-20 amino acid window. 1)
Hydrophobicity using ProtScale
(http://web.expasy.org/protscale/) with the Kyte-Doolitle
scale []. 2) Hydrophilicity using MPEx with the Wimley and
White scale (http://blanco.biomol.uci.edu/mpex/) 
[]. 3)
Antigenicity using Antibody Epitope Prediction
(http://tools.immuneepitope.org/tools/ElliPro/iedb_input)
with Parker scale []. 4). Flexibility, with PROFbval
(http://www.predictprotein.org); Average Flexibility using
ProtScale available at ExPasy
(http://web.expasy.org/protscale/). 5) Overall charge, with
Charge EMBOSS
(http://emboss.sourceforge.net/apps/cvs/emboss/apps/charge.html).

Peptide selection and structure prediction:
The regions of the protein that showed to be highly conserved
in amino acid sequences (a minimum of 80% of conserved
amino acids) and also, hydrophilic, exposed (antigenic), flexible
and charged, were chosen for designing the AVPs and their 3D
structures were predicted by using PEPFOLD
(http://bioserv.rpbs.univ-paris-diderot.fr/PEP-FOLD/) 
[].

Docking analysis:
To determine probable interactions among the 3D peptide
structures and the viral glycoproteins involved in the fusion
event, a docking analysis was carried out using ClusPro 2.0:
protein-protein docking (http://cluspro.bu.edu/login.php)
[]. For the docking analysis with the influenza A AVPs we
used as a target the HA PDB (3LZG). For the HSV AVPs we
used HSV-1 or HSV-2 gB, gD and gH proteins available at PDB;
and the missing proteins were modeled using the Modeller
program [].

The ClusPro server gave four different choices for docking
results. We used the balanced coefficients considering that we
did not know what forces dominate in our complex. Thus, of
the generated models we selected those with the lowest ΔG
(energetically favorable) and lowest cluster size complex (the
most frequent interaction between receptor and ligand at the
same site).

Discussion
Fusion between the viral envelope and the cellular membrane is
a complicated and elegant process used by enveloped viruses to
penetrate into their host cell. Fusion can be executed by one or
more viral glycoproteins and different cellular receptors, which
interact and undergo a series of conformational changes, before
releasing the viral capsids into the cellular cytoplasm. Since this
process is one of the initial steps of infection, it is an ideal target
for the design of novel antivirals.

Several approaches have been used to design or identify AVPs
capable of blocking virus entry into the cell. One strategy is
based on peptides derived from the HR of viral glycoproteins
involved in the fusion event for example, the Fuzeon®
(enfurvitide). It is known that HIV-1 predominantly infects T
cells carrying the CD4 antigen by binding the viral envelope
glycoprotein gp120 to the CD4 cellular receptor. After this
initial attachment, a conformational change in gp120 allows its
further association with the cellular co-receptors CCR5 or
CXCR4. Subsequently, a conformational change in the viral
glycoprotein gp41 allows the HR2 domain to fold back on itself
to interact with the HR1 domain. This process (known as gp41
zipping) leads to fusion of the viral and host-cell membranes.
The enfuvirtide inhibits the fusion event by preventing the gp41
zipping due to its association with gp41 [].

Other approach to find AVPs has been the screening of phage
display libraries to identify peptides capable of inhibiting virus
infectivity when they bind to viral particles. AVPs for several
viruses such as West Nile virus [], Hantavirus 
[], or even
influenza A virus [] have been found using this type of
libraries.

Our strategy to design AVPs derived from the viral membrane
glycoproteins of HSV and influenza A viruses, is based on the
search for highly conserved regions in the viral fusion proteins.
For HSV, we used the gB and gH proteins which are known to
be involved in HSV membrane fusion process []. For
influenza A, we chose the HA which is known to be the viral
fusogen. By a series of multiple alignments we identified the
conserved regions among the 16 subtypes of HA of influenza A
viruses since we hypothesized that the important functional
regions of the HA should be conserved among the different
influenza A subtypes. The same was done with the gB and gH
proteins of HSV-1 and -2 strains. Therefore, we assumed that
the derived AVPs should have antiviral activity against
influenza A viruses, independently of their HA subtype; and in
the case of HSV, the AVPs should be effective against HSV-1 as
well as HSV-2.

For designing the AVPs we took only in account the regions of
the protein whose amino acids were at least 80% conserved in
the consensus sequence. Then, we performed an in silico
physicochemical analysis looking for surface exposed,
hydrophilic, flexible, and charged properties in the conserved
regions of the protein, since these properties have been found to
be important for protein-protein interactions. We chose
probably exposed regions according to, hydrophilicity values
lower than -1 of the Kyte &amp; Doolitle scale (values &lt;0 indicate
hydrophilicity and the maximum value is -2.5). This property
was corroborated using MPEX with the Wimley &amp; White scale
considering only values lower than -10 (which means
hydrophilicity, the maximum value is -20). Since the
hydrophilic regions in a protein are known to correlate with the
antigenic sites identified by several immunological studies, we
also used the Parker scale for the prediction of antibody
epitopes and we selected those regions with values &gt;4 (values
&gt;1 mean hydrophilicity). The flexibility was determined using
PROFBval and only those regions with values &gt;0.6 were
considered (minimum value of flexibility is 0.4). We also looked
for an overall charge in these regions. For each analyzed protein
we detected several regions with a maximum length of 12-20
amino acid residues sharing all these properties. For HSV gB
protein we found a total of 4 peptides corresponding to
positions 126-145, 224-243, 413-432 and 467-486 of gB. They are
different to other gB derived peptides previously reported 
[].
In the case of HSV gH protein, 5 peptides corresponding to the
positions 362-379, 569-586, 609-626, 646-664, and 706-723 were
found.  shows some of the in silico results for HSV gH
protein.

For influenza A HA, we found 6 peptides in the subunit HA1
corresponding to the position 10-24, 44-59, 26-40, 279-296, 299-
310, 270-285, and 3 peptides in the subunit HA2, located at the
positions 410-421, 489-510, 517-537.  shows a summary of
the interactions we found with the influenza A AVPs derived
from the subunit HA1.

A similar approach was reported to design AVPs for SARSCoV,
derived from the S protein which blocked the binding of S
protein to the cellular receptor. These peptides were designed
based on hydrophilicity, surface probability and chain
flexibility of the S protein []. Other strategies, such as a Monte
Carlo based computational method have been proposed to
identify and optimize potential self-inhibitory peptides derived
from viral envelope proteins, which inhibit the protein-protein
interactions between viral an cellular proteins during the
membrane fusion step []. But despite immense potential of
this field, there is no virus specific AVP prediction algorithm,
and even more, Thakur et al., [] have collected the information
of 1245 AVPs which were experimentally checked for their
antiviral activity against different important viruses, and by
analyzing amino acid composition and several physicochemical
properties such as: secondary structure, overall charge, size,
residue composition, hydrophobicity and amphiphilic
character, have proposed the first web server for predicting
effective AVPs (http://crdd.osdd.net/servers/avppred).
However, it is necessary to gather more information about AVP
derived from the viral fusion proteins to feed the AVP web
server to develop an accurate predictive algorithm for AVPs,
and our strategy seems to be a promising procedure to design
AVPs. It is worth mentioning that the peptides we predicted
have been synthesized and their antiviral activity has being
tested and the results are very encouraging (manuscript in
preparation).

Conclusion
We have successfully produced new AVPs 12-20 amino acid
length derived from the fusion proteins of HSV gB and gH, and
influenza A HA, which were designed using a strategy based
on the bioinformatics analysis of those proteins, looking for
highly conserved amino acids regions with properties of
hydrophilicity, exposed surface, flexibility and charge.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank CONACyT-SEP 99164, ICyTDF 2009/225: and
Secretaría de Investigación y Posgrado, Instituto Politécnico
Nacional for the financial support to carry out this work.

Citation:Jesús et al, Bioinformation 8(18): 870-874 (2012)

Multiple alignments for HSV gH protein and physicochemical parameters evaluated for the gH consensus sequence. A)
Conserved amino acid residues identified with PRALINE; B) Parker hydrophilicity prediction determined with Antibody Epitope
Prediction (the hydrophilic regions are indicated above the horizontal line); C) Flexibility determined with PROFbval (values &gt;0.4
indicated flexibility), and D) overall charge determined with the CHARGE program. CB-1, CB-2 and CB-3 indicate the regions we
have chosen to design the AVPs.

