Background
There are several protein targets known to be linked with type 2
diabetes. However, effective ligands are not available for many
such protein targets in relation to type 2 diabetes. The role of
the aldose reductase in type 2 diabetes is widely described.
Literature survey shows that the average docking score of the
existing ligands, inhibitors for aldose reductase is -126.048
Kcal/mol []. Hence, it is of interest to screen for compounds
with improved inhibitory effects.

The role of food sourced from plants in controlling abnormal
blood pressure and insulin activity is a subject intense debate
and speculation. Hence, these benefits are often associated with
plant specific compounds. Various plants and their parts have
been tested for their efficacy in modulating diabetes. However,
information of compounds isolated from such plants with
protein targets associated with type 2 diabetes is limited 
[].
Hence, it is of interest to virtually screen hundreds of
compounds. Therefore, we used the x-ray crystal structure of
aldose reductase (PDB: 1AH3; http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/) for
molecular docking with plant derived compounds. Here, we
describe the computed binding of potential molecules with the
target protein using docking methods.

Methodology
Plant derived compounds:
Details of 267 compounds from 7 plants is summarized as: 
Allium sativum [42 Compounds];

Coriandrum sativum [50 Compounds];

Dacus carota [74 Compounds];

Murrayya koneigii, [31 Compounds];

Eucalyptus, [26 Compounds];

Calendula officinali [14 Compounds];

Lycopersicon esculentum [30 Compounds].



Protein target:
Protein coding genes related to diabetes are selected using the
gene cards website. We selected aldose reductase because its
structure was solved and co-ordinates made available.

Target protein structure:
We used the x-ray crystal structure of aldose reductase (PDB:
1AH3; http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/).

Virtual Screening:
Virtual screening (VS), is a productive and cost-effective
technology in search for novel lead compounds 
[].

Plant derived compound structures:
267 compounds, selected based on the property and substructural
features, from 7 plants were drawn using ISIS Draw
software (www.mdli.com). The 2D structures are converted into
3D structures by using corina 3D analysis tool in Tsar. The
geometries of these compounds were optimized using cosmic
optimize 3D module and the charges were added. All molecules
were written as mol2 files.

Molecular visualization and analysis:
It is important to visualize the docked poses of high-scoring
compounds because many ligands are docked in different
orientations and may often miss interactions that are known to
be important for the target receptor. This sort of study becomes
more difficult as the size of the dataset increases. Therefore, an
alternative approach is to eliminate unpromising compounds
before docking by restricting the dataset to drug-like
compounds; by filtering the dataset based on appropriate
property and sub-structural features and by performing
diversity analysis []. Consensus scoring combines information
from different scores to balance errors in single scores and
improve the probability of identifying ‘true’ ligands 
[]. In our
study, we tested six different scoring functions such as 
GOLD;

Patchdock;

eHITS;

Molegro;

MEDock;

Autodock Vina.




Molecular docking:
Molegro Virtual Docker (MVD) was used to dock compounds
to generate an ensemble of docked conformations and each
scoring function is applied to generate classes based on the
obtained dock scores followed by ranking the best
conformations. During ranking, signs of some scoring functions
are changed to make certain that a lower score always indicates
a higher affinity

Rank-sum technique:
Ranking was done individually by clustering best scored
compounds into equally split four classes using the Tsar
software, of which compounds in Class4 represents the highest
class or top rank. Classes were generated for all scoring
functions and instead of taking an average, rank-sum technique
[] 
was employed to retrieve best compounds. The ranks
obtained from each of the individual scoring functions were
added to give a rank-sum. The advantage of a sum over an
average is that the contribution from each individual score can
more easily be split out for illustrative purposes in the former
instance.

Discussion
The 267 plant compounds from 7 different plants were docked
with the aldose reductase protein structure (PDB ID: 1AH3) and
the Docking Scores for all the 267 plant compounds were
recorded. The dock score of the top 10 compounds out of the
267 compounds from 7 different plants are shown in the 
 
(see supplementary material). The top 10 compounds were
further docked against aldose reductase using 5 others docking
programs GOLD, PatchDock, eHits, MEDock and Autodock
Vina. The docking scores of the 10 best compounds attained
using different software are listed in  (see
supplementary material). Each docking program is listing
different compound as best docking score. To find the best
compound, rank sum technique was used. Classes were
generated using Tsar Software and the sum of the classes for
each ligand is shown in  (see supplementary material).
The rank-sum technique resulted in Allium38 with the highest
score. The structure of the allium 38 is shown in (). The
hydrogen bond interactions for the best compounds were
visualized using Molegro Virdual Docker (MVD). The Mol
Dock Scores, number of interactions and the interacting residue
list are given in  (see supplementary material).

Conclusion
Consensus scoring is a widely used approach to improve the
scoring reliability and hit rate in virtual screening and four
standalone programs (GOLD, Molegro, AutoDock and e-HiTS)
and two online servers (PatchDock and MEDock) are utilized to
rank top hits. Allium38 ranked high and reported to be the best
compound that can bind with high affinity to aldose reductase
enzyme. Allium38 resulted in best hits with a better binding
energy than the original co-crystallized ligand described in PDB
ID: 1AH3. This observation is interesting and promising in the
context of a potential inhibitor for aldose reductase.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Dr. Allam Appa Rao and Dr. M. Naresh Babu would like to
thank the Dept. of Science and Technology for their financial
support (DST-CMS GoI Project No.SR/S4/MS:516/07 Dated
21.04.2008).

Citation:Muppalaneni &amp; Rao, Bioinformation 8(20): 980-983 (2012)

Schematic structure of allium38 compound

