Background
Microorganisms are almost omnipresent, very diverse and
indispensable to human survival. Preparation of suitable
culture media is one of the prerequisites to study them.
Different microorganisms thrive at different environments and
have variety of growth requirements; like nutrients, pH,
osmotic conditions and temperature. Due to the lack of
sufficient variability of media composition, replication of the
exact environmental conditions in the laboratory, nearly 99% of
all microorganisms are still unculterable, for example
Trephonema pallidum, Candidatus liberibacter, Tropheryma
whippelii, Bartonella henselae []. Given the current limitations of
microbial growth in lab, formulation of newer media should be
a much needed thrust area of modern biology.

Microbial culture media can be of different type, depending on
the nutritional growth requirements of the microorganisms.
Microorganisms require about 10 macroelements namely (C, O,
H, N, S, P, K, Ca, Mg and Fe). The first six components are used
in the synthesis of Carbohydrates, Lipids, Proteins and Nucleic
acids and the remaining four exist in the cell as cations and play
a variety of roles. In addition to macroelements, all
microorganisms require several microelements like (Mn, Zn,
Co, Mo, Ni and Cu). These are generally part of enzymes and
cofactors. Microorganisms also require growth factors, which
are organic compounds.

Bacterial Culture Media
Bacterial media can be formed into simple, synthetic or
complex media, where they vary in nutritional make-up.
Simple media facilitates the growth of non-fastidious bacteria
and the exact chemical compositions of simple media are
known. Synthetic media is composed of minimal ingredients
needed for the growth of the microorganisms, for example
Davis and Mingioli Medium. However in complex media, the
exact chemical composition is not known, for example in
Tryptic Soy Broth. Bacterial media can be of different
consistency, solid nutrient agar medium, Stuart׳s semi solid
media and nutrient broth liquid media.

A pure culture is often paramount for conducting research on
particular bacteria and for that, selection of the medium is
pivotal to isolate and grow them. Therefore various selective
and differential media have been formulated, which have
various components that differentiate one group of organism
from another, for example, MacConkey Agar and Blood Agar.
Different alternative media have been prepared by
supplementing with specific components to help in further
selective culturing of bacteria, for example, Dorset medium and
Petergnani medium used for cultivating mycobacteria. Dorset
medium consists of egg white and egg yolk and a solution of
sodium chloride []. However, besides mycobacteria, egg-based
media have also been found to support growth of certain other
pathogenic bacteria like Streptococcus pneumonia, Neisseria
meningitides and Haemophilus influenza (type b) 
[]. Starch and
protein substitutes like cow pea, green gram and black gram
have also been used to reduce the cost of microbial media.

Fungal Media
Media containing high carbohydrate source, nitrogen source
are required for the growth of fungi at pH range of 5 to 6, and a
temperature range from 15 to 37˚C. There are two general types
of fungal culture media: natural and synthetic. Natural media
are composed of natural substrates, such as herbaceous or
woody stems, seeds, leaves, corn meal, wheat germ, and
oatmeal etc. Natural media are usually easy to prepare but they
have the disadvantage of their unknown composition. Some
examples include corn meal agar, potato dextrose agar, V-8
juice agar, and dung agar. Synthetic media, on the other hand,
contain ingredients of known composition. These types of
media can be duplicated with precision each time they are
made and contain defined amounts of carbohydrates, nitrogen,
and vitamin sources. Czapek-Dox medium, glucose-asparagine
and Neurosporacrassa minimal medium fall in this category.
General purpose media, which are commonly used for fungal
culture, are Sabouraud dextrose agar (SDA) which is
nutritionally poor with acidic pH (5.6). Selective media, like
Inhibitory mould agar and Dermatophyte test media are
important in the isolation of fungal pathogens such as
Cryptococcus neoformans and dermatophytes 
[]. Agar
supplemented by rice, casein, and other nutrients like
Cornmeal agar with Tween 80 have been used to differentiate
Candida species and Trichophytan species. Potato dextrose
agar used to enhance conidia and pigment development of
Trichophytan rubrum. Most lab used media are not cost effective
at a large-scale, so industrialists have started to use several
common cheap sources of carbon.

Culture of Extremophiles
Studying the mechanism behind the robustness of
extremophiles has implications for biotechnology, evolution
and most interestingly in search for life in extreme conditions.
However, conventional culture techniques often fail to support
the growth of extremophiles under high temperature and
pressure conditions, low or high pH values etc. Culturing of
thermophiles cannot be done on cellulose and agar plates
containing Luria-Bertani broth or nutrient broth, as these are
unstable above 70˙C for extended periods of time 
[].

Solid culture technique using porous solid plate made of
nanofibrous cellulose has been developed recently which can
retain its integrity up to 260˙C at 25 MPa []. This finding
provided a versatile platform to support the growth of a wide
number of extremophiles including acidophiles, alkaliphiles,
thermophiles, acidothermophiles and alkalithermophiles under
extreme physiochemical conditions in laboratory.

Gelling Agents
In the earlier days, isolation of bacteria for preparation of pure
culture was very difficult in liquid media. Often any attempt to
prepare pure culture using liquid media would result in
contamination because of the slow and tedious steps. Thus
came the need of a solid media, which was achieved by adding
a gelling agent to the liquid broth. The first gelling agent used
was gelatin by Robert Koch in 1881 to prepare solid medium.

But as it melted at a temperature around 35˙C and was digested
by the bacteria, he faced problems with its use. These problems
led to the discovery of an alternative gelling agent agar.
Angelina Fanny Eilshemus, wife of Walther Hesse, an associate
of Koch, first proposed the use of agar as a substitute to prepare
solid culture medium. Gradually various advantages of agar
made it very popular amongst the scientists, as it is stable at
wide range of temperature (solidified at 32˙C to 42˙C, melted at
85˙C) and thus is suitable for the growth of mesophilic
organisms. Additionally agar does not have any toxic effect on
bacteria, has good diffusion characteristics and is not digested
by most bacteria. Agar is also found to have good clarity and is
metabolically inert. But on the flip side, agar is not suitable for
culturing thermophilic microbes and inhibits PCR in a
concentration dependent manner []. Besides, high cost of agar
has made research work very expensive and due to its high
usage in laboratories, the natural resources of agar (i.e.
Gelidium sp., Gracillaria sp. and Pterocladia sp.) are being
over-exploited and have made scientific community to look for
some other alternative sources of gelling agents.

pH
pH of the culture media effects the growth of microbes. Any
organism has an optimal pH at which it grows the best.
Alteration of this pH value leads to undesirable growth. For
most bacteria there is an orderly increase in growth rate while
approaching the optimum “pH” value and a corresponding
orderly decrease in growth rate while it starts to vary from the
optimal point. Each species of microbe is divided into three
types on the basis of its own characteristic range of pH values
in which it grows and reproduces best. Although we know that
the general pH range for most bacteria is 5 to 9 (optimum 7),
they can be acidophilic (pH range from 0 to 5.5), neutrophilic
(pH range from 5.5 to 8.0) and alkalophilic (pH range from 8.5
to 11.5) [].

Just like other organisms, microorganisms also need a
physiological pH inside their cells. The ability to survive in
extreme pH either high or low, depends on their ability to
neutralize the environmental difference with the physiological
pH []. 
Microorganisms like Helicobacter pylori mostly are found
in stomach in very acidic conditions, so to maintain their
environmental differences they produce urease, an enzyme that
degrades urea and decreases the acidity []. There are other
bacteria that are specialized to live in alkaline pH, for instance
near black smokers, geological fountains of minerals that shoot
highly alkaline minerals into the ocean [].

The change in the acidic or alkaline conditions of the medium is
indicated by a color change using pH indicators. They are used
in culture media to differentiate between the different groups of
microorganisms based on their acid or alkali producing
properties. For example, Eosin and Methylene blue, Bromothymol
blue, Acidfuchsin, Phenol red etc [].

Other parameters
Osmolarity is an important parameter for the formulation of
any culture media as it helps the media resemble the natural
environment of the cells for their proper growth. Certain
organic solutes known as osmoprotectants are used to make the
cells resistant towards a wide range of osmotic tension. So far,
in microbial growth osmolarity has not been systematically
explored as a parameter to culture unculturable and difficult to
culture microorganisms.

Several metabolically active microorganisms that can be seen
under microscope, cannot be cultured in the laboratory
conditions. To grow these unculturable microorganisms novel
techniques have been implemented in recent times. Some
bacteria exhibit co-culture dependence. They only grow in the
presence of helper microorganisms, and present a problem of a
need of mixed culture.

Future prospect
The current knowledge base of microbial growth media is a
limiting factor in culturing various microorganisms.
Broadening the knowledge base will require extensive research
in the field and help achieve affordable culturing of the
unculturable microorganisms. Better control of pH, use of
better pH probes and control over osmolarity is largely missing
from current microbial media. We expect to see a systematic
research in this direction to culture presently unculturable
microorganisms. A look into animal cell culture, which has
been focus of more recent research, can guide further
development of microbial media. It is possible that alternative
gelling agents can support the growth of microorganisms that
do not grow on agar. A systematic evaluation of gelling agents
is much needed. We expect microbiology to have another
“golden age” with resurgence in interest in growth media.

Citation:Basu et al, Bioinformation 11(4): 182-184 (2015)

