Background
Around 30 per cent of newly born babies in India suffer from
acute iron deficiency caused due to malnourished mothers who
also suffer from the same problem [–]. The growing
malnutrition problem in largely due to the dramatic change in
food habits involving increasing shift from iron and micronutrient
food to high energy and high fat fast food 
[–]. Black
pepper (Piper nigrum) is one of the most widely used among
spices. It is valued for its distinct biting quality attributed to
piperine and its isomers. Black pepper is used not only in
human dietaries but also for other purposes such as medicinal,
as a preservative, in perfumery, even as insecticide. Like
Piperine, curcumin could modulate P-glycoprotein and
CYP3A4 expression, and in turn modify the pharmacokinetic
profiles of P-glycoprotein and CYP3A4 substrates in male
Sprague-Dawley rats. Curcumin also attenuated the CYP3A4
level in the small intestine but induced CYP3A4 expression in
the liver and kidney [–]. However, piperine inhibits both
the drug transporter P-glycoprotein and the major drugmetabolizing
enzyme CYP3A4. Because both proteins are
expressed in enterocytes and hepatocytes and contribute to a
major extent to first-pass elimination of many drugs, which
indicate that dietary piperine could affect plasma
concentrations of P-glycoprotein and CYP3A4 substrates in
humans, in particular if these drugs are administered orally
[]. Very recently, it is shown that a single administration of 1g
of black pepper more than doubled area under the plasma
concentration time curve and elimination half-life of phenytoin
[]. In this paper we discussed the in silico docking studies of
piperine conjugated with iron (Fe3+) into Cytochrome P450 3A4
(CYP450 3A4). This implies the efficacy of conjugate on iron
metabolism using cytochrome P450 red-ox system.

Methodology
Tools employed:
Protein Data Bank server (PDB:www.rcsb.org/pdb) 
[], WhatIf
server (http://swift.cmbi.ru.nl/servers /html/index.html)
[], ACDChemSketchand MoleGro Virtual Docker and Viewer
Preparation of CYP450 3A4 and Piperine-Fe conjugate
Cytochrome P450 3A4 structure was downloaded from PDB
server. The ID generated was 1W0E. The protein was optimized
using Whatif server. The optimized protein was used for
further analysis. Piperine-Fe conjugate structure was
constructed using ACDChemSketch 12.01 software. The three
dimensional structure of the Piperine-Fe conjugate was
optimized using ACDChemSketch – Tools- - 3D structure
optimization wizard. Docking studies of Piperine-Fe conjugate
with 1W0E. The protein was imported into MoleGro Virtual
Docker version 4.0.2.0 and surface was created. Cavities were
detected in the protein surface. Five cavities were found and
they were represented in green color. Piperine-Fe conjugate was
imported into MoleGro Virtual Docker software in .mol format.
This ligand was docked into cavities and it produced five
docking sites with different amino acid sequences. The
MolDock score and RMSD values were calculated.

Discussion
Optimization of CYP450 3A4 and Piperine-Fe conjugate:
The optimized structure of CYP450 3A4 (PDB ID: 1W0E) was
shown in . The protein was subjected to detect
cavities using MoleGro Virtual Docker version 4.0.2.0. The
cavities were shown in green in (). Five cavities were
detected as shown in . Piperine-Fe conjugate was
optimized using ACDChemSketch 12.01. The optimized
structure was shown in . Docking in each cavity
generated five poses (Pose 1 through 5). The five poses
generated are shown in . It should be noted that each
pose has its own spatial arrangement.

Docking studies of Piperine-Fe conjugate with CYP450 3A4:
Docking of piperine-Fe conjugate with cavities of CYP450 3A4
generated five poses with unique chemical arrangement. The
cavity structures were shown in , 
 &amp; . 
 represents pose-1 docked onto , 
represents pose-2 docked onto ,  represents
pose-3 docked onto ,  represents pose-4
docked onto ,  represents pose-5 docked
onto . All five poses were represented in .

Docking results were shown in  (see supplementary
material). The MolDock Score and cavity volume of Pose 1
was high; the structure in the pose 1 would be superior to
other poses. This implies that the structure in pose 1, was
firmly bound with CYP450 3A4, making the protein more
inactive. This leads to the reduction or inhibition of
metabolism of Piperine-Fe conjugate. A similar report was also
shown with crude piperine extract. To increase bioavailability
of iron, we prepared Piperine-Fe conjugate and this ligand was
docked with CYP450 3A4. This report suggests that conjugating
piperine with iron may slow down the metabolism of iron,
thereby piperine probably enhances the bioavailability of iron.

Conclusion
Many drug-drug interactions can be explained by inhibition of
P-glycoprotein and/or CYP3A4. A broad variety of drugs are
substrates for both P-glycoprotein and CYP3A4 and because
many compounds are inhibitors of both proteins, elevated
plasma concentrations of a drug by a concomitantly
administered substance can be due to a dual effect on drug
transport and metabolism. This was evidenced by our previous
data on docking of piperine with CYP3A4, Ferritin and Pglycoprotein
[]. In this paper the reports suggest that piperine
probably influence the metabolism of iron, a substrate for
CYP3A4.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank the Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI),
Govt. of India, for sponsoring the above mentioned work
(Project code: SERB/MOFPI/0042/2012)

Citation:Alugolu et al, Bioinformation 9(7): 334-338 (2013)

A) represents the cavities with protein structure. Green colored cavities are embedded in protein structure; B) represents
optimized structures of piperine – iron conjugates. All five structures of Piperine-Fe conjugates are given in Figure 1B.

2A, 2D and 2G represent amino acids around the cavities. Figure 2B and 2C represent the ligands docked into cavities. 2E
and 2F represent the ligands docked into 2D. 2H represents the Ligand docked into 2G. 2I represents all the five ligands docked
into 2G cavity.

