Background
Of late, the role of medicinal plants as a primary source of
prevention and management of diseases is being realized with
alarming concerns [–]. The inherent disadvantage of toxicity
of synthetic drugs, especially when used for longer period has
led to the search for easily available safe remedies with less
harmful effects. Globally, there is a renewed interest in the use
of traditional medicines. An estimated 65% of the population in
India use medicinal plants to meet the primary health care
needs, and similar usage has been reported in many parts of the
world [–]. Unfortunately, inadequate research in the
traditional medicine sector has slowed down its development.
Moreover, lack of cooperation and sharing of knowledge
among diverse disciplines have further hampered the research
and development. Hence, a systematic comprehensive
knowledgebase of medicinal plants is the need of the hour.

India is well-known for its wealth of medicinal plants. The use
of plants to treat various diseases in ancient systems of
medicine in India dates back to 3000-6000 BC 
[]. The rich
heritage is unfortunately confined within the local population
and rest of the world is largely ignorant about it. Few attempts
were made in the past to develop such information resources 
[–]. 
However, the North-East (NE) region of India, which is one
of the treasure house of various plants have largely been
ignored. We have therefore developed an integrated database,
referred as NeMedPlant with the purpose to facilitate the
accessibility of the indigenous knowledge related to medicinal
plants from the NE region of India. In this region, the state of
Manipur and Nagaland are endowed with exceptionally rich
tropical and subtropical flora. An estimated about 4500 species
of plants occur in this region. We selected these two NE zones
as a part of our continuing research on plants in these areas.
NeMedPlant aims to unify the available traditional and
scientific knowledge on medicinal herbs, their therapeutic
applications and molecular and structural data of their chemical
constituents. The integrated information resource, cross-linked
with major databases and analytical tools would be a useful
product for computational analysis, and to direct the
experimental investigations towards this important area.

Database Design
Data Collection, Curation and Integration
Since most of the information about medicinal plants in this
region was not available, an elaborate investigations and
compilation are made. The plants selected were those which are
widely used and sufficient information is available in the
traditional medicinal systems. This involved field collection of
data, manual examination of the local treatise and scholarly
literature search. Information about active constituents, their
molecular structure, properties, synthetic routes and targets
were retrieved from scholarly literature using Scifinder 
[],
Scopus [], PubChem 
[], various encyclopedias and books.
The information within the database is broadly classified and
presented in two different categories: 
details of the medicinal plants, drug formulation and their therapeutic uses. Here comprehensive account of various aspects of medicinal plants including illustrations has been provided. This include - the botanical name, common and vernacular names, place and distribution of the species in the region, parts used, applications, medicinal information, disease name, and relevant literature source.

Phytochemical information: the active constituent data include the name of the compound, its chemical structure, details of preparation or extraction, physicochemical properties like molecular weight, log P value, H-donor/acceptor, available molecular targets etc ().



The NeMedPlant database is archival and each record receives a
unique randomly generated ten digit alphanumeric identifier at
the time of first submission. These records can be updated from
the individual submission pages. The data can also be curated
by third party (users) using registration facility provided in the
home page.

The database is integrated with major primary and secondary
databases and bioinformatics tools. In addition, there are
several Java applets included within the database for
convenient analysis and visualization of the data.

Database Implementation
The schematic representation of the database information flow
is illustrated in (). The database was created in
MySQL with PHP-based web-search engine for data retrievals.

Availability and Support
To facilitate data extraction, flexible search options have been
provided. In addition to the simple search interfaces, the
advanced search functionality provides various options for
quick, easy browsing and retrieval of desired information.
Facilities have been set-up for the users to contribute to
submission and annotation in NeMedPlant via a ‘Submit’ dropdown box.

Utility
In most part of the world, the information on medicinal plants
has generally been handed down from generation to generation
only by means of folklore, which may disappear over a period
of time. For effective conservation of phytodiversity and the
successful documentation of medicinal plants, the systematic
inventory of medicinal plants is necessary. The relevant data
(detailed description of medicinal herbs, therapeutic uses,
pharmaceutical applications and chemical constituents) on such
plants in organized and easy to understand format, with
illustrations, is available in the database. The integrated
database with interactive analytical and visualization tools,
having multiple editing options, allows users to investigate
many questions without requiring time-consuming inferences
from the literature or multiple data sets. The activity prediction
for phytochemicals forms an important part of the work. The
NeMedPlant would be useful for prediction of activities of
natural as well as synthetic products and identifying drug leads
having low toxicity and high bioavailability. The activity
prediction can be made in two different ways: 
using chemical similarity and substructure searches in chemical databases with available Java tools in NeMedPlant;

when information on molecular target is known, using inverse docking or similar cavity search approaches



Conclusion and Further Development
Development of new natural product based drugs for treating
disease requires multiple approaches. Using bioinformatics
approaches, we made an attempt to systematically record
information on rich heritage of the medicinal plants in this
unexplored NE region of India. We gathered traditional,
scientific and medicinal information from local sources and
peer-reviewed literature, and compiled it into a comprehensive
knowledgebase. The present database with integrated
information on herbs, natural products, structural,
physicochemical properties and analytical tools would be an
ideal resource for information retrieval, pharmacological,
bioinformatics and chemoinformatics analyses, to make new
discoveries in the area, and direct further experimental
investigations. Some of the plants appearing in this database
from NE region also occur beyond the area, hence suggesting
the usefulness of it outside the region as well. The database is
under constant development. It is regularly updated for any
new information. Many existing and in-house developed tools
are being incorporated. Activity prediction can also be made
with chemoinformatics searches for similar models in known
3D-QSAR databases. Data curation for this purpose is being
carried out. The study on medicinal plants, of course, does not
end with the knowledge of their therapeutic uses, and bio- and
chemo-informatics analyses. Various aspects of medicinal
plants like biochemistry, associated physiological pathways,
phytochemistry, agronomy, botany, ethnobotony,
pharmacognosy, cultivation, conservation and biodiversity
have to be studied for their optimum utilization. Attempts to
integrate these data are underway.

Bioinformatics Infrastructure Facility, University of Hyderabad,
is supported by Department of Biotechnology, Government of
India. VV acknowledges the financial support from Department
of Biotechnology, Government of India under RGYI scheme.

Citation:Meetei et al, Bioinformation 8(4): 209-211 (2012)

(A) A screenshot of a typical record in NeMedPlant. (B) Schematic representation of database information flow.

