Background
Lipoxygenases are a class of enzymes that convert arachidonic,
linoleic, and other polyunsaturated fatty acid into biologically
active metabolites involved in the inflammatory and immune
responses []. There are five active LOXs found in human
beings: 5-LOX, 12S-LOX, 12R-LOX, 15-LOX-1, and 15-LOX-2. A
sixth gene family member, epidermal LOX type 3 (eLOX3,
gene symbol ALOXE3) was described first in the mouse 
[],
and in humans in 2001 []. Widely expressed in animals and
plants, and also in some bacteria and fungi, LOX enzymes
participate in diverse physiological and pathological processes.
Mammalian 12R-LOX and epidermal lipoxygenase-3 (eLOX3),
for example, play an indispensable role in skin barrier
formation [,
]. A distinctive characteristic of LOX enzymes in
general is that the resting enzyme requires activation before
catalytic reactions with fatty acids and molecular oxygen can
begin []. eLOX3 is an enzyme that in humans is encoded by
the ALOXE3 gene. Unlike other lipoxygenases, the eLOX3
enzyme does not act directly on fatty acids. Instead, it
processes the product of another lipoxygenase reaction, a fatty
acid hydroperoxide. The substance produced is later converted
to a signaling molecule that is involved in the growth and
division (proliferation) and specialization (differentiation) of
skin cells. The eLOX3 enzyme is thought to play a role in the
formation and maintenance of the fat (lipid) membrane of the
cells that make up the outermost layer of the skin (the
epidermis). The epidermis helps prevent water loss, regulates
body temperature, and protects against infection. At least 10
mutations in the ALOXE3 gene have been found to cause
nonbullous congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma (NBCIE).
Most of these mutations change single protein building blocks
(amino acids) in the eLOX3 enzyme. Many ALOXE3 gene
mutations lead to the production of a nonfunctional eLOX3
enzyme, which impairs the formation of the lipid membrane of
cells within the epidermis. Problems with this protective
barrier underlie the skin abnormalities and other features of
NBCIE [].

Several classes of compounds having selective lipoxygenase
inhibitory activity have been reported in the literature. Many
5-LOX inhibitors have subsequently been developed, and
several have displayed efficacy in asthma models, such as
allergen-induced bronchoconstriction. For example, 1, 5-
diarylpyrazoles, indolizines and indoles []. However,
evidence suggests that adverse reactions such as
neuropsychiatric events, including sleep disorders, behavioral
changes, headache, nasal burning and somnolence are
associated with prolonged use of lipoxygenase selective
inhibitors like zileuton and azelastine [,
]. Thus, there is still
a need for novel, selective, and potent inhibitors of active LOXs
with an improved profile compared to current lipoxygenase
inhibitors. Traditional synthesis of a series of new compounds
utilizing combinatorial chemistry and high-throughput
screening can be carried out at high cost and also are time
consuming; whereas on the other hand, screening small
molecule databases for novel compounds represents an
alternative process. Docking various ligands to the protein of
interest followed by scoring to determine the affinity of
binding and to reveal the strength of interaction has become
increasingly important in the context of drug discovery.
Screening large databases of compounds can provide a
feasible, alternative technique against highthroughput
screening, but depends on the fast and accuracy of the docking
algorithm. Hence, in this paper we report screening a library of
compounds from ZINC database [] against eLOX3 protein,
1N8Q (PDB ID) with bound ligand protocatechuic acid
extracted from protein data bank, by utilizing a fast,
exhaustive docking software Molegro Virtual Docker [].

In recent years, virtual screening has reached a status of a
dynamic and lucrative technology in probing for novel drug
like compounds or so called hits in the pharmaceutical
industry []. The technique employed is based on the
prediction of binding modes and binding affinities of each
compound in the dataset by means of docking to an X-ray
crystallographic structure. Virtual screening utilizes docking
and scoring of each compound from a dataset. It is important
to visualize the docked poses of high-scoring compounds
because many ligands are docked in different orientations and
may often miss interactions that are known to be important for
the target receptor. This sort of study becomes more difficult as
the size of the dataset increases. Therefore, an alternative
approach is to eliminate unpromising compounds before
docking by restricting the dataset to drug like compounds, by
filtering the dataset based on appropriate property and substructural
features and by performing diversity analysis. These
approaches can be highly effective in reducing the dataset to
be docked to the order of 103 to 104 compounds 
[].

Methodology
Receptor X-ray structure:
The 3D coordinates of the crystal structure of eLOX3 in
complex with protocatechuic acid (PDB code: 1N8Q) was
selected as the receptor model in virtual screening program.
We used the chemical compound library, ZINC database and
the docking program Molegro Virtual Docker for the study.
, illustrating the hydrogen bond interactions between
protocatechuic acid and eLOX3 protein (PDB code: 1N8Q).

Ligand ZINC database:
ZINC, an acronym for ‘ZINC is not commercial, a free
database for virtual screening’ contains over 21 million
compounds in ready-to-dock, 3D formats, available at the URL
http://zinc.docking.org. Molecules in ZINC are annotated by
molecular property that include molecular weight, number of
rotatable bonds, calculated log P, number of hydrogen-bond
donors, hydrogen-bond acceptors, chiral centers, chiral double
bonds (E/Z isomerism), polar and apolar desolvation energy
(in kcal/mol), net charge and rigid fragments. The database
contains ‘lead-like’ molecules, having molecular weight in the
range 150 to 350 with calculated log P &lt; 4, number of hydrogen
bond donors ≤ 3 three, and number of hydrogen-bond
acceptors ≤ 6. ZINC provides several search criteria such as
molecular property constraint, ZINC codes, vendor based, and
molecular substructure search [].

Molegro Virtual Docker:
Molegro is a Danish company, developing novel high-quality
drug discovery and data mining software, founded in 2005 by
Rene Thomsen and Mikael Hvidtfeldt Christensen 
[]. We
used the template docking available in Molegro virtual docker
and evaluated MolDock, rerank and protein-ligand interaction
scores from MolDock and MolDock [GRID] options. Template
docking is based on extracting the chemical properties like the
pharmacophore elements of a ligand bound in the active site
and using that information for docking structurally similar
analogs. We used the default settings, including a grid
resolution of 0.30 Å for grid generation and a 15 Å radius from
the template as the binding site. We used the MolDock
optimizer as a search algorithm, and the number of runs was
set to 10. A population size of 50, maximum iteration of 2000,
scaling factor of 0.50, crossover rate of 0.90 and a variationbased
termination scheme for parameter settings were used.
The maximum number of poses was set to a default value of 5.

Screening:
Before screening ZINC database, the docking protocol was
validated. 1N8Q protein bound ligand protocatechuic acid was
docked into the binding pocket to obtain the docked pose and
the RMSD (Root Mean Square Deviation) of all atoms between
these two conformations indicating that the parameters for
docking simulation were good in reproducing the X-ray crystal
structure. Therefore, the ZINC database was screened for
compounds similar to protocatechuic acid structural features
(structure based search) and by providing molecular
constraints (property based search). ZINC database was also
screened for compounds having properties similar to the
known inhibitors of LOXs. The physicochemical properties
such as log P value, H-bond donors, Hbond acceptors,
molecular weight and rotational bonds, for protocatechuic acid
ligand and known inhibitors of LOXs were calculated using
the molinspiration server [].

Discussion
Lipinski's “Rule of 5” states, that most “drug-like” molecules
have log P &lt; or = 5, number of hydrogen bond acceptors &lt; or =
10, number of hydrogen bond donors &lt; or = 5 and molecular
weight &lt; or = 500 g/mol. Molecules violating more than one of
these rules may have problems with bioavailability. The rule is
called “Rule of 5”, because the border values are 5, 500, 2*5, and
5 []. Number of rotatable bonds is a simple topological
parameter which is a measure of molecular flexibility. It has
been shown to be a very good descriptor of oral bioavailability
of drugs []. Rotatable bond is defined as any single non-ring
bond, bounded to nonterminal heavy (i.e., non-hydrogen)
atom. Amide C-N bonds are not considered because of their
high rotational energy barrier. The physico-chemical
properties (log P value, H-bond acceptors, H-bond donors,
molecular weight and rotational bonds) for protocatechuic acid
ligand and known inhibitors of LOXs (aromadedrin, azelastin,
robinetin, zileuton, caffeic and eriodictyol) were calculated
using the molinspiration server. For these compounds range of
calculated log P values was from 0.88 to 4.222, number of Hbond
acceptors ranged from 4 to 7, number of H-bond donors
ranged from 1 to 5, molecular weight ranged from 154.121
g/mol to 367.88 g/mol and number of rotational bonds ranged
from 1 to 3.

We searched the ZINC database based on range values of
properties of protocatechuic acid and known inhibitors of
LOXs and identified 4319 hits that were Lipinski compliants.
We docked these 4319 compounds using Molegro virtual
docker and evaluated binding compatibility with the receptor
based on docked energy (in kcal/mol). The docking tool
generated 50 conformers for each docked molecule in about 1-2
minutes of CPU time. The virtual screening technique
employed in this study identified diverse, yet specific ligands
that bind in a comparable manner similar to protocatechuic
acid binding for eLOX3. This approach identified four
compounds ZINC84299674 ([5-(5,7-dimethyl-1H-indol-2-yl)-
1H-pyrrol-3-yl] methanamine); ZINC76643455 (4-(4-methyl-
1H-indol-2-yl)-1H-pyrrol-3-amine); ZINC84299122 ([5-(1Hindol-
2-yl)-1H-pyrrol-3-yl]methanamine) &amp; ZINC75626957 (4-
[(E)-2-(2- thienyl)vinyl]benzene-1,2-diamine) from the ZINC
database for compatible binding with eLOX3 (see
supplementary material).

eLOX3 co-crystallized protocatechuic acid ligand resulted in
MolDock score of -77.225 kcal/mol. Therefore, any molecule
from the dataset which shows a score lower than-77.225
kcal/mol would be regarded as ligands with higher binding
affinity. In other words, these four zinc ligands would act as
inhibitors against eLOX3 protein and such screening analysis
forms the basis when millions of ligands are available in
compound libraries such as the ZINC database. The docked
energies of the four zinc ligands are given in (). Active
site of eLOX3 offers many different binding modes for these
compounds as they are strongly dependent on the attached
substituent. All the ligands were docked deeply within the
binding pocket region forming interactions with Thr337,
Ser326, Lys332 and Glu333. In () the binding affinities
and the possible number of interactions based on chemical
property identifiers are reported. Our screening approach
identified four molecules ZINC84299674 (MolDock score of -
128.901 kcal/mol); ZINC76643455 (MolDock score of -120.22
kcal/mol); ZINC84299122 (MolDock score of -116.873
kcal/mol) and ZINC75626957 (MolDock score of -102.116
kcal/mol) from the ZINC database. Their energy scores were
better than the 1N8Q bound co-crystallized ligand
protocatechuic acid with MolDock score of - 77.225 kcal/mol.
, illustrating the protein-ligand complex between
ZINC84299674 and eLOX3 protein (PDB code: 1N8Q).

Conclusion
Finding novel compounds as starting points for lead
optimization is a major challenge in drug discovery. Virtual
screening is a powerful technique for identifying hit molecules
as starting points for medicinal chemistry. The number of
methods and software which use the ligand and target-based
virtual screening approaches is increasing at a rapid pace. It
has been clearly demonstrated that the approach utilized in
this study is successful in finding four novel eLOX3 inhibitors
from the ZINC database. ZINC84299674, in particular, showed
high binding affinity with MolDock score of -128.901 kcal/mol
against 1N8Q. The ligand was docked deeply within the
binding pocket region forming hydrogen bond interaction with
Thr337. Therefore, this study states the importance of small
molecule libraries and their use to enhance drug discovery
process prior synthesis. This approach to screen novel
compounds as eLOX3 inhibitors from ZINC database depends
on various parameters such as Lipinski's rule of 5,
pharmacophoric groups attached on the ligand, size of the
dataset and compound libraries among others. Further, work
can be extended to study the receptor ligand interactions
experimentally and evaluation of their biological activity
would help in designing compounds based on virtual
screening techniques.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We would like to extend our heartfelt thanks to Molegro ApS
for giving us a fully functional trial version for a period of 30
days during which all the in-silico docking work was carried
out.

Citation:Monika et al, Bioinformation 9(11): 583-587 (2013)

Diagram illustrating the interactions between 1N8Q
protein and protocatechuic acid. Legend: black dashed lines -
hydrogen bonds [].

Schematic diagram illustrating the docking of
ZINC84299674 (pink) (ligand with best MolDock score) to
eLOX3 protein (pdb id 1N8Q) to form a protein-ligand
complex.

