Background
Botanically, basil belongs to the genus Ocimum of the family Lamiaceae. More
than 160 species of Ocimum are reported from different parts of the world.
Different parts (roots, stem, leaves, seeds and flowers) of Ocimum have been
used for treatment of variety of diseases such as bronchitis, malaria, diarrhea,
dysentery, skin diseases, arthritis etc. Ocimum sp. contains monoterpene
derivatives such as camphor, limonene, thymol, citral, geraniol and linalool. A
detailed analysis of protein sequences from Ocimum, their probable structures
and mode of action are yet to be accomplished. Plants synthesize chemicals in
their leaves in order to protect themselves from herbivores. One such class of
defense compounds that has been used extensively by humans are members of
phenylpropenoid class namely eugenol, chavicol and their derivatives. It has
been reported that in basil glands, two closely related (90% identical) enzymes
chavicol o-methyltransferase (CVOMT) and eugenol o-methyltransferase
(EOMT) catalyze the formation of methylchavicol and methyleugenol from
chavicol and eugenol respectively []. The enzymes are involved in aroma
production in basil. From an evolutionary perspective plant and microbial
PALs (phenylalanine ammonia lyase) are part of superfamily of enzymes from
plants, fungi and bacteria, and are likely derived from a precursor of the
widespread histidine ammonia lyase (HAL) family in the histidine degradation
pathway []. 
PAL catalyses the non-oxidative deamination of phenylalanine to
trans-cinnamate and directs the carbon flow from the shikimate pathway to the
various branches of the general phenylpropanoid metabolism. Lipooxygenase
(Fatty-acid metabolism) is one of the most widely studied enzymes found in
more than 60 species of plant and animal kingdom. The enzyme catalyses the
biooxygenation of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) containing a cis, cis-1,
4-pentadiene unit to form conjugated hydroperoxydienoic acids. Lipoxygenase
has considerable application in food related products such as in bread making.
The enzyme plays a significant role in formation of secondary metabolites in
sweet basil.

Enzymatic browning of fruits and vegetables is caused mainly by the
conversion of native phenolic compounds to quinones which are then
polymerized to brown, red or black pigments imparting colour to various plant
parts. The enzymes responsible for catalyzing this sequence of reactions are
termed as polyphenol oxidases, but are also known as tyrosinases, catecholases,
cresolases and phenolases []. Because of deleterious effect of enzymatic
browning on fruits and vegetables much work is devoted as to retard or at least
delay the browning process. Polyphenol oxidase being the causative agent
responsible for browning is exploited for the purpose. The enzyme is involved
in iso-quinoline alkaloid biosynthesis and in biosynthesis of other secondary
metabolites. In order to understand biochemical function and interaction
properties of the protein at molecular level, three dimensional structure of
protein is foremost requirement. However, the number of available protein
sequences exceeds far behind the available three dimensional protein
structures. In order to compensate this, homology modeling approach came into
being. These methods are believed to be cost-effective and time-effective when
compared to X-rays crystallography and NMR techniques. Computational
methods make use of hidden information inside amino acid sequences in order
to predict protein structure and function. In the present study, In silico analysis
and homology modeling studies on uncharacterized proteins in different
species of Ocimum like O. basilicum, O. tenuiflorum, O. citriodorum, O. seloi,
O. gratissimum and O. americanum whose structures are not yet available in
PDB have been accomplished.

Materials and Methodology
The amino acid sequences of secondary metabolite proteins of Ocimum whose
structures are not yet available in RCSB Protein Databank (PDB) were
retrieved from SWISSPROT, a public resource of curated protein sequences 
[]
and subjected to NCBI BLAST []. Based on high score, lower e-value and
maximum sequence identity, the best template was selected which was then
used as reference structure to build a 3D model. Template and target proteins
considered for the study have been shown in (see 
).

Model building and evaluation
The three dimensional structures of proteins were modeled using Modeler 9v8
[]. 
Quality of generated models was evaluated with PROCHECK 
[] by
Ramachandran plot analysis []. 
Stereochemical quality and accuracy of the
selected models was further improved by subjecting it to energy minimization
with the GROMOS 96 43B1 parameters set, implementation of Swiss-PDB
Viewer []. 
Validation of generated models was further performed by VERIFY
3D [] and ERRAT 
[] programs. ProSA 
[] was used for the analysis of Zscores
and energy plots. The three dimensional structures of modeled proteins
were analyzed using Deep View Swiss PDB viewer. Root Mean Square
Deviation (RMSD) values were calculated between the set of targets and
template protein to see how much modeled protein deviates from the template
protein structure.

Computation of amino acid composition
Amino acid composition (see ) of Ocimum
proteins under study was calculated using CLC protein workbench tool
(www.clcbio.com/protein). 
The tool also provides estimation of percentage of
hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues present in the protein (see
).

Physiochemical characterization
For physiochemical characterization, theoretical pI (isoelectric point),
molecular weight, ­R and +R (total number of positive and negative residues),
EI (extinction coefficient) [], II 
(instability index []) 
[], AI (aliphatic
index) and GRAVY (grand average hydropathy) [] were computed using the
Expasy's ProtParam server [] for set of proteins 
(http://us.expasy.org/tools/protparam.html). 
The results are shown in (see )

Functional characterization
CYS_REC (http://sunl.softberry.com/berry.phtml?
topic) was used to locate
“SS bond” between the pair of cystein residues, if present. The tool yields
position of cysteins, total number of cysteins present and pattern, if present, of
pairs in the protein sequence as output. All the Ocimum proteins under study
showed absence of disulphide bonds. The results are presented in Table 5 (see
).

Secondary structure prediction
Profunc [] 
was employed for calculating the secondary structural features of
Ocimum protein sequences. The results are presented in Table 6(see
).

Submission of the modeled proteins in protein model database (PMDB)
The models generated for various Ocimum proteins were successfully
submitted in Protein model database, PMDB [] without any stereochemical
errors. The submitted models can be accessed via their PMIDs (see Table 7
).

Results and Discussion
As experimental structures of some of the important secondary metabolite
proteins of Ocimum are not available, homology modeling approach was used
in order to derive their structures.

Model building, refinement and evaluation
PROCHECK analysis
Ramachandran plot for Chavicol O-methyltransferase (D3KYA1) has been
illustrated in . 
Altogether more than 90% of the residues were found to
be in favoured and allowed regions, which validate the quality of homology
models. The overall G-factor for D3KYA1 was ­0.19. As the value is greater
than the acceptable value ­0.50, this suggests that the modeled structure is
acceptable. The modeled structures were also validated by other structure
verification servers such as Verify 3D and Errat. Verify 3D assigned a 3D-1D
score of &gt;0.2 for all the modeled proteins. This implies that the models are
compatible with its sequence. ERRAT showed overall quality factor of 49.62
for D3KYA1. The plot generated by Verify-3D and Errat for Chavicol
omethyltransferase has been illustrated in .

PROSA analysis
The z-score for all the modeled proteins was found to be within the range of
scores typically found for native proteins of similar size showing good quality
of the model. Energy Plot for chavicol o-methyltransferase (D3KYA1) with
chain length (257 AA) and z-score (­7.26) is presented in .

Swiss-PDB viewer analysis of predicted model
Visualization and analysis of the model using Swiss-PDB reveals that there are
no steric hindrances between the residues and thus modeled structures are
stable. Structure-structure superimposition was done in order to calculate Root
Mean Square Deviation (RMSD) between the target and template sequence.
RMSD values for D3KYA1 were found to be 0.94. This implies good quality
of the modeled structures.  represents modeled structure of Chavicol
o-methyltransferase.

Physiochemical characterization
The physiochemical parameters viz., theoretical isoelectric point (Ip),
molecular weight, total number of positive and negative residues, extinction
coefficient, half-life, instability index, aliphatic index and grand average
hydropathy (GRAVY) were computed using the Expasy's ProtParam tool
(). 
The computed pI value for A8D7D8, B2ZA17, B6VQV5, B6VQV6,
D3KYA1 (pI&lt;7) indicated their acidic nature, whereas pI for A8D6D7,
B2ZA12, B2ZA16 (pI&gt;7) revealed there basic behaviour. The computed
isoelectric point (pI) will be useful for developing buffer system for
purification by isoelectric focusing method. Extinction coefficient values for
Ocimum proteins at 280 nm ranged from 1490 to 50795 M-1cm-1 for
B6VQV6 and D3KYA1 indicating the presence of higher concentration of Tyr
and Trp. Cys was very low in concentration in all the eight Ocimum proteins
studied. This indicates that these proteins cannot be analyzed using UV spectral
methods. On the basis of instability index Expasy's ProtParam classified the
B2ZA17 (Eugenol o-methyltransferase), A8D7D8 (Lipoxygenase), B2ZA12
(Eugenol o-methyltransferase) and B2ZA16 (Eugenol o-methyltransferase)
proteins as unstable (Instability index&gt;40) and other Ocimum proteins as stable
(Instability index&lt;40). The aliphatic index (AI) which is defined as the relative
volume of a protein occupied by aliphatic side chain is regarded as the positive
factor for the increase of thermal stability of globular proteins. The very high
aliphatic index of all Ocimum proteins infers that these proteins may be stable
for a wide range of temperature. The very low GRAVY index of proteins
B6VQV6 and D3KYA1 infers that these proteins could result in a better
interaction with water.

Functional characterization
The result of primary analysis suggests that all the Ocimum proteins under
study were hydrophobic in nature due to the presence of high non-polar
residues content (). As percentage of Cysteine(C) is very low in all
the Ocimum proteins under study (), none of these proteins have
disulphide bond linkages, as indicated by CYS_REC result (). The
extensive hydrogen bonding may provide stability to these proteins in absence
of disulphide bonds. Proteins B2ZA12, A8D6D7 and B6VQV5 have high
percentage of methionine(M), alanine(A), leucine(L) and lysine(K). As these
amino acids have high helix-forming propensities, alpha helix are dominant in
these proteins. This is also evident from analysis of PROFUNC result 
(). 
Rest of the Ocimum proteins had mixed secondary structures i.e.
alphahelices, beta-strands and coils. All the proteins showed high percentage of
glycine and proline (). 
As these amino acids are common in turns, other
secondary structures such as Beta turns and Gamma turns are dominant in these
proteins ().

Submission of modeled proteins in PMDB
The modeled structures of proteins from various species of Ocimum were
successfully deposited in Protein Model Database (PMDB). The PMDB ID for
the submitted structures has been presented in (see 
). 
These 3D structures may be further used in characterizing the
protein experimentally.

Conclusion
In this study proteins from various species of Ocimum were modeled using
homology modeling approach. Different parameters such as isoelectric point,
molecular weight, total number of positive and negative residues, extinction
coefficient, instability index, aliphatic index and grand average hydropathy
(GRAVY) were computed for these proteins in order to determine their
physiochemical characteristics. All the proteins were found to be deficient in
amino acid cystein, and therefore lack presence of disulphide linkages as also
inferred from analysis of cys_rec result. In the absence of disulphide bond,
extensive hydrogen bonding is believed to be responsible for stability of these
proteins. Polarity studies using CLC protein work bench tool confirmed all the
studied proteins to be hydrophobic in nature. This may be due to the presence
of a large number of non-polar residues. Secondary structure studies showed
that all the studied proteins contain high proportion of other secondary
structures ie. Beta-turns and Gamma-turns. This is attributed to the presence of
higher concentration of proline and glycine residues. The modeled structures
can be accessed through protein model database PMDB via there PMID's.
Homology derived models are extensively used in wide range of applications
such as virtual screening, site-directed mutagenesis experiments or in
rationalizing the effects of sequence variation. These structures will serve as
cornerstone for functional analysis of experimentally derived crystal structures.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Financial support of Department of Biotechnology (DBT) Govt of India; New
Delhi under BTISnet program is gratefully acknowledged. Sudeep Roy is
thankful to Council of Scientific and Industrial Research for Senior Research
Fellowship.

Citation:Roy et al, Bioinformation 6(8): 315-319 (2011)

Ramachandran plot of chavicol obtained by PROCHECK. 91.2%
residues in favourable regions; 8.0% residues in additional residue regions;
0.0% residues in generously regions; 0.9% residues in disallowed regions; Over
all G-factor: 0.00.

(A) Verify-3D plot, (B) Errat plot

(A) Prosa-web z-score plot, (B) Prosa-web plot of residue scores

Modeled structure of Chavicol o-methyltransferase as viewed by
Swiss-PDB viewer

