Background
Aspergillus terreus, an important fungus is a major source for lovastatin, which
treats cardiovascular disease by effectively inhibiting HMG CoA reductase
activity, the rate limiting step in cholesterol biosynthesis. In addition, lovastatin
is also involved in anti-inflammatory antioxidant activities and has the ability
to inhibit proliferation and induce apoptosis in a variety of tumor cell lines 
[].
Experimental evidences from literature reveal the presence of 18 proteins
involved in lovastatin biosynthesis of A. terreus, ATCC 20542. Out of the 18
lovastatin biosynthetic cluster proteins it is found that 2 proteins are involved in
regulatory mechanisms, 3 in transportation, 9 enzymes, 2 unknown proteins of
thiolases acyl-enzyme intermediate signature and PQ loop repeat, and 2
megasynthases, [] 
Lovastatin Nonaketide Synthase (LNKS) and Lovastatin
Diketide Synthase (LDKS). The insilico analysis of physicochemical properties
along with their topology and the functional analyses of these proteins are done
by integrating standard functional annotation tools available online based on
different methodologies. The final verification of functions of unknown
proteins is done by structure based analysis.

Materials and Methodology
The protein sequences involved in lovastatin biosynthesis in ATCC 20542
strains are retrieved from NCBI (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) database.

Sequence analysis
Primary sequence analysis is done using sequence manipulation suite 
[]. By
using the suite the physicochemical properties like grand average of
hydropathicity (GRAVY), pH, acidicity, basicity, Instability index, aliphatic
index, extinction coefficient and molecular weight are calculated.

Secondary structure prediction
The secondary structure of protein features such as helical content, beta sheet
formations and turns, loops, and coil regions are predicted by GOR 
[],
available within Antherprot []. 
A number of trans-membrane helices are also
identified from the sequences.

Functional annotation
The functional annotation is done using different standard functional
annotation tools available online such as KOGnitor 
[] which incorporates
orthologous information for eukaryotic sequence, Pfam 
[], a tool that is based
on protein families, ScanProsite [] 
for identifying biologically significant
sites, ProDom [] 
for domain based analysis, and BLAST 
[] for annotating
function based on homology. SignalP [] is used for determining whether the
protein is secretory or non-secretory and ProtFun 
[] for characterizing
function by integrating post-translational and localization aspects of the
protein.

Tertiary structure prediction
The 3D structures of the unknown proteins are predicted by using
MODELLER9V8 []. 
The templates for unknown proteins, which do not have
structural homologs in Protein Data Bank (PDB) 
[] (through blastp analysis)
is determined using mgenThreader []. The model of the proteins was
subjected to Swiss-PDB Viewer [] for refinement (of side chains,
problematic loops, removal of amino acid clashes and energy minimization).
Finally, the refined models were subjected for validation. Backbone
conformations are evaluated by Psi/Phi Ramachandran plot obtained from
SAVS [] 
and the Z-Score is obtained from Prosa web server 
[].

Results and Discussion
Primary sequence analysis
The primary sequence analysis revealed that the GRAVY indices of 13
lovastatin biosynthetic proteins are ranging from − 0.03 to -0.5, which indicates
they are hydrophilic and mostly predicted to be localized in extracellular and
mitochondrial regions, the other 5 proteins (PQ loop repeat containing protein,
HMG-CoA reductase, the 2 Permeases of the major facilitator superfamily,
tricarboxylate transport protein) are hydrophobic (GRAVY values range from
0.05 to 0.6) and are localized in plasma membrane and basic in nature with pH
value greater than 7. There are 2 more basic proteins, cytochrome P450
monooxygenase and protein containing thiolase activity region. The rest of
proteins are acidic in nature. The aliphatic index value of lovastatin cluster
proteins ranges between 60°C and 110°C, indicating that the proteins are
highly thermostable for wide temperature range. 11 proteins have instability
index greater than 40 () and are unstable.

Secondary structure
The secondary structures of lovastatin biosynthetic cluster proteins revealed
that all proteins in cluster have random coils dominated among secondary
structure elements alpha helix, extended strand and beta turns.

Topology predictions
In lovastatin biosynthetic cluster, there are 4 protein sequences with
transmembrane helices, in which 2 protein sequences (efflux pump
(gi|4959951) and Major facilitator superfamily (gi|4959957)) are involved in
membrane transport and has 12 transmembrane helices. The other two
sequences with 6 transmembrane helices are enzymes predicted to be PQ loop
repeat membrane protein (gi|4959944) and HMG-CoA reductase (gi|4959949).

Functional analysis
The ScanProsite results showed that presence of unknown protein sequence
with accession number gi|4959953 has the thiolases acyl-enzyme intermediate
signature with the pattern [LIVM]-[NST]
-{T}-x-C-[SAGLI]-[ST]-[SAG]-
[LIVMFYNS]-x-[STAG]-[LIVM
]-x(6)-[LIVM]. The BLAST results revealed
that even though gi|4959959 is highly homologous with immunoglobulin I-set
domain protein it is also homologous with Glycosyl hydrolase family 67 Nterminus
with 98% query coverage and E-value 9e-86. The presence of sequons
NXS/T also confirms that gi|4959959 codes for Glycosyl family protein. The
sequons are verified by using Net-N-Glyc server 
[] 
(). Gi|4959944
is distantly homologous to uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase with query
coverage of 33% and E-value of 0.11 is predicted as a PQ-loop repeat family
protein. The other proteins are having close homology and their functional
prediction is done by annotation transfer from homologous sequences. The
patterns and signature of lovastatin biosynthetic proteins along with their
predicted functional roles of ATCC strain are shown in Table 1 (see
).

3-D structure prediction and analysis
Homology based tertiary structure prediction for unknown proteins are done
using Modeller so as to verify the function predicted. Totally 5 models are
generated for each of the individual protein and the best model of each protein
is refined using Swiss PDB Viewer. The refined structures are validated and
the scores obtained are shown in Table 2 (see 
).
More than 80% of residues in modeled structures obey Ramachandran plot, and
Prosa Z- scores are negative, which indicates the predicted structure correlated
with the structural features of PDB. Homology modeling for the unknown
protein gi|4959944 failed, because of the lack of homologous structures. The 3-
D structure of modeled protein gi|4959959 () with the template Beta-
N-acetylhexosaminidase enzyme confirms that gi|4959959 belongs to Glycosyl
hydrolase family.

Conclusion
The insilico analysis of lovastatin biosynthetic cluster protein to understand
their physicochemical, structural and functional properties are performed.
Functional analysis of eight unknown proteins performed by different function
analysis tools based on domains, motifs and profiles improved the function
annotation capability. The annotation revealed the presence of cis-aconitic acid
decarboxylase of itaconic acid biosynthesis in lovastatin biosynthetic cluster,
which shows that the two metabolites itaconic acid and lovastatin are related.
Gi|4959953 has thiolase activity domain and regulation of it may affect the
energy level of the cells in metabolic state. From this analysis it is also found
that the sequences with accession number gi|4959944 and gi|4959959 may be
involved in glycosylation machinery as tailoring enzyme and can be used in
preparing analogues of Lovastatin. The incorporation of these enzymes with
cytochrome P450s into heterologous hosts may help in large scale production
of lovastatin in microbial fermentations.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Subazini TK is thankful to CSIR, Govt of India, New Delhi for the award of
Senior Research fellowship (SRF).

Citation:Subazini &amp; Kumar, Bioinformation 6(7): 250-254 (2011)

Physicochemical analysis on lovastatin biosynthetic cluster proteins.
The graph shows the correlation observed in aliphatic, instability index and
molecular weight of lovastatin biosynthetic cluster proteins.

Prediction of glycosylation sites for unknown protein sequence with
accession number gi|4959959 using NetNGlyc Server. The vertical lines
indicate the presence of 4 sequons crossing the threshold (horizontal line at 0.5)
and 2 sequons crossing additional thresholds are predicted to be glycosylated.

Modelled structure for unknown protein sequence with accession
number gi|4959959. The unknown protein sequence of accession number
gi|4959959 is modeled using Modeller and the function is predicted as beta-Nacetylhexosaminidases
based on structural similarity. The N-glycosylation sites
are represented by shaded regions in sequence and as stick in the 3-D structure.

