Background
Trematodiases are the zoonoses, caused by trematodes of flukes
(Platyhelminthes: Trematoda: Digenea). The flukes are commonly oval or leaf
shaped and furnished with two suckers (the anterior oral sucker surrounding the
mouth and a posterior ventral sucker or acetabulum for adhering with their
hosts). Digenetic trematodes have complicated life cycles that involve one or
two intermediate hosts. The cercariae which are shed in water either enter the
definitive host directly or encyst on objects or in the bodies of animals (second
intermediate hosts), transforming into metacercariae, the infective stage. The
definitive host becomes infected by swallowing the metacercariae which
develop to sexual maturity in various organs according to the species
concerned. The prerequisites for transmission of trematodiases in a community
involves presence of water bodies with plenty of water plants to support the
large snail populations, consumption of risky foods such as
undercooked/pickled crabs, crayfish and fresh water fish or tubers and fruits of
water plants and contamination of water bodies with human/animal excreta
leading to perpetuation of the foci of human infection of these zoonoses. The
preponderance of these infections in usually in food deficit poor communities
residing in the interior and the tribal areas due to their food habits (evolved in
consonance with the meagre available resources) and unhygienic sanitary
habits (practised due to lack of education). Food borne trematodiases are thus a
result of environmental, social and economic conditions prevailing in the
region. While targeting the health of all, especially the poor tribal communities,
it is imperative to take into account. To focus the control strategies at the target
populations, knowledge of the distribution and the probable endemic areas of
these infections are essential. The lung flukes of the genus Paragonimus have
been known as one of the most important zoonotic parasites causing
paragonimiasis, also known as endemic haemoptysis, in man. It is estimated
that over 20 million people are infected worldwide due to several species of
Paragonimus []. 
Over 40 species are known to infect the lung of different
mammalian hosts throughout the world [] and approximately 15 species are
known to infect humans. The giant intestinal fluke, Fasciolopsis buski
(Trematoda: Fasciolidae), is widely distributed in India and neighboring
countries of the continent in South and Southeast Asia 
[]. The fluke is the
etiological agent of the disease commonly known as fasciolopsosis. The
infection occurs by ingestion of raw aquatic vegetation or food plants that are
contaminated with the infective encysted larvae, the metacercariae. In endemic
zones pigs, dogs and rabbits act as reservoir of infection. In India, the parasite
has been reported from different states including those in the Northeast.
Variations in the morphology of the fluke have been observed when collected
from different geographical regions [].

The trematode flukes of the genus Fasciola (the sheep liver fluke) are parasites
of herbivores and infect humans accidentally causing fascioliasis worldwide.
The parasite is very cosmopolitan in distribution being found throughout all
regions of the world, both temperate and tropical. F. hepatica is the causative
agent of fascioliasis or ‘liver rot’ in ruminants, where it may be an important
pathogen. Human infections with F. hepatica are found in areas where sheep
and cattle are raised, and where humans consume raw watercress, including
Europe, the Middle East and Asia []. 
Infection with F.gigantica on the other
hand is found more commonly in tropical regions of the world, areas affected
including Africa, Asia, many Pacific islands including Hawaii (where it has
been reported in man), the Middle East and Southern Europe and the south of
the USA []. 
Both fasciolids follow a similar two-host life cycle, in which
freshwater snails of the family Lymnaeidae act as intermediate or vector host
and a broad spectrum of mammals including humans, mainly herbivorous
large-sized species, act as definitive host [].

The identification of closely related species based on morphological characters
can be difficult. This is particularly the case of soft-bodied animals such as
digenean trematodes. However, recent advances in molecular biology, in
particular the amplification of specific DNA regions via the polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) and improved sequencing techniques, have been employed to
resolve taxonomic issues related to various helminth parasites by comparing
their DNA. The ribosomal DNA cluster (rDNA), which codes for structural
components of ribosomes, is particularly useful for genetic studies because it is
highly repeated and contains variable regions flanked by more conserved
regions []. 
PCR-based techniques utilizing the rDNA ITS2 sequences, which
occur between the 5.8S and 28S coding regions, have proven to be a reliable
tool to identify the helminth species and their phylogenetic relationships 
[].
The nuclear ribosomal DNA second internal transcribed spacer (ITS2)
sequences, which occur between the 5.8S and 28S coding regions, have proven
useful for diagnostic purposes at the level of species. Fasciola spp and isolates
of Fascioloides magna from different geographical regions were discriminated
on the basis of ITS sequences []. 
Studies on phylogeny and/or intraspecific
variation in Paragonimus species have also been done using ITS2 region in
recent years []. 
The development of objective, reproducible and sensitive
diagnostic technique is required for accurate species discrimination and
identification of individual flukes. This method could be used for
epidemiological investigations of the prevalence of infection and controlling
trematodiases. DNA techniques utilizing genetic markers in nuclear ribosomal
DNA (rDNA) have been employed to resolve taxonomic issues related to
various helminthic parasites. The PCR-based technique has the potential to be
used for discrimination and identification of the flukes irrespective of their life
cycle stages []. 
In the present study, we focused on the common food-borne
trematodes parasites Paragonimus (lung fluke), Fasciolopsis (giant intestinal
fluke) and Fasciola (liver fluke), and describe the establishment of species specific
markers utilizing the ITS2 sequences, which allows species
discrimination and identification of the individual fluke.

Methodology
Parasite material
Naturally infected freshwater edible crabs (Barytelphusa lugubris) were
collected from a mountain stream of the suspected focal area Miao, Changlang
District in Arunachal Pradesh (Altitude - 213 mASL, Longitude- 96°-15'N and
Latitude- 27°-30'E). Paragonimus metacercariae were isolated from the
muscles of the crustacean host by digestion technique. Live adult Fasciolopsis
buski were obtained from the intestine of freshly slaughtered pig, Sus scrofa
domestica at local abattoirs. The worms recovered from these hosts represented
the geographical isolates from Assam region of Northeast India. Adult Fasciola
were obtained in live form from hepatic biliary ducts of freshly slaughtered
cow, Bos indicus. The worms recovered from these hosts represented the
geographical isolates from Assam, Northeast India and morphologically
resembled Fasciola gigantica (deposition number of paratypes at Zoological
Survey of India, Kolkata = W7787/1). Eggs were obtained from mature adult
flukes by squeezing between two glass slides.

DNA isolation
The 70% alcohol-fixed metacercariae were further processed for DNA
extraction and PCR amplification. For the purpose of extraction, metacercariae
recovered from one single host were pooled together, DNA was extracted from
metacercariae in FTA card by using Whatman's FTA Purification Reagent and
amplified by PCR. For the purpose of DNA extraction, adult flukes collected
from different host animals were processed singly; eggs recovered from each of
these specimens were also processed separately. The adult flukes were first
immersed in digestion extraction buffer (containing 1% SDS, 25 mg Proteinase
K) at 37° C for overnight. DNA was then extracted from lysed individual
worms by standard ethanol precipitation technique [] and also extracted on
FTA cards using Whatman's FTA Purification Reagent as described elsewhere
[]. 
DNA from the eggs was extracted only with the FTA card technique.

DNA amplification and sequencing
The rDNA region spanning the ITS2 was amplified from metacercarial DNA
by PCR. As primers, we used 3S: 5'-GGTACCGGTGGATCACTC
GGCTCGTG-3' (forward) and A28: 5'-GGGATCCTGGTTAGTTTCTT
TTCCTCCGC-3' (reverse), which were designed based on the conserved
sequences of the 5.8S and 28S genes of Schistosoma species 
[]. The PCR
amplification was performed following the standard protocol 
[] with minor
modifications in 100 mM Tris HCL (pH 9.0), 500 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2,
and 0.2 mM deoxynucleotide triphosphates each of dATP, dGTP, dCTP and
dTTP, 0.25 mM of each primer and 2.5 units of Taq polymerase (Bangalore
Genei Pvt. Ltd., India). DNA was preheated at 94° C for 5 min and added to
each PCR reaction. The PCR cocktail (final reaction volume, 25µl) was
amplified with the following conditions: 26 cycles of denaturation at 94° C for
30s, annealing at 55° C for 38s and extention at 72° C for 42s followed by a
final extension at 72° C for 10 min. The resultant PCR products were separated
by electrophoresis through 1.6% (w/v) agarose gels in TAE buffer, stained with
ethidium bromide, transilluminated under ultraviolet light and then
photographed. The known size fragments of Phi X 174 DNA/ Hae III Digest in
agarose gel were used as marker. For DNA sequencing, the PCR products were
purified using Genei Quick PCR purification Kit, and sequenced in both
directions using PCR primer A28 and 3S on an automated sequencer.

Bayesian phylogenetic analysis
DNA sequences were aligned using ClustalX 2.0.7. The interleaved NEXUS
file was edited manually in order for it to be recognized by Mr. Bayes V3.1.2
programme and phylogenetic analysis was carried out using the Bayesian
approach with combined datasets and default parameters, wherein each data
partition is allowed to have a different evolution rate. The cladogram with the
posterior probabilities for each split and a phylogram with mean branch lengths
were generated and subsequently read by the tree drawing program Tree view
V1.6.6 [], 
Motif identification, testing and validation. The ITS sequence
motifs were identified from aligned sequences of the data set for the species
using PRATT software (
http://genoweb1.irisa.fr/Serveur-GPO/outils_acces.php3?id_syndic=70). 
The minimum percentage of sequences to match (C%)
parameter was adjusted to report pattern matching at 100% of the sequence
input. The motifs were expressed using the DNA alphabet (A, T, C, G) in
PROSITE language. The validation of the motifs was performed for each
species using a “PATTERN MATCHING” Web application 
(
http://genoweb.univ-rennes1.fr/Serveur-GPO/outils_acces.php3?id_syndic=186).

Predicted ITS2 RNA secondary structures and analyses
Secondary structures of ITS2 sequences of various fasciolid species were
reconstructed by aligning their sequences using Bioedit. The acquired
structures with restrictions and constrains were submitted in MFOLD. RNA
was folded at a fixed temperature of 37° C, and the structure chosen from
different output files was the desired 6-helicoidal ring or the one with the
highest negative free energy if various similar structures were obtained.

Design of species specific primers and amplification by PCR
To selectively PCR-amplify a DNA fragment, suitable primers need to be
designed and synthesized. Primers are short nucleotides often not more than 50
and usually only 18 to 25 base pairs long- containing nucleotides that are
complementary to the nucleotides at both ends of the DNA fragment to be
amplified. These complementary bases in primer and DNA template facilitate
annealing of the primer to the DNA template to which the DNA polymerase
can bind and begin with the synthesis of a new DNA strand that is
complementary to the DNA template. To establish a more direct PCR
procedure for species discrimination and identification, specific reverse primers
were designed to target unique regions of the ITS2 sequence of each species.
Each specific primer was examined for species-specific amplification with the
3S primer under the PCR conditions described above. The primer set 3S-A28
was used to control for the presence of parasite genomic DNA in each sample.

Results
PCR amplification of ITS region and its analysis
In the first step, we amplified the rDNA region spanning ITS2 from
metacercarial DNA using primer set 3S-A28. Agarose gel electrophoresis
showed that the generated ITS PCR products were about 500bp in size
(including the primer annealing regions) for all the three trematodes. Multiple
sequence alignment was done for all the three sequences using ClustalW
programme ().
Sequence analysis of the ITS2 PCR products of
Fasciolopsis buski (DQ351841) Fasciola gigantica (EF027103) and
Paragonimus metacercariae (DQ351845) revealed no intra-specific variations
in length or composition of the sequences of fasciolid and paragonimid, and the
ITS sequences of adult, metacercariae and egg origin were found to be identical
in length as well as composition ().We identified hundreds of
sequence motifs from the ITS2 areas of the selected sequences. These were
then screened and validated against the training set using the pattern matching
tool, which allowed a final selection to be made of 10 representative short
sequence motifs of sizes inferior or equal to 50 nucleotides and were found to
be present in all the sequences under study ().Three predicted RNA
secondary structures were reconstructed from the unique sequences with
highest negative free energy of Fasciolopsis buski (DQ351845), Fasciola
gigantica (EF027103) and Paragonimus westermani (DQ351845) to provide
the basic information for phylogenetic analysis (). The ITS2 plus
flanking regions of nuclear region ranged from 606bp in F. gigantica India to a
minimum length of 481bp in F. buski India. The secondary structural features
of ITS2 regions as shown in the figures were analysed based on conserved
stems and loops. F. buski and P. westermani isolates from India showed closer
similarity in the rRNA folding as revealed by their energy level and had
identical secondary structure compared to that of F. gigantica. Moreover, the
observed phylogenetic trend was identified with respect to the target
accessibility sites for all the three different isolates; the orders of preference
being interior loop, bulge loop, multiple branch loop, hairpin loop and exterior
loop in all the isolates.The P. westermani-specific, F. buski-specific and
F.gigantica-specific primers (PwAR1, FbMR1 and FgMR1 respectively) were
designed to target the 3'-terminal position of the ITS2 sequences, and the
species specificity of these primers was evaluated by PCR using primer 3S
(; see 
). As was expected, the
primer set 3S-PwAR1 amplified a PCR product only from P. westermani DNA,
3S-FbMR1 amplified a PCR product only from F. buski DNA and 3S-FgMR1
amplified a PCR product only from F. gigantica. Primer set 3S-A28 was used
to control for the presence of parasite genomic DNA in each sample. These
PCR products were sequenced using the corresponding specific primer and
were confirmed to be the ITS2 region of rDNA from the respective species.

Discussion
Morphological differences found in adult specimens have been widely used to
discriminate between platyhelminth species. However, traditional diagnostic
techniques in parasitology are now complemented by a variety of molecular
tools to help in resolving the taxonomic issues associated with describing new
species or strains on the basis of phenotypic characteristics 
[]. The taxonomy
of parasitic helminthes has been based mainly on morphological data
complemented with ecological, cytological and pathological results as well as
clinical manifestations. However, it is impossible to identify the species using
adults with damaged internal organs and/or tegument, where the morphological
characteristics are insufficient for the unequivocal discrimination of the
species. In that case, the PCR-based techniques utilizing the ITS2 sequences
can be used as a tool to identify the species. In search for molecular markers for
this species, we characterized the ITS region of rDNA.It is possible to
distinguish between adult F. hepatica and F. gigantica on the basis of
morphology, but much variation exists. Consequently, where both species
occur concurrently or in overlapping geographical distribution, it is not
possible to be certain as to which species is responsible for the disease. The
low number of records of infection with F.gigantica may well be due to the
lack of good tools to distinguish this species from F. hepatica 
[].We
attempted to develop short ITS sequence motifs (each ≤ 50bp) as DNA
nucleotide barcode, for an unambiguous and easy identification of parasite
species. Three patterns of secondary structures of RNA were constructed, each
belonging to a different genus and provided us with additional characteristics
that could be used for differentiating the species and their phylogenetic
relationships. Secondary structure analysis of the data confirmed the results
obtained from the primary sequence data analysis. However, there are
difficulties in defining a distance between two related structures with variable
topologies []. 
Thus, combined dataset using primary sequence analysis of
ITS2 sequences, secondary structure and Bayesian analysis revealed close
similarity with members of both Fasciolidae and Paragonimidae, proving that
both these families are closely related phylogenetic groups.The PCR-based
technique described here allows accurate discrimination between the common
food-borne trematodes. To elucidate the applicability of this technique for
epidemiological investigations, rigorous testing using a large number of
isolates from each species is warranted in order to establish whether
intraspecific variations exist in the ITS2 sequence. Thus, the technique
described here could present a useful tool for epidemiological investigations of
the presence and prevalence of different helminth parasites in the region.

Conclusion
The findings indicate that the different life cycle stages of trematodes do not
alter the applicability of the method. The usefulness of the ITS2 region for
species discrimination, irrespective of the life cycle stages of the parasite, has
also been demonstrated in nematode species. In conclusion, as has already been
demonstrated for other parasitic helminthes, ITS can serve as an effective
genetic marker for molecular identification. To ascertain intra-specific strain
variations, if any, and to determine the population structure, different
geographical isolates from the region need to be studied with the use of
additional molecular markers.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This study was carried out under the ‘All India Co-ordinated Project on
Capacity Building in Taxonomy: Research on Helminths’, sanctioned to VT by
Ministry of Environment &amp; Forests, GOI; DBT Project to VT &amp; AC and DSA
(UGC-SAP) programme of the University Grants Commission, GOI, in the
Department of Zoology and UGC's UPE (Biosciences) programme in the
School of Life Sciences at NEHU, Shillong. We thank the Co-ordinator,
Bioinformatics Centre, NEHU for allowing access to its facility.

Citation:Prasad et al, Bioinformation 6(2): 64-68 (2011)

A. Multiple sequence alignments of ITS2 sequence and flanking regions of Fasciolopsis buski, Fasciola gigantica and Paragonimus westermani; B.
Pattern matching of ITS motifs of different geographical isolates of fasciolid species: Fasciolopsis buski India (481bp), Paragonimus westermani India (496bp),
Fasciola gigantica India (606bp); C. Predicted ITS2 RNA secondary structures and their structure formation enthalpies according to MFOLD; D. Results of PCR
amplification of DNA (M= 100-bp DNA ladder marker, C= Control primers 3S-A28); E. Phylogenetic relationships between members of family Paragonimidae
and Fasciolidae. The Tree shows hypothetical Bayesian analysis phylogeny based on the secondary structure alignment data of the ITS2 region. The numbers are
equivalent to bootstrap percentages.

