Background
The secondary structure of an RNA molecule is the collection of base pairs that
occur in its 3D structure. When the 5'-end of one nucleotide fits to the 3'-end
of another, a p-bond is formed, while the sequence of p-bonds defines the
backbone of the molecules. On the other hand certain base pairs like C-G, A-U
and G-U form h-bonds, which cause folding of the molecular backbone into a
configuration of minimal energy []. In some cases unusual non-canonical base
pairs, like G/U, G/A and C/A, replace the canonical Watson-Crick base pairs,
which maintained a stable helical structure. While these non-canonical pairings
allow possible hydrogen-bonding interactions and can be treated as neutral
evidence for a helical structure, there seems to be evidence against pairing 
[].
Additionally, an RNA molecule can be viewed as an ordered sequence of n
bases, while secondary structures can be generally defined as a set of pairs i . j,
1 &lt; i &lt; j &lt; n, , indexed starting at 1 from the so-called 5'-end and with each
index in, at most, one pair. The above folds, cooperatively, form pseudoknot
free secondary structures, where no base pairs overlap, that is there are no pair
of bases i . j and i'. j' with i &lt; i' &lt; 
j &lt; j'. In literature [] except for hairpin and
interior loops, definitions for bans, multiloops, external loops, pseudo knot
loops, interior-pseudo knotted loops and multi-pseudo knotted loops, can also
be found. A secondary structure of size n is closed [] if there is an h-bond
connecting bases 1 and n and for given integers n &gt; 2, l &gt; 0, there are S(l)(n - 2)
secondary structures of size n and rank l. A bijection between the set of all
closed secondary structures Z(l) (n) and the set of all plane trees with exactly n
leaves T(l)(n) has also been proved. A more extended definition of closed
secondary structures has been given [], through the closed regions of a
secondary structure. Representing a secondary structure as an arc diagram, in
which base indices are shown as vertices on a straight line, ordered from the 5'-
end and arcs (always above the straight line) indicate base pairs, a region [i; j]
will be referred to as: weakly closed if it contains at leat one base pair and for
all base pairs i'. j' of R, i'∈[i; j] if and only 
if j'∈[i; j] and closed if either i =
1, j = n or if it is weakly closed and for all l with i &lt; 1 &lt; j the regions [i; 1] and
[1; j] are not weakly closed. Finally, it should be mentioned that secondary
structures are in a simple bijection with Motzkin paths without peaks [].

Furthermore there are cases, such as antisense RNAs which exhibit their functions by establishing stable joint structures with target mRNA, introducing
the well known RNA-RNA Interaction Prediction Problem (RIP). Although it is proved [] 
that RIP is an NP-complete problem in its general form, there are a number of algorithms in the literature for RNA interactions. We can mention
the latest studies concerning methods with polynomial complexity: minimum free energy models for joint RNA structures [,
], multiple sequence alignments [], 
grammar based approach [], base pair counting, stacked pair
energy models and loop energy models []. Even though in some cases the
running time and the space complexity is of better performance [] the
proposed methods for the RIP, concern mainly joint secondary structures that do not contain pseudoknots, crossing interactions or zigzags. In this paper we
introduce a new combinatorial technique for the representation of two interacting RNA molecules. The extension of the well known Motzkin paths to
a more complex form, will probably overcome the limitations of RNAs structure comparison, giving the opportunity to apply new operations between
joint sequences in order to identify, analyze and compare them.

Methodology
A Motzkin path on n steps is a lattice path in the Cartesian plane from (0,0) to
(n,0) using only steps of the type (1,1)-up, (1,-1)-down and (1,0)-level, that
never run below the x-axis. Of particular interest is the set of elevated paths
that never touch the x-axis except initially and perhaps finally. If the above
steps are written as: u-up, d-down and u-level, an elevated path lies between an
initial extra u and a final extra d.

A new class of Motzkin Paths
In the case in question, we assume that the 5'-end of an RNA molecule
corresponds to the initial element of an elevated Motzkin path, while the 3'-end
treats like a semi-elevated step, able to transform the final d to h, in order to
create a new structure (). Therefore, we introduce the term semielevated
generalized Motzkin peakless path for RNA secondary structures.
Additionally, the use of these paths, may offer a solution to the opening of
RNA secondary structures in specific bonds. A method for the opening of RNA
secondary structures was firstly introduced by using movable specific bond
indices [], 
which failed in certain structures. Furthermore, an inverse
generalized Motzkin peakless path on n steps is a lattice path in the Cartesian
plane from (n,1) to (0,0), using only steps of the type (-1,1)-inverse up (iu), (-
1,-1)-inverse down (id) and (1,0)-inverse level(ih), that never run below the xaxis.
The map z : Mn 􀃆 Rn can now be constructed. Given two independent
generalized Motzkin paths K and L of length n and m respectively, it is
possible for their paths z(K ο L) to be combined using the following procedure:
The last step of the corresponding Motzkin path P is followed by a semielevated tail;

In order to obtain the joint secondary structure on the 3' -end, the elevated-tail step changes to a semi-elevated and becomes a horizontal step;

For each up step of the form hd…d the corresponding iu…iuih will be designed;

For each down step of the form u…uh the corresponding ihid…id will be designed;

Every step h…h will be designed in the same length towards the inverse direction ih…ih.



Representation of joint RNA secondary structures
We apply the above procedure on the joint RNA structure of two secondary
sequences K and L, according to the method of the longest common
subsequence of multiple binary strings (mLCS) []. Let's assume the following
Motzkin paths ():
K: uuuhdhdhdhhhuhuhuhuhhhhdhdhhhdhd (5' to 3' direction)
L: uhuhuhuhhhhdhdhdhhhdhuhuhhhuhddd (3' to 5' direction)
The steps of the L Motzkin path are transformed with the following procedure:
each d-step is converted to iu, 
each u-step is converted to id and each h-step is
converted to ih. Hence, the Motzkin path of L-RNA secondary structure
becomes an inverse Motzkin path and the composition of these two paths
defines the Motzkin path of the RNA's interaction (Figure 1c).

Discussion
In the general case of RNA-RNA Interaction Prediction Problem (RIP), it is
assumed that there exist two independent RNA sequences K and 
L of length n
and m respectively. In the joint secondary structure of K and L each nucleotide
is paired with at most one nucleotide in the same or the other strand, while
these two strands interact in opposite directions. If we assume that the K strand
is indexed from 1 to n in 5' to 3' direction and L is indexed from 1 to m in 3' to
5' direction, then we refer to the ith nucleotide in K and L by iK and iS
respectively and to any base pair between nucleotides i and j with the notion i.
j. We present an efficient algorithm for the generation of invertible walking and
the formulation of joint RNA secondary structures.

Algorithm - Motzkin Paths for Joint RNA Secondary Structures
Input: Two independent RNA sequences Kn and Lm

Output: The combined Motzkin paths of the joint RNA secondary structures Design the generalized Motzkin peakless path of K, from 1 to n in 5' to 3'
direction; Transform the last d-step (elevated) with an h-step; Design the
generalized semi-elevated Motzkin peakless path of L, from 1 to m in 3' to 5'
directionEnd

It is necessary to recall and adjust some basic definitions of the ‘lattice walk’.
The assumption that the path is peakless means that there are no 
iuid or idiu; A
hid…id is called maximal if it is not followed by another down step; a
horizontal step is said to be single if it is not adjacent to a down step; a down
step is called tail if it is the last down step of a maximal (hid…id); For an
inverse up step a (at level k) its corresponding inverse down step is b (the
leftmost down step at level k­1, right to a) and for an inverse down step its
corresponding inverse up step will be the rightmost up step at level k+1 to the
left. Additionally the creation of a semi-elevated inverse Motzkin peakless path
is totally reversible, using reflection techniques and with 1-1 correspondence to
a Motzkin path and the number of Dyck paths of these semi-elevated inverse
Motzkin peakless paths is equal to that of the corresponding Motzkin paths. It
can be easily observed that several interesting relationships are valid in the case
of joint Motzkin paths such as the bijection between unit squares and the
auxiliary paths []. 
Nevertheless, the application of any merging algorithm to
these joint Motzkin paths or to their corresponding labelled trees 
[] is
currently uncertain while the process of the RNA-RNA is not completely
understood. While our improvements concern an alternative representation of
the RIP, we can implement new operations on RNA interactions in future
studies, similar to the node fusion and edge fusion on trees representations 
[].
These new operations will improve our understanding on multilevel RNA
structure comparison and will extend the limitations of the classical
mathematical representations on individual RNA structures.

Conclusion
In this study, a new class of generalized Motzkin paths is introduced, the semielevated
inverse generalized Motzkin peakless paths. As an application of this
Cartesian walk the RNA Interaction Problem was studied, concerning an
optimal representation of joint RNA secondary structures. The proposed
technique makes it possible to extend close secondary structures without peaks
towards the 3' direction ignoring any steps of the form ud. While in most of the
cases the algorithms for the prediction of RNAs interaction have a polynomial
complexity, our model specifies a new field for the design of prediction models
and computer tools. Future study and implementation of new operations among
interacting RNA structures, will clarify the principles of RNA Interaction
Problem.

Citation:Alexiou &amp; Vlamos, Bioinformation 6(4): 162-163 (2011)

New Motzkin paths for the representation of joint RNA secondary
structure. (1a): The semi elevated Motzkin peakless path, transforming the
final d to h, in order to create a new structure. (1b): An example of joint RNA
structure. (1c): The corresponding Motzkin paths for the joint structure, using
the definition of semi elevated Motzkin peakless path

