Background
The role of alkaline proteases in facilitating the host cell entry
by influenza A viruses through receptor mediated endocytosis
is now well documented []. Evidences are mounting that
extracellular proteases are responsible for the proteolytic
cleavage activation of avirulent avian and mammalian
influenza viruses and contribute to pathogenicity and tissue
tropism []. As a matter of fact, the cleavage of HA of virus
allows into HA1 and HA2 the exposure of amino-terminal
fusion peptide of HA2 within the endosome, which in turn
facilitate the fusion of viral envelope with the endosomal
membrane.

The sources of specific proteases that confer cleavage activation
of influenza A viruses, however, is yet to be fully understood.
While intracellular proteases recovered from nasal wash
samples of children suffering from upper respiratory disease
were able to cleave HA of influenza virus, several endogenous
host inflammatory and hemostasis proteases such as kallikreine,
urokinase, thrombin and plasmin, etc., were found to be
capable of cleavage activation of only a few, but not all,
influenza viruses. Similarly, several other host proteases such as
granulocyte proteases and cathepsin D were found to cleave the
HA but were incapable of conferring infectivity 
[]. Contrary to
this, staphylokinase, streptokinase and a protease isolated from
Serratia marcescence was found to facilitate cleavage activation
by generation of plasmin from plasminogen 
[],where as a
protease namely elastase secreted by Pseudomonas aeruginosa
isolated from seven out of 11 proteolytic bacteria isolated from
nasal samples of swine could cleave influenza HA viruses
directly.

The proteases obtained from bacteria present in the respiratory
tract revealed a similar picture. The proteases recovered from
several strains of Streptomyces griseus, Staphylococcus aureus and
Aerococcus viridians could cleave some but not all influenza A
viruses, though HA cleavage by S.aureus and A.viridias could
confer infectivity as well as replication both in vitro and mice in
vivo [,
]. 
Highly proteolytic bacteria namely Flavobacterium sp.
and Vibrio alginolyticus which are said to be associated with soil
and water sources have also been isolated from respiratory tract
of poultry birds. Certain bacterial species namely Staphylococcus
hyicus, E.coli and Streptococcus sp. have also been reported to
cause acute fibrinopurulent blepharitis and conjunctivitis, in
chickens and turkeys [] S. huicus in particular has been found
to play a role in inducing during other diseases like pox and
joint asteomyelitis [].

Thus variations in the number of proteolytic isolates and the
degree of proteolytic activity as seen in pigs as other
mammals, has also been observed in the upper respiratory
tract of poultry []. Based on these observations, it has been
suggested that proteolytic environment of nasal mucosa and
mucous membrane cells of other digestive tract may differ
between animals and that such variability may account for
some of the differences in disease severity. It appears, therefore,
likely that examination of proteolytic bacteria from nasal flora
of poultry and chicks especially from nasal specimens as well as
specimens suffering from influenza viral infection may prove
regarding in understanding the contribution of endogenous and
microbial proteases in natural influenza virus infection. The
present paper describes the protease activity of one out of five
bacteria isolated from the upper respiratory tract of one locally
collected poultry with no sign of influenza and another wild
chicken suffering from influenza virus. The protease activity of
the flora was assessed and the single species showing protease
activity was analysed

Methodology
Site of isolation and cultivation conditions:
Bacteria were collected from the upper respiratory tract of one
healthy broiler chicken and another wild chicken suffering from
influenza. The isolates were cultured in nutrient agar medium
containing peptone 0.5 mg, Sodium chloride 0.5 mg, Beef
extract 0.05 mg, Yeast extract 0.15.mg, Agar1.5 mg per 100mL of
double distilled water. The colonies obtained were cultured in
Gelatin agar medium with congo red as dye(selective media)
composed of Gelatin 1 gm/100ml, Mannitol 1 gm/100ml,
K2HPO4 0.05gm/100ml, NaCl 0.01 gm/100ml, MgSO4 0.02
gm/100ml, Yeast extract 0.01 gm/100ml, Agar 2 gm/100ml,
Congo red dye 2 gm/100ml at pH 7.2. The colony obtained was
found to be protease producing one and was sub-cultured in
Gelatin yeast extract glucose broth composed of Gelatin 1
gm/100ml, glucose 1 gm/100mL, Yeast extract 0.2 gm/100mL,
Di-potassium hydrogen phosphate 0.3 gm/100mL, Potassium
di-hydrogen phosphate 0.1 gm/100mL, MgSO4.7H2O trace
amount at pH 7.2.

Determination of Optimum Growth Conditions:
The optimum temperature for better growth was determined by
incubating the culture at different temperature ranging from 35°
C – 60° C in water bath shaker at 150 rpm for a period of 20hr.
To determine the optimum pH for the growth, the culture was
grown in Gelatin broth of different pH ranging from 5 to 10.
The growth was defined in terms of Optical Density at 660nm
(UV Vis spectrophotometer) 
[].

Morphological characterization of proteolytic strain:
The preliminary morphological characteristics were determined
by using bright field microscopy (Zeiss Axiostar Plus
microscope) following post simple staining with crystal violet
dye .Gram staining, acid fast staining, endospore, capsule and
flagellar staining were performed for cell surface analyses 
[].

Biochemical characterization:
For biochemical characterization of proteolytic strain, tests like
Methyl Red Test, Indole Production Test, Nitrate Reduction
Test, Voges Proskauer Test and Citrate Utilization Test were
performed as standard protocols.

16S rDNA Sequence Analysis:
Sequence analysis of 16S rDNA (which occur as a conserved
molecule in the bacterial domain) extracted using HELINI
Biomolecules, Chennai, India. Kit formed the basis of molecular
identification of the isolate []. The 16S rDNA sequences
obtained were subjected to BLAST and were submitted to
GenBank. The phylogenetic analysis was done by Neighbor
Joining method.

Protease assay:
The bacterial culture was centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 6 mins
and 0.15 ml of the supernatant was added to a tube containing
0.3 ml of 1% (w/v) casein (dissolved in 20 mM Tris-HCl buffer,
pH 7.4) and incubated at 37oC for 30 mins. Subsequently, 0.45
ml of a 10% (w/v) tri-chloroacetic acid solution at a final
concentration of 5% w/v was added to stop the proteolysis. The
mixture was incubated at room temperature for 1 h. After
incubation, the reaction mixture was centrifuged at 12000 ×g for
5 mins and the absorbance of the supernatant was measured at
280 nm. One unit of protease is defined as the amount of
enzyme that hydrolyses casein to produce equivalent
absorbance to 1 µmol of tyrosine/min with tyrosine as standard
[].

Preparation of Tyrosine standard curve:
The concentration of protease secretion was estimated using
tyrosine standard curve. The steps involved are same as
described above for the protease assay except that instead of
taking 3 mL of culture filtrate, 200, 400, 600, 800 and 1000 µg of
tyrosine was taken in five separate test tubes along with 1 % of
3 mL caseine and 3 mL of phosphate buffer. Thereafter the
absorbance was measured at 650 nm, taking Folin ciocalteu's
reagent as control.

Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and Zymogram Test:
SDS-PAGE was carried out using a 12.5% (w/v) running gel by
the method of Laemmli et al., 1979. For zymography, 0.5%
(w/v) gelatin was co-polymerized with the running gel and
samples were then loaded onto the gel without heating
followed by electrophoresis with 100 V at room temperature.
Following electrophoresis, the gel was incubated in 2.5% (v/v)
Triton X-100 (renaturing solution) for 30 mins at room
temperature with gentle agitation. The solution was then
replaced with developing buffer (50 mM Tris, 0.2 mM NaCl,
and 5 mM CaCl2, pH 8.0) twice and the gel was incubated for 30
mins at 37°C for 6 h. The gel was stained with Coomassie
Brilliant Blue G-250 for 45 mins and then destained in double
distilled water.

Results and Discussion
Morphological and Biochemical Characterization of Isolates:
The morphological characteristic of the proteolytic strain is
illustrated in  (see supplementary material).
Biochemically, the isolate was found to be positive for Gram's
stain, Endospore stain, Catalase test, Starch hydrolysis, Voges
Prokauer test and Citrate utilization test but negative for
Methyl red and Indole tests.

Physiological Characterization:
The strain showing maximum proteolytic activity designated as
SRG was found to grow at temperature ranging from 20°C to
60°C. However, the optimum temperature for maximum
growth was found to be 45 °C ().

16s rDNA sequences analysis:
The 16S rDNA based molecular phylogeny indicated that
isolate (SRG) obtained was novel and hence submitted to
GenBank which is available under the Accession No JN981163.
Bootsrap and UPGMA phylogenies as predicted according to
neighbor joining method are shown in Fig.2a and 2b. In both
the types of phylogeny our strain (SRG) was found to have
high sequence similarity with Klebsiella pneumonae strains NK
2bp- IE, S2AB 270603 and K- 30 EU 66137 
().

Determination of Protease Production:
Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and zymogram
assays revealed a clear band of protease at around 60 kDa
(). The concentration of protease was found to be
around 750µg/mL as compared to Tyrosine Standard Curve
().

Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and zymogram analysis effect of pH on protease production:
The effect of pH on protease activity of the isolated strain SRG
was determined using fermentation media containing
phosphate buffer (pH 5 – 6.0), Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.0 - 8.0) and
glycine-NaOH buffer (pH 9-10). The protease activity was
measured and monitored at 6 hours intervals for a 72 h
fermentation period through assay of protease activity. The
maximum protease activity was found at pH 9 thereby
indicating that the enzyme was active in alkaline condition
().Analysis of protease activity at varying temperature
revealed that a maximum of 2μg/mL protease was produced by
the SRG studied herein ().

Prior to this study a number of proteolytic bacteria have been
isolated from the digestive and respiratory tracts of poultry
chickens []. 
A cursory survey of the data would make it
evident that more than 82% of the birds studied contained at
least one protease secreting bacterium and 50% had two or
more protease secreting bacterial species in their lower
digestive tract. Again, of the 20 protease secreting bacterial
species screened by them 17 were gram positive cocci, two
gram positive bacilli and only was gram negative bacillus.

Thus, the presence of one gram positive protease secreting
coccus in one of our samples from upper respiratory tract of
country chicken is not surprising. In fact, occurence of
proteolytic bacteria colonizing the respiratory tract of
commercial/ country chickens appear to be a common
phenomenon [].

According to King et al., 2009 the amount of protease secretion
by proteolytic isolates is said to vary with growth of bacteria as
well as with the substrates used for detection of proteolytic
activity. Indeed, isolates studied by them did not secrete any
detectable proteolytic enzyme in broth culture though all the
isolates produced significantly large size clearing zone on
casein agar assay as compared to known trypsin standard .We
have not analysed the proteolytic activity of our isolate using
casein agar assay, our results on concentration of protease
produced by the strain studied however, using tyrosine
standard clearly revealed that around 750 μg of protease was
produced per ml. It appears, therefore, logical to suggest that
the isolate (SRG) is an active protease secreting strain.

Our analysis of 16S r-DNA revealed that our strain (SRG) had
close proximity to the Klebsiella pneumoniae sps. This was found
in both the neighbor joining method. It appears therefore that
our strain may turn out to be a novel species. This however
needs to be confirmed through DNA sequencing. Microbial
proteases are classified into various groups dependent on
whether they are active under acidic, neutral on alkaline
conditions and depending on the characteristics of the active
site group , the enzyme is metallo- , aspartic- , cysteine ,
sulphdryl- or serine- type [,
]. Alkaline proteases are
defined as those proteases which are active in a neutral to
alkaline pH-range. The protease secreted by SRG strain studied
here had highest activity at pH 9 thereby indicating that the
protease belong to alkaline type. Further support to this
supposition comes from our data on molecular weight of the
enzyme (60kDa) and its stability up to 620C. However, as we
have neither studied its substrate specificity nor its active sites
based on biochemical assays or DNA sequencing we refrain
from commenting whether it is seine type or any other type i.e.
subtilases, carboxypeptidase, etc.. A further study in this
direction is, therefore, warranted before suggesting any
commercial application of the protease produced by SRG strain
studied herein.

Conclusion
Proteases play a critical role in almost every aspect of biology.
Therefore a better understanding of their complex functions
and regulation is vital to disease prevention and treatment, one
of the first steps when investigating novel proteases are to
establish its substrate specificity and a robust assay.

Here we have concluded that the isolated strain SRG has
potential to produce alkaline protease. The highest protease
activity was achieved at pH 9.0 and temperature at 45°C. The
molecular weight of the purified alkaline protease was found to
be 60kDa. It is also very important to obtain enzymes with high
stabilities and activities under alkaline pH and high
temperature. Further investigations are needed on genetic
analysis of this strain and structure elucidation of the purified
protein for industrial exploitation. Additional manipulation of
growth conditions may result in yields suitable for commercial
applications.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are very grateful to Prof. R. Prasad, Director, GIBS,
Gunupur for going through the manuscript critically. Also they
show deep gratitude to management of GIET, Gunupur-765022,
for the facilities provided for this paper.

Citation:Raut et al, Bioinformation 8(7): 326-330 (2012)

Depicting the growth profile of the isolates in enriched
medium (LB broth). X-axis is time in hours and Y-axis is optical
density.

a) SRG bootsrap phylogeny; b) SRG phylogeny
upgma

a) Protease from SRG; b) Tyrosine Standard Curve
showing after Coomassei Brilliant Blue concentration of
protease production.

a) Effect of pH on Protease Activity; b) Effect of
Temperature on Activity

