Background
To deposit or upload some gene records information into
public popular databases requires users to conform the
requirements of their standard feature tables. There is an
increasing need in the bioinformatics field that standard tools
should be able to convert tables annotated with certain formats
to different structures.

The University of California Santa Cruz (UCSC) [] Gene
annotation files (e.g knownGene.txt) have been widely adopted
by many standard and custom downstream analysis
tools/scripts. The National Center for Biotechnology
Information (NCBI) [] .tbl file is a 5-column tab-delimited
feature table containing genomic coordinate and other
associated information of molecular records (gene, CDS,
mRNA).

The Arabidopsis genome annotation files from TAIR 
[] used
.tbl table format to store gene annotation information. A
universal tool for converting sequence and annotation data files
from .tbl to “knownGene.txt” has not yet been developed. The
author has developed a tool - Tbl2KnownGene, a .tbl file parser
that can convert NCBI .tbl files and produce UCSC Known
Genes annotation feature tables.

Methodology
Download .tbl annotation files from the TAIR:
The Arabidopsis .tbl file for each chromosome, a 5-column tabdelimited
feature table containing genomic information of
records (gene, CDS, mRNA), was downloaded from the TAIR
(http://www.arabidopsis.org). A total of five chromosome files
for Arabidopsis genome were obtained for the conversion. Each
record contains the genomic coordinate start/end and other
associated annotation information. See  and 

(see supplementary material).

Convert .tbl to UCSC knownGene.txt:
The Tbl2KnownGene algorithm first classifies records into
“blocks”. Each block׳s contents are processed separately. The
algorithm designates the leftmost start coordinate (rightmost
start coordinate for “-”) annotated for exons as the record start
and the rightmost end coordinate (leftmost end coordinate for
“-”) as the record end. The algorithm concatenates all exon start
locations for a transcript into a single comma-separated list,
and likewise all exon end locations into a comma-separated list
to comply with the UCSC knownGene schema format. The
algorithm determines a gene׳s strand by comparing the
record׳s start and end values. Since the UCSC knownGene.txt
table always reports the exon coordinates in order from low to
high, the algorithm reverses the order of the exon coordinates
for genes coded on the negative strand. The pseudocode of the
Tbl2KnownGene algorithm is shown in . An example
for a part of the input .tbl file of Arabidopsis is listed in 
().

Tbl2KnownGene Input and Output:
The input are .tbl files (e.g. the chromosome files of
Arabidopsis) and the output are annotated UCSC
KnownGene.txt files. A truncated example file is shown in
 (see supplementary material).

Conclusions
Efficient pipelines/tools are needed for downstream analyses
for next-generation sequencing data. Even though UCSC
database tables have been built for many organisms/species,
the research community requires similar annotations for other
organisms. A PERL parser named Tbl2KnownGene converts
the contents of a NCBI .tbl annotation table to a UCSC Known
Genes annotation table used by other downstream analysis.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The author thanks reviewers for comments and Dr. James
Cavalcoli at University of Michigan for suggestions.

Citation:Bai, Bioinformation 10(8): 544-547 (2014)

NCBI .tbl table annotation information

The pseudocode of Tbl2KnownGene algorithm

