Background
Antisense Oligonucleotides (AOs) are short sequences with 7-30
nucleotides (nt) in length designed to bind a specific region of a
target messenger RNA (mRNA). Ground theory that highlights
the concept of antisense strategy is the use of a complementary
sequence that can inhibit the expression of a specific mRNA.
The binding of Antisense nucleotides to target mRNA is
accomplished by standard Watson – Crick base pair interaction.
When nucleotides pair up, specific gene expression occurs via
different mechanisms such as RNase-H mediated cleavage,
interface with splicing, translational arrest and prevention or
destabilization of the target mRNA. Once target cell receives an
AO through electroporation or microinjection, this gene
expression is blocked or disabled through a reversible process
called gene knock-down. Clinically AOs are proved to have
immense significance in therapeutical field in the treatment of
virtual diseases, cancer and inflammation []. In addition, this
helps to exploit the study of gene function and has been
proposed as a strategy for systematic use in functional
genomics []. Advanced studies on antisense technology as a
therapeutic agent and as gene expression modulation tool was
started during late 1960's and 1970's. The report on inhibition of
prokaryotic gene expression and viral replication using the
potential of oligodeoxynucleotides blazed the light for such a
beginning. The far and wide outburst of antisense technology
was witnessed in the last two decades with the discovery of
RNA interference (RNAi) mechanism. It enabled deactivation
or silencing of a specific gene with the advancement in
automated DNA synthesis and advances in the reel of nucleic
acid chemistry. Emphasizing on this AO research group, use
this as a new era technology worldwide in modern drug
discovery. The antisense approach pioneered the
transformation of costly and time consuming traditional drug
designing methods to the present day low cost pharmaceutical
inventions. Antisense oligonucleotides are finally paving the
way of functional genomics as the most powerful experimental
tools in the design of novel pathways and new gene specific
drugs [].

One basic question that arises while working with antisense
oligonucleotides is how to select the exact AO from a cluster
against a specific target mRNA. Literatures reported various
experimental and theoretical methods in oligonucleotides
prediction [–]. In most cases the experimental in-vivo AO
screening time-line and expense stands incomparably high. At
this point, necessity of computational prediction approaches got
intensified and later on scientists were successful in their
efforts.

Computational approaches eased many tedious works like
structural predictions of target mRNAs, target pairing regions
and promising sites for oligo binding []. Consequently, while
the experimental cost and AO testing duration got subdued, the
efficacy achieved seemed to be significantly fair.

Outline of existing computational methods:
The computational methods for oligonucleotide prediction can
be classified into mathematical methods, motif discovery and
machine learning techniques. Among mathematical methods,
two major ones are statistical studies by sampling secondary
structures and computational formalization for optimal
oligonucleotide microarray synthesis. Charles revealed
mathematical modeling of different cellular mechanistic events
while an AO associates with its target []. Mathematical models
were created to describe antisense activity under steady state
and dynamic conditions based on AO mass action kinetics. Itsik
et al. discussed a polynomial algorithm that reconstructs long
DNA targets by universal oligonucleotides []. A work
reported that ten sequence motifs have been identified with
significant correlation coefficient value for oligo activity 
[].
Discovery of motif sequences incorporated with soft computing
approaches like artificial neural network enables better
understanding of factors affecting oligo predictions 
[]. Infact
AOs can be designed and synthesized in laboratories by motif
discovery [].

Soft computing approaches like ANN, SVM and HMM are
popularly good classification approximation and knowledge
discovery machine learning techniques for efficient AO
prediction. Gustavo et al. proposed an SVM based AO
prediction and efficacy analysis using correlation analysis, the
mutual information feature selection and recursive feature
elimination [].

Methodology
Dataset preparation:
We collected the data from published literatures 
[,
,
,
].
We used experimentally validated oligo sequences in the
training set. We defined a scoring system with a range 0 – 1 to
measure oligo: target mRNA binding intensity. We fixed ‘0.5’ as
cut-off score value with the consideration that oligos that fall
above ‘0.5’ tend to have stable binding and those fall below ‘0.5’
show poor binding. We set a score value of ‘1’ for absolute oligo:
mRNA locking and ‘0’ for no locking. Thus positive dataset
survived with those successful oligos based on cut-off after
filtration and classification process. We ignored those oligos
that fell below cut-off score assuming poor binding.

The required negative dataset was generated after manual cross
validation of sequences. Since randomly generated sample
sequences could create ambiguities, they are completely
avoided from the training set. Target nucleotide positions in the
target sequences were changed either by insertion or deletion.
Nearly 1 to 3 position changes of this kind were done per
sequence in order to generate large negative samples. We then
aligned all training dataset sequences. The good stand alone
negative dataset was built up by removing those sequences that
showed repetition and any kind of matches after sequence
alignment. Thus we had a total of 423 oligo patterns out of
which 180 served as positive and 243 served as negative dataset.

Parameter calculation:
Several parameters associated with oligo:mRNA hybridization
was identified and examined for its behavioral function to the
duplex formation using Principle Component Analysis (PCA).
We could find a set of 11 most relevant parameters as the
outcome of PCA scaling results listed in  (see
supplementary material). We categorized these selected
features under two classes – structural parameters 1 to 7 in
 and 
thermodynamic parameters 8 to 11 in .
Structural Parameters show the potency of oligo binding based
on local secondary structural analysis of the target and
thermodynamic parameters allow a precise prediction of
oligonucleotide stability. All these calculations are done using
nearest neighbour (NN) method.  (see supplementary
material) presents the thermodynamic nearest neighbor (NN)
parameters for Watson- Crick base pairs in 1 M NaCl.

Method for Generating AO:
Sliding Window by Matrix Expansion:
Inorder to generate oligonucleotides, we used a method -
sliding window by matrix expansion. The method defines a
window of nucleotides with a predefined constant value 5 as
window size. When this window is slided across the target
sequence, oligonucleotide sequences are generated from one
end to the other end. The exact complementary sequence to the
mRNA subsequence is generated and is validated against its
parameter cutoffs. If values are above the cutoff, subsequence is
considered as an oligonucleotide and subsequently added to the
oligonucleotide set. The generated oligo sequence is randomly
changed to produce three oligo nucleotide matrices. Again,
each of these oligo is verified against the specified criteria
described in the parameter selection and resulting sets are
generated accordingly.

After completing the matrix expansion, window is slides
toward right to the next position of the target mRNA.
Validation process is done on each oligo generated and the
successful ones are added to the set. The whole process is
repeated and continued till the required oligos are generated or
end of the mRNA is reached.

Training Network Architecture:
We have trained a multilayer feed forwarded Artificial Neural
Network (ANN) with error back propagation algorithm for
validating the generated AOs. The ANN's input layer has 11
nodes to feed 11 selected oligo features, hidden layer has 8
nodes fixed by trial and error method and output layer has 1
node to measure the desired output as a score of either 0 (low)
or 1 (high). That means predictor scores 1 for an ‘oligo’ and 0 for
‘non-oligo’. The ANN is trained with a total of 290 oligo
sequences consisting of 105 positive dataset having their
experimentally determined mRNA targeting activities and 185
negative dataset which are manually verified for its exclusion
from the positive dataset. Thus, out of 423 patterns obtained
during dataset preparation, 290 were used as training set and
rest patterns were kept as testing dataset. The learning rate is
set as o.2. Increasing sigmoid function is chosen as the
activation function since these functions are mathematically
well behaved and enables smooth transition between 0 and 1.

Results and Discussion
Our tool predicts antisense oligonucleotides for a given set of
input sequence. In order to study the response of the trained
neural network, we have conducted 2 different levels of cross
validation examinations. Both validations were done using the
test dataset of 133 elements composed of 78 positive and 55
negative samples that were kept aside during ANN training.
Test examples were carefully verified for its exclusion from the
training sequences.

The tool efficiency accounts for the measure of overall predictor
performance expressed in the standard terms, sensitivity and
specificity. The parameter, accuracy ranks the quality of test
performance by the predictor. Sensitivity (Sn) is the ratio of true
positive to sum of true positive and false negative and
specificity (Sp) is the ratio of true positive to sum of true
positive and false positive. Accuracy (Acc) accounts for the
proportion of true data in the total testing data set. Tool
performance is rated high when both sensitivity and specificity
measures show high scores. Each term is expressed as shown in
.

Validation with learning rates:
First level validation was carried out for different values of
learning rate, η. The system performance was analyzed and
compared during every training period.  (see
supplementary material) depicts the test result of five training
sessions to find ideal oligos against target mRNA. We included
only those five epochs in the  since they gave significant
values for the prediction. The test showed enhanced
performance at lower learning rates from which could conclude
that our model is an efficient one. These differential effects
could be best viewed with the help of ROC curves. ROC graph
plots true positive rate (sensitivity) along y-axis and false
positive rate (1- specificity) along x-axis. The area under the
curve corresponds to the measure of model accuracy. When
plotted, we could find that the maximum area coverage under
the curve is 92.48%. This is considered as the best prediction
result with 92.09% specificity and 91.7% sensitivity for a
threshold 0.92.  shows ROC plot of the same. For other
values of learning rates, ROC area showed decrement but
promising accuracy.

Validation on parameter impacts:
Second level testing was performed based on the analysis of
effects of selected features. The same first test examples were
used for this analysis. We examined the relative impact of
individual parameter on the overall system performance on a 10
x 1 basis. That is, we made changes in the ANN input vectors
by replacing one known feature out of eleven in the parameter
set with an unknown feature. Each time the network
performance was measured with same training and testing
dataset. Resultant accuracies are compared with the accuracy
produced while all parameters are in the dataset (92.48%). It is
seen that accuracy attained during each feature change over is
notably different. Depending on this relative comparison, we
ranked the influence of each parameter in the prediction
process and are listed in  (see supplementary material).
It is obvious that thermodynamic parameters show immense
impact than structural parameters in antisense oligonucleotide
predictions. We carried out an evaluation to know the response
of this system when combinations of only two parameters are
considered. Validation yielded decreasingly varying accuracy
results depending on parameter combination constrains. The
summary of various performance outcomes of all validation
tests are shown in ().

Our study started with 2 main objectives related to antisense
oligo nucleotides. One was to design a computational tool for
predicting the efficiency of a given antisense oligonucleotide
and second was to predict antisense oligonucleotide that binds
to target mRNA with high efficiency. We availed good results
for both the objectives. Meanwhile, other than these two
primary objectives, we were able to produce two more results.
The first is a provision to filter mRNA by specifying the value
of each parameter. Another one is to find out the value of each
parameter corresponding to an oligonucleotide.

Our system performance was compared with the existing
initiatives in computational AO prediction techniques based on
Artificial Neural Network. A previous approach using ANN
classifier generated 92% success rate. When compared with this,
our work highlights enhanced performance as well as ranking
of both thermodynamic and structural features associated with
AO predictions.

Conclusion
We have derived an antisense prediction methodology that
might help to obtain highend systematic knockdown of targets.
An artificial neural network classifier was trained with
experimentally validated dataset. Eleven parameters were
identified and fed to ANN to get optimal output. We obtained
appreciable system performance in terms of sensitivity (91.7%),
specificity (92.09%), and accuracy (92.48%). The role and impact
of some relevant thermodynamic and structural parameters in
AO predictions are estimated. Our method predicts AO's under
two categories – low efficacy AO's and high efficacy AO's. Soft
computing community could implement other classification
techniques to maximize sensitivity. The computational
technique used here within could be expanded or coupled to
identify new and better oligomers to impart better translational
block depending on individual properties. However,
experimental validation holds the final statement in digging out
the hidden potentials of antisense oligonucleotide. We believe
that our work could be a reference to future researchers in this
field who tries to bridge the gap between computational and
experimental strategies of antisense oligonucleotide predictions.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Anusha &amp; Chandra, Bioinformation 8(23): 1162-1166 (2012)

ROC Curve of learning rate validation performance.

Performance comparison summary of validations (a)
Blue line indicates the performance when all features are
included. (b) Green line indicates the performance for one
feature replacement to ANN input. (c) Red line indicates the
performance for two parameter replacement to ANN input.
Area under the curve

