Background
DNA damage occurs almost all the times in cells, but is repaired
also continuously. For a cell to become transformed
accumulation of all the damage/mutations in cell is mandatory
and which appears, to be possible only if mutation escape the
repair mechanism, in other words, the repair pathways are
hampered. Studies have shown that DNA damage, due to
environmental factors and normal metabolic processes inside
the cell, occurs at a rate of 1,000 to 1,000,000 molecular lesions
per cell per day. While this constitutes only 0.000165% of the
human genome's approximately 6 billion bases (3 billion base
pairs), unrepaired lesions in critical genes (such as tumor
suppressor genes) can impede a cell's ability to carry out its
function and appreciably increase the likelihood of cancer
formation [].

Occurrence of all these mutations and their accumulation in one
cell which finally becomes tumorigenic/carcinogenic appears
possible if the DNA repair mechanism is hampered.A number
of chemicals including cigarette smoke carcinogens like NNK
and NNAL are well to induce unrepaired/non repairable DNA
damage []. 4-(Methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-Pyridyl)-1-butanone
(NNK) is one of the nitrosamines derived from tobacco
alkaloids and is a proven potent carcinogen []. Presence of
substantial amount of NNK in tobacco products plays a
significant role as a cause of cancer in population using these
products [].

Therefore, we hypothesize that for the initiation and
progression of Cancer, alterations in the DNA repair pathways,
either all or at least at one i.e. genetic, translational or posttranslational
level, becomes quite imperative []. That's why we
have targeted the lung cancer carcinogens like NNK and NNAL
for interaction with enzymes involved in DNA repair pathways
[].

We investigated the interaction capability of these carcinogens
with enzymes involved in the DNA repair mechanisms. In cell
mechanisms normal cells are regularly maintained by a set of
instructions that follows whether cell should divide or not.
Cancer cell develop an autonomous set of instructions against
normal rules, leading to uncontrolled growth and proliferation
of abnormal cells [].

Our hypothesis says that if there would be any damage in DNA
repair pathways occurs than the main repair machinery and
component is caused by carcinogens. The enzymes targeted by
foreign particles show the abnormal behavior or failure
mechanism to prevent damage. Thus, failure of DNA repair
mechanisms leads to cancer progression.

In this study, the docking simulation technique was adopted to
preliminarily investigate the binding efficacy of specific
carcinogens like NNK and NNAL to genes involved in DNA
repair Pathways []. A total of 72 enzymes involved in the DNA
repair mechanisms and their interactions with ligands (NNK
and NNAL) were analysed. This study was designed to
investigate whether the carcinogen like NNK and its metabolite
NNAL, apart from directly causing damage to DNA, are
capable of affecting the DNA repair pathways.

Methodology
Preparation of ligand structures:
Ligand file of NNK (4-(Methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-
butanone) and NNAL (4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-
butan-1-ol) were downloaded in .mol format 
(, 

&amp; ) from ChemSpider Chemical Database. These files
could not directly used by Autodock 4.0 tools [] thus they were
converted it into .pdb files using Discovery Studio Visualizer
version 2.5.5. Discovery Studio is a software package of
biological molecular design solutions for computational
chemists and computational biologists. Discovery Studio makes
it easier to examine the properties of large and small molecules.
Further the ligands were submitted for minimization using
Chimera version 1.5.3 using with Genetic Algorithm Steps 2000
and 0.5 grid units Optimized [].

Preparation of protein structures:
The structures of enzymes involved in the DNA Repair
mechanisms were obtained from Protein Data Bank and some
structure were downloaded from MODBASE server  (see
supplementary material). MODBASE is a queryable database of
annotated protein structure models, contains theoretically
calculated models, which may contain significant errors, not
experimentally determined structures []. Published structures
were edited to remove HETATM using Discovery Studio
Visualizer (Version 2.5.5). Chimera was used for energy
minimization, removal of steric collision with the steepest
descent steps 1000, steepest descent size 0.02 Å, Conjugated
gradient steps 1000 and the conjugate gradient step size 0.02 Å
for the conjugate gradient minimization [,
].

Docking Studies:
Docking studies were performed by Autodock version 4.0 suit
[,
] and Cygwin interface was used in the Microsoft
Windows XP professional Version 2002, Service pack 3
operating System on Intel (R) Core (TM) 2 Duo, CPU T6500 @
2.10 GHz, 1.19 GHz, and 2.96 GB of RAM of Dell Machine. We
implemented molecular docking methods followed by the
searching the best conformation of enzymes and carcinogens
complex on the basis of binding energy. Water molecules were
removed from the protein structures before docking and
hydrogen atoms were added to all target proteins. Kollman
united charges and salvation parameters were added to the
proteins. Gasteiger charge was added to the ligands. Grid box
was set to cover the maximum part of proteins and ligand. The
values were set to 60×60×60 Å in X, Y and Z axis of grid point.
The default grid points spacing was 0.375 Å. Lamarckian
Genetic Algorithm (LGA) [] was used for proteins ligands
flexible docking calculations. The LGA parameters like
population size (ga_pop_size), energy evaluations
(ga_num_generation), mutation rate, crossover rate and step
size were set to 150, 2500000, 27000, 0.02, 0.8 and 0.2 Å,
respectively. The LGA runs were set to 40 runs. All obtained 40
conformations of proteins and ligand complex were analysed
for the interactions and binding energy of the docked structure
using Discovery Studio Visualizer version 2.5.5.

Protein-Protein Interaction analysis:
The interacting proteins of selected enzymes were found using
STRING 9.0 database that predict, interacting proteins against
your query. We found interface residues using PDBe PISA, an
interactive tool for the exploration of macromolecular (protein,
DNA/RNA and ligand) interfaces []. The discovery studio 2.5
was used for Zdock (Dock Proteins). Zdock scores obtained
from both Protein-Protein interactions as well as from Protein-
Complex (ligand protein+NNK/NNAL) interaction.

Z dock calculations:
Discovery studio 2.5 was used to perform protein-protein
docking. ZDOCK is an initial stage rigid body molecular
docking algorithm that uses a fast Fourier transform (FFT)
algorithm to improve performance for searching in translational
space []. All of the available structures from NMR were used
to calculate the docking poses and the structures obtained were
subjected to energy minimization using the smart minimize
algorithm (Max steps 200, RMS gradient 0.01) in the program
Discovery studio 2.5. The resulting Zdock scores with the
highest value were used as appropriate conformational pose
 (see supplementary material).

Discussion
The 1IRD (Crystal Structure of Human Carbonmonoxy-
Haemoglobin at 1.25 Å Resolution) was employed as a
positive control and 3CI9 (Human heat shock factor-binding
protein 1) as a negative control to validate our docking analysis.
Furthermore, docking results of these proteins showed that
1IRD docked with NNK, observed binding energy was -6.68
Kcal/Mol, it docked with NNAL and observed binding energy
was -6.31 Kcal/Mol. 3CI9 docked with NNK with observed
binding energy of -3.91 Kcal/Mol, it docked with NNAL with
binding energy of +2.09 Kcal/Mol.

A total 72 enzymes involved in the DNA repair mechanisms
and their interactions with ligands (NNK and NNAL) were
analysed during study. NNK showed the binding efficiency
with enzymes ranging from +25.41 to -7.47 Kcal/Mol and
NNAL showed the binding efficiency ranging from +36.96 to -
6.52 Kcal/Mol. Simulations were completed and hydrogen
bonds were built in docked structures. After analysing the
binding energy of distinct formed clusters, top 4 enzymes those
shown the higher efficiency to bind with ligands (NNK binding
efficiency with top 4 enzymes of DNA repair mechanisms
ranging from -6.80 to -7.47 Kcal/Mol and NNAL binding
efficiency with top 4 enzymes of DNA repair Mechanisms
ranging from -6.17 to -6.52 Kcal/Mol were selected on the basis
of their binding energy obtained from docked conformation.
Hydrogen bond distances calculated by Discovery Studio
Visualizer version 2.5.5 and reference RMSD and inhibition
constant obtained from docked files are shown in  &amp;
 (see supplementary material).

The study shows that NNK has shown good binding efficiency
with proteins 1CKJ (Casein kinases) (,-6.80 Kcal/Mol.),
3K05 (, -7.04 Kcal/Mol), 2O8B (centromeric DNA
binding; protein binding;) (, -7.47 Kcal/Mol) and 3GQC
(Deoxycytidyl transferase (,-6.94 Kcal/Mol). On the
other hand it was observed that NNAL shown good binding
efficiency with proteins 1CKJ (,-6.34 Kcal/Mol), 1Q2Z
(Single stranded DNA-dependent ATP-dependent helicase)
(,-6.17 Kcal/Mol.), 1T38 (Methylated-DNA-proteincysteine
methyltransferase) (,-6.52 Kcal/Mol) and
2RBA (G/T mismatch-specific thymine DNA glycosylase)
(,-6.41 Kcal/Mol).

It was reported that oral cancer developed by smoking and
consuming tobacco []. In most of the cases when people orally
consume the tobacco they would be in contact with NNK and
derivatives like NNAL present in the cigarette smoke which
leads to reaction with Cytochrome P450. After that NNK binds
with the DNA and form DNA adduct that is responsible for the
tumor progression []. Hence, we have taken an account to
elucidate the mechanism of carcinogenesis induced by
environmental carcinogens NNK and NNAL with
implementation of molecular docking techniques. Z dock scores
are varying between Protein-Protein and Protein-Complex
scores. Observed highest Zdock score is between 2O8B Vs
3NA3=23.40 which is greater than PC score=22.16. 
 (see
supplementary material) Z dock scores obtained from Protein-
Protein docking as well as from Protein-Complex
conformations shows that carcinogens are reducing the normal
capability of DNA repair enzymes.

Conclusion
Study indicated the loss of functions of these enzymes, which
probably could be a reason for fettering of DNA repair
pathways resulting in damage accumulation and finally cancer
occurs. Furthermore, our study suggests that carcinogens (NNK
and NNAL) definitely alter the mechanisms of DNA repair
pathways and enzymes functioning could be affected by
carcinogens. NNK showed the binding efficiency with enzymes
ranging from +25.41 to -7.47 Kcal/Mol and NNAL shown the
binding efficiency ranging from +36.96 to -6.52 Kcal/Mol. We
have selected top 4 enzymes those shown the higher efficiency
to bind with ligands (NNK: -6.80 to -7.47 Kcal/Mol. and NNAL:
-6.17 to -6.52 Kcal/Mol) on the basis of their binding energy
obtained from docked conformation. Binding was characterized
for the enzymes sharing equivalent or better interaction as
compared to +Ve control. After analysing the Zdock scores
obtained from Protein-Protein and Protein-complex
interactions, we observed that when NNK and NNAL are
binding with enzymes the main functioning of enzymes
decreases.

Computer based structural analysis of bio macromolecular
could play an important role in cancer treatment. At last but not
least, a deep analysis is needed to elucidate the failure of DNA
repair mechanisms with best suitable techniques and tools. In
vivo and In vitro validation is needed to authenticate in silico
results obtained from this study.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We gratefully acknowledge the University Grant commission,
New Delhi, India for providing Maulana Azad National
Fellowship and we are also thankful to Prof. S.W. Akhtar, the
Hon'ble Vice-Chancellor of Integral University, Lucknow, U.P.,
India for his support and for providing necessary facility.

Citation:Jamal et al, Bioinformation 8(17): 795-800 (2012)

4-(Methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone
PubChem Compound ID- 47289, ChemSpider ID-43038

4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butan-1-ol
PubChem Compound ID- 104856, ChemSpider ID- 94646

A-H is showing the interaction models of NNK/NNAL and enzymes, Graphics developed by PyMol 3D structure
visualizer browser. (A) 1CKJ interacted with NNK; (B) 1CKJ interacted with NNAL; (C) 1Q2Z interacted with NNAL; (D) 1T38
interacted with NNAL; (E) 2O8B interacted with NNK; (F) 2RBA interacted with NNAL; (G) 3GQC interacted with NNK; (H) 3K05
interacted with NNK.

