Background
Human papilloma virus (HPV), the most common sexually
transmitted infection, causes cervical cancer in women,
contributes to anogenital cancers in men, and is associated
with oropharyngeal cancers and genital warts in men and
women []. 
Currently, PCR-based assays are applied to
identify HPV prevalence, ranges of oncogenic and
nononcogenic HPV types, and incidence of multiple type
infection []. Next Generation sequencing (NGS) technology
provides increased sensitivity for in depth analysis of HPV
types, although large datasets of HPV sequences present
considerable barriers for analyses. Available automated HPV
genotyping tools, including Virus Sequence Database 
[],
REGA HPV Automated Subtyping Tool [], and NCBI blastn
are limited by either a restricted number of reference
sequences with incomplete annotation or outdated
nomenclature, an inability to classify short sequences, or an
inadequate capacity to analyze efficiently large sequence data
sets. To accelerate HPV genotyping of high-throughput NGS
data, an automated system including a comprehensive
collection of HPV mucosal and cutaneous reference sequences
with updated nomenclature was developed.

Methodology
The web-based HPV-QUEST subtyping system uses
PHP/HTML language, MYSQL, as the database management
system for blast searches is available freely on
http://www.ijbcb.org/HPV/. HPV-QUEST is able to
processes up to 10 megabases (Mb) of sequences (around 6,500
sequences of 100 bp) per run, returns results within one to two
minutes, and displays up to 150 hits with the top hit as
default.

HPV genotyping is based on sequences from the L1 region
comprised of 1500 nucleotides. HPV-QUEST includes a new
HPV database with updated nomenclature for 150 annotated
cutaneous and mucosal HPV L1 sequences, representing 5
genuses, 14 species, and 150 types, compiled from complete
genomes, subgenomic regions containing the L1 region, or L1
region [,
] 
from NCBI Genebank [], Virus Sequence
Database [], 
and Los Alamos HPV Sequence Database 
[].

HPV-QUEST Input and Output
HPV-QUEST is password protected. User can obtain a log-in
password for free access by visiting the website. Sequence files
as large as 10 Mb containing forward or complementary
reverse sequences are entered in fasta format by copy/pasting
or uploading files. Pre-blast sequence cleaning to remove low
quality reads is recommended. Blast parameters with
suggested default values include: –e (expect value, default =
10), -r (nucleotide match, default = 1), -q (nucleotide
mismatch, default = -3), -g (perform gapped alignment,
default = yes), -W (word size, default = 16), -G (gap open
penalty, default = 2), -E (gap extension penalty, default = 2),
and -v (number of hits display, default = 1) (). A
confirmation with submitted file name, date and time of
submission and a link to view results and retrieve reports is
generated and e-mailed to the user.

A set of Perl scripts is applied to parse the program output
files and produce a result page in HTML format, and a report
in both text- and excel-format containing: No. (the query
sequence serial number), Query id (fasta file header of the
query sequence), Score (blast score), Evalue (expect value),
Strand (+/+ or +/-), Local identity (percentage of matched
nucleotides within alignment region), Coverage identity
(percentage of nucleotides matched with reference sequence),
Genus, Species, Type, GI (NCBI gene identification number),
AN (NCBI accession number), Source (source of reference
sequence), Infection site (mucosal or cutaneous or both), Risk
(high or low or unknown), Ref seq region (reference sequence
region in the genome), Length of ref seq (nt), and Alignment
(alignment of query sequence with reference sequence)
(). The original query sequences are included in the
report to eliminate the need to match query sequences with
correspondent results. Query sequences failing to align with
any known reference sequences in the HPV-QUEST are
designated as “nd”. Any sequences that fail to blast, have low
local identity, or with an e-value &gt;1e-15 are considered as low
quality, new recombination, or new genotype.

Testing and validation
HPV-QUEST version 1.0 was tested and validated in two
ways. Firstly, reference sequences used to construct the
database were blasted against themselves. The typing was
100% correct, and all e-values were 0 with local or coverage
identities of 100%. Secondly, a test dataset of 18,000 quality
HPV pyrosequences, generated by PGMY9/11 and GP5+/6+
primers using Titanium Amplicon Pyrosequencing technology
from DNA extracted from genital swabs of 15 asymptomatic
men recruited in an international study cohort, was processed
by using HPV-QUEST and the results compared with typing
by traditional NCBI blastn with an cutoff evalue of 1e-15 
[].
HPV genotypes and frequency distribution by using HPVQUEST
coincided with results from NCBI blastn with
significantly shorter processing time (less than 30 minutes
versus more than 40 hours) to produce results ready for
analysis.

Caveats and Future development
Although new HPV types are discovered continuously, HPV
classification and nomenclature are updated periodically by
the Reference Center for Human Papillomaviruses at the
German Cancer Research Center in Heidelberg, which will be
used to update HPV-QUEST. Version 2.0 will include HPV
subgenomic regions other than L1, reference sequences for
non-human papilloma viruses, and extensive data sets
generated by next generation sequencing technology.

University of Florida Cancer Center /Moffitt Cancer Center
Collaborative Initiative; NIH R01CA098803; Stephaney W.
Holloway University Chair for AIDS Research.

Citation:Yin et al, Bioinformation 8(8): 388-390 (2012)

Input and output files. (A) HPV-QUEST blast page.
Users either paste or upload up to 10 Mb of sequences, chose
desired parameters, click submit, and obtain the results in 1 to
2 minutes as html, excel or text files; (B) HPV-QUEST output.
HPV-QUEST output includes a result page illustrating the No.
(the query sequence serial number), Query id (fasta file header
of the query sequence), Score (blast score), Evalue (expect
value), Strand (+/+ or +/-), Local identity (percentage of
matched nucleotides within alignment region), Coverage
identity (percentage of nucleotides matched with reference
sequence), Genus, Species, Type, GI (NCBI gene identification
number), AN (NCBI accession number), Source (source of
reference sequence), Infection site (mucosal or cutaneous or
both), Risk (high or low or unknown), Ref seq region
(reference sequence region in the genome), Length of ref seq
(nt), and Alignment (alignment of query sequence with
reference sequence). Date and time of submission is also
displayed. Two result files in excel or text format are
generated for download.

