Background
Wheat is one of the most important cereal crop grown
worldwide. Occupying 17% (one-sixth) of crop acreage of the
world [], wheat is a staple food for 35% of the world’s
population and provides more calories and protein in the
global diet than any other cereal. Apart from constituting the
bulk of staple diet, it also contributes essential amino acids,
minerals, vitamins, and beneficial phytochemicals and dietary
fiber components. Wheat can be consumed variously
as flour for breads, cookies, pasta, noodles etc. [] and also for
fermentation to make beer [] and other alcoholic beverages. In
the Indian sub-continent the major wheat producing states are
placed in the northern regions of the country with the states of
UP, Uttrakhand, Punjab and Haryana contributing to nearly
80% of the total wheat production. While wheat is of great
socio-economic importance, it gets infected with many fungal
diseases among rust, smut and bunt are the most common
ones. These diseases are borned by fungal pathogens like rust
disease is caused by Puccinia sp., smut disease by Urocystis sp.
and Ustilago sp., and bunt disease from Tilletia sp respectively.
These diseases cause harvest losses, affect the quality of the
harvested grains, and cause degradation during storage.
Nonetheless, yield losses can be linked to genetically
determined resistance and tolerance of the wheat cultivars to
specific diseases, diversity and level of the pathogen
inoculums present, and the local climate conditions [].

Rusts are the most important foliar diseases of wheat in
Australia. Additionally, rust causes serious epidemics in other
parts of the world such as North America, Mexico, South
America and is a devastating seasonal disease in India. Of the
three types of rust, stripe, stem and leaf, rust the latter is
potentially the least damaging in susceptible varieties, though
conditions are conducive for this disease in most seasons. Stem
rust occurs worldwide wherever wheat is grown. Over a large
area, losses from stem rust can be severe, ranging from 50-70%
[]. 
Stripe rust has been reported particularly in Central and
West Asia, North Africa, Australia, Europe, China and United
States. The smuts and bunts diseases are a group of related
fungi that infect developing grain. Cool, humid weather
accompanied by light showers or heavy dews is most favorable
for these infections. A special mention is Karnal bunt or partial
bunt which was first reported from a city named karnal and
also from Punjab area in 1930. This integrated database aims to
provide a compendium of browsable information for the three
economically important fungal pathogen of wheat. Primarily,
collation of genomic information of the wheat species with the
pathogen diversity greatly facilitates researchers who wish to
use this information to understand disease aetiology and crop
vigour, pathogenesis and resistance mechanisms.

Methodology
Database Construction and Content:
Data were collected from various literature sources from the
web. Tripath database is containing information about wheat
fungal diseases viz. Rust, Smut and Bunt. The database can be
accessed using fungus name for information on specific rust,
bunt and smut. Database architecture is designed by Adobe
dream weaver CS6 using hypertext mark-up language (html).
Web interfaces were written in PHP, html and JavaScript.
XAMPP software was used for whole compilation of data.
Data was compiled by the Apache with MySQL relational
database storage. Tripath database can be accessed at 

http://www.gbpuat-cbsh.ac.in/ departments/bi/database/ tripath/.
All database information is compiled sequentially including
systematic position, geographical distribution, morphology
and symptoms, weather conditions, hosts, significance and
control of the diseases. The database includes all information
about the rust, smut and bunt diseases and also the genetic and
genomic information related to the species.

Database Description:
Database is a collection of whole information of wheat fungal
diseases viz. Rust, Smut and Bunt. In these diseases, rust
contains 197 species, smut contains 105 species and bunt
contains total 81 species. Database including the information of
these diseases is called TRIPATH, i.e., information of three
fungal pathogens of wheat. The database entry side contain
‘Home’, ‘Rust’, ‘Smut’, 
‘Bunt’, ‘Genetic/Genomic information’,
‘About us’ and ‘Contact us’ sections. ‘Home’ section contains
general information about wheat and its importance. ‘Rust’
section contains three important types of Rusts i.e. Leaf rust
(caused by P. recondita), Stem rust (caused by P. graminis),
Stripe rust (caused by P. striiformis), and its distribution,
significance and control. In ‘Smut’ section, it is devastating
disease of cereals contains mainly two important types i.e.
Loose smut of wheat (caused by Ustilago tritici), Flag smut of
wheat (caused by Urocystis agropyri), and its distribution,
significance and control. In ‘Bunt’ section, it is also devastating
disease of cereals contains mainly three common types i.e.
Common bunt (caused by T. tritici &amp; T. laevis), Dwarf bunt
(caused by T. controversa), Karnal bunt (caused by T. indica),
and its distribution, significance and control. Genetic marker,
genetic map, and chromosome, EST, protein, genomic, mRNA
and WGS information were also added in Genetic/Genomic
information section. For retrieving entries of interest, Tripath
provides a search tool using keywords of rust, smut &amp; bunt
name. The search fields can be individually or simultaneously
utilized to filter entries.  is showing a screen shot of
the different pages of TRIPATH database.

Utility
TRIPATH database provides authentication of fungal species
of three important pathogens of wheat i.e. rust, smut and bunt.
With the help of this database users can identify and
characterize of fungal diversity amongst three pathogens.
TRIPATH also develops our understanding for the etiology of
disease and central measures. It generates molecular and
genomic data for understanding the mechanism of
pathogenesis and defense and molecular detection.

Future development
Continuous updates shall be released to include other
pathogens of cereals plant. The present access method shall be
upgraded for faster access to accommodate the growing
number of data to browse records on the studied fungal
pathogens.

Authors are grateful to Sub-DIC, Bioinformatics at G.B. Pant
University of Agriculture and Technology, Pantnagar, India
for providing computational facility.

Citation:Garg et al, Bioinformation 10(7): 466-468 (2014)

The Tripath database web resource

