Background:
Proteins, the work horse molecules of the cellular machinery,
are accountable for a broad range of cellular functions. Proteins
mostly function through their interactions with other proteins.
Such protein-protein interactions are responsible for mediating
vast majority of protein chores in living cells. A group of
proteins and their interactions form a protein-protein
interaction network (PPIN). In a PPIN, a node denotes a protein
and a connecting edge represents a protein-protein interaction.
Total number of interactions of a protein is its connectivity.
Most proteins interact with very few other proteins while a
relatively small number of proteins have a very large number of
interacting partners []. Proteins with large number of
interactions are called hubs and they literally ‘hold the protein
interaction networks together’ []. Hub proteins are known to
have high density of binding sites [], which enable multiple
bindings. Due to their interactions with large number of other
proteins and thus possible involvements in multiple pathways,
study of hub proteins assumes critical importance [].

Previous studies have shown the relationship between the
degree of connectivity of proteins in PPIN and their cellular
essentiality properties []. When a hub node is deleted, it is
more likely to be lethal to the organism than the deletion of
those nodes which are connected with less number of proteins
in a protein-protein interaction network []. Hub
characterization is highly crucial for understanding cellular
functions as well as identifying novel drug targets. Functions of
many proteins are unknown and hence the identification of the
physical interactions of these proteins could give an indication
of their functions. Several well-known and extensively studied
proteins including p53, p27, p21 and many others which are
implicated in diseases are hubs []. Knowledge of the pathways,
topologies and dynamics, of hub proteins should provide useful
information for predicting side effects in drug discovery [].

There have been attempts to identify hub proteins in proteinprotein
interaction networks using various data such as gene
proximity [,
], gene fusion events 
[,
], gene co-expression
data [,
], phylogenetic profiling 
[], interacting protein
domains [,
] and gene ontology 
[]. Most of such
computational predictions have been centered on the
identification of pairwise protein-protein interactions with
varying degrees of accuracies. The lack of availability of the
above data for the entire protein interaction network of an
organism is a limiting factor in applying the methods generally.
For instance, the hub classifier proposed by Michel Hsing et al.
using gene ontology terms gives 84.96% accuracy, 34.41%
sensitivity and 90.27% specificity []. However, in order to
predict whether a target protein is hub or not, this method
requires gene ontology annotation of the target protein. The
authors observe that “the performance of hub classifier will
primarily rely on the number of gene ontology annotations
available for each species”[]. They relate the low sensitivity, to
the lack of gene ontology annotations for certain proteins in
their training sets. Generality of existing methods which use
structural information are also severely limited as PDB
structures and functional classifications are not available for
many of the proteins.

To overcome the limitations of availability of structural and
ontology data which are slow in emergence, we have chosen to
investigate whether hubness can be predicted from amino acid
sequence information alone. Studying structural and functional
phenomena from sequence information is not a new approach
and has been widely used with the advent of bioinformatics
approaches in genomics and proteomics. The author's research
group itself has been applying this approach to various
problems from gene finding [] to protein subcellular
localization [] to protein allostery prediction 
[]. The
approach is of course a reductionist approach. Though the
underlying hypothesis, that sequence information can predict
structural and functional behaviors, is not yet completely
accepted, the approach remains as a viable alternative to the
data dependent methods at this point of time. We report here
the extraction of twenty features based on amino acid sequence
information which we have used in designing a hub prediction
tool based on soft computing.

Methodology:
Dataset:
Two organisms, E. coli and H. sapiens, which are well annotated
and have modest interaction information, were selected for this
study. IntAct [] database was used to extract the protein
interaction data of the model organisms. These data were then
curated to obtain the Uniprot IDs and corresponding
connectivities of all the proteins. This non-redundant dataset
included 10,578 H. sapiens PPIs and 2,047 E. coli PPIs. Using the
uniprot IDs corresponding sequences of varying lengths were
compiled from Uniprot [].

Determination of Connectivity Threshold for hubs:
The degree of connectivity of proteins in our PPI dataset ranged
from 1 to 450. In order to classify a protein as hub, a
connectivity threshold had to be determined. Review of
literature revealed that, connectivity thresholds of hub proteins
are species specific []. Nevertheless, there is no consensus on
the exact connectivity threshold values for these proteins [].
There are studies, which have taken the thresholds based on the
accumulative protein interaction distribution plots []. Some
other studies base it on fold change []. We have adopted the
latter approach. The connectivity fold change was computed by
taking the ratio of the connectivity value and average
connectivity. In the case of E. coli, a node with fold change
greater than or equal to 2 was considered as hub (cutoff, Pvalue
&lt; 0.03 using distribution of standard normalized fold
change values in E. coli). In the case of H. sapiens, fold change
greater than or equal to 10 (with P-value &lt; 0.001) was the
criterion applied for considering a protein as hub. Summary of
protein interaction data of E. coli and H. sapiens used in this
study is depicted in  (see supplementary material).
The datasets of both organisms were divided into two sets, train
and test, for both hub and non-hub proteins. Train datasets
were used to develop a model to predict hubness of proteins
and test datasets were used to evaluate the reliability of the
model. To ensure stringent sieving of non-hubs, we considered
only those proteins which have connectivity in a range between
1 and 5 for non-hub test and train sets in H. sapiens data. To
minimize data variances, the datasets were equally divided into
training and testing sets.  (see supplementary material)
shows the train and test sets statistics.

Amino Acid Properties:
We examined a set of 28 diverse amino acid properties
(physicochemical, thermodynamic and conformational) and
these properties were extracted from most commonly used
amino acid index databases, AAindex 
[] and Protscale 
[].
These properties are shown in  (see supplementary
material). They were normalized between 0 and 1 using the
formulae, P (i) norm = (P (i) – P 
min) / (P max 
– P min). Where, P (i), P
(i) norm are the original and normalized values of amino acid i for
a particular property, and Pmin and Pmax are, respectively, the
minimum and maximum values. For each protein, the average
amino acid property was computed as the sum of amino acid
indices for all residues divided by total number of residues for
each property. For a short amino acid sequence
“MAEKSLAMDG” having a length of 10 amino acids, we give
the computed numerical values for chosen properties in 
(see supplementary material).

Dimensionality reduction of feature vector:
Feasibility of the chosen 28 amino acid features for the
classification model was analyzed by designing a system of
linear equations for both organisms. We derived a matrix of
28×28 feature vector elements by randomly choosing 28 amino
acid sequences from hub dataset of both organisms. RH is a
matrix formed with each row representing the feature vector of
a hub sequence in the train data. The entry rij represents the jth
feature vector of the ith randomly selected sequence. Consider a
coefficient matrix CH to be determined 
such that, RH .CH = I,
where, CH has dimensions 28×28, and I is a unity vector with
dimension 28×1. We computed CH 
as RH-1. I. We then computed
the average coefficient vector, CH , for hubs by taking the
average of the modulus of each column of CH. For
dimensionality reduction, we dropped the least contributing
features as dictated by the coefficients in CH . The dropped
coefficients are conveniently numbered 21 to 28 in Table 3. Our
classification model uses the reduced feature vectors of 20
elements, identified as mentioned above, since these are most
contributing to classification vectors of hubness.

Hub classification model:
We developed a classification model based on linear
discriminant analysis in combination with normal Bayesian
approach []. The twenty selected amino acid properties are
the backbone of the classification model. Each protein sequence
was encoded using all these features and we compiled a feature
matrix for entire dataset of both organisms. We took 100 train
data for both hub and non-hub and produced a matrix of
100×20 feature vectors, RH 
and RN, for hub and non-hub
datasets respectively. Then the mean vectors µ1 and 
µ2 of
each train dataset were calculated. The global mean, 
µG, was
computed as the average of mean vectors 
µ1 and µ2 . Then the
mean corrected data for RH and RN were computed by
subtracting µG from each row of 
RH and RN. The covariance matrix
for each mean corrected data of hub dataset was calculated as,
CH = RH 
T × RH T / 
NH. Similarly, for non-hub dataset, covariance
matrix for each mean corrected data was calculated as, CN =
RN T × RN 
T / NN. In the above equations, 
NH and NN are the total
number of training data of hub and non-hub, which are 100 for
each. Further, we generated the pooled covariance matrix,
where element Pij, is obtained as, 
Pij = (NH 
/ (NH + NN) × CHij ) 
+ (NN / (NH +
NN) × CNij )

We applied the linear discriminant analysis formula for hubs as,
fh = µ1P­1xT 
− 1/2 µ1P­1µ1T+ 
ln(Pi) where, µ1 is the mean of hub
train data, P is the pooled covariance , xT is the transpose of the
feature vector of the target data x and Pi is the prior probability
which is imputed as 50% for both groups. Similarly for non-hub
train data, the formula is, fn = µ2 
P­1 xT − 1/2 
µ2 C­1 µ2T + ln(Pi)
where, µ2 is the mean of non-hub train data. In these formulae,
the second terms, µ1P­1µ1T 
and µ2P­1µ2T are actually Mahalanobis
distances, which is the distance to measure dissimilarity
between several groups []. 
If fh &gt; fn, the target data x will be
assigned to hub category, otherwise to non-hub category.

Self-consistency test, jackknife test and independent data test
were performed to evaluate the classification model. Same
datasets are used for training and testing in self-consistency
test. Hence the classification accuracy will be high. If the selfconsistency
of a method is good, it can be considered as a good
classification method. In jackknife test, each protein in the
training set is pulled out to make classification using the rest of
the training set. Jackknife is considered as more objective and
exhaustive than other tests. In independent test, different sets of
training and testing datasets, which were randomly picked,
were used for hub classification []. In independent test, we
partitioned training and testing sets equally to minimize data
discrepancies. We have used different measures to assess the
accuracy of classifying hub and non-hub proteins. The formulae
used are, Sensitivity = True Positive / (True Positive + False
Negative); Specificity = True Negative/ (True Negative + False
Positive); Accuracy = (True Positive +True Negative)/ (True
Positive+ False Positive + True Negative + False Negative)
where, True Positives are hubs identified as hubs, False
Positives are non-hubs identified as hubs, True Negatives are
non-hubs identified as non-hubs, and False Negatives are hubs
identified as non-hubs, respectively.

Discussion:
Our results show that meaningful amino acid features can
produce signature features for differentiating hubs from nonhubs.
For different performance tests including self-consistency,
jackknife and independent data tests, our hub classifier gave
comparable accuracies and the results are shown in  (see
supplementary material). Part (a) of the table reports the results
on the test data summarized in  (see supplementary
material). Part (b) of the table reports the results on a broader
interaction data from APID [], which consists of 12,053
sequences for H. sapiens and 2,997 sequences for E. coli. For the
original test data which is depicted in  (see
supplementary material), the best accuracies, sensitivities and
specificities in different performance tests are close to 90%. For
the broader APID dataset the best results in different
performance tests are close to 87%, which is yet impressive.
Since the two different datasets gave prediction results on a par,
we anticipate that the tool would be useful to provide strong
hypothesis on hubness of proteins. The beta version of our tool
is available online at http://hubcentre.in/.

The biological significance of the selected amino acid properties
in this work for hubness identification are yet to be explained,
even though there are some results which match with our
extracted feature list []. It would be interesting to investigate
the significance of these properties in the formation of PPINs.
Recent works have indicated basic flaw in the concept of high
connectivity hubs in PPINs []. Chung-Jung Tsai suggests that
hubs could be multi conformation proteins and each
conformation is to be considered as a separate molecule [].
Lack of comprehensive structure data prevents us from testing
this hypothesis at this point of time.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Funding from Department of Information Technology, Govt. of
India (DIT/R&amp;D/B10/15(23)2008, dated 07/09/2010), is
acknowledged. Athmaja S. acknowledges the internship
support from State Inter-University Centre for Bioinformatics,
University of Kerala.

Citation:Latha et al, Bioinformation 7(4): 163-168 (2011)

