Background
Filamins are large cytoplasmic proteins that crosslink cortical actin into threedimensional
structures and give mechanical force to cells by binding to actin
filaments forming bundles or gel networks []. Filamins have been reported to
interact directly with more than 30 cellular proteins of great functional
diversity []. 
In the human filamin there are three isoforms (FLN - A, B and C),
in which FLNA and FLNB are expressed ubiquitously and FLNC is expressed
in skeletal and cardiac muscles. They are structurally very similar to each other.
Each isoform has a relative molecular mass of 280 kDa, consists of an aminoterminal
actin binding domain (ABD) and 24 repeated immunoglobulin Ig-like
rod domains []. 
The actin-binding domain of filamin is composed of two
calponin homology (CH) domains: the amino- and carboxy-terminal CH1 and
CH2 domains respectively. All human filamins have two unique long hinges
positioned between repeats 15-16 (27 residues) and 23-24 (35 residues) that are
postulated to be flexible. But filamin C contains 81 amino acid insertions in
repeat 20, not present in filamin A or filamin B []. Each CH domain consists
of four main α-helices connected by long loops, and two or three shorter, less
regular α- helices. Three dominant alpha helices form a triple helical bundle,
against which the amino-terminal α-helix packs in a perpendicular orientation
[]. 
The human filamin rod domains consist of a β sandwich, which resembles
the subtype C1 fold of the immunoglobulin family []. It is commonly assumed
that a protein must attain a stable, folded conformation in order to carry out its
specific biological function. However, it was recently shown that several
proteins do not assume a well defined and stable three-dimensional structure
but are natively unfolded. A disordered protein can be either completely
unfolded or comprise of both folded and unfolded segments 
[]. Disordered
protein regions often lead to difficulties in purification and crystallization of
proteins, and become a bottleneck in high throughput structural determination
[]. 
Therefore, it is quite necessary to identify the disordered regions of target
proteins from their amino acid sequences. The prediction of disordered regions
is also important for the functional annotation of proteins. The techniques for
predicting conformational disorder are extremely important in structural
biology, where they are becoming routine filters in the pipeline of finding
suitable targets to be analyzed. In order to visualize predicted disorder features
in the context of a filament structure, homology modeled 3D structures of
individual domains of human filamin isoforms A, B and C were generated.
Consensus conformational disorder residues were mapped onto filamin models
to observe the occurrence and nature of disorder.

Materials and Methodology
Sequence retrieval
The FASTA sequence of individual domains of human filamin isoforms A, B
and C was obtained from the uniprot database []. For each filamin isoforms,
26 sets were constructed for CH1, CH2 and the Ig-like domains 1-24. Domain
boundaries were taken directly from the uniprot annotations.

Sequence Alignment
Comparative modeling usually starts by searching the PDB of known protein
structures using the 26 individual filamin A, B and C isoforms sequences
(target sequence) as the query []. This search is generally done by comparing
the target sequence with the sequence of each of the structures in the database.
The target sequence was searched for similar sequence using the FASTA
search tool against Protein Database (PDB) with default parameter. Maximum
sequence identity between target and template was selected. Ig-like domains 6
and 8 were ignored since their sequence identity was below 30%. (Table 1, see
).

Comparative modeling and structure verification
Filamin CH and Ig-like domains were modeled using templates composed of
homologous Ig-like domains of human and Dictyostelim discoideum filamin
(ddFilamin). A template for each target domain was chosen so that both
sequence and insertion pattern were similar to the query. Homology models of
filamin domains generally have high sequence-structure compatibility scores.
The template and target sequence were carefully aligned to remove potential
alignment. The homology modeling of 3D structure was performed by
Modeller software version 9v5 []. The resulting individual filamin domain
model was evaluated by using PROCHECK [] and energy minimization
using Verify3D []. The overall stereo chemical quality of the protein was
assessed by Ramchandran plot analysis []. The structures were visualized
through Pymol program.

Conformational disorder prediction
For each filamin isoforms A, B and C, protein sequences were obtained from
the Uniprot database and the protein disorder were predicted using
conformational disorder prediction method developed. The detailed
methodology on how the consensus prediction of protein conformational
disorder from amino acid sequence was calculated is given elsewhere 
[].

Results and Discussion
Comparative modeling of human filamin
The FASTA sequences of human filamin isoforms A, B and C were obtained
from Uniprot. This sequence was queried against the PDB using FASTA tool.
Comparative modeling predicts the 3-D structure of filamin A, B and C
isoforms model of given protein sequence (target), based primarily on its
alignment to the template (structure determined experimentally). The model
was also checked for φ and ψ torsion angles using the Ramchandran plots. A
comparison of the results shows that all the models expect Ig-like domain 6 and
8 models generated by Modeller program are more acceptable. An example of
Ramachandran plot for filamin A of Ig-like domain 3 is show in .

Conformational protein disorder prediction
The prediction of conformational disorder for individual domains of filamin
was done with the consensus method developed []. The predicted disordered
residues were mapped on the homology models of filamin domains as
discussed below.

(i) Mapping disorder residues on CH domain structures
The topology diagram of filamin isoforms of CH domain consists of four main
α-helices (1, 2, 3, 4) connected by loop regions (0-1, 1-2, 2- 3, 3-4) that might
contain two or three shorter helices. Three dominant helices form a parallel
bundle against which N-terminal helix packs at a right angle. It can be seen that
disordered residues were predicted for CH1 in the loop region 2-3 and for CH2
domain between the helix 2 and loop 3-4.

(ii) Mapping disorder residues on Ig-like domain structures
The topology diagram of Ig-like domain presents an immunoglobulin-like fold
made up of seven β-strands organized in two beta sheets giving a β-sandwich.
The first β-sheet consisted of strands 1, 2, 5 and 6. The second β-sheet
consisted of strands 3, 4, 7 and 8. Only in some of filamin isoforms strand 4
was present. The loops connecting different betastrands were 0-1, 1-2, 2-3, 3-4,
4-5, 5-6, 6-7 and 8-7 (). The predicted disordered residues were
marked on homology models of Ig-like domain 3. From the topology diagram,
we can infer that disordered residues tend to be in the loop region (between
loops 1 and 2) and at the N-terminus. Among filamin protein, Ig-like domain
15 of filamin A and B were predicted to be ordered, whereas Ig-like domain 15
of filamin C was predicted to be disordered. Also Ig-like domain 24 of filamin
A and C were predicted to be completely ordered, whereas Ig-like domain 24
of filamin B was predicted to be partially disordered. For e.g. as shown in
, predicted disordered residues were marked on homology model
filament A of Ig-like domain 3. From the topology diagram, we can infer that
disordered residues tend to be in the loop region (between loop 1 and loop 2)
and at the N-terminus (Table 2, see ).

Conformational disorder in the experimental filamin PDB entries
The conformation disorder status in experimentally solved structures deposited
in the PDB was studied. The conformational disordered status was inferred
from the missing residues in the REMARK 465 entries. In filamin A, Ig-like
domain 17 along with GPIB alpha cytoplasmic domain complex (PDB ID:
2BP3) and the disordered residues were in the loop 0-1 and in the loop 8-9. In
filamin A, Ig-like domain 21 complexed with MIG FILIN peptide (PDB ID:
2WOP) and the conformation disordered were found to be in the loop 0-1, loop
5-6 and loop 8-9. In filamin C, Ig-like domain 23 (PDB ID: 2NOC) and the
conformational disordered residues were found to be in the loop 0-1. The
conformational disorder residues were only observed either in the N-terminus
(loop 0-1) or at the C-terminus (loop 8-9) of Ig-like domain of human filamin.
Despite the paucity of the data, they agreed quite well with the predictions
described above.

Conclusion
The consensus conformational disorder prediction approach was performed on
the modeled filamin proteins to know the occurrence of disorder residues. The
results suggested that there were more occurrences of disorder residues in Nterminus
and occurrence of order residues on C-terminus of Ig-like domain. It
also suggested that more disorder residues can be found between loop 1-2 and
loop 3-4 of Ig-like domain. In CH domain of filamin isoforms, the disorder
residues were predicted between the loop 2 and 3. The conformational disorder
status studied from the experimentally determined filamin structures agreed
quite well with the prediction. Mapping of Predicted disorder residues in
homology model filamin protein will give valuable insights for target selection
and the design of constructs, particularly in structural biology and structural
genomics projects.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work was supported by the Austrian GEN-AU project BIN-II.

Citation:Kumar, Bioinformation 6(10): 366-369 (2011)

Ramachandran Plot of filamin A of Ig-like domain 3. The plot
calculation was done with PROCHECK program

Disordered residues marked on the homology model of filamin A of
Ig-like domain 3. Ig-like domain- β-sheets organized in two beta sheets giving
a β-sandwich. First β -sheet consists of strands 1, 2, 5 and 6. The second β -
sheet consists of strands 3, 4, 7 and 8. Strand 4 is present only in some filamin
isoforms. The loop connecting different beta-strand is 0-1, 1-2, 2-3, 3-4, 4-5, 5-
6, 6-7 and 8-7.

