Background
India has a coastline of about 5500 km in the main land and
about 2000 km in the offshore islands. The coastal area of the
country is blessed with a vast network of backwaters, estuaries,
creeks, lagoons and specialized ecosystems like mangroves and
coral reefs. It has vast beach all along the coast. The
biodiversities in these coastal waters are significantly high.
Hence there is an urge to preserve, conserve and protect the
coastal habitats and the marine environment from all manmade
activities. Oil spills that occur during discharge from the
refineries, accidents of ships/tankers, their grounding, rupture
on seabed and on shore pipelines, offshore oil production and
exploration platforms do affect these habitats causing
irreversible damage to the biodiversity. Thus the pressing
research needs for bioremediation of oil spill, necessitate the
isolation and identification of efficient degrading microbe and
devising ways to accelerate the biodegradation rate.

Ennore Creek:
The present study area covers the Ennore creek (13°13'54.48" N,
80°19' 26.60" E) is located in the northeast coast of Chennai,
Tamil Nadu, India. It lies between the city of Chennai and the
Pulicat Lake, the second largest brackish water lake in India.
The southern arm of the creek is well developed with
industries, utilities, residential areas and fishing hamlets. The
northern section of the creek or Kortalaiyar back water is
connected to the Pulicat Lake and has the North Chennai
Thermal Power plant, Ennore port and Petrochemical industries
[].

The total area of the creek is 2.25 sq km and is nearly 400 m
wide. Meteorological data for Ennore shows average minimum
air temperatures varying between 20°C and 28° C and
maximum temperatures ranging from 28°C to 37°C. The
seasons of Ennore influences its oceanographic characteristics,
i.e., strong winds during the SW and NE monsoons and
cyclonic winds producing larger waves. The region mostly
receives rainfall from the Northwest monsoon during the
months of October and November. Ennore creek was once
encompassed with rich biodiversity and in due course of time it
has been totally wiped out by the petrochemical industries
pumping their effluents into the creek. The creek receives waste
water from industries in the Manali Industrial area. Some of the
petrochemical industries discharge their effluents into the sea
through submerged pipelines, south of Ennore creek mouth.
The present study describes the isolation and identification of
Total Heterotrophic Bacterial (THB) population and
Hydrocarbon Degrading Bacterial (HDB) population,
identification of the efficient degrader, its molecular
characterization and phylogenetic analysis based upon 16s
RNA gene sequencing from the samples collected in Ennore
creek.

Methodology
Sample collection:
Surface sediment samples were collected from oil contaminated
site in Ennore creek. Discharges from the petrochemical
industries can be seen at the southern side of the creek at a
latitude, North of 13°13.413' and longitude of East of 80°19.139'.
The water depth in this region was found to be 0.16m. Surface
sediment samples were collected over a period of 12 months
from the same point, between July 2009 and June 2010, at four
different points in the oil contaminated site using a sterile
stainless steel spatula. The collected samples were pooled and
transferred to pre-sterilized, labeled, self sealed plastic bags and
transported at 4°C to the laboratory and maintained at 4°C until
analysis.

THB population:
THB population was enumerated by pour plate method 
[]. 1g
of the sample was aseptically transferred into 100ml of
physiological saline and transferred in a series of eight 10 fold
serial dilution using physiological saline. 1ml of the aliquot
from each of the dilution was inoculated by pour plate method
onto Nutrient agar (NA) in duplicates. The plates were
incubated at 37°C for 24 - 48 hrs.

HDB population:
HDB population was enumerated by spread plate technique 
[]
by inoculating 0.1 ml of aliquot onto sterile Bushnell Hass agar
(BHA) plates spreaded with 100µl of sterile crude oil. The crude
oil used was sterilized by filtering through Millipore filter,
0.45µ diameter and stored in sterile bottles. Crude oil was
obtained from Chennai harbor with a specific gravity of 0.892 at
25° C and used as the sole carbon source to isolate HDB. The
plates were incubated at 25° C for 7 days.

Identification of THB and HDB population:
The enumerated bacteria were isolated and stored in NA slants
at 4°C for further identification. Primary identification was
done on the basis of colony and cell morphology and Gram
staining. Secondary identification is carried out by performing a
series of Biochemical tests [].

Preliminary screening of crude oil degraders:
The hydrocarbon degraders which are stored on glycerol stock
were subjected to its efficiency of crude oil degradation. The
isolates were single streaked on BHA plates overlaid with 100
µl of crude oil and on plain NA plates and were incubated at
25°C for 14 days and 37°C for 24 - 48 hrs respectively. Any
isolate which grow on NA plates but failed to grow on BHA
plate were confirmed as non degraders. The isolates which
grow on both the agar plates were confirmed as hydrocarbon
degraders []. The zone of clearance around the degraders,
grown on BHA plate with varying diameters was observed.

Selection of efficient degraders:
Isolates showing greater zone of clearance were subjected
further for the estimation of oil degrading efficiency. The
growth was analyzed in terms of biomass and degradation rates
by gravimetric method.

Biomass determination:
Cells of density 108 mL-1 of the above each isolates was
inoculated, into 250 ml flask containing 100ml of BHM with
1.0% crude oil. Optical density was initially recorded at day 1 at
620 nm to find out the initial population. The flasks were then
incubated at 25°C at 150 rpm for 60 days. 3ml of the samples
were withdrawn periodically at day 7, 15, 30, 45 and 60. 3 ml
obtained from the uninoculated flask was used as a blank. The
actual biomass in dry weight (g/L) were obtained from the
constructed calibration curve (y=31.2x) 
[].

Estimation of crude oil degradation:
The estimation of crude oil degradation was accomplished by
gravimetric analysis []. The residual crude oil was extracted in
a preweighed flask with petroleum ether in a separating funnel.
Extraction was repeated twice to ensure complete extraction.
After extraction, petroleum ether was evaporated in a hot air
oven at 60-70°C, the flask was cooled down in a dessicator and
weighed. The percentage of degradation was calculated as
shown in (Please see  for formulas).

Molecular characterisitation:
Strains with efficient degrading ability were identified upto its
species level by 16s RNA sequencing. The sequencing reaction
was performed using BigDye terminator V3.1 cycle sequencing
Kit containing AmpliTac DNA polymerase (Applied
Biosystems, P/N: 4337457). The sequencing reaction - mix was
prepared by adding 1 µl of BigDye v3.1, 2ul of 5x sequencing
buffer and 1µl of 50% DMSO. To 4µl of sequencing reaction –
mix was added 4 pico moles of primer (2µl) and sufficient
amount of plasmid. The constituted reaction was denatured at
95°C for 5 minutes.

Cycling began with denaturing at 95°C for 30 seconds,
annealing at 52°C for 30 seconds and extension for 4 minutes at
60°C and cycle repeated for a total 30 cycles in a MWG
thermocycler. The reaction was then purified on sepheadex
plate (Edge Biosystems) by centrifugation to remove unbound
labelled and unlabelled nucelotides and salts. The purified
reaction was loaded on to the 96 capillary ABI 3700 DNA
analyzer and electrophoresis was carried out for 4 hours.The
16s RNA gene sequences obtained, were compared with the
sequences from Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST)
search of National Centre for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)
data bases. The strains showing more than 97% 16s RNA gene
sequence similarity, was considered to be of the same species.

Phylogenetic analysis:
For construction of a phylogenetic tree, the sequences were
aligned with known bacterial 16s RNAs obtained from the
GenBank database by using MEGA5.1 [] software, Neighbour
Joining and Maximum Likelihood method.

Gene bank, NCBI accession number:
The 16s RNA sequence of the efficient degrader was submitted
to the Gene bank, NCBI, USA to obtain the accession number.

Results and Discussion
THB population:
The average number of heterotrophic bacteria during the study
period was in the order of 22.32× 105 CFUg-1, with the highest
count 32.4×105 CFUg-1 being recorded in the post monsoon,
August, 2009 and the lowest 12.21×104 CFUg-1 in the beginning
of summer, March and April, 2010  (see supplementary
material) &amp; (). Similar studies recorded that the THB
counts ranged from 9.0×103 to 2.6×106 CFUg-1 in the
hydrocarbon contaminated surface sediment samples of
Gokana, River state []. THB population ranged from 105 to
9.0×108 CFUg-1 on sediment samples collected from Cuddalore
fishing harbor over a period of 8 months from October 2011
onwards was reported [].

HDB population:
The average number of hydrocarbon degraders during the
study period was in the order of 10.75×104 CFUg-1, with the
highest count 15.8×104 CFUg-1 being recorded in the post
monsoon, August, 2009 and June, 2010 and the lowest 5.7×104
CFUg-1 in March, 2010  (see supplementary material) &amp;
(). Similarly HDB count between 2.0×107 – 1.8×108
CFU mL-1 was enumerated from petroleum effluent discharge
[]. 
Highest level of HDB was recorded in Dec, 2003 and Jan
2004 during the dry season by in tropical mangrove estuarine
intertidal and sub tidal sediments [].

HDB/THB ratio percentage:
High HDB/THB ratio were recorded is 47.11% in March, 2010,
post monsoon, which may be associated with the slow oil
degrading activities of the oil degraders despite of the presence
of hydrocarbon. Lowest HDB/THB ratio were recorded is
3.48% in November, 2009, monsoon, which may be due to the
proliferation of heterotrophic bacteria  (see
supplementary material) &amp; ().

Identification of THB population:
A total of 247 strains of heterotrophic bacteria were isolated.
The bacterial flora in all the tested samples was predominated
by gram-negative. In the samples collected 62.34% were gramnegative
and 35.63% were found to be gram-positive. The gramnegative
isolates mainly belonged to 4 genera repeatedly viz.
Pseudomonas sp, Vibrio sp, Achromobacter sp and Serratia sp,
accounting to 39.68, 15.78, 3.64 and 3.24% respectively. The
gram-positive isolates belonged to 2 genera viz, Bacillus sp. and
Micrococcus sp. accounting for 27.94 and 7.69% respectively
 &amp; 
 
(see supplementary material) &amp; ()
Studies had reported on the isolation of 32 strains of bacteria
from hydrocarbon contaminated soil and approximately 67% of
them were gram-negative [].

Identification of HDB population:
A total of 113 strains of hydrocarbon degrading bacteria were
isolated from the surface sediment samples, during the period
between July 2009 – June 2010, slightly predominated by gramnegative
bacteria. In the samples collected 52.21% were gramnegative
and 47.78% were found to be gram-positive. The gram
negative isolates mainly belonged to 3 genera viz. Pseudomonas
sp, Achromobacter sp and Serratia sp, accounting to 38.94, 5.31 and
7.96% respectively. The gram-positive isolates belonged to 2
genera viz, Bacillus sp. and Micrococcus sp. accounting for 35.39
and 12.39% respectively  &amp; 
 (see supplementary
material) &amp; ()

To date, genera belonging to Pseudomonas, Micrococcus,
Sphingomonas, Bacillus and Mycobacterium have been
characterized and reported in the literature as hydrocarbon
degrading strains. Studies on biodegradation of the toxic
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon, by an indigenously isolated
Alcaligenes faecalis MVMB1strain, from a petroleum
contaminated site of Ennore creek []. Similarly P. putida was
isolated from the oil-contaminated sites of BHEL Tiruchirapalli,
Tamilnadu, India []. Pseudomonas sp. as the predominant
(64%) crude oil degrading microbe was isolated from oil
polluted sites from Cuddalore fishing harbor [].

Screening of crude oil degraders:
15 isolates of 113 hydrocarbon degraders, were found to
maintain its crude oil degrading ability, which was established
by the isolates growing both on BHA with 100µl of crude oil
and on NA plates. The efficiency to degrade was recorded by
the zone of clearance exhibited by the degraders on BHA paltes.
The zone of clearance, shown a minimum of 2 mm, by Serratia
sp and a maximum of 11mm, by Pseudomonas sp. Pseudomonas sp
found to predominate the group by 40%, followed by Bacillus
sp. 26.67%, Micrococcus sp. by 20% and lastly by Serratia sp. and
Achromobacter sp. by 6.7%. Five isolates, I1, I2, I5, I8 and I14
were found to exhibit maximum clearing zone,  (see
supplementary material) &amp; () compared to the
remaining isolates.

Selection of efficient degraders:
Biomass concentration:
The growth of the 5 isolates shows  (see supplementary
material) &amp; () that all the isolates found to have their
exponential phase between 7 and 45 days and a stationary
phase between 45 and 60 days.

Crude oil degradation:
Estimation of crude oil degradation by gravimetric analysis for
the five isolates has shown  (see supplementary
material) &amp; () that, higher degradation rate, 55% was
observed by I5, Pseudomonas sp. and the least by I14 Micrococcus
sp., 25%.

Molecular characterization:
The 16s RNA partial sequencing () of the 3 different
bacterial generae viz., 1 Bacillus sp. and 2 Pseudomonas sp. had
shown that the organisms were identified as B. subtilis (I1), P.
aeruginosa (I5) and P. putida (I8). The sequences aligned with the
BLAST search of NCBI data bases were found to show 98%
similarity for all the three strains. Bacterial strain PS-I isolated
from soil samples collected from oil production site of Oil and
Natural Gas Commission (ONGC) was identified as P. putida
with 97% similarity by 16s rDNA analysis with blast search of
NCBI, RDP and microseqTM []. Studies on 16s RNA gene
sequence of the isolate VITDDK3 from Ennore creek were
aligned with ClustW data base and the strain was designated as
Streptomyces sp [].

Phylogenetic analysis:
The systematic phylogenetic tree () of Bacillus sp (I1),
Pseudomonas sp (I5) and Pseudomonas sp (I8) and other 15 strains
with high homology was constructed. Evolutionary analyses
were conducted in MEGA5.1. The evolutionary history was
inferred using the Neighbor-Joining method .The optimal tree
with the sum of branch length = 11.01557767 are shown (next to
the branches). The evolutionary distances were computed using
the Maximum Composite Likelihood method and are in the
units of the number of transversional substitutions per site. The
analysis involved 18 nucleotide sequences. All positions
containing gaps and missing data were eliminated. There were
a total of 462 positions in the final dataset.

Gene bank, NCBI accession number:
JQ062961 was the accession number obtained from Gene bank,
NCBI, USA for the partial sequence of the 16s RNA,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa I5 isolate.

Conclusion
The understanding of the influence of different perturbations
on the fate of the released oil in marine environment is useful in
the assessment of the environmental impact of oil released and
its remedial investigation. The present study monitored the
isolation and identification of the heterotrophic and
hydrocarbon degrading microbes of the crude oil contaminated
Ennore creek area. P.aeruginosa JQ062961 was identified as the
efficient degrader among the various strains isolated which can
be applied towards oil discharge and spill treatment. However,
further scale-up studies as applicable need to be carried out in
increasing the degrading ability and stability of the crude oil
degrading isolate and its usage as a possible commercial strain.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Subathra et al, Bioinformation 9(3): 150-157 (2013)

(A) Total heterotrophic bacterial population; (B) Total
hydrocarbon degrading bacterial population; (C) Percentage of
hydrocarbon degraders.

(A) Heterotrophic bacterial flora; (B) Hydrocarbon
degrading bacterial flora; (C) Percentage of heterotrophic and
hydrocarbon degrading bacterial flora.

Percentage of zone of clearance on BHA plates by
hydrocarbon degraders.

(A) Biomass estimation; (B) Estimation of crude oil
degradation.

16s RNA partial sequences.

Molecular phylogenetic ananlysis by maximum likelihood method

