Background
The completion of the human genome project shows a significant gap between the protein sequence and known structure space. 
      Determination of protein structures using conventional X-ray crystallography and NMR (nuclear magnetic resonance) techniques 
      is not adequate to cover the sequence space in the context of drug discovery. Hence, protein structure prediction using 
      computational methods is becoming critical. However, prediction of protein tertiary structure from sequence is non-trivial 
      and is generally achieved by dividing the problem into finite levels of secondary structures and super secondary structures.

The native protein fold is dependent on the physical-chemical properties of the amino acid residues in the sequence. Disulphide 
      bonds between cysteines are important features in the formation of several protein folds. It is shown that cysteines are highly 
      conserved in a protein family and they exit in either oxidized or reduced states. [­] The cystines 
      in oxidized state form covalent bond between each other and are referred as disulphide bridges. A schematic representation of 
      conotoxin (PDB (protein databank) ID 1AS5) showing disulphide bonds is given in . Information about the location of 
      disulphide bridges find application in the understanding of protein folding [
      ] and have a role in thermodynamic stability of proteins. [] 
      Hence, studies on disulphide bridges have become very important. 

Fariselli et al., [] proposed a disulphide 
			prediction model combining 
      a neural network based predictor and evolutionary data with an accuracy of 81%. In 2000, Fiser and Simon [] proposed a method based on multiple sequence alignment and reported an accuracy of 
      82% using Jack Knife test on a larger dataset of 81 proteins. Martelli et al., [
      ] proposed a Hidden Neural Network method (a combination of Hidden Markov Model and Neural Network) with an accuracy of 
      84% for a larger data set of 969 non-homologous proteins. 

Vullo and Frasconi [] used recursive neural networks and evolutionary 
      data to predict bonding patterns using known information on cystine bonding states. The method was tested using a small dataset 
      derived from Swiss-Prot release 39 (SP39) and an accuracy of 48% was reported. Prior to this, Fariselli and Casadio [] linked connectivity prediction to graph matching. They also showed better connectivity 
      prediction by combining with neural network models.

Recently, Ferre and Clote [] emphasized the importance of secondary 
      structure and solvent accessibility information in the development of a di-residue neural network model for predicting disulphide 
      bridges. Cheng and colleagues discussed ways to find and count (using recursive neural network) disulphide bridges in a given 
      sequence and tested the model performance in SPX (an extended dataset of SP39 and SP41 with known disulphide information from 
      PDB). [] Here, we describe a SVM (support vector machine) model for 
      predicting cysteine bonding state as an extension of the work by Cheng and colleagues []. In this method, we predict disulphide bond connectivity given two cysteines with and without a priori knowledge 
      on their bonding state using the SPX dataset. 

Methodology
Support Vector Machines
SVM (Support Vector Machine) is a class of tool used in classification and regression as described elsewhere by Vapnik. 
      [] When used as a binary classifier, an SVM will construct a hyperplane 
      which acts as the decision surface between the two classes. This is achieved by maximizing the margin of separation between 
      the hyperplane and those points nearest to it. The idea is further extended for data that is not linearly separable by first 
      mapping it to a possibly higher dimension feature space. The SVM formulation is desirable due to its mathematical tractability 
      and good generalization properties.

 The data to be classified is formally written as given in the PDF file linked below.

Disulphide bonding patterns in proteins
The human alkaline phosphatase (PDB ID: 1EW2) have 5 cysteines with 2 disulphide bonds formed between 2nd
       ­ 3rd and 4th -5th cysteines in the order of the sequence. It should be noted that the 
       1st cysteine is not involved in any disulphide bond formation. This describes the nature and selectivity of 
       disulphide bond formation in human alkaline phosphatase and gives information on the bonding states of the cysteines in 
       the sequence. However, disulphide bonds are formed in various combinations in different proteins. Therefore, it is of potential 
       interest to predict the nature of disulphide bonds from sequence for which structure is unknown. Nonetheless, this task is 
       non-trivial and predictions of disulphide bonds are generally preformed with and without prior knowledge on cysteine bonding 
       states in a sequence of interest. If we have to predict the disulphide bonding patterns in human alkaline phosphatase assuming 
       the structure is un known, then it can performed either with or without a prior knowledge on the bonding state of cysteines. 
       Prediction of disulphide bonding patterns with prior knowledge on the bonding state (6 different possible combinations) is 
       relatively simpler to that without any prior knowledge on the bonding state of the cysteines (10 different possible combinations) 
       in human alkaline phosphatase.

Dataset
The SPX dataset was created by Cheng et al. [] was used in this study. 
      The dataset contains non-homologous (at a sequence similarity cut-off of &lt; 25%) sequences (containing information on intra-chain 
      disulphide bonds) from PDB. 

Feature parameters
We used five parameters for each cysteine based on physico-chemical properties and probability of occurrence in secondary 
      structures (alpha helix, beta strand, coil), Chou-Fasman conformational parameters [] (3 in number), Kyte-Dolittle hydrophobicity scale [] 
      and Grantham polarity [] (1 in number each) were chosen as features. 
      The Chou-Fasman parameter for helix α is given by Pαi =  fαi / &lt;
      fα&gt; where, &lt;fα&gt; = (number of residues in helixtotal number of 
      residues) and  iis the set of amino acids residues. Similar conformational parameters for strand Pβi  and coil Pγi  were 
      calculated. Kyte-Dolittle hydrophobicity values and Grantham Polarity values were taken from the Protscale website. [
      ] We chose the above parameters after preliminary experimentation with a small 
      dataset (30 protein chains) at different hydrophobic and polarity scales. 

Use of homologous sequence information
Recent CAFASP and CASP results showed that the use of homologous sequences can improve secondary structure prediction, solvent 
      accessibility calculations and cystine connectivity identification. This attempts to capture the evolutionary information for 
      sequences and is generated by developing matrices from sequence profiling. The PSSM (position specific scoring matrix) is 
      generated by calculating position-specific scores for each position from sequence profiles and the scores are a measure of residue 
      variability or similarity in the profile. [] The PSSM generated by 
      PSI-BLAST (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) from a non-redundant (NR) dataset of protein sequences was used in this analysis with 
      an E-value (expect value) of 0.001 at 3 iterations. A window of length  w was considered for every cysteine under consideration 
      at the center of the window and this is used as a feature for the classifier. In PSSMs, there are  elements w*L and L is the protein 
      length. In this study, we used L = 5 after several trails. The PSSM values vary approximately between -10 and +10. However, SVM 
      require values between 0 and +1. Therefore, we normalized the PSSM values using the following function as described elsewhere. 
      []

g(x) = 0 for x &lt;= -5 || 0.5+0.1x for -5 &lt; x &lt;5 || 1.0 for x &gt;= 5

In this formulation x is the value in the PSSM matrix. Instead of taking just 20 values per residue as a feature vector, we 
      considered a window of length  w and all the values within the window were considered in feature definition. [] We were able to incorporate the gradual variation required for the classifier 
      to make a better decision by selecting a window w = 5 for PSSM values. We included 5 X 20 PSSM values in addition to five 
      physical-chemical features for every cysteine under consideration and the total feature length for every cysteine was 105. 
      Hence, the final feature length for each cysteine pair is ((w*20)+5)*2. 

SVM parameters and performance measures
We use SVM with C = 10 and a polynomial kernel with D = 2 in this analysis. We used the SVM implementation SVMHeavy developed based on 
      incremental training of support vector machines as described elsewhere. [–
      ]. A five fold cross validation was performed for each experiment reported in 
      the study. We compared the performance of the model with the results of Cheng and colleagues using specificity, sensitivity and 
      accuracies Qc and Qp. Specificity is the ability to reject false positive matches 
      given by TN/(FP+TN) and sensitivity is the ability 
      to detect true positive matches given by TP/(TP+FP) (TP = True Positive; FP = False Positive; TN = True Negative). Qc defined per 
      disulphide bond is given by (TP + TN)/TP+TN+FP+FN) and  Qpis the accuracy defined per protein sequence.

Results and Discussion
Prediction of disulphide bonds from sequence has a critical role to play in protein fold identification and folding simulation. 
      A number of statistical models have been described using ANN (artificial neural network), HMM (hidden Markov model) and 
      evolutionary algorithm for the prediction of disulphide bonding patterns in protein sequence. [
      ­] However, a SVM model was not 
      available for disulphide boding pattern prediction in protein sequences.  shows the performance of the described SVM model 
      (with prior knowledge on disulphide bonding states). The results were compared with the recursive neural network model by Cheng 
      and colleagues [] in SPX dataset. We compared with the results of Cheng 
      and colleagues [] because the dataset used in the both studies were 
      identical. The comparison shows that the SVM method (4% higher sensitivity and 8% higher specificity) performs better than the 
      recursive neural network model for classification with a priori knowledge. Although, the method performs better than the recursive 
      neural network model, variations in performance are noticed among different prediction runs.

  shows the performance of the described SVM model (without a priori 
			knowledge on disulphide bonding states) and 
      compares with the results of a recursive neural network by Cheng and colleagues [ ] 
      in SPX dataset. The results from SVM model were found to be similar to that of the recursive neural network presented 
      by Cheng and colleagues. [] We measured the performance using the overall 
      accuracy for disulphide bridges and proteins. These results () show the utilization of SVM models for the prediction of 
      disulphide connectivity in proteins. In our opinion, the combination of SVM parameters and the encoding method chosen in model 
      development played an important role in better performance even in small datasets. 

Conclusion
Disulphide bridge pattern identification for fold prediction from sequence is not trivial. In this paper, we have described a 
      SVM model to predict disulphide bridges with and without a priori knowledge on their bonding states. The SVM method is found to 
      perform better than a recursive neural network model described elsewhere. []
      In future investigation, we plan to extend our approach to classify sequences with and without disulphide bonds.

Supplementary Material
Data 1
The authors would like to thank Prof. David Jones for providing the pfilt program. We are also grateful to NCBI for PSI-BLAST 
      program and Cheng and colleagues for making the SPX dataset available on the web. We also thank the anonymous reviewers for help 
      in improving the manuscript. 

Figures and Tables
Disulphide Bridge Prediction with a priori knowledge about bonding state
Number of 
							Bridges	Specificity †	Sensitivity †	Specificity	Sensitivity	
1	0.48	0.71	0.61	0.65	
2	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	
3	0.67	0.62	0.66	0.60	
4	0.55	0.50	0.61	0.51	
5	0.41	0.37	0.56	0.38	
6	0.33	0.29	0.59	0.37	
7	0.36	0.31	0.47	0.36	
8	0.32	0.30	0.44	0.32	
9	0.71	0.61	0.55	0.35	
10	0.40	0.37	0.59	0.45	
12	0.55	0.50	0.60	0.50	
14	0.62	0.57	0.65	0.58	
16	0.23	0.22	0.43	0.25	
17	0.40	0.35	0.51	0.31	
25	0.40	0.24	0.63	0.30	
26	0.73	0.42	0.69	0.30	
Overall	0.54	0.55	0.62	0.59	
Disulphide Bridge Prediction without a priori knowledge about Bonding State
Number of Bridges	Accuracy at Bridge level †	Accuracy at Protein Level †	Accuracy at Bridge level	Accuracy at Protein Level	
1	-	0.59	0.65	0.53	
2	-	0.59	0.59	0.50	
3	-	0.54	0.61	0.56	
4	-	0.34	0.63	0.46	
Overall	-	0.51	0.63	0.52	
† Chang et. al. []

A schematic representation of CONOTOXIN(PDB (protein databank) ID 1AS5) showing disulphide bonds. 


					Citation:Jayavardhana Rama et al., Bioinformation 1(2): 69-74 (2005)

