Background
Gene expression in mammalian system is influenced by various factors.
One such factor is a class of small non coding RNA sequences‐ micro
RNA (miRNA), small interfering RNA (siRNA), transfer RNA (tRNA),
ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and many more. Some of these non‐coding RNAs
are involved in silencing the gene expression by the process of RNA
interference. RNA interference is an effective mechanism for sequence
specific regulation of gene expression [].

MicroRNAs are small, non‐coding regulatory RNA of around 22bp length
that are the key regulators of gene expression. They bind to specific sites in
the 3’UTR region of the transcribed genes and inhibit protein expression
either by mRNA degradation or by inhibition of translational processes, by
cleavage or by repressing translation by complementary binding 
[]. They
play significant roles in various important biological processes, including
diseases, developmental processes, signal transduction, cell maintenance
and differentiation [
–]. 
MiRNAs are evolutionarily ancient component
of genetic regulation and are well conserved in eukaryotic organisms. Till
date, more than 900 human miRNAs have been reported, and estimated to
regulate more than one third of cellular messenger RNAs. Various
experiments have been done which relate dysregulated expression of
miRNAs to a variety of diseases, such as neurodegenerative diseases,
cancer, cardiovascular diseases and viral infections 
[
–].

Many miRNAs are enriched in a tissue-specific manner 
[], for example
miR‐1, miR‐16, miR‐27b, miR‐30d, miR‐126, miR‐133, miR‐143, and the
let‐7 family are abundantly expressed in adult cardiac tissue. The heart
may also contain many other non‐cardiomyocyte cell types, such as
endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, fibroblasts, and immune cells,
which have distinct miRNA expression profiles. During cardiac diseases
and developemental changes, miRNA pattern profiles show differential
pattern. MiRNAs otherwise silenced in adult cardiac cells, tend to get reexpressed
in several cardiac diseases [
–]. Chronic exposure to stress
signals eventually leads to impaired function which finally results in
cardiac failure. The involvement of miRNAs in this pathological process
has been recently found [
–].

MicroRNAs control gene expression by inhibiting the translation and
destabilizing the mRNAs. Emerging evidence suggests a direct link
between miRNA and diseases. The mammalian cell sequences with a high
AU content have been shown to cause mRNA instability 
[].

Methodology
The microRNA dataset comprises experimentally validated sequences
derived from published data. The information was classified with respect
to the association with their expression in heart diseases as reported in the
literature. The sequence data was primarily derived from miRBase
(http://www.mirbase.org/) for humans.

miRBase is a centralized online repository for nomenclature, sequence
data, annotation and target prediction of all published miRNA. It provides
a user-friendly interface for miRNA. It provides a range of data to facilitate
studies of miRNA genomics. All miRNAs are mapped to their genomic
coordinates. Clusters of miRNA sequences in the genome are highlighted,
and can be defined and retrieved with any inter‐miRNA distance.
Sequences from the database as mature sequences in unaligned FASTA
format were retrieved [].

Sequence composition namely A%, U%, G%, C%, A+U% &amp; G+C% was
estimated manually and computationally using BioEdit software
(
http://www.mbio.ncsu.edu/bioedit/bioedit.html), inhouse perl scripts as well as DNA SCANNER software
(
http://nldsps.jnu.ac.in/bioit/ccbb/dnascanner_help.html) 
[].

Disparity in sequence length was eliminated through alignment and
positional frequency for the four nucleotides was estimated using script
MSA.pl for both all (control) and the upregulated (test) sequences. The
relative frequency (RF) was computed by dividing the positional frequency(PF) by the total number of sequences and further estimation was done by
Trend Analysis [].

RF was calculated for each position in aligned sequences and was plotted
in MS-Excel software (). 
The positional variation was estimated using Trend Analysis for both all 
(control) and upregulated (test) dataset.The function COUNTIF was used to 
count the number of nucleotide at each position and hence the positional frequencies 
were known. At each position of the sequence the relative frequency of each nucleotide was
calculated by dividing the positional frequencies by the total number of
sequences for both the groups which are the control and test miRNAs.

Relative frequency = Positional frequency/ Total No. of sequences
Using the relative frequencies calculated for each of the nucleotide at all
positions the graphs were plotted to compare the variations in the pattern
of position wise nucleotide frequency distribution between the upregulated
test miRNA and the control miRNA. Then TREND ANALYSIS for each
of the nucleotides was performed and added to these line graphs to
compare the trend of nucleotide frequency distribution for each nucleotide
base in test and control miRNA dataset.

Results and Discussion
The upregulated miRNA sequences show a significant increase in the AU
content. The average AU and GC content of control miRNAs were
calculated to be 50% each by our analysis. On the other hand the AU and
GC content of test miRNA sequences were found to be 56% and 44%. We
observed that there is a significant increase in the AU content in the
upregulated miRNA sequences (). 
Analysis of the AU and GC content in the downregulated miRNA sequences were also done but
difference was not significant (data not shown).

Trend Analysis
To visualize the trend of frequency distribution for each
nucleotide base the trend analysis graphs were plotted for control and test
sequences. For nucleotide “A” the trend analysis showed a concave
downward curve for both control and test sequences with the trend line of
test curve lying above the control () indicating higher
frequencies of this nucleotide in upregulated sequences. The trend for
nucleotide “U” showed a concave downward curve for the control
sequences whereas the test sequences showed almost a linear curve
(). Nucleotide “G” 
showed concave downward curves for both test and control sequences 
(). For nucleotide “C” 
the trend of test sequences was similar to that for G, as it showed a concave downward
curve for both test and control sequences (). 
The comparative trends of normal and test sequences are shown in Figure 
 and 
respectively. These trends noticeably indicate that since the frequency of
nucleotide “A” and “U” both is higher in the test sequences, hence the
average AU content becomes high altogether for these sequences.

The AUGC frequency distribution at each of the nucleotide positions was
analyzed for control and compared with that for the test by plotting line
graphs from the data calculated from these sequences 
(See ) 
When these graphs were compared for the control and test
sequences, the test graph were observed to have a considerable variation at
each position and for each nucleotide, thus indicating role of sequence
composition in the upregulation of miRNA in cardiac cells. Further control
of test sequences was subjected to analysis using DNA SCANNER such as
A-rule, thermodynamic parameters etc. to generate dinucleotide
distributions of miRNA sequences.

Conclusion
The AU richness in miRNA genes involved in cardiac diseases may be of
importance but requires further studies. AU richness and other parameters
may play a role in their prediction. This is a preliminary study where we
hypothesise role of sequence based parameters in identification of
upregulated miRNA involved in cardiac diseases.

AU‐rich elements (AREs) can act as an important paradigm for posttranscriptional
regulation as a control of cytoplasmic mRNA in the 3'
untranslated region of transcripts encoding oncoproteins, cytokines and
transcription factors. Many RNA‐binding proteins have been shown to
bind to AREs in vitro. Therefore higher AU content may reflect better
binding of certain proteins and thus, a stress condition of heart 
[].

Sequence composition as well as sequence based patterns (thermodynamic
features) plays a role in several biological functions. Sequence
composition as well as sequence based patterns such as protein induced
deformability, propeller twist etc. play a role in identification of genomic
features such as Transcription start sites (TSS), insertion sites
retrotransposons etc. Therefore it would be important to understand
genomic neighbourhood of these upregulated miRNA. Further experiments
are needed to understand the role of high AU content in upregulated
miRNA.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Guptaetal; Bioinformation 5(3): 132-135 (2010)

A comparative analysis of the mononucleotide A, U, G &amp; C and dinucleotides 
G+C &amp; A+U, calculated for the normal and upregulated miRNA

Positional frequency distribution (a), (b), (c), (d) show the comparison 
between test (upregulated) and control (normal) miRNAs of nucleotide
A, U, G and C respectively. The plots also show the trend lines for each 
of the nucleotide's positional frequency in case of both test and control datasets.
(e) and (f) show the trends of all four nucleotides in normal and upregulated 
miRNAs respectively. The x‐axis is the nucleotide position and y‐axis is the
frequency of occurrence of nucleotide.

