Background
Diabetic retinopathy, a microvascular complication of diabetes 
mellitus is a major cause of non-inherited blindness among 
adults []. It is the second leading cause of blindness due to 
retinal degeneration in the working age group, contributing to 
an overall 4.8 % blindness across the globe []. India, being the 
diabetic capital of the world, is feared to end up with an 
alarming 11.4 million type 2 diabetes mellitus individuals 
developing this sight threatening disease by 2025 if the present 
trend of 20 % type 2 diabetes mellitus population developing 
diabetic retinopathy were to continue []. Although diabetic 
retinopathy is a common complication of diabetes, we still 
know little about the underlying molecular mechanisms. 
Analyzing the molecular aspects that govern the development 
of a disease or predisposition to a disease would achieve 
desirable clinical outcomes by helping physicians to decide 
specific management of the disease depending upon the 
patient׳s genetic and environmental profile rather than a 
generalized treatment as laser photocoagulation []. Moreover, 
recognizing an underling genetic susceptibility would help in 
counseling presymptomatic individuals to adopt preventive 
and control measures to delay the onset of disease. Therefore 
this database will help the scientists and doctors in studying the 
candidate genes responsible for causing diabetic retinopathy 
and progress faster the diagnostic treatment.

Methodology
It is found through Literature survey and analysis that many 
genes play an imperative role in causing the disease. 
Information on those genes which play active role in diabetic
retinopathy was retrieved from NCBI (National Center for 
Biotechnology Information) database. The data were 
normalized to reduce and eliminate redundancy. The protein 
functional information was extracted from UniProt database 
which is curated manually. The structures of proteins were 
extracted from PDB (Protein Data Bank) which is a world-wide 
repository of information about the three dimensional 
structures of large biological molecules.

Data collection
Data for this novel database were collected from various 
literature sources such as PubMed [], Science Direct 
[], 
Biomed Central [], Springer link 
[], Scirus 
[], Wiley journals 
[] and also from specific Diabetic journals. The data is 
provided in alphabetical order and the records are organized to 
simplify the task of finding any relevant gene. The schema of 
data collection is given in . The database can be 
accessed alphabetically either using gene name or alternative 
names for detailed information of the gene.

Construction of Diaretinopathy database
The Diaretinopathy database is a HTML based database and is 
represented in table format. The home page and the gene page 
of this database is given as screenshot in  and 
. The 
database is freely available to view and download data at 
http://diaretinopathydatabase.com/. 

Database features
Diaretinopathy database acts as complete web source providing 
information of 102 potential candidate genes  (see 
supplementary material) causing diabetic retinopathy at 
molecular, biochemical and at structural level. For each 
candidate genes the database is designed by taking 24 
parameters into consideration that comprises official Symbol, 
alternative names, description, chromosome map showing the 
location, number of exons and GT-AG introns, motif, 
polymorphic variation, Enzyme commission (EC) number, 
catalytic activity, active site, cofactor, biophysicochemical 
properties, enzyme regulation, induction, molecular pathway, 
interactors, post translational modification, and 3D structure. In 
addition to the molecular class and function of these genes, this 
database also provides links to download the corresponding 
nucleotide and aminoacid sequences in FASTA format from 
NCBI and UNIPROT database respectively which may further 
be used for their computational approaches.

Software
Microsoft windows 95/98/2000/2003/XP operating system 
was used in the development. HTML was used for the creation 
of web pages and Javascript was used for the development of 
database front end.

Hardware:
Personal computer with high speed processor with windows 
95/98/2000/XP Os was used. We used 10.08 MB memory for 
running the databse.

Utility
This is however, the first database containing information of 
susceptibility genes causing diabetic retinopathy. This 
database finds utility to the scientific community for a quick 
review on the genetic basis of disease and may serve as a 
platform for therapeutic treatments.

Future development
The database will be updated periodically and will be linked to 
related resources in near future for easy accessing of 
information so as to ensure that users get latest information on 
diabetic retinopathy. Additionally, our next prospective goal is 
to provide drugs that are used in the treatment of diabetic 
retinopathy treatment.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We gratefully acknowledge the help of Mr. Kannan, Senior 
System Administrator, SGS Technologies, Chennai for 
developing this database.

Citation:Vidhya &amp; Anusha, Bioinformation 10(4): 235-240 (2014)

The Schema of data collection for Diaretinopathy database

A Screenshot of the database “DIARETINOPATHY DATABASE“ home page with links.

A Screenshot of the Gene page in DIARETINOAPTHY DATABASE

