Background
Molecular markers are used in molecular biology to identify a 
particular sequence of DNA. To reveal the genomic relationship 
among molecular markers has become a necessary step for biology 
research. Molecular markers are required in a broad spectrum of 
gene screening approaches, ranging from gene-mapping within traditional 
‘forward’-genetics approaches through Quantitative Trait Loci (QTL) 
identification studies to genotyping studies []. 
The multiple molecular marker database based on various markers 
have been constructed for the purpose of displaying positional 
relationships among mapped markers in each chromosome 
[]. The National Academy of Agricultural Science (NAAS, 
http://www.naas.go.kr/) 
developed a web-based database system to provide 
information about Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) and QTL markers 
in rice. The genetic marker database provides 7,227 SNP markers on each 
of 12 chromosomes by using genetic map in rice []. 
The NAAS has released a major update marker database which provides 
12,829 SNP markers information including gene location information on 
12 chromosomes in rice []. In addition, 
NAAS genome information database provides information on expressed sequence 
tags for 10 species which are possible to detect specific markers and gene clone which 
mapped locus on a genetic map []. In 2013, 
we have released a major update that comprises various new features for annotation 
including 3,280 molecular markers analysis information. Enhanced methods to accuracy 
of gene annotation analysis information are included along with novel functionality 
that allows users to compare the different method for varying sets of molecular markers.

Methodology
Dataset, design and development
The molecular markers were collected from the agricultural 
crops research project of NAAS. As a result of these projects, we 
have investigated 3,280 molecular markers on the genome and
other marker information. The integration-based molecular 
marker database is designed to provide molecular marker 
information on the genome of agricultural crops. This database 
has three major categories which consist of map viewer, RSN 
marker and gene annotation. It could be accessed by using a 
web-based graphical view and anonymous users can query and 
browse the data using the various functions. This database has 
developed an integrated system which platform was developed 
using MySQL, Hypertext Transfer Protocol and Hypertext 
Preprocessor language. The physical and logical scheme 
followed the standard principle of relational database by 
ERWin Data Modeler software (http://www.ca.com). This data 
was stored in an Oracle relational database management system 
(Oracle Database 10g, Redwood, CA, USA, http://www.oracle.com/). 


Implementation and Features
The molecular marker database features three major functions: 
map viewer, RSN marker and gene annotation. Map viewer 
provides molecular markers information including sequence 
and location information on chromosome using a genetic map. 
The marker viewer allows that users can access the information 
of updated 7,250 markers in 2013 (). RSN marker 
menu provides the localization information with marker name, 
chromosome region, gene definition, and product. Users can 
view a table of detailed information for updated 3,301 RSN 
markers using keyword search or inputting identification 
number (). Gene annotation menu provides a table of 
detailed annotation information for additional 3,280 molecular 
markers in 2013. An annotation table provides specific 
information such as marker name, identification number, 
expressed sequence tag information, gene definition and 
general marker information. In the detail table, users can view a 
specific information table through GO, MIPS, EC, SNP and 
Marker view tables. For the example, result by clicking a 
specific accession number in the ‘GO’ menu shows a detail 
information table among three categories: biological process, 
cellular component, molecular function (). 


Discussion and Future work
The molecular marker database of NAAS consists of three 
major functional categories: map viewer, RSN marker and gene 
annotation. The database provides 13,831 molecular markers 
including 7250 marker locations, 3301 RSN marker property, 
3280 molecular marker annotation information in agricultural 
plants. Users are assisted in tracing any new structures of the 
chromosomes and gene positional functions using specific 
molecular markers. In the future, NABIC continually provides 
related services to professional genomic research institutes and 
societies. The integration-based molecular marker database 
provides information through a user-friendly Web-interface 
from searching marker sequences to related genome location 
analysis. We plan to develop an integrated marker database 
that combines a molecular marker database and the other 
genetic marker database for agricultural crops. 


This study was conducted with support from the Research 
Program for Agricultural Science &amp; Technology Development 
(Project No. PJ006651) of the National Academy of Agricultural 
Science, and the Next-Generation BioGreen 21 Program (SSAC, 
grant number PJ009614), Rural Development Administration, 
Republic of Korea. 


Citation:Kim et al, Bioinformation 9(17): 887-888 (2013)

A web snapshot of the molecular marker database is 
shown. The individual menus have a hypertext sub-menu that 
can access linked windows with additional information. A) The 
map viewer; B) RSN marker; C) gene annotation menu table 


