Background
Sphingomyelin (SM) is a component of plasma and lysosomal membranes.
Hydrolysis of SM generates ceramide, sphingosine, and sphingosine 1-
phosphate that have regulatory effects on vital cellular functions such as
proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis 
[–]. Sphingomyelinase (SMase)
hydrolyses SM, and so far five types of SMase have been identified. Alkaline
sphingomyelinase (alk-SMase) is an old enzyme identified in the
sphingomyelinase family. There is no structural similarity with another SMase
and it belongs to the Nucleotide Pyrophosphatase/Phosphodiesterase family. It
has specific properties such as bile salt dependency, trypsin resistance, high
stability and tissue specific expression 
[–]. 
Alk-SMase is down regulated in colon cancer and supplementation of SM in the diet inhibits the formation of
colonic aberrant crypt foci and colon tumors in animal studies 
[]. However,
hydrolysis of SM by alk-SMase generates antiproliferative messengers, such as
ceramide and sphingosine, and proliferative messengers, such as sphingosine 1-
phosphate, ceramide phosphate and lyso-sphingomyelin 
[]. Alk-SMase can
also hydrolyze lyso-phosphatidylcholine (lyso-PC) to monoacylglycerol, with
phospholipase C activity. Lyso-PC is considered being mitogenic under the
action of phospholipase D, which produces lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) from
lyso-PC, leading to cell proliferation through different types of G protein
coupled receptors. It is assumed that alk-SMase, by cleaving off the
phosphocholine headgroup from lyso-PC, reduces the formation of LPA and
protects cells from tumorigenesis [], 
[] and 
[]. Recent findings by Wu et al.
(2005) stated that alk-SMase could hydrolyse platelet activating factor (PAF)
and inactivate them. Alk-SMase may generate the proliferative signals by
generating ceramide, reducing LPA formation, and inactivating PAF 
[].

A direct product of SMase is ceramide, which has a variety of physiological
functions including apoptosis, cell growth arrest, differentiation, cell
senescence, cell migration and adhesion. On the other hand, downstream
metabolites of ceramide are involved in a number of pathological states,
including cancer, neurodegeneration, diabetes, microbial pathogenesis, obesity
and inflammation. Inhibition of SMase activity can suppress pathological
conditions including cancer. Recently, a model for alk-SMase is proposed by
Duan et al.[]. 
In the present study, the 3D structures of human alk-SMase
have been predicted by homology modeling. We studied the effect of zinc
metal ion on alk-SMase by molecular dynamics simulations.

Materials and methodology
The sequence of human alk-SMase was obtained from the NCBI (National
Center for Biotechnology Information) protein sequence database (GI:
33440070). The sequence was submitted to the fold recognition server
Genesilico Metaserver [
https://genesilico.pl/meta2/]. The obtained template
was further submitted for template target alignment using ClustalW
[http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalw2/], Multalign 
[http://multalin.toulouse.inra.fr/multalin/], 
T-Coffee [http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/tcoffee/] and
Muscle [http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/muscle/]. Modeller was used for
comparative modeling []. Loops were modeled using ModLoop
[http://modbase.compbio.ucsf.edu/modloop/]. The resulting alk-SMase model
was evaluated using the structure evaluation software Verify3D
[http://nihserver.mbi.ucla.edu/Verify_3D/] and PROCHECK 
[http://www.ebi.ac.uk/thornton-srv/software/PROCHECK/]. 
Graphical presentations of the 3D model were prepared using Chimera 
[http://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera/]. The
model was submitted to the protein modeling database as PM0076830 [].

Molecular dynamics simulations
Two molecular dynamics simulations were performed for the alk-SMase model
as obtained from homology modeling, one in the absence of Zn2+, and the other
one in the presence of Zn2+ ions. The setup and parameters were chosen to be
identical for both systems. The protein coordinates were first stripped off the
hydrogen atoms using the program Openbabel 
(http://openbabel.org). Since the
united atom GROMOS force field (ffG43a2) was used we first removed all H
atoms and then readded the polar H atoms with charge states of ionisable and
terminal residues selected for a neutral pH. The GROMACS distribution 4.0.3
[] 
was used for the simulations. A cubic box was set up and the molecules
positioned at the centre of the box by defining a 10 Å distance between the
protein and the box edge. A steepest descent minimization was carried out in
vacuum. The systems were then solvated using the simple point charge (SPC)
explicit water model and Na+ and Cl− ions were added to obtain charge
neutrality and a near salt physiological concentration of 0.15 M. Two energy
minimization methods were then applied to the solvated system, that is a
steepest descent minimization followed by a conjugate gradient minimization.
The molecular dynamics runs were carried out in the NPT ensemble for a total
of 6 ns for each system. The first 1 ns involved restraining forces of 1000
kJ.mol-¹.nm-² applied to the heavy atoms of the protein in order to allow the
solvent molecules to equilibrate around the protein and to remove bad contacts.
During the equilibration dynamics the system was coupled to the Berensden
thermostat to maintain a temperature of 300K and to the Berensden barostat to
maintain a pressure of 1 bar. A spherical cut-off of 1.4 nm was used for the
computation of short-range nonbonded interactions and the particle meshewald
(PME) method was used for computing long-range electrostatic
interactions. After 1 ns, all restraints were removed from the protein heavy
atoms and simulation data collected during the 5 ns production runs. Here,
protein atoms and non-protein atoms were separately coupled to a Nose-
Hoover thermostat at 300 K, while the Parrinello-Rahman barostat at 1 bar was
used for pressure coupling. The collected data were then analyzed using
functionalities of GROMACS.

Results and Discussion
Homology modeling of alkaline sphingomyelinase
The protein sequence of intestinal human alk-SMase was queried against the
Protein Data Bank (PDB) using PSI-BLAST 
[http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/sss/psiblast/] 
and the result shows a 31% identity against the Nucleotide
Pyrophosphatase/Phosphodiesterase (NPP) family of proteins. The Critical
Assessment of Structure Prediction (CASP) experiments have lead to sufficient
knowledge that allows us to build a reasonably good comparative model. There
are two factors that affect the accuracy of template derived models: Firstly, the
selection of the template, and secondly, target-template alignment errors in the
distant comparative modeling []. We therefore concentrated on the template
selection and target-template alignment by using different methods in order to
obtain a reliable protein model for alk-SMase.

We queried the alk-SMase protein sequence to Genesilico Metaserver for
template identification which analyses the query using different servers. All
servers predicted the Nucleotide Pyrophosphatase/Phosphodiesterase (NPP)
protein of Xanthomonas axonopodis as target with reliable scores (see
). 
Three structures of the same NPP protein with
PDB codes 2GSO (holoenzyme), 2GSU (Vanadate bound structure), and 2GSN
(Adenosine monophosphate (AMP) bound structure) [] were identified as a
template by the servers. We selected 2GSO as the template for homology
modeling based on good resolution. Target template alignment was carried out
using ClustalW, T-Coffee, Multalign and FFAS. The sequence identity in the
alignments between target and template varied from 31% to 34%. Individual
alignments (Supplementary Figure 1 available with authors) were given as a
input to Modeller to build 3D structures, and the resulting models were
evaluated using Verify3D. Verify3D was used for the assessment of the
reliability of the protein structures. This program analyzes the compatibility of
an atomic model with its own amino acid sequence. Each residue is assessed as
a structural class (alpha, beta, loop, polar, apolar etc.) based on its location and
environment. All the alignment models were found to have good Verify3D
scores (see ). We chose the T-Coffee
alignment model as final model for further studies because for this model
89.95% of the residues have a good Verify3D score. However, the loop region
involving residues 243 to 264 showed a low Verify3D score for the T-Coffee
model. We therefore used ModLoop to build the loop, and the resulting model
yielded 91.75% of the residues with good Verify3D scores. The template
structure 2GSO was evaluated as well using Verify3D and we found that 100%
of the residues had an average score better than 0.2. From this analysis we can
conclude that the modeled structure is a reliable model. As a further test, we
subjected our final model to a Ramachandran plot test (PROCHECK) and
found that 99.1% of the residues were in allowed regions, while only 0.9% of
amino acid residues were in disallowed regions.

Structure of alkaline sphingomyelinase
Alk-SMase is a novel member of the NPP family of proteins and catalyses the
breakdown of SM via the phospholipase C activity. The enzyme shares ˜30%
similarity with the members of the NPP family but with no detectable NPP
activity []. 
Furthermore, alk-SMase shares no similarity with either acidic or
neutral SMases. Therefore, alk-SMase is also called NPP7. Alk-SMase was
well studied in the work by Duan et al. (2006) 
[]. However, there is still no
structural information available for this enzyme. We therefore modeled alk-
SMase by homology modeling. Out of the 458 amino acids in the sequence we
modeled only the residues ranging from 29-415 due to insufficient coverage of
the template. We were not able to model the hydrophobic transmembrane
domain involving both the N and the C terminal of alk-SMase since the
residues from 1-30 and 415-458 are predicted as disordered regions. It has been
experimentally reported that N terminal results in a signal peptide, when it is
cleaved in the mature enzyme, and that the C-terminal is a signal anchor, which
hooks the enzyme to the plasma membrane []. The immunogold labeling
experiments showed that the cellular location of alk-SMase is on the surface of
microvillus membranes in the human intestinal tract 
[]. It is noteworthy that
both the membrane bound form and the secreted form of the enzyme are
reported to be active []. 
The predicted glycosylation sites are shown in .
It has been shown that the glycosylation not only affects the enzyme activity
but also affects the transport of the enzyme to the plasma membrane 
[]. The
predicted model of alk-SMase is shown in . The motif sequence
TKTFPNH in the active site core of NPP family members is different in the
template structure 2GSO [SLTFPNH, 88-94]. The first two amino acids were
modified in the conserved motif of NPP. In alk-SMase the corresponding core
motif [TMTSPCH, 73-79] is reported to be involved in Sphingomyelin
hydrolysis [].

In  
we superimposed the active site of alk-SMase, residues T73, M74,
T75, S76, P77, C78 and H79, with the active site of NPP, residues S88, L89,
T90, F91, P92, N93 and H94. We observed two main differences in the
superimposed structures of template and target. Firstly, a disulphide bond in
alk-SMase is predicted between C78 and C394, which may have an essential
role in the enzyme stability. Furthermore, C78 has an important role in
substrate specificity. It is to be noted here that C78N mutation reduced the alk-
SMase activity but it could not abolish activity completely 
[]. The NPP
structure, on the other hand, has a disulphide bond between residues C314 and
C337, which does not involve in the active site residues. Secondly, there is a
Serine at the 76th position of alk-SMase, which is different in the template
structure having Phenylalanine instead. It has been reported by Gijsbers et al.
(2001) that Phenylalanine in the motif [TKTFPNH] is responsible for the
substrate specificity of the NPP family of proteins 
[]. The corresponding
Serine in alk-SMase might thus have a significant role in substrate specificity.
This conclusion is supported by mutation studies of Wu et al. (2005), which
showed that the S76F mutant abolishes the alk-SMase activity completely 
[].
From the superposition of alk-SMase with the NPP template structure we found
that the metal coordinating residues (Asp39, Asp199, Asp203, Asp246, His247,
and His353) were conserved and also that the metal coordinating sites are
geometrically similar. Mutations on the metal coordinating sites of alk-SMase
abolish its enzymatic activity, suggesting that these metal binding sites play a
vital role in the activity of alk-SMase. From this observation it was inferred
that substrate binding sites may form a single pocket along with metal binding
sites, because it has been shown that either binding of Zinc or mutations of this
site abolish alk-SMase activity.

Molecular dynamics simulations
RMSD, RMSF and SASA analysis
We performed molecular dynamics simulations to investigate the effect of Zinc
ions on the structure of alk-SMase. The main-chain root mean square
deviations (RMSDs) were calculated for the trajectories of the two proteins,
i.e., alk-SMase with and without Zn2+, from the starting structures as a function
of time. The resulting RMSD profiles are shown in . The 5-ns
trajectory shows that the presence of Zn2+ ions has little or no stabilizing effect
on the structure. The zinc bound protein structure has even a little higher
RMSD compared to the unbound structure. For both structures a major
structural change occurred during the initial few picoseconds leading to a
RMSD to ˜0.2 nm, followed by smaller structural deviations for the rest of
both simulations. The final RMSD values are ˜0.25-0.28 nm. The RMSDs
reach a stable value in 2.5 ns for both structures. The main-chain root mean
square fluctuations (RMSFs), calculated over the trajectories for the Zinc
bound form and the unbound form, indicate that a large part of the residues
fluctuates not more than 0.1 nm (). The two proteins display a
different fluctuation pattern except for a few regions. In both structures, the N
and C terminals have higher fluctuations than the other residues. The Zinc
bound residues show similarly small fluctuations as the same residues in the
protein without Zinc. However, the rigidity in the metal binding sites induces
some degree of fluctuation in some other parts of the structure, leading to
differences in the fluctuations observed for alk-SMase with and without Zn2+.
Major fluctuation differences are observed in four regions, namely for residues
29, 48-65, 250-265, and 285-310. We conclude from these findings that the
Zinc ions induce increased fluctuations in some parts of the structure while not
decreasing the overall stability of this structure as judged by the RMSD (see
). The active site motif (TMTSPCH, residues 73-79) shows only
small fluctuations in both structures, i.e., with and without zinc ions. This
rigidity in the active site is due to the disulphide bond between residues C78
and C394. The solvent accessible surface area (SASA) analysis for the active
site residues are shown in . The SASA is the surface area of a
biomolecule that is accessible to a solvent and it can be related to the
hydrophobic core. The results indicate that the hydrophobic core is more
compact in the presence of bound zinc ions compared to the metal unbound
form.

Effect of Zn2+ on the structure of alkaline sphingomyelinase
To further analyze the effect of the zinc ions on alk-SMase, we superimposed
the average structures of both alk-SMase with and without zinc. The results are
shown in Figure  &amp; 
. Secondary structure changes are observed between
the superimposed structure in the regions 43-47, 60-68, 99-104, 115-120, 155-
158, 249-253, 282-286, and 348-352. The superimposed structures indicate that
the presence of Zinc ions affects the secondary structure. In the absence of zinc
ions, alpha helices are lost in the regions 43-47, and 282-286 whereas beta
sheets are lost in the regions 60-64 and 155-158. On the other hand, alpha
helices are gained in the regions 99-104, 115-120 and beta sheets are gained in
the regions 64-68, 249-253, 348-352 and 380-83 in the zinc unbound structure.

In presence of the zinc ions, the ion binding helix region maintains its
secondary structure whereas in the absence of these ions it loses the helix
region partially, leading to a drift in the active site and a structural deviation of
about 4 Å (Supplementary Figure 2A available with authors). The mobility of
the zinc binding residues in the absence of metal ions and the resulting changes
of the active site conformation provides an explanation why the mutation on
metal binding residues abolishes the enzyme activity. The metal binding
residues and the active site motif form together the required conformational
scaffold for sphingomyelin to bind, and mutations in either region abolish the
enzyme activity. The active site motif helix region was stable during both
simulations, i.e., in the presence and absence of the zinc ions, apart from a
minor structural deviation of about 1.30 Å in the zinc unbound form
(Supplementary Figure 2B available with authors). The results of our
simulations show that the Zn ions are important for the overall stability of the
active site conformation.

Conclusion
This study was carried out to build the model structure of human alkaline
Sphingomyelinase on the basis of the crystal structure of Nucleotide
Pyrophosphatase/Phosphodiesterase (PDB code 2GSO). The resulting structure
was evaluated using Verify3D and PROCHECK and was found to be good.
Molecular dynamics simulations confirm that Zn2+ plays an important role in
the activity of the enzyme. The Zinc metal ion has a crucial role in secondary
structure and tertiary structure stabilization.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We acknowledge the facilities supported by Centre of Excellence grants from
Department of Information Technology (DIT) and the financial assistance in
the form of Major Research Project (37-314/2009) from University Grant
Commission (UGC), Government of India, New Delhi. B.S. and O.O
gratefully acknowledge the Julich Supercomputing Centre for providing and
maintaining the computing resources used in this work.

Citation:Suresh et al, Bioinformation 6(2): 78-82 (2011)

Predicted 3D Structure of alkaline Sphingomyelinase.
Sphingomyelinase hydrolyzing motif (73-TMTSPCH-79) is shown in blue
color, the metal binding residues are shown in grey color and the glycosylation
residues are shown in yellow color. Labels are shown in single letter code with
numbering. Amino acids are shown in ball &amp;
stick representations.

Superimposition of the 3-D models obtained from Chimera (green)
compared with their template (PDBID 2GSO) (in red). Only the amino acids
side chains are shown. Metal binding amino acid side chains are shown in ball
and stick model and the active site motif [TMTSPCH for alk-SMase and
SLTFPNH for template 2GSO] are shown in stick representation. Zinc binding
to the residues are shown in blue color.

The starting structures of the protein with zinc (shown in red line)
and without zinc (show in black line). (3a) Root Mean Square Deviations
(RMSD); (3b) Root Mean Square Fluctuations (RMSF); (3c) Accessible
Surface Area (ASA)

The superimposed average structure in presence of zinc (brown) and
in absence of zinc (grey) is shown. Zinc ions are shown in spheres (cyan).
Secondary structure changes observed regions are highlighted in green colour.

