Background
Leishmaniasis is a parasitic disease that caused by infection with species of Leishmania and occurs in most parts of the
world. Visceral Leishmaniasis (VL) is caused by Leishmania donovani and motivates large-scale epidemics
with a high fatality rate. [] Leishmania species possess a
membrane glycoprotein on their surface which is called leishmanolysin. This major surface glycoprotein of Leishmania, referred to as 
gp63, is a zinc metalloproteinase of 63,000 Daltons containing a glycosyl phosphatidyl inositole (GPI) membrane anchor, which is displayed
abundantly on the surface of promastigotes (~5×105 molecules/cell), however in a less density on the surface of
amastigotes. [] gp63 has been shown to function in the receptor mediated uptake 
of promastigotes by macrophages in the mammalian host. [] It is one of the parasite
receptors for host macrophages, and parasite mutants lacking the protein are non-virulent. [] 
gp63 facilitates survival of the extracellular promastigote stage in the presence of host complement, likely by converting complement 
component C3b to C3bi. It also promotes attachment of promastigotes to macrophage receptors such as CR3, the receptor for C3bi. 
[] There is evidence that gp63 promotes amastigote survival within macrophage
phagolysosomes. gp63 protects parasite from lysosomal cytolysis and degradative activities of macrophage by its protease activity. 
[] It can also protect liposomeencapsulated proteins from phagolysosomal 
degradation by macrophages. [] Thus, gp63 plays a crucial role in macrophage 
binding to Leishmania and in intramacrophage survival and replication. [] gp63 
is a neutral site-specific endopeptidase cleaving a variety of substrates, [] 
such as clusters of differentiation (CD) 4 molecules on human T cells. [] It is 
synthesized as an inactive precursor, which is activated via a cysteine switch mechanism [] 
and has been reported to hydrolyze a variety of substrates including casein, azocasein, gelatin, albumin, hemoglobin and fibrinogen. 
[] gp63 shares several characteristics with the members of the matrix 
metalloproteinase family including degradation of components of the extracellular matrix such as fibrinogen, location at the cell 
surface, requirement for Zn2+ and sequence similarity of the proposed active site, inhibition of the proteinase activity by chelating 
agents and α2-macroglobulin, [] secretion as a latent form of the enzyme and 
the activation by mercurial compounds. [] gp63 is one of the promising 
candidates for subunit vaccine against Leishmaniasis. As the three-dimensional structure of Leishmania donovani gp63 was not available, 
no correlations could have been made between the 3D structure and function of its protection as vaccine. By considering the progress of 
bioinformatics in molecular modeling, we can model gp63 structure using homology modeling with high accuracy, and then analyze 3D
structure of gp63 which can reveal exact facts about its structure, interaction and function.

Methodology
Searching databases to find right sequences
Target protein was searched by name in the Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL databases through ExPASy server to find raw sequence. Visceral 
Leishmaniasis (Kala azar), caused by Leishmania donovani, gives rise to large-scale epidemics with a high fatality rate and 
its treatment is a serious problem and is also widely endemic in Iran. [] 
Therefore, among 452 sequences for gp63 in Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL databases, the sequence of Leishmania donovani gp63 was selected from 
Swiss-Prot database.

Comparative modeling
The process of comparative protein structure modeling usually requires the use of many programs, to identify template structure, 
generate sequence-structure alignments, build and evaluate models. Our results can be divided into four categories: 
1) Initial construction of comparative model was achieved by MODELLER and MOE. 2) Refinement of comparative models was facilitated by 
MODELLER, MOE and Swiss-PdbViewer. 3) Inspection and analysis of models was made by ERRAT, VERIFY3D, PROCHECK and WHAT IF. 
4) The models were got better when template selection, target-template alignment and model building were improved.

Finding structures and sequences related to the target sequence
Before any modeling can begin, the sequences and segments with known 3D structures that are related to the sequence being modeled 
must be found. This was achieved by searching a database of structures that are representative structures of the whole 
Protein Data Bank (PDB), using BLAST programs through different servers. The similarity search was performed at the SIB by the 
BLAST network service using NCBI-BLAST 2 program under BLOSUM62 comparison matrix. The similarity search was also carried out through 
EBI and NCBI servers and the results were quite similar. Another method to find template is fold assignment or threading. It was 
achieved through FUGUE and 3D-PSSM web servers.

Template selection
Several factors need to be taken into account when selecting a template. The quality of a model increases with
overall sequence similarity of template to the target and decreases with the number and length of gaps in the
alignment. The simplest template selection rule is to select the structure with the highest sequence similarity to the
target sequence. Another important parameter is the length of the template. Therefore, it is necessary to consider
family, identity and the number of residues participating in the alignment in order to select the best template. CATH
and SCOP databases were used to find the related super family of target protein. At the super family level, proteins
probably share an evolutionary relationship, even if they share relatively low amino acid sequence identity in pair
wise alignments. Thus, the selected templates must be assigned based on classification. The best result for
alignment of gp63 sequence against PDB entries through ExPASy server was obtained.

Alignment of the target sequence and template
3D structure solution does not always end up with full length structure due to the complexity of some regions in X-ray diffraction 
map. To avoid mismatching between the number of the residues in the sequence and the PDB file, we derived the sequence directly from the 
related PDB file through Swiss-PdbViewer not the databases such as SwissProt and TrEMBL. Although MODELLER could do sequence and 
structure alignment, the alignments were also carefully prepared by other resources such as ClustalX, T-COFFEE, CPHmodels, ESyPred3D, 
FUGUE and 3D-PSSM. These diverse alignments with different gap regions created various models that had different ERRAT and VERIFY3D 
scores.

Evaluating the models
After building the models, they checked for possible errors and determined whether or not were acceptable. Initial models were 
subjected to detailed evaluation, mainly by visual inspection of structural consistency in Swiss-PdbViewer and ViewerLite, secondary 
structure matching with the secondary structure prediction and using ERRAT program. Two types of evaluation were accomplished: stereo 
chemical quality and side chain environment. PROCHECK was utilized to assess the quality of the conformation of the polypeptide backbone 
and side chains using a Ramachandran plot. The steric overlap of atoms (bad clashes) was checked using bump check within WHAT IF, and 
selection of ‘aa Making Clashes’ command in Swiss-PdbViewer program.

VERIFY3D and ERRAT were used to evaluate the compatibility between the amino acid sequence and the environment of the amino acid side 
chains in the model. The result of ERRAT program was the main assignment factor for investigating of the progress in comparative 
modeling of target protein. Also, there were reasonable agreement between the position of helices and sheets in each generated model and 
those in the secondary structure prediction by Jpred server. This agreement confirmed the accuracy of modeling procedure for target 
protein.

Model regeneration and refinement
In the case of unsuccessful models (bad points and scores in evaluation), we stepped backward and realigned or regenerated models 
sometimes using totally different alignment or template till an acceptable model was created. To clarify the affect of alignment in 
refining a model an example is given here. For instance, only with the following change in the pairwise alignment of gp63, ERRAT 
percentage rise from 85.043 to 91.649 presenting huge improvement in model quality.

Discussion
Overall structure
gp63 is a compact molecule containing predominantly β sheet secondary structure. This is against of the other protozoan 
surface antigen structures determined to date. [] The physico-chemical 
properties of gp63 calculated by ProtParam (an online tool on the ExPASy server) showed that the exact molecular weight was 62950.3 
Dalton, isoelectric point (pI) = 6.41 and the total charge was -5. The three-dimensional structure of gp63 protein was modeled using 
comparative modeling of this protein based on the X-ray crystal structure of the Leishmania major gp63 (PDB code: 1LML) as a template. 
The alignment of target sequence and template showed 81¢ sequence identity. According to data in Ramachandran plot of the 
model, percentage of residues in most favored regions was above 84¢. Consequently, this result suggested the proper geometry 
for model. Because the model optimized and refined by MODELLER, it had no bump (bad clashes). Furthermore, the result of ERRAT program 
(overall quality factor = 91.649) showed the gp63 model had acceptable side chain environment. Also, the Accessible Surface Area (ASA) 
of gp63 model, calculated by RVP-NET program, indicated agreement between the model and the results (). 
The translated amino acid sequence shows that Leishmania donovani gp63 contains 590 amino acids precursor protein consisting of an 
NH2-terminal signal peptide of 39 amino acids for membrane targeting, a pro region of 48 amino acids, the mature protein of 478 amino 
acids containing glycosylation and putative catalytic sites, and a COOH-terminal signal peptide of 25 amino acids for GPI attachment 
[] (). The protein consists of 
three domains: the N-terminal, central and C-terminal domains ().

N-terminal domain
The N-terminal domain includes Val87-Ser260 of the model and has a fold similar to that of the catalytic modules of zinc 
proteinases. [] This domain contains a catalytic zinc atom and an active site 
helix containing the two histidines of the zinc proteinase sequence motif HEXXH (His-Glu-Xaa-Xaa-His). There are deep surface 
indentations at domain interfaces that join the active site cleft, which is located between the N-terminal domain and the central domain 
of the molecule. [] Three-dimensional structures of zinc proteinases containing 
the HEXXH sequence motif have been grouped into two families: the bacterial thermolysins and the metzincins. 
[] Molecules of both classes have a major catalytic domain with a topology 
consisting of two α-helices (A and B) packed against one side of a five-stranded twisted β sheet. The HEXXH motif is located 
on helix B and the two histidine side chains are ligands of the zinc atom active site. The N-terminal domain of gp63 includes 
35- and 38-residue inserted ’flaps‘ which cover the side of the β sheet opposite of the helices (). 
The 38-residue flap replaces the second strand of the central sheet in the conserved topology. 
[] There are two disulfide bonds within this domain, one between residues 
Cys112-Cys129 and the other is between residues Cys178-Cys217 ().

Central domain
Residues Val261-Glu378 of gp63 folds into a compact domain with antiparallel helices. A single disulfide bond (residues Cys301-Cys373) 
connects the C terminus of the domain to the beginning of the long loop (). Metzincin 
class zinc proteinases have an extended zinc proteinase motif HExxHxxGxxH, where the glycine residue is part of a tight turn at the end 
of active site helix B, allowing the extra histidine of the motif to form the third ligand of the zinc atom active site. Metzincins 
share two additional structural features, an unusual tight 1,4 ‘met-turn’ with a conserved methionine at the base of the active 
site, and a following helix (helix C), which is roughly parallel to the active site helix B. The central domain of gp63 contains a 
corresponding met-turn (Asp329-Ala335) () and a helix C, but there is an unexpected 62 amino acids insertion between the 
glycine and third histidine residue (Gly258-His321) of the metzincin motif that represents half of the central domain. gp63 is 
clearly a metzincin class zinc proteinase, but does not satisfy the defining sequence motif HExxHxxGxxH because of the insertion 
between the glycine (Gly258) and the last histidine (His321).

The active site
To find likely residues involved in the active site, residues within a 4 Angstrom radius of the zinc atom were selected 
using Swiss-PdbViewer program because the zinc atom has already been identified as a major part of the active site. 
[] The zinc atom is coordinated to the nitrogen atoms of His251, 
His255 and His321. The gp63 zinc active site appears to be tetra coordinated, with Glu252 
().

C-terminal domain
The elongated C-terminal domain (residues Lys379-Asn565) of gp63 consists of mainly antiparallel β strand and random coil 
structure with only minor helical contributions. The domain contains six disulfide bonds (Cys380-Cys443, Cys393-Cys412, 
Cys402-Cys477, Cys454-Cys498, Cys503-Cys553 and Cys523-Cys546) (). The N-terminal part 
of the domain also contains three two-stranded antiparallel sheets. These sheets are connected via two short helices to an antiparallel 
six-stranded β sheet folded into a sandwich structure and this is in turn attached via two short helices to the GPI anchor. 
[]

Conclusion
Although there is no evidence for similar antigenic variation in Leishmania, gp63 sequences derived from
different species do differ. Leishmania sequences are at least 60¢ identical and the mature proteins share all 18
cysteines, the active site zinc ligand and methionine turn residues with the less conserved gp63 homologues from
Crithidia and Trypanosoma brucei. The Leishmania donovani carbohydrate-linked residue (Asn287) and the
GPI anchor attachment site at Asn565 are not conserved in Leishmania species. As expected, surface residues are less
conserved than interior residues, and a surface representation of variability suggests sequence variability
is correlated with structural flexibility. In summary, this work provides evidence that the homology modeling
approach based on a reliable template could result in accurate and precise structural models that bear significant
quality for finding crucial residues which affect protein structure, interaction and function.

The authors wish to thank Dr. Najmeh Zarei (Pharm.D.) for his kind helps and comments in preparation of this manuscript.

a) Three-dimensional structure of gp63 model based on 1LML, 1CM5, 1TZC and 1HGV. α-helices and β-sheets are in red 
and blue respectively. Green color represents loop while the grey areas are turns. Zinc atom is shown as a yellow sphere. 
ASA calculation for Glu46 was 48.4 which indicate to exposed amino acid. b) 3D structure of gp63 domains. c) The N-terminal domain 
of gp63 model. Pink ribbon represents the 35-residue flap while the yellow ribbon shows 38-residue flap. Dark yellow stick style 
indicates disulfide bond. d) The central domain of gp63 model. Orange ribbon represents the met-turn. e) The active site of 
gp63 model. His251, Glu252, His255 and His321 are within 4 Å radius of the zinc atom. The residues are shown as stick 
display style and zinc atom as yellow sphere. f) The C-terminal domain of gp63 model.

