Background
Glycosylation is one of the most common post-translational
modifications and more than half of all mammalian proteins are
glycosylated []. The studies towards isolation, discovery and
subsequent identification of glycosylated proteins are becoming
more and more important in glycoproteomics and disease
diagnosis []. In particular, differential glycosylations (e.g.
missing, aberrant or additional) are known to be linked to
certain diseases and may be utilized as markers for diagnosis
and/or therapeutic monitoring []. Glycoproteins play essential
roles in controlling various biological processes in immunology,
cancer, protein folding, host‐pathogen interactions, human
diseases and signal transduction etc. The broad specificity
lectins, such as Concanavalin A (Con A), are widely applied for
enriching serum glycoproteins []. Human seminal plasma
contains a large array of proteins of clinical importance which
are essentially needed to maintain the reproductive physiology
of spermatozoa and for successful fertilization. Seminal plasma
glycoproteins are known to participate in sperm-egg
recognition [], modulation of capacitation 
[,
] and acrosome
reaction inhibition []. Moreover, Con A-interacting fraction of
human seminal plasma is reported to have decapacitating
activity []. 
Thus, functional analysis of various proteins of this
fraction is of immense importance for better understanding of
fertility related processes.

We had isolated glycoproteins from human seminal plasma by
lectin affinity chromatography using Con A – agarose. Overall
ten proteins bands on SDS-PAGE gel, corresponding to nine
different proteins, were identified by MALDI-TOF/MS
analysis, viz. aminopeptidase N precursor (ANPEP), lactoferrin
(LTF), prostatic acid phosphatase (ACPP), human zinc-alpha-2-
glycoprotein (AZGP1), prostate specific antigen (KLK3),
progestagen-associated endometrial protein (PAEP), kinesin
light chain 4 (KLC4), izumo sperm-egg fusion protein 1
(IZUMO1) and prolactin inducible protein (PIP) 
[]. There are
a number of bioinformatics tools available for in silico analysis
of proteins isolated and identified in protein chemistry
laboratories. These analyses help us in better understanding of
functional aspects of new proteins in various biological
processes. Hence, we report the computational analysis of Con
A binding glycoproteins, identified, using various
bioinformatics tools. The objectives of this study include, (1)
prediction of glycosylation sites using sequence information
and to compare the results with available experimental data, (2)
functional annotation studies using Interpro and Blast2GO to
cluster these proteins into functional groups, and (3)
identification of protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks.

Methodology
Sequence Retrieval
The amino acid sequences of glycoproteins - ANPEP (P15144),
LTF (P02788), ACPP (P15309), AZGP1 (P25311), KLK3 (P07288),
PAEP (Q5T6T6), KLC4 (Q9NSK0), IZUMO1 (Q8IYV9) and PIP
(P12273) were retrieved in FASTA format from Protein
Knowledgebase (UniProt KB) [].

Prediction of glycosylation sites and comparison with known sites
The possible N-glycosylation sites were predicted using
NetNGlyc 1.0 program []. This program predicts Nglycosylation
sites in human proteins using artificial neural
networks that examine the amino acid sequence of N-X-S/T
(Asn-Xaa-Ser/Thr). The predicted sites were compared with the
known sites in these proteins, as evidenced by direct
experiments [].

Statistical analysis of amino acid content
The statistical analysis of amino acid content of each protein
was done using program Pepstat []. This is a basic statistical
tool which calculates the % share of individual amino acids in a
protein sequence as well as shares of nine specific types of
amino acid groups, such as tiny, small, aliphatic, aromatic,
polar, non-polar, charged, basic and acidic.

Functional annotations and clustering using Blast2GO and InterProScan
InterProScan is a popular program suite for protein sequence
analysis and classification []. It classifies sequences at various
levels such as superfamily, family and subfamily and predicts
the occurrence of functional domains and repeats. InterPro
analysis was performed for glycoproteins to identify their
subcellular locations and functions. The functional annotations
were also carried out using Blast2GO and subsequently
proteins were grouped into functional clusters 
[]. All protein
sequences were arranged in a single file in FASTA format and
uploaded to the Blast2Go software suite 
[] to facilitate batch
handling of sequence data. The file was processed by
implementing batch mode blastp, mapping to retrieve GO
terms associated with each blast hit and Gene Ontology
annotations. The program finally provides refined functional
terms to each query based on their functions, statistical testing
and InterProScan analysis. Finally, the retrieved information
was used for graphical representation of results (cellular
components, biological processes and molecular functions) in
the form of pie charts.

Prediction of protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks
PPI networks for each protein were retrieved from STRING
database [,
]. This database consists of known and
predicted protein interactions collected from direct (physical)
and indirect (functional) associations. This database
quantitatively integrates interaction data from four sources –
genomic context, high-throughput experiments, co-expression
and previous knowledge from research publications.

Results and Discussion
The predicted N-glycosylation sites in Con A binding
glycoproteins were compared with experimentally known sites
in these proteins (see,  in supplementary material ).
AZGP1, LTF, ACPP, KLK3 and PIP have 4,3,3,1 and 1 known
N-glycosylation sites respectively, which were accurately
predicted by NetNGlyc 1.0 program. This program predicts that
ANPEP has 11 potential N-glycosylation sites (N42, N128,
N234, N265, N319, N527, N573, N625, N681, N735, and N818),
of which six are previously known (N128, N234, N265, N573,
N681 and N818). IZUMO1 has one known N-glycosylation site
at position N204 and predictions indicate that it may have
another potential glycosylation site at position N239. PAEP and
KLC4 have no known N-glycosylation sites and NetNGlyc 1.0
predicts that they may have 2 (N33, N55) and 1 (N4)
glycosylation sites respectively. The Pepstat results show that
nine glycoprotein sequences have the following mean mole
percentage values of different types of residues: Aliphatic
(A+I+L+V) = 29.13±6.81; Aromatic 
(F+H+W+Y) = 11.25 ±2.37;
Non-polar (A+C+F+G+I+L+
M+P+V+W+Y) = 53.73±4.12; Polar
(D+E+H+K+N+Q+R+
S+T+Z) = 46.16±4.12; Charged
(B+D+E+H+K+R+Z) 
= 25.46±3.83; Basic (H+K+R) = 13.30±1.80;
Acidic (B+D+E+Z) = 12.13±2.36.

InterProScan results were integrated to the Blast2GO analysis to
increase the confidence level of functional clustering. The final
outputs of functional annotation studies are shown in 

and  (see supplementary material). The annotations
specify that these proteins are involved in various biological
processes including transport (LTF, PAEP), morphogenesis
(ANPEP, KLK3), metabolic processes (ANPEP, AZGP1, KLK3),
cell differentiation (ANPEP) and homeostasis (LTF). ACPP and
IZUMO1 have reported roles in hydrolysis and reproduction
(sperm-egg fusion) respectively, but the exact biological
processes, they are involved, are still unknown. The functional
clusters show that Con A − binding glycoproteins have two
major molecular functions – hydrolase activity (ANPEP, LTF,
ACPP, AZGP1, KLK3, PAEP) and binding – protein (LTF,
AZGP1, KLC4, PIP)/carbohydrate (LTF)/lipid (AZGP1). The
subcellular localizations of these proteins are also shown in the
results, indicating that most of them originate from different
cellular components. These proteins play imperative roles in
various biological processes related to fertility/infertility and
their expression regulates the processes essentially required for
successful fertilization. Their key roles in reproductive
physiology are well discussed []. PPI networks for these
glycoproteins are shown in . The large
interactomes for most of the proteins point towards their
versatile roles in wide range of biological processes. Thus, in
depth characterization of these proteins may reveal that these
are more important and multifaceted entities than what we are
assuming about them for long.

Conclusion
The computational tools aid to the functional characterization of
biomolecules by identifying their homologs in the biological
databases and retrieving information from the research articles
published worldwide. It helps researchers to guide their future
studies towards in vivo or in vitro functional characterization.
We have successfully identified the N-glycosylation sites of Con
A binding glycoproteins isolated from human seminal plasma,
clustered them into functional groups and mapped their
interactomes. Thus, it is of importance in better understanding
of functional aspects of these proteins in reproductive
physiology.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work is supported by grant from Department of Science
and Technology (DST), New Delhi INDIA. Anil Kumar Tomar
also thanks DST for his fellowship.

Citation:Tomar et al, Bioinformation 7(2): 69-75 (2011)

Blast2GO analysis of Con A binding glycoproteins of
human seminal plasma (see,  in supplementary material)

Protein interaction networks (see, Tables 3-11 in
supplementary material)

