Background
Glycosylation is the process of addition of a carbohydrate moiety to a protein
molecule. Addition of a carbohydrate moiety to the side chain of an amino acid
residue affects the physicochemical properties of that protein. Glycosylation
process alters the different properties of proteins like proteolytic resistance,
protein solubility, stability, local structure and immunogenicity 
[]. Two
important types of glycosylation are O-linked and N- linked Glycosylation. Nlinked
glycosylation is a co-translational process involving the transfer of a
precursor oligosaccharide to asparagine residues in a sequon Asn-X-Ser/Thr
(N-X-S/T), where X is any amino acid other than Proline 
[]. This is however,
not a specific consensus, since not all such sequins are modified in the cell. Olinked
glycosylation involves the post-translational transfer of an
oligosaccharide to a serine or threonine residue 
[]. A large number of proteins
contain the N-X-S/T motif and thus could be potential glycoproteins 
[]. A
protein can have a number of these tri-peptide motifs but only a few of them or
selected ones get glycosylated due to structural constraints. Glycosylation was
earlier thought to be restricted only to eukaryotes but now both O- and Nlinked
glycosylation pathways have been studied in detail in prokaryotes
particularly in Campylobacter jejuni 
[].

Protein glycosylation is widespread in prokaryotes, with more than 70 bacterial
glycoproteins reported so far []. 
Most of these are surface or secreted proteins
that affect how bacteria interact with their environment, for instance, by
influencing cell-cell interactions, surface adhesions, or by evasion of immune
response [,
]. 
The well-known glycoproteins of E. coli present several
similarities: (a) are secreted as autotransporters, which represent a branch of the
type V secretion pathway. Autotransporter proteins belong to the family of
outer membrane or secreted proteins. They are involved in virulence functions
such as adhesion, aggregation, invasion, biofilm formation and toxication. (b)
Have nearly identical N-terminal 19-amino-acid repeats; (c) are glycosylated
by the addition of heptoses mediated by single glycosyltransferases that are
functionally interchangeable; and (d) are versatile virulence factors mediating
bacterial autoaggregation and biofilm formation as well as adhesion to and
invasion of mammalian cells. Because of these similarities, enzymes like
AIDA-I, TibA, and Ag43 have been named self-associating autotransporters
(SAAT) []. 
In this study we predicted the number of glycosylation sites in a
large group of autotransporter proteins of the bacterial pathogens. This may
have implications in terms of their virulence and hence overall pathogenecity
of the host bacteria possessing them.

Glycosylation in Bacteria
Studying glycosylation in relatively less-complicated bacterial systems, such as
mucosal associated pathogens, provides the opportunity to exploit glycoprotein
biosynthetic pathways. For example, C. jejuni has been established as an
excellent model for an N-linked glycosylation pathway in bacteria, with the
activities of the characterized pgl (protein glycosylation) gene cluster
assembling and transferring a known heptasaccharide from a membraneanchored
undecaprenylpyrophosphate-linked donor to an asparagines residue in
proteins at the classic Asn-X-Ser/Thr motif 
[]. There is strong evidence for the
presence of a conserved glycosylation operon known as pgl in Campylobacter
jejuni and many other bacteria. Proteins encoded by the pgl locus are capable
of carrying out functions ranging from the synthesis of structural components
to the functional molecules, i.e. carbohydrate moieties and enzymes
respectively, involved in the cascade of glycosylation. Glycosylation pathway
in C. jejuni is encoded by the pgl gene cluster. One protein from this cluster,
PglB is considered to be the oligosaccharyl transferase (OST) due to its
homology with the Sttp3 protein, which is a subunit of yeast OST complex. Nlinked
glycosylation is a very common post-translational modification in
eukaryotes []. PglB and Sttp3 both have a conserved signature motif
‘WWDYG’ which has been shown to be essential for activity in vivo.

PglB comprises of 10-12 predicted transmembrane domains and a small Cterminal
periplasmic domain. It has also been shown that unlike the eukaryotic
OSTs, PglB is capable of transferring the heptasaccharide to the asparagine
side chain of fully folded acceptor proteins in vitro as well as in periplasm 
[].
The optimal glycosylation consensus sequence for PglB is ‘DQNAT’ although
additional binding determinants and local peptide confirmations are also likely
to affect glycosylation efficiency in full-length proteins 
[]. Furthermore,
PglB has substrate flexibility and can accept multiple peptide substrates. In
contrast to the eukaryotic N-linked glycosylation, the enzymes from C. jejuni
can be readily over expressed in functional form in E. coli, which makes them
more amenable to biochemical studies and hence in better understanding of the
functioning of the enzyme [].

Glycosylation in Archaea
AglB is a homologue of the bacterial PglB in Archaea. The understanding of
genetic pathways for the assembly and attachment of N-linked glycans in
bacterial systems far outweighs the knowledge of comparable processes in
archaea. Recent characterization of a novel trisaccharide [b-ManpNAcA6Thr-
(1-4)-b-GlcpNAc3NAcA-(1-3)-b-GlcpNAc] N-linked to asparagine residues in
Methanococcus voltae flagellin and S-layer proteins affords new opportunities
to investigate N-linked glycosylation pathways in archaea [].

Methodology
Protein sequence of pglB gene from Campylobacter jejuni (Accession number:
Q9S4V7) was retrieved from UniProt [] and then Basic Local Alignment
Search Tool (BLAST) [] was used to search for its homologs in archaeal and
bacterial proteomes. First PglB was searched against the bacterial resource
using BLOSUM62 as the scoring matrix and at an expect threshold of 0.1 with
search optimized to report only the best 100 hits. Out of the 63 hits, 20 hits
were short listed for further analysis based on the following parameters, which
are their functional description (i.e. glycosylation), percentage identity and the
presence of motif WWDYG.

Search for PglB homologs against the archaeal database yielded 37 hits and 16
were short-listed based on the above-mentioned parameters. Search against the
archaeal database was carried out using adjusted parameters such as setting the
expect threshold to 10.0 in order to accommodate more results and search
optimized to report only the best 100 hits. Selected sequences were given as
input to generate the Multiple Sequence alignment by MUSCLE 
[].
Alignment file generated by MUSCLE was given as input to the BioNJ 
[]
program, ran at 1000 bootstraps, to compute a distance tree to represent the
phylogenetic relationships between bacterial and archaeal enzymes. Trees were
visualized using TreeDyn []. 
Mr. Bayes was also used to further confirm the
results [] 
(). To test protein models for the prediction of
glycosylation sites, seven hundred autotransporter proteins were retrieved from
NCBI []. 
These proteins were classified into five main classes on the basis of
their functional domains using Pfam []. 
These classes are adhesins, lipolytic, proteases, toxins, and SPATES.

Prediction of Glycosylation Sites
For N-linked and O-linked glycosylation, a signal peptide is needed in the
target protein. We used two online glycosylation site prediction servers i.e.
NetOGlyc 3.1 for the prediction of O-linked glycosylation sites 
[], and
NetNGlyc1.0 [] 
for the prediction of N-linked glycosylation sites. It was also
used for the prokaryotic proteins, due to the reason that N-glycosylation
machinery in prokaryotes resembles to that of eukaryotes 
[].

Development of Database
The database of PglB protein sequence was developed in MySQL. MySQL is
currently the most popular open source database server in existence. On top of
that, it is very commonly used in conjunction with PHP scripts to create
powerful and dynamic server-side applications.

Software Development
A tool for finding specific motifs in glycosyltransferases was developed using
PHP as the scripting language in Macromedia Dream weaver. This tool is
named Oligosaccharyl Transferase Prediction Tool (OTPT) version 1.0 and it
can check for the presence of specific motifs in query sequences.

Results and Discussion
Protein sequences of PglB from C. jejuni and its archaeal homologs were
stored in a database which carries information regarding the accession
numbers, length of proteins, their names and records of sequence/motif of five
amino acids essential for N-linked glycosylation. All the protein sequences
contain common motifs with few exceptions in archaeal proteins where there
was a single amino acid change from Y→N, Y→F, Y→Q and Y→W. OTPT
can detect such motifs.

Phylogenetic Analysis of PglB Sequences
First objective of this study was to analyze the evolutionary relationships
among the OSTs from archaeal and bacterial Proteins. Twenty bacterial and
sixteen archaeal enzymes were used for phylogenetic studies. The bacterial tree
shows close grouping of bacterial enzymes () but the archaeal tree
shows clustering of archaeal enzymes into four sub-clusters probably indicative
of relatively low level of sequence homology but still sharing common
functionality (). All 36 sequences were then used to make the final
phylogenetic tree. BioNJ was used to draw the phylogenetic tree (ran at 1000
bootstraps). Trees produced were then visualized using TreeDyn and
represented in a phylogram (). Phylogenetic tree differentiates the
bacterial and archaeal enzymes in two separate clusters.

Retrieval of Autotransporter Proteins
About seven hundred autotransporter protein sequences were retrieved and
classified by Pfam and then used to check for the presence of glycosylation
sites. In total, 366 autotransporter proteins were classified, out of which 298
were Adhesins, 37 IgA1 proteases, 11 Lipolytic, 16 SPATES and 4 Toxins.
AIDA-I precursor, outer membrane autotransporter, lipase/esterase; EstA are
some examples of these autotransporters. Our results indicate that among the
autotransporters, members of adhesins subfamily are more frequently
glycosylated compared to members of other subfamilies in the group. Although
there is a clear bias in the number of adhesin proteins being the largest group of
the five classes of autotransporters but they are the only group in which
potential N-glycosylation sites could be detected (109 in total). No Nglycosylation
sites could be detected in rest of the four classes of
autotransporters. From the results of glycosylation site prediction, we inferred a
contradictory result that many of the autotransporter proteins without
conventional signal peptide are also glycosylated (see 
).

Glycosylation Site Prediction Results
O-glycosylation occurs more frequently in autotransporters. The reason is that,
autotransporter proteins are membrane proteins and they are present on the
surface. It is observed relatively more in adhesins and lipolytic class of
autotransporter proteins. While the results of NetNGlyc show that there is a
low level of N-glycosylation in autotransporter proteins because mostly it lacks
the signal peptide for N-glycosylation except for the adhesins class 
().
This higher number is probably because the conserved motif for N-Linked
glycosylation occurs more frequently in adhesins than in any other class of
autotransporter proteins. Graph shows occurrence of both types of
glycosylation in adhesins (). Furthermore, the archaeal and bacterial
glycosyltransferases were aligned using MUSCLE in order to search for a
conserved pattern of amino acids in the flanking sequence of N-X-S/T motif
but it is clear from the output of MUSCLE that no such significant pattern
could be identified which is common across bacteria and archaea except for a
conserved tyrosine residue ().

Tool Development
As explained earlier, WWDYG is a specific motif which is important for the
proper functioning of OSTs. Software for the identification of this conserved
motif in glycosyltransferases was developed using PHP. We tested a total of 90
proteins of Archaea and Bacteria to detect motifs (NXS/T and WWDYG) in
protein sequences. Results were saved into the database of PglB.

Conclusion
In this study, we compared and analyzed the oligosaccharyl transferases from
different species of bacteria and archaea. Phylogenetic analysis of the bacterial
enzymes revealed close grouping of bacterial enzymes within bacteria whereas
the archaeal enzymes reflected less sequence homology even though
functionally they are same. It was also noticed that proteins from several
species share a conserved motif essential for N-linked glycosylation especially
some of the bacterial species i.e. Acceptor site “NXS/T” and Oligosaccharyl
transferases “WWDYG”. Software was developed for the efficient searching of
these motifs in a given query sequence. Low sequence conservation was
observed in the flanking sequences of these potential glycosylation sites (N-XS/
T) when multiple glycosyltransferases were aligned using MUSCLE. These
protein sequences of PglB and its homologs were stored in a database i.e.,
“Database of PglBs”. Prediction of glycosylation sites in autotransporter
proteins was done using online tools. Although the presence of a signal peptide
is necessary for glycosylation but even in the absence of signal peptide
glycosylation sites were observed in autotransporters. Among the five classes
of autotransporters, adhesins showed significant higher glycosylation frequency
than the other classes of autotransporter proteins. More analyses on
glycosyltransferases would help our understanding of these pathways and help
direct new ways for further research. The outcome of the study may have
implications in understanding the roles of the oligosaccharyl transferase and
redefining the virulence potential of each adhesin.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Prof. Brendan W. Wren, Head of the Dept of Pathogen Molecular Biology,
LSHTM, for his invaluable guidance and Department of Biosciences for
providing necessary facilities to carry out our work.

Citation:Tabish et al, Bioinformation 6(5): 191-195 (2011)

Phylogram produced by Mr. Bayes for a total of thirty (30)
glycosyltransferases from archaea (16) and C. jejuni (14)

Phylogram of bacterial glycosyltransferases drawn by BioNJ run at
1000 bootstraps. Close clustering of bacterial enzymes could be seen.

Phylogram of archaeal glycosyltransferases drawn by BioNJ run at
1000 bootstraps. Four clusters could be seen among the archaeal enzymes
probably suggestive of low level of sequence homology within.

Phylogenetic tree of bacterial and archael glycosyltransferases drawn
by BioNJ at 1000 bootstraps. Bacterial enzymes at the top and archaeal
enzymes at the bottom.

Graph showing potential number of glycosylation sites in adhesin
class of autotransporter proteins

Alignment of glycosyltransferases. No conserved pattern around the
N-X-S/T motif detected except for a conserved tyrosine residue.

