Background
Drug lead screening has been an active area of research for
many years. Due to the tedious and expensive nature of
experimental screening procedures, computational compound
screening has been pursued extensively in recent years [,
].
Receptors are macromolecules involved in chemical signaling
between and within cells. They may be located on the cell
surface membrane or within the cytoplasm. Activated receptors
directly or indirectly regulate cellular biochemical processes (eg.
ion conductance, protein phosphorylation, DNA transcription,
enzymatic activity). Molecules such as drugs, hormones and
neurotransmitters which bind to a receptor are called ligands. A
ligand may activate or inactivate a receptor; activation may
either increase or decrease a particular cell function. A high
throughput virtual screening by molecular docking can be used
nowadays in screening millions of compounds rapidly, reliably
and cost effectively. Screening of pure compounds by in silico
will be evaluated for the drug likeliness and ADME properties.
Further it is also depending on structural complexity, functional
group modified, the charges and interactions on the surfaces,
can take from a few minutes to hours on a standard personal
computer, which means screening all compounds in a single
database can take years. Computation time can be reduced very
significantly with a large grid gathering thousands of
computers [,
]. Fragment-based discovery attempts to identify
such molecular anchors providing attractive starting points for
inhibitor design. This strategy has gained increasing interest in
primary screening [,
]. In the present study the Identified pure
compounds from the H. Isora extracts (data were not given)
were docking with Insulin receptor proteins to find out the
antidiabetic activity by the Docking parameters.

Methodology
Preparation of Receptor for docking:
The Insulin receptors 5'-AMP-Activated Protein Kinase
Catalytic Subunit Alpha-1 Pdb.Id.4CFF, was imported from the
(http://.rcsb.org/pdb/home/home.do) 
shown in . The
receptor crystallographic water molecules were removed from
the protein and the chemistry of the protein was corrected for
missing hydrogen. Crystallographic disorders and unfilled
valence atoms were connected using alternate conformations
and valence monitor options. Further the protein was subjected
to energy minimization using the CHARMm Force field.

Design of small molecules (Ligand):
The Efficacy of the enzyme inhibition with the identified four
compounds (NMR data not given) from the H.Isora were docked
with the Amp kinase Insulin receptor. The compounds were 1.
((2z)-2-methyl -4-(3-2((z)-3-methylpent-2-enyl) cyclopendyl)
cyclohexyl) but-2-en-1-ol) 2.Tetra hydro-6-methyl-3-(2,3-
dimethylpentyl)-2H-pyran-2-ol 3.1,2,3,4-tetra hydro -1,5,6,8-
tetramethyl-7-(2-methylprop-1-enyl naphthalene-4-ylpivalate
4. 2-(3,4-dihydroxyphenyl)-5,7-dihydroxy-3-[(2S,3R,4S,5S,6R)-
3,4,5-trihydroxy-6-(hydroxyl methyl)oxan-2-yl]oxychromen-4-
one. The above ligands were screened for antidiabetic activity
against insulin receptors. The structure of these ligands was
retrieved from NCBI –PubChem Compound database 
(http://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) 
[]. The structures of these
compounds were shown in Figure 2.

Active site finder:
The active site was predicted by using the Qsite finder 
(www.bioinformatics.leeds.ac.uk./ qsitefinder/). This tool predicts the
active atoms in the ligand binding site.

Molecular Docking studies by Autodock:
AutoDock is docking software predicting the interaction of
ligands with Biomacro molecular targets. AutoDock Tools
software prepares the receptor by adding all hydrogen atoms to
the macromolecule, to correct calculation of partial atomic
charges. Gasteiger charges are calculated for each atom of the
AMP kinase receptor molecule in AutoDock 4.2 instead of
Kollman charges which were used in the previous versions of
the program. 3D- affinity grids of size 277 × 277 × 277 Å with 0.6
Å spacing were centered on the geometric center of the target
protein and were calculated for each of the following atom
types: HD, C, A, N, OA, and SA, representing all possible atom
types in a protein. Additionally, an electrostatic map and a
desolvation map were also calculated []. The dimensional
affinity grid was fixed based upon the necessity to run the
AutoGrid file. The selected important docking parameters for
the LGA as follows: population size of 150 individuals, 2.5
million energy evaluations, maximum of 27000 generations,
number of top individuals to automatically survive to next
generation of 1, mutation rate of 0.02, crossover rate of 0.8, 10
docking runs, and randominitial positions and conformations.
The probability of performing local search on an individual in
the population was set to 0.06. AMP kinase is a Insulin receptor
which play a important role in the type 2 diabetes mellitus. This
receptor was chosen and evaluated for the antidiabetic activity
by in silico tool. The Compounds identified from the H.isora
mentioned in the ligands were docked with the AMP kinase
receptor using Autodock 4.2 software with above mentioned
procedure. The drug score, binding frequencies, active residues
interacted and energy minimizations were simulated.

Results &amp; discussion
Helicteres isora is a traditional medicinal plant which was rich in
secondary metabolites such as terpenes, flavonoid,
bioflavonoid, benzophonones, xanthenes as well as some
metabolites such as tannins, saponins, cyanates,oxalate and
anthrax- quinines [–
]. In the present study the antidiabetic
activity was evaluated using the in silico docking activity using
autodock. The H.isora compounds methanolic fractions were
elucidated by Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and the
structure identified was simulated and presented in the Figure
2. The strucutres were evaluated and mined from the NCBI
pubchem databases. Further the active site residues were
identified using the Q-site finder and shown in the 
 (see
supplementary material). The Active site residues
Phenylalanine ans asparigine were predominantly predicted
and the numbers from 139-155 position. The other residues
Methionine, Proline, Leucine, Glutamic acid were predicted in
the receptor. The isolated compounds were docked with
modeled AMP kinase auto dock. Compound (HS1) and
compound (HS2) formed one hydrogen bond with LYS, ASP
amino acid at position 152 and 241 presented in the 
.
Whereas compound HS3 showed no bonding therefore the
docking of the compound 3 is not shown in the figure.
Compound 4 showed good docking energy with 2 hydrogen
bonds with AMPK Proteins bind to many types of molecules
using a wide variety of binding sites. They have binding sites
used by natural ligands, e.g., enzyme active sites and allosteric
regulatory sites, as well as “novel” binding sites at which
artificial or non-natural ligands, such as drugs, bind. Proteins
are often bound to cofactors or are post-translationally modified
and these non-protein components can have an important
influence on the protein binding sites []. In the present study,
docking of isolated compounds from the methanol fraction of H.
isora with AMP kinase receptor indicated that the compounds
(HS1 and HS2) had binding score value of -7.79 and -7.61 
 
(see supplementary material) good docking score than the
other two compounds. The compounds got hydrogen bonding
with LYS (155) amino acid in the target of AMP kinase. But
there were no interaction of the compound (HS3) with the AMP
kinse. Whereas compound HS4 had high binding energy of -
8.84 with formation of two hydrogen bonds with LEU(128) and
PRO 129.AMP Kinase as being important in control of fatty acid
oxidation and glucose uptake in skeletal muscle and possibly in
modulating insulin secretion by the pancreatic b-cell. It is
recognized that Type 2 diabetes is not one disease but a
syndrome with numerous possible etiologies. Winder and
Hardie (1999) reported that the activation of AMPK control
system either with exercise or by pharmacological manipulation
may partially correct the metabolic perturbations of the forms of
Type 2 diabetes resulting from defects in the insulin signaling
cascade [].

Conclusion
The Insilico docking studies of 4 compounds identified and
docked from H.isora with AMP kinase insulin receptor (Type 2
diabetic targets) demonstrates, all the three compounds were
well docked with specific targets. The Drug score and energy
minimization reveals that the active compounds 1, 2 and 4 have
potent antidiabetic activity. This ultimately confirms the
compounds induce the secretion of necessary proteins and
activates the IRS-receptors in carbohydrate metabolism for
maintenance of glucose homeostasis condition during Diabetes
mellitus. Finally, this paper concludes that the compounds
isolated from Helicteres isora have good receipting activity of the
Insulin receptor substrate proteins. Therefore this study
recommends that the methanolic extracts of identifying
compounds would be taken for the Type 2 Diabetes mellitus
and it can be profiled for further clinical studies for the
therapeutics of Diabetes mellitus.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Vennila et al, Bioinformation 10(5): 263-266 (2014)

3D strucutre of 5'-AMP-Activated Protein Kinase
Catalytic Subunit Alpha-1 Pdb.Id.4CFF

Structure of the identified ligands from H.Isora: A)
((2z)-2-methyl -4-(3-2((z) -3-methylpent-2-enyl)cyclopendyl)
cyclohexyl) but-2-en-1-ol) B) Tetra hydro-6-methyl-3-(2,3-
dimethylpentyl)-2H-pyran-2-ol; C) 1,2,3,4-tetra hydro -1,5,6,8-
tetramethyl-7-(2-methylprop-1-enyl naphthalene-4-ylpivalate;
D) 2-(3,4-dihydroxyphenyl)-5,7-dihydroxy-3-[(2S,3R,4S,5S,6R)-
3,4,5-trihydroxy-6-(hydroxyl methyl)oxan-2-yl]oxychromen-4-
one.

A) Docking of ((2z)-2-methyl -4-(3-2((z)-3-methylpent-
2-enyl)cyclopendyl) cyclohexyl) but-2-en-1-ol) with AMP
kinase; B) Docking of Tetra hydro-6-methyl-3-(2,3-
dimethylpentyl)-2H-pyran-2-ol with AMP kinase; C) Docking of
2-(3,4-dihydroxyphenyl)-5,7-dihydroxy-3-[(2S,3R,4S,5S,6R)-
3,4,5-trihydroxy-6-(hydroxyl methyl)oxan-2-yl]oxychromen-4-
one with AMP kinase.

