Background
For a long time, the use of natural products with therapeutic
properties is considered as ancient as human civilization where
minerals, plant and animal products were the main sources of
drugs [,
]. In the recent years, the natural drugs from
medicinal plants and marine sources are considered as an
effective treatment against diabetes and inflammation. Many of
the currently available exemplary sources of drugs have been
derived directly or indirectly from medicinal plants. The
ethnobotanical information reports that around 800 plants may
possess anti-diabetic properties [] and several medicinal plants
have shown effective activities against the diabetes when
assessed by available experimental techniques [–]. Some of the
medicinal plants show potential inhibition against aldose
reductase target [,
].

Marine algae are other richest sources of structurally diverse
natural products [,
]. Recent studies report that the marine
bromophenols (BPs) inhibitors exhibit a wide spectrum of
beneficial biological activities [–]. The bromophenols
isolated from marine algae have been reported to exhibit potent
inhibitory activities agaisnt Protein Tyrosine phosphatase-1B
(PTP1B), Alpha-glucosidase [–] and PLA2 [,
]. Our
current study aims to perform a high throughput virtual
screening and induced fit docking studies of natural
compounds against diabetes and inflammation. While the
inhibitor compounds from medicinal plants were docked with
aldose reductase enzyme, the marine bromophenols (BPs)
inhibitors were treated against PTP1B, Alpha-glucosidase and
PLA2 targets. Docking score glide energy and hydrogen bond
interactions were analyzed with the docked complexes. These
analyses suggest that inhibitors from plants and marine sources
can be used for the treatment of diabetes and inflammation.

Methodology
All computational works were performed on CentOS EL-5
workstation using the molecular modeling software Maestro
(Schrodinger LLC 2009, USA). GLIDE-5.5 (Grid-based Ligand
Docking with Energetics) performs rigid (HTVS) and flexible
(IFD) docking between one or more ligand molecules with a
macromolecule, usually a protein. PyMOL software was used
for graphical visualization, analyzing hydrogen bond
interactions and producing quality images.

Ligand and Protein preparation:
Natural compounds () from medicinal plants and
marine algae were found to have anti diabetic and anti
inflammatory properties. Based on the biological activity of
these compounds, some protein targets were chosen for HTVS
and IFD studies. These natural compounds along with those
already cocrystallized with the chosen protein targets were built
using builder panel in Maestro for further calculations. These
compounds were subjected into ligand preparation by Ligprep
2.3 module (Schrödinger). Ligprep performs addition of
hydrogens, 2D to 3D conversion, realistic bond lengths and
bond angles, low energy structure with correct chiralities,
ionization states, tautomers, stereochemistries and ring
conformation.

Alpha glucosidase (2ZQ0) [], aldose reductase (2FZD) 
[]
and PTP1B (1KAK) [] enzymes were chosen as anti-diabetes
targets. PLA2 (1FV0) [] enzyme was subjected for antiinflammatory
target. All these structures were retrieved from
Protein Data Bank and taken into the protein preparation
wizard where changes such as addition of hydrogen atoms,
assigning correct bond orders, fixing of the charges and
orientation of groups were incorporated into the raw PDB
structure. Optimization of hydrogen bonds and amino acid flips
were also assigned iteratively. Non-hydrogen atoms were
energy minimized until the average root mean square deviation
reaches 0.3Å. All the above mentioned steps were performed
using Glide, Prime, QSite, Liasion and MacroModel in the
Schrödinger modules.

High Throughput Virtual Screening (HTVS):
HTVS is an important method, which helps in screening one or
more compounds from a set of compounds. HTVS needs
previously calculated receptor grid and one or more ligand
structures. When a ligand is docked, the active site of the
receptor and its properties will be calculated on a grid by
different set of fields which provide accurate scoring function
along with their energy. This method facilitates the ligands to
bind in more than one possible and meaningful conformation
but the receptor is rigid. However, van der Waals radii of nonpolar
atoms were estimated to decrease close contact penalties
between the active site residues and the ligand. Using HTVS, 42
compounds (data not shown) from medicinal plants were
screened against aldose reductase and 7 marine algae
compounds (data not shown) were screened against
Phospholipase A2, alpha-glucosidase and PTP1B. The best fit
compounds have been chosen for each target by docking score
and glide energy. The best compounds () were used for
IFD.

Induced Fit Docking (IFD):
In many proteins, conformational changes take place in the
side-chain or backbone or both, when a ligand binds at the
active site. Therefore, receptor is generated by calculating close
conforms to the shape and binding mode of the ligand. This is
known as IFD. In our study, IFD, one of the main complicating
factors predicts accurate ligand binding modes and concomitant
structural movements in the receptor using modules of Glide
and Prime. In the workspace, each energy minimized complex
was loaded and the ligand was selected to specify the active
site. All the screened compounds were docked with respective
protein target. van der Waals radii of nonpolar atoms of the
receptor and ligand were scaled by a factor of 0.50 and 20
conformational poses were calculated. In IFD results, the best
conformation was chosen for further calculations based on the
docking score, Glide energy and none bonded interactions.

Results and Discussion
Aldose reductase:
The co-crystal ligand, Tolrestat was redocked at the active site
of aldose reductase. The docked complex had a docking score of
-8.57 and glide energy of -45.60 kcal/mol. The ligand has three
hydrogen bond interactions with Tyr 48, His 110 and Ser 302 at
the active site. The docked complex has been superimposed
with crystal structure of aldose reductase and the rmsd is 0.18Å.

Out of the many screened medicinal compounds, the IFD
complex of Salvionolic acid ligand with the target enzyme had
eight hydrogen bond interactions with active site residues such
as His 110, Trp 111, Gln 183, Ser 210, Ile 260 and Ser 302. In
particular, Ile 260 and Ser 260 have two hydrogen bond
interactions with the ligand. This complex resulted with a
docking score of -12.45 and glide energy of -81.08 kcal/mol.

For Salvioflaside - aldose reductase complex formation a
docking score of -11.53 and glide energy of -82.70 kcal/mol
were observed. At the active site, His 110, Ile 260 and Val 297
residues have two hydrogen bond interactions with the ligand.
Altogether this complex has nine hydrogen bond interactions
with Trp 20, Lys 77, His 110, Asn 160, Ile 260 and Val 297.

Another plant ligand Lithospermic acid docked at the active site
of aldose reductase has a docking score of -12.07 and glide
energy of -75.25 kcal/mol. The ligand has five hydrogen bond
interactions with Lys 21, Trp 111, Asn 160, Gly 183 and Ser 302
at the active site.

Alpha-glucosidase:
Alpha-Acarbose inhibitor was redocked at the active site of the
alpha-glucosidase and the docking score is -8.33 and Glide
energy is -85.66 kcal/mol. This complex has eleven hydrogen
bond interactions between the ligand and the active site
residues. Pro 215 and Arg 529 have two hydrogen interactions
with the ligand and remaining residues like Ser 270, Trp 331,
Glu 391, Trp 400, Glu 439, His 507 and Phe 536 have one
interaction each. The docked complex was superimposed with
the crystal structure of alpha-glucosidase and the rmsd is 0.21Å.
Best fit of the 3-bromo-4,5-bis(2,3-dibromo-4,5-
dihydroxybenzyl)-pyrocatechol ligand at the active site of
alpha-glucosidase's showed the docking score of −9.19 and
Glide energy of −75.33 kcal/mol. This inhibitor has totally six
hydrogen bond interactions, Trp 331, Met 334, Glu 391 and Tyr
533 residues have one interaction each and Ser 217 has two
interactions with the bound ligand.

Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1 B:
FNP inhibitor redocked at the active site of PTP1B has a
docking score of -10.46 and Glide energy of -100.31 kcal/mol.
Arg 47 and Ser 216 have two interactions and Arg 221 has three
interactions with FNP. The remaining active residues have one
hydrogen bond interaction each with the ligand. This complex
has been stabilized with thirteen hydrogen bond interactions
between the ligand and the active site residues. The
superimposition of crystal and docked complexes has rmsd of
0.15Å. 2,2',3,3'-tetrabromo-4,4',5,5'-tetra-hydroxydiphenyl
methane bound PTP1B complex has a docking score of -8.26
and Glide energy of -52.03 kcal/mol. This ligand has four
hydrogen bond interactions with the active site residues Asp 48
(two H-bonds), Phe 182 and Glu 262.

The best fit of 3-bromo-4,5-bis(2,3-dibromo-4,5-
dihydroxybenzyl) pyrocatechol at the active site of PTP1B has
shown five hydrogen bond interactions with Arg 47, Asp 48(
two H-bonds), Lys 120 and Asp 181 residues. Docking score of -
9.84 and glide energy of -67.94 kcal/mol were observed for the
complex formation. Bis(2,3-dibromo-4,5-dihydroxybenzyl) ether
ligand has three hydrogen bond interactions with the active site
residues (Tyr 20, Lys 120 and Gln 262) of PTP1B. Docking score
of -7.45 and glide energy of -50.02 kcal/mol were observed in
this complex.

Phospholipase A2:
Aristolochic acid ligand was redocked at the active site of the
PLA2 which has the docking score of -8.18 and glide energy of -
48.52 kcal/mol. The ligand has three hydrogen bond
interactions with active site residues Gly 30, His 48 and Asp 49.
The docked complex superimposed with crystal structure of
PLA2 and the rmsd is 0.17Å. 6-(2,3-dibromo-4,5-
dihydroxybenzyl)-2,3-dibrom0-4,5-dihydroxybenzylmethyl
ether ligand has also three hydrogen bond interactions with His
48, Asp 49 and Lys 69 residues. This complex has the docking
score of -8.51 and glide energy of -60.71 kcal/mol.

The docked Vidalol B-PLA2 complex showed the docking score
of -9.65 and glide energy of -73.71 kcal/mol. The vidalol B
ligand has maintained the hydrogen bond interaction with His
48 and Asp 49 and additionally has two more interactions with
active site residues (Tyr 22 and Leu 2). 3-bromo-4-(2,3-dibromo-
4,5-dihydroxybenzyl)-5-methoxymethylpyrocatechol bound at
the active site of PLA2 has showed the docking score of -8.27
and glide energy of -59.35 kcal/mol. This ligand has the
hydrogen bond interactions with His 48 and Asp 49 residues.

Conclusion
In this study, natural inhibitors from medicinal plants and
marine algae were screened for anti-diabetic and antiinflammatory
properties. Based on the screening, few of the
ligands were subjected for induced fit docking studies and were
compared using docking score, glide energy and hydrogen
bond interactions. Along with Tolrestat, the natural compounds
Salvionolic acid, Salvioflaside and lithospermic were docked at
the active site of aldo-reductase. Based on the IFD studies,
salvioflaside was selected as the potent anti-diabetic compound
for the target aldose reductase compared to tolrestat which was
reported to have some side effects.

Although, docking studies with Acarbose show better results
than 3-bromo-4,5-bis(2,3-dibromo-4,5-dihydroxybenzyl)-
pyrocatechol, due to the side effects of the Acarbose, the new
compound, an analog of the compound from the marine algae
appears to be the best in the IFD results of alpha-glucosidase.
The cocrystal ligand (FNP) of PTP1B inhibitor has the best score
and energy but with the IC50 value of 25 µM. 3-bromo-4, 5-bis(2,
3-dibromo-4,5-dihydroxybenzyl) pyrocatechol seems to be the
next alternative according to glide energy but with better IC50
value than FNP (IC50=1.7 µM).

Out of the four ligands docked with PLA2 against inflammation,
it is found that the new compound Vidalol B is better than the
anti-inflammatory drug aristolochic acid from another natural
product. The induced fit docking studies thus support the use
of natural products for curing inflammation and diabetes.

Supplementary material
Data 1
SS thanks the University Grants Commission (UGC),
Government of India, New Delhi, for Fellowship for
Meritorious students. The authors thank Bioinformatics
infrastructure facility of University of Madras supported by
DBT. UGC is gratefully acknowledged for the SAP program.

Citation:Suhitha et al, Bioinformation 8(23): 1125-1131 (2012)

Schematic representation of natural compounds from medicinal plants and marine algae.

Hydrogen bond interactions (blue dot line) a) Salvioflaside- aldose reductase complex b) 3-bromo-4,5-bis(2,3-dibromo-4,5-
dihydroxybenzyl)-pyrocatechol - alpha-glucosidase complex c) 3-bromo-4,5-bis(2,3-dibromo-4,5-dihydroxybenzyl)-pyrocatechol –
PTP1B complex d) Vidalol B - Phospholipase A2.

