Background:
In the state of Mizoram (Northeast India) the rodent outbreaks
are intertwined with the onset of bamboo flowering, causing a
tremendous destruction to food crops. This gregarious bamboo
flowering, which is known locally as ‘Mautam’, occurs
periodically after every 48±1 years and since the last
confrontation with the flowering was in 1959, it was again
expected during the period 2007-2009. About 31% of the total
forest area of Mizoram is covered by bamboo forests, of which
about 90% is covered by M. baccifera alone, which has been
flowering since the year 2003. Although various measures have
been taken to control outbreak of rodents in Mizoram,
exhaustive studies on their parasites have never been
undertaken. In view of their underlying threat as serious pests
of crop plants and also as reservoir of zoonoses, a study on the
parasite of rodent hosts in Mizoram was undertaken. Studies on
the phylogeny of tapeworms (Eucestoda) have achieved
considerable progress and the ribosomal DNA (rDNA) clusters
have been used for genetic studies []. PCR techniques that
utilize the second internal transcribed spacer (ITS2) sequences
and mitochondrial coding region COI,have been used to be a
reliable tool in identifying the platyhelminth parasite species
and their phylogenetic relationships 
[–]. Mitochondrial DNA
has minimal non-coding DNA and no introns and it has been
used in taxonomic studies as it is a rapidly evolving genome as
compared to nuclear DNA []. For the design of
oligonucleotide primers which are used for amplification of
variable region of the genome conserved coding regions are
ideal and the cytochrome oxidase subunit1 (COI) gene quiet
useful for studying closely related species.

Cestodes of the family Taeniidae are parasites of carnivore
animal and human hosts which use mammals as their
intermediate hosts where the larval stage develops in the
tissues causing significant harm to the host. As they are of great
medical and veterinary significance several studies have been
focused at the species level [–]. Approximately 40 species of
the genus Taenia have been recognized based on morphological
studies of the adult specimen []. Phylogenetic relationships of
taeniid cestodes have been constructed using morphology, host
specificity and biological traits. However it is still difficult to
come up with a reliable conclusion on the phylogenetic
relationship between the members of Taeniidae []. However,
recent studies have shown high level of interspecific variations
for molecular characters, which are useful for characterization
of species of Taenia and many new taeniid species have also
been reported using more recent molecular biological
techniques [–]. Taenia taeniaeformis is a taeniid cestode
parasite, the adult form of which is found in cats and other
carnivores and uses rodents as the intermediate hosts where the
larval form or the cysticercus develops as a fluid filled larva in
different organs [–]. Taxonomic revisions of Taenia spp
have been done based on morphological criteria []. During an
exploratory survey of rodent pests (burgeoning coincident with
bamboo-flowering times in forests of Mizoram Northeast India)
for their helminth parasite spectrum, metacestodes of
cyclophyllidean tapeworms were frequently encountered
infecting the liver lobes and body cavity of the host. The present
study aimed at identifying this larval form based on
morphological studies supplemented with molecular
characterization.

Methodology:
Rattus rattus the commonly prevalent rodent species in the
region were collected and examined. The parasites were found
encysted in the liver tissues. The capsules were opened by
making a small slit to release the parasite. The recovered
parasites were processed for morphological studies following
standard procedures of fixation and stained whole mount
preparation. Measurements of the specimens were taken using
stage and ocular micrometers and/or morphometric software in
the image analyser (Leica DM 1000).

Note: The Nucleotide sequence data reported in this paper
have been submitted to the GenBank with the accession
numbers FJ939133-FJ939135.

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
The specimens were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin
(NBF) and processed as per the protocol described elsewhere
[]. 
The gold coated specimens were observed using LEO 435
VP scanning electron microscope at electron accelerating
voltages between 10 and 20 kV.

Molecular characterization
The genomic DNA of the parasite was isolated and amplified
following standard procedure as described earlier 
[] using the
universal trematode primers of Schistosoma species 
[]. These
include ITS1: BD1 (forward) and 4S (reverse); ITS2: 3S
(forward) and A28 (reverse); CO1: JB3 (forward) and JB4
(reverse). The PCR amplification was performed following the
standard protocol with minor modifications as described
elsewhere [–]. The PCR product was purified and
sequenced in both directions on an automated sequencer. The
sequences were submitted to GenBank for obtaining their
accession number. The Sequences obtained were analysed using
bioinformatic tools such as Basic Local Alignment Search Tools
(BLAST), ClustalW and the extent of variation was compared
by doing pairwise alignment of the nucleotides. Initially the
sequencesc were aligned using ClustalW multiple alignment
with the default gap and extention penalties used by this
program. The phylogenetic trees of the metcestodes were
constructed using distance and character based method in
MEGA 4.0 []. Branch support was given using 1000 bootstrap
replicates.

Results
Morphological Analysis
The morphological examination of the parasite revealed typical
taeniid features: body measuring 0.9-9.6 cm in length; large
scolex 0.8-1.6 mm long and 1.1-2.09 mm wide, with four
prominent lateral suckers; rostellum armed with double rows of
34 - 42 hooks, the outer larger hooks 0.36-0.42 mm in length, the
smaller inner hooks 0.23-0.27 mm, all hooks typically taenoid
type having long blunt handle with sharp pointed blade; and
short or elongated and segmented strobila terminating with a
bladder, thus resembling a small tapeworm but without
reproductive organs (). All these morphological
characters are in consistence with those of Cysticercus fasciolaris,
the adult form of which is Taenia taeniaeformis.

Molecular Analysis
The rDNA ITS and mtCOI regions of the metacestode were
successfully amplified using primers as mentioned above
(). PCR amplification of ITS regions and the mtCOI
showed a single band of size 744bp, 443bp and 374bp,
respectively (). The nucleotide sequences obtained
from the PCR products were put to BLAST and compared with
other available cyclophyllidean cestode sequences from
GenBank ( see supplementary material). The BLAST
hits result shows that the sequences of the metacestode are
closer to those of species of Taenia, with maximum similarity to
Taenia taeniaeformis. In pairwise alignment of the ITS2 and
flanking regions of the query sequences with the sequences of
Taenia taeniaeformis from Hyderabad India isolate shows the
presence of 6.4% mismatches. Similarly, with regard to ITS1
pairwise alignment of query sequences with the sequences of T.
taeniaeformis from Hyderabad India shows 14.3% mismatches
(), multiple alignment of COI of query sequences with
three different isolates shows the presence of 2.1% mismatches
with no gap (). Phylogenetic trees were obtained by
comparing the ITS and mtCOI sequences of the metacestode
with other cyclophyllidean cestode species using the NJ and MP
methods (). The topology of the trees obtained through
both the methods emerged to be quiet similar placing both the
Taenia taeniaeformis and the query sequences in the same clade;
giving high bootstraps values of 90% and above. Bootstsrap
value of 99% in the tree constructed for ITS1 and 100% for ITS2
with T. taeniaeformis obtained from Wistar rats indicates perfect
phylogenetic accuracy and reliable grouping. In the trees
constructed for COI the query sequences are placed in the same
clade with T. taeniaeformis isolates from Hokkaido (Japan),
Kazakhstan and Kolkata (India) showing high bootstrap values
of 100%.

Discussion:
The LM and SEM observations clearly shows the presence of
double rows of hooks and four lateral suckers which are the
distinguishing characters for T. taeniaeformis. The size and the
number of hooks are important features for identification of
Taeniidae species. The numbers of hooks reported in the
metacestode under study were also found to be in confirmity
with those of T. taeniaeformis 
[]. Ribosomal DNA or the rDNA
clusters has also been widely used for taxonomic studies.
Mitochondrial genes have also been used to study phylogenetic
relationships as they have fast evolutionary rate 
[–]. In
analysis of the sequences of the rDNA ITS2 and ITS1 and the
mtCO1 and comparing with the so far known sequences of
other cyclophyllidean cestodes, the sequence of ITS and CO1
showed close similarity with the sequence of T. taeniaeformis
showing high bootstrap value of 90% and above. If the
bootstrap value is 70% or higher than the topology at that
branch is considered reliable or correct []. Intraspecific
variations of four different isolates of T. taeniaeformis by using
several criteria such as morphology of the parasite, infectivity,
protein component of the parasites and restriction fragment
length polymorphism of the parasite DNA have also been
reported earlier by []. In the present study when pairwise and
multiple alignment of the query sequences was done with
different isolate only a few mismatches and gaps were seen. On
the basis of the morphological similarities with earlier studies
supplemented by close matching of the ITS and the
mitochondrial CO1 sequences of the metacestode under study
with T. taeniaeformis it can be concluded that the parasite found
in the liver cysts of rodents in the study area is indeed the
metacestode of T. taeniaeformis the adult of which occurs in the
various carnivorous animals.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work was supported by All India Co-ordinated Project on
Capacity Building in Taxonomy: Research on Helminths
(AICOPTAX; MoE&amp;F, GOI), DSA (UGC-SAP) Programme in
Zoology, UPE programme in School of Life Sciences at NEHU,
Shillong and ‘North East Parasite Information and Analysis
Centre (NEPIAC): an in silico approach’ sanctioned to VT and
DKB by DIT.

Citation:Malsawmtluangi et al, Bioinformation 7(8): 393-399 (2011)

ITS1, ITS2 and COI sequence of Taenia taeniaeformis

Pairwise Alignment of ITS2 and ITS1 sequences of Taenia taeniaeformis

Multiple alignment of CO1 sequences of Taenia taeniaeformis geographical isolates

MP phylogenetic trees of the metacestode for- (A) 
ITS2 (B) ITS1 (C) COI. The numbers on the branches refer to bootstrap values.

SEM (A-D) view of the metacestode. (A) Scolex with
hooks and four lateral suckers; (B) Double rows of hooks on the
scolex; (C) A portion of the Strobila showing segmentation,
suggestive of proglottidization; (D) The terminal bladder like
end

PCR products of metacestode DNA using different
primer sets (M) = 100bp DNA ladder

