Background
Rhinosporidiosis produces polypoid masses in nose and other sites in
individuals exposed to fresh water ponds. An outbreak of rhinosporidiosis
occurred among people on holiday near Silver Lake in Serbia 
[]. The
disease has worldwide distribution and is endemic in southern India, Sri
Lanka and Argentina. Rhinosporidium seeberi is spherical upto 300- 400
μm in diameter, visible in histological sections as a round body (RB) filled
with endospores that are discharged and enlarge into new RBs. All in vivo
stages in R. seeberi 's life cycle (enlargement, maturation of round bodies
and release of endospores) have been demonstrated in vitro using
monolayers of a human rectal tumor cell line []. 
Immunological defensemechanism is not known, only phagocytosis is reported 
[]. First
described by Seeber in 1900 [], 
taxonomy of R. seeberi has been debated throughout the century. No treatment is 
effective; multiplerecurrences are common after surgery. The disease is not transmitted to
family members of affected individuals. RBs have not been seen in natural
habitats, nor in pond water samples from 3 endemic regions in India 
[].

Recently we detected a 16S rRNA gene (GenBank accession no.
AJ440719) in purified RBs carefully isolated from infected tissue, and
determined the sequence []. 
This study is a detailed analysis of sequence of 16S rRNA gene.

Methodologies
Individual uncontaminated RBs (R. seeberi ) were isolated from infected
tissue () and pure organismal DNA extracted
from a single RB (details in []). 
Briefly, between 15‐25 ng DNA extracted from a single RB was checked for purity spectrophotometrically
and by running on 0.85% agarose. Experiments were repeated 3 times
using 3 different clinical samples. PCR primers identical to those used in a
previous study [] were procured from Yale University, Connecticut. Gene
Amp 2400 PCR system (Perkin Elmer) was used. Clustal algorithm was
used for multiple sequence alignment in LASERGENE software (DNA
Star). Phylogenetic trees were constructed using Saitou &amp; Nei's 
[]
neighbor‐joining method.

Results and Discussion
R. seeberi 's 1458 bp 16S rRNA gene sequence (AJ440719) aligned in
BLASTN with 16S rDNA sequences in GenBank (no domain specified)
showed high similarity (99%) with DNA in chloroplasts (cpDNA) of
flowering plants Solanum tuberosum, Nicotiana tabacum, N.
plumbaginifolia, Arabidopsis thaliana, Carica papaya and Vitis vinifera.
cpDNA in 70 genera of higher plants, liverwort Marchantia, green alga
Chara, Spirogyra and related genera displayed 95-97% identity with
AJ440719. Oryza sativa showed 96% identity with cpDNA as also with
genomic DNA in chromosome 10. cpDNA in nonphotosynthetic alga
Prototheca and amoeba Paulinella chromatophora showed 82% and 84%
identity, respectively. BLAST search specifying domain bacteria indicated
high similarity with many cyanobacteria. Phylogenetic tree ()
shows R. seeberi 's sequence positioned unambiguously among cpDNA of
flowering plants. AJ440719 clusters with cpDNA with high bootstrap
support. Chloroplast genes in human apicomplexan pathogens are not
phylogenetically close to R. seeberi 's sequence 
().

Pairwise alignment of 1458 bp sequence (AJ440719) in BLAST2 with 16S
rDNA in chloroplasts of several plants indicates most differences with
R. seeberi 's sequence in nucleotide positions 1 to 82. Thus, cpDNA in
Solanum nigrum displayed 99% identity with nucleotides 79‐1458 with 4
gaps, and identity of 93% for nucleotides 4‐63 with no gap. Two gene
fragments, 1‐82 and 83‐1458 were aligned separately in BLAST2 in 2
steps. Nucleotides 1‐ 82 aligned mostly with bacteria including 14
proteobacteria and 5 pathogenic bacteria (identity 90‐95%), 
nucleotides83‐1458 showed 95‐99% alignment with cpDNA of numerous plants.
G+C content of AJ440719 is 56.8.

Chloroplast sequence in R. seeberi displayed cyanobacterial sequence
characteristics. Two palindromic repeats and sequence signature
(AATTTTCCG) of cyanobacteria were found in RB's 16S rRNA gene 
[].
In this study, multiple sequence alignments showed that sequence
signature is shared with 16S rDNA in 11 cyanobacteria and cpDNA in
plant Carica papaya, and flanking nucleotides are also similar
(). 
Among 826 conserved nucleotide positions in
AJ440719, 773 (92.4%) are shared with 11 cyanobacteria and cpDNA in
Carica, while conserved nucleotides in segment 116‐225 are dissimilar.
The single conserved nucleotide T is in position 799, and A is in position
1233 as reported in cyanobacteria []. 
Pairwise alignment of 1458 bp sequence (AJ440719) in BLAST2 with several cyanobacteria showed
identity range of 79‐86%, with most differences in first segment of 82
nucleotides. Low identity of 79-86% may be result of comparison with
chloroplast-like 16S rRNA sequence in RB. Another different copy of 16S
rRNA gene, that is not chloroplast-like, could possibly be present in R.
seeberi 's genome. Different 16S rRNA sequences could be present in a
single cell genome [,
].

Taxonomic Placement of R. seeberi
Ashworth [] 
considered organism in rhinosporidiosis to be a fungal
sporangium filled with spores, and named it Rhinosporidium seeberi .
Mycology textbooks describe R. seeberi as a fungus of uncertain
taxonomy. We used fungal‐specific primers for 18S and 28S rRNA genes,
no amplification was seen with DNA from RBs as template, negating
fungus in R. seeberi []. Presence of 
chlorophyll led Vanbreuseghem []
to suggest RB as an alga that was refuted by some authors 
[] as
chloroplasts have not been seen in RB. Photosynthetic pigments, also
found by us [], rule out fungus.

The in vivo life cycle of R. seeberi is initiated with the entry of
endospores into host epithelium [,
]. Study of pond water samples
revealed striking similarity between mature endospores in RB and
cyanobacterium Microcystis []. 
PCR using genomic DNA of R. seeberi
showed a sequence that is strongly amplified by 16S rRNA primers
specific for cyanobacterium Microcystis []. 
For a pathogen as little understood as R. seeberi , accurate assessment 
of ultrastructure could complement molecular data. Our findings, and of others indicate RBs
phenotypic relationship with cyanobacteria. These include dispersed
chromatin [–
], polyhedral bodies, wall peptidoglycan 
[],
photosynthetic pigments [,
], and red auto fluorescence excited with
green (510-540 nm) wavelengths (this study) that is typical of
photosynthetic pigments [].

Another study in two laboratories, based on DNA from infected tissue,
proposed R. seeberi 's relationship with the protist Dermocystidium 
[,
]. Since rhinosporidiosis develops 
in individuals exposed to fresh water ponds, the presence of aquatic protists like Dermocystidium in infected
tissue is not ruled out. Cysts and spores of Dermocystidium sloughed from
gills of fish “could be a significant source of infection in fresh water
systems” []. 
Even a low number of Dermocystidium spores in infected
tissue could be detected by the sensitive PCR. Authors in both laboratories
selected 18S SSU rRNA primers F1‐fw F2‐rev and NS1 NS8
(degenerated) for fungi that also anneal to some protists 
[,
]. Therefore,
DNA of Dermocystidium, if present in infected tissue, would be
amplifiable with these primers. Although primer F2‐rev differs from the
sequence in 2 nucleotide positions and primer F3‐rev differs in 3
nucleotide positions, these primers gave amplification, “data not shown”
[]. 
Primer Rhino-fw differs from the sequence at 4 nucleotide positions
and Rhino-rev differs in 2 nucleotide positions, they are reported to give
amplification []. 
In one study [], since control samples of nasal
polyps from patients without rhinosporidiosis came from humans not
exposed to fresh water ponds, the samples are not expected to harbor
aquatic protists, and this explains why the authors 
[] 
got negative results with PCR. Controls are lacking in the other study 
[]. We procured the
same 18S SSU rRNA primers mentioned in their study, for using with
organismal DNA extracted from purified RBs, PCR did not show
amplification with those primers. As 16S rRNA sequence can be compared
with 18S rRNA [], 
a comparison made between R. seeberi 's sequence
AJ440719 and 18S rDNA in [] 
did not show similarity.

Conclusion
R. seeberi is a pigmented prokaryote with cyanobacterial features, and
contains 16S rDNA identical to that in chloroplasts of land plants. This is
the first report of a chloroplast sequence in R. seeberi , and since humans
do not harbor chloroplast, can be used as target for development of
chemotherapy. Detection of a sequence similar to AJ440719 in a
cyanobacterial genus, or species/strain of Microcystis, might be useful for
taxonomic identification of RB. DNA from RB generated a strong band
with primers for Cyanobacterium microcystis []. 
Taking a cue from this observation, the presence of cyanobacterium-specific repeat sequences and
sequence signature found in the sequence of R. seeberi 's chloroplast-like
16S rRNA gene [] 
should now be searched elsewhere in the genome.
Sequencing the entire genome of R. seeberi would be rewarding.

Supplementary material
Data 1
K.B.A. thanks Prem Chopra, Professor of Pathology, AIIMS for useful
discussions. Department of Science and Technology, Government of India
and All India Institute of Medical Sciences provided research grants.

Citation:Ahluwaliaet al; Bioinformation 5(3): 89-96 (2010)

Phylogenetic tree showing affinities of R. seeberi 's sequence (AJ440719) with chloroplast DNA in genera from different taxonomic groups.
Flowering plants: Arabidopsis thaliana, Carica papaya, Solanum tuberosum, S. oleracea, Nicotiana tabacum. Gymnosperm: Ginkgo biloba. Bryophyte:
Marchantia polymorpha. Streptophyte: Chara. Cyanelle of Cyanophora paradoxa. Human pathogen: Toxoplasma gondii.

