Background
The Interferon (IFN)-τ a member of Type I IFN, produced by
ruminant ungulates, during blastocyst stage and the time when the
elongated trophoblast attaches to the uterine wall, prevents the
destruction of the corpus luteum and helps in maternal recognition
of pregnancy. IFN-τ acts on the endometrium to abrogate
production of luteolytic pulses of PGF2α, produced from the uterine
endometrium [–] by reducing expression of estrogen and oxytocin
receptors in uterine epithelial cells [,]. Transcriptional
inactivation of the Cox-2 gene from uterine epithelial cells, upon
exposure to IFN- τ has also been suggested []. IFN-τ has potent
antiviral [] and antiproliferative activity [,] like other IFNs, but
is less toxic in vitro and in vivo than IFN-α and IFN-β [,],
moreover they are unique in that, these responses are not induced by
viral infection [] , and could therefore be considered a possible
alternative to IFN-α. IFN-τ also inhibits human and feline
immunodeficiency virus replication [,]
 without cytotoxicity,and its anti-HIV effects in human macrophages are stronger than
those of IFN-α2a []. IFN-τ induces the same antiviral pathways in
macrophages as other type I IFNs but without associated toxicity
[]. This is important since the type I IFNs are potent therapeutic
agents for the treatment of various diseases, moreover preventing
the infection of macrophages and the production of viral particles in
these cells might make it possible to control the spread of HIV to
some extent.

Bovine IFN-τ, like IFN-α, IFN-β and IFN-ω belong to type I IFNs,
and possess many common features. IFN-τ exhibit nearly 70 and
50% homology to IFN-ω and IFN-α (166-residue), respectively. On
the basis of secondary and tertiary structure predictions, all IFN
subtypes probably fold in a roughly similar manner and have the
same general overall architecture based on five α-helices separated
by loop regions []. The INF-τ family can be further sub-divided
into 3 major groups. Out of different bovine isoforms of INF-τ
expressed during blastocyst stage, there is a major bias for
expression of IFN-τ1c and INF-τ3a []. In the present paper
homology based modelling was used to predict the protein model
and potential binding sites of IFN-τ1c.

In case of humans all, type I IFNs (α, β and ω) bind to IFN receptor
(IFNAR) which consists of two subunits, IFNAR-1 and IFNAR-2.
IFNAR-2 binds to all types 1 IFNs with lower affinity and has
different specificity as compared to IFNAR complex where as
IFNAR-1 exhibit low intrinsic binding of IFNs but strongly affects
the affinity and differential ligand specificity of the IFNAR
complex []. Hence the molecular interaction of the IFNAR1 with
bovine INF-τ1c was carried out to predict its interaction with the
human IFNAR complex.

Methodology
Sequence retrieval
The structural template protein, which is the structural homologue
of the target protein i.e. INF-τ1c from Bos taurus, was identified in
NCBI (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) using protein Basic Loci Alignment
Search Tool (pBLAST) [] and Protein Data Bank (PDB) 
[] was
set as reference data base.

Structure Prediction and Evaluation
Modeller 9v5 [] was used for alignment of target protein
sequence (INF-τ1c) with its corresponding template (1B5L) with
the help of align 2D module. The target sequence file and the file
containing the structural coordinates of template, in the PIR (Protein
Information Resource) format were generated, which are essential
for identification of the common conserved sequences and to know
about the active residues in both the sequences. The 3D structure
was predicted based on spatial constraints.

Models generated were subjected to Swiss PDB viewer [] for
minimisation of energy, using the steepest descent conjugate
gradient technique to eliminate the unfavourable contacts between
protein and H2O molecules and to correct the stereochemistry of the
model. Computational analysis was carried out in vacuo with
GROMOS96 43B1 parameters set, without reaction field in Swiss
PDB viewer. The refined model was subjected to a series of tests for
validation of consistency and reliability of the model using
PROCHECK_NT []. Backbone structure of the protein was
obtained by the assessment of χ/ψ plots. SAVS NIH (http://nihserver.mbi.ucla.edu/SAVES/) was used to explore the non bonded
interactions between different atom types.

Molecular interaction
INF-τ1c predicted model was docked to human IFNAR1 using Hex
5.1 (http: //www.csd.abdn.ac.uk/hex/). The atomic coordinates of
human IFNAR1 was retrieved from PDB (PDB ID: 1N6V) []. For
identification of pockets present on IFNAR1, Ligsite CSC (Conally
Surface and Degree of Conservation) software
(www.scoppi.biotech.tu-dresden.de/pocket/) was used. Ligsite uses
grids to detect functional sites, further, conally surfaces and degree
of conservation are used for refining. Different pockets of the
receptor were obtained and arranged according to their volumes.
The pocket having the maximum surface area was selected and the
nearest atom to the pocket was determined using the distance tool in
Swiss PDB viewer. Only this pocket was used for binding in further
steps. Introduction of ligand into pocket was done using Hex 5.1. A
pocket is the functionality centre of protein and has no physical
existence in 3 dimensional spaces. To place a ligand in the pocket
with maximum interaction, indirect approach was applied. Placing
of ligand into the cavity should be such that the Vander Waal’s radii
of the ligand and electron cloud of the closest atom to pocket do not
overlap. Parameters, such as receptor and ligand angle, twist angle,
steric scan were changed to bring the ligand close to the closest
atom of the pocket. Before docking all hetero molecules like ions
and water molecules were removed using Hex.

Discussion
The amino acid sequence of the Bos taurus INF-τ1c (accession
number: AAF08671) protein was retrieved from the SWISS PROT
(http://www.expasy.org). The molecular weight of the protein is
19.79 KDa and its pI is 6.01 which were obtained from Sequence
Manipulation Suite (http://www.bioinformatics.org/sms2/). The
template file exhibited a sequence similarity of 80%. The target and
template protein alignment was performed using ClustalW for
determining the conserved regions ().

After alignment, 20 different models were generated using Modeller
9v5, out of them best 5 were selected. The selected models were
then subjected to energy minimisation using SWISS PDB viewer.
The model with the lowest objective function (-10029.48), was
selected and subjected to quality evaluation. Ramachandran plot of
the model was obtained using PROCHECK_NT, out of total, 94.2% 
of the residues were in the favourable region, 5.2% in additional
allowed regions, 0.6% in generously allowed regions and 0.0% in
disallowed regions. The quality factor of protein model was 87.5%
which was obtained using SAVS NIH (nihserver.mbi.ucla.edu/SAVES).

The model was then submitted to protein model data base
(PM0075822) (http://mi.caspur.it). The visualisation of the 3D
structure of protein was done with the help of PyMol software. The
generated model was found to contain 5 α helices separated by loop
regions, as reported earlier for other members of Type I IFN family. The high level of structural similarity, of different members of
IFN-τ family, and among different species indicates the significance
and conservation of their function.

Based on rigid-body docking using HEX 5.1, both proteins were
analyzed for shape complementary and electrostatic interactions
(). Two pockets (pkt 87 &amp; pkt 19) of IFNAR1 were
obtained from Ligsite. Pkt 87 was chosen as it was having the
maximum surface area and volume. Also from the Swiss PDB
viewer, residue Arg 73 with atom ’C-alpha‘, having distance 5.06Å 
was found to be the closest to the pocket. It was found that keeping
ligand and receptor angle at 45°, twist angle at 180° and steric scan
at 15, ligand was closest to the pocket and total energy was -370.15.
These docking results indicated that the complex () could be
stabilized by hydrogen bonding.

Type I IFNs induce the synthesis of antiviral factors via activation
of the cellular Jak-STAT signalling pathway. There are three main
mechanisms involving 2‘, 5‘-oligoadenylate synthetase (2‘, 5‘-
OAS), RNA-dependent serine-threonine kinase R (PKR) and MxA
protein. 2‘,5‘-OAS activated by the TAR sequence on human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) RNA, activates the latent RNase L.
The 2‘, 5‘-OAS/RNase L pathway was found to be involved in
inhibiting HIV. The second factor PKR, is known to impair HIV
replication in chronically infected cells, and the third, MxA protein
of the GTPase superfamily has been proposed to act at different
levels of the virus replication cycle, as for other viruses []. The
potential binding of the IFN-τ1c protein with the human IFNAR1
may illicit the same response as reported earlier for ovine
recombinant IFN-τ. Though production of recombinant bovine IFN-
τ1c has never been reported, other members of bovine INF have
been produced but their efficacy as anti-viral or anti-HIV agents has
never been explored.

Conclusion
Structure of INF-τ1c was predicted using homology modelling,
which is basically similar to other INFs and the crystallized murine
IFN-β []. Proper understanding of the structure, may not only add
on to the current understanding of functioning but also differences
within closely related proteins of the same family. IFN-τ is
structurally different from other IFNs (α, β and ω), biologically they
constitute a distinct serological group, and also differ considerably
in amino acid sequence. Also they are much less toxic than other
INFs. This suggests that IFN-τ may present themselves in a distinct
manner, to the receptors on the uterine endometrium and other
potentially functional sites, as compared to other IFNs. A
comparison between the structure and amino acid residues in the
potential binding site may provide a clue to these differential
properties. Here we have shown that bovine IFN-τ1c interact with
the human IFNAR1 and therefore may bind to the human IFNAR,
thus activating its downstream signalling molecules. Ability of
ovine IFN-τ has been previously shown to exhibit resistance to
HIV-1 infection in human macrophages []. Thus it will be
exciting to explore the antiviral activity of bovine IFN-τ1c.

Citation:Jamwal et al, Bioinformation 4(4): 155-157 (2009)

Sequence alignment of target and template proteins generated by clustalW

Molecular interaction between IFNAR1 &amp; INF-τ1c

