Background
Anaphylaxis is an immediate Type I hypersensitivity reaction
triggered by sudden release of immune cell mediated release of
mediators into the circulatory system []. Anaphylaxis is
graded using a scale of 0 to IV and the stage III and above
corresponds to life-threatening Anaphylactic Shock (AS) 
[]. AS
is sudden and making the prevention in most cases difficult in
an emergency situation. Without immediate treatment, AS
might lead to substantial morbidity and mortality; within
minutes this sudden clinical response can be lethal. The lifetime
probability of an individual to develop anaphylaxis may be
from 1 to 3 % with a mortality rate of about 1 % 
[].

AS leads to cardiovascular collapse that occurs after the
interaction of antigen and antibody [] which in most cases
results from immunogenic reactions to foods [,
], medication
[–], 
chemicals [], dental materials 
[], insect bites 
[],
vaccines [,
], therapeutic antibodies 
[–], herbal extracts
[], exercise in rare cases 
[] and other agents 
[]
,–] that
can induce the degranulation of mast cells and basophils (18,
31). Some of the symptoms of AS includes cardiac arrhythmias,
diffuse erythema, headache, nausea, unconsciousness and
cardiovascular collapse in severe cases [,
]. Most often these
signs and symptoms occur within 30 min of allergen exposure,
however, in some cases severe anaphylactic reactions may take
a progressive path regardless of adequate treatment; even in
the case of an initial favorable response to therapy, lifethreatening
symptoms may recur due to late-phase reactions
from 6 to 12 hours after the initial events of AS [,
].

However, very little advancement has been achieved in the
effective treatment and management of anaphylaxis [,
].
The prophylaxis is confined to total avoidance, allergen specific
desensitization, and proper treatments, including
antihistamines, adrenaline, corticosteroids etc., [,
]. On the
other hand, various studies using in vitro, in vivo and in silico
models have identified various cellular and molecular
mechanisms, either to enhance or attenuate, the AS 
[–].
Here, we discuss the cellular machineries implicated in AS

Distinct cellular cascades of AS:
Studies conducted on the animal models of murine systemic
anaphylaxis show that the anaphylaxis is rapid and
hypothermia, hypotension, diminished movement, piloerection
and scratching [,
]. During anaphylaxis, the crosslinking
of the multivalent FceRI expressed on mast cells and
basophils [,
] by allergen induces the activation of an array
of signaling pathways [,
], resulting in degranulation, lipid
mediator release and cytokine gene transcription, culminating
in secretion of cytokines and chemokines that play a central
role in allergic reactions [,
]. Novel cytokines such as
Interleukin-33 (IL-33) may play a potential role in AS. It is the
ligand for ST2 receptor, and the IL-33/ST2 axis is implicated in
various human diseases including allergy and asthma. The ST2
is expressed predominantly in immune cells such as mast cells
and type 2 helper T- cells (Th2). Advancing research into the
role of IL-33/ST2 using in vitro, in vivo and in silico models of
allergy and anaphylaxis may perhaps provide novel targets for
the robust management and treatment of an extensive range of
allergic disorders in humans.

Anaphylaxis or AS can be mediated by distinct cellular and
molecular cascades in both humans and mouse, namely mast
cell mediated (Conventional or Classical or Orthodox) and
macrophage mediated (Alternate or Unconventional or
Unorthodox) cascades [] 
(). The classical cascade is
initiated by the sensitization of mast cells by IgE antibodies
coupled with high affinity FceRI receptors on the cell surface
followed by binding of antigens leading to mast cell
degranulation and the release of histamine as well as other 
proinflammatory molecules. However, histamine is principally
responsible for the induction of AS [,
].

On the other hand, the alternate cascade of AS can be partially
induced by IgG antibodies through the stimulation of FcγRIII, a
low-affinity IgG receptor, on macrophages []. Most
importantly, PAF is mainly responsible for the initiation and
progression of AS in the alternate cascade [,
].
Consequently, the alternative cascade can be induced in mice
with monoclonal antibody 2.4G2 that directly binds with
FcγRIII on macrophages [,
]. The evidence for the alternate
cascade of AS has been demonstrated in mice that lacked IgE
[], FceRI 
[] and mast cells (c-kit–deficient W/Wv mice) 
[,
]. The anaphylaxis induced by any one of these cascades
deactivates the initiation of AS through the other pathway 
[,
].

Neutralizing the neutrophils to ameliorate AS – A novel paradigm shift:
Among the leukocytes, neutrophils are the primary immune
cells transmigrate to the sites of infection or tissue damage in
the acute inflammatory response(s) []. Neutrophils migrate
through the endothelial layer of the blood vessels by a process
termed as neutrophil extravasation. Deciphering the gene
regulation of this extravasation phenomenon is one of the chief
objective of the current immunological research to reduce the
severity of various diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA),
asthma, atherosclerosis, ulcerative colitis (UC) etc.,
[]
Conversely, the critical role of neutrophils, a major innate
immune effector cell, in AS was so far not very well
characterised.

Very recently, Jönsson et al. showed that anaphylaxis could
also be triggered in mast cell-deficient mice as well as in 5KO
mice []. The 5KO mice administered with FcγRIV-specific
blocking antibodies were protected from Active Systemic
Anaphylaxis (ASA), pointing out that an anaphylactic reaction
can be induced through FcγRIV activation itself. Intriguingly,
FcγRIV is expressed macrophages and neutrophils, but not by
immune cells playing a major role in the induction of classical
cascades of AS such as mast cells and basophils. Additionally,
the systemic luminescence experiments precisely indicated that
neutrophils were activated within minutes of ASA induction.
Besides, reduction of neutrophils protected 5KO mice from AS,
reduction of macrophages and monocytes did not attenuate the
induction of ASA.

Moreover, Jönsson et al., deciphered that neutrophil reduction
protected wild-type (WT) mice from Passive Systemic
Anaphylaxis (PSA) induced by polyclonal IgG antibodies,
whereas mice lacking both mast cells and basophils were still
vulnerable to anaphylaxis. Therefore, neutrophils are not only
responsible for the development of IgG-induced PSA but are
very much necessary for the triggering of anaphylactic reaction
in this in vivo model. These interesting discoveries lead the
authors to study the role of neutrophils in ASA in WT mice in
order to rule out the embryonic complementation or adaption
of KO mice during the embryonic development to overcome
the lack of a particular gene and use other alternate pathways
for a particular biological function 
[]. Surprisingly, neutrophil
depletion potentially attenuated the severity of the anaphylactic
reaction and blocked the ASA-associated mortality in WT mice. 

Treating WT mice with a histamine receptor antagonist mildly
ameliorated the severity of ASA, whereas antagonists of the
receptor for PAF protected from ASA related mortality.
Therefore, the ability of neutrophils to steer ASA, as well as,
PSA may at least in part depend on their secretion of PAF.
Furthermore, the transfer of human neutrophils restores ASA
susceptibility in Fc receptor γ-chain KO mice, which are usually
resistant to ASA, Jönsson et al., provided proof that neutrophils
might also be potentially playing a decisive role in the
development of AS in humans. These findings vouch for a
notion that the neutrophils are also important in triggering
anaphylaxis in certain immunological milieu in mice and
humans. Hence, designing therapeutic modalities to specifically
target the mediators of anaphylaxis such as PAF, released from
neutrophils, in addition to mast cells, basophils and
macrophages, may lead to more effectively neutralize the AS in
humans in a typical clinical setting.

Conclusion
AS and other types of allergies are constantly increasing in the
society. The patients who develop AS are treated in the
Intensive Care Unit (ICU) initially with intramuscular injection
of epinephrine and intravenous fluid administration followed
by both antihistamines and corticosteroids, if necessary, as
determined by the Physician [,
]. However, the modulation
of FceRI responses is currently being used as a principal
therapeutic strategy in allergic disorders [–
]. The Classical
Cascade is the major target for the attenuation of IgE-mediated
allergic diseases. Furthermore, anti-IgE monoclonal antibody
therapy to allergic patients has exhibited remarkable inhibition
and, thus, an effective therapeutic for AS [,
]. Interestingly,
the recent findings by Jönsson et al. 
[] signify a de novo
paradigm shift that the neutrophils are also important in
triggering anaphylaxis in mice and humans. Hence, designing
therapeutic modalities to specifically targeting the mediators of
anaphylaxis such as PAF, released from neutrophils, in
addition to mast cells, basophils and macrophages, may be
useful to effectively neutralize the AS in humans.

Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

This project was supported by the NSTIP strategic technologies
program in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA) Project
Numbers 12-BIO2719-03 and 12-BIO2267-03. The authors also
acknowledge with thanks the Science and Technology Unit
(STU), King Abdulaziz University (KAU) for technical support.
In addition, authors would like to acknowledge the wonderful
figure generated by the technical team of Beacon Biosoft
(www.beaconbiosoft.com).

Citation:Pushparaj et al, Bioinformation 11(1): 043-046 (2015)

Cellular Cascades of Anaphylactic Shock (AS). Anaphylactic shock is a rapid allergic reaction involving multiple organs
including the bronchial and cardiovascular system. It is induced either by the mast cells or basophils triggering the Classical
Molecular Cascades of AS. On the other hand, macrophages as well as neutrophils trigger Alternate Molecular Cascades of AS.
Classical Cascade is induced even when IgE bound with the FceRI receptor on the mast cells and basophils cross-links with
allergen/antigen leads to the release of proinflammatory cytokines, lipid mediators, histamine, PAF and other granular contents.
The Alternate Cascade is induced when both antigen specific IgG and IgE are present and IgG concentration is more than IgE, in
this state, antigen/allergen complex binds with FcgRIII/FcgRIV on the surface of macrophages and neutrophils respectively. Except
histamine, all other mediators of AS such as cytokines, lipid mediators and PAF are released from both macrophages and
neutrophils.

