Background
Folate, the water-soluble vitamin of B complex family is an essential cofactor in several eukaryotic metabolic pathways 
[]. It facilitates methylation reaction and transfer of “one carbon units” 
for purines and pyrimidines biosynthesis. Folate is also involved in the biosynthesis of methionine, histidine and serine. Availability 
of folate is essential for various metabolic pathways in higher eukaryotes []. 
Prokaryotes have the ability to synthesize folate through metabolic processes. However, eukaryotes are unable to synthesize folates and 
hence they require an external source as supplements. Mammals have the ability to synthesize the pteridine ring, but are unable to link 
it with other compounds such as p-Amino benzoate and glutamic acid []. In general 
there are two types of folate transporters present in higher eukaryotes; membrane channels and carriers; they vectorialy move molecules 
into endocytic vesicles and are internalized. Transport systems can be distinguished by their preferences of various folates as 
substrates, as well as differences in physiological conditions such as temperature and pH. The main mechanism by which folate is 
transported from the extracellular space to the cytoplasm are the carrier mediated or receptor, which operate efficiently at natural 
physiological pH []. Here in this report, we propose a hypothesis that the genes 
which are present in lower eukaryotes, partially converged into a meaningful pattern in higher eukaryotes of similar function. We tested 
this hypothesis using folate synthesizing genes from lower eukaryotes that converged into receptor and binding proteins in higher 
eukaryotes.

Methodology
Dataset
Nucleic acid sequences of Folate receptor were collected from the Swissprot (http://www.expasy.org/). Three types of folate receptor variants sequences were obtained, 
which are named as alpha, beta, and gamma. The common folate receptors found in humans belong to the alpha variant. Even within the 
alpha variants, many sub variants are reported [].

PROSITE pattern search
Pattern set were obtained form prosite database. All other sequences for folate synthesizing gene were obtained from the KEGG 
(Koyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) database (http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/pathway.html). To get the data out from 
the kegg data base we used Folate, folate synthesizing gene and folate metabolism and folate synthesis as key words. After getting the 
information about pathways, several enzymes envolved in the pathways were noted and search for pattan analysis using swiss pro data 
base. The SWISSPROT ID for the enzymes are P12954-ATP dependent DNA Helicase SRS2, P37254-Probable polyglutamate synthase, P06839-DNA 
repair helicase RAD-3, P13587-Sodium transport ATPase 1, Q12691-ATP dependent DNA helicase SRS-2, P53848-Folic acid synthesis protein 
FOL-1, P07807-Dihydrofolate reductase, P51601-GTP Cyclohydrolase 1, P51979-ATP dependent DNA helicase MER-3, P36001-Probable 
folypolyglutamate synthase, P53327-Antiviral helicase SLH-1, P32639-Pre mRNA splicing helicase BRR-Genes involved in synthesis of folate 
in lower eukaryotes (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) are summarized in Table 1 
(). 
Prosite database also helped in identifying functions of uncharacterized proteins translated from genomic or cDNA sequences and in the 
determination of protein function with biologically meaningful patterns and profiles 
[–].

MUSCLE alignment
MUSCLE is a comparatively new program and used in creating multiple alignments of protein sequences 
[,]. Multiple alignments of 
protein sequences are important in many applications, including phylogenetic tree estimation, structure prediction and critical residue 
identification. In this experiment, we used MUSCLE (MUltiple Sequence Comparison by Log-Expectation), a Multiple Sequence Alignment 
program with better average accuracy and speed compared to ClustalW2 or T-Coffee and gives output as a summary of the algorithm 
[].

Discussion
To evaluate the similar motifs (amino acid), between folate receptor and folate synthesizing gene, we used the protein sequence of 
Folate receptor-α and scanned it with DNA repair helicase RAD 3 (EC 3.6.1.-) enzyme, which forms a pattern that showing the region of 
4 to 51 of the folate receptor alpha (), of which 9 amino acid exactly matches and 24 were same group of amino acids rest are 
different residues. This observation led us to scan more patterns of folate synthesizing gene with folate receptor alpha protein 
sequence. Para amino benzoate synthase (E.C 6.3.5.8) scanning results gave a meaningful pattern with in the region of 8 to 53 of FRα, 
out of which 11 exact amino acid residues are matched, 23 amino acids were in similar group. ATP dependent DNA helicase SRS-2 
(E.C 3.6.1.-) shows a pattern in the region of 23 to 69 of FRα, out of which 11 amino acid residues were exactly matched in both the 
sequence and 19 were similar group of amino acids. Antiviral helicase SLH-1 (E.C 3.6.1.-) shows a pattern in the region of 55 to 103 
of FRα, of which 8 amino acid residues exactly matched in both sequences, and 24 were similar groups of amino acids. Dihydrofolate 
reductase (E.C 1.5.1.3) showed the pattern in between the amino acid residues 62 to 111 of FRα, of which 9 amino acid residues were 
exactly matched and 25 were similar groups of amino acids.

Probable poly glutamate synthase (E.C 6.3.2.17) exhibited the pattern in between the amino acid residues of 68 to 113 of FRα, 
of which 11 amino acid residues were exactly matched and 22 were similar groups of amino acids. Folic acid synthesis protein 
(E.C 2.5.1.15) also showed a pattern in between the amino acid residues of 108 to 155 of FRα, of which 8 amino acid residues were 
exactly matched and 24 were similar groups of amino acids. Similarly, ATP dependent DNA helicase MER-3 (E.C 3.6.1.-) showed a pattern 
in between the amino acid residues of 115 to 161 of FRα , of which 7 amino acid residues were exactly matched and 24 were similar 
groups of amino acids. Sodium transport ATPase 1 (E.C 3.6.3.7) showed a pattern in between amino acid residues of 145 to 192 of FRα, 
of which 8 amino acid residues were exactly matched and 21 were similar groups of amino acids. GTP cyclohydrolase1 (E.C 3.5.4.16) 
shows a pattern in between the amino acid residues of 181 to 230 of FRα, of which 7 amino acid residues were exactly matched and 27 were 
similar groups of amino acids. Pre mRNA splicing helicase BRR-2 (E.C 3.6.1.-) showed a pattern in between the amino acid residues of 
210 to 257 of FRα, of which 11 amino acid residues were exactly matched and 22 were similar groups of amino acids. We have combined all 
the patterns that were obtained in the scanning results and created complete length of converged folate receptor alpha sequence with 
their synthesizing protein sequences. These results indicate that part of the synthesizing genes was partially converged into folate 
receptor alpha sequence in higher eukaryotes (human) ().

To prove further this convergence we wanted to see how many motif are actually present in folate receptor form various part of genes 
which are part of folate synthesis in yeast, we used muscle alignment (multiple sequence alignment) which used Gonnet Pam 250 protein 
weighing matrix was helpful in identifying domain similarities in between the distantly related protein sequences. This gave a good 
alignment scores between protein sequences in folate receptors and folate synthesizing genes. Possibility of the gene conservation as 
well as convergence of folate synthesizing genes form lower eukaryotes (Yeast) into folate transport protein (folate receptor) of higher 
eukaryotes (human), we aligned all the folate synthesizing genes from Yeast and of folate receptor protein sequences (Human). After 
alignment maximum conserved domains we identified as shown in . The aligned sequence shows the part of folate synthesizing genes 
are converged to form folate receptors in higher eukaryotes. In this alignment P15328, P14207 and P41439 are folate receptors 
(α, β and γ) from human and other sequences are folate synthesizing genes from Yeast. Maximum residues are conserved from Sodium 
transport ATPase-1, sodium transport ATPase-5, folic acid synthesis protein, antiviral helicase SLH-1 and pre mRNA splicing helicase 
BRR-2. These results clearly validated our hypothesis that genes for folate receptors in higher organisms (human) are conversed from 
folate synthesizing genes of lower eukaryotes (yeast) during evolutionary process.

Conclusion
We described gene evolution and conversance pattern of the similar functional domains. Here, we have chosen a model of receptor and 
synthesizing genes of similar function. Similarly, other model can be evolved to test this hypothesis. These conserved and conversed 
region maybe used to develop as target for drug development in future.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work was supported by the grant from MHRD (0506/007/RAMS) and DBT (07/08/032/RAMS) and partial support to KR from DBT is 
acknowledged.

Prosite scan of folate receptor alpha (Human) and folate synthesizing genes (Yeast)
FR = Folate receptor; DNARHRAD3 = DNA repair helicase RAD-3; ATPDDDNAHSRS2 = ATP dependent DNA helicase SRS-2; 
AVH = Anti viral helicase SLH-1; DHFR = Dihydrofolate reductase; PFPS = probable folypolyglutamate synthase; 
FASP = Folic acid synthesis protein; ADDHMER3 = ATP dependent DNA helicase MER-3; STATP1 = Sodium transport ATPase-1; 
GTPCH-1 = GTP cyclohydrolase-1; PmRNASHBRR2 = Pre mRNA spicing helicase BRR-2.

Schematic representation of convergence of Folate receptor (Human) from Folate synthesizing genes (Yeast). Proteins from 
colored boxes represents patterns which related to folate receptor colored boxes shows corresponding patterns which converged from 
folate synthesizing genes from folate receptor. FR = Folate receptor; DNARHRAD3 = DNA repair helicase RAD-3; 
ATPDDDNAHSRS2 = ATP dependent DNA helicase SRS-2; AVH = Anti viral helicase SLH-1; DHFR = Dihydrofolate reductase; 
PFPS = probable folypolyglutamate synthase; FASP = Folic acid synthesis protein; ADDHMER3 = ATP dependent DNA helicase MER-3; 
STATP1 = Sodium transport ATPase-1; GTPCH-1 = GTP cyclohydrolase-1; PmRNASHBRR2 = Pre mRNA splicing helicase BRR-2.

Alignment of the amino acid sequence of folate receptor from Human (alpha, beta and gamma) and folate synthesizing genes 
from yeast. Asterisk (*) shows similarity between folate receptors and folate synthesizing genes.

