Background
With a public dataset of both genotypes and inferred haplotypes for millions of SNPs in ethnically diverse
samples, the International HapMap Project [] has provided a
landscape of the human genome that enables genetic scientists to compare their genetic variant results with that of
a reference. The vast information from the International HapMap Project has significantly driven the development of
more efficient statistical tools for high-throughput analysis of large genetic data sets 
[] and enhanced our knowledge of population genetics 
[–]. Given that the HapMap 
samples are Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) that can be purchased 
[], researchers can perform integrated analysis that includes genetic 
variation, gene expression [–], 
gene transcript isoforms [] and sensitivity to drugs 
[–].

HapMap3 enhances the initial HapMap samples with 1,115 individual samples collected from 11 populations around the
world, thus providing more diversity. The HapMap3 includes samples from individuals of African, Asian, European and
Mexican descent residing in various locations. Therefore, it has become an ideal resource to study genotype-phenotype
relationships with cellular phenotypes.

In this analysis, we compare the genotypic frequencies of over 1 million SNPs among the samples. We hypothesize that
the list of candidate SNPs, which have significantly different allele frequency distributions among the diverse samples,
will facilitate studies attempting to correlate genotype with cellular phenotypes such as pharmacogenomics, and alert
investigators to SNPs that might contribute disproportionately to substructure within more heterogeneous samples.

Methodology
HapMap3 genotypic data and SNP function classes
The genotypic data of 1,115 individuals from 11 population samples were downloaded from the International HapMap
Project website (Phase III, release 1). Two samples NA18955, NA18962 in the CHB group actually belong to the
JPT sample set, and thus were dropped out of the analysis. In the current study, the tested population panel focused only on
the 931 unrelated individuals comprised of Gujarati Indians in Houston, Texas (GIH, n = 83), individuals of Mexican
ancestry in Los Angeles, California (MEX, n = 47) and individuals of African ancestry from the Southwest USA
(ASW, n = 47), Luhya in Webuye, Kenya (LWK, n = 83), Maasai in Kinyawa, Kenya (MKK, n = 143), Yoruba in
Ibadan, Nigeria (YRI, n = 108), Han Chinese from Beijing, China (CHB, n = 80), Chinese from metropolitan Denver,
Colorado (CHD, n = 70), Japanese from Tokyo, Japan (JPT, n= 82); Utah residents with Northern and Western European
ancestry from the CEPH collection (CEU, n = 111), and Tuscans from Italy (TSI, n = 77). Of note, two samples
(NA18955, NA18962) included in the CHB group belong to JPT. Five groups of samples (ASW, CEU, MEX, MKK and
YRI) are familial samples; and the rest are unrelated samples. A total of 1,614,792 polymorphic SNPs were genotyped in
the HapMap3 Project. The number of shared SNPs ranges from 1,047,055 to 1,487,361 for the pair-wise combinations
of the 11 HapMap3 population samples (). Using the same reference allele of a SNP, we 
calculated the allele frequencies across all the populations.

Fst calculation
Fst, a metric representation of the effect of population subdivision, was estimated according to Wright's
approximate formula, Fst = (HT − HS) / HT where HT represents expected heterozygosity per locus of the total
population and HS represents expected heterozygosity of a subpopulation []. 
An Fst value was calculated for each SNP of interest with allele frequencies estimated from the unrelated individuals in each 
population. We calculated Fst values for only SNPs with minor allele frequencies greater than 5¢ in each of the HapMap3 samples.

Dataset
The dataset [] contains all SNPs with Fst value over 0.5
from the tests between any two of the 11 HapMap3 samples. There are 28,215 common SNPs with high population
differentiation observed for at least 1 of 49 different combinations of HapMap3 population samples in the
databases.

Development
The genotypes of approximately 1.6 million SNPs were downloaded from the International HapMap Project (HapMap3, release 1). 
Fst was evaluated for over 1 million SNPs for each of the 55 paired combinations from the 11 HapMap3 samples, followed by rearrangement 
into five distinct groups defined by historical geographic ancestry (African, Asian, European, MEX and GIH) 
(). The Fst test was evaluated again among the combinations of the five
geographical defined groups. Altogether there are 64 genomewide Fst tests for the HapMap3 samples. SNPs with high population 
differentiation (Fst &gt; 0.5) were categorized into two major classes: genic and nongenic SNPs. The genic
SNPs were further divided into six function classes including intron, UTR (utr-3 or utr-5), locus region (near-gene-3 or
near-gene-5), splice site, coding synonymous or nonsynonymous based on the annotation in the NCBI dbSNP129 database. The SNP 
annotation was added as a separate column to facilitate additional applications in the future.

Database content
This database [] provides 115, 212 entries of 28,215 SNPs with high 
differentiation among 48 different combinations of the HapMap3 samples. There are six columns for the database as follows: SNP, SNP_CHR 
(SNP Chromosome), SNP_POSI (SNP position in dbSNP129), Fst value, Tested_Populations and DbSNP129_Class. The number of the entries in 
each group ranges from 3 for GIH_TSI group to 10,416 for JPT_YRI group.

Database usage
The users can download the FstSNP_HapMap3 [] and then
query the database by the conditions of genomic regions or a list of SNPs or SNP Class.

Caveats
The Fst test was evaluated in the HapMap3 population samples, some of which have relatively small sample size
(e.g. 47 individuals in ASW and MEX). Furthermore, we note that SNPs included in HapMap3 are subject to a number
of ascertainment biases; thus, these SNPs cannot be considered as representative of Fst values that might be
calculated for all common variants.

This Pharmacogenetics of Anticancer Agents Research (PAAR) Group 
(http://pharmacogenetics.org)
 study was supported by the NIH/NIGMS grant U01GM61393.

The diagram for the construction of FstSNP_HapMap3

