Background
Malaria is a life threatening disease, which is transmitted to
public from one another exclusively by female Anopheles
mosquitoes. The life cycle of Plasmodium is extraordinarily
complex involving an invertebrate vector (mosquito) and a
vertebrate host (human). Among the other, Plasmodium
falciparum causes severe symptoms such as cerebral malaria and
finally death. This disease is present in 106 countries and
among these 99 have ongoing transmission of malaria.
According to WHO (World Health Organization) estimation
there were 216 million malaria cases was reported worldwide
and among this 6, 55,000 persons were dead in 2010. 86% of the
victims were children under 5 years of age, and 91% of malaria
deaths occurred in the WHO African Region. Malaria mortality
rates have fallen by 5.3% in global context in 2010 
[]
http://www.who.int/malaria/worldÅmalariaÅreportÅ2011/WMR2011
Åfactsheet.pdf. The global incidence of malaria is mainly caused
by four Plasmodium species. They are Plasmodium falciparum,
Plasmodium vivax, Plasmodium ovale and Plasmodium malariae.

Life cycle in brief:
Life cycle of malarial parasite can be dividing into three stages
(1) Exoerythrocytic stage; (2) Intraerythrocytic stage and (3)
Sporogonic stage. Among these first two stages are completed
in humans and next one is in mosquitoes. Infection of
Plasmodium is initiated as porozoites (Exoerythrocytic Stage),
they are injected into peripheral blood stream through the
saliva of a feeding mosquito. These sporozoites are carried to
the liver and invade hepatocytes through the circulatory
system. After that it forms merozoites and enters into the blood
stream and infects the erythrocytes (Intraerythrocytic), which is
a pathogenic stage of malaria. Digestion of Hemoglobin is the
major catabolic process of Plasmodium sps in merozoitic stage
[], mature merozoites can form tropozoites and these can form
gamatocytes or again invade into fresh erythrocytes.
Plasmodium completes its life cycle in humans and enters into
mosquitoes gut by blood meal for sexual cycle which is
sporogonic and enters into salivary gland, ready to infect
another human being.

Stage specific protein targets:
The protein targets of P. falciparum from sporozoites (the
infectious form injected by the mosquito), merozoites (the
invasive stage of the erythrocytes), trophozoites (the form
multiplying in erythrocytes), and gametocytes (sexual stages) of
the human malaria parasite are tabulated  (see
supplementary material). Genes involved in virulence and
antigenic variation (for example, var, vir and rif genes) in
Plasmodium falciparum are located in the subtelomeric regions of
the chromosomes [,
].

Anti malarial drug- target- resistance:
A limited number of chemotherapeutic agents for the treatment
of malaria are available but the growing problem of drug
resistance makes the treatment of malaria increasingly difficult
[]. 
Its control is hampered by increasing resistance of malaria
to the available drugs []. Some of the anti malarial drugs
available in market are mainly Quinine derivatives, antifolates
and arylalcohols. Quinoline antimalarials, i.e. an active
ingredient of Cinchona bark, which was used as antimalarial
drug since seventeenth century []. Quinine requires thrice
daily administration over 7 days; this can result in poor
compliance. The dependence on raw material for its extraction
and the availability of structural elucidation techniques leads to
the development of fully synthetic chloroquine and later
amodiaquine [], which are inexpensive and more effective for
a long time. Amodiaquine use has been limited since the mid
1980s, as it shows a high degree of efficacy []. The other
antimalarial drugs structurally similar to chloroquine are
Mefloquine and halofantrine, but resistance to these drugs was
rapidly developed than chloroquine []. Additional limitations
to these drugs usage of these drugs are occasionally
neuropsychiatric disturbances for mefloquine and halofantrine,
it can cause harm to the people with a history of heart disease
[].

Artemisinin the active constituent of the Chinese herb
(Artemisia annua), which was used traditionally for treating
several types of fevers, have been used increasingly over the
past two decades [,
]. The derivatives of this include
artemether, arteether and artesunate, they are metabolized to
dihydroartemisinin the main active agent in the body to treat
malaria. These drugs can act against gametocytes, the sexual
stages of the parasite that infect mosquitoes. Lumefantrine is an
aryl alcohol similar to mefloquine and halofantrine, and
neurotoxicity was not reported in animal toxicology studies
[]. Antifolates are not derived from plants and synthesized
through knowledge of cell biology and synthetic medicinal
chemistry. Fully reduced folate cofactors are essential for
nucleotide biosynthesis and amino-acid metabolism 
[].
Antifolate used to treat malaria is 2, 4-diaminopyrimidine
(Pyrimethamine) and Sulphadoxine, (sulphonamide) an
inhibitor of dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR), and
dihydroopteroate synthase (DHPS) respectively. These enzymes
are the part of folate pathway. Atovaquone/proguanil is
another combination similar to that of sulphadoxine/
pyrimethamine []. The hydroxynaphthoquinone atovaquone
interferes with mitochondrial electron transport. Common
antibiotics acting against bacterial protein synthesis such as
tetracycline, doxycycline and clindamycin inhibit parasite
growth and are being used increasingly in combination with
other antimalarial treatments to augment their activity 
[].

Resistance:
Chloroquine, which served as a cheap and reliable drug for
decades, is becoming ineffective against Plasmodium falciparum
in most tropical areas. Thus, there is a need to develop novel
antimalarial agents that are effective against drug-resistant
malarial parasites []. Drug development efforts generally aim
for structurally unrelated compounds that work through new,
independent mechanisms of action to existing antimalarial
agents. Chloroquine and other derivatives such as
amodiaquine, mefloquine, quinidine, quinacrine are potent
inhibitors of heme polymerization. Target for the Chloroquine
is the lysosome or food vacuole of the parasite; it interferes in
the detoxification of haemoglobin. Pfmdr1 gene located on
chromosome 5 of P. falciparum, encodes a P glycoprotein of 160
kDa which plays a role in drug efflux []. Pfmdr1 gene at
codons 86, 184, 1034, 1042 and 1246 have been proposed to be
associated with chloroquine resistance []. N86Y mutation in
pfmdr1 seems to be playing some role in the chloroquine
resistance but it is unclear. pfcrt is located on chromosome 7
and encodes for a protein named as P. falciparum chloroquine
resistance transporter protein (PfCRT), this 36 kb membrane
protein localizes to the parasite digestive vacuole (DV), the site
of CQ action K76T mutation in pfcrt has been found in all the
chloroquine resistant parasites. Besides K76T mutation in pfcrt,
mutations at codon 72, 74, 75, 97, 220, 271, 326, 356 and 371 have
also been found to be associated with chloroquine resistance
[]. Concomitantly associated with increased sensitivity to
mefloquine and halofantrine [–] because of the 1042D and
1034C/1042D/1246Y alleles are associated with increased
resistance to quinine and increased sensitivity to mefloquine
and artemisinin drugs. The increased copy number of the
Pfmdr1 gene in Plasmodium falciparum leads to treatment failure
with mefloquine [,
].

After the failure of chloroquine, Sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine
is used as a second line of drug to treat uncomplicated
chloroquine resistant falciparum malaria cases. Use of SP is
limited for pregnant women during the early trimester 
[,
].
Sulphadoxine and pyrimethamine inhibit the enzymes
dihydropteroate synthase and dihydrofolate reductase,
respectively, involved in folate pathway. The mutation at codon
108 of P. falciparum DHFR S108N reduces the sensitivity of the
pyrimethamine. The parasite isolates which showed
pyrimethamine resistance, were found to contain this mutation
and other mutations at codons 51 (N51I), 59 (C59R) and 164
(I164L) were associated with S108N mutation. Majority of
Indian isolates were found to contain double DHFR mutations
(C59R+ S108N) []. Most of the mutation in dihydropteroate
synthase are at codons 436 (Ser to Ala/Phe), 437 (Ala to Gly),
540 (Lys to Glu), 581 (Ala to Gly) and 613 (Ala to Ser/ Thr).
A437G is the key point mutation in DHPS; it is similar to S108N
mutation in DHFR. A single DHFR mutation or double DHFR
mutations alone will not cause SP treatment failure but that
double DHFR mutations plus a single DHPS mutation or triple
DHFR mutations alone can cause higher level of SP resistance
[,
]. Artemisinin was another antimalarial drug adopted by
several countries; it inhibits the uptake of host hemoglobin. P.
falciparum degrades host hemoglobin in an acidic digestive
vacuole in a mid ring stage and reaches a peak in the mid
trophozoite stage []. Artemisinin distributes like
BODIPYthapsigargin to membranous structures in the
cytoplasm of parasites, and does not localize to the parasite
food vacuole []. Artemisinin resistance would be calamitous
for global malaria control. Artemisinin resistance is observed
because of the polymorphisms in the Plasmodium falciparum
merozoite genes encoding the surface proteins of (MSP-1 and
MSP-2) and the glutamate-rich protein (GLURP). The point
mutations in the PfMDR1 gene at positions N86Y, S1034C,
N1042D, and D1246Y, but the mutant codon Y184F was found
to be responsible for resistance againt Artemisinin. Sporadic
point mutations noted in the sequence of PfSERCA gene
revealed that mutations at I89T, N465S, and E847K are also seen
in several field isolates. The PfSERCA L263E and S769N
polymorphisms, proposed to confer artemisinin resistance, but
these two mutations were not detected in fields 
[] 

(see supplementary material).

Amodiaquine, artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT),
introduced in 2001has the World Health Organization
recommended ACTs as the first-line treatment for
uncomplicated malaria. The mode of action of the combination
therapy appears to be similar, and known to be concentrated in
the parasite's lysosome like Chloroquine(CQ) []. Most
countries have now adapted to either Artemether Lumefantrine
(AL) or ArteSunate (AS) and AmodiaQuine (AQ) as their firstline
ACT, AQ is a 4-aminoquinoline related to chloroquine
(CQ), and Although CQ resistance is now widespread across
the world, the efficacy of AQ is variable in treatment trials 
[].
A mutation from 76K-T of the P. falciparum chloroquine
resistance transporter (Pfcrt) gene is associated with resistance
to both CQ and AQ []. Amplification of Pfmdr1gene
modulate susceptibility to the artemether-lumefantrine ACT,
leading to poor treatment response

Drugs that are potent inhibitors of heme polymerization, such
as amodiaquine, mefloquine, quinidine, quinacrine, and
chloroquine, competed well, although quinine competed to a
lesser extent, Mefloquine is a lipophilic quinoline alcohol
which is in wide clinical use. Like chloroquine and quinidine, it
also binds to heme polymer in a heme-dependent fashion and
diminishes binding of quinolines associates with hemozoin.
Mefloquine and a protease inhibitor blocks heme release in the
food vacuole []. Chloroquine accumulates in food vacuole
and is bound to free heme and results in the inhibition of
formation of hemozoin. Over expression of pfmdr1 related to
the mafloquine resistance because it is also sharing same
mechanism as other quinine derivatives []. Polymorphisms in
the P. falciparum multidrug-resistant 1 (Pfmdr1) gene have
concluded that its protein product, Pgh1, plays a role in
modulating levels of resistance to several structurally unrelated
drugs [,
]. All resistant parasites had the K76T mutation in
the PfCRT gene. Some antimalarials, including artemisinin, are
reported to inhibit hemoglobin uptake [], but it is not clear if
this is a direct effect, or a consequence of parasite killing.
Artemisinin is highly potent against hemoglobin-digesting
stages of malaria parasites [,
] than other hemoglobindegrading
drugs, but it is much less potent against other
pathogens []. Falcipain-2 is the only cysteine protease
hemoglobinase expressed early in erythrocytic parasite
development, and knockout parasites have markedly
diminished hemoglobinase activity in the early trophozoite
stage []. These parasites exhibit a swollen vacuole phenotype,
consistent with defective haemoglobin digestion, but the
deletion is not lethal, apparently due to rescue by the
expression of falcipain-2 and falcipain-3 beginning at the mid
trophozoite stage [].

Conclusion
Antimalarial drugs play very important role in controlling of
malaria at individual as well as at epidemiological level.
Careful treatment can slow down the development of resistance
against the available drugs, mostly due to regular usage leads
to development of mutations in the target gene. It is advisable
to check the efficacy of the drug at regular intervals so as to take
a policy decision in advance on its continued usage in the field.
Molecular surveillance can give an advanced indication that a
particular drug is going to lose its efficacy in near future.
However, molecular markers for several antimalarial drugs are
yet to be identified and much improvement is required on the
currently used method.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors thank the Department of Biotechnology, Govt. of India
for the financial assistance provided to carry out the project
work. The authors would also like to thank Acharya Nagarjuna
University, Guntur, India for providing the congenial
environment and also for extending the lab facilities to carry out
the work.

Citation:Kasturi et al, Bioinformation 8(22): 1114-1118 (2012)

