Background
The hypocreomycetidae genus Trichoderma was known for their
rapid growth, capability of utilizing diverse substrates and
resistance to noxious chemicals []. They are often the
predominant components of the mycoflora in soils of various
ecosystems, such as agricultural fields, prairie, forest, salt
marshes and deserts, in all climatic zones []. Several
Trichoderma species are significant biocontrol agents against
fungal plant pathogens for nutrients, stimulators of plant
health, or inducers of plant systemic resistance to pathogens 
[].
Trichoderma species produce a wide diversity of metabolites as
well as the toxins and trichothecenes that display in vitro
cytotoxicity [].

Due to the ecological importance of Trichoderma and its
application as a biocontrol agent in the field, it is important to
understand its biodiversity and biogeography. However,
accurate species identification based on morphology is difficult
at best because of the paucity and similarity of useful
morphological characters [,
] and increasing numbers of
morphologically cryptic species that can be distinguish only
through their DNA characters are being described 
[]. With the
advent of molecular methods and identification tools, which are
based on sequence analysis of multiple genes, it is now possible
to identify every Trichoderma isolate and /or recognize it as a
putative new species []. Considering the environmental
conditions as one of the important factors, the right selection of
BCAs, which begins with a safe characterization of biocontrol
strains in the new taxonomic schemes of Trichoderma, is equally
important since the exact identification of strains to the species
level is the first step in utilizing the full potential of fungi in
specific applications []. The current diversity of the
holomorphic genus Hypocrea/Trichoderma is reflected in
approximately 160 species, the majority of which have been
recognized on the basis of DNA sequence analysis and
molecular phylogeny of pure cultures and/or herbaria
specimens []. Manipur belongs to the rich Indo-Burma mega
biodiversity hotspot region of the world which lies between
23°47'- 25°45' North latitude and 96°61'- 94°48' East longitude.
This region is representing an active center of gene pool and
having a diverse range of Trichoderma spp. with potential
biocontrol activity.

Methodology
Geography of sample sites:
Sampling was done from nine different districts of Manipur
comprising of four different agro-climatic zones viz. i.
Subtropical plain zone, ii. Sub-tropical hill zone, iii. Temperate
sub-Alpine zone and iv. Mid tropical hill zone, which differ in
their geographic location, altitude and climate.

Isolation of pure cultures:
Trichoderma selective medium [] was used as a selective
medium for Trichoderma, using the soil dilution plating method.
Putative Trichoderma colonies were purified by two rounds of
subculturing on potato-dextrose agar (PDA).

Morphological analysis:
For morphological analysis, strains were grown on PDA at 25ºC
- 30°C. Microscopic observations, measurements were made
from slide preparation by using trinocular microscope.
Conidiophore structure and morphology were examined on
macronematous conidiogenous pustules or from fascicles when
conidia were maturing. Conidial morphology and sizes were
recorded after 6-7 days of incubation.

DNA isolation:
The genomic DNA of Trichoderma isolates were extracted from
the pure culture of young and actively growing hyphae using
NBAIM method. Mycelia were obtained by inoculating potato
dextrose broth (PDB;Difco) with aerial mycelium from PDA
plates, and after incubation at 24ºC for 48h on an orbital shaker
(120 rpm). Mycelia were collected on filter paper in a Buchner
funnel, washed with sterile water and grinded in a sterile motar
and pastle [] 
with minor modifications as described by [].

DNA amplification:
Trichoderma nuclear small-subunit rDNA sequence containing
the Internal Transcribed Spacer (ITS) 1 and 4 regions and the
5.8S rRNA gene were amplified by Polymerase Chain Reaction
(PCR) in an automated thermocycler using a combination of
two specific primers ITS1 (TCCGTAGGTGAACCTGCGG) and
ITS 4 (TCCTCCGCTTATTGATATGC) [].

Sequence assembly and alignment:
Amplification products obtained from PCR reactions with
unlabeled ITS primers (ITS1 &amp; ITS4) were sended to B'Genei for
sequencing. DNA sequences obtained for each strain from each
forward (ITS) and reverse (ITS4) primer were inspected
individually for quality. Both strands of the DNA were then
assembled to produce a consensus sequence for each strain
using Gene Runner software and submitted to NCBI blast.
Multiple sequence alignment was performed using ClustalW
tool with default parameter in MEGA 5.05.

Phylogenetic Analysis:
The phylogenetic analyses of the aligned sequence were
performed using MEGA 5.05 [] with 1000 number of
bootstrap replicates and Neighbor-Joining method of statistical
analysis.

Results
A total of 193 isolates were obtained from the nine
geographically diverse areas of Manipur. Out of the total
isolates, 65 representative isolates were preliminarily identified
at the species level by morphological characteristics. Later, 22
different Trichoderma spp. among the total 65 strains were
identified by the analysis of their ITS1 and ITS4 sequences
(amplicon sizes ranging from 560-600bp). T. harzianum was the
most dominant species among the 22 Trichoderma spp. Sequence
strains of the nearest accession numbers obtained from the
Gene Bank along with the strain identity percentage and the
result of the blast searches are listed in 
 (see
supplementary material). Phylogenetic studies revealed
considerable variations among the isolates collected from
different districts of Manipur.

Discussion
We have carried out a survey of the occurrence of Trichoderma
and Hypocrea in Manipur which aimed to obtain a more
complete picture of the biodiversity of these genuses in
Manipur. A collection of 65 isolates obtained from 9 different
districts of Manipur were identified by morphological
observations and by analysis of the ITS sequence analysis. A
wide diversity of Trichoderma isolates were found (22 species
were identified among 65 isolates) in comparison with the
studies on the biodiversity of Trichoderma in South-East Asia
[], Austria 
[], South America 
[], China 
[], Sardinia 
[]
and in Poland [].

We found that the amplification products for the ITS region of
65 species of Trichoderma collected from nine different districts
of Manipur ranges from 560-600bp. These results were in
accordance with [] and other several workers also observed
the amplified rDNA fragment of approximately 500 to 600 bp
by ITS-PCR in Trichoderma []. T. harzianum, which was the
most dominant species in this study, was reproducibly
associated with all the types of soils of nine different districts
[]. In previous studies that used cultivation-dependent
methods to quantify Hypocrea/Trichoderma in various habitats,
T. harzianum sensu lato represented the most dominant species
[,
,
]. 
Among the total 675 strains belonging to Trichoderma
and Hypocrea strains available in the International
Subcommision on Trichoderma and Hypocrea, 6 strains from the
present study namely H. intricata, T. amazonicum, T. album, H.
rufa, T. gamsii and H. nigricans have not been reported in ISTH.
The results from this study stress the importance of the use of
molecular identification tools to describe the biodiversity of
Trichoderma in a natural habitat. This further corroborate from
phylogenetic tree (). The high number of species of
Trichoderma and Hypocrea found in the nine different districts of
Manipur confirms that this is one of india's biologically most
diverse regions with a large portion of endemic species.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors like to thanks to Department of Biotechnology,
Government of India to provide financial support during this
study.

Citation:Kamala et al, Bioinformation 9(2): 106-111 (2013)

phylogenetic analysis of Trichoderma strains using MEGA 5.05 with 1000 number of replications and Neighbour-joining
statistical method.

