Background
Traditional methods of classification and identification of the
organisms are based on morphological, physiological, biochemical
developmental and nutritional characteristics. Standard references such
as Bergey's Manual of Systematic Bacteriology or the Manual of
Clinical Microbiology help in this type of study [,]. 
These traditional methods of bacterial identification have two major
drawbacks. Firstly, this method cannot be applicable for noncultivable
organisms such as Tropheryma whippelii. Secondly,
occasionally biochemical characteristics of some organisms do not fit
into patterns of any known genus and species []. With the discovery
of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and DNA sequencing
methods, elucidation of closely related taxon with better authenticity
has been made successfully in comparison to other conventional
methods [–]. Beside this, phylogenetic analysis of 16S rRNA gene is
presently an important area of evolutionary study and sequence
analysis. In addition to analyzing changes that have occurred during
the evolution among different organisms, the evolution of a family of
sequences may be studied. On the basis of the analysis, sequences that
are most closely related can be identified by the places they occupy on
neighboring branches of a tree. Phylogenetic analysis of a family of
related gene sequences is a method to determine how the family might
have been derived during evolution. The evolutionary relationships
among the sequences are depicted by placing the sequences as outer
branches on a tree. The branching relationships on the inner part of the
tree reflect the degree to which different sequences are related. Two
sequences that are very much alike will be located as neighboring
outside branches and will be joined to a common branch beneath them.
The object of phylogenetic analysis is to discover all of the branching
relationships in the tree and the branch lengths. One of the most
significant uses of phylogenetic analysis of sequences is to make
predictions concerning the tree of life. For this purpose, 16S rRNA
genes are selected as they are highly conserved in nature and
universally present. At the same time it shows enough sequence
variation to determine which groups of organisms share the same
phylogenetic origin. Ideally, the 16S rRNA gene is also under
selection &amp; universal in distribution, meaning that as variation occurs
in populations of organisms, certain sequences are not favored with a
loss of the more primitive variation. A large number of rRNA
sequences from a variety of organisms were aligned and the secondary
structure was deduced. Phylogenetic predictions were then made using
the distance method []. On the basis of rRNA sequence signatures, or
regions within the molecule that are conserved in one group of
organisms but different in another [], predicted that early life
diverged into three main kingdoms­ Archaea, Bacteria and Eukarya.
Evidence for the presence of additional organisms in these groups has
since been found by PCR amplification of environmental samples of
RNA [,
]. However, few studies so far have been reported on the use
of rDNA sequencing for the identification of bacterial isolates in a
more systematic fashion [,
].

In the studied work, we are reporting the strain identification of our
novel isolate ckm7 with the help of 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis.
This partial sequencing of 16S rRNA gene was done from Microbial
Type Culture Collection (MTCC), IMTECH, Chandigarh, India
(http:// www.mtcc.imtech.res.in). Pairwise sequence alignment of 16S
rRNA gene sequence was performed to identify closely related
homologs with the help of BLAST search tool available at NCBI
webserver (http://www.nih.nov.ncbi). Phylogenetic tree was
constructed to predict the species level characterization of the studied
isolate through distance method based web­tool, CLUSTALW
(www.ebi.ac.uk/clustalw). Biological activity profiles of the closely
related microbial strains and the new isolate have been compared to
establish the novelty of the antibiotic produced. Taxonomic position of
the isolate belongs to the genus Streptomyces, which was done with
the help of in silico sequence analysis and later confirmed by
experimental biological activity study. Sequence comparison study of
ckm7 showed 98% identity with 16S rRNA gene sequences of S.spinichromogenes, S. triostinicus and S. capoamus. Finally on the
basis of both biological activity and phylogenetics study it was
concluded that the isolated strain belongs to the genus S. triostinicus.

Methodology
Isolation of biologically active culture
Biologically active culture (M4) was isolated from a phenol (30 °C,
30 min) pre­ treated soil sample [] collected from the agricultural
field of Eastern U.P., India through serial dilution method. The
isolated active culture (M4) was maintained on YMG slants (per liter
of distilled water: Yeast extract 4.0g, Malt extract 10 g, Glucose 4.0 g,
CaCO3 2.0 g and Agar powder 20 g).

Characterization through conventional method
In conventional method the producer strain was characterized through
morphological, cultural and biochemical tests(). Cultural characteristics
were studied on different ISP media regarding their growth intensity,
growth pattern, color of areial mycelia and formation of soluble
pigments [,
]. Various biochemical tests such as assimilation of
sugars, utilization of starch, urea, tyrosine, asparagines and citrate
components, nitrate reduction, tolerence range of pH, NaCl and
temperature were performed.

Selection of target gene
Since rRNA genes are highly conserved within bacteria therefore 16S
rRNA gene sequences are considered as a powerful tool in the study of
prokaryotic taxonomic identification. In comparison to 23S rRNA, 5S
rRNA genes and ribosomal protein sequences, mostly 16S rRNA was
preferred to investigate species relationships within the genus
Streptomyces [–].

16S rRNA gene analysis
Producer strain was grown on YES (Yeast extract 1%, sucrose 10%
and 0.5 mM MgCl2) medium for 24 hr at 28°C and genomic DNA was
isolated from the cell mass according to the method described by Saito
&amp; Miura []. The 16S rRNA gene was selectively amplified by PCR
using universal primers. Amplification was carried out with an initial
incubation (5 min, 94°C) followed by denaturation (25 cycles of 30
sec at 96°C), annealing (30 sec, 58°C) and elongation (1 min, 72°C).
The reaction was terminated with a final extension at 72°C for 5 min.
Direct sequencing of PCR product was conducted using 109f and
1115r primers on an AVI 3100 genetic analyzer.()

Pairwise sequence alignment
Closely related homologs were identified through phylogenetic
analysis by comparing partial 16S rRNA gene sequence of ckm7 with
the non­redundant database of nucleotides sequences deposited at
NCBI web server (www.ncbi nlm.nih.gov), through Basic Local
Alignment Tool (BLAST) program
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/) [,.

Multiple sequence alignment
After BLAST analysis, a data set of potential orthologs was prepared
by considering those database sequences which had &gt;98% sequence
identity with the query sequence ckm7. Phylogenetic analysis and
nucleotide conservation of the data set sequences were studied through
multiple sequence alignment program viz., CLUSTALW v1.83
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/clustalw). Genetic distances between the strains
were calculated using the neighbor joining method.

Phylogenetic analysis
A phylogenetic analysis of ckm7 was performed to determine of how
the 16S rRNA sequences of ckm7 and closely related strains might
have been derived during evolution. The evolutionary relationships
among the sequences were depicted by placing them as outer branches
on a phylogenetic tree. The branching relationships on the inner part of
the tree reflect the degree to which different sequences are related.
Sequences that were very much alike were located as neighboring
outside branches and joined to a common branch beneath them. The
object of phylogenetic analysis is to find out all of the branching
relationships in the tree along with branch lengths. For this
dendrogram/phylogram was constructed using distance method of
phylogenetic tree construction (e.g. neighbor joining). Distances
between the studied sequences helps in understanding the evolutionary
distances among the species.

Criteria for species identification
Identification of species through sequence similarity basis was
performed according to criteria used by Bosshard et al., [] which
states following selection parameters: 
when the percentage similarity of the query sequence and the reference sequence is 99% or
above, the unknown isolate would be assigned to reference species;

when percentage similarity is between 99 ­ 95 %, the unknown isolate
would be assigned to the corresponding genus;

when percentage
similarity is less than 95 %, the unknown isolate would be assigned to
a family.



Discussion
Biological importance of the strain
The isolate showed broad-spectrum antibacterial and antifungal
activity (Table 1 and 2 in ). The active crude
was purified using normal phase silica gel column chromatography
and finally on reverse phase high pressure liquid chromatography
(HPLC). Molecular weights of antibacterial (M4B1A) and antifungal
(M4B3) compounds were found to be 1269 and 1331 respectively as
deduced by mass spectroscopy. Both the active compounds are colored
(M4B1A: dark red; M4B3: light yellow), indicating the presence of
chromophore groups in their structure. UV absorption of both the
compounds, in methanol, produced maximum absorbance near 208 nm
suggested the presence of one or more amido chromophoric groups in
the structure. Presence of phenoxazone nucleus in the antibacterial
compound was confirmed by the presence of absorption hump near
443 nm [] whereas consecutive bands at 320, 337 and 356 nm
confirmed the polyene nature of antifungal compound []. Details of
the chemical characterization of the compounds is not presented here
and being published elsewhere. Survey of Active compounds produced
by the closely related microorganisms of the phylogenetic tree through
literature concluded that these microbes produced various compounds
with diverse chemical structure and biological activity. Quinoxaline
antibiotics which is a chromopeptide lactones is reported by
Streptomyces triostinicus [], suggests the phylogenetic similarity
between ckm7 and Streptomyces triostinicus.

Comparison with the active compounds produced by the other
members of clad-1 reveals that Streptomyces roseochromogenes is
reported to produce nojirimycin, a piperidinose sugar antibiotic []
and clorobiocin, containing aminocoumarin ring [] whereas
Streptomyces griseovariabilis is reported as a Bandunamide, a
cyclopeptide [] and chlorobiocin [] producer. All the compounds
have molecular weights in the range of 500 to 1100 whereas
quinoxaline antibiotics [] showed higher molecular weight i.e.
greater than1800 does not coincide with the molecular weight of the
M4 isolates 1269 and 1331. On the basis of molecular weight and
activity profile study it could be assumed that isolated compounds may
be of some other group since the studied compounds showed no
chemical similarities with the compounds produced by our isolate.

Sequence analysis of CKM7
Identification of species was further confirmed by computational
analysis. Gene sequence of 16S rRNA of M4 was compared with
nucleotide database of NCBI webserver through BLAST tool. Result
showed that query sequence ckm7 was best pairwise aligned with 16S
rRNA gene sequence of Streptomyces spinichromogenes,
Streptomyces triostinicus and Streptomyces capoamus with similar
sequence similarity and identity of 98 %, but with variable BLAST
score value i.e. 2696, 2688 and 2674 bits respectively. BLASTn result
concluded that ckm7 is a partial 16S rRNA gene sequence of
Streptomyces spinichromogenes origin but later through phylogenetic
analysis we found that ckm7 was actually a partial 16S rRNA gene
sequence of Streptomyces triostinicus only. For phylogenetic analysis
a new data set of 16S rRNA gene sequences was prepared after
removing the sequences of non-cultured and repeating strains from the
BLAST result. Sequence comparison and phylogenetic tree
construction of new data set sequences was made through multiple
sequence alignment tool i.e. ClustalW.

Nucleotides conservation
For better understanding of new species identification, nucleotides
level conservation was evaluated by comparing 16S rRNA sequences
of S. spinichromogenes, S. capoamus, S. triostinicus and ckm7 through
multiple sequence alignment analysis. Result of sequence alignment
showed that conservation of nucleotides was much higher in S.
triostinicus and ckm7 than S. spinichromogenes and S. capoamus
(). Fragment of 16S rRNA gene sequence of Streptomyces
triostinicus from position 500 to 1300 was identical to the ckm7
sequence without any substitution or mutation whereas in the case of
S. spinichromogenes and S. capoamus there were differences in
nucleotide level conservation at regular interval. Although the BLAST
score value of S. spinichromogenes was higher than S. triostinicus but
on the basis of multiple sequence alignment and phylogenetics study,
ckm7 gene sequence showed much higher nucleotide conservation and
close evolutionary relationship with S. triostinicus. Thus local pairwise
sequence alignment through BLAST program is not enough for
computational identification of new species.

Phylogenetics of CKM7
Constructed phylogenetic tree of ckm7 was categorized into four
major clads on the basis of their evolutionary distances calculated
through neighbor­joining method (). First clad was further
divided into two sub­clads viz., sub­clad 1.1 and 1.2. The sub­clad 1.1
leads ckm 7 alone whereas sub­clad 1.2 further divided into 1.2.1 and
1.2.2 and so on and ultimately form a branched group of four gene
sequences of Streptomyces triostinicus (AB184519.1), Streptomyces
griseovariabilis (AY654298.1), Streptomyces ginsengisoli
(AB245392.1) and Streptomyces roseochromogenes (AB184512.1).
On observing the evolutionary distances among the species as shown
in phylogenetic tree, it is clear that Streptomyces triostinicus have
evolutionary distance of 0.00315 which was closely related to ckm7
evolutionary distance i.e. 0.00403. Further the above clad revealed
common ancestral origin, in terms of 16S ribosomal gene sequence
homology with another clad 2 comprising of S. spinichromogenes
(AB184534.1), S. antibioticus (EF063450.1), S. cinnabarinus
(AB184266.1) and S. kagawaensis (AB184496.1). On the other hand
clad 3 divided into sub­clad 3.1 and 3.2, where sub­clad 3.1 further
sub divided into 3.1.1 covering S. capoamus (AB184385.1) and while
3.1.2 further subdivided twice and form a cluster of three genes of S.
bungoensis (AB184696.1), S. longwoodensis (AB184580.1) and S.
galbus (AB184201.1). Later sub­clad 3.2 divided into 3.2.1 showing S.
coeruleorubidus (AB184841.1) and 3.2.2 with S. cyaneus
(AJ399471.1). Clad 4 shows 3 closely related 16S rRNA gene
sequences of S. olivaceoviridis (AB184288.1), S. corchorusii
(AB184267.1) and S. hygroscopicus (AB184725.1). Gene sequences
of species of clad 3 and 4 showed distant relationship with ckm7
sequence, thus assumed putative distant orthologs.

Conclusion
Sequence comparisons of specific genes were applied successfully to
investigate the relationship among the members of genus Streptomyces
on the basis of their nature of product and other characteristics such as
antibiotic producers and pathogenic Streptomyces. We showed that
molecular weight and activity profile study of compounds produced by
our isolate (ckm7) is not sufficient for the identification of the isolated
strain since the isolated compounds showed no chemical similarities
with related compounds produced by other microorganisms. Thus,
gene sequence level comparison was employed in this study. BLAST
results revealed higher sequence similarity of ckm7 with 16S rRNA
partial gene sequence of S. spinichromogenes. Results of multiple
sequence alignment analysis using CLUSTALW showed higher level
of nucleotide conservation of ckm7 with S. triostinicus. This is further
confirmed through evolutionary tree study using neighbor­joining
distance method of phylogenetic analysis. BLAST analysis showed
98%­99% sequence similarity between ckm7 and other Streptomyces
members. Hence, the isolated strain was designated as S. triostinicus.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We acknowledge Council of Scientific &amp; Industrial Research (CSIR),
New Delhi for financial support as a SRF at Division of Fermentation
Technology, Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow (INDIA).

Citation:Singh et al, Bioinformation 4(2): 53-58 (2009)

Antibacterial activity (A), antifungal activity (B) and morphological appearance through light microscopy (C) of the producer strain.

Partial gene sequence of 16S rRNA gene of ckm7, sequenced from Microbial Type Culture Collection (MTCC), IMTECH,
Chandigarh, India. The length of nucleotide sequence is 1424 base pair.

Conservation of nucleotides in the 16S rRNA sequences of S. spinichromogenes, S. capoamus, S. triostinicus and ckm7. In the diagram
arabic numbers i.e. 1 to 14 indicates range of nucleotides from 100 to 1400 while roman numbers on the top of each row except ckm7 indicates
difference in number of nucleotides with ckm7 sequence.

Unrooted phylogenetic tree showing evolutionary relationship of ckm7 with other members of Streptomyces along with their
evolutionary distances.

