Background
Cubilin (CUBN, also known as intestinal intrinsic factor
receptor or intrinsic factor-cobalamin receptor or intrinsic
factor-vitamin B12 receptor), acts as a co-transporter and helps
in the uptake of lipoprotein, vitamin and iron. It functions as a
transporter in many absorptive epithelia (intestine, renal
proximal tubules and embryonic yolk sac) []. A potential role
of mutations in CUBN gene has been hypothesized to play a
role in the etiology of autosomal recessive megaloblastic anemia
[]. This hereditary condition is also known as MGA1
Norwegian type or Imerslund-Grasbeck syndrome. The disease
is characterized by defective absorption of vitamin B12 and
impaired function of the enzyme thymidine synthase; therefore,
DNA synthesis, particularly during erythropoiesis is affected 
[,
]. Cubilin interacts with megalin in a calcium dependent
manner by forming a dual-receptor complex called cubam
which facilitates the uptake of specific ligands like hemoglobin,
uteroglobin etc. []. In addition, CUBN also controls and
facilitates endocytosis of various ligands [,
]. In the proximal
tubule cells, cubilin helps in reabsorption of vitamin D binding
protein from glomerular filtrates and assists in the synthesis of
1α,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) [,
]. In addition, a missense
mutation in CUBN gene was found to alter the levels of [].

The cubilin protein has 27 CUB domains and 7 EGF-like
domains and is coded by the human CUBN gene is located on
chromosome 10 (10p12.31; 11933 bp mRNA; Entrez PubMed ref
NM_001081.3; NG_008967.1; GI:119606627) and expressed as a
3623 amino acid, 460 kDa receptor []. The acquisition of
CUBN in eukaryotes indicates one of the important events in
evolution of cells. Because of the inherent role of CUBN as a
transporter in many epithelia and its ability to facilitate
absorption of hemoglobin and other important ligands, we
aimed to understand if variance in this gene exists among in
various organisms using a phylogenetic analysis of published
protein sequences.

Methodology
Data Set, Sequence Alignment and Construction of Phylogenetic Tree:
We queried the GenBank database [] for all available protein
sequences of the CUBN. The retrieved sequences were saved in
FASTA format. An initial first-pass phylogenetic tree was
constructed using Neighbour Joining method 
[] (maximum
sequence difference of 0.85) using Domain Enhanced Lookup
Time Accelerated Basic Local Alignment Search Tool [DELTA
BLAST] pairwise alignments between the query and the
database sequences searched []. Grishin computation was
used by the software to calculate the evolutionary distance
between any two sequences. This was modeled as expected
fraction of amino acid substitutions per site 
[].

The list of sequences obtained after DELTA BLAST were
narrowed down to delete sequences which are not CUBN and
which were hypothetical. The concerned retrieved sequences
were then aligned using Kalign software 2.03 version 
[] with
the results being produced in the Clustal W [] format and
employing a gap extension penalty of 0.85. The phylogenetic
tree was reconstructed using the maximum likelihood method
implemented in the PhyML program (v3.0 aLRT) [,
]. The
Jones-Taylor-Thornton (JTT) substitution model was selected
along with gamma-distributed rate categories to account for
rate heterogeneity across sites. The reliability for internal
branch was assessed using the aLRT test (SH-Like). The
graphical representation and edition of the phylogenetic tree
were performed with TreeDyn (v198.3) []. The RAxML
(Randomized Axelerated Maximum Likelihood) program
version 7.2.8 was then used for sequential and parallel
Maximum Likelihood of the sequences []. An additional
analysis of the presence of horizontal gene transfer was
performed using the T-REX online software [].

Results
From the NCBI GenBank database, 588 sequences of CUBN
covering the CUB domain () were used to construct a
first-pass phylogenetic tree. The sequences were mostly from
arthropods, placozoans, nematodes, tunicates, rabbits, hares,
primates, rodents, placentals, odd toed ungulates, even toed
ungulates, bivalves, lancelets, hemichordates, sea urchins, bony
fishes, amphibians, birds, lizards, marsupials and monotremes.
This tree however had many repetitive and unrelated sequences
which were deleted. A high degree of sequence similarity of
CUBN enzyme in many of the selected sequences was observed
during phylogeny reconstruction. Putative conserved domains
were observed in many taxa at the CUB domain CUB domain
(cd00041); extracellular domain; present in proteins mostly
known to be involved in development; not found in
prokaryotes, plants and yeast []. The actual alignment after
DELTA BLAST was detected with cd00041, Cd Length: 113 Bit
Score: 139.08, E-value: 4.18e-37. The final accession information
for the tested sequences (n=25) are presented in 
 (see
supplementary material); multiple sequence alignment is
presented in Appendix 1. Using the PhyML program a tree was
constructed for these sequences, the results of which are
presented in (). RAxML revealed that there were 3782
distinct alignment patterns and the proportion of gaps and
completely undetermined characters in this alignment was
24.21%. RAxML rapid bootstrapping and subsequent ML search
showed an ML estimate of 25 per site rate categories ().
No horizontal gene transfers have been observed in the selected
taxa.

Discussion
The acquisition of cubilin and its importance in evolution was
assessed by using a mix of programs to construct a phylogenetic
tree [,
]. It is interesting to note that CUBN as a protein with
receptor function has arisen only in the eukaryotes and thus not
found in prokaryotes and plants. Cubilin is very helpful in the
absorption of Vit B12 from the intestinal epithelia on which
animals and protists are dependent for various biochemical
pathways; however, they do not have the ability to synthesize
it. It should be noted that plants and fungi neither produce Vit
B12 nor use it but animals and protists use it but cannot
synthesize it owing to the very complex de novo biosynthesis
pathways []. The acquisition of cubilin in these phyla from an
evolutionary stand point explains why mammalians have an
efficient mechanism for uptake of extrinsic Vit B12.

We have used the neighbor-joining method to create trees based
on multiple sequences in ClustalW; a JTT matrix method was
used to cluster sequences at 85% identity level [] followed by
construction of a phylogenetic tree []. The PhyML software
was used because it is an accurate but slightly faster than other
phylogeny programs. DELTA-BLAST which uses a heuristic
method to identify homologous sequences produced high
scoring sequence alignment to generate a first pass phylogenetic
tree from which relevant sequences were narrowed down.
Kalign was used for multiple sequence alignment of shortlisted
sequences because it is very fast, suitable for large alignments
and concentrates on local regions providing insight to
evolutionary relationships []. The RAxML software was used
in inferring and validating the most scoring maximum
likelihood tree []. In addition, using the T-Rex software, we
have evaluated horizontal gene transfers in the selected
organisms. It is well understood that this involves a transfer of
genetic material from one lineage to another commonly found
in prokaryotes as an adaptation mechanism to environment
[]. However, the selected organisms did not show the
presence of this phenomenon. The final phylogenetic tree
indicated that CUBN is a relatively new protein having evolved
very late in evolution ( &amp; ). Also, no homologous
gene transfer has been observed among the short-listed
organisms which are indicative of the largely conserved
domains within the amino acid sequences.

Conclusion
Acquisition of CUBN in relatively evolved organisms indicates
its crucial role in the physiology of cells. A higher conservation
at CUB domains indicates preserved function. The phylogenetic
tree for CUBN revealed the presence of this gene in eukaryotes
and indicated its importance in the biochemical pathways
related to absorption of many ligands from the epithelial linings
in cells re-emphasizing the importance of certain proteins in
evolution.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors would like to extend their appreciation to the Research
Centre, College of Applied Medical Sciences and Deanship of
Scientific Research at King Saud University for funding this
research.

Citation:Shaik et al, Bioinformation 9(1): 029-036 (2013)

First pass phylogenetic tree constructed by multiple alignment using BLAST pair wise alignments: Results presented
using Taxonomic name. First pass phylogenetic tree constructed showed that the CUBN sequences were mostly from arthropods,
placozoans, nematodes, tunicates, rabbits, hares, primates, rodents, placentals, odd toed ungulates, even toed ungulates, bivalves,
lancelets, hemichordates, sea urchins, bony fishes, amphibians, birds, lizards, marsupials and monotremes.

Phy ML: Phylogenetic tree of CUBN sequences. The
final phylogenetic tree constructed using specific sequences
revealed that the CUBN sequences were highly similar in most
organisms. The closest similarity was observed in the primates.

RAxML: Sequential and parallel maximum likelihood
of sequences – best scoring ML tree. The values indicated here
show the most scoring maximum likelihood tree constructed
from the shortlisted organisms.

