Background
Seed storage proteins of cereal grain crops meet the major
dietary protein requirement of over half of the world
population []. These seed storage proteins provide over 200
million tonnes of protein for the nutrition of humans and
livestock. Seed storage proteins were among the earliest of all
proteins to be characterized due to their abundance and
economic importance []. All seeds contain one or more groups
of storage proteins which are present in high amounts and
which serve to provide a store of amino acids for use during
germination and seedling growth. Seed storage proteins are
synthesized only in the seed (in cotyledon or in endosperm)
and lack any other functional activity besides storage. Based on
their solubility in different solvents, seed storage proteins are
divided into four groups: albumins (water soluble), globulins
(salt soluble), glutamines (soluble in diluted acid/base), and
prolamins (alcohol soluble) []. Albumins and globulins
comprise the storage proteins of dicots (e.g. pulses), whereas
prolamins and glutelins are major proteins in monocots (e.g.
cereals). Albumins and globulins are preferentially synthesized
in initial stages of grain development and other storage
proteins are synthesized in later stages [].

The seed storage proteins can be distinguished from other
proteins by some of their unique characteristics. Storage
proteins carry out the same function in various species, viz.
they supply the developing embryo with nitrogen, sulfur, and
carbon and their genes are regulated by similar mechanisms
and regulatory elements. Some seed storage proteins are
characterized by the presence of conserved motif like zein motif
for prolamin, cupin motif for globulin and internal repeat
sequence followed with hexapeptide repeat for albumin.

This integrated database aims at providing a compendium of
browsable information for bioactive peptides, epitope mapping
and physiochemical properties of seed storage proteins which
will greatly facilitate researchers who wish to use this
information to improve seed storage proteins in cereals or use
them for nutritionally enhanced product. Among several
databases focus on seed storage protein encoded in the plants,
Seed Pro Nutra Care is the primary database which integrates
information of bioactive peptides and physiochemical
properties, allergenicity and immunogenicity of seed storage
proteins. Seed Pro Nutra Care thus provides a comprehensive
view of seed storage proteins and their bioactive peptides that
will be a valuable resource for deciphering the nutritional and
therapeutic values.

Methodology
Construction of Seed Pro-Nutra Care:
Seed Pro-Nutra Care was constructed using Hypertext Markup
Language (HTML), Cascading Style Sheet (CSS), JQuery,
AJAX, and Hypertext Preprocessor (PHP). Web server is
implemented in Apache &amp; MYSQL for PHP environment and
database handling. PHP scripts and programs are written for
database connectivity, accessing data, creating search, filtering,
displaying simplified results and creating motif search tool.

Like our previously published databases Phyto Diab Care 
[]
and Tripath [], Seed Pro Nutra Care database is available
online at http: // www.gbpuat-cbsh.ac.in/departments
/bi/database /seed_pro_nutra_care/ . The database also
accessed using peptide name/ sequence for information on
specific peptide. Further, a tool is developed for searching of
seed specific motifs in the entered nucleotide sequence. On
query, the tool returns the position of each motif along with
highlighting with a specific color. Thus, a given query sequence
can easily be analyzed for seed specificity by using this tool.
The Work flow of overall methodology is shown in .

Database Description:
Database is a collection of diverse information on bioactive
peptide, physiochemical properties, epitope mapping and
allergen testing including the information on the functional
attributes and diversity of seed specific protein in cereals.

This database contains data on about 2400 bioactive peptides
which were obtained from different sources from the web. Each
bioactive peptide included in this database is represented by a
separate entry containing protein sequence of peptide. These
peptides exhibit different activities, such as antimicrobial,
antioxidant, antithrombotic, antihypertensive,
hypocholesterolemic, hypoglycemic, immunomodulatory,
opioid, and antiproliferative activities. They can affect the
condition of major body systems, and these are cardiovascular,
digestive, endocrine, immune and nervous system.  is
showing the composite snapshot of various sections of the Seed
Pro Nutra-Care database.

Utility
Seed Pro-Nutra Care database provides information on
physico-chemical properties of seed storage proteins and their
molecular characterization. With the help of this database users
can characterize of their protein whether their protein sequence
of interest belongs to seed storage protein group or not. Seed
Pro-Nutra Care also allows us to identify the bioactive peptides
in the seed storage proteins of interest. This database helps for
identification of different epitopes through epitope mapping
and characterization of allergicity through allergen testing in
seed storage protein.

This type of database approach can make important
contributions toward a more complete and holistic knowledge
of seed storage proteins, their potential health benefits and
subsequently use of information for making nutritionally
important product and functional foods.

Future Development
In the future, we intend to keep developing Seed Pro-Nutra
Care database as a comprehensive information system for
relevant seed storage proteins. This would be achieved by
integrating literature mining, bio active peptide data and
sequence-level information for cereals, legumes and other
crops.

Authors are grateful to Sub-DIC, Bioinformatics at G.B. Pant
University of Agriculture and Technology, Pantnagar, India for
providing computational facility. We also thank the
Department of Biotechnology, Government of India, for
providing financial support.

Citation:Kumar et al, Bioinformation 10(9): 592-594 (2014)

The Work flow of overall methodology

The composite snapshot shows the various sections of
the Seed Pro Nutra-Care database. The sections are as follows -
(1) Seed Storage Protein (2) Bioactive peptide (3)
Physiochemical Properties (4) Epitope Mapping (5) Allergen
Testing (6) Contact Us pages.

