Background
Hepatitis B Virus ʘHBV) infection has now become one of the most
dangerous diseases of the world. It causes both acute and chronic
hepatitis []. Chronic HBV infection can lead to cirrhosis, liver
failure and hepatocellular carcinoma [,].
Presently, there are only few agents, namely α­interferon (IFN-α), i.e., lamivudine (3­Tc) [], 
adefovir dipivoxil [], and entacavir [], that have been
approved for clinical treatment. However, all these drugs suffer
from serious side effects. Interferon­α,an immunomodulator and the
first therapeutic agent developed to treat HBV infection, has very
low cure rate (effective only to 30­40% patients) and produces
many side effects []. The three nucleoside analogs, lamivudine,adefovir dipivoxil, and entacavir, are supposed to elicit their effects
mainly through the inhibition of HBV polymerase leading to
decrease in viral replication []. All these three drugs suffer from
high relapse rates after the cessation of the treatment [].
Lamivudine has the potential of inducing drug resistant HBV after
few months of therapy, and causes an associated risk of increase of
viremia during the therapy in HBV patients. Although a
combination therapy of lamivudine and adefovir dipivoxil may be
more fruitful [] since both have excellent activity and oral
bioavailability and the combination has good tolerability and
reduced potential to produce drug resistant HBV, this therapy is still
limited []. Therefore, the medicinal chemists are paying high
attention to design and develop novel classes of anti­ HBV agents
that may have optimal pharmacological profiles with little side
effects. In this respect, the quantitative structure­ activity
relationship (QSAR) studies have been of great importance. They
not only provide guidelines for the drug design but also throw the
light on the mechanisms of drug­receptor interactions, which further
aid to the rationalization of drug development. We, therefore,
present here a QSAR study on some important series of HBV
inhibitors.

Methodology
We have taken three different series of HBV inhibitors that were
synthesized and studied for their anti­HBV activity. Recently, a
series of novel bis (L­amino acid) ester prodrugs of 9­[2­
(phosphonomethoxy)ethyl]adenine [] was synthesized and reported
for their anti­HBV and toxic activities by Fu et al. [] and a similar
series of compounds comprising of 2­amino­6­arylthio­9­[2­(phosphonoethoxy)ethyl] purine bis(2, 2, 2­ trifluoroethyl) esters []was earlier studied by Sekiya et al.[] . However, an entirely new
class of anti­HBV agents comprising of 1­isopropylsulfonyl­2­amine benzimidazoles [,
] was reported by Li et al. []. The first
two series of compounds are listed I Tables 1 and 2, (see ) respectively. A combine of these two is
listed in Table 3, and Table 4 (see ) lists
the derivatives of 6 and 7. These tables also list the anti­HBV and
toxic activities of the compounds and their physicochemical
parameters that were found to govern their potency. Among the
physicochemical parameters listed in different tables, ClogP and
CMR refer to calculated hydrophobicity and molar refractivity of
the compounds, respectively, Es is Taft's steric constant, and B1 is a
STERIMOL parameter, a steric parameter referring to the minimum
width of the substituent [] .ClogP and CMR have been calculated
from ChemDraw version 8.0, and values of B1 have been taken
from the literature []. In the activity term log (1/EC50), EC50
refers to molar concentration of the compound achieving 50%
inhibition of cytoplasmic HBV DNA synthesis, and in toxicity term
log (1/CC50), CC50 refers to the molar concentration of the
compound leading to 50% extinction of HepG2.2.15 cells.

Results and Discussion
A multiple regression analysis performed on anti­HBV and toxic
data of Fu et al. on bis(L­amino acid) ester prodrugs and 9­[2­
phosphonomethoxy)ethyl[adenine (Table 1) (see ) had revealed the correlations in equations 1 and 2 (see
). In these equations, n is the number of
data points, r is the correlation coefficient, rcv2 is the square of crossvalidated correlation coefficient obtained by leave­one­out (LOO)
jackknife procedure, F is the F­ratio between the variances of
calculated and observed activities (data within parentheses refer to
standard F­values at 99 % level), and the figures with ± sign
following the coefficients of the variables are 95 % confidence
intervals. Now  exhibits that the anti­HBV activity of this
class of compounds is solely controlled by the lipophilicity of the
molecules and has a simple linear dependence on ClogP. The rcv2
greater than 0.6 shows a good predictive ability of the equation.
However, the toxic data of this series of compounds was not found
to be linearly dependent on ClogP, rather is shown to have a
parabolic correlation (inverted parabola) with optimum ClogP value
equal to zero. This means that the compound may have the lowest
toxic effect when ClogP is zero. Further,  shows that the toxic
effect of the compounds will be lower; the higher is its molar
refractivity. The molar refractivity refers to the size of the molecule,
so larger is the molecule, the lower would be its toxic effect. Thus
we can have a good selective index of the compounds by increasing
their bulkiness, maintaining their ClogP values. However, for the
compounds of Table 2 (see ), which are
structurally very similar to those of Table 1 (see ), the anti­HBV activity was found to have negative
dependence on ClogP as well as on CMR (). If we compare the
ClogP values of these compounds with ClogP values of compounds
of Table 1 (see ), we find that these values
are much higher than those in Table 1 (see ), and thus it can be concluded that higher values of ClogP
may be detrimental to the activity. So there should be a limit to the
value of ClogP. To find this thing, we combined both the series of
compounds (Table 3) (see ) and obtained
the correlation as shown by . This equation gives an optimum
value of ClogP equal to 1.80. Thus, equations 3 and 4 are formed
(see ). The activity will have a positive
dependence on ClogP only until its value does not reach 1.80.
Beyond that, the activity will decrease as ClogP increases. In Table 2 (see ), none of the compounds has its
ClogP value less than 1.80, hence we got a negative correlation with
ClogP. On the other hand, in Table 1, none of the compounds has
its ClogP value greater than 1.80, hence in this case a positive
correlation with ClogP was found. Since the lipophilicity of the
compounds also depends on the size of the molecule,for highly
hydrophobic molecules the molar refractivity has also cropped up to
play a negative role in Equation 4 (see )
derived for the combine. For Table 2 (see ), we were unable to correlate the toxic effects of the
compounds with any parameters. The reason being that there was
little span in the toxic data. However, when we combined them with
that of compounds of Table 1 (see ), a
similar equation, as found for Table 1(see ) itself, was obtained ().

This equation, too,, suggests that toxicity can be minimum when
ClogP = 0, i.e., when there is a balance between the solubilities of
the compound in lipid and aqueous phases, and it can be further
controlled by controlling the size of the molecule. A control in size
will also be beneficial to anti­HBV activity, but a limit of ClogP
equal to zero will be slightly unsatisfactory for it. For better anti­
HBV potency, ClogP should approach to 1.80 as Eq. 4 suggests.
For the compounds of Table 4 (see ), the
anti­HBV activity was found to be correlated with Taft's steric
parameter Es, STERIMOL parameter B1 that describes the
minimum width of the substituent, and an indicator parameters I1
(Equation 6) (see ). The indicator
parameter I1 has been used for regioisomerism of the compounds.
For all the derivatives of 6, I2 = 1 and for all the derivatives of 7, I2 =
0. The positive coefficient of this parameter indicates that in general
6­substituted isomers [] would be more active than 5­ Substituted
ones []. The reason of this may be that in the former the phenyl
ring may be better oriented towards the active site of the receptor
for interaction than in the latter. The occurrence of the Es parameter
in the equation suggests that there would be some steric effect of the
R­substituents and since Es usually have negative values, the
positive coefficient of it in the equation indicates that the bigger
substituents may not be conducive to the activity. However, a
positive coefficient of B1 suggests that the width of the substituent
may be beneficial. The toxic effects for some of these compounds
were also reported, but we could not find any good correlation for
them. All the equations mentioned here represent statistically
highly significant correlations, but in deriving each one, certain
compounds that behaved as outliers were removed. These
compounds are indicated in respective tables. However, no
convincing reasons could be assigned for the aberrant behavior of
these compounds in most of the cases. Outliers, in general, are a
problem in QSAR, but sometimes they provide important clue to the
drug design. An excellent and the only example of this here is ,
which has been derived for Table 4 (see ).
The outliers of this equation are compounds 6a and 6i, from which
we can derive some important information. For compound 6a, the
observed activity is much lower than that predicted by .
This compound has no substituent at the phenyl ring, so its low
observed activity can be attributed to the absence of any substituent
at the phenyl ring in this compound. And consequently it can be
suggested that the substitution at the phenyl ring is essential for the
good activity of the compound. Compound 6i, which has an NO2
group at the 3­position of the phenyl ring, also has a lower observed
activity than the predicted one. The reason of this may be that nitro
group may be involved in the formation of intramolecular hydrogen
bond with the NH moiety in the bridge, a moiety that otherwise may
presumably form a hydrogen bond with the receptor. Thus, this
outlier indicates that the NH moiety may definitely be involved in
the hydrogen bonding with the receptor, strengthening the drugreceptor
interaction. Not only this, one can also assume that the
whole carboxamide (­CONH­) or sulphonamide (­SO2NH­) bridge
group may be involved in the hydrogen bonding with the receptor,
since CO and SO2 are also able to do so acting as H­bond
acceptors, while NH may act as H­bond donor.

Conclusion
This QSAR analysis has shown that for certain series of anti­HBV
agents, such as the series of novel bis(L­amino acid) ester prodrugs
of 9­[2­(phosphonomethoxy)ethyl]adenine [] and the similar series
of compounds comprising of 2­amino­6­arylthio­9­[2­(phosphonoethoxy)ethyl]purine bis(2, 2, 2­ trifluoroethyl) esters
[], the hydrophobic property and the bulk of the molecules are very
crucial. However, for the agents, such as 1­isopropylsulfonyl­2­
amine benzimidazoles, this study has pointed out that the
substitution at the phenyl ring and the steric properties of those
substituents are highly important for their anti­HBV activity and
that the hydrogen bonding ability of carboxamide or sulphonamide
group, bridging the phenyl and benzimidazole rings, may be of
further advantage because of their ability to form the hydrogen
bonds with the receptor. Thus, the receptor of HBV inhibitors (HBV
polymerase) can be assumed to possess an active site that may be
capable of forming the hydrogen­bonds with the compounds.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Arora et al, Bioinformation 4(9): 417-420 (2010)

