Background:
Candidiasis is the most common oral fungal infection
caused by candida species in man and manifests in a variety
of clinical guises ranging from pseudo-membranous
(thrush), erythematous, and hyperplastic variants to more
recently described linear gingival erythema associated with
HIV infection []. 
Candida is ubiquitous and more than 200
species have been described. Some species are part of our
microbiological flora and only 10% are known to be
responsible for infections in people []. The ARTEMIS
Global Antifungal Surveillance Program showed that C.
albicans was the most common (63–70%) candidal cause of
invasive fungal infections, followed by C. glabrata (44%),
Candida tropicalis (6%), and Candida parapsilosis (5%) 
[].
Candida rugosa has been rarely reported as a human
pathogen. Recently, Colombo et al., (2003) have evaluated a
cluster of Candida rugosa candidemia cases occurring in six
hospitalized patients from a tertiary care teaching hospital
in Sao Paulo, Brazil []. Polyene antibiotics nystatin (NYS)
and amphotericin B (AmB) have been incessantly used in
the treatment of topical (NYS) and systemic (AmB) fungal
infections for more than 50 years now. The advantage of
administering these compounds, which are more efficient
and not replaceable with other agents belonging to different
families of antifungal compounds, e.g. azoles, is their wide
spectrum of activity towards pathogenic fungi and yeasts.
However, their application is accompanied by serious side
effects, resulting from compositional similarity between host
and fungi cells []. Due to these secondary effects, other
treatments based on the hydrolytic activity of extracellular
secreted enzymes of fungi cells are needed []. An
increasing amount of evidence associates lipases with
microbial virulence. Putative roles of microbial extra-cellular
lipases include the digestion of lipids for nutrient
acquisition, adhesion to host cells and host tissues,
synergistic interactions with other enzymes, unspecific
hydrolysis due to additional phospholipolytic activities,
initiation of inflammatory processes by affecting immune
cells and self-defense by lysing the competing microflora.
The importance of extracellular secreted lipases has been
demonstrated in C. albicans and C. parapsilosis. Additionally,
Trofa et al., (2009) have shown that disruption of lipases
attenuates damage associated with C. albicans and C.
parapsilosis murine infections. Hence, lipase has been
identified as a possible target for the development of novel
anti-fungal therapeutic compounds []. Orlistat or
tetrahydrolipstatin is a competitive inhibitor of pancreatic
lipase (PL) with β lactone cycle incorporated into a carbon
skeleton. This molecule is an irreversible inhibitor of human
pancreatic lipase with an IC50 value of 0.14 mM. The
inhibitory activity of this molecule is lost when the β lactone
ring is opened. It is currently used as approved anti-obesity
drug []. Although it is one of the best-selling drugs
worldwide, it has certain unpleasant gastrointestinal side
effects like oily stools, oily spotting, and flatulence among
others [].

Lipases belong to the family of carboxylic ester hydrolases,
also known as tri-acylglycerol hydrolases (EC.3.1.1.3). The
physiological role of lipases is to hydrolyze triglycerides
into diglycerides, monoglycerides, fatty acids and glycerol.
Lipases also have the ability to perform synthetic reactions
such as esterification (reaction between acid and alcohol),
trans-esterification (ester and alcohol) and the interesterification
(ester and ester). Lipases have catalytic
properties that vary according to species. The mechanism of
lipase enzyme shows some similarities with the active serine
proteases. Unlike other hydrolases, the active site of lipases
is usually covered with a peptide loop formed by an
amphiphilic α helix of about fifteen amino acids, that acts as
flap (lid) [–
]. When α helix covers the active site, the
enzyme is in its closed or inactive conformation. In this
conformation, the hydrophobic face of the amphiphilic helix
interacts with hydrophobic residues surrounding the active
site while its hydrophilic face interacts with water
molecules. The substrate cannot be interacting with the
catalytic triad. In the open or active conformation of the
enzyme which is a result of interfacial activation
mechanism, there is a shift of α helix constituting the cover.
The hydrophobic face of the helix facing inward before the
active site exposed to the solvent, creating a hydrophobic
surface, assumed to interact with the interface water / fat.
The active site of the enzyme is then accessible to the
substrate.

Based on the crystallographic data, some residues, different
from the catalytic triad appear to be important in the
catalytic mechanism. These residues form what is called the
oxyanion hole. Their role is mainly to stabilize reaction
intermediates, such as the tetrahedral intermediates. In the
case of lipase from Candida rugosa, it is the nitrogen amide of
Gly123 and Gly124 and Ala210 that appears to perform the
same function []. The hydrolysis of a carboxylic ester by
the catalytic triad can be divided into six main stages. First,
the carbon of the carboxylic function of the substrate
undergoes nucleophile attack of the hydroxyl group of
serine whose nucleophilicity is enhanced by the histidine
residue following the formation of a hydrogen bond. The
imidazole ring of histidine becomes protonated and
positively charged. This positive charge is stabilized by a
charge of an acidic residue (Asp or Glu) (). This
results in the formation of the first tetrahedral intermediate,
stabilized by two hydrogen bonds with residues of the
oxyanion hole (). Subsequently, there is release of
a molecule of alcohol, formation of the acyl-enzyme 
() 
and nucleophile attack of the acyl-enzyme by a water
molecule (). This second nucleophile attack
results in the formation of a second tetrahedral
intermediate, stabilized by the oxyanion hole ().
Finally, there is the fatty acid release and return of the
enzyme in its original conformation () 
[–].
Hence, we have studied the use of orlistat as another
candidiasis treatment with low secondary effects.

Methodology
Building the 3D structure of orlistat
The inhibitor model was built using Hyperchem software
(www.hyper.com) based on Lewis structure. Atoms have
been chosen from dialog box (default elements) in build
menu. The 3D structure of the orlistat is shown in 
.

Optimizing the Structure of inhibitor model
In this step, the inhibitor model structure was minimized by
performing a molecular mechanics optimization using MM+
force field and Polack Ribier algorithm to obtain the most
stable structure geometry ().

Energetic calculations
A single point calculation was performed in order to
compute the energy and gradient of the inhibitor model, this
method allowed the calculation of the total energy and
gradient before the geometry optimization.

Enzyme structure optimization
The crystal structure coordinates of the lipases enzyme
(1CRL for Candida rugosa lipase and PDB_ID: 1LPA for
pancreatic human lipase) was obtained from the Protein
Data Bank (PDB) (
http://www.rcsb.org). Water molecules,
hetero atoms and ligands such as sugars were removed 
[].
All hydrogen atoms were added to the protein including
those necessary to define the correct ionization and
tautomeric states of amino acid residues using Hyperchem
software. A two-step procedure was set up for the energy
minimization of protein using the same software. In the
first step, all hydrogen atoms in the protein were allowed to
optimize. The hydrogen locations are not specified by the Xray
structure but these are necessary to improve the
hydrogen bond geometries. In the second stage, all protein
atoms were allowed to relax. Minimization in both stages
was performed using 100 steps of steepest descent and 2000
steps of conjugate gradient algorithm [].

Docking procedure of orlistat
Docking of the inhibitor in the active site of the two lipases
was carried out using GOLD 4.1.2 software (Genetic
optimisation of ligand docking). The procedure consisted of
three main parts: (1) A scoring function to rank different
binding modes; the Gold score function is a molecular
mechanics-like function with four terms, was used. (2) A
mechanism for placing the ligand in the binding site; GOLD
uses a unique method to do this, which is based on fitting
point. (3) A search algorithm to explore possible binding
modes; GOLD uses a genetic algorithm (GA) 
[–]. This
method allows a partial flexibility of protein and full
flexibility of ligand [] for each of the 10 independent GA
runs.

Discussion
Prior to the docking, amino acids and the anatomy of the
active site of both lipases (CRL and HPL) have been studied
by consulting literature of previous works and also by using
the software PyMOL to understand the specificity of the
active site towards the substrate. The funnel-like binding
pocket of HPL (13*4.5 Å at its base) consists of two hand
walls. Its left-hand wall is the lowest of all lipase binding
sites (4.5 Å). In addition, HPL is the only lipase where this
left-hand wall is lower than both the left and the right-hand
walls in the front view []. Similarly, the lid or the
amphiphilic component of Cys 237 to Cys 261 [] forms the
left wall to the binding site of alcohol. The β 5-loop lies
opposite to the lid and constitutes the right-hand wall of the
alcohol binding site []. The binding pocket of CRL is
exceptional and completely differs from those of the other
lipases. Here, the scissile fatty acid binding site is located in
a tunnel inside the protein with a wide entrance at the righthand
side. This tunnel is at least 22 Å long with a diameter
of about 4 Å. In the free CRL, this tunnel can hardly be
predicted, since it is blocked by side chains. It is formed by
G124 and A210 (oxyanion hole), F125, the catalytic S209,
M213, V245, P246, F296, S301, L302, R303, L304, L307, F345,
Y361, F362, S365, F366, V409, L410, L413, G414, F415, F532
and V534 [].

The results of docking have shown 10 binding possibilities
of orlistat in the active site of both lipases, and we have
accepted one of them according to the weakest inter-atomic
distance (ID) between the oxygen atom of the hydroxyl
group of the catalytic amino acid Ser (for CRL: Ser209; for
HPL: Ser152) and the ketone function of β lactone cycle of
orlistat. It is attempted that this distance allows the
formation of covalent bond between these described atoms
basing on the catalytic mechanism. In docking, it is admitted
that the affinity of the inhibitor towards lipase is related
reciprocally with the ID value (when the ID value decreases
the affinity increases). For CRL, we have recorded an ID of
2.7 Å () which is 5 times higher than the ID
recorded for HPL, with a value of 0.5 Å (). From
these results, it is attempted that orlistat presents a strong
affinity to HPL than to CRL. The ID of experimental
complexes of enzyme-inhibitor for both lipases has been
calculated to compare the ID and the affinities of inhibitors
to each lipase. An ID of 1.6 Å has been found between the
phosphorus atom of (1S)-menthyl-hexyl-phosphonate
(MHP) and the oxygen atom of Ser209 for CRL 
[], this
value is lower than the one found for orlistat which mean
that this inhibitor presented a higher affinity (, see
supplementary material). For HPL, an ID of 1.7 Å has been
saved between the phosphorus atom of Methoxy-Undecyl-
Phosphinic acid (MUP) and the oxygen atom of Ser152 
[],
when it is compared with this ID, it has been confirmed that
orlistat is three times potent inhibitor than MUP (,
see supplementary material).

Conclusion
Docking studies of the natural competitive inhibitor
(orlistat) in an attempt to discover a new candidiasis
treatment is of interest. Orlistat has presented a higher
affinity towards HPL than to CRL, and is also a more potent
inhibitor than MUP for HPL, based on ID values of both
lipases. These results have shown the potential of orlistat as
a new candidate for candidiasis treatment with fewer side
effects in comparison to nystatin. Nonetheless, experimental
in vitro and in vivo studies are required to demonstrate the
effectiveness of the inhibitor. Therefore, this study illustrates
affinities of inhibitors to lipases which are considerably
easier to implement, cheaper and faster compared to
experimental methods.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Khedidja &amp; Abderrahman, Bioinformation 7(3): 125-129 (2011)

Schematic representation of the lipase estercleavage
reaction pathway: (1) non-covalent Michaelis
complex; (2) first tetrahedral transition state; (3) formation
of the acyl-enzyme and release of an alcohol molecule; (4)
attack of a water molecule on the acyl-enzyme; (5) second
tetrahedral transition state; (6) release of the fatty acid 
[].

The 2D (a) and 3D (b) structure of orlistat.

The binding modes of orlistat (shown as green
lines) in the active site of both inter-atomic distances (shown
as red dashes) represented in A: CRL, B: HPL, (2.7Å; 0.5 Å
respectively). Triad catalytic shown with blue lines for both
lipases.

