Background
Systems biology involves understanding biological systems in a
holistic way. It deals with interactions between biological
systems and consequently their functions. A thorough
understanding of systems structure is critical in such a study.
Quantitative and qualitative methods such as modeling gene
regulatory, biochemical networks, flux analysis etc are key
constituents of systems approach []. Systems biology provides
a framework for assembling models of biological systems from
systematic measurements [,
].

Down's syndrome (DS) is one of the most common genetic
disorders which affect about 1 in 800 live births across the
globe. The disorder is caused by a total, or occasionally partial,
triplication of chromosome 21 resulting in a multifarious and
capricious phenotype []. The disorder is primarily
characterized by cognitive and dysfunction of verbal
communication along with neuromotor and sensory deficit. The
neuropathology of the disorrder is chiefly characterized by
reduced brain size and weight along with abnormal gyrification
and neurogenesis []. Two main theories have been
hypothesized to explain the mechanism by which trisomy 21
leads to the DS phenotype. The ‘developmental instability’
theory hypothesizes a dosage disparity on the entire
chromosome 21, which interrupts various developmental
pathways []. The other theory - ‘gene-dosage’ theory suggests
increased dosage for certain genes on 21st chromosome adds
more directly to different manifestations of the disorder 
[].

Neural Tube Disorders (NTDs) are a collection of inborn
malformations of the central nervous system and adjacent
structures related to flawed neural tube closure during the first
trimester of pregnancy occurring usually between 18-29 days of
gestation []. Principally Ectodermal and mesodermal
malformations concerning the skull and vertebrae can arise as
an effect of faults in neural tube closure []. NTDs: are classified
into open, and closed types.

Numerous studies have yielded considerable evidence that
abnormal folate and methyl metabolism are associated with
inception of Down's syndrome. The abnormalities in folate
metabolism are implicated with DNA hypomethylation, which
in turn is associated with chromosomal instability, improper
chromosomal segregation and consequently aneuploidy 
[]
[]. 
At the same time studies also point to impaired folate
status in mothers of children born with neural tube disorders.
Several genetic investigations have revealed more than the
expected frequency of certain mutations in the genes coding for
Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase and 5-
methyltetrahydrofolate-homocysteine methyltransferase
reductase proteins [,
]. At the molecular level MTHFR
677C-T polymorphism is recognized as the foremost genetic
risk factor for NTDs. Homozygosity for this allele has been
recognized to be very prevalent in NTD parents and their off
springs, in comparison to controls [].

There is a possible common etiological pathway for both NTDs
and Down's syndrome. Numerous epidemiological
characteristics are very common between NTDs and DS such as
large maternal contribution to the risk of occurrence, differences
between ethnic groups, reliance on maternal age at the time of
pregnancy, high probability of miscarriages. If there were a
causal link, the two conditions should arise more often in
affected families than in the population in general. But there is
little epidemiological evidence showing familial link between
the diseases [].

Gene expression microarrays can provide quantitative
information on the status of a cell in a particular condition and
point in time. Gene regulatory networks based on microarrays
can be pervasive and can be instrumental in getting an insight
into pathological roots of a given clinical conditions. This kind
of network data extends and compliments a great deal of other
information available in the biomedical sciences. The gene
network provides ample knowledge on not only the physical
interaction between two genes but also about indirect
regulation via proteins, metabolites and ncRNA 
[].

The study will involve gene expression profiling of micro array
data sets available on public domain databases for NTDs and
Down's syndrome and identify genes whose expression levels
are significantly altered in these clinical conditions in
comparison with the control. Consequently gene regulatory
networks can be built on basis of the basis of the differential
expression profile and can be used to understand the complex
interactions underlying the pathogenesis of the two disorders.
The major goal of the study was to understand the complex
molecular interactions which are central to the pathogenesis of
both NTDs and Down's syndrome and thereby draw inferences
regarding the lack of familial co morbidity between the two
disorders.

Methodology
Dataset Collection:
A comprehensive and thorough survey for all differential gene
expression studies on Down's syndrome and neural tube
defects was carried out. Only those studies conducted on
samples from human subjects were considered (Till August
2012). Only one study for each of the disorders was found to
fulfill the selection criteria. The platform files – GPL570 &amp;
GPL90 for NTDs and DS was downloaded and the expression
datasets for each of the above mentioned studies were
downloaded in order to be subjected to gene expression
profiling analysis. Furthermore, all literature pertaining to
studies on familial links between neural tube defects and
Down's syndrome was searched for, across various
populations.

Gene expression analysis &amp; Filtering:
The microarray analysis was carried out using R/Bioconductor
[], open source software for the analysis of genomic data. The
datasets were normalized to standardize microarray data to
facilitate demarcation between real variations in gene
expression levels and variations due to the measurement
procedure. All microarrays CEL file involved in our study was
processed using RMA algorithm and normalized based on
quartile array. Further the gene expressions were log
transformed to determine the fold change and their significance
was measured by standard t-test. The genes were filtered based
on fold changes. The fold changes in gene expression levels
between the disease samples control samples to check for the
differential expression []. Genes which ere differentially up
regulated by 1.5 fold were filtered out and their gene ontology
was identified.

Gene Network Construction:
Two gene networks were constructed using BisoGenet plugin
[] 
for Cytoscape for the two disorders – neutral tube defects
and Down's syndrome to explore the molecular factors
involved in the etiological pathway underlying the
pathogenesis of the disorders and thereby derive plausible
reasons for the lack of familial link between the two disorders
.The Networks were generated taking as input an initial list of
identifiers of genes filtered out on basis of fold change.

Network Analysis &amp; Recognizing Dense Cliques:
The network obtained from the BisoGenet Server is analyzed
using the plugin Network Analyzer, which computes the
degree - its clustering coefficient, the number of self-loops and a
variety of other parameters for every node in a gene regulatory
network. Topological parameters such as - the number of nodes,
edges, and connected components, the network diameter,
radius, density, centralization, heterogeneity, and clustering
coefficient, the characteristic path length, and the distributions
of node degrees, neighborhood connectivity, average clustering
coefficients, and shortest path lengths are calculated &amp;
exhibited by this plug-in [].

A complex gene network that emerged as a resultant of the
interaction between significantly upregulated or down
regulated genes was broken down into smaller sub networks
using mcode module of cytoscape. mcode module of cytoscape.
Allegro MCODE plugin finds densely connected regions of a
network Graph theoretic based clustering algorithm. It works 3
stages - Network Weighting, Complex Detection, and Optional
Post-processing []. The over representation analysis of the
genes present in the top ranked dense clique for both NTDs and
DS was performed in order to map it to their gene ontology.

Results &amp; Discussion
The etiological connection between NTDs and DS, especially
pertaining to their link to in born errors in folic acid
metabolism, makes it imperative that familial link would exist
between these disorders. But contrary to this hypothesis,
studies carried out in the past have indicated otherwise. Several
studies in the past have provided considerable evidence that
abnormal folate and methyl metabolism are associated with
onset of Down's syndrome. At the molecular level - MTHFR
677C-T polymorphism of the gene was the first genetic risk
factor for neural tube defects identified at the molecular level.
But, various research studies over the years have indicated very
little evidence for familial link between the two disorders.
Barkai and colleagues (2003) reported significantly high
frequency of Down's syndrome in pregnancies at high risk of
NTD; even this has been attributed to biased selection of study
participants due to incomplete ascertainment of individuals
[]. Marcia et al. found no association occurred between
families at risk of neural tube defects and those at risk of
Down's syndrome with their studies on Latin American
countries. Källén et al. found no association with anencephaly,
spina bifida, cephalocele, or hydrocephalus.in their studies on
5581 cases of Down's syndrome []

For long, it has been hypothesized that “if there were a causal
link, the two conditions [neural tube defects and Down's
syndrome] should arise more often in affected families than in
the population in general“ []. But several research projects
have only yielded inconsistent information about the actual
frequency of functional mutations in genes associated with
folate metabolism in the mothers of individuals with neural
tube defect or Down's syndrome. The gene expression profiling
analysis on microarray datasets for both disorders clearly
showed significant alteration with the expression level of genes
involved in folic acid metabolism.

The research focused on identifying the genes and their
interactions which are central to the pathogenesis of NTDs and
Down's syndrome and thereby recognize the reasons for the
limited familial link between the two clinical conditions.

Gene Expression Profiling Studies:
The microarray datasets were subjected to gene expression
profiling. Microarray technology is highly useful in recognizing
the co-regulated genes, pathways, and systems facilitating a
deep insight about the transcriptome. Various research have
indicated that changes in the significance level of differential
expressed gene products along with the fold change cut-offs,
can give very different results that imply different signaling
pathways and functions involved []. T-tests were used to
identify deviation from the mean, large sampling sizes can have
an impact on the number of false positives and may yield little
information, if anything about the biology. Fold change on the
other hand lends itself to a more biologically meaningful
assessment, [].

Initial filtering of the genes was performed on the basis of fold
change in the expression levels and the p-value. Only genes
which were up regulated by least 1.5 fold with a p-value of
lesser than 0.05 were chosen for analysis.

Gene Interaction Network:
The gene network for Down's syndrome was much bigger than
the one for NTDs owing to the distinct difference in the number
of genes which were obtained as a result of the initial filtering
process. But, interestingly this gene remained isolated, with no
notable interaction with any other gene or their protein
products. The gene network constructed for Down's syndrome
consisted of 539 nodes and 4547 edges &amp; for neural tube defects
totally 29 nodes and 80 edges. The gene network obtained for
Down's syndrome was considerably larger than the one
obtained for Neural Tube Defects. The smaller size of NTD gene
network can be attributed to the smaller number initial genes
(obtained from gene expression profiling and subsequent
filtering based). The graphical representation of the top ranked
dense cliques for DS &amp; NTDs are displayed in ( &amp; 
)
respectively.

Allgro. Mcode module was employed for identifying the top
ranked dense clique. The genes in the dense clique are the most
interconnected and therefore, must be center of the etiological
pathway underlying the two diseases. The genes which are part
of the top ranked dense cliques for DS &amp; NTDs are displayed in
 (se supplementary material) respectively. Over
representation analysis, based on their respective ontology was
carried out for all the genes which constitute the top ranked
dense clique for both NTDs and Down's syndrome.

Inferences from the Gene Networks:
The gene networks constructed on the basis of gene express
profiling provides us a hypothetical insight into the pathology
of both the disorders. No genes involved in folic acid
metabolism were a part of the top ranked dense clique for both
NTDs and Down's syndrome.Notably XIST was the top up
regulated gene for both neural tube defects and Down's
syndrome, with more than 4 fold up regulation in both cases.
Xist (X-inactive specific transcript) is a RNA gene, present on
the X chromosome of the placental mammals, acts as major
effector of the X inactivation process. It is a component of the
Xic - X-chromosome inactivation centre []. But,uniquely the
gene Xist remained unconnected to other nodes in the networkthereby
indicating lack of interaction with other members of the
gene network.

DS individuals present higher cerebral cortex and cerebellum
protein levels of the proapoptotic genes Fas and p53. Altered
apoptosis has been suggested as one of the mechanisms
responsible for different DS phenotypes. The most prominent
feature of DS is cognitive disability, which is likely to be
partially due to widespread brain hypo-cellularity. Although
neuronal cultures from human fetal and mouse models of DS
brains show enhanced apoptosis, different studies have
demonstrated that apoptosis has a prominent role in other
important DS phenotypes, such as neurodegeneration in later
life stages, impaired retinal development, heart anomalies,
immunological alterations and predisposition to the
development of different types of cancers [].

The construction of separate gene regulatory networks for
NTDs and DS yield an hypothetical understanding of the
pathogenisis of the diseases and the lack of familial link
between the two disorders.

Conclusion
The neural tube defects and Down's syndrome defects are
amongst the most birth defects across the globe. Though, it has
been hypothesized that there is a common etiological pathway
underlying the two disorders, especially related to the folic acid
metabolism - there has been little evidence that points to
familial link between the two disorders. Our study aimed at
investigating the gene gene interactions involved in the
pathogenesis neither two disorders and thereby draw
inferences regarding the lack of familial link between the two.
We generated gene regulatory networks for NTDs and DS
based on their gene expression profiling and consequently,
recognizing top ranked dense clique from the gene regulatory
networks. Only the genes - EGFR, CBL were found to be
common between NTDs and DS. In future studies can be
carried out to investigate the allelic variants of these genes and
Meta analysis can be carried out to study their association with
NTDs and DS. The gene regulatory network gives us a picture
of all the interactions at molecular level which conspire and
combine to bring about the pathogenesis of the two disorders.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Ragunath &amp; Abhinand, Bioinformation 9(12): 610-616 (2013)

Illustration of the top ranked gene dense clique for DS.
Nodes are represented in cyan blue circle, depicting a single
gene; the edges which depict interactions between the genes are
represented as black lines. The edges represented in red denote
possible self interaction between the gene products. The node
represented as green square represents the gene which is
commonly present in the dense cliques for both NTDs and DS.
The numbers on each node corresponds to the S.no: given in the
 (see supplementary material).

Illustration of the top ranked gene dense clique for
NTDs. The nodes are represented in cyan blue circle, depicting
a single gene; the edges which depict interactions between the
genes are represented as black lines. The edges represented in
red denote possible self interaction between the gene products.
The node represented as green square represents the gene
which is commonly present in the dense cliques for both NTDs
and DS. The numbers on each node corresponds to the S.no:
given in the (se supplementary material).

