Background
The Ory s1 protein from Oryza sativa has been studied extensively to
gain a better understanding of its remarkable allergenicity []. Pollen
allergens of Oryza sativa is recognized by the International Union of
Immunological Societies (IUIS) official list of allergens which include
Ory s1, Ory s7, and Ory s12. Much information has been published
focusing on the physicochemical and epitope analysis of the allergenic
pollen proteins [,,]. Majority of the 
world's population depend on
rice, wheat, maize for daily sustenance. These provide important
models for evolutionary studies of the grasses since various aspects of
their biology have been well documented []. The present
investigation focuses on sequence and epitope analysis of Ory s1 and
its homologs. Chemical modification of allergen vaccines to reduce
IgE binding improves safety while maintaining clinical efficacy.
Analysis of molecular size and allergen content may be useful
techniques for characterization and standardization of allergoid
products []. Identification of potentially allergenic proteins is needed
for the safety assessment of genetically modified foods, certain
pharmaceuticals and various other products on the consumer market.
Features that differentiate allergens from non-allergens are difficult to
find by manual inspection of amino acid sequences. Current methods
in bioinformatics allergology exploit common features among
allergens for the detection of amino acid sequences of potentially
allergenic proteins. Features for identification still unexplored include
the motifs occurring commonly in allergens, but rarely in ordinary
proteins []. In addition to laboratory experimentation and clinical
testing, current procedures for allergenicity assessment involve an
introductory comparison of the novel protein's amino acid sequence
with those of known allergens []. Several regions of the amino acid
sequence of the homologs are evolutionarily highly conserved. Highly
conserved primary sequences of allergenic homologs have been used
in an attempt to establish evolutionary relationships. The studies of
different allergen protein sequences suggest that allergens tend to
share certain sequence similarities. Thus, the potential allergenicity of
query proteins can be predicted by examining their sequence
similarities with known allergens []. The application of
computational techniques in biological discovery was possible due to
the availability of extensive sequence data. The most widely-used and
conceptually easiest to understand of these techniques is database
homology searching, where sequence similarity can be used to assign
target for hypoallergenic vaccine production. A recent paper showed
the efficacy of recombinant birch pollen vaccine for the treatment of
birch-allergic rhinoconjunctivitis []. The similarities found between
the homologous sequences argue that there should be similarities in
their three-dimensional structures, strengthening the hypothesis that
proteins with similar sequences perform a similar function. The main
objective of this study is to analyze the comparative abundance and
distribution of allergenic epitopes in the sequences and to help in
identifying target amino acid positions in the course of vaccine
development.

Methodology
Sequence retrieval
All databases and software used in these studies are publicly available
on the world-wide web. The primary sequence of Ory s1 from Oryza
sativa was acquired from the NCBI's GenPept, a publicly available
database []. BLAST (psi blast) search, using the non redundant
database, was performed that resulted homologous sequences. Twenty
homologs from distant organisms were selected and the sequences
were acquired from GenPept. This provided data required to predict
the primary structure (sequence) and to perform the allergenicity
assessment study.

Physiochemical analysis
Physiochemical analysis of the sequences namely molecular weight,
theoretical pI, amino acid composition, instability index, aliphatic
index and grand average of hydropathicity (GRAVY) were done using
PROTPARAM tool [].

Phylogenetic analysis
Clustal W analysis software available online from Moscow State
University's A. N. Belozersky Institute of Physio-Chemical Biology
was used to compare sequence alignment of allergenic homologs with
the default settings []. Here the dendrogram is calculated in 2 stages:
first all pairs of sequence are compared using of Wilbur and Lipman
method [] and then the similarity scores resulted are used to 
construct the dendrogram using the UPGMA cluster analysis method
of Sneath and Sokal []. Tree construction was done by using
Phylodraw [].

Allergenic domain detection
Allergenic domains of the sequences were extracted using ProScan
[]. Motif search in the multiple sequence alignment was carried out
using Multiple Em for Motif Elicitation (MEME tool) technique [].
Antigenic sites on proteins was discovered, using EMBOSS antigenic
program [], a semi-empirical method which makes use of
physicochemical properties of amino acid residues and their
frequencies of occurrence in experimentally known segmental epitopes
[].

Discussion
Sequence from NCBI server was retrieved for Oryza sativa allergenic
protein Ory S1 A86533.1. BLAST search (Psi BLAST) obtained
homologous Sequences, and 20 significant homologous sequences
were short listed from diverse species varying from grasses to higher
plants for comparative study: AAA86533.1, NP_001048686.1,
CAA81613.1, CAA10520.1, CAA10140.1, CAB63699.1,
AAP96760.1, AAS48882.1, ABF81662.1, CAC40805.1, ABB83474.1,
AAZ08315.1, NP_190182.2, ABK93417.1, AAV85475.1,
ACB45301.1, ABJ90221.1, AAT11859.2, BAC67192.1,
BAC66787.1. Amino acid residues Ala (7.6-11.9), Cys (2.70-3.80),
His (1.0-2.2), Leu (4.6-6.7), Trp (2.2-3.5), Tyr (2.3-4.5), Val (6.2-9.8)
are found quite equally distributed among all the sequence than other
amino acids (), while Cys and Val residues are predominant
found in allergenic epitopes ().  shows most of the
hydrophobic residues in allergenic site.  provides details of the
physiochemical analysis which shows all the sequences as stable
(instability index ranging from 17.35 to 44.02) with a theoretical pI
ranging from 5.32 to 9.58. Though GRAVY was found negative (-.003
to -0.643) for complete sequences the distribution of sequences in
alleregnic motif was predominantly hydrophobic (). The
information content diagram provides an idea of the positions in the
motif that are most highly conserved. It is very interesting to note the
simplified position specific matrix result where the four conserved
cystiene residues was found in all the sequences at the same position
(). Interestingly the phylogenetic tree of Ory s1 homologs
included several apparently eukaryotic orthologs. Therefore it seems
most likely that the progenitors of each of these orthologous sets might
also cause allergy. The phylogenetic analysis has resulted that pollen
allergen sequence from Oryza sativa japonica (NP_001048686.1) was
most closely related sequence and EXPB10 sequence from Zea mays
(ABF81662.1) as next closely related sequence with the query
sequence Ory s1 from Oryza sativa indica (AAA86533.1). Beta
expansin B2 from Festuca pratensis (CAC40805.1) and Beta-expansin
EXPB4 from Hordeum vulgare (ACB45301.1) were next most closely
related sequences found. Expansin 1 from Mangifera indica
(AAT11859.2) and sequence from Eucalyptus globulus (AAZ08315.1)
were found less related. Pollen allergen from Lolium perenne
(CAB63699.1) and Group 1 allergen Dac g 1.02 precursors from
Dactylis glomerata (AAP96760.1) were found as distantely related. It
shows that the relation ship of the sequences in phylogenetic analysis
().

Conclusion
Consensus epitope identification using the accessible allergenic region
has geared up the pace. If bioinformatics approaches are standardized
and optimized, it can be used for the swift identification of potential
antigenic regions to target allergenic proteins in course of development
of hypoallergenic vaccines. Allergenic epitopes in this study show
abundance of hydrophobic residues in the motif. The role of highly
conserved cysteines residues at four positions shall also play a major
role in determining the allergenicity. Cystiene residues were found
highly conserved for the motif 1 with a width of 29 and 20 sites. It was
found in all the sequences at 9, 21, 24, 29 positions as shown in the
information content diagram []. This is in order with the results
documented in . The function of disulfide bonds formed between
cysteines in IgE binding has been investigated in studies with several
other allergens this falls in line with the previously documented studies
[,]. Hence, the procured consensus region shall be utilized for
effective vaccine design against food allergens.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Sharma et al,Bioinformation 4(1): 12-18 (2009)

Figure showing phylogenetic relationship of Ory s1 protein sequence with other homologs.

