Background
Marine chemicals have novel structures with pronounced biological 
activity and pharmacology. The study  of such chemicals therefore is 
promising. High throughput screening of marine metabolites for a given 
drug target can be achieved only if natural compounds are available as a 
database. Creating a database of natural products and sharing it with huge 
scientific community facilitates the understanding of basic mechanism of 
compounds and can reduce the timeline in drug discovery  
[]. A publicly 
accessible database that provides comprehensive information about these 
compounds is therefore helpful to the relevant communities. 

Seaweeds are among the first marine organisms chemically analyzed, with 
more than 3,600 articles published describing 3,300 secondary metabolites 
from marine plants and algae, and they still remain an almost endless 
source of new bioactive compounds. This database is focused on bioactive 
compounds that target the pharmaceutical market, along with the spectrum 
of biological activities  (Table 1). Among macroalgae, significantly more 
rich in secondary metabolites appear  the brown and red algae, with the 
latter being the top producers of halogenated metabolites. Red algae of the 
genus Laurencia (Ceramiales, Rhodomelaceae) are some of the most 
prolific producers of secondary metabolites in the marine environment. 
Secondary metabolites from these algae are predominantly sesquiterpenes, 
diterpenes, triterpenes and C15-acetogenins, characterized by the presence 
of halogen atoms in their chemical structures. Most Laurencia species 
accumulate a characteristic major metabolite or a class of compounds not 
widely distributed within the genus [].

Database Structure
The entries of this database are generated from a text mining of published 
articles. Our database currently contains 356 entries of compounds found 
from literature. SWMD is designed  in MySQL 5.1.36 and PHP 5.3.0. 
These compounds cover 37 different  species of Laurencia and other 
genera, which is shown is Table 2A, 2B respectively. Geographical origin 
and extraction method directed for each of these compounds were searched 
and included in the database along with the biological activity exhibited.

Compounds in SWMD are annotated by molecular property. These include 
molecular weight, Monoisotopic Mass, Molar Refractivity, number of 
rotatable bonds, calculated LogP, number of hydrogen-bond donors, 
number of hydrogen-bond acceptors,  Polar Surface Area and Van der 
Waals surface area. The chemical descriptors and 3D structure for each 
compound were calculated using Marvinsketch  [] and Chemsketch  
[], 
respectively. Lipophilicity or calculated LogP is predicted using ALOGPS 
2.1 program  [].  For molecular visualization, the user needs the free 
Chime-Plugin from MDL (available for Windows, SGI, Mac) or the Java2 
Runtime Environment.

The SWMD database web interface is shown in . This database is 
searchable by Accession Number, Compound type, Seaweed Binomial 
name, IUPAC name, SMILES notation or InChI.  The search is case 
insensitive. In a query, a user can specify full name or any part of the name 
in a text field. Wild characters of ‘%’ and ‘_’ are supported in text field. 

Database features
SWMD has a web interface at http://www.swmd.co.in. The database is 
unique in providing comprehensive information of compounds from 
seaweeds via 25 descriptive fields. Each entry in the database is 
categorized into sections such as General information, Structure 
information, Predicted  properties and Bibliographic references. The 
general information part of the database entry displays the compound’s 
unique SWMD accession number viz. XY123 where X represents the 
Macroalgae ‐ Brown, Green and Red by B, G and R respectively and Y 
represent the first letter of the genus. It also encompasses compound type, 
and an external links to the compound's PUBCHEM ID and Chemspider 
ID (if available) are provided. Binomial name is followed by geographical 
origin and biological activity which was curated from literature sources. 
The Structure of the compound, its name in IUPAC, SMILES notation and 
InChI are displayed in structure information along with atomic coordinates 
in MOL and PDB format which can  be downloaded for 3D molecular 
visualization  []. The predicted properties display the pre-computed 
chemical descriptors of the compounds and reference section lists the 
citations relevant to the respective compounds with external links to 
PubMed if available. 

SWMD currently contains entries for 517 compounds encompassing 25 
descriptive fields mostly from the Red algae of the genus Laurencia 
(Ceramiales, Rhodomelaceae) (Table 2 in ). The 
number of compounds in SWMD is growing, and the numbers reported 
here should be considered a representative snapshot; see the Web-page for 
up-to-date statistics. Of these 517 compounds, 331 are Lipinski compliant 
[], with the caveat that we have used ALOGPS 2.1 program  
[] as a 
surrogate for c Log P between -3.5 and 5, MW ≤ 500 g•mol-1, a maximum 
of 10 H bond acceptors and 5 H bond donors. Of these, 107 are “lead-like” 
molecules [,
]
, which have MW = 150-350 g•mol-1, c Log P ≫ 4, H bond 
donors  ≤ 3, and H bond acceptors  ≤ 6. A total of 27 molecules are 
“fragment-like” [] 
with c Log P between ‐ 2 and 3, MW ≫ 250 g•mol-1, 
H bond donors ≫ 3, H bond acceptors ≫ 6 and rotatable bonds ≫ 3 
().

Conclusion and Future Perspectives
The data presented in SWMD can  be effectively used for chemoinformatics 
studies like QSAR analysis, pharmacophore search, molecular 
docking etc. pertaining to drug discovery. It also portrays the span of 
secondary metabolites available in seaweeds and the need to preserve the 
perishing marine ecosystem.  The database will be extended with more 
data on molecular interactions, embedded interactive visualization tools 
and additional chemical descriptors. The users are also welcome to 
contribute relevant data to the database via email to authors. The dataset 
and web interface shall be upgraded periodically.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Davis &amp; Vasanthi, Bioinformation 5(8): 361-364 (2011)

The search result page of SWMD. 

Molecular properties of compounds in SWMD. (A) molecular weight; (B) calculated LogP; (C) violations of Lipinski's rule-of-fives; (D) 
hydrogen-bond donors; (E) hydrogen-bond acceptors and (F) rotatable bonds.

