Background
Mosquitoes are vectors for transmitting parasites and viruses for human diseases such as malaria, filariasis, yellow fever, 
      dengue fever and encephalitis viruses. [] Vector identification is a 
      basic preventive strategy to control mosquito borne diseases. Generally, experienced taxonomists are involved in the 
      identification and characterization of disease causing mosquito species. []
      However, identification of mosquito species using visual inspection of pictorial keys is time consuming and error prone. Hence, 
      it is desirable to have a computerized mosquito identification system for the accurate identification of unknown Culex
      species in the South East Asian region. The use of expert system in disease management has improved public health care. 
      [–] Here, we describe the 
      use of expert system for the identification of disease causing mosquito species in the South East Asian regions. 

Methodology
Data utilized
A rule based expert system was developed using the pictorial keys described elsewhere for Culex species 
      associated with Japanese Encephalitis in Southeast Asia (Diptera: Culicidae) in Mosquito Systematics. []

Iterative Dichotomizer (ID3):
ID3 algorithm was applied for the development of the rule-based expert system for female Culex mosquito species of South 
      East Asia. The algorithm uses “binary partitioning”, where, parent nodes are always divided (using IF­THEN rules) into two 
      child nodes until the tree terminates.

Macromedia Dream weaver MX 2004
Macromedia Dream weaver MX 2004 was used for creating the online web interface

Utility
Accurate and rapid identification of mosquito species are paramount importance for the public health planners and 
      administrators involved in vector control operations. The online expert system described in this article finds utility in 
      vector identification and disease management. The system produces a decision tree for the identification of common 
      Culex species in the South East Asian region ().

The authors are grateful to Director, IICT for his encouragement and support. The authors are also thankful to Dr Kenneth 
      J Linthicum, Editor Journal of American Mosquito Control Association, USA, for granting permission to use the published 
      pictorial keys in this development. 

Figures and Tables
A decision tree for the identification of common
        Culexspecies in the South East Asian region is shown


      Citation:Murty
      et al., Bioinformation 1(2): 40-41 (2005)

