Background
Bacillus produces linage of extracellular enzymes including
proteases. Protease occupies a significant part of world enzyme
production by contributing nearly 60% share of the total world
enzyme market. Bacillus protease contributing 35 % sale of
total enzymes [,
]. They are generally classified into four
groups; serine proteases- presence of serine group,
Thiol/cysteine protease- Thiol group/cystein group, acidic
proteases and metalloproteases. Proteases having diversity in
industrial application like pharmaceuticals, food, detergents,
leather and textile []. A number of proteases are produced not
only from plant, but also from bacteria and fungi. There is still
a need to search a novel protease of desirable physical and
chemical stability that can be used in various medical and
chemical applications. Proteases from. A niger and A. oryzae are
commercial produced and used as enzyme therapy [,
] like
to improve blood circulation, to prevent abnormal blood
clotting, to reduce pain and inflammation associated with
Phlebitis, to alleviate the pain, inflammation, and discomfort
of varicose veins; to minimize muscle pain that occurs after
exercise, to minimize the inflammation and pain associated
with Osteoarthritis and Rheumatoid Arthritis, to alleviate the
symptoms of Sinusitis and to alleviate (reverse) Edema [,
].
It's also helpful in studying of kinetic and protein or peptide
structure. Various researches have been shown that production
of protease and activity influences by various physicochemical
parameters like nutritional and cultural cultural characteristics.
Hence, to obtain maximum yield, it is necessary to optimize
the media components and the cultural characteristics like pH,
temperature, incubation time, inoculum size, agitation and
others [] suitable for each strain. Alkaline proteases from
microbial sources are most commonly used in various
industries. The commercial superiority of alkaline proteases is
due to their suitability for use in the field of detergent
industry, where they are required in large quantities. It is
desirable to develop a non-phosphate based product with
decreased detergency which can be achieved by incorporation
of enzymes to remove the proteinaceous stains. Moreover,
liquid laundry detergents are becoming increasingly popular
among consumers in developed countries. Furthermore, to
improve washing performance of liquid detergent, enzymes
are to be incorporated to remove the proteinaceous materials.
An ideal detergent protease must be cost effective, stable, and
compatible to detergents, active at a high pH (8-12) and in a
wide range of temperature. Although various Bacillus ideal
proteases have been reported and significantly used in various
industrial applications, but Lysinibacillus protease
characteristics and its production optimization were not much
reported. So, in this study, we have evaluated protease
characteristics and optimization of production parameters to
enhance protease production from Lysinibacillus, which can use
in various industrial applications for the human welfare.

Methodology
Isolation and screening for protease production:
Isolation was done on MRS agar, in search of bacteriocin
producing isolates and protease screening was the result of
their biochemical characterization. So, to elaborate the
industrial potential of Lysinibacillus its protease spectrum was
characterized. For this, collected samples were serially diluted
in sterilized normal saline and seeded on to MRS agar plates
which were incubated at 37 °C for 24 h. Grown colonies were
separated by streak plate method. Primary screening for
protease was done by streaking the isolates on casein agar
plate and secondary screening was done from cell free
supernatant according to []. Different media used in this
study were- Nutrient broth; Peptone: 5g/l, Beef extract: 3g/l,
NaCl : 5g/l, Skim milk broth; Skim milk : 100g/l, Peptone 1.0
g/l, NaCl: 5g/l, LB broth; Tryptone: 10g/l, NaCl: 5g/l, Yeast
extract: 5g/l, Glucose: 1g/l, Glucose broth; Glucose: 1.o g/l,
Peptone: 10.0 g/l, Yeast extract: 0.2 g/l, CaCl2: 0.1 g/l,
K2HPO4: 0.5g/l, MgSO4: 0.1 g/l. MRS broth; containedproteose
peptone: 10.0g/l, Beef extract:10.0g/l, Yeast extract:
5.0 g/l, Dextrose: 20.0g/l, Poly sorbate-80: 1.0 g/l, Ammonium
citrate: 2.0g/l, Sodium acetate: 5.0g/l, magnesium Sulphate:
0.10 g/l, Maganese Sulphate: 0.05 g/l, Di potassium
phosphate: 2.0 g/l.

Enzyme assay:
Protease activity (U/ml) was determined according to Anson
and Folin [] by using casein as substrate solution and TCA as
reaction blocking reagent and total protein conc was estimated
by Bradford's method []. One unit of enzyme activity (U/ml)
was defined as the amount of the enzyme that liberates 1 µg of
tyrosine per minute per milliliter under the standard assay
conditions.

Calculation:
(i) Standard Curve: ΔA660 Standard = A660nm Standard -
A660nm Standard Blank
Plot the A660nm Standard Vs. µ moles of Tyrosine.
(ii) Sample Determination:
A660nm Sample = A660nm (Test) - A660nm (Sample Blank)
Determine the µ moles of Tyrosine equivalents liberated using
the Standard curve.

Units/ml enzyme= (µ mole Tyrosine equivalents released)
(11) / (1)(10) (2)

Where: 11 = Total volume (in milliliters) of assay; 10 = Time of
assay (in minutes) as per the Unit Definition c; 1 = Volume of
enzyme (in milliliter) of enzyme used; 2 = Volume (in
milliliters) used in Colorimetric Determination

Accession number and phylogenetic analysis:
Being potential inhibitor of bacterial and fungal pathogens,
isolate 6 was characterized by 16 S rRNA and isolate 10 was
used for the comparative study of both the proteases isolated
from the same sample. The amplified gene sequence was
submitted to NCBI (JX416854). The Sequence was retrieved to
constract the phylogenetic tree (FigTree 1.4.0) using the
Neighbor –Joining method [].

Optimization of fermentation conditions:
Physicochemical factors like media, carbon and nitrogen
source, pH, Temp and salt concentration. Influences protease
productions which were optimized by one parameter at a time
approach, using submerged fermentation system carried out at
constant time, rpm and seeded volume. The selected isolate
was inoculated in four different media (LB, NB, GP and casein
broth was assayed for protease activity. The enzyme activity
and protein conc. were estimated as described previously. The
optimized media used for further characterization of other
parameters. Similarly the effects of carbon (citric acid, sucrose,
fructose, glucose, lactose and starch), nitrogen (tryptone,
casein, yeast extract, peptone, ammonium nitrate, ammonium
chloride and corn steep liquor ) were evaluated. The tests were
conducted in triplicates and average reading was recorded
[].

Optimization of culture conditions:
For enhanced protease production, different culture variables
such as pH (3.0–12.0), temperature (15, 25, 37, 45 and 55 °C),
salt concentration (0.25-2 % NaCl) and inoculums size (0.5–2.5
%) were optimized.

Characterization of protease activity:
Effects of pH and Temperature:
Pre incubated CFS at specified conditions, was used to
evaluate the protease activity at different sets of experiment
needed. The enzyme activity was screened at various pH and
temperature viz. 3.0–11.0 with an interval of 0.5 units using 0.1
M of citrate buffer. (pH 3.0–6.0), phosphate buffer (pH 6.0–8.0),
Tris–HCl (pH 7.5–9.0) and carbonate buffer (pH 9.0–11.0). The
pH stability was determined by pre-incubation of crude
enzyme for 30 min at room temperature with appropriate
buffers (pH 3.0–11.0), and the activity was measured under
standard assay conditions. Similarly, optimum temp for the
protease activity (10-50 °C) and stability (20-90 °C) was
determined by calculating the activity as described previously
[].

Effect of substrates:
The proteolytic activity of the crude protease was determined
1% w/v various proteinaceous substrates such as BSA, casein,
skim milk, and gelatin under the standard assay conditions.

Effect of protease inhibitors:
The effect of various chemicals like (w/v)―
phenylmethanesulphonyl fluoride (PMSF), dithiothreitol
(DTT); surfactants (1% v/v) Tween 80, Triton X-100; detergents
(w/v)―SDS; chelators (w/v)―ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
(1mM EDTA) and various metal ions (1% w/v) (Mg2+, Fe3+,
Zn2+ and Ca2+) at different concentrations on protease activity
was determined. The enzyme was pre-incubated in these
chemicals for 30 min at room temperature, and the residual
activity was measured under standard conditions.

Wash Performance Assay and stability with detergents:
Wash efficiency was tested with three pieces of muslin cloth.
They were stained with goat blood, dried at 60 °C and fixed
with 1 % (v/v) formaldehyde. The stain fixed fabrics were
immersed in the crude enzyme for 10 min at room temperature
and examined for stain removal. The same procedure was
followed for the control without the enzyme []. A negative
control without any treatment was maintained.

Results
Isolation, identification and screening of isolate:
Protease producing isolate was selected from bacteriocin
producing isolates during the course of their biochemical
characterization. Among them two isolates form clear zone on
a casein agar plate and recorded to be protease positive 
(). Both isolates were gram positive rods and negative with
gelatinase, amylase, nitrate reductase, urease but positive with
catalase and protease. Isolate 06 was 16S rRNA based
molecularly found to be as Lysinibacillus. It is closest to
Lysinibacillus (96% similarity) and lies on separate parenthesis
on radius of fermicutes on the phylogenetic tree constructed by
neighbor- joining method using FigTree 1.4.0 ().

Optimization of media and nutritional components:
Four different media (LB, NB, GP and CB were tested for
protease production. It was observed that both strains showed
highest protease activity (889U/ml; 742U/ml) with CB
followed by nutrient broth, glucose broth and LB broth but
strain 6 Showed greater activities as compared to isolate 10.
The used carbon components were found significant as glucose
763; 725U/ml, fructose 720; 697U/ml, sucrose 640;580 U/ml,
citric acid 580;550U/ml, lactose 530; 515 U/ ml and starch 520;
500 U/ml Similarly, nitrogen sources casein and peptone
found to be significant in protease production ().

Effect of culture conditions on Protease Production:
Different pH, Temp, incubation time, shaking conditions and
inoculums volumes for both the strains were optimized. The
activity enhanced gradually from pH 6.0 and reached the
utmost production at pH 8.0 (921; 821 U/ml) while no activity
was observed with pH ranging 3.0–5.0 and activity decreased
at pH 9-11.0. The isolate produced protease at temperature 15,
25, 37, 45 and 55 °C with maximum production at 37 °C (970;
960 U/ml). Further increased protease production was
observed with shaking @ 120 rpm for the 36 h followed by 48
h, 30 h and 25 h. Prolonged incubation and static condition
showed the reduced protease production. We did not observe
any significant effect of NaCl conc. on protease production.

Effect of pH on activity of protease:
Different buffer systems of pH (3-11) were used to evaluate the
effect pH on protease activity. The enzymes were found to be
stable at a pH range of 7.0–11.0 and retained maximum
activities up to pH 9.0. The enzymes reduced residual activity
nearly 30% between pH 6.0 and pH 11.0 ().

Effect of heat:
Heat stabilities of the enzymes were estimated at various
temperatures from 40 to 120 °C. The enzyme exhibited
optimum residual activity at 40 °C (898; 903 U/ml) followed by
50 °C (865; 854 U/ml), 60°C (854; 843 U/ml) and at 70 °C (7821;
811 °C) the protease enzymes nearly lost 20% their activities.
Both the enzymes found to be retained nearly 80 % of its
original activity in the range of 30–70 °C. At higher temp (70-
120 °C) protease activity was not recorded (s).

Effect of substrates:
The hydrolytic activity of the crude protease was observed to
be more than 90% with the tested pertinacious substances BSA,
casein, skim milk while no activity was recorded with gelatin.

Effect of Chemicals:
The chemical stabilities of both the enzymes are summarized
in the Table 1 (see supplementary material). 0.25M protease
inhibitor, PMSF significantly inhibited the enzyme activity to
35 % and 20% with while enzymes retained about 78 % of its
total activity upon treatment with DTT. Surfactants like Triton
X-100, T-80, SDS and metal ions like Ca2+, Mg2+ and EDTA
significant enzyme activities nearly 95 % were retained while
85 % reduction in activity was observed with Zn ions.
Destaining of blood on muslin cloth was observed without the
addition of detergents, taken from local market (ghadi
detergent). Further quick and easy destaining of blood was
observed when used with detergent that indicated it's stability
with detergent ().

Discussion
In the present study, protease producing Lysinibacillus was
isolated from fruits and vegetable waste, Lucknow India.
Many Bacilli proteases were significantly reported as an
additive of many formulations in many industries [].
Substrate consumption in production is an important criteria
for a product to be cost effective. Optimization of carbon and
nitrogen sources in the media plays a vital role to determine
the cost of the substrate and enzyme production []. So, It is
necessary to formulate the media with cost effective
components and to optimize the culture conditions for
enhancing protease production. Many bacillus proteases
optimized and stability conditions have been reported by
various researchers [,
,
]. The nitrogenous sources like
CB, corn steep liquor have been reported to be a cost effective
nitrogenous component in various protease production.
Similarly, glucose, fructose and sucrose are also reported to be
used as suitable carbohydrates for enhancing protease
production []. There is gradually increased in protease
production in the pH range of 6-11 but optimum production
was achieved at 37 °C with the pH 8. This finding indicated the
alkalophillic nature of the proteases. Many alkalophillic
proteases have been described [,
]. The enzyme showed
maximum activity at pH 9.0 which was supported by the
finding of [,
]. Generally, the commercial proteases from
various bacilli have maximum activity in the alkaline pH range
of 8.0–12.0 []. This stability at higher pH indicated that it can
be used as an additive of detergents. Protease activity with
bivalent ion was found to be not affected; this signifies the
protection from denaturation and helping the enzyme to
maintain its native conformation for the activity. Washed
performance assay of enzyme showed that it helped to remove
the blood stain from muslin cloth with the addition of any
detergent. This blood destaining application and stability at
higher pH and indicated its importance and might be used an
additive in detergent industries.

The cost effective optimized media components like Casein
broth and NB broth with the glucose as carbohydrates and
peptone or corn steep liquor as nitrogenous sources were
analyzed for the proteases of this study and the further
characterization showed that these protease was found to be
stable at pH 9 and temperature 70 °C. it was observed from
the conducted study that both enzymes were found to be
stable at higher pH and temp, indicated that these enzyme
could be belong to serine ( inhibited by PMSF) alkaline
protease family. Its significant blood destaining activity with
tested surfactant further showed that it could be used as a stain
remover in detergent industry.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are thankful to Integral University Lucknow,
India for providing necessary facilities to carry out this work
and also thankful to UGC for providing financial assistance to
Mr. Varish Ahmad as UGC-MANF during the course of this
work.

Citation:Ahmad et al, Bioinformation 10(1): 013-018 (2014)

a) Screening of protease on casein agar plates, b)
gram staining showing gram positive bacilli

Phylogenetic position of isolate JX416854 is
highlighted. The tree was constructed by Neighbor-Joining
method and visualized by FigTree 1.4.0 by using 30 species,
with 1000 replicon at the scale of 0.008. The highlighted
position of isolate representing a separate sp among the bacilli.

Showing effect different media on protease
production LB; Luria-Bertani broth, NB; nutrient broth, CB;
casein broth and GP; glucose broth

A) Showing effect different media on protease production LB; Luria-Bertani broth, NB; nutrient broth, CB; casein broth
and GP; glucose broth; B) Showing effect Temperature on protease production; Optimum production of protease was achieved at
the 370 C; Figure 6: Effect of pH on activities of enzymes; C) Effect of Heat on stability of enzymes.

Washing effect of enzyme Jx416854 a; control, b)
washing with detergent without enzyme showed detergent
itself is not sufficient to remove the blood stain c) The blood
destaining test showed that the enzyme has the efficiency to
remove blood stain almost completely from the muslin cloth
piece without the use of any of the detergents, also additives
washing activity of enzyme (Decreased area and sensitivity of
blood clot in fig C) with detergent further signified the stability
of enzyme in harsh washing conditions.

