Background
Accurate and reliable prediction of protein structure has long been a principal challenge for bioinformatics. Of particular importance is the prediction of membrane
protein structure, as, unlike soluble and fibrous proteins, membrane proteins remain poorly tractable targets for the main experimental methods of structure
determination: X-ray crystallography and multidimensional nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. [] The seriousness of this problem is
highlighted by the observation that 20% of most genomes encode membrane proteins [], yet the number of solved membrane protein structures is 
approximately 2% of the Research Collaboration for Structural Bioinformatics (RCSB) Protein Data Bank (PDB). [,]

Membrane proteins fall into two structural classes: α-helical and β-barrel. α-helical membrane proteins are responsible for interactions between most cells and their
environment. Transmembrane (TM) helices are typically encoded by stretches of 17-25 residues, which provide sufficient length to cross the membrane. [] A
compositional bias towards hydrophobic residues is apparent in the TM helices, as they must make complementary interactions with the hydrophobic lipid
bilayer. α -helical proteins vary in topology, from single TM regions to “serpentine” structures consisting of over 20 TM helices, which are separated by hydrophilic
regions that loop alternately in and out of the extracellular space and the cytoplasm. [] At present, the only
known location for TM β-barrels is the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria. The SCOP database classifies TM β-barrels into 6 structural superfamiles: OmpA-like, OmpT-like, OmpLA, porins,
TolC and Leukocidin (α Haemolysin). []

When considering algorithms that target problems in membrane proteomics, relatively few address the issue of distinguishing alpha helical transmembrane, beta
transmembrane, and non-membraneous proteins. HUNTER [], for example, specifically addresses this
issue: the algorithm has been tested on Gram-negative genomes with good accuracy for well- and partiallyannotated proteins.

This paper describes an alignment-free prediction methodology that can distinguish between membrane and non-membrane proteins. These methods are based on
Bayesian Networks (BNs), a form of machine learning that has been used very successfully in a number of biological applications in recent years. 
[,] BNs are considered especially suited to computational biology, as
they provide a flexible and powerful framework for statistical inference, and learn model parameters from data. []

Methodology
Data-set
In compiling the membrane-class predictor data-set, the only requirement was for proteins of known sub-cellular location rather than accurate topologies. 
			[] The β-barrel set was smaller than the α-helical set owing to the lack of solved 
			structures. The β-barrel set was taken from the PSORT-B complete data-set, version 1.1. [] 
			Non-membranous sequences were extracted from the Reinhardt and Hubbard data-set 14. [] The number of 
			sequences used from each compartment is listed in .

Bayesian Network construction
A static full Bayesian model was used since such a model, compared with a naïve network model, outputs a probability that is not a product of 
			probabilities from each descriptor but rather associates one probability with combinations of descriptors. Thus, overall performance is at least as good 
			as that of the best individual descriptor.

We define the output prediction node of the network as O, the individual scale nodes are defined as S1, S2, etc., individual scale 
            node values are designated x1, x2, etc. The network models the joint probability distribution of all individual descriptor nodes. 
            Predictions are made using Eqn 1: as given in the 		
			
          

Membrane protein class prediction method
The membrane class predictor seeks to classify membrane proteins and their structural class. Three classifications can be made: α-helical membrane protein,
β-barrel membrane protein and non-membranous protein. Accordingly, the network is trained on α-helical, β-barrel and non-membranous sequences. Instead of
attempting to classify local regions, this algorithm considers the whole protein using amino acid pseudocomposition. Pseudo-amino acid composition is used in
preference to simple amino acid composition, as it attempts to model sequence-order effects, and hence more information about the sequence is used. Exploiting
such additional information may prove useful, as proteins show different residue preferences in different parts of the sequence.

Pseudo-amino acid composition
Consider a protein of L residues: as given in the  

Assessing Prediction Accuracies
Accuracies were assessed using two methods of crossvalidation: leave-one-out (LOO) and five-fold crossvalidation. LOO cross-validation removes one protein
from the data-set, trains the network on the remaining proteins and then tests the removed protein. The test is repeated, removing and testing different proteins, until
all proteins have been tested. Five-fold cross-validation randomly extracts 1/5 of the data-set and then retrains the network on the remaining 4/5 and tests the removed
1/5. This is repeated 4 times, each iteration excluding proteins that were previously included; therefore, each individual protein is included in the test set only once.

Results and Discussion
A BN was constructed and then trained on membrane proteins, both α-helical and β-barrel, and nonmembranous proteins for a variety of sub-cellular
compartments. The sequences (with the obvious exception of the β-barrels) were of mixed eukaryotic and prokaryotic origin. As shown in , the results are
of good accuracy, α-helical proteins being the most successfully identified (94.4%/96.5%), β-barrel proteins proving harder to classify, with accuracies of
72.4%/72.1%. To test whether amino acid pseudocomposition [] provides a significant increase in
accuracy from a BN trained on simple amino acid composition, we also trained networks using amino acid proportions only. See . These results indicated
that networks based on pseudo-composition were significantly more accurate classifiers.

The most significant difference between pseudo and simple composition is in the Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC), which decreases by 0.110 when
predicting “all classes”. This change is mostly the result of an increased rate of false-positive detection. A 0.036 fall in α-helical protein predictions was observed, and a
0.186 fall in β-barrel MCC owing to increased falsepositives. Thus results for the protein-class predictor display considerable differences between the accuracies
for the different locations. There are several possible explanations for this variance. The method relies on the use of pseudo-amino acid composition to discriminate
compartments. It is thus probable that sequences that mimic the composition of membrane proteins will be predicted as membranous. This is a problem particularly
common in proteins that are secreted, as has been observed by other researchers, and is often attributed to the N-terminal signal sequence. [] The signal sequence
has a hydrophobic core and averages 20-30 residues in length, making it highly similar to a TM α-helix, which often causes problems for α-helical membrane protein
topology predictors. [] This problem is best addressed by using specific signal sequence prediction methods,
which have high degrees of accuracy. [] Other false predictions were found to result from stretches of
hydrophobic residues that fold inside globular proteins, but this was only observed in 2 cases. False-positive α-helix predictions are much less prevalent using machinelearning
methods, such as described here, than when using simple hydrophobic plots, but still represent an area for future improvement.

Of special note is the observation that no false-positive β-barrel predictions were made. As β-barrel proteins often have varied compositions, being exposed to a range
of environments in different segments of the proteins, one might assume that they would likely possess amino acid characteristics that partially imitate other subcellular
compartments or have no overall characteristic composition. Our results show that the opposite is true. This may indicate that the exposure of β-barrels to a
range of environments produces a more characteristic amino acid composition than expected. To further investigate this, we examined the simple amino acid
compositions of all proteins used. As expected, a skewed bias towards hydrophobic amino acids is observed in the α-helical membrane proteins; the non-membranous
proteins present a generalised composition, as expected from their different locations and functions; and the β-barrel composition differs from both, but shows no
simple, overall pattern of preference. This suggests that this apparent complexity is captured well by pseudocomposition, giving the network its predictive power.

To assess the ability of the protein-class predictor to aid genome annotation, the predictor was used to classify all proteins of known sub-cellular location from both the
human and E. coli genomes. The proteins were obtained from Swiss-Prot release 42, and only proteins of unambiguous location were used. From the human
genome, 5568 proteins were tested, of which 2416 were membranous. The protein-class predictor correctly identified 90.54% of the membrane proteins and 82.58%
of the non-membranous proteins. For E. coli, the results were of higher accuracy, 97.68% of the 689 membranous proteins being correctly classified, and 91.89% of the
non-membranous proteins. These results indicate that the protein-class predictor is a powerful tool for genome annotation, able to differentiate protein class with a high
level of confidence. The higher rate of accuracy for E. coli proteins probably reflects their over-representation in the training-set.

Conclusion
The method described here represents an important advance in the computational determination of membrane protein structural class and topology. It
provides an accurate tool for the alignment-free classification of proteins into TM α-helical, TM β-barrel or non-TM. Although many predictors can
distinguish between α-helical membrane proteins and other proteins, few have been reported that can reliably predict β-barrel membrane proteins, and fewer
still have been produced that combines both functions. The protein-class predictor provides both a means of annotating the location of novel proteins and an in
silico tool to aid the discovery of drug and vaccine targets. Thus, the method offers a useful approach for the analysis of membrane proteins for a wide range of
possible applications.

Supplementary Material
Data 1
Data 2
PDT wishes to thank the MRC for a priority area studentship. The Jenner Institute (Formally, The Edward Jenner Institute for Vaccine Research) wishes
to thank its sponsors: GlaxoSmithKline, the Medical Research Council, the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council, and the UK Department of Health.

Figures and Tables
Numbers of sequences used in the protein-class predictor
Protein class	Number of sequences	
Eukaryotic membranous	432	
Eukaryotic non-membranous	2106	
Prokaryotic inner membrane	268	
Prokaryotic outer membrane	352	
Prokaryotic non-membranous	997	
Performance of the protein-class predictor when trained on pseudo- composition
	LOO cross-validation	Five-fold cross-validation	MCC	
All classes	85.2	82.4	0.915	
α -helical	94.4	96.5	0.932	
α -barrel	72.4	72.1	0.835	
Non-membranous	85.9	84.6	0.868	
Performance of the protein-class predictor when trained on simple amino-acid composition
	LOO cross-validation	Five-fold cross-validation	MCC	
All classes	74.84	75.72	0.805	
α -helical	88.68	85.89	0.896	
α -barrel	48.97	51.23	0.629	
	
Non-membranous	81.68	79.99	0.816	

      Citation:Taylor
            et al., Bioinformation 1(6): 208-213 (2006) 

