Background
Protein hetero-dimer subunit interaction is important in regulation and
catalysis in living cells. The modes and types of protein-protein
interactions using hetero-dimer protein complexes are numerically large
in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. However, documented data on
such interactions are inadequate in the literature [–]. The formation
of the interface between the two subunits is governed by both
biophysical and chemical features as described in a number of studies
elsewhere [–]. The documented features available thus far are based
on structural datasets of protein-protein complexes of limited size. In
these studies, geometrical (interface size, planarity, sphericity and
complementarity) and chemical properties (the types of amino acid
chemical groups, hydrophobicity, electrostatic interactions and Hbonds)
are frequently analyzed.

Janin and colleagues have described the principles of protein-protein
interaction since 1975 using a modest dataset of 3 protein complexes to
more than 75 complexes in recent years [–]. Some of the parameters
described by them for understanding protein subunit interactions
include, close atomic packing [,,], hydrophobicity and its free
energy [,,,], structural mobility and interface conformation
changes [,], Interface area based crude energy function [], surface
complementarity [], interface size and chemistry [,,,,,],
statistically derived mean-field potential [], polar interactions [],
atomic nature of recognition sites[,,], interface residue propensity
score [], hydrophobic score indexes for atomic packing [] and
interface hydrophobic patches []. Thornton and colleagues
simultaneously studied size and shape, surface complementarity;
interface propensity, hydrophobicity, H-bonds, segmentation  &amp;
secondary structures and conformational changes in protein subunit
complexes [,,]. Nussinov and colleagues described hydrogen
bonds and their geometry, salt bridges and their distributions, interface
hydrophobicity and, charge distributions at the interface [,]. This
data in later years lead to the development and benchmarking of
interaction functions for protein docking predictions by Weng and
colleagues [–]. The size of the test cases used for the identification
of structural features in the development of the docking scoring
functions is often the challenge in protein-protein interaction prediction.
Despite these progresses, the use of such interaction features for the
prediction of interaction partners and sites given their sequences is yet a
challenge. Our interest is to describe hetero-dimer protein-protein
interactions using size and mode of interactions in a non-redundant
dataset of 156 hetero-dimer structures determined by X-ray
crystallography.

Methodology
Dataset
We used a non-redundant dataset of 156 hetero-dimers created by
Zhanhua and colleagues (Table 1 in  ) []. This
non-redundant dataset was created from an initial redundant set of 2,488
hetero-dimer structures downloaded from PDB (Protein Databank) and
PQS (Protein Quaternary Structure Server). The redundant entries were
removed using a 30% sequence similarity cut-off. These structures are
solved by X-ray crystallography with resolution ≤ 2.5 Å. Each entry in
the dataset is a complex of two different monomers (different proteins)
of varying lengths (Table 2 in  ). The minimum,
maximum lengths for subunit A is 68 and 535, respectively. The same
for subunit B is 41 and 456, respectively. The dataset mean for subunit
A and B are about 140 and 252, respectively. However, the standard
deviation about the mean for subunit A and B are about 109 and 78,
respectively. The categorization of the dataset based on the source type
for chains A and B is given in Table 3 (see  ).
The dataset is most represented with complexes having chains A and B
from the same source and these have regulatory/catalytic functions. The
distribution of the protein-protein complexes with different A  &amp; B
source types are given in Table 4 (see  ).

Size based grouping of complexes
Size variation between the interacting partners is an important factor in
determining the mode of interface formation. The size of protein
subunits interacting are either small-small, large-large, mediummedium,
large-small, large-medium and small-medium ().
Proteins of sizes 100-300 residues are most represented for subunit A
and 50-200 residues for subunit B in the dataset (Table 5 ).

Modes of interface interaction
The interface formed between subunits A and B have physical
interactions at N terminal (N), C terminal (C) and middle (M) region of
the protein with reference to its sequence in one dimension ().
A representation of the protein ¯ protein interface in 3D, 2D and 1D is
shown for chemo-taxis proteins chey and chea (PDB ID: 1FFG) in
. In this dataset, nearly 33% of interfaces have NMC - NMC
mode of interactions ( ). However, the dataset contains a wide type of interaction modes like N-N, C-C, NMC-NMC, M-M, NC-NC,
NM-NM, and MC-MC (Table 4 in  ).

Interface residues
Interface residues in a protein-protein complex are identified by
calculating the change in accessible surface area (delta ASA) upon
complex formation from individual monomers using the software
Surface Racer 5.0 with probe radius 1.4 Å´ in Lee and Richard
implementation []. The interface residues are represented as a
function of residue number using delta ASA in an X-Y plot ().

Results
 illustrates the role of protein size in protein-protein
interactions using examples. Examples of protein-protein complexes are
used to show interactions between 
small-small protein;

largelarge proteins; and

large–small proteins.


Thus, protein-protein complexes are formed between small, large and medium sized proteins
in different combinations. The protein-protein complexes in the dataset
of 156 non-redundant structures are subsequently classified based on
protein sizes forming the interface (Table 5  ).
Proteins of sizes 100-300 residues are most represented for subunit A and 50-200 residues for subunit B in the dataset.

 illustrates the representation of protein-protein interfaces in 3-
dimensional (structure complex in 2a), 2-dimensional (X-Y plots in 2b)
and 1-dimensional (sequence in 2c) using the ex	ample structural
complex of chey - chea with the protein databank (PDB) entry 1FFG. A
qualitative representation of the interface between the interaction
proteins chey and chea is given in  using 3-dimenional
structural features. However, a quantitative understanding of the
interacting residues forming the interface is not possible using this
representation. Thus, we represented the interface residues as a function
of residue number using delta ASA in . The measure of delta
ASA calculated using the Lee and Richards implementation (1977) for
the complex determine the extent of residues involved in the formation
of the interface. This shows the region (N or C terminal) in the sequence
(1-dimensional) involved in the formation of the interface. 
shows that residues towards the C terminal in chain A and residues in
the middle regions of chain B are involved in the formation of the
interface. highlights (bold letters) interface residues in
sequence (1-dimension). Thus,  shows the representation of the
protein-protein interface using structure (3D), X-Y plots (2D) and
sequence (1D) for visual comparison in all the three dimensions. We
extrapolated the principle to all the 156 protein-protein complex
structures in the dataset. As shown in , the interface formed
between subunits A and B have physical interactions at N terminal (N),
C terminal (C) and middle (M) region of the protein with reference to
its sequence in one dimension for all the structures (Table 6  ). In this dataset, nearly 33% of interfaces have
NMC - NMC mode of interactions. However, the dataset contains a
wide type of interaction modes like N-N, C-C, NMC-NMC, M-M, NCNC,
NM-NM, and MC-MC.

Discussion
The principle of protein-protein interactions in living cells is a subject
of debate and discussion for about four decades now [–]. The
importance of a protein-protein interface for catalysis and regulation has
been frequently described in recent years (Table 3  in ). It is also known that many such interactions are also
associated with those of enzyme -inhibitors and antigen-antibody
complexes (Table 4  in ). The formation of an
interface in cellular milieu is often dictated through bio-physical
features followed by chemical properties to activate a cascade of
subsequent reactions. The biophysical aspects of the protein-protein
interaction principles have been extensively studied using protein
complexes determined by X-ray crystallography [–]. Janin &amp;
colleagues [–], Thornton &amp; colleagues [–] and Nussinov &amp;
colleagues [–] studied protein complexes in protein databank
(PDB) and documented several structural features that are found to be
significant. The features described thus far include atom packing,
hydrophobicity, polarity, shape complementarity, conformational effect,
interface size and residue propensity and interface hydrogen bonds. The
information documented has significantly improved the understanding
of protein-protein interactions using biophysical data. The use of these
data to develop interaction scoring functions for application in protein
docking has been shown [–]. Thus, it is now fairly possible to dock
protein structures given the structures for the interacting partners
through the identification of recognition sites in known structural
partners. Nonetheless, the prediction of interaction partners and sites
given their sequences is still a grand challenge. Hence, we studied a
non-redundant dataset of 156 hetero-dimers to understand their mode of
interactions in structure to relate to their corresponding sequence. The
dataset consists of 89 structures with regulatory role and 61 with
enzyme-inhibitor function (Table 3 and Table 4 in ). The protein sizes involved in the formation of the complexes
are variable in the dataset with significant standard deviation about the
mean (Table 2  in ). Protein-protein complexes
in the dataset are formed between small, large and medium sized
proteins in different combinations as shown in . The proteinprotein
complexes in the dataset of 156 structures are subsequently
classified based on protein sizes forming the interface (Table 5  in ). Proteins of sizes 100-300 residues are most
represented for subunit A and 50-200 residues for subunit B in the
dataset. Thus, size variation between the interacting partners is an
important factor in determining the mode of interface formation. The
size of protein subunits interacting are either small-small, large-large,
medium-medium, large-small, large-medium and small-medium.
Nonetheless, it should be emphasized that conceptualization of size
variations between and across interacting partners is a challenge. This is
an important factor in hetero-dimer interaction as proteins of different
sizes are capable of interacting in specific and sensitive ways. We
believe that formulation of a method to incorporate the protein size
components for potential interaction and selection will provide insight
to detect protein partners and sites from sequence. It is also important to
categorize interacting proteins based on their size to relate and link their
potential partners.

The future challenge is to detect interaction partners and sites from their
primary sequence. This requires relating interface features in structures
to sequences. Hence, we attempted to represent interface features in 3-
dimension using 2-dimenional X-Y plots as shown in . In this
example, the chey-chea protein complex (PDB ID 1FFG) is shown to
interact with each other structurally in 3-dimension. The interface is
represented qualitatively and realized visually by the reader. Thus, a
qualitative representation of the interface between the interaction
proteins chey and chea is established in  using 3-dimenional
structural features. However, this representation does not provide
information on the interacting residue numbers at the interface. Thus,
we represented the interface residues as a function of residue number
using delta ASA in . The measure of delta ASA calculated
using the Lee and Richards implementation (1977) for the complex
determine the extent of residues involved in the formation of the
interface. This shows the region (N or C terminal) in the sequence (1-
dimensional) involved in the formation of the interface. 
shows that residues towards the C terminal in chain A and residues in
the middle regions of chain B are involved in the formation of the
interface.  highlights (bold letters) interface residues in
sequence (1-dimension). Thus,  shows the representation of the
protein-protein interface using structure (3D), X-Y plots (2D) and
sequence (1D) for visual comparison in all the three dimensions. We
then used the same principle to extrapolate to all the 156 protein-protein
complex structures in the dataset. As shown in , the interface
formed between subunits A and B have physical interactions at N
terminal (N), C terminal (C) and middle (M) region of the protein with
reference to its sequence in one dimension for all the structures (Table 6 in ). Nearly 33% of interfaces in the dataset
have NMC - NMC mode of interactions. However, the dataset contains
a wide type of interaction modes like N-N, C-C, NMC-NMC, M-M,
NC-NC, NM-NM, and MC-MC. Thus, the analysis provides a method
to relate interface features in structure to its occurrence in sequence
using delta ASA represented in X-Y plots. This method of relating
interface features from structure to sequence is interesting. We believe
the procedure when incorporated in a formulation (development of a
method) will help to detect interaction partners and sites from
sequences.

Conclusion
Protein hetero-dimer (different monomers in sequence composition)
subunits interact in cellular systems to create interface active sites for
catalysis and regulation. The formation of the interface active site is
generally determined by the interface shape complementarity and
chemical properties between the interacting subunits. These interactions
are usually specific and sensitive between the interacting partners. The
possible numbers of such interacting partners are often huge and their
magnitude is frequently beyond our realization for both prokaryotic and
eukaryotic cells. The physical and chemical properties determining
subunit interactions have been shown in a relatively small dataset of
hetero-dimer structures determined by X-ray crystallography. However,
the information thus far gleaned from such datasets is typically limited
for the prediction of interaction partners and sites given their sequences.
Hence, we analyzed a non-redundant dataset of 156 hetero-dimer
structures determined by X-ray crystallography to assemble information
to understand interface types using size, shape and interaction mode for
potential application in protein-protein interaction prediction from
sequence. In this analysis, the dataset mean size of subunit A (140
residues) is smaller than subunit B (250 residues) with a large standard
deviation (109.4). Hence, the interacting partners are often varying in
size. Thus, size variation between the interacting partners is an
important factor in determining the mode of interface formation. The
size of protein subunits interacting are either small-small, large-large,
medium-medium, large-small, large-medium and small-medium.
Proteins of sizes 100-300 residues are most represented for subunit A
and 50-200 residues for subunit B in the dataset. Nonetheless, it should
be emphasized that conceptualization of size variations between and
across interacting partners is a challenge. The interface formed between
subunits A and B have physical interactions at N terminal (N), C
terminal (C) and middle (M) region of the protein with reference to its
sequence in one dimension. In this dataset, nearly 33% of interfaces
have NMC - NMC mode of interactions. However, the dataset contains
a wide type of interaction modes like N-N, C-C, NMC-NMC, M-M,
NC-NC, NM-NM, and MC-MC. These features are implied to have
application in the prediction of interaction partners and sites.
Nonetheless, the comprehension of such features for protein-protein
interaction prediction from sequence is not explicit at the moment.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We express our sincere appreciation to all members of Biomedical
Informatics for many discussions on the subject of this article.

Citation: Vaishnavi et al, Bioinformation 4(7): 310-319 (2010)

Protein-protein interactions and protein size is illustrated using examples; (a) small protein ‐ small protein; (b) large protein ‐ large
protein; (c) large protein ‐ small protein.

Representation of protein-protein interfaces in 3D (structure complex in panel a), 2D (X-Y plots using X-Y plots in panel b) and 1D
(sequence in panel c).

