Background
Pyrazole and its derivatives are a class of five-membered 
heterocyclic structure with two adjacent nitrogen atoms. These 
derivatives have drawn more attention in the field of current 
medicinal and pharmacological research; and reported to have 
a broad spectrum of biological activities, such as antitumor [], 
antimicrobial [], antioxidant 
[] and antimalarial activities 
[].
Several pyrazole derivatives have exhibited potent anticancer 
activity by the inhibition of the cyclin-dependent kinases 
(CDKs), which are responsible for eukaryotic cell cycle 
regulation and they are intensively studied for their cancer 
implication []. Recently some aryl pyrozole are reported to 
have non nucleoside HIV-1 reverse transcriptase inhibitor 
activities []. Hence, a systematic investigation of this class of 
heterocyclic lead containing pharmacoactive agents may play 
an important role in medicinal and pharmaceutical chemistry.

Cancer is a class of disease that, a group of cells display 
uncontrolled growth. Strategies to block cell division by 
affecting the mitotic spindle have been a successful area of 
research for the advancement of cancer drugs for a long time 
[,
]. Since Aurora A, Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) and
Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Receptor (VEGFR-2) 
kinases are emerging as a promising molecular drug target for 
cancer related diseases. These observations have stimulated a 
great deal of research directed at identifying selective kinase 
inhibitors as anticancer agents. The VEGFR-2, are attractive 
targets for the development of anti-cancer agents. Vascular 
endothelial growth factor belongs to the receptor tyrosine 
kinase (RTKs) family, play essential roles in all stages of tumor 
angiogenesis, are able to form autocrine loops which mediate 
cancer cell growth and survival, and drive hematologic 
malignancies [,
]. VEGFR-2 is not only widely distributed 
in the organization of vascular endothelial cells, but also
distributed in some tumor cells; it plays an important role in 
the cell signaling of VEGFR-2 and tumor proliferation []. 
Therefore, inhibition of the VEGFR-2 has become an important 
research direction in the treatment of cancers [].

The Aurora kinases are a family of three highly homologous 
serine/threonine protein kinases that play a critical role in 
regulating many of the processes that are pivotal to mitosis 
[]. 
Aurora-A kinase has been identified as a colon cancer 
associated kinase that is overexpressed in a wide range of 
human tumors such as breast, colorectal, ovarian, as well as 
glioma [–
]. The role of Aurora A in the cell cycle and 
tumorogenesis suggested that the inhibition of the kinase 
activity have remarkable value for the development of small 
molecular therapeutics for cancer treatment. Thus, targeted 
inhibition of Aurora-A kinase has become an attractive 
therapeutic strategy in cancer therapy.

The cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) are a family of 
serine/threonine protein kinases, which are key regulatory 
elements in cell cycle progression. Inhibition of CDKs activity 
has turned out to be the most effective strategy for the 
discovery of novel anticancer agents specifically targeting the 
cell cycle proteins []. The importance of CDK2 for cell cycle 
progression has led to an active pursuit of small molecule 
inhibitors of this enzyme as a possible treatment against 
cancer and other hyper-proliferative disorders [,
]. One 
significant member of CDKs family, have been proved to 
participate in the majority of cancer cases mainly due to its 
vital role during the G1/S transition of the cell cycle when 
combined with cyclin E. Besides, plenty of reports also 
illustrated that the inhibition of CDK2 could be an important 
way for the treatment of cancers [,
]. In our previous 
papers [,
], we have reported the synthesis and crystal 
structure of 5-Methyl-1,3-diphenyl-N-(5-phenyl-1,3,4-
thiadiazol-2-yl)-1H-pyrazole-4-carboxamide (2a) derivative. In
continuation to this, we study herewith, molecular docking 
studies of pyrazole derivatives with multitargeted kinase 
(Aurora A, CDK2 and VEGFR2) approach to evaluate their 
potential value for the treatment of different cancers.

Methodology
Preparation of ligands and macromolecules:
All ligand molecules () were drawn and the 
structure was analyzed by using ChemDraw Ultra 12.0 
 (see supplementary material). The compounds are 
converted to 3D structure using Openbable software tool. 
Energy minimization was performed by employing Dundee
PRODRG server []. The core structure of pyrazole
derivatives are shown in . All three different cancers 
related proteins (PDB codes 2QU5, 2W1G and 2VTO) were 
retrieved from the Protein Data Bank []. These protein 
targets were selected based on their best appropriate ligand 
interactions. The water molecules, co-factors and ligands were 
removed from the protein structures and then checked for 
polar hydrogen atom in the macromolecules. For docking 
study, active site pocket predictions of crucial amino acids of 
all three proteins are identified from PDB sum [].

Molecular docking:
Automated docking was used to assess the appropriate 
binding orientations and conformations of the ligand 
molecules with different protein inhibitors. A Lamarkian 
genetic algorithm method implemented in the program 
AutoDock 4.2, was employed. For docking calculations, 
Gasteiger charges were added and the rotatable bonds were 
set by the AutoDock tools and all torsions were allowed to 
rotate. Polar hydrogen atoms were added and Kollaman 
charges were assigned to the protein using AutoDock tools 
(ADT). The grid maps were generated by Autogrid program. 
Each grid was centered at the active pocket of the proteins 
(VEGFR-2 (2QU5), Aurora A (2W1G) and CDK2 (2VTO)), and 
grid parameters were specified separately. In all the cases, we 
have used grid maps with a grid box size of 55×55×55 Å3
points with a grid-point spacing of 0.375 Å. The Lamarckian 
genetic algorithm, the pseudo-Solis and Wets methods were 
applied for minimization using default parameters. The
docking protocol for rigid and flexible ligand docking 
consisted of 10 independent Genetic Algorithm (GA) runs per 
ligand, population size of 150, maximum number of 
evaluation 2500000, maximum number of 27000 generation, 
mutation rate of 0.02 and a crossover rate of 0.8 were used for 
this study. The docking results for a given macromolecule-
ligand pair mainly comprised of the intermolecular interaction 
energies including inhibition constant, hydrogen bond 
interaction energy, van der Waals forces, electrostatic energy 
and ligand efficiency. The lowest binding energy of protein-
ligand complex has been considered to be the best. The details 
of dock score results of the different pyrazole derivatives with 
protein targets (2QU5, 2W1G and 2VTO) are given in 
 
(see supplementary material).

Results &amp; Discussion
Docking evaluation for VEGFR-2 inhibitors:
Docking studies was carried out for all ten ligand molecules 
with VEGFR-2 inhibitor (2QU5). Docking of ligands with 
VEGFR-2 indicated that, all compounds found to have lowest 
binding energy ranging from -5.92 to -10.09 kJ/mol. 
Particularly, the ligands 1b and 1e showed minimum binding 
energy of -10.09 and -9.64 kJ/mol, with ligand efficiency of -
0.33 and -0.31, respectively. These molecules were completely 
wrapped by active site amino acid residues at the active site 
pocket region as shown in . The molecular docking of 
ligand molecules with VEGFR-2 (2QU5) revealed that, 
maximum numbers of compounds have exhibited hydrogen 
bond interaction with one or more amino acids in the active 
pocket region . The protein (2QU5) comprises of 
seventeen active site residues, which are promiscuous to the 
ligands. Out of which, Leu 840, Asn 923, Arg 1066, Cys 919 
and Asp 1046, residues are directly interacting with the 
ligands. The ligands 2d and 2e, has no hydrogen bond 
interactions with the protein. The details of docked score 
results of the different pyrazole derivatives with protein 
VEGFR-2 (2QU5) are given in  (see supplementary 
material). 

Docking evaluation for Aurora A kinase inhibitors:
The active site of Aurora A (2W1G) offers different binding 
modes for the ligands. All the ligands were docked deeply 
within the binding pocket region of 2W1G showing 
considerable hydrogen bonds with Thr 217, Arg 137, Arg 220, 
Lys 141, Leu 139, Lys 224, Ala 213 and Pro 214. Most of the 
residues that are in close proximity to the inhibitor are 
hydrophobic in nature. Ligand molecules 1c and 2a were 
found to show hydrogen bond interaction with active site 
amino acid residues (Lys 20 and Lys 89) and (Ile 10 and Lys 
89) at a distance of (1.779 and 1.579) and (1.871 and 2.085) Å, 
respectively . Almost all the compounds showed 
promising binding interactions with the receptor. The enzyme 
surface model was showed in , which revealed that 
the molecules 1d and 2e with their binding energy of -8.57 and 
-8.52 kJ/mol, was well embedded in the active site pocket and 
likely to be a potent inhibitors of Aurora-A kinase. The ligands 
with corresponding protein Aurora A (2W1G) interaction 
details are given in  (see supplementary material).

Docking evaluation for CDK2 inhibitors:
Docking studies was performed for all the pyrazole 
derivatives with CDK2 (2VTO). Among the molecules tested 
for docking study, 3-(4-chlorophenyl)-N-(5-(4-chlorophenyl)-
1,3,4-thiadiazol-2-yl)-5-methyl-1-phenyl-1H-pyrazole-4-
carboxamide (2b) exhibited minimum binding energy (-10.35 
kJ/mol) with ligand efficiency of -0.3. Paul group [] given a 
detail analysis of the ATP binding site of CDK2 (2VTO) and 
identified a number of key regions, including a hydrophobic 
pocket (defined by Ile10, Phe82, Asp86, and Leu134); the 
relatively small region between the gatekeeper residue (Phe80) 
and the DFG motif (Asp145) and the solvent accessible region 
toward Lys89. All the ligands were docked deeply within the 
binding pocket region of CDK2 (2VTO) showing hydrogen 
bonds with Ile 10, Lys 20, Lys 89 and Asp 145 ). The 
ligand molecules, 1c and 2a showed minimum binding energy 
of -7.5 and -9.07 kJ/mol, with ligand efficiency of -0.21 and -
0.28, respectively. These molecules were completely wrapped 
by active site amino acid residues at the active site pocket
region as shown in . The details of dock score results 
of the different pyrazole derivatives with protein (2VTO) are 
given in  (see supplementary material).

Conclusion
Docking studies was performed for all the pyrazole 
derivatives with protein (VEGFR-2 (2QU5), Aurora A (2W1G) 
and CDK2 (2VTO) inhibitors) targets. The docking study 
results showed that these pyrazole derivatives are potential 
inhibitor of all the three protein targets; and also all these 
docked compounds have good inhibition constant, vdW + 
Hbond + desolv energy with best RMSD value. Among the 
docked molecules, 1b, 1d and 2b revealed minimum binding 
energy of -10.09, -8.57 and -10.35 kJ/mol with VEGFR-2 
(2QU5), Aurora A (2W1G) and CDK2 (2VTO) protein targets, 
respectively. Thus the docking results provides theoretical 
framework to rationally design new pyrazole derivatives as 
cancer inhibitors.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The author MM would like to thank UGC, New Delhi, 
Government of India, for awarding a project under the head F. 
No. 41-920/2012(SR) dated: 25-07-2012.

Citation:Chandra et al, Bioinformation 10(7): 413-418 (2014)

Core structure of pyrazole derivatives.

Enfolding of molecules (1d &amp; 2e), (1d &amp; 2b) and (1b, 
1e) in the active site pocket of Aurora A (2W1G), CDK2 
(2VTO) and VEGFR-2 (2QU5) inhibitors, respectively

H-bond interaction of ligand molecules (1c &amp; 1e), (2c 
&amp; 2e) and (2a &amp; 1e) with VEGFR-2 (2QU5), Aurora A (2W1G) 
and CDK2 (2VTO) inhibitors, respectively

