Background
Butachlor a commonly used herbicide is frequently used in the
rice paddy fields to block the growth of undesirable weeds.
This butachlor toxicity also harms the cyanobacterium strains
which are very important agriculturally as they convert
atmospheric nitrogen into the form available to the plants for
various purposes. Anabaena sp. PCC7120 is a completely
sequenced [] heterocystous,gram-negative photoautotroph,
endowed with two agriculturally important traits of carbon
and atmospheric nitrogen fixation within the heterocyst cells.
It contributes to the global nitrogen economy of soil and
supports rice paddy production in tropical countries including
India. The heterocyst and vegetative cells have division of
labour, where heterocysts provide nitrogen to vegetative cells
which in turn provide photosynthate to heterocysts. It is now
known that the nitrogen fixing genes (nif) are wide spread in
the genome of Anabaena which harbours an 11,278 kb nifD
element, a 59,428 kb fdxN element and a 9419kb hupL element
[]. All these three elements are excised by site-specific
recombination process during the late stages of heterocyst
differentiation [,
]. XisA, required for the excision of the nifD
is located near the nifK-proximal end of the nifD element 
[].
XisA protein shows sequence homology with the integrase
family of tyrosine recombinase []. The loss of excision may
occur in case of any mutation or absence of xisA recombinase,
which is absolutely essential for excision. During heterocyst
formation substantial changes occur in the cell. In addition to
transcriptional gene regulation, two site-specific chromosomal
rearrangements are tightly coupled to heterocyst
differentiation: (i) excision of an 11kb from the nifD gene in the
nifHDK operon, and (ii) excision of a 55kb element from the
fdxN gene in the nifB-fdxN-nifS-nifU operon. The
rearrangement thus obtained produces continuous coding
sequences and functional operons essential for nitrogen
fixation. The nifHDK operon is thought to encode the
structural proteins of nitrogenase, the absence of nitrogenase
activity in the strain of Anabaena sp. PCC7120 reiterates the
necessity of nifD element excision for nitrogenase expression.
Furthermore, the nifB-fdxN-nifS-nifU is thought to encode for
the proteins required for the maturation of nitrogenase 
[]. The
site- directed inactivation of the Anabaena xisA gene can block
the rearrangement of the 11kb element and also the nitrogen
fixation. It is worth mentioning that Anabaena variabilis also
contains a xisA gene which may complement the defective
xisA gene of Anabaena sp PCC7120 though they are quite
different in many ways [].

XisA is a soluble, cytoplasmic protein with Gene ID: 1105037 in
lineage: Bacteria; Cyanobacteria; Nostocales; Nostocaceae;
Nostoc. It is composed of 472 aminoacids with positive strand.
With the synonym of alr1442, xisA is found to be located at
1700741 to 1702159 in the Anabaena genome. It requires
mention that reduction in nitrogenase activity at high
concentrations of herbicide may be due to inhibition of
photosynthesis [,
], which provides reductant and ATP
required for nitrogenase activity and carbon skeleton for
heterocyst formation [], a entity harbouring nitrogenase. The
present study is an attempt to ascertain at sequence level if
xisA is a type II restriction endonuclease having a recombinase
activity using in-sillico approaches. Efforts have also been
made to construct the homology model of XisA protein for its
proper functional elucidation and its docking with butachlor, a
rice field herbicide to trace out the possible mechanism of
butachlor toxicity on nitogen fixing ability of Anabaene sp.
PCC7120 if it shows any interaction with the XisA protein,
thereby regulating the function of nitrogenase.

Methodology
Sequence Retrieval of xisA gene:
The nucleotide sequence of the xisA gene was retrieved from
the NCBI database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) 
[] with
the accession NC_003272.1. The corresponding amino acid
sequence of the xisA was also retrieved from the same
database.

Physico-chemical characterization:
This study was done to determine the physiochemical
properties of xisA gene in Anabaena sp. PCC7120. The
isoelectric point (pI), molecular weight, number of atoms
present, aliphatic index and grand average of hydropathicity
(GRAVY) were computed using the Expasy's protparam server
[].

Study of Protein-Protein function association network:
The protein- protein interaction was done using STRING 
[],
a web-server to retrieve and display the repeatedly occurring
neighborhoods of XisA protein which are functionally
associated with XisA protein.

Homology modelling for three dimentional structure prediction of XisA protein:
Homology modelling (HM) also known as comparative
modelling was used for three dimensional structure prediction.
In view of the fact that the three-dimensional structure of the
XisA protein from Anabaena sp. PCC7120 was not available in
the Protein Data Bank, hence an attempt was made to construct
the 3D model using Discovery studio 3.5 [] and also to find
out a suitable template protein for the modelling of the target
protein. The template protein was searched through
Brookhaven Protein Data Bank (PDB) [] advance Blast to
find out the most identical and positively similar model as a
template. From the homology searching 1Aop (the site-specific
recombinase) was selected as template protein model. The
modelled structures outcomes were ranked on the basis of an
internal scoring function and those with the least internal
scores were utilized for model validation. Validation of the
modelled structure was done to assess the reliability of the
structure of XisA protein. The backbone conformation of the
structure was calculated by analyzing the phi (Φ) and psi (ψ)
torsion angles using PROCHECK, as determined by
Ramachandran plot statistics using PDBsum []. Finally, the
quality of the consistency between the template and the
modelled xisA was evaluated using ProSA [] during which
the energy criteria for the modelled structure were compared
with the potential mean force obtained from a large set of
known protein structures.

Probable active site prediction for butachlor:
Q-site finder was used for prediction of active sites in XisA
protein structure. Q-site finder uses the interaction energy
between the protein and a simple Van der Waals probe. This
was done to find out the binding site and the interacting
residues for the ligand butachlor.

Cofactor-Ligand docking study with XisA protein:
Docking of the XisA protein structure was done using
Discovery Studio 3.5 []. The study of interaction of the XisA
protein was done to trace the interacting residues with ligand
butachlor herbicide. This study provides useful information
regarding protein and the ligand.

Result &amp; discussion
Homology search showed Anabaena sp. PCC7120 circular
DNA, with complete genome length of 6413771 bp and xisA
gene possesses the accession no.NC_003272.1 and location
starting at 1700741 and ending at 1702159 with 1419nt. The
protein length was found to be 472 aa long with the accession
NP_485485.1

Physico-chemical characterization:
XisA protein was found to have a molecular weight of 55227.6
g mol-1. The computed isoelectric point (Pi) of 8.88 indicates
that the protein will precipitate in acidic buffer. The relatively
high Ai 78.41 value indicates that the cyanobacterial XisA
protein will be stable over a wide range of temperature. The
grand average of hydropathicity (GRAVY) value 0.749,
suggests its favourable water solubility. The amino acid
composition of nifH protein shows the abundance of Leu
(9.7%) and Lys (9.1%).

Study of protein- protein interaction:
Protein–protein association has emerged as a useful concept
for organizing all protein-coding genes in a genome. This
study was done to find out the network of proteins ()
that might be interacting with XisA protein in one or the other
way. The protein association network revealed the functional
modularity and interconnectivity of XisA protein in the cell.
Each different coloured lines represent the manner in which
these predicted functional partners are associated with the
XisA protein  (see supplementary material) such as the
blue line indicates cooccurence of alr7043, alr1147, asl4317 and
psaK1 with XisA as shown in the (). The predicted
functional properties of the participating partners are
catalogued in () where nifD nitrogenase molybdenumiron
protein alpha chain is a part of the nitrogenase complex
that catalyzes the key enzymatic reactions in nitrogen fixation,
the exact function of psaK in photosystem I (PSI) is not yet
known; cbbL catalyzes two reactions: the carboxylation of Dribulose
1,5-bisphosphate, the primary event in carbon dioxide
fixation, as well as the oxidative fragmentation of the pentose
substrate in the photorespiration process, NifH1 is involved in
key enzymatic reactions in nitrogen fixation catalyzed by the
nitrogenase complex, which has 2 components: the iron protein
and the molybdenum-iron protein, ntcA required for full
expression of proteins subject to ammonium repression and
glnA glutamate--ammonia ligase.

Homology modeling and assessment:
The XisA protein (target) was modeled for structural
classification and functional analysis taking 1Aop
(crystal structure of the site-specific recombinase, XerD) from
E.coli showing 19% identity with XisA protein as a template
(). The three-dimensional structural classification helps
in studying the ligand-protein binding. The modeled protein
structure was then validated through Prosa () and
Rampage (). The rampage results showed 3.3%
residues  (see supplementary material) in the outlier
region. The Prosa () used for overall quality
assessment through NMR and X-ray crystallography gave the
z-score as -5.7. The results obtained through these assessment
tools showed the overall satisfactory model quality. Thus the
modeled structure was deposited to PMDB with PMDBID as
XisA_PM0078645.

Butachlor (herbicide) docking study with XisA protein:
Active site binding region and prediction of functional sites in
modeled protein structure are the computational methods
continuously attracting the attention. The protein surface was
analysed for pockets through ligand binding site prediction
(). The major interacting cavity has the major active
binding region and these cavities are defined by the energy
criteria (). The interacting energies of the ligand with
the protein were calculated by Van-der Waals interactions. The
ligand butachlor interacted with the modeled protein XisA
with the libdock score of 88.1706 confirming the interaction
between the ligand and the protein  (see
supplementary material). The ligand butachlor and the
protein XisA possessed the interacting residues ALA189,
LEU192,ILE193,SER195 ,ILE196, 
ALA211, ILE212, PHE215, CYS216,
MET231, PRO232, ASP233, ARG234 between them 
(). The
Q-site finder predicted 10 active binding sites in XisA protein
of Anabaena sp. PCC7120 (). Most favourable binding
sites contain amino acids with high conservation residue
scores. The q-site finder also gave the information about the
volume of each of the predicted site and the overall protein
volume  (see supplementary material). When traced
with Q-site finder the site 3 with a volume of 320 cubic
angstroms was found to be the actual binding site of the ligand
butachlor with XisA protein structure (). It was
observed that ALA211, PHE215 (site 2), ILE217 (site 4), and,
LEU192, SER195, PHE215 (site 10) were present at more than one
site. Furthermore, the MET231 was present solely at the ligand
binding site and not found at any other site and location
(). This amino-acid is coded by the initiation
codon AUG which indicates mRNA's coding region required
for initiation of translation into protein.

Conclusion
Using in-silico approaches, an attempt has been made for the
first time to elucidate that binding of butachlor at the active
site of XisA protein hampers the nitrogen fixing mechanism of
Anabaena sp. PCC7120. The XisA protein on predicting its
functionally associated partners in a protein interaction
network showed co-occurrence with hypothetical proteins of
unknown function and psaK1 whose exact function is not yet
known. Through docking studies it was revealed that butachor
binds at site 3 of the modelled XisA protein and MET231 was
present solely at the ligand binding site. It is well-known that
this amino-acid is coded by the initiation codon AUG which
indicates mRNA's coding region required for initiation of
translation into protein. Thus binding of butachlor at this site
may hamper the regulation mechanism XisA protein thereby
altering the excision of nifD element hence disrupting the
nitrogen fixing capacity of Anabaena sp. PCC7120. These
findings suggest that wet lab approaches may be applied to
verify the adverse affects of butachlor binding at the active site
of XisA protein and inhibition of nitrogen fixation in
cyanobacteria

Supplementary material
Data 1
Shilpi Singh is thankful to Prof. L.C. Rai, Prof. J. P. Gaur,
Centre of Advanced Study in Botany, Banaras Hindu
University, Varanasi and Mr. Vinay Kumar Singh, Centre of
Bionformatics, School of Biotechnology, Banaras Hindu
University, Varanasi for providing facilities. Intellectual input
from Dr. Shwetabh Rai is highly appreciated.

Citation:Singh &amp; Singh, Bioinformation 9(13): 701-706 (2013)

Protein-protein interaction network of the predicted
funtional parters of XisA protein.

Modeled structure of XisA protein by using
Discovery Studio 3.5.

Prosa graph plot analysis of XisA protein structure
using NMR and X-ray crystallography.

Ramachandran Plot for relibilityassessment of the
modelled protein Xis.

Surface view of the ligand butachlor and protein
XisA docking

2D view of the ligand and the protein docking
showing different types of interactions with each residues.

Active binding site in the modelled protein

