Background
The present work attempts to unify all prerequisite calculations required for codon usage analysis in a common graphical platform, enabling high throughput 
sequence analysis and statistical profiling. Development of ACUA has been made after comprehensive studies of tools such as CodonW 
[], GCUA [], 
EMBOSS [], and Jemboss []. ACUA has been 
developed by integrating calculations like codon usage table, RSCU, CAI, Nc Value, selective positional AT, GC content and its skewness. 
[] The package also provides on-click access of the sequence from the result interface, and is unique to ACUA.

Methodology
ACUA has been developed as a standalone package for codon usage analysis using Visual Basic, PERL and C++ programming languages. 
A snapshot of ACUA is shown in .

Program Input
ACUA requires FASTA formatted nucleotide sequence(s) in a plain text file as input. Additionally, for CAI calculation, user can select the reference set either from 
inbuilt codon usage tables or they can provide a customized codon usage table in Emboss .cut format. Furthermore, the user shall select their preferred calculations 
like CAI, RSCU, Nc value, AT and GC content with their positional preferences with an optional choice for excluding non synonymous and stop codons.

Program Output
ACUA consolidates all results into an MS-Excel File (.xls) with two worksheets. The first worksheet contains CAI value, Nc Value and all the Nucleotide Positional 
percentages with its respective skewness, whilst the second contains codon usage table and RSCU values facilitating statistical analysis. The user can sort the results 
within ACUA interface by right click of mouse. Furthermore, ACUA lists complete header information of each sequence in the results, which shall aid Gene ontology 
classifications. Moreover, user can access their preferred sequence as output by on-click access on result of their interest and these features are present only in ACUA.

Utility
ACUA has got the potential to serve as comprehensive platform, and also as a part of biologist's essential toolkit to extract all the prerequisite data 
required for statistical analysis of codon usage.

Caveats and future development
The present version of ACUA is only compatible for single processor machine. A MPI (Message Passing Interface) version of ACUA is being developed with R-language 
based inbuilt statistical functions, enabling cluster computing.

The authors are grateful to bioinsilico research team for their valuable suggestions and for hosting ACUA on web.

ACUA interface showing the sample output

