Background
Proteins are macromolecules that play a very important role in the functioning of living organisms. Proteins are made of 20 
      different types of amino acids formed in different combinations. Proteins are active only in their native or folded state and 
      prediction of protein structure from sequence is challenging. [] Each 
      amino acid residue in a protein constitutes the phi and psi dihedral angles. Dihedral angles are of considerable importance in 
      protein structure prediction as they define the backbone of a protein, which together with side chains define the entire protein 
      conformation. [] The three-dimensional tertiary structure of a protein 
      consists of repeating units of secondary structures. The two major types of secondary structures are alpha helix and beta strands. 
      Most ab initio protein structure prediction methods predict secondary structural elements as a starting point to predict the 
      tertiary structure of proteins. ­
      ] Hence, both dihedral angles and secondary structure details of proteins are 
      important in ab initio protein tertiary structure prediction.

The calculation of dihedral angle values from each known structure downloaded from PDB (protein databank) is trivial. However, 
      calculation of all occurring dihedral angle values of a short fragment of amino acids for all known structures available at the 
      PDB is computationally intensive. A protein structure prediction program using fragment assembly techniques would initiate 
      hundreds of queries to obtain dihedral angle values of different short fragments of amino acids. Thus, a database of dihedral 
      angles of short fragments is critical.

Methodology of development
This article describes the dihedral angle and secondary structure database (DASSD) of short amino acid peptide fragments of 
      lengths 1, 3 and 5 derived from PDB (protein databank). For each fragment, all occurring dihedral angles of the middle amino acid 
      residue and its STRIDE secondary structure classification [] were 
      extracted from a set of 5,227 non-redundant high resolution (less than 2-angstroms) protein structures. The non-redundant dataset 
      (cullpdb_pc90_res2.0_R0.25) was obtained from the PISCES protein sequence culling server for removing redundancy. [] Even though there are many protein secondary structure assignment programs as described 
      elsewhere [], we chose the most widely used STRIDE for this analysis [
      ] and it is shown to perform better than DSSP. [] 

DASSD contains information for dihedral angles (phi and psi), phi distribution, psi distribution, STRIDE secondary structure 
      classification and Ramachandran plot of the middle residues in about 733,000 different amino acid peptide fragments. Information 
      stored in this database would assist in ab initio protein tertiary structure prediction methods using fragment libraries and 
      fragment assembly techniques. It is also useful in protein secondary structure prediction. Information in DASSD is stored as flat 
      files. PHP is used to extract information for each query from the database. The extracted results from DASSD are displayed using 
      a Java Applet as shown in .

Utility to the biological community
One of the methods used in many ab initio structure prediction methods is to use secondary structure prediction as a start 
      point to predict the tertiary structure and then use fragment assembly techniques where a library of fragments is generated from 
      which the protein's tertiary structure is built. ––––] The proposed database of dihedral angles and secondary structures of short amino 
      acid fragments would assist such ab initio methods as fragment libraries or in building new fragment libraries. The database can 
      also be used to analyze the dihedral angles and secondary structure properties of an amino acid in relation to other amino acids. 
      Such analysis would help in assigning structures for amino acids in tertiary structure prediction and also in protein loop 
      structure prediction. The secondary structures of fragments in DASSD can also be used in secondary structure prediction. 
      

Future development
The current database contains information for dihedral and secondary structure details of peptide fragment length &lt;= 5 
      residues. We plan to update and improve the database using a more representative dataset of structures for peptide fragment 
      length &gt; 5 residues. Visual comparison of dihedral angles distribution and secondary structure of different fragments will be 
      facilitated in future developments. 

We thank Victorian Partnership for Advanced Computing (VPAC), Melbourne, Australia for providing access to their parallel 
      computing facility. We also thank Nathan Hall, The Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Melbourne, Australia, for his valuable 
      advice. 

Figures and Tables
Screen shot of DASSD showing the dihedral angles distribution and the STRIDE secondary structure classifications for the            amino acid fragment GLU-ALA-LEU


      Citation:Dayalan
      et al., Bioinformation 1(3): 78-80, (2006)

