Background:
A significant increase in the immunocompromised populations 
suffering from AIDS, cancer, diabetes mellitus or undergoing 
organ transplants and immunosuppressive therapy have been 
encountered in the past two decades [–]. Such patients are 
prone to be infected with opportunistic invasive fungal 
infections such as zygomycosis caused by the filamentous 
fungus Rhizopus oryzae belonging to the phylum Zygomycetes.
Zygomycosis is characterized by nodular lesions and 
inflammation leading to tissues undergoing extensive necrosis, 
formation of ulcers and finally dissemination. Number of recent 
cases of zygomycosis has been observed globally with an 
overall mortality rate of approximately 80% []. Its treatment 
requires parallel intervention of surgery and antifungal drugs. 
The antifungals comprise Amphotericin B, Posaconazole and 
Echinocandins that are nephrotoxic and hepatotoxic []. The 
drugs are mostly used in combinations for synergistic effects, 
but owing to the emergence of drug-resistant fungal strains, 
their varied susceptibility towards antifungal agents [] and 
early diagnoses inadequacies of mycoses, further research is 
critical for the mining of new antifungal targets leading to the 
development of next generation antifungal drugs. The enzyme 
G-6-P synthase [EC 2.6.1.16] catalyzes the rate-limiting step of 
the fungal cell wall biosynthetic pathway () and forms
chitin, a major cell wall component [,
]. Its potentiality as an 
antifungal target has been studied in E. coli 
[]. G-6-P synthase 
has been cloned, purified and biochemically characterized in E. 
coli [], 
S. cerevisiae [], 
Candida albicans [], Volvariella volvacea
[] and humans 
[]. Further, the enzyme kinetics and IC50
values of inhibitors like FMDP have been determined. In R. 
oryzae, the enzyme has not been cloned and characterized so far 
to the best of our knowledge, subsequently, its X-ray 
crystallographic structure is not yet known. Rapid progress in 
genomic studies has accelerated the drug discovery process. 
Genome sequencing of R. oryzae was carried out by Broad 
Institute of MIT and Harvard 
[
http://www.broadinstitute.org/] and it was found that G-6-P 
synthase in R. oryzae is encoded by two genes viz.
RO3G_04247.3 and RO3G_14807.3 located at chromosomes 7 
and 15, respectively. Both the genes consist of 12.4% introns, 
share a nucleotide sequence similarity of 89% and amino acid 
sequence similarity of 97% ( see supplementary 
material). Two chemically synthesized peptide inhibitors, 
FMDP and ADGP have been previously studied against G-6-P 
synthase of E. coli [], S. cerevisiae 
[], 
C. albicans [], V. volvacea 
[] and humans 
[]. FMDP is a highly selective irreversible 
inhibitor of G-6-P synthase which is effectively transported into 
the cells and have shown promising in-vitro activity against 
S.cerevisiae and in-vivo activity to mammalian cell lines or to mice 
without toxicity. Therefore, in the current study, these 
inhibitors have been chosen for docking studies with the 
predicted structures of G-6-P synthase of R. oryzae using the 
software Schrödinger Maestro v9.1 in an attempt to discuss its 
potentiality as an antifungal drug target in R. oryzae and to 
provide insights into the use of inhibitors against the target
such that they can be exploited further for the treatment of 
zygomycosis in the near future.

Methodology:
Prediction, validation and preparation of protein (receptor):
The 3-dimensional structures of G-6-P synthase of two genes of 
R. oryzae (RO3G_04247.3 and RO3G_14807.3) were predicted 
using the online protein structure and function prediction 
server I-TASSER [–
]. The stereochemical quality of the 
predicted structures was measured employing PROCHECK 
which yielded Ramachandran Plots displaying favourable
conformations obtained after an analysis of 163 structures at 
resolution 2.0 Å or better []. Subsequently, the proteins were 
analyzed for their potential binding pockets with the help of 
CASTp server []. The preparation of predicted proteins was 
carried out with the help of docking software SchrödingerMaestro v9.1. Foremost, the missing side-chain atoms within 
the protein residues were predicted by Prime (Schrödinger). 
The crystallographic water molecules, ions and cofactors were 
deleted, hydrogen atoms were added and formal charges along 
with bond orders were assigned to the structures.

Sketching and preparation of ligand:
The ligands FMDP and ADGP were sketched in 
ACD/ChemSketch (Freeware) and saved in MDL molfiles 
[V2000\. Subsequently, they were prepared using LigPrep 
(Schrödinger) by modifying the torsions of the ligands and 
assigning them appropriate protonation states. In Glide 
(Schrödinger), 32 stereochemical structures were generated per 
ligand with possible states at target pH 7.0 ± 2.0 using Ionizer, 
tautomerized, desalted and optimized by producing lowenergy 3D structure for the ligand under the OPLS 2005 force 
field while retaining the specified chiralities of the input 
Maestro file.

Receptor grid generation:
Receptor grids were calculated for prepared proteins such that 
various ligand poses bind within the predicted active site 
during docking. In Glide, grids were generated keeping the 
default parameters of van der Waals scaling factor 1.00 and 
charge cutoff 0.25 subjected to OPLS 2001 force field. A cubic 
box of specific dimensions centred around the centroid of the 
active site residues (predicted by CASTp) was generated for 
each receptor. The bounding box was set to 14 Å × 14 Å × 14 Å 
for docking experiments.

Glide Standard Precision (SP) ligand docking:
SP flexible ligand docking was carried out in Glide of 
Schrödinger-Maestro v8.5 [–
] within which penalties were 
applied to non-cis/trans amide bonds. Van der Waals scaling 
factor and partial charge cutoff was selected to be 0.80 and 0.15, 
respectively for ligand atoms. Final scoring was performed on 
energy-minimized poses and displayed as Glide score. The best 
docked pose with lowest Glide score value was recorded for 
each ligand.

Induced fit docking (IFD) Extra Precision (XP):
IFD XP was performed using the module Induced Fit Docking 
of Schrödinger-Maestro v9.1 []. The entire receptor molecule 
constrained minimized with an RMSD cutoff of 0.18 Å was 
selected for generation of centroid of the residues and the box 
size was generated automatically. The initial Glide docking for 
each ligand was carried out. Side chains were trimmed 
automatically based on B-factor, with receptor and ligand van 
der Waals scaling of 0.70 and 0.50, respectively; and the number 
of poses generated were set to be 20. Prime side chain 
prediction and minimization was carried out in which residues 
were refined within 5.0 Å of ligand poses and side chains were 
optimized. This leads to a ligand structure and conformation 
that is induced fit to each pose of the receptor structure. Finally, 
Glide XP redocking was carried out into structures within 30.0 
kcal/mol of the best structure, and within the top 20 structures 
overall. The ligand was rigorously docked into the induced-fit
receptor structure and the results yielded an IFD score for each 
output pose.

Results and Discussion:
Prediction and validation of protein:
The 3D structures of the two genes encoding G-6-P synthase in 
R. oryzae have been predicted by I-TASSER () which 
yield the Confidence score (C-score) ranging from -5 to 2, for 
estimating the quality of the predicted models and higher score 
indicates better predicted structure. TM-score and Root Mean 
Square Deviation (RMSD) are standard parameters used to 
indicate the closeness of the predicted model to the native 
structure. TM-score &gt; 0.15 signifies a model of correct topology. 
On comparison of the C-scores and TM-scores of predicted 3D 
structures, RO3G_04247.3 seems to be slightly better predicted 
than RO3G_14807.3. In context with the proteins' secondary 
structure, the N-terminal domain of the enzyme is made up of 
anti-parallel β-sheets surrounded by α-helices (αββα- core 
structure) as is observed in other members of the superfamily of 
the N-terminal nucleophile (Ntn) hydrolases. PROCHECK 
sketches Ramachandran plots () between the Phi (Φ) 
and Psi (Ψ) torsion angles of all residues of the predicted 
proteins, except the amino acids present at the chain termini. 
Glycine residues are shown in black triangles. The residues in 
the core (red coloured) region represent the most favoured 
combinations of the torsion values indicating low-energy
regions and the additional/generously allowed regions are in 
yellow. On evaluation of the Ramachandran plots, it is observed 
that the torsion angles in the plot of RO3G_14807.3 slightly lack 
real clustering in the core regions and residues are more 
dispersed as compared to the plot of RO3G_04247.3. Hence, 
there is a trivial difference between the residues falling in the 
core region for both the genes of R. oryzae. The validated 
structures were further used to predict active sites by CASTp 
out of which the binding pocket with deepest cleft was selected 
for our study (results not shown).

Docking studies:
The best ligand binding pose with the least Glide/IFD score or 
energy was chosen. Previous docking studies on G-6-P synthase 
of E. coli [] were carried out with PDB ID: 1gdo which is 
currently superseded by 1XFF in the Protein Data Bank (PDB). 
The Glide SP docking calculations for Glutaminase domain of 
G-6-P synthase of E. coli (PDB ID: 1XFF) with FMDP were not 
reproduced as per literature. In view of the fact that, Glide 
docking uses the basic assumption of a rigid receptor; it may 
not be adequate if the ligands () induce significant 
conformational changes in the receptor. Hence, flexible 
receptors were generated by carrying out induced fit XP 
docking which uses Glide with Prime to allow for receptor 
flexibility. The protein-ligand binding interactions of 1XFF with 
FMDP were consistent with literature after performing IFD 
( see supplementary material). The functions of few of 
the amino acids have already been elucidated in previous 
studies []. Cys1 is known to play a major catalytic role in the 
substrate-induced activation of the enzyme by acting as a 
nucleophile and Thr76, Gly99 and Asp123 are responsible to 
form stable hydrogen bonds with the amido moiety of the 
inhibitor. Docking studies in R. oryzae have not been conducted 
till date, to the best of our knowledge; hence, molecular docking 
was performed for the organism (). Cys379 and Gln427 
emerged out to be crucial for binding of R.oryzae enzymes to 
inhibitors and they could be part of coevolving residues that 
were fixed over time []. The docking calculations reveal that 
the two genes of R. oryzae encoding G-6-P synthase interact 
slightly differently to both the inhibitors as is apparent from 
their binding energies (, see supplementary material).

The scores also illustrate that ADGP has a much improved 
enzyme affinity than FMDP. Comparative study of the IFD 
scores for R.oryzae and 2BPL (G-6-P synthase of E. coli) reveal 
that inhibitors show appreciable binding with R.oryzae, 
implying that they could be used to delimit the growth of the 
fungus. The result needs to be validated by wet lab 
experimentation in the future by determining the IC50 values for 
FMDP and ADGP in R.oryzae. It is common knowledge that in 
fungi, gene duplication is a frequent event. Several enzymes in 
fungi exist in multiple copies such as 16 genes of chitin synthase 
in R.oryzae. Hence, presence of different isoforms of the enzyme 
may be one of the reasons that the antifungal drugs are not very 
effective against them. However, an additional advantage 
which has been observed for G-6-P synthase in R.oryzae is that 
it has only two copies and both the protein molecules have high 
similarity as observed through molecular docking studies, 
making it a highly lucrative antifungal target in R. oryzae. 
Moreover, existing literature [] on the enzyme revealed that 
the enzyme is of vital importance to both fungal and 
mammalian cells, but slight enzyme inactivation in fungi is fatal 
while the same is not true in the case of humans because of 
rapidly expressing enzyme. Therefore, G-6-P synthase shows 
promise as a potential antifungal drug target in R.oryzae.

Conclusion:
Rapid progress made in genome sequencing studies of 
zygomycetes has greatly helped in identifying the drug target. 
Due to varied antifungal susceptibility, further research is 
crucial in the field of drug discovery to unearth new 
compounds, especially peptides as drug molecules. The present 
study yielded few significant amino acids involved in inhibition 
of the drug target G-6-P synthase in R. oryzae and ligands FMDP 
or ADGP could be used in the near future to inhibit its growth. 
This study facilitates initiation of the drug discovery process for 
zygomycosis to present the scientific community with better 
inhibitors and/or drugs.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are thankful to Jaypee Institute of Information Technology, 
Noida for providing the necessary facility to conduct the study 
and Prof. G.B.K.S Prasad, SOS Biotechnology, Jiwaji University, 
Gwalior, M.P. for his visionary support.

Citation:Banerjee et al, Bioinformation 7(6): 285-290 (2011)

Fungal cell wall biosynthetic pathway eventually 
leading to the formation of chitin. Glucosamine-6-phosphate 
synthase [EC 2.6.1.16] is the drug target selected in R. oryzae
which forms chitin, a major component of fungal cell wall. 
(Source: KEGG)

Secondary structure prediction of G-6-P synthase by ITASSER. a. RO3G_04247.3 C-score: ­0.35, Exp. TM-score: 
0.67±0.13, Exp. RMSD: 8.8±4.6 Å b. RO3G_14807.3 C-score: -
0.53, Exp. TM-score: 0.65±0.13, Exp. RMSD: 9.3±4.6 Å. It consists 
of α-helices (in red), β-sheets (in cyan) and loops (in gray).

Ramachandran plots of predicted structures of G-6-P 
synthase estimated by PROCHECK. 67.3% residues of a. 
RO3G_04247.3 and 64.0% of b. RO3G_14807.3 fall in the most 
favoured regions (red coloured). Yellow shaded areas display 
the residues in additional/generously allowed regions. The 
labeling is as follows: A- Core alpha, a- Allowed alpha, ˜a- 
Generous alpha, B- Core beta, b- Allowed beta, ˜b- Generous 
beta, L- Core left-handed alpha, l- Allowed left-handed alpha, 
˜l- Generous left-handed alpha, p- Allowed epsilon, ˜p- 
Generous epsilon

Peptide inhibitors. FMDP and ADGP drawn in 
ACD/ChemSketch (Freeware).

Screenshots of docking calculations performed using IFD of Schrödinger-Maestro v9.1. a. RO3G_04247.3 docked with 
FMDP b. RO3G_04247.3 docked with ADGP c. RO3G_14807.3 docked with FMDP d. RO3G_14807.3 docked with ADGP e. 1XFF 
docked with FMDP f. 2BPL docked with ADGP. 1XFF (PDB ID: Glutaminase domain of G-6-P synthase of E. coli), 2BPL (PDB ID: 
G-6-P synthase of E. coli). Figures represent ligand docking of the enzyme within its active site. Amino acid residues are labelled 
with which ligand interactions have taken place. Yellow dotted lines represent hydrogen bonds. Wireframe structure of the 
enzyme is coloured by atoms: gray, white, blue, red and yellow represent carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, and oxygen and sulphur 
atoms, respectively.

