Background
Actinomycetes comprise a large and diverse group of Grampositive
bacteria frequently filamentous and sporulating
extensively obtained in environments with DNA rich in GC
content from 57%-75%. These bacteria are primarily saprophytic
and are known to contribute in nutrient turnover, using many
available nutrient sources for their development []. Many
actinomycetes are recognized for their metabolic versatility that
frequently is accompanied by the production of secondary
metabolites of economic importance []. During the last few
decades, isolation of actinomycetes has been mainly performed
as part of drug discovery programs and has focused on
terrestrial sources. Considering the importance of Streptomyces
and its relatives in terms of both biological behavior and
metabolic products, it becomes essential to understand its
evolutionary relationships to other species in the diverse
actinomycetales order []. An evolutionary study may help to
explain how Streptomyces emerged and adapted to the soil
environment. On the other hand, information obtained from a
well-resolved phylogeny can be used for the comparison of
genome sequences, comparative genome reannotation, and
genome visualization. A robust phylogeny is central for
ongoing efforts in many groups to reconstruct system-wide
metabolic models of Streptomyces and related species 
[], which
are used for systematic strain-engineering in biotechnology.
Molecular systematics, which includes both classification and
identification, has its origin in the early nucleic acid
hybridization studies, but has achieved a new status following
the introduction of nucleic acid sequencing techniques 
[].
Significance of phylogenetic studies based on 16S rDNA
sequences is increasing in the systematics of actinomycetes 
[].
However, RNA secondary structures have not been particularly
used for such taxonomic studies, although they can provide
meaningful information on systematics because of their
inherent prospects of providing characteristics on “molecular
morphometrics” usually not found in the primary sequences.
The basic idea behind molecular morphometrics is to use the
molecular structures as a direct source of measurable
information. This method is based on the assumption that,
secondary structure can be as significant as primary sequence in
deriving phylogenetic relationship. In other words, one can
consider the secondary-structure elements of RNA molecules,
i.e., the helices, loops, bulges, and separating single-stranded
portions, as phylogenetic characters [] instead of the
conventional linear sequences. Sequence variations in RNA
sequences maintain base-pairing patterns that give rise to
double-stranded regions in the secondary structure of the
molecule. Thus, alignments of two sequences that specify the
same RNA molecules will show covariation at interacting basepair
positions. In addition to these covariable positions,
sequences of RNA-specifying genes may also have rows of
similar sequence characters that reflect the common ancestry of
the genes. It is an established fact that rRNA structure is highly
conserved throughout evolution as most of the folding is
functionally important despite primary sequence divergence.

North-East India being one of the mega biodiversity hotspots of
the world has natural ecosystems still prevalent in pristine
conditions which offer scope for bioprospection of novel
organisms hitherto unknown to scientific world. Exploration of
actinomycetes diversity from diverse ecological niches of the
Indo-Myanmar hotspot holds promise for isolation of
biotechnologically significant strains of actinomycetes and even
novel species []. In this study, cultivation-based and molecular
approach is employed to compare the culturable actinobacterial
diversity along the altitudes of eastern Himalayan range. The
phylogenetic affiliation of the actinobacterial isolates were
assessed by 16S rDNA and molecular morphometrics approach.

Methodology
Site description and Sample collection:
A total of 18 soil samples were collected aseptically from
different sites (located in between latitude 26 55'N and 28 40'
and longitude 92 40' and 94 21') at a depth of 5-15 cm in sterile
containers from May 2010 to April 2011 along the Eastern
Himalayan range of India. The soil samples were brought to the
laboratory and stored in dark at 4°C for not more than one
week.

Morphological and Biochemical studies:
One gm of each sample was taken for actinomycete isolation.
Samples were suspended in sterile saline solution (0.85%
NaCl), treated by thermal shock at 60°C for 6 min and serial
diluted to 10-6. Aliquots (0.1 ml) of each dilution were spread on
Starch casein agar, Actinomycetes isolation agar, ISP-2 and ISP-
3 medium (Himedia Laboratories Pvt. Ltd., India) 
[] amended
with nalidixic acid (10 µg/ml) and nystatin (25 µg/ml) to
inhibit fungal growth and the fast growing Gram-negative
bacteria. Plates were incubated at 28°C for one to three weeks
and checked regularly for the emergence of presumptive
actinobacteria. Actinomycetes were subcultured onto new
Starch casein agar, Actinomycetes isolation agar, ISP-2 and ISP-
3 medium plates supplemented with the above antibiotics.
Isolates were compared based on colony and morphological
characteristics and two representative colonies for each sample
were selected. Coverslip culture of all the isolates were
prepared on CSPY-ME and ISP-3 medium and incubated at
28°C for 4-8 days []. Periodical observations on Gram staining
and mycelloid structure were recorded using Leica microscope
model DM 5500. Biochemical characterizations were performed
following standard protocols [,
].

DNA isolation, 16S rRNA gene amplification and Sequencing:
The representative 6 isolates were selected and cultured on ISP-
2 liquid medium at 28° C for 3 to 5 days in a orbital shaking
incubator (New Brunswick Scientific, USA). Genomic DNA was
isolated according to a method described by Selvin et al. 
[]
and for 16S rDNA gene amplification, genomic DNA was
amplified with actinomycetes specific primers T7-pA, 5'-TAA
TAC GAC TCA CTA TAG AGA GTT TGA TCC TGG CTCAG -
3', and 16Sact1114r, 5'-GAG TTG ACC CCG GCR GT -3' 
[].
The reactions were performed on a GeneAmp PCR system 9700
(Applied Biosystems, USA). The PCR mixture consisted of 5 µl
10X Buffer (with Mg2+), 8 µl dNTP mixture (1.25 mM each), 0.5
µl of each primer, 1 µl of template DNA, and 1.0 µl of Taq
polymerase (Fermentas, USA) in a final volume of 50 µl 
[].
PCR amplification parameters were as follows: 94°C for 3 min
of initial melting; 30 cycles of 94°C, 45 s; 55°C, 30 s; and 72°C, 90
s; and a final extension at 72°C for 7 min 
[]. The PCR products
were purified using the QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen,
Germany) according to manufacturer's protocols. The DNA
content of the PCR products was estimated using a NanoVue
Plus Spectrophotometer (GE Healthcare's Life Sciences,
Sweden). Sequencing reactions of the 16S rDNA fragments
were performed with the Big Dye Terminator v 3.1 Cycle
Sequencing Kit (Applied Biosystems, USA).

Molecular morphometric and phylogenetic analysis:
Sequence alignment based on primary sequences and
phylogenetic analysis:
The 16S rRNA gene sequence of the isolates and their closely
related species were retrieved from EzTaxon-e server
(http://eztaxon-e.ezbiocloud.net/) 
[] and aligned using the
ClustalX2 programme []. The tree topologies were evaluated
by bootstrap analyses based on 1,000 replications with
ProfDistS 0.9.9 [] and consensus phylogenetic tree was
inferred using the distance based method neighbor-joining i.e.,
ProfDist neighbor-joining (PNJ) method considering Escherichia
coli and Bacillus subtilis as outgroups with Kimura's 2 parameter
model (K2P) as distance correction []. The threshold for
profile generation was adjusted to 75% in case of bootstrap
value lower and 90% in each case of uncorrected p-distances.
The generated alignments and the consensus trees were
deposited in TreeBASE under submission ID number 12801
[].The Weblogo program 
[] was used to generate sequence
logos for assessing sequence conservation within 16S rRNA
gene and the relative frequency of the nucleotides at each
position. To generate the sequence logos the sequences for the
phylogenetic outgroups were removed from the alignment.

Prediction of secondary structure of RNA and analysis:
Open source sequence conversion tools were used to convert
the DNA sequences to RNA sequences in upper case and lower
case format and a single .fas file was created containing all the
16S rDNA sequences of Streptomyces spp. Different physical and
kinetic properties for these RNA sequences were calculated
using in silico open source tool OligoCalc 
[].

Restrictions and constraints of the RNA sequences of the
selected Streptomyces spp. were checked and secondary folding
were predicted using MFOLD 3.0 [] at a default temperature
of 37°C, [Na+ = 1 M] and [Mg++ = 0 M]. The structure chosen
from different output files were with the highest negative free
energy value but essentially identical for all the species (e.g.,
ring model structure). The .ct files and Vienna files were
downloaded and used for secondary structure display, Loop
Free-Energy Decomposition (LFD) and minimum free energy
(MFE) determination purpose. The energy dot-plots 
[] of the
sequences were also drawn using the MFOLD 3.0 []. Structure
annotation followed in the study was according to Zuker and
Jacobson method []. The Maximum Weight Matching (MWM)
analysis and circle plot of individual RNA sequences were
drawn using Circle 0.1.1 package [,
] which gives the
assumptions regarding the pseudoknots. The structure
annotated alignment, RNAalifold consensus structure and
consensus minimum free energy (MFE) of the six Streptomyces
isolates was also interpreted by LocARNA 1.5.2 [].

Sequence alignment based on secondary structure and
phylogenetic analysis:
Using the Q-INS-i of MAFFT programme a multiple structural
alignment of RNA sequences was constructed taking both
multiple sequence alignment and secondary structure
prediction in account, which was achieved with McCaskill
routine and McCaskill-MEA algorithm implemented in Vienna
RNA package and MXSCARNA []. The output file was
converted in order for it to be recognized by ProfDistS 0.9.9 and
phylogenetic analysis was performed as mentioned above. Here
also the generated alignments and the consensus trees were
deposited in TreeBASE under submission ID number 12802
[]. Sequence logos were also generated for 16S rRNA
structural alignment to assess sequence conservation and the
relative frequency of the nucleotides at each position using the
Weblogo program. Analytical runs were performed on two
different HP Workstations, one with Windows XP and another
with CentOS 6.2 which has one quad-core 2.93 GHz Intel Xeon
processors, Intel 5520 chipset, 16 Gb of RAM at the NUMA and
NVIDIA Quadro FX 3800 1.0 GB PCIe Graphics Card.

Nucleotide sequence accession numbers:
The 16S rRNA gene sequences determined for the 6
representative isolates in this study were deposited in the
GenBank database with the accession numbers JF827349 to
JF827354.

Discussion
Discrete colonies were observed in various media used for
isolation of actinomycetes (Supplement ). The use of
standard culture media targeting Actinobacteria resulted in the
isolation of 52 isolates not previously cultured from this region.
In all cases, morphotypes obtained in the study were regarded
as novel if they had not been observed in previous culturebased
studies. The largest diversity of bacterial morphotypes
was observed on plates of actinomycete isolation agar (AIA),
while starch casein agar yielded the lowest diversity.
Microscopic observation revealed the organisms to be Grampositive
and filamentous with distinct biochemical reactions.
PCR of total DNA isolated from different sites using 16S rRNA
primers specific for actinobacteria yielded a band of the
expected size of ~1500 bp. An almost-complete 16S rDNA
sequence containing less than 1% undetermined positions were
obtained for all of the isolates. Out of 52 bacterial isolates, 6
isolates selected based on colony, morphology and biochemical
characters were identified upto species level using 16S rRNA
phylogenetic analysis. The isolates belonged to the Streptomyces,
supported by two treeing algorithms and a high bootstrap
value in the neighbour-joining analysis. The Tajima's D test was
used to measure the allele frequency distribution of nucleotide
sequence data. This statistics can be influenced by both
population history and natural selection. The calculated
Tajima's D value is -1.566278, so the null hypothesis of
mutation-drift equilibrium and constant population size is
rejected.

The in silico analysis of the physical and kinetic properties of the
six Streptomyces isolates showed a similar values in most of the
cases shown in  (see supplementary material). The high
GC content of structural RNA also hypothesized that
Streptomyces favors high adaptability to temperature change in
the environment []. The calculated GC content of structural
RNA and basic melting temperatures were positively correlated
(p&lt;0.05) which is also supported by the findings of Laurence
and Merchant []. Except the S.aureofaciens GL2, all the other
isolates showed a similar secondary structure of RNA 
(). Comparison of Streptomyces 16S rRNA secondary structure
with other available actinobacteria sequences showed that it
was consistent with the structure of the other known
actinobacterial 16S rRNA gene (data not given). The consensus
structure also showed a consistent conserved secondary
structure, but with a great difference in case of consensus MFE
(, 
). DNA and RNA secondary structure based
sequence logos (Supplement ) were constructed for 16S
rRNA gene in order to easily visualize conserved regions and
local sequence biases, such as expansion or contraction
segments and mono and di-nucleotide repeats. They clearly
indicate variation in case of linear DNA sequence conservation
and secondary structural conservation. Molecular phylogenetic
and molecular morphometric analysis based upon 16S rRNA
genes clearly and consistently showed the diversity of the
genus Streptomyces ().

The phylogenetic data revealed clear differences between the
isolates and divided these isolates into six different groups in
both linear DNA sequence and 16S rRNA secondary structure
based phylogeny (). This variation among the isolates is
also reflected by the relatively high amount of informative sites
present. But with RNA secondary structure based phylogeny,
cluster 6 containing S.chattanoogensis GP4 and cluster 7
containing S.aureofaciens GL2 are more closely related when
compared to linear DNA based phylogeny. The structure of
RNA is evolutionarily more conserved than its sequence and is
thus key to its use in this phylogenetic analysis 
[]. The
function of non-coding RNA (ncRNA) genes like 16S rRNA
largely depends on their secondary structure and the
interaction with other molecules. Thus, the secondary structure
of a 16S rRNA is more conserved than its counterpart DNA
sequence []. The tree obtained from the analysis of the
concatenated 16S rRNA indicated that this gene determined the
general topology of the tree and resolved the main lineages
consistently (data not shown). The molecular phylogeny of the
genus Streptomyces presented here is consistent with the earlier
analysis by Kim et al. []. However, the study is more
comprehensive than earlier ones, in terms of the computational
RNomics approach and depth of phylogeny of taxa resolved.
More specifically, this is the first report on the secondary
structure of 16S rRNA being used for sequence alignment in a
molecular phylogenetic analysis of the genus Streptomyces.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors are grateful to Department of Information Technology,
Ministry of Communications &amp; Information Technology,
Government of India for the research support. Authors
acknowledge the support received from Mr. Shakti Kumar,
Bioinformatics Center, North-Eastern Hill University, Shillong.

Citation:Bhattacharjee et al, Bioinformation 8(12): 548-554 (2012)

Result of MFOLD 3.0's prediction on 16S rRNA of the Streptomyces isolates [(a) S.aureofaciens GL2, (b) S.chattanoogensis
GP4, (c) S.niveoruber MA1, (d) S.cacaoi subsp. asoensis MB2, (e) S.galbus NG4; (f) S.griseoruber NG5]. Different colours indicates
different probability of occurrence of base paring in the secondary structure with red colour as highest (0.999) and black as lowest
(0.001) [please refer 19 for colour scheme].

Predicted RNAalifold consensus secondary structure
of the six Streptomyces isolates.

Phylogenetic tree showing the relationships among the 16S rDNA sequences of 6 isolates from Eastern Himalayan region
and related organisms from the EzTaxon-e database. The tree was constructed by using the neighbour-joining method for
calculation. Bootstrap values were calculated from 1000 replications of Kimura 2-parameter, and bootstrap values higher than 75%
were shown on branches. Values on the braches are branch length. (a) Based on linear sequence alignment; (b) based on secondary
structure of RNA alignment.

