Background
With next-generation sequencing becoming a mainstay in
molecular biology, transcriptomics research will continue to
make ever-growing leaps and bounds. Genomic coverage, not
to mention advances in gene expression and gene copies are
now at our fingertips. Just as our knowledge of highthroughput
experiments continues to progress, so too will our
understanding of annotated biochemical pathways. Databases
such as KEGG [] 
and Reactome provide a visual means of
exploring functional enzyme activity within biological
pathways. Numerous tools are actively in use which interface -
omics data with KEGG: Paintomics [], Genoscape 
[], and
KEGGanim []. 
The Caleydo software [] utilizes KEGG to
provide a means of visualizing gene expression in a 3D manner,
equipped with capabilities such as hierarchal clustering and a
user-driven GUI to assist pathway exploration and analysis.
The above tools provide useful features and are built with solid
capabilities, however we found that these tools are organism
dependent or have minimal features for processing time series
data and handling of multiple gene copies. We present MAPT
and PAICE, tools to provide an organism independent
transcriptomics workbench. Equipped with time series analysis,
visualization and data-mining capabilities, both tools provide a
low-resource and user friendly environment to drive
knowledge discovery, data-mining and time-series analysis.

Software input/output
PAICE and MAPT are cross-platform standalone applications
built using Python 2.7. The former tool requires the Python
‘suds’ SOAP client to facilitate KEGG pathway querying, while
the latter tool requires ‘PyQt’ and ‘matplotlib’ to enable GUI and
graphing capabilities respectively. Running PAICE is the first
step to initiate analysis within this suite. In order to do so, a
populated four-column tab-delimited text file is required. Each
row in this file represents the necessary values for each of the
four columns: an EC accession, a numerical experimental and
control expression value, and a unique reference identifier (i.e.
gene loci or chromosomal coordinates). PAICE utilizes the
KEGG web-service to map EC accessions onto biochemical
pathways, a service heavily studied with numerous resultant
manuscripts and tools. PAICE however introduces additional
features designed to deal with the complexities of todays -omics
datasets. First is its handling of multiple EC gene copies: if a set
of isoforms differ in expression such that some copies are
induced while others are suppressed, each member in this set
will be flagged. This feature provides insight into individual
isoform quantification, useful when investigating gene
duplication or alternative splicing as some copies may differ in
expression more than others. Secondly, rather than adopting
static coloring schemes whereby green and red represent
induced and suppressed respectively, isoform expression is
statistically stratified (lightly expressed, moderately expressed,
heavily expressed).

This stratification translates to color gradients whereby each
stratum has a unique color. Lastly, two additional strata are
further allocated, one for accessions failing to pass a userdefined
fold-change cutoff, and another for annotated
accessions that lack expression. This latter strata serves the goal
of highlighting accessions which are annotated but do not have
quantifiable expression, hence failing to map onto any pathway.

Upon PAICE completion, a collection of KEGG pathways will
be generated whereby all mapped EC accessions are colored
based on their applicable strata. These pathways are then fed
into MAPT, a graphical interface for sifting through expression-
Overlaid pathways. Numerous analytical tools like MAPT have
been developed: CPTRA [], 
GeneVestigator [], and TRAM 
[].
MAPT differs from the above tools by bundling biological
pathways with quantified expression whilst providing an
organism-independent data-mining and transcriptomics
analysis platform. There are two analytical views to make such
analysis possible: single and multi time point view. The single
time point view within MAPT is ideal for analyzing a single
timepoint or PAICE dataset, equipped with features such as
functional annotation, k-Means clustering and pathway
similarity analysis. On the contrary, multiple timepoint view
() 
visualizes gene copy expression per time point as
well as additional analyses into gene copy expression levels;
useful in cases where X copies are induced but Y copies are
suppressed across differing loci.

Conclusions
MAPT and PAICE are two tools designed for visualization and
analysis of transcriptomics datasets. PAICE utilizes the proven
and successful KEGG web-service to map numerical expression
onto biochemical pathways, while MAPT provides an analytical
framework to dissect such datasets and ultimately accelerate
knowledge discovery through visualization and data-mining.
Both MAPT and PAICE are actively in use throughout
numerous research projects, e.g. in understanding the hostpathogen
interactions within Soybean (Glycine max).

Future Improvement
PAICE and MAPT are continuously being worked on and
improved. We welcome user feedback and suggestions as we
strive to make them easier to use and intuitive in nature.

The authors wish to thank Dr. Vincent Klink and Heba Ibrahim
for advice on initial application prototypes. We also wish to
thank the United Soybean Board for their funding.

Citation:Hosseini et al, Bioinformation 8(6): 287-289 (2012)

MAPT time series analysis and viewer. The three tables above represent isoform expression levels, minimum and
maximum expression levels per isoform, and an image viewer to visualize all pathways and their expression side by side; driven
by PAICE-generated KEGG pathways. Any individual time point can honed in and analyzed independently in conjunction with
additional built-in data-mining tools.

