Background:
Mycoplasma genitalium is a gram-positive disease-causing 
pathogen. It was first isolated from humans in 1981. It is a 
common cause of acute and chronic nongonococcal urethritis 
(NGU), primarily in patients without Chlamydia trachomatis
infection []. Studies in non-human primates have clearly 
demonstrated the pathogenicity of M. genitalium in male and 
female animals. In addition, in vitro studies have demonstrated 
the potential for M. genitalium to attach to genital tract epithelial 
cells using a surface adhesin protein and to enter cells, leading 
to upregulation of cytokine genes with an associated 
inflammatory response []. M. genitalium can also attach to 
spermatozoa, which provides a potential mechanism for 
spreading to the female upper genital tract. In light of these 
studies, it has been suggested that M. genitalium is a cause of 
NGU in men, and it may be associated with genital tract 
inflammatory diseases in women, including cervicitis, pelvic 
inflammatory disease, and tubal factor infertility []. The 
genome of M. genitalium consists of 475 protein-coding genes. 
Among these, there are 94 proteins with no known function and 
thus referred to as “hypothetical proteins”. Recent genome 
sequencing projects have provided massive amount of data,
however, many of these genomes are still not fully annotated 
and consist of genes/proteins with unknown function and 
structure. This is due to several limitations, such as the cost and 
time required for experimental approaches. An alternative to 
laboratory-based methods is a bioinformatics approach that 
utilizes algorithms and databases to estimate protein function. 
As these algorithms and databases are based on experimental 
results, they can be an effective means to perform functional 
and structural annotation of hypothetical proteins. Structure is 
more evolutionary conserved than sequence; therefore, analysis 
of three-dimensional (3D) structures holds great potential. Our 
present study describes the first 3D model of the M. genitalium
hypothetical protein MG_237 obtained through homology 
modelling. In addition, primary and secondary sequence 
structure analysis, functional annotation, comparative 
genomics, and involvement in bacterial metabolic pathways 
were also performed.

Methodology:
Sequence analysis and subcellular localization prediction:
The amino acid sequence of a M. genitalium hypothetical protein 
MG_237 was retrieved from the SWISS-PROT database []
using the primary accession number P47479 and the entry 
name, Y237_MYCGE. ProtParam [] was used to predict 
physiochemical properties. The parameters computed by 
ProtParam included the molecular weight, theoretical pI, amino 
acid composition, atomic composition, extinction coefficient, 
estimated half-life, instability index, aliphatic index, and grand 
average of hydropathicity (GRAVY). Secondary structure 
predictions (helix, sheets, and coils) were using made using 
ESPript2.2 []. Determining subcellular localization is important 
for understanding protein function and is a critical step in 
genome annotation. Prediction of subcellular localization of 
MG_237 was carried out by CELLO v.2.5 [] which is a 
multiclass support vector machine classification system. Results 
obtained were also cross-checked with subcellular localization 
predictions obtained from PSORTb v3.02 [].

Homology modelling of MG_237:
Homology modelling was used to determine the 3D structure of 
MG_237. A BLASTP [] search with default parameters was 
performed against the Brookhaven Protein Data Bank (PDB) to 
find suitable templates for homology modelling. PDB ID: 
1TD6_A was identified as the best template based on sequence 
identity (63%) between query and template protein sequence. 
The Protein Structure Prediction Server (PS)2­v2 
[] was used 
for homology model construction. (PS)2 is an automated 
homology modelling server that builds 3D models using the 
modelling package MODELLER. Multiple sequence alignments 
between query and template protein sequences made by the 
(PS)2 server were manually curated before initiating homology 
modelling of MG_237.

Energy minimization, quality assessment and visualization:
Once the 3D model was generated, energy minimization was 
performed by GROMOS96 force field in a Swiss-PdbViewer 
[]. Structural evaluation and stereochemical analyses were 
performed using ProSA-web Z-scores [] and PROCHECK 
Ramachandran plots []. Furthermore, Root Mean Squared 
Deviation (RMSD), superimposition of query and template 
structure, and visualization of generated models was performed 
using UCSF Chimera 1.5.3 [].

Protein structure accession number:
The predicted 3D structure of M. genitalium hypothetical protein 
MG_237 was submitted to the Protein Model Database (PMDB) 
[] and assigned the PMDB ID: PM0077727.

Functional annotation of MG_237:
M. genitalium hypothetical protein MG_237 was analysed for the 
presence of conserved domains based on sequence similarity 
search with close orthologous family members. For this 
purpose, three different bioinformatics tools and databases 
including InterProScan [], Proteins Families Database (Pfam) 
[], 
and NCBI Conserved Domains Database (NCBI-CDD) []
were used. InterProScan is a tool that combines different 
protein signature recognition methods native to the InterPro 
member databases into one resource with look up of 
corresponding InterPro and GO annotation. Pfam is a database 
of protein families that includes their annotations and multiple 
sequence alignments generated using hidden Markov models. 
NCBI-CDD is a protein annotation resource that consists of a 
collection of well-annotated multiple sequence alignment 
models for ancient domains and full-length proteins.

Comparative genomics analysis of MG_237:
Workflow of comparative genomics analysis of bacterial 
genomes as described recently by us [] (accepted, article in 
press) was used for the analysis of MG_237. At first, BLASTP 
search was performed between H. sapiens proteome and 
MG_237 to check its similarity to humans. BLASTP search was 
restricted to proteins from humans only through an option 
available under BLASTP parameters. Hits were filtered on the 
basis of expectation value (e-value) inclusion threshold being 
set to 0.005, and a minimum bit score of 100. Essential proteins 
of a cellular organism are necessary to live and replicate, and 
are therefore attractive targets for antimicrobial treatments. 
Information about essential proteins of M. genitalium was 
retrieved from the Database of Essential Genes (DEG) 
[]. Evalue cut-off of 10-10
and a minimum bit score of 100 were used 
to scan MG_237 against essential proteins listed in DEG from 17 
different Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria using DEG 
microbial BLASTP. To check involvement of MG_237 into 
metabolic pathways of M. genitalium, KEGG automatic 
annotation server (KAAS) was used []. 

Results and Discussion:
The present study focused on sequence, structural and 
comparative genomics analysis of M. genitalium hypothetical 
protein MG_237. ProtParam was used to analyze different 
physiochemical properties from the amino acid sequence. The 
hypothetical protein MG_237 was predicted to be 294 amino 
acids, with a molecular weight of 34572.1 Daltons and an 
isoelectric point of 7.69. An isoelectric point above 7 indicates a 
positively charged protein, and an instability index of 28.33 
suggests a stable protein. The negative GRAVY index of ­0.235 
is indicative of a hydrophilic and soluble protein. The protein 
sequence was found to be rich in the amino acid leucine, 
suggesting a preference for alpha-helices in 3D structure. 
Secondary structure analysis was performed using ESPript 
() and the protein was predicted to contain several 
helices, consistent with the ProtParam results (). The 
high percentage of helices in the structure makes the protein 
more flexible for folding, which might increase protein 
interactions. Subcellular localization is a key functional attribute
of a protein. Cellular functions are often localized in specific 
compartments; therefore, predicting the subcellular localization 
of unknown proteins could be used to obtain useful information 
about their functions, and to select proteins for further study. 
Moreover, studying the subcellular localization of proteins is 
also helpful in understanding disease mechanisms and 
developing novel drugs []. The consensus protein subcellular 
localization predictions suggest that MG_237 is a cytoplasmic 
protein.

Homology modelling of MG_237:
Protein 3D structures can provide us with precise information 
of how proteins interact and localize in their stable 
conformation. Homology or comparative modelling is one of 
the most common structure prediction methods in structural 
genomics and proteomics. Numerous online servers and tools 
have become available for homology or comparative modeling 
of proteins in past years. Despite minimal modifications, one 
initial step that is common in all modeling tools and servers is 
to find the best matching template by performing a sequence 
homology search with BLASTP. Templates are experimentally 
determined 3D structures of proteins that share sequence 
similarity with the query sequence. The template sequence and 
the protein sequence whose structure is to be determined are 
aligned using multiple sequence alignment algorithms []. A 
well-defined alignment is very important for the prediction of a 
reliable 3D structure. The genome of M. genitalium consists of 94 
hypothetical proteins without any known function or structure. 
A BLASTP search was performed for each protein sequence 
against the PDB to identify templates for homology modeling. 
MG_237 was selected for homology modeling as it showed 
maximum identity to its 1td6_A, which is an X-Ray diffraction 
model of a M. pneumoniae hypothetical protein. The query 
sequence and template ID was then given as input to the (PS)2
server for homology modeling using MODELLER.

Energy minimization, quality assessment and visualization:
The predicted 3D structure of MG_237 is shown in . 
Even though there were no steric clashes in the structure 
generated, it was still subject to energy minimization and 
assessed for both geometric and energy aspects. The positioning 
of alpha-helices and beta-sheets was then compared using 
ESPript2.2. Secondary structure elements were found to be 
comparable to that of the template (). Eleven helices 
and two beta sheets were predicted in the 3D structure of 
MG_237, which implies that it is rich in helical structures 
(). Several structure assessment methods including 
RMSD, Z-scores, and Ramachandran plots were used to check 
reliability of the predicted 3D model. The RMSD value indicates 
the degree to which two 3D structures are similar. The lower 
the value, the more similar the structures. Both template and 
query structures were superimposed for the calculation of 
RMSD (). The RMSD value obtained from 
superimposition of MG_237 and 1TD6 in UCSF Chimera was 
found to be 0.213 Å, suggesting a reliable 3D structure. 
The Zscore is indicative of overall model quality and is used to check 
whether the input structure is within the range of scores 
typically found for native proteins of similar size. Z-scores of 
the template and query model were obtained from PROSAweb. 
The template Z score was ­7.97 () and for the 
MG-237 homology model it was ­7.42 (), suggesting 
similarity between template and query structure. Finally, the 
Ramachandran plots were obtained for both the homology 
model and the template as a quality assessment. PROCHECK 
displayed 91% of residues in the most favored regions, with 
7.6%, 0.7%, and 0.7% residues in additionally allowed, 
generously allowed and disallowed regions, respectively 
(). This indicated that the backbone dihedral angles,
phi and psi, in the MG_237 3D model, were reasonably 
accurate. The Ramachandran plot for the template structure 
showed the amino acid residues to be 84.2%, 14.0%, 1.9% and
0.0%, in most favored, additionally allowed, generously 
allowed and disallowed regions respectively (Data not shown). 
The comparable Ramachandran plot characteristics, RMSD 
values, and Z-scores confirm the quality of the homology model 
of MG_237. The final protein structure was deposited in PMDB 
and is available under ID: PM0077727.

Functional annotation and comparative genomics analysis of MG_237:
Currently, there is no known function of MG_237 is known. In 
the present study, a systematic workflow consisting of several 
bioinformatics tools and databases was defined and used with 
the goal of performing functional annotation of MG_237. Three 
web tools were used to search the conserved domains and 
potential function of Mg_237. Based on consensus predictions 
made by Pfam, NCBI-CDD and InterProScan, it is suggested 
that MG_237 contains DUF3196 domains and is currently 
classified as protein of unknown function. Once the functional 
annotation of hypothetical was performed, we applied 
comparative genomics approach to further characterize 
MG_237. This involved search against human proteome, 
essentiality estimation, and involvement in metabolic 
pathways. At first, a BLASTP search against human proteome 
was performed to identify whether MG_237 has any human 
homologues. It was identified that MG_237 is a unique protein 
of M. genitalium and showed no homology to any of the human 
proteins. Proteins with no homology to human proteins can 
effectively be used as drug targets as targeting these proteins 
will not have any side effects. Identification of proteins that 
regulate key factors, such as nutrient uptake, virulence and 
pathogenicity, is of great importance for disruption of pathogen 
functions and existence. Such proteins are termed as essential 
for the pathogen. Again, not all essential proteins are 
nonhomologous in nature. Therefore, pathogen proteins that fulfil 
the criteria of being unique and essential at the same time 
represent more attractive drug targets. The information about 
essential genes of M genitalium was retrieved from DEG 
database. Microbial BLASTP search as per selection criteria 
mentioned in materials &amp; methods section, suggested that it is a
non-essential protein. Finally, KEGG was used to identify the 
involvement of MG_237 in M. genitalium metabolic pathways. 
Based on search performed via KAAS, MG_237 was found to be 
involved in four metabolic pathways namely; biosynthesis of 
secondary metabolites, microbial metabolism in diverse 
environments, glycolysis / gluconeogenesis, and amino sugar 
and nucleotide sugar metabolism.

Conclusion:
We have used homology modelling and comparative genomics 
approach to propose the first 3D structure and possible 
functions for the M. genitalium hypothetical protein MG_237. 
With the assistance of a well-defined structure and annotations, 
we can predict protein functional and binding sites, which can 
help in understanding what biological role it fulfils. It is 
expected that several of these hypothetical proteins may play 
important roles, including cell survival, pathogenesis, and 
antibiotic resistance. Additionally, the workflow described in 
this study can also be applied to other hypothetical proteins.

Competing interests:
The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests.

This work was supported by the Hi-Tech Research and 
Development (863) Program of China (No. 2009AA02Z111), and 
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 
30872223). We are thankful to Mr. Imran Mehmood Butt for his 
assistance in preparing graphical illustrations.

Citation:Butt et al, Bioinformation 7(6): 299-303 (2011)

Sequence and structure analysis of Mycoplasma genitalium hypothetical protein MG_237. (A) Multiple sequence and 
structure alignment between protein sequence of MG_237 and the selected template PDB ID: 1td6_A. Conserved regions between 
template and query are highlighted in red colour. (B) Homology model of MG_237. Alpha helices are shown in orange, beta sheets 
in purple and coils in grey colour. (C) Superimposed structure of MG_237 and template 1td6_A. Template is shown in pink colour.
(D) Ramachandran plot of MG_237 (E) Z-score of MG_237. (F) Z-score of template 1td6_A.

