Background
Oral lichen planus (OLP) is a T-cell-mediated chronic inflammatory 	 
oral mucosal disease of unknown etiology []. The histological 	 
lesions are characterized by a sub-epithelial inflammatory infiltrate, 	 
mainly constituted by T lymphocytes and focused to the basal 	 
keratinocytes []. OLP lesions are characterized by a higher degree 	 
of cell turnover than healthy tissue: the proliferation, the maturation 	 
and the apoptosis of basal keratinocytes require a fine regulation at 	 
a genomic level []. From these observations, OLP may be seen as a 	 
complex multifactorial disease[]. The World Health Organization 	 
defined OLP as a premalignant condition, with a possible 	 
progression to oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) [,]. The 	 
progression from OLP to OSCC is a relatively rare event: although 	 
frequencies ranging from 0.4 to 6.5% have been reported, most 	 
studies suggest that the malignant progression rate is around 1%[,]. 
The molecular mechanisms determining the possible malignant 	 
development in OLP lesions are still not completely elucidated []. 	 
Further research is therefore advocated to clarify the molecular 	 
aspects of this potential relationship, including the identification of 	 
potential prognostic markers at a genomic and proteomic level [].

Bioinformatics and data-mining can play a central role in the 	 
analysis and interpretation of genomic and proteomic data [,]. In 	 
particular, these disciplines may be useful to further clarify the 	 
pathophysiology of complex diseases, which are characterized by 	 
various biologic pathways, dependent upon the contribution of a 	 
large number of genes forming complex networks of interactions [,
]. Interactions between genes may be direct (physical interactions 	 
between the proteins, confirmed by experimental techniques, such 	 
as NMR or crystallography) or indirect (involvement in the same 	 
metabolic pathway or co-expression in different conditions) [].

Recently, a data-mining method, defined as the “Leader Gene
approach” have been proposed [,
]. This mining algorithm is
based on the systematic search for the genes involved in a given
process; the interaction among these genes are then calculated and
genes are ranked according to the number and the confidence of all
experimentally established interactions [,
], as derived from free
Web-available databases, such as STRING (Search Tool for the
Retrieval of Interacting Genes, Heidelberg, Germany) []. Genes in
the highest rank are defined as “leader genes”, since they can be
preliminarily supposed to play an important role in the analyzed
process [,]. These genes may become potential targets for a
targeted experimentation, which may be simpler than mass-scale
molecular genomics and, at the same time, powerful [,]. The
Leader Gene approach was applied to different cellular processes
and pathological conditions, such as the human T lymphocyte cell
cycle, human kidney transplant and periodontitis[,]; the results
were integrated with a targeted experimental analysis, to draw an
overall picture of these processes []. Recently, the Leader Gene
approach was applied to infer the epidemiologically-established
correlation between human periodontitis and type-2 diabetes [].
Overall, the results showed that periodontitis and diabetes share four
leader genes and that all leader genes are linked in a complex map
of interactions. This finding may suggest an important role of leader
genes in the association between these diseases; leader genes may
be supposed, at least preliminarily, to act as hubs in the interaction
map[,]. Leader genes may therefore become promising targets
for a dedicated experimentation. In this data-mining ab-initio study,
we apply the leader gene approach to preliminarily investigate the
molecular mechanisms underlying the potential association between
OLP and OSCC. The theoretical results are integrated with some
experimental findings, recently obtained by mean of
immunohistochemistry and tissue micro-array on patient biopsies.

Methodology
General architecture
The data mining algorithm followed is represented in  [,]. 
First, a preliminarily set of genes with an established role in a
specific process is identified by an iterative search of large-scale
gene databases (PubMed, GeneBank, Geneatlas, Genecards), using
several keyword-based searches and the official HGNC
nomenclature. Second, the preliminary set of genes is expanded
using the STRING database (version 8.2), excluding textminingderived
interactions, to identify genes linked to those playing an
established role in the process under study, and therefore potentially
involved in it []. Only interactions with a confidence score ≫0.9, as
given by STRING, are considered. Results are then filtered to
discard false positives via a keyword-based query in PubMed, until
no new genes are retrieved. Third, the interactions between all the
genes identified are mapped using STRING. This database gives a
combined association score to each gene-gene interaction,
representing its strength. The combined association scores referring
to each single gene are then summed to obtain a weighted number
of links (WNL). Fourth, genes are clustered (hierarchical and Kmeans
algorithms) according to their WNL. The genes belonging to the highest class are defined as leader genes. The other genes are
defined as class B genes, class C genes, and so on. The differences
in WNL among different classes are compared by ANOVA test
(alpha value = 0.001).

Leader genes in OLP and OSCC
The above-described leader gene algorithm is applied to both OLP
and OSCC. The resulting leader genes are compared. Research was
last updated on 2th November 2009. Overall, 48 human genes were
identified as involved or potentially involved in OLP; 7 of them
were classified as leader genes (p≪0.001 for their WNL vs other
classes). In total, 208 human genes resulted as involved or
potentially involved in OSCC; 5 of them were classified as leaders
(p≪0.001 for their WNL vs other classes).   summarizes the
established or putative role of all leader genes. OLP and OSCC
share 2 leader genes: TP53 and CDKN1A. All leader genes
involved in the control of cell cycle are closely interacting ().

Pathways characterization and comparison with experimental data
PI3K signalling pathway may play a role in the pathogenesis of
OSCC []. The involvement of leader genes in this pathway has
been checked in the Pathway Interaction Database (PID). Both
shared leader genes and MDM2 are involved in PI3K signalling
mediated by ATK1 pathway. The results of the data-mining process
are compared and integrated, using STRING and PID databases,
with the results of a recent experimental study, which identified
LCK, PIK3CA and survivin (BIRC5) as potential biomarkers of the
progression from OLP to OSCC. These genes are strongly
interconnected with the two shared leader genes between OLP and
OSCC, TP53 and CDKN1A (). The interactions seem to
be mediated by AKT1 gene; three molecular pathways are involved
in this network, namely
IL2 signalling events mediated by PI3K

PI3K signalling events mediated by AKT, and

Aurora A signalling, including AURKA gene



Discussion
We applied the Leader Gene approach, a previously-validated datamining
algorithm [,,], to obtain a preliminary evaluation of the
potential correlation between OLP and OSCC at a genomic level.
Overall, two leader genes, i.e. those with the strongest
interconnections among all genes involved in OLP or OSCC, were
shared between these conditions: TP53 and CDKN1A. All the other
leader genes involved in cell cycle were close interconnecting.
These findings might suggest that leader genes may play an
important role in the association between OLP and OSCC: even a
small variation in the expression, in the sequence or in the
regulation of these genes might have an impact on several other
genes []. Moreover, the shared leader genes can be supposed, at
least preliminarily, to act as hubs in the interaction map [,
].
Recently, the Leader Gene approach was applied to formulate new
hypotheses on the correlation between periodontitis and diabetes:
results showed that 4 leader genes were shared between the two
diseases, while all the remaining leader genes were strongly linked
[]. In the present analysis, only two genes were linked; this may
suggest, at least preliminarily, that the association between OLP and
OSCC is weaker than that between periodontitis and diabetes. This
hypothesis is in line with the rates of malignant progression from
OLP to OSCC and those referring to periodontitis-diabetes
comorbidity [,,]. Data-mining was completely conducted abinitio
[]. A blind search might represent a proof of the validity of
this approach, if the retrieved results are in line with current
knowledge. After the ab-initio identification of leader genes,
scientific literature was mined to verify the role of leader genes in
OLP and OSCC.

Evidence of the role of leader genes in OLP and in OSCC
All the identified leader genes are actually playing a role in OLP or 	 
in OSCC. For instance, MMP2, TGFB1 and DCN are involved in 	 
cellular damage and their expression is increased in OLP lesions 	 
[]. Similar findings were observed for CASP3 []; moreover, 	 
this gene and MDM2 are regulators of cell cycle and apoptosis, [,
]. Leader genes in OSCC regulate cell cycle. A genome-wide 	 
profiling revealed the association of RB1 and BRCA1 with OSCC 	 
[], while a reduced expression of CTNN1B in associated with 	 
aggressive OSCC[]. TP53 and CDKN1A, the two shared leader 	 
genes, play a major role in the potential malignant progression. 	 
TP53 is associated to genome repair and pro-apoptotic signalling. 	 
An increase in TP53 expression is observed in OLP lesions []. 	 
Mutations in this gene are associated with progression to OSCC and 	 
the expression of TP53 protein correlates with poor prognosis in 	 
OSCC patients []. CDKN1A inhibition and misregulation 	 
frequently occur in OSCC [].

Molecular pathways potentially involved between OLP and OSCC
The potential association between impairment in the regulation of
PI3K signalling pathway mediated by AKT1 and the pathogenesis
of OSCC has been recently suggested []. Both TP53 and CDKN1A
are involved in this pathway[,], as well as another leader gene
in OLP, MDM2 []. This finding may support the possible
correlation between the two conditions. Recent findings, obtained in
OLP and OSCC patients, have shown that the overexpression of
three key proteins (LCK, PIK3CA and BIRC5) may be associated to
an high risk of malignant progression (Oluwadara, paper 1 of this
series). These proteins form a complex network of direct and
experimentally-established interactions with TP53 and CDKN1A.
Such network includes two other genes (AKT1 and AURKA) and
three different pathways: the PI3K signalling pathway mediated by
AKT1, the IL2 signalling events mediated by PI3K, and the Aurora
A signalling. These pathways may play a role in the malignant
progression from OLP to OSCC. For instance, it may be very
preliminary suggested that an impairment in IL2 signalling, which
promotes T-cell proliferation and subsequent continuous T-cell
signalling and activation, may be associated to a reduction in
immune activity and to an enhancement in the malignant potential
of OLP lesions.

Limitations
The present analysis presents several limitations. The first limitation
is the lack of an experimental validation; however, like all datamining
processes, the Leader Gene approach is only able to provide
new well-grounded hypotheses, which may be either verified or
discarded by a targeted experimentation, e.g. with microarrays or
real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) [,]. Another
limitation is the possible bias related to database mining [,].
However, only strong and experimentally-established gene and
protein interactions were considered []. These choices might limit,
at least partially, a possible bias related to database mining.

Conclusion
This analysis could further confirm that data-mining of existing
databases may represent a starting point to improve our knowledge
about cellular processes and diseases, to formulate new hypotheses
and to plan targeted experimentation [,]. In particular, the
analysis of gene interaction maps and the ranking of genes
according to their interconnections might help in identifying new
targets for dedicated experimental analyses, which may confirm or
discard each hypothesis and suggest potential risk factors and
therapy targets [,]. The results of this study must be interpreted
together with the findings obtained in an experimental analysis
conducted on a large number of biopsies from OLP and OSCC
patients (Oluwadara, paper 1 of this series). Overall, these studies
suggest the possible involvement of some key genes and of the
encoded proteins (LCK, PIK3CA, BIRC5, TP53 and CDKN1A) in
the malignant progression from OLP to OSCC. Moreover, these
findings support the role of some molecular pathways, namely IL2
signalling events mediated by PI3K, PI3K signalling events
mediated by AKT, and, possibly, Aurora A signalling in the
association between OLP and OSCC. Further details about these
complex molecular networks will likely be provided by targeted
DNA or protein microarrays, as previously suggested [,,].
These analyses will be focused only on selected molecular targets
and therefore will be much easier to interpret than mass-scale
experiments. On this basis, further insights towards a better
understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying the
potential progression from OLP to OSCC may be retrieved.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are grateful to Dr Victor Sivozhelezov (Nanoworld Institute,
University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy) for useful discussion. The
authors declare no conflict of interest directly relevant to this study.

Citation:Giacomelli et al., Bioinformation 4(6): 258-262 (2009)

Flow chart of the leader gene approach (reproduced from []).

Maps of interactions, according to STRING software []. The lines connecting single genes represent physical interactions
between proteins, confirmed by various experimental methods (magenta lines), correlation in gene expression experiments (dark blue) or the
involvement in the same metabolic pathway (light blue). A) Interactions among leader genes in human oral lichen planus (OLP) and in
human oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). Leader genes in OLP involved in cell cycle regulation are circled in green; leader genes in
OLP potentially determining cellular damage are circled in yellow. Leader genes in OSCC are circled in black. Leader genes shared between
OLP and OSCC are circled in blue. B) Interactions among the leader genes (TP53 and CDKN1A) shared between OLP and OSCC and some
key genes (LCK, PIK3CA and BIRC5) recently showed as playing a role in the malignant progression from OLP to OSCC. Molecular
pathways and further genes (AKT1 and AURKA) linking the above-mentioned ones are also shown.

