Background
Plants are constantly attacked throughout their life cycle by a range of 
phytopathogens that includes viruses, mycoplasma, bacteria, fungi, 
nematodes, protozoa and  other parasites. In the first line of defence, 
presence of an invading pathogen is detected by host immune system 
through pathogen–associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), such as 
bacterial flagellin, lipopolysaccharides and fungal-oomycete 
cellulosebinding elicitor proteins  []. However, some pathogens have developed a 
way to evade PAMPs mediated pathogen defence mechanisms. For 
instance,  Agrobaterium tumefaciens circumvents recognition by 
Arabidopsis flagellin receptor by domain modification and Pseudomonas 
syringae effectors proteins by suppression of basal immune system in 
Arabidopsis [,
]. In the second line of defence ‘gene for gene resistance’ 
gets activated which is governed by resistance (R) genes that recognize 
pathogen race specific effecter (Avr) proteins []. The R gene family is one 
of the largest known plants gene families that mediate elicitor recognition 
and activate downstream signalling response leading to disease resistance 
by localized cell death (hypersensitive response)  []. R proteins monitor 
the integrity of PAMPs mediated basal immune system and any 
perturbation of these components by  effector proteins could trigger 
activation of R proteins. Pathogen recognition elicits nucleotide-dependent 
conformational changes that might induce oligomerisation, thereby 
providing a scaffold for activation of downstream signalling components 
[].

Most of the R proteins contain C-terminal leucine-rich repeats (LRRs), a 
central nucleotide-binding site (NBS) and a variable amino-terminal 
domain. The LRRs are mainly involved in recognition, where as the
amino-terminal domain determines signalling specificity. The NBS domain 
that presumably functions as a molecular switch consists of two subdomains: 
nucleotide binding (NB) and ARC (common in APAF-1 in 
human, R protein in plants and CED-4 in Caenorhabditis elegans). 
NBARC is a member of the P-loop NTPase domain superfamily that is 
characterized by conserved nucleotide phosphate-binding motif, also 
referred to as the Walker A motif, and the Walker B motif. The Walker A 
and B motifs bind the beta-gamma phosphate moiety of the bound 
nucleotide (typically ATP or GTP) and the Mg2+ cation, respectively

Molecular structure of plant R protein homologoues in human APAF-1 and 
C. elegans CED-4 have been resolved by X-ray crystallography  
[,
]. In 
plants 3D structure of NBS domain with conserved P loop NTPase motif 
has been modelled for tomato,  Arabidopsis and flex 
[], however such 
information for coil-coil (CC) domain is lacking. Moreover the previously 
predicted 3D models are static in nature that do not reflect true and most 
stable confirmation as observed in dynamic conditions. 
In the present work, sequence for CC-NBS domain of R protein was 
cloned from brinjal (Solanum melongena) and a structural model was 
developed by homology modeling that was further optimized and refined 
by molecular dynamic simulations for 5 ns. The refined structural model 
was used for docking with ADP and ATP.  Docking studies confirmed 
specific but differential affinity of ADP and ATP binding at active site.

Methodology
Target protein
The brinjal (Solanum melongena L.) R protein sequence, for which only 
one sequence coding for CC-NBS domain is available in database was
retrieved from NCBI GenBank (accession number   EU573702) and used 
for modeling. 

Template identification
For identification of a suitable template and homology modeling different 
web servers, 3D-Jury  [], 
ESyPred3D  [], I-TASSER  
[], MODEB 
(http://salilab.org/modweb), PHYRE 
[], (PS)2 
[] and SWISS-MODEL 
[].

Homology modelling
Sequence alignment provided by I-TASSER was manually improved and 
used as an input for homology modeling by HOMMER 
(http://protein.cribi.unipd.it/homer/) and Swiss-Model   
[]. The 3-D 
model was energy minimized by SPDBV  [] and quality evaluation was 
done on the basis of Ramachandran’s plot and energetics using VERIFY-
3D by PROCHECK  []. Protein 3D structure were aligned and RMSD 
calculated by TM-Align []. 

Molecular Dynamics Simulations
The model was further refined and optimized by 5 ns molecular dynamics 
(MD) simulation. MD simulations were done using Amber 10  with the 
AMBERff99 forcefield and the SPC/E water model  []. The predicted 
model was solvated in a truncated octahedron periodic boxThe system was 
then energy minimised using a steepest gradient method for 300 steps 
followed by conjugate gradient method. Initial velocities for each atom 
were assigned from a Boltzmann distribution at 298K followed by a 
constant volume MD simulation. A 5 ns MD simulation was run in 
periodic water box to establish the equilibrium behaviour of protein. All 
covalent bonds containing hydrogen were fixed at equilibrium lengths 
using the SHAKE algorithm. A 1 femotoseconds integration time step was 
used and configurations were collected every 1 picoseconds for subsequent 
analysis.  A real space non-bonded cut off and particle-mesh Ewald 
summation method was used to compute long range electrostatic energy 
and force corrections.  MD trajectories were analysed using ptraj module 
of AMBER visualized using VMD [].  

Prediction of protein function
Protein cavities were identified by SiteHound programme []. The 
residues involved in ligand interaction were identified by PDBsum []. 
Docking of ligand to the protein structure was done using GLIDE [].

Docking of ADP and ATP
The geometry of ADP and ATP was optimized by molecular mechanics 
using IMPACT in a dynamic environment using standard TIP4P water 
model. The energy minimization was done using Optimized Potentials for 
Liquid Simulations 2005 force field; using Polak-Ribier conjugate gradient 
and Truncated Newton conjugate gradient algorithms. The convergence 
threshold used was rms gradient of 0.01.

Docking of the ATP and ADP ligand with CC-NBS was carried out using 
extra precision (XP) method called GLIDE (Grid-based Ligand Docking 
with Energetics). The ligands were prepared for docking using LIGPREP. 
The receptor grid generation for docking was done using the centroid of 
selected active site residues as well as blind docking. The different 
conformations of the compounds were docked flexibly and 1000 poses per 
compound were obtained. The analysis of the poses, complexes and the 
binding affinities between the receptor and ligands were analyzed using 
Schrodinger's suite.

Discussion
Template identification and sequence alignments
PDB-BLAST using found human APAF-1 as the closest match and aligned 
a segment of 112 amino acids (187-299)  that share a sequence identity of 
32%. Similarly all five homology modeling programs selected either chain 
A of human apoptotic protease-activating factor 1 (APAF-1) (PDB ID 
1Z6T) or  C. elegans CED-4 chain B (PDB ID 2A5Y, involved in 
programmed cell death) as a template  [,
] (Table 1 see 
). 
However, none of these programmes were able 
to align  S. melongena CC-NBS sequence with either APAF-1 or CED-4 
templates completely. Most of these programs except I-TASSER and 
PHYRE could match only the conserved P-loop containing ‘nucleoside 
triphosphate hydrolase’ region, but not the entire CC-NBS sequence. This 
was quite possible because of very  low sequence similarity between the 
two sequences.

Structural modelling
Initial CC-NBS structure was modelled with I-TASSER using APAF-1 and 
CED-4 as multiple templates. Ramachandran plot analysis of I-TASSSER 
model showed that only 80 percent residues were present in most favoured 
regions and 5 percent residues in disallowed regions  (Table 2 see 
). Although I-TASSER failed to develop a 
satisfactory model but the predicted model guided sequence alignment of                  
S. melongena CC-NBS with CED-4 chain B became an valuable input for 
further 3D structure modeling with HOMMER and SwissModel  ().  

Quality of homology model
The final structure was subsequently checked by VERIFY-3D graph. The 
compatibility score above zero in the VERIFY-3D graph corresponded to 
acceptable side chain environments.  All residues appeared to be 
reasonable and therefore the structure of S. melongena CC-NBS can be 
considered relibale. Validation of the model was further carried out using 
Ramachandran's plot calculations computed with PROCHECK program. 
The phi and psi distributions of the Ramachandran's plot of non-glycine, 
non-proline residues are summarized in  Table 2 (see  
). 
Ramachandran's plot analysis further shows that 99.9% main 
chain bond length and 95.6 bond angles are within limit with overall 
PROCHECK G factor of -0.01.

Optimisation of the model by MD simulation
The MD trajectories obtained were analysed to study the behaviour of the 
structure.    shows energy plot with respect to time for the 
complete 5 ns simulation. Comparison of the initial model obtained from 
homology modeling with the frames from MD trajectories shows that there 
are pronounced structural fluctuations with root mean square deviations of 
2.5-3.0Å (). The frames were then taken from the production 
phase and analysed further.  RMSD for backbone atoms was &gt;1.2 Å 
revealing that structural fluctuations are not highly pronounced and 
consistent over frames obtained from production phase  (). 
Overlapping the different conformations from the latter half of the 
trajectories shows that the molecule is relatively rigid, an indicative of 
structure stability. The average structure from the production phase frames 
was taken as the final model.  The structural superimposition of Ca trace of 
CED-4 template and S. melongena CC-NBS shows RMSD of 0.9 A° with 
an identity score of 0.14 and TM score of 0.52 ().

Active site prediction
The SiteHound program revealed 10 possible ligand binding sites 
() 
and residues in the site1, Val160, Gly 190, Gly192, Lys193, Thr194, 
Thr195, Arg295 were found conserved with the active site of CED-4 . 
Thus, site1 was chosen as the most favourable binding site to dock ADP 
and ATP and the remaining 9 sites were excluded from the study.

Predicted model functionality
In the docked CC-NBS ligand ADP and ATP are located in the centre of 
the active site and stabilized by hydrogen bond interactions 
. 
In the docked complex H-bond/electrostatic interaction was observed 
between ligand and residues Asp155, Gly190, Lys193, Thr194 and 
Arg295. Interestingly, these residues are in the active site of the protein as 
predicted by the active site detection program. In the docked complex ADP 
has slightly lower (-83 kcal/mol) energy than ATP (-82 kcal/mol). It 
indicates that ADP has slightly competitive edge over ATP in binding to 
the active site.

Conclusion
The CC-NBS domains have specific binding site for ADP and ATP, with 
minor difference in their binding affinity that makes it a suitable molecular 
switch. Presence of slightly lower binding energy of ADP (-84 kcal/mol) in 
comparison to ATP (-83 kcal/mol) may have a special significance in the 
context of their binding functioning as a molecular switch.  In the ground 
state there will be more ADP binding because of its lower binding energy. 
However, in the activated state ADP  has to be swapped with ATP, for 
downstream signalling [,
]. Had there been large difference between 
ADP and ATP binding energies it would  have become hard to exchange 
the two molecules. These studies  confirm that CC-NBS domains are 
perfectly suited for working as molecular switch. Availability of 3D 
structure of CC-NBS domains will further help us in understanding 
evolution, structure and function of  these proteins and help in designing 
novel proteins for pathogen resistance management.

Supplementary material
Data 1
SS wishes to acknowledge Supercomputing Facility 
for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology (SCFBio), IIT Delhi for 
providing access to their facility to carry out molecular dynamics 
simulations.

Citation:Shrivastava et al, Bioinformation 5(8): 326-330 (2011

Alignment of S. melongena CC-NBS (query) with CED-4 (template), for homology modeling.

A. Plot of potential energy vs. time in ps for 5 ns simulation. B. Plot of root mean 
square deviation (RMSD) of Cα vs. frames from MD trajectories. The graph shows the RMSD 
of backbone atoms (Cα, C, N) during 5ns simulation. C. Plot of RMSD of Cα atoms vs. frames from MD 
trajectories. The graph represents the variations in Cα atoms for 5ns simulation for frames chosen from production phase. 

A. Superimposition of main chain alpha trace atoms of S. melongena 
CC-NBS (green) and C. elegans apoptosis regulator (magenta);  
B. Identification of cavities on CC-NBS surface; C-D. Interactions of conserved residues 
present in active site of S. melongena CC-NBS with ADP (C) and ATP (D) using Ligplot. 

