Background
Clustering refers to a procedure that assigns data objects to a set of disjoint
classes, called clusters, so that objects within a class have similarity to each
other in some sense. Unsupervised clustering means that clustering does not
rely on predefined classes and training examples. Thus, clustering is some sort
of pattern recognition. Cluster analysis consists of mathematical tools for
recognizing natural and meaningful clusters within a set of samples. The
importance of these tools is that they can divide similar data without any prior
knowledge. That is why this field is also called unsupervised clustering. The
existing clustering approaches such as k-means, fuzzy k-means etc., require the
specification of initial cluster seeds, i.e. a priori knowledge of the number of
natural clusters is essential and may be estimated by several potential
algorithms or given randomly. Graph theory clustering methods resolve this
problem, because they do not need a priori knowledge of the number of
clusters. The most widely used graph clustering approaches are Markov
clustering process (MCP) [] and the cFinder algorithm 
[]. The MCP
approach forms clusters in the dataset using random walks in the full weighted
graph that represents the similarities among the objects to be clustered. In
computer science, graph theory has been widely used in many areas such as in
chip and circuit design, reliability of communication networks, transportation
planning, etc. However, it has been applied recently in biology. The aim of the
current paper is to implement a graph theoretic approach for clustering of
proteins. A graph G is an ordered pair G = (V, E), 
where V = {vi, i = 1,…, n} is
a set of points (nodes) and E is a set of edges denoted by 
eij or (vi, vj)
connecting the points vi and vj. If the order 
of points vi and vj is not meaningful,
the graph is called undirected; otherwise it is called directed. A weighted graph
is a graph G in which each edge e has been assigned a real number say, w(e),
called the weight (length) of 
e. If no real number is associated with the edges
the graph is said to be unweighted. If the number of elements in the vertex set
V and edge set of a graph G are v and e respectively, then the incidence matrix
denoted by M(G) is a v×e matrix and is defined by M = [aij], the matrix element
aij = 1, if jth edge ej is incident on 
ith vertex vi, and aij = 0, otherwise. The
adjency matrix of a labeled graph G denoted by A (G) is a v×v matrix defined
by aij = 1, when vi is adjacent to 
vj, otherwise aij = 0. We have already defined
undirected graphs above; graphs that are not directed can be represented by a
symmetric matrix, whereas directed graphs can be represented by using an
asymmetric incidence matrix. Matrix representation of a graph is very
convenient for the evaluation of any algorithm in computer processing. The
graph-theoretic algorithms represent the problem data through an undirected
graph. Each node (the protein sequences) is associated to a sample in the
feature space, while each edge represents the distance between nodes
connected under a suitably defined relationship. A cluster is thus defined as a
connected sub-graph, obtained according to criteria peculiar of each specific
algorithm. Algorithms based on this definition are capable of detecting clusters
of various shapes and sizes, at least for the case in which they are well
separated []. 
Moreover, isolated samples should form singleton clusters and
then can be easily discarded as noise. Usually graph-based clustering
algorithms do not require the setting of the number of clusters, but need
however some parameters to be provided by the user. The algorithm applied in
this paper overcomes this limitation, proving to be an effective solution in
some real applications where a completely unsupervised method is desirable.
This clustering approach is based on the algorithm described by Zahn 
[]. At
the first stage construct a Minimum Spanning Tree (MST) of the graph
representing the samples. After that, identifies inconsistent edges and removes
them from the MST. The remaining connected components are then the clusters
in the graph G. An edge is inconsistent if the distance associated to it is greater
than a predefined threshold. In order to determine the optimal value of this
threshold, we used a novel method based on the use of the Fuzzy C-Means
algorithm [].

Methodology
Dataset
The investigations were performed on the sequences taken from SCOP's 
[]
superfamily grouping. Proteins in the same superfamily are believed to be
evolutionary related, and for this reason we chose such superfamily groupings
as the correct groupings. The dataset taken consists of 500 sequences belonging
to 6 super-families, namely globin-like (85 proteins), EF-hand (83),
cuperdoxins(78), (Trans) glycosidases (81), Thioredoxin-like (79), Membrane
all-alpha (94). This set was extracted from Astral-95
(http://astral.berkeley.edu/), 
so the maximum pairwise identity was 95%.

Graph-Based Clustering Method
The clustering method applied here is based on graph theoretical cluster
analysis. Firstly the complete graph is constructed, where each node is
associated to a single protein to be clustered. The distances of a protein from all
other remaining proteins in the dataset is calculated by NW algorithm 
[], and
stored in N×N matrix, where N is the number of proteins in the dataset. The
weight of each edge is the distance between the connected protein nodes, the
diagonal will contain only zero, as the distance of a protein with itself is zero.
Then, the Minimum Spanning Tree (MST) is computed for this graph. By
removing all the edges with weights greater than a threshold δ, we arrive at a
forest containing a certain number of subtrees (clusters). In this way, the
method automatically groups protein nodes into clusters. As stated in 
[], the
subtrees are independent of the particular MST, i.e algorithm chosen for
deriving MST. In this paper, we have applied the Prims's algorithm. The
optimal value of δ is determined by reformulating the problem as the one of
partitioning the whole set of edges into two clusters, according to their weights.
The cluster of the edges of the MST with small weights will contain edges to
be preserved, while the edges belonging to the other cluster will be removed
from the MST. This problem is solved by employing the Fuzzy C-Means
(FCM) clustering algorithm []. 
(More details given in )

Result and Discussion
We have considered the problem of clustering proteins according to their
evolutionary relatedness and we are particularly interested in those cases in
which some related proteins have very low sequence similarity. As a
characterization of evolutionary relatedness, we used SCOP's superfamily
grouping. SCOP is organized in a hierarchical manner at four main levels:
class, fold, superfamily and family. At the superfamily level homology
relationships may not be apparent from sequence considerations alone since
proteins in the same superfamily can display varying degrees of sequence
similarity. Therefore, at superfamily level, SCOP provides an excellent
benchmark for testing how algorithms perform in cases, in which some related
proteins have very low sequence similarity. Distance measure between two
sequences is computed by the N-W alignment algorithm and PAM50 
[]
mutation probability matrix. The distances is calculated between every pair of
protein sequences in the dataset and stored in a square matrix of N×N, where N
is the number proteins in a dataset to be clustered. The algorithm applied is
summarized in . 
We have tested the algorithm on different set of
superfamilies, starting from 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 i.e. increasing the complexity of
dataset to judge the efficiency of algorithm. This is shown in Table 1 (see
). 
From the results of the table, we conclude that the
efficiency of the algorithm is satisfactory even when the number of
superfamilies is increased in the datasets. Table 1 
shows that the algorithm
predicts actual number of clusters in case of 2, 3, 4 and 5 set of superfamilies
dataset. In the case of 6 superfamily dataset the predicted cluster is 8. The
reason for this could be that there are some sequences which come in the
twilight zone of the two or more groups and the algorithm can cluster the
sequence in any one of that group. The use of accuracy rate to assess clustering
performance is standard in any algorithm, but sometimes this measure can be
misleading since it does not discriminate between positive and negative cases.
That is, the accuracy rate is the sum of the correctly clustered cases. Another
useful way to measure performance is using ‘sensitivity’ and ‘specificity’, for
clustering a protein of unknown class, depending on the class predicted by the
system and on the actual class of the protein. These measures are frequently
used in two-class problems, but can be readily adapted for multiclass problems.
Sensitivity (Se) and the specificity (Sp) can be defined as given in
. 
Sometimes sensitivity and specificity are called true
positive rate and true negative rate, respectively. Sensitivity measures the
ability of the classifier system to correctly assign a protein to its real class. On
the other hand, specificity measures the ability of the system to reject a given
protein as belonging to a class to which it does not belong. The clustering
algorithm is better than other existing algorithms in the sense that it does not
require any priori information about the clusters, i.e. it is completely
unsupervised. The other advantage of this algorithm is that it does not require
the training of the algorithm; we can apply the algorithm directly to dataset and
can obtain the clusters.

Conclusion
We have applied existing graph theoretic techniques in the protein world and
explored a new dimension for proteins. The algorithm has a low polynomial
computational complexity and it is also efficient in practice. The graph-based
clustering algorithm is applied to a cluster detection problem in a dataset of
proteins where group of different proteins are merged together, and to detect to
which group or class a particular protein belongs, with the condition that we are
given only the primary sequence of that particular protein. The graph-based
clustering algorithms are different from other clustering algorithms in that it
does not require the user to set any parameter or threshold. This approach is
can thus be used for classification of unknown proteins based on their
similarity.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Mishra &amp; Pandey, Bioinformation 6(10): 372-374 (2011)

The scheme of the method that we used in our experiments. Proteins
of the same color are evolutionary related.

