Background
The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that there are
currently 400 million individuals worldwide who are
chronically infected, of whom 100 million eventually will die 
[]
with the hepatitis B virus (HBV), it is critically important to
understand how persistent HBV infection is maintained and
linked to chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis, and development of liver
cancer (hepatocellular carcinoma [HCC]) []. HBV is a member
of the Hepadnaviridae family of viruses. The natural host for
HBV is humans [], although similar viruses have been isolated
from apes, woodchucks (woodchuck hepatitis virus [WHV]),
squirrels (ground squirrel hepatitis virus [GSHV]), herons
(heron hepatitis B virus), ducks (duck hepatitis B virus), geese
(goose hepatitis B virus), and cranes (crane hepatitis B virus).
The hepadnavirus genome is a partially double-stranded
circular DNA structure that is encapsidated within the
enveloped viral particle []. Upon infection of hepatocytes, viral
DNA is transported to the nucleus, where it is converted to a
covalently closed, circular, double-stranded DNA (cccDNA).
The cccDNA is essentially an episome that does not replicate
but functions solely as the template for all viral transcription
[]. 
The HBV genome is highly compact, such that over 50% of
the coding capacity lies in at least two open reading frames.
Genomic and subgenomic viral transcripts, all of which utilize
the same polyadenylation signal, are all transcribed from
cccDNA. Viral mRNAs encode the viral core (HBcAg), envelope
(HBsAgs), polymerase/reverse-transcriptase (pol), and HBx
polypeptides. The largest HBV transcript, the pregenomic RNA
(pgRNA), is also the template for viral replication and is reverse
transcribed by the viral pol, similar to the replication of
retroviruses []. However, in contrast to that of conventional
retroviruses, reversetranscribed HBV DNA is not integrated
into the host cell genome as a requisite step in the viral life
cycle. Instead, an intermediate in the replication reaction, a
partially double-stranded viral DNA genome, is encapsidated
within the mature viral particle. Viral pgRNA is encapsidated
in cytoplasmic viral particles comprised of core protein, known
as core particles, within which reverse transcription and DNA
replication occur. As the virus replicates, it buds into the
endoplasmic reticulum by envelopment within the viral HBsAg
proteins and is eventually secreted from the infected cell 
[].
While all hepadnaviruses can establish persistent infections in
their respective hosts, only chronic infection by mammalian
hepadnaviruses is associated with significant development of
HCC []. 
As avian viruses either lack the HBx gene or, at best,
encode a highly divergent form, the potential role of HBx in the
development of HCC in mammals has been an area of intense
interest for research [].

Role of hepatitis B virus proteins
In addition to the integration of viral genome into host DNA,
another direct role of HBV in hepatocarcinogenesis involves the
long-term expression of viral proteins such as X protein (HBx)
[,
]. 
This is supported by the observation that in a large
portion of HCCs, viral DNA sequences encoding these proteins
are found to be integrated in the host genome 
[]. Hepatitis B
virus has a unique fourth ORF coding for a protein known as
HBx [–]. 
The HBX gene is well conserved among the
mammalian hepadnaviruses and codes for a 16.5 kDa protein,
which has been detected in both the nucleus and the cytoplasm.
HBX mRNA (0.7 kb) has been detected in infected liver, but the
protein has not been easy to detect. HBX gene has been shown
to be essential for the establishment of HBV infection in vivo
[]. 
HBx likely binds directly to the transcription factor CREB
and possibly to transcription factors TFIIB, TFIIH, and the RNA
polymerase II-associated protein RPB5, but the latter might
interact with HBx via secondary interactions with CREB. HBx-
CREB transcription complexes have been shown to stimulate
transcription. HBx is thought to act on the mitochondria,
causing calcium release, in turn activating the Pyk2/FAK and
Src kinase families, leading to stimulation of a variety of
cytoplasmic signal transduction pathways. Interaction of HBx
with the UV-DDB proteins (1 and/or 2) is implicated in
stimulation of viral replication. HBx interaction with the
proteasome is also reported to stimulate HBV replication 
[].

HBx is a promiscuous transactivator, it activates a variety of
viral and cellular promoters in diverse cell types, and it has
been shown to transactivate several viral and cellular targets. It
can activate p53 but can also influence a variety of signal
transduction pathways like MAPK/ERK, protein kinase B
(PKB), PKC, SAPK/JNK, Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinase (PI-3-K)
and janus kinase (JAK)/STAT kinase pathways within the cell.
HBx up regulates the activity of a number of transcription
factors. However, the majority of HBx is localized to the
cytoplasm where it interacts with and stimulates protein
kinases. It can also localize to the mitochondrion where it acts
as an adaptor or kinase activator to influence signal
transduction pathways [,
]. HBx can bind to C-terminus of
p53 forming a proteinprotein complex and inactivating many
functions of p53, including apoptosis. HBx sequester p53 in the
cytoplasm and prevents it from entering the nucleus. HBV
protects itself from apoptotic death through an HBx-P13K-AKTBad
pathway and by inactivating caspase 3 activity that is
partially p53 independent in hepatocytes.The proapoptotic
action of HBx overcomes the inhibitory effect of Bcl-2 against
Fas cytotoxicity. HBx also up regulates surviving expression, an
inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP) family. HBx also promotes the
apoptosis of liver cells by upregulating the expressions of
Fas/Fasl, Bax/Bcl-2, Bcl-xL, and c-myc in a dose dependant
manner. Thus HBx has function in both pro-apoptosis and anti
apoptosis pathways dependent on different cell settings.
Increased anti-apoptosis and decreased pro-apoptosis in HCC is
an important mechanism []. The integrated HBx is frequently
mutated and has a diminished ability to function as a
transcriptional cotransactivator and to activate the nuclear
factor kappa-B (NF-кB) pathway [].

In this study we present the first step towards an integrated
construction of Molecular-Interaction Network pathways in
Hepatitis B virus. Our focus is on the interactions of the protein
HBx, as this protein HBx play a central role in regulation of
hepatitis, cirrhosis, and development of hepatocellular
carcinoma. This HBx protein is involved in the cell cycle
regulation, apoptosis, signalling, transcriptional regulation,
encoding of cytoskeleton, cell adhesion molecules, oncogenes
and tumour suppressor genes. Therefore, understanding the
integrated function of this protein is of great importance in
development of effective therapies for these diseases. In the
second steps of this study we designed an inhibitor which
showed inhibitory activity towards Hepatitis B virus HBx
protein. The binding interactions between this inhibitor and
HBx protein were studied by docking methods using AutoDock
vina software. The aim of this study was to get a better ligand
that could inhibit polyprotein processing of HBV, and to better
understand the interactions between the inhibitor and the
enzyme's binding sites via computational docking methods. We
hope, this Drug will get success to clear out all the phases of
clinical trial and it will be effective drug in the cure HBV's
diseases.

Methodology
Data
Using the search terms ‘Hepatitis B virus AND hepatitis b virus
disease AND hepatitis b virus x protein’, an intensive literature
search of scientific papers was done in order to identify genes,
proteins and small molecules that relate to HBV. Finally, peerreviewed
articles had been enrolled and combined with data
publicly available in the KEGG database
‘
http://www.genome.jp/kegg/’ in order to further identify
proteins involved in HBV and to aid reconstruction of
pathways.

Construction of the Molecular-Interaction Network
Using the data obtained, the general molecular interaction
network was created in PathVisio v2.0.11. Initially, connections
were built among all the molecules (proteins, genes, DNAs,
simple molecules, ions and antisense RNA) presented in the
literature studied. In some cases, detailed regulatory
relationships between different molecules, such as activation,
inhibition and phosphorylation were available, enabling the reconstruction
of part of the HBV map. In the case where
molecules were identified in the literature, but their interactions
not identified, we searched the KEGG PATHWAY database for
missing connections. Where no interaction information was
available from either the literature or KEGG database, the
molecules were excluded from the map. Each entity in the
network is annotated with a complete list of interactions in
which it participates, and PMIDs supporting those interactions
(). Entities are also linked to Uniprot, NCBI and KEGG
pages. From this Molecular-Interaction Network of HBV, HBx
protein was taken for further in silico structure based drug
designing study.

HBx as a Target Protein
Out of all the entries for HBx protein from RCSB protein data
bank, HBx protein 3I7H was taken for docking analysis. The
active site residues were found to be 88- ILPKVLHKRTLGLS -
101.

Generating novel ligands
The structure of the fragment, i.e. the “seed molecule” was
revealed on the basis of previous studies of available inhibitors
for HBx protein []. The fragment “(2S, 3R)-2-(hydroxymethyl)
tetrahydrofuran-3-ol” was identified on the basis of “Lipinski's
Rule of Five” and may therefore represent suitable starting
point for evolution of good quality lead compounds. The
docking analysis of “(2S, 3R)-2-(hydroxymethyl)
tetrahydrofuran-3-ol” compound with HBx protein was carried
out by HEX (http://hex.loria.fr/) docking software with
default parameters. The conformation of the pre-placed “seed”
ensuring the binding affinity decides the manner that ligands
would be grown with Ligbuilder software. Novel ligands had
been developed with Ligbuilder
(
http://mdl.ipc.pku.edu.cn/drug_design/work/ligbuilder.html) 
v1.2 software. We developed 100 novel ligands for the
inhibitory site in HBx protein.

Virtual screening
Virtual screening, an in silico tool for drug discovery, has been
widely used for lead identification in drug discovery programs.
Out of 100 novel ligands generated, 10 ligands were selected on
the basis of maximum binding affinity measured in kcal/mol.
The selected 10 ligands were then analyzed for drug- relevant
properties based on “Lipinski's
Rule of Five” and other drug like
properties of valid structures using OSIRIS Property Explorer
(
http://www.organic-chemistry.org/prog/peo/), Molsoft:
Drug- Likeness and molecular property explorer
(
http://www.molsoft.com/mprop/). On the basis of binding
affinity and drug like properties, one ligand that passed all of
the screening tests was taken for further molecular docking
study.

Protein-ligand docking
The docking of ligands to the catalytic triad of HBx protein for
HBV was performed using AutoDock Vina software. Docking
was performed to obtain a population of possible
conformations and orientations for the ligand at the binding
site. Using the software, polar hydrogen atoms were added to
the HBx protein and its nonpolar hydrogen atoms were
merged. All bonds of ligands were set to be rotatable. All
calculations for protein-fixed ligand-flexible docking were done
using the Lamarckian Genetic Algorithm (LGA) method. The
grid box with a dimension of 40 × 40 × 40 points was used
around the catalytic triad to cover the entire enzyme binding
site and accommodate ligands to move freely. The best
conformation was chosen with the lowest docked energy, after
the docking search was completed. The interactions of complex
HBx protein-ligand conformations, including hydrogen bonds
and the bond lengths were analyzed using Accelrys DS
Visualizer software (http://accelrys.com).

Molecular descriptors calculation
Quantitative structure-activity relationships (QSARs) correlate
the response with molecular properties of compounds under
interest. Any compound to be considered as a lead must
possess acceptable scores for all of the descriptors. The OSIRIS
Property Explorer (
http://www.organicchemistry.org/prog/peo/), Molsoft: Drug-Likeness and
molecular property explorer
(http://www.molsoft.com/mprop/), and Molinspiration
property explorer
(
http://www.molinspiration.com/cgibin/properties/) were
used to calculate 18 descriptors- logP, solubility, drug likeliness,
polar surface area, molecular weight, number of atoms, number
of rotatable bonds, volume, drug score and number of
violations to violations to assure its drug-confirm behavior.

Results and Discussion
Construction of the Molecular-Interaction Network
We find that some nodes in the network that prove to be
topologically important, in particular HBx, Polymerase, HBsAg
and HBcAg &amp; HBeAg, are also known to be associated with
drugs used for the treatment of Hepatitis B. Importantly, based
on topological consideration, we are also able to suggest HBx as
a novel potentially relevant target protein for the diagnosis or
treatment of Hepatitis B. This type of finding proves the
potential of in silico analyses able to produce highly refined
hypotheses, based on vast experimental data, to be tested
further and more efficiently. As research on Hepatitis B is
ongoing, the present map is in fieri, despite being -at the
moment- a reflection of the state of the art.

HBx as a Target Protein
Via the pathway analysis, we also found that HBx is associated
with a number of pathways, for instance, the cell cycle
regulation, apoptosis, signalling, transcriptional regulation,
encoding of cytoskeleton, cell adhesion molecules, oncogenes
and tumour suppressor genes. So it is reasonable here to
suggest that HBx could be an interesting candidate as potential
new drug target for the treatment of Hepatitis B. This is
consistent with the recommendation in [].

Protein-ligand docking
The Protein-ligand interaction plays a significant role in
structure based drug designing. Overall, the best confirmation
showed that the free energy of binding (ΔGbind kacl/mol) for
the designed ligand were good and represented in 
 and
. The negative and low value of ΔGbind indicates
strong favorable bonds between HBx protein and the novel
ligand indicating that the ligand was in its most favourable
conformations. The information about the number of hydrogen
bonds formed and catalytic site residues involved in proteinligand
complex are shown in Table and figure.

Molecular descriptors calculation
The further descriptor analysis and the toxicity prediction
(Tables 1 see ) helped in the
identification of the better inhibitor. Drug Score and the Drug-
Likeness are the two properties that are important for
considering a compound to become a successful drug. Novel
ligand had a drug score of 0.29 and drug likeness property
score of 0.49. The molecular weight of novel ligand was 398.619
g/mol between the preferred ranges of molecular weight for
drug likeness property. From  novel ligand was the
compound that had the acceptable range (green colors) for
toxicity risk. These values were also taken into account to
decide the best inhibitor. Thus, novel ligand was the best drug
candidate and also found to possess better global binding
affinity score.

Conclusion
In this study we have successfully reconstructed and analysed a
systemic network of interactions of the processes on-going in
patients affected by Hepatitis B. Through the topological
analysis of this Hepatitis B network, HBX has been identified to
be a hub of pathway. In this study, we designed a novel ligand
against HBX protein of HBV. The molecular docking was
applied to explore the binding mechanism and studies on the
novel ligand against the HBX protein showed that the free
binding energy for the inhibitor was small, indicating that the
ligand binds favorably to the binding site. The ligand was
observed as the best inhibitor candidate, which may be
considered as a potential ligand for treatment of diseases
caused by HBV. Using a combination of virtual screening, and
molecular docking, we successfully identified putative novel
inhibitor, which can be further evaluated by in vitro and in vivo
biological tests.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Jitendra et al, Bioinformation 7(1): 9-14 (2011)

Molecular-interaction map for Hepatitis B virus.

Docking representations of HBX protein. (A) Docked
Ligand inside the pocket of HBX protein. (B) H-Bond
interactions (blue dashed line) of the docked ligand with Active
site residues.

