Background
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small ˜20-24 nucleotide endogenous and noncoding
regulatory RNAs that are processed from hairpin RNA precursors
encoded within the genome of metazoans . In both animals and plants, the
majority of the miRNA genes exist as independent transcriptional units,
and they are transcribed by RNA polymerase II into long primary
transcripts (termed pri-miRNAs) [].

The first miRNA was discovered in Caenorhabditis elegans hundreds of
miRNAs also have been cloned in various plant species [,
,], but the
progress in prediction of the genes responsible for these miRNAs
production, and cleavage target/sites of these miRNAs are still at very low
rate which need to speed up to understand the fundamentals of gene
regulation system at miRNA level, more accurately and completely 
[].

In nature, miRNA acts as post-transcriptional regulators in animals and
plants. miRNAs use two distinct post-transcriptional mechanisms to
regulate gene expression. They act by binding to the complementary sites
on the 3' untranslated region (UTR) of the target gene to induce cleavage
with near perfect complementarily [] or to repress productive translation;
they also facilitate deadenylation, which leads to rapid mRNA decay.

miRNAs are very important regulators for development in plants, they
code for proteins with a known or suspected role in developmental control
[,
]. 
Abnormality or dysfunction of these miRNA has been shown to
cause various defects in plants and its various development processes like
floral and leaf-patterning defects, loss of organ polarity, altered vascular
development and reduced fertility. Given these clear roles in plant
development, it has been proposed that precise regulation of miRNA
activity during various stages of growth and in specific cell types is of
central importance for normal plant development [,
]. Thus to get insides
about the post-translational regulation and importance of miRNA, it is very
important and essential to understand about the interaction between
miRNA and their complementary targets present on mRNA.

Several computational methods are developed and have been widely used
by scientist for the prediction of miRNAs [] 
and their target genes using different approaches [] . 
Several approaches have been used for miRNA target predictions in plants and animals. For plant, sequences similaritybased
simple pattern matching approaches or BLAST similarity searches
have shown high performance, because complementarity in miRNA and
their targets is nearly perfect [,
], in case of animal they need different
approaches.

Lot of work is already going on miRNA in plants but it mostly focus on
world's most important crop Rice (Oryza sativa) 
[] and model organism in
plant biology, Arabidopsis thaliana 
[] because of the availability of their
complete genome sequence and other information that provide the basis for
in silico analysis, but lot of work yet to have done to fully understand
miRNA system in other plant species. This present study was undertaken
to identify miRNAs targets, affected protein by miRNA and miRNA
homologs of Glycine max, using simple sequence similarity search method.

Methodology
Retrieval of miRNA sequences from miRBase database
For the current study, we used MiRBase database 
(http://microrna.sanger.ac.uk/) 
[]. Its
current release (12.0) contains 8619 miRNA loci from 87 species including
Homo sapiensc, flies, plants, animals and viruses. Among 87 species, 21 are
plant species. Our work focus on Glycine max, for this, all available
sequences of mature miRNAs of Glycine max (69) were downloaded from
miRBase database.

Identification of miRNA targets
To find the targets for miRNAs, we compared them with their EST database dbEST
(http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/dbEST/) available at NCBI (National Center
for Biotechnology Information) [], 
with the help of BLAST tool [].
Corresponding mRNA of EST, with high similarities (E-value less than
0.1) had been considered as potential targets for miRNA.

Identification of affected proteins
these targets encode specific protein
whose translation is being suppressed due to binding of miRNA with
corresponding mRNAs. In order to identify the miRNA affected proteins,
with their functions, we had converted target sequence (nucleotide
sequence) into protein query sequence. For this purpose BLASTX was
used, which uses nucleotide sequences as queries and translate them in all
six reading frames to produce translated protein sequences. These
translated protein sequences further used as protein query for protein
sequence Database. Further, to get more specified results, target sequences
with significant statistics values had been selected, and BLASTX was
performed for these selected target sequences against SwissProt Database
(highly annotated protein database). Hits with highest bit score and lowest
E-value had been considered as affected proteins by miRNAs of Glycine
max.

Identification of miRNA homologs
To identify miRNA homologs,sequences of mature miRNAs (which are conserved since their sequence
are crucial for target-interaction) were taken as input for sequence
similarity search against mature miRNA sequences of all other plants
available in miRBase Database []. 
miRNAs of all other plant species with bit score more than 100 against query sequence 
had been selected as homolog miRNAs.

Result and Discussion
Identification of miRNA targets
Previous studies suggest that miRNAs
bind to their mRNA target with nearly perfect sequence complementary,
and degrade the target mRNA []. 
On the basis of this concept we used sequence similarity search between our query sequence of miRNA and
EST database and got 573 targets for 44 mature miRNA sequences among
69 mature miRNA sequences published in database. These targets were
also showing significant sequence similarities with E-value ranging from
0.025 to 0.0004.

We observed that, among 573 miRNA targets of Glycine max, 61% of
targets were showing E-value around 0.0004 and 17% were showing Evalue
around 0.001, thus most of the miRNA with their respective target
sequence shared very high similarities which are significant and provide
accuracy [,
]. High number of predicted targets (mRNAs) for the
miRNA candidates of Glycine max () 
were observed, as compared to other well studied plants i.e 49 for 13 miRNA in Arabidopsis 
[], revealed
that a broad range of genes were regulated by miRNA in Glycine max.

Identification of affected proteins
In Glycine max we got 458 targets
sequences using suitable statistical parameter i.e. concerning bit score (40
and above) and E-value. Most of the targets encode for Maturase K (Intron
maturase) and Photosystem I P700 chlorophyll a apoprotein A1 (PsaA/PSIA).
Probably, Maturase K assists in splicing of its own and other
chloroplast group II introns []. 
Psa A proteins bind P700, the primary
electron donor as well as the electron acceptor of photosystem I 
[].
These proteins are among those protein whose formation is terminated or
altered by the action of miRNA binding and interfere RNA splicing and
photosynthesis respectively. Our prediction suggest that miRNA also
control those mRNA whose proteins are involved in various process other
than just as transcription factors, which was earlier suggested 
[], and play
broader regulatory role like in animal.

Identification of miRNA homologs
In Glycine max 22 miRNA targets
were having total 418 homologs with-in species like Physcomitrella
patens, Triticum aestivum, Sorghum bicolor, Gossypium hirsutum, Vitis
vinifera, Oryza sativa, Brassica napus and many more.

Total number of miRNA homologs for Glycine max was 418 and 92
miRNA sequences were showing homology with miRNA of species
Populus trichocarpa.Therefore miRNAs of Glycine max were more
conserved with in Populus trichocarpa. miRNAs of Arabidopsis thaliana,
Oryza sativa, Vitis vinifera, Zea mays and Brassica napus were also
showing homology with Brassica napus (). Analysis suggests
that miRNA are evolutionary conserved and shared similarities with
different plant species, over wide evolutionary distances
[,
]. Here it
is notable that Glycine max share maximum similarities (homology) with
Populus trichocarpa and minimum similarities with species Triticum
aestivum and Saccharum officinarum.

Conclusion
Present study was focused on the prediction of the miRNA targets, affected
proteins and miRNA homologs of Glycine max; as a result we found 573
mRNA targets for 44 mature miRNA sequences among 69 mature miRNA
sequences published in database. Its most of the targets encode for
Maturase K and PsaA/PSI-A that are very important elements of
photosynthesis system, this suggest that miRNAs play major role in the
regulation of photosynthesis process, thus their activity in Glycine max
may cause major alteration in photosynthesis process. Homology analysis
for miRNA suggest that 22 miRNA of Glycine max show 418 miRNA
homologs from different plant species, these homologies indicates that
miRNAs of most of the plants belongs to same family. Here we observed
that Glycine max share maximum similarities with Populus trichocarpa.
Mined potential miRNA targets and affected functions further can be
validated by using available approach i.e. RT-PCR and 5’RACE which is
based on PCR assay. Availability of microarray data in future can be used
to asses the relative expression levels of potential mRNA targets in tissues
in which their miRNAs were expressed, which will provide the means to
understand and validate miRNA targets.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We acknowledge the bioinformatics facility at Department of Bioscience
and Biotechnology, Banasthali University, Banasthali for providing
essential facilities for completion of this research work.

Citation:Katara et al; Bioinformation 5(4): 162-165 (201029

Plant share miRNA homologs with Glycine max

