Background
A number of physical/chemical stress agents increase the cellular
ROS/RNS pool and subsequently cause significant biomolecular damage.
Since mitochondria are a major source of cellular ROS/RNS, successful
maintenance of a healthy cellular redox state through mitochondrial
tolerance is considered an important determinant of cellular fate under
such conditions. Stress-induced increase in mitochondrial ROS/RNS
generation occurs mainly through damage caused to the components of
electron transport chain (ETC), thereby resulting in leakage of electrons
and the subsequent formation of superoxide radical. This damage may be
countered through increase in expression and replacement of the damaged
proteins by the newly synthesized functional molecules. Since the ETC
comprises of various proteins coded by mitochondrial DNA, variation in
the composition, expressivity and regulation of mitochondrial DNA (mt‐
DNA) could prominently influence the mitochondrial tolerance towards
oxidative stress conditions.

Mitochondrial DNA is a closed circular molecule which codes for two
rRNAs, all 22 species of tRNAs required for translation, and 13 proteins
that are essential for proper mitochondrial functioning, primarily the
proteins coding for oxidative phosphorylation, viz., NADH dehydrogenase
subunit 1‐6 (ND1‐6) and 4L (ND4L), Cytochrome-c oxidase subunit 1‐3
(COX1‐3), ATP subunit 6 and 8, and Cytochrome-B (CYTB). Since the
mitochondrial genome codes for a number of proteins participating in
oxidative phosphorylation and also all tRNAs, it is pertinent to expect that
evolutionary variations known to occur in the organization and
functioning/ regulation of mitochondrial genome amongst different
organisms [,
,
,]
 may also cause variation in the mitochondrial
functions including their role in cellular stress response.

The mitochondrion-encoded genes are highly conserved but are reported to
differ in their codon bias. [,,
]Since the higher basal gene expression is
reportedly associated with higher codon bias [] differences in the codon
bias within Mt-DNA may also result in differential expression of
mitochondrial genes. The different patterns of codon usage bias may be
due to mutation bias, variation in GC content and/or various forms of
natural selection, viz., to optimize the efficiency or accuracy of translation
and/or to maintain sequence composition of mRNA/DNA [] In addition
to translational regulation mechanisms that may control stress response,
mitochondria have been known to undergo biogenesis following cellular
stress [,
]
 which is marked by an increase in the mitochondrial mass.
[,
,]
Under these conditions of stress-induced biogenesis as well,
the cellular machinery may try to raise expression level of certain
mitochondrial coding genes, which is also associated with increased
expression of the tRNA pool [] Therefore, mitochondrial gene
expressivity and its regulation by codon usage bias warrants further
investigations for understanding their role in the mitochondria-mediated
stress responses.

Certain insects (e.g. moths and butterflies; order Lepidoptera) and
nematodes are considered as excellent experimental models to study the
cellular and molecular signaling pathways. Despite high level of
conservation in the molecular and cellular factors involved in stresssignaling,
these organisms are far more stress-resistant as compared to
mammalian system. Therefore, we carried out in silico analysis of the
mtDNA and its encoded proteins in these organisms and compared it with
that of the stress-sensitive humans/mammals. The study indicates
significant differences in the composition (gene arrangement and
nucleotide composition), ENC value and GC3 content between the mt-
DNA of mammals and insects/nematodes. Based on these observations, we
hypothesize that besides the other cellular and molecular factors reportedso 
far [] certain features of mitochondrial genome organization may also
influence the responses of these stress-resistant invertebrates.

Methodology
Sequences retrieval and data analysis
Nucleotide sequences were obtained from National Center for
Biotechnology Information (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). Full
mitochondrial genomes of Aedes aegypti  (NC_010241), Apis mellifera 
(NC_001566), Bombyxmori  (NC_002355), Drosophila melanogaster 
(NC_001709), Manduca sexta (NC_010266), Oxya chinensis 
(NC_010219), Periplaneta fuliginosa (NC_006076), Tribolium castaneum 
(NC_003081), Mytilus edulis  (NC_006161), Sepia officinalis 
(NC_007895), Caenorhabditis elegans  (NC_001328), Xenopus laevis 
(NC_001573), Pista cristata  (NC_011011), Rhabdocalyptus dawsoni 
(NC_009627), Crocodylus siamensis  (NC_008795), Gallus gallus 
(NC_001323) and Homo sapiens  (NC_001807) were chosen and retrieved
from the nucleotide database of NCBI for initial analysis. Also we found
the open reading frame (ORF), the individual genes were utilizing, using
ORF Finder (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/gorf/). The
arrangements of their protein coding genes were retrieved from NCBI's
genome database.

Codon bias analysis
The initial codon bias data were retrieved from an online tool CodonO
(http://www.sysbiology.org/CodonO) for initial comparative study of SCU
between insects and mammals. Sequences of Bombyx mori, Manduca sexta
and Homo sapiens were submitted for analysis and invertebrate and
vertebrate mitochondrial codon tables were used as required. The average
codon bias for individual amino acids in each species was determined.
Since the data on codon usage bias is unnecessarily complex for analysis, it
has been expressed in terms of ENC (Effective Number of Codons) value,
as a statistical measure proposed by Frank Wright in 1990. The value of
ENC ranges from 20 to 61 and is inversely related to the codon usage bias.
A gene having 100% codon bias will have the ENC value = 20 and a gene
with 0% codon bias will show an ENC value = 61. This shares an analogy
with the behavior of multiple alleles; an amino acid with four synonymous
codons can be considered analogous to a locus with four alleles.[]

Where F1, F2, F3 etc. are the average homozygosity estimates for
Synonymous Family (SF) type ‘i’, and n1, n2, n3 etc. are the contributions of
each of the SF type. Average ENC was calculated for each species by
taking average value for each protein coding gene.

Codon Adaptation Index (CAI) is a measure of the relative adaptation of
codon usage of a gene towards the codon usage of highly expressed genes,
or in other words, measures the degree to which selection has been
effective in moulding the pattern of codon usage. [] A higher CAI value
(&gt;0.5) indicates that the gene is well expressed and a CAI value  ≫0.3 is an
indicator of low expression [] To calculate the codon usage we used
another online tool Mobyle (
http://mobyle.pasteur.fr/cgibin/MobylePortal/portal.py),
 which allows computing of multiple indexes
related to codon usage such as ENC, CAI, and GC3 values. 
(see  for details on ENC).

Analysis of Shine-Dalgarno (SD) sequences
The sequences of protein-coding mitochondrial genes coding for the
5'UTR of the translation start site from the four species (M. sexta, B. mori,
C.elegans and H. sapiens) were transformed to respective RNA sequence
and aligned using CLC Workbench 4. Annotations from NCBI Genbank
files were used to find the upstream sequences for the 13 proteins in each
sequence. A length of 100 bp preceding the gene was chosen for analysis
and conserved consensus sequences from SD sequence such as UUUC,
AAAUU, GAAU, and GAUU [] were spotted.

Discussion
Codon bias: ENC, CAI and GC3 content variation in insects, nematodesand mammals:
The codon bias data were firstly analyzed in terms of average ENC value.
Quite significantly, the average ENC values were found to be lowest (i.e.,
highest codon bias) for insects and nematodes amongst all the organisms
evaluated, while the higher value derived for Homo sapiens implies
significantly lower codon bias    This feature of insect
mitochondrial genes was in contrast to that of the nuclear genome
encoded ribosomal genes of Spodoptera frugiperda (Lepidopteran insect)
which is unusually unbiased. [] The ENC value for C. elegans was equal
to that of D. melanogaster and almost equal to that of Bombyx mori and
Manduca sexta indicating similar nature of mitochondrial genes of all
these species, which is quite different from Homo sapiens. Since high
codon bias promotes high expression level of genes [] and thereby assists
the cells to fight stress conditions [] the low codon bias in human
mitochondrion may be a possible indicator of low resistance against
stressors.

A scatter-plot of ENC values vs GC3 content was also drawn for these
species for all the 13 conserved protein-coding mitochondrial genes
[]. The dispersion of dots for majority of genes in Apis mellifera,
Bombyx mori, Drosophila melanogaster, Manduca sexta as well as for
Caenorhabditis elegans clustered mainly between 20≫ ENC ≫35 and 0.0≫
GC3 ≫0.2, indicating a high degree of similarity in the regulation of their
expression. As the complexity of the organisms increased, an increase in
the GC3 content could be observed clearly in the following order-Insecta
(A. mellifera, B. mori, D. melanogaster, M. sexta) ≫ Nematoda (C.
elegans) ≫ Mollusca (S. officinalis) ≫ Amphibia (X. laevis) ≫ Mammalia
(H. sapiens). In addition, an increase in the variation of ENC value could
be observed with the increasing complexity of organisms []. This
may be correlated with the fact that the genes become unbiased with the
GC3 content reaching a value of 0.5 [] and genes move biased as GC3
content shifts either side from 0.5. The drastic difference between GC3
content of humans/mammals versus insects or nematodes strongly
correlates with the anomalously high mitochondrial GC content (44%) of
Homo sapiens against the low GC content of the insect and nematode
species (18‐25%) (). This also suggests that the third codon
position may involve similarity while first and second codon positions are
expected to bear more selective stress for holding their function.

Codon bias is known to be directly linked to the tRNA pool [] While
microorganisms share the same tRNA pool and thus attain the single most
optimal codon usage pattern [] Mt-DNA codes for only 22 tRNA species
out of 60 tRNA's reported in eukaryotes. Although these 22 tRNA species
are sufficient for expressing proteins depending on their availability, they
may also impart codon bias. Apart from the Mt-DNA encoded tRNA
species, tRNA's coded by nuclear DNA can also be imported from cytosol.
In addition to the tRNA availability, adaptation of a particular t-RNA for
related amino acid may also contribute in codon bias. Hence analysis of
codon adaptive index (CAI) can also provide important insight into this
phenomenon. CAI reflects the ‘ weight’ (representing the relative
adaptation) for each codon from its frequency within a chosen small pool
of highly expressed genes, and combines these weights to define the CAI
of the gene. [] A recent study has concluded that a gene showing a
CAI≫0.318 should be considered with low expression and a gene with
CAI&gt;0.502 should be considered as highly expressed. [] This result is
independent of any ENC value consideration; hence a gene with high CAI
should be expected to have a high bias and vice versa. Genes that show
above kind of variation in CAI and ENC value may be considered to show
an expected or ‘ usual’ behavior. [] Similarly, a group of genes with low
CAI but a high bias and a group of genes with high CAI and low bias show
‘unusual’ behavior. In the present study, we plotted ENC value against
CAI values of mitochondrial protein-coding genes in all the species takenunder consideration. Interestingly, majority of mitochondrial genes showed
an ‘ unusual’ behavior. The CAI for all mitochondrial genes was less than
0.20 in all the species and ENC for the majority of genes from insect and
nematode species was less than 37 denoting a high bias [].
Therefore, since the mitochondrial genes are highly expressed it may be
safe to infer that the mitochondrial genome regulation is different from that
of the nuclear genome.

A relation between the codon bias and the length of the coding gene has
been spotted in a few cases. [] Assume a non-optimal codon requires
double the time to translate into an amino acid in comparison to optimal
codon. In a small gene (say 100 codons), one mutation from an optimal
codon to non-optimal codon increases the time of translation by 1%,
whereas a similar mutation in a gene with larger number of codons (say
1000 codons) would only increase the translation time by 0.1% .
[]Alternatively the length effect could be explained by the fact that highly
expressed genes tend to be short. Therefore, we plotted the ENC value for
different species against their corresponding protein lengths coded by them
[]. No significant difference could be observed in the plot apart
from the difference in ENC values. This can be understood by considering
that the coded proteins are highly conserved across these species tested
despite variations at the genomic or codon level, and thus the same
proteins would have almost the same structure and function in different
species.

Protein-coding mitochondrial gene arrangement varies significantly
between invertebrates and vertebrates
All the sequences obtained for initial analysis were found to code for 13
proteins namely ND1‐6, ND4L, COX1‐3, ATP6, ATP8 and CYT B and
the genes ND1, ND4, ND4L and ND5. The arrangement of these proteincoding
genes for different species showed a highly conserved pattern
within each specific phylum (). Changes in the
position of these genes within the mitochondrial genome reflect variations
acquired during evolution of mt-DNA in the divergent species. The
diversity in genes and genomes is known to occur through the complex
processes of evolution including mutations, random drift and natural
selection, gene rearrangements. However, these are considered to be rare
evolutionary events, and as such the existence of a shared derived gene
order between taxa most often indicates a common ancestry. [] As evident
from the , changes in the sequences of proteincoding
mitochondrial genes become more stagnant among vertebrates
unlike the invertebrates where significant variations in the sequence
arrangement could be seen. This indicates that the invertebrate
mitochondria may have been under a heavy selection pressure compared
with the vertebrate mitochondria.

Shine-Dalgarno sequences also show distinct pattern in the insect and
nematode mitochondrial genomes
Mitochondrial gene/protein expression is known to be similar to
prokaryotes. Like prokaryotic mRNA, the mitochondrial gene encoded
mRNA is also known to contain Shine-Dalgarno sequence, responsible for
recognition by ribosomes during translation. [] We examined the Shine-
Dalgarno (AAAUU, GAAU, UUUC and AUUC) sequences in the
upstream region of mRNA’s from all 13 candidate mitochondrial genes. A
remarkable conservation in the Shine-Dalgarno sequence patterns could be
found among the upstream regions of Manduca sexta, Bombyx mori, and
C. elegans  . The SD sequences found in 
Homo sapiens did not
show same pattern as observed in these insect and nematode species tested.
These variations in the upstream sequence patterns indicate evolutionary
changes that may have been incorporated suitably by different organisms
during evolution, and may even contribute in the stress resistance of
insects and nematodes through higher expressivity of mitochondrial
proteins.

Conclusion
The present study indicates that mitochondrial genome of insects and
nematodes displays unique characteristics such as high codon bias, low
GC3 content and highly conserved gene arrangement, which are associated
with a well conserved pattern of SD sequences in the transcripts of
mitochondrial functional proteins. Some of these features may favour
higher expressivity of mitochondrial proteins, thereby maintaining
mitochondrial physiology under extreme conditions and potentially leading
to increased stress resistance. This is the first study that highlights
noticeable features within the mitochondrial genomes of these highly
stress-resistant organisms, and warrants more in-depth investigations.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This study was conducted as part of the R&amp;D project INM-311.1.5 funded
by DRDO, Ministry of Defence, Government of India. Authors duly
acknowledge the encouraging support received from Dr. RP Tripathi,
Director INMAS.

Citation:Pandey, Bioinformation 5(1): 21-27 (2010)

Average ENC values for D.melanogaster (Insecta: Diptera), B.mori (Insecta: Lepidoptera), M.sexta (Insecta: Lepidopteran), A.mellifera
(Insecta: Hymenoptera), C.elegans (Nematoda: Rhabditida), S.officinalis (Mollusca: Sepiida), X.laevis (Amphibia), H.sapiens (Mammalia). Average of all
ENC values derived from all 13 protein coding genes present in each species. Statistically significant difference in ENC value was observed between
insect-nematode group and mollusca-amphibia-mammal group.

Inter-relationships of ENC values with CAI, GC3 content and amino acid length of mitochondrial proteins. (a) Scatter plot of ENC value vs CAI
value of conserved protein coding genes from representative species of various phyla. (b) Scatter plot of ENC value vs GC3 content of conserved protein
coding genes from representative species of various phyla. (c) Scatter plot of ENC value vs amino acid length value of conserved protein coding genes
from representative species of various phyla.

Rearrangement of protein coding genes in mitochondrial genome of different animal species ranging up to mammals

SD sequences in the upstream region of protein coding genes (Bombyx mori, Manduca sexta, C. elegans and Homo sapiens). Rectangular boxes
over the sequences mark the position of SD sequences in the respective upstream region.

