Background
MicroRNAs, the tiny molecules that fine-tune gene expression,
were first discovered in 1993; Victor Ambros made a startling
discovery []. With implications for the treatment of cancer,
diabetes and brain disorders miRNAs play a vital role in the
human genome. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous ~22 nt
RNAs that do play important regulatory roles in animals and
plants by targeting mRNAs for cleavage or translational
repression. The microRNA biogenesis has been well
characterized as illustrated in  
[].

miRNA – the name
A system of nomenclature has been adopted and names are
designated to specific miRNAs before publication of their
discovery as hundreds of human miRNAs and thousands
across other species are available as of now [,
].
Experimentally confirmed microRNAs are given a number that
is attached to the prefix mir followed by a dash e.g. mir-123. The
uncapitalised mir- refers to the pre-miRNA and the capitalised
miR- refers to the mature form. miRNAs with similar structures
bar at 1 or 2 nucleotides are annotated to show their similar
structure with added lower case letter e.g. miR-1a and miR-1b.

It is possible for miRNAs at different loci to produce the same
miRNA and these are show with additional number eg miR-1-1
and miR-1-2. Names are even preceded by the annotation for
the species they are observed in e.g. Homo sapiens = hsa-miRxxx.
Others include viral v-mirNA and Drosphila d-miRNA.
microRNAs originating for the 3' end or 5' end are denoted
with a -3p or 5p suffix e.g. miR-142-5p, miR-142-3p.

Biogenesis
Most microRNA genes are found in the intergenic regions or in
anti-sense oritentation to certain genes containing their own
miRNA gene promoter and regulatory units. [–] However, as
much as 40% are said to lie in the introns and non-protein
coding DNA or even rarely in exons. These are usually, though
not exclusively, found in the sense orientation and thus usually
show a concurrent transcription and regulation expression
profile originating from a common promoter with their host
genes [–].

Other microRNA genes showing a common promoter include
42-48% of all miRNAs originating from polycistronic units
contaning 2-7 discrete loops from which mature miRNAs are
processed, though this does not necessarily mean the mature
miRNAs of a family will be homologous in structure and
function [,
]. The promoters mentioned have been shown to
have some similarities in their motifs to promoters of other class
II (meaning transcribed by POL II) genes such as protein coding
genes [,
]. The DNA template is not the final word on mature
miRNA production: 6% of human miRNAs show RNA editing,
the site specific modification of RNA sequences to yield
products different to those encoded by their DNA. This
increases the diversity and scope of miRNA action beyond that
implicated from the genome.

Transcription
In the nucleus, polymerase II (POL II) is used to transcribe
microRNA encoding parts of the genome often through binding
to a promoter found near the sequence destined to be the
hairpin loop of the pre-miRNA [,
]. This produces a
transcript that is capped at the 5' end, polyadenylated to give a
(poly)A tail and spliced to form pri-miRNA several hundred to
thousand bp in size. Curiously, some pri-miRNAs have been
shown to be able to coordinately express both miRNAs and
mRNAs, when the stem loop precursor is found in the 3' UTR
of an mRNA []. Uncommonly, polymerase III (POL III) is
speculated to be used instead of POL II when transcribing
microRNA that have upstream -Alu, -tRNA, Mammalian Wide
Interspersed Repeat (MWIR) promoter units [].

Nuclear processing and export
Pri-miRNA's are processed by the microprocessor complex
consisting of drosha and its cofactor DGCR8 into pre-miRNAs.
Pri-miRNA contains at least 1 (up to 6 when transcribed from
polycistronic units) ~70 nucleotide hairpin loop structures,
there is a potential for a single pri-miRNA to house many
miRNAs. The hairpin loops have &gt;40 nucleotide flanking RNA
sequences necessary for efficient processing. These are
recognised by the DiGeorge Syndrome Critical Region 8
(DGCR8), the cofactor to drosha, DGCR8 is a dsRNA binding
nuclear protein that recognizes the hairpin loop of the primiRNA
and orientates the catalytic RNAse III domain of drosha
for cleavage. This cleavage occurs around 11 nucleotides from
their base (2 helical RNA turns into the stem) by Drosha, a
RNAse III type dsRNA specific endonuclease, to form premiRNA.
Together, drosha and DGCR8 (the invertebrate
equivalent is Pasha) form the microprocessor complex 
[]. The
microprocessor complex introduces staggered cuts to the ends
of the hairpin loop arms resulting in a 2 nucleotide overhand on
the 3' end and phosphate on the 5' end to produce a premiRNA
of ~ 70 nt in length. Mostly, one arm of the hairpin loop
is destined to become the mature miRNA, though rarely a
mature miRNA may be produced from either arm eg Mir-458-
3p/mir-458-5p and mir-202/mir-202* with the asterisk applying
to less predominantly expressed transcript.

There is evidence that pre-miRNAs can be produced without
having to undergo the microprocessor machinery if they are
directly spliced from the introns in which they reside These
miRNAs are called mirtrons and have traditionally been
thought to only exist in drosphila and c elegans. Recently
however, mammalian mirtons that even show conservation
between species have even been discovered [].

Pri-miRNA can also be subject to RNA editing wherein the
miRNA processing or specificity is altered through adenosine
deaminase acting on RNA (ADAR) enzymes catalysing
adenosine to inosine transitions, the most common form of
RNA editing in metazoans []. RNA editing has been shown to
occur in 6% of miRNAs, even altering the specificity of miRNAs
when it was observed in the seed region of miR-376, though this
is only present in the CNS [].

RNA editing of microRNA can also prevent their processing, as
seen in the pri-miR-142 editing leading to degradation by the
tudor SN protein (a RISC component) and thus avoiding of the
drosha pathway []. Overall, this offers many implications in
expanding the already complicated role in genetic expression
that are covered in more detail than this paper has to
opportunity to do in an excellent review []. The nuclear
membrane protein exportin 5 recognises the 2 nucleotide
overhang on the 3 end of the pre-miRNA [] and then
transports it into the cytoplasm using ran-guanine
triphosphatase (Ran-GTP) [].

Cytoplasmic processing
In the cytoplasm the pre-miRNA is cleaved by another RNAse
III type double stranded endonuclease called Dicer. Dicer
cleavage of pre-miRNA results in an imperfect miRNA:miRNA
duplex around 20-25 nucleotides in size containing the mature
miRNA strand and its opposite complementary miRNA strand
[]. Dicer is associated with the cofactors immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) transactivating response RNA binding protein
(TRBP) and protein activator of the interferon induced protein
kinase PACT that physically bring the TRBP-PACT-dicer
complex into contact with Ago2 to form the RNA Induced
Silencing (RISC) loading apparatus. Dicer processing of the premiRNA
is thought to be coupled to the unwinding of the
duplex to produce a mature miRNA which Ago2 binds to,
forming the active miRISC complex. The mature miRNA then
guides the RISC to target sites in order to induce silencing 
[,
].
The precise sequence of events is difficult to elucidate and
still under debate.

miRNAs in plants
Plants contain significant quantities of miRNAs derived from
various miRNA biogenesis pathways. Many of these miRNAs
play regulatory roles in plants. Analysis revealed that
numerous miRNAs in corn, rice and soybean seeds have high
sequence similarity to animal genes. However, exogenous RNA
is considered to be unstable within the gastrointestinal tract of
many animals, thus limiting potential for any adverse effects
from consumption of dietary RNA.

This August, Monsanto people searched for plant miRNAs
sequences in public sRNA datasets from various tissues of
mammals, chicken and insects. They revealed that plant
miRNAs were present in the animal sRNA datasets, and
significantly miR168 was extremely over-represented.
Furthermore, all or nearly all (&gt;96%) miR168 sequences were
monocot derived for most datasets, including datasets for two
insects reared on dicot plants in their respective experiments.
To investigate if plantderived miRNAs, including miR168,
could accumulate and move systemically in insects, they
conducted insect feeding studies for three insects including
corn rootworm, which has been shown to be responsive to
plant-produced long double-stranded RNAs [].

miRNA biogenesis in plants differs from metazoan biogenesis
mainly in the steps of nuclear processing and export. Instead of
being cleaved by two different enzymes, once inside and once
outside the nucleus, both cleavages of the plant miRNA is
performed by a Dicer homolog, called Dicer-like1 (DL1). DL1 is
only expressed in the nucleus of plant cells, which indicates that
both reactions take place inside the nucleus. Before plant
miRNA:miRNA* duplexes are transported out of the nucleus its
3' overhangs are methylated by a RNA
methyltransferaseprotein called Hua-Enhancer1 (HEN1). The
duplex is then transported out of the nucleus to the cytoplasm
by a protein called Hasty (HST), an Exportin 5 homolog, where
they disassemble and the mature miRNA is incorporated into
the RISC [].

miRNA and viruses
A microRNA is about 17 to 24 nucleotides, and its function is to
dampen or shut down the production of proteins in the body.
There are hundreds of different types of microRNAs in animals.
It's been known for many years that when a virus such as
influenza infects respiratory cells there is an immediate
antiviral response at the cellular level -- the first barrier for
protecting the body from the virus. Most of the changes that
occur are a result of antiviral gene expression. The expression of
transcription activators by human herpesvirus-6 DNA is
believed to be regulated by viral miRNA [].

Target Finder tools – the machine guns
The current edition of miRBase [] (version 19) lists more than
21000 microRNAs. Clearly, a challenge ahead will be to identify
the targets of all these small RNAs. Since, each microRNA can
target several mRNA sequences, this will be a daunting task
and will require the aid of in-silico target finder tools. However,
most typical Bioinformatics tools require longer sequences than
the ~20 nucleotides offered by microRNAs. In addition,
microRNAs are only partially complementary to their mRNA
target sequences, which make identifying them even more
difficult. Nevertheless, a number of algorithms have been
developed which can be used for microRNA target prediction.

miRecords [] is resource for animal miRNA-target
interactions developed at the University of Minnesota.
miRecords consists of two components. The Validated Targets
component is a large, high-quality database of experimentally
validated miRNA targets resulting from meticulous literature
curation. The Predicted Targets component of miRecords is an
integration of predicted miRNA targets produced by 11
established miRNA target prediction programs.

PicTar [] is an algorithm for the identification of microRNA
targets. This searchable website provides details (3' UTR
alignments with predicted sites, links to various public
databases etc) regarding microRNA target predictions in
vertebrates, several Drosophila species, and C. elegans.

miRanda [] is an algorithm for finding genomic targets for
microRNAs. This algorithm has been written in C and is
available as an open-source method under the GPL. MiRanda
was developed at the Computational Biology Center of
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. This software will be
further developed under the open source model, coordinated
by Anton Enright and Chris Sander.

TargetScan [] predicts microRNA targets. They are
essentially the 3'UTR targets, with a few changes arising from
updated gene boundary definitions from the April 2005 UCSC
genome browser mapping of RefSeq mRNAs to the hg17
human genome assembly. To avoid difficulties in browser
display, the few predictions spanning splice junctions are
excluded.

RNAhybrid [] tool finds the minimum free energy
hybridization of a long and a short RNA. The hybridization is
performed in a kind of domain mode, ie. the short sequence is
hybridized to the best fitting part of the long one. The tool is
primarily meant as a means for microRNA target prediction.

DIANA MicroT Analyzer [] this is a tool for prediction of
MicroRNA targets. The program reports a signal to noise ratio
and a precision score which help in the evaluation of the
significance of the predicted results.

RegRNA [] is an integrated web server for identifying the
homologs of Regulatory RNA motifs and elements against an
input mRNA sequence. Both sequence homologs and structural
homologs of regulatory RNA motifs can be identified.

RNA22 [] is a pattern-based method developed by IBM
group, for the identification of microRNA-target sites and their
corresponding RNA/RNA complexes.

TarBase [] is a database of experimentally supported targets.
TarBase reveals significantly more experimentally supported
targets than even recent reviews claim, thereby providing a
comprehensive data set from which to assess features of
miRNA targeting that will be useful for the next generation of
target prediction programs.

psRNATarget [] is a Plant Small RNA Target Analysis Server.
A plant small RNA (including microRNAs) target analysis
server, which features two important analysis functions: 
reverse complementary matching between miRNA and target transcript using a proven scoring schema, and

target site accessibility evaluation by calculating unpaired energy (UPE) required to “open” secondary structure around miRNA's target site on mRNA.


PsRNATarget incorporates recent discoveries in
plant miRNA target recognition, e.g. it distinguishes
translational and post-transcriptional inhibition, and it reports
the number of miRNA/target site pairs that may affect miRNA
binding activity to target transcript. psRNA Target is replacing
miRU (Plant microRNA Potential Target Finder) by the same
group.

miRDB [] is an online database for miRNA target prediction
and functional annotations. All the targets were predicted by a
bioinformatics tool MirTarget2, which was developed by
analyzing thousands of genes impacted by miRNAs with an
SVM learning machine. Common features associated with
miRNA target binding have been identified and used to predict
miRNA targets. miRDB hosts predicted miRNA targets in five
species: human, mouse, rat, dog and chicken.

IPA's microRNA Target Filter [] a new microRNA target
prioritization tool that is available within IPA - The latest that
adds to the list. It contains content from TarBase, TargetScan,
miRecords, and micro-RNA related findings from the
published literature. It also includes filtering tools that helps
quickly sort through thousands of microRNA targets to find the
ones most biologically relevant dataset or experiment.

HMMER [] searches sequence databases for homologs of
protein sequences, and for making protein sequence
alignments. It implements methods using probabilistic models
called profile Hidden Markov Models (profile HMMs).

Conclusion
Targeting miRNAs have received new impetus in recent years.
The computational miRNA target finders, that exist may vary in
the algorithm used; and one can state opinions about the
strengths or weaknesses of each particular algorithm, the fact of
the matter is that all methods fall substantially short of
capturing the full detail of physical, temporal, and spatial
requirements of biologically significant miRNA::mRNA
interactions. The performance of current tools is largely
dependent on the overall number of predicted targets (hits).
Some tools may be very efficient in predicting true targets sites
(High sensitivity) but at the same time display an extremely
large number of overall hits (Low specificity). In contrast other
tools display an overall high specificity but a very low
sensitivity. It is evident that there is great need for a more
sophisticated target prediction tool that achieves a balance
between sensitivity and specificity. Performing this large scale
scan of all miRNAs in the online registry and all the genes of
the human genome, will allow us to compare our tool with
other available tools on a large scale basis. The results will be
stored on an online database that will allow users to query the
database using miRNA name or gene name. This will shed
some light into new gene targets for miRNAs and the molecular
processes that they regulate. Finally experimental verification of
computational predictions will be the ultimate step in revealing
the molecular pathways of miRNA regulation and
characterizing their involvement in disease.

Finding true miRNAs in-silico is still a big task []. A better
insight for future growths on miRNA gene search can likely be
attained by considering what is not a miRNA. A given location
in the genome does not contain a miRNA if: 
A stem–loop structure liable for effective processing by all partakers in the miRNA biogenesis pathway is not found;

it cannot regulate a target gene in a physiologically relevant manner

it is not effectively transcribed.


Widely used modes focused on the first case and the other two are still awaiting attention.


Another question that becomes more important when many
authors argue that the identification of well conserved and
phylogenetically extensive miRNAs is reaching its saturation is
whether non-conserved, presumably more exotic, miRNA
precursors would be processed as such in different organisms
that may have small yet important differences in their
processing pathways. The elucidation of this question is crucial
to methods which try to generalize from pre-miRNAs taken
from several different species.

This review is made possible through the help and support of
academic advisors, teachers, publishers, family and friends. The
author thanks Prof. Dr. Mrutyunjay Suar, Director and Head,
KIIT School of Biotechnology (KSBT), KIIT University. Thanks
are also to Dr. Rajanikanta Mahapatra, Faculty Associate, KIIT
School of Biotechnology (KSBT), KIIT University.

Citation:Das, Bioinformation 8(17): 841-845 (2012)

MicroRNA biogenesis.

