Background
During the general survey of economically important
freshwater fish of the Meerut region, the important and
commonly available fish, namely Wallago attu were found
harbouring with the species of the genus Thaparocleidus 
[].
Thaparocleidus [] was proposed by Jain 
[] for T. wallagonius 
[]
from the gills of W. attu (Bloch &amp; Schneider, 1801) collected in
the Gomti River at Lucknow, India. Later, Gusev 
[] proposed
Silurodiscoides, to which species of Thaparocleidus were
transferred. However, Lim [] pointed out that Thaparocleidus is
a senior synonym of Silurodiscoides and listed 80 species of
Thaparocleidus with emphasized the need to ascertain the status
of some species from Indian fish and suggested that a detailed
redescription of T. wallagonius, the type-species, was required.
Taxonomic revisions of T. wallagonius have been done based on
morphological criteria []. It is hard to differentiate the species,
strains and populations from any stage in their life history only
on the basis of morphology. Molecular methods also enable in
distinguished morphologically similar parasites. PCR-based
techniques utilizing the 28S rDNA sequences have proven to be
a reliable tool to identify the helminth species and their
phylogenetic relationships. Moreover, in platyhelminth
systematics, rDNA genes, in general, have been used
successfully [–] and 28S rDNA, in particular, to estimate the
relationships existing among the platyhelminthes 
[]. In view of
this, study on the molecular characterization and phylogeny of
T. wallagonius was achieved by the help of ribosomal DNA
(rDNA).

RNA secondary structures are particularly useful in systematics
because they include characteristics, not found in the primary
sequence, that give ‘morphological’ information []. The
derivation of reliable secondary structure models for 28S region
would represent a major step towards a detailed understanding
of their biological roles which provides a powerful tool for
identifying biologically relevant folding patterns in RNA
molecules [–]. For the present study, we describe the
molecular characterization and discrimination of the species T.
wallagonius by using 28S rDNA region and to estimate the
genetic variation, phylogenetic relationship with other species
of the genus Thaparocleidus. We also aimed prediction of the
secondary structure to substantiate the findings. In this paper,
we provide first molecular confirmation of the presence of T.
wallagonius species from Meerut (U.P.), India.

Methodology
Parasite material and DNA isolation:
The economically important food fish of India Wallago attu
(Bloch &amp; Schneider, 1801) belong to the order Siluriformes and
family Siluridae were collected from Meerut (29°01'N and
77°45'E), U.P., India and examined. Monogenea, T. wallagonius
were obtained in live form from gill filaments of W. attu. The
worms were mounted as per method suggested by Malmberg
[]. 
Mounted voucher specimen of T. wallagonius species were
deposited in the Museum of Department of Zoology, Ch. C.S.
University, Meerut (U.P.), India under the voucher no.
HS/monogenea/2011/01. Monogenean was examined with a
microscope for species identification and then destroyed in the
process of DNA extraction.

DNA amplification, Sequencing and its Analysis:
Monogenean DNA was extracted from the whole specimen
using DNeasy Tissue kit (Qiagen). A fragment of 866 bp of 28S
gene was amplified using the specifically designed primers
forward (5'-TCAGTAAGCGGAGGAAAAGAA-3') and reverse
(5'-CAAAACCACAGTTCTCACAGC-3'). Each PCR reaction
was performed in a final volume of 25 ml containing 3 ml of
lysate, 10 X polymerase chain reaction (PCR) buffer, 1U Taq
polymerase (Biotools, Madrid, Spain), 0.4mM
deoxyribonucleotide triphosphates (dNTP) and 10 pM of each
primer pair. PCR products were examined on 1.5% agarose–
TBE (Tris–borate–EDTA) gels, stained with ethidium bromide
and visualized under ultraviolet light. Amplification products
were purified by a Chromous PCR clean up kit (#PCR 10,
Chromous Biotech). Gel-purified PCR products were sequenced
using a Big Dye Terminator version 3.1 cycle sequencing kit in
ABI 3130 genetic analyser (Applied Biosystems) with the same
primers. The DNA sequence were put to further analysis by
using various Bioinformatics tools including similarity search
BLAST and phylogenetic prediction by CLUSTALW for query
DNA sequence. The Nucleotide sequence data reported in this
paper have been submitted to the GenBank with the accession
number JN020351.

Molecular Phylogenetic Analysis and secondary structure:
The sequences were aligned using ClustalW multiple alignment
[] with the default gap and extension penalties used by this
program. 28S sequences were entered in the MEGA 5.0 
[] for
construction of the phylogenetic trees. The phylogenetic trees of
the T. wallagonius were constructed using distance method,
neighbour-joining (NJ) and character state method, maximumparsimony
(MP). Branch support was given using 1000
bootstrap replicates. Secondary structures of 28S sequences of T.
wallagonius were predicted by the online MFold package 
[].
MFold is the most widely used algorithms for RNA secondary
structure prediction that are based on a search for the minimal
free energy state.

Results
The 28S rDNA region of the T. wallagonius was successfully
amplified using primers as mentioned above (). The
nucleotide sequence of 866 bp obtained from the PCR
amplification was put to BLAST and compared with other
available Thaparocleidus species sequences from GenBank. The
BLAST hits result showed that the sequence of the T.
wallagonius is closer to the species of Thaparocleidus within range
of 91-98%. Phylogenetic trees were obtained by comparing the
sequences of T. wallagonius and available 28S sequences of other
Thaparocleidus species. Phylogenetic analyses using the various
methods like distance method, neighbour-joining (NJ) 
() 
and character state method, maximum-parsimony (MP)
() showed that the topology is similar among the trees
obtained with significant bootstrap support for the clades. In
the bootstrap test, the values of 70% and above show the
phylogenetic accuracy and indicate reliable grouping among
different members of Thaparocleidus species. Phylogenetic trees
constructed in MEGA also revealed a close relationship of T.
wallagonius with isolates of Pseudancylodiscoides because this
genus is morphologically similar to Thaparocleidus.
Pseudancylodiscoides has been considered a synonym of
Thaparocleidus [] but now this genus is considered valid and
well differentiated from Thaparocleidus.

Secondary structure analysis:
Secondary structure was reconstructed from the 28S sequence
with highest negative free energy ΔG= -324.90 Kcal/mol of T.
wallagonius to provide the basic information for phylogenetic
analysis (). The secondary structural features of 28S
region as shown in the figure were analyzed based on
conserved stems and loops. In the structure of T. wallagonius the
orders of preference of loops in their number were interior loop,
hairpin loop, bulge loop, multi loop and exterior loop 
(). 
The stems stabilize RNA secondary structure and the
different features of the structure are: G+C content (%) = 49.3;
number of GC = 427; AU = 439 and GU = 461. The topology
based only on the predicted RNA secondary structure of the 28S
region resolved most relationships among the species studied.

Discussion
The demand for fish Wallago attu as important food fish and as
valuable protein source has been increased. Among the
parasites infecting fishes, the monogeneans constitute a group,
which plays an important role as pathogens of severe diseases
[] because the monogeneans affect those organs and tissues
which are vital to normal functioning i.e. the gill and skin, the
organ of respiration. This negative effect of monogeneans on
the fish host may vary between species and also bacterial or
viral organisms may get entry into the host through the injuries
infected by monogenean anchors and feeding apparatus 
[,
]. Delimiting species of Thaparocleidus monogeneans is often
difficult, owing to their limited morphological characters and
this may have resulted in a gross under estimation of the true
number of species. The taxonomy of Thaparocleidus species has
been based mainly on morphological data and morphological
differences found on stained and mounted adult specimens
have been widely used to discriminate between the species. Of
the 92 nominal species attributed to the genus Thaparocleidus
and its synonyms, there are 15 species that are considered
species inquirendae/nomina nuda and synonyms and 77 that
are tentatively considered valid. At least 16 nominal species of
Thaparocleidus have been described from W. attu in India 
[,
].
So, it is difficult to ascertain from the morphological
descriptions, even though many are detailed, whether the
differences noted are significant or the result of environmental
or other variation. The original description of T. wallagonius is
incomplete and it needs a detailed redescription 
[,
]. About
fifteen species were considered as synonym of T. wallagonius
because there is no significant structural difference was found
in the copulatory complex and haptoral armature 
[]. But the
DNA based identification used during this study has enabled
the recognition and validation of T. wallagonius, which has
implications for our understanding of their species diversity
estimates.

In the present study, primary sequence analysis revealed the
validity of T. wallagonius and is strongly supported by
molecular evidence inferred from rDNA 28S sequence analysis.
With phylogenetic analysis, as general rule, if the bootstrap
value for a given interior branch of a phylogenetic tree is 70% or
higher, then the topology at that branch is considered reliable.
The present findings show the bootstrap value to be &gt;70% for
the tree obtained. The T. wallagonius species genetically well
distinct from the other species of Thaparocleidus previously
recognized with the same ribosomal marker, available at the
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). The tree
topologies derived from the phylogenetic analysis are in
agreement where they depicted T. wallagonius as genetically
closely related with the sibling-species, including species of
genus Pseudancylodiscoides. Besides molecularly, Thaparocleidus
is morphologically similar to Pseudancylodiscoides and can be
differentiated on the basis of having a divided ventral bar, the
parts of which are well separated and larval type marginal
hooks []. However, there was some species of the genus
Pseudancylodiscoides with similar characteristics described under
Thaparocleidus.

In phylogenetic studies involving secondary-structure analysis
as a tool, RNA folding is used for refining the alignment. The
molecules measurable structural parameters are used directly as
specific characters to construct a phylogenetic tree. These
structures are inferred from the sequence of the nucleotides,
often using energy minimization []. Molecular
morphometrics has been found to be the most powerful tool in
comparison to classical primary sequence analysis, because in
the study of phylogenetics only the size variations of
homologous structural segments are considered, whereas
molecular morphometrics infers the folding pattern of an RNA
molecule. Moreover, the secondary structure analysis also
confirmed the results obtained from primary sequence analysis.
Different RNA folding algorithms also take into account the
structural energy as the major determinant in furnishing RNA
secondary-structure models and conformation, which will
definitely add significant dimensions to our understanding of
the relationships among the sequence features and structural
parameters that come into play in determining the structural
energy. This approach can be further fine-tuned for resolving
ambiguities, using differences at the RNA structural level for
identification of sibling-species complexes. Therefore, structural
model-based analyses of DNA sequence data have become
increasingly important for phylogenetic inference. Application
of the secondary-structure model of rRNA to phylogenetic
analysis leads to trees with less resolved relationships among
clades and probably eliminates some artefactual support for
misinterpreted relationships in the highly diverse genus like
Thaparocleidus. The highly resolved topology in tree parts
suggests that a deep phylogenetic signal has been retained in
the 28S sequences of extant species. However, incorporating
secondary structure information allows improved estimates of
phylogeny among several Thaparocleidus species.

Conclusion
The present identification of the T. wallagonius species with 28S
sequence and secondary structure analysis is consistent with
investigations made using traditional approaches, i.e. by
morphology. RNA secondary structure analysis could be a
valuable tool for distinguishing species and completing their
systematic, because the 28S secondary structure contains more
information than the usual primary sequence alignment.

We are thankful to the Head of the Department of Zoology,
CCS University, Meerut, for providing laboratory facilities.
Funding for this study was provided by the UGC (University
Grants Commission), India, under the Junior Research
Fellowship (RGF) to CV.

Citation:Verma et al, Bioinformation 8(17): 816-819 (2012)

Pairwise alignment of 28S rDNA of T. wallagonius.

Phylogenetic positioning of T. wallagonius based on
28S sequences using neighbour joining (NJ).

Phylogenetic positioning of T. wallagonius based on
28S sequences using maximum parsimony (MP).

Schematic representation of 28S rRNA predicted
secondary structure for T. wallagonius.

Distribution of different loops in the 28S region of T.
wallagonius

