Background
Azo dyes, aromatic moieties linked together by azo (−N=N−)
chromophores represent the largest class of dyes which have
wide applications in textiles, leather, plastics, cosmetics,
printing, paper making, and cosmetic industries for their
versatility. These residual dyes in industrial effluents are a
threat to public health because of its high toxicity and
carcinogenicity [,
]. Many microorganisms including
cyanobacteria could transform these azo dyes into colorless
products, which are initiated by an enzymatic step involving
cleavage of azo linkages with the aid of an azoreductase
enzyme and an electron donor [–]. Azoreductase enzyme of
many microbes confers potential advantages in the
bioremediation of dyes contaminated areas []. The first step in
the biodegradation of azo compounds is the reduction to the
corresponding amines, a reaction catalyzed by azoreductase
resulting to aromatic amines which are further degraded
aerobically []. Similarly azoreductase activity of
cyanobacterial species which are known for their ubiquitous
occurrence in nature and the activity of this enzyme in response
to various mono and diazo compounds have also been reported
[,
], 
but a detailed analysis on the degradation pathway and
the involvement of other enzymes or proteins in general has not
been addressed so far. There is thus an increasing demand on
understanding the function and relationships of proteins in the
degradation pathway. Therefore the present work signifies an
attempt to study the cascade of reaction occurring during
azodye degradation by the azoreductase enzyme in
cyanobacteria using systems biology approach. Most proteins
attain their biological functions through specific interactions
with other proteins. Thus, the study of protein-protein
interactions and the interfaces that mediate these interactions is
of prime importance for the understanding of biological
function []. It is important to understand the enzyme
degradation pathway, its components and the interaction
taking place in the pathway if we plan to regulate the pathway
for increasing the azoreductase activity and better degradation
of the azodyes. Systems biology being a holistic and a pivotal
approach which involves various molecular modeling,
metabolic pathways analysis, and regulatory and signal
transduction networks for understanding better cellular
behavior. There are also various levels of abstraction at which
variety of techniques that has been employed based on the
quality and quantity of data available []. An excellent
application of systems biology in metabolic engineering with
commercial potential has been illustrated for improving lysine
production using E. coli to discover putative genes impacting
network properties and cellular phenotype []. Hence in this
context to the present study, the azoreductase enzyme (azoR)
from the cyanobacterium Nostoc sp. PCC7120 has been
accounted for exhibiting its interaction with its accessory
proteins obtained from the STRING database []. The
interacting proteins are further studied for its structural,
functional, physiochemical properties and its localization using
bioinformatics tools to have detailed information on each of the
components of the azodye degradation pathway. This approach
might be proven to be a novel one for the identification of target
genes, which could increase the azoreductase activity for
accelerating azodyes degradation in context to cyanobacteria.

Methodology
Sequence Retrieval:
The sequence of the azoreductase enzyme was retrieved from
National Centre for Biotechnology Information protein
database at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein having
accession No: Q8YV76 which was isolated from Nostoc sp.
PCC7120 []. Confidence interval map of azoreductase
accessory proteins were analyzed from STRING database at
http://string-db.org/ 
[] and availability for authentic
structures in Protein data bank was checked comparatively in
NCBI Entrez, PDB and SWISSPROT Databases. The protein
sequences of alr2599, all4276, alr2326, alr2106, all1172, alr1063
and alr4046 with undefined function and structure were
retrieved from the STRING database. This search tool identifies
interaction partners according to a variety of criteria including
co localization in one or more genomes (e.g., operon structures),
co-occurrence across genomes (phylogenetic profiling), and,
where available, correlated expression data and / or literature
citations.

Domain Analysis:
The sequences of the accessory proteins were analyzed for
domain architecture using the NCBI domain database CDART at
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Structure/lexington/lexington.cgi 
[].

Physiochemical Characterization:
The physiochemical characterization like theoretical isoelectric
point (pI), molecular wt, no. of positively and negatively
charged residues, extinction coefficient, instability index,
aliphatic index and Gram Average Hydropathicity (GRAVY)
were computed using the Expasy Protparam server at
http://web.expasy.org/protparam/ 
[].

Secondary structure prediction and functional analysis:
The accessory proteins were characterized for its nature of
solubility or presence of transmembrane regions using
membrane protein prediction system, SOSUI at
http://bp.nuap.nagoya-u.ac.jp/sosui/ 
[] and disulphide
linkages were computed by DISULFIND server at
http://disulfind.dsi.unifi.it/ 
[]. The Secondary structure was
predicted using PSI-PRED server at
http://bioinf.cs.ucl.ac.uk/psipred/ 
[].

Model building and evaluation:
The homology modeling for the seven accessory proteins were
performed using CPHmodels server at
www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/CPHmodels/ 
[] with templates
2hzt, 1tq5, 1yyv, 1lfp, 2ocs, 3acl and 3ppu respectively
generated with highest similarity percentage. Evaluation of the
3D structures modeled was carried out using MOLPROBITY
server at http://molprobity.biochem.duke.edu/ 
[]. The
constructed models were energy minimized by QMEAN server
at http://swissmodel.expasy.org/qmean/cgi/index.cgi 
[,
]. 
The overall stereo chemical properties of the protein were
analyzed using QMEAN server and viewed under RASMOL at
www.openrasmol.org 
[].

Analysis of Ligand binding sites and pockets:
Ligand binding sites were predicted by QSITE FINDER at
http://www.modelling.leeds.ac.uk/qsitefinder/ 
[].

Docking studies:
Docking study of the azoreductase enzyme and the accessory
proteins were carried out using PATCHDOCK server at
http://bioinfo3d.cs.tau.ac.il/PatchDock/ 
[] and energy
minimization was performed before and after docking using
QMEAN server.

Discussion
The confidence interval map of azoreductase interacting
proteins and the confidence scores of each protein are depicted
in (). 
There are basically 10 accessory interacting
proteins which are involved with azoreductase enzyme (azoR)
activity as revealed from the STRING database. The confidence
scores of all the proteins are evaluated to be good and all the
interacting proteins are neighboring proteins. The interacting
proteins chosen for analysis are alr2599, all4276, alr2326,
alr2106, all1172, alr1063 which are hypothetical and do not have
a comprehensive three dimensional structure. So functional
analysis is carried out using CDART for domain prediction and
resulted with important domains responsible for transcription
and xenobiotic degradation  (see supplementary
material). The protein alr2106 constitutes of domain which
belonged to the family of DNA-binding protein that acts as a
positive regulator. The physicochemical parameters are
computed using Protparam and are compiled in  (see
supplementary material). Analysis of all the protein sequences
with DISULFIND showed the absence of disulfide bond in all
the proteins. Proteins with disulfide bonds are extracellular
proteins and hence these interacting proteins are intracellular
[]. 
Analysis with SOSUI revealed that the interacting proteins
are all soluble proteins and are present in the cytoplasm and do
not contain any signal peptides.

Hence these proteins do not belong to the family of
transmembrane proteins. Secondary structure prediction using
PSIPRED revealed the average number of amino acids favoring
alpha helix in all the proteins comparatively higher than any
other secondary structure which implies the fact that
intracellular proteins contain amino acids favoring alpha helix
than any other secondary structure []. The result obtained
from SOSUI, DISULFIND and PSIPRED revealed the
intracellular localization of the accessory proteins and hence
give an insight into the site of azo dyes degradation. Homology
modeling of the seven accessory proteins was further carried
out using CPHmodels and the resulting structures along with
the Ramachandran plots are illustrated in (). 3D model
quality estimation for the hypothetical proteins are carried out
using QMEAN Z-scores. Binding pockets prediction of azoR
revealed many binding sites indicating that there is more than
one important site, giving insights to competitive inhibition
with the active site or the presence of multiple substrate binding
sites. The docking study showed (, 

supplementary material), the protein alr2106 has the best
docking score with azoR which also have the best confidence
score obtained from STRING database. It is than followed by
proteins alr2326 and alr1063 which are involved in substrate
specification and detoxification. Amongst all the accessory
proteins alr2106 showed the best confidence score, best docking
score and the CDART result showed that it consists of DNAbinding
domain that acts as positive regulator. It is followed by
other proteins such as alr1063 and alr2326 which are involved
in substrate specification and xenobiotic degradation. This
establishes a relationship between azoR and the seven
hypothetical azoreductase accessory proteins of the
azoreductase (azoR) enzyme pathway.

Conclusion
Knowledge of important accessory proteins in such pathways
enables identification of appropriate targets and co-targets.
Here from this study we can propose transcription regulator,
alr2106, and other important proteins, alr1063, alr2326 involved
in substrate specification and xenobiotic degradation which can
be considered for targeting the azodye degradation pathway.
Identifying the location of ligand binding sites will help us in
comparing the different functional sites of azoreductase and the
aspect of broad substrate specificity. Secondary structure
prediction and functional analysis will give an insight to the
location of these proteins along with the site of dye
degradation. This information will further help us in
understanding the azodye take up by the microbes and how it
has been degraded.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We take this opportunity to acknowledge the funding received
from the Department of Biotechnology, Govt. of India for
setting up BIF facility under BTISNET programme in
Department of Biotechnology, St. Edmund's College, Shillong.
We also express our heartfelt gratitude to Dr Sylvanus Lamare,
Principal, St. Edmund's College, Shillong for his support
throughout the work.

Citation:Philem &amp; Adhikari, Bioinformation 8(7): 296-300 (2012)

(a) Showing the confidence interval map of the seven
azoR interacting accessory proteins that plays a pivotal role in
azodye degradation pathway; (b) Graph representing the
confidence score of the accessory proteins of azoreductase
(azoR) enzyme. The scores are in the category of Highest - 0.9;
High - 0.7; Medium - 0.400 and low - 0.15.

Homology modeled structure and the corresponding
Ramamchandran plot analysis of the modeled structure.

Docking result of the seven accessory proteins with
azoreductase enzyme. The best docking result was obtained for
alr2106, alr2326, alr1063 with the best global energy.

