Background
Rab proteins, the largest subfamily of small GTPases, consist of
more than 70 members [,
]. Rab proteins function with their
effectors in distinct organelle membranes and regulate the
docking, tethering, motility and fusion of intracellular
membranes in the eukaryotic organisms []. One member of
this family, Rab9, cycles between active (GTP-bound) and
inactive (GDP-bound) conformations [–
]. It is localized in the
late endosome membranes and required to transport the
mannose 6-phosphate receptors to the trans-Golgi network
from late endosomes [–
]. Moreover, Rab9 is also involved in
the late endosome morphology and lysosome biogenesis [,
].
Rab9 can also act as a cellular target for some pathogens such as
HIV and Salmonella [,
]. Some effectors of Rab9 have been
discovered that include RhoBTB3, Tip47, GCC185, all of which
are involved in recycling the mannose 6-phosphate receptors
[–]. 
RhoBTB3 and GCC186 are localized to the trans-Golgi
network. They facilitate the fusion of the Rab9-bound vesicles
and the TGN [,
]. The two conserved effectors of Rab9 in
eukaryotic organisms are RUTBC1 and RUTBC2 [,
].

Rho GTPases, the key regulator of actin cytoskeleton, regulate
the most aspects of cell dynamics, including morphogenesis
migration and division [,
]. Some members are classified as
atypical GTPases because their sequences are not like classical
GTPases. RhoBTB3, an atypical Rho GTPase, is much larger
than other Rho GTPases. It consists of a Rho GTPase-related
domain near its N-terminus and a BTB domain near its Cterminus
[]. 
These Rho-GTPases have an active GTP-bound
and an inactive GDP-bound state. The GTP-GDP binding cycle
is tightly regulated. The inactive form is activated at the cell
membrane by GDP–GTP exchange with the help of a large
family (~80 proteins) of guanine nucleotide exchange factors
[]. 
The BTB domain is found to have a key role in proteinprotein
interaction that participate in many functions such as
cytoskeleton regulation [,
], transcription repression 
[,
]
and protein ubiquitination/degradation [].

In the present study we report the prediction of 3D structures
of human Rab9 GTPase and RhoBTB3 C-terminus (designated
as Rho_Cterm thereafter) based on the crystal structures of
human Rab9 GTPase mutant and human SPOP BTB domain
respectively. The modeled structures of Rab9 and Rho_Cterm
are of high quality as suggested by the Ramachandran plot. The
ZDOCK online server [] was used to predict the complex
structure. The binding interface of the resultant complex
matches the experimental data. And the MD simulation
performed with the complex shows that the complex is stable.

Methodology
Homology modeling:
The Rab9 GTPase and RhoBTB3 with accession No. P51151 and
O94955 were used as target sequences respectively. The crystal
structure of human Rab9 GTPase fragment (residues 1-177) is
available at Protein Data Bank (PDB). So, we have made an
attempt to model the complete sequence (residues 1-201) of
human Rab9 GTPase. To find suitable templates for the
modeling of these proteins, BLASTP server and the other server
(http://toolkit.tuebingen.mpg.de/psi_blast/) were used
against PDB using default parameters [,
]. Both servers give
the same results .The high-resolution crystal structure of
human Rab9 GTPase (PDB ID: 1WMS) and crystal structure of
the human SPOP BTB Domain (PDB ID: 4J8Z) were selected
as templates for Rab9 GTPase and Rho_Cterm (residues 420-
607) respectively. The models were built using the Molecular
Operating Environment (MOE). A series of 10 independent
models for each target protein were built using the Boltzmannweighted
randomized procedure [] combined with
specialized logic for the handling of sequence insertions and
deletions []. Out of 10 models, the models with best MOE
packing scores were selected for each target. Both models were
superimposed over its templates using protein superpose
module implemented in MOE. The structural evaluation and
stereo chemical analysis were done using Ramachandran plot,
ProSA [] and 
Procheck [].

Protein-protein docking:
For protein-protein docking, we used unrestrained pair wise
rigid body docking for Rab9 GTPase and Rho_Cterm. The
coordinates of Rab9 and Rho_Cterm models were used for
energy minimization prior to docking procedure. The energy
was minimized using AMBER99 force field implemented in
MOE software. ZDOCK server [] was utilized for proteinprotein
docking to predict and evaluate the interactions in
Rab9-Rho_Cterm complex. Docking was carried out without
specifying the binding residues so that the docking results will
reflect the most possible interaction patterns without any
arbitrary restrain.

This ZDOCK server ranks the 100 most probable predictions on
the basis of electrostatic complementarity, hydrophobicity and
geometry of the molecular surface out of thousands of
candidates. By manual analysis of the complexes, the important
residues of RhoBTB3 mentioned by Espinosa EJ et al. 
[], were
found in the complex that is ranked second on the basis of
docking Z-Score.

Molecular Dynamics Simulation:
Molecular dynamics simulation was performed utilizing
AMBER14 software package. The atomic coordinates of the
Rho_Cterm-Rab9 complex were obtained from the ZDOCK
online server. The system was made neutral by adding counterions.
The resultant system was then solvated in a rectangular
box of TIP3P water with a buffer of 8 Å []. Long-range
electrostatic interactions were computed by employing Particle
Mesh Ewald (PME) with the default setting in AMBER14. Force
field ff14SB was used for the MD simulation. The system was
energy-minimized by steepest descent and conjugate gradient
methods. Subsequently, the system was heated from 0 to 300 K
for 100 ps and then equilibrated for 400 ps. After equilibration,
a MD simulation was executed for 40ns.

Results &amp; Discussion
Homology modeling:
In order to build the 3D models for Rab9 GTPase and
Rho_Cterm, the BLASTP searches were carried out against the
PDB. We identified the entry 1WMS with 95% identity to Rab9
GTPase and entry 4J8Z with 33% identity to Rho_Cterm
(Residues 420-607), which were used as templates for the
modeling. The target and template protein sequences were
aligned as shown in . The modeled structure of Rab9
consists of six β-sheets surrounded by six α-helices. Rab9 has a
classical nucleotide-binding fold that is present in all Rab
GTPase family members (). The modeled structure of
Rho_Cterm consists of three β-sheets and ten α-helices 
(). The aromatic interactions and hydrogen bonds between α-
helices and β-sheets of Rho_Cterm model contribute toward the
stability of the structure. The aromatic interaction in
Rho_Cterm is found between the Phe474 of α3 and Tyr501 of α5
(). The β1 and β2 sheets of Rho_Cterm are antiparallel
to each other. This arrangement is supported on one side by
hydrogen bonds between Asp421 of β1 and Arg435 of α1 and
on the opposite site by the interaction of Thr429, Glu425 and
Tyr464 through hydrogen bonding network (). Along
with this, all other α-helices are connected to each other
through a hydrogen-bonding network. The hydrogen bond
between the Gln507 and Glu499 supports the parallel
arrangement of α5 and α6. Moreover, the α3 is held
perpendicular to the α1 by the hydrogen bond between Arg441
of α1 and Leu478 of α3 (). The residues Ala498,
Asp532 and Ile533, which are proved to be important for the
interaction with Rab9, are present in the α5 and in the loop
between α7/ α8 respectively [].

The quality of modeled structures was evaluated through
Ramachandran plot. The evaluation of backbone Psi and Phi
dihedral angles for Rab9 model revealed that 85.9 % residues lie
in favored regions, 11 % residues lie in allowed regions and
only 3 % residues lie in the outlier regions. In addition, the
Ramachandran plot tools implemented in MOE show that Ala2,
Gln35 and Leu36 fall in the outlier regions but after MD
simulation there are only two residues Asp52 and Ala64 in the
outlier regions (). The stereo chemical evaluation of
backbone Psi and Phi dihedral angles for Rho_Cterm model
revealed that 82.6 % residues lie in favored regions, 12.6 %
residues lie in allowed regions and only 4.7 % residues lie in
outlier regions. The residues in the outlier region are Ser520,
Asp535, Ser545 and Met589 but after the MD simulation no
residues were found in the outlier regions (). The
structural superposition of alpha carbon (Cα) of Rab9 and
Rho_Cterm models over their templates has root mean square
deviation (RMSD) of 0.94 Å and 1.008 Å respectively 
(). The qualities of the models were further evaluated by
ProSA that checks the potential errors in the models. This
server calculates the Z-score of the input structure that is the
measure of quality of the model and the deviation of the total
energy of the structure with respect to an energy distribution
derived from random conformations. The value of the Z-score
was plotted with the Z-scores of all similar size proteins
determined experimentally through NMR and X-ray. Analysis
of the Rab9 and Rho_Cterm with ProSA shows a Z-score of -
5.21 and -3.73 respectively, indicating no significant deviation
from the scores determined for the proteins of similar size
(). To confirm the above results, the model was also
evaluated by Procheck. The results of Procheck are given in
 (see in supplementary material).

Protein-Protein Docking and MD simulation:
Protein-protein docking is an important method to understand
the structural information on protein-protein interactions 
[–
]. The structural interface between RhoBTB3 and Rab9 has
been described previously through experimental procedure 
[]
but their atomic level interactions have not been available yet.
The unavailability of the complex structure is a hindrance to
understand that how Rab9 binds with RhoBTB3 to facilitate the
protein transport from endosomes to the Trans Golgi network.

The docking of Rab9 and Rho_Cterm was performed using
ZDOCK program. The  shows the shape
complementarity of Rab9 and Rho_Cterm. The interface of the
complex is formed by the α-helices and β-sheets from both
partners (). To study the stability of this complex, the
molecular dynamics (MD) simulation of the complex was
performed with the program Amber14. The complex energy
was minimized; the model was solvated and ionized with the
addition of Na+. The MD was performed at 300K for 40ns. The
stability of the complex was monitored during MD simulation
using RMSD with respect to the initial structure. The RMSD
converges around 6 Å after 16ns simulation and has shown no
more significant fluctuation afterwards, revealing that the
complex of Rho_Cterm and Rab9 is stable. Most of the RMSD is
contributed by the residues 175-201 of Rab9 and the residues
584-607 of RhoBTB3, which are not the binding regions.
Without these regions, the RMSD converges at about 2.5 Å after
7ns (). The most important residues for the binding,
Asp532 of RhoBTB3, as mentioned by Eric J. Espinosa et.al 
[],
makes two hydrogen bonds with Arg68 of Rab9. The OD1 of
Asp532 makes two hydrogen bonds with the HH11 and HH21
of Arg68. Another important residue Ile533 of RhoBTB3, as
mentioned by Eric J. Espinosa et.al, also makes a hydrogen
bond with Gly41 of Rab9. In addition, Leu531 of RhoBTB3
makes a hydrogen bond with Gln66 and further strengthens the
binding interface (). We observed from the MD
simulation that the binding site fluctuates a little bit but the
important residues involved in binding do not change before
and after the simulation.

The root mean square fluctuation (RMSF) of the system was
also calculated. As the RMSF calculation is used to identify the
flexible region in protein or complex, the residues having low
RMSF value is regard as more stable. As shown in , the
binding residues in the interface, which are highlighted in gray,
have significant lower RMSF values (ranging from 2-3 Å) than
the rest of the protein. Therefore the binding interface lies in the
stable portion of the protein complex.

Conclusions
The modeled structures of human Rab9 and Rho_Cterm are of
good quality as suggested by the Ramachandran plot, Procheck
program and ProSA server. The unrestrained pair wise docking
performed with ZDOCK indicates that Asp532 and Ile533 of
human RhoBTB3 are involved in the binding of Rab9, which is
consistent with the published experimental results. As revealed
by the complex structure, the binding interface on the Rab9 side
includes Gly41, Gln66 and Arg68. The MD simulation
performed with the complex shows the complex is stable along
the 40ns simulation process. Further PCR mutagenesis is
needed to confirm the importance of interface residues in Rab9
that are indicated in our prediction.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We would like to thank Professor Yi Xiao and Mr. Jun Wang for
the helpful discussion. This work is financially supported by
National Key Basic Research Program of China (No.
2013CB933900) and National Natural Science Foundation of
China (No. 31000326).

Citation:Junaid et al, Bioinformation 10(12): 757-763 (2014)

A) Partial Alignment of Rho_Cterm with its template:
Human SPOP BTB Domain (PDB ID 4J8Z); B) Partial Alignment
of Rab9 with its template: Human Rab9GTPase mutant (PDB ID
1WMS).

A) The modeled structure of Rab9; B) The modeled
structure of Rho_Cterm; C) The 3D representation of aromatic
interactions between helices α3 and α5 of Rho_Cterm; D) The
3D representation of hydrogen bonding network between
Asp421 and Arg435, Thr429 and Glu425, Glu425 and Tyr464 of
Rho_Cterm; E) The 3D representation of hydrogen bonding
network between Gln490 and Glu469, Gln507 and Glu499,
Arg441 and Leu478 of Rho_Cterm.

A) Ramachandran Plot of Rab9 after MD simulation.
The residues shown in blue color are in outlier region; B)
Ramachandran Plot of Rho_Cterm. After MD simulation there
is no residue in outlier region; C) The superposition of Rab9
homology model over its template 1WMS, The Rab9 is shown
in green while the template is shown in golden color; D) The
superposition of Rho_Cterm homology model over its template
4J8Z, The Rho_Cterm is shown in green while the template is
shown in golden color.

A) Protein model quality scores of Rab9 and B)
Rho_Cterm; The Z-scores of Rab9 and Rho_Cterm are
represented in the plot by large black dots. The Z-scores of all
proteins in PDB, determined by X-ray crystallography, are
shown by light blue color. The Z-scores of all proteins in PDB,
determined by NMR spectroscopy, are shown by dark blue
color.

A) The 3D representation of shape complementarity
of Rab9-Rho_Cterm complex; B) The overall 3D representation
of Rab9-Rho_Cterm complex. The shaded portion shows the
binding interface area. The Rho Cterm is colored in blue and
the Rab9 is colored in magenta.

A) RMSD versus time plot of Rab9-Rho_Cterm
complex during 40ns of simulation. The black line represents
the RMSD of whole complex. The RMSD converges at about 6
Å after 16 ns and it remains stable afterwards. The red line
represents the RMSD of truncated complex (without short
regions at C-terminal of both proteins). The RMSD converges at
about 2.5 Å after 7 ns; B) The 3D representation of hydrogen
bonding network between Rab9 and Rho_Cterm after MD
simulation of 40ns. The Rho_Cterm is colored in red and Rab9
is colored in blue.

RMSF graph of Rab9-Rho_Cterm complex. The
shaded areas show the residues involved in binding. The
residues at the left of dotted line are for Rab9 and residues at
the right of dotted line are for Rho_Cterm.

