Background
Dengue fever is a serious threat to global health issues.
Geographic distribution of this disease has undergone
tremendous expansion over the last 30 years. Approximately
100 countries are endemic for dengue fever and 40% of the
world's population or about 2.5 billion people in the tropical
and sub-tropics have an increased risk of catching the disease.
More than 50 million of low-grade fever infections with
400,000 cases of dengue hemorrhagic fever are reported
annually, which has caused many deaths of children in several
countries in the Asian [].

Dengue virus has four serotypes i.e., DENV-1, DENV-2,
DENV-3, and DENV-4. The classification is based on the type
of antibodies produced in the human body after infection.
These four serotypes had the same morphology and genome
but show different antigens so that a person can be infected
with this virus more than once in the absence of complete
cross-protection [].

Nonstructural (NS) enzyme such as NS3 protease with NS2B
cofactor, NS3 helicase/nucleoside triposfatase (NTPase)/
RNA 5 'triposfatase (RTPase), NS5 methyltransferase (Mtase),
and NS5 RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) were
known to have an important role in the replication of dengue
virus []. 
Currently, NS3 and NS5 of dengue virus enzyme are
the most understood mechanism, making these enzyme as an
ideal target for antiviral manufacture of dengue virus 
[].

Several studies related to inhibition of the enzyme which is a
potential target in the dengue virus have been carried out.
Tambunan et al., [] designed cyclic peptides CKRKC as
potential inhibitors of NS2B-NS3 protease. Tambunan et al., 
[]
also designed of 49 cyclic peptides based on amino acid that
could be recognized by the active site of NS2-NS3 protease
and generating the best ligand CRKRC. Podvinec et al., 
[]
used the S-Adenosil-homocysteine (SAH), triphosphate
ribavirin, and sinefungin as analogues inhibitors of the NS5
methyltransferase. The result showed that SAH has stability
issues and indicate the nature of toxicity, ribavirin has a low
activity, and sinefungin has low specificity and problems of
nephrotoxicity. Ribavirin triphosphate (RTP) and RTPanalogues
were designed as potential antiviral NS5
methyltransferase []. Lim et al., 
[] discovered several
potential compounds that are active against dengue virus NS5
methyltransferase through virtual screening using structurebased
and ligand-based methods.

NS5 methyltransferase has two ties sides that are connected by
a Y-shaped slit. The first binding site is the SAM (methyl
donor) binding site and the second is the RNA-cap binding
site that likely shallow and smaller in size 
[]. This enzyme
has two methylation processes, first step movement of a
methyl group to the SAM binding site and then transfer the
methyl group to the guanine bases of RNA. Although NS5
methyltransferase has two methylation processes, these are
occurring at the same place []. RNA substrate is expected to
change positions in order to receive the methyl group on the
SAM binding site [].

Currently, research on peptides for drug design and discovery
are the most promising fields in the development of new
drugs. More than 140 peptides were used as drugs and more
than 400 peptides have entered on preclinical phase with
average growth of more than 15% in a year 
[]. This study
was conducted to design cyclic peptide for two binding pocket
of dengue virus NS5 methyltransferase, so it could be used as
an inhibitor of dengue virus NS5 methyltransferase.

Methodology
Ligands design and preparation:
Determination of amino acid sequence was based on natural
substrate NS5 methyltransferase that are regonized by the
binding sites i.e., SAM binding site and RNA-cap binding site.
Peptides were designed as cyclopentapeptides, which were
joined by disulfide bonding at each terminal cystein and
modeled into three-dimensional structure using ACDlabs. We
designed cyclopentapeptides as ligand for SAM binding site
and RNA-cap binding site. Preparation of cyclic peptides
based on the polarity of amino acid residues at the active sites
of the SAM and RNA-cap. Cyclopentapeptide optimization
was carried out by choosing wash option, partial charge and
energy minimization using MMFF94 forcefield, gas phase
solvation and RMS gradient 0.001 kcal/ Å mol 
[].

NS5 methyltransferase preparation:
Structure of NS5 methyltransferase with code 2P41 was
obtained from PDB and was loaded into Molecular Operating
Environment (MOE) 2008.10. The enzyme structure was
repaired and optimized using the protonate3D option in MOE
[]. 
Hydrogen atoms were added by choosing partial charge
option. Energy minimization was performed by employing
MMFF94x force field, gas phase solvation and RMS gradient
0.05 kcal/ Å mol [].

Molecular docking:
Molecular docking was performed by choosing Simulationdock
option in MOE. Triangle matcher was generated as
placement method. Triangle matcher method generates poses
in a systematic manner and more accurate way than the alpha
triangle method by aligning the ligand triplet of atoms with
the triplet of alpha spheres in cavities of tight atomic packing
[]. 
A London dG scoring function was used to rank
candidate poses. Forcefield was used in refinement and
repetition was set to 100 with only one best pose to be
retained.

Toxicity prediction:
Analysis of toxicity of the ligands were carried out on the best
ligand docking results. Parameters that will be seen from the
nature of the ligand are carcinogenicity and mutagenicity. The
analysis was performed using software ToxTree v2.1.0 and
Osiris Property Explorer. Toxicology analysis based on the
rule Benigni / Bossa rulebase for mutagenicity and
carcinogenicity developed by Romualdo Benigni and Cecilia
Bossa from the Instituto Superiore in Sanita, Rome, Italy, and
approved by the European Chemical Bureau, Institute for
Health and Consumers Protection, European Commission-
Joint Research Centre (JRC) in 2008..

Disscussion
Ligands Screening:
The inhibitors cyclopentapeptide designed was consisted of
two cysteines at the end and three other amino acids are
combined in the middle. Preparation of cyclic peptides by S-S
bridge is intended to improve the stability of the ligand 
[].
From combination of 20 amino acids based on polar and
nonpolar, we obtained 1635 cyclopentapeptides as ligand for
SAM binding site and 736 cyclopentapeptides for RNA-cap
binding site. Screening of all ligands resulted in obtaining
eight best ligands. The eight cyclopentapeptides that we
designed are illustrated in (). Four cyclopentapeptides
as the best inhibitor on the SAM active side and four
cyclopentapeptides on the RNA-cap pocket. 
 (see
supplementary material) showed that CTWYC and CYEFC as
the best inhibitor for SAM and RNA-cap site respectively.

SAM Binding Site:
Residues that are on the SAM binding site includes Ser56,
Lys61, Cys82, Gly86, Trp87, Thr104, Lys105, Asp131, Val132,
Phe133, Asp146, Ile147, Lys181, and Glu217. It had been
reported that residues Lys61, Asp146, Lys181 and Glu217 are
important on the SAM active site 
[].

Result by screening of 1635 ligands was obtained CTWYC as
the best inhibitor of the SAM site with binding free energy
(ΔGbinding) of -30.72 kcal/mol. There are three polar
interactions formed between CTWYC and SAM site (),
i.e., polar basic, polar acidic, and polar uncharged. Lys61,
Lys105 and Lys181 are polar basic. The sidechain of Lys61 and
Lys181 were interacted with CTWYC molecule by forming
hydrogen bonds with the carboxyl site of cystein, and the
backbond nitrogen of Lys105 was interacted by forming
hydrogen bond with the 4–OH site of tyrosine. Glu217 is polar
acidic, the backbond oxygen of Glu217 was interacted with
CTWYC molecule by forming hydrogen bond with amino site
of cystein. Ser150 is polar uncharged, the backbond nitrogen
of Ser150 was interacted by forming hydrogen bond with the
OH sidechain of threonine.

Binding free energy (ΔGbinding) of cyclic peptide CTWYC while
compared with SAM and SAH standards, has a value of
ΔGbinding is much greater, it provides a sense that strength of
CTWYC to inhibit the SAM active site was better stable. pKi
value or affinity of CTWYC also larger from the other.

RNA-cap Site:
Residues has a role important at the RNA-cap site are Lys14,
Leu17, Asn18, Leu20, Phe25, Lys29, Ser150, and Ser151 
[].
CYEFC cyclic peptide is the best inhibitor of RNA-cap site
with binding free energy (ΔGbinding) of -22.89 kcal/mol. This
result was obtained by screening of 736 cyclic peptides. There
are three polar interactions formed between CYEFC and RNAcap
site (), i.e., polar basic, polar acidic, and polar
uncharged. Lys29 is polar basic; the sidechain of Lys29 was
interacted with CYEFC molecule by forming hydrogen bonds
with the OH carboxyl of glutamate sidechain. Glu149 is polar
acidic, the sidechain of Glu149 was interacted by forming
hydrogen bonds with amina site of cystein. Asn18, Ser150,
and Ser214 are polar uncharged. The backbond nitrogen of
Asn18 was interacted with CYEFC molecule by forming
hydrogen bonds with 4-OH of tyrosine. Ser150 was interacted
with CYEFC by forming two hydrogen bonds, from the
backbond and the sidechain of Ser150. The backbond of Ser150
was performed hydrogen bonds with amine site of cystein and
the sidechain of Ser150 was performed hydrogen bonds with
oxygen carboxyl of cystein. Ser214 was interacted by
performing hydrogen bonds with carboxyl sidechain of
glutamic acid.

Binding free energy (ΔGbinding) of cyclic peptide CYEFC while
compared with RTP standards, has a value of ΔGbinding is much
greater, it provides a sense that strength of CTWYC to inhibit
the RNA-cap site was better stable. pKi value or affinity of
CYEFC also larger from the other but the value is below from
the standard .

Toxicity Prediction:
Toxicological prediction using Toxtree, all the ligands for both
of the targets SAM and RNA-cap sites did not have structural
alerts (SAs) which are genotoxic and nongenotoxic properties.
QSARs approach also showed that all ligands are not
mutagenic or carcinogenic. The same results occured in the
standard ligand RTP had no structural alerts (SAs) which are
genotoxic and nongenotoxic. In other hand, standard ligand
SAH was known to have structural alerts (SAs) which are
nongenotoxic compounds and has potential as carcinogens.
Predictions using the Osiris Property Explorer, SAM and SAH
standards ligands have a higher tendency to mutagenic and
effective reproductive properties, whereas the RTP standard
ligand has no issues either on the mutagenic or tumorigenic
properties, but has problems with the effective reproductive.
All peptide ligands, for both targets did not have tendencies
toward toxicity properties.

Conclusion
We have performed several cyclic peptides as potential
inhibitor of dengue virus NS5 Mtase through virtual screening
using docking-based methods. These peptides were predicted
to bind by forming hydrogen bonds to SAM and RNA-cap
sites with higher binding free energy (ΔGbinding) than
standards. CTWYC cyclic peptide is the best inhibitor of the
SAM site with binding free energy (ΔGbinding) of -30.72
kcal/mol. CYEFC cyclic peptide is the best inhibitor of RNAcap
site with binding free energy (ΔGbinding) of -22.89 kcal/mol.
CTWYC and CYEFC did not have a tendency towards toxicity
properties. CTWYC and CYEFC expected that it could be used
as potential antiviral drug candidate, which can inhibit the
SAM and RNA-cap binding sites of dengue virus NS5 Mtase.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This research is support by University of Indonesia (Riset
Unggulan Universitas Indonesia tahap-1, 2012). The authors
are grateful to Prof. T. Khayamian, Departement of
Chemintry, Isfahan Technological University, Isfahan, Iran for
his critical comments and excellent assistance in proof-reading
the manuscript.

Citation:Idrus et al, Bioinformation 8(8): 348-352 (2012)

Illustrates (2D) eight cyclopentapeptides by S-S
bridge, (a) Four cyclopentapeptides as the best inhibitor for
the SAM active side and (b) Four cyclopentapeptides for the
RNA-cap pocket.

Interactions formed between CTWYC and SAM
binding site. There are three polar interactions by forming
hydrogen bonds between CTWYC and SAM binding site.

Interactions formed between CYEFC and RNA-cap
site. There are three polar interactions by forming hydrogen
bonds between CYEFC and RNA-cap site.

