Background
The complexity of mammalian genomes is compounded by the
presence of large number of repetitive elements whose
functions have not yet been fully deciphered. Repeats
contribute to more than 50% of the human genome 
[].
Depending on their distribution within the genomes, repeat
sequences can be divided into tandemly arrayed and
interspersed repeats. Aberrant transpositions of these repeats
contribute to number of diseases such as cholinesterase
deficiency, Ehlers-Danlose Syndrome,
Glanzmannthrombasthenia, Lesch-Nyhan syndrome 
[],
Huntington's disease [].

Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) 
[] database
catalogues Mendelian disorders in man and the corresponding
genes with description of the diseases in human. TRbase 
[]
relates tandem repeats to human diseases. Satellog 
[] is
another database that describes tandem repeats in disease genes
with the option of obtaining OMIM IDs. Transpogene 
[] covers
transposable elements located inside protein coding genes of
seven species including human genome with no option for
searching either by disease or repeat-related information. None
of these contain options for a homology-based search. Here we
describe a dynamically searchable database of disease gene
reference sequences, with options for text-based and sequencebased
searches. The database provides information on the
repeat structure within the gene. This information can be
retrieved through gene-centric or disease-centric searches or
with the help of a query sequence, with FASTA as the search
tool.

Methodology
Implementation
RiDs db is a relational database with well-defined schema and
has been implemented using the Structured Query Language
(SQL) from the MySQL server version 5.1 
(www.mysql.com).
Tandem repeats were detected using the Tandem Repeats
Finder (TRF) program [] 
(version 4.01); interspersed repeats
were identified with the RepeatMasker program (Version:
open-3.2.9), using repeat masker library (RMLib: 20090120).
The Disease information was downloaded from the OMIM
database []. Reference sequences for disease genes were
extracted from Ensembl [] database using BioMart 
[] (Homo
sapiens genes GRCh37). The default parameters were used for
identification of interspersed repeats with rmblast as search
engine, DNA source as human. The TRF detection parameters
were (match, mismatch and insertion/deletion scores of +2, ­7,
­7) with a minimal alignment score of 50 as the cut-off for
reporting repeats. FASTA [] program is implemented on local
server. FASTA is a DNA/Protein sequence alignment software
package, which uses local sequence alignment to identify
homologous sequences in databases. The sequence library is
created in FASTA format for homology based searching of
disease gene sequences.

Database Structure
RiDs db contains disease genes and the corresponding
sequences with information on interspersed repeats and
tandem repeats contained in them. Four tables (a-d) have been
constructed for storing the data in a structured manner using
MySQL; The Disease Information Table (a) consists of disease
information downloaded from OMIM database 
[] with OMIM
ID, title, gene name, locus and genetic disorder information.
This serves as the central table of RiDs db. The gene symbols
were used to extract sequence ID, OMIM ID and sequences
from Ensembl database [] using the BioMart 
[] tool. The
annotated information was stored in Gene Information Table
(b) that is linked with disease information table via OMIM ID as
primary/foreign key in the database. The sequences
downloaded from Ensembl database were subjected to
RepeatMasker analysis for the detection of interspersed repeats.
Repeat information was stored in a third table viz. RiDs db
Repeat information table (c). The tandem repeats were
identified using TRF [] and the output was stored in Tandem
repeats table (d). The tables are linked through the sequence
IDs. A library of reference sequences was constructed and
stored in FASTA format for sequence based homology search
(FASTA search) (). Robust PHP scripts were written for
efficient processing of data and for making dynamic and
interactive Web pages. The main page of RiDs db contains
links to various options provided for searching. It can be
queried by either free text or limited keyword or by FASTA
program. The free or limited text search theme is centralized to
gene centered information,

disease centered information and

Global Search. All queries will guide the user to available disease and repeat information.


The links are also provided for three model organisms, viz. Mouse 
[], Zebrafish
[] and Drosophila 
[]. For ease of navigation, links to OMIM,
RepeatMasker, TRF, Ensembl and FASTA program are
provided.

Conclusion
Repeats are no more considered junk. Abundance of repeats in
the human genome indicates probable functions, either for selfpropagation
or perhaps to fulfill an unknown requirement at
the level of the genome. Therefore to understand these
repetitive elements in relation to diseases is important. Repeats
in diseases database is a unified platform for studying repeats
present in disease genes. Sequence based homology search is a
unique feature of this database allowing comparative genomics
based query of patient specific as well as novel sequences with
reference genes, which will provide more insights into the
association of repeats with specific diseases and hence could be
a valuable database for biomedical informatics.

Citation:Chaturvedi et al, Bioinformation 7(2): 96-97 (2011)

Data flow diagram: The figure describes the input and
output for RiDs db. 1) Disease related information from OMIM
db; 2-5) disease gene sequences from Ensembl via BioMart
subjected to repeat identification using RepeatMasker and TRF;
6, 7) repeat output in RiDs db; 8, 9) modes of search; 10, 11
result.

