Background
The rapid industrialization and mainly geological sources cause 
inadvertent exposure of arsenic (As) to humans through 
water pollution []. The non-anthropogenic sources of arsenic 
[both arsenate (AsV) and arsenite (AsIII)] are the major causes 
of their chronic exposure to 100 million people worldwide, in 
the form of drinking water with a very high unacceptable level 
[]. In present, mainly in the several regions of India and 
Bangladesh, a major population drinks groundwater with 
arsenic concentrations above than the World Health 
Organization (WHO) acceptable standard [,
]. Apart from 
their presence in water bodies, in clinical medicine, arsenic is 
used as arsenic trioxide in tandem with all-trans-retinoic acid to 
treat acute promyelocytic leukemia, [,
], and in some drugs 
along with antimony to treat parasitic infections, african 
sleeping sickness, and leishmaniasis []. The Multidrug 
resistance-associated protein1 is a protein, which is in humans is 
encoded by the ABCC1 gene. It is a polytopic transmembrane 
protein that belongs to the ABC Transporter family, and acts as 
an efflux pump. It transports conjugated organic anions and 
also co -transports certain unmodified xenobiotics e.g. 
vincristine with glutathione (GSH). It is equally important for 
the transports inorganic arsenic as a GSH conjugate and GSTP1-
1 may have a synergistic role in this process [,
]. ABCC1 
mediates the cellular efflux of a variety of xenobiotics, typically 
as glucuronide sulfate, or glutathione conjugates. It may also 
play a role in protecting the seminiferous tubules from 
methoxychlor-induced damage [].

The Aquaporins, major intrinsic protein are a family of water
selective membrane channels aquaporin super family and, 
responsible for transporting small uncharged molecules such as 
glycerol and urea whereas, water, plays a pivotal role in the 
uptake of AsIII [,
]. It is reported that, both the channels 
involved in the efflux of arsenic in presence of GSH, and it has 
also been reported that ABCC1 and Aquaporin are involved in 
the arsenic efflux []. Evidence suggests that at least some of 
these substrates are co-exported with GSH across the plasma 
membrane. The purpose of the current study is to identify the 
arsenics associated complex in best fit structure and the mode 
by which they get transported with a greater affinity and that 
are substrates for ABCC1 and Aquaporin 9.

Methodology
Preparation of Ligand structures:
Ligand files of Glutathione, Diglutathione selenide/ Seleno
diglutathione (GSH-Se-GSH), Arsinite and Selenite were 
downloaded in .mol format () from ChemSpider 
Chemical Database. These files cannot be directly used by Patch 
Dock tools [], thus they were converted it into .pdb files using 
Discovery Studio Visualizer version 3.5. Discovery Studio is a 
software package of biological molecular design solutions for 
computational chemists and computational biologists. 
Discovery Studio makes it easier to analyze the properties of 
large and small particles. GSH-AsH-GSH () was 
drawn and the SMILE ID generated by using ChemSketch 
Software, after that CORINA (http://www. molecular
networks.com/ online_demos/corina_ demo) was used for the 
conversion of SMILE ID (Simplified Molecular Input Line Entry 
System) to 3D structure in .pdb format. Further the ligand was 
submitted for the minimization using Chimera version 1.5.3 
using with Genetic Algorithm Steps 2000 and 0.5 grid units 
Optimized [,
].

Preparation of protein structures:
The structures of Proteins involved in this study Auqapurine-9 
and ABCC1 both, were not available in the RCSB Protein Data 
Bank, so that we have generated both structures by 
Homology Modeling (Modeller9.10) and validated by the 
Ramachandran Plot (RAMPAGE). The Chimera was used for 
the energy minimization, removal of steric collision with the 
steepest descent steps 1000, steepest descent size 0.02 Å, 
Conjugated gradient steps 1000 and the conjugate gradient step 
size 0.02 Å for the conjugate gradient minimization 
[–].

Protein- Chemical Molecular Docking Studies:
All the in silico protein-chemical docking analyses were 
performed by using of PatchDock. The Auqaporin-9 and ABCC-
1 were docked with the Glutathione, GSH-AsH-GSH, GSH-Se
GSH, Arsinite and Selenite as shown in figure 2 and 3. Patch 
Dock online Server done the molecular docking on Geometry
based algorithm [,
]. This sever was applied to recognize 
the binding scores and binding residues of Glutathione, GSH
AsH-GSH, GSH-Se-GSH, Arsinite and Selenite with the 
Auquaporin-9 and ABCC-1, that were treated as a rigid body. 
To yield good molecular shape complementary with high 
competency, this method engaged 3D transformations driven 
by local characteristic matching and spatial pattern detection 
techniques, such as the geometric hashing &amp; poses clustering. 
After the fast transformational search, the best geometric fit 
obtained the highest scores, while the low scores exhibited poor 
matches. Clustering RMSD was chosen as 4.0Å. The result 
obtained through the email address provided and the docked 
complex structure was downloaded [,
].

Results
Generation and Validation of Protein Structures:
We modeled Aquaporin-9 and ABCC1 Receptor protein 
structure by using Homology Modeling (MODELLER-9.10). 
The obtained DOPE percentage similarity of proteins was 
42.12% for Aquaporin-9 and 89.98% for ABCC-1. After the 
protein modeling, we have validated our modeled structures by 
the use of RAMACHANDRA PLOT (RAMPAGE). The torsion 
angles of the 3D structure of Aquaporin-9 showed 93.9% amino 
acid residues in the favored regions, 5.5 % amino acid residues 
in the allowed region and 0.7% amino acid residues in the 
outlier region, whereas ABCC-1 showed 83.9% amino acid 
residues in the preferred regions, 10.9 % amino acid residues 
in the allowed region and 5.2 % amino acid residues in the 
outlier region.

Docking Study:
To explore the binding and the efflux potential of Arsenite and 
other Arsenic based complexes alone and accompanied with 
Selenium and Selenium based complexes towards the 
Aquaporin-9 and ABCC-1 receptors, we have performed in 
silico protein-chemical docking analysis using Geometry Based 
Algorithm. The Auqaporin-9 and ABCC-1 were docked with the 
Glutathione, GSH-AsH-GSH, GSH-Se-GSH, Arsinite and 
Selenite ( &amp; 
). Patch Dock online docking Server used
in the molecular docking on Geometry-based algorithm []. This 
server was applied to recognize the binding scores and binding 
residues  (see supplementary material) of GSH, GSH
AsH-GSH, GSH-Se-GSH, Arsinite and Selenite with the 
Auquaporin-9 and ABCC-1. The patchdock docking results is 
obtained through the email, where as Aquaporin-9 and ABCC1 
showing different binding score against GSH-As-GSH, GSH-Se
GSH, Selenite &amp; Arsenite. The binding affinity of aquaporine 9 
is presented in the docking score which is 5852, for GSH-As
GSH, 6296, for GSH-Se-GSH, 1402 for Selenite and 798 for the 
Arsenite and similarly the docking score of ABCC-1 with GSH
As-GSH, GSH-Se-GSH, Selenite &amp; Arsenite is 7248, 6678, 1500, 
790 correspondingly when Arsinte and GSH-AsH-GSH interact 
with Selenite and GSH-Se-GSH docked with Aquaporin-9 and 
ABCC-1complexes, then the docking score increased from the 
earlier docking score when Aquaporin-9 and ABCC-1were 
untreated .

Discussion
Here, we report the transportation of toxic compound through 
ion channels and in the face of multidrug receptor protein, 
which acts as multi specific anion transporter, glucuronides and 
sulfate conjugates of steroid hormones and bile salts []. We 
explored the complex molecule such as arsenite, selenite and 
GSH complex proximity with the ABCC1 transporter protein, as 
we know the role of ABCC1 transportation involved MRP1-
dependent transport system where of AsIII requires GSH and 
the glutathione transferase P1 (GSTP1) []. Currently, it is 
unknown whether the formation of ArsenicIII(GS)2 under 
physiological conditions, and what proximity was best fitted.

For the arsenic efflux. In the current study, we explore the 
transport activities for AsIII(GS)2 and free AsIII in the presence 
of GSH . Binding simulation reveled Superficially, arsenic 
complex interaction with the channel protein these interaction 
showing higher arsenic efflux related most fitted structure, 
these results suggest that AsIII(GS)2 formation is spontaneous; 
however, high levels of plasma membrane- associated ABCC1 
exist in the cell vesicles, and although further 
experimentation is required for the validation of ABCC1 related 
protein transportation efficiency. Here we found the arsenite
GSH complex, bind efficiently and showing best proximity.and 
it was compared with the other complex structure of selenite
GSH and selenium arsenic and GSH and found they showed 
close proximity with the ABCC1 transporter.

In the other protein transport channel aquaporin9, an integral 
membrane protein acts similarly for the arsenic efflux. Both 
protein complexes exhibited special binding with these 
complexes and the arsinite complexes. It is suggested that, if 
Selenite or Selenite complex and Arsenite or Arsinite complexes 
act together, then binding efficiency showed preferential over 
both the proteins. After the pre-exposure of Selenite or 
Selenite complexes with both protein structures it enhanced the 
binding affinity of Arsenite or Arsinite complexes was 
observed, which is related to the high efflux activity of Arsenic 
from the cell and it reduced the arsenic accumulation and 
arsenic detoxification.

ABCC1 and aquaporin 9 was found to deliberate cellular 
protection against arsenic in the presence of GSH- and it also 
reduced the arsenic cellular accumulation. Direct transport 
studies using this complex membrane vesicles revealed that 
Arsenic was a substrate for ABCC1 and aquaporin 9, but only in 
the presence of GSH or as As (GS)2. In the other hand 
transportation of Arsenic was not supported by selenium alone, 
selenium lacking a free thiol group, suggests that it also needed 
GSH for making conjugations. For the transport of As (GS) 2 
was then characterized extensively.

Conclusion
In the present study, it was apparent that the best transport was 
facilitated by the ABCC1 transport channel as aquaporin is 
showing less proximity that rivaled less removal of the arsenite 
from the cell. It also reports reduced arsenic clearance and 
increased toxicity in aquaglyceroporin-9-null mice aquaporin 
nul mice [] and thereby aquaporin provides partial protection 
to animal from arsenic toxicity as compared to ABCC1. These 
results suggest that aquaporin 9 and ABCC1 are involved in 
controlling arsenic accumulation in cells, which then contribute 
to differential sensitivity to As (III) cytotoxicity between the 
cells. Mechanistic study was also needed to understand the 
structural integrity and molecular simulation in the chemical 
transportation. Therefore more in silico and biological 
interpretation was needed for the further investigation.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are grateful to The Vice-Chancellor Prof. S.W. 
Akhtar, Integral University, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India for 
his support and providing necessary facility.

Citation:Poojan et al, Bioinformation 10(8): 474-479 (2014)

A) Chemical structure of Glutathione, Pubchem ID: 
CID 124886, ChemSpider ID: 111188; B) Chemical structure 
of Diglutathione selenide (GSH-Se-GSH), ChemSpider ID: 
97171, Pubchem ID:CID 108069 C) Chemical structure of GSH
AsH-GSH; D)Arsinite, Pubchem ID:CID 5460562; E) Chemical 
structure of Selenite, Pubchem ID:CID 1090.

A-G molecular interactions of Aquaporin 9 and arsenite, selenite and GSH complex showing 3D graphics generated
by PyMol Visualizer.

A-G Molecularinteractions of ABCC1 and Arsinite, Selenite and GSH complex showing Molecular Docking Simulation 
done by PatchDock, 3D structure Generated by Pymol Visualizer.

