Background
Protein structure validation is as important a task as to obtain
its structure through either experiments like X-Ray
Crystallography or NMR or by Homology or Threading based
prediction methods. Importance and limitation of knowledgebased
validation of protein structure is well documented in the
review of Kihara et al (2009) []. In this context, Semiempirical
validation model for protein structure is indeed a new idea
being introduced in this work. However, there exists reports on
attempts based on semiempirical strategy to unearth structural
information of many protein related events [] worked on use
of semiempirical methods for building geometric model of
proteins. Möhle et al (2001) [] showed utility of semi-empirical
method to improve efficiency in deducing secondary structure
of peptides and proteins. Paper of Khandogin and York (2004)
[] presented a set of macromolecular quantum descriptors for
surface characterization of macro-biomolecules in solution,
extraction of which needs modest computational cost because
the method was backed by linear-scaling semi-empirical
quantum/solvation methods. In a similar effort Raha and Merz
(2005) [] presented a scoring function that has been derived by
using semi-empirical quantum mechanics to calculate the
electrostatic interactions between protein and ligand and
solvation free energy expected during complexation. Huey et al
(2007) [] claimed successful development and testing of
semiempirical force field for incorporation in AutoDock4
formalism.

Giving due regards to these research works, it can further be
noted that there is every possibility to end up with a set of
multiple structural models for the same protein due to nonconvergence
of decision on single model based on different
parameters. It indicates that there still remains requirement of a
method that can remove above-described confusion. In this
context, previous work of Mishra and Lahiri (2011) 
[] and the
references of works therein showed that extraction of structure
parameter, Surface Roughness Index (SRI) of a protein whose
structure was not known, was possible using semi-empirical
method. They also showed that the predicted SRI value of a
protein well correspondence with its calculated counterpart
obtained from its known PDB structure.

The present paper-work showed that the current practice of
validation of protein structure can be further strengthened by
introducing parameters that are easily and experimentally
obtainable from the protein of interest only. Therefore, this
approach can uniquely solve the confusion regarding
acceptance of a particular model out of various models of the
same protein.

Methodology
Selection of Proteins in the Study:
The proteins which are available in the market as well as listed
in the PDB site were selected. For this pilot study, lysozyme,
Cytochrome C, Ferritin and Albumin were chosen keeping in
mind the diversity of secondary structure content for these
proteins. All the proteins were obtained from Sigma Aldrich
(USA).

Experimental Design:
Each of the proteins is suspended in milipore water at
concentration of 25 mg/cc and put in hot water bath having
temperature 100°C for 15 minutes to obtain Heat Denatured
Protein Aggregates (HDPAs). Suspension of HDPAs kept at
hemocytometer slides (Model: Neubauer Chamber, Marienfeld,
Germany) and covered with thin microscopic glass cover slip,
was visualized at 400X magnification using phase contrast
microscope (Leica Model DML-B2). Digital images of
aggregates were captured using a camera (Canon PowerShot
S50) at optical zoom 2X. Thus cumulative optical zoom of the
microscope and camera was 800X. 50 images of different
HDPAs were captured for each protein. This work was carried
out following Mishra and Lahiri (2011) [].

Algorithmic Formalism:
All Multiple structural models were generated for each protein
through homology model which also included its original PDB
structure. Calculated SRI (CSRI) for each of these structural
models were obtained following the method of Lahiri et al
(2006) [] and semi-empirically obtained predicted SRI (PSRI)
values for the same protein were obtained using the method of
Mishra and Lahiri (2011) []. The target of this work was to
check whether PSRI of a protein which can be obtained without
being bothered about its original structure information, can be
used to ascertain the final validation of a single model out of a
confusion set of structural models of a protein. In these purpose
Euclidian distances of CSRIs of all the structural models of a
particular protein from that of CSRI of the original structure
and PSRI of the same protein giving Distance Profile Vectors
(Calculated), DPVC = {dci}Ni-1 and (Predicted),
DPVP = {dpi}Ni-1
respectively for N number of models was measured. dci and dpi
are the distances from CSRI of i-th model from that of original
structure and PSRI of the same protein respectively. Our
intention was to check whether both of these distance profiles
are same which means the minimum distances obtained both
from DPVC and DPVP are for the same structural model or not.
If it is found for the same model then it indicates that in absence
of experimentally obtained original protein structure, PSRI, that
is obtainable through semi-empirical method, can be utilized
for final validation and selection of a single-best structural
model from a confusion set of multiple structural model. Flow
chart of the algorithm is given in () for further
clarification.

Discussion
 (see supplementary material) shows results of
structure validation for 5 best models generated from homology
model for the same protein for which PDB structure was
already available and its PDB structure was excluded from the
homologue database to conform to the fact that prediction
method had no prior knowledge of known structure. The result
of validation from different validation methods, viz., Dope,
Procheck, Verify3D and Errat shows confusion set of structure
model for each of the protein indicating difficulty in accepting a
single model as the best one. For example, for the protein
Lysozyme, validation method Dope, Procheck, Verify3D and
Errat shows best models as 1st, 5th, any one among five and 3rd
model respectively indicating difficulty in forming a decision
regarding acceptance of a single model as the best validated
model.

The result shown in  showed similar outcome for the
other proteins too. In this situation the strategy given in method
section and flowchart in () suggested to utilize the
experimentally drawn information from the concerned protein
only to help in zeroing in a single model for final acceptance. As
described in Algorithmic Formalism of Method Section, the
closeness of these models to the original structure can be
checked by measuring distance between SRI deduced from
original structure (CSRI) and SRIs deduced from these model
structures. For example, dci values as referred in algorithmic
section gives distance profile vector DPVC. As described by
Lahiri et al (2006) [], SRI is a surface roughness property
marker of a protein and therefore can be utilized as an intrinsic
property of a protein related to its surface. Hence distance
profile values DPVC gives closeness of a model to the original
structure from where the closest model can be accepted as final
structural model. In this regard, DPVC is also helping us to
eliminate confusion for acceptance of a model from a set of
models.

Conclusion
While utility of SRI to SRI distance of models from original
structure can be understood for finalizing acceptance of a single
model, the difficulty of this formalism is that it requires SRI
derived from original structure. Therefore, in absence of
experimentally evaluated original structure (which is the case
for any protein for which we need to predict and finally
validate its structure) we require reference SRI that can be
derived by some other simpler means. In this direction Mishra
and Lahiri (2011) [] has given a semi-empirical method which
uses a very simple experimental arrangement (vide section
Material and Methods) to derive predicted SRI using nonparametric
function and human cognition model referred as
PSRI in our work. This work showed that PSRI is very close to
SRI derived from the original structure for which we have
decided to use PSRI as reference SRI. The result shown in Table
1 also conforms to the fact that SRI to SRI distance profile DPVC
calculated using reference SRI derived from original structure
matches well with that for reference SRI derived from semiempirical
method of Mishra and Lahiri (2011) [] (referred as
DPVP in this work). Therefore, this work indicates that semiempirically
drawn SRI of a protein can be used for final
validation and acceptance of a single protein model out of a
confusion set of multiple structural models obtained from
homology and other prediction methods.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are thankful to Indian Council of Medical Research for
financial aid in the form of external project (Grant
No.52/8/2005-BMS, dated-04/02/2010) for funding this work.

Citation:Lahiri et al, Bioinformation 8(20): 984-987 (2012)

Calculation of distance profiles DPVC and DPVP for a set of 5 predicted structural models of a protein. Here, CSRI-O is
SRI calculated from original structure, CSRI is calculated SRI from 5 models and PSRI is predicted SRI.

