Background
Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is a genetic disorder resulting from mutations in the 
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), a chloride 
conducting channel that regulates fluid in the gastrointestinal and 
respiratory tracts [].  The most common CFTR mutation causing disease 
is the deletion of a phenylalanine at position 508 (ΔF508) which causes the 
protein to be retained in the ER and be degraded instead of being trafficked 
to the apical membrane  [].  One of the major resulting clinical problems 
in CF is excessive chronic airway inflammation in response to bacterial 
infection and may occur even before bacterial airway infection is 
documented and continue after an infection is cleared  [] 
[].  How a 
change in airway epithelial chloride conductance results in activation of an 
inflammatory response is not well understood.

Since its identification as a specific disease in 1938, CF patient lifetime has 
increased from a few months to over 30 years  []. With an increasing 
number of long term patients, issues with tissue damage due to chronic 
inflammation and bacterial infection assume a much greater importance.  
Current research efforts are multi-pronged to address immediate problems 
of damage due to chronic inflammation and longer term projects to address  
the basic defect by gene therapy to replace the defective gene or find a 
means to correctly traffic ΔF508.  Additionally, there are biomarker studies  
aimed at discovering relationships in disease pathways that can be used to 
monitor disease status, identify exacerbations before patients become 
symptomatic and evaluate effects of treatment.

Data integration and information retrieval from large scale studies with 
multiple independent data sources are significant issues in studying 
biological systems.  Many experiments are independently developed for 
specific projects with different objectives on a variety of platforms using 
multiple methodologies.  Even output file information may be in 
incompatible formats.  For example protein results may have Swiss-Prot 
identification and gene microarrays results may be listed with Affymetrix 
identifications. Historically, the process of connecting information 
scattered among various experiments was for the researcher to use personal 
knowledge and experience, exhaustive literature surveys and professional 
judgment to create a comprehensive picture of the underlying processes.  
The process is tedious, time consuming, requires expertise in multiple 
fields and it is difficult to grasp an overall view when mired in the details.  
With the advent of highly automated testing, gene microarrays, protein 
arrays and an explosion in the number of scientific papers published 
annually, the ability of an individual to stay current and integrate multiple 
sources has been severely challenged.

Automated literature searching suffers from several problems when 
integrating information sources.  One of the larger issues is the naming of 
genes and proteins.  The same gene or protein may be reported under a 
variety of names or the same name may be used for different genes or 
proteins at different times []. 
While there has been an effort to standardize 
naming, each discipline still has a favored name for some of the commonly 
researched genes or proteins within the field.  As a consequence, only 
manual inspection of the literature will correctly link the results in these 
publications []. 
Additionally a standardized vocabulary is required so that 
a computer can find interactions across the database and link effects to 
pairs of objects that can be used by a computer to construct complex 
networks of interactions. MetaMiner CF incorporates cystic fibrosis 
research oriented extensions to the MetaMiner program developed by 
GeneGo (St Joseph, MI).  This is an automated search engine but it is 
based upon a manually curated database which provides a high degree of 
reliability in connecting literature to specific genes and proteins plus 
provides a graphic output which presents a more easily understood overall 
view of network connectivity.

Methodology
PubMed and the NCBI GEO databases were searched for publications, 
reviews and experimental data related to CFTR trafficking or inflammatory 
responses due to bacterial infection in lungs.  Where available, source 
microarray images were examined for quality.

Data were uploaded into MetaMiner CF where protein and gene identifiers 
were translated to a standard set of common objects for automated 
literature searching and association analysis.  Identification is done from a 
manually curated database of standard names and aliases.  The networks 
(directed graphs) were built using the direct interactions algorithm with 
identified genes or proteins as the seed nodes and protein interactions in 
the MetaCore database as the edges. The resulting networks are unique for 
a dataset and are a qualitative analysis tool as there are no weights on 
different interaction types and kinetic data on signaling interactions is not 
available. The space and time dimensions are defined by the original 
experiment on file at NCBI GEO and in this case are not provided.  Each 
data set was first analyzed independently by checking for publications 
indicating direct interactions between objects within each set; a second 
analysis then identified direct interactions between sets.

Discussion
We identified 6 publications with adequate numbers of identified genes or 
proteins for analysis and the associated lists were loaded into MetaMiner 
CF [,
,
,
,
,
].  
The interactions among 3 of these sets provided new 
insights into the disease mechanism.

In the Mayer experiment  [], human bronchial epithelial cell lines were 
exposed to UV inactivated pathogens.  Bacteria,  P. aeruginosa or  S. 
aureus, or the respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) were used.   Changes in 
gene expression profiles 4 hr after exposure were created using the 
Affymetrix U133 2.0 genome chip.  A subset of genes changing in 
expression in response to both RSV and  P. aeruginosa challenges were 
used to create a response model for further analysis.  A search for 
documented direct interactions between members of this gene list resulted 
in an extensive network of elements directly linked to each other by 
experimental data  ().  Many of the network 
elements, such as interleukins and chemokines, are well known and well 
documented in the inflammatory response to infection.  This figure was 
used as a base model of a general inflammatory immune response to 
infection in bronchial epithelial cells. 

The  interaction graph of the CFTR ER-interactome  [] was also used as a 
base connectivity figure because it covered much of the known CFTR ERtrafficking pathway 
interactions and produced a well connected map with 
11 of 25 elements having demonstrated direct interactions confirmed by 
experimental data (). 

A set of 34 genes has been demonstrated to significantly improve ΔF508 
trafficking to the cell surface when expressed in a cell line stably 
expressing ΔF508 []; however, the mechanisms of correction are currently 
unknown.  These genes did not produce a well connected map within the 
group which suggested these are functionally independent, possibly 
operating through a variety of pathways or operating on a pathway which 
has not yet been defined.  However, six of the genes, HSP70, HSBP1, 
CHIP, Erdj5, DJ-1 and HSP22, integrated with direct connections into the 
CFTR ER- trafficking map and further extended the network by providing 
intermediate links through the immune system response transcription factor 
STAT1 (, ). 

Proteins which are secreted into the extracellular space, CCK, CCL2, 
Calgranulin A, and Endothelin-1, have no direct connections from them to 
protein trafficking in the ER.  However, further analysis indicates a likely 
functional pathway through known interactions.  CCL2 can activate 
STAT1 via Janus kinases linked to CCR1, CCR2 and CCR5 receptors 
(); similarly, CCK can activate both STAT1 and 
PPAR-gamma.  The JAK/STAT connection is a well established cytokine 
signaling pathway  [] and STAT1 directly influences expression of 
multiple chaperones involved in CFTR trafficking ().

 Analysis of trafficking corrector gene set  [] in conjunction with the 
inflammatory response gene set  [] produced numerous unexpected 
connections which tied the inflammatory and trafficking responses together 
().  We found that 9 of the 34 genes known to correct  ΔF508 
trafficking (CCL2, Endothelin-1, Calgranulin A, CCK, AQP3, Galectin-3, 
Caveolin-2, STAT1, PPAR-gamma) were directly linked by positive 
expression activation mechanisms to the inflammatory response  ().  
In addition, 3 genes which can correct ΔF508 trafficking when over 
expressed (CCL2, P23 co-chaperone and APQ3) are also upregulated at the 
mRNA level by the cellular response to infection.  The P23 co-chaperone 
is in a position to influence CFTR maturation due to its interaction with 
HSP90, a critical step in trafficking of mature CFTR  [].  The principal 
path of cross talk between the inflammatory response and the 
corrector/trafficking compartments was through transcription factors, 
notably STAT1 and NF-κB ().

Mapping connections between elements rather than just comparing 
similarity of function between lists was a more productive approach in this 
case.  A parallel analysis using Gene Ontology descriptions found no 
functional overlap between the studies ( ). 

While all these connections are found in existing literature,  is a 
summary of 818 publications with experimental data, it is highly unlikely 
that an individual would pull all the disparate information together to 
arrive at a model linking inflammation and trafficking in this manner.  
Prior models of inflammation in CF have focused on the origin and 
maintenance of an inflammatory response as a reaction to misfolded 
proteins not being degraded properly, an overwhelmed degradation system, 
presence of unfolded proteins, a reaction to oxidative stress, altered 
homeostasis of calcium or a variety of other reasons  []. Our results 
suggest that the inflammatory response may also favor correct trafficking 
of misfolded proteins.  Rather than turning off the inflammatory response 
entirely, it may be of therapeutic benefit to selectively activate discrete 
portions of the response to promote correct trafficking of ΔF508 thereby 
reducing the overall inflammatory response.

Several diseases with an inflammatory component are proposed to be 
caused or influenced by protein trafficking including type 2 diabetes, 
insulin resistance and Alzheimer's disease  [,
].  Protein trafficking 
problems can arise at multiple points in the process.  Insulin resistance and 
type 2 diabetes are proposed to occur when misfolded proteins overload an 
early step in the trafficking process thus setting off an inflammatory 
response [].  In CF,  the  vast  majority  of  severe  cases involve a single  
mutation which fails to traffic the CFTR protein from the ER to the Golgi 
and has an associated exaggerated inflammatory response; this is the focus 
of this analysis. Central to controlling an inflammatory response is NF-κB, 
a complex structure with multiple subunits []. The NF-κB complex is an 
integrating sensor through which the input and output signaling can change 
from cell to cell depending on the subunit composition of the complex and 
the subunit composition of its upstream regulators.   Proposed targets for 
intervention would be downstream of NF-κB by activating specific genes 
known to enhance correct trafficking of mutant CFTR but do not provide 
positive feedback for inflammatory signalin.

Conclusion
A systems biology knowledge-based bioinformatics tool used experimental 
data to develop signaling networks for a bronchial epithelial inflammatory 
model and CFTR trafficking.   Source data were generated on diverse 
platforms by independent laboratories with different experimental goals.   
The tool was able to integrate data and identify key pathways and targets in 
a protein trafficking pathway. NF-κB and STAT1 were identified as 
transcription factor hubs linking inflammation and trafficking pathways.  
The interconnected pathways suggested an unexpected role for the 
inflammatory response in CF in that inflammatory reactions produce 
changes which favor correction of ΔF508 trafficking.

The close connection between elements of an inflammatory response and 
trafficking of CFTR was entirely unexpected.  Much of the previous work 
on the connection between chronic inflammation and CFTR trafficking has 
focused on understanding the inflammatory triggering mechanism and 
developing therapies to reduce the inflammatory state  []. The 
interactions between elements of the separate data sets provided important 
information needed to generate new insights at a systems level of 
organization.

These results assist in understanding the mechanism and effects of chronic 
inflammation in more detail thus providing new research directions and 
new hypothesis to test.  One question immediately raised is: can specific 
portions of the inflammatory response be enhanced to further promote 
correct ΔF508 trafficking without causing additional tissue destruction?   
Possible future studies include use of RNAi, over expression, cell line 
models either primary culture or established cell line, and ion flux to test 
drugs which affect protein targets in inflammatory pathways and determine 
if they can correct  ΔF508 trafficking.  These results highlight the 
complexity of Cystic Fibrosis at the organism level and the value of 
integrating multiple large data sets generated by independent laboratories.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Wrightet al, Bioinformation 5(6): 228-233 (2010)

 Connectivity map of combined multiple, independent experiments showing connections between the inflammatory response and CFTR 
trafficking primarily through NF-κB and STAT1 transcription factors. Genes differentially regulated in bronchial epithelial cells in response to both 
Pseudomonas and respiratory syncytial virus are indicated by black dots.  Proteins associated with CFTR trafficking are indicated by green dots.  Genes 
demonstrated to correctly traffic DF508 when expressed in a cell line are indicated by orange dots.  Separation of the inflammatory response and 
correction/trafficking compartments is denoted by the vertical black bar. Lines between objects indicate there are published experiments showing direct 
interactions between the two objects; arrows indicate direction of action. Red lines indicate inhibitory effects; green lines indicate stimulatory effects 
while grey lines indicate an association, such as binding, but no described effect.

