Background &amp; Description
The inherent ability of the 2009/H1N1 pandemic influenza virus to evade
immune surveillance through genetic drift, shift, and genomic reassortment is a
serious public health threat []. 
Reactivity studies demonstrate species-specific
antigenic differences in virulence as well as immune surveillance. The ‘avianlike’
swine viruses, including the recent pandemic strain (swine-avian A/H1N1)
are characteristically most similar to avian viruses, and antigenic drift is more
marked in ‘avian-like’ swine viruses than in classical swine strains 
[].

Humoral Immunity
Phage expression library molecular methods serve to characterize influenza
antigens and antibodies. Immune characterization methods used wholegenome-
fragment phage display libraries expressing fragments of 15-350
amino acids traversing all the proteins of influenza A/Vietnam/1203/2004
(H5N1). These oligopeptides induced B cell responses using neutralizing sera
and monoclonal antibodies following full recovery from H5N1 infection. This
approach yielded two broadly neutralizing human monoclonal antibodies with
conformation-dependent epitopes. Sera of patients convalescing from H5N1
H5 HA, without any cross-reactivity with sera from H5N1-naïve or H1N1-
/H3N2-seropositive controls. Additional promising epitopes include the
neuraminidase catalytic site M2 ectodomain, and the PB1-F2 virulence factor.
The germline gene VH1-69 yields a common neutralizing mechanism specific
for the HA fusion domain. This region exhibits less neutralization escape, and
could be a promising strategy for broad-spectrum therapeutic protection against
pandemic influenza threats [].

Cellular Immune Surveillance
A wider use of influenza vaccines could control the severity of influenza
pandemics. Moreover, comparative effectiveness and efficacy research
increasingly indicates that humoral immunity alone may be insufficient to
defeat influenza virus. Cellular immune events, mediated by sub-populations of
both CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes, contribute important surveillance
against influenza virus, via cytokine modulation and the cross-reactivity that
exists with virus-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL, CD8+CD38+). For
epitopes on NP and M1, CTL-based assays cross-reacted with viral strains from
patient infections that were up to 9 years apart 
[]. The 1977/8 influenza
A/H1N1 infections occurred in otherwise healthy children and young adults in
up to 50% of the cases. In fact, actuarial inferences from epidemiological data
suggest that people infected with the 1945-55 influenza A/H1N1 developed
immune surveillance against that later strain, which persisted as immune
memory [].

Incidences for H5N1 infection and fatality rates are lower for the older than 40-
year age group (10.9% and 32%, respectively) than less than 40-year age group
(89.1% and 59%, respectively). While these differences may be due to
exposure to seasonal infection or vaccination, and the higher fatality rate may
be due to differences in virus replication rates, the persistence of antigenspecific
CD8+ T cells confers the ability of CTL's to clear infection and assists
in reducing viral pathogenesis []. 
Greater than 97% of US H1N1 recovered
isolates are from patients who are younger than 26 years old. For people over
the age of 35, the recovery rate of H1N1 viruses drops to 4-5%. In the elderly,
T-cell responses correlate better with vaccine protection than humoral
immunity [].

Viral infection leads to increased production of several cytokines, which are
finely controlled by T cell sub-populations of TH17 and regulatory T cells
(Tregs). The more virulent H5N1 influenza strain results in cytokine ‘storms’,
characterized by sharp “great”-elevations of cytokine cascades 
[]. IL-21,
which is produced by TH17, may contribute to the mechanism by which CD4+
cells orchestrate the immune system response to viral infections, and
specifically counteracts influenza infection in a mouse model. Without IL-21,
CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses are rapidly abrogated during acute and
chronic viral infection, and viral clearance is severely impaired. IL-21
stimulates activation and proliferation of natural killer cells and CTL's via IL-
21 receptor-mediated activation of the STAT3 pathway [,
]. These
modulatory effects by TH17 on one hand seem to be modulated by Tregs on
the other, such that, for instance, IL-12 enhances anti-viral immune response,
and the related cytokine, IL-28B (Type III anti-viral λFN family: with IFN-λ1,
IFN-λ2, and IFN-λ3, e IL-29, IL-28A, and IL-28B, respectively) has substantial
influence in adaptive immune responses as a vaccine adjuvant 
[]. Presently,
well-controlled experiments are used to characterize the cytokine storms in
influenza pandemic, particularly in terms of TH17 and Tregs modulation. The
current trends of knowledge depicted in , opens novel avenues for
clinical verification and Comparative Effectiveness and Efficacy Research and
Analysis for (evidence-based) Practice (CEERAP), in order to utilize the best
available evidence for ensuring most successful influenza management.

Impact of Immunology on Clinical Outcome
In most cases, patients with H1N1 influenza have self-limited illness. However,
some patients, especially those with co-morbidities, are more susceptible to
influenza complications. In addition, the fine regulation of cellular immunity
requires both vigorous effector responses and the maintenance of regulatory T
subsets, such as TH17 and Tregs. Any disturbances in the balance between
these two opposite activities of immune system, including tumor
microenvironment, pregnancy or immune senescence, can seriously jeopardize
this balance, and profoundly affects epigenetic regulatory controls of cellular
immune surveillance [–
]. The latter actually provides a suggestive
rationale to account for the anomaly of the 2009 influenza pandemic that
exhibited higher lethality in younger patients than in the elderly, as noted
above, because it is conceivable that the Tregs/TH17 ratio may be biased
toward Tregs with age, thus yielding to a suppression and inhibition of TH17-
mediated responses during senescence [].

Pregnancy is a known risk of severe influenza. In the 2009 H1N1 pandemic,
pregnancy led to increased risk of morbidity and mortality. In the US, most
deaths in this population were due to pneumonia and respiratory failure.
Because of the particular cellular immune conditions of pregnancy, vaccine
failure is not uncommon in pregnant patients. To date, the corresponding
efficacy of immune response to H1N1 monovalent vaccine remains unclear in
this population. One mechanism may involve shifting immunity away from
cell-medicated immunity towards humeral immunity, which could impair
vaccine response. This may occur in association with occasional
immunoglobulin G2 subclass deficiency in pregnant women with severe
influenza. H1N1 may behave the same way in HIV infected population as in
general population. Severe influenza seems to occur in late or advance
diseases. Cellular immune response to the influenza virus appears to be lower
in HIV-seropositive patients than general population.

In conclusion, current trends suggest that immunological studies support the
need for additional proteomic research for characterizing novel treatment
interventions based on chemokine and cytokine functions to help defeat the
influenza virus. Timely and critical research must characterize the impact of
genetics and epigenetics of oral and systemic host immune surveillance
responses to H1N1. The continued development and application of proteomics
and gene expression to diagnosis and characterization of influenza viruses and
host responses across viral strains and human tissues ensure our ability to
combat the spread of influenza epidemics and pandemics by means of carefully
articulated research synthesis designs for developing and testing Translational
Comparative Effectiveness and Efficacy Research and Analysis for Practice (TCEERAP)
interventions.

Citation:Barkhordarian et al, Bioinformation 6(1): 39-40 (2011)

Tregs/TH17 Modulatory Balance in H1N1 Infection. (a) Cellular
immune surveillance to H1N1 infection engages the release of a spectrum of
cytokines (IFN-γ, TNF-α, IL015, IL-12p70, IL-8, IL-9, IL-6, IL-21, and TGF-
β) within the microenvironment [,
], which act in concert to regulate T cell
subset activation, maturation and differentiation. TGF-β plays a critical role in
the regulation of both TH17 and Tregs (CD4+CD25+FoxP3+), which blunt T
cell activation and TH17 generation and activity. This dual signaling function
of TGF-β suggests that the ultimate balance between these subsets in cellular
immune surveillance to influenza is likely due to epigenetic factors in the
microenvironment [] 
such as consequential to, but not limited to pregnancy
[] and immune senescence 
[]. (b) While the proportion of TH17 cells may
be relatively low in influenza patients, compared to control subjects, the
secretion of TH17 and TH1 cytokines is vigorous, and characteristically the
reported cytokine “storms” []. 
(c) The cytokine “storms” cascade leads to an
increase in CD8+CD38+ CTL's, whose number and proportion correlate with
the stage of infection, as they are responsible for the elimination of virally
infected host cells.

