Background
Microscopic organisms live in a constantly changing
environment and are subject to a variety of environmental
stresses. They have evolved adaptive networks to face the
challenges of changing environments and to survive under
conditions of stress []. It is difficult to provide a universal
definition for stress. Under adverse environmental conditions,
for example depletion of nutrients, changes in pH, temperature
etc., bacteria launch “stress responses“ which significantly
improve their chances of survival under, or successful
adaptation to, the challenges posed by such unfavorable
environments []. These responses have significant implications
for many of our interactions with bacteria.
Most of the archaea are known to be extremophiles and can
survive in extreme environments. It suggests that archaea
should be well equipped with several stress response
machineries that help them to survive in extreme conditions.
The ability of archaea to sense and respond (correctly) to
spontaneous alterations in the environment is crucial to their
survival []. Here we have chosen archaea for the construction
of this database because this group shows most unique and
diverse stress responses.

Objectives:
From the above discussion it has become clear that different
stress responses play their respective roles to provide important
survival strategies to individual archaeal species. Many stress
response proteins are involved and regulated carefully
throughout these processes. Though there are quite a few
studies on stress responses but still this field has got huge
dimensions to offer. However, some troubles are often
encountered:

1) Different stress responses had been identified at different
times but no such approach has ever been made to classify
all the stress responses.
2) Lack of an effective system to identify,
a. All the stress responses present in a specific archaea.
b. In how many archaea a particular stress response is
present?
c. Whether some archaea have more stress responses than
others.
d. Whether stress responsive proteins have some other
functions.
e. Frequency of occurrences of different stress responses in
different archaea.

A stress response database for archaea can provide answers to
all the questions. With the availability of a large number of
completely sequenced archaeal genome in public domain and
rapid advancement of Bioinformatics, it is possible to create a
archaeal stress response database which will not only help to
provide more detail insight into different archaeal stress
responses, but will make researchers jobs comparatively easy.
Keeping these facts in mind we have developed an archaeal
stress response database as no such database is publicly
available till date.

Methodology
A thorough examination of literature and existing online
resources including other large databases like GenBank was
performed and relevant data were retrieved (). 66
archaeal genomes have been used for the construction of the
database. With adequate literature searching, an integrated
classification of 17 different types of archaeal stress responses
had been made. They are: Heat shock, Cold shock, Envelope
stress, General stress, Osmotic stress, pH &amp; acid tolerance,
Universal stress, Sodium stress, Metal resistance, Nitrosative
stress, Oxidative stress, Oxygen deprivation, SOS response,
Organic solvent tolerance, Starvation &amp; Stringent induced
shock, Phage shock, Stationary phase response (please check the
web database for complete reference of each stress category).

In the next step, we have generated “key search terms” for
every stress category through extensive study of literatures
 (see supplementary material). These “key search
terms” were then used to retrieve sequences from publicly
available sequence databases. While retrieving the sequences
corresponding to any particular stress category using “key
search term” we took special attention to remove all false
positive results through manual curation. Information on
accession numbers, nucleotide and protein sequences were
extracted and included in ASRDb.

Database Architecture
ASRDb (Archaeal Stress Response Database) is built on Internet
Information Services (IIS) 7.0 Server in Microsoft Windows
Vista Business SP1 Platform. Easy and most accessible front-end
was designed using Microsoft Visual Studio 2005 version 8.0
with Microsoft .NET Framework version 2.0 SP1. Most lucrative
frames are made using Visual basics embedded in Active Server
Pages (ASP) and to make bright and keen web pages JavaScript
are used along with HTML tags. An overall database support is
maintained by Microsoft Access 2007 which is server
supportive and also having flexible environment for securing
the unique data stored in the database.

The architecture of ASRDb is shown in . We have
provided several useful tools for database searching, online
BLAST, genome download and online reference. Sequence
information can be retrieved in various forms, the whole
genome sequences of all archaeal genomes as well as individual
sequences (protein and nucleotide) for a particular stress. A
short sequence description with its NCBI Gene ID can also be
retrieved.

Database Interfaces
ASRDb is designed to be a publicly accessible online resource
with user-friendly interface. Various useful features have been
built into ASRDb. Users can easily navigate and use various
tools integrated in the database. The database interface
includes: Home, Organism list, Stress categories, Database
search engine, Database statistics, Help, and Site map.

There are 66 archeal genomes and 17 different archaeal stress
categories included in the database. The search features in
ASRDb are designed to accommodate all possible queries of the
users. There are two types of search options available, one is
random search and another is advanced search. In random
search, users can search the entire database with any keywords
of his/her choice. The advanced search feature enables specific
searches by using the advanced query form. Users can limit
their search to a particular organism with a specific stress
category. Database statistics page gives the total number of
genomes, stresses and sequences included in the ASRDb
database. In addition we have also provided some important
database characteristics. Users can find the percentage of
different stress categories present in a given archaeal genome in
the form of a bar diagram. Detailed statistics of the percentage
of all genes distributed in the 17 stress categories among 66
archaeal genomes has been displayed through pie chart and bar
chart.

We have also provided a very rich and informative help page
detailing every aspect of the database. A set of frequently asked
questions (FAQ) has also been provided to make user
acquainted with the database. A site map page representing the
schematic diagram will enable user to understand the logic
behind the construction of the database.

Utility
Microorganisms have evolved adaptive networks to face the
challenges of changing environments and to survive under
conditions of stress. Their response to environmental stress was
first elucidated about 25 years ago, through pioneering
proteomic studies of the response to temperature shift-up - now
known as the heat shock response [,
]. Since then many
important studies have been published on the stress responses.
However, after the availability of a large number of completely
sequenced archaeal genomes, it is the need of the hour to
develop an exhaustive database on stress response genes to
provide constructive support to research community.

ASRDB is a repository for 17 different stress specific genes of 66
archaeal genomes. It is the first of its kind, and should prove of
value to a variety of researchers. Altogether, 6295 gene
sequences have been classified into 17 different stress
categories. From the database statistics page users can get some
more additional information. Allowing users to compare
between different stresses categories is another helpful element
of ASRDb. Comparative statistics of all the genes among 17
different stress categories has been provided. The average
percentage of all the different stress response genes for a given
genome has also been provided. Through systematic data
mining, ASRDb offers researchers new means for inspecting
and analysis using comparative genomics approach. We believe
that ASRDb represents a new and important model for stress
response gene database. We are hopeful that the rich content in
ASRDb will allow researchers to uncover answers to many
common questions about different categories of stresses in
archaeal genomes.

Future Directions
Over the coming years we also plan to bring in additional data
and to add new features to this database, with the intent of
making ASRDb a more comprehensive database for stress
response genes. The ASRDb will continue solicitation of
feedback from users in order to continue improving all aspects
of the database. We are eager for scientists to visit the database
webpage and let us know what you think. We will surely try to
accommodate constructive suggestions and upgrade the
database accordingly. We sincerely hope that this thorough and
comprehensive database will be extended to effective
completeness, and then maintained and its content expanded,
with constantly enhanced search and analysis features added
on a rolling basis.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work is funded through an extramural project (IRIS ID:
2001-0496D) of ICMR, Government of India.

Citation:Labala et al, Bioinformation 9(12): 650-655 (2013)

Schematic diagram for overall design and data transfer of ASRDb.

