Background
Klebsiella pneumonia (KN) belonging to the enterobacteriaceae
family is a gram-negative, rod-shaped, non-motile,
encapsulated bacterial pathogen. Its continued global challenge
has precipitated the emergence of pandrug-resistant clones to
clinically pertinent antibiotics (e.g. Fluroquinones, thirdgeneration
cephalosporins and carbapenems) that resulted in
limited therapeutic strategies to combat this pathogen 
[–].
Hence, the compelling need to develop novel and potent antibacterial
drugs to overcome this pathogen is of global concern
and national importance. Most of the antibiotics designed by
the researchers over last five decades have focused on either
improving the design or structure of an agent that could
intervene with the peptidoglycan biosynthesis process or inhibit
a key enzyme involved in its assembly []. Peptidoglycan layer
is considered to be indispensable to bacterial cell wall providing
it structural integrity and protection against osmotic pressure.
The peptidoglycan biochemical assembly involves both
extracellular and intracellular pathways []. Among them only
the extracellular pathway has been extensively studied and
over-exploited for anti-bacterial intervention. The intracellular
stage of peptidoglycan biosynthesis involving the ATPdependent
Mur ligases (MurC, MurD, MurE and MurF) have
been least studied []. Hence to explore this (MurF) pathway of
KN as an option for bactericidal drug development the present
study was undertaken.

MurF catalyzes the last cytoplasmic step of ligation of D-Ala-
DAla to UDP-MurNAc-tripeptide (UDP-MurNAc-L-Ala-γ-DGlu-
meso-diaminopimelate), with hydrolysis of ATP resulting
in synthesis of UDP-MurNAc-pentapeptide []. MurF lacks
human counterparts and are unique and highly conserved
among various bacterial species rendering them as promising
therapeutic targets for intervention. Due to the above
mentioned reason, a potential MurF inhibitor would be
expected to be bactericidal and to have a wide spectrum action
against gram negative pathogens, which validates its choice as a
target for the development of new inhibitors/bactericidals 
[].
The search for new biologically active compounds from natural
sources is currently of great interest as they are the parent
compounds for most of presently available commercial
bactericidal agents/inhibitors/antibiotics. Numerous in vitro
(10 µM &lt; IC 50 &gt; 20 µM) reports suggest the aqueous, alcoholic
and acetone extracts of Desmodium plant sp. possesses potential
bactericidal activity against enterobacteriaceae family of
pathogens. Desmodium flora species have a long history of being
used in Indian ayurvedic medicine and Chinese traditional
medicine against such enterobacteriaceae pathogens 
[]. Here, we
chose few recently reported phyto-ligands from this plant for
our structure based drug designing (SBDD) study, viz., 6-
Methyltetrapterol A (6MT), Uncinanone A, Uncinanone B,
Uncinanone C, Uncinanone D, Uncinanone E, Quercetin,
Hydnocarpin, Edudiol, Hydroxydesmodian B, Desmodol,
Desmodian C, Desmodian D and Yukovanol [].

Virtual screening has become increasingly popular in hit
discovery and lead compound optimization. Comparisons
based on Lipinski analysis for all phyto-ligands were pursued
to suggest the drug likeliness of active principles/phytoligands
of Desmodium plant sp considered for this study. The results of
in silico interactions studies of MurF with all the above
mentioned phyto-ligands were compared with interactions of
Ciprofloxacin (CP - Fluroquinone drug used as last resort broad
spectrum anti-bacterial agent) to show the bactericidal potency
of the phyto-ligands. The primary objective of the present work
is to report the three-dimensional model of KN-MurF enzyme
for the first time. KN-MurF provides the geometry of hot spot
regions, i.e., binding site residues, and therefore provides a
clear insight into the importance of the active site residues in
terms of their contribution to protein-ligand complexes.
Moreover, the rational design of an inhibitor selective towards
the KN-MurF enzyme could be more effective if the key
residues and atomic level binding site interactions are known.
A unified approach involving homology modeling, molecular
docking and electrostatic potential analysis was applied to KNMurF
to probe its active site residues, interactions, thereby
revealing its mechanism of action.

Methodology
All computations and SBDD of KN-MurF enzyme were carried
out on a Pentium IV Dual Core processor workstation with
Windows 7 operating system using Accelrys Draw (v4.0),
Autodock (v4.2), Schrödinger (v9.2), Swiss-PdbViewer (v4.04)
and Chimera (v1.5.3) molecular modeling packages 
[–].

Sequence analysis and physiochemical characterization:
KN-MurF Ligase protein sequence (ID: A6T4M9) was retrieved
from Uniprot database in FASTA format. Its physiochemical
characterization was computed using the Expasy Protparam
program. Secondary structure prediction analysis was
performed using SABLE program []. Template (Escherichia
coli-MurF: 1GG4_A) was selected by performing BLAST search
against protein databank (PDB) with &gt; 80% sequence identity
cut off for homology modeling. Alignment between target KN
sequence (KN-MurF Ligase) and the template Escherichia coli
(EC) sequence (EC-MurF Ligase, PDB ID: 1GG4_A) was
performed with Multalin tool and visualized using ES pript 
[,
].

Homology modeling and validation:
Tertiary structure prediction was performed using I-Tasser
Server for homology modeling []. The plausible models of
KN-MurF obtained from I-Tasser server were verified by
Structural Analysis and Verification Server (SAVES) to evaluate
its stereo-chemical quality [,
].

Ligand preparation and ADME/Tox Prediction:
The structures of 14 phyto-ligands and 1 antibiotic,
Ciprofloxacin, were sketched with Accelrys Draw (v4.0). Each
structure was launched in ligprep (Schrödinger) and energy
minimized using the OPLS force field and geometrically
optimized followed by Lipinski's values/ADME-Tox prediction
by using Qikprop (Schrödinger).

Molecular Docking:
Docking analysis of KN-MurF1 was carried out using Autodock
(v4.2) with the aim of exposing the active site amino acid
residues involving protein-ligand interactions so as to obtain
information about the bioactive conformation of these KNMurF
inhibitors. From the ADT package hydrogen atoms were
added, Nonpolar hydrogens and lone pairs were merged and
each atom within the macromolecule was assigned a Gasteiger
partial charge. A grid box of 80×80×80, with a spacing of 0.447
Å was positioned using autogrid and blind docking was
performed. The Lamarckian genetic algorithm (LGA) of up to
20 runs was employed with the settings of population size of
150 individuals, maximum number of generations and energy
evaluations of 27,000 and 2.5 million respectively. From the
estimated free energy of ligand binding (ΔG), the inhibition
constant (Ki) for each ligand was calculated. Ki is calculated by
the equation: Ki =exp [(ΔG* 1000)/ 
(R*T)] Where ΔG is docking
energy, R (gas constant) is 1.98719 cal K−1 mol−1 and T
(Temperature) is 298.15 K. Only the best pose (the one with the
lowest binding energy) was considered for each ligand. All
previously mentioned phyto-ligands after ligand preparation
were docked successfully in the active site of the model KNMurF1
enzyme. Molecular visualization of the docked
complexes was carried out with Chimera (v1.5.3).

Molecular electrostatic potential analysis:
The Molecular electrostatic potential (MEP) analysis at the
functional binding pocket of KN-MurF1-6-MT complex and
KN-MurF1-CP complex were carried out using Swiss-
PdbViewer (v4.04) to visually compare two molecules with its
ligands based on their surface level potential values. To both
structures Poisson-Boltzmann based molecular surface was
generated and visualized independently.

Discussion
The physiochemical characterization of KN-MurF protein
revealed the following: Sequence length (452 amino acid
residues); Molecular weight (47.5 KDa); Theoretical Iso-electric
point (5.53); Major residues (Ala 15.7% and Leu 10.8%); Total
number of negatively charged residues (Asp + Glu): 46; Total
number of positively charged residues (Arg + Lys): 36;
Extinction coefficient (33835 M-1 cm-1); Instability index (25.81);
Aliphatic index (98.54) and Grand average of hydropathicity
(GRAVY): 0.118.

Secondary analysis of KN-MurF revealed presence of 42.92% α-
helix (H), 19.9% β-sheets (E) and 28% random coils (C). In the
absence of experimental data, structure-building on the basis of
known 3D structure (template) of a homologous protein is the
only plausible method to obtain structural information which is
based on sequential information []. The blastp results of KNMurF
revealed the availability of crystal structure of MurF
(1GG4_A: Resolution 2.3 Å) from closely homologous
bacterium E. Coli (EC) []. Hence, EC-MurF (PDB ID: 1GG4_A)
was chosen as template to predict target KN-MurF (A6T4M9)
structure due to global sequence similarity of 80% between two
sequences, higher coverage &gt;90% of aligned sequence, with
least E-value (0) and higher score (721) than other PDB hits.

Since, the quality of the 3D structure of a modeled protein
strongly depends on the accuracy of the template structure
chosen; multiple sequence alignment (MSA) was undertaken.

MSA between target (KN-MurF: A6T4M9) and template (ECMurF:
1GG4_A) sequence was performed to identify the
sequence-structure relationship () It was found that
approximately &gt; 80% of the amino acid residues are highly
conserved between them including the active site region
containing residues PRO278, HIS281 and ASN282 (shown as
marked boxes).

I-Tasser a web based structure prediction program was used in
this study for performing template (EC-MurF) based homology
modelling approach of target (KN-MurF). I-Tasser generated
two plausible models KN-MurF1 and KN-MurF2 
( &amp; 
2b). Three criteria (C-Score, TM score and RMSD values) were
employed to compare the quality of predicted models to choose
the best one. KN-MurF1 homology model was predicted to
have a C-Score 1.21 which was comparatively better than KNMurF2
homology model C-Score of 0.22. The estimated
computational TM score (0.94±0.05) and RMSD (3.8±0.2Å) of
KN-MurF1 too was found to be better than the values obtained
for KN-MurF2 model. KN-MurF1 expeditiously qualified all the
three criteria signifying its quality as the best model.

Ramachandran plot computed by PROCHECK module of
SAVES showed that only 0.3% of residues existed in disallowed
regions confirming the quality of KN-MurF1 predicted to be
highly significant (). ERRAT analysis showed the
overall structural quality of the predicted structure as 95.64,
which is very good experimentally and computationally 
(). VERIFY_3D analysis showed that 98.44% of KN-MurF1
protein residues had an average 3D-1D score &gt; 0.2 showing
good primary sequence to tertiary structure compatibility.

Evaluation of KN-MurF1 structural quality with ProSA-web
reveals that its ProSA Z-score value −9.22 falls in the range of
native conformations computed using X-ray crystallography
method represented as encircled large black dot ().
The results reveal that most of the residues fall in the negative
energy minima region representing good structural quality and
low energy levels of the predicted protein KN-MurF1 
(). Thus the various approaches elaborate the highly
dependable quality and stability of predicted KN-MurF1 3D
structure.

ADME-Tox/Lipinski's rule of five (molecular weight &lt; 500 Da,
HB donor &lt; 5, HB acceptor &lt; 10 and QPlogPo/w
(octanol/water partition coefficient) should be &lt; 5) for all 14
phyto-ligands and Ciprofloxacin (CP) were generated 

(see supplementary material). Out of the 14 phyto-ligands
Hydnocarpin, Uncinanone A, Uncinanone B,
Hydroxydesmodian B and Desmodian D failed to obey the
Lipinski's rule of five since the number of acceptor HB were
greater than 10. All the other phyto-ligands including CP
comply with the Lipinski's rule of five. Hence only the rest ten
ligands inclusive of ciprofloxacin were further considered for
docking studies Table 1 (see supplementary material). The
docking analysis revealed the presence of GLU116, PRO278,
HIS281, ASN 282, GLN 311, VAL313, ARG316, LEU317 and
SER339 residues within the vicinity of 4Å of active site of KNMurF1.
The docking results further confirmed 6-
Methyltetrapterol A (6MT) as the best lead molecule due to its
least docking energy, lowest Ki value and involves 3 hydrogen
bond (HB) interactions with hotspot residues PRO278, HIS281
and ASN282 of KN-MurF1 active site as compared to other
ligands  &amp; 
 (see supplementary material).

The docking interaction complex KN-MurF1-6MT was
compared with KN-MurF1-CP (3a-3d). The active site
interaction was magnified to understand the molecular
conformations of ligands (CP and 6MT) docking with receptor
KN-MurF1 and to gain knowledge on the ligand-receptor HB
interaction (light brown colour) within the vicinity of 4 Å of
active site hot spot region ( &amp; 
). KN-MurF1-6MT
complex involves three HB interactions at PRO278, HIS281 and
ASN 282 residues with a better ΔG score and least Ki Value as
compared to two hydrogen bond interactions at GLU116 and
HIS 281 and higher ΔG score and Ki Value of KN-MurF1-CP
complex. Almost 90 degree conformational orientation of the
two primary rings of ligand 6MT as compared to CP expanded
KN-MurF1 active site resulting in accessing the ASN282 residue
for HB interaction. The smaller ring structure of CP resulted in
only partially accessing the active site resulting in the
prevention of access to ASN282 as evident from the molecular
surface information of both the complexes.

The docking interaction complex KN-MurF1-6MT was
compared with KN-MurF1-CP (3a-3d). The active site
interaction was magnified to understand the molecular
conformations of ligands (CP and 6MT) docking with receptor
KN-MurF1 and to gain knowledge on the ligand-receptor HB
interaction (light brown colour) within the vicinity of 4 Å of
active site hot spot region ( &amp; 
)). KN-MurF1-6MT
complex involves three HB interactions at PRO278, HIS281 and
ASN 282 residues with a better ΔG score and least Ki Value as
compared to two hydrogen bond interactions at GLU116 and
HIS 281 and higher ΔG score and Ki Value of KN-MurF1-CP
complex. Almost 90 degree conformational orientation of the
two primary rings of ligand 6MT as compared to CP expanded
KN-MurF1 active site resulting in accessing the ASN282 residue
for HB interaction. The smaller ring structure of CP resulted in
only partially accessing the active site resulting in the
prevention of access to ASN282 as evident from the molecular
surface information of both the complexes.

MEP represents the non-bonded interaction energy between
ligands and receptors []. Hence, it was calculated for both the
complexes to compare their ligand docking regions. The ligand
docking region cleft (encircled with an arrow) of KN-MurF1-
6MT is completely engulfed by a positive charge whereas in
case of KN-MurF1-CP the ligand docking region is only
partially engulfed by a positive charge ( &amp; 
). Thus,
there is clear evidence of differences in their charge
complementarity indicating tighter binding in KN-MurF1-CP
than in KN-MurF1-6MT. Thus, MEPS analysis revealed basic
differences in the ligand binding pocket, which could be
exploited in future for the rational design of selective KN-MurF
bactericidals.

Conclusion
The KN-MurF homology model generated for the first time a
3D structural model that can be used for screening different
molecules for KN-specific MurF inhibitory activity. The
developed model showed good overall structural quality and
was confirmed using several different validation tools. Our
study provided structural insight about the hotspots HIS 281
and ASN 282 and their corresponding plausible potential
charge interactions with ligands. Thus, the present work forms
the basis for further molecular modeling and biochemical
studies on targeting the KN-MurF enzyme for therapy. Our
studies conclusively revealed 6-MT as a potent lead compound
better than other ligands based on best values of docking
energy, Ki value and HB interactions. Further, pre-clinical
analysis of 6-MT is necessary to accurately understand its
molecular mechanism of action and pharmacological efficiency
to conclusively state it as an anti-bacterial analogue.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Sivaramakrishnan et al, Bioinformation 8(10): 466-473 (2012)

The alignment between target and template sequence

Target models of K. pneumonia (MurF Ligase): KNMurF1
(2a) and KN-MurF2 (2b) illustrated as ribbon structure
with RGB (red, green and blue) colours along with its shadow
as hydrophobic surface. (D1-D3) represents three consecutive
open alpha/beta-sheet domains. C and N represent C-Terminal
and N-Terminal respectively

Stereo-chemical validation of the predicted KP-MurF1
is shown below using Ramachandran plot and its statistics from
Procheck (3a), ERRAT plot (3b), ProSA Z-score (3c) and
corresponding energy schema (3d).

KN-MurF1-6-MT complex (4a) and KN-MurF1-CP
complex (4c) with their corresponding interaction residues
within 4Å vicinity of active site hotspots (4b &amp; 4d). 6MT- Blue
colour and CP- Pink colour represented as a ball and stick
model.

Molecular surface representation of KN-MurF1-6-MT
Complex (5a) and KN-MurF1-CP Complex (5b) and their
respective MEP represented as blue mesh (positive potential)
and red mesh (negative potential). The encircled region
represents their corresponding active site region.

