Background
Tabernaemontana divaricata is a glabrous, evergreen,
dichotomously branched shrub, belonging to the family
Apocynaceae. This plant is known as Crepe jasmine in India,
Togor, Dudhphul in Bangladesh. T. divaricata is common garden
plant and widely distributed in the northern part of Thailand
and used as Thai folk medicine for treatment of inflammation,
pneumonia and fever etc []. The growing scientific evidence
has establishing this plant for its medicinal importance and
possibility of this plant as pharmaceutical purposes []. During
last few decades, investigation to characterized chemical
constituents from the leaves, stems and roots of this plant was
carried out across the world , and more than 100 Law Molecular
Weight Compound has been reported till date 
[–]. The
beneficial properties of T. divaricata are antioxidant, antiinfection,
anti-tumour action, anti-bacterial, analgesia and the
enhancement of cholinergic activity in both peripheral and
central nervous systems []. In North-East India region, the
leaves stem and root part of this plant is traditionally used for
the treatment of Pneumonia related infection by Local healer.
Therefore, there is great demand to study the molecular
interaction of these compounds against bacterial protein for
designing anti-bacterial lead compound []. In this present
investigation, we have studied 66 Low Molecular Weight
(LMW) compound reported from T. divaricata in their structural
level. We predicted few structural properties of these
compounds necessary for a novel candidate drug and
performed Molecular Docking analysis against few established
drug target of Streptococcus pneumonia. Streptococcus pneumonia is
a causative organism of pneumoniae, also called pneumococcus,
can infect the upper respiratory tracts of adults and children
and can spread to the blood, lungs, middle ear, or nervous
system []. Presently antibiotic such as Amoxicillin, Cefazolin,
Dicloxacillin, Levofloxacin, Ciprofloxacin etc are suggested for
the treatment of Bacterial pneumonia, but due to adverse side
effect and law efficacy , these drugs fails to inhibit bacterial
pathogen especially Streptococcus pneumonia 
[–]. Bacterial
membrane protein plays an important role in growth, cell
division and maintaining the cellular structure in bacteria.
Therefore, inhibition of these proteins is important for
controlling the pathogen.

Penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs) are a group of proteins that
are characterized by their affinity for and binding of penicillin.
They are a normal constituent of many bacteria as well as S.
pneumonia []. The enzyme has a penicillin-insensitive
transglycosylase N-terminal domain (involved in formation of
linear glycan strands) and a penicillin-sensitive transpeptidase
C-terminal domain (involved in cross-linking of the peptide
subunits) and the serine at the active site is conserved in all
members of the PBP family []. Another important receptor
sialidases (or neuraminidases) are believed to be involved in
removing sialic acid from host cell surface glycans, thereby
promoting colonization of the upper respiratory tract. The
biosynthesis of UDP-GlcNAc in bacteria is carried out by GlmU,
an essential bifunctional uridyltransferase that catalyzes the
CoA-dependent acetylation of GlcN-1-PO4 to form GlcNAc-1-
PO4 and its subsequent condensation with UTP. GlmU is an
essential enzyme in both Gram-positive and Gram-negative
bacteria, and is viewed as an attractive target for the
development of antimicrobial compounds peptidoglycan,
lipopolysaccharide and techoic acid synthesis has been
identified as an novel drug target. Plants are the major source of
anti-bacterial agent without side effect. Therefore, herein an
attempt was made to identify potential photochemical from this
plant as a selective anti-bacterial agent.

Methodology
Compound Library Creation and protein preparation:
Literature study was conducted and a data set of 66
Tabernaemontana divaricata derived compounds was prepared
[]. The name and compound ID of few top ranking
compounds are presented at  (see supplementary
material). ChemBio Office Ultra [] and Marvin Sketch
software was used to draw their structure. Open Bable software
was used for file conversion purpose. Crystal structures of
Streptococcus pneumonia membrane protein receptor namely
Penicillin-binding proteins [], NanB sialidase 
[] and
acetylglucosamine-1-phosphate uridyltransferase 
[] and
aspartate beta-semialdehide dehydrogenase 
[] was retrieved
from Protein Data Bank along with their co-crystallized ligand.
The lists of receptor model with resolution are presented in the
 (see supplementary material).

Physiochemical Property and Force field Calculation:
Prediction of physiochemical property of retrieved compounds
is performed by using Molesoft Browser and optimized their
structure in ChemBio Office 3D tool using MM2 force field.
Prediction of drug likeness properties of these optimized
compounds were performed using Mol-Soft ICM Browser and
ChemBioOffice. PASS (Prediction of Activity Spectra for
Substance) software was used to predict the drug-likeness and
toxicity properties of these ligands as shown in the  (see
supplementary material) []. The force field values of lignads
are presented in the  (see supplementary material).
Drug-likeness of all those compounds were also studied and
given in the  (see supplementary material).

Drug-likeness study of Ligand:
The proposed ligands were predicted for the non violation of
CMC like, Lead like. Identification and optimization of lead
compounds as a chemical staring points are very important in
combinatorial chemistry. MDDR like and Lipinski's rule of five
necessary for a ideal drug compound. The drug-likeness values
of these compounds are presented in the  (see
supplementary material). The PreADMET server was
employed to predict drug like rule for these entire compound
[].

Molecular Docking Study:
Molecular interactions study of the Streptococcus pneumonia
membrane protein receptor models with these phytochemical
was carried out using Autodock 4.0 tools. Energy grid was built
within a cubic box of dimensions 60 × 60 × 60A grid points and
0.375 Å spacing using the Autogrid program. Docking was
performed based on Lamarckian Genetic Algorithm. Grid
points were generated around the catalytic pocket to cover the
entire ligand binding site, such that the compound to be docked
can move freely within it. Docking simulations were performed
using Lamarckian Genetic Algorithm (LGA). The docking
parameters set to perform each docking experiment were
derived from 100 different runs that were set to terminate after a
maximum of 2,500,000 energy evaluations, elitism of 1,
mutation rate of 0.02, cross-over rate of 0.8, and local search rate
of 0.06. The population size was set to 150 []. The receptor
wise results of docking are presented in the  (see
supplementary material).

Result &amp; Discussion
Tabernaemontana divaricata is a widely used medical plant used
for the treatment of inflammation, pneumonia, fever etc. Antibacterial
and anti-fungal properties of this plant have been
reported and more than 100 compounds are characterized till
date by many workers across the worldwide. The Virtual
Screening and Molecular Docking is standard protocol to find
out the molecular interaction of small compounds with the
receptor models of pathogen. In this study, we employed the
Virtual Screening of 66 compounds reported from T. divaricata.
The physiochemical properties and drug-likeness prediction of
these compounds has clearly reflecting the importance of these
compounds as a drug candidate (, 
 &amp; ).
Herein, we found 70% compounds following lipinki's rule of
five and 50 compounds not violating other drug-like rules such
as CMC, MDDR etc necessary for a novel lead compound. In
this present work, the docking was performed against three
membrane protein namely Streptococcus pneumonia Penicillinbinding
proteins, sialidases, GlmU and aspartate betasemialdehide
dehydrogenase. These receptors are selected
because they are present in most of the bacterial community and
established targets of many existing anti-biotics. The Molecular
Docking of these compounds with receptor model was
conducted in autodock 4.0 tool using the parameter as described
in the methodology part after calculating their forcefield 
(). 
Docking results are computed in term of binding energy,
ligand efficiency and Number of hydrogen bonding. Apparicine
(-5.14), 5-Hydroxyvoaphylline (-4.78), Voacangine (-4.7), 19-
Hydroxycoronaridine (-4.44) and Coronaridine (-4.72) are
identified as most suitable to bind with N-acetylglucosamine-1-
phosphate uridyltransferase receptor. Ervaticine (-
6.33),Ibogamine(-6.15),Methylvoaphylline(-5.74) and
Coronaridine hydroxyindolenine (-5.32) has shown novel
binding against the penicillin-binding proteins. Ervaticine(-
6.42), 5-oxo-11-hydroxy voaphylline(-6.18), Conolobine B(-6.02)
has found optimum binding against the active site of
NanB sialidase from Streptococcus pneumonia. The compounds
3S-Cyanocoronaridine (-6.71), 19-Epivoacristine (-5.48) and
Ervaticine(-5.45) interacting with aspartate beta-semialdehide.
Interestingly few derivatives of Coronaridine has showed good
binding against receptor models. This compound is already
reported for strong antibacterial activity against K. pneumonia.
However, there is no report of molecular interaction of these
compounds with bacterial membrane protein targets. Therefore,
the present study may be a useful starting point to design novel
anti-bacterial compounds from these 66 Low Molecular Weight
drug-like compounds derived from Tabernaemontana divaricata.
In the study, it was also observed that the most of suitable
compounds interacting with receptor models are characterized
from leaves and study was significant in this aspect.

Conclusion
Virtual Screening and Docking of 66 Law Molecular Weight
compounds of Tabernaemontana divaricata has clearly reflecting
their drug-likeness as promising inhibitors of bacterial cell
membrane protein. Experiment study on compounds such as
Voacangine, Ibogamine, Methylvoaphylline may be carried out
to confirm the novelty of their bacterial inhibition. More
importantly the few derivatives of Coronaridine with least
binding energy (Kcal/mol) may be useful as lead molecule to
design and development of future anti-biotic for the treatment
of bacterial pneumonia and other bacterial infection by
inhibiting their cell membrane proteins.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors thankfully acknowledge the Department of
Biotechnology, Govt. of India for providing the Bioinformatics
Infrastructure Facility to CSIR-NEIST, Jorhat under the project
“Creation of BIF for the promotion of biology teaching through
bioinformatics, 2008” and Director, CSIR-NEIST for constant
support and encouragement throughout the study.

Citation:Gogoi et al, Bioinformation 10(3): 152-156 (2014)

Ligands physiochemical properties in acceptable
range.

Physiochemical Properties predicted in accepted limit.

