Background
Benzimidazopyrimidine belonging to the fused heterocyclic
system have three nitrogen atoms. The most prominent
benzimidazole moiety in nature is N-ribosyl -dimethyl
benzimidazole, which serves as an axial ligand for cobalt in
vitamin B12 []. Literature survey revealed that benzimidazole
derivatives play a vital role in biological activities such as
antifungal, kinase inhibitor, anti-hepatitis-C-virus,
antidepressant and anticancer [–
]. Also, heterocycles
containing an imidazolone moiety exhibits various biological
activities such as antibacterial and antifungal activities 
[–].
Coumarins are an important class of widely distributed
heterocyclic natural products exhibiting several biological
properties. 4-Amino-3-(2-methylbenzyl)coumarin derivatives
[] exhibited potent estrogenic activity on the estrogen
receptor positive (ER+) human MCF-7 breast cancer cell line.
Benzothiazolyl coumarin acetamide derivatives [] exhibited
strong in vitro anti-HIV effect against the wild-type HIV-1 cell
line. The in vitro antioxidant activities of 4-schiff bases-7-
benzyloxy coumarin derivatives [] revealed that DPPH and
ABTS+ radical scavenging activities were better than that of the
commercial antioxidant BHT.

Human protein kinases are attractive targets for the
development of new therapeutics because of their involvement
in processes associated with the progression of cancers and
metabolic diseases [,
]. Aurora kinase family of
serine/threonine kinase regulates some important events
during mitosis. They play key roles in centrosome maturation
and separation, mitotic spindle assembly and chromosome
segregation []. The Aurora kinase A is commonly
overexpressed in many tumor cell lines and human primary
tumours []. In addition, Aurora A has the ability to transport
cell lines that are capable of forming tumours in mice 
[]. The
role of Aurora A in the cell cycle and tumorogenesis suggested
that the inhibition of the kinase activity have remarkable value
for the development of small molecular therapeutics for cancer
treatment. Based on the current success of Aurora kinase
inhibitors in the development of kinase-based cancer therapy,
we have initiated a virtual screening program for the
identification of Aurora kinase inhibitors.

In our previous paper [], we have reported the synthesis, in
vitro antimicrobial and anticancer activities of novel coumarin
substituted dihydrobenzo[4,5]imidazo[1,2-a]pyrimidin-4-ones.
In continuation to this, we study herewith, the crystal structure
(2g) and molecular docking studies of benzimidazopyrimidine
and coumarin substituted benzimidazopyridimine derivatives
with human Aurora A kinase target to evaluate their potential
value for the treatment of cancers.

Methodology
Preparation of ligands:
The 2D structures (.mol) of all the thirteen compounds as
tabulated in  (see supplementary material) were drawn
and the structure was analyzed by using ChemDraw Ultra 12.0.
All the compounds (2a-2k) are converted to 3D structure (.pdb)
using Openbable software tool. The 3D coordinates (.pdb) of
each molecule were loaded on to Dundee PRODRG server for
energy minimization []. The structure of the
benzimidazopyridimine and coumarin substituted
benzimidazopyridimines are shown in .

Preparation of macromolecule:
The protein target, which is retrieved from the RCSB Protein
Data Bank (PDB code 3FDN) serves as docking receptor [].
All the bound ligands and water molecules were removed from
the active site of the receptor. For docking target, crucial amino
acids of the active site were identified using data in pdbsum as
shown in  [].

X-ray structure determination:
A single crystal of the compound (2g) with dimensions of 0.30 ×
0.25 × 0.20 mm was chosen for X-ray diffraction studies. The
data were collected on a Bruker SMART APEX II X-ray
diffractometer with graphite monochromated MoKα radiation,
operating at 50 kV and 30 mA. Raw data was processed and
reduced by using APEX2 and SAINT []. The structure was
solved by direct methods using SHELXS-97 []. All nonhydrogen
atoms were revealed in the first Fourier map itself.
Full-matrix least squares refinement was carried out using
SHELXL-97 []. Anisotropic refinement of non-hydrogen
atoms was started at this stage. Subsequent refinements were
carried out with anisotropic thermal parameters for nonhydrogen
atoms and isotropic temperature factors for the
hydrogen atoms which were placed at chemically acceptable
positions. CCDC- 990917 contains the supplementary
crystallographic data of molecule 2g []. The X-ray structure of
this compound (2g) was used for the docking studies.

Molecular docking:
The molecular docking was performed and analyzed using
AutoDock 4.2. A Lamarkian genetic algorithm method
implemented in the program suite was employed to identify
appropriate binding modes and conformation of the ligand
molecules. Gasteiger charges were added and the rotatable
bonds were set by the AutoDock tools and all torsions were
allowed to rotate. Polar hydrogen atoms were added and
Kollaman charges were assigned to the protein using AutoDock
tools (ADT). The grid map was centered at the active site
pocket of the protein by Autogrid. The grid map which was
centered at the following residues of the protein (Thr 217, Arg
220, Arg 137, Leu 139, Pro 214, Ala 213, Gly 216, Tyr 212, Gly
140, Leu 263, Val 147, Glu 211, Leu 194, Leu 210, Ala 160) were
predicted from the ligplot (). In all the cases, we have
used grid maps with a grid box size of 55×55×55 Ǻ3 points with
a grid-point spacing of 0.375 Ǻ. During docking, centre grid
parameters were specified for x, y and z axis as -2.0, -32.0 and
7.0, respectively. The Lamarckian genetic algorithm, the
pseudo-Solis and Wets methods were applied for minimization
using default parameters. Binding energy, torsional energy,
intermolecular energy, number of H-bonds and RMS value
were recorded in each ligand bound conformations. The details
of dock score results of the different benzimidazopyrimidine
derivatives are given in  (see supplementary material).

Results &amp; Discussion
The crystal structure analysis showed that the compound (2g)
crystallizes in monoclinic system under the space group P21/n
with cell parameters, a = 9.3819(12) Å, b = 8.0471(10) Å, c =
26.808(4) Å, β = 93.592(7)° and Z=4. The crystal structure was
solved by direct methods and refined by full-matrix least
squares on F2 to a final residual value of R1 = 0.0486.
Automated docking was used to assess the binding modes and
conformation of the ligand molecules. Docking studies was
performed for all the benzimidazopyrimidine and coumarin
substituted benzimidazopyridimine derivatives. In docking
study, all the compounds were found to have minimum
binding energy ranging from -6.26 to -9.29 kJ/mol. Among the
docked molecules, 2h, 2i, 2j and 2k revealed minimum binding
energy of -8.8, -9.1, -8.9 and -9.29 kJ/mol, with ligand efficiency
of -0.29, -0.29, -0.3 and -0.31, respectively. These molecules were
completely wrapped by active site amino acid residues at the
active site pocket region (as shown in ).

The protein (3FDN) comprises of fifteen active site residues,
which are promiscuous to the ligands. Out of which only two
(Ala 213 and Asn 261) residues are directly interacting with the
ligands. Most of the residues that are in close proximity to the
inhibitor are hydrophobic in nature. All the ligands were
docked deeply within the binding pocket region of 3FDN. The
ligand molecules 2e, 2f, 2h and 2k were found to show
hydrogen bond interaction with active site amino acid residues
Ala 213 and Asn 261 at a distance of (1.923 and 2.203), (1.909
and 1.925), (2.234 and 1.928) and (2.024 and 2.104) Å,
respectively (). The ligands 2a, 2b, 2g and 2j showed
only one hydrogen bond interaction with protein, where as
ligand 2c and 2i has no interaction with the protein. The
docking results for all ligand molecules against protein target
showed minimum intermolecular energy, ligand efficiency,
binding energy, inhibition constant and vdW + Hbond + desolv
energy with best RMSD value. From this study, we have
predicted ligands 2h, 2i, 2j and 2k may act as potential
inhibitors of human Aurora A kinase enzyme.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The author MM would like to thank UGC, New Delhi,
Government of India, for awarding a project under the head F.
No. 41-920/2012(SR) dated: 25-07-2012.

Citation:Chandra et al, Bioinformation 10(5): 288-292 (2014)

Structure of (A) Bennzimidazopyrimidine (B)
Coumarin substituted benzimidazopyridimine derivatives.

Ligplot results of Aurora A (3FDN), showing the
binding of ligand Mmh 1(A) with amino acid residues present
in an active site pocket.

Enfolding of molecules 2e, 2f, 2h and 2k in the active
site pocket

H-bond interaction of ligand molecules (2e, 2f, 2h and
2k) with 3FDN

