Background
Cervical cancer is malignant neoplasm of the cervix uteri or
cervical area. Cervical cancers start in the cells on the surface of
the cervix. Most cervical cancers originate from squamous cells.
Undetected precancerous changes can develop into cervical
cancer and spread to the bladder, intestines, lungs, and liver 
[].
Papilloma viruses are heterogeneous groups of viruses. They
are small double stranded DNA viruses that infect mucosae and
cutaneous surfaces, causing warts and epithelial tumours 
[].
Human Papillomaviruses (HPVs) are the primary cause of
cervical cancer, involved in 90% of all Cervical Cancers. The
HPVs can be divided into two groups, the ‘low risk’ such as
type 6 and 11) and the ‘high risk’ (such as type 16 and 18) 
[].
Persistent HPV infection with a high risk virus is essentially
observed in cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) II and III
stages []. There is sufficient morphological and
epidemiological consensus for the assumption that CIN III is a
dynamic disease in which some cases regress spontaneously,
whereas others progress to the invasive state, invasive cervical
carcinoma (ICC) [,
]. Two early HPV genes, E6 and E7, are
known to play crucial role in tumor formation. Both in vitro and
in vivo studies show that the function of E6 and E7 proteins,
particularly of the ‘high risk types’, are essential for cellular
transformation [,
]. These oncogenes from the ‘high risk’
viruses have been shown to alter pathways involved in cell
cycle control, interacting with and neutralizing the regulatory
functions of two important tumor suppresser proteins, p53 and
Rb [], and also in conjunction with cellular genes, like
deregulating key signal transduction pathways 
[].

HPV 16 E6 is a 151 amino acid protein with two zinc finger
domains. E6 is one of the primary oncogenes of the virus;
causes immortalization of cells and along with E7 brings about
transformation. Hence, it is obvious that E6 induces several
important changes in the host cell by interacting with a plethora
of cellular proteins. E6 can associate with the product of the
tumor suppresser gene, p53 []. Analysis of human tumors
reveals that p53 is one of the most commonly mutated genes.
P53 is a transcription factor. It stimulates the expression of
genes involved in cell cycle arrest and apoptosis, for example
the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor (p21CIP). E6 binds to p53
and leads to ubiquitin mediated degradation of the latter. E6
binding to p53 can also lead to retention of p53 in the
cytoplasm, blocking its translocation to the nucleus and hence
abrogating its function independently of degradation 
[]. This
prevention of p53 translocation inhibits the ability of p53 to
activate or repress target genes []. HPV 16 E7, a nuclear
protein of 98 amino acids, has casein kinase II phosphorylation
sites at serine residues 31 and 32. It is divided into three
domains, CR1, CR2 and CR3. The ability of E7 to bind to
members of the retinoblastoma (Rb) protein (p107, p130) is
perhaps the most characterized property of this viral
oncoprotein []. When cells progress in mitosis from G0
through G1 to S-phase, Rb gets hyperphosphorylated by G1
cyclin–cyclin dependent kinases, releasing the transcription
factor E2F, which in turn activates genes involved in DNA
synthesis and cell cycle progression []. E7 binds to
hypophosphorylated Rb and thereby induces cells to enter into
premature S-phase by disrupting Rb-E2F complexes 
[].
Cervical cancer treatment has remained highly variable across
the globe, largely owing to variances in disease burden in
developed and developing nations. Hysterectomy (whole
uterus removal including part of the vagina) has been
employed in Microinvasive cancer (stage IA) 
[]. The most
commonly used drugs in chemotherapy against cervical cancer
are combination of two drugs - hycamtin and cisplatin usually
employed in women with late-stage (IVB) cervical cancer 
[].

Inspite of the availability of chemotherapeutic compounds,
there seems to be no specific drug tailor made for cervical
cancer. Hycamtin and cisplatin are generally targeted towards
the viral DNA and hycamtin is also known to suppress the bone
marrow production. The combination treatment has significant
risk of adverse effects like neutropenia, anemia, and
thrombocytopenia. In this atmosphere, identifying a lead
compound that would specifically target the HPV oncoproteins
or the Human tumor suppressor genes which they interact or
both would be highly critical in treatment of HPV induced
cervical carcinoma with high precision and efficacy.

Methodology
Lead Identification &amp; optimization:
A comprehensive search of all eligible studies on natural
compounds which possess antineoplastic property was made
by searching the electronic literature (PubMed database) for
relevant published reports and by manual searching of
reference lists of articles on this topic. A complete survey of Dr.
Duke's Phytochemical and Ethnobotanical Databases 
[] was
also made to enlist natural compounds which have an
inhibitory effect on the HPV onco proteins.

ADMET Prediction:
Elementary physical descriptors like molecular weight, logP,
number of hydrogen bond acceptors and hydrogen bond
donors were calculated for all the short listed compounds using
molinspiration []. The compounds which abide by the
“Lipinski's Rule of 5” filter was chosen for further analysis.

Binding Site Identification:
The site of interaction of the HPV oncoproteins and human
tumor suppressor proteins was identified with SHARP2 
[].
SHARP2 was used for prediction of predicting potential
protein–protein interaction sites on protein structures. A series
of surface residue patches are defined and a maximum of 6
parameters are calculated for each. The parameters such as
Solvation Potential, Hydrophobicity, Accessible Surface Area,
Residue Interface Propensity, Protrusion, and Planarity are
calculated. Based on these parameters, the site of interaction of
the proteins is calculated.

Docking studies:
The selected compounds were docked against E6 (PDB ID:
1VZN), p53 (PDB ID: 1TUP), Rb1 (PDB ID: 1AD6), E7 (PDB ID:
2B9D), using Molegro Virtual Docker (MVD) 
[]. MolDock
scoring system is employed by MVD and it is based on a new
hybrid search algorithm, called guided differential evolution.
The guided differential evolution algorithm combines the
differential evolution optimization technique with a cavity
prediction algorithm. Differential evolution (DE) was
introduced by Storn and Price in 1995 [] and has previously
been successfully applied to molecular docking. The use of
predicted cavities during the search process, allows for a fast
and accurate identification of potential binding modes (poses).
Moldock score scoring function has been used. The intact
protein structure was loaded on to MVD platform for docking
process. Potential binding sites (also referred to as cavities or
active sites) has been identified using the built-in cavity
detection algorithm of MVD. The search algorithm is taken as
Moldock SE and numbers of runs are taken 10 and max
iterations were 2000 with population size 50 with an energy
threshold of 100. At each step least ‘min’
torsions/translations/rotations were tested and the one giving
lowest energy was chosen. After the docking simulation was
over, the poses which were generated were sorted by rerank
score. The Rerank Score uses a weighted combination of the
terms used by the MolDock score mixed with a few addition
terms (the Rerank Score includes the Steric (by LJ12-6) terms
which are Lennard-Jones approximations to the steric energy –
the MolDock score uses a piecewise linear potential to
approximate the steric energy) []. The chosen ligands were
manually prepared using ligand preparation module of
Molegro virtual docker. Bond order and hybridization assign
wherever missing and flexible torsion and the ligands were
deducted. The target protein structures were prepared after
careful removal of hetero atoms and water molecules and its
electrostatic surface was generated. The docking was subjected
towards the amino acid residues which were found to be part of
interaction between HTSPs and VOPs. The grid resolution was
set at 0.3 A0.The maximum interaction was set at 1500 and
maximum population size 50.

Results
Interaction site Prediction:
Role of E6 and E7 oncoprotein from Human papiloma virus in
tumor formation and it's interaction with human tumor
suppressor proteins p53 and Rb1 respectively is well
characterized by numerous studies. It becomes quite imperative
that their site of interaction be targeted in order to court a cure
against cervical carcinoma. The protein-protein interaction
between Rb1 -E7 &amp; p53-E6 was analyzed and the precise site of
interaction was identified by employing SHARP2.The amino
acid residues of each of the aforementioned human tumor
suppressor proteins and viral oncoproteins taking part in the
interaction, subsequently leading to pathogenesis of the cervical
carcinoma were mapped out accurately.  (see
supplementary material) reveals the entire list of amino acids
involved in the interaction.  (see supplementary
material) contains the complete list of amino acid residues
involved in the interaction between E7-Rb1, E7-p53.

Docking results:
All the 88 natural compounds listed from the thorough
literature survey were docked against E6 (PDB ID: 1VZN), p53
(PDB ID: 1TUP), Rb1 (PDB ID: 1AD6), E7 (PDB ID: 2B9D) at the
specific sites of interaction predicted from SHARP2 results. The
docking results were tabulated for all compounds against the
four receptors. For each compound, out of the many docking
poses, only those which posses the highest moldock score and
relatively good Hydrogen bond interaction was chosen. The
best few compounds which exhibited very good affinity
towards the interaction site of all the four receptors were picked
out and the best ligand binding pose was picked out on the
basis of aforementioned criteria. Out of the 88 compounds,
Nicandrenone was found to possess best binding affinity
towards all the four receptors and was found to form Hydrogen
bond interaction with amino acid residues predicted to be
crucial in the protein-protein interaction between human tumor
suppressor proteins and viral oncoproteins. Nicandrenone was
found to be capable of binding with all the four receptor under
consideration. It was found to be binding with Rb1 by
interacting with surrounding amino acids like ser534, ser463,
and val531 by forming hydrogen bonds. It formed five
hydrogen bonds with high interaction energy of -95.0387.
Similarly Nicandrenone was found to bind with E7 by forming
six Hydrogen bonds by interacting with amino acids residues
Glu74, Asn82, Leu77, Val49, and Glu56, exhibiting interaction
energy of -84.8187. Nicandrenones binding affinity towards
p53-E6 interaction site was found to be even better. Very high
interaction energy of -121.578 was found for its interaction
towards E6, forming five hydrogen bond with the residues
Lys79, Tyr99, Glu120, and Glu97. With p53 Nicandrenone,
formed five hydrogen bond with the residues Thr231, Thr230,
Glu221 Glu224 and Arg202 showed interaction energy of -
106.56.The complete information of Nicandrenone interaction
with the 4 proteins of interest are depicted in 
 (see
supplementary material) and illustrations of the docking pose
of Nicandrenone binding with HTSPs &amp; VOPs is shown in
().

Discussion
P53 and RB1 are highly vital tumor suppressor proteins and
discrepancy in their normal function is implicated in
pathogenesis of several cancers. The Inactivation of these two
cellular tumor-suppressor proteins through their interaction
with E6 and E7 oncoproteins of found in HPV has been widely
hypothesized to play pivotal role in cervical carcinogenesis.
This binding is postulated to be the functional equivalent of
specific mutations in the p53 and RB genes 
[]. The E7
oncoprotein from HPV is partly responsible in mediating cell
transformation by binding to the human Rb1 tumor suppressor
protein and E2F transcription factors, consequently dissociating
Rb1 from E2F transcription factors and the premature cell
progression into the S-phase of the cell cycle 
[]. On the other
hand, E6 oncoproteins from both high and low risk HPVs have
been found to be capable of binding to p53 without inducing its
degradation []. This interaction prevents the p53-mediated
transcriptional repression of TATA-containing promoters 
[],
and also represses p53's transactivation of promoters containing
p53- responsive elements []. Several studies over the past two
decades have consistently suggested that strategies aimed at the
therapeutic targeting of the E6-p53 interaction would be most
likely to succeed if the actual physical association between E6
and p53 could be disrupted [].

The principle goal of our study was to target the site of
interaction of the E6-p53 and E7-Rb1 and thereby sabotages the
physical interaction between these tumor suppressor protein
and viral oncoproteins. The primary step was to enumerate the
amino acid residues involved at the site of interaction. The
result from SHARP2 server gave comprehensive list of all the
residues which would be a part of this vital interaction. Our
study results showed that amino acids residues 110 ARG - 231
THR of p53 were involved in its binding with E6 residues 22
LEU- 99 TYR. Our results were consistent with the finding of
Crook et al (1991), who observed that HPV E6 can bind to the
core region, (amino acids 66-326) which correlate with the
induction of p53 degradation []. E7 amino acid residues
45PRO- 93 GLN were found to interact with 378VAL- 531VAL
of Rb1. Liu, X et al (1990) established that the CR3 zinc binding
domain of E7 (amino acids 44-93) is responsible in dissociation
of pRb from E2F transcription factors and the premature cell
progression into the S-phase of the cell cycle []. As the CR3
region of HPV E7 has no detectable homology to other human
proteins, the structure-function studies presented here provide
an avenue for developing small molecule compounds that
inhibit HPV-E7-mediated cell transformation. The molecular
docking studies carried out with the shortlisted compounds,
targeting the site of interaction between E6-p53 &amp; E7-
Rb1.Nicandrenone was found to be most viable compound to
bind to the site of interaction and disrupt the physical
interaction between HTSPs &amp; the VOPs. The nicandrenones are
structurally complex steroids obtained from Nicandra
physalodes and belong to group of naturally occurring chemical
compounds called withanolides. Traditionally they have been
known to posses with insecticidal effects and antibacterial
properties. This compound as also been identified to exhibit
cytotoxic effect against certain cancerous cells in Homo sapiens
and Mus musculus []. The Docking results clearly indicate that
Nicandrenone interacts with the list of amino acids as predicted
by SHARP2. As the site of binding coincides with the site of
interaction between viral oncoprotein and the human tumor
suppressor proteins, there is a great chance that Nicandrenone
would be highly capable of disrupting the physical interaction
between HTPs and VOPs. The comparable affinity of
nicanderone towards all the 4 receptors of interest makes it
viable drug candidate for cervical carcinoma. Other compounds
amongst the list which were chosen for screening- pregnane
and steroidal glycoside also exhibited similar moldock score as
that of nicanderanone indicating that they can also be subjected
to further analysis and subsequently be treated as a candidate
for drug discovery pipe line. Nicandrenone's hypothesized
ability to act as a lead compound against HPV induced
cerviacal carcinoma as revealed by our Insilico studies makes it
an interesting case to investigate other Withanolides against the
same protein target at the identical sites. Such a future studies
might prove to be invaluable in finding other leads which might
be structurally similar to Nicandrenone but with even better
binding affinity or drug like properties.

Conclusion
The molecular interaction between the human tumor
suppressor proteins p53 &amp; Rb1 and the HPV oncoproteins E6 
&amp; E7 is crucial in the pathogenesis of cervical carcinoma.
Molecular screening of natural compounds was carried out,
targeting the site of interaction of E6-p53 and E7-Rb1. The
docking results revealed that Nicandrenone exhibited the
highest binding affinity towards the site of interactions and
hence it could be an ideal molecule to disrupt the physical
interaction between the human tumor suppressor proteins and
HPV oncoproteins. Thus our study indicates that Nicandrenone
could be a potential candidate against Human Papilloma Virus
induced cervical cancer.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We would like to extend our heartfelt thanks to Molegro ApS
for giving us a fully functional trial version for a period of 30
days during which all the insilico docking work was carried
out.

Citation:Shaikh et al, Bioinformation 8(13): 607-612 (2012)

Illustrations of the docking pose of Nicandrenone
binding with HTSPs &amp; VOPs carried out with Molegro Virtual
Docker 5.0. A. Nicandrenone interacting with Rb1 (1AD6) B.
Nicandrenone interacting with E7oncoprotein (2B9D) C.
Nicandrenone interacting with P53 (1TUP) D. Nicandrenone
interacting with E6 oncoprotein (1VZN). Images depict ligand
interaction with the site of interaction of the viral oncoproteins
and human tumor suppressor proteins. Green dotted lines
represent hydrogen bonds. The Receptor is depicted in ball and
stick model and the ligand in Wireframe. CPK coloring
convention has been employed.

