Background
Bacillus cereus, B. thuringiensis and B. anthracis are genetically
closely related members of the group 1 bacilli []. All three
species are readily isolated from soil environments though they
show different patho-physiologies in different hosts.
B.thuringiensis has been widely utilized to control many
agricultural and medically important insect pests whereas B.
cereus and B. anthracis are considered as highly pathogenic to
mammals. The presence of delta-endotoxins or crystalline
proteins produced during sporulation phase is the only
phenotypic criteria determining the identity of B.thuringiensis
strains []. The genes encoding these inclusion proteins are
present in the plasmid which has the ability for horizontal
transfer between closely related Bacillus strains 
[].
Comparative analysis of conserved genes in the core genomes
and pan genomes of the related bacillus species have led to the
identification of many overlapping loci in these strains 
[].

Hence much debate exists in the concreteness of describing
B.thuringiensis, B.cereus and B.anthracis as individual entities.
However, a few sequences of specific genes such as atxA, capA
capB, capC, pag, lef etc have been identified to impart high
specificity to B.anthracis []. Cap genes are essential for
synthesis of polyglutamic acid capsules which confer virulence
in B.anthracis and atxA gene is a regulatory gene for anthracis
toxin. Hence the presence of these genes and analysis of
sequence homology could be used as a potential genetic marker
in predicting the relatedness of environmental B.thuringiensis
strains to that of pathogenic B.anthracis strains. The present
investigation aims at identifying these gene sequences in
B.t.LDC-391 and comparing its relatedness to B.anthracis.

Parasporins are a new functional category of inclusion proteins
possessing cancer cell killing property, identified first in a
Japanese B.thuringiensis isolate []. These strains are usually non
haemolytic and non-motile with other phenotypic characters
similar to that of insecticidal B.thuringiensis strains. B.t.LDC-391,
investigated in this study is one such soil isolates from southern
part of India, showing cytotoxicity against human colon cancer
cell line, HCT-116 []. Albeit this strain possesses parasporal
inclusions which is a common feature of B.thuringiensis species,
the distinctness of this strain at morphological and molecular
level to other related species needs to be investigated.

Methodology
Bacterial strains and culture media:
The indigenous bacterial strain B.t.LDC-391 and the reference
type strain Bacillus thuringiensis israelensis, 4Q2 (Bacillus Genetic
Stock center) were cultured in Nutrient broth (Hi-media, India)
supplemented with 20 IU of penicillin for routine sub culturing
at 37°C with 200 rpm shaking.

Morphological analysis:
Scanning Electron Microscopic analysis:
Axenic cultures of B.t.LDC-391 were obtained by streak plate
method. The sporulated (72h), cells were washed thrice with
0.5M NaCl and fixed in gradients of aqueous ethanol (30%, 50%,
70%, 90%) and finally with absolute ethanol. The SEM
examination was performed at the Department of Plant
Sciences, Madurai Kamaraj University, and Madurai. The
samples were coated with gold to a thickness of 100 Å using the
Vacuum Evaporator, (Hitachi, Model HUS 5GB), and analyzed
in a Scanning Electron Microscope (Hitachi, Model S-450, Japan)
operated at 15 kV and photographed.

Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM):
Sporulated cultures of B.t.LDC-391 containing intact crystals
were centrifuged at 4000g for 15 min. The pellets were
suspended in a buffer containing 3% glutaraldehyde, 1.5%
paraformaldehyde and 0.1M PBS (pH7.2) for 3h at room
temperature and centrifuged at 4000 g. The pellets were
resuspended in a cocktail of 1% osmic acid and 1.5% potassium
ferrocyanide for 1.5 h at 4°C. After gradient fixing, the pellets
were ultra cut and serially stained with uranyl acetate and lead
citrate for 5 min. The sections were examined with a
transmission electron microscope (Jeol, model 1010, Japan) and
photographed.

Biochemical characterization:
The biochemical tests for the bacterial characterization was
performed according to the methods described in Bergey's
manual of Systematic Bacteriology []. All the tests were done in
parallel with appropriate positive and negative controls 

(see supplementary material)

Characterization of salt tolerance and temperature optima:
Spizizen's media [] containing different NaCl concentrations
(0.5%-10%) were inoculated with the B.t.LDC-391 and its
respective controls. Growth and optical density parameters
were measured at 600 nm using spectrophotometer after 24 h.
The sporulated cultures were checked for the presence of
crystalline inclusions under phase contrast microscope.
Sporulating cultures were monitored for their ability to grow at
various temperatures ranging from 27°C - 50°C. The plates
were incubated for 5 days to confirm optimal temperature and
other physiological conditions. The sporulated colonies were
analyzed under phase contrast microscope for the presence of
spherical parasporal inclusion.

Antibiotic sensitivity test:
Different antimicrobial agents were tested by the disc-agar
diffusion method in accordance with the national committee for
clinical laboratory standards (NCCLS). Cultures of B.t.LDC-391
were inoculated in Mueller-Hinton Agar (Difco, BBL. USA)
with discs impregnated with known concentrations of
antibiotics  (see supplementary material).

PCR analysis:
Total DNA from the strain using DNA isolation kit (Chromous
Biotech, India) under investigation was titrated with the below
listed primers for amplification of their respective genes in
 
(see supplementary material). PCR was performed
within a volume of 25 µl containing 500 ng of genomic DNA, 2.5
µl of 10X PCR buffer, 50 ng of forward and reverse primers of
the respective gene, 10 mM of dNTP mix and 2.5U taq
polymerase (Bangalore Genei, India). The samples were
subjected for 30 amplification cycles at 94° C for 30s, respective
annealing temperature for 40s, and 72°C for 60s in an Eppendorf
Gradient Cycler. DNA from B.thuringiensis israelensis (BGSC
4Q2) was used as a control. The presence of the amplicon was
observed using 1% agarose gel.

Analysis of 16S rRNA:
The 16S rRNA gene sequences for B.t.LDC-391 (EU625359.1)
obtained earlier were analyzed using the BLAST program (Basic
Local Alignment Search Tool) (www.ebi.ac.uk and
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). About twenty B.cereus and
B.thuringiensis sequences, ten B.anthracis sequences showing
maximum score in the BLAST analysis and sequence of
pathogenic B.cereus strain E33L was acquired from NCBI. These
sequences were aligned using ClustalW and manually
corrected. Maximum likelihood (ML) analysis was performed
with Molecular Evolutionary and Genome Analysis package,
MEGA 5 [,
] using the Kimura 2-parameter model with 1000
bootstraps.

Discussion
SEM and TEM analysis:
Scanning and Transmission Electron microscopic analysis of
B.t.LDC-391 spore crystal complex showed spherical crystal
morphology and were smaller than spores in comparison with
the established parasporin producers []. The size of the
inclusions varied from 0.5 µm to 1µm in width. There was an
envelope surrounding the sporangia and they were found as
detached entities from the crystalline inclusions at the fully
developed stage ( &amp; 
).

Biochemical characterization:
The biochemical and physiological characterization of B.t.LDC-
391 done in triplicates showed all the typical biochemical
features exhibited by Bacillus thuringiensis strains 
 (see
supplementary material). In sharp contrast to all the parasporin
producers reported so far, B.t.LDC-391 is the only strain
showing motility. Observing the motility of the strain is of
special interest among group 1 Bacilli, because it is usually
associated with the vegetative strains of B.thuringiensis and
B.cereus but not B.anthracis 
[].

Although B.t.LDC-391 was able to grow in high saline (10%)
and temperature (above 35°C) conditions, the number of
crystalline inclusions was reduced three to five fold when
observed under phase contrast microscope. Carbon utilization
potential profile of B.t.LDC-391 was similar to that of earlier
observations that all parasporin producers were able to produce
acid from all the monosaccharides except from arabinose 
[].
B.thuringiensis strains are not capable of utilizing non-reducing
sugars, lactose and galactose which is also a common feature
found in B.t.LDC-391.

Antibiotic sensitivity:
B.t.LDC-391 showed resistance to ampicillin, penicillin and
bacitracin but sensitive to kanamycin. Apart from the absence
of δ-endotoxins, the only biochemical parameter reported to be
varying from B.thuringiensis and B.anthracis is the tolerance to
ampicillin as reported elsewhere []. The tolerance to β-lactam
group of antibiotics place B.t.LDC-391 close to B.thuringiensis
 (see supplementary material).

16S rDNA sequence analysis:
About 30 representative strains from B.thuringiensis, B.cereus
and B.anthracis showing maximum score on the BLAST analysis
of 16S rDNA sequence for B.t.LDC-391 were used for the
phylogenetic tree construction.No anthracis strains were
obtained within the first 50 hits. The dendrogram did not
represent the strain B.t.LDC-391 in the cluster of the B.anthracis
which included the pathogenic B.cereus strain E33L, with a
significant bootstrap value. It is in accordance to the study
reported elsewhere []. The strain B.t.LDC 391, was
represented at a different node although it was not statistically
significant () implying the divergence from the
pathological strains within the B.cereus group. Its exclusion
from the pathogenic cluster of B.cereus group deserves special
mention and confirms that the strain under investigation does
not belong to the virulence causing bacillus strains.

PCR analysis:
PCR analysis of total DNA using B. thuringiensis israelensis (4Q2)
as positive control confirmed that the strain B.t.LDC-391 under
investigation did not possess any cyt I and cyt II related genes.
B.thuringiensis israelensis (4Q2) showed the expected 480 base
pairs amplicon for cyt I and a 350 base pairs amplicon for cyt II
primers. Surprisingly, the strain B.t.LDC-391 was positive for
the presence of cap gene, while the other primers mentioned in
 (see supplementary material) did not generate
amplicons, implying the absence of atxA, a regulatory gene of
anthracis toxin and previously reported parasporin related
genes. It is to be noted that very permissible annealing
conditions were provided for the amplification of atxA, PS-1,
PS-4 and PS-6 genes. Unfortunately, no reference strains are
available as positive control for these reactions. Genomic
analysis using cyt I, cyt II specific primers confirmed that there
is no cyt related genes present in strain B.t.LDC-391. This result
confirms that the protein exerting cytolytic action on cancer
cells might not be due to the cyt gene. The information on the
sequence of novel parasporin gene in B.t.LDC391 is yet under study.

DNA sequencing of the amplified PCR product using cap A
primers revealed a high degree of sequence similarity to the
gene for capsule biosynthesis protein. Cap genes are
responsible for producing a protective capsule around the
organism during adverse conditions, so that it can escape from
host immune response []. The amplicon sequences obtained by
the use of capA primers was submitted in GenBank and the
accession number JQ319804 was obtained. The orf fragment
from the amplicon revealed 98% sequence identity to the cap A
genes with e-values ranging from 6e-178 to 3e-175. There was no
B.anthracis hits obtained in BLAST analysis using cap sequences
of B.t.LDC-391. UPGMA based analysis with 1000 boot strap
using jukes cantor method was utilized to generate the
phylogram. Cap sequences of representative B.anthracis strains
for the tree generation were acquired from NCBI, non
redundant nucleotide data base. The phylogram revealed that
the cap gene sequences were placed in a different node which
included only B.cereus and B.thuringiensis strains with 100%
boot strap values ().

The UPGMA and Neighbor Joining method based analysis of
cap gene sequence from B.t.LDC-391 has shown that it is not
grouped with any of the pathogenic or B.anthracis strains. It is
also note worthy that several reports have shown that strains of
B.cereus and B.thuringiensis contained similar capA sequences
obtained by PCR and DNA hydridization [,
]. However,
the functionality of the detected capA gene in B.t.LDC-391 is in
question because no capsule formation was observed in both
phase contrast and electron microscopic analysis. This may be
perhaps due to the absence of atxA gene which regulates the
capABCDE operon []. This gives us the notion that the cap
genes may have undergone evolutionary changes resulting in
divergence from B.anthracis strains.

Conclusion
In view of their natural competence, horizontal spreading of
plasmids may take place and has in fact has been demonstrated
for B. cereus group. The above results suggest that the strain
B.t.LDC-391 might have evolved as a result of interaction with
neighboring species, probably by the horizontal transfer of
extraneous plasmid genes from B.cereus and B.thuringiensis as
evinced by the presence of a non functional capA gene closer to
B.cereus. The stand alone nature of the 16S rDNA sequence in
the phylogenetic tree and the presence of the divergent cap
gene along with the cancer cell killing proteins throw light into
the possible permutations and combinations of nature. As
hypothesized by earlier workers, what seems to be a minor
problem of taxonomy may result in evolution of virulence,
pathogenicity [] and even beneficial characteristics such as
novel cancer cell killing quality as in our strain B.t.LDC-391.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors thank Department of Biotechnology (DBT), Govt.
of India, New Delhi for the financial support in the form of
Bioinformatics Infrastructure Facility (BTISNeT), University
Grant Commission (UGC), for Major Research Grant (F.No.34-
421/2008 (SR), DST Funding vide SR/SO/HS-48/2008 and
CSIR funding vide 37(1480)/11/ EMR-II.

Citation:Poornima et al, Bioinformation 8(10): 461-465 (2012)

A) SEM analysis of B.t. LDC-391; B) TEM analysis of B.t.
LDC-391; C-Crystalline inclusions and S-Spores

A) Phylogram analysis using using Maximum
likelihood for 16s rDNA sequence of B.t.LDC-391. *B.anthricis
strains. #pathogenic B.cereus strain. Bootstrap values indicated
at the nodes. Scale bar indicates no.of substittions per site; B)
Phylogram analysis using UPGMA for cap gene sequence of
B.t.LDC-391 along with representive strains from B.cereus
group. B.cereus ungrouped bacillus B.thuringiensis, B.anthracis.
Bootsrap values are indicated at the nodes of the phylogram

