Background
N-acetyl transferase (NAT) was first identified as the
genetically controlled step responsible for the inactivation of
isoniazid [] in the treatment of Tuberculosis 
[]. NAT is
responsible to catalyze the transfer of acetyl groups to
arylamines from acetyl-CoA, which have mainly specificity for
aromatic amines (e.g. serotonin), and can also catalyze acetyl
transfer between arylamines []. GCN5-related N-acetyl
transferase (GNAT) is a superfamily of enzymes that are
broadly distributed in nature and use acyl-CoAs to acylate
their cognate substrates []. All GNAT family members share
common structural features associated with acetyl coenzyme A
binding; in addition, each member of the family has unique
features reflecting substrate specificity for each of a wide range
of substrates (e.g. aminoglycosides, diamines, puromycin,
histones, and arylalkylamines). Aralkylamine N-acetyl
transferase (AANAT), which belongs to GCN5-related Nacetyl
transferase member, regulates the daily cycle of
melatonin biosynthesis in mammals, making it an attractive
target for therapeutic control of abnormal melatonin
production in mood and sleep disorders. Melatonin is
responsible for time keeping and playing a unique role in
vertebrate biology by controlling the rhythmic production of
melatonin in the pineal gland. It has been suggested in fish to
play a role in osmoregulation, and in salmonids, relate to the
timing of adaptive mechanisms during smolting []. AANAT
family includes enzyme like dopamine N-acetyl transferase
(Dat) []. The function of Dat is not melatonin biosynthesis;
rather it is in cuticle sclerotization and neural transmission 
[].
Dat and other AANAT family members have not been found
in the same genome []. AANAT is a globular 23-kDa cytosolic
protein that forms a reversible regulatory complex with 14-3-3
proteins [,
]. Catalytic core of AANAT forms a cavity
encompassing the arylalkylamine and AcCoA binding pockets.

As with other GNAT superfamily members [], AcCoA binds
by contacts between the pantethiene moiety and the edge of a
rigid sheet directing the thioacetyl group into the center of the
enzyme; the adenosine moiety is at the surface
Arylalkylamines bind in a funnel-shaped pocket formed by
three protein loops, which contact the aromatic ring of
substrates via aromatic residues. This position of the
protonated amine group of substrates is close to the AcCoA
thioacetyl group [,
]. The N-acetyl transferase, found in
Tribolium castaneum (red flour beetle), is an AANAT type.
The red flour beetle is a tenebrinionid beetle. It's a worldwide
pest of stored products such as flour, cereals, pasts, biscuit, nut
etc which causes loss and damage []. Since, there is no
adequate information related to the active site amino acids and
their nature. So, the present study deals with the identification
of active site amino acid and accessible surface area analysis in
protein model of Tribolium castaneum.

Methodology
Isolation of Template selection and confirmation of absent Nacetyl
transferase: The Dopamine N-acetyl transferase in
complex with acetyl-COA from Drosophila Melanogaster was
isolated from RSCP PDB [] as template and compared
against a complete Non-Redundant Protein Database using
The NCBI PSI-BLAST to ensure that those protein matching
eukaryotic protein exclusively in the first step truly had no
Dopamine N-acetyl transferase in Tribolium castaneum.
Visualization and Model Validation: The protein structure was
predicted by homology modeling with different server CPH
model (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/CPHmodels) and
SAVES (http: //nihserver.mbi.ucla.edu/SAVES). The program
CPH models 3.0 servers [] was used to build the model as
PDB file of N-acetyl transferase in Tribolium castaneum
according to the homology modeling method. The PDB of Nacetyltransferase
in Tribolium castaneum was visualized by
using PyMOL version 1.3 (http: //pymol. sourceforge.net/)
[]. The structure which was obtained from homology
modeling was validated by SAVES. The steriochemical quality
of the model was verified with program PROCHECK 
[] in
order to select best model.3D-profiling of the residue was done
by VERIFY 3D Structure evaluation Server [,
]. ERRAT
was used for verifying protein structure for evaluating the
progress of crystallographic model building and refinement
[]. 
The model was submitted to the ProSA [] to obtain the
Z-Score. Protein Structure analysis: Secondary structure of the
protein was predicted through SOPMA program
(http://npsapbil.ibcp.fr/cgibin/npsa_automat.pl?page=/NPSA/npsa_sopma.html), the program determined individual role
of amino acid for building the secondary structure with their
positions [].

Active site and accessible surface area analysis: One of the
keenest areas in the bioinformatics is the active sites of the
protein and its residual identification and characterization. The
structure was used to find out the ligand binding efficiency
with the predicted model and to detect whether the protein
was better or weak with other reported sources. CASTp
(http://sts.bioengr.uic.edu/castp/calculation.php/) was used
for identification of active site from the protein structure 
[].
POPS (http://mathbio.nimr.mrc.ac.uk/~ffranca/POPS) is a
new method based on an empirically parameterisable
analytical formula to calculate solvent accessible surface areas
of protein [].

Discussion
Isolation of Template selection and confirmation of absent
Dopamine N-acetyl transferase: The Dopamine N-acetyl
transferase in complex with acetyl-COA from Drosophila
Melanogaster (accession ID: 3TE4) was retrived from RSCP
PBD and was compared against complete Non-Redundant
Protein Database using The NCBI PSI-BLAST and N-acetyl
transferase absent in PBD used as subject in Tribolium
castaneum (Accession ID: ACN43328.1). Visualization and
Model Validation: The three dimensional structure of
Dopamine N-acetyl transferase was generated by using
PyMOL program (). To verify the predicted structure,
validation was carried out with PROCHECK program.
Ramchandran plot of non-glycine and non-proline residue in
the structure showed that 89.7% of the total amino acids were
presented in most favored regions and the other 10.3% of
amino acids were presented in allowed regions including
disallowed region with 0.0%. VERIFY_3D shows 87.43% of the
residues had an averaged 3D-1D score greater than 0.2
indicates that the environment profile of the model is good.
ERRAT2 shows 92.208 overall quality factors indicating good
resolution structure. Moreover, quality of the model can be
compared to reference structure of high resolution obtained
from X-Ray crystallography analysis through Z score and “0”
is the average Z score for good model. The Z score of N-acetyl
transferase is -5.74 showing the possibility to be a better model.
Figure 1: 3-D structure of the predicated model by PyMOL

Protein Structure analysis: The secondary analysis indicates
whether a given amino acid is located in helix strand or coil.
The result obtained from SOPMA described that about 47.70%
of amino acids presented in helix containing 4 α-subunits,
24.14% of amino acids in random coil, 21.26% of amino acids in
extended strand as 4 β subunits and rest of all amino acids in
bridge and turn. All the subunit is shown in (). Active
site and accessible surface area analysis: A total of 10 active
sites were evaluated in the structure through CASTp software
with ideal parameters shown in table 6. All 10 pockets were
characterized to find out its residues around probe radius of
1.4Ǻ and among them; largest and second largest active sites
have an area of 2014.5 Ǻ and 97.6 Ǻ respectively and volume of
3378.1 Ǻ and 91.1 Ǻ respectively. The green color ()
shows the largest active site position in the build protein which
lies between amino acid 1 and 161. Accessible surface area
(ASA) analysis of the predicted model showed the amino acids
with low ASA value are buried inside the catalytic cleft and
with high ASA values are on the surface of the cleft. Some of
the ligand binding residues and metal ion binding residues
were found to have high ASA values (LYS17, ASN42, LYS44,
TYR58, GLU60, GLU63, GLU64, ARG113, ) and some others
were found to have low ASA values (CYS20, SER27,
GLY47,CYS49,THR123,ALA127, ALA145). The active site
amino acids, which are hydrophobic, are CYS20, ALA127 and
ALA145 with low ASA values. While those active site amino
acids, which is hydrophilic, are LYS17, GLU63 and GLU64
with high values. Most of the active site amino acids such as
SER10, SER33, THR55, TYR78, SER86, SER105, SER108,
SER141, THR144, TYR157, SER158, TYR161 and THR173,
which are oxidized mostly, show average ASA values with
hydrophilic nature indicating that, are (): Active site
in predicated model computed with CASTp. Green color
represents active site with largest area and volume and other
colors represent the remaining active site with different areas
and volumes located in the middle of the ceft. Except SER10,
SER33, SER108, and THR173, all the above active site amino
acids are the part of large active site in the predicted model.

Conclusion
In this study, we proposed a valid and stable 3D model of
Dopamine N-acetyl transferase in Tribolium castaneum whose
structure is not present in PDB (Protein Data Bank). Further
analysis provides information about α and β subunits, active
site and their ASA value analysis in the predicted model. On
the basis of the findings, it could be concluded that further
characterization of Dopamine N-acetyl transferase from
Tribolium castaneum will be important in regulation of the
melanin sysnthesis. Such models can be effectively used to
design and support the drug design project. Knowledge
gained from this study will be used in broad screening on
inhibitors of the protein and can be further implemented in
future drug designing.

Citation:Singh et al, Bioinformation 9(14): 715-717 (2013)

3-D structure of the predicated model by PyMOL

Active site in predicated model computed with
CASTp. Green color represents active site with largest area and
volume and other colors represent the remaining active site
with different areas and volumes

