Background
Transcription factors play a pivotal role in the regulation of gene expression by sequence specific binding to the promoters of target genes. 
			Prediction of putative transcription factor binding sites has become an important resource to explore genome organization and regulatory mechanisms. 
			The binding specificity of transcription factors are usually represented by known sequence motifs (consensus sequences) or matrices (PFM (Position 
			Frequency Matrix) or PWM (Position Weight Matrix)). [] High throughput analyses using SELEX (Systematic 
			Evolution of Ligands by Exponential Enrichment) and CHIP-Chip (Chromatin Immunoprecipitation-Microarray) along with computational sampling methods have 
			generated thousands of PFMs. These data together with the related transcription factor information are curated in online databases such as Transfac [], JASPAR [], etc.

Online applications, such as MatInspector [,], 
			MATCH [] and ConSite [], have been built to utilize 
			PFMs to predict transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) embedded in promoter sequences. Many of the servers are comprehensive but lack the information on transcription 
			factors whose binding specificities are similar to the input PFMs, which could effectively assist regulatory module finding. To provide such information and to meet the 
			needs for efficient prediction tasks in the study of gene regulation network, we developed a server named PMSearch (Poly Matrix Search) for predicting TFBSs in DNA sequences 
			with the novel functions of fetching similar PFMs and processing multi-forms of input motifs. PMSearch made the following improvements: 1) It has a more succinct and friendly 
			user-interface. 2) It provides user with the convenience of customizing any set of PFMs from the local dataset. 3) It generates a resizable plot that shows the distribution 
			and scores of predicted binding sites in variable scales. 4) It provides clusters of PFMs similar to the input PFMs.

Methodology
We have implemented a scoring scheme adapted from
previous algorithms. [,] The uninformative nucleotides (ambiguous letters: N, B, 
D, H, and V) on either end of an input PFM are discarded before searching to enhance efficiency and specificity. We downloaded 507 PFMs from JASPAR and Transfac Public 7.0 to construct 
a local dataset from which the user may take any subset of PFMs, or along with userdefined PFMs, for a prediction task. In addition to PFMs, the server could also accept sequence motifs 
(modeled in the format of consensus sequences), which will then be converted into pseudo PFMs and applied in subsequent prediction. We have set a default global cutoff value of 0.85 previously 
adopted by TFSEARCH. [] The user may adjust this cutoff if required.

User interface
The web interface of PMSearch helps in promoter analysis. The inputs are composed of PFMs and sequences under analysis. The user may submit PFMs, motifs or retrieve desired 
			PFMs from our dataset using keywords (e.g., name of the transcription factor), its source database accession number (e.g. Transfac Matrix Accession number M00001) or our local 
			accession number (e.g. X00001). Sequences in FASTA format or Genbank format are acceptable and will be auto-parsed. When the user initiates a predication task, each sequence will 
			fork an independent task in which corresponding results can be retrieved respectively. In the output, PMSearch plots a figure that illustrates binding sites that are scored above 
			the cutoff value (). The user may specify a sub-region on the sequence that will be plotted for more detailed view, such as a specific promoter region in a sequence file. 
			Other results including scores, sequence motifs and closely located putative binding sites (clusters) are also listed. In addition, the server provides a hyperlink for the user to 
			fetch PFMs that are related to the input PFMs by implementing a gap-allowed alignment algorithm. A comprehensive instruction for users is available online.

Conclusion
PMSearch is an easy-to-use and efficient tool that utilizes PFMs to predict transcription factor binding sites in DNA sequences. It offers user the flexibility to search for
putative TFBS with any set of PFMs. PMSearch outputs a plot demonstrating distribution of predicted binding sites and a table of the locations, scores, motifs and clusters of predicted binding 
sites. In addition, PMSearch provides the user access to PFMs that are relative to an input PFM for more sophisticated promoter analysis, as the predicted binding sites of one transcription 
factor could also be bond with other transcription factors that share the similar binding specificity. Such information may give hints to untangle the composite transcription regulatory network. 
We propose to update PFMs in our local dataset regularly. The source codes are available from the authors upon request. 

Caveats
It has been proposed that many of the predicted TFBSs lack biological function in vivo. [] This could result from 1) The 
			predicted site is located in a context which is insufficient to facilitate transcription factor binding, 2) The low specificity of the input PFM gives rise to large portion of false 
			positive predictions. We suggest the users prepare a list of certain transcription factors that are suspected to regulate the target gene to specify a prediction task. 

This work is supported by the National Science Foundation of China (No.90208021) and 973 Project Grant No. 2003CB715905 founded by MOST of China. The implementation was done in IBM-NJU
Laboratory of Bioinformatics.

Figures and Tables
The scoring scheme is illustrated. 1B: An example of binding site search with PFMs for NF-Kappa B, AP-1 and Sp1 on the sequence of adenovirus early E3 gene (NCBI nucleotide accession: 
      X03002). Orange rectangles represent clusters of putative binding sites. Dark grey bar indicates coding sequence (CDS). The first cluster located on the 5' end contains verified binding 
      sites. This cluster belongs to E3 promoter, which overlaps with the adjacent CDS. High scoring sites located in non-coding sequences or promoters are considered significant


      Citation:Su      
      et al., Bioinformation 1(5): 156-157 (2006)

