Background
Periodontium is a complex member in anatomy and it consists
of epithelium andmineralized connective tissue. Different
diseasescould affect the structure of it , and the loss of
structural integrity of periodontal tissue could result in
destruction and loss of strength of the matrix and bone tissue
[]. 
Stem cells have unique characteristics; they are
unspecialized cells with the ability of self-renewal and
differentiation in response to the appropriate stimulants 
[,
].
Periodontitis is a type of soft and hard tissue destruction
around teeth [,
]. Successful restoration of periodontium, and
generating a cover of functional epithelial cells in connective
tissue to pentrate in root structure, needs to createan acllular
cemantom on root surface for renergation of bone 
[,
].
Restoration of periodontal ligament continued by
mezonshimal progenitors that are derived from tooth
pholicole. These PDL stem cells could be derived from teeth
roots.These cells can be separated as colonies, but they show a
low potential to osteogensis process in experimental conditions
[]. 
PDLSCs could differentiate eha into cells or tissues that are
similar to periodentium. When PDLCS were transferred to
laboratory rats with manipulated immune system, they show
the capacity for restoration and periodontal amendment.
Recently PDLSCs were also derived from sheep and pig and it
showed that an implicational for successful periodontal tissue
regeneration []. Dexamethasone is the combination of
corticosteroids groups whose effect on stem cells and
motivating activities of Proliferation such as osteoblasts and
fibroblasts was reported in many papers. It was shown that the
combination of Dexamethasone with a density of 8-10 m/l has
the most effect in cell motivation, and has positive impact on
stem cells and the proliferation and motivation of osteoblasts
[,
]. osteogenic cover bone marrow stroma is contained
some pre structures that could be motivated by
Dexamethasone with density of 8-10 m/l, that a maximum 0.55
of cell population of positive phosphates has impact on it 
[].
Due to the effects of dexamethasone on bone formation in rat
the possible effects of it on the differentiation of
osteoprogenitors might be happened in humans 
[].
Considering the effects that dexamethasone significantly
increased alkaline phosphatase (ALP), and the formation of
osteoblastic cell []. This study aimed to investigate
osteogenic stimulation effect of dexamethozone on stem cells
of periodontal ligaments.

Methodology
The study was a lab based experiment which included three
groups to compare magnitude of calcium deposition and
mineralization through three phases as described below.

Isolation of stem cells:
In order to reach the suitable stem cells, they were derived
from root surface of extracted sound first premolars of 17
healthy individuals who were going under orthodontics
treatment. After tooth extraction, coronal part of the root, was
separated by a high speed air turbine using a carbid disc and
was washed by normal saline to prevent temperature
increasing and cell corruption. Ligament tissues of periodontal
membrane containing stem cells were crushed by a surgical
scalpel. Coronal and apical parts of ligament weren׳t used to
avoid including gum and pulp cells. The issue cells were
transferred to lab plates containing α-MEM and FBS 15%. They
assimilated in colognes solution level 1with 3 mg density for
one hour as enzymatic, then samples were centrifuged for 15
minutes. Cell containing α-MEM and 15% FBS and 10%
antibiotics was planted in size six paltein 37°c temperature
with 5% CO2. Three days after the cultivation, a large number
of fibroblastoied cells migrated from plant environment. On
seventh day, labeled cells that were 80-90% homogeneous,
were separated from plant using EDTA-Trypsin 25% solution
in a polyester size of 5×103 cells/cm2. Primarily plants of
PDLSCs almost contain colonies of bipolar fibroblastoied cells
and after plant they reached to appropriate level of
homogenecity about twice time of proliferationin just 48 hour
().

Osteogenic differentiation:
In the second phase for osteogenic differentiation, the cells
after removal by soluble trypsin-EDTA 25% collected and
divided into 6 culture plates and incubated for 24 hours. When
the cell density 80%, the medium was changed to different
substances as follow: Group1 contained basic medium
environment of α-MEM contains 10% FBS, 5 mm β-glisrophosphate
and µm/ml L-ascorbic acid. Group2 contained basic
medium environment with complementary 8-10 m/l of
dexamethasone and the Group3: plants of negative controls
that were α-MEM, contain 10% FBS without complementary
osteogenic. Cells were fed every three days and then activity of
alkaline phosphates was measured in seventh and fourteenth
days, and calcium test was done on days 7, 14, 21 and 28.
Alizarin red was used for coloring on day 28, three times for
each group and the average amount was calculated 
[].

Alkaline phosphate test (ALP):
To study the osteoblastic differentiation,7 and 14 days after
plate culture PDLSCs was was collected and stored in -200c.
Collecting environment was dilluted with a solution contains 4
times of buffer solution (1mol/1Diethanolamine) (0.5mmol/L
MCL2 )and one time of substrate solution (10mmol/L Pnitrophenyl
phosphataseee). ALP activity was determined as
coloring by of P-nitrphinale-phosphate as substrate.

Calcium test:
During days 7, 14, 21 and28 during of cultivation, washed cells
removed from plate and stored in -200c. These cells were
frozen three times and finally calcium amount was measured
based on cresol phethalein compeiron.

Statically analysis:
The data were analyzed SPSS version 18 The data distribution
in normal range was evaluated by kolmogrovsmirnov test. The
differences among groups were compared using ANOVA and
Tukey post-hoc test.

Results
Morphologic Observations:
In this study, a population of multi-agents stem cells was
derived from human PDL, and semi-fibroblasts cells like stem
cells of Mesenchymal were observable in end of plates.
Morphologic analyze of PDLSCs separation was performed
using combined environment with osteogenic material by
inverted microscopic (). It shows the presentation of
live cells, that were organized in nodule structure as bone. The
alizarine coloring of periodontal ligament stem cells was traced
on days 21 and 28. Basic medium environment contains 10%
FBS, 50mm β-glisro-phosphate and L-ascorbic acid µg/ml.
Dexamethasone: basic medium environment with a
complementary 8-10 mole dexamethasone and control:
negative control plant that in α-MEM contains 40% FBS
without osteogenic complementary (P&lt;0.05) 
(). The
activity rate of alkaline phosphate on days 7, 14 and 21
periodontal ligament stem cells was basic medium
environment contains 10% FBS, 50mm β-glisro-phosphate and
L-ascorbic acid µg/ml. Dexamethasone: basic medium
environment with a complementary 8-10 mole dexamethasone
and control: negative control plants that in α-MEM contains
40% FBS without osteogenic complementary (P&lt;0.05) 
(). 
Internal rate calcium of cells on days 7, 14, 21 and 28
periodontal ligament stem cells basic medium environment
contains 10% FBS, 50mm β-glisro-phosphate and L-ascorbic
acid µg/ml. Dexamethasone: basic medium environment with
a complementary 8-10 mole dexamethasone and control:
negative control plants that in α-MEM contains 40% FBS
without osteogenic (P&lt;0.05) Supplementary 
 (see
supplementary material).

Discussion
Dexamethasone is one of the necessary SAIDs to osteoblast
proliferation and differentiation []. The SAIDs have complex
impact on bone depends on duration time and dose 
[]. The
purpose of this research was to evaluate the osteogenic effect
of dexamethasone on PDL stem cells, which showed potential
of this material as a factor to treatment of bone defections. The
mechanism is inhibition of A2 phospholipase , that it is leading
to reduction the secretion of arachidonic acid from inflamed
cells and prostaglandins and lukoterians, which is decreas e
the accumulation of neutrophils, subsequently [,
]. In this
research we used alizarin red stain, activity of alkaline
phosphate and calcium test to content to evaluation osteogenic
separation. Alizarin red has been used to evaluate the amount
of calcium in cultured cells from several years ago and
basically used to prove the existence of calcium store in the
tissues. The results of quantitative analyze showed that the
generated mineralized nodules were more in the group with
dexamethasone complementary than control and basic group,
that it is an interesting finding. The most important point was
double increase in in the rates of mineralized nodules between
days 21 and 28 of experiment which could be a result of
induction role of dexamethasone on cell genes 
[]. Results of
this test are compatible with studies Igarashi and Nesrine et al
[,
]. Previous studies showed that bone alkaline
phosphates can be in human body as a marker of bone
formation in experiments. Results of the study showed a
significant difference between the dexamethasone group and
the other groups, and rate of alkaline phosphates in fourteenth
day after cultivation was five times more than seventh day.
Results are compatible with study of Kamalia et al, that studied
the impact of Dexamethasone on stem cells of bone and
claimed that stem cells of bone contain pre-organizations that
activate by Dexamethasone in plant environment and
maximum of 55% of alkaline phosphates cells leads to
osteogenesis. The results are compatible with study of Pei et al
[,
]. Guzman et al also indicated that Dexamethasone has
osteogenic effect on stromal cell of human bone marrow 
[],
which is in line with reported study. Shintani et al,
demonstrated the effects of Dexamethasone on the
chondrogenic differentiation of MSCs is influenced by their
micro-environment and tissue origin, as well as by the nature
of the growth factor that this finding confirmed our study 
[].
Nuzzi et al, indicated that Dexamethasone has significant effect
on Mesenchymal Stem Cells but this in vitro study was
demonstrated that high doses of Dexamethasone have a
negative effect on MSCs []. Dexamethasone has a main
impact on osteogenic separation in 14th day, can accelerate
activity of alkaline phosphates. Also results of calcium test
show that calcium resources of inter-cells in group of
dexamethasone are several times higher than basic and control
groups. Existence of calcium stores is an index to show boney,
that it shows the impact of motivator of osteogenic
Dexamethasone on PDL stems cells.

Conclusion
The dexamethasone decreased collagenase expression and not
only enhanced osteoblastic markers, but also increased mineral
nodules. So we can claim that dexamethasone could used as an
osteobalstic stimulator and further studies on its effect is
recommended.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This report is a part of a post graduate thesis in specialty
degree of periodontics which has registered by the Research
Ethics Committee approval at the Medical University of
Hamadan. Hereby the authors appreciate the support of
Research Center in dentistry at Medical University of
Hamadan.

Citation:Roozegar et al, Bioinformation 11(2): 096-100 (2015)

A) teeth were examined one week before extraction;
B) cutting the tooth crown by disk and, C, putting the root in
the tube.

PDL stem cells differentiation into osteoblasts
observed with inverted microscopy a: 100×magnification, b:
200× magnification, c: 400× magnification.

Alizarin red stain of PDL stem Cells in day 21, 28 ,
Control, PDL SC without any treatment, Basic: PDL SC in
medium contain (α-MEM and FBS 10% and 5mmol of
β_gelisrophosphat and L_ascorbic acid µg/ml),
Dexamethasone: basic medium with complement of
dexamethasone. *P&gt;0.05 and **P&lt;0.05

The result of ALP test in day 7,14 and 21 in PDL stem
Cells, Control, PDL SC without anytreatment, Basic: PDL SC in
medium contain (α -MEM and FBS 10% and 5mmol of β
_gelisrophosphat and L_ascorbic acid µg/ml),Dexamethasone:
basic medium with complement of Dexamethasone. *P&gt;0.05
and **P&lt;0.05

