Background
In gene coding regions, DNA is put together in triplets to form
64 distinctive codons. 61 of those codons synthesize for the 20
amino acids, each of which can be synthesized by as few as one
or as many as six synonymous codons. An intuitive assumption
is that codons and amino acids are evenly used throughout
different genomes. However, it has been discovered that amino
acid incorporation as well as codon usage are biased in all
organisms from bacteria to mammals [–]. It is anticipated then
that selective forces are acting to maintain the current balance
between mutation and selection, resulting in optimal coding
regions. Some of the proposed factors include degree and
timing of gene expression, codon-anticodon interaction,
transcription and translation rate and accuracy, codon context,
and global and local G+C content.

In humans, bias has been reported on nucleotide abundance in
the three codon positions, dinucleotide usage, and di-codon
usage within coding regions []. This bias leads to a high usage
of acidic amino acids as well as reflects the avoidance of stop
codons. Bias in codon usage has been attributed to selection
towards a more efficient translation model. This suggests
codon usage in highly expressed genes is biased toward
optimal codons corresponding to more abundant tRNAs. Such
models take into consideration both the elongation rate and the
translation accuracy [–]. In more recent studies [7-8], it has
been shown that the codon usage bias is found to relate to gene
expression with highly expressed genes favoring codons
corresponding to the more abundant tRNAs (thus increasing
translation efficiency) and lower expressed genes favoring less
abundant tRNAs. In addition, highly expressed genes in
humans are found to be shorter in general and contain less
intronic content []. This study also reports a bias in the amino
acid usage where highly expressed genes avoid complex amino
acids, where complexity is based on the weight and shape of the
amino acid. Other selection factors proposed include the effects
of DNA polymerase and repair mechanism, methylation, CpG
islands [–], tissue or organelle specificity [12], increasing
mRNA stability, transcription rate [–] and evolutionary age
[]. None of the previously mentioned factors manage to
provide a complete explanation for codon usage bias. It is likely
that all of these forces work together competitively with
selection, organelle and organism specificity to produce the
current bias found in every gene and every genome.

In a previous paper [], we demonstrated that in humans, bias
in codon usage makes the coding DNA significantly more
tolerant to point mutations than random sequences. If only
substitution events are considered in a codon, the degeneracy of
the genetic code allows for a single nucleotide conversion to
result in a codon representing the same amino acid, a different
amino acid (missense mutation), or a stop codon (nonsense
mutation). Analysis based on single nucleotide mutation rates
and similarity among amino acids showed that point mutations
in the natural coding sequence of humans are significantly more
likely to yield the same or similar amino acids than would be
the case in random DNA sequences. Moreover, the coding
sequence based on the natural transcription reading frame was
shown to be more buffered to mutations than the other two
possible shifted reading frames. Here, we say a codon is
buffered to or tolerates point mutations when it tends to
translate to the same or similar amino acid as the original one
more often than would be expected by random when exposed
to point mutations.

Methodology
Buffering capacity:
Buffering capacity refers to the tendency of a coding sequence
to allow for point mutation events that result in a sequence of
the same or similar amino acids, as opposed to missense or
nonsense mutations. In order to quantify this property, we have
developed a mathematical model that approximates the
buffering capacity for an individual sequence by taking into
account the codon composition, individual nucleotide mutation
rates, and a distance matrix between amino acids that reflects
the resulting damage caused by individual amino acid
substitutions(See ).

Selection toward error minimization or increased buffering is
not a new concept. For example, the natural coding or the
natural mapping between the 20 amino acids and the 61 coding
codons is believed to have come to its current state by evolution
and selection and it has been shown to provide high tolerance
to mutations or translation errors [–]. In 
[], the authors
have shown that only two in a billion randomly generated
mappings would provide better error minimization than the
natural genetic code.

In this paper, we test for a possible correlation between the
expected life span of an organism and the buffering capacity in
its coding DNA. This hypothesis is motivated by the fact that an
organism that lives long will require genes buffered against
mutations to protect against harmful changes to protein
sequences while a species with a short life span does not need
such a property since it will not be subjected to nearly as many
point mutations throughout its life. Furthermore, organisms
that have a long life span usually reach sexual maturity at a
later age at which time their DNA gets passed to the next
generation. Therefore, it is expected that the longer the life span
or age to sexual maturity of an organism, the higher the
buffering.

To calculate the buffering capacity of a given coding DNA
sequence, we used a similar measure to the one used in [].
The computed buffering capacity takes into consideration both
the organism-specific rates of mutation and the consequences of
the corresponding mutations. For mutation rates, we have used
the neighbor-dependent substitution rates reported in a recent
study based on observed neutral mutations within inserted
retrotransposable elements [].

To estimate the consequence of a mutation, an amino acid
similarity matrix is used to measure the distance between the
original amino acid and the amino acid resulting from the
mutation []. This similarity matrix is based on computations
of the change in the structure and folding free energy of a
protein when a single amino acid is mutated to another one at
all positions in a set of 141 different proteins. On the other
hand, a nonsense mutation is thought to be the worst type of
mutation; nonetheless there is no natural way to weigh a
nonsense mutation compared to other types of missense
mutations. As an approximation, in this paper we consider it to
be three times as detrimental as the worst missense mutations.

Dataset:
The species selected include Drosophila melanogaster (fruit fly),
Danio rerio (zebrafish), Mus musculus (mouse), and Homo sapiens
(humans). These were selected based upon varying rates of
average life expectancy and time to sexual maturity as well as
the availability of sequence data and species specific mutation
rates. The rates for life expectancy and time to sexual maturity
were derived from the Human Aging Genome Resources [].
These rates are provided in  (See supplementary
material).

For the purpose of this study, human gene sequences from
GenBank build 35.1 were downloaded from the human Exon-
Intron Database (EID) [] from the website
http://www.utoledo.edu/med/depts/bioinfo/database.html.
16,800 human genes in this dataset were considered. These
sequences were further filtered to exclude genes whose
nucleotide sequence is not a multiple of three, or who do not
begin with the start codon ATG. In addition, gene sequences
that do not end in one of the three stop codons (TAA, TAG, or
TGA) were removed. For zebrafish, mouse, and fruit fly,
mRNA sequences were downloaded from the RefSeq database.
The total number of genes used for each organism is provided
in  (See supplementary material).

CDS categorization:
The data downloaded represents known mRNA sequences
from the coding sequences (CDS) of genic regions. These
datasets were categorized and labeled as “natural”. For each
known CDS, a randomly generated mRNA sequence was
constructed that yields the exact same protein. These
correspond to a group labeled as “constrained random” since
they are randomly generated sequences constrained by the
property that they must yield an identical amino acid sequence
upon translation. A third set of sequences labeled “random”
was constructed consisting of mRNA sequences of the same
length as the natural group.

Analysis of buffering capacity:
For each of the natural, constrained random and random
sequences, the buffering capacity was calculated as described in
the buffering capacity section. Mutation rates for fruit fly,
zebrafish, and human were downloaded from an existing
dataset []. Mutation rates for the mouse were calculated using
the publicly available web server using the methods described
in [] with the mouse B1_Mur1 repetitive element from
RepBase as the ancestral sequence and a set of 4,010 annotated
B1_Mur1 occurrences in the mouse genome as the descendant
sequences. A distribution of the buffering capacities for each of
these three groups was examined. A distribution close to zero
would indicate a set of sequences that are highly buffered to
point mutations at the mRNA level that do not significantly
affect the corresponding translated protein sequence. The main
hypothesis is that if a species has a built-in tolerance to
mutations, the distribution of buffering capacity scores between
the naturally occurring mRNA sequence and the random
sequence sets should be significantly different.

Statistical analysis:
For further analysis of the results two different statistical
analyses tools are used. A t-test is used to measure the
significance of the increased buffering in the natural coding
sequences as compared to the random sequences. Second, for
each of the four species, we use Cohen’s d measurement to
quantify the effect size of codon usage bias in increasing the
tolerance to mutations in the natural coding sequences
compared to the random sequences and to quantify how much
more the constrained random sequences are buffered than the
completely random sequences. Note that a direct comparison
between the three organisms’ coding sequences would be
invalid because the mutation rates are time independent and
were computed within every genome separately. The mutation
rates are relative values within the same genome only.
However, the comparison between the natural coding and the
random sequences under the same mutation rates should tell us
how much bias is there in the natural DNA structure toward
buffering within every genome separately. Therefore, the effect
size within every genome should be a valid indicator for
comparison between the different genomes.

Discussion
Our results show that both human and zebrafish DNA are
significantly more buffered than random sequences. Buffering
is more apparent in human while being absent in fruit fly.
Furthermore, random sequences that are constrained to
produce the same protein as the natural ones are found to be
more buffered than completely random sequences while being
less buffered than the natural sequences themselves in both
human and zebrafish. This property is also more apparent in
human than zebrafish while being absent in fruit fly. These
results suggest evidence that bias in the DNA structure toward
tolerance to mutations is correlated with life span and is
realized on two levels: protein selection and codon usage bias.

Distributions of buffering capacities for fruit fly, zebrafish,
mouse, and human are given in . Note that the x-axis
for each of these cannot be compared directly due to the
different mutation rates in each of these organisms. As 
clearly indicates, a difference in the distribution of buffering
capacity for the random, constrained random and natural
mRNA sequences cannot be observed in the fruit fly while the
separation is evident in zebrafish and more pronounced in the
mouse and human.

Analysis of the effect size  (see supplementary material)
shows that the separation between the naturally occurring
mRNAs and random sequences is greatest in the mouse and in
the human. When the effect size is compared to the life
expectancy () and time to sexual maturity 
(), a
clear trend results with an exception occurring with the mouse
buffering distribution. This may be due to a difference in the
method for calculating mutational rates within the mouse.

In order to provide a more accurate measure of the relationship
between life expectancy and codon buffering, a more thorough
analysis is needed for organisms with a wider range of life
expectancies and age to sexual maturity. Nonetheless, the
presented results demonstrates an overall significant correlation
between buffering capacity to mutations as a result of codon
usage bias and both the life expectancy and the time to sexual
maturity of the corresponding organisms. To our knowledge,
this is the first time such a hypothesis has been tested. Our
analysis also shows that the optimization toward higher
tolerance to point mutations is accomplished at both levels the
codon usage and the sequence of codons themselves. These
results add a new additive explanation to current theorems
about codon usage bias in the natural transcripts of these
organisms. Finally, as more organisms get sequenced and as
more accurate and comprehensive studies of mutation rates
become available, we hope to continue this work on a larger
scale, with additional phylogenetic information included as
well.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Support provided by NIH NCRR grants P20RR16481 and
P20RR16481S1. The contents of this manuscript are solely the
responsibility of the authors and do not represent the official
views of NCRR or NIH.

Citation:Mahdi &amp; Rouchka, Bioinformation 8(3): 158-162 (2012)

Buffering capacity distributions. Shown are the
distribution of buffering capacities (larger x-value = more
buffering) for the naturally occurring mRNA sequences (solid
line), constrained random sequences (dashed line), and random
sequences (dotted line). The species represented are fruit fly
(panel A), zebrafish (panel B), mouse (panel C), and human
(panel D).

Distribution effect as a function of life expectancy.
Dm: Drosophila melanogaster (fruit fly), Mm: Mus musculus
(mouse), Dr: Danio rerio (zebrafish), Hs: Homo sapiens (human).

Distribution effect as a function of age to sexual
maturity. Dm: Drosophila melanogaster (fruit fly), Mm: Mus
musculus (mouse), Dr: Danio rerio (zebrafish), Hs: Homo sapiens
(human).

