Background
Natural products are a major source of drugs and about half of
the pharmaceuticals in use today are derived from natural
products []. Application of advanced drug screening methods
show plant compounds have variety of structures with
bioactivities, including anti-tumor, anti-inflammatory, antiviral
and hepatoprotective properties []. Inflammation and
pain are major areas of interest for discovery starting with the
identification of morphine form opium [,
]. The non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are among the most widely
used drugs in the control of postoperative pain but often cause
a number of side-effects []. Cyclooxygenase (COX), the key
enzyme required for the conversion of arachidonic acid to
prostaglandins was first identified over 20 years ago 
[]. The
enzyme exists in at least two isoforms, COX-1 and COX-2.
Although both the isoforms catalyze the same biochemical
transformation, the two isoforms are subject to a different
expression regulation []. COX-1 is a constitutive enzyme and is
responsible for the supply of prostaglandins which maintain
the integrity of the gastric mucosa and provide adequate
vascular homeostasis whereas COX-2 is an inducible enzyme
and is expressed only after an inflammatory stimulus 
[].
Literature studies indicate that direct tissue contact of NSAIDs
gives the side effects like gastric upset, irritation, and ulceration
[], 
and also confirms that gastrointestinal side effects of
NSAIDs such as irritation and GI bleeding are due to the
presence of a free carboxylic group in the parent drug 
[,
].
Thus, developing new agents with minimum or without side
effects is an extensive research area in the present scenario. The
genus Erythrina comprises of about 110 species of trees and
shrubs. The name “coral tree” is used as a collective term for
these plants. Coral tree is indigenous to the Old World tropics,
possibly originally from India to Malaysia, but is native of
ancient westward to Zanzibar and eastward to eastern
Polynesia (the Marquesas). It is typically found on sandy soil in
littoral forest, and sometimes in coastal forest up to 250 m
(800ft) in elevation. The coral tree is cultivated particularly as
an ornamental tree and as a shade and soil improvement tree (it
fixes nitrogen) for other tree crops such as coffee and cacao 
[,
]. 
Leaves are stomachic, anthelmintic, laxative, diuretic,
gatactagogue and emmenagogue; applied externally for
dispersing venereal buboes, relieve pain of the joints and
inflammations; juice is poured in to the ear to relief earache and
is used as an anodyne in toothache. The bark is astringent,
febrifuge anti-bilious and anthelmintic; useful in dysentery and
as a collyrium in ophthalmia. The roots are emmenagogue 
[,
].
Phytochemical studies [] 
suggest that Erythrina variegata
L. contain compounds like Isoquinoline, Isococcolinine,
Erythrinin A, Erythrinin C, Erythrinin B, Osajin, Alpinum
Isoflavone, Erythrabyssin II, Erycristagallin, 6-
Hydroxygenistein, Lupiwighteone, Hypaphorine, Erysovine,
Erysopitine, Erysotrine, Erysonine, Erythratidine, Erythrinine,
Erythramine, Erythraline, Nororientaline, Erybidine, LReticuline,
Coreximine, Euchrenone B10, Eryvarins Q,
Abyssinone V, Phaseollin, Campesterol, Scoulerine,
Erystagallin A, Orientanol B, Robustone, Stachydrine,
Erysovine. Therefore, it is of interest to evaluate the analgesic
activity of the ethanolic bark extract of Erythrina variegata L. and
also the compound for this activity by in silico molecular
docking analysis [].

Methodology
Plant material collection and identification:
The whole plant was collected from Chittagong University
hilly forest, Bangladesh on March 2012. A voucher specimen
for this plant has been maintained in Bangladesh National
Herbarium, Dhaka, Bangladesh (Accession No. 36148).

Preparation of plant material:
Barks were sundried for 7 days and later dried in drier at 40°C
for about an hour. The dried bark were then ground into
powder using high capacity grinding machine and stored in
airtight plastic container with necessary markings for
identification and kept in cool, dark and dry place for the
investigation. The bark of the plant material was extracted with
ethanol. After completion of the extraction, the liquid was
filtered using a sterilized cotton filter []. It was then
evaporated by rotary evaporator for about 1 hr. Further, it was
kept for drying till it solidifies from liquid form. Then solvent
was completely removed and obtained 6 g (yield 1.5%) dried
crude extract which was used for preliminary phytochemical
group tests and then subjected to for rest of the experiments.

Preparing animals:
For the experiment Adult Swiss albino mice (BALB/c)
weighing between (12-300) g of either sex were collected from
animal sources department of ICDDRB, Dhaka. The animals
were maintained under normal laboratory condition and kept
in standard polypropylene cages at room temperature of (30 ±
2)°C and 60% to 65% relative humidity and provided with
standard diet and water. The institutional animal ethical
committee approved all protocols for animal experiment. Each
group consists of five mice and to denote individual animal,
they were marked as group I, II, III, for test samples at the
doses of 50, 100 and 200 mg/kg body weight and a control and
positive control group was also maintained for every tests.

Preliminary phyto-chemical screening:
One gram of the ethanol extract of E. variegata was dissolved in
ethanol and was subjected to preliminary phytochemical
screenings for determining nature of phytoconstituents 
[].

Acetic acid-induced writhing test:
The anti-nociceptive activity of the extract was studied using
acetic acid-induced writhing model in mice []. The animals
were divided into control, positive control and test groups with
five mice in each group. The animals of test groups received
test samples at the doses of 50, 100 and 200 mg/kg body
weight. Positive control group received standard drug
diclofenac sodium at the dose of 10 mg/kg body weight. Test
samples were administered orally 30 min before intraperitoneal
administration of 0.6% acetic acid but diclofenac
sodium was administered 15 min before injection of acetic acid.
After an interval of 5 min, the mice were observed for specific
contraction of body referred to as ‘writhing’ for the next 30 min
[].

Hot plate method:
The paws of mice are very sensitive to temperature at (55 ±
0.5)°C, which are not damaging to the skin. The animals were
placed on Eddy׳s hot plate kept at a temperature of (55 ± 0.5)°C.
A cut off period of 30 sec [], was observed to avoid damage to
the paw. Reaction time was recorded when animals licked their
fore or hind paws, or jumped at 0, 30, 60 90 and 120 min after
oral administration of the samples []. The animals of test
groups received test samples at the doses of 50, 100 and 200
mg/kg body weight. Positive control group received standard
drug diclofenac sodium at the dose of 10 mg/kg b.w. and saline
water.

Tail immersion test:
The procedure is based on the observation that morphine like
drugs selectively prolongs the reaction time of the typical tail
withdrawal reflex in mice animals of the control, positive
control and test groups were treated with diclofenac sodium
(10 mg/kg body weight), saline water (10 ml/kg body weight)
and test samples at the doses of 50, 100 and 200 mg/kg body
weight respectively. 1 to 2 cm of the tail of mice was immersed
in warm water kept constant at 55°C. The reaction time was the
time taken by the mice to deflect their tails. The first reading
was discarded and the reaction time was recorded as a mean of
the next three readings. A latency period of 30 sec was defined
as complete analgesia and the measurement was stopped when
the latency period exceeded to avoid injury to mice. The latent
period of the tail-flick response was taken as the index of antinociception
and was determined at 0, 30, 60, 90 and 120 min
after the administration of the test drugs and standard 
[].
Definition of groups and their treatments were as some of the
hot plate test. The hot plate latencies and tail flick were
sequentially measured at 0, 30, 60, 90 and 120 min with the
same cut off time of 30 sec for the safety of animals.

Statistical analysis:
The results of statistical analysis for animal experiment were
expressed as mean ± SEM. Data were analyzed by paired
sample t test. The results obtained were compared with the
control group. The criterion for statistical significance was ***p&lt;
0.01 and *p&lt; 0.05. All the statistical tests were carried out using
SPSS statistical software.

In silico molecular docking analysis:
For docking analysis Gold 4.12 is used to predict the potent
active compound E. variegata against the active site of COX-1
and COX-2 enzymes where compounds are collected from the
literature review.

Ligands preparation:
From the literature review, all compounds-Isoquinoline,
Isococcolinine, Erythrinin A, Erythrinin C, Erythrinin B, Osajin,
Alpinum Isoflavone, Erythrabyssin II, Erycristagallin, 6-
Hydroxygenistein, Epilupeol, Lupiwighteone, Hypaphorine,
Erysovine, Erysopitine, Erysotrine, Erysonine, Erythratidine,
Erythrinine, Erythramine, Erythraline, Nororientaline,
Erybidine, L-Reticuline, Coreximine, Euchrenone B10,
Eryvarins Q, Abyssinone V, Phaseollin, Scoulerine, Erystagallin
A, Orientanol B, Robustone, Stachydrine, Erysovine are drawn
in Symyx Draw 4.0 and then prepared for docking using the
Sybyl 7.3 Molecular Modeling Suite of Tripos, Inc. 3D
conformations were generated using Concord 4.0 
[],
hydrogen atoms were added and charges were loaded using
the Gasteiger and Marsili charge calculation method 
[]. Basic
amines were protonated and acidic carboxyl groups were deprotonated
prior to charge calculation. The AMPPD ligand was
minimized with the Tripos Force Field prior to docking using
the Powell method with an initial Simplex [] optimization
and 1000 iterations or gradient termination at 0.01
kcal/(mol*A). Input ligand file format was mol2 for all docking
programs investigated.

Protein preparation and active site determination:
The crystal structure COX-1 and COX-2 enzymes are collected
protein data bank [] pdb id: 2OYE (COX-1) and 6 COX (COX-
2). Two enzymes are prepared according to the docking
protocol of Gold. The active site of these enzyme identified
according to the giving information by Harman et al. 2007 
[]
for COX-1 and Kurumbail et al. 1996 
[] for COX-2.

Docking using GOLD (Genetic Optimization for Ligand Docking):
GOLD utilizes genetic algorithm to explore the rotational
flexibility of receptor hydrogens and ligand conformational
flexibility []. In GOLD docking was carried out using the
wizard with default parameters population size (100); selection
pressure (1.1); number of operations (10,0 00); number of
islands (1); niche size (2); and operator weights for migrate (0),
mutate (100) , and crossover (100) were applied. The active site
with a 10 Å radius sphere was defined by selecting an active
site residue of protein. Default Genetic Algorithm settings were
used for all calculation s and a set of 10 solutions were saved
for each ligand. GOLD was used by a GoldScore fitness
function. GoldScore is a molecular mechanism like function and
has been optimized for the calculation of binding positions of
ligand. It takes into account four terms:

Fitness = S(hb_ext) + 1.3750*S(vdw_ext) + S(hb_int) + 1.0000*S(int)
S(int) = S(vdw_int) + S(tors)

Where, Shb_ext is the protein-ligand hydrogen bonding and
svdw_ext are the vanderwaals interactions between protein and
ligand. Shb_int are the intramolecular hydrophobic interactions
whereas Svdw_ int is the contribution due to intra molecular
strain in the ligand.

Phytochemical screening:
Preliminary phytochemical screening of the crude ethanolic
extracts of the barks of E. variegata revealed the presence of
alkaloid and flavonoids  (see supplementary material).

Acetic acid-induced abdominal writhing test:
The analgesic effect ethanolic extracts of E. variegata at dose
level of 50, 100 and 200 mg/kg body weight on acetic acid
induced writhing in mice was exhibited. Doses of the extract
inhibited writhing response induced by acetic acid in a dose
dependent manner in which group III (200 mg/kg b.w.)
exhibits the highest 18.89% of inhibition and is comparable to
the reference drug diclofenac sodium (79.42%)  (see
supplementary material).

Hot plate test:
The tail withdrawal reflex time following administration of the
ethanolic extracts of E. variegata at dose level of 50, 100 and 200
mg/kg b.w. was found almost remain the same consistency
with increasing dose of the sample which is comparable to
the reference drug  (see supplementary material).

Tail immersion test:
The tail withdrawal reflex time following administration of the
ethanolic extracts of E. variegata at dose level of 50, 100 and 200
mg/kg b.w. was found almost remain the same consistency
with increasing dose of the sample which is comparable to the
reference drug  (see supplementary material).

Docking analysis:
The compounds of E. variegata mentioned above were subjected
to dock in the active site of COX-1 and COX-2 enzyme by gold
docking method. The results of docking analysis of COX-1 and
COX-2 enzyme are listed in  (see supplementary
material). After docking the ligand protein complex was saved
in pdb format then subjected for analysis in the Accelrys
Discovery Studio Visualizer. Docking studies showed that
phaseollin has the best gold fitness score against the COX-1
which is 56.64 and 59.63 for COX-2 enzyme. Molecular analysis
showed that phaseollin form two hydrogen bonds with
residues of the active site of COX-1 enzyme. It is that phaseollin
made bonds with TYR354 with a distance 2.98478 Å between 4
no oxygen of phaseollin with hydrogen of Tyr354. Another
hydrogen bond was formed between 1 no hydrogen of
phaseollin and O of SER499 where bonding distance is 1.86273
Å. Similarly, In COX-2 enzyme two hydrogen bonds are
formed between the oxygen of SER499 and hydrogen of
TYR354 with the hydrogen at 1st and oxygen at 4th position of
phaseollin where bonding distance is 1.48447 Å and 1.54784 Å
respectively. Interaction between the phaseollin with the COX-1
and COX-2 are represented in .

Discussion
The present study has established analgesic potential of E.
variegata using acetic acid induced writhing test for visceral
pain and tail immersion and hot plate tests for pain mediated
by central activity. Acetic acid induced writhing in mice is a
model of visceral pain, which is highly sensitive and useful for
screening peripherally acting analgesic drugs. E. variegata plant
extracts caused dose dependent anti-nociception against
chemical induced pain in mice. Ethanolic extracts of the bark of
E. variegata were treated in test animals at a dose of 50, 100 and
200 mg/kg b.w. The ethanolic extracts of E. variegata at the dose
of 200 mg/kg b.w. were found to exhibit the highest 18.89%
writhing inhibitory response, where the reference drug
diclofenac sodium showed about 79.42% writhing inhibitory
response at a dose of 10 mg/kg b.w.

The tail immersion test is considered to be selective to examine
compounds acting through non-opoid receptor; the extract
increased mean basal latency, which indicates that it may act
via centrally, mediated analgesic mechanism. Narcotic
analgesics inhibit both peripheral and central mechanism of
pain, while non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs inhibit only
peripheral pain []. The extract inhibited both mechanisms of
pain, suggesting that the plant extract may act as a narcotic
analgesic.

The hot plate and tail immersion tests are widely used for
assessing central anti-nociceptive activities. Opioid agents
exhibit their analgesic effects both via supra-spinal and spinal
receptors []. 
The present experiments, ethanolic extracts of E.
variegata exhibited a statistically significant. It seems quite
possible that the lower doses of the extract have more potent
central anti-nociceptive effect. It has been suggested that the
opioid mechanisms mediate anti-nociceptive effect of ethanolic
extracts of E. variegata.

Ethanolic extract of E. variegata produced a dose-dependent
anti-nociceptive effect on the glutamate-induced paw licking
response. Recently, found that the nociceptive response
induced by glutamate appears to involve peripheral, spinal and
supraspinal sites of action and is greatly mediated by both
NMDA and non- NMDA receptors as well as by the release of
nitric oxide or by some nitric oxide-related substance. Hence,
an effect of the plant extract directly on the receptors or second
messengers related to these transmitters could avoid the
nociceptive response. The effect of E. variegata against
nociception induced by glutamate is of great interest since
glutamate plays a significant role in nociceptive processing in
both central and peripheral nervous systems [].

Advances in computational techniques have enabled virtual
screening to have a positive impact on the discovery process.
Virtual screening utilizes docking and scoring of each
compound from a dataset and the technique used is based on
predicting the binding modes and binding affinities of each
compound in the dataset by means of docking to an X-ray
crystallographic structure []. Some recent studies have
focused on certain factors such as the size and diversity of the
ligand dataset, wide range of targets and the evaluation of
docking programs []. In our present studies, by means of
gold docking, we docked 33 compounds of E. variegata into the
active site of the COX-1 and COX-2 enzymes. In view of the
above, fitness score values were measured using GOLD 4.12
showed that phaseollin has the highest fitness score of 56.64
was noticed with COX-1 and fitness score of 59.63 was
observed for COX-2, suggesting that more interaction of
phaseollin has more in COX-1 and COX-2 than the other
compounds.

Conclusion
Results show that plant extract of E. variegata possesses
moderate analgesic potential. Though the involvement of
opioid receptor has been determined using naloxone, further
studies are needed using different agonists (such as adrenergic,
serotonergic etc.) to completely understand the exact
mechanisms of its anti-nociceptive activity. It seems possible
that E. variegata contains chemical constituents with analgesic
property for consideration in drug development. In the present
study the analgesic activity of the ethanolic bark extract of E.
variegata was done and its compound was successfully docked
onto the both COX-1 and COX-2. Thus, phaseollin could be
considered as a potent analgesic molecule against COX-1 and
COX-2 for further validation.

Competing interests
All authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors׳ contributions
MMNU has designed the study, performed data analysis and
interpretation and wrote the manuscript. TBE has wrote the
manuscript and also modify the in silico parts. MMRM has
provided assistance in taxonomical identification and
collections of voucher specimen׳s numbers for the plants and
modify the in silico parts. RD has performed data analysis and
wrote the in silico parts.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Uddin et al, Bioinformation 10(10): 630-636 (2014)

Interaction of phaseollin with a) COX-1 and b) COX-2.

