Background
Protein interaction network analysis is basic need for the understanding of functional association of proteins in
cellular processes [] Protein interaction networks are
being used in tasks such as assignment of function to uncharacterized proteins and searching for most and least
association between proteins for various purposes [].
Since almost all cellular processes are regulated by proteinprotein interaction, so any interruption in interactions may
be a cause of disorder or disease []. So, it is necessary to
know the cellular impact of every association (inhibition or activation) on multiple signaling pathways. Various
methods are existing for the study of protein-protein interaction i.e. Co­Evolution, Co­Occurrence, Co­
Expression, Gene Fusion etc. [,]. In co-evolution
process, two or more species interact and influence genetic changes in one another. The process is also evident at the
molecular level, where interacting proteins exhibit coordinated mutations to evolve at a similar rate 
[,]. As
a result, interacting proteins will seem to evolve at the same rate and have similar evolutionary histories.
Observed co­evolution between interacting proteins has been used previously to predict protein interaction sites and
to improve docking algorithms []. Cellular processes are regulated by interaction of various proteins i.e.
multiprotein complexes and absences of these interactions are often the cause of disorder or disease. Such type of
protein interactions are of great interest for drug designing []. Nowadays, protein-protein interaction is one of the
recent approaches for drug target identification for various types of diseases. PINAT has been developed for drug target identification with the special relevance to hostparasite
disease “tuberculosis”.

Methodology
Theoretical concept of PINAT
In the present work, well established Co­evolutionary
profile model has been used for identification of interacting
proteins [,,,
]. Identification of interacting proteins
consists of the following sequential steps: 
Retrieval of
proteins and its orthologous sequences from KEGG
databases (http://www.genome.jp/kegg)

Construction of distance matrices among retrieved sequences for each proteins

Upper triangular part of the distance matrix was transformed into a phylogenetic vector

Normalization of the elements of each vector and

Interacting protein identification and network construction through correlation coefficient.




Software Input and Output
PINAT provides user defined (no. of protein sequences) browsing facility for loading of protein sequences files.
After entering of desired number of proteins for proteinprotein interaction analysis and network building, the
browsing window will open. This window will browse the entered number of protein files. For large data, browsing
can take a few seconds for uploading a browsed protein file. PINAT computes distance matrix (),
Phylogenetic vector (), correlation coefficient matrix, interaction network () and potential
interactants ().

Network Construction and Potential Interaction Table
PINAT also provides the facility to visualize the computed association network among proteins as a non­directional
graphical network. Network association is shown by potential interactions. Protein association interaction network has been developed considering correlation
coefficient values (r­values).

We are grateful to Department of Bioinformatics, MANIT,
Bhopal, M. P. India for support and cooperation and we are
also thankful to Mr. Mohit Jha for many useful discussions
and technical support.

Citation:Kushwala et al, Bioinformation 3(10): 419-421 (2009)

(a) Representative screen of PINAT with browse protein sequence along with distance matrix (b) Representative
Screen of PINAT After phylovector generation.

(a) Representative screen of PINAT with interaction network (b) Interaction list with potential interactants.

