Background
Ayurveda (In Sanskrit “knowledge of life” or “knowledge of
longevity”) has now spread beyond India to other countries like, Sri
Lanka, Malaysia, Mauritius, South Africa, Japan, Russia,Europe, and
North America. []. Herbs are commonly used for treatment in
Ayurveda. Ethnobotanical studies of traditional herbal remedies used
for diabetes around the world, have identified more than 1,200 species
of plants with hypoglycemic activity []. The pharmacopoeia of India
is especially rich in herbal treatments for diabetes. Diabetes mellitus is
a complex disorder that is characterized by hyperglycemia, resulting
from malfunction in insulin secretion and action. Insulin malfunction
is caused by impaired metabolism of glucose, lipids and protein [].
Medicinal plants used to treat hypoglycemic or hyperglycemic
conditions are of considerable interest for ethno-botanical community
as they are recognized to contain valuable medicinal properties in
different parts of the plant and a number of plants have shown a
varying degree of hypoglycemic and antihyperglycemic activity [].

The objective of this database is to conduct a search of the published
literature, on the use of Ayurvedic medicine/therapies for the treatment
of health conditions. The basis of this database is, to check chemical
compounds present in medicinal plants, with reference to their
citations. A broad search of Ayurvedic medicine/therapies showed that
there was sufficient literature to support a systematic review of these
plants for the treatment of diabetes. Diabetes is a common illness.
Many traditional medical systems have developed strategies to treat
this condition. This database is to provide a platform for individuals,
professionals and R&amp;D organizations to utilize and harness the
alternative medicines, capable to cure incurable diseases.

Methodology
Construction of Phyto-Mellitus
PhytoMellitus is constructed using HTML and can be accessed at
http://www.mlacw.org/bt/. Data were collected from various literature
sources such as,PubMed [],ScienceDirect [], Mary Ann Liebert
[],BlackWell Synergy[], IngentaConnect [], Scirus [], Bentham
Publishers [], Wiley journals [] and others. A panel of technical
experts representing diverse disciplines was established to advice us
throughout the preparation of this database. A number of databases
were searched: MEDLINE®,HealthSTAR, EMBASE®, Allied and
Complementary Medicine™, MANTIS™, BIOSIS Previews®, CAB
HEALTH, and CINAHL®. For searching we used the MeSH terms
“Diabetes” or “chemical constitutes” combined with the botanical
names of different herbs commonly used in Ayurvedic treatment. In
addition, a strategy was developed to identify and retrieve literature
from all over India. As part of this, several Indian journals were used
to gather information. Additional articles were obtained from
supplemental searches which focused on the Ayurvedic herbs, most
often used for diabetes, from review articles, and from 71 citations of
articles. All titles, abstracts, and articles were reviewed by two
reviewers, and all disagreements were resolved by consensus. Data
was collected using screening forms that we developed for this
purpose. We analyzed the data regarding the general characteristics of
medicinal plants from the Ayurvedic literature and used this
information to select a topic for a focused review.Phyto-Mellitus
includes 250 species, described to possess medicinal properties against
diabetes. The complete list of 250 species can be found at
http://www.mlacw.org/bt/plants.htm. The database can be accessed
alphabetically using genus name for information on specific plants. A
screen-shot of the Phyto-Mellitus is given in . From the
collected data, 36% were whole plants, 30% leaves, 13% seeds, 11%
roots, and 10% fruits.

Description of the evidence
More than 1000 articles were searched and considered in the
preparation of this database (given in reference section of database as
link to PMID). Maximum annotated studies came from the different
published literatures. In terms of interventions, there was no study that
tested Ayurveda as a system of care; from all tested herbs. Each and
every data given in databases is considered only after a thorough
curation process. There are several existing databases for information
on plants used in diabetes. Our database is regularly updated with
chemical constituents of these plants with direct link to original papers
which facilitates easy access that has not been provided in any other
existing databases. In this database, we are planning to include all
herbal research in the field of diabetes.

Utility
Empirical evidence of efficacy for this database for diabetes would be
helpful to health care providers in managing diabetic patients. It is also
useful in identifying areas for future research in providing a quick
review on the number of plants and plant parts for diabetic research for
the benefit of scientific community.

Future development
Chemical structures of the plants with their IUPAC nomenclature and
bio-energetic of different compounds will be incorporated. Continuous
updates shall be released to include other plants of medicinal value.
We plan to develop provisions to search the database, to identify
plants of interest using keywords.

Conflict of interest
The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.

This research has been carried out in Maharani lakshmi Ammanni
College For Women, DBT­BIF facility under BTIS (Biotechnology
information system), DBT (Department of biotechnology), Ministry of
Science and Technology, Government of India, India. We would also
like to thank Dr. T. L. Shantha, director of MLACW for her moral
support all through the work. The authors are also grateful to whole
scientific community for their contribution towards science and Pt.
LMS Govt. P.G College, Rishikesh.

Citation:Middha et al, Bioinformation 4(2): 78-79 (2009)

Distributed data as per their therapeutic use

A screen shot of P record entry in Phyto­Mellitus is shown

