Background
Repetitive secondary structures like α-helices and β-strands have been viewed as key building blocks of proteins. These
local protein structures are stabilized mainly by hydrogen bonds within the protein backbone. In 1984, Kabsch and
Sander identified identical fragment sequences of limited length found in both α-helices and β-strands, namely
chameleon sequences []. This suggests that only local
sequence composition and the order of amino acids are not sufficient to predict the secondary structure accurately [].
The number of examples supporting the above speculation has strikingly increased in the recent past []. Elegant
experimental studies have shown the importance of nonlocal interactions to guide the formation of α -helix or β - strand, 
e.g. the IgG-binding domain of protein G (GB1) []. Chameleon sequences have also been designed, e.g.
MATa2 and MCM1 DNA complexes []. Studies have emphasized that these 
chameleon sequences, have no strong preference for either α-helical or β-strand conformations 
[]. Nonetheless, the information on the
local sequence neighborhood can be used to predict their
secondary at a high accuracy level [,]. Here, we have
analyzed chameleon sequences to estimate their
propensities to form not only the regular secondary
structures like α-helix or β-strand, but also coil [].

Description
Unlike the previous studies that focused only on limited
parts of the Protein DataBank [], all the protein structures
available in 2007 (∼40.000 protein structures) have been
used. Secondary structures have been assigned for these
proteins using the DSSP algorithm []. Only those
proteins with complete side-chain co-ordinates and without
multiple breaks in the chain were considered, leading to a
final number of 14,692,070 amino acid residues associated
to a given secondary structure. The 8 secondary structural
assignments made by DSSP were reduced to the 3 classical states: helix includes α, 3.10 and π-helices, strand has only
the β-strand assignments, and coil covering the rest of the
assignments (γ-bridges, turns, bends, and coil). Default
parameters of the program have been used.

In the second step, we searched for chameleon sequences
of length L, L ranging from 4 to 8 amino acids. A fragment
is considered as a chameleon sequence if all the residues in
this fragment are associated at least once to the helical
conformation and also, at least once to the β-strand. Thus,
numerous chameleon sequences have been located: 63,228
(for L = 4 residues), 34,408 (for L = 5), 2,423 (for L = 6),
179 (for L = 7) and 64 (for L = 8). As the dataset is large
and complete when compared to the ones used in previous
studies, more examples were found, especially for the
longer fragments [].

Our main goal is to check whether the chameleon sequences don't have any strong preference for either
helical or strand conformations [], and also to extend the
questioning to the preference of chameleon sequences for the coil state, a question not directly tackled in the previous
works. For this purpose, we have used a simple methodology. We have used a non-redundant databank
containing proteins with not more than 20% pairwise sequence identity. The selected chains have X-ray
crystallographic resolutions less than 1.6 Å, with a R-factor less than 0.25 (details can be found in 
[]). Using this non-redundant databank, the propensity of an amino acid 
k to be associated to a given secondary structure state i, namely pik, has 
been computed (see equation 1 in ) 
and i corresponds to α-helix, β-strand or the coil state, while k corresponds 
to one of the 20 amino acids.

Hence, each chameleon sequence XS is associated to a score Sα, 
Sβ and Scoil As these scores are propensity products, a score 
Si of 1.0 corresponds to the random value. If Si is higher than one, this 
chameleon sequence is found preferentially associated with the secondary state i and vice versa. This measure is 
crude but gives some basic insights into the behaviors of chameleon sequence.

 shows a plot of Sα versus Sβ for the 63,228
chameleon sequences (for L=4 residues). The adequacy 
scores greater than 4.0 were set to a maximum value of 4.0.
The figure shows that 53.7% and 47.3% of the chameleon
sequences have Sβ and Sα scores greater than 1.0
respectively. Thus, each square delineated by the red lines
are quite equivalent. Sβ scores go far beyond Sα scores, as
16% of the Sβ scores are greater than 2.0, 5.3% than 3.0
and 2.7% than 4.0, while only 5.1% of the Sα scores are
greater than 2.0 and 0.2% than 3.0. 21.6% of the
chameleon sequences have Sα and Sβ scores greater than
one, with an average Scoil of 0.42 (i.e. less than two times
the random value). For 25.7% of these fragments, α-helix
is statistically preferred over β-strand, with an average Scoil
of 0.68, while for 24.7%, only β-strand is preferred
(average Scoil of 0.65). Interestingly, 27.9% of the
chameleon sequences have Sα and Sβ less than 1.0, i.e., the
coil state is favored.

 shows the chameleon sequence fragment MLIL that have 
Sα and Sβ scores greater than 2.0 (shown as the
blue dot in ). In type-1 beta-hydroxysteroid 2 dehydrogenase, this chameleon 
sequence forms the central β-strand of a β-sheet composed of 5 β-strands 
( left), while in hyperthermophilic tungstoperin enzyme 2
aldehyde ferredoxin oxidoreductase, this sequence is in the middle of a long α-helix 
( right).

With this simple approach, we have underlined that chameleon sequences have no strong preference for either
α- or β-conformation. We have also found that very different chameleon sequences exist, some showing a
higher preference for either helical or strand conformations, some showing preference for both, while
some sequences favor the coil state over the regular secondary structures. These observations again support the
idea that non-local factors [,]
have a major influence over the secondary structure that an amino acid sequence adopts. Supplementary information can be 
found on our website: http://www.dsimb.inserm.fr/~joseph/chameleon/

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work was supported by grants from the Ministère de la Recherche, Université Paris Diderot - Paris 7, Université de La Réunion and the French 
Institute for Health and Medical Care (INSERM). APJ has a grant from CEFIPRA number 3903-E and AB has a grant from Ministère de la Recherche.

Citation:Ghozlane et al, Bioinformation 3(9): 367-369 (2009)

(a) Distribution of adequacy scores S(α) and S(β) of chameleon sequence fragment of length 4. The legend gives the occurrence number of observed fragments. (b) example of the chameleon 
sequence fragments MLIL found (left) in a β-strand of Guinea pig 11 beta-hydroxysteroid 2 dehydrogenase type 1 (PDB code 1XSE) and in an α-helix of a
hyperthermophilic tungstoperin enzyme 2 aldehyde ferredoxin oxidoreductase (PDB code 1aor). The blue point in (a)represents the scores of example (b).

