Background
Protein prenylation is an important post translational
modification through which naïve protein molecules are
targeted to membranes. It also helps in protein-protein
interactions and reversible binding of some transport proteins
to membranes []. Prenylation is the addition of either Farnesyl
or geranylgeranyl moieties to proteins. Many proteins including
Ras superfamily of proteins require prenylation for their proper
function []. Three independent prenylating enzymes namely
protein farnesyl transferase (FTase) and two protein
geranylgeranyl transferases (GGTase1 and 2) are responsible for
addition of respective isoprenoids. The subtle change in amino
acid recognition sequence by these three enzymes makes sure
that any given protein is prenylated with only one of them.
GGTase1 transfers geranylgeranyl diphosphate (GGPP) to
proteins containing CAAX domain where C is cysteine, A can
be any aliphatic amino acid, and X is always leucine. In a stark
contrast GGTase2 recognize proteins with C-C or CXC domain
and prenylate them. To date Rab family of proteins were the
only known candidates to possess C-C or CXC domain [,
].

Rho family of GTPases (about eight members) belongs to Ras
superfamily of protein that is geranylgeranylated by GGTase1.
Members of Rho family especially RhoA and Rac1 play a vital
role in Ras mediated transformation of NIH 3T3 cells 
[].
Furthermore Ras prenylation, particularly farnesylation was
targeted to prevent transformation of cells even today 
[,
].
Farnesylation was effectively stopped by inhibiting FTase
through peptidomimetic compounds. Though proven to be
very good drugs with amazingly nil side effects, FTase
inhibitors (FTI) could not completely prevent tumor
proliferation as some Ras isoforms like K-Ras-4B are resistant to
FTIs like L-744,832, and FTI-277 or undergo alternative
prenylation i.e. geranylgeranylation []. On the other hand most
of the GGTase inhibitors found to date shows consistent results
by arresting cells in G0/G1 phase and induce apoptosis [].

FTase and GGTase1 are structurally very similar with a
common alpha subunit []. The beta subunit gives specificity
for the enzymes towards the protein substrate depends not only
on the C- terminal tetrapeptide but also to the peptide sequence
adjacent to it []. These two proteins also show high homology
towards yeast mating factor proteins RAM1 and RAM2 which
have farnesylation and geranylgeranylation transferase
properties respectively. Unfortunately not much is known
about the sequence of mammalian, especially human GGTase1
beta subunit but the gene for GGTase1 is homologous to yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae CDC43 []. 3-D structures of human
GGTase1 are also not available which severely impedes the
usage of rapid techniques like high throughput screening etc. to
find inhibitors for it. Computational modeling of protein is a
handy technique through which structures of highly
homologous proteins can be easily generated. One such
structure for RabGGTase (GGTase2) has already been generated
in order to understand the mechanism of prenylation []. Here
we present a computation based 3-D model for human
GGTase1 to which pubchem small molecule library was docked
using AutoDock Vina run on PyRx0.8 graphic user interface
(GUI).

Methodology
Sequence analysis:
Human GGTase1 protein amino acid sequence (P53609) was
retrieved from UniProt website http://www.uniprot.org/.
BLAST was performed from the blast tab available in UniProt
website using default settings.

Homology modeling: the human GGTase1 protein sequence
showed more than 90% homology with same protein from other
organisms. Hence automatic modeling mode of SWISS MODEL
was used without any optional template. The validated
structure was then downloaded from the output file and used
for further experiments [,
].

Docking:
Compounds with less than 1000 atoms and 1000 bonds were
downloaded from pubchem small molecule library. Autogrid
was constructed with default values around the active site
predicted by CASTp []. Molecular docking was done using
AutoDock Vina tool in a PyRx graphic user interface (GUI)
version 0.8 [] that run on a PC containing Windows7. These
dockings were compared with those of well-known inhibitors
like GGTI-297, GGTI-298 and CHEMBL525185. Chimera []
was used for visualization and rendition of high resolution
images.

Results &amp; Discussion
Local alignment of P53609 showed that the protein sequence is
about 98% similar to the sequence of Rat GGTase1 for which Xray
structure is resolved with a resolution of 2.85Å. The high
degree of sequence similarity provided us the way to use
automatic modeling mode in SWISS MODEL and the output
was generated (). GGTase1 model obtained from
SWISS MODEL was superimposed with that of template
protein 1N4Q (). Docking interactions of modeled
protein with various putative inhibitors are shown in ().
Most of the inhibitors were docked to Thr49, Tyr272, Trp275.
Docking scores of compounds with high dock score were
tabulated  (see supplementary material). These results
show that natural compounds camptothecin and curcumin with
dock scores -8.2 and -7.3 respectively may potently inhibit
GGTase1 better than the known inhibitors GGTI-287,297,298
and CHEMBL525185 with dock scores of -6.5, -7.5, -7.5, -7.2
respectively.

Ras mediated transformation is manifested in many cancers. As
mentioned earlier, a combined administration of FTase and
GGTase1 inhibitors was proven to better cancers facilitated by
Ras. To date the only proven drugs that act against GGTase1
were the peptidomimic compounds that are structurally similar
to CAAX tetrapeptide. in silico docking is a fast track method
for screening drugs with low cost but high efficiency and
rapidity. Many compounds are already available in markets
that were initially screened by in silico methods. But there are
no inhibitors for GGTase1 other than peptidomimic compounds
reported. This is mainly due to the lack of a 3-D structure of
GGTase1. Here we present for the first time a homology
modeled structure of GGTase1 and docked a library of natural
compounds against it using AutoDock Vina. Our findings such
that camptothecin and curcumin as putative inhibitors may go a
long way in dealing with Ras mediated tumors. Camptothecin,
a well-known topoisomerase I inhibitor was an anti-cancer drug
[]. It was discontinued as a drug due to its side effects.
Curcumin, a pleiotropic molecule is shown to ameliorate cancer
progression by a number of ways []. We hypothesize that
anti-cancer activity of these compounds are in part may be due
to GGTase1 inhibition. We have to further study and elucidate
the complete mechanism of action of camptothecin and
curcumin on GGTase1 inhibition.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The financial support provided by the University Grants
Commission, New Delhi [UGC F. No: 42-176/2013(SR)], India.

Citation:Thippanna et al, Bioinformation 9(19): 973-977 (2013)

A Homology modeled of human GGTase1 downloaded from SWISS-MODEL workspace. B. Superimposition of modeled
protein (gold) with its template 1N4Q (cyan).A blast of mouse GGTase1 protein against that of PDB database yielded 3-D model of
1N4Q with &gt;90% sequence similarity. Using 1N4Q as template human GGTase1 is modeled (A) and sumperimposed with its
template (B) for clarity.

Docking simulation diagrams of GGTase1 with A. GGTI297 B. GGTI298 C. Camptothecin and D. Curcumin. Docking
simulations using Autodock yielded structures which were saved as PDB files and later imaged using Chimera v1.8. Protein
surfaces with ligand spheres are shown in left. In right side ribbon structures with hydrogen bonds (dashed lines) and bond length
are shown.

