Background
The development of genomic and proteomic techniques is widely 
envisioned as a useful and powerful  approach for oral cancer biomarker 
discovery. However, if proteomic approaches are to be successful, a 
reliable and comprehensive means of identifying appropriate tissue 
sampling sites is essential in order to limit costly and time-consuming 
sampling to sites that truly may present a threat to the patient. The major 
focus of cancer proteomics is to identify target proteins for specific cancer 
therapy and protein biomarkers for early diagnosis and prognosis. The 
major drawback when looking for tumor specific biomarkers is the need to 
extract the tumor material either surgically or through a needle biopsy 
which is quite invasive, and needs specific clinical skills. Thus it is 
important that proteomic sampling be  directed and limited to sites that 
truly are in need of sampling.

Squamous cell carcinoma, accounting for 96% of all oral cancers, is 
usually preceded by dysplasia presenting as white (leukoplakia), or 
occasionally red (erythroplakia) epithelial lesions on the oral mucosa. 
Leukoplakias develop in 1-4% of the population  [,
]. Malignant 
transformation, which is quite unpredictable, occurs in 1-40% of 
leukoplakias over 5 years. Dysplastic lesions in the form of erythroplakias 
carry a risk for malignant conversion of 90% [,
]with increasing severity 
of dysplasia associated with higher  risk of progression to cancer. Since 
clinical examination with white light has been shown to vary with the 
experience level of the clinician and there remains no reliable correlation 
between clinical appearance and the presence of dysplastic changes 
detection, current practice prescribes frequent biopsy of suspicious oral 
lesions, to ensure early detection of malignant changes. However, biopsied 
lesions are many times benign and quite often may not represent the site of 
dysplastic changes, which, in combination with poor patient acceptance of 
surgical sampling, discomfort, and some degree of scarring, serves as a 
powerful disincentive to patients to attend for further regular surveillance.

Tumor detection is further complicated by a potential wide field (regional) 
molecular change with risk of progression to cancer, leading to 
multicentric lesions  []. 
Especially in the case of tumor recurrence, and 
second primary tumors which are quite frequent in oral cancer, these 
lesions may not be visible to the naked eyes. Consequently, they are 
neither detected nor sampled and remain undiagnosed and untreated, 
posing a serious threat to a patient’s long-term health. Thus, there exists an 
urgent need for a clinical modality for direct, non-invasive early detection 
and mapping of potentially (pre-) malignant oral lesions.  We hypothesize 
that the combined use of a quick and noninvasive imaging approach to 
detect and map regions of interest  would aid clinical examination and 
monitoring without warranting a biopsy specimen, as well as providing an 
indicator of the appropriate sites for proteomic characterization. In the head 
and neck region, early detection  and monitoring of dysplastic and 
cancerous conditions will facilitate less aggressive treatment and result in a 
better prognosis.

Method and Discussion
Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT) was first introduced as an imaging 
technique in biological systems in 1991  []. The non-invasive nature of 
this imaging modality coupled with (i) a penetration depth of 2-3 mm, (ii) 
high resolution (1-10µm), real-time image viewing, and (iii) capability for 
cross-sectional as well as 3-D tomographic images, provide excellent 
prerequisites for in vivo oral screening and diagnosis.

OCT has often been compared to ultrasound imaging. Both technologies 
employ backscattered signals reflected from different layers within the 
tissue to reconstruct structural images, with OCT measuring light rather 
than sound. The resulting OCT image is a two-dimensional representation 
of the optical reflection from a tissue sample. Cross-sectional images of 
tissues are constructed in real time, at near histologic resolution 
(approximately 1-10µm with current  technology). These images can be 
stacked to generate 3-D reconstructions of the target tissue. This permits in 
vivo non-invasive imaging of epithelial and subepithelial structures, 
including: (1) depth and thickness, (2) histopathological appearance, and 
(3) peripheral margins of the lesions.

Various OCT systems have received FDA approval for clinical use, and 
OCT is deemed by many as an essential imaging modality in 
ophthalmology. In vivo image acquisition is facilitated through the use of a 
flexible fiberoptic OCT probe. The probe is simply placed on the surface 
of the tissue to generate real-time, immediate surface and sub-surface 
images of tissue microanatomy and cellular structure, whilst avoiding the 
discomfort, delay and expense of biopsies.

Several studies have sought to investigate the diagnostic utility of in vivo 
OCT to detect and diagnose oral pre-malignancy and malignancy [,
].  In 
a blinded study involving 50 patients with clinically suspicious lesions 
including oral leukoplakia or erythroplakia the effectiveness of OCT was 
evaluated for detecting oral dysplasia and malignancy []. OCT images of 
dysplastic lesions revealed visible epithelial thickening, loss of epithelial 
stratification, and epithelial down-growth  (). Areas of oral 
squamous cell carcinoma of the buccal mucosa were identified in the OCT 
images by the absence or disruption of the basement membrane, an 
epithelial layer that was highly variable in thickness, with areas of erosion 
and extensive epithelial down-growth and invasion into the sub-epithelial 
layers (). A semi-quantified scale of 0-6 measuring these changes 
was developed and validated in animal and human studies [,
] Statistical 
analysis of the data gathered in this study using 50 subjects with oral 
lesions substantiated the utility of in vivo OCT to detect and diagnose oral 
pre-malignancy and malignancy in the oral cavity, with diagnostic 
accuracy, and early histological changes during clinical follow-up of the 
lesions. Agreement between OCT and histopathology was excellent, 
averaging 0.896 (SE=0.049). For detecting carcinoma in situ or squamous
cell carcinoma (SCC) vs. non-cancer, sensitivity was 0.931 and specificity 
was 0.931; for detecting SCC vs. all other pathologies, sensitivity was 
0.931 and specificity was 0.973.

In another study of 97 patients using OCT imaging to detect neoplasia in 
the oral cavity  [], 
a sensitivity of 83% and specificity of 98% were 
determined with inter-observer agreement of 0.76. This study suggested 
that OCT is a promising imaging modality for non-invasive detection, 
mapping, and evaluation of tissue sites suspicious for high-grade dysplasia 
or cancer. These findings also have important clinical diagnostic utility in 
detecting dysplastic and malignant lesions in patients previously treated for 
upper aerodigestive cancers, who are susceptible for new or recurrent 
cancer and who are difficult to assess clinically due to prior treatment 
induced mucosal change, and represent the highest risk patient population 
for OSCC. Therefore, several studies have demonstrated the potential role 
of OCT imaging for detecting, diagnosing and mapping oral lesions. In all 
of these studies, histopathology was used as the gold standard, which is 
indeed, the current accepted practice.  Several other imaging approaches 
with promising advances in the last decade include photosensitizers, 
fluorescence, various forms of spectroscopy []. However, as we strive to 
define and validate more accurate markers of early cancer risk using 
genomic and proteomic approaches, the tissue sites to be interrogated by 
these markers ‐ which, by their very definition are highly resolved and 
highly sensitive ‐ must be identified with accuracy and precision. In an 
early animal study, we were able to determine that the diagnostic accuracy 
for oral malignancy of high-resolution in vivo microscopy was 
considerably enhanced by pre-scanning with OCT to identify and map oral 
lesions  []. 
Hence it seems reasonable to propose that the use of OCT 
imaging techniques for identifying sites in need of genomic and proteomic 
interrogation will serve to enhance the accuracy, speed and 
comprehensiveness of the diagnostic process of early pre-malignant and 
malignant lesions in head and neck cancer.

Conclusion
In vivo imaging can identify and map oral premaligant and malignant 
lesions, providing a useful means for ensuring accurate and comprehensive 
sampling of oral lesions by emerging approaches such as genomics and 
proteomics. The increase in sensitivity and specificity of the combined 
optical imaging and proteomic technology when compared with both 
clinical examination and frozen section analysis supports their cutting edge 
approach for the XXI century of oral cancer detection and diagnosis.

Citation:Le et al, Bioinformation 5(7): 304-306 (2011)

Dysplastic and Normal Buccal Mucosa. (A) Photograph, (B) in vivo Optical Coherence Tomography image, 
(C) H&amp;E (10x) of dysplastic buccal mucosa, (D) In vivo OCT image of normal buccal mucosa. Key: 
1-stratified squamous epithelium, 2-keratinized epithelial surface layer, 3-basement membrane 
4-submucosa. From: “In-Vivo Diagnosis of Oral Dysplasia and Malignancy Using Optical Coherence 
Tomography: Preliminary Studies in 50 Patients. Wilder-Smith et al 2009. Reprinted with permission 
of Wiley-Liss, Inc. a subsidiary of John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc.”.

Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the Buccal Mucosa. (A) Photograph, (B)  in vivo OCT image 
(C) H&amp;E (10x) of buccal mucosa with squamous cell carcinoma (D) In vivo OCT image of 
normal buccal mucosa. Key: 1-stratified squamous epithelium, 2-keratinized epithelial 
surface layer, 3-basement membrane 4-submucosa. From: “In-Vivo Diagnosis of Oral Dysplasia 
and Malignancy Using Optical Coherence Tomography: Preliminary Studies in 50 
Patients. Wilder-Smith et al 2009. Reprinted with permission of Wiley-Liss, Inc. a 
subsidiary of John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc.”.

