Background
Protein-protein interaction (PPI) provides valuable framework
for comprehensive understanding of the biological processes
and cellular function. Proteins are essential biomolecules that
mostly function along with the other proteins rather than alone
[]. Thus for any organism, the interactions of the proteins are
needed to depict a better understanding of the biological
process along with the proteins []. PPI have been determined
by many experimental methods such as Mass spectrometry 
[],
protein chips [], binding reaction methods 
[], two hybridbased
methods [] etc and these experimental methods are
expensive, labor intensive and time consuming. Several
computational techniques have been developed for predicting
the PPI which includes many concepts, approaches and data
types such as gene fusion [], gene expression profiles 
[],
phylogenetic profile [], conservation of gene neighborhood
[], correlated mutation 
[], and gene ontology annotation
[]. Some approaches use the known PPI experimental
information and supervised machine learning methods [,
]
such as support vector machine, Bayesian network and random
forest method for predicting the PPIs. Moreover it includes
domain-domain interaction [], amino acid composition 
[],
conjoint triad feature [], physiochemical and structural
descriptor []. Recent studies have shown the interactions
between proteins of bidensovirus BmDNV-Z and specific host
midgut proteins of Bombyx mori using yeast two-hybrid (Y2H)
system [].

Of late, the interlog method is being widely used to predict the
protein-protein interactions in various organisms. In the rice
blast fungus, Magnaporthe grisea, PPI pairs were predicted using
the interlog method to study the pathogenecity and secreted
protein interactions []. Recently swine interactomes were
predicted using the interlog method, domain-motif interactions
from structural topology, D-MIST and the Motif-motif
interactions from structural topology []. Interlog method uses
the orthology information between the model organisms for
predicting the PPI of the organisms and widely implemented
for various organisms and proved to be reliable method [].

Silkworm, Bombyx mori is an important domesticated
Lepidopteran insect due to its primary role in silk production
and also as a model organism for biochemical, genetic and
genomic studies in insects, next only to Drosophila due to strong
advantages for experimental research, such as rapid
development with ease of rearing in the laboratory, short life
cycle, tractability, small adult size etc. Despite this importance,
large-scale protein-protein interaction mapping projects have
not been implemented in silkworm and yet to be explored. In
this study an attempt has been made to predict the PPI network
of Bombyx mori using a well-recognized computational method
ie interlog method.

Methodology
Data Collection:
The Silkworm, Bombyx mori protein sequences were acquired
from the SilkDB database which contains 14623 sequences [].
The PPI network of Bombyx mori were inferred using the
experimentally verified existing PPI maps of the five model
organisms namely C. elegans, D. melanogaster, E. coli, H. sapiens
and S. cerevisae. The protein sequences of C. elegans, D.
melanogaster, E. coli, S cerevisae were downloaded from the
Entrez genome database which contains of 22894, 23948, 4038,
6717 protein sequences respectively []. The information about
the protein-protein interactions of the model organisms except
human were obtained from the database of Interacting Proteins,
DIP which provides the experimentally determined 5112, 23484,
12894, 25233 protein-protein interactions of the said model
organisms respectively []. Then 30046 human protein
sequences and the 14276 human PPIs were downloaded from
the human protein reference database, HPRD, which provides
information regarding the interaction networks of human
proteome []. The domain informations were collected from
the Pfam database [] and the Hmmer software was used to
annotate the silkworm protein sequences by utilizing the Pfam
domains. The microarray data and the gene ontology
annotation of the silkworm, Bombyx mori were obtained from
the BmMDB [] and SilkDB database. Orthologs of Bombyx
mori proteins in model organisms were predicted by using the
InParanoid program, which uses the pairwise similarity scores
for constructing the orthology group and then these orthologs
were grouped into a likely co-orthologs group [].

PPI Prediction:
The homologous sequences of Bombyx mori were obtained from
each model organisms using the BLAST program []. The
orthologous sequences of the silkworm were predicted from the
model organisms using the InParanoid program and clustered
into groups. For the entire silkworm genome, the interaction
network was constructed by assuming that any pair of
silkworm proteins are interacting if their orthologs from any
one of the model organisms that has shown the experimentally
verified interaction and thus it was considered as an interacting
pair. Further, interaction score was assigned for each predicted
PPI pair using the sequence similarity bit score and the number
of instances that the protein-protein interaction pair occurred in
all the model organisms by following the same strategy of
previous studies [,
]. Here s(a,a`) and s(b,b`) are the
sequence similarity bit scores between a and a', b and b'
respectively. N is the total number of instances occurred in all
the model organisms.

 N
Interaction Score = Σ ln (S(a,a`) χ S(b,b`)
i=1

PPI Verification:
The computationally predicted protein-protein interactions
were verified by various techniques. Here the most popularly
used techniques such as domain-domain interactions and the
gene expression data were applied. In the first verification, the
predicted interaction pairs from the silkworm sequences were
mapped into domains. The sequences have been annotated into
domains with the E-value cut off 0.01 using the HMMER
program with the default settings utilizing the Pfam database.
The domain-domain physical interactions were downloaded
from the iPfam, the protein domain interactions database 
[].
Then the predicted PPI pairs which are associated with the
experimentally verified domain-domain interactions were
checked. Moreover, to facilitate the comparison, 1000 PPI
networks were selected randomly with replacement and related
to the experimentally verified domain-domain interactions. At
last, for assigning the quality of the prediction method, the
percentage of the Pfam interacting domain pairs associated with
the predicted PPI pair and randomized PPI pair were calculated
and finally the statistical significance of the predicted results
were determined. In the second verification, the microarray data
of the Bombyx mori were collected from the BmMDB database.
Each of the predicted protein-protein interaction pair of the
silkworm was mapped with the respective microarray data and
the number of proteins and PPI interaction pairs were
computed. Then the average absolute value of PCC and the pvalue
between the predicted protein interacting pairs of the
silkworm were calculated. Then 100 randomized networks were
selected with the replacement and compared the average
absolute PCC value of predicted PPI and the 100 randomized
networks.

The predicted PPI network of the silkworm were analyzed to
calculate the nodes, edges, network radius, network diameter,
average number of neighbour, characteristic path length,
betweenness centrality, closeness centrality using the Cytoscape
program which is an open source software project, providing
framework about the biomolecular interaction networks 
[].
The 2700 unique proteins were represented as nodes and the
interactions between the two nodes were represented as edges.
The degree of the node represents the number of the
interactions of the particular node. This interaction framework
is essential for understanding the topological behavior of the
network. The PPI network was grouped into cluster using the
Cfinder program which uses the clique percolation method 
[]
For each community, overrepresented Gene ontology (GO) term
was assigned by analyzing GO enrichment of biological process
which were found using Fischer exact test followed by False
Discovery Rate (FDR) correction.

Results
By using of InParanoid program with the default settings, the
orthologous between the Bombyx mori and each of the model
organisms were obtained. In Silkworm, totally 7736 proteinprotein
interaction pairs were predicted using the Interlog
method, among which 2700 proteins were unique. The number
of protein-protein interactions predicted from each of the model
organism׳s namely C. elegans, D. melanogaster, E. coli, H. sapiens
and S. cerevisae, were, 422, 2688, 114, 557, 4184, respectively and
the data is presented in  (see supplementary material).
In the first validation technique which relies on the iPfam
database, the predicted 7736 PPIs of the silkworm proteins were
mapped into their respective domains. Totally 2349 proteins
were assigned with the Pfam domains among the 2700 unique
proteins of the silkworm PPIs. Here 6553 PPI pairs were
mapped with Pfam domains among the 7736 PPIs which were
constructed. Around 625 PPIs of the predicted silkworm PPIs
were associated with the iPfam domain-domain interactions.
Moreover for comparison purpose we created 1000 random
network, in which samples were selected with replacement
from the 14623 proteins of the Bombyx mori. In each random
network, we constructed 7736 PPI pairs and counted the
number of interactions which were associated with iPfam
interacting domains.

In the second validation technique which is based on the
microarray data of the silkworm, after removal of the selfinteraction
PPI pairs, there were 7434 non-self-interaction PPI
pairs of the silkworm which were assigned with their respective
microarray data. Altogether 6643 PPIs were mapped with the
microarray data, among which 2511 unique proteins have their
respective gene expression data. Then the average Pearson
correlation coefficient was calculated between the expression
data of interacting pairs which was found to be 2.29. By using
the same method, 1000 random networks were created and each
network consists of 7434 PPIs pairs and the average absolute
PCC value among the interacting pairs of the random networks
were computed which is shown in  (see supplementary
material). The network analysis and the visualization were
carried out on the silkworm PPI network using the Cytoscape
program and the information regarding the topological
properties of the network such as nodes, network radius,
network diameter, average number of neighbour, characteristic
path length and clustering coefficient are shown in  (see
supplementary material) and the degree distribution,
between׳s centrality, closeness centrality shortest path are
depicted in the .

Discussion
The protein-protein interaction data of the model organisms
were collected from the DIP and HPRD which are
experimentally verified and manually curated databases so that
the quality of the data is high when compared to any other
database and to reduce false positive prediction and increase
the accuracy. Maximum numbers of the silkworm PPI were
predicted from the S. cervisease and the Drosophila using the
interlog method as shown in . Previous studies show
that interlog approach is highly acceptable and reliable method
as the interlog of interacting protein is found in many model
organisms []. Presently no information is available on the
experimentally verified protein-protein interaction of the
silkworm and therefore it is difficult to validate the predicted
PPIs. Hence the predicted PPI of Bombyx mori were validated
using the existing computational methods. Proteins have many
functions in cellular processes which interact with one another
leading to successful execution of biological events. Here the
main idea is that the likely co-expressed genes might have
similar functions and interact with each other. So we used the
interacting Pfam domains and the gene expression data of the
silkworm for the purpose of validation. These methods are very
effective to validate the computationally predicted PPI of the
silkworm. In the first validation method, 625 PPI pairs are
predicted and associated with the interacting Pfam domains. In
random network, the average number of PPI pairs sharing the
Pfam interacting domains was found to be 8.97±0.399 which is
much smaller than our predicted PPI network , however, still it
is highly significant as the highest number of PPIs sharing
random network was found to be 24. In the second validation
method, the average PCC value of the predicted network is 0.29
and the average PCC value of the Random network was
0.23100±0.00042 which is highly significant.

The PPI network has highly connected protein nodes known as
hubs which have biological significance in the network
architectures. In human, cancer-related proteins are more likely
to act as hubs []. However these hub proteins do not have
important biological properties but these hubs contain more
essential proteins when compared to non-hub proteins.
Genome-wide studies show that deletion of hubs affects more
when compared to the non-hub proteins [] organization of
PPI network [,
]. In the predicted network, 35 hubs were
found each having more than 40 interactions. It implies that our
predicted network follows a power law P(k) ~k-1.823, R2=0.940.
It means that the predicted network has hubs with small
number of highly connected proteins and thus it possesses the
scale free property.

The degree of a node represents the number of edges i.e.,
interactions linked to n []. It was shown that the few nodes
have more degree and larger nodes have less degree obeying
the power law (). The neighborhood connectivity of a
node n is the average connectivity of all neighbors of n 
[]
(). The length of the shortest path between two nodes
n and m is L(n,m). The shortest path length distribution gives the
number of node pairs (n,m) with L(n,m) = 
k for k = 1,2,….
Network diameter is the maximum length of shortest paths
between two nodes [,
]. The betweenness centrality 
[]
Cb(n) of a node n is calculated as 
Cb(n) = Σs≠n≠t (σst (n) / σst),
where s and t are nodes in the network different from n, σst
denotes the number of shortest paths from s to t, 
and σst (n) is
the number of shortest paths from s to t that n lies on 
(). The closeness centrality [] 
Cc(n) of a node n is the
reciprocal of the average shortest path length and computed
Cc(n) = 1 / avg( L(n,m) ), here L(n,m) is the length of the shortest
path between two nodes n and m.

The closeness centrality of each node is a number between 0 and
1 (). The clustering coefficient Cn of a node n is defined
as Cn = 2en/(kn(kn-1)), where kn is the number of neighbors of n
and en is the number of connected pairs between all neighbors
of n [,
] and here clustering coefficient is 0.053. We can
identify the protein function by means of studying the network
clusters []. By using Cfinder program which uses k-clique
clustering method, the PPI networks were clustered into
communities, here we selected the k value as 4. In order to
understand the functions of each cluster of PPI network, we
analyzed each cluster by GO enrichment of biological process at
the depth of 4. The identified GO enrichment consists of RNA
processing, ion transport, protein transport, protein
ubiquitination etc ().

Conclusion
The present investigation has predicted totally 7736 proteinprotein
interactions among the 2700 silkworm proteins which
include unique proteins using a well-known interlog method.
The predicted PPI networks were validated by two
computational methods and it shows that our network is more
reliable. The reliability of the network has been clearly
demonstrated by the result of validation methods using the
iPfam domain interacting pairs and coexpression information.
The silkworm protein-protein interaction data are publicly
available at SilkPPI (http://210.212.197.30/SilkPPI/). It can be
browsed using the SilkDb accession number which provides the
details of the interaction proteins and their GO annotations,
Pfam domains and nominal p-value of microarray data.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are thankful to the BTISNet, Dept. of Biotechnology, New
Delhi, Central Sericultural Research and Training Institute,
Mysore and Karpagam University, Coimbatore, for providing
infrastructural facilities to carry out the work.

Citation:Sumathy et al, Bioinformation 10(2): 056-062 (2014)

The properties of the silkworm PPI network: a) Degree distribution; b) Topological coefficient; c) Betweenness centrality;
d) Closeness centrality.

Clusters with GO enrichment term and their p-value. The clusters were visualized using the Cytoscape Program.

