Background
Chemical constituents of vegetables are known to be
responsible for the beneficial health effects, namely vitamins,
minerals, trace elements, dietary fiber, proteins and especially a
wide variety of phytochemicals. Though a great deal of
information has been acquired about phytochemicals and their
role over the past few decades, much of this information is
highly dispersed and of limited accessibility, often being
confined to specialized textbooks, obscure government
documents or subscription-requiring scientific journals.
Fortunately, over the past few years a number of web-accessible
databases have started to appear, such as the pubchem,
chembank, Dr. Dukes phytochemical database and so on. They
focus on providing information on either chemical property,
structure, ambiguous mode of action or only about the source of
phytochemicals. A few databases were reported for biological
applications, which are mostly focusing on particular aspects of
dietary phytochemicals [–], which are based on experimental
and published secondary data from the scientific reports.
However, they lack information on phytochemicals along with
its unrevealed possible mechanism of actions. In an effort to
integrate informations about phytochemicals as well as their
targets, this Vegetable Phytochemicals and phytochemical
Target Database (VPTD) were developed to be useful in finding
effective chemical entities in drug discovery.

Methodology
Data on phytochemicals were manually collected from online
databases [–] and from peer-reviewed scientific articles 
[–].
From 27 commonly consumed vegetables in India, 2496
phytochemicals were collected and this data was compiled
using Microsoft Access® 2003. The 3D molecular structures of
the phytochemicals were rendered from online small molecular
databases namely, Pubchem and Chembank as 2D structures as
.sdf file. For those, whose structures are not available in the
online databases were drawn using ACDLab's Chemsketch 12.0
version [], 3D optimized and energy minimized using
CHARM force field and saved as .mol file. They were submitted
to PASS (Prediction of Activity Spectra for Substances) to
predict the possible biological activity of phytochemicals 
[].
PASS has provided possible mechanisms with statistical
probability as - probable activity (pa), probable inactivity (pi).

The activity index (Pa-Pi) for each phytochemical was manually
calculated. PASS prediction for each vegetable phytochemical
was saved as .xls files. VPTD was developed using Microsoft
Access® 2003. This database comprises primary Table and
secondary 
(see supplementary material). Primary
() consists of seven data fields (name of the
phytochemical, structure, source common name, source
binomial, and source family and part of the plant body).
Secondary () contains four data fields (pa; pi; pa-pi and
biological activity). Compound name_source binomial (E.g.
Betanin_Beta vulgaris) was set as primary key in the database.
Finally, data were exported from Microsoft Access® to Microsoft
SQL server 2005, which is used as the web interface. The front
end of the database was designed using Microsoft .NET
Framework SDK v2.0.

VPTD features
VPTD has a web interface at http://www.vptd.in/. It currently
abodes 1337 mechanism of actions of 2496 phytochemicals
present in 27 commonly consumed vegetables in India. It also
provides name of the phytochemicals, their source binomial
and common name, part of the plant body (ppm).  gives
the different search modes and examples of typical search terms
of the VPTD. The output of “compound search-plant” category
is illustrated in (), which is obtained by giving an
input “Rutin.” The result contains plant source of the
compound, Source binomial, source common name and
structure. Similarly for the same input in “compound searchbiological
activity” category (), the output includes
compound name with source binomial, biological activity, pa
value, pi value and pa-pi value. For the same input in
“compound search-plant, amount present &amp; family” category,
the output () includes source common name, plant
part, amount present (ppm), plant family and structure. In
“biological activity search” category, for the input
“antimycobacterial,” the output () contains the list of
all possible activities with pa value, pi value and pa-pi value. In
“plant name search” category by selecting the common name of
the plant from dropdown box (e.g. Bhendi) the output includes
a list of compounds present in that vegetable along with the
details-source binomial, part of the plant, amount present and
family (). If the binomial name is selected from
dropdown box the output will be same by replacing binomial
with common name (). In the “part and family name
search” category, for the input “root” in part of plant field, the
output contains the compounds present in the root part with
their source common name (). In the same search
category, for the input “Solanaceae” in family name field the
output comprised of compounds belongs to the input family
along with the source common name (). Queries are
text based and case insensitive.

Utility
VPTD is useful in scrutinizing the vegetable leads based on
their predicted biological activity, which will reduce the time
involved in various types of in vitro experiments. With the aid
of VPTD, a vegetable lead can be proved for its specific
pharmacodynamic property by conducting precise wet lab tests,
which is less time consuming and cost effective. Thus VPTD is a
specific database designed for vegetables and will be useful in
facilitating the identification and exploration of potential
therapeutic targets of vegetable phytochemicals.

Caveat and Future Developments
The database website has a provision for updating and adding
new entries (as .xls files or even a folder containing .xls files) in
future by the database manager. All data fields will be curated
and then accepted by the built in program. Database will be
extended for phytochemicals present in spices and fruits.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Kriushnapriya et al, Bioinformation 8(10): 492-495 (2012)

a) The output of compound search - plant category; b) The output of compound search - biological activity category; c)
The output of compound search - plant, amount present &amp; family category; d) The output of biological activity search category; e)
The output of plant name search category for common name field; f) The output of plant name search category for binomial name
field; g) The output of part and family name search category for part of plant field; h) The output of part and family name search
category for family name field

