Background
Ayurveda- “The Science of Life” goes way back to ancient days
which aimed to integrate herbs and other plants - including oils
and common spices for curing diseases. As a medical system, it
includes herbal medicines, dietary therapies, physical therapies
as well as psychological and spiritual healing []. Concept of
Ayurvedic medicine is followed as it relates to the body's
constitution (prakriti) and life forces (doshas) i.e. its Universal
interconnectedness []. Ayurvedic medicine being a holistic
approach to health and life makes a comparative study with the
commercial drug and has added conventional therapies to their
practices. Availability of various new drugs in the market
showing side effects to our body emphasizes the need to
explore natural plant sources that would play a remarkable and
substitute role to address the problem of less toxic and costaccounting
drug. Currently, more than 600 herbal formulae and
250 single plant drugs have been included in the pharmacy of
Ayurvedic treatments []. Ethno-botanical studies of traditional
herbal remedies used for diabetes around the world have
identified more than 1,200 species of plants with antihyperglycaemic
activity []. The pharmacopoeia of India forms
the base for such kind of structure based study since it is rich in
herbal treatments for diabetes []. Diabetes, an issue of
international concern can lead to fatigue, disorders of organ
systems / organs. It is generally accompanied with high level of
blood sugar leading to polyuria, polydipsia and polyphagia and
is classified into 3 types – Type 1, Type 2 and Gestational
diabetes. Aiming to approach for a novel ayurvedic compound,
we used target based drug discovery which follows on
rationally identifying chemical compounds that should bind to
a therapeutic target molecule – protein [].

Concept of Computer Aided Drug Designing (CADD) was
applied to understand atomic details of drug binding strength
and specificity in order to identify or create a novel molecule
that binds to a selected target and also optimizes the therapeutic
index of an already available drug or lead compound 
[]. The
dynamic of these binding interactions was achieved through
protein-ligand study. In these kinds of interactions, an
atom/ion binds to the specific binding site of the protein. An
important condition for binding is its active site, exhibiting the
correct size and shape in order to optimally fit into a cavity
exposed to the surface of the protein, i.e. the “binding pocket”.
In our present bench marking protein-ligand interaction study,
the protein Insulin is a transmembrane receptor which belongs
to the large class of tyrosine kinase (). It is made up of
two alpha and beta subunits each. The beta subunits pass
through the cellular membrane and are linked through
disulfide bonds. The alpha and beta subunits are encoded by a
single gene (INSR). The receptor initiates insulin action through
the binding and activation of its cell-surface receptor 
[].

The ligand, Glipizide is a second generation oral blood-glucoselowering
drug of the sulfonylurea class available in a
Gastrointestinal Therapeutic System (GITS) (). The
mechanism of action is produced by blocking potassium
channels in the beta cells of the Islets of Langerhans which
appears to lower blood glucose acutely by stimulating the
release of insulin from the pancreas. In this study, an attempt
has been made to explore molecules of Ayurvedic plant origin
that would play a role in anti-hyperglycaemic activity
addressing the problem of Diabetes and act well than the
existing drugs. For identifying the chemical structures having
good inhibiting effects on specific targets with low toxicity and
also for evaluating the drug likeness property of these AhG
compounds, we used quantitative structure-activity
relationships (i.e. partition coefficient log p value) which are
detailed in subsequent sections.

Methodology
Screening of AhG compounds (Based on drug likeness / biochemical property):
Compounds possessing AhG activity were identified from their
plant sources and their drug likeness and biochemical
properties were checked using Lipinski's Rule of Five and
Molinspiration respectively. Glipizide was choosen to be the
most suitable benchmark/reference drug for this study 
[].

a) Drug-likeness property (Lipinski's Rule of Five):
Christopher Lipinski's Rule of Five analysis helped to raise
awareness about properties and structural features that makes
molecules more or less drug-like. The guidelines predicted that
poor absorption or permeation of an orally administered
compound will meet the following criteria such as molecular
mass &gt; 500 Da, high lipophilicity (expressed as cLogP &gt; 5), &gt; 5
hydrogen bond donors and &gt; 10 hydrogen bond acceptors 
[].
The compounds not meeting the above mentioned criteria were
considered for docking studies as shown in  (see
supplementary material).

b) Biochemical property (Molinspiration):
Molinspiration – a cheminformatics tool for calculation of
important molecular properties (for example logP, polar surface
area, number of hydrogen bond donors and acceptors),
prediction of bioactivity score for important drug targets i.e.
GPCR ligand-based signaling cascade was used for the
development of a new functional drug with increased binding
selectivity profile and less undesirable effects 
[], kinase
inhibitors for development of selective inhibitors that can block
or modulate diseased signaling pathways were considered a
promising approach for drug development [], ion channel
modulators allowed the movement of charged particles across
cell membranes and are important therapeutic targets which are
modulated by a range of theraupetic drugs [] and nuclear
receptors for ligand activation of target genes for therapeutic
drug development [] along with possible molecular toxicity
[]. Analysis of Chemical and Bioactivity performed through
cheminformatics tool is represented in ().

Energy Minimization of AhG compounds:
Marvin Sketch – an editor for drawing chemical structures,
queries and reactions was used for energy minimization, which
is important in molecular conformations/ligand (AhG
compounds) in order to release any constraints such as torsional
or steric, for proper binding to the receptor. Energy
minimization generated 10 conformers, of which the one with
least energy was considered for our study. As represented
graphically in () for the compound Glipizide, the
conformer with least energy 110.8 kcal/mol was considered out
of other 9 conformers.

Selection of Receptor:
In order to identify a molecular activator with potent antidiabetic
effect, Insulin receptor (PDB ID: 3KR3) was selected
based on factors like resolution &gt; 1 and ≤ 3Å to avoid structure
with basic contours of the protein chain, r-factor &lt; 0.25 to
provide a nearly perfect fit atomic model, length ≥ 100 to avoid
peptides and X-ray crystallized structure to check the reliability
of the protein receptor.

Protein-Ligand Interaction study (Phase I):
Protein-Ligand Interaction Phase I study involves the dynamic
of ligand binded induced conformational change to the Insulin
receptor by compairing the docking score of the benchmarked
drug Glipizide () with other AhG compounds (i.e.
filteration based on better interaction score for further
cheminformatics study () using Hex software (Version
5.0) [].

Binding site analysis:
a) Swiss PDB Viewer:
The receptor-ligand complex obtained through Phase I of
Protein-Ligand Interaction study provided an insight of their
structural alignments and a comparision of their active sites 
[]
through statistically significant amino acids contributing for the
binding pocket ().

b) Q-Site Finder:
An energy based matrix captured the location of the ligandbinding
sites on protein - insulin giving a view of its structural
identification and comparision of its functional sites ()
and thus a combined statistical analysis of the binding pockets
for macro vs. micro molecules brought out the significant active
site residue [].

Protein-Ligand interaction study (Phase II):
The statistically potent amino-acid (combination of binding site
analysis vs. H-bond distance i.e. Leucine – 32) served as an
active site for the grid formation i.e. environment for the study
of Protein-Ligand Interaction (Phase II) (), which
enhances further stages of drug discovery, such as target
identification, drug / lead hit identification and lead
optimization using Quantum 3.0 []. A breakthrough into
thermodynamic analysis of the interaction study between
macro vs. micro molecules was achieved through the Gibbs free
energy values whereas best structural fit and their chemical
activity were studied through Root Mean Square Deviation 
[].
Best fitted structure (lower Gibbs score /Root Mean Square
Deviation) paved the platform of selection of the AhG
compounds for pharmacokinetic study with reference to our
benchmark drug – Glipizide ().

Pharmacokinetic study:
a) ADME Analysis:
The AhG molecules screened from Protein – Ligand Interaction
study (Phase II) were subjected to pharmokinectic and
pharmodynamic studies () to capture the dosage level as
well as the process of active drug components governing our
body thus giving an insight into target site concentration and
their theraupetic responses [].

b) Toxicity analysis:
Mutagenesis plays an important role to decide the potential of
the compounds for drug designing. AMES test (biological
assay) aims to assay this potential only, thus briefing us
whether these AhG compounds can be possible carcinogens or
not []. Virtual lab provided us with the AMES value as
predicted on the rat liver  (see supplementary material).
Further, it also comprehended us with their bio-chemical effect
on various body organells ().

Discussion
Prevention of diabetes is quite a difficult task considering our
present way of living. To treat the imbalance of glucose level in
the body one has to take complex decisions about treatment.
Hence, considering prevention of diabetes is better than
controlling it. The best known way to control diabetes is by
medication through commercially available drug such as,
Glipizide. In this study, we found four AhG compounds
namely Aloins, Capparisine, Funiculosin and Rhein, which can
be extracted from naturally available plant sources and can
control diabetes in a manner similar to Glipizide or better than
it. Also, these compounds found by us can serve as therapeutic
drugs as well as dietary supplements.

AhG compounds targeting diabetes were taken for our study.
Initial screening of these compounds was done based on
Lipinski's rule of five, to check the drug likeness property. 500
compounds were selected, out of which 243 compounds
showed drug likeness property that can be used as therapeutic
ligand/drug. These molecules were subjected to Phase I
Protein-Ligand interaction study followed by Chemical/Bioactivity
analysis which suggested that out of 243 natural
compounds, 6 compounds i.e. Aloins, Capparisinine,
Daturilinol, Funiculosin, Rhein, and Tamarixetin possessed
lower docking score than the reference drug (Glipizide) 
(). Lower the docking score of a compound; the more effective
it is as an inhibitor (). For the grid construction in the
Phase II study of Protein-Ligand Interaction, contribution of
each amino acid was investigated (). Comparative
analysis of ligand vs. receptor revealed Leucine (LEU) to be the
most active contributor for the ligand binding site. Phase II of
Protein-Ligand interaction study filtered out Daturilinol and
Tamarixetin () since they had high docking score
compared to the bench mark drug. Further, LD50 values were
also predicted for selecting reliable AhG molecule for ADME
analysis. The reference investigational drug Glipizide is good in
solubility, stability and absorption but showed no significant
first pass metabolism in liver and intestine and no active
transport. Plasma binding protein and volume of distribution
prediction of Glipizide was unreliable in distribution analysis.
The natural molecules Aloins, Capparisine, Funiculosin and
Rhein were considered as final reliable molecules based on their
ADME and Toxicity features ().

These molecules were considered as better ligands for insulin
receptor based on their interaction, pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics features. Aloins are naturally occurring
compound in Aloe barbadensis (Aloe vera). Aloe vera tends to
show very positive results for skin treatments. Though it has
anti-diabetic properties, but consuming aloe vera orally or
taken internally causes active secretion of fluids and
electrolytes, delays wound healing and is also responsible for
spontaneous abortion in pregnant women if high dosages are
taken frequently or could cause premature birth. It is
recommended to take them in a minimal quantity and
consuming a good amount of water will help in the metabolic
activities to function smoothly. Capparisinine is a naturally
occurring compound in Capparis decidua (Kerda) that has an
efficient anti-diabetic property, consumption of which causes
hypercholesterolemia, a low fat diet and poor bile flow, which
can keep a check on the cholesterol levels as bile acts as an
emulsifier in the presence of fats. Also, thinning the bile can
help in raising the cholesterol levels to normal. It can be taken
in small quantities as a form of spice in our daily diet.
Funiculosin and Rhein are naturally occurring compounds in
Senna occidentalis (Coffee senna/ Mogdad coffee). Funiculosin
is the new antibiotic in market. Senna occidentalis can be used
as a substitute for coffee as it doesn't contain caffeine. It is
suggested not to take this during pregnancy as Funiculosin and
Rhein are anthraquinones which have the ability to cause
electrolyte abnormalities and uterine contractions during
pregnancy and anthraquinones also have the ability to cross
into breast milk during lactation. It also acts as an efficient
antiviral, antitumor and antifungal in nature.

Hence, in the present study we can conclude saying that
Funiculosin and Rhein can be considered as a better antidiabetic
compound for their better results and lesser toxicity
levels, followed by Capparsinine and Aloins. It is also essential
to maintain a well balanced diet along with consumption of a
good quantity of water and regular exercise is recommended
().

Conclusion
Through CADD, the AhG compounds were made to undergo
screening process to find out efficient anti-diabetic drugs which
were extracted from natural plant sources. The compounds
which showed better drug like properties against diabetes
when compared to our bench mark drug (Glipizide) were
Aloins, Capparisine, Funiculosin and Rhein naturally found in
Aloe barbadensis (Aloe vera), Capparis deciduas (Kerda) and
Senna occidentalis (Coffee senna) respectively and can be
consumed orally in limited quantities but are advised not to be
consumed during pregnancy, heart problems and/on steroids
or while undergoing diuretics treatment. These compounds can
be taken as a daily diet prior to the onset of diabetes in a limited
quantity.

Future prospective:
As the work is purely on computational analysis, we wish to
connect a bridge between dry lab to wet lab in our further work
by implementing our present analysis on model organisms like
mice and monitor them to undergo a balanced diet along with
the plant extract which is rich in the above mentioned
compounds and test them for the blood glucose level in their
body before and after physical activity like swimming. Further,
we would like to concentrate on combining the compounds to
understand the physical dosage of each on human beings to
overcome diabetes using Support Vector Machine. Further
Molecular Dynamic (MD) studies on these natural compounds
will help us to analyse how well these ligand/micromolecules
are complexed with the protein insulin.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This research has been carried out in Maharani lakshmi
Ammanni College For Women, DBT- BIF facility under BTIS
(Biotechnology information system), DBT (Department of
biotechnology), Ministry of Science and Technology,
Government of India, India. We would also like to thank Dr. M
B Nagaveni, dean life science and Mr. Sushil Kumar Middha,
head bioinformatics for their moral support all through the
work and allowing us to work with the commercial software
Quantum (version 3.0).

Citation:Chatterjee et al, Bioinformation 8(24): 1195-1201 (2012)

(a) Molecular secondary structure representation of Insulin receptor with various active sites highlighted with red spheres
and important region of the protein captured with the red rectangular box; (b) three dimensional structural representation of bench
mark drug – Glipizide; (c) Snap Shot of 10 energy minimized conformational structure for the bench mark drug – Glipizide, the
first lowest value is of our interest; (d) schematic representation of Protein-Ligand Interaction (Phase I) study for Insulin receptor
(protein) versus bench mark drug – Glipizide (ligand) using Hex docking software (version 5.1), (e) ligand binding pocket / site
analysis for the Insulin receptor using Q-site server prediction; (f) schematic representation of Protein-Ligand Interaction (Phase II)
study for Insulin receptor (protein) versus bench mark drug – Glipizide (ligand) using Quantum docking software. Here a grid
(represented in white) has been constructed around the active binding site where the molecular dynamic interaction takes place; (g)
comparative analysis of the binding score for the AhG compounds with Glipizide (represented in yellow bar). The red color bar
represents the average Protein-Ligand Interaction (Phase I) score of the compounds eliminated. The green color bar represents the
Protein-Ligand Interaction (Phase I) of the compounds accepted; (h) propotional toxicity analysis of screened AhG natural
compounds on various body organs.Here green color signifies less, yellow medium and red more toxicity effect.

