Background
RNA polymerase (RNAP) is a ubiquitous molecular assembly
which is indispensable for the process of transcription. This
class of enzymes catalyzes the template-directed synthesis of
RNA []. Specialized RNA polymerases have been fine tuned
by evolution to synthesize different kinds of RNA. In
eukaryotes, three nuclear RNA polymerases are present –
RNAP I, RNAP II, RNAP III. RNAP I is required for the
synthesis of pre-rRNA precursor of the three largest rRNAs 
[].
RNAP II is involved in transcribing all mRNA along with noncoding
RNAs []. 
RNAP III aids in synthesizing 5s rRNA, all
tRNAs, and various short non-translated RNAs 
[]. In
eubacteria, a single molecule, evolutionarily closest to RNAP
II, performs catalysis []. The archaeal RNAP resembles RNAP
II holoenzyme [].

The multi-molecular assembly consists of four core subunits –
alpha (I and II), beta, betaprime, and omega. These four
subunits are common to RNA polymerase complexes of
eubacteria, eukaryota and archaea. The sigma subunit aids in
initiation of transcription in eubacteria (core enzyme + sigma =
holo enzyme). The corresponding function is performed in
eukaryotes and archaea by a combination of subunits. In
addition to the above subunits, archaea and eukaryota contain
additional subunits []. Viral RNA polymerases form
exceptions to this structural organization by operating as
single protein enzymes []. Remarkably, prokaryotic (Thermus
thermophilus (PDB: 1IW7), Thermus aquaticus (PDB: 1HQM))
and eukaryotic (Saccharomyces cerevisiae (PDB: 2E2I)) holo
enzyme structures exhibit high degree of structural similarity,
although their sequence similarity is low []. Pairwise
sequence identity for the core subunits between the RNA
polymerases of these two organisms is in the range of 19-28%.

Study of interface conservation in proteins related at level of
family/superfamily shows that as sequence divergence
becomes extensive (as in protein domains related by
superfamily), proteins tend to change their partners 
[]. RNA
polymerase subunits, although some of them show extensive
divergence, seem to interact with the same partners. RNA
polymerase system is thus a rare example. However, this is
expected as the obligatory interaction between the various
subunits is essential to successfully carry out transcription. The
objective of this work is to investigate the structural
accommodation of diverse sequences at the interface of RNA
polymerase machinery. Further, we use homology modelling
to understand how variations at the interface, such as
substitutions, insertions and deletions in the sequences are
accommodated in order to maintain the interface structure of
the multi-molecular assembly.

Methodology
Sequence analysis of homologous RNA polymerase subunits:
Most of the subunits of RNA polymerase are multi-domain
proteins. Two parameters were employed to estimate sequence
divergence: variability in composition and order of sequence
domains and percent sequence identity. Pfam [] domain
assignments of the different subunits of RNA polymerase
complex of bacterial organisms with known genome sequences
were extracted from the PRODOC [] database. Greater than
100 sequences were obtained for alpha (121), beta (138) and
betaprime (127) subunits each. 88 sequences were analyzed for
omega subunit. Only 43 sequences were considered for sigma
subunit, as only proteins assigned as sigma70, the generalpurpose
sigma factor were used in the analysis. The core
subunits of RNA polymerases from all phyla were aligned
using T-Coffee [], to calculate sequence identities.

Identification of interface and surface residues:
The interacting residues which are largely buried upon
complexation are considered as interacting residues. These
residues are identified on the basis of their residue surface
accessibility (RSA) values: residues with RSA ≥10% in the free
form (A) and RSA ≤7% in the bound form (AB) fulfill the
criteria []. The surface accessibility of residues in each subunit
was determined in two forms, free form and in complex with
another subunit, using NACCESS []. Surface residues were
extracted by considering those residues in the free form of the
subunit whose RSA ≥10% but which did not figure in the list of
interface residues.

Estimating the extent of conservation of different residue types:
The concept of Shannon Entropy (SE) was used to calculate the
entropy of all interface residue positions. Shannon information
analysis is a generalized mathematical tool to estimate
variability []. SE of a position (H) is calculated using the
formula: H= ­Σ P (i) * log2P (i) where H indicates SE of a
position, P(i) indicates frequency of occurrence of ‘i’ in that
position and ‘i‘ varies from 1 to 20 corresponding to 20 amino
acid types. Literature survey [] suggests the following
cutoffs for H: 0.00 ­ 1.00 ­ conserved; 1.00 – 2.00 ­ semiconserved.
Analysis of different parameters suggests that an
alignment containing ~100 sequences can be expected to be a
good representative of a protein family for estimating
variability using the Shannon measure. Around 130 sequences
of alpha, beta and betaprime subunits of eubacterial species
and 95 sequences of the omega subunit were used for the
analysis. The eubacterial homologues of each core subunit
were aligned using CLUSTALW []. Shannon entropy of
every position in the MSA was calculated using the formula
specified above.

Modeling and evaluation of interfaces of divergent RNA polymerases:
The pairwise alignments between template and model for each
of the subunits were generated using FUGUE 
[], PHYRE 
[]
and 3D-Coffee []. The alignments were manually analyzed
and refined where appropriate to arrive at a final alignment
which was used as the basis for modeling. For cases of low
sequence similarity between template and target sequences,
the alignment was carefully analyzed and modified to ensure
correspondence between observed and predicted secondary
structures, in order to generate good models. The subunits
were modeled individually using MODELLER []. Small
inserts were generated using the loop modeling module of
MODELLER []. The generated models were energy
minimized using the Kollman United force field in SYBYL
(Tripos Inc) to remove short contacts. After the individual
subunits are modeled, we assembled the different subunits to
form the RNA polymerase complex. Assuming that the
topology of interaction between the various RNA polymerase
subunits is preserved in all the eubacterial species (which
seems probable considering that even the prokaryotic and
eukaryotic RNA polymerase complexes retain the same
interaction topology between their core subunits), the modeled
subunits were assembled into a complex based on the layout of
the Thermus thermophilus complex as template. The program
SUPER (B.S. Neela, unpublished) was used to place the
individual modeled subunits in the same orientation and
location as they are present in the template. The entire complex
was again energy minimized using SYBYL to remove short
contacts.

The interface residues of every pairwise interface between the
different subunits of the template RNA polymerase complex
are extracted and its overall interface score calculated
according to the formula: Score = (Σnij * Rij )/ Tot_int where
Score = Overall score for the interface, nij = number of
interactions where amino acids i and j are in the environment
of each other, Rij = preference score for the case where amino
acids i and j are in the environment of each other calculated
from the reference non-redundant dataset (), Tot_int =
total number of interacting residues in the pair-wise interface.
The same process is repeated for all the interfaces of the RNA
polymerase subunits from the modeled complexes. Those
interfaces whose interface score falls within ±5% of the
interface score of the template are considered to be similar.

Discussion
Extent of sequence divergence of core RNA polymerase subunits:
The extent of sequence divergence in the four core subunits
among members of all kingdoms was studied using two
parameters: %sequence identity between homologous pairs
and variation in domain composition and order.

The lowest percent sequence identities for homologous
subunits across kingdoms are as follows: Alpha I (11%,
Nanoarchaeum equitans (archaea) – Synechochoccus sp
(eubacteria)), Alpha II (19%, Halobacterium sp (archaea) – Homo
sapiens (eukaryota)), Beta (21%, Bartonella henselae (archaea) –
Plasmodium falciparum (eukaryota)), Betaprime (20%,
Mycoplasma pulmonis (eubacteria) – Saccharomyces cerevisiae
(eukaryota)), Omega (8%, Methanococcus jannaschi (archaea) –
Candidatus Blochmannia floridanus (eubacteria)). These values
indicate the extensive sequence divergence of the subunits.
However, when we consider RNA polymerase homologues
only within the eubacterial species, the lowest percent
sequence identities are as follows: Alpha (24%, Helicobacter
pylori – Mycoplasma pulmonis), Beta (39%, Helicobacter hepaticus
– Mycoplasma pneumoniae), Betaprime (38%, Deinococcus
radiodurans – Mycoplasma pulmonis), and Omega (11%,
Candidatus Blochmannia floridanus – Treponema pallidum). In
eubacterial species, both alpha I and alpha II are identical.
Within the eubacterial kingdom, RNA polymerase complex
seems conserved, except for omega subunit, which shows
extensive divergence.

Further, the various sequence domains of the core subunits
were analyzed to determine whether any variability exists at
the level of the individual Pfam sequence domains (addition or
deletion of domains / difference in the order of domains),
which generally serve as independent evolutionary and
functional units. Analysis of the domain assignments reveals
that domains and their order are completely conserved in all
the subunits. Next, the interface residues for the various
subunits, extracted from the RNA polymerase holoenzyme
complex of Thermus thermophilus (PDB ID: 1IW7), were
mapped on to the sequences to get an idea of the extent of
participation of every sequence domain in interface formation.
For each sequence domain, its variation in the members of the
kingdom was analyzed in terms of its length in an attempt to
correlate the variation in length (indicating
insertions/deletions) with the extent/nature of the sequence
domain's participation in interaction with other subunits
(, see supplementary material).

The analysis indicates that no major insertions/deletions are
present in the alpha subunit or omega subunit. In the case of
sigma70 subunit, the Pfam-assigned domains for the sigma70
subunit of Thermus thermophilus are completely conserved.
However, many other sigma70 members contain two more
Pfam domains (which correspond mainly to unassigned region
in Thermus thermophilus). Both do not seem to be involved in
interface formation. The Pfam domain corresponding to region
1.1 of sigma70 factor (PF03979), found at N-terminus,
modulates DNA binding to region 2 and 4 of the same subunit
when RNA polymerase is not bound to the sigma70 subunit.
Another Pfam domain (PF04546), found in the primary
vegetative sigma factor, is a non-essential region. Huge
insertions/deletions are present in beta and betaprime
subunits, the best conserved of the RNA polymerase subunits,
even in domains involved in interaction with other subunits
(, italicized see supplementary material). This analysis
indicates that insertions and deletions are common in several
domains involved in interaction even in an evolutionarily well
conserved multi-molecular assembly like RNA polymerase,
corroborating other studies [].

Extent of conservation of interface residues of RNA polymerase subunits:
Based on the MSA of each of the four core enzymes, Shannon
Entropy (SE) was calculated for three categories of residues: all
(overall), interface and surface residues. Initially, % conserved
residues (see Methods) in a particular residue class (interface /
surface / overall) was calculated using SE method (,
see supplementary material). As expected, a higher
proportion of interface residues are conserved when compared
to surface residues or the whole protein. Also, surface residues
are slightly less conserved when compared to the whole
protein. The order of subunits in terms of the percent of
interface residues conserved is Beta &gt;~ Betaprime &gt; Alpha II
&gt; Alpha I &gt; Omega (, see supplementary material).
However, when we consider the Interface/Surface ratio, the
trends completely reverse. Omega subunit, which has the
lowest Overall and Surface conservation, has the highest
Interface/Surface ratio value. This is followed by Alpha I and
Alpha II, the subunits with intermediate % Overall
conservation, finally followed by Betaprime, Beta, and
Sigma70, the most conserved subunits. This trend is in keeping
with the fact that beta and betaprime should have more
conserved residues on the surface (apart from those involved
in interface formation), as the subunits are critical for catalysis,
DNA binding, RNA binding and substrate binding []. In
contrast, the main function of alpha and omega subunits seems
to be interaction with other core subunits to form RNA
polymerase assembly. This facet seems to be indicated by the
high Interface/Surface ratio of these more divergent subunits.
In summary, a larger proportion of interface residues of the
more divergent RNA polymerase subunits (alpha, omega) are
conserved than the rest of the surface in comparison to that of
the less divergent (beta, betaprime, sigma70) RNA polymerase
subunits.

Next, we analyzed the conservation of specific pair-wise
interfaces of RNA polymerase subunits using SE measure
(, see supplementary material). The trend seen from
the Interface/Surface values for the various pair-wise
interfaces corroborates the pattern seen for Overall Interface
residues. The more divergent subunits show better capability
to distinguish their interfaces rather than the more conserved
subunits. Another interesting observation from the analysis is
that although beta and betaprime are generally wellconserved,
the residues involved in interaction with the
divergent subunits are not well conserved (, see
supplementary material). In light of evidence that the interface
structure is maintained in evolution, this indicates that these
interacting positions, although not conserved, probably coevolve
to maintain the interface structure.

Modeling and evaluation of interfaces of three divergent eubacterial RNA polymerases:
From the preliminary analysis of the multiple sequence
alignment, it is evident that there exist cases of large insertions
and deletions near to the interface in even the most conserved
RNA polymerase subunits (beta and betaprime). Therefore, we
explored, using modeling, how insertions/deletions at the
interface (, see supplementary material) and
substitutions at the interface, which account for 30% (beta,
betaprime) - 85% (omega) changes in interface residues (
, see supplementary material), are accommodated in the
formation of the complex and evaluate the similarity of the
modeled interface with that of the template's interface (using
log-odds matrix, ). The species chosen for modeling
are: Helicobacter pylori, Onion yellow phytoplasma and
Mycoplasma pulmonis. These were chosen because they
contained the poorest %sequence identity (with respect to
majority of the RNA polymerase subunits) and contained some
interesting insertions/deletions near the interface. The RNA
polymerase holoenzyme complex of Thermus thermophilus
(PDB: 1IW7) solved at 2.6 Å was used as the template
structure. The sequence identities between template and target
sequences for all subunits are listed in (, see
supplementary material). The locations of the insertions /
deletions occurring in the sequences of the target subunits are
mapped onto the crystal structure of the template in .
We observe that some insertions and deletions (indicated using
arrows in ) occur near subunit-subunit interfaces.
However, all the insertions occur at the periphery of the
assembly, indicating that they can be accommodated in spite of
the large size.

The holoenzyme generated for the three organisms (see
organisms) was used for further analysis of the interfaces
formed between the different subunits in the modeled RNA
polymerase complex. The residues participating in interface
formation were extracted for both template and modeled
complexes using accessibility information (see Methods). All
the residues from the partner chain whose Cβ atom (Cα in case
the residue is glycine) is ≤9 Å from the Cα atom (Cα for Gly) of
the interface residue is considered to be in the environment of
the latter. Cβ-Cβ distance is chosen instead of atom-atom
distances as the latter parameter may not be reliable in case of
modeled structures due to inaccuracies in side-chain
positioning.

Figure 3a shows the distribution of the %surface contributed to
interface formation between various subunits of the RNA
polymerase complex. In the case of the betaprime-omega
interface, although similar surface area equivalent to one
observed in template structure is involved in interface
formation for Helicobacter pylori and Onion yellows phytoplasma,
this interface is absent in Mycoplasma pulmonis because the
omega subunit is absent in the latter. For the rest of the
pairwise interfaces, the %surface area contributed to interface
formation is almost similar to the area buried in the template
structure, indicating that similar sized interfaces have been
modeled. Slight variations can occur due to the small
insertions / deletions at interface regions. We also note that all
large insertions and deletions could be accommodated since
they occur on the periphery and would be amenable to
modeling if a suitable template was available for those regions.
Next, we compare if the modeled interfaces are physicochemically
similar to the corresponding interface in the
template structure.  depicts the comparison of overall
interface scores for the template and modeled RNA
polymerase interfaces. Apart from alpha II – betaprime
interface (of Helicobacter pylori) and sigma70 – beta interface of
(Onion yellows phytoplasma) , we see that the interface scores of
all other pairwise interfaces are similar to that of the
corresponding values in the template in most of the cases,
indicating that they are able to accommodate substitutions at
the interface. The smaller insertions and deletions were
modeled and do appear to be accommodated while
maintaining the physico-chemical complementarity of the
interface.

Conclusion
The structure of RNA polymerase assembly is retained during
the course of evolution. Although some of the core subunits of
RNA polymerase complex show high sequence divergence,
their interacting partners are retained. Furthermore, the
orientation of the interacting partners is also conserved. This
feature contrasts with the general behavior of homologous
proteins, which change their interacting partners during
extensive divergence. Analysis of domain composition and
order of the core subunits of the RNA polymerase assembly in
&gt;85 eubacterial species indicates complete conservation.
However, conservation analysis of the various core subunits
indicates that the interface residues are more divergent for
alpha and omega subunits. Although beta and betaprime are
generally well-conserved, the residues involved in interaction
with the divergent subunits (i.e. alpha, omega) are not
conserved. Insertions/deletions are also observed near the
interacting surfaces even in case of the most conserved
subunits (beta and betaprime). Using homology modelling of
three divergent RNA polymerase complexes, Helicobacter
pylori, Mycoplasma pulmonis and Onion yellows phytoplasma, we
observe that insertions/deletions can be accommodated near
the interface as they generally occur at the periphery. Using a
generalized matrix capturing preferences of interface
environment, we find that the modeled interfaces are physicochemically
similar to that of the template interfaces in Thermus
thermophilus, indicating that nature accommodates substantial
substitutions and indels at and near the interface in order to
retain the structure of the obligate complex, which is
indispensable for the process of transcription.

Supplementary material
Data 1
L.S.S is supported by the Mathematical Biology programme,
Department of Science and Technology grant. This research is
supported by the Mathematical Biology programme,
Department of Science and Technology, Department of
Biotechnology and Microsoft Corporation.

Citation:Swapna et al, Bioinformation 8(1): 006-012 (2012)

Log-odds matrix for determining preferred
environment of the 20 amino acids. The reference matrix to
indicate preferred environment of amino acids was generated
as follows: The list of all interacting domains was culled out
from SCOP 1.67 [], and a non-redundant dataset comprising
only one representative domain-domain entry for each SCOP
family (the pair with the best resolution was chosen) was
derived. The interacting residues in each complex were
identified using RSA cutoffs as defined in Methods section.
The residues in its environment were identified as those
occurring within a Cβ-Cβ distance of ≤9Å. From this dataset,
the preference for every amino acid to occur in the
environment of each of the other 20 amino acids was
calculated using the formula: Preferenceab=log2 (Pab/PaPb). The
symbols ‘a’ and ‘b’ represent 2 amino acids in the environment
of each other. Pab represents the observed probability of
occurrence of ‘a’ and ‘b’ in the environment of each other
(calculated from the dataset). PaPb represents the expected
probability of occurrence of ‘a’ and ‘b’ in the environment of
each other. This log-odds score gives an idea of the preference
of amino acid ‘a’ to be in the environment of amino acid ‘b’.
The preference score is calculated for each of the amino acid
pairs (210 pairs) and represented in the form of a 20*20 matrix.

Insertions and deletions in the subunits of a)
Helicobacter pylori b) Onion yellows phytoplasma and c)
Mycoplasma pulmonis mapped onto the crystal structure of the
macro-molecular assembly of RNA polymerase from Thermus
thermophilus (PDB:1IW7). The subunits are colored as follows:
alpha I (dark blue), alpha II (marine blue), beta (yellowish
orange), betaprime (red), omega (green), sigma70 (grey).
Regions containing small insertions in the subunits are
indicated as spheres colored according to the respective
subunit, regions containing large insertions are indicated as
black spheres and deletions are shown as large dotted spheres.
Insertions / deletions which occur close to subunit-subunit
interfaces are indicated using yellow arrows.

Assessing the similarity between interfaces of the
template and modeled holo-enzyme RNA polymerase
structures. Similarity is assessed using (a) %Total surface area
involved in interface formation (b) Interface score for all pairwise
interfaces in template (1IW7) and modeled structures.

