Background
Microarray is one such technology which enables the researchers to investigate
and address issues which were once thought to be non traceable by facilitating
the simultaneous measurement of the expression levels of thousands of genes
[,
]. 
A microarray is simply a glass slide on which DNA molecules are fixed
on an ordered manner at specific locations called spots or probes 
[]. The spots
are printed on the glass slide by different technologies such as
photolithography to robot spotting. The DNA in a spot may either be complete
copy of genomic DNA or short stretch of oligo-nucleotides that correspond to a
gene. A typical microarray platform and its architecture and flow of
experiential design and data analysis perspective are illustrated in 
.
Using microarrays one can analyze the expression of many genes in a single
reaction quickly and in an efficient manner. It has empowered the scientific
community to understand the fundamental aspects underlining the growth and
development of life as well as to explore the genetic causes of anomalies
occurring in the functioning of the human body. The core principle behind
microarrays is hybridization between two DNA strands, the property of
complementary nucleic acid sequences to specifically pair with each other by
forming hydrogen bonds between complementary nucleotide base pairs.
However, with the generation of large amounts of microarray data, it has
become increasingly important to address the challenges of data quality and
standardization related to this technology []. 
The recent advancement of the
microarray technology has allowed for a very high resolution mapping of
chromosomal aberrations with the use of their tiling array platform 
[].
Computational data analysis tasks such as data mining which includes
classification and clustering used to extract useful knowledge from microarray
data. In addition, relating gene expression data with other biological
information; it will provide kind of biological discoveries such as transcription
factor biding site analysis, pathway analysis, and protein- protein interaction
network analysis. In the present paper focus was given on biologist's
perspective to get knowledge about the several tools and programs available for
microarray data mining tasks. With this motivation at the end of each data
mining task, we provided the list the commonly available tools with its
underlying algorithms, web resources and relevant reference.

Microarray Data Analysis
Microarray data sets are commonly very large, and analytical precision is
influenced by a number of variables. So it is extremely useful to reduce the
dataset to those genes that are best distinguished between the two cases or
classes (e.g. normal vs. diseased). Such analyses produce a list of genes whose
expression is considered to change and known as differentially expressed
genes. Identification of differential gene expression is the first task of an in
depth microarray analysis []. 
There are two common methods for in depth
microarray data analysis, i.e. clustering and classification 
[]. Clustering is one
of the unsupervised approaches to classify data into groups of genes or samples
with similar patterns that are characteristic to the group. Classification is
supervised learning and also known as class prediction or discriminant
analysis. Generally, classification is a process of learning-from-examples.
Given a set of pre-classified examples, the classifier learns to assign an unseen
test case to one of the classes.

Identification of Differentially Expressed Genes
Differentially expressed genes are the genes whose expression levels are
significantly different between two groups of experiments 
[]. The genes are
relevant for discovering potential drug targets and biomarkers. In the earlier
stage, simple “fold change” approach was used to find differences under
assumption that changes above some threshold, (For example, two-fold) were
biologically significant. There are several univariate statistical methods were
used later to determine either the expression or relative expression of a gene
from normalized microarray data, including t tests 
[], modified t-test known as
SAM [], two-sample t tests 
[], F-statistic 
[] and Bayesian models 
[].
For more complex datasets with multiple classes, Analysis of Variance
(ANOVA) techniques were used []. Various software packages have been
developed and available to identify changes in expression using the above
statistical methods. The commonly used and freely available programs with its
underlying algorithm are illustrated in (see ).

Cluster Analysis
Clustering is the most popular method currently used in the first step of gene
expression data matrix analysis. It is used for finding co-regulated and
functionally related groups []. 
Clustering is particularly interesting in the
cases when we have complete sets of an organism's genes. There are three
common types of clustering methods (i.e.) hierarchical clustering, k-means
clustering and self-organizing maps. Hierarchical clustering is a commonly
used unsupervised technique that builds clusters of genes with similar patterns
of expression []. 
This is done by iteratively grouping together genes that are
highly correlated in terms of their expression measurements, then continuing
the process on the groups themselves. It is a method of cluster analysis which
seeks to build a hierarchy of clusters. A dendrogram represents all genes as
leaves of a large, branching tree. The number and size of expression patterns
within a data set can be estimated quickly, although the division of the tree into
actual clusters is often performed visually. It generally falls into two categories
(i.e.) agglomerative and divisive. Agglomerative is a bottom up approach
where each observation starts in its own cluster and pairs of clusters are merged
as one moves up the hierarchy. Divisive is a top down approach i.e., all
observations start in one cluster and splits are performed recursively as one
moves down the hierarchy.

K-means clustering is a data mining/machine learning algorithm used to cluster
observations into groups of related observations without any prior knowledge
of those relationships []. 
It is one of the simplest clustering techniques and it
is commonly used in medical imaging and biometrics. The K-means clustering
algorithm typically uses the Euclidean properties of the vector space. After the
initial partitioning of the vector space into K parts, the algorithm calculates the
center points in each subspace and adjusts the partition so that each vector is
assigned to the cluster the center of which is the closest. This is repeated
iteratively until either the partitioning stabilizes or the given number of
iterations is exceeded []. 
A self-organizing map (SOM) is a neural networkbased
non-hierarchal clustering approach. (SOMs) work in a manner similar to
K-means clustering []. 
The commonly used and freely available programs
for clustering analysis are illustrated in (see ).

Classification
Classification is also known as class prediction, discriminant analysis, or
supervised learning. Given a set of pre-classified examples, (for example,
different types of cancer classes such as AML and ALL) a classifier will a find
a rule that will allow to assign new samples to one of the above classes 
[].
For classification task, one must have sufficient sample numbers to allow an
algorithm to be trained known as training test and then to have it tested on an
independent set of samples known as test set. Using normalized gene
expression data as input vectors, classification rules can be built. There are a
wide range of algorithms that can be used for classification, including k
Nearest Neighbors (kNN), Artificial Neural Networks, weighted voting and
support vector machines (SVM). The promising application of classification is
in clinical diagnostics to find disease types and sub types. Popular examples
includes finding classes of leukemia (ALL or AML) 
[], five classes of brain
tumor (MD classis, MD desmoplastic, PNET, rhabdoide, glioblastoma) 
[]
and four classes of lymphoma []. The general data mining and machine
learning application tools are used for classification tasks are illustrated in the
Table 3 (see ).

Knowledge Discovery with Microarray Data
Classification, clustering and identification of differential genes can be
considered as basic microarray data analysis tasks with gene expression
profiles alone. However, Gene expression profiles can be linked to other
external resources to make new discoveries and knowledge. Some of the
common applications that addressed with gene expression data with other
biomedical information are discussed below.

Identification of transcription factor binding sites
The identification of functional elements such as transcription-factor binding
sites (TFBS) on a whole-genome level is the next challenge for genome
sciences and gene-regulation studies. Transcription factors act as critical
molecular switches in the gene expression profiling. Transcription factors play
a prominent role in transcription regulation; identifying and characterizing their
binding sites is central to annotating genomic regulatory regions and
understanding gene-regulatory networks []. Various groups have exploited
this problem and discovered putative binding sites in the promoter regions of
genes that are co-expressed []. Some of common tools for transcription
factor binding site prediction and underlying algorithm are illustrated in Table
4 (see ).

Protein-protein interaction network and pathway analysis
Protein-protein interactions (PPI) are useful tools for investigating the cellular
functions of genes. It is a core of the entire interactomics system of any living
cell. PPI improves our understanding of diseases and can provide the basis for
new therapeutic approaches []. Several databases that have been developed
to store protein interactions such as the Biomolecular Interaction Database
(BIND) [], 
Database of Interacting Proteins (DIP) [], IntAct 
[], STRING
[] and the Molecular Interaction Database (MINT) 
[]. Combining coexpressed
as well as interacting genes in the same cluster several meaningful
predictions related to gene functions, evolutionary prelateships and pathways
can be made []. 
Obviously, the next promising method for analyzing
microarray data is pathway analysis as it involves the cascade of network
interactions. Analyzing the microarray data in a pathway perspective could lead
to a higher level of understanding of the system []. 
This integrates the normalized array data and their annotations, such as metabolic pathways and
gene ontology and functional classifications. Metabolic pathway analysis can
identify more subtle changes in expression than the gene lists that result from
univariate statistical analysis []. There are several web based tools and
academic softwares are available to predict protein interactions and pathways
from microarray data and are tabulated in Table 5 (see ).

Gene set enrichment analysis
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) is a computational method that
determines whether a set of genes shows statistically significant and concordant
differences between two biological states. The gene sets are defined based on
prior biological knowledge, e.g., published information about biochemical
pathways, located in the same cytogenetic band, sharing the same Gene
Ontology category, or any user-defined set. The goal of GSEA is to determine
whether members of a gene set tend to occur toward the top (or bottom) of the
list, in which case the gene set is correlated with the phenotypic class
distinction []. 
The freely available software packages for gene enrichment
are illustrated in Table 6 (see ).

Conclusion
DNA Microarray is a revolutionary technology and microarray experiments
produce considerably more data than other techniques. Integrating gene
expression data with other biomedical resources will provide new mechanistic
or biological hypotheses. However, innovative statistical techniques and
computing software are essential for the successful analysis of microarray data.
This review shows the current bioinformatics tools and the promising
applications for analyzing data from microarray experiments. The various data
analysis perspectives and softwares mentioned in the paper will help the
biological expertise as a good foundation for computational analysis of
microarray data.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank our lab members for valuable comments.

Citation:Selvaraj &amp; Natarajan, Bioinformation 6(3): 95-99 (2011)

(a) A typical microarray platform and its architecture (b) Flow of typical microarray experimental design and data analysis perspectives

