Background
Ginger (Zingiber officinale Rosc.) of the family Zingiberaceae is a
significant tropical crop plant esteemed all over the world as
the second most important spice and for its unique medicinal
properties [,
]. Ginger rhizome has several implementations
in traditional systems of medicine, including ayurveda, chinese
medicine, and western herbal medicine. It is conventionally
used in the treatment of a wide array of ailments such as
common cold, flu like symptoms, headaches, digestive
disorders as well as muscular and rheumatic disorders [,
]. It
is important to emphasize its richness in a series of secondary
metabolites including volatile and non-volatile phenolic
compounds, the major ones possessing pungent characteristics
which are responsible for the pharmacological activities of
ginger. Gingerol is one of the most significant series of pungent
oleoresin compounds. They are reported to possess essential
physiological and pharmacological roles, despite which
relatively little is known regarding its genome and gene
expression patterns. Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs) are direct
evidences of gene expression and can provide useful resource
for novel gene discovery, especially in non-model plants 
[].
EST database can be exploited for identifying and developing
molecular markers such as SSRs, gene discovery, genome
annotation and comparative genome analysis [,
].
Comparative approaches based on ESTs derived from various
kinds of tissues could significantly expedite gene discovery and
genetic variations that may account for specific characteristics
[,
]. EST analysis also offer unique opportunities to elucidate
the genes involved in biosynthetic pathways and the enzymes
involved in pathways of secondary metabolite synthesis and
manipulation []. Genes encoding enzymes involved in the
biosynthesis of glycyrrhizin, ginsenosides, with anolides were
successfully identified using EST analysis [,
,
].

Despite the medicinal values of Zingiber officinale, information
regarding its genome and transcriptome is limited. Many of the
enzymes involved in biosynthesis of gingerol have not yet been
identified. Here we describe the analysis of over 35,000 ESTs
from rhizomes, leaves and roots that are available in dbEST
(database of Expressed Sequence Tags). Functional annotations
of ESTs were performed using BLASTn, BLASTx [], Gene
Ontology (GO) [] and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and
Genomes (KEGG) [] resources. Transcriptome similarity
analysis between ginger and other plant species, identification
of genes involved in gingerol biosynthesis and Simple
Sequence Repeats (SSR) analysis were also performed.

Methodology
Data generation and EST pre-processing:
A total of 38,169 expressed sequence tags from different tissues
including leaf, rhizome and root deposited in NCBI
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) EST database was obtained
through keyword search (‘Zingiber officinale’, ‘Rhizome’, ‘Root’,
‘Leaf’). Raw EST sequences contain contaminants such as poly
A/T tail, low complexity sequences, vector sequences etc. The
ESTs were thus pre-processed to generate unigene dataset
which contains a set of non-redundant sequences composed of
singletons and contigs. Different steps required for sequence
processing integrated on a web server, EGassembler [] were
used for the generation of unigene dataset. ESTs obtained from
different tissues were subjected to the server with default
parameters. The sequences were cleaned, followed by masking
of low quality sequence, removal of repetitive elements and
organelle sequence masking. Pre-processed sequences were
then assembled into 8624 contigs and 8821 singletons using
CAP3 [] software 
().

Functional analysis:
Blast2GO (B2GO), [] comprehensive software for sequence
analysis was used for the functional annotation of ginger ESTs.
Putative functions were analyzed by performing blastx against 
non-redundant protein sequence database. For further
perception of the functional classification, the EST contigs were
submitted to Gene Ontology analysis (GO). Cellular
component, biological process, and molecular function were
classified for these contigs. Unigenes were further subjected to
pathway analysis using KEGG. InterPro Scan [] embedded
with B2GO was utilized to obtain the protein domain
information for the putative sequences.

SSR detection:
Simple Sequence Repeats (SSRs) analysis on contigs of ginger
was performed using SSR Finder from GRAMENE
(ftp://ftp.gramene.org/ pub/gramene/software/scripts/
ssr.pl). The parameters were set for detection of di-, tri-, tetra-,
penta-, and hexa-nucleotide units with a minimum of six, five,
four, four and four repeats respectively []. Primer pairs for
each detected SSR were designed using Eprimer3 from
EMBOSS software packages (http://emboss.sourceforge.net/).
Parameters used to design flanking primers were primer length
18 to 24 nt with an optimum of 20 nt, annealing temperature
with optimum 60°C, GC content ranging from 40 to 60% with
an optimum 50% [].

Identification of novel miRNAs:
Raw EST sequences from Zingiber officinale and EST contigs
obtained after data preprocessing were combined to form the
subject dataset. All known Viridiplantae miRNAs from the
publicly available EST database, miRBase (Release 20: June
2013, http://www.mirbase.org/) 
[] was used as a reference
set and performed homology searches using blastn. Blast
parameter settings were as follows: expect value - 0.01; the
maximum number of alignments -100. Python script was
developed for the identification of miRNAs. EST sequences
with n/n, n-1/n and n-2/n nucleotide mismatches were
identified and retained for further analysis. A 60-400 nt sliding
window was chosen to predict the secondary structure of premiRNAs
using mfold algorithm (~14000 bp for each EST). If the
length of EST sequence is &lt;400nt then the whole sequence was
taken as the candidate to check whether it is a miRNA
precursor. Blastx was performed on these sequences to remove
the protein coding sequences. The pre-miRNA secondary
structure was predicted by using RNAfold 
(http://rna.tbi.univie.ac.at/cgi-bin/RNAfold.cgi) 
[] by applying
default parameters. The predicted hairpin-like structures were
further assessed for their MFE, GC content, homology with
mature miRNA sequence and ensured that the miRNA:
miRNA* duplexes had less than 4 mismatches and it should
arise from opposite arms and is present completely in the
opposite arm. To ensure the stem-loop precursor could be
precisely processed into mature miRNA, the predicted
structures were examined according to the following criteria:
(1) An appropriate stem-loop structure can be assigned to the
secondary structure; (2) The presence of mature miRNA
sequence in one arm of the hairpin; (3) &lt;=3 nucleotide
substitutions when compared with existing miRNA; (4) &lt; 6
mismatches with miRNA* of the opposite arm; (5) No loops
should be present in miRNA*; (6) Predicted secondary
structures should have minimal folding free energy (MFE).

Database construction:
Raw ESTs, assembled data and annotation results were
integrated into a web based database GINGEREST. Front end 
and backend were created using PhP and MySQL5.0
respectively. GINGEREST database was deployed on Apache
HTTP server and runs on a server managed by the Windows
operating system.

Results &amp; Discussion
Assembly and annotation of EST׳s:
A total of 38,169 ginger (Zingiber officinale) ESTs from different
tissues were downloaded from NCBI. The largest library of EST
fragments was obtained from ginger leaf. Out of these EST
sequences, 8624 contigs (unique sequences) were obtained after
removing the non-informative sequence stretches. The CAP3
results included 8624 contigs and 8821 singlets. In order to
capture the most informative and putative functions of ginger
ESTs, all unique sequences were annotated using blastx against
public non-redundant protein (nr) in NCBI using an E-value
cutoff of 1e-15 and a maximum of 20 BLAST hits per sequence.
Majority of BLASTX hits for sequences were from the following
plants: Vitis vinifera, Populus trichocarpa, Oryza sativa, Zea mays,
Brachypodium distachyon, Ricinus communis, Sorghum bicolour,
Glycine max.

Functional analysis based on Gene Ontology:
Gene Ontology annotation provides description of genes in
terms of their associated molecular functions, cellular
components, and biological processes. Functional classifications
of ESTs in terms of gene ontology were retrieved for 8624
contigs using Gene Ontology (GO) analysis. GO term provides
a broad overview of the groups of genes cataloged in the 
transcriptome. The total EST sequences were found coding for
2356 cellular compounds (CC), 928 molecular functions (MF),
and 7258 biological processes (BP). Of these EST sequences, 640
were mapped under CC and MF, 2539 were mapped under CC
and BP, 1511 were mapped under BP and MF and 4474 EST
sequences were annotated according to all the three GO
vocabularies. All annotations were simplified using plantspecific
GOslim. EST contigs were grouped with respect to their
GO terms, belonging to only one, a combination of two, or all
three, and were organized in a venn diagram. A large number
of unique sequences were found mapped under molecular
functions such as binding, catalytic activity, nucleotide binding,
protein binding, and transferase activity. The second most
represented category was biological processes, including
unique sequences associated with cellular process, response to
stress, biosynthetic process, biological process, response to
abiotic stress, transport and metabolic process. Finally, the
cellular compound category was mapped for plasma
membrane, plastid, cytoplasm, mitochondria, cytosol, and
nucleus. According to annotation classification, the largest
cellular component found for ginger ESTs was from plasmid
(15.33%) and the smallest were from golgi apparatus and
endoplasmic reticulum (2%). The majority of molecular
functions identified were associated with binding (16.7%) and 
catalytic activities (15.67%). The major biological processes
were involved in cellular process (16.7%), response to stress
(9.67%) and biosynthetic process (8.67%) ().

Protein family and functional domains:
Annotation of EST sequences involves the identification of
protein coding regions. InterPro Scan combines different
protein family and domain signature identification method and
can be used for the prediction of protein function. All
sequences were subjected to InterPro Scan to identify functional
domains associated with ginger EST sequences. InterPro Scan
associated with Blast2GO was able to assign InterPro ID to 6071
sequences out of 8624 contigs whereas 2553 sequences were left
without domain mapping. Gene ontology and protein domain
information was obtained for 3021 ESTs, while 3050 ESTs were
mapped by InterPro but not to a specific GO. Our analysis
included secondary protein database like Pfam, SMART,
Gene3D, PROFILE, ProDom, SUPERFAMILY, PANTHER, PIR,
and TIGR. Along with functional and structural annotation of
protein sequences, InterProScan incorporates prediction of
signal peptide sequences (SignalP) and transmembrane helices
(TMHMM).

Biochemical analysis based on KEGG pathways:
KEGG is one of the most accessible biochemical pathway
databases that provide functional annotation of genes
according to their associated biochemical pathways. Putative
Zingiber officinale transcripts from rhizome, root and leaf were
subjected to search against KEGG database for annotations
based on similarity search yielding KEGG enzyme commission
(EC) number and pathway map. KEGG annotations were
assigned to ESTs derived from Rhizome (395), Root (288), and
Leaf (393) of which only 115 (Rhizome), 117 (Root) and 112
(Leaf) respective sequences were assigned to biochemical
pathways. The metabolic pathways were well represented
among unique sequences of Zingiber officinale, most of which
were associated with amino acid metabolism, carbohydrate
metabolism, lipid metabolism, energy metabolism, and the
biosynthesis of secondary metabolites.

Genes involved in Gingerol Biosynthesis:
Gingerols were identified as the major bioactive components in
ginger rhizome and 6-gingerol is the most abundant constituent
in the gingerol series. Biosynthesis of gingerol takes place
through phenylpropanoid pathway. ESTs involved in
phenylpropanoid pathway and gingerol biosynthesis pathway
were identified from the ginger transcriptome (Rhizome, Root
and Leaf) using in silico approaches. ESTs encoding enzymes
associated with phenylpropanoid pathway, including
phenylalanine ammonia lyase, polyketide synthases, pcoumaroyl
shikimate transferase, p-coumaroyl quinate
transferase, caffeic acid O-methyltransferase, and caffeoyl-CoA
O-methyltransferase were observed in the sequences.
Phenylalanine ammonia lyase, the most extensively studied
enzyme in the phenylpropanoid pathway and it is the entry
point into the potential pathways leading to the formation of
gingerols []. Phenylalanine ammonia lyase ESTs were found
in ginger root alone and was not found in rhizome and leaf.
Caffeoyl-CoA O-methyltransferase (CCOMT) ESTs were found
in all the three tissues. Cinnamate 4-hydroxylase ESTs were
most abundantly found in all tissues among the
phenylpropanoid pathway enzymes. The pathway enrichment
analysis of ginger ESTs based on KEGG annotation revealed
1,075 contigs involved in 345 different pathways. Out of the
1,075 contigs, 11 contigs were involved particularly in gingerol
biosynthesis. Contigs encoding enzymes involved in the
biosynthesis of gingerol is depicted in  (see
supplementary material).

SSR detection:
Simple Sequence Repeats or SSRs are tandem repeats of a
stretch of 2 to 6 nucleotide units and are important molecular
markers being utilized in crop improvement programme. A
total of 409 SSRs were identified from the three tissues, 
rhizome, root and leaf. Trinucleotide SSRs were found larger in
number in rhizome whereas dinucleotide SSRs were found
more in leaf. The dominant motifs are TA/GGC/TC in leaf
contigs, CT/AT/GCC/GAA in rhizome and TA/CT/TC in
root contigs  (see supplementary material).

Identification of novel miRNA:
Scanning of ESTs for miRNAs revealed 4456 pre-miRNA
sequences. Structures with minimal free energy and geometry
were filtered and further optimized. A single possible miRNA
was mapped to be present in rhizome tissue with MFE= -
122.50 kcal/mol from a pre-miRNA sequence of length 259nt.
The modelled miRNA structure along with the positional
entropy of the pre-miRNA is described in . Further
target prediction was performed to see whether they regulate
any significant genes involved in gingerol biosynthesis.
However no genes were found to be targeted. The predicted
miRNA obtained after computational analysis is to be validated
experimentally.

Web based GINGEREST database:
Ginger ESTs and its annotations were integrated into a webbased
knowledge base in order to make the data widely
available. Annotation results include contigs, blast results, Gene
Ontology analysis, pathway maps and Simple Sequence
Repeats for the three tissues, leaf, rhizome and root. Raw ESTs,
assembled data and annotation results can be accessed freely
through the web interface (http://www.kaubic.in/gingerest).

Conclusion
Despite recent improvements in modern medicine, there is a
growing interest in herbal drugs due to the undesired side
effects. Gingerol obtained from Zingiber officinale is a widely
used phytocompound that has profound physiological effects.
The study aims at mining the major genes involved in gingerol
biosynthesis pathway in a leaf, root and rhizome. The
annotation of ESTs from Zingiber officinale was performed using
computational methods. A total of 8624 assembled contigs have
been successfully annotated and the genes involved in the
gingerol synthesis were predicted. Out of the 8624 assembled
contigs, 11 contigs were involved particularly in gingerol
biosynthesis. The genes were further checked for the presence
of regulatory miRNAs revealing one hypothetical miRNA
wholes role might be significant in controlling gene expression
in rhizome tissue. This analysis provides significant resources
for gene discovery as well as identification of novel RNAs in
gene silencing in Zingiber officinale and will pave the way to
characterize the biosynthetic pathways of gingerol. The 
analytical results on ginger ESTs such as similarity search, gene
ontology, pathway analysis and SSRs are integrated into a user
friendly freely available web based database to share the
transcriptomic data, gingerest.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This project was supported by the Department of
Biotechnology (DBT), Government of India.

Citation:James et al, Bioinformation 11(6): 316-321 (2015)

Schematic representation of the functional analysis
pipeline for ginger EST pre-processing and database
construction

Percentage of unigenes from ginger ESTs involved in gene Ontologies. (A) Molecular Function (B) Biological Process (C)
Cellular Component.

Predicted mature miRNA sequence from pre-miRNA in Zingiber officianale. (a) Mature miRNA sequence based paired
with miRNA* (b) Positional entropy of each base in the pre-miRNA.

