Background
Intensification of agriculture and manufacturing industries has
resulted in increased release of a wide range of dangerous and
harmful byproducts, xenobiotic compounds and toxic waste to
the environment named pollutants, a type of diversified
problem and a big challenge of living being. In which
halogenated organic compounds are one of the largest
groups of environmental pollutants, and accordingly
dehalogenases that catalyze the degradation of these
compounds attract a great deal of attention from the viewpoint
of environmental technology. Beside it 2-Haloacid
dehalogenases are also useful for the production of optically
active 2-hydroxyal kanoic acids and 2-haloalkanoic acids,
which are used as chiral synthons in chemical industry 
[,
].
Relationship between structures and functions of haloacid
dehalogenases is interesting not only from the view point of
basic enzymology, but also from the point of view of the
molecular design of dehalogenases showing more efficient
catalysis. In the biosphere Burkholderia sp. is one of versatile,
gram-negative bacteria. They have been isolated in various
niches including soil, water, plants, the rhizosphere and
animals including humans. Burkholderia cepacia strains have
been shown to be plant and/or animal pathogens, and yet they
have also been found to possess antibacterial and antifungal
activity. Moreover, they have also been shown to be involved in
the bioremediation of many types of environmental pollutants
[–] due to the presence of the enzyme haloacid dehalogenase.
Haloacids are metabolic products of naturally occurring
compounds and are also disinfection by-products of sewage
and water. It has been shown that some haloacids are toxic and
mutagenic. Microorganisms capable of degrading these
haloacids can be found in the natural environment. One of
these, a soil-borne Burkholderia mallei posses the ability to grow
on monobromoacetate (MBA). This bacterium produces a
haloacid dehalogenase that allows the cell to grow on MBA, a
highly toxic and mutagenic environmental pollutant.

Structure elucidation is an expensive and time consuming
process and also requires extensive expertise. Currently used
techniques to reveal 3D structures are X-ray crystallography
and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Imaging. Due to the
techniques being expensive and time consuming, there has been
an increasing gap of information between DNA/protein
sequence information and structure information.
Computational methods and molecular dynamic simulations
are good alternatives to overcome these problems in protein
structure prediction []. Comparative modeling is a
computational technique for 3D structure prediction of proteins
using known structures as templates []. Hence, the adopted
approach enables to formulate a structure from an amino acid
sequence in less time. Our current study describes the 3D model
of the haloacid dehalogenase protein obtained through
homology modelling. In addition, primary and secondary
structure analysis, sub-cellular localization prediction was also
performed and is explained.

Methodology
Sequence retrieval and Physico-chemical Analysis:
The amino acid sequence of haloacid dehalogenase protein was
retrieved from the NCBI database (http//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/)
imported to pBlast search against PDB (Protein data bank) for
sequence identity cut off for homology modeling.
Physiochemical characterization, theoretical isoelctric point (pI),
total number of positive and negative residues, extinction
coefficient [], and instability index 
[], half life time, aliphatic
index [] and grand average hydopathy (GRAVY) 
[] were
computed using Expasy'sProt-Param server []. The sulphide
(S-S) bond pattern is predicted by using the tool CYS_REC
(http://linux1.softberry.com/berry.phtml?topic).

Secondary Structure Prediction and Homology Modeling:
Secondary structural features of considered protein sequences
was predicted by employing Accelry's Discovery Studio
visualize 2.5, a new highly accurate secondary structure
prediction method. The 3-dimensional structural prediction was
carried out by iterative threading assembly refinement (ITASSER)
server (http://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/ITASSER/).
I-TASSER is a platform for automated protein
structure and function prediction based on the sequence to
structure to function paradigm. Visualization and structure
Decipherization of target proteins were carried out by studio
visualize 2.5 software.

Model evaluation functional Site Prediction:
An assessment of how well the final model (or ensemble of
models) compares with the experimental data, is an essential
part of the structure validation process. It was done by
PROCHECK; verify 3-D and Prosa,
(http://www.came.sbg.ac.at/typo3/index.php?) the best validation
and evaluation server. Functional site prediction was carried
out by employing the Q-site Finder and accurate protein
function was assessed by 3D2GO
(http://www.sbg.bio.ic.ac.uk/phyre/pfd/index.html)

Phylogenetic Analysis:
Phylogenetics of haloacid dehydrogenase of Burkholderia mallei
was performed in this study to assess the evolutionary
relatedness among the different species as well as genus. The
haloacid dehydrogenase protein sequences were retrieving
from NCBI database. Alignment and evolutionary analysis
through phylogram was performed by MEGA version 4.0 
[]

Discussion
The present study focused on structural analysis of an
important biodegrading protein of Burkholderia mallei named
haloacid dehalogenase protein. ProtParam was used to analyze
different physiochemical properties from the amino acid
sequence. The haloacid dehalogenase protein contains 346
amino acids, with a molecular weight of 37141.3 Daltons. Total
number of negatively charged and positively charged residues
is 37 and 43respectively, which show the basic nature of
protein. The predicted molecular formula of haloacid
dehalogenase is C1643H2597N495O469S11 contain 2652 bond in
which 1994 single bond, 392 double bond, 152 Partial Double
and 120 aromatic bond are present. The isoelectric point of
haloacid dehalogenase is 9.29 which is above 7 indicates that a
positive charge protein corresponds to having more positive
charge residues, and an instability index of 46.83 suggest an
unstable protein. The negative GRAVY index of -0.075 is
indicative of a hydrophilic and soluble protein. The protein
sequence was found to be rich in the amino acid leucine,
suggesting a preference for α–helices in 3D structure. The
sulphide (S-S) bond pattern is predicted by employing the tool
CYS_REC (http://linux1.softberry.com/berry.phtml?topic) has
shown that haloacid dehalogenase protein has 4 cysteines in
positions 4, 94,288 and 303, but have no S-S bonding. This result
shows that the target protein residue have low enthalpy at
folded state because disulphide bond increase the enthalpy of
the folded state by stabilizing local interactions and lack of
enhancer against proteases because disulphide bonds
maintaining the integrity of a protein structure against local
unfolding events.

Secondary structure analysis was performed using Studio
Visualizer and the protein was predicted to contain 149 Coil,
170 helix and 27 Beta sheet that consistent with protParam
results (). The high percentage of helices in the
structure makes the protein more flexible for folding, which
might increase protein interactions. Homology modeling has
been carried out by the I-TASSER server. BLASTp search
against the PDB database identified 2no4B is a best template as
it shows maximum identity to query sequence of the domain.
Ten models were obtained in which the best model was selected
based on discrete optimized protein energy (DOPE). Model
visualization and contact map development was done by Studio
visualizer. The predicted 3D structure of as shown in 
() has been evaluated by several structure assessment
methods including RMSD value, PROCHEK, verify 3-D and
Prosa server. The RMSD value were found to be 14.7+-3.6,
indicates the degree to which 3D structure was calculated by
superimposing template and query structure. Finally
Ramachandran plots were obtained for the quality assessment
of generated model. in case of haloacid dehalogenase
PROCHECK displayed 83.5% of residues in the most favorable
regions, with 11.0% additional allowed region and generously
allowed and disallowed regions respectively (Data not shown)
The comparable Ramachandran plot characteristics, RMSD
values and verify 3-d score confirm the quality of the homology
model of haloacid dehalogenase. The predicted 3D structure of
haloacid dehalogenase were submitted to the protein Model
Database (PMBD) and assigned the PMBD ID PM0078397.

The consensus protein sub-cellular localization predictions
suggest that dehalogenase protein is a periplasmic protein. The
function of modeled haloacid dehalogenase protein of
Burkholderia mallei was determined by 3D2GO server,
suggesting that it is mainly employed in metabolic process
followed by hydrolase activity and catalytic activity (Score 0.97,
0.96 and 0.80. Q-Site Finder server has been predicted the 25
functional sites including LEU10, VAL11, GLU14, ALA15,
GLY16, LEU17, PHE19, MET31, SER32, AP33, GLY34, ARG35,
PHE38, TRY53, ALA55, VAL56, LEU57, ARG58, TRP265,
PRO217, ASP218, ARG312, ALA313, ASP336 and ILE 338. This
result provides the abyssal information of the function of the
haloacid dehalogenase protein. We have retrieved the protein
sequence to display the greater evolutionary depth and
relatedness of haloacid dehalogenase protein among the species
as well as genus. Regarding this 37 different protein sequence
was downloaded from NCBI and aligned through ClustalW
program. Alligned file is then imported to MEGA version 4.0 to
develop the phylogenetic tree. The generated dendogram
() has been separated in three major clusters shown that
haloacid dehydrogenase is a very diverse protein among the
bacteria. Protein interactions have also been predicted on the
basis of the comparison of evolutionary histories, or
phylogenetic trees, under the premise that interacting proteins
are subject to similar evolutionary pressures resulting in similar
topologies for the corresponding trees [].

We would like to express special gratitude to Dr. S.S Dhondge ,
Principal S.K Porwal College, Kamptee, for his inspiration and
constant support.

Citation:Rai et al, Bioinformation 8(22): 1111-1113 (2012)

(A) Secondry and (B) Tertiary structure of Haloacid
dehalogenase protein (PMDB Identifier code PM0078397).

Phylogenetic tree of Haloacid dehalogenase

