Background
Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) play central roles 
in the signaling network as terminal components of MAPK 
cascades, which are composed of at least three sequentially 
activated MAPK family modules MAP3Ks (for MAPK kinase 
kinase), MAP2Ks (for MAPK kinase), and MAPKs 
[]. The 
MAPKs are known to regulate a myriad of physiological and 
developmental responses such as cell growth, cell 
differentiation, hormone signaling, pathogen infection, 
wounding, drought, low temperature, high salinity etc. 
[]. 
Although very little is known about MAPK's downstream 
targets but despite this gap in our knowledge it is clear that 
MAPKs interact with the transcription factors []. Five major 
families of plant transcription factors, including bZIP, WRKY, 
MYB, EREBF and homeodomain protein, have been shown to 
play roles in the regulation of the plant defense response 
[]. 
Generally, it is believed that the WRKY family of transcription 
factors plays major roles in plant responses to biotic and 
abiotic stresses and during development [–]. WRKY proteins 
constitute an important link between pathogen-activated 
MAPK signaling pathways and downstream transcriptional 
programming. WRKY proteins are characterized by a stretch of 
the amino acids tryptophan (W), arginine (R), lysine (K), and 
tyrosine (Y), followed by a typical zinc-finger domain, and 
constitutes a large class of DNA-binding proteins in plants 
[]. 
WRKY proteins bind W-box sequences (TTGACC/T) in the 
promoter region of target genes []. It is difficult to identify the 
downstream interacting partners or the substrates of MAPKs, 
primarily because MAPK-substrate interactions are very 
transient and unstable. Many experimental methods have been 
developed to study the protein-protein interactions including 
yeast two hybrid systems, affinity purification followed by 
mass spectrometry and the phage display libraries, but these 
methods have its own limitations and suffer from high false 
positive rate []. 
In order to overcome these limitations in silico 
studies has been carried out. For studying protein –protein 
interactions in silico “Docking” strategy is extensively used in 
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling 
[–]. 
Regulation of protein activity is required for functional 
signaling pathways and metabolism. Protein interactions can 
be regulated by post-translational modifications. Protein 
phosphorylation is one of the most common posttranslational
modifications in eukaryotic organisms and is involved in 
almost all cell biological processes. The phosphorylation of 
serine, threonine and tyrosine residues can affect protein 
structure, enzymatic activity and subcellular localization, 
interaction with other proteins as well as it is crucial in signal 
transduction []. In eukaryotes MAPKs are catalytically 
inactive in their base state and require phosphorylation. The 
dual-specificity MAP2Ks phosphorylate MAPKs on both 
serine/threonine and tyrosine residues in the activation loop 
[]. Once activated, MAPKs phosphorylate many 
evolutionarily diverged substrates on serine or threonine 
residues within a minimal S/T-P motif [–]. To mimic this 
regulation activity we phosphorylated the BjMPK3 protein at 
threonine (196) and tyrosine (198) residue in TEY motif located 
in the activation loop (T-loop). In an effort to better understand 
the protein-protein interactions, we have generated a protein –
protein network based on docking approach to predict the 
downstream interacting WRKY proteins in Brassica with 
BjMPK3P.

Methodology
The sequences for WRKY transcription factors were 
downloaded from BRAD (Brassica database 
[] for Brassica 
rapa WRKY TF (BrWRKY), from Brassica genome gataeway 
[] 
for Brassica napus WRKY TF (BnWRKY) and the sequence of 
Brassica juncea (BjMPK3-KF420418) is downloaded from NCBI 
[] in FASTA format. Homology modeling of the BjMPK3 and 
WRKY transcription factors was done with the help of MOE 
(Molecular Operating Environment). For constructing the 
structures of all, a template for homology modeling was 
searched with PDB search Programme of MOE. For each 
molecule 10 structures were generated in the database, out of 
which the minimized average models with maximum score, 
lowest E-value and with a cut off sequence identity of &lt; 40% 
were selected. Structure of BjMPK3 was phosphorylated 
(BjMPK3P) with MOE as phosphorylation is essential for its 
enzymatic activity. The final structures were done after 
constructing and evaluating 3D models. Structural refinement 
through energy minimization model was performed using 
energy minimization tool keeping parameter value constant 
for all structures i.e Gradient: 0.5, MMFF94x Forcefield Cutoff: 
On=8, Off=10 Solvation: Dielectric=1, Exterior=80. The 
minimized structures were finally saved as *.pdb files which 
were validated by Ramachandran plot. After structure 
formation the refined structure of phosphorylated BjMPK3P 
was taken as receptor and the structures of WRKY
transcription factor family (BrWRKY &amp; BnWRKY) were taken 
as ligand for the docking studies on the online patch dock 
server [] which is based on shape complementarity 
principles and results were refined using FireDock on-line 
server [] which rearranges the interface side chains and 
adjusts the relative orientation of the molecules. Taking the 
global energy of the interacting WRKY transcription factors 
with MPK3 reported in the literature (WRKY 8, 20, 22, 28, 29, 
33, 40, 47, 53 and 69) [ &amp; 
–] as a criteria, we identified the 
interacting and non interacting partners of BjMPK3P. After 
docking, the results were analyzed.

Results &amp; Discussion
Networks of protein–protein interactions provide a framework 
for understanding the biological processes and can give 
insights into the mechanism of diseases. Thus the
understanding of biological mechanisms requires the 
knowledge of protein-protein interactions. MAPK is a 
conserved link between cell receptor and cell response and is 
mediated through gene expression which is regulated by 
transcription factors. To best of our knowledge no work in the 
literature has been done regarding the prediction of BjMPK3P 
with WRKY transcription factor family (BrWRKY &amp; BnWRKY) 
in Brassica. As WRKY transcription factor reported to play 
prominent roles in the regulation of the plant defense response 
[5-6]. Therefore, the paper focuses on identifying the 
interacting WRKY transcription factors with BjMPK3P of 
Brassica juncea which is involved in disease signaling process 
through docking approach. Docking studies use geometric and 
steric considerations to fit the two proteins (BjMPK3P and 
WRKY) into a bound complex, the more stable the complex 
structure (less global energy) higher the probability of their 
interaction. The docking studies performed here, suggested 
that out of 63 and 37 members of BrWRKY and BnWRKY 
transcription factors, 50 and 29 members are showing 
interaction with BjMPK3P respectively while the rest are 
showing non-interaction  (see supplementary 
material). Twenty two WRKY members are common to both 
the species, whereas (BrWRKY 35 &amp; BrWRKY 72) is showing 
interaction in B. napus and (BnWRKY 25 &amp; BnWRKY 39) is 
showing interaction in B. rapa. These results indicate that
protein-protein interactions are might be species specific. A 
similar study was carried out to predict the downstream 
interacting partners of MPK3 in Arabidopsis thaliana through 
Support vector machine (SVM) []. 31 WRKY transcription 
factors (1, 4, 6, 9, 15, 17, 21, 22, 23, 33, 40, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 52, 
54, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 63, 64, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70 and 71) are found 
to be the common interacting partners of MPK3 through both 
docking and SVM approach. Recently Sorensson et al. (2012) 
determined the primary sequence specificity of Arabidopsis 
MPK3 and MPK6 substrates []. They indicated a minimal 
motif sequence L/P-P/X-S/T-P-R/K by random positional 
peptide library search to be the substrate for both the kinases. 
In an another study conducted by Hoehenwarter et al. (2013) 
they have reported other sequences surrounding the minimal 
motif S/T-P (Table-2) through the use of tandem metal oxide 
affinity chromatography to be the MPK3/6 substrate []. 
Using the minimal sequence motif identified in the above 
studies, we have derived a list of potential novel substrates 
(WRKY transcription factors) from Brassica which also showed 
interaction with BjMPK3 through docking studies  (see 
supplementary material). It could be hypothesized that the 
amino acids surrounding the minimal S/T-P motif contribute 
to MAPK specificity. Those motif sequences are also 
considered in Brassica in which the given hydrophobic residue 
is being replaced by the other hydrophobic residue and so and
so for. The results of our study clearly revealed the complexity 
of BjMPK3P interaction with several WRKY transcription 
factors triggered in response to diverse upstream stimuli. 
Number of novel candidate BjMPK3 substrates was predicted 
and need to be confirmed by in vitro kinase assay.

Conclusion
The PPI networks can give insights into the mechanisms of 
diseases and provide a spectrum for the understanding of 
biological processes. Interaction networks can aid in designing 
signal transduction pathway and help to find the disease 
suppressive agents as well as uncover the key genes those are 
responsible for senescence and defense responses against 
pathogens.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors are grateful to sub-DIC, Bioinformatics unit at G.B. 
Pant University of Agriculture and Technology, Pantnagar, 
India for providing computational facility. This study was 
supported by Department of Biotechnology, Govt. of India 
under Programme Mode Support Project.

Citation:Giri et al, Bioinformation 9(20): 1036-1039 (2013)

