Background
Senescence is the last step of leaf development process and it 
takes place in a highly synchronized manner by degradation 
and recycling process leading to organ death [,
,
,
,
,
].
During senescing process nutrients synthesized in leaves such 
as proteins, lipid and nucleic acid are degraded and 
redistributed to the growing parts and reproductive organs for 
developing fruits and seeds [,
,
,
,
]. Senescence might 
reduce productivity of crop if senescence induced prematurely 
under unfavourable weather conditions or any other stress 
[].

External factors as well as internal factors will induce the 
senescence. A lot of efforts have been done to know the 
mechanism of leaf senescence process for crop productivity 
[,
]. 
This is complex process containing a series of physiological, 
biochemical event and thousands of genes regulating 
senescence event in plants. In plant leaf senescence, nitrogen is 
the most important nutrient to be recycled and 70% of nitrogen 
is stored in chloroplast []. Presently nutrient recycling process 
during leaf senescence is not well known. It has been reported 
that GABA-transaminase (γ-aminobutyric acid) has very 
important role in nitrogen recycling process in rice leaf 
senescence process through GABA shunt []. Similar 
information has been reported in post-harvest citrus fruit 
nitrogen metabolism through GABA shunt []. It is very
important to note that GABA shunt is essential for normal plant 
growth []. GABA is a non-protein amino acid, it is known as 
inhibitory neurotransmitter in mammalian central nervous 
system []. Rapid GABA accumulation has been reported in 
plants under biotic and abiotic stress conditions [] and 
evolvement of GABA-shunt in responses to abiotic stress has 
been reported [,
].

Role of GABA Shunt in Leaf Senescence Process:
GABA is one of the special interest of molecule among stress 
responsive metabolites as this molecule is accumulated at 
various biotic and abiotic stress conditions including leaf 
senescence process. GABA is metabolized via a pathway 
composed of three enzymes called GABA shunt. GABA shunt 
pathway composed of enzyme cytosolic glutamate 
decarboxylase (GAD), mitochondrial GABA transaminase 
(GABA-T) and succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase (SSADH) 
[,
]. It has also been reported that GABA shunt is way to 
assimilate carbons from glutamate and to create carbon and 
nitrogen flues that enter into tricarcoxylic acid cycle (TCA 
cycle) [,
,
].

In leaf senescence process, once leaf senescence started the 
degradation of macromolecules ie. proteins, lipids and nucleic 
acid will took place and these will be transported to the
growing parts of plants, developing fruits and seeds 
[,
,
,
]. 
Nitrogen which is a key important nutrient to be recycled 
and mobilized in senescing process []. Nitrogen which is 
present in these macromolecules will be converted into 
glutamine and asparagine in the leaf senescence and these 
amino acids (glutamine and asparagine) will be transported to 
the growing parts and growing seeds and fruits of plants 
through phloem []. As shown in Fig. 1 in senescence process 
protein with the help of proteases will be converted into α-
amino acid and from this α-amino acid with the help of 
transaminase will be converted into glutamate and α-keto acids 
and ammonia is released. This ammonia can be used to convert 
into glutamate into glutamine with the help of enzyme 
glutamine synthetase (GS) and further this glutamine with 
enzyme asparagine synthetase (AS) will be converted into 
asparagine []. Part of glutamate will be converted into GABA 
with the help of glutamate decarboxylase (GAD). Process of 
GABA to glutamate conversion speed up when there is 
inhibition of protein synthesis []. The metabolism of GABA is 
related to glutamate metabolism in senescence process and this 
way the glutamate will enter into GABA shunt. This GABA is 
converted into succinate in the mitochondria with the help of 
enzyme succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase (SSADH). So 
GABA shunt pathway converts glutatmate into succinate via 
GABA [] in the plant leaf senescence and nitrogen 
assimilation. In case of post-harvest citrus fruit GABA shunt 
not only catabolise organic acid but this link between organic 
acid metabolism and amino acid production as a result in this 
process inorganic nitrogen assimilated mainly into four amino 
acids ie.glutamic acid, glutamine, aspartic acid and asparagine. 
Glutamine and asparagine are transported for plant growth [,
].

So GABA shunt is involved in nitrogen metabolism and its 
transport in leaf senescence that finally enters into TCA cycle 
() [,
]. In my opinion the production of succinate 
through GABA shunt is very important, in case TCA cycle does 
not provide enough succinate as GABA shunt is important for 
normal plant growth [].

Conclusion
Leaf senescence is a complex process progressing with age, 
different internal and environmental adverse condition. 
Nitrogen is known to be the most important nutrient to be 
recycled in senescence process. GABA shunt plays an 
important role in nitrogen metabolism through TCA cycle. 
GABA shunt is a key signalling and metabolic pathway in 
senescence process and this has tremendous potential in the 
field of agricultural crop productivity. Therefore, it is very 
important to study mutant lacking GABA shunt enzymes to 
know the complete mechanism of nutrient remobilization in 
leaf senescence.

This work was financially supported by Science and 
Engineering Research Board (SERB), Department of Science and 
Technology Govt. of India, New Delhi (Grant No.SB/SO/BB-
002/2012) to Mohammad Israil Ansari.

Citation:Ansari et al, Bioinformation 10(12): 734-736 (2014)

Role of GABA shunt in metabolism of proteins and amino acids during leaf senescence GDH: Glutamate dehydrogenase, 
GAD: Glutamate decarboxylase, a-KGDH: a-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase, GABA-T : GABA-transaminase, SSADH : Succinic 
semialdehyde dehydrogenase, SCS : Succinyl CoA synthetase, GS: Glutamine synthetase, AS: Asparagine synthetase, TCA : 
Tricarboxylic Acid. The arrow indicates the direction of the reaction during senescence.

