Background
Mycobacterium tuberculosis continues to kill millions of people
yearly worldwide and tuberculosis continues to be a major
health problem. Despite the existence of effective
chemotherapies, no new drugs have come to the market in &gt;40
years. In addition the rise in drug resistance among M.
tuberculosis strains is becoming a severe threat to public health,
illustrated by the recent emergence of extensively drug-resistant
tuberculosis (XDR-TB) that has caused a mortality of &gt;98% 
[].
Virulence of pathogenic mycobacteria is related to their capacity
to survive for prolonged times within macrophage phagosomes
[,
], 
whereas, normally internalized and phagocytosed
bacteria are rapidly degraded within phagolysosomes, and
pathogenic mycobacteria have evolved to block lysosomal
delivery []. 
One strategy by which pathogenic mycobacteria
prevent lysosomal maturation is through the activity of
mycobacterial protein kinase G (PknG), a eukaryotic-like
serine/threonine protein kinase that is not required for
mycobacterial growth per se but is essential for survival within
host macrophages [,
]. This PknG blocks the intracellular
degradation of mycobacteria in lysosomes []. It is involved in
host cell signal transduction capable of modulating host
macrophage trafficking pathways []. Importantly,
mycobacteria overexpressing a kinase-dead mutant of PknG are
rapidly transferred to lysosomes and killed, demonstrating that
PknG kinase activity is crucial for mycobacterial survival 
[].
The fact that PknG is translocated into the host cytosol suggests
that compounds aimed at blocking PknG activity do not require
transport across the only limited permeable mycobacterial cell
wall []. 
Together, these findings make PknG an attractive and
promising drug target. Indeed, blocking PknG kinase activity
by a specific inhibitor results in rapid transfer of mycobactera to
lysosomes and killing of the intracellularly residing bacilli.
PknG is a multidomain protein () consisting of a
rubredoxin, kinase and tetratricopeptide repeat domain and
show that the rubredoxin domain is essential for the activity of
PknG. The structure reveals that the inhibitor-binding pocket is
shaped by a unique set of amino acid residues that, in
combination, is not found in any human kinase [,
]. This
structural information provides the basis for the identification
of novel compounds aimed at blocking the proliferation of M
tuberculosis from W. somnifera.

Plants are rich in a wide variety of secondary metabolites such
as tannins, terpenoids, alkaloids, flavonoids etc. which have
been found to have antimicrobial properties. Withania somnifera
(L) Dunal (Aswaghanda or Indian “Ginseng”) is widely used in
ayurvedic medicines and is consumed as a dietary supplement
around the world []. The major bioactive compounds of
Ashwagandha are steroidal lactones compounds known as
withanolides. They also contain several alkaloids, withanosides,
reducing sugars, few flavonoids, tannins etc. 
[]. These
compounds have shown to possess a remarkable range of
therapeutic properties. Other investigations indicated that leaf
extracts of W. somnifera also has antibacterial properties 
[].
The withanolides are C28-steroidal lactones built on an intact or
rearranged ergostane framework, in which C-22 and C-26 are
approximately oxidized to form a six-membered lactone ring.
The basic structure () is designated as the withanolide
skeleton. There are many novel structural variants of
withanolides with modifications either of the carbocyclic
skeleton or the side chain and these have often been described
as modified withanolides or ergostan-type steroids related to
withanolides. Hence, the present study was aimed to identify
the potential PknG inhibitors from W. somnifera by molecular
docking studies using Glide (Schrödinger).

Methodology
Selection of docking molecules
A set of 26 withaferin and 14 withanolide derivatives were
downloaded from pubchem database
[
http://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/] for the docking studies.
Similarly the commercially available drugs namely Ciproflaxin,
Kanamycin, Isoniazid, Ethionamide, Prothionamide,
Pyrazinamide, Amino salicylic acid, Cycloserine, Streptomycin
and Ethambutol were taken from the literature. All the ligands
were built using Maestro build panel. The collected ligands
were prepared by using LigPrep [Schrodinger] which uses
MMFF 94s force field and gave the corresponding low energy
3D conformers of the ligands. These ligands were neutralized
and checked for their ADME properties using QikProp
(Schrodinger). QikProp helps in analyzing the
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of the ligand by
assessing the drug like properties.

Target propein preparation
The three dimensional crystal structure of PknG from M.
tuberculosis in Complex with Tetrahydrobenzothiophene
AX20017 (PDB Id: 2PZI) was downloaded from the Protein Data
Bank (PDB) (
http://www.rcsb.org) (). Before docking
the ligands into the protein active site, the protein was prepared
using protein preparation wizard of Schrodinger's molecular
docking software. In this protein preparation all water
molecules and hetero atoms were removed. Hydrogen atoms
were added to the protein, including the necessary to define the
correct ionization and tautomeric states of amino acid residues
such as Asp, Ser, Glu, Arg and His. The active site of the protein
was defined for generating the grid. The screened ligands were
then docked into the prepared grid, for which [standard
precision mode] was selected. No constraints were defined.

Docking
Docking was carried out using GLIDE (Grid-Based Ligand
Docking with Energies) software. Glide searches for favourable
interaction between one or more ligand molecules and a
receptor molecule. The combination of position and orientation
of a ligand relative to receptor, along with its conformation in
flexible docking, is referred to as a ligand pose. The ligand
poses that Glide generates, pass through a series of hierarchical
filters that evaluate the ligands interaction with the receptor.
The initial filters test the spatial fit of the ligand to the defined
active site, and examine the complementarity of ligand-receptor
interactions using a grid-based method patterned after the
empirical ChemScore function. Poses that pass these initial
screens enter the final stage of the algorithm, which involves
evaluation and minimization of a grid approximation to the
OPLS-AA nonbonded ligand-receptor interaction energy. Final
scoring is then carried out on the energy-minimized poses.
GlideScore is based on the ChemScore, but includes a stericclash
term and adds buried polar atoms devised by Schrodinger
to penalize electrostatic mismatches: Gscore=0.065*vdW +
0.130*Coul + Lipo + Hbond + BuryP + RotB + Site.

Results and Discussion
Out of 40 withanolide derivative compounds, only 10
compounds showed better interaction with the target protein.
The docking confirmation with best GlideScore had been
analyzed.

Binding mode of available antituberculosis drug molecules
The GlideScore values of available drug molecules range
between -4.40 and -6.91 (Table 1, see ).
The drug Kanamycin and Isoniazid showed the better
interaction than the other drug molecules and the GlideScore
values are -6.91 and -6.63. The main chain amino acids Glu233
and Val235 form hydrogen bonds, with the drug molecules.

Binding mode of compound AX20017
The compound AX20017 inhibitor is bound deep within a
narrow pocket formed by the inter lobe cleft of the kinase
domain as reported in the x-ray crystallographic structure 
[]
and the G-Score value is -5.6 (Table 2, see 
). 
The main chain Glu233:O and Val235:NH of PknG
form hydrogen bonds with inhibitor ().

Binding mode of bioactive compounds from W. somnifera
The binding efficiency of the bioactive compounds from W.
somnifera is shown in Table 2 (see )
and the G-score value is ranging between ­4.58 to ­7.86. Out of
22 compounds tested, Withanolide E, F and D showed the best
G-Score value of ­7.86, ­ 7.69, and ­7.63 respectively than the
withaferin and currently existing drug molecules. More
negative GlideScore value indicates the better interaction of the
inhibitor with the target protein. A comparison of the different
docking poses of compounds suggests that the compounds
namely withanolide E, F and D showed fairly potent activity
against PknG with the more negative G-Score value than the
available drug molecules The bioactive compounds was
positioned in a similar orientation like Ax20017 and forming
hydrogen bonding with the residues Glu233, Val235, Gly237,
Gln238, Ser239, Lys241, Ile292 and Ser293 of the kinase domain
as shown in Table 2 (see ). The
calculated distances between these residues and the ligand
molecule ranged from 2.671 to 3.429 Å. The presence of strong
hydrogen bond interactions between the oxygen atom of the
ligands and Val235 was observed. This hydrogen-bonding
network places the inhibitor such that van der Waals contacts
are made with the side chains of Ala158, Ile165, Val179, Lys181,
Met232, Ile292 and Asp293 of PknG. These results indicate that
the predicted nonbonding interactions and hydrophobic chains
to accommodate the ligands are similar to the experimental data
obtained from crystal structure as reported in the earlier studies
[]. 
The ADME properties indicated that withanolides obey the
Lipinski's rule of five (Table 3, see )
the basic rules to be followed by a candidate drug molecule.

Conclusion
Withanolide D, E and F show better with PknG based on
GlideScore and interaction with the active site residues in
comparison with the existing drug molecules. This data
provides molecular insights to the consideration of
Withanolides as potential candidates against the PknG target in
M. tuberculosis.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank Tamil Nadu State Council for Science and
Technology, for research funding.

Citation:Aishwarya &amp; Santhi, Bioinformation 7(1): 1 - 4 (2011)

Structure of the PknG-AX20017 complex (PDB ID
2PZI).

(A) Basic structure of Withanolides, (B) Basic structure
of Withaferin A

Potential docking pose for the ligands (A) withanolide
D, (B) withanolide E and (C) withanolide F within the active
site of PknG

