Background
Medicinal plants documented in the literature from thick vegetations of the world are routinely used for high throughput 
      screening in small molecular drug discovery. A large number of such plants are known to be recognized in a discrete manner. 
      Therefore, it is important to store information related to medicinal and aromatic plants of JK in a database. This will help in 
      the use and exploitation of the plant materials for drug discovery. Some of the plants available in this region are also known 
      to have aromatic value. Here, we describe the development and use of a database containing information on medicinal and aromatic 
      plants from JK. 

Methodology
Dataset
Folklore medicinal usage and other associated data were manually collected from the inhabitants (tribal/gujjars/local 
      clinicians) of JK through direct person to person survey for each plant species. The current dataset contains information for 
      about 133 plant species.

Database Interface
The database interface is designed for searching the dataset using a PHP (a programming language that allows web developers 
      to create dynamic content that interacts with databases) server enabled script for keywords such as botanical name, local name, 
      folklore use and medicinal use. The database is accessible for free through the internet. 

Database Design
The database is developed in MySQL on a Linux Platform and updated regularly.

Search result
The search output for a given query (for example, diabetes) is given in .

Utility
The database finds utility in the selection of medicinal plant species for high throughput screening in drug discovery.

This project is funded by BTIS (Biotechnology information system), DBT (Department of Biotechnology), Ministry of Science and 
      Technology, Government of India, India.
    

Figures and Tables
A database for medicinal and aromatic plants of JK (Jammu and Kashmir) in India. A sample output for ‘diabetes’ is shown. 


					Citation:Masood &amp; Shafi, Bioinformation 1(2): 56-57 (2005)

