Background
Cancer remains an important cause of chronic illness. Better
understanding of various genes and proteins and their
implications at the cellular and molecular levels helps in
identifying appropriate preventive/diagnostic measures.
Studies in our lab on heparanase (HPSE-1 [Entrez Pubmed
ref|NP_001092010.1|, heparanase isoform 1 preproprotein
[Homo sapiens]) gene polymorphisms associated with cancer
have provided a preliminary understanding of the role of this
gene in the pathophysiology of cancer (unpublished).
Heparanase is a predominant endoglycosidase that cleaves
heparan sulfate which forms a principal polysaccharide in the
basement membrane and extracellular matrix. Cleavage of
heparan sulfate disintegrates the structural integrity of the
basement membrane and releases angiogenic and growthpromoting
mediators [,
]. 
Heparanase is synthesized as an
inactive 65 kDa proheparanase in the golgi apparatus and later
transferred to endosomes/lysosomes for transport to the cellsurface
[]. 
The human heparanase gene (HPSE) is located on
chromosome 4 (4q21.3) and is expressed as a 5- and 1.7-kb
mRNA by alternative splicing []. The heparanase mRNA
encodes a 61.2-kDa protein with 543 amino acids. This
proenzyme is then post-translationally cleaved into 8 (Gln 36 to
Glu 109) - and 50 (Lys 158 to Ile 543)-kDa subunits that
noncovalently associate to form the active heparanase 
[,
]. The
formation of this heterodimer is essential for heparanase
activity. Penetration of the endothelial layer of cell in the
surface of blood vessels is an important process in tumor
metastases . SHA proteoglycans are important components of
this layer []. Therefore, increased metastatic potential may
correspond to increased heparanase activity []. Because of this
inherent role of heparanase, the inhibition of its activity can be a
potential target for anti-cancer therapies. Heparanase also elicits
an indirect neovascular response by releasing extracellular
matrix resident HS-bound angiogenic factors []. Considering
the importance of HPSE-1 gene in cancer, we aimed to elucidate
if variance among this gene exists in various species during
evolution by using a phylogenetic analysis of published protein
sequences of these genes.

Methodology
Data Set, Sequence Alignment and Phylogenetic Tree Building:
The GenBank database [] was queried to retrieve all available
protein sequences of the heparanse gene. These sequences were
retrieved and saved in FASTA sequence format. These
sequences were then aligned using Clustal W [] algorithm
using default parameters. The initial first-pass phylogenetic tree
was constructed using Neighbour Joining [] method
(maximum sequence difference of 0.85) using Basic Local
Alignment Search Tool [BLAST] pairwise alignments between
a query and the database sequences searched []. Evolutionary
distance between two sequences modeled as expected fraction
of amino acid substitutions per site given the fraction of
mismatched amino acids in the aligned region was taken by the
software using Grishin computation []. Using the results from
BLAST [] we created a first-pass phylogenetic tree after which
we used a purpose-built computational phylogenetic method
using Phylogeny.fr software. Sequences were aligned with
MUSCLE (v3.7) [] configured for highest accuracy (MUSCLE
with default settings). After alignment, ambiguous regions (i.e.
containing gaps and/or poorly aligned) were removed with
Gblocks (v0.91b) [–]. The phylogenetic tree was
reconstructed using the maximum likelihood method
implemented in the PhyML program (v3.0 aLRT) [–]. The
Jones-Taylor-Thornton (JTT) substitution model was selected
assuming an estimated proportion of invariant sites (of 0.108)
and 4 gamma-distributed rate categories to account for rate
heterogeneity across sites. The gamma shape parameter was
estimated directly from the data (gamma=.163). Reliability for
internal branch was assessed using the aLRT test (SH-Like). The
graphical representation and edition of the phylogenetic tree
were performed with TreeDyn (v198.3) [].

Results
From the NCBI GenBank database, 112 sequences of heparanse
1 isoform covering the putative conserved Glyco_hydro_79n
domain were obtained and used for the construction of a firstpass
phylogenetic tree. However, some of the repetitive and
non sequences which were not related to HPSE-1 were deleted.
The short-listed sequences majorly belonged to the classes
Mammalia, Aves, Amphibia, Actinopterygii and Insecta
(lancelets, bony fishes, frogs and toads, marsupials, rodents,
primates, even-toed ungulates, carnivores, rabbits and hares,
odd-toed ungulates, lizards, birds and placentals). The
accession information for these sequences is available in 

(see supplementary material). Analysis of the sequences
revealed that there is a high degree of sequence similarity of
heparanase protein in many of the Mammalian species used for
the phylogeny reconstruction, thus implying that this protein
might be more or less conserved in most of the Mammalian
species. The two species belonging to Class Insecta also seem to
share a high degree of sequence similarity with each other, but
show very less degree of sequence similarity with the other
classes. Putative conserved domains were observed in many
taxa at the Glycosyl hydrolase family 79, N-terminal domain;
Family of endo-beta-N-glucuronidase () 
[]. The actual
alignment was detected with superfamily member pfam03662
(E-value: 9.29e-12). BLAST produced 112 hits (); these
sequences were screened manually and only those related to the
sequence in question (HPSE-1) from different taxa were
retained for further analyses. This produced a total of 31
sequences from various taxa. Multiple sequence alignment
results of these short-listed sequences are presented in 
(). Using the PhyML program a tree was constructed for these
31 sequences, the results of which are presented in ().

Discussion
Heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) play a key role in the
self-assembly, insolubility and barrier properties of basement
membranes and extracellular matrices []. Hence, cleavage of
heparan sulfate (HS) affects the integrity and functional state of
tissues and thereby fundamental normal and pathological
phenomena involving cell migration and response to changes in
the extracellular micro-environment [,
]. Heparanase, an
enzyme that degrades heparan sulfate at specific intra-chain
sites is synthesized as a latent approximately 65 kDa protein
that is processed at the N-terminus into a highly active
approximately 50 kDa form. Experimental evidence suggests
that heparanase may facilitate both tumour cell invasion and
neovascularization, both critical steps in cancer progression.
The enzyme is also involved in cell migration associated with
inflammation and autoimmunity. Our preliminary studies
(unpublished) have indicated that the HPSE gene might have
association in the pathophysiology of cancer. Phylogenetics was
performed in this study to evaluate the evolutionary relatedness
of heparanase protein among various groups of organisms (e.g.,
species, taxa, phyla). We aimed to unearth the relationship of
this protein synthesized by HPSE-1 gene using computational
phylogenetics to identify the seemingly similar genes in
different organisms. This was done through the use of
algorithms, methods and programs through phylogenetic
analyses to assemble a phylogenetic tree from a set of genes,
species, or other taxa [,
]. Neighbor-joining method was
used to calculate genetic distance from multiple sequence
alignments, and ClustalW was used to create trees based on
distance. JTT matrix is an efficient method for generating
mutation data matrices from protein sequences by using the
peptide-based sequence comparison algorithm, the set
sequences are clustered at the 85% identity level. The closest
relating pairs of sequences are aligned, and observed amino
acid exchanges tallied in a matrix []. Later, a phylogenetic tree
is constructed from closely related sequences []. Several
studies and especially the BAliBASE benchmark showed that
MUSCLE achieved the highest ranking of any method at the
time of publication. Gblocks eliminates poorly aligned positions
and divergent regions (removes alignment noise). PhyML was
shown to be at least as accurate as other existing phylogeny
programs using simulated data, while being one order of
magnitude faster. Furthermore, the system offers the possibility
to control results of each step before launching the next
program, so that users can modify and properly adjust
parameters for a given task. This is possible in checking the
“Step by step” option.

BLAST algorithm was used for comparing primary biological
sequence information; this preliminary fundamental program
uses a heuristic method to find homologous sequences by
locating shot matches by seeding followed by local alignment.
The main idea of initially using BLAST is its ability to produce
high scoring sequence alignment between the query sequence
and database sequences. The BLAST algorithm gives a very
good speed and relatively good accuracy. However, it has been
widely believed that BLAST should be used as a first pass
sequence alignment. Phylogenetic trees constructed in this
study indicated that HPSE protein is conserved and may play
and important role in organismal evolution ( &amp; 
). It is
interesting to note that the conserved regions as shown in
Homo sapiens are similar to those found in some other
organisms that have this conserved gene. Presence of
heparanase in the major organisms indicates that it is crucial for
the development of the physiology of cell membranes. Its high
conservation at certain domains indicates that its function is
preserved. This gene was absent in lower organisms like the
invertebrates and the prokaryotes. In conclusion, the
evolutionary relationship of HPSE gene was established based
on the sequence alignment, conserved sequences and
phylogenetic trees. The results of the published data on protein
sequences of the above genes showed that the sequences are
highly conserved especially at certain domains. Human
sequences consistently clustered with their mammal orthologs
within these genes clearly indicate the importance of these
genes in evolution.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors would like to extend their appreciation to the Research
Centre, College of Applied Medical Sciences and Deanship of
Scientific Research at King Saud University for funding this
research.

Citation:Shaik et al, Bioinformation 8(9): 415-419 (2012)

Putative sequence of heparanase in super families. The
actual alignment was detected with superfamily member
pfam03662: Cd Length: 320 Bit Score: 65.50 E-value: 9.29e-12

First pass phylogenetic tree constructed by multiple
alignment using BLAST pair wise alignments: Results presented
using Taxonomic name [112 hits]

MUSCLE (3.7) multiple sequence alignment [CLUSTAL format] of short-listed sequences [31 taxons]

Phylogenetic tree using short-listed sequences
[cladogram] built using the PhyML software [31 taxons]

