Background
The number of compounds available for high throughput
screening (HTS) has dramatically increased. However, largescale
random combinatorial libraries have made limited
contributions in the identification of leads in drug discovery
projects.Therefore, the concept of ‘drug-likeness’ of compound
selections has become a focus in recent years. The low success
rate of converting lead compounds into drugs often due to
unfavorable pharmacokinetic parameters has sparked a
renewed interest in understanding more clearly what makes a
compound drug-like [].

Docking predicts the preferred orientation of one molecule to a
second when bound to each other to form a stable complex.
Knowledge of the preferred orientation in turn may be used to
predict the strength of association or binding affinity between
two molecules using scoring functions []. We show the use
ofDempster Shafer Theory (DST) [] on docking results using
an example structure with PDB ID: 3CL2 (crystal structures of
oseltamivir-resistant influenza virus neuraminidase mutants).

In DST, evidence can be associated with multiple possible
events, e.g., sets of events. As a result, evidence in DST can be
meaningful at a higher level of abstraction without having to
resort to assumptions about the events within the evidential set.
Where the evidence is sufficient enough to permit the
assignment of probabilities to single events, the Dempster-
Shafer model collapses to the traditional probabilistic
formulation []. Combination rules are the special types of
aggregation methods for data obtained from multiple sources.

These multiple sources provide different assessments for the
same frame of discernment and Dempster-Shafer theory is
based on the assumption that these sources are independent.
The requirement for establishing the independence of sources is
an important philosophical question.Lianwen Zhang [] also
provides an alternative combination rule to Dempster's rule.
With respect to the rule of combination, Zhang points out that
Dempster's rule fails to consider how focal elements intersect
[]. 
To define an alternative rule of combination, he introduces a
measure of the intersection of two sets A and B assuming finite
sets. This is defined as the ratio of the cardinality of the
intersection of two sets divided by the product of the
cardinality of the individual sets.

Methodology
Docking, visualization, scoring and selection:
It is important to visualize the docked poses of high-scoring
compounds because many ligands are docked in different
orientations and may often miss interactions that are known to
be important for the target receptor. This sort of study becomes
more difficult as the size of the dataset increases. Therefore, an
alternative approach is to eliminate unpromising compounds
before docking by restricting the dataset to drug-like
compounds; by filtering the dataset based on appropriate
property and sub-structural features and by performing
diversity analysis []. Consensus scoring combines information
from different scores to balance errors in single scores and
improve the probability of identifying ‘true’ ligands 
[]. In our
study, we have tested five different scoring functions as used in
tools such as: (i) GOLD []; (ii) Patchdock 
[]; (iii) Molegro [];
(iv) MEDock []; (v) AutodockVina 
[]. The input for this
application is Spread Sheet with an extension of .xls. The spread
sheet consists of docking results of various compounds from
various docking tools.The uploaded file is parsed and the data
is stored in 2D array. We then use DST in a 5 step procedure.
The steps used are: (1) Divide the data into 4 classes; (2) get
results from Rank Sum Technique; (3) get results from DST unweighted;
(4) get results from DST weighted; (5) get results
from Zhang Rule. Compounds selected by steps 2 to 5 in the
above procedure will be considered for further analysis and
investigation in the discovery pipeline.

Output data and analysis
We used 4,347 experimentally determined ligand structures for
this study. The target protein structure with PDB ID: 3CL2 was
screened against these ligand structures using Molegro to select
the optimal binding small molecules using binding scores.The
top 35 compounds were further docked using Patchdock,
GOLD, MEDock, AutodockVina. Analysis using Dempster
Shafer Theory selects compounds having drug bank ID
numbers DB02259 and DB01911 as best binding candidates with
the protein target and for consideration in further
investigations.

Future developments
We plan to include other combination rules such asYager's Rule
and Inagaki's Rule in future developments.

Dr. AllamAppaRao and Dr. M. NareshBabu would like to thank
the Department of Science and Technology (DST) for their
financial support (DST-CMS GoI Project No.SR/S4/MS:516/07
Dated 21.04.2008).

Citation:Rao et al, Bioinformation 9(4): 207-209 (2013)

Selection of top 35 compounds using Dempster Shafer Theory (DST) data analysis for the target with PDB ID: 3CL2
(crystal structures of oseltamivir-resistant influenza virus neuraminidase mutants) from an original set of 4,347 compounds from
Drug Bank [http://www.drugbank.ca/]post docking and scoring. This procedure thus helps to identify molecules with ID
numbers DB02259 and DB01911 with good binding features with the target for further consideration and analysis.

