Background
The genus Litsea includes 200 to 400 species across the world.
Litsea glutinosa (L.), Litsea cubeba (L.) and Litsea verticillata (L.)
are some of the important species of the Litsea popularly used as
a traditional herbal remedy for various aliments including antiinflammatory
agent [–]. 
The species L. cubeba has been
reported as an anti-inflammatory plant material []. The species
L. rubescene and L. peduncalt have long been used in traditional
Chinese medicine for the treatment of gastroenterologia,
oedema and rheumatic arthritis []. Most Litsea plants contain
alkaloids, flavonoids [], terpenes 
[], lactone 
[] and volatile
oils constitution []. Several biologically active compounds
were isolated and their structures have been elucidated by
many researchers [,
]. In this current work, we illustrated the
importance of these compounds as anti-inflammatory
molecules by studying their binding potential with the COX
(cyclo-oxygenase) enzymes. The COX enzyme exits in two
isoforms (COX-1 and COX-2). The COX-1 enzyme protects the
stomach lining from corrosive acids and digestive chemicals 
[].
The COX-2 enzyme binds to arachidonic acid which causes pain
and inflammation []. The known inhibitors such as celecoxib,
robecoxib, valdecoxib of COX-2 are of the category of nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID) with observed side
effects ranging from pain, nausea, indigestion and lack of anti
thrombotic activity [] 
[]. Thus, the need to indentify new yet
better compounds to inhibit COX-2 is critical. Therefore, it is of
interest to investigate the potential chemical phenomenon
responsible for binding of Litsea derived molecules to COX-2.
Here, in this communication we have presented the interaction
analysis of these biologically active molecules with the COX-2
enzyme using molecular docking.

Methodology
Litsea derived compounds and structures:
Compounds selected for this experiments are; (a) 6'hydroxy- 2',
3', 4'-trimethoxy-chalcone [], (b) alpinetin 
[], (c) catechin 
[],
(d) kaempferol [], (e) linderol A 
[], (f) liteseaone A 
[], (g)
liteseaone B [], (h) flavokawin B 
[], (i) litseaverticillol A 
[],
(j) pinocembrin [] and (k) quercetin 
[]. These structures were
drawn, and optimized using RMS gradient of 0.1 by geometry
optimization. The MM2 module of ChemBio3D suite was used
for optimization. The physiochemical properties of these
compounds were predicted in Molsoft Browser version 3.6.
 (see supplementary material).

Known COX-2 inhibitors:
The structures of known COX-2 inhibitors such as rofecoxib,
valdecoxib, celecoxib, lumiracoxib, acetylsalicylic acid (asprin),
ibuprofen, nabumetone and naproxen were downloaded from
DrugBank []. The physiochemical properties of these
inhibitors were shown in  (see supplementary
material).

COX-2 enzyme protein structure:
The 3-dimensional structure of the COX-2 enzyme protein was
downloaded from Protein Data Bank (PDB) with ID 6COX. The
6COX is a complex of COX-2 with an inhibitor SC-558 
[].

Docking tool and algorithm:
Molecular docking was completed using Molegro Virtual
Docker (MVD) 4.02 (Lic. to CSIR-NEIST, No.3a5d-34b3). MVD
uses a differential evolution algorithm. The solution to the
function is the sum of intermolecular interaction energy
between protein and ligand with the intra-molecular interaction
energy of the ligand. The docking energy scoring function is
based on a modified Piecewise linear potential (PLP) with new
hydrogen bonding and electrostatics terms included.

Receptor cavity identification:
The pockets or cavities (5 in number) in the COX-2 structure
were identified using MVD. The minimum cavity volume is 10
Å3 with a probe size of 1.20 and a grid resolution of 0.80. The
maximum number of ray checks is set at 16. The side chains
flexibility was relaxed by adjusting the strength and tolerance
of the receptor in their nearest residues of respective cavities.
The physical descriptions of the predicted cavities are given in
 (see supplementary material).

Molecular Docking of compounds with COX-2:
The molecular docking was performed for all the small
molecules (11 Litsea derived and 8 known COX-2 drug
inhibitors) with the four (4) best predicted cavities of the
receptor COX-2 model. The MolDock Score (GRID) function
was used with a grid resolution (Å) of 0.30 and a binding site
radius of 12 Å with respect to the origin of the respective
cavities. The “MolDock SE” searching algorithm 10 runs using a
maximum of 1500 iterations with a total population size of 50
was used. The energy threshold used for the minimized final
orientation is 100. The Simplex evaluation with 300 maximum
steps of neighbour distance factor 1 was completed.

Analysis of docked protein-ligand complex structures:
The best orientation for the ligand-protein complexes were
analysed, H Bonds were identified and labelled. The ligand
energy was inspected and analysed using Rerank scoring
(linear combination of E-inter (steric, vander Waals, H bonding
and electrostatics) and E-intra (torsion, sp2-sp2, hydrogen
bonding, van der Waals and electrostatics).

Discussion
Cyclooxygenase (COX), also known as Prostaglandin (PG) H
Synthase, catalyzes the conversion of arachidonic acid to the PG
endoperoxidases. Two isoforms of COX are designated COX-1
and COX-2. These two isoforms have similar primary protein
structure homology of 60%. COX-2 is an inducible isoform that
is found and expressed mainly in inflammatory and immume
cells. At the site of inflammation, COX-2 is responsible for the
generation of the hyperalgesic and proinflammatory
Prostaglandins. The drugs used for the inhibition of
inflammations are called as COX-2 inhibitor. COX-2 inhibiting
drugs were developed to provide the anti-inflammatory effects
of NSAIDs with a reduced risk of gastrointestinal bleeding.
Concern have found that COX-2 inhibitors could have
cardiovascular and renal adverse effects similar to those of
nonselective NSAIDs, such as raised systemic vascular
resistance and decreased renal perfusion. The antiinflammatory
drugs alone cause over 16,500 deaths and over
103,000 hospilization per year in the United State of America.
Recent research reveals that present COX-2 inhibitors have
shown Hematological, Cardiovascular, Central Nervous side
effects. Gastrointestinal Effects associated with NSAID therapy
are common. Approximately 30-60% of NSAID users experience
some abdominal discomfort or dyspepsia. The current study
dealt with the in silico investigation for alternative potent COX-
2 inhibitor also with minimum side effects. The simulation
reflects that Linderol, one of the molecules of Litsea being more
effectively interacting, which is evident by the rerank score, and
is smaller than the existing COX-2 inhibitors. Beside, linderol,
most other compounds of litsea also analysed to be more potent
to become a drug molecule inhibiting COX-2 inhibitor. The
interaction was analyzed by the formation of the hydrogen
bond, where it reflected that linderol forms four hydrogen
bonds on interaction with best cavity. These hydrogen bonds
are formed with residues Tyr385, Trp387, His388 and Thr206.
The docked poses were analyzed on the basis of Rerank score
followed by MolDock and HBond (Hydrogen Bond Interaction)
Score. In the best Cavity, most of the litsea molecules showed
better score against the receptor then that of existing COX-2
inhibitors shown in  (see supplementary material).
Kaempferol, on the other hand a molecule of Litsea, although
having a low rerank score than linderol shows better stability
by formation of seven hydrogen bond in the same cavity
(). However, this interaction might result into
permanent inhibition of the COX-2 until the protein molecule
gets degraded. The other compounds of Litsea, Catechin,
Pinacembrin and Litseaverticillol also showed a better docking
simulation and interaction analysis, than the existing COX-2
inhibitor such as Celecoxib, Lumiracoxib which is evident from
the rerank score and interaction analysis. The molecule 6'-
hydroxy-2', 3', 4'-trimethoxy-chalcone scored moderate range of
dock result, but six different interactions were noticed. In the
cavity 2 of the receptor molecule most of the litsea compounds
have shown significant docking but poor than that of the best
cavity of the receptor. The active compound such as 6'-hydroxy-
2',3',4'-trimethoxy-chalcone, Flavokawin, Alpinetin, Litseaone
and Lumiracoxib have been predicted to be more potent
through comparative analysis in this docking simulation
experiment than the existing COX-2 inhibitors. Since the
compounds were reported from plant source and the different
parts of the Litsea are already been used as anti-inflammatory
agent as herbal treatment. Hence, these compounds hold lots of
promise to develop as an inhibitor of COX-2.

Conclusion
Molecular Docking of Litsea derived selected molecules have
clearly reflected the binding of these molecules such as linderol,
catechin, 6'-hydroxy-2', 3', 4'- trimethoxy-chalcone and litseaone
against COX-2 receptor Fmodel. These compounds showed
better binding features in terms of energy scores in comparison
to already known inhibitors such as e celecoxib, acetylsalicylic
acid and rofecoxib. Thus, the significance of these plant derived
medicinal compounds is highlighted to using docking analysis.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors thankfully acknowledge the Department of
Biotechnology, Govt. of India for providing the Bioinformatics
Infrastructure Facility to CSIR-NEIST, Jorhat under the project
“Creation of BIF for the promotion of biology teaching through
bioinformatics, 2008” and Director, CSIR-NEIST for constant
support and encouragement throughout the study.

Citation:Gogoi et al, Bioinformation 8(17): 812-815 (2012)

Kaempferol interaction with receptor, showing H
Bond Interaction in black dotted line.

