Background
The protein molecule was suggested by Kauzmann to represent the form of 
oil drop  []. 
This model which is treated as discrete one was extended to 
the form of “fuzzy oil drop” taking the 3-D Gauss function to describe the 
idealized hydrophobicity density distribution  []. The highest 
hydrophobicity concentration is expected in the center of the protein body 
with the decrease of its values toward the surface where the hydrophobicity 
is expected to be close to zero. This is the way to express the hydrophobic 
character of protein molecule particularly in respect to its tertiary structure 
stabilization.

The assumption of the regular accordant with 3-D Gauss function appeared 
not appropriate for proteins representing the significant irregularity versus 
assumed model in the biological function-related area  [–
]. The protein 
1NMF was selected in this paper to represent the structure accordant with 
the assumed “fuzzy oil drop” model.

Methodology
Data
The protein belonging to downhill proteins ‐ 1NMF was selected for 
analysis []. 
This the protein of the β-barrel structure. This protein belongs 
to the group of cold shock proteins.

“Fuzzy oil drop” model
The idealized hydrophobicity density distribution in protein body is 
assumed to be represented by 3-D Gauss function (see 
). 
This is why these values can be considered equal to zero. The 
size of the molecule is expressed by the triple σx, σy, σz, which is calculated 
for each molecule individually provided that the orientation of the 
molecule with the longest possible inter-effective atoms distance is 
determined according to the appropriate coordinate system axis. The  σ
values are calculated as the 1/3 of the longest distance between two 
effective atoms calculated along each axis. The value of the Gauss function 
at any point of protein body is treated as the idealized hydrophobic density 
defining the hydrophobic core.

The idealized hydrophobicity at any point of the “fuzzy oil drop” can be 
calculated according to the Gauss function for the molecule located with its 
geometric center as the origin of the coordinate system.

On the other hand, The empirical hydrophobicity distribution is calculated 
according to the function presented by Levitt  [].  (See 
).

Kullback-Leibler information entropy
The accordance between the idealized and the observed hydrophobicity 
distribution is measured according to the Kullback-Leibler relative 
(divergence) entropy  [], which quantifies the distance between two 
distributions. The distance between the observed and the theoretical (O/T) 
distribution was calculated. This value can be estimated only with respect 
to other solutions. The random distribution of hydrophobicity represented 
the border case for which the distance (O/R) was calculated. The relation 
O/T &lt; O/R was taken as evidence for a non-random distribution close to 
theoretical one (see ).

Discussion
Structure interpreted using the “fuzzy oil drop” model
The results of DKL calculation are as follows: O/T equal to 0.1715 and O/R 
equal to 0.5832. The relation O/T &lt; O/R and low value of O/T suggests the 
hydrophobicity distribution similar to the theoretically expected. Large 
value of O/R supports this observation.

The profile for 1NMF showing the hydrophobic interactions collected by 
effective atoms of each residue as the effect of interactions with other 
amino acids is shown in .

The 3-D presentation of protein 1NMF with residues (marked in white) 
with strongest hydrophobic interactions (responsible for the generation of 
the hydrophobic core) is given in . 

Conclusions
The proteins folded following the “fuzzy oil drop” model are expected to 
represent the molecules very well soluble with no biological activity. 
Entire coverage of the protein surface with hydrophilic residues could 
result as no tendency to interact with any other molecule. Taking this 
conclusion into consideration no protein satisfying the condition of 
idealized hydrophobic core structure was expected. Although the proteins 
of biological function requires to be highly soluble with no specific 
interaction were found. The antifreeze proteins seem to represent the 
biological activity of this category  []. The downhill proteins, 
experimentally proved as folding very fast seem to be influenced by water 
environment directing the hydrophobic residues toward the center of 
protein body with simultaneous exposure of hydrophilic residues on the 
protein surface  []. The cold shock proteins (the protein under 
consideration belongs to this group of proteins) is oriented on non-specific 
RNA binding keeping RNA unfolded. The protein appears in the stress 
condition (temperature stress). This is why is expected to appear and fold.

When folding, the selected protein satisfies all the conditions defined by 
non-bonding interactions with simultaneous hydrophobic core formation. 
Hydrophobic residues located in the central part of the molecule and 
exposure of hydrophilic residues on the surface are the main tenets of the 
“oil drop” model introduced by Kauzmann  
[]. The Kullback-Leibler 
entropy  [], 
which is a measure of the distance between the target 
distribution (idealized one) and the observed one in a particular molecule 
revealed good accordance of the observed hydrophobicity distribution with 
the idealized one.

Although the protein described in this paper as accordant with the “fuzzy 
oil drop” model is of the category “easy predictable” (according to CASP 
classification  []  the meaning of the presented model expresses its 
possible applicability to folding process simulation taking into account the 
influence of external force field. 

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Banach et al, Bioinformation 5(9): 375-377 (2011)

The hydrophobic density distribution in 1NMF. A: profile of idealized (T), observed (O) and random (R) distributions. B: 3-D presentation of 
the 1NMF structure with residues responsible for hydrophobic core generation distinguished in yellow (maxima on the O profile shown in A)

