Background
Dengue:
Dengue Virus Transmission:
Dengue is a systemic viral infection, with remarkable rapid 
emergence and global spread in the last decades. Dengue 
virus (DENV) is transmitted to humans by the Aedes
mosquitoes (Genus: Aedes; Subgenus: Stegomyia), primarily Ae.
aegypti and Ae. albopictus, as vectors for domestic and peri
domestic transmission, and arboreal Aedes mosquitoes as 
vectors for enzootic transmission. Tropics and subtropics 
distribution of these two major vectors puts nearly a third of 
the global human population at risk of DENV infection 
[].
Dengue is brought about by infection with one of the four 
genetically related but antigenically distinct serotypes of 
dengue virus (DENV): DENV 1, DENV 2, DENV 3 and DENV 
4, and possibly a fifth dengue virus, which however does not 
share the same pattern of transmission cycle in humans. 
DENV, a single-stranded, positive-sense, RNA arbovirus of 
Flavivirus genus (family Flaviviridae) with a genome of 
approximately 11 Kb, established endemic transmission among 
tropical human populations in the last several hundred years, 
becoming a worldwide problem since the 1950s 
[]. The 
transmitting mosquito must feed on an infected person during 
a 5-day period of high viremia, during which the person is in 
the process of becoming symptomatic. Asymptomatic 
individuals can still infect mosquitoes. The mosquito 
incubates the virus for another additional 8-12 days before 
being able to transmit it to another human. The mosquito 
remains infected for the remainder of its lifespan, and can 
repeatedly transmit DENV. There is scant evidence of 
transmission in organ transplants, blood transfusions, or from 
an infected pregnant mother to her fetus.

Dengue was first documented in the Americas at the end of the 
eighteenth century, and its arrival on this continent, from the 
forests of Central and West Africa, may have resulted from the 
slave trade. Although Aedes mosquitoes are common in the 
southern U.S. and Puerto Rico, nearly all Dengue cases 
reported in the 49 continental states are brought in the US by 
travelers. These imported cases can lead to significant 
outbreaks, such as Puerto Rico (1915, 2007), Hawaii (2001) and 
Texas (2005). Intensive mosquito control measures deployed in 
the 1960s and 1970s could not prevent, or contain Dengue 
penetration in the Gulf of Mexico (Cuba, 1981), and the 
following large epidemic. The infection is endemic in over 100 
countries in Asia, the Pacific Rim, the Americas, Africa, and the 
Caribbean. World Health Organization (WHO) estimates 50-
100 million infections worldwide yearly, including 500,000 
cases of dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) and 22,000 deaths 
yearly, mostly among children. Recent public health modeling 
maps the global distribution of Dengue risk, taking into 
account recent climate changes, including rainfall, temperature
change and urbanization, and draws projections of over 400 
million Dengue infections globally per year. This prevalence 
estimate is alarmingly more than three times the dengue
burden estimate of the WHO based on traditional modeling 
projections [].

Dengue Virus Pathology:
The clinical presentations of DENV infections are very broad, 
ranging in severity from asymptomatic or mild 
undifferentiated dengue fever (DF) to severe DHF or dengue 
shocking syndrome (DSS), which can be lethal. Dengue must 
be considered in the differential diagnoses of illness for all 
patients who have fever and a history of travel to tropical and 
subtropical areas within 2 weeks before the onset of 
symptoms. DF usually lasts 2–7 days and manifests as sudden 
onset of fever, generalized body ache, myalgia, arthralgia and 
intense headache. Patients may have sore throat, infected 
pharynx, conjunctival injection, pain behind the eyes, as well 
as gastrointestinal symptoms, including vomiting and 
diarrhea. By contrast, DHF, a rare but more severe form of 
dengue infection, presents minor or major bleeding 
phenomena, thrombocytopenia (&lt;100,000 platelets/µL), and 
evidence of increased vascular permeability (e.g., 
hemoconcentration [hematocrit increased by &gt;20% from 
baseline], pleural or abdominal effusions, or hypoproteinemia). 
The first well-documented outbreak of DHF was described in 
Manila in 1953-54. DSS results from a critical loss in plasma
volume, leading to catastrophic circulatory failure, including 
narrow pulse pressure (&lt;20 mm Hg), hypotension, and shock. 
DSS has a fatality rate of approximately 10%.

The principal risk factors for developing DHF include (a) the 
strain of infecting virus, (b) prior infection with a heterologous 
serotype, and (c) the patient׳s age, gender, nutrition and 
genetic make-up. Following the acute febrile phase, 
temperature drops and an increase in capillary permeability 
occur. Clinically significant plasma leakage usually lasts 24–48 
hours, with associated leukopenia and thrombocytopenia that 
can precede this event. Patients without increased capillary 
permeability tend to improve, but cohorts with increased 
capillary permeability suffer loss in plasma volume and tend 
to worsen.

Dengue Disease Prognosis:
Early diagnostic markers for both DHF and DSS are lacking. 
The physiologic mechanisms that aid containment of the 
infection, recovery and convalescence from DENV remain to 
be characterized. A vaccine is lacking, infection with one 
DENV serotype does not trigger an endogenous vaccine: in 
fact, sequential infections with multiple DENV serotypes put 
people at greater risk for DHF and DSS 
[].

Management of severe Dengue depends on symptomatic 
treatment of hemorrhagic complications and hypovolemic 
shock, and ought to include acetaminophen, for management 
of pain and fever. But, acetylsalicylic acid (i.e., aspirin) and 
other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents are contra
indicated because of their anticoagulant properties, which can 
precipitate DHF and DSS. All patients with Dengue should be 
monitored for hypotension and related signs of DHF, because 
prompt fluid therapy can help reduce morbidity and mortality.

The prognosis of DENV infection is determined by a balance 
between the rate of viral replication and the efficiency of the 
immune system viral surveillance for viremia clearance 
[].
Using convalescent gene expression levels as baseline, two 
distinct groups of host immunity genes emerge 
[]. These 
include an “early” group of genes associated with innate 
immunity (i.e., acute pro-inflammatory, activation-inducing), 
including interferon-gamma (IFN-Ỳ), cytokine-mediated 
signaling, chemotaxis, and complement activity, which 
together peaks at day 0-1 following DENV infection, and 
declines 3-4 days thereafter. In addition, a “late” group of genes 
associated with cell cycle, emerge about day 4 and peaking by 
day 5-6 (i.e., proliferation-inducing). The up-regulation of 
these early innate immune response genes coincides, as it 
should from an immune surveillance perspective, with a drop 
in DENV viral replication during day 0-3 of DF. Indeed, gene 
signatures of DHF can be identified as early as day 1, and 
document a partial slowing of immune surveillance (i.e., 
reduced expression of genes associated with antigen 
processing and presentation, MHC class II receptor, natural 
killer (NK) and T cell activities, compared to that of DF 
patients). Taken together, the characteristically broad and 
dynamic host responses in DENV infected subjects appear to 
consist of two distinct phases of immune surveillance, with 
unique transcriptional signatures and footprints and strong
potential for early molecular diagnostics []. Since DENV is 
transmitted by Aedes mosquitoes, it follows that the most 
effective prevention measure for Dengue is avoiding exposure 
to the mosquito vectors by using repellents, wearing protective 
clothing, and remaining in well-screened or air-conditioned 
areas. Preventing exposure to Aedes and to DENV infection 
benefits both indigenous habitants and travelers, and protects 
society from the emergence of autochthonous Dengue 
transmission in areas where a competent vector is abundant 
but DENV is absent.

Dengue Neurocognitive Disease:
Infection with DENV leads to debilitating headaches, high 
fever, a variety of neurological disorders, and seizures, which 
indicate of the virus involvement in pathology of the central 
nervous system (CNS). The adverse effects of pro
inflammatory cytokines on CNS function in DENV+ patients 
may result from (a) persistent inflammation of the CNS 
through the release of cytokines and chemokines and 
recruitment of infected monocytes, (b) disruption of the blood 
brain barrier (BBB), which increases its permeability and 
deregulation of tight junction proteins, and (c) acquired 
neurological insults resulting from DENV virus infection. 
Virus infections, including DENV, engage initial activation of 
monocytes/macrophages, which release pro-inflammatory 
cytokines that target endothelial cells, among others, and 
disrupt the BBB vascular system. This early innate immunity 
cytokine response also leads to deregulation of homeostatic 
mechanisms, destruction of host tissues and apoptosis 
[].
Infection of DENV leads to increased synthesis of tumor 
necrosis-alpha (TNF-α), in large part responsible for the 
cachexia and the physiopathology observed in patients with 
virus hemorrhagic fevers (VHFs) in general and Dengue in 
inflammatory cytokines on CNS function in DENV+ patients 
may result from (a) persistent inflammation of the CNS 
through the release of cytokines and chemokines and 
recruitment of infected monocytes, (b) disruption of the blood 
brain barrier (BBB), which increases its permeability and 
deregulation of tight junction proteins, and (c) acquired 
neurological insults resulting from DENV virus infection. 
Virus infections, including DENV, engage initial activation of 
monocytes/macrophages, which release pro-inflammatory 
cytokines that target endothelial cells, among others, and 
disrupt the BBB vascular system. This early innate immunity 
cytokine response also leads to deregulation of homeostatic 
mechanisms, destruction of host tissues and apoptosis 
[].
Infection of DENV leads to increased synthesis of tumor 
necrosis-alpha (TNF-α), in large part responsible for the 
cachexia and the physiopathology observed in patients with 
virus hemorrhagic fevers (VHFs) in general and Dengue in 

In the brain, receptors for IL1β, IL6, and TNF-α have been most 
widely studied in relation to neuropsychiatric and neurological
disorders. These pro-inflammatory cytokines have atherogenic 
and prothrombotic effects that directly influence ischemic 
stroke, vascular dementia and other CNS pathologies. Data 
show that IL6 alters adult neurogenesis in many 
neuropathological conditions, including possibly in stroke, 
status epilepticus, Alzheimer, Parkinson and Huntington 
diseases, putatively by interfering with oxidative stress and 
apoptosis. IL6 and its downstream JAK/STAT signaling 
pathway appear to modulate facilitate cognitive flexibility 
[]. 
By contrast, TNF-α, produced by CNS astrocytes and 
microglia, alters synaptic transmission and plasticity in several 
neurological disorders by there inhibitory effect on glutamate 
transporters, resulting in increased glutamate concentration in 
the brain, which can affect cognitive processes and behaviors 
such as sleep, and water and food intake []. MCP-1, a β-
chemokine expressed during inflammation, activates its 
receptor, CCR2, to induce chemotaxis of monocytes to the 
inflammatory sites. It is a potent activator of macrophages, and 
its levels are elevated in cerebral inflammation 
[].
Inflammation resulting from viral infection, such as DENV, 
and mediated in part by chemokine activity and the release of 
proinflammatory cytokines, contributes to BBB breakdown, 
and leads to increased risk of viral CNS invasion. CNS 
perivascular cells also play a key role in brain inflammation by 
recruiting peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) to the 
brain, causing neuronal damage and microglial inflammation.

Evasion of Immune System by Dengue:
Innate Immunity:
Pro-inflammatory cytokines are also toxic to peripheral tissues 
and organs, when in chronically elevated and unregulated 
concentrations. The gastrointestinal and other mucosal linings 
are targeted first, leading to the observed capillary leakage, 
renal failure, diarrhea, and disseminated intravascular 
coagulation: signs of virulent and often lethal hemorrhagic 
fever. Systemically, DENV infection leads to a rapid initial rise 
in pro-inflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL6, TNF-α), which trigger 
a relatively short-lived initial burst of fever and inflammation 
often disregarded by the patient, and cellular immune 
migration factors (e.g., IL-8) to recruit PBMC. Soon into the 
immune surveillance response, which commences immediately 
after infection, a slower process of cellular pathology ensues, 
which includes myeloid cell and endothelial cell infection and 
cytotoxicity. Consequential to this second phase are both a 
sharp rise in fever, and loss in vascular integrity, which leads 
to increased permeability of blood vessels with transudates 
increasingly rich in micronutrients, red blood cells and 
eventually white blood cells. Deficiencies in specific and 
nonspecific immune-driven antiviral responses result in 
unrestricted DENV replication and dissemination in the host, 
which together lead unavoidably to death within 14 days 
following the appearance of EVD symptoms. Unless, prompt
intervention are engaged to prevent DENV binding to target 
cells, or block its replication within infected macrophages and 
dendritic cells to counter the physiological collapse due to 
dehydration secondary to heavy bleeding and violent diarrhea.

In brief, DENV finds multiple ways to evade immune 
surveillance, and actively subverts both innate and adaptive 
immune responses, in part by triggering harmful inflammatory 
responses that inflict direct tissue damage [,
]. The 
organism is ultimately overwhelmed by a combination of 
inflammatory factors and virus-induced cell damage, 
particularly in the vasculature, often leading to death from 
liver and kidney failure, complicated by septic shock. In part 
for this reason, live-attenuated tetravalent chimeric yellow 
fever-dengue vaccines generally afford little or no protection 
against disease caused by DENV-2 in both human and sub
human primates. Live-attenuated tetravalent DENV vaccines 
also exhibit evidence of immunological interference. It is 
possible and even probable that vaccine specifically directed to 
DENV non-structural protein 1 (NS1) may be successful in 
preventing the more severe forms of the disease 
[].
Macrophages are myeloid derivatives that mature from 
monocytes and process foreign materials by phagocytosis, a 
process that has evolved in vertebrate immunology to 
recognize pathogens and damaged tissues through pattern 
recognition receptors (PRR)/Toll receptors. They recognize 
pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMP) and damage
associated molecular patterns (DAMP) 
[].

It is now clear that there are two primary states of mature 
macrophage activation and function. Macrophages either elicit 
responses that include nitric oxide and oxygen radical 
production, the M1 stage, or they may be involved in the 
production of factors that promote proliferation, angiogenesis, 
and matrix deposition, referred to as the M2 stage. M1 
macrophages actively metabolize arginine either to nitric oxide 
and citrulline via the inducible nitric oxide synthase pathway: 
M1 physio-toxic profile; M2 macrophages process arginine to 
ornithine and urea via the arginase pathway: M2 physio
repairing profile. An M1 stage produces IL12 and IL23, which 
signal T cells to elicit a TH1 response with high levels of IFN-γ. 
Thus M1 is sustained, and TH17 activation ensues further 
amplifying M1-mediated cytotoxicity. Upon containment of 
the pathogen, M1 macrophages are replaced with M2 that 
engender a pattern of cytokine associated with TH2 pattern of 
cytokines to favor tissue remodeling. This includes IL10 that 
shuts down the TH1 cytokine response, as well as IL4 and IL13 
that promote antibody production for the removal of the 
pathogen, and transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β), which 
induces arginase for cell and tissue rebuilding and repair. To a 
INF-γ/TGB-β-1 and a TH1/TH2 balance seem to correspond a 
M1/M2 balance, a tissue destruction (by virtue of excessive 
nitric oxide and related cytotoxic compounds) and a tissue 
regeneration modality (resulting from arginase-mediated 
production of polyamines for DNA repair and L-proline and 
ornithine).. Undoubtedly, the M1/M2 dichotomy is 
oversimplified description of complex immune-regulatory 
processes []. 
However, it is a useful functional classification 
that simply proposes two different, actually opposing and 
balancing activities of mature macrophages following viral 
trigger, such as DENV. If the hypothesis can be brought 
forward that DENV alters the M1/M2 balance, then, the
inference follows that DENV may contribute to drive and 
sustain the M1 stage simply out of the physiological need to 
generate new myeloid derivatives to clear DAMP and PAMP. 
If this hypothetical model were proven true experimentally in 
vitro, it would open new avenues for potential treatment 
intervention testable in vivo.

Case in point, dendritic cells are important antigen presenting 
cells, and permit such investigations. Studies have shown that 
targeting certain protein antigens to engage the maturation of 
dendritic cells can be an efficient means of immunization. 
Antigen targeting is most often accomplished in these 
instances by the use of a monoclonal antibody (mAb) directed 
against a dendritic cell surface receptor fused to the protein of 
interest.

When this technique is used experimentally to raise immunity 
against DENV, either of two mAbs (i.e., αDEC205, αDCIR2) 
are used, which target two distinct dendritic cell 
subpopulations, distinguished by either DEC205 or DCIR2 
endocytic receptors. These mAbs are fused to NS1, and the test 
animals (e.g., BALB/c mice) are challenged with these 
conjugated antigens in the presence of the 
polyriboinosinic:polyribocytidylic acid (poly [I:C]) adjuvant. A 
strong anti-DENV NS1 immunoglobulin response ensues 
within a few weeks, indicating that the overall strength of the 
antibody response does not vary with the different dendritic 
cell endocytic receptor challenged, whereas remarkable 
differences in the IgG1/IgG2a ratios can be obtained 
depending on which of the DEC205 or DCIR2 sites are 
challenged. Furthermore, the αDEC-NS1 challenge is generally 
more productive in terms of immune-protective 
immunoglobulin, rise in the number of IFN-γ producing cells, 
and involvement of CD4+ and CD8+ immune surveillance cell 
population, compared to αDCIR2-NS1 targeted dendritic cells 
[].

T Cell-Mediated Immunity:
Potential of anti-DENV DNA vaccines are tested by measuring 
the protective efficacy and immune responses of mice 
intramuscularly injected with plasmid encoding DENV NS1. 
Intravenously challenged by lethal DENV, mice vaccinated 
with NS1-DNA present a remarkable delay onset of dengue
associated paralysis, a marked decrease of morbidity, and a 
greater survival. This improved clinical profile is correlated 
with an elevation of anti-NS1 antibody serum titer, and a 
strong priming effect on anti-NS1 response, which consists of a 
vigorous production of naive T cells (CD4+/CD8+CD45RA+), 
and a strong NS1-specific cytotoxic T cell proliferation and 
NS1-directed cytotoxicity. Taken together, these concerted 
immune responses appear to be directed specifically against 
the non-structural protein of DENV, and are further 
augmented by co-injection of plasmid encoding the regulatory 
TH1 cytokine, IL12. This observation unequivocally confirms 
and establishes the important role for TH1-mediated immune 
regulation in the effector processes leading to the 
establishment of immune surveillance to DENV 
[]. It is 
important to note that T cell-mediated immune surveillance 
against DENV, as against other viruses, is stringently 
modulated by the micro-environment, which determines and 
dictates the intricate and fluid relationships among the 
different subpopulations of T CD3+ cells, and the pattern of
cytokines they produce. The TH1 and the TH2 patterns of 
cytokines cited above are regulated by the regulatory T cell 
subpopulation (Tregs, CD4+/CD8+CD25+FoxP3+). They also 
respectively engender the TH17 and the TH9 sub-populations, 
which together modulate and regulate a state of sustained T 
cell-driven inflammation []. Should the hypothesis that 
DENV impairs the host׳s cellular immunity by altering the 
Tregs-mediated regulation of TH1, TH2, TH17 and TH9 
plasticity be proven true, then novel immunotherapies could 
be designed and tested on DENV+ patients directed 
specifically at restoring the physiological homeostasis in TH1, 
TH2, TH17 and TH9 cytokines.

Humoral Immunity:
Infection with wild-type DENV induces high-titered 
neutralizing antibody that can provide long-term immunity to 
the homotypic virus and short-term immunity (only several 
months duration) to a heterotypic DENV. The high level of 
virus replication seen during both secondary infection with a 
heterotypic virus and during primary DENV infection in late 
infancy is a direct consequence of antibody-dependent 
enhancement of replication. This enhanced virus replication is 
mediated primarily by preexisting, non- or sub-neutralizing 
antibodies to the virion surface antigens that enhance access of 
the virion-antibody complex to FcγR-bearing cells. A single 
amino acid change in DENV envelope protein (e.g., single 
T51K substitution in the domain I/II hinge region of the viral 
envelope protein []; single mutation in domain III of the 
envelope protein T329A [] confers resistance to a potent 
antibody through abolishing the antibody-virus interaction. 
Taken together, these observations are at the basis of an intense 
program of anti-DENV vaccines development, fueled by the 
timely and critical need to provide long-term protection 
against each of the four DENV serotypes by inducing 
neutralizing antibodies, and live, attenuated and various 
nonliving virus vaccines [].

For more than a century, immunologists and vaccinologists 
have existed in parallel universes. Immunologists have for 
long reveled in using ‘model antigens’, such as chicken egg 
ovalbumin or nitrophenyl haptens, to study immune responses 
in model organisms such as mice. Such studies have yielded 
many seminal insights about the mechanisms of immune 
regulation, but their relevance to humans has been questioned. 
In another universe, vaccinologists have relied on human 
clinical trials to assess vaccine efficacy, but have done little to 
take advantage of such trials for studying the nature of 
immune responses to vaccination. The human model provides 
a nexus between these two universes, and recent studies have 
begun to use this patient-centered model to study the 
molecular profile of innate and adaptive responses to 
vaccination. Patient systems vaccinology studies provide 
mechanistic insights about innate and adaptive immunity in 
humans, including yellow fever and seasonal influenza 
vaccines.

Converging lines suggest that induction of anti-NS1 immunity 
correlates with protective immunity, and may generate cross
reactive antibodies that recognize platelets and proteins 
involved in the coagulation cascade. Bacterial exotoxins, such 
as Escherichia coli heat-labile enterotoxin (LT), exert strong 
immunostimulaton effects through binding to
monosialoganglioside (GM1) cell surface receptors. The LT 
formulations, deficient in GM1 binding by mutation (LT
[G33D]), is a premier promising candidate adjuvant for human 
trials of parenteral vaccines in general and for current vaccine 
development. Purified recombinant NS1, jointly administered 
with the nontoxic Escolar heat-labile enterotoxin LT derivative, 
may procure the most promising line of new and protein
based anti-dengue vaccines [].

DENV vaccine development includes the use of live, vectored 
and killed, as well as recombinant preparations. Vaccine 
candidates must provide broad and robust immunity to all 
four DENV serotypes simultaneously as secondary DENV 
infections often enhance disease severity. The design, 
implementation, and surveillance measures associated with 
Dengue vaccine trials must be rigorous due to the complexity 
of the disease and its epidemiology. Eligible trial sites must 
satisfy several criteria including documented hyper
endemicity and a known epidemiological history of the 
circulating serotypes. The epidemiological findings from 
Ratchaburi province in Thailand provide an interesting model 
in this domain: the data strongly support this location's 
suitability for a proof-of-concept efficacy trial of the Sanofi
Pasteur tetravalent dengue vaccine []. Accurate disease 
surveillance and carefully monitored clinical trials will provide 
essential evidence concerning the efficacy of candidate dengue 
vaccines, which will hopefully herald a new era in dengue 
disease prevention []. Case in point, the Sanofi-Aventis© 
Group, which offers the broadest range of vaccines in the 
world protecting against 20 bacterial and viral diseases, 
developed a tetravalent Dengue vaccine, composed of four 
recombinant, live, attenuated vaccines to the pre-membrane 
and envelope genes of one of the four DENV serotypes, in a 
model reminiscent of the yellow fever vaccine. Phase 0 in vitro, 
and Phase 1 in vivo preclinical studies have established that the 
vaccine induces controlled stimulation of human dendritic 
cells, and significant immune responses in monkeys. Scale up 
Phase 3 and Phase 4 trials before industrialization in children 
and adults are yielding conclusive, albeit preliminary results 
about the vaccine׳s efficacy and effectiveness. The 
recommended three-dose vaccination regimen induces an 
immune response against all four serotypes in the large 
majority of vaccinees. Preexisting immunity against flavivirus 
favors a quicker and higher immune responses to the Sanofi
Pasteur tetravalent dengue vaccine, without significant side
effects such as increasing toxicity, excessive viremia, or 
endangering clinical safety in general. Taken together, these 
promising outcomes should lead to industrial production and 
dissemination of the vaccine, and facilitate supply and access 
to vaccine in the countries where the dengue disease burden 
makes it an urgent public health priority [].

Oral mucosal vaccination, a feasible and economic vaccination 
strategy alternative to sub-cutaneous or intramuscular 
injections, can be an effective method to overcome the pitfalls 
of current injection-based vaccines, such as pain, high cost of 
vaccination, risk of infection or cross-contamination. It is a 
cost-effective vaccine application Ideal for developing
countries, which efficiently delivers antigen into mucosal 
lymphoid organs to trigger a vigorous immune stimulation. 
But, our knowledge-base presently is prohibitively scares for 
developing and testing an effective oral anti-DENV vaccine.

Nonetheless, one promising approach for oral mucosal vaccine 
development is exploring the potential of M cells via M-cell-
targeting ligands that have the potential to deliver ligand-
conjugated antigens into mucosal lymphoid organs and evoke 
conjugated-antigen-specific systemic and mucosal immune 
responses. The M-cell-targeting ligand, Co1, has been tested 
for inducing specific immune responses against a pathogenic 
viral antigen, envelope domain III (EDIII) of dengue virus, to 
provide the foundation for oral mucosal vaccine development 
against the pathogen. After oral administration of Co1-
conjugated EDIII, antigen appears to be effectively delivered to 
the Peyer's patches. Resulting antibodies induced by the 
ligand-conjugated EDIII antigen show effective virus-
neutralizing activity. Taken together, these observations 
confirm that the M-cell-targeting strategy using Co1 ligand as 
a mucosal adjuvant may be a beneficial tool in the pursuit of 
effective vaccines for pathogenic DENV antigen 
[].

In brief, antiviral vaccines have been the most successful 
biomedical intervention for preventing epidemic viral disease, 
such as Dengue. Recent technological advances in gene 
delivery and expression, nanoparticles, protein manufacturing, 
and adjuvants have created the potential for new vaccine 
platforms that may provide solutions for vaccines against viral 
pathogens for which no interventions currently exist. The 
technological convergence of human monoclonal antibody 
isolation, structural biology, and high-throughput sequencing 
also provides new opportunities for atomic-level immunogen 
design. Selection of human monoclonal antibodies can identify 
immune-dominant antigenic sites associated with 
neutralization and provide reagents for stabilizing and solving 
the structure of viral surface proteins. Understanding the 
structural basis for neutralization can guide selection of 
vaccine targets. Deep sequencing of the antibody repertoire 
and defining the ontogeny of the desired antibody responses 
can reveal the junctional recombination and somatic mutation 
requirements for B-cell recognition and affinity maturation. 
Collectively, this information can provide new strategic 
approaches for selecting DENV vaccine antigens, formulations, 
and regimens, which together will benefit the development of 
dengue vaccine programs, and improve our readiness to 
address this and related new emerging viral threats.

Patient-Centered Outcomes Evaluation and Translational Effectiveness:
Recent developments in health care have witnessed the 
evolution of the original conceptualization of translational 
research into translational science in medicine, dentistry and 
nursing. Translational research, as originally defined by NIH, 
requires that sample biopsies obtained from individual 
patients be analyzed and characterized in the laboratory, and 
that the outcome of these studies be integrated in the clinical 
decision-making for treatment. Translational effectiveness, as 
later defined by AHRQ, defends that another major 
component of clinical decision-making must rest on obtaining, 
disseminating and utilizing the best available evidence in 
specific clinical settings. Dissemination must be directed in 
various forms and formats to all stakeholders involved in the 
patient׳s well-being - from the patients themselves, to the 
caregivers, the health-care team, and the patients׳ friends and 
acquaintances. Stakeholders play a critical role in the 
dissemination process, be it person-to-person or via tele
medicine processes, in caring for patients with DENV 
infection, and the extent on their active engagement in the 
translational process of health care.

The figure represents a simplified generalization of the 
fundamental steps of Patient-Centered Outcomes Evaluation 
(PCOE), in contrast to Patient-Centered Outcomes Research 
(PCOR). The figure is derived from the ample discussion on 
this subject provided in the referenced footnote. In brief, 
PCOE is distinct from PCOR in that the former pursues the 
goal of improving existing programs, whereas the latter seeks 
to prove the superiority of one over other programs. In this 
process, therefore, PCOE generates new hypotheses, whereas 
PCOR is structured to test existing hypotheses. Whereas both 
PCOE and PCOR employ the scientific process to reach the 
conclusions of their respective endeavors, the former obtains 
conclusions that are specific to the programs under evaluation, 
but the latter generates conclusions, which, provided the study 
has strong external validity, will be generalizable beyond the 
sample under test to the population. Researchers principally 
disseminate their research outcomes to their peers and fellow 
researchers in a constant strive to obtain a better, more precise 
and more accurate understanding of fundamental mechanisms 
and principles. By contrast, evaluators seek to disseminate 
their findings to the various stakeholders who are affected, 
either directly or indirectly by the program under evaluation, 
with the primary concern of increasing effectiveness – be it 
cost-effectiveness of the program under evaluation, or its 
benefit-effectiveness. From this viewpoint, research and 
evaluation are two complementary aspect the science of health 
care, whose interdependence is all the more timely and critical 
in the context of the contemporary new model of translational 
science in health care, in which translational research and 
translational effectiveness are inextricably intertwined. In this 
light, PCOE and PCOR are the fundamental and indispensable 
pillars of patient-centered, effectiveness-focussed and 
evidence-based health care

Despite the rapid advancement in information and 
communications technology over the last decade, there is 
limited evidence suggesting improvements in the ability of 
health professionals to communicate effectively. Given the 
critical nature of communication, it is timely and critical to 
initiate further evaluation of information and communication 
technology designed to improve communication between 
clinicians []. We recently proposed a framework for 
systematic patient-centered outcomes evaluation (PCOE) that 
consisted of six distinct steps, which can be summarized as (a) 
Focused literature review, (b) Development of draft 
framework, (c) Workshop with technical experts, (d) 
Refinement of framework, (e) Development of two case 
studies, and (f) Pilot test of framework on case studies . The 
resulting model () has several important features 
combining work from a variety of fields that represent an 
important step forward in the rigorous assessment of such 
evidence because it integrates a definition of evidence based on 
inferential effect, not study design. The model strives to 
separate evidence about the biological and physiological 
mechanisms from evidence derived from research synthesis 
aimed at linking the intervention to a given clinical outcome, 
and evaluating efficacy and effectiveness. In brief, this
approach proffers the sine qua non, the essential and 
minimum sufficient set of steps for building a logic-based 
process based on the best evidence that is adaptable adaptable 
and generalizable across the health care domains.

In brief, this approach, developed and advocated by AHRQ for 
dissemination of the best evidence, integrates and links the 
fields of basic science, evidence-based health care and 
comparative effectiveness research. In that context, it is 
important to note the principal threads of intervention against 
Dengue currently address the patients׳ socio-economic status 
(i.e., living conditions), community-based (i.e., educational) 
interventions, as well as biological (e.g., immunotherapies) and 
medical interventions. In brief and as in the case of VHFs, in 
experiencing Dengue local people employ multiple 
explanatory models to make sense of and respond to the 
syndemic nature of any Dengue outbreak. Local and 
indigenous epidemic control measures are often implemented 
and these are consistent with the ones being promoted by 
healthcare workers; although some cultural practices may 
amplify the outbreak. Improving treatment of VHFs in tropical 
regions prone to dengue ultimately hinges on effective and 
compassionate care for the effected patient. To this end, there 
is the need to refocus efforts on aggressive supportive care and 
clinical monitoring; including communications and social 
mobilization experts as a primary part of every outbreak 
response team; and reestablishing the isolation ward as the key 
functional component of the overall outbreak control strategy.

Even in the context of vaccination programs, they must be 
tailored to regional and national epidemiological specificities. 
Introduction of Dengue vaccination in the national 
immunization programs must take into account the special 
features of each country without jeopardizing the existing 
vaccines already in use.

To be clear, vector control cannot be the only intervention to 
prevent or contain dengue. It is equally necessary to empower 
the communities to be better prepared to protect themselves 
against the mosquito infestation. Empowerment of the 
stakeholders may be obtained, for example, by means of 
raising the level of awareness and general knowledge. A study 
of the comparative effectiveness analysis has examined the 
annual targeted larvae-formation of standing water to 
neutralize the dengue vector A. aegypti. The 4-year campaign 
ended in 2005, and was centered in two urban areas of 
Cambodia with a population of 2.9 million people. Cost 
effectiveness, calculated as the ratio of disability adjusted life 
years (DALYs) saved to the net cost of the intervention, and 
interpreted following sensitivity analysis of the effectual range 
of study parameters, compared the intervention against the 
hypothetical alternative of no intervention. The results 
demonstrated that the simple step of larviciding standing 
water to neutralize the dengue vector reduced the number of 
dengue cases and deaths by 53%, decreased dengue 
hospitalizations annually by close to 3000, and dengue 
ambulatory cases by close to 12,000 cases. Overall, the 
intervention cost over $500,000, but resulted in a saving of 997 
DALYs per year by averting medical care, which translated to 
an effective reduction in the cost of the intervention of about 
$200,000 yearly. More importantly, annual, targeted larviciding 
campaigns appear to be cost-effective medium-term 
interventions to reduce the epidemiologic and economic 
burden of dengue in urban areas of Cambodia 
[].

Conclusion
In conclusion, translational research yields an increasing 
understanding of the fundamental molecular immunobiology 
that results from infection with DENV, and unveils the modes 
by which dengue virus escapes immune surveillance
processes. Translational effectiveness seeks to understand and 
to uncover the best available evidence for immune-based 
treatment interventions, and to integrate this evidence in 
evidence-based decisions within specific clinical settings on 
site. Translational effectiveness for medical interventions to 
contain and control the pathologies that result from DENV 
infection relies on the consensus of the evidence produced by 
systematic reviews. Moreover, considering the several 
candidate Dengue vaccines under development, it is timely 
and critical to assist stakeholders to better understand the 
potential economic value and cost effectiveness of Dengue 
vaccines, one provisional goal is that vaccination may replace 
environmental control as a strategy for cost and life- saving 
dengue prevention modality. As we go forward in the next few 
years, the joint consideration of translational research and 
translational effectiveness concerns in the context of the novel 
model of translational science in health care in general, and 
patient-target Dengue intervention in particular will benefit 
patients, caregivers and stakeholders along the complex 
syndemic dimensions of this viral disease. 

EBD-PBRN is registered with the US Agency for Healthcare 
Research &amp; Quality (AHRQ) PBRN Resource Center as an 
affiliate primary care Practice-Based Research Network. The 
authors thank the past and present members of the Evidence
based research group who have contributed to the research 
presented here. The authors particularly thank Professors Sam 
Beck (Cornell), Olivia Ellis (UCLA), Marvin Marcus (UCLA), 
and Merrill Singer (University of Connecticut). The authors 
also thank the stakeholders of EBD-PBRN who have 
contributed many critical discussions of fundamental concepts. 
Support for this research was from Fulbright grant 5077 and 
UC Senate grants to FC; NIH/NIMH Career Development 
Award (K23 MH095661) grant to AT.


Citation:Chiappelli et al, Bioinformation 10(12): 726-733 (2014)

Schematic Representation of the Similarities and Differences between Patient- Centered Outcomes Research and Patient-Centered Outcomes Evaluation

