Background
The increasing number of complete genomic sequences has
unwrapped loads of ways to interpret the adaptation of
genomes in their respective niche in relation to their structure,
function etc. []. An estimation of amino acid preferences of
different organisms is now possible through comparative
genomic study []. Comparative genomics helps to determine
the genes that are present across bacterial genomes of the same
species (or genus) known as conserved (core) genes and
disparity within these core genes is an indication that can be
used to unravel highly variable and conserved genes within the
genomes of interest. The conserved genes usually evolve more
slowly; therefore, they will play a role to infer molecular
evolution of the genomes []. Moreover, molecular phylogenetic
trees built using the sequences of core genes can also determine
the relationship among the genomes.

Shewanella is a genus from which adequate number of species
had already been sequenced facilitating detection of core genes.
Different species belonging to the genus Shewanella are capable
of inhabiting many aquatic (from fresh water to deep sea) and
sedimentary ecosystems under aerobic as well as anaerobic
conditions []. Some of the Shewanella species, for example
Shewanella violacea, had been isolated from cold environments,
such as seawater in Antarctica or in the North Sea, implying
that they are not only peizophilic (can breed better under high
hydrostatic pressure conditions), but also psychrophilic (needs
low temperatures, ranging from −15°C to +10°C for growth and
breeding). They can be defined as psychro-peizo-tolerant
Shewanella species.

It is known that pressure influences protein structure and
folding []. Functional properties of proteins might get affected
by pressure range that is experienced by organism []. In this
study, we discuss the comparative analysis of the core genes of
phylogenetically related twelve members from the genus
Shewanella and focus on the recognition of a common trend
towards a certain pattern of amino acid usage of the
psychropeizo-tolerant Shewanella species.

Methodology
We have downloaded the fully annotated complete nucleotide
sequences of all the twelve Shewanella genomes, considered in
the present study, from NCBI FTP site
(www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Ftp/). Details of the 12 bacteria are
listed in (see supplementary material).

Identification of core genes:
Highly similar paralogous sequences have been removed from
each of the twelve set of genome sequences, based on a
comparison of the gene list against itself (with identity &gt;=90%)
using Blastclust program
(www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Web/Newsltr/Spring04/blastlab.html
). From the rest of the genes, core genes were detected through
putative one-to-one orthologous gene identification, using
BLASTP (&gt;= 85% identity and 0% gap). This search identified a
total of 121 orthologous groups that had all twelve species
represented, which were used for further analysis.

Phylogenetic analysis:
All core genes from 12 Shewanella genomes were used for
generating a neighbor joining tree. For each twelve species, the
amino acid sequences of 121 core gene sets were concatenated
in order to produce twelve continuous sequences of average
length 34,746 amino acids. Multiple Alignments of these 12 sets
of concatenated core amino acid sequences were performed
using CLUSTALW (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/clustalw/). A
Neighbor-joining Phylogenetic tree based on these concatenated
core amino acid sequences from the Shewanella species of
interest, was generated using MEGA 5 [].The bootstrap values
are shown in the Phylogenetic tree.

Estimation of amino acid composition:
We have computed the frequencies of amino acid residues in
the protein sequences of two groups of Shewanella sp., as
depicted in the Phylogenetic tree. To compare the means of two
groups of data, t-test is essentially a good tool. The t-values are
calculated as follows:

t = (FGroup1 - FGroup2) / √ [(VarGroup1/ nGroup1) + (VarGroup2/ nGroup2)]

where, VarGroup1 and VarGroup2 are the variance of amino acid
residues. FGroup1 and FGroup2 are mean frequencies of Group1
and Group2 proteomes respectively. The nGroup1 and nGroup2 are
the total number of Group1 and Group2 proteins investigated
in this study. Based on student's t-distribution table of
significance, critical values for such t-test at various
probabilities are as follows:

Probability 10% 5% 2.5% 2% 1% 0.5%

Critical Value 1.372 1.812 2.228 2.359 2.764 3.169

If t-value is positive and greater than critical value at 10%
probability (1.372), then the mean frequency (FGroup1) of Group1
core proteins are significantly greater than that of the Group2
core proteins (FGroup2) at 90% or higher confidence level. If the
frequency of residue or property group t-value is negative and
less than -1.372, then the mean frequency of Group1 core
proteins are (FGroup1) is significantly less than that of Group2
core proteins (FGroup2) at 90% or higher confidence level 
[–].

Functional classification:
The core proteins were functionally classified according to
Clusters of Orthologous Groups (COGs) of proteins categories.
BLAST homology study had been carried out against the COG
database. Proteins that were classified in two COG categories
were registered in both categories.

Results and Discussion
A final list containing a total of 121 core gene sets from all the
twelve Shewanella species, were used for further analyses.
Alignment of these 12 sets of concatenated core amino acid
sequences using CLUSTALW
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/clustalw/) reveals 17% non-conserved
amino acid sites. Neighbor-joining phylogenetic tree based on
the concatenated core amino acid sequences from the Shewanella
species of interest, was constructed using MEGA 5, which
separates 12 Shewanella species into two groups i.e., Group 1
and Group 2 (). Literature search describes Group 1
members of Shewanella as cold adapted species that grow at
high pressure, while Group2 members are mesophilic, pressure
sensitive species [].

Amino acid composition preferences:
We have analyzed the amino acid composition of 121 core gene
sequence sets for each of the twelve Shewanella species. The
frequencies of individual amino acids were further analyzed
using student t-test, which shows that a few of the amino acid
differed significantly in the core gene sets of Shewanella species
present in Group1 when compared to the core gene sets of
Shewanella species present in Group 2  (see
supplementary material). As specified by the t-value, amino
acid residues A, D, S, N and C, are significantly preferred
(marked in bold red in ), while G, T, V, M, I are
moderately preferred and residues R, Y, E, P and L are
significantly avoided (marked in blue in ) by Group 1
Shewanella species compared to Group 2. Residues S and D are
helix breakers and residue E favors the formation of helical
structure. On the other hand, presence of residue L stabilizes
the helical conformations []. It is known that amino acid
substitutions that diminish protein flexibility and
compressibility results in an increase of stability of the protein
at high pressure []. In addition, helix destabilizing beta
branch residues I, T and V are preferred by peizophilic proteins
[]. All the above results signify that increased structural
homogeneity is perhaps favored by the high-pressure
environments of the deep-sea, which is attained by favoring a
decreased number of helix breaking and helix destabilizing
residues. Considering the amino acid properties, Group1
Shewanella members most significantly, favor the amino acid
residues S, D, and N, all of which are strongly polar as well as
have very low molecular weight. Interestingly, the hydrostatic
pressure asymmetry index is positively correlated with the
polarity of amino acids and inversely correlated with molecular
weight of amino acids [].

Thus, the amino acid composition of the core genes of the
twelve species of Shewanella considered in our study shows a
particular trend, which points towards a strong favor of polar
and small amino acids with adequate propensity of breaking
and destabilizing the helical structure, for the Group 1 members
of Shewanella () sustaining their psychropeizophilic
adaptation for residing in deep sea environment, while an
opposite amino acid compositional trend is featured by the
Group 2 members of Shewanella () supporting their
mesophilic, pressure sensitive characteristics.

Functional Classification:
Core genes considered in our study can be divided into two
categories depending on the average percent identity of the
blast score. (a) Core gene showing low variation (54% of the
total core genes with identity &gt;95%); (b) Core gene that are
highly variable (46% of the total core genes with identity &lt;95%).
Functional profiles of the core genes of the twelve Shewanella
species considered in our study have been determined based on
COG categories. It has been found that higher proportion of the
core genes (44%) are involved in information storage and
processing, 62% of which are involved in translation, ribosomal
structure and biogenesis ().

Variable core genes as well as conserved core genes are
classified according to COG functional categories and
compared. The comparison points to the fact that functional
categories like “Translation, ribosomal structure and
biogenesis”, “Carbohydrate transport and metabolism” and
“Amino acid transport and metabolism” are more common in
conserved core genes (). On the other hand, functional
categories like “Energy production and conversion”, “Cell
envelope biogenesis” and “Cell motility and secretion” are
more common in variable core genes.

Core genes with low variation experience selection against
mutations that leads to amino acid changes. But in case of
highly variable core genes, positive selection for amino acid
changes takes place []. Consequently, three functional
categories which are more common in variable core genes are
accountable for the specific amino acid compositional trend in
psychropeizophilic Shewanella species (members of Group 1),
favoring polar and small amino acids with helix breaking and
destabilizing property.

Conclusion
Phylogenetic study based on the concatenated core amino acid
sequences of twelve Shewanella species separated two distinct
groups of Shewanella. Group 1 comprises of psychropeizophilic
Shewanella species, whereas Group2 members are mesophilic,
pressure sensitive species. Our studies on the composition of
individual amino acid residues within these two groups of
bacteria revealed that the psychropeizophilic Shewanella species
show a specific trend of amino acid usage that favors the
increase in frequency of strongly polar, small and tiny amino
acids having the potential of avoiding helical structures. Amino
acid residues S, D and N are mostly preferred by them.
Functional profiles of the core genes of the twelve Shewanella
species show that information storage and processing
represents higher proportion of the core genes, with 62% of
them involved in translation, ribosomal structure and
biogenesis, signifying the importance of these two functional
categories in maintaining the most important cellular processes
of the genus Shewanella. We have also divided the core genes
into two types: conserved core genes and variable core genes,
which are evaluated on the basis of COG functional
classification. Three functional categories (Cell envelope
biogenesis, Cell motility and secretion, Energy production and
conversion) which are quite more common in variable core
genes are responsible for displaying the specific amino acid
compositional trend in psychropeizophilic Shewanella species
(members of Group 1). Thus, they seem to have played an
important role for niche adaptation of the twelve Shewanella
species considered in our study.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We wish to thank Department of Biotechnology, Government of
India, for providing financial support through two project
grants, (BT/BI/04/026/93 and BT/BI/010/019/99).

Citation:Banerjee &amp; Mukhopadhyay, Bioinformation 8(19): 938-942 (2012)

Phylogenetic tree constructed using core genes of 12
Shewanella species.Group1 consists of psychro-peizo-tolerant
Shewanella species and Group2 contains mesophilic pressuresensitive
Shewanella species. Bootstrap values for all the
branches are mentioned in the figure.

Distribution of COG classification of 121 core genes in twelve Shewanella species considered in this study.

COG classification terms for conserved core genes (red
bars) and highly variable core genes (blue bars). Functional
classes like Translation, ribosomal structure and biogenesis (J),
Carbohydrate transport and metabolism (G), Amino acid
transport and metabolism (E), are more common in conserved
core genes. Variable core genes have a preference over
functional categories like Energy production and conversion
(C), Cell envelope biogenesis (M) and Cell motility and
secretion (N).

