Background
There is an exponential increase in genome sequence and
protein structure data in last few years. Comparatively less
availability of experimental assays of carbohydrate binding and
discoveries of essential roles of some of the proteincarbohydrate
interactions in various metabolic processes
suggests the necessity for prediction algorithms. It is known
that carbohydrate-binding proteins share low sequence and
structural similarity []. Despite this low similarity in sequence
as well as structure, their binding sites are very specific. This
specificity can be attributed to the local characteristics of
binding sites such as hydrogen bonding patterns, presence of
stacking interactions []. Another proof for presence of local
characteristic features comes from biochemical studies of sugar
binding in lectins by Rao et al []. They found conserved loop
structures to be important for sugar binding. Hydrophobic
stacking interactions have also been found to be specific for
carbohydrate binding []. Such features constitute a
multidimensional feature space. Prediction of mannose binding
site employing Random Forest is carried out under the
assumption that from such a space enough informative features
can be extracted and employed for supervised classification of
binding and nonbinding sites.

Mannose binding proteins cover a diverse range of functions.
They can be broadly classified into two classes, viz. 1) those
having N or O-glycosylation bonds with sugars and 2) those
exhibiting non-covalent interactions with sugars. In this work
only the proteins with non-covalent interactions are considered.
In the literature there exist a few studies pertaining to
prediction of carbohydrate binding sites. Shionyu Mitsuyama et
al [] first derive empirical rules based on the similarity of
spatial distribution of amino acid residues in known binding
protein structure and subsequently employ the derived rules
for identification of positive sites. Taroni et al 
[] used amino
acid propensity at carbohydrate binding sites. Sujatha and
Balaji [] developed a COTRAN algorithm to identify Galactose
binding sites. Malik and Ahmad [] employed neural network
to predict carbohydrate-binding sites. Nassif et al [] used
different types of atomic and residue features to predict
glucose-binding sites.

Methodology
For the purpose of extracting different features we need to
provide a rational method of representing the binding sites of
different structures []. As in the earlier work binding site has
been represented as concentric spherical shells around its centre
[] and this centre is taken as the centroid of the atoms
excluding hydrogen atoms present in the ligand. This approach
was used by Nassif et al [] for extracting different shell
features. The shells are started from a distance of 3 Angstroms
from the shell centre and continued up to 10 Angstroms from
the shell centre, each shell with a width of 1 Angstrom. The
radius of outermost shell is chosen to be 10 Angstrom unit. The
radius of mannose pyranose ring is 1.5 Angstrom unit. The
molecular interactions are significant to a range of 7 Angstrom
unit []. Therefore the radius of outermost sphere is kept at 10
Angstrom unit.

Preparation of Dataset:
A non-redundant list of 11 proteins, which bind to mannose
non-covalently, where structures of protein-mannose
complexes are known, was taken from PDB. This dataset of 11
proteins is kept as the final dataset. The positive dataset consists
of 55 mannose-binding sites derived from 11 mannose-binding
proteins. True binding sites for non-mannose ligands have been
included as the negative data; Non-mannose ligands include
non-mannose hexoses, non-sugar organic molecules and metal
ions. These comprise of 78 Glucose binding sites, 40 Galactose
binding sites and 69 other ligand-binding sites. All these 187
binding sites along with 55 positive sites form our input data
for the experiments.

Extraction of Shell Features:
Separate features:
15 such features  (see supplementary material) were
extracted for each shell. These consist of both atomic features
and residue wise features. The first 14 features are the same as
those employed by Nassif et al []. The first eight features are
based on the number of atoms of a particular type. Features 1, 2
and 3 define charge. Features 4, 5 and 6 define hydrophobic
character. Features 7 and 8 define the ability of forming
hydrogen bonds. Features 9 to 14 are based on the number of
atoms of a particular type of residue. The usefulness of such
features and their relevance to prediction of glucose binding
sites has been discussed in detail by Nassif et al []. In addition
to these features accessible surface area has also been included
in our experiments.

Combined features:
These features comprise of different combinations of
independent features  (see supplementary material).
First eight features are used for generating combinations. These
eight features fall in three categories viz. charge,
hydrophobicity and hydrogen bonding property. Charge has
three possible values; hydrophobicity has three possible values
while hydrogen bonding property has two possible values.
These are combined in all possible ways to obtain 18
combinations. Out of these 18 combinations only 7
combinations are physically possible. These seven features are
calculated for each shell. The idea is that specific combinations
of independent features can have better discriminative
capabilities. The seven combinations employed in our work are
shown in .

Feature selection:
Feature selection is needed to reduce the feature space by
filtering out unwanted features that reduce the classification
performance. Feature selection is useful to know relatively
more informative features from a collection of features that
might contain redundant and non-informative features
increasing the confidence of classification. For the selection of
the attributes, information gain attribute evaluator from Weka
software was employed.

Classification:
Random Forests are an ensemble of randomly constructed
independent decision trees. In each decision tree a randomly
chosen fixed subset of features are employed to build a
classification model. Bootstrapping technique is used in each
tree for selection of training set. Due to this about one third of
the examples are left unused and are known as out of bag
examples. It is customary to use this out of bag examples as
validation set for tuning the algorithm parameters. Hence a
separate test data is not normally required in RF for checking
the overall accuracy of the forest. After all individual trees are
built a majority vote is then taken to decide on the class label for
each case.

Discussion
Separate versus Combined features:
Separate features refer to the all possible values of various
properties taken together as separate features. For example, for
a property called ‘charge’, there are three possible values viz.
positive, zero and negative. These three properties taken
separately can be considered as three different features. Thus,
here the feature ‘positive charge’ shows the number of atoms
with positive charge. Combined features refer to the
combination of values of more than one property. Advantage of
using combined features is that, the combination of more than
one property avoids the redundancy in the features. Since the
feature values considered here are the counts of atoms of a
particular property, using different values of the properties will
give redundant counts for some of the properties. Clubbing the
properties together to form a new property will automatically
reduce the redundant counts. Thus the combined features give
more realistic properties rather than the separate features.
Another advantage of the combined features is the reduction in
the feature space. Here only the atom wise features are used
and residue wise features are omitted from the combinations.
The results  (see supplementary material) indicate that
with separate features there is a slight decrease in MCC and
slight increase in accuracy with feature selection. The reversal
in this trend is observed for combined features. The maximum
accuracy is found to be 95.59 % and 94.11% for separate and
combined features respectively.

Conclusion
In this work ligand centroid approaches were employed for
prediction of mannose-binding sites. The tuned classifier model
with most informative features provides an accuracy of more
than 90 % percent. The developed model can be used to predict
the mannose binding sites with a high degree of confidence.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Dr. V.K. Jayaraman gratefully acknowledges funding from
Department of Science and Technology, New Delhi for financial
assistance

Citation:Khare et al, Bioinformation 8(24): 1202-1205 (2012)

