Background
The silkworm is one of the most economically important, beneficial
insects in many developing countries owing to for silk production
and source of biomaterials. With advances in genomic technologies,
there is a rapid increase in silkworm­related data including genome
sequences and genetic markers. The SilkDB database is a web based
repository for the curation, integration and study of silkworm
genetic and genomic data []. KAIKObase is an integrated
silkworm genome database and data mining tool with 4 map
browsers, 1 gene viewer, and 2 independent databases []. The
Central Sericultural Germplasm Resources Centre (CSGRC)
provides 1,120 mulberry and 432 silkworm germplasm resources
[]. The WildSilkbase provides the database is provided with
57,113 ESTs which are clustered and assembled into 4,019 contigs
and 10,019 singletons derived from 3 major wild silk­moth []. The
SilkSatDb is a relational database of microsatellites extracted from
the available expressed sequence tags and whole genome shotgun
sequences of the silk­moth []. The National Academy of
Agricultural Science (NAAS) has developed a database system to
provide integrated information about various gene resources [–]and 
has launched the silkworm gene resources project []. Towards
this effort, we developed a web­based database to provide
characterization and images information in silkworm.

Methodology
Dataset
The silkworm varieties collected from the silkworm gene resources
project of NAAS. As a result of this project, we have investigated
the characterization of silkworms as variety, strain and larval
marking including shape and color in the different stage images.
The silkworm database provides 321 silkworm variety information
for six different regions namely, Korean (4 varieties), Japanese (90
varieties), Chinese (96 varieties), European (32 varieties), Tropical
(9 varieties) and non­classified (90 varieties). The 1,132 photo
images of shape and color information collected from the life cycle
of various silkworm varieties. Additionally, the database was
distinguished four different race types, namely univoltine (32 races),
bivoltine (188 races), multivoltine (11 races) and others (90 races).

Database development
Using the collected silkworm varieties characterization and image
information, we have developed a silkworm gene resources
database with four main features: variety searching, characterization
viewing, general information and photo gallery. The platform was
developed using MYSQL and JAVA languages. The data was
stored in Oracle relational database management system (RDBMS).
The logical and physical schema of the database followed the
standard principles of relational database by ERWin Data Modeler
software.

Implementation and features
The silkworm database [] has four major function menus: variety
searching, characterization viewing, general information and photo
gallery. The variety searching viewer allows that users can access
the information of 321 silkworm gene resources. Characterization
viewer provides silkworm gene resources characterization
information including images in the life cycle such as larval, egg
and cocoon stages. General information menu provides a table of
detailed information such as description of silkworm, brushing, rearing of young silkworms, rearing of advanced silkworms,
mounting, cocoon harvesting and cocoon sorting. The photo gallery
menu provides 1,132 images regarding shape and color in the life
cycle of various silkworm varieties. All images of database provide
an enlargement photograph by clicking a specific image. When
using category search or clicking identification number, users can
view a table of detailed characterization table and image table of
three life cycle stages in silkworm. A specific characterization
information table provides accession number, variety, strain and
larval marking, blood color, cocoon color, cocoon shape, egg colors,
remarks and image table provides photos which consist of shape and
color in the different stages of larval, egg and cocoon stages .

Future work
The silkworm gene resources database consists of four major
functional categories: variety searching, characterization viewing,
general information and photo gallery. The database provides of 321
silkworm gene resources and 1,132 images regarding life cycle of
various silkworm varieties. Users are assisted in tracing any new
variety and utilization on basic such as silkworm breeding using
specific characterization information. In the future, we plans to
develop an integrated silkworm database not only commercial
silkworm genes but also wild silkworms and other rare insect
species.

This work was supported by the National Academy of Agricultural
Science and the Biogreen 21 Program of Rural Development
Administration.

Citation:Kim et al, Bioinformation 4(10): 436-437 (2010)

A snap shot of the specific characterization information table through silkworm database. The characterization and image
information table show sample (Hansung banmun) by clicking a specific identification number (No. 143).

