Background
The CREB/ATF family contains transcription factors that
regulate various processes, including cell proliferation,
differentiation and apoptosis [–]. Members of the CREB/ATF
family are characterized by their control of gene expression
through the cAMP-responsive element sequence 
[]. Moreover,
these proteins contain a conserved transmembrane region and
basic region-leucine zipper (bZip) domain on the C-terminus 
[–]. 
Although particular proteins are ubiquitously expressed in
tissues, certain members are tissue specific and organism
specific. For instance, the CREB3L4 protein is primarily found
in the human prostate [], whereas mice express CREB3L4,
referred to as Tisp40, almost exclusively in the testis 
[–].
Nonetheless, CREB3L4 isoforms are cytoplasmic proteins,
found embedded in the endoplasmic reticulum [,
]. Upon
activation of CREB3L4, via Golgi protease S1P cleavage,
CREB3L4 translocates to the nucleus to regulate DNA targets 
[,
,
].

Two isoforms of the mouse CREB3L4 protein have been
identified, namely Tisp40α and Tisp40β [–]. Both transcripts
vary in size, where Tisp40α contains 315 amino acids and
Tisp40β possesses 370 amino acids. This transcript difference in
size is due to differing transcription start sites 
[]. Moreover,
this difference could result in varying secondary structure
elements, ultimately promoting alternative structures.
Although Tisp40α is the more abundant form of the CREB3L4
protein in mice testes, Tisp40β is the more potent transcriptional
activator []. In contrast, human CREB3L4 contains 395 amino
acids, with a similar transcription start site to that of Tisp40β
[GenBank AB057281.2]. Furthermore, elevated CREB3L4
expression in humans has been linked to a variety of cancers,
including prostate and hepatocellular carcinomas [, 
–]. 

Mice offer a valuable experimental model organism for
analyzing signaling pathways implicated in human cancer
development. However, preliminary examinations must be
conducted in order to insure that results from murine studies
can be translated into a human model. Computational
approaches involving bioinformatics offer a method for
deducing protein homology when comparing factors across
organisms. The aim of the current study is to analyze the
similarities and differences of CREB3L4 in mice and humans,
using tissue location, sequence length, sequence homology,
protein binding sites and folding patterns in active sites as
parameters for assessing whether knowledge regarding Tisp40α
in mice can be extrapolated for human CREB3L4. Structural
similarities can reveal functional similarities, as most protein
function is ultimately determined by structure.

Methodology
For immunostaining, frozen testis sections (5 microns) were
exposed for 60 minutes to PBS containing 10% normal goat
serum (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) and 0.1% Triton X-100 (Research
Organics Inc, Cleveland, OH) to block nonspecific antibody
binding, followed by incubation overnight with primary
antibody for mouse Atce1/Tisp40a Isoform of CREB3L4 at 4°C.
After being incubated with Alexa Fluor 568-conjugated IgG (1:
500) secondary antibody and counterstained with 4,6-
diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI), images were acquired by
using Nikon Eclipse E600 fluorescence microscope. Images
were processed by using SPOT advance software, Diagnostic
Instruments, Sterling Heights, MI and Photoshop CS3 (Adobe
Systems, San Jose, CA), with the input levels adjusted to span
the range of acquired signal intensities exactly.

Full-length cDNA of mouse and human CREB3L4 were
obtained from NCBI GenBank (accession numbers AF287260
and AB052781.2 respectively) while protein sequences were
downloaded from Uniprot database (Q9D2A5 and Q8TEY5
respectively). Sequence alignment was conducted using a
ClustalW program to identify homologous regions 
[].
Secondary structural similarities were assessed using PHD, a
neural network method []. Transmembrane helices were
predicted using PHD Helical Transmembrane prediction 
[].

Discussion
Similar to the murine CREB3L4 as shown by El-Alfy et al.
(2006), the human isoform also contains nine exons ().
However, the human CREB3L4 has only one isoform while the
mouse contains two isoforms. Specifically, the human isoform is
more similar to mouse Tisp40β as it contains the initial 55
residues which are absent in Tisp40α. Nonetheless, the current
study utilized Tisp40α because this particular isoform is more
prevalent [].

DAPI staining and fluorescence microscopy reveal that active
mice had higher Tisp40α expression in their spermatids
compared to sedentary mice. Images suggest that Tisp40α
operates as a stress-response molecule during murine
spermatogenesis (). Detection of the Tisp40α isoform is
consistent with a prior study in which only Tisp40α was present
in the mice testes []. Zhang and Kaufman (2004) propose that
factors containing a basic leucine zipper domain (bZIP) support
the maintenance of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) [].
Specifically, bZIP factors initiate the production of proteins
utilized by the ER for the synthesis of peptides. Thus, if the
onset of activity instigates stress and elevated protein
production, greater expression of bZIP factors such as Tisp40α
would likely occur. This reasoning provides an explanation for
the elevated Tisp40α shown in the active mice. Moreover,
Chigurupati et al. (2008) report that exercise in mice alleviates
oxidative stress and promotes spermatogenesis and testosterone
production. The Tisp40α isoform possibly mediates this effect,
as demonstrated by the elevated expression of Tisp40α in
running mice [].

Human CREB3L4 contains 69% identity and 80% similarity
with Mouse Tisp40α (). Furthermore, three notable
features were found in both isoforms: the DNA binding basic
region, the dimerized leucine zipper and the putative
transmembrane region containing 20 hydrophobic amino acids.
The conserved sequence (RXXL), which is speculated to be the
consensus recognition motif of S1P, was also prominently
present.

According to PHD, both proteins contain a secondary structure
that primarily consists of coils and alpha helices. Specifically,
mouse Tisp40α showed 31.75% alpha helices, 11.43% beta
strands and 56.83% random coils whereas human CREB3L4
showed 34.80% alpha helices, 9.72% beta strands and 55.49%
random coils (). Transmembrane helices, as predicted
by the PHD Helical transmembrane (PHDhtm) program, also
showed similar secondary structural features ().
Conserved transmembrane helices suggest that the overall
folding and resultant function of these proteins are likely
similar.

Our results reveal that the genomic organization of human
CREB3L4 is very similar to mouse Tisp40α. Although the two
proteins are found in different organisms and tissues, the
isoforms display very similar secondary structural homology.
Comparisons of 3D structures for these proteins are unavailable
because the current RCSB database does not contain the
structures. Our computational results suggest that the
important domains necessary for the function of the protein are
well conserved. These proteins likely carry out similar
functions, acting as membrane-associated transcription factors
with a bZIP domain that mediate DNA binding and
dimerization.

Conclusion
The present study offers the first preliminary results depicting
the homology of mouse Tisp40α to human CREB3L4. We
conclude that although both proteins are found in different
organisms and tissues, the isoforms likely demonstrate similar
mechanisms in regulating gene expression due to their high
structural homology. Other studies have mentioned the
presence of a pig CREB3L4 that contains a similar genomic
organization to the human CREB3L4 []. Further studies
examining the homology of the porcine gene would be useful in
constructing an evolutionary tree for the CREB3L4 gene.
Although mouse Tisp40α is commonly identified in the mouse
testes, RT-PCR results have revealed the presence of mRNA
transcripts of the gene in the mouse prostate []. Moreover,
another study detected human CREB3L4 mRNA transcripts in
the human testes [], suggesting that this protein may be
expressed in a variety of tissues within a single organism.

Understanding the homology across different isoforms is vital
to extrapolating information across organisms. Numerous
studies utilize a murine model to analyze interactions in vivo.
However, murine models exhibit little use if observations
cannot be related to the human population. Structural evidence
suggests the similarity existing between mouse Tisp40α to
human CREB3L4, despite the two proteins being present in
different organisms and tissues. Thus, translating observations
collected on Tisp40α in a mouse-based model to human
CREB3L4 is plausible, as supported by the results of the study.

Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest exists with this
manuscript.

We thank Dr. Mark P. Mattson and Alexis Stranahan of
National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health,
Baltimore, MD for kindly providing mouse tissues. We also
thank Sic L Chan, Assistant Professor and Srinivasulu
Chigurupati, Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences, College of
Medicine, University of Central Florida, 4000 Central Florida
Blvd, Orlando, FL 32816 for providing laboratory to conduct
experiments. Antibody specific for mouse Tisp40α isoform of
CREB3L4 was kindly provided by Dr. Claude Labrie, CHUL
Research Center: 2705 Laurier Boul, Ste-Foy, QC, G1V 4G2,
Canada (email: Claude.Labrie@crchul.ulaval.ca)

Citation:Velpula et al, Bioinformation 8(12): 574-577 (2012)

Legend − Structure of the human CREB3L4 gene with
the encoded polypeptides. The solid black rectangles illustrate
the coding exons while the solid line depicts the non-coding
exons. The Genbank accession number for the human CREB3L4
gene is AB052781.2

Expression of the Atce1/Tisp40α isoform of CREB3L4
in mouse spermatids in life long runners and sedentary mice.

Alignment of the deduced amino acid sequences of
CREB3L4 from mouse and human species. ‘*’ represents
conserved amino acid acids, ‘:’ represents high similarity, ‘.’
represents low similarity. The deduced, basic regions, leucine
zipper motifs and transmembrane regions are indicated in the
above sequences. The conserved, repeated leucine residues in
the leucine zipper motif are highlighted and the putative S1P
recognition sites are boxed.

Secondary structural features of mouse and human
CREB3L4 protein predicted by the PHD program. Yellow
arrows indicate the region of beta strand conformation while
red color lines indicate regions with alpha helices.

PHD Helical transmembrane prediction for Tisp40α
and human CREB3L4. A similar topological prediction for both
mouse and human protein is shown, indicating that overall 3D
fold might be similar in for both isoforms.

