Background
The DNA double helix has more information built into its structure,
that are both local such as variation in base pairing interactions and
stacking interactions, as well as long range such as dynamic
superhelical stress [–]. These interactions are responsible for the
physical chemistry of the sequences and they are reflected in the
thermodynamic properties such as the melting temperature.
Therefore, sequences that have a high homology are expected to
have similar thermodynamic parameters such as the melting
temperature (Tm). Melting of a DNA molecule involves the
denaturation the double­stranded DNA molecule into two single
strands and it is the reverse process of hybridization. The
denaturation process can be affected by many means such as an
increase in temperature or denaturant concentrations []. The
melting curve represents the denaturation process as a function of
increasing sample temperature. Experimentally, the melting profile
can be monitored by optical techniques such as absorption and
fluorescence microscopy as the interactions among stacked bases
cause a decrease in UV absorption. Melting of double­stranded
DNA at elevated temperatures involves breaking the hydrogen
bonds of the base pairs and a decrease of base stacking. This results
in an increase in UV absorption, a hyperchromicity, which can be
measured with a spectrophotometer [].

Melting curve analysis has been used in many applications such as
the detection of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) [–] and
has recently been proposed as an approach to DNA sequencing [].
DNA melting profile analysis has also been used in many clinical
research applications []; these include genotyping [–],
mutation scanning [,] and simultaneous genotyping and
mutation scanning [–]. Experiments based on melting profiles
have also been used as a rapid, economical means of screening close
relatives for transplant compatibility []. The melting behavior and
melting temperature of oligonucleotides can be predicted by a wide
range of thermodynamic models which assumes that the stability of
a DNA duplex depends on the identity and orientation of the
neighboring base pairs [–‌–]. The idea of using the thermal
stability, in particular the melting temperature to differentiate
between DNA sequences was originally suggested in the pioneering
work by King and Wilson [] and later followed by others [–]. King and Wilson used the nucleic acid hybridization melting
temperature to quantify the resemblance between human and
chimpanzee genes []. The difference in melting temperature
between the reannealed human DNA and human­chimpanzee hybrid
DNA is about 1.1° C, and that to the sibling species of Drosophila,
congeneric species of mice and congeneric species of Drisophila are
3° C, 5° C and 19° C, respectively. Higher the difference in the Tm,
larger the evolutionary distance between the species. As longer
DNA sequences tend to have several localized melting events [,], the melting profile of the DNA sequence has additional
information []. In one of the early works, Schmid and Marks []
demonstrated the use of DNA hybridization as a guide to phylogeny
using a model system of heteroduplexes formed between human β
globin CDNA and four β ­like globin genes isolated from a different
species (chimpanzee).

In this study, we present a simple method for classifying the
nucleotide sequences using simulated melting profiles. We
demonstrate the utility of this method in β έglobin and gene clusters
of MHC class II α­chain proteins across multiple mammalian
species. Comparison of the melting profile generated phylogenetics
with that of the conventional sequence based approach reproduces
many of the major features, but do not show a perfect match. The
major advantage of this method is that it provides a way to verify
phylogenetics constructed only from the DNA sequence and the
molecular evolutionary process experimentally.

Methodology
The first exon of the β ­globin gene is often used as a standard
example in many DNA­based graphing methods [] is used as the
first example. The gene family of β ­globin varies between 86­105
bases and has a significant biological role in oxygen transport. β ­
globin gene across the 11 species is listed in  . The class II
MHC α­chain sequences were obtained from the original reference
of Takahashi and co­workers [] 
(see  for data). The average length of the class II MHC α­chain is 612 and a
total of 31 different species were used for the analysis. The melting
profile was separately calculated for each individual sequence using
the MELTSIM program [, ]. The melting profiles were
calculated from 60°C to 120°C in steps of 0.1°C using the default
setting (75mM of NaCl). Classification of the calculated profiles
were performed using the Euclidian distance measure, unweighted
arithmetic average for clustering with a 10 fold bootstrapping for
revalidation. Clustering and validation of the profiles were
performed using a combination of codes written in Matlab [] and
R [,]. For the same DNAs, sequence­based evolutionary trees
were constructed using MEGA []. All phylogenetic output files
were generated in newick tree format
(http://evolution.genetics.washington.edu/phylip/newicktree.html) ,
and visualized using Treedyn [].

Results
The gene family of β-globin across the 11 species are listed in
  along with the percentage of the various bases, GC content
as well the estimated Tm, for each sequence.  shows the
simulated melting profile using the program MELTSIM of the
denaturation process (θ vs. temperature) (in ) for all the
11 sequences and its first derivative dθ/dT (in ). The
population value 0.5 and ­0.5 represents the double­­helical and
denatured (single strand) DNAs, respectively and the melting
temperature (Tm) is defined to be where these populations are equal.
The first derivative of the melting profile is more illustrative of the
process of denaturation, as the melting temperature is represented as
a peak (dθ/dT). Each derivative profile shows peak value that
corresponds to the Tm and additional features such the width, shape
and other low intensity peaks are manifestations of the sequence
composition [,]. 
As β­globin is represented by a relatively
small number of bases such distinct features are not pronounced,
except for the opossum (highlighted with dark curve in ).
The DNA sequence of opossum has the lowest of the GC content of
the sequences and consequently has the lowest Tm []. Melting
profile based phylogenetics of β ­globin is shown in ,
while the similar profile using the sequence is shown in .
Most of the tree structures are reproduced in the melting profile
based phylogenetics, with few notable differences. In both
approaches the sequence of Opossum is clearly differentiated and
the relative distances between Rat, Lemur and Gallus are also
reproduced. Sequence based approach shows the cluster of Human,
Chimpanzee and Gorilla, while the melting profile based approach
keeps only the cluster of Chimpanzee and Gorilla together.

The shape of the melting curve and the melting temperature (Tm) are
sensitive to the salt concentration in the sample []. All the
calculations in  are performed with the salt concentration of
75mM. To highlight the effect of salt concentration on the melting
profile, the β­globin sequence of opossum that shows additional
features in the melting profile is simulated as a function of salt
concentration.  shows the plot of the profiles and the
change in the Tm is shown in . Increase in salt
concentration increases Tm (70°C at 0.01M to 98°C at 0.5M) and
follows the empirical relationship between Tm vs.
log(Concentration) []. Increasing the salt concentration also
drastically changes the melting profile such as drastic loss of fine
features that represent local melting events. Both melting profile
and the Tm are important to differentiate the sequences in
determining the phylogenetics and therefore optimal concentration
of the salt is expected to be critical.

 show the melting profiles and molecular phylogenetics,
respectively for the genes of class II MHC α­chain genes []. The
origins and divergence times of mammalian class II MHC genes
have been studied in detail by Takahashi et al [] and the data
presented here is one of the subgroups of gene clusters studied in
the original study (  of []). 
The sequence lengths of class II
MHC α­chain genes are much larger than that of β ­globin. Total of
31 different sequences and sequence length close to 612 for most
sequences (see supporting material for the list genetic sequences)
were used. As expected the melting profiles of these genes are
complex suggesting the presence of additional features that could be
useful to differentiate one sequence from the other. Original
sequence based analysis of class II MHC α­chain genes showed four
sequences (Zebra fish A1, A2 and A3 and shark) belong to an outgroup
and the melting temperature analysis () also reproduces
the same result. Mammalian class II MHC genes are clustered into
four major groups, DRA, DPA, DQA and DNA []. Melting
temperature based phylogeny is able to reproduce three of the four
clusters only with overlaps between the closer clusters DQA and
DPA.

Discussion
With the advent of new molecular biology techniques including
sophisticated cloning, sequencing and monitoring genomes allows
the characterization of the single species without need for crosshybridization
techniques. For example Liu et al [] have applied a
melting map calculation to the complete human genome.
(http://meltmap.uio.no). DNA melting curves analysis is a valuable
technique in sequencing, differentiate between coding and noncoding
regions [–], 
genotyping [–] in the design of
oligonucleotide probes in microarray experiments [–] and
clinical applications [] Classification of the profiles presented in
this paper adds to an additional dimension to the power of melting
profile analysis.

Salt concentration is expected to play a significant role on the
applicability of DNA melting based differentiation between the
sequences (). The hypochromicity of DNA, responsible for
the denaturing of the double helix is explained in terms of the
interaction of the bases when they are stacked in the double helical
array as delineated by Watson ­ Crick Model [–]. Semiquantitative
models developed in the 1960s continue to provide
significant insight to the melting profiles of DNAs [,]. Another
major variable generating the melting profiles of the DNA
sequences is the choice of the simulation program. In this work we
have used the one of the widely used method, MELTSIM (materials
and methods). For short oligonucleotides (16­32 bases), Panjkovich
and Melo [] performed an extensive comparison of the various
methods. In their study it was noted that large and significant
differences in the estimations of Tm were obtained while using
different methods and no conclusive recommendations were
provided on the choice of simulation methods to determine the
melting profiles or its accuracy. Here, we are suggesting an
approach to classify DNA sequences has potential implication for
sequence analysis; DNA sequences could be classified purely from
the experimental melting profiles and sequence information is not
mandatory as it depends. This method is expected to find wider
applications once the sensitivity of the results is established by
experiments.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors acknowledge Dr. K.W. P. Miller for critical reading of
the manuscript. V.V.K. is supported by an NIH grant: Research
Infrastructure for Minority Institutions P20MD002732.

Citation:Reese et al, Bioinformation 4(10): 463-467 (2010)

Melting profiles of beta­globin genes: (a) and their respective first derivatives (b). Some of the sequences are labeled in (b) and
the melting profile of Opossum is shown in dark lines.

Evolutionary trees of β­globin genes: Evolutionary trees constructed using the thermal melting profiles (left) and that from the
respective gene sequence after sequence alignment.

Temperature effect of Melting profiles: Plots of the melting profiles of the Opossum sequence of the β­globin gene family as a
function of salt concentration (a). The plot of the melting temperature (Tm) as a function of the log (concentration) follows a liner
relationship (b).

Application to Class II α­chains of MHC sequences: (a) Melting profiles of the 31 class II α­chains of MHC proteins
simulated using MELTSIM. (b) Melting profile derived molecular evolutionary tree of class II alpha­chains of MHC proteins. DPA, DQA,
DNA and DRA refer to the gene clusters originally ([]).

