Background
Computational tools to analyze nucleic acid sequences and primary
structures of proteins are essential in the help of the work of biochemists
and molecular biologists. Many tools for this purpose are available so far
in sites of various research groups or in servers of biological data, such as
GenBank [], Protein 
Data Bank [] 
and ExPASy []. Javascript is an
object-oriented language that is interpreted by several current Web
browsers. Together with the hypertext markup language (HTML) and
cascading style sheets (CSS) languages, Javascript allows the development
of several bioinformatics simple tools, with Web interface, to manipulate
short sequences of nucleic acids, peptides or proteins, generating primers
and extracting specific information contents from a biological data file. In
this work, we developed a package of programs in Javascript, called Easy
Bioinformatics Analysis (EBiAn), which enable the more routinely
analysis used in preliminary computational approaches to experimental
laboratory practices in the biochemistry and molecular biology area.

Description
The package includes the following tools:

GenBank to Fasta
Receives a GenBank file as input and returns the entire biological sequence
in FASTA file. Use this tool to remove non-sequence information from a
GenBank file.

EMBL to Fasta
Receives an EMBL file as input and returns the entire biological sequence
in FASTA file. Use this tool to remove non-sequence information from an
EMBL file.

To three Letter Code
Converts a protein sequence in one-letter code to a sequence in three-letter
code.

ToOneLetterCode
Converts a protein sequence in three-letter code to a sequence in one-letter
code.

DNA/RNA-Param
Receives a RNA or DNA sequence and returns its contents of nitrogen
bases.

Complement
Receives a DNA sequence and returns its complementary sequence. In this
program there is the possibility of obtain the reverse complementary
sequence.

Translate
Receives a DNA sequence and performs the translation into amino acids,
using the standard codon table. It is possible perform the translation for the
three open reading frames (ORFs) in the direct strand (reading +1, +2 and
+3) and in the reverse strand (reading -1, -2 and -3).

Transcription
Receives a DNA sequence and returns its transcript sequence.

DNA Cutter
Receives a DNA sequence and returns the possible cleavage sites of most
used restriction endonucleases, giving the name of the enzyme, the number
and locations of the cuts along of the sequence.

ORF Finder
Receives a DNA sequence and returns all the possible open reading frames
(ORFs). In this tool, its possible obtain the three open reading frames in the
direct strand (reading +1, +2 and +3) and in the 
reverse strand (reading -1, -2 and -3). The user can discriminate the minimum size of coding
sequences to be screened.

Primer Generator
Receives a DNA sequence and returns its forward and reverse terminal
primers. It is possible also generate the internal primer from the input
sequence. The user can determine the length of the primers, as well as
adding endonuclease restriction sites.

Prot-Param
Receives a protein sequence and returns the amount of each amino acid
type. Moreover, returns the amount of hydrophobic, hydrophilic, positive,
negative and aromatic amino acids residues and the amount of amino acids
with hydroxyl group.

ProteinDigest
Receives an amino acid protein sequence and returns the position of its
potential sites of proteolytic cleavage 
[,] 
of a user selected enzyme.

MS-Digest
Receives an amino acid protein sequence and returns all theoric peptide
fragments generated by proteolytic cleavage 
[,] 
of a user selected enzyme. The program also generates the monoisotopic and average mass,
simulating monoprotonated fragments.

ProtColourer
Receives a protein or peptide sequence and highlights a group of amino
acids selected by user. The program contains pre-defined groups of amino
acids to be marked: hydrophobic, hydrophilic, positive, negative and
aromatic residues and amino acids with hydroxyl group. In addition, the
user can choose the color to be used in the highlights and define its own
group of amino acids.

PepBuilder
Allows the user to create textual representations of peptide sequences. The
program automatically calculates the average and monoisotopic mass, and
returns its molecular formula.

 The Easy Bioinformatics Analysis package has an intuitive and easy
navigation. The programs can be accessed online by the main page
accessible from 
http://www.iq.unesp.br/EXTENSAO/EBiAn/html/ebian.html
(). 
Moreover, it can also be used offline after downloaded it
from the main page. The user with programming skills can access the
source code and change it to create new programs or adapting them. The
programs depend only of Web browsers and are compatible with Internet
Explorer, Opera, Mozilla Firefox and Google Chrome, having better
performance for the last two. In future versions of the package, the
included programs will be improved and new programs may be included.
Additional questions or comments regarding the Easy Bioinformatics
Analysis package can be sent by e-mail to luiz_cbb@hotmail.com.

We gratefully acknowledge CNPq and CAPES for financial support. R.
Marchetto is recipient of research fellowship from CNPq.

Citation:Barbosaet al , Bioinformation 5(2): 46-48(2010)

Web interface of the EBiAn package.

