Background
Three point Test Cross has been in extensive use to determine
the linkage between two or more genes. Viruses, bacteria, fungi,
tomato, barley, wheat, rice, sorghum, morning glory, garden
pea, maize, Drosophila, etc. are the examples of the organisms
with constructed linkage or genetic maps using this approach
[]. 
Linkage is an essential technique to locate genes on a
chromosome. This helps us to understand the mode of
transmissions for many genetic disorders as well as many other
aspects of a gene, especially for those which are not extensively
studied yet. Moreover, the evolutionary behavior exhibited by
the genes in a population is also affected by the linkage 
[].
Most existing software (Map Distance Calculator at Chang
biosciences &amp; Knud Christensen's Calculator) find out the map
distance by the number of parental progeny and recombinants
progeny taken as input. Recombination is used to determine
map distance between two loci []. 
They calculate map distance on the proportional basis as represented in equation (I). For
small distance, the recombination frequency (RF) is proportional to the map distance 
(see  in
supplementary material).

Methodology
The Gene Locator uses formulae (II), (III), and (IV) to find out
the Recombination frequency and map the genes on the linkage
group to display the sequence of the genes graphically (see
).

Input
Input the traits, their dominant and recessive alleles in the form
of a label or name of the traits and their forms. This input is
then processed into possible number of crossovers. Then the
user is required to input the number of physical progeny
against each of the trait thus formed. These values are then
sorted by progeny or score. Those with the maximum progeny
are classified as “Parental”, those with minimum are classified
as “Double Crossovers”, and the rest as “Single Crossovers”.
The processing of the input entered in the previous steps gives
the output in a three panned frame.

Output
The top left contains the recombination frequency between the
genes sequenced in their exact physical position. The second
pane is for the Coefficient of coincidence, and interference. The
map is printed in the last pane.

Implementation
Gene Locator has been developed integrally in JAVA as a
standalone application for Microsoft Windows operating
systems. The program operates on two main inputs as
mentioned previously: Traits and their Dominant and
recessive alleles. Progeny can be entered in integer form and
the incorrect data or input is trashed by the software with a
message of wrong input. Other user-customized options
such as “save” the data, use 
a “default” data set, “copy”,
“paste” make it more flexible to use to calculate the results
(). The Bottom-right Panel is an example of such
options as it shows the output which was saved through the
options.

Performance
The Software describes the prediction of Genetic Linkage
using three-point testcross. The tool was tested using 45
different datasets (available with the authors). 
 (see
supplementary material) provides with the comparison of
the Gene locator with two similarly designed working
programs to elaborate the functional capabilities of this
software.

Utility
This software can be used for identifying and evaluating the
results of Plant breeding labs accurately and faster than
manual calculation. Moreover, it can help in educational
purposes as testcross calculator and recombination
frequency calculator.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Anwar et al, Bioinformation 8(5): 243-245 (2012)

[Left panel] GUI interface of GENE LOCATOR showing the main page. [Top-right panel] GUI interface for taking the
input in the text fields, such as the name of the traits and the recessive and dominant alleles for the traits to represent them.
[Bottom-right panel] GUI displaying the results of the data set from the NCBI BOOK SHELF which is displaying the recombination
frequency, coefficient of coincidence and interference.

