Background
Simple Sequence Repeats (SSR) or microsatellite is a relative
short tandem repeats of DNA [,
]. Its length polymorphism is
specie specific and inheritable, which makes SSR very useful for
developing genetic SSR marker widely used in linking genome
sequence with traits, diversity investigation, map-base cloning
and molecular breeding []. There are some useful software and
tools developed for SSRs discovery and marker development in
silico. However, they were designed before large genome era
and have two major limitations: i) too low sequence processing
capability and slow speed as pointed by Sharma [] et al to deal
with large genomes while more large genomes i.e. those from
crops become important sources for SSR characterization with
the benefit from the advanced next generation sequencing
technology, ii) no or simple statistical function provided such as
TROLL []. In addition, some tools have platform dependence
i.e. SSR Locator [] and SciRoko 
[]. Most command tools have
no graphic interface and very limited other functions, i.e. tool
MISA [,
]. In order to overcome those limitations mentioned
above, novel software named GMATo was developed for faster
and accurate SSR discovery and comprehensively statistical
analyzing especially for large genomes running at multiple
platforms with both graphic and command interface.

Methodology
The soft GMATo was written in Perl and Java language. Java
was used for developing graphic interface. Perl was used to
discover the microsatellite and perform statistical analyzing. In
GMATo DNA sequences are formatted first and the long DNA
sequence is chunked to small segments at several Mb for easy
processing. All microsatellite motifs consisting of A, T, G and C
nucleotide of DNA at user controlled length are generated
using Perl meta-characters and regular expression pattern. All
motifs are searched greedily through each DNA chunk using
Perl powerful pattern matching function. The returned values
are used to generate SSR loci information at each chunk and the
final SSR loci data at a chromosome after merging data from
chunks. This method allows microsatellite discover efficiently
in any genome with any size theoretically. Statistical
classification and summarization were performed at four levels
i.e. motif length, motif composition, grouped complementary
motifs and chromosome/scaffold. A flowchart was shown in
().

Validation
The performance of microsatellite identification in recent
published Setaria Italica entire genome[] showed GMATo ran
faster than either of most widely used tools, SSR Locator and
MISA, in all three platforms  (see supplementary
material). It was also easily to mine SSR in the genome in a
normal computer because processing one chunked segment at a
time in GMATo required less computing memory. A total
number of 46,739, 46,625 and 46,782 microsatellite loci were
identified by GMATo, SSR Locator and MISA respectively
(), suggesting more accurate SSR mining than SSR
Locator. Manually comparison of these loci revealed that the
extra loci from MISA are mined redundantly in the overlapped
microsatellites.

Software input
Both graphic user and command line interface were provided in
GMATo, either executable independently in Windows, Linux or
Mac OS system. Only one input file containing DNA
sequence(s) in (raw) (multi-) FASTA format is required to be
chosen in graphic mode or typed in command mode if taken the
default parameters. The parameters are the motif length range,
the minimum repeated times and an option for highlighting
microsatellite (). The motif length can be set to any
range instead of 1-10 bp given in most SSR mining tools.

Software output
The output files generated by GMATo are one formatting
report, one file containing SSR loci information and another file
containing statistical distribution of SSR. All output files are in a
tab delimited plain text format for easily importing to other
applications i.e. spread sheet for viewing or other manipulation
().The formatting report summarizes the input
sequence(s). The SSR loci file lists the input sequence ID and its
length, starting and ending position of a microsatellite, the
repeated times and the motif sequence.

The statistical distribution file provides statistical data at four
different classifications at genome aspect. A summary of total is
generated in the end of each classification. Classification I is the
motif length statistics, providing overview information for the
type, abundance in rank order. Classification II is the motif
statistics based on sequence composition, i.e. motif composition,
occurrence in ranked order. Classification III is the statistics of
grouped complementary motifs, providing distribution data for
complementary motifs such as TC/GA in a group and their
occurrence in ranked order. Classification IV is the statistics of
chromosome level distribution, providing the total occurrence
of motif(s) and SSR frequency (loci/Mb) at each chromosome or
super-scaffold.

Utility
GMATo can be used for efficient and faster microsatellite
sequence identification from any given DNA sequences or
genomes at any size. Detailed statistic distribution of
microsatellites can be used for genome analysis.

Caveat and future development
Current version provides each perfect SSR loci information. The
compound and long imperfect microsatellites can be calculated
from the SSR loci output using additional script. For a future
development, more functions including displaying statistical
data graphically, primer designing, marker generation and
electronic mapping markers into a genome will be added. The
final goal is to develop an integrated powerful toolkit
facilitating microsatellite characterization and marker
development in large genomes.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Wang et al, Bioinformation 9(10): 541-544 (2013)

A flowchart of software GMATo.

Image showing input and output of soft GMATo; (A) graphic input interface; (B) SSR loci information produced by
GMATo; (C) SSR statistical data produced by GMATo.

