Background
Medicinal Plants possess naturally occurring valuable
phytochemicals []. Plant uses these chemicals to defend them,
but recent research demonstrated that they can protect humans
and animals against different diseases []. Medicinal plants
contain various phytochemicals such as organosulfur
compounds, limonoids, lignans, furyl compounds, alkaloids,
polyines, thiophenes, proteins, peptides, flavonoids, terpenoids,
polyphenolics, coumarins and saponins etc. These
phytochemicals display curative functions due to scavenging,
antioxidant activities, hampering viral entry, DNA and RNA
replication against diverse range of viruses i.e antibacterial,
antifungal, cancer prevention, enzyme stimulation, hormonal
action, and many more. Researchers are evaluating drugs
resulting from natural sources due to belief that these medicines
are safe as compared to expensive synthetic drugs which are
always related with adverse effects. The adverse effects of
synthetic drugs necessitate for finding new harmless
therapeutic agents from natural sources [,
].

Different online medicinal plant databases provide information
about geographical distribution, classification, activities (i.e.
antidiabetic, antitumor, antimicrobial), some provides
phytochemical information and structures in different formats.
There is no single database that combines all aspects of
medicinal plants under one forum. To fulfill this gap and to
provide researchers all information under one forum MAPS
database is constructed.

The MAPS (Medicinal plants Activities, Phytochemicals and
Structural) database provides useful information about not only
included in different databases/literature but also Pakistan's
medicinal plants missed in them, helping researchers working
on drug discovery from natural resources. It facilitates the user
to search (selecting plant name/activity/target/all
information), download structures and submit information.

Design &amp; Methods
Screening for Medicinal Plants Activities, Phytochemicals and their Structures:
Plants activities, phytochemicals and their structures were
searched using PubMed [], Pubmed Central 
[], Pubchem 
[],
NPACT [], Drug Bank 
[] and PhytAmp 
[] with different
keyword i.e. plants name (scientific and common) with
activities i.e (antibacterial, antimicrobial, antiviral, antifungal,
antidiabetic, lavacidal, etc), structures in .mol format,
phytochemicals, targets (i.e Bacillus cereus, Candida albicans,
Escherichia coli and Hepatitis virus etc ).

MAPS database construction:
MAPS database is constructed using MS Access. (a)Each
activity based record was stored with plant name, activity,
target and literature reference; (b)Each phytochemical record
was stored with medicinal plant name (scientific),
phytochemical constituent with literature reference (PMID,
other paper titles not found in PubMed); (c)Each Structural
record includes MAPS_ID, constituent name, phytochemical
class (i.e. flavonoids, alkaloids, saponins, aromatic compounds,
tannins), PubChem-Id, and Hyperlinks to PubChem-Id (if
available), structure image and .mol format downloadable file;
(d) Each Literature record was stored as PubMed ID, title,
abstract, authors and PubMed Central Id (if available) and for
the non-pubmed references paper title, journal name, abstract
and author's information is used.

MAPS Web Interface:
MAPS database is made freely accessible on
http://www.mapsdatabase.com using HTML, PHP, CSS,
Aspx.Net, MySQL and MS Access (). MAPS Database
web interface includes pages for home page, activity,
phytochemical, structures, literature (PMID &amp; Other Journal)
and search page. Web Interface also allows users to submit
phytochemicals, activities with target, and structures only with
reference to authentic source of information that will be
updated by MAPS admins after reviewing.

Utility
Currently MAPS includes more than 500 medicinal plants,
&gt;1000 records for medicinal plants activities including test
targets (i.e Vibrio cholera, Staphylococcus spp., Shigella., Salmonella
spp., Influenza virus, HIV, Enterococcus spp., Dengue virus,
Enterobacter spp., Candida spp., Bacillus spp., Aspergillus spp., A.
aegypti larvae, Acinetobacter spp., Microsporum spp.,
Mycobacterium spp., Penicillium spp., Plasmodium spp., Proteus
spp., Pseudomonas spp.) and activities (i.e antibacterial, antiviral,
antifungal, antidiabetic, antiprotozoal, anti-inflammatory,
larvacidal, urease inhibitory, gastroprotective, cardioprotective,
hepatoprotective, thrombolytic, Antidiarrhoeal). More than
2200 phytochemicals, &gt;1200 phytochemical structures in .mol
format and &gt;450 literature references are stored in MAPS
database used for medicinal plant activtities, phytochemicals
and structural search. This database can be helpful for
researchers looking for plants as a source of drug designing by
providing information that a specific plant contains what type
of phytochemicals, on which targets it found to be effective in
previous research studies, phytochemical structures &amp; activities
it possess.

Future Development
We plan to search more information and update MAPS
database and to facilitate users to download complete
information, search phytochemicals via PubChem Id, names or
source (plant). MAPS will include user login system to store
their query results.

We are thankful to Government College &amp; University,
Faisalabad and AzizSoft for providing facilities and funding to
online MAPS Database

Citation:Ashfaq et al, Bioinformation 9(19): 993-995 (2013)

Steps followed for creating MAPS database.

