Background:
Nanotechnology deals with the study and manipulation of 
matter at nanometer scale i.e., in 1-100 nm range []. It has been 
recently used in various fields ranging from electronics, 
cosmetics, to medicinal applications like targeted drug delivery 
systems [,
,
,
]. These applications of nanoparticle have been 
possible, because of their specific properties that are different 
from their counterparts at larger scale of size []. Nanoparticles 
of several metals like gold, Iron, and proteins like albumin and 
gelatin are being increasingly used for medicinal purposes 
[,
,
]. 
Among non metallic nanoparticles, albumin nanoparticles 
are being used for site-directed delivery of antitumor drugs, as 
these have tendency towards accumulation in solid tumors 
[].
Similarly gelatin nanoparticles have been used as 
immunological adjuvant to elevate both humoral as well as 
cellular immune responses to antigen []. Among metals, gold 
and iron nanoparticles have been used in traditional ayurvedic 
medicines and are being used in modern medicinal 
interventions []. Colloidal gold was successfully used to do 
the therapy for rheumatoid arthritis in rats 
[]. Several studies 
are under progress to investigate the interaction of gold 
nanoparticles with proteins. Recently our group has shown 
presence of anti-glycation property in gold nanoparticles 
(GNPs) by preventing glycation of eye lens protein α-crystallin, 
paving a novel approach for cataract prevention and therapy
[]. 
In α-crystallin molecule, amino acids lysine and arginine 
containing free amino groups are powerful sites for glycation in 
addition to the N-terminal amino acid. GNPs competitively 
bind to these free amino groups and N-terminal amino acid and 
prevent the glycation of these groups. Similarly, study done by 
Kogan et al., has demonstrated the applicability of GNPs to 
prevent aggregation of amyloid beta protein and re dissolving 
the amyloid aggregates []. Motivated from these abovereferred 
studies we have chosen to investigate the effect of
GNPs of sizes 20nm and 40 nm to modulate thermal 
aggregation of an enzymatic protein citrate synthase. The 
importance of citrate synthase is that it is involved in Kreb's 
cycle of aerobic respiration. Citrate synthase has optimum 
activity at room temperature, and even with a slight rise in 
temperature it starts to lose its activity and gets aggregated 
[].
We have studied the interaction of this protein with gold 
nanoparticles and tried to deduce a reaction-mechanism of this 
interaction using the concept of pores of GNP assemblies.

Methodology:
Experimental:
Synthesis of gold nanoparticles:
Gold nanoparticle of different size was synthesized by chemical 
reduction method as describe by Storhoff et al. 
[]. Here gold 
(III) salt like chloro auric acid (HAuCl4) (0.256 mM)was 
reduced by tri-sodium citrate (0.52mM) for preparation of 
smaller nanoparticles and for larger nanoparticle particle we 
used less amount of reducing agent (0.15 mM) keeping the 
auric chloride concentration same.

Interaction of gold nanoparticle with protein citrate synthase monitored by TEM:
Citrate synthase (0.0032mg/ml) was incubated with two 
different types of gold nanoparticle for 1 hour at 45°C. The TEM 
images were taken for both particle at 0min and 60 min of the 
reaction as described by Singha et al. 
[]. These TEM (FEI, 
Czech Republic, type FP 5018/40 TECHNAI G2 SPIRIT 
BioTWIN) images are used for computational analysis to 
explain the possible mechanism for prevention of protein heat 
aggregation by gold nanoparticle.

Computational:
Preprocessing and segmentation of images:
Each image was converted to gray scale and resized to 1/3rd of 
the original size to ease further processing. Part of images 
representing nanoparticles were segmented out from 
background using an artificial neural network based 
texturesegmentation protocol. In this protocol each pixel was defined 
by its context window (CW) surrounding it the size of which 
was fixed as 9x9. CW texture defined by the intensities of its 
pixels was fed as input to the ANN to yield a (1, ­1) output for 
object (­1, 1) output for background. Finally the object and 
background pixel values were assigned as 1 and 0 respectively. 
The training data points (i.e., pixels) were carefully chosen to 
include all variety of contexts of types, 
points within the object,

points near the edge but inside the objects,

points at the border of the objects,

points near the edge but outside the objects,

points near or at the edge of the image frame.

 
Moreover the training data points were selected from all the 
image types as described in image acquisition section. CW
texture information for 120 pixels from nanoparticle area and 
background area of images were captured, out of which 84 CWs 
were used as training input data, and remaining 36 for testing. 
The ANN we used for this purpose was a four layered feedforward 
backpropagation network having 81, 42, 21, and 2 
neurons in input, first hidden, second hidden, and output layer 
respectively.

Clustering of object-pixels to isolate individual nanoparticles in segmented images:
Pixels representing nanoparticles were clustered, using k-means 
clustering to arrange the pixels representing different 
nanoparticles into separate groups. Value of k was manually 
counted by observing images having different number of GNPs. 
In the clustering protocol the initial cluster centres were chosen 
by clicking mouse at nearly the GNP-centres to avoid early and 
erroneous convergence of clustering process. The clusters 
actually represented individual GNP and from the pixels within 
it we calculated size of each GNP presented within the 
respective image. Size of a GNP was calculated using its 
diameter in pixel unit where its radius was calculated as the 
distance of the maximally distant point from the cluster centre. 
The area of GNP was however calculated by counting the total 
pixels covering it. Finally size and area units were converted to 
nm and nm2 respectively by using scale given in right-bottom 
corner of each image as shown by Singha et al. 
[]. Arithmetic 
mean, median, and standard deviation for these geometric 
features was calculated for each group of images. These 
measures were compared for evaluating the effect of interaction 
of nanoparticles and citrate synthase (CS).

Computation of expected area and size of pores of clusters made by circular objects:
For rough estimation of size and area of pores of GNP clusters, 
we considered GNPs as spherical objects and their 2D 
projection as circles. Initially 2D pore-area covered by these 
circles was computed to finally estimate the size of these pores. 
Since visual representation of GNP40 clusters shows a major 
existence of pores made by 3-circle compact cluster 
conformation with occasional presence of that made by 4 circles 
and the reverse situation for GNP20, we computed the size 
parameters for these examples only. Expected pore area made 
by 3 and 4-circle compact cluster conformation (as shown in 
) for circle of radius, R as shown in 


Computation of size of protein citrate synthase:
The PDB structure of citrate synthase with PDB code, 1CSC.pdb 
was first downloaded and then read through MATLAB library 
function pdbread. From the coordinates of the atoms of this 
protein, its centroid and maximum radius (i.e., distance of 
maximally distant atom from centroid) was calculated. Finally 
size of the protein was estimated as its diameter.

Results and discussion:
Result of image processing was shown for GNP20 as shown in 
. Diameter of citrate synthase with PDB 
code, 1CSC.pdb was calculated as 8.23 nm. The image 
processing task was performed with primarily three objectives. 
First was to estimate geometric profiles of individual GNPs that 
might have significance in giving insight to whether chaperone 
like activity of GNP has any dependence on its surface. To find 
individual geometric profile of GNP we relied on k-means 
clustering technique [] by manually counting and selecting 
the cluster number and cluster centres respectively. 
 a-c 
showed significant success in achieving this goal. 
( see 
supplementary materials) showed that average size of GNP20 
and GNP40 in presence of protein were 24.74 and 48.02 nm 
respectively. The second objective was to study whether 
chaperone like activity of GNP was dependent on total surface 
area of GNPs present in a particular experimental condition. 
Starting with the existing knowledge 
[] that GNP-constituent 
gold atom is constant we get the indication that number and 
total surface area of GNP40s present in the solution is less than 
GNP20. Therefore we found that reported 
[] less increase of 
protein activity exhibited by GNP20 in comparison to GNP40 in 
the reported experimental condition cannot be interpreted as 
positive dependence of chaperone activity of GNP with total 
GNP surface. Thus it also cross-validated the earlier reported 
findings. Our third objective was to study the effect of size 
profiles of both GNPs and the porous configurations within 
their clusters to control protein activity and aggregation. 
 
showed more increase of average size of GNP20 (30.21%) in 
comparison to GNP40 (15.2%) in presence of protein. To explain 
the underlying cause of this increase in size of GNPs we also 
calculated the expected pore size profiles at different size of
GNPs considering them as spheres. It was intriguing to observe 
that pores obtained by compact 4 circle cluster configuration 
made by circle of size (i.e., diameter) 20 can just accommodate a 
single protein of size 8.23 nm (as shown in result section) while 
its compact 3 circle compact circle counterpart cannot 
accommodate even a single protein. The image of GNP20 
clusters [] 
also supported this finding where we get presence 
of 4 circle cluster configuration is more than other 
configurations. However, the increase in size of GNP20 within 
GNP20-clusters in presence of protein appeared to be a reaction 
mechanism favoring entry of protein molecules within its 
porous configuration by enhancing its pore size. For both of 3 
and 4 circle porous configurations made by GNP40 the pore 
size was already found to be fit to accommodate single protein 
molecules and therefore, increase in size of GNP40 was not 
needed to be that much favored by the same reaction 
mechanism. Therefore, the reaction mechanism driving increase 
of GNP-size in presence of protein appears to be controlled by 
the need of accommodating protein molecules within the 
porous configurations made by their clusters. It also indicated 
existence of an optimum size of GNP for cellular interaction is
40 to 60 nm []. 
Finally it appeared that porous configurations 
of GNP clusters were responsible to give its chaperone like 
activity by accommodating single protein molecules within it to 
retain their activity and thus by preventing its aggregation. 
Also, pores appeared to have an optimum size range, possibly 
to accommodate single protein molecules only, more than 
which may lead to formation of protein aggregates within pore, 
and thereby reducing citrate synthase activity.

Conclusion:
An image processing based geometric theoretic approach was 
presented as an experiment support system to compliment 
investigation of nanoparticle driven biological phenomena. This 
introductory approach showed its effectiveness by extracting 
size information of nanoparticles and porous configurations of 
their clusters. It also indicated the possible role of GNP 
geometry to show its chaperone like activity by retaining citrate 
synthase activity in an experimental condition that should favor 
its aggregation. Our study also showed a possible existence of a 
model describing this role where porous configuration of GNPs 
of an optimum size or a range of size accommodating single 
protein was appeared to serve a role both to prevent protein 
aggregation and to retain its activity.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are thankful to MHRD, Govt. of India and ICMR, Govt. of 
India for approval of grants (No.F.26-14/2003.T.S.V.Dated 
14.01.2004 and No. 52/8/2005-BMS, dated 4/2/10) for this 
work.

Citation:Kaushik et al, Bioinformation 7(7): 320-323 (2011)

Result of a) image of GNP of size 20 nm at 0 min of the 
reaction with protein; b) their segmented form and c) their 
individual form; d) and e) GNP20 and GNP40 clusters 
respectively in presence of citrate synthase; f) diagram 
developed from cluster pore theoretics for 3 and 4 circular 
objects.

