Background
Chrysanthemums, often called mums or chrysanths, are of the
genus (Chrysanthemum) constituting approximately 30 species of
perennial which is native to Asia and northeastern Europe.
Chrysanthemum plants exhibit potential medicinal activities as
shown by earlier studies, e.g., C. indicum showed inhibitory
action against bacteria and viruses [,
]. C. indicum is a
traditional herb, commonly used to treat various disorders,
hypertension symptoms and several infectious diseases in
Koreanand Chinese medicine [,
]. Organic extracts of C.
coronarium fresh flowerheads have shown antibacterial 
[],
insecticidal [] and antiparasitic activities 
[,
]. Pyrethrins,
complex esters extracted from C. cinerariaefolium exhibited
insecticidal effects [] and in vitro activity against Herpes
simplex virus []. Recently, the use of C. trifurcatum
flowerheads has been reported in Tunisian traditional medicine
to treat constipation []. Chrysanthemum tea has many
medicinal uses, including an aid in recovery from influenza.
Chrysanthemum plants have been shown to reduce indoor air
pollution.

Currently, DNA analysis is the most desirable method for
molecular characterization of species. Extraction of high quality
DNA from medicinal plants and its purification is difficult
because of the presence of large quantities of secondary
metabolites, poly-saccharides and proteins such as tannins,
alkaloids, and polyphenols. These compounds degrade the
quality of DNA by precipitating along with it, thus reducing
yield []. 
An array of DNA isolation protocols have been
optimized and were used in various combinations to isolate
quality DNA from plants for analyses [–]. Liquid nitrogen
plays an important role in obtaining good quality DNA and
hence, it has been used extensively for DNA extraction from
fresh leaf and or other tissues. The objective of the present
study was to standardize a protocol for obtaining high-quality
DNA, suitable for PCR amplification without the use of liquid
nitrogen for plant tissues including seeds of Chrysanthemums
species.

Methodology
Plant material:
DNA was isolated from the leaves and seeds of C. indicum,
which were collected upon 6-8 leaves stage. The young leaf
tissues were maintained in ice and were crushed in the
extraction buffer for DNA isolation. Seeds of C. indicum,
collected from the farm grown plants were stored in zipper
bags and maintained in the laboratory. Three protocols were
followed for DNA isolation from C. indicum: isoamylalcohol,
cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) and sodium dodecyl
sulphate (SDS). A modified CTAB buffer method was
employed for post extraction analyses of DNA from seeds and
leaf tissues.

Reagents Employed:
(1) M Tris-C1 (pH 8.0, 9.5), 0.5 M EDTA (pH 8), 5.0 M NaCl;
3.0M sodium acetate (pH 5.2), CTAB (20%), chloroform:isoamyl
alcohol (24:1, v/v), β-mercaptoethanol (AR grade); (2) Modified
CTAB extraction buffer: 0.1 M Tris-Cl (pH 9.5), 20 mM EDTA
(pH 8), 1.4 M NaCl, CTAB (2%, w/v), β-mercaptoethanol (1%,
v/v) (added to the buffer just before use); (3) Pure cold (-20°C)
isopropanol; (4) 70% ethanol; (5) Absolute ethanol; (6) TE
buffer: 10 mM Tris-Cl buffer (pH 8.0), 1 mM EDTA (pH 8.0); (7)
Enzyme: Taq DNA polymerase (Fermentas Inc.), Rnase a
(Fermentas Inc.); (8) Buffer: Taq DNA polymerase buffer
(Fermentas Inc.); (9) Nucleotides: dNTPs (G, A, T, C) and RAPD
primers (GL A1-10); (10)TBE 5X: 54 g Tris, 27.5 g boric acid, 20
mL 0.5 M EDTA; (11) Agarose gel; (12) Ethidium bromide.

DNA extraction:
(1) Fresh-leaf tissue (0.2 g) was ground in a 1.5-ml Eppendorf
tube with a micro pestle and preheated freshly prepared 800 µL
extraction buffers was immediately added to the tube; (2) Leaf
tissues (0.1 g) were grounded to a fine powder with pestle and
mortar and transferred to a 1.5-mL Eppendorf tube in which
800 µL extraction buffers was added; (3) The tube was
incubated at 65°C for 35-45 min, with inversion during
incubation; (4) An equal volume of chloroform: isoamyl alcohol
(24:1, v/v) was added and the tubes were inverted thoroughly;
(5) The tubes were centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 15 min; (6) The
supernatant was transferred to a fresh Ependorf tube; (7)
Precipitate formed was removed by repeating steps 4 – 6; (8) An
equal volume of absolute ice-cold isopropanol was added; (9)
The tubes were again centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 10 min; (10)
Supernatant was discarded and the pellet was washed with
70% (v/v) ethanol; (11) The pellet was air-dried for 1 h at room
temperature and then dissolved in 100 µL TE buffer; (12) RNase
A [2 µL (1 µg/µL)] was added and the tubes were incubated at
37°C for 1 h; (13) For further purification, extraction with an
equal volume of chloroform: isoamyl alcohol (24:1, v/v) was
performed; (14) DNA was precipitated by adding 1/10th
volume of 3 M sodium acetate, pH 5.2, and volume of ice-cold
ethanol; the tube was inverted gently and this mixture
maintained for 30 min at -20°C. It was then centrifuged at
13,000 rpm for 10 min; (15) Supernatant was discarded and the
pellet was washed with 70% (v/v) ethanol; (16) The pellet was
dried and dissolved in 100 µL TE buffer; (17) DNA
concentration was measured by reading absorbance at 260 nm
and by running aliquots on 0.8% agarose gel; (18) The DNA
samples were stored at -20°C until further use.

PCR amplification and gel electrophoresis:
PCR-based amplification of the purified DNA was carried out
in a 20L-reaction mixture. The reaction mixture contained the
following: 25 µg template DNA, 0.125-U Taq DNA polymerase,
1.6 mM dNTPs, 3.75 mM MgCl2, 1X Taq DNA polymerase
buffer [] and 2 mM Primer (GL, USA). Amplification of the
DNA was performed in a thermocycler in the following
manner: initial denaturation at 94°C for 5 min, followed by 35
cycles of denaturation at 94°C for 30 seconds, primer annealing
at 50°C for 1 min, and extension at 72°C for 1 min, with a final
extension at 72°C for 7 min. The reaction mixture was stored at
4°C, until it was loaded onto the gel. The PCR products were
fractionated on 0.8% agarose gel using 1X TBE buffer containing
10 mg/ml ethidium bromide and were visualized under UV
light. The gel was photographed using the UV gel
documentation system [].

Discussion
Previous study has shown the successful isolation of high
quality DNA from various plant parts 
[,
]. The major aim of
the present study was to optimize a rapid and inexpensive
protocol for DNA isolation yielding high quality DNA. Hence,
three different protocols using Isoamyl alcohol, CTAB, and SDS
respectively were employed to isolate and analyze DNA from
different plant parts of C. indicum. The DNA obtained showed
very faint bands upon gel electrophoresis due to the presence of
higher levels of secondary metabolites in C. indicum such as
polysaccharides, polyphenols, flavonoids, and essential oils,
which may get co-precipitated with DNA, thus interfering with
enzymatic analysis. No amplification products were seen after
PCR analysis. However, the results from the modified CTAB
buffer method gave better results than the other tested
protocols.

The DNA concentration was measured as ratio of absorbances,
i.e., A260/A280 and was found to be 1.5, indicating high levels of
contaminated proteins and polysaccharides. Total DNA isolated
from leaves and seeds of C indicum was analysed by agarose gel
electrophoresis ( &amp; ). The modified protocol thus
yielded DNA of high purity as indicated by the ratio of
absorbance (A260/A280), which was 1.75 indicating DNA frees
from essential oils, polyphenols, flavonoides, and
polysaccharides. The high quality DNA obtained from the
modified protocol was suitable for PCR and showed high
intensity amplification with arbitrary RAPD primers ().
PCR amplification also indicates that the DNA was free from
interfering compounds, and it would be suitable for other DNA
characterization techniques such as restriction fragment length
polymorphism (RFLP).

DNA isolation is a primary and critical step for molecular
analysis of any plant species. The chemicals routinely used in
many protocols are too expensive to be used for routine DNA
extraction. Therefore, it was necessary to establish an
inexpensive and less time-consuming protocol for DNA
extraction from various plant parts. C. indicum is one of such
plant species which contains high amounts of secondary
metabolites and essential oils. Therefore the extraction of
genomic DNA from this plant is difficult. The modified CTAB
buffer containing Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP), a compound
known to suppress polyphenolic oxidation, was also employed
to extract DNA from C. indicum using liquid nitrogen 
[].
However, PVP has been used frequently in CTAB extraction
protocols [] 
and prevents contamination of DNA 
[].
However, the use of PVP in CTAB buffer did not improve the
yield or quality; rather we obtained significantly better results
without its use in DNA extraction. We also tested seeds for
extraction of DNA because C. indicum is an annual medicinal
species and seeds are easily preserved in plastic bags for a long
time without specific preserving conditions. High-quality DNA
was obtained from seeds or fresh leaves of C. indicum for postextraction
enzymatic assay. We anticipate that this protocol will
be adequate for extracting high-molecular weight DNA from
other species containing large amounts of secondary
metabolites and essential oils.

Citation:Hasan et al, Bioinformation 8(5): 225-228 (2012)

Bands obtained after agarose gel electrophoresis
showing total DNA isolated from three samples of leaf tissue of
Chrysanthemum indicum (lanes 1, 2 and 3).

Bands obtained after agarose gel electrophoresis
showing total DNA isolated from three samples of seeds of
Chrysanthemum indicum (lanes 1, 2 and 3).

PCR-amplified products obtained from DNA by using
random primers. M: 100-bp DNA ladder; lanes 1, 2, and 3:
Chrysanthemum indicum leaf tissue DNA amplified with
primer GL A-03; lanes 4, 5, and 6: C. indicum seed tissue DNA
amplified with primer GL A-03.

