Background
The best nutritional option for newborn infants is mother's milk;
however, some infants may not be exclusively breast fed during the
first months of life. In that case, another substitute or alternative must
be provided as cow milk. This substitution results in an allergic disease
known as cow milk protein allergy (CMPA) in 2­6% of children [].
Nowadays, most common alternatives are soy and extensively
hydrolyzedmilk proteins formulae []. However, there is evidence that
10­20% of children allergic to cow milk do not tolerate soy
derivatives [–] and some cases of high immunological reaction to
extensively hydrolyzed formulae have been reported [–].
Immunoglobulin E­mediated allergies belong to the most common
forms of immunologically mediated forms of hypersensitivity
reactions to food []. In sensitized individuals dietary intake of food
can cause a variety of clinical manifestations reaching from oral
allergy syndrome and gastrointestinal symptoms (e.g., vomiting,
diarrhoea) to skin, respiratory, and severe systemic manifestations
such as anaphylactic shock [–]. The development of food allergy
shows a typical course []. It starts early in childhood mainly against
Ags encountered in the initial diet (e.g., cow's milk, eggs) and affects
between 4% and 6% of children. Milk is one of the first food
components introduced into the diet and therefore represents one of the
most important food allergen sources in terms of frequency and
severity of allergic manifestations [–]. The symptoms of cow's
milk allergy are due to IgE­mediated activation of mast cells and
basophils as well as to activation of allergen­specific T cells, and they
comprise a plethora of gastrointestinal, skin, respiratory, and severe
systemic manifestations such as death due to anaphylactic shock.
Unlike in respiratory allergy, which proceeds untreated from mild
(e.g., rhinoconjunctivitis) to severe manifestations (e.g., asthma), many
milk­allergic children grow out their allergy, and the induction of
tolerance against cow's milk allergens has already been described [,
]. Cow's milk contains more than 25 different proteins, but only the
whey proteins alpha­lactalbumin, beta­lactoglobulin, BSA, and
lactoferrin, as well as the four caseins, have been identified as
allergens []. The casein fraction is composed of alpha S1­, alpha S2­
, beta­, and k­casein, of which alpha S1­casein seems to be a major
allergen according to IgE and T cell recognition data [–].
In developed countries there is
increasing interest in goat milk and its derivates, the quality of which
is considered of special importance in the light of current tendencies
favouring healthy eating. In particular, the composition of goat milk is
said to have certain advantages over that of cow milk, and thus the
former is preferable for some consumers [–].
On these bases, the identification of a suitable protein source for
children allergic to cow milk represents an important goal for both
nutritionists and paediatricians. Therefore, the present study aims at
evaluating the suitability of sheep milk for the nutrition of children
allergic to cow milk by analysing the primary structure, secondary
structure and hydropathicity plots of sheep, goat and cow milk
proteins.

Methodology
Dataset
Casein alpha S1 and S2 proteins from sheep were analyzed in the
present study. The protein sequences are available at NCBI with
accession numbers [GenBank: P04653 and CAA26983 respectively] .
The casein alpha S1 and S2 protein sequences of goat and cow were
downloaded from NCBI [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov]  and summary
of sequence data is given in Table 1 (see  ).
The dataset consists of casein alpha S1 and S2 protein sequences from
sheep, goat and cow.

Physico­chemical analyses
The ProtParam tool at ExPASy [http://www.expasy.ch/] was used to
analyse amino acid and atomic compositions, isoelectric point,
extinction coefficient and hydropathicity in the three species.

Multiple Sequence Alignment &amp; Secondary structure prediction
The CLUSTALW at European Bioinformatics Institute[http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/clustalw]  was used for generating
a multiple sequence alignment [MSA]  of casein alpha S1 and S2
protein sequences from three different species and the GOR at
EXPASY [http://npsa-pbil.ibcp.fr] to assign secondary structures to
casein alpha S1 and S2 sequences.

Results
Physico­chemical analysis
The casein alpha S1 protein consists of 214 amino acids in each
species while casein alpha S2 consists of 223 residues in sheep and
goat and 222 in cow. Besides the identical sequence alignment
between the casein alpha S1 and S2 proteins of sheep and goat, these
proteins also share considerable equality in their percentage content of
amino acids as given in Table 2 and 3 (see  ).

Sequence analyses and secondary structure prediction
The alpha S1 and S2 casein protein sequences of cow were compared
with S1 and S2 of goat and sheep as given in Table 4 &amp; 5 (see  )respectively.
The alpha S1 and S2 protein sequences of goat and sheep obtained
from GenBank have at least 99% similarity among themselves but the
two differ markedly from the cow. A multiple sequence alignment is
obtained using the software ClustalW (). Changes in
sequences between the cow and other two species are summarized in
Table 2 (see  ) with changes in corresponding
predicted secondary structures. On comparing sequences of S1 and S2
proteins by using the program ClustalW, it was observed that there are
almost no changes in the sequences and the secondary structure
between goat and cow. However when the two were compared with
cow, it was found there is a dramatic change in the cow protein
sequences with a definite change in the secondary structure and the
chemical properties as shown in table 4 and 5 (see  )for S1 and S2
respectively.

Discussion
Cow's milk contains more than 25 different proteins [] but the
casein fraction composed of alpha S1­, alpha S2­, beta­, and k­casein
particularly alpha S1­casein seems to be a major allergen [–].
The chemical property and biological function of a protein is a direct
consequence of its primary structure[]. The most common and
generally more accessible approach to protein function prediction is
’ inheritance through homology‘  ­ that is, the knowledge that proteins
with similar sequences frequently carry out similar functions []. For
a majority of proteins it is already possible to predict their approximate
function with reasonable accuracy based on their evolutionary
relationship or sequence similarity to proteins with known functions
[–].

Since the casein alpha S1 and S2 from goat and sheep share a great
similarity so they could be thought of having the same effect and
function. Much anecdotal evidence is available, suggesting that goat's
milk is a hypoallergenic alternative to cow's milk in the human diet.
Improvement in the symptoms associated with colic and minor
digestive disorders, asthma and eczema have all been reported [].
Scientific and clinical studies also suggest that infants and children
who are sensitive to a cow's milk based product often thrive better
when a goat's milk based product is substituted [].

Goat milk as a
substitute for cow milk was studied in 38 children during a 5 months
period []. The children on goat milk surpassed those on cow milk in
weight gain, height, skeletal mineralization, and blood serum contents
of Vitamin A, calcium, thiamin, riboflavin, niacin and hemoglobin.
Similar findings were obtained in studies with rats []. In French
clinical studies over 20 years with cow milk allergy patients the
conclusion was that substitution with goat milk was followed by
“undeniable” improvements []. In other French extensive clinical
studies with children allergic to cow milk, the treatment with goat milk
produced positive results in 93% of the children and was
recommended as a valuable aid in child nutrition because of less
allergenicity and better digestibility than cow milk [.

Conclusion
Since casein alpha S1 and S2 proteins of sheep are almost identical to
goat, so sheep milk can be a useful another convenient alternative to
the cow milk allergic children.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Masoodi et al, Bioinformation 4(9): 430-435 (2010)

Multiple sequence alignment of casein alpha S1 in the three species

Multiple sequence alignment of casein alpha S2 in the three species

