Background
A large amount of information about biological functions and 
genetic research can be obtained by searching the PubMed 
database. While this database provides a list of boldface 
keywords to help users to search abstracts, it does not highlight 
the sentences which contain these keywords, and it does not 
provide any information about these keywords co-occurring in 
the same sentence. While many previous studies have 
developed websites and databases to help researchers in this 
context, these resources have a number of limitations, as 
outlined below.

EBIMed can be used to find genes and keywords related to 
proteins, Gene Ontology (GO) annotations, drugs and cancers 
that co-occur in the same sentences []. The BSQA shows 
abstracts which contain keywords for genes and behaviors co
occurring in the same sentences []. MeInfoText is a text-mining 
database that shows abstracts which contain co-occurring
keywords related to specific genes and methylation and/or 
cancers []. Another tool for conducting database searches is 
PubTator which features a PubMed-like interface 
[]. This 
database enables entity-specific semantic searches and provides 
pre-annotations for computer-assisted biocuration, 
automatically applying text-mining tools to all articles with 
respect to genes, diseases, species, chemicals and mutations 
[].

All of the text-mining systems mentioned above are aimed at 
achieving a comprehensive value-added database, with little 
attention paid to either the flexibility of the query interface or 
the ease of visualizing the search results. Since they are value
added databases which require periodical maintenance, they 
may not synchronize with the PubMed database. 
PubstractHelper retrieves abstracts directly from PubMed by 
means of its e-utility feature, ensuring perfect synchronization. 
By allowing searches of up to ten different groups of up to ten 
keywords each, all of which are user-defined, PubstractHelper 
also provides great flexibility. When at least one keyword from 
groups two to ten co-occurs in the same sentence with at least 
one keyword from group one, this sentence is highlighted in 
different colors for easier visualization.

Tool features
Score calculation:
PubstractHelper retrieves abstracts directly from PubMed using 
its e-utility feature. The abstracts are processed in 3 steps: the 
insertion of a symbol, the cutting of a sentence, and the scoring 
of a sentence [,
]. The method for the PubstractHelper website 
recognizes as a distinct sentence any section of writing that is 
separated from any other section by “.”, “?”, “!”, or “;” 
[]. The 
threshold score for each sentence is defined as:

Score [0]= p + Πni ki

where Score [0] is the score for sentence 0. The i is an index of 
the keyword group. The n is the number of keyword groups, 
with the maximum value set at ten. The value of p is set at one, 
if at least one user-selected keyword (from any group) occurs in 
the sentence (default p = 0). The value of ki is set at one, if at 
least one user-selected keyword in group i occurs in the 
sentence (default ki = 0). If the value of Score [0] is equal to 
or greater than 1, HTML tags are added to the beginning and 
end of the sentence. The tags are different for different scores 
(either 1 or 2), corresponding to different colors.

Tagged Abstracts:
This section presents an example of using PubstractHelper to 
access abstracts in PubMed. Suppose that a user is interested in 
the relationship between “electromagnetic field” (EMF) and 
“Brain cancer”. Then, a search is carried out in which group one 
contains “*EMF*”, “Electromagnetic_field*” or 
“electric_and_magnetic_field*”, and group two contains 
“brain_cancer*” or “brain_tumor*”. The results of this user 
query are shown in Figure. When this query was actually run 
with PubstractHelper, the number of abstracts in PubMed 
which contained a correlation between group one and group 
two was 204 on October 29th 2014. There are 1888 sentences in 
all abstracts, but only 82 sentences contain co-occurring 
keywords from groups one and two.

The user can enter various keywords with spaces between them 
into the textbox, and compound words can be entered using an 
underscore (e.g.: “electromagnetic_field”). The symbol “*” can 
be added in front of or behind a keyword, and the system then 
recognizes longer words which contain this keyword as a 
component or section. For example, if a user types 
“electromagnetic_field*” as the keyword, the system recognizes 
both “electromagnetic_field” and “electromagnetic_fields”. The 
color of the keywords and the highlighted background of the 
sentences in which they co-occur can be changed. As shown in 
Figure, the user only needs to read the highlighted sentences 
which include the co-occurring keywords in the abstracts. In 
addition, the user can click to hide sentences in the abstracts 
which do not include the co-occurring keywords. Finally, the
user can download the PMID or abstracts which he selects from 
the PubstractHelper website.

Conclusion
Our website, PubstractHelper, is designed to enable researchers 
to quickly find key sentences in PubMed-listed abstracts by 
color-marking sentences with co-occurring keywords selected 
by users. It is a handy tool for biomedical research.

Citation:Chen &amp; Liang Ho, Bioinformation 10(11): 708-710 (2014)

Shows a screen-shot of the tool.

