This Editorial is divided into two parts. 1. Single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) for genome wide association studies
(GWAS) and 2. Molecule of the month, Nitric Oxide Synthase,
multiple interactive pathways for three related genes, Nitric
Oxide Synthase-1, -2, -3 (NOS-1, -2, -3).

Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for genome wide
association studies (GWAS)
Generally, genome wide association studies (GWAS) are done
by analysis of DNA mutations including single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) across the human genome. The DNA
SNPs that occur in DNA coding regions are translated into
cognate mRNAs and these mRNAs are translated into their
cognate proteins. Therefore, the SNP information is carried
through the different levels of information by transcription and
translation. In addition to the sequence complexity caused by
SNPs, are variations in mRNA splicing. Consequently,
translation produces proteins that will reflect their
corresponding mRNA variants that produced them (including
both SNPs and splicing variants). When correlations are run
against only the DNA then only one level of analysis is
broached. However, from a gene functionality point of view or
‘phenotype’, knowledge may be required at the mRNA and
protein levels as these are closer to phenotype than the DNA.
Thus, the functionality of a gene product may vary not only
depending on the SNPs that are transcribed into the mRNA but
also will vary due to variations in splicing of different exons
(when this occurs). This approach is of importance even if all of
the variants are functional, because one or more such variants
may be the ones actually associated with a disease or disease
process. Therefore, at the protein level itself, such variations in
sequence may occur due to the changes that occur at the amino
acid sequence level due to the variants of mRNA as just
mentioned. All three levels (DNA, RNA, and protein) may
necessitate analysis to produce the sensitivity required to detect
some gene associations. A naïve example follows. Let us
assume two exons undergo splicing variation for a protein
composed of 10 exons. Next, allow the proteins to be functional
to varying degrees when they are produced from mRNAs with
these variations.

exon1-exon2-exon3-…exon10
exon1-exon3-…exon10
exon2-exon3-…exon10

Therefore, even if there were only one SNP in exon1, three
mRNA variants could be produced (for a gene that has this type
of splice variation) and each of the proteins produced may exert
different effects on the disease phenotype. This would be due
to the differnet protein sequences due to splicing variations as
well as the different placement of the SNPs in the protein
tertiary and quaternary structure. The heterogeneousness of the
SNPs thus further affects the complexity calculations. In the
world of GWAS studies, there are many levels of analysis
relating the genetics findings with markers at the DNA, RNA
and protein levels: SNPs, tandem repeats, copy number
variations (CNVs), methylation at the DNA sequence level, and
chromatin structural and biochemical changes. At the
transcription level there are expression, miRNA, and various
post-transcription modifications. Finally, at the translation level,
the splice variants, isoforms, and even subtle
tertiary/quaternary structural changes that occur via
synonymous SNP variants affect the outcome as well (Personal
communication, Prof. Andrew J Levine, UCLA School of
Medicine, Westwood, CA).

Molecule of the month, Nitric Oxide Synthase, multiple
interactive pathways for three similar genes, Nitric Oxide
Synthase-1, -2, -3 (NOS-1, -2, -3)
Neuronal NOS (nNOS, NOS-1) is on chromosome 12 and
expressed in neurons; Inducible NOS (iNOS, NOS-2) is on
chromosome 17 and expressed in immune system cells; and
Endothelial NOS (eNOS, cNOS, NOS-3) is on chromosome 7
and expressed in endothelial cells) [,
] There is also highly
sophisticated technological evidence that the NOS-1 gene is in
proximity to additional genes on chromosome 12 that are
associated with brain hippocampus structure 
[]. 
()
shows molecular interactions of various types as described in
the figure legend for the three NOS gene products. Thus, there
is a remarkable series of interactions that the proteins of the
NOS-1, -2, and -3 genes exhibit that must be components in the
function and effects of these genes.

There are no financial conflicts.

Citation:Shapshak, Bioinformation 8(11): 496-497 (2012)

NOS interactions. In this figure, line-colors and
various interactions with other genes are red Down-regulation,
green Up-regulation, beige Regulation, purple Co-expression,
brown Physical Interaction, turquoise dotted Predicted Protein
Interaction, and mauve dotted Predicted Transcription Factor
Factor Regulation. (GenePro SA Biosciences,
http://www.sabiosciences.com/).

