Background
Presently sedentary plant parasitic cyst nematodes (Heterodera
spp. and Globodera spp.) and root-knot nematodes (Meloidogyne
spp.) are the world's most damaging agricultural pests. They
reduce crop production and quality of seeds causing billion
dollar losses per annum []. Crop safety relies predominantly
on the use of environmentally toxic synthetic nematicides.
Rather than using chemical pesticides on a large scale, other
alternative need to dig into that are based on system-oriented
science and technology. Such confined systems will decrease
inputs of chemicals and will not generate harmful output such
as pesticides residues []. To carry out this aim it is essential to
increase the resistance of plant to pest and nematodes through
promising control of Integrated Pest Management (IPM). IPM
includes various strategies to control the pest like Mechanical
control, Biological controls etc. The crop protection under
biological controls principle includes the inhibition of target
gene by suitable protein inhibitors []. Plant Serine Proteinase
Inhibitors (SPIs) are natural defense-related proteins frequently
present in seeds and certain plant tissue which prevents plant
by herbivores and wounding. SPIs gens are inhibiting the target
protease enzymes which are responsible for proteolytic activity
in nematodes []. Numerous structural biology approaches are
facilitating to check insight inhibition mechanism of protease by
SPIs. Protein-Protein docking is one of the suited methods to
find out the interaction between two proteins. The current work
demonstrated the comparative insight of structural inhibition
pattern of SPIs with respect to Serine proteinase of nematodes.

Methodology
Molecular model of Serine Proteinase of Heterodera glycines:
The protein sequence Serine Proteinase of Heterodera glycines
(SP_HG) was downloaded from National Centre for
Biotechnology Information (NCBI) 
[].The FASTA sequence of
the SP_HG was subjected to PSI-BLAST against PDB database
for the selection of best homologous templates [,
]. The best
template was selected based on similarity, percentage of
identity, expectation value, bit scores and query coverage area.
A 3D model of SP_GH was generated by Modeller 9v10 
[]. The
chain-A of Earthworm Fibrinolytic Enzyme Component A from
Eisenia Fetida, PDB: 1M9U was identified as the best template
for comparative modeling []. This 3D structure was generated
by X-ray diffraction studies and resolution was 2.30Å. The Rfactor
of the structure was 0.191 and R-free value was 0.236. A
bundle of 100 models are formed through random generation
and subsequently the good model was obtained.

Molecular models of Plant Serine Proteinase inhibitors:
Following Plant Serine Proteinase Inhibitors (SPIs) of Phaseolus
glabellus (SPI_PG), Phaseolus grayanus (SPI_PGn), Phaseolus
oligospermus (SPI_PO), Vigna mungo (SPI_VM), Vigna marina
(SPI_VMn) sequences having Accession No. CAQ17032,
CAM88858, CAO82009, ABD97865, ABD97867 respectively
were obtained from NCBI []. Each Sequence of proteinase
inhibitors was subjected to PSI-BLAST against PDB database for
the selection of best homologous templates [,
]. The chain-I of
The Bowman-Birk type inhibitor from Mung bean, PDB ID:
3MYW and Bowman-Birk Inhibitor from Vigna unguiculata
Seeds having, PDB ID: 2G81 were identified as the best model
for comparative modeling of Phaselous family and Vigna family
inhibitors respectively [,
]. Both 3D structures were
generated by X-ray diffraction studies and resolution were
2.50Å for 3MYW and 1.55 Å for 2G81. Out of Twenty generated
models one good model was obtained for each plant proteinase
inhibitors using Modeller 9v10 [].

Minimization and molecular evaluation:
Energy minimization 3-D model of SP_HG and all SPIs were
performed using Amber force field for 10000 steps with ten
update interval without fixing any atom in chimera 
[,
].
Stereo- chemistry of all models was evaluated by PROCHEK
and WHAT-IF [,
]. The overall quality factor of non-bonded
interactions between different atoms was calculated by ERRAT
[].
Compatibility of amino acids in each 3D model was
checked in VERIFY-3D [,
]. X-Ray and NMR spectroscopy
structural validation of structures was predicted by PROSA
server [].

Designation of Protein-Protein interacting sites and Docking:
A combine study of various PSI-BLAST results of SPIs showing
the specific region of protease binding site of their inhibitor
with respect to crystal structures was obtained. Multiple
sequence alignment of SPIs sequences with respect to crystal
structure helps us to find out protease binding sites shown in
(). In addition to that we also find out detailed protein
interacting sites for all SPIs and SP_HG using online server PPipred
[]. Protein Interface site specific docking of all SPIs with
SP_HG was performed using ZDOCK server []. ZDOCK
output files were subjected in FiberDock server for flexible
induced-fit backbone and side chain refinement of the protein
complexes [,
].

Molecular Interaction Study:
The molecular interaction plots between SP_HG and SPIs were
generated using Dimplot in LIGPLOT software 
[]. The 3D
structure and detailed interaction of all proteins complexes
were visualized using Accelrys DS Visualizer software 
[].

Discussion
Finding of good proteinase inhibitor using structural biology
approaches would be helpful for experiment biologist to
explore their research in pest management. In this connection
we have generated the 3D- models of SPIs and SP_HG. 

shows the catalytic domains of SP_HG (A) and Serine
proteinase inhibitors of Phaseolus Family (B) and Vigna Family
(C).The
dependability and quality of these models were ensured by
evaluating the backbone conformation, angles and bond lengths
based on Psi/Phi Ramachandran plot using PROCHECK 
[].
Analysis of each model with ProSA web interface brings out
that Z-Score and over all residues energies are all well within
the limits []. 
ERRAT score shows overall quality factor for
non-bonded atomic interactions and higher the score means
better the quality of models (accepted range for a high quality
model is &gt;50) []. VERIFY-3D score indicates good sequenceto-
structure agreement because most of the amino acids score
for all models have &gt; 0.2 values shown in  (see
supplementary material) [,
]. The above said validating
parameters assuring the quality and reliability of models. To get
insight of structural inhibition mechanism of proteinase
inhibitors need to have the protein interacting sites. The protein
interacting sites were identified using a web based server PPipred
[]. Most probable interacting residues are common with
the crystal structure substrate binding sites which are given in
 (see supplementary material). The Docking of each
SPIs with SP_HG deducing a reliable results, in terms of
minimum Global, Attractive and Repulsive Van-der wall,
Atomic contact and Hydrogen bond energies shown in 

(see supplementary material). In addition to that molecular
interaction plots are also certifying the protein-protein
interaction between protein complexes. The interaction study
inferring that the Serine Proteinase inhibitor of Vigna marina
and Phaseolus oligospermus are the potent inhibitors in
comparison to others within the same family of SPIs. Molecular
interacting plot of SPI_PO with SPI_HG () shows total
13 hydrogen bonds formation among eight amino acids of
SPI_PO and nine residues of SPI_HG.  shows the
molecular interaction plots between SPI_VMn and SP_HG
which having eight hydrogen bonds.The nine residues of
SPI_VMn and eight residues of SP_HG are participating in
bond formation. The comparative studies between these two
inhibitors conclude that SPI_PO is the most capable inhibitor
among them. This finding will help to biologist in nematodes
control.

Conclusion
Now a day's protection of crop against Nematodes is being big
challenge for the researchers with taking concern of
environmental safety and economical balance. Our present
work will help to researchers in biological pest control. We have
developed high quality 3D models of Plant Serine Proteinase
Inhibitors. The comparative In-sillico inhibitory mechanisms of
these inhibitors were identified against Serine Proteinase of
Heterodera glycines. The inhibitory efficiency of each serine
proteinase was calculated on the ground of Number of
hydrogen bonds, Van der Waal attraction, and docking energy.
Vigna marina and Phaseolus oligospermus proteinase inhibitor
forming major hydrogen bonds with minimum docking energy
was concluded as potent inhibitors in their family.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are thankful to Department of Science and Technology,
New Delhi, India for supporting us financially in our ongoing
project “Development of transgenic Wheat plant against Cereal
Cyst nematode (Heterodera Aveane) and Sunnpest (Eurygaster
intergrices puton) by using Bioinformatics and Genetic
Engineering approaches” Project code: INT/ILTP/A-1.28.

Citation:Prasad et al, Bioinformation 8(14): 673-677 (2012)

Multiple sequence alignment of all SPIs with their respective template structures for modeling. Rectangular red box
covered residues are having high probability to participate during protein-protein interaction.

Cartoon representation of catalytic domain of SP_HG (A), Serine Proteinase Inhibitors of Phaseolus Family (B) and Vigna
Family (C).

Molecular Interaction plots of docked complexes of Phaseolus oligospermus (A); (B) Vigna marina, with Serine proteinase
inhibitor of Heterodera glycines. Hydrogen bonds with their bond length between Protein interface residues shown in green dotted
line

