Background
Insulin as peptide hormone is produced in beta-pancreatic cells
and release when any stimuli such as glucose and protein in
blood that produced from digested food. The action of insulin
is mediated by insulin receptor family include human insulin
receptor (hINSR) and insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (Igf-
1R) on target cells. Both of these receptors have similar
homolog sequence and structure, and have effect signaling
within the respective pathways of glucose metabolism and
normal human growth. The human insulin receptor exists in
two isoforms are hINSR-A and hINSR-B. Human INSR gene
consist 22 exons and occupies in excess of 150 kb pairs of DNA
on the short arm of chromosome 19 (bands pl3.2→pl3.3). The
two hINSR isoform has differed by the absence or presence of
12 residue-sequences (717-729) of exon 11 due to splicing 
[,
].
The hINSR has a tyrosine kinase intrinsic active by catalyzing
transfer γ-phosphate from adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Insulin
will bind with extracellular part of hINSR protein []. These
activities will induce intracellular responses of Insulin Receptor
Substrate-1 (IRS-1).These proteins have glucose uptake role in
skeletal muscle and adipose cells, or mitogenic induction 
[,
].
Defect Insulin signaling from hINSR to IRS-1 is one kind of
type-2 diabetes mellitus (DM type-2) insulin resistance. In vivo
study of tyrosine kinase hINSR of Tyrosine kinase signaling
that showed reducing sensitivities in the present of insulin up
to 50% in DM type-2. The case assessed caused by insulin
intrinsic signaling defect. The defect also detected as in vitro
(adipose cells), in which there is reduction of glucose transport
and hINSR responses perhaps change by mutation of hINSR
coded gene [,
]. Recent study found that there is a frameshift
mutation of tyrosine kinase domain of exon 22 hINSR gene of
type 2 DM patient that contributed in DM type-2 pathogenesis
[]. Mutations effect of tyrosine kinase hINSR showed that the
varied on physiologies effect either in vivo or in vitro, even
though some question still unclear. The mutations assessed
influence protein functions in receptor-ligand interaction can
be able to observe by in silico analysis. To predict effect of
mutation on tyrosine kinase hINSR gene of DM T2 patients
reduce the IRS-1 activation, we used an in silico analysis. This
analyzing could give both physics-chemistry visual
information contribution and also interaction molecules within
the process. The method advantage will help to clear the
tyrosine kinase hINSR mutations effect in insulin intracellular
signaling mechanism to IRS-1 knowledge.

Methodology
This research was analyzed at Bioinformatics Laboratory of
Biology Department, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural
Sciences, Brawijaya University. All experiment has approved by
ethical clearance from Medical Ethic Committee of Brawijaya
University as member of National Ethic Committee. Blood DNA
samples were taken from type-2 DM patients of Saiful Anwar
hospital, Malang. Blood DNA isolation, amplification and
sequencing have been done by Fatchiyah et al 
[]. Normal
tyrosine kinase of hINSR protein sequence (CCDS12176.1) and
PTB domain of Insulin Receptor Substrate-1 (IRS-1) protein
(CCDS2463.1) was taken from the sequence database of NCBI
(National Center for Biotechnology Information) []. Mutation
of tyrosine kinase hINSR gene sequences took from patients
(code 8-3F and DMK9-3K) and converted to protein sequence by
BLAST analysis. The samples protein sequence was aligned by
using Bio-edit version 5.0.6 []. The model of three dimension
protein was predicted by SWISS MODEL webserver [], and
visualized the structure alteration by using Pymol 0.99rc6 
[],
and then superimpose of the hINSR and IRS interaction were
examined by docking using Hex 5.0 [].

Results &amp; Discussions
In this research, we found deletion and substitution mutation of
DNA sequence on exon 22 of hINSR gene of DMT2 patients
from Saeful Anwar hospital, Malang. Patient 8-3F has two kind
mutations  (see supplementary material). There is
substitution on T3812Acaused amino acid change Met1271Lys
mutation on tyrosine kinase domain of hINS receptor. Point
mutation on A3822deletion was induced frameshift peptide
sequence mutations from 1274 - 1279 which is Gln1274His,
Phe1275Ser, Asn1276Thr, Pro1277Pro, Asn1278Arg, and Met1279STOP.
We predict that methionine changed to STOP codon will induce
an early termination of protein translation and uncompleted its
post modification. This frameshift mutation affected to the 3Dstructure
of tyrosine domain of hINSR of 8-3F DMT2 patient
shorter than normal () and the topology of
protein surface also changed ().The alteration
structure of tyrosine kinase hINSR protein 8-3F mutant was loss
four helixes and three coils. Though in this patient, the tyrosine
kinase domain could not activated insulin receptor substrate
(IRS) phosphorylation to communicate intercellular signaling.
Mutation on DMK 9-3F patient is different with 8-3F patient. We
identified deletion on nucleotide from 3799 into 3803 of GACCT
which it induce the amino acids Asp1268 and Leu1269 have not
synthesized on mutant () and the protein structure
altered from helixes to become coil (, red). This
deletion could make frameshift mutation on Met1270Leu,
Arg1271Ala, Met1272Gln, Cys1273Val, Trp1274Gln, and Gln1275Ala.
We also found deletion on A3822 and two substitutions at G4071A
&amp;G4097A that change the amino acid residue at Glu1356Lys and
Met1364Ile (). The changing structure of tyrosine kinase
domain of hINSR of DMK9-3F patient was also stimulate the
3D-structure surface topology shorter than normal ()
and superimpose between normal and mutant give a mosaic
profile ().

We assume that this reduction of 3-D structure protein of
surface topology on hINSR protein in both patients could
inhibit interaction and/or reduce activation between hINSR
tyrosine kinase domains and PTB domain of IRS-1. These defect
suspected also could disrupted insulin intracellular signaling
showed that reducing insulin action effectiveness so affected to
the insulin resistance occurred []. The phosphorylation of
Ser307 of IRS1, which is located in the PTB domain, has been
correlated with negative regulation of insulin signaling
[]. Interestingly, the docking of hINSR tyrosine kinase
domains and PTB domain of IRS-1 in both patients interacted as
properly. However, the weakness of total interaction energy
measured on 8-3F patient (Etotal: -554.20kj/mol), we suggest that
tyrosine kinase could not stimulate IRS activation and impair
intracellular signaling. The X-ray crystal structure of the
tyrosine kinase domain of the human insulin receptor reveals
the determinants of substrate preference for tyrosine rather than
serine or threonine and a novel auto inhibition mechanism
[]. TrkA of insulin receptor has auto inhibition to relying on
projection of an activation loop tyrosine residue into the
substrate-binding site and occlusion of the ATP-binding site by
the activation loop []. Meanwhile, we identified on DMK9-3F
patient that the mutation lead the function of tyrosine residue
(Tyr972) of tyrosine kinase domain of hINSR disruption with
high interaction energy (Etotal:-458.04kj/mol). Previous study
reported Tyr972 have important role in phosphorylation
mechanism on IRS-1 []. Nobile reported that in Donohue
syndrome showed the novel pTyr818Cys missense mutation in
the INSR gene which is a residue of the αβ-fibronectin domain
of the insulin receptor induce severe metabolic and endocrine
function []. To understand the mechanism of intracellular
signaling due to this mutation, need further observation.

Yamamoto-Honda et al in Krook et al wrote that tyrosine kinase
hINSR without 86 amino acid residue at C-terminal part
tyrosine kinase hINSR Chinese hamster ovary cells have no effect
in intracellular metabolism signaling activities against IRS-1
PTB domain but have defect of auto-phosphorylation process
[]. Contrary, Takata et al detected that mutation of Tyr1316Phe
and Tyr1322Phe at C-terminal part of tyrosine kinase INSR rat
fibroblast-1 cells have no effect in metabolic signaling 
[].
Murakami and Olsen informed that C-terminal tyrosine kinase
hINSR mutation in CHO cells have no effect on metabolic
function [].

Conclusion
In summary, our finding suggest that mutation on tyrosine
kinase domain of hINS receptor has no inhibition between
tyrosine kinase domain of hINSR and PTB domain IRS, but the
activation of IRS phosphorylation mechanism was slightly
impair.

Conflict of interest statement
The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This research supported by WCU UB grant research 2010. I
acknowledge to internist team from Saeful Anwar Hospital,
Malang for providing the patient's blood samples and Firli
Rahmah Primula Dewi for sentence correction.

Citation:Fatchiyah et al, Bioinformation 9(17): 853-857 (2013)

Three dimensional (3-D) structure of Tyrosine kinase of hINS of DMT2 code 8-3F patient. A) Three-D structure Tyrosine
kinase domain (yellow) on normal and mutation region; B) Visualization of 3d-surface structure between normal and mutant
region; C) Superimpose 3D-structure of normal and mutant Tyrosine kinase hINSR.

Three dimensional (3-D) structure of Tyrosine kinase of hINS of DMT2 code DMK9-3F patient. A) Three-D structure
Tyrosine kinase domain (red) on normal and mutation region; B) Visualization of 3d-surface structure between normal and mutant
region; C) Superimpose 3D-structure of normal and mutant Tyrosine kinase hINSR; D) Docking of IRS activation on the PTB
domain of IRS was interacted with tyrosine kinase domain of hINSR with proper energy.

