Background
The enzyme Histo-aspartic protease (HAP) is one of the 10
plasmepsins (PMs) identified in the genome of Plasmodium
falciparum, the parasite responsible for the most virulent and
widespread form of malaria []. It is one of the 4 PMs residing
in the food vacuole of the parasite that are involved directly in
the process of haemoglobin degradation making them potential
targets for novel antimalarial therapy []. Despite its high
sequence identity (60%) with other PMs (PMI, PMII, and
PMIV), which are typical pepsin-like aspartic proteases, the
active site of HAP contains several significant deviations from
the pepsin standard. The particular substitutions are Asp32,
which together with Asp215 creates the catalytic dyad in classic
aspartic proteases, is replaced by a histidine, giving this enzyme
its name. In addition, substitutions are found in the functionally
important flexible loop called the “flap” (residues 70–83), and it
participates in enzyme catalysis. The substitutions include the
strictly conserved Tyr75 and the highly conserved Val/Gly76,
which are replaced by Ser and Lys, respectively []. The flap
plays a major role in all pepsin-like aspartic proteases, changing
its conformation upon ligand binding. Despite its unusual
active-site amino acids, HAP seems to be a reasonably active
enzyme []. The recombinant HAP enzyme, cleaves at the
penta-peptide substrate sequence Met1-Phe2-Leu3-Ser4-Phe5
that corresponds to the 32-36 residues of human haemoglobin
α-chain. This fragment is located in the region joining two α-
helices. It contacts the β-chain in haemoglobin tetramer and is
hidden inside the globular protein. Upon haemoglobin
dissociation the 32-36 fragment is exposed to solvent and
becomes available to proteolytic enzyme []. Enzymatic activity
data indicate that HAP is most active as a monomer. The
dominant monomer form showed a Km of 2.0 µM and a
turnover number, Kcat, of 0.0036s-1 using the internally
quenched florescent synthetic peptide substrate []. However,
the available biochemical as well as structural data does not
provide an unambiguous answer about the exact nature of the
catalytic mechanism of this unusual enzyme.

Although the overall level of sequence similarity suggests that
HAP should have a pepsin-like fold [] the predicted details of
the active-site architecture and, consequently, the mode of
enzymatic activity have been subjects of considerable
disagreement. In the model published by Andreeva et al.(2004),
HAP was postulated to function as a trypsin-like serine
protease, with the catalytic triad consisting of Ser35, His32, and
Asp215 []. But recent structural studies disapproved this
hypothesis []. On the other hand, Bjelic and Aqvist postulated
a reaction mechanism of HAP that would assign a direct
catalytic role only to Asp215, whereas the role of His32 would
be to provide critical ~10,000-fold stabilization along the
reaction path []. It has become clear that experimental
structural evidence is necessary to validate or disapprove these
predictions.

The unique properties of HAP make it an especially attractive
protein to target for antimalarial drug development []. HAP
apparently has a high affinity for aspartic protease inhibitor
Pepstatin-A (), with a Ki value 0.081nM similar to
those of other plasmepsins. Pepstatin-A binds competitively in
the active site of Histo-Aspartic Protease (HAP) and makes
hydrogen bonds with Asp215 and His32 []. KNI compounds
are peptidomimetic inhibitors containing flexible and
asymmetric functional groups and are proposed to be high
affinity inhibitors of vacuolar plasmepsins []. Many KNI
compounds utilize a common molecular scaffold containing an
allophenylnorstatine moiety followed by a thioproline ring. One
of them, KNI-10006 () was subsequently shown to be a
potent inhibitor of HAP with an IC50 of 0.69 µM []. Recent Xray
crystallographic data supports that another members of this
class, KNI-10395, is also a potent inhibitor of HAP [].

Recently, in malaria chemotherapy hybrid molecules with dual
functionality and/or targets have been developed through a
rational drug design approach. This is termed as “covalent
bitherapy” []. There are numerous advantages of employing
hybrid molecules in malaria therapy. Hybrid drugs whose
toxicity as single entities is already known may be less
expensive to develop, than new single entities or their
combinations. This may also results in a lower risk of drug–
drug adverse interactions, compared to other approaches to
designing multi-component drugs []. 
Art-Qui-OH ()
is a novel &amp; potent antimalarial hybrid compound with IC50
values of 8.95nM and 9.59nM after 48 hrs of in vitro incubation
for Plasmodium falciparum chloroquine sensitive 3D7 and
chloroquine resistant FcB1 strains []. Additionally, the
artemisinin-quinine hybrid compound, because of the coupling
of the lipophilic fast acting, rapidly cleared artemisinin with the
higher half-life, slower acting polar quinine base is likely to
have a higher half-life in vivo and in vitro.

The hybrid drug promises to be clinically effective against MRD
(multi-drug resistant) malaria because the chance of parasites
simultaneously developing resistance as a result of genetic
mutations to two drugs with different modes of action is likely
to be lower than the chance of developing resistance to single
drug. So in view of the reported antimalarial synergism
between artemisinin/other endoperoxides and quinine [], as
a proof-of-concept we planned to evaluate in silico the binding
mode and relative binding affinity of Art-Qui-OH with the
Histo-Aspartic Protease (HAP) of P.falciparum. The reason of
choosing HAP as the drug target is that, HAP is the most
divergent vacuolar plasmepsin, with no counterpart in other
characterized species of Plasmodium []. It is the observed
divergence of HAP from mammalian proteolytic enzymes that
is the most interesting point here, because it would be even
more valuable if the drug hybrid were also active on other
species of Plasmodium. Moreover, regarding inhibition of HAP
enzyme only one compound is so far been reported (KNI-10006)
while for Plm-I and Plm-II, a number of very potent inhibitor
have been synthesized [].

Methodology
Preparation of protein:
The X-ray structure of HAP-Pepstatin-A complex (PDB ID:
3FNT) and HAP-KNI-10006 complex (PDB ID: 3FNU) have
been used as the initial structure in the preparation of Art-Qui-
OH binding site. Hydrogen atoms were added to the model
using Maestro interface (version 8.5; Schrodinger LLC, New
York) based on an explicit all atom model. The multi step
Schrodinger's protein preparation tool (PPrep) has been used
for final preparation of protein. The complex obtained was
minimized using OPLS-2005 force field with Polack-Ribiere
Conjugate Gradient (PRCG) algorithm. The minimization was
stopped either after 5000 steps of minimizations or after the
energy gradient converged below 0.001 kcal/mol.

Ligand preparation:
The structure of Art-Qui-OH hybrid was collected from
published data []. We used ISIS Draw 2.3 software for
sketching the structure and converting to its 3D representation
by using ChemSketch 3D viewer of ACDLABS 12.0. LigPrep
was used for final preparation of ligands for docking. LigPrep is
a utility of Schrodinger software suit that combines tools for
generating 3D structures from 1D (Smiles) and 2D (SDF)
representation, searching for tatutomers and steric isomers and
perform a geometry minimization of ligand. Ligprep utility
produces a number of structures from each input structure with
various ionization states, tautomers, stereo chemistries, and
ring conformations.

The program automatically generated all possible stereoisomers
(default value of 32 was used) for each ligand. Furthermore, a
unique low-energy ring conformation for each stereoisomer
with correct chirality was generated with the help of Ligprep.
All the structures were subsequently subjected to molecular
mechanics energy minimization using Impact (version 5.6,
Schrodinger Inc.) with default settings: maximum cycles 100,
conjugate gradient minimizer, initial step size 0.05, maximum
step size 1.0, gradient criteria 0.01. The partial atomic charges
were assigned to the molecular structures using the 2005
implementation of the OPLS-AA force field. These energy
minimized structures were used for Glide (grid-based ligand
docking with energetic) docking.

Molecular Docking of Art-Qui-OH to HAP (Histo-Aspartic Protease):
The “Extra Precision” (XP) mode of Glide docking 
[] (version
4.5, Schrodinger Inc.) has been used to perform all docking
calculations using the OPLS-AA 2005 force field. In this work
the bounding box of size 10 Å ×10 Å ×10 Å was defined in
Histo-Aspartic Protease and centred on the mass centre of the
crystallographic KNI-10006 and Pepstatin-A to confine the mass
centre of the docked ligand. The scale factor of 0.4 for van der
Waals radii was applied to atoms of protein with absolute
partial charges less than or equal to 0.25. Five thousand poses
per ligand were generated during the initial phase of the
docking calculation, out of which best 1000 poses per ligand
were chosen for energy minimization. The dielectric constant of
4.0 and 1000 steps of conjugate gradient minimizations were
included for energy minimization protocol. Upon completion of
each docking calculation, 100 poses per ligand were generated
and the best docked structure was chosen using a Glide Score
(Gscore) function. Glide Score is a more sophisticated version of
ChemScore [] with force field-based components and
additional terms accounting for solvation and repulsive
interactions. The choice of the best pose is made using a model
energy score (Emodel) that combines the energy grid score,
Gscore, and the internal strain of the ligand.

Post-scoring with MM-GB/SA:
The pre-positioned structure of Art-Qui-OH, KNI-10006 and
Pepstatin-A with Histo-Aspartic Protease from Glide docking
were used to study the association of these ligands with the
receptor (PDB ID: 3FNT). For each ligand, the pose with the
lowest Glide score was rescored using Prime/MM-GBSA
approach. This approach is used to predict the free energy of
binding for the set of ligands to the receptor. The docked poses
were minimized using the local optimization feature in Prime
and the energies of the complex were calculated using the
OPLS-AA force field and generalized-Born/surface area
(GB/SA) continuum solvent model. The binding free energy
(ΔG bind) is then estimated using equation [] as follows:
ΔG bind = E R: L – (ER+EL) +ΔG solv+ ΔGSA (Equation 1)

where ER: L is energy of the complex, ER+EL is sum of the
energies of the ligand and unliganded receptor, using the
OPLS-AA force field, ΔGsolv (ΔG SA) is the difference between
GBSA solvation energy (surface area energy) of complex and
sum of the corresponding energies for the ligand and
unliganded protein. Corrections for entropic changes were not
applied in this type of free energy calculation.

Discussion
Molecular docking methods are widely used by academic
institutes and pharmaceutical industries to study drug-target
interactions in order to understand the basic electronic/steric
features required for therapeutic action and to design new drug
candidates with improved activities. These docking calculations
provide insight into interactions of ligands with amino acids in
the binding pocket of a target and to predict the corresponding
binding affinities of ligands []. 
 (see supplementary
material) presents the Glide XP docking results of KNI-10006,
Pepstatin-A, and Art-Qui-OH against Histo-Aspartic protease.
Their Glide score values among the ligands vary in between -
7.460 and -8.777 kcal/mol. The relative docking scores (ΔG
score) of Art-Qui-OH with reference to Pepstatin-A and KNI-
10006 is 1.298 kcal/mole and 1.317 kcal/mol respectively. These
results demonstrate that binding mode of Art-Qui-OH
resembles the binding mode of Pepstatin-A in HAP active site
[].

The docked complexes were rescored with Prime-MM/GBSA
approach and the relative binding energy (ΔΔG bind-cald) of Art-
Qui-OH was calculated using Pepstatin-A and KNI-10006 as
reference  (see supplementary material). The drop in
calculated relative binding energy ΔΔG bind-cald value (2.43
kcal/mol) of Art-Qui-OH with reference to Pepstatin-A
revealed a strong binding affinity (binding mode resembles to
Pepstatin-A) () when compared to ΔΔG bind-cald value of
3.44 kcal/mol for KNI-10006 () []. Although more
computationally demanding, the MM-GB/SA scoring generally
yields far superior correlations with experimentally scoring
functions [–].

Validation of the docking method by reproducing the
crystallized HAP-KNI10006 and HAP-Pepstain-A Complex:
The original crystal structures of HAP-Pepstain-A complex
(PDB ID: 3FNT) &amp; HAP-KNI-10006(PDB ID: 3FNU) complex
were used to validate the Glide-XP docking protocol. This was
done by moving the crystallized ligand outside of active site
and then docking it back into the active site. The top 6
configurations after docking were taken into consideration to
validate the result. The root mean square deviation (RMSD) for
each configuration in comparison to the co-crystal of Pepstatin-
A was 0.000-1.248 Å  (see supplementary material),
whereas the RMSD value calculated from KNI-10006 of each
configuration was 0.000-1.531 Å  (see supplementary
material). The best docked structures, which are the
configurations with the lowest Gscore, were compared with the
crystal structure as shown in the table. These docking results
illustrate that the best docked KNI-10006 and Pepstatin-A
complex agrees well with its crystal structure.

Inhibitor (Art-Qui-OH) binding to HAP:
Pepstatin-A was noted to bind in an extended conformation,
with the statine hydroxyl positioned between Asp215 and
His32. The binding mode of Pepstatin-A in the active site of
HAP indicates that Asp215 and His32 are very likely involved
in the catalytic reaction. The KNI-10006 inhibitor
predominantly interacts within the enzyme in the flap area.
Unlike KNI-10006, the mode of binding of Art-Qui-OH hybrid
is drastically different and the hybrid interacts in the active site
of the enzyme with O11 atom of artemisinin moiety forming an
H-bond with His32 (). The O11 atom of artemisinin and
His 32 Nε2 H-bond distance is 2.085 Å. This revealed a strong
binding affinity between ligand and binding site residue. No
interaction has been observed in the binding pose of Art-Qui-
OH with the functionally important flexible loop called the
“flap” (residue 70-83), which changes its conformation upon
ligand binding.

The replacement of Asp by a His residue in the enzyme active
site and some other replacements indicate the possibility of a
catalytic mechanism differing from that of aspartic proteases.
However, up to now, there are no available data on HAP
specificity, which could confirm its catalytic activity.
Experimental study revealed the stabilizing role of His 32
residue in the substrate catalytic reaction of HAP enzyme.
Additionally, Bjelic and Aquist suggested that the positive
charge on His32 provides a critical stabilization (by a factor of
~10, 000) to the water/hydroxide nucleophile as well as
developing negative charge on the substrate during catalysis.
There is also supportive evidence to state that mutation of His
32 to alanine disrupts a hydrogen bonding network that is
critical for proper positioning of the Asp 215 residue 
[].
Moreover on the basis of recent crystal structure of HAP-KNI-
10395 complex (3QVI) it has also been postulated that His32
might be directly involved in providing the electrophilic
component for the catalytic mechanism [].

Conclusion
In this manuscript we have presented two lines of evidence that
Art-Qui-OH binds at or near the Pepstatin-A binding site of Histo-Aspartic Protease

The ΔΔG bind-cald of the hybrid molecule is 2.43 kcal/mol for Pepstatin-A in comparison to ΔΔG bind-cald value of 3.44 kcal/mol for KNI-10006.


We suggest that the molecular interactions described here for the binding
mode and relative binding affinity of the Art-Qui-OH inhibitor
for HAP enzyme should be considered for further structurebased
design effort.

Competing interests
The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors acknowledge R. Raghu, Schrödinger Inc. for
providing trial license software for preparation of the
manuscript. The authors also like to thank Prof. David
Warhurst of LSHTM, University of London for correction of
manuscript in view of language as well as technical approach.

Citation:Mahapatra et al, Bioinformation 8(17): 827-833 (2012)

Overlapped docking poses of Pepstatin-A, and Art-
Qui-OH obtained from Glide docking onto binding site of
Histo-Aspartic Protease.(Magenta= Art-Qui-OH, Silver=
Pepstatin-A).

Overlapped docking poses of KNI-10006, and Art-
Qui-OH obtained from Glide docking onto active site of Histo-
Aspartic Protease (Magenta= Art-Qui-OH, Silver=KNI-10006)

Illustrates the H- bond interaction of His32 and O11
atom of Art-Qui-OH

