Background
Alternative splicing (AS) is an important mechanism for functional diversity in eukaryotic cells. AS allow processing 
      of one pre-mRNA into different transcripts in a cell type. This results in protein diversity with each protein having 
      distinct function. [–
      –] To address this problem we used EST (short, single pass cDNA 
      sequences generated from randomly selected library clones produced in a high throughput manner from different tissues, 
      individuals and conditions) and mRNA sequences to detect AS variants. The detected variants (using 5,469,433 EST and 
      26,159 mRNA sequences) were stored in a database called AVATAR.

Although, AS databases are available in the public domain, not many contain AS information for multiple eukaryotes 
      (a comparison summarized in AVATAR web site). Therefore, it is important to document AS information for multiple 
      eukaryotes. Hence, we developed AVATAR containing AS information for six eukaryotes. Here, we describe AVATAR development, 
      its content and utility.

Methodology
Dataset used
The dbEST database (Jan 16, 2004) at NCBI contains nearly 5.4 million human EST sequences and this dataset is used 
      in the current analysis. [] The human genome sequences (CONTIG build 3.4)
      in Genbank format is obtained from NCBI. [] Gene information and 
      mRNA sequence were downloaded from the NCBI RefSeq project.

Identification of AS
The identification of AS in AVATAR is performed in three steps (described below) as illustrated in .

Step 1:
      Alignment of EST and mRNA with the genome sequence
EST sequences were aligned to the whole genome sequence using Mugup. [
      ] Mugup is a sequence  alignment program developed in Windows platform. This procedure identified splice sites in 
      the ESTs ( panel A and B). The matched regions and gaps correspond to exons and introns, respectively. EST and mRNA 
      alignments with scores greater than 94% were used for further analysis.

Step 2:
      Clustering EST and mRNA
EST and mRNA were clustered according to their location in the genome ( panel C). EST and mRNA with overlapping 
      regions were then assembled together.

Step 3:
      Detection of AS sites
The mapping of EST alignment with genome sequence to intron positions helps to identify skipped exons and 
					included exons.
      

Searching AVATAR
AVATAR can be queried using keywords. The keywords include accession number, gene name, gene isoform, gene location, 
      cytogenetic locations, chromosome number and number of AS events. The database search produces AS visuals for queried gene.
      

Utility to the Biological Community
AVATAR is a collection of AS information for 6 eukaryotic organisms. The database can be queried simultaneously for 6 
      organisms. It can also be searched using gene names and desired number of AS events. EST sequences are error prone resulting 
      in the detection of aberrant transcripts. Frequency of EST alignment at a specific site provides improved detection in AVATAR.
      

Caveats
AS information on paralogous genes in eukaryotic genomes are not included in AVATAR due to the difficulty in identifying 
      their corresponding chromosomal locations using EST sequences.      

Future developments
New EST sequences are generated in laboratories every day. Hence, it is a time consuming to keep AS databases updated due 
      to the growth of genome and mRNA sequences. Hence, we are in the process of developing a computer agent which can update AVATAR 
      automatically. We also plan to include tumor specific AS data.      

This work was supported by National Science Council under Grant, NSC92-3312-B-468-001.

Figures and Tables
Process of EST alignment and screening. (a) Search the genomic location for each EST. (b) Screening ESTs            scores with greater than 94%. (c) Grouping intron by splicing site matched within 3 bp. (d) Detection of AS sites

Database statistics
Organism	Exon skipping	3’ AS	5’ AS	Total	
Homo sapiens	5800	3227	3213	12240	
Mus musculus	2772	1504	1488	5764	
Rattus norvegicus	158	145	162	465	
Drosophila melanogaster	8	100	106	214	
Caenorhabditis elegans	7	50	63	120	
Arabidopsis thaliana	2	59	76	137	

      Citation:Hsu
      et al.,Bioinformation 1(1): 16-18 (2005)

