Background
Cotton leaf curl Allahabad virus is a single stranded DNA virus
causing devastating cotton leaf curl disease (CLCuD) in cotton
(Gossypium hirsutum). It belongs to family Geminiviridae, genus
Begomovirus and transmitted by whitefly Bemisia tabaci (Genn)
[]. CLCuD is a serious threat in the Indian subcontinent for
several plant species in the family Malvaceae and most
importantly for the cultivation of cotton (Gossypium sp.). In
India, CLCuD was appeared in an epidemic form during the
year 1997 in the state of Rajasthan affecting an area of 0.1
million hactares. This disease caused significant losses to cotton
crop estimating total value of &gt; $ 5 billion from 1992 to 1997 in
Pakistan. Though losses were reduced following the
introduction of resistant cultivars, resistance was broken down
due to the emergence of new recombinant CLCuV species
identified as Cotton leaf curl Burewala virus. Now it has become
the limiting factor for cotton productivity in Pakistan and north
western India []. Therefore, it is of utmost important to devise
effective CLCuD resistance strategy.

The genome of Cotton leaf curl Allahabad virus is circular, ~ 2.7 kb
in size. It transcribes ORFs from virion and complementary
strands. The virion sense produces ORFs AV1 and AV2, while
complementary strand includes AC1, AC2, AC3, AC4 and AC5
(). AC1 encodes the replication- associated protein (Rep)
that plays a key role in rolling circle replication and regulation
of gene expression of a begomovirus. AC1 is also involved in
inhibiting expression of complementary-sense gene. AC2
encodes the transcriptional activator protein, a multifunctional
protein, which acts as a transactivational regulatory factor that
regulates transcription of coat protein (CP) and movement
protein (MP) encoding genes, and suppresses gene silencing.

AC3 encodes the replication enhancer Protein (REn) leads
accumulation of viral DNA followed by symptom development
and interacts with Rep to increase Rep mediated ATPase
activity. AC4 protein is involved in characteristic vein swelling
symptom development in Arabidopsis and suppresses miRNAs
and siRNAs mediated RNA silencing. AC5 protein is very
uncommon protein for begomoviruses and it has been reported
that it may contribute in viral DNA replication but not essential
for viral infectivity. Coat Protein (AV1), a structural
multifunctional protein is involved in genome packaging, insect
transmission and systemic spread of virus. Pre-coat protein
(AV2), interacts with suppressors of gene silencing viz AC2 or
AC4 and maintains high level of viral DNA in infected tissues
[]. Even though several defense mechanisms against virus
infections are operative in plants, miRNA- mediated RNAi
responses are suggested to be decisive factors in combating the
pathogens [,
]. RNA Interference (RNAi) is a sequence specific
process of post-trancriptional regulation of gene expression. It
involves sequence-specific degradation of target messenger
mRNA transcripts employing 21-23 nucleotide long microRNA
(miRNA) or small interfering RNA (siRNA) []. The mechanism
is evolutionarily conserved and occurs in plants, animals, fungi
and viruses. MiRNAs are involved in a variety of plant
processes like organ morphogenesis [], signaling pathway 
[],
abiotic stresses [] and biotic stresses 
[].

In ribonucleoprotein complex miRNA binds to the
complementary mRNA transcript and results cleavage or
translational repression of target. Till now several
experimentally validated results of miRNA-mRNA transcript
binding are available []. These findings led to generalised rules
of in silico miRNA-target prediction. Most important feature of
miRNA-target pair is octameric ‘seed‘ 1–8, 1–7, or 2–8
nucleotide position of the miRNA having Watson-Crick
complementarity [,
,
]. Other characteristic that favours
mRNA cleavage includes perfect complementarity and most
favourable minimum free energy (MFE) of miRNA-mRNA
complex [].

Animal viruses have been found to encode miRNAs that
effectively regulate virus gene expression and amend the host׳s
small RNA metabolism. In animals it has been demonstrated
that host encoded miRNAs have the potential to target viral
mRNA transcripts directly or indirectly by interfering viral
replication through miRNA-mediated regulation. Over the past
years, several studies have revealed complex host specific
miRNA- virus interactions in mammals. It has been found that
the host miRNA pathway in mammals brings about powerful
effects on virus replication. For example, hsa-miR-210, hsa-miR-
199-3p, hsa-miR-125a-5p and hsa-miR-151-5p have been shown
to affect HBV gene expression and replication in cultured cells
following direct binding to the viral transcripts []. Likewise,
human miRNAs (viz. hsa-miR-28, hsa-miR-125b, hsa-miR-150,
hsa-miR-223 and hsa-miR-382) over-expressed in resting CD4+T
cells, were reported to target the 3׳end of the human HIV-1
RNA, thus silencing almost all transcribed viral proteins viz.
Gag, pol, env []. Critical scrutiny of analogous miRNA in the
genome of plant infecting viruses provide little evidence
towards the existence of virus-encoded miRNAs []. However
growing number of studies demonstrate that predicted miRNA
target sites can be efficiently manipulated to generate artificial
miRNA (amiRNA) based antiviral defense strategies in plants.

Niu et al., (2006) were among the first to report miRNA-based
defense strategy against viruses. They have shown that these
small miRNAs can be engineered to protect plants against the
infection by tymoviruses and potyviruses. They engineered
miRNA precursor of abundant natural plant miR159 a 273-nt
backbone with complementary sequences of viral suppressors
of RNA silencing (VSR), viz. P69 of Turnip yellow mosaic virus
and HC-Pro of Turnip mosaic virus. Arabidopsis thaliana plants
transformed with these recombinant artificial miRNA
precursors acquired immunity against infection of these viruses.
Transgenic Nicotiana tabacum expressing an amiRNA derived
from miR171 precursor of A. thaliana targeting another VSR, 2b
of Cucumber mosaic virus (CMV), showed resistance against
CMV. This study clearly demonstrated that, expression of
miRNA was more effective than expression of short hairpin
sRNA.

In another experiment similar protection was achieved against
Potato virus X (PVX) in N. tabacum expressing amiRNAs
(developed from A. thaliana miR159a, miR167b and miR171a
precursors) targetting TGBp1 / p25 domains of PVX. Later,
tomato plants expressing amiRNAs against highly conserved 3׳
untranslated region (UTR) and the overlapped coding sequence
of RNA-dependent RNA polymerase 2a protein and the
suppressor 2b protein genes of CMV demonstrated resistance
even following infection with Tobacco mosaic virus, Tomato
yellow leaf curl virus or CMV []. Silencing suppressor genes,
such as AC2 or AC4, impart pathogenic attribues to
begomoviruses appear to be the important targets for designing
antiviral strategy. Transgenic tomato plants expressing amiRNA
targeting silencing suppressor genes, AC2 or AC4 of Tomato leaf
curl New Delhi virus led to the successful production of resistant
transgenic tomato lines offering a great degree of resistance
towards the challenge of Tomato leaf curl virus. Similarly, N.
benthamiana transformed with cotton miRNA169a, sharing
homology with the AV2 gene of Cotton leaf curl Burewala virus
(CLCuBuV) showed good resistance against CLCuBuV as well
as Cotton leaf curl Kokhran virus [].

The rising number of experimental validations warrants
attention towards competitive struggle for survival between
hosts and viruses that takes place in vivo around the RNA
silencing system. It seems that miRNA-mediated plant defence
responses have emerged as relevant components of the innate
immune system and some miRNA families [,
] appears to be
playing crucial role in developing plant resistance against virus
infections. In view of these findings, we have attempted to
explore cotton miRNAs that have the potential to generate
defence against CLCuAV disease. In the present study a
combinatorial approach, which makes use of more than one
computational program for predicting CLCuAV targets of
cotton host microRNA set, was applied. Bioinformatics
approaches were explored to check the possibility whether
cotton host miRNAs have any potential to target CLCuAV
genome. This is likely to provide an effective way for exploring
complex host miRNA-virus target relationship and could serve
as the basis to engineer resistance against CLCuAV infection in
cotton (G. hirsutum). It will further increase our understanding
of the complex virus-host interactions. This is the first report of
the identification of cotton miRNAs which potentially could
target crucial CLCuAV genes.

Methodology
Source of data:
The Cotton microRNA mature sequences were downloaded
from The Plant microRNA database []. For predicting
probable targets in the CLCuAV genome (Accession:
NC_014897), nucleotide sequences were retrieved from NCBI
GenBank (http://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov).

Target prediction:
MiRNA target prediction software ―miRanda [] and
RNAhybrid [] were used to predict CLCuAV targets against
the sixty nine numbers of cotton miRNAs in the genome of
CLCuAV using detailed statistical study of minimum free
energies (MFEs). Cotton miRNAs targets in CLCuAV genome
were initially predicted using miRanda with default parameters
(Gap Open Penalty: -9.0; Gap Extend: -4.0; Score Threshold:
50.0; Energy Threshold: -20.0 kcal/mol). With a view to increase
the stringency for selection of miRNA-target pairs, a cut-off
score 70 was derived by running the same program on a
shuffled sequence of CLCuAV with the same set of miRNAs.

Results
This bioinformatics analysis provided a repertoire of miRNAs
targeting respective CLCuAV genes. Only top scoring miRNAtarget
pairs with maximum complementarity and optimal MFE
were selected as summarised in  (see supplementary
material). A total number of 18 cotton miRNA targets in the
CLCuAV genome were identified above the threshold values.
Among them, a total number of 11, 3, 3, 4, 4, 6 and 2 targets
were recognized for AC1, AC2, AC3, AC4, AC5, AV1 and AV2
genes of CLCuAV genome respectively. Potential regulatory
targets, having five or fewer mismatches and without any gap,
was identified by four miRNA family viz. (miR394, miR395,
miR2949 and miR3476). AC1 gene has maximum targets against
six cotton miRNAs (viz. ghr-miR394, ghr-miR395a, ghrmiR395d,
ghr-miR408, ghr-miR2949 and ghr-miR2950). The
MFE (kcal/mol) of these miRNA-target pairs as calculated by
RNAhybrid was claimed to be -25.1,-28.1,-28.1,-25.1,-26.2, and -
24.3, respectively. Among them ghr-miR395a, ghr-miR395d and
ghr-miR2950 showed multiple loci interaction within nucleotide
positions 795-815, 210-230 and 230-250, 1007-1027 in CLCuAV
genome, respectively. It is worth to mention that ghr-miR2949
and ghr-miR3476 exclusively target the AC1 and AV1 genes
while ghr-miR2950 binds to the potential genes of CLCuAV
genome. It was observed that AC2 gene was targeted by three
miRNAs (ghr-miR157, ghr-miR408 and ghr-miR2950). AC3 and
AC5 gene were targeted by single miRNA (ghr-miR2950). The
analysis further revealed that AC4 gene was targeted by ghrmiR394,
ghr-miR395a, ghr-miR395d, and ghr-miR2950. AV1
gene possess potential targets for miRNA viz. ghr-miR164, ghrmiR168,
ghr-miR394, ghr-miR779, ghr-miR2950 and ghrmiR3476
with MFE of -23.3,-25.2,-25.4,-22.6,-23.2 and -25.0,
respectively. AV2 gene showed putative targets for ghr-miR164
while, ghr-miR168, ghr-miR394 ghr-miR395a, ghr-miR395d,
ghr-miR408, ghr-miR2949, ghr-miR2950, and ghr-miR3476 seem
to cleave target sites, ghr-miR157, ghr-miR164, ghr-miR394, ghrmiR408
and ghr-miR779 exhibit propensity to result in
translation inhibition of the targeted sequences.

Discussion
This bioinformatics analysis revealed that there is high
probability that CLCuAV genome is targeted by abundant and
conserved miRNA families in the ORF regions coding for AC1,
AC2, AC4 and AV1 genes. However, it requires experimental
validation (studies are underway). Fate of a miRNA target site
is determined by the degree of complementarity, it predicts
with miRNA. In a similar study, miRNA families (viz. miR171,
miR156, miR395, miR834 and miR398) were reported to be
targeting Scarecrow-like-IV, Squamosa Promoter Binding
Protein-Like3, ATP sulfurylases, COP-1 interactive partner and
copper/zinc superoxide dismutase2 respectively. It was
concluded that if there is perfect complementarity between
miRNA and mRNA target, the deserved target will be
endonucleolytically cleaved while imperfect complementarity
may leads to translational repression or destabilization of
mRNA []. In our study, AC1 gene that encodes a
multifunctional protein was targeted by eight different
conserved miRNA families. Among them, complementarity (%)
of miRNA-target alignment for ghr-miR395a, ghr-miR395d, ghrmiR2949a,
ghr-miR2949b and ghr-miR2949c was found to be
significantly high (100, 100, 87, 87 and 87, respectively).
Sequence complementarity of silencing suppressor AC4 gene
with ghr-miR395a and ghr-miR395d was also observed to be
100%. Artificial miRNA (amiRNA) constructs designed and
developed from these miRNA families can serve as a novel
strategy to engineer resistance against CLCuAV infection in
cotton plants.

Multiple binding of a miRNA on a same target gene leads to
cooperativity of binding and hence increases the efficiency and
stringency of RNA silencing []. In present computational
study, five miRNAs (ghr-miR168, ghr-miR395a, ghr-miR395d,
ghr-miR2950 and ghr-miR3476) were predicted to interact with
AC1, AC4 and AV1 genes at multiple loci. The success rate on
implication of these miRNAs against respective targets is
assumed to be high. Multiple miRNAs binding to multiple
locations of target sites reported as effective mean to achieve
target repression either by cleavage or translational inhibition
[]. Overlapping transcripts of various genes appear to be hot
spots of miRNA-target interaction. Overlapping segment of AC1
and AC4 genes were observed to be targeted by ghr-miR394,
ghr-miR395a, ghr-miR395d and ghr-miR2950; overlapping
transcripts of AC1 and AC2 genes shown to be targeted by ghrmiR408
and ghr-miR2950 while overlapping segment of AV1
and AV2 genes retrieved to be targeted by ghr-miR164 and ghrmiR2950.
These overlapped transcripts emerged as favoured
sites of action for the repression of gene expression.
Understanding the mechanism of repression of these genes
involved in CLCuD onset and progression by miRNAs would
be helpful in developing a strategic plan to control
pathogenecity of CLCuAV. During miRNA: target binding
process in vivo free energy changes occur and stability of this
miRNA:target duplex is governed by thermodynamic stability
[]. This thermodynamic stability of binding sites is termed as
Minimum Free Energy (MFE). Previous studies have established
that weak miRNA-target seed binding stability resulted in
lower downregultion of targets in plant system [,
].
Overlapped transcript pairs of AC1 and AC4 genes acquired
very high MFE value (-28.0 kcal/mol) with ghr-miR395a and
ghr-miR395d suggesting the key role of cotton miRNAs in the
process of virus infection and replication. Contiguous binding
at central region is very important as pairing between miRNA
and target propagate towards central position of miRNA, only
after disruption of original argonaute binding with miRNA
central and 3׳ regions []. This disruption releases part of energy
gained from central pairing, favouring Watson-Crick pairing of
adjacent seed region. Ghr-miR157, miR164, ghr-miR168, ghrmiR394,
ghr-miR395a, ghr-miR395d, ghr-miR408, ghr-miR779,
ghr-miR2949, ghr-miR2950, and ghr-miR3476 were turned up to
be the most potential miRNA families which could target
CLCuAV genes with perfect and near-perfect complementarity.
So the perfect and near perfect complementarity observed
between these miRNAs and cognate genes, reflect a functional
relationship that the protein-encoding genes of CLCuAV are
putative regulatory targets of the cotton miRNAs.

Conclusion
In this study, we have shown that ten cotton miRNA families
(namely miR157, miR164, miR168, miR394, miR395, miR408,
miR779, miR2949, miR2950 and miR3476) have the potential to
down regulate the expression of Cotton leaf curl Allahabad virus
genes and could be used to develop virus resistant cotton plant.
Several studies have demonstrated the role of miRNA in
inhibiting virus infection in mammals [,
]. Similiarly,
artificial-miRNA [amiRNAs] targeting specific genes of plant
viruses also have been successfully used to generate resistance
against devastating begomoviruses not only in model plants but
also in agricultural crops [,
]. MiRNAs have least probability
to undergo recombination with virus sequence because of their
short length as compared to siRNAs. Apart from that it has been
testified that begomovirus may escape from siRNA derived
RNA interference []. Our work is coherent with the view that
host miRNAs may act as first line of defence in plants against
infecting viruses, the efficacy of this defence against Cotton leaf
curl Allahabad virus, however need to be carefully evaluated in
vivo.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank DST-FIST (Department of Science &amp; Technology,
Govt. of India) for infrastructure facilities.

Citation:Shweta &amp; Khan, Bioinformation 10(5): 251-255 (2014)

Schematic diagram of Cotton leaf curl Allahabad virus
(Accession: NC_014897).

