Background
The guanine rich region is a relatively unexplored part of the
human genome. Although there are some algorithms to detect
special motifs, such as G quadruplex, the algorithms to detect
other types of G rich motifs do not exist. It was first reported in
1910 that guanylic acid forms a gel at high concentrations 
[].
Therefore, it is suggested that G-rich sequences may form some
other structures. About 50 years later, Gellert used X-ray
diffraction to display that guanylic acids can accumulate into
tetrameric structures []. The presence of G-rich sequences is
found in functional regions of many genomes. For example, Grich
regions have the potential to form G4 structures which
locate telomeres, promoters, mitotic and meiotic double-strand
break (DSB) sites []. Naturally occurring ‘G’ rich sequences,
via non-Watson-Crick base pairing capable of forming Gquadruplexes
and stabilized by cyclic Hoogsteen hydrogen
bonding, have been implicated in some different genomic
activities such as: transcription pausing, FMRP binding, mRNA
stability, translation initiation as well as repression 
[].

Although the G-quadruplex (G4) motif has been analyzed as a
non-B-form DNA secondary structure, there may be some
others which have not been given nomenclature yet 
[]. It is
already known that G-quadruplex is involved in different
human cancers [,
,
]. Thus G-quadruplexes may be targeted
for therapeutic purposes [,
,
]. DNA folding properties allow
it to make various inter- and intramolecular secondary
structures. Although the structures seem in vitro artefacts,
bioinformatics reveals that DNA sequences capable of forming
such structures which are conserved [].

It is known that there are some types of guanine rich regions
and motifs. Z-DNA motifs are mostly related to transcriptional
start sites in eukaryotic genomes []. Cruciform structures are
located close to replication origins, breakpoint junctions and
promoters in various organisms. Triplexes cause genomic
instability by breaking double-strand that result in
translocations []. The repeated expansion may relate to human
genetic disorders []. G4 structures present different 
topologies and are separated into various groups depending on
the orientation of the DNA sequences. It is unclear how many
G-rich sequences form stable G4 structures in vivo, but G4
DNA motifs are common in G-rich micro and minisatellites, up
and downstream of TSSs, often near promoters, transcription
factor binding sites, and mitotic and meiotic DSB sites 
[,
,
,
]. Telomerase activity in most human cancers can be
influenced by G4, because different small ligands target the
regions and bind, as has been tested in different experiments
[]. G4 motifs are most likely found within 1,000 nt upstream
of the TSS in 50% of human genes []. Special Bioinformatics
algorithms find that the promoters of human oncogenes and
regulatory genes have G4 motifs more than in the promoters of
housekeeping and tumor suppressor genes []. G-rich
sequences or G4 may cause supercoiling in the structures are in
or near promoter regions, which can have both positive and
negative effects on transcription. First, the location of the G
motif is a very powerful factor for transcription.

Approximately ~ 400,000 presumed G4 motifs are found in the
human genome. The motifs are frequently located within the
promoter regions of oncogenes, assuming that G4 motifs may
act in a key role for regulation of different cellular activities
such as transcription, translation, telomere maintenance, and
replication []. The G4 motif importance in the regulation of
gene transcription came from v-myc viral studies, oncogene
homolog (MYC), the transcription factor regulates the
expression of different genes which are altered in human
cancer, is a non-regulated in around half of the tumors 
[].
Guanine-rich nucleic acid sequences which form G-quadruplex
structures are key regulators of some biological processes and
are targeted for therapeutic medicine such as Quarfloxin, a
fluoroquinolone [,
].

Guanine numbers and densities are very distinctive parts of the
genome. The aim of this study is to find repeating G motifs
consisting of 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 guanines in the promoter
sequence of selected genes important for carcinogenesis (50
tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes). Previous studies have
analyzed G quadruplexed for oncogenes, but not other types of
motifs and genes like tumor suppressor genes []. However, in
this paper the promoter sequences of oncogenes and tumor
suppressor genes (TSG) are the candidates for finding G-type
densities.

Methodology
Data types:
Three different databases have been used, including Genecards,
EPD (Eukaryotic Promoter Database), and TCGA (The Cancer
Genome Atlas). The workflow has been described as a flow
chart (). The names of the oncogenes and tumor
suppressor genes (TSG) most related to colon cancer are taken
from Genecards []. Fifty oncogenes and fifty TSGs are
selected from Genecards for each group. According to the
chosen oncogenes and TSGs, promoter sequences are
downloaded from EPD []. The genes׳ promoter sequences
consist of 600 nucleotides, -500 before Transcription Start Site,
(TSS), and +100 after the Transcription Start Site. The database,
EPD, which promoter sequences are downloaded has supplied
the promoter sequence 500 before TSS and 100 after TSS 
[].
The cancer genomic data portal is TCGA [] from which 174
colon cancer patients with gene expression Level 3 and the 46
control data are downloaded on 01/02/2015.

Guanine density detection:
The guanine nucleotide number is reported in other studies,
especially in genomic locations such as, telomere, promoter,
exon and intron []. G types including GG, GGG, GGGG,
GGGGG, GGGGGG, GGGGGGG, have been produced to detect
guanine density (GD) in the promoter sequences []. For each
promoter sequence, GD is detected by a computational
program which was created for this study. The program
searches GD types of the sequences between -500 to +100 in a
100 nucleotide group for both oncogenes and TSG in .
According to the guanine density of each group, oncogenes and
TSG promoter sequence profiles are characterized and listed
 (see supplementary material).

Our results indicate that the oncogenes and TSG G profiles
present increasingly high density between -100 to 0, where they
achieved maximum density after Transcription Start Site (TSS)
( &amp; 
, respectively). The G types, G2, G3, G4, G5,
G6, G7, show increasing order and reach the maximum level
after TSS, 0 to +100. The G-types show diverse density in
different groups of the promoter sequences. Especially, G2, G3,
G4, G5 types are detected more than other types. In addition to
that, in the -100 to 0 locations of the sequence, the G6 types
appear 8 times in both oncogenes and TSG, which is especially
rare. G2 is the most commonly found type and followed G3, G4
and G5 in the all small groups. Unexpectedly, G7 type is found
2 times between -200 to -100 in both promoter sequences ( &amp; 
 (see supplementary material)).

If we analyze the promoters of oncogenes only, the G profiles
consist of maximum G3, G5, G6, G7 types in -100-0 and G2, G4
types maximum 0-100. In the TSG promoters, the maximum
profile of G types is demonstrated as G4, G5, G6, G7 in -100-0
and G2, G3 in 0-100. The maximum G density is found before
and after 100 nucleotides after TSS ().

G-type density is compared before and after TSS; the average
G-type density of all 5 nucleotide groups between -500 and 0, is
compared to the G-type density of the group between 0 and
+100. Before TSS, on average, starting from -500, the oncogenes
have 336 and TSG have 332 G types, but after TSS, to +100, the
oncogenes have 402 and TSG have 435 G types ().
Surprisingly, 200-100 location of both promoters has distinct G
types, such as G9 and G11 in oncogenes and 2 times G8 in TSG.
The G types number increases between the segments 400-300 to
300-200 around and then a little bit decrease after that.
However, the last segment before the TSS and 100 nucleotides
after TSS have the maximum G type number over all
comparison.

Gene expression comparison:
Since G profiles are found in promoters sites, which are
important for the regulation of gene expression, we decided to
compare the G profiles of selected cancer-related genes to their
expression in the colon cancer patients. The expression data
were downloaded from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data
portal which supplies many different patient genomics data,
including gene expression, microRNA, RNAseq, methylation,
mutation and others. We downloaded the expression data from
17815 genes from 174 colon cancer patients and 46 controls. The
average expression level of all 17815 genes was determined and
compared with control data (Supplementary ). Abnormal fold
change of 50 selected oncogenes and 50 selected TSGs has been
found. According to the fold change, high-expressed and lowexpressed
genes are profiled with G Density  (see
supplementary material).

Discussion
Guanine numbers and densities are very distinctive parts of the
genome. In this study, we presented the G densities of motifs
consisting of 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 guanines in the promoter
sequence of selected genes important for carcinogenesis (50
tumor suppressor genes and 50 oncogenes). Previous studies
presented different algorithms and methods to find guanine
rich regions and potential motifs. In those studies, different Gscore
for G quadruplex calculation methods were developed
[]. However, no previous study has shown the densities of
other G repeats such as GG, GGG, GGGG, GGGGG, GGGGGG,
GGGGGGG and GGGGGGGG. Our study is the first to
compare the G repeats in tumor suppressors and oncogenes׳
promoters.

The promoter sequences were separated into small groups of
100 nucleotides, from -500 to +100. Our results showed that the
oncogenes and TSG G profiles present increasingly high
density between -100 to 0, where they achieved maximum
density after Transcription Start Site (TSS) ( &amp; 
,
respectively). Analysis shows that G density increases from -
500 to +100 and more from TSS. G density is found to be
maximum within -/+100 of TSS. The results of G densities were
compared with the expression data of the selected oncogenes
and tumor suppressor genes in patients with colon cancer
(n=174, ).

The relation between gene expression and Guanine types density:
Since G profiles are found in promoters sites, we decided to
compare the G profiles of selected cancer-related genes to their
expression in the colon cancer patients. TCGA colon cancer
data of 174 patients and 46 controls are compared. According to
fold changes, high and low expressed genes have been
determined as compared to the controls. All types of G repeats
of 18 highly expressed genes from both oncogenes and TSG
have been analyzed  (see supplementary material). The
18 highly expressed oncogenes have the average of all G-types
to be 44.44 and the low expressed to be 46.17. On the other
hand, the 18 highly expressed TSGs have the average of all G
types to be 41.17 and the low expressed to be 46.94.

Conclusions
This study describes a method with a computer program for
quantitatively evaluating the conservation of different guanine 
types and densities. Guanine types, G (2-7), can be identified by
guanine density (GD) program in order to detect potential
sequence motifs which are conserved in promoters of
oncogenes and TSGs. The computer program quickly and
efficiently identifies conserved Guanine Types Density regions
where there is a relatively high probability of sequence
conservation. The program reported in this study has
application for the analysis of large datasets.

Our results show that depending on the exact locations of the
guanine types and density, the gene promoter sequences
demonstrate conserved characteristics. In other words, the G
densities increase closer to the transcriptional start site of both
oncogenes and TSGs. The G density is the highest within the
100 base pairs proximal to the transcriptional start site.
Identifying common conserved GDs may help us validate these
findings on larger datasets to show the role of G densities in
pathogenesis and disease. 

Moreover, the G types density demonstrates that the location
and number of G repeates are conserved in oncogenes and TSG
promoter sequence. The paper may help elucidate the potential
role of the specific G types in therapeutic and diagnostic
pursuits.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Dogan et al, Bioinformation 11(6): 290-295 (2015)

The workflow for the detection of the G repeats in promoter׳s sites of 100 genes important for carcinogenesis (50
oncogenes and 50 tumor suppressor genes). TCGA – The Cancer Genome Atlas, TSG – Tumor suppressor gene, GD- gene density, EPD –
The Eukaryotic Promoter Database, MATLAB - A software tool (
http://www.mathworks.com/products/matlab/) for analysis of data.

 100 window promoter sequences. The G types (G2-7) number is detected in both Oncogenes (A) and TSG (B). The number
shows conservative structure, almost together high and low. Panel A represents the oncogenes G types and number. The number
increases as closer to TSS and G2 is getting the maximum number. Panel B represents the TSG G types and number. Almost all
types dramatically increase between 200-100 to 100-0 windows.

Comparison of G Density in Oncogenes and TSG
promoter Sequence. The G repeats presents steps increasing
closer to the TSS. Before 100 nucleotides from TSS it reaches
higher level than other segments.

G density comparison before and After TSS
(Transcription start sites). Before TSS, G types average is 336 in
oncogenes, and 332 in TSG. But after TSS G types of oncogenes
and TSG are 402 and 435 respectively.

