Background
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play an important role in almost all
biological functions []. Transcriptional deregulations in
miRNAs have been implicated in disease processes including
cancers and developmental disorders []. It has been well
established that a single miRNA can regulate the expression of
many mRNAs/ transcripts and an mRNA can be regulated by
multiple miRNAs []. miRNA gene regulation is mediated by a
complex set of proteins termed RNA induced silencing
complex. The miRNAs are guided to the miRNA response
elements (MRE) present in the target mRNAs, which may result
in transcript degradation and/or translational inhibition 
[].
Recently it has been established that miRNA activity on the
target gene can be influenced by the presence or absence of
other competing endogenous (ceRNA) mRNAs that contain
shared MREs [–]. These miRNA activity modulators can act as
a sponge, absorbing and releasing miRNA based on the level of
the transcript. Several modulators of miRNA activity have been
recently characterized []. Salmena et al proposed a hypothesis
that these modulators can communicate with each other in a
miRNA dependent manner mediated through MREs []. This
complex miRNA-mRNA network and interactions opens up a
new chapter in miRNA-mediated gene regulation. However,
currently there are no publicly available resources that identify
and catalog the list of genes that can act as miRNA activity
modulators or ceRNAs. Here we developed a comprehensive
and easy to use resource named ‘competing endogenous RNA
database (ceRDB)’ that lists potential MRE containing genes that
can act in a sponge like fashion for a given mRNA based on a
set of scoring and ranking criteria.

Methodology
MiRNA-mRNA target interactions were obtained from
http://www.targetscan.org Release 5.2 June 2011. The
predicted conserved target information file was parsed to
obtain 54979 conserved human miRNA-mRNA interactions. To
explore the structure of the dataset, the list of interactions was
converted into a matrix containing 153 miRNA families on the
X-axis and 9448 target mRNAs on the Y-axis. The presence of a
predicted conserved miRNA-mRNA interaction is defined by
the presence of a ‘1’ at the defined gene row miRNA column
corresponding to the interaction. The absence of an interaction
is defined by the presence of a ‘0’ at the corresponding
interaction. To shuffle the matrix, interactions between each
miRNA and mRNA were randomly assigned maintaining the
total number of interactions for each mRNA. Both the real
matrix and the shuffled matrix were filtered to only show genes
with more than 5 miRNA binding sites and these were
clustered using Gene Cluster 3.0 hierarchical clustering of both
the X and the Y-axis using Centroid linkage. The resulting
clustered matrixes were visualized using Java Treeview. To
score potential ceRNA interactions, the 54979 human
interactions were loaded into a mySQL database and when the
user selects a given mRNA all predicted miRNA targets for the
given mRNA are obtained. These miRNA are then used to
define all mRNAs that contain binding sites for the set of
miRNAs. For each mRNA, an interaction score is then defined
by adding up the total number of miRNA binding sites that
overlap with the miRNA for a given mRNA. This interaction
score is then used to sort the results and the top 50 predicted
potential ceRNAs are returned. This process is carried out on
the fly using PHP interactions with mySQL in a similar fashion
as previously described in our publicly available databases such
as sarcoma microRNA expression database (S-MED).

Results
In order to define the information content present within
miRNA-mRNA predicted interactions we clustered a matrix
containing miRNA families on the Y-axis with genes on the Xaxis.
Predicted binding interactions are labeled with a ‘1’ and
the lack of an interaction is labeled with a ‘0’ at corresponding
points in the matrix. A heatmap of the clustered images as well
as the branch structure indicate that miRNA binding sites
coexist within 3'UTR at a much higher rate than would be
expected at random. To visually show this we randomized the
interaction matrix and clustered the results ().
Within the cell, each miRNA has many mRNA targets and each
mRNA has potentially many miRNAs capable of regulation
leading to a complex and dynamic regulatory system. One
heretofore overlooked consequence of this system is that
manipulation of the transcript level of a given mRNA may lead
to changes in the concentration of available miRNAs leading to
changes in alternate mRNA regulation via miRNA-mRNA
interactions. In order to predict these interactions for a given
target mRNA we determined all possible miRNA binding to
this target mRNA and then found mRNAs (ceRNAs) that
contained binding sites to these miRNAs. The potential for
competition was ranked for each mRNA by counting the
number of overlapping miRNA binding sites shared between
the given mRNA and the potential ceRNA ().
Competing endogenous mRNA rankings were generated using
the conserved mRNA-miRNA interactions. To access the data,
we built a simple to use web interface and have made it
available at http://www.oncomir.umn.edu/cefinder/. The
user enters an mRNA they are interested in finding potential
competing mRNAs that can regulate the gene of interest, and
the tool returns potential ceRNA regulators. The list is sorted
based on the overlap of the miRNA binding sites in the each of
the pairwise relationships (). Additionally the
miRNA interactions present within the 3'UTR of the primary
mRNA and all potential regulators are visualized in the final
table.

Discussion
In recent years miRNAs have taken center stage in many
aspects of post transcriptional gene regulation. The complexity
of miRNA-mediated gene regulation is compounded by the
presence of multiple mechanisms that modulate either the
levels of miRNAs and/or its target gene. Recently, the Pandolfi
group proposed a novel concept in which mRNAs can regulate
each other via common miRNA response elements [,
].
Through this cross talk novel mRNA-mRNA interactions have
been identified in multiple cancer types. These findings suggest
that modulation of miRNA activity by changing the levels of
competing endogenous RNA is a key fundamental mechanism
of gene regulation that will be applicable for many biological
functions. Here we present a general and straightforward tool
for identifying competing endogenous RNAs (ceRNAs) for a
given gene of interest. Starting with the conserved set of
miRNA-mRNA interactions, we observe that there is high
degree of co-occurrence of miRNA binding sites within the
miRNA-mRNA interaction dataset. This is consistent with the
reports of Shalgi et al []. We then use the co-occurrence of
miRNA binding sites to predict and rank potential ceRNAs for
all mRNAs. Our predictions are experimentally validated for
PTEN and likely very relevant for a large number of additional
genes []. Several recent articles have described ceRNAs that
are capable of regulating PTEN via competing reactions 
[,
].
In these cases, loss of a competing mRNA releases miRNAs for
interaction with the tumor suppressor PTEN leading to
decreased PTEN expression. Our database predicts many of the
biologically validated interactions previously reported and uses
a very straightforward algorithm in identifying these competing
endogenous RNAs. Our search for ceRNAs for many
established tumor suppressors in our database revealed some
interesting observations. For example, genes such as ONECUT2,
NFIB and TNRC6B appeared in many of the ceRNAs gene lists,
these genes contains long 3'UTRs of up to 14kb in length and
are predicted to contain many MREs that can potentially act as
a sponge for multiple miRNAs. We are tempted to speculate
that these ceRNAs with long 3'UTR can act as a ‘master’ MRE
containing gene whose regulation may be affected in multiple
disease conditions. Recently, TNRC6B was predicted to
function as a ceRNA for PTEN and the downregulation of
TNRC6B reduced the expression of PTEN 
[].

In conclusion, we have developed the ceRDB resource to in the
future accommodate multiple species such as model organisms
and other types of sequences such as long non-coding RNAs
and pseudogenes that can potentially also function as ceRNAs.
We believe that the concept of competing endogenous RNA is
likely to become a canonical central theme of gene regulation
and having the ceRDB resource will significantly enhance our
understanding of this fundamental gene regulatory mechanism.

Conflict of Interest
We declare no conflict of interests

Author contributions
AS and SS developed the idea. AS wrote the code and
implemented. AS and SS wrote the manuscript.

Funding
We acknowledge the funding from Department of Defense
grant number # W81XWH-10-1-0556.

We profusely thank Drs. Clifford Steer, Reena Kartha,
Praveensingh Hajeri and Venugopal Thayanithy for their
helpful discussions. We also wish to acknowledge the
Minnesota Supercomputing Institute for providing access to
computational resources.

Citation:Sarver &amp; Subramanian, Bioinformation 8(15): 731-733 (2012)

Visualization of co-occurrence in predicted miRNA-mRNA interactions. Heat map showing the presence of predicted
miRNA-binding sites on the X-axis and the genes that contain the binding sites in the 3'UTR on the Y-axis. Only genes that show
more than 5 binding sites are shown for (A) predicted interactions and (B) predicted interactions after shuffling. (C) Predicting
competing mRNA via miRNA-mRNA interactions. miRNA binding site predictions in the 3'UTR are shown as colored boxes. The
‘Score’ is generated by counting the number of conserved predicted interactions. In this hypothetical case shown there are 7
predicted binding elements in the 3'UTR of the gene. (D) To predict potential competing RNA for the gene shown in A, binding
sites for the predicted miRNA found in A are obtained and summed in all genes. The genes are then sorted by total number of
overlapping binding sites and returned to the user. (E) Example of competing mRNA predictions from ceRDB for PTEN. The user
selects an mRNA of interest from the list of available mRNA. In the case shown here the PTEN tumor suppressor is chosen. (F)
Starting with the list of miRNA binding elements present in PTEN the tool predicts potential competing RNA and visualizes the
extent of overlap between the miRNA binding sites. Only a representative subset of the matrix is shown, the full matrix is available
online. Each predicted gene is linked back to the TargetScan database to visualize the position and total numbers of each miRNA
element.

