Background
Cervical cancer is one of the leading causes of deaths
worldwide. The cancer profile of the Indian state of
Uttarakhand reveals that the Breast cancer was most prevalent
in female followed by cervical and ovarian cancer []. Human
Papillomaviruses (HPVs) are the major cause of cervical cancer
in the world, involved in 90% of all Cervical Cancers. The HPVs
is divided into two groups, the ‘low risk’ such as (type 6 and
11) and the ‘igh risk’ (type 16 and 18) 
[]. Although there are
more than 200 types of HPV identified, the most commonly
associated with cervical cancer are ‘high-risk’ HPV-16 and
HPV-18 [] HPV-16 and HPV-18 remain the primary drug
targets for the development of anticancer drug. The two HPV
genes, E6 and E7, are known to play crucial role in
development of cancer. Both in vitro and in vivo experimental
studies show that the function of E6 and E7 proteins,
particularly of the ‘high risk types’, are essential for tumor
formation [,
]. These oncogenes from the HPV-16 and HPV-18
have been showed to alter gene regulatory pathways involved
in cell cycle control, interacting with and neutralizing the
regulatory functions of two important tumor suppressor
proteins, p53 and pRb (Retinoblastoma Protein) and
deregulating key signal transduction pathways [,
]. HPV has
been known to be play a major role in cervical cancer but
effective treatment against HPV infection is still unavailable 
[],
Plant-derived product have currently become of great interest
due to their medicinal values for prevention and treatment of
cancer.

Plants secondary metabolites are known as magnificent
accumulators of medicinal compounds. More than 50% of all
the drug forms used in the clinical fields around the world have
originated from the compounds extracted from plants. In our
study, five different natural compounds from different plant
sources were collected viz., Colchine, Curcumin, Daphnoretin,
Ellipticine, and Epigallocatechine-3-gallate. Colchicine is a plant
secondary metabolite extracted from Colchicum autumnale and
Gloriosa superba L [,
]. Curcumin, a polyphenolic compound
isolated from Curcuma longa, (commonly called turmeric), now
finds its application as potential anti-cancer compound. It has
been observed to induce apoptosis of various cancer cells and
cause the modulation of the cell cycle pathway. However the
exact mechanism is yet to be studied. To study its effect on
colorectal cancer, multiple myeloma and pancreatic cancer, the
compound is under Phase I/II trials. Curcumin is reported safe
by phase I clinical trials, even when used at a high dosage level
[]. Daphnoretin, a bis-coumarin derivative, extracted from
the root bark of Wikstroemia indica (Thymelaeaceae) in good
amounts was found to have anti-cancer activity []. It is
responsible for the suppression of protein and DNA synthesis
in Ehrlich ascites carcinomas. Ellipticine, which is a plant
alkaloid (5, 11-dimethyl-6H-pyrido [4, 3-b] carbazole) and its
derivatives were isolated from Apocynaceae plant species. It
intercalates with DNA and inhibits the Topoisomerase II
activity. Apart from inhibiting the cell growth, it also leads to
the apoptosis of human hepatocellular carcinoma HepG2 cells
[]. Epigallocatechin-3-gallate is a stable and water soluble
compound and belongs to the group of flavonoids referred to
as flavan-3-ols. Flavan-3-ols are mainly found in tea (black,
green,) (Camellia sinensis), red wine (Vitis vinifera), strawberry
(Fragaria ananassa) and cocao (Theobroma cacao) products 
[,
]. In order to understand the potential role of natural
compounds as anticancer molecules, there is a need of
computational drug designing tools that can identify and
analyze protein-ligand interactions with respect to their
binding affinity for investigation of novel drug molecule
against HPV.

Methodology
Sequence retrieval and phylogenetic analysis:
The 5 amino acid sequences of the E6 protein of HPV from
different countries (Accession no-AAD33252.1, ABK32509.1,
ACQ90215.1, AFF58869.1, AEN69303.1) was retrieved in
FASTA format from National Centre for Biotechnology
Information (http:// www.ncbi. nlm.nih.gov/) database for
multiple sequence alignment. Phylogenetic tree was
constructed using Neighbor-Joining method by MEGA6 
[].
E6 protein sequence (Accession no. AAD33252.1) was taken for
protein 3D model construction.

Protein structure prediction and validation:
The 158 amino acids residue long E6 protein of HPV-16 was
subjected to BLASTp (http: //blast. ncbi.nlm. nih. gov/Blast.cgi) 
analysis against PDB database (http://www.rcsb.org /) 
to identify suitable template for comparative
protein modeling. Comparative homology modeling depends
on a sequence alignment between target sequence and the
template sequence whose 3D structure has been determined by
experimental method. A target-template alignment was
performed using ClustalX program [] and ESPrint 3.0
(http://espript.ibcp.fr/ESPript/ESPript/) server was used to
visualize the target-template alignment results (). In
addition to target-template alignment, the three-dimensional
structure of E6 protein sequence were constructed using five
different servers viz., Bhageerath (http: // www.scfbioiitd.res.in/bhageerath /index.jsp/), 
CPH Model (http: //www.cbs.dtu.dk / services /CPHmodels/), 
Geno3D (http://geno3dpbil.ibcp.fr),
ITASSER(http://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu /I-TASSER/) 
and Phyre2 (http://www.sbg.bio.ic.ac.uk/phyre2 /html /page.cgi? id=index). 
The predicted models were subjected for further refinement in ModRefiner server
(http://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu /ModRefiner /). The
best model was selected on the basis of Ramachandran plot and
protein stability analysis by Rampage (http: //mordred.bioc.cam.ac.uk /~rapper /rampage.php) and
ProsaA (https: //prosa.services.came.sbg.ac.at/prosa.php).
Discovery Studio 4.1 visualizer (http: // accelrys.com/products /discovery-studio/) was used for the visualization
of modelled protein structure ().

Ligand preparation:
The Structure of natural compounds derived from plants viz.,
Colchine (CID 2833), Curcumin (CID 969516), Daphnoretin
(CID 5281406), Ellipticine (CID 3213) and Epigallocatechin-3-
gallate (CID 65064) were retrieved from PubChem database at
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). These ligands were reported
in literature. The three dimensional coordinates of ligands
molecules were generated by Marvin Sketch 
(http://www.chemaxon.com /product /marvin /marvinsketch /)
and saved in *.pdb files for molecular docking studies.

Molecular docking:
Molecular docking studies were performed using AutoDock
Vina []. Preparation of required input files for AutoDock
Vina was prepared using AutoDock 4.2 program. Preparation
of files through AutoDock 4.2 involved addition of polar
hydrogen atoms and gasteiger charges. The size of grid box was
kept as 22, 20, 24 for X, Y, Z. The energy range was kept as 4
which is default setting. It is one of the most important highly
cited molecular docking tools for the prediction of proteinligand
interaction. It requires the three dimensional structure of
both ligand and protein. The results with best conformation
and energetic were selected for analysis. Ligplot
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/thornton-srv/software/LigPlus/) was
used for visualization and analysis of protein-ligand complex
[].

Drug-likeness prediction:
OSIRIS Property Explorer (http: // www.organicchemistry. org/prog/peo/) 
was used to predict side effects, such as
mutagenic, tumorigenic, irritant and reproductive effects which
are also providing score for drug-relevant properties with
respect to drug-likeness and overall drug-score 
[].

Results and Discussion
Multiple sequence alignment of five E6 protein sequences from
India, USA, China, Canada and Spain were performed using
ClustalX [] and Phylogenetic tree was constructed using
Neighbor-Joining method in MEGA6 () 
[].
Phylogenetic analysis clearly revealed that the E6 protein of
Human Papilloma Virus of USA origin is closely related to the
Indian and it is experimentally verified, therefore E6 protein
sequence from USA (Accession no. AAD33252.1) was preferred
for the modeling of 3D structure. BLASTp search revealed one
putative template (PDB id: 4GIZ, Chain C) of high-label
identity and query coverage with the target sequence, as the
best template for comparative modeling. The pair-wise
sequence alignment of HPV-16 E6 and template was generated
using ClustalX, and alignment was showed in ESPrint 3.0
(). Based on target-template alignment, five different
server viz. I-TASSER, Geno-3D, Phyre 2, CPH model and
Bhageerath generated protein 3D models of E6.

Structure refinements through energy minimization were
performed using ModRefiner server (
http://zhanglab. ccmb.med. umich.edu /ModRefiner /). The minimized structures
were finally saved as Hpv.pdb. The best model was selected
based on of its stability assessment by RamPage and ProsaA.
The model which had highest percentage of amino acid
residues in the favoured region was chosen. Phyre2 Model,
having 97.1% of residues in the most favoured region, 2.9%
residues was found in additional allowed region and no
residue observed in the generously allowed and disallowed
region was selected  (see supplementary material). The
energy profile of the selected model and the Z-score value (a
measure of model quality) were obtained using ProsA program
that calculates the interaction energy per residue using a
distance-based pair potential. Based on ProsA analysis, the
model constructed by Phyre2 showed a Z score of -4.46 and that
of template as -4.91 which represent the reliability of predicted
model  (see supplementary material), indicating that
this model is suitable for wide spectrum of applications.

The binding sites predicted by the I-TASSER during modeling
(135,137,138, 139,111,112,140) were chosen for molecular
docking studies []. The grid box was prepared by AutoDock
4.2 program as 22, 20, and 24 for X, Y, Z coordinates of E6. The
energy range was kept as 4 which is default parameter.

Molecular docking was carried out with each of the natural
compounds viz.,colchine, curcumin, Daphnoretin, Ellipticine,
Epigallocatechin-3-gallate at the binding site grid generated by
AutoDock []. For each compound, out of the many docking
poses, only those that possessed the highest docking score
and relatively good hydrogen bond interaction were chosen.
Colchine was docked with E6 protein of HPV showing docking
energy -6.8 kcal/mol with three hydrogen bonds, Curcumin
was docked with E6 protein of HPV showing docking energy -
6.3 kcal/mol with three hydrogen bonds, Daphnoretin was
docked with E6 protein of HPV showing docking energy -8.3
kcal/mol with five hydrogen bonds, Ellipticine was docked
with E6 protein of HPV showing docking energy -7.4 kcal/mol
with one hydrogen bond and Epigallocatechin -3-gallate was
docked with E6 protein of HPV showing docking energy -6.6
kcal/mol with two hydrogen bonds  (see
supplementary material).

Ligplot were used to study the interaction site analysis 
[]. The
interaction analysis for binding site of natural compound with
E6 protein has been done to find out the residues that play an
important role in binding. The Daphnoretin shows highest
affinity to bind with E6 protein with energy value -8.3
kcal/mol. It interacts with E6 amino acid residues Tyr39,
Cys58, Ser78, Gln114, Arg138 with 5 hydrogen bonds 
(). The hydrogen bonding is of considerable importance in the
interaction of molecules. On the basis of docking energies
natural inhibitor Daphnoretin may be lead compound for
prevention of various form of cervical cancer caused by HPV.
Hence this information would prove to be important for
desiging of novel drug molecules against E6 protein of HPV.

Conclusion
The inhibitory effect of natural compounds against E6 protein
has been studied by few researchers. Advancements in
computational chemistry and bioinformatics are very useful for
the investigation of novel inhibitors from natural sources. The
E6 protein of HPV-16 inactivates p53, therefore, the process of
gene regulation is disturbed, which is a fundamental cause of
cervical cancer. Thus, E6 of HPV-16 is of considerable interest
for discovery and designing of novel molecule to overcome the
challenges. A high-quality three-dimensional model of E6
obtained through in silico approach and molecular docking
were performed using AutoDock vina. Daphnoretin was
predicted to be the most potent inhibitor amongst all known
selected natural compounds that may lead to the inhibition of
E6 protein. In vitro and in vivo experimentaion are needed to
confirm its efficacy and potency. Further it can be used for
design candidate drug with desired biological properties by
chemical modification in functional group at appropriate
places.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors would like to thank Department of Biotechnology,
G. B. Pant Engineering College, Pauri Garhwal, Uttarakhand,
India for providing all necessary facilities. One of the authors,
Saril Mamgain gratefully acknowledges Technical Education
Quality Improvement Programme (TEQIP), G. B. Pant
Engineering College, Pauri Garhwal, India for fellowship.

Citation:Mamgain et al, Bioinformation 11(5): 236-242 (2015)

Pair-wise sequence alignment of the target protein E6
with C-chain of its template (PDB id: 4GIZ)

Homology model of E6 of HPV-16.

Neighbor-Joining tree of E6 protein sequences of five
countries constructed in MEGA6. E6 protein from India and
USA is closely related.

2D representation of 3D structure of Daphnoretin with E6 protein of HPV-16 created by Ligplot, showing H- bond
interaction with CYS58, TYR39, SER78, GLN114, ARG138, CYS58 and Hydrophobic interactions with LEU74, VAL69, LEU57,
TYR77, SER81, ILE135.

