Background
The sequencing of some major group of organisms allows comparative analysis
of genes, gene families and genomes across phylogenetically divergent genus
[]. 
The completion of the human genome sequence provides a platform for
understanding genetic complexity and elucidating genetic variations
contributing to diverse traits and diseases []. 
Orangutans (Pongo abelii) prove
very useful in further understanding of Human genetic diseases 
[]. The Wild
Boar (Sus scrofa) is known to be one of the sources of infection for some
human diseases []. Orangutans are the only primary arboreal great apes,
characterized by strong sexual dimorphism and delayed development of mature
male features, a long lifespan and the longest inter-birth interval among
mammals [] with 48 chromosomes 
[]. The Orangutans are the most
phylogenetically distant great apes from humans, thereby providing an
informative perspective on hominid evolution. Structural evolution of the
Orangutan genome has proceeded much slower than other great apes, which
have played a major role in restructuring other primate genomes 
[].
Orangutans also develop cardiovascular disease and spontaneous diabetes like
humans. It is found that Orangutan genome might help in developing
treatments for such conditions by allowing in-depth analysis of the disease’s
evolution in great apes []. On the other hand, the pig occupies a unique
position amongst mammalian species as a model organism of biomedical
importance and commercial value worldwide []. It shows similarity in size (at
2.7 Gb) [], shape and physiology to human and has been used as a major
mammalian model for many studies concerning xenotransplantation,
cardiovascular diseases, blood dynamics, nutrition, organ-specific toxicity, etc.
With the improved knowledge of the structure and function of the pig genome
in the last two decades it has been found that this animal shares a high
sequence and chromosomal structure homology with humans [].

We describe the comparative genome analyses of two mammalian species,
Pongo abelii and Sus scrofa. 
The great apes, including Pongo abelii, are highly
susceptible to many human diseases, some of which can be fatal while others
can cause marked morbidity. There is increasing evidence that diseases can be
transmitted from humans to free-living habituated apes, sometimes with serious
consequences []. 
Wild boars (Sus scrofa) are indigenous in many countries.
These free-living swine populations pose not only ecological concerns but also
infectious disease concerns. In addition, recreational hunting of wild boars and
consumption of wild boar meat in some regions of the world further provide
ample opportunities for direct human contacts with wild boars, and thus created
a suitable environment for the transmission of pathogens 
[]. Antibodies to a
number of zoonotic viruses have been detected in wild boar populations,
including Hepatitis E virus (HEV), swine influenza virus and Japanese
encephalitis virus. Wild boars infected by these zoonotic viruses have the
potential to transmit to humans in close contact 
[]. Thus, annotation of
hypothetical proteins for these organisms is an imperative necessitate which
can further be of assistance in identifying potential targets.

Methodology
Genome dataset
The complete protein sequences of Pongo abelii and Sus scrofa were retrieved
from the NCBI database (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/). The sequence
dataset shows that 25,862 proteins were function annotated and 3,253 were
hypothetical for Pongo abelii. In Sus scrofa, 18,305 were function annotated
and 1,875 were hypothetical.

Orthologous hypothetical sequences
The hypothetical sequences of Pongo abelii and Sus scrofa were grouped using
CD-HIT (http://weizhong-lab.ucsd.edu/cdhit_suite/) at a certain threshold (60%
sequence identity cut off). This eliminated redundant sequences with less than
60% identity. These orthologous sequences were then extracted out manually
(47 clusters of 107 proteins).

Human non-homologous proteins
The human protein sequences were retrieved from the NCBI database
(ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/) with 30,685 function-annotated and 2,925
hypothetical. The analogous hypothetical sequences between Pongo abelii and
Sus scrofa (107 proteins) were clustered with the annotated sequences of
human using CD-HIT. This resulted in 50 related and 57 divergent sequences.

Functional assignment
The 57 divergent proteins were screened for the presence of enzyme related
conserved domains using sequence similarity search with close orthologous
family members available in various protein databases using CDD BLAST
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Structure/cdd/wrpsb.cgi), INTERPROSCAN
(http://www.abi.ac.uk/interpro), PFAM 
(http://www.pfam.sanger.ac.uk/) and
TIGRFAMs (http://blast.jcvi.org/web-hmm/).

Functional categorization
Analysis of hypothetical proteins using function prediction tools have shown
variable results for conserved domain search. Hence, rough confidence levels
such as 100% (all four methods concur), 75% (three methods concur), 50% (2
methods concur) and 25% (others) have been assigned (data not shown).

Protein structure prediction
The structures of the hypothetical protein sequences were predicted using the
PS2 Protein Structure Prediction Server 
(http://www.ps2.life.nctu.edu.tw/)
which accepts protein sequences in FASTA format and uses the strategies of
pair wise and multiple alignment by combining the powers of the programs
PSI-BLAST, IMPALA and T-COFFEE for constructing the protein 3D
structures using the best scored orthologous templates. The structures which
were not predicted using PS2 Server were then assigned using BlastP against
the PDB database.

Essential proteins and sub-cellular localization
The protein sequences were subjected to DEG 
(http://tubic.tju.edu.cn/deg/) for
essential function assignment. Sub-cellular localization tools such as Balanced
Sub-cellular Localization Predictor − BaCelLo
(http://gpcr.biocomp.unibo.it/bacello/pred.htm), CELLO
(http://cello.life.nctu.edu.tw/) and WOLF PSORT 
(http://wolfpsort.org/) were
subsequently used for assigned as shown in .

Discussion
The orthologous hypothetical proteins in the genomes of Pongo abelii and Sus
scrofa were described in this study. Computational prediction of protein
function, structure and sub cellular localization is a key for genome annotation.
We identified 57 hypothetical proteins orthologous between pig and orangutan
with human non-homology using the procedure illustrated in . This
exercise identified enzyme related conserved domains in 36 hypothetical
proteins using four web based prediction tools. The remaining 21 hypothetical
proteins show no putative conserved domains. Each protein was then classified
into a family based on the presence of specific domain in the sequence.

PS2 server predicted the three dimensional structures for 15 sequences using
homology search criteria. It should be noted that the remaining 42 hypothetical
proteins lacked sufficient templates for homology building. Weak assignments
were then made for these sequences using BLASTP search against the PDB
database. The dataset is also subjected to the assignment of essential functions
() in addition to sub-cellular localization predictions as given in

and
. Thus, the role of pig-orangutan orthologous hypothetical
proteins as enzymes, essential proteins and localization function is unclearly
realized. It should also be noted that a consensus is not seen among the
different prediction tools for this dataset. Thus, the predicted data should be
cautiously interpreted. Nonetheless, these predicted data provide a framework
for understanding genomes through iterative function assignments and
annotations.

Conclusion
Prediction of protein function, structure, essentiality and sub-cellular
localization for hypothetical proteins is an important component of protein
description in genome annotation.

Citation:Jitendra et al, Bioinformation 6(8): 297-299 (2011)

Flowchart describing identification and analysis of hypothetical
orthologs in pig and orangutan.

Distribution of essential and non-essential hypothetical proteins.

Sub-cellular localization prediction using BaCelLo.

Sub-cellular localization prediction using CELLO

Subcellular localization prediction using WOLF PSORT.

