Background
Meloidogyne graminicola is one of the major biotic stresses in rice
production. Reported losses to Meloidogyne vary with ranges of
12-33%; 28-87% 11-73% and 20-80% (mean 43 ± 7.5%) 
[].
Approximately 57% of Indian rice is produced in the Indo-
Gangetic plain, comprising nearly 12 million ha, which can be
sub-divided on physiographic and bio-climatic considerations
into four transects in India as well as one in the Pakistan
Punjab. The four Indian transects have both individual and
shared cropping problems. Each transect suffers a range of
biotic stresses of which root-knot nematodes (Meloidogyne) are a
key issue for three of the Indian transects i.e. a) Indian Punjab,
Himachal Pradesh and Haryana (b) Eastern Uttar Pradesh, and
Bihar and c) West Bengal. M. graminicola is also an important
rice pest in several major rice growing areas of South and
South-east Asia, causing estimated yield losses of between 20%
and 80% [–]. Due to the inadequacy of the existing
management approaches, there is a need to develop
economically and environmentally sustainable approaches for
which nematode genomics could be highly promising by
providing novel targets.

Neuropeptide signaling system has been proposed to be the
potential target for the management of plant parasitic
nematodes [,
] due to its critical role in various parasitic
activities like host recognition, migration and penetration,
secretory activities, alimentation, and reproduction.
FMRFamide-like peptides (FLPs) have shown to be widely
expressed in the nervous system of root knot nematodes,
Meloidogyne spp []. The largest families of neuropeptides in
nematodes are the FLPs, which possess a C-terminal Arg-Phe-
NH2 signature and play a central role in motor activities. There
are 28 flp genes reported in Caenorhabditis elegans encoding at
least 72 distinct peptides []. Likewise, 21 FLPs have been
identified in economically important plant parasitic root knot
nematode, M. incognita []. One or more FLPs are known to coexpress
indicating that there is an interaction between them.
Previous reports in C. elegans have indicated that, flp-1, 12 and 8
are co expressed and a mutation in flp-8 did not have any
phenotypic aberration in C. elegans. But disruption of flp-1 and
12 resulted in various neuro muscular dysfunctions []. Further
functions of flp genes are regulated by microRNAs (miRNAs)
and flp-12 was identified as a potential target in pine wood
nematode, Bursaphelenchus xylophilus []. Although studies on
role of FLPs on behavior of plant parasitic nematodes are
limited, a series of RNA interference studies of flp genes in M.
incognita [] and Globodera pallida 
[] revealed aberrant
behavioral phenotypes and migrational abilities. flp-12 is
predicted to be crucial for the normal muscular function in G.
pallida and M. incognita as it has interfered with the nematode
migration in a sand column in response to the root defusates
[]. A similar effect can be envisaged in M. graminicola that will
be very useful in designing an efficient management strategy. In
view of this, for the first time, we have cloned and characterized
flp-1 and flp-12 from the Indian isolates of M. graminicola using
orthologous sequences present in M. incognita.

Methodology
Nematode collection:
Nematode infected roots were collected from the nematode
culture pots and root galls were separated and used for
hatching the 2nd stage juveniles (J2s) of M. graminicola.

RNA Isolation, quality controls and cDNA Synthesis:
Total RNA was extracted from J2s of M. graminicola using
NucleoSpin total RNA Kit (Macherey-Nagel, Germany). The
quality and quantity of each RNA sample was confirmed by
using Nanodrop (Thermo Scientific). The RNA samples with
260/280 ratio from 1.9 to 2.1, 260/230 ratio from 2.0 to 2.5 were
used for the analysis. One µg of the RNA sample was reverse
transcribed to cDNA by using cDNA synthesis Kit (Superscript
VILO, Invitrogen).

Cloning and Sequencing:
flp-1 and flp-12 were amplified from the M. graminicola cDNA,
using the primers designed based on the published nucleotide
sequence of flp-1 and flp-12 genes of M. incognita, (Accession
Nos. AAW56944 and AY804187 respectively). The sequences of
the primer sets for flp-1 were forward primer: 5'
ATTCCTGGTCAGATGCAGACCCAA3'; reverse primer:
5'CCACTACTTCGGCCAAATCGAAGA3' while flp-12 was
amplified using forward primer:
5'CCCAAGTTTGAGCTCTAAAAACAC3' and reverse primer:
5'TCATCGTCCAAATCGAATGA3'. PCR amplification
reactions were performed in 50 µl reaction volume containing 5
µl 10 x assay buffer, 200 µM each of dATP, dCTP, dGTP and
dTTP (Fermentas), 0.5 µM each primer, 0.5-2 units of Taq
polymerase (Sigma-Aldrich) and 1 µl cDNA. The PCR
amplification consisted of initial denaturation at 94°C for 4 min,
followed by 35 cycles of amplification, denaturation at 94° C for
60 s, annealing at 60°C for 30 s and extension at 72°C for 1 min
with a final extension at 72°C for 10 min. The amplified product
was separated on 1.2% Agarose gel electrophoresis to confirm
the size of the amplified product.

Fresh PCR product was cloned into pGEM-T easy cloning
vector (Promega, USA) using standard protocol. Freshly
prepared competent cells of Escherichia coli DH5α were
transformed with the recombinant plasmids. Positive clones
were selected by blue white colony screening along with
ampicillin and colony PCR. Recombinant colonies were used for
plasmid extraction. Inserts in the clones were confirmed by
restriction digestion with EcoRI. The positive clones were
custom sequenced by ABI SOLiD sequencing system [].

Bioinformatics Analysis:
The amino acid sequences were deduced from the
corresponding nucleotide sequences by using the OrfPredictor
(ORF-Predictor) server, which is designed for ORF prediction
and translation of a batch of EST or cDNA sequences. Database
searches were performed with the BLAST Network Service
(NCBI, National Center for Biotechnology Information), using
the BLASTX and BLASTN algorithm []. Comparison with the
homologous sequences was done with ClustalW []. Gene
ontology term was assigned through AmiGO BLAST [].
Phylogenetic trees were plotted by the maximum likelihood
method using MEGA5 software package [,
].

Result &amp; Discussion
Cloning of flp genes from cDNA of M. graminicola and deduced amino acid sequence:
Partial cDNA fragments of 214 bp and 299 bp, named Mg-flp-1
and Mg-flp-12 respectively, were generated by PCR
amplification from M. graminicola () cloned into
pGEM-T TA cloning vector and confirmed the recombinant
colonies. The inserts in the plasmids for the positive
recombinants were confirmed by restriction digestion with
EcoRI (). The cloned genes were sequenced using ABI
solid sequencing platform and sequences along with the
predicted ORF obtained from ORF-predictor.

Characterization of the sequences:
Sequences of the partial cDNAs of flp-1 (214 bp) and flp-12 (299
bp) obtained from M. graminicola were submitted to Genbank
sequence database (Accession Nos. KC250005 and
KC250006).The percentage of the GC content was 43% and 35%
for flp-1 and flp-12 respectively. BLASTN was carried out to
determine the homology against non-redundant Genbank
database. flp-1 showed best hit with the M. incognita having
70% identities (E value 3e-26) and 17% Gaps. Whereas, database
searches for the flp-12 revealed 99% identity with Heterodera
avenae [] and 95% with M. incoginta. Conceptually translated
nucleotide sequences into the corresponding amino acids
resulted in 70 (flp-1) and 91 (flp-12) amino acids.

The BLASTX algorithm was also used to compare the M.
graminicola sequence with protein sequences in database. flp-1
showed the most significant match with (Score = 236, Expect =
1e-23) with that of M. incognita while flp-12 showed most
significant (Score = 472, Expect = 6e-59) match with
FMRFamide-like protein 12 of cereal cyst nematode, H.avenae.
SignalP server was used to identify the signal peptide in both
the FLPs. SignalP result did not produce significant hits for flp-
1. However, flp-12 was predicted to contain a putative Nterminal
short secretion signal peptide of 22 amino acids. This
indicates that flp-12 could be involved in extra cellular function
like signal transduction. AmiGO BLAST hit was performed to
assign the putative function of flp-1 and flp-12 from M.
graminicola and suggested their potential role in neuropeptide
signaling pathway (GO: 0007218) and locomotory behavior
(GO: 0007626).

Putative function for the flp-12 sequence was identified as G
protein coupled receptor activity (GO: 0004930). Previous
studies on C.elegans showed that flp-1 can encode up to seven
distinct, yet highly similar, FMRF amide-related peptides
(FaRPs), small neuromodulators peptides that are characterized
by a C-terminal Arg-Phe-amide motif. flp-1 peptides are
required for the regulation of several behaviors, including wellcoordinated,
sinusoidal movement and the transition between
active and inactive states of egg laying. Receptors for the flp-1
peptides have not yet been identified, but genetic studies have
suggested that flp-1 peptides may act through G-protein
coupled receptors. flp-1 mRNAs are detected at all
developmental stages, and a flp-1 translational reporter fusion
detects expression in the anteriorly positioned neurons AVK,
AVA, AVE, RIG, RMG, AIY, AIA, and M5. Based on spring
model, generated interaction network image by the STRING
database suggested that flp-1, flp-8 and flp-12 are co-expressed
(). flp-8 encodes three copies of a FMRFamide-related
short peptide neurotransmitter. Although the flp-8 peptide can
increase pharyngeal action potential frequency, loss of flp-8
function does not result in a mutant phenotype, suggesting that
flp-8 may function redundantly with other FMRFamide-like
peptides in the nervous system. flp-12 gene encodes a predicted
FMRFamide-like peptide neurotransmitter that affects
locomotion when injected into A. suum []. Similarly, silencing
of flp-1 and flp-12 of M. incognita in our laboratory interfered
with host recognition and infection (unpublished data).

Sequence comparison of M. graminicola neuropeptides (flp-1, flp-12) with other nematodes:
The conceptually translated Mg-flp-1 protein revealed highest
similarity with that of Mi-flp-1 while the Mg-flp-12 exhibited
closeness with H.avenae. BLASTX identified homologous
sequences for flp-1 from the free-living nematode C. elegans,
animal parasitic nematode, A. suum and plant parasitic
nematodes, M. incognita, D. destructor, G. pallida. On the other
hand, homologous sequences for flp-12 were only found in
plant parasitic nematodes, H. avenae, M. incognita and M. minor.
They were aligned with the deduced amino acid sequence of
the M. graminicola
flp-1 and flp-12 respectively, as shown in
(). Multiple sequence alignment result suggested the
diversity of flp-1 among the homologous sequences. NH2
terminal of flp-1 seems to appear poorly conserved than COOH
terminal and the LFRGR motif present in three repeats is highly
conserved across the nematode species (). This
strongly suggests that these conserved motifs could be essential
in signal transduction mediated by GPCR (G-protein coupled
receptor) [,
]. Alignment of flp-12 revealed high sequence
conservation only among the plant parasitic nematodes. 
clearly indicated that C- terminal FMRF signature motif was
not amplified during the PCR experiment (As shown in the
rectangular box). Phylogenetic analysis was carried out for both
Mg-flp-1 and Mg-flp-12 respectively. Protein sequence for M.
graminicola and M. incognita were clustered together but
appeared as an out group. Interestingly, flp-1 of A. suum, an
animal parasitic nematode was grouped with C. elegans, a free
living nematode. flp-1 of Ditylenchus distructor and G. pallida
appeared different from the other sequences (). flp-12
of H. avenae, M. graminicola and M. incognita could be clustered
together as they were highly similar whereas, G. pallida was as
an out-group. The sequence from M. minor was slightly diverse
from the two root knot and one cyst nematode species ().

Conclusion
Neuromuscular system of nematodes has been established as an
important target for nematode control efforts and majority of
the leading anthelminthic drugs act on targets within the
neuromuscular system. M. graminicola is an obligate parasite of
rice; despite of its high economical importance, very less genetic
information is available. In this regard, we have cloned and
characterized the two partial cDNA sequences of M. graminicola
neuropeptide, flp-1 and flp-12 genes. flp-1 predicted to have role
in neuropeptide signaling pathway and locomotory behavior
and putative function of flp-12 is indicated its association with
G protein coupled receptor activity. These two neuropeptides
can be used for future molecular and genetic studies for
confirming its practical utility for the management of M.
graminicola.

We would like to thank Indian Agricultural Research Institute,
New Delhi and Department of Biotechnology, Government of
India for the financial support to carry out the Research work.

Citation:Rao et al, Bioinformation 9(4): 182-186 (2013)

(A) PCR amplification of flp-1 and flp-12 genes from
cDNA of M. graminicola. Lane 1:100 bp DNA marker, Lane2: flp-
1 and Lane 3: flp-12; (B) EcoRI digestion of pGEMT vector
containing flp-1 and flp-12. Lane 1:100 bp DNA marker, Lane 2:
undigested plasmid, Lane 3: flp-1 and Lane 4: flp-12.

Interaction network generated by the STRING
database based on spring model, generated for flp-1, flp-8 and
flp-12. Confidence scored for co-expression of flp-1 and flp-12
(0.730) and confidence score for co-expression of flp-1 and flp-
8(0.822).

Multiple sequence alignment of the predicted amino acid sequence of the (A) flp-1 and flp-12 (B) from M. graminicola with
flp sequences from other nematodes. Genbank identifier for the sequences used of flp-1 as follows, M. incognita (AAW56944); G.
pallida (CAC36149); Ditylenchus destructor (ACZ97403); Ascaris suum (AEX09241); C. elegans (NP_872078) and for flp-12 genebank
identifiers as H. avenae (AEN71840); M. incognita (AAX19364); M. minor (ABB49052) and G. pallida (CAC32452) and Signal peptide
shown in red.

Phylogenetic relationships of the predicted (A) flp-1
and (B) flp-12 from M. graminicola and flp sequences from other
nematodes. The evolutionary history was inferred by using the
Maximum Likelihood method based on the JTT matrix-based
model. Initial tree for the heuristic search were obtained
automatically as follows. When the number of common sites
was &lt; 100 or less than one fourth of the total number of sites,
the maximum parsimony method was used; otherwise BIONJ
method with MCL distance matrix was used. The tree is drawn
to scale, with branch lengths measured in the number of
substitutions per site. Evolutionary analyses were conducted in
MEGA5. The homologous sequences genebank accessions were
given in Figure 4 were used in this analysis.

