Background
Protein-protein interactions have become important in drug design. Proteins are 
the major catalytic agents, signal transmitters, and transporters in cells 
[]. The 
interactions are usually involved in signalling cascades and biochemical 
pathways. When two proteins interact, only a small portion of the surfaces of 
two proteins are involved. The contacting surfaces are called binding sites. 
These binding sites determine the functions of proteins. There are seven 
characteristics of binding sites: residue propensity, hydrophobicity, accessible 
surface area, shape index, electrostatic potential, curvedness, and conservation 
scores  [].  
Experiments in labs on protein-protein interaction are timeconsuming 
and very expensive. Some methods for accurately predicting 
protein-protein interaction have been developed 
[–]. 
These methods provide tools for predicting the interaction of proteins and protein sequence alignments. 
If one protein sequence is homologous with another, it may be classified into a 
same group, further exploiting the known protein so to predict the structures 
and functions of the unknown protein. In addition, analysis of physicochemical 
properties of the protein interface also can help us to find out some 
similar biological functions and characteristics in cell processes.

Protein-protein recognition is defined as: A protein recognizes another protein 
if they interact and their assembly becomes a transient complex. As for 
classifying transient complexes and permanent complexes, some literatures 
applied machine learning to predict results, such as Support Vector Machine 
[] and Neural Network  
[,
]. Furthermore, there are also some studies in 
data mining to predict protein-protein interaction 
[]. Fabian et al. 
[] used a 
nonredundant set of 621 protein interfaces to characterize protein-protein 
interaction. They used the residue frequencies and the propensity of residueresidue 
to estimate many pairing preferences, which are: residue-residue
contacts, amino acid composition, residue-residue contact, specific residueresidue 
contacts, hydrophobic-hyrdrophobic, hyrdrophobic-charged, oppositely 
charged residues, and so on. In [], 
the three-dimensional data of residues on binding sites from RS-PDB database 
[] is used to mine the characteristics of 
binding site residue compositions from  protein-ligand complexes. However, 
those methods did not further analyze  which residues on the proteins more 
frequently bind with the residues on  ligands. Our goal is to apply the 
association rule mining technique to mine patterns of binding site residues in 
recognition complexes. Some commonly  used methods for mining frequent 
patterns are Apriori  [], FP-growth  
[], and Gradational decomposition 
algorithm  []. 
A pattern is a set of residues which is supported by at least a 
predefined number of transactions. And a pattern is supported by a transaction 
if the pattern is a subset of the transaction. Patterns are further analyzed to 
obtain the hidden relations of residues.

Methodology
Datasets
For the experiment, we adopted the dataset from  
[] which consisted of 209 
identified transient recognition complexes, including 34 antibody-antigen 
complexes and 60 enzyme-inhibitor complexes. First, we obtain binding sites 
from the BOND website (
http://bond.unleashedinformatics.com/), which offers 
detailed AA numbers of a pair of interaction proteins. Second, we retrieved the 
protein three-dimensional structure coordinates from PDB  
[,
], which 
provides a large number of accurate  three-dimensional protein complex 
structures. Since we could not find the matching binding sites on the BOND 
website from the 209 recognition complexes, we could not integrate them with 
PDB. After filtering the inadequate data, there are 78 transient recognition 
complexes for the experiment, as shown in  Table 1(see 
).
The proposed method is divided into two parts respectively: first, 
forming a circular grid, and then applying the mining association rule. The first 
part is also subdivided into five steps. As for the association rule, we will use 
the data mining technique to mine these AA relations.

Circular Grid
Step 1: The three-dimensional coordinate of  binding site residues in proteins 
are obtained by combining the information of PDB file and BOND file. We 
manually examine and correct the name and number of AAs in the BOND file 
whether they can match the same AAs in the PDB file for getting the correct 
three-dimensional coordinates.  Moreover, in order to simplify the calculation, 
we adopt the coordinate of  Ca atom of residues. Three points are needed to 
decide a projected plane. The mid-point of each residue pair on binding sites is 
computed. The three points are determined as follows: the first point is the 
mean of all the mid-points. The second point is a mid-point which is farthest 
from the first point. The third point is a mid-point which is farthest from the 
second point. Euclidean distance is adopted. Step 2: Project all of the Ca atoms 
of residues on the binding sites to the plane, which will be different for each 
protein complex. Step 3: Rotate the residues on the plane twice. First, we rotate 
the plane parallel with the YZ plane. Second, we rotate the plane again, making 
it parallel with the XY plane, while eliminating the Z coordinate of residues. 
Then, we just take the (x, y) results and calculate, as shown in 
.The 
counter clockwise rotation formula is given in 
.

Step 4: All of residues on the plane will then be put into a circular grid, which
consists of ten rings: a central ring, the second ring with 6 sectors, the third
ring with 12 sectors, and the later rings, which are added to four sectors in
order. As for the radius of each ring, it is an arbitrary parameter in our program,
but we complete a small calculation on it to obtain its proper value. For each
recognition complex, we calculate the center of all residues on binding sites
and then find out the longest distance from the center for each complex. Next,
we average the longest distances and divide the result by 10. Finally, we double
the average as a radius. Therefore, the radius of each ring is 10 Å. After that,
we draw a central ring with the radius from the center, the second ring with
double radius from the center, and so on. The radian of a sector of each ring (ri)
has the formula as follows: The radian of a sector of each ring = 2 * PI /
riwhere ri = {1, 6, 12, 16, 20, 24, 28, 32, 36 , 
40}, PI = 3.1415926535.  
illustrates the partitioning of protein complex 1BKD into circular sectors.
Step 5: Finishing the above work, we refer each sector as a transaction record.
A transaction record is a data mining term, which is also called an itemset. In
this study a transaction is the set of AAs in a sector on the binding sites, like
the transaction X = {R_leu, L_asp, …}. 
In the transaction, we add a prefix to an
item (i.e., an AA). Prefix L is added to the AAs on the convex side of the
protein complex; and prefix R is for the concave side. After we retrieve these
transactions from each sector, there are total 463 transactions, which consist of
78 recognition complexes. An example of an itemset generated from a protein
complex is shown in .

Association Rules
Here, we briefly introduce association rule mining. For a market example, the
association rule {Milk, Cheese} → 
{Bread} means: if Milk and Cheese are
bought, then customers are likely to buy Bread.A transaction supports an
itemset if the itemset is contained in the transaction. A set of items is referred
to an itemset, and in this paper the items consist of residues. The support of an
itemset is the number of transactions that contain the itemset. If the support of
an itemset is larger than the predetermined minimum support, it is called a
frequent itemset. The support of a rule X→ Y is the support of X ∪ Y. The
confidence of a rule X→ Y is the conditional probability that a transaction
having X also contains Y. An association rule meets the requirements of userdefined
minimum support and minimum confidence.In order to discover hidden
relationships and characteristics of amino acids on the binding site, we apply
association rule mining on the 463 transactions. The analytic results can help
biologists to better understand the amino acids on the binding site of
recognition protein complexes.

Results
In the first experiment, we try to find the frequent appearance residues on the
binding sites of all recognition complexes. Table 2 (see 
) 
shows the result of applying association rule mining on the 463 AA
transactions. In Table 2 (see ), we discovered that no
matter which side residues form on a protein, {arg} binds at the highest
frequency; or, we can say {arg} appears most on the binding sites in the
recognition complexes.In the second experiment we take the shape of binding
sites into account. In data mining terminology, we put {arg} to the consequent
and observe the antecedent {antecedent} → {consequent}, as illustrated in
. We set the minimum support at 1.5% and the minimum confidence at
80%. The results we mined, such as {phe, ser} →{arg}, are shown in 
.
 shows {arg} on the concave shape of binding sites in a protein and
the mining AA patterns on the convex shape of binding sites in another protein.
The minimum support and the minimum confidence is the same above.
Furthermore, we are also interested in the higher frequency AA patterns on the
binding sites in recognition complexes.  describes AAs on the convex
binding sites in a protein, which contact more frequently with the AA patterns
on the concave binding sites in another protein. The minimum support is 2%
and the minimum confidence is 75%. For the same above-mentioned
experiment, we also mined the opposite side to discover different situations
(). The minimum support is also 2% and the minimum confidence is
also 75%. All of above experiments show if we set various Supports and
Confidences properly, and we will discover more surprising facts in the dataset
of recognition protein complexes.

Conclusion
In this study, we present a mining method for the relationship among AAs on
the convex or concave binding sites in protein complexes, and take the advance
of data mining to discover several interesting AA patterns. Furthermore, we
analyzed them on different binding sites to make the results more biochemically
meaningful. Before using the association rule mining techniques, we had the
difficult task of integrating BOND files with PDB structure files, which contain
three-dimensional coordinates of AAs. Taking advantage of the twodimensional
circular grid, the distance range of each mining AA patterns came
within 10Å, making the discovery of AA patterns more meaningful. By
analyzing the frequency of residues by using different radii, we found {cys}
always appears fewest on the binding sites in recognition complexes. As for the
probability of appearance, {pro}, {his}, 
{trp}, and {met} are also rated low.
Oppositely, {arg} and {asp} appear most on the binding sites in recognition
complexes. Perhaps the protein complex dataset is not large enough since it
only generates 438 transactions. As a result, we are unable to find more patterns
or hidden relationships among the AAs on the binding sites. However, our
experimental results can be exploited as an attribute of feature vectors to
improve the prediction of protein-protein recognition or protein-protein
interactions accurately.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work was partially supported by grants NSC 98-2221-E-415-013- and NSC 99-
2221-E-415-015- from the National Science Council, Taiwan.

Citation:Huang-Cheng Kuo et al, Bioinformation 6(1): 10-14 (2011)

The rotation illustration.

The illustration of protein complex 1BKD. The left picture shows the
result of above steps.

The illustration of itemset generation.

The illustration for convex and concave shape of binding sites.

The relations between {arg} on the convex side in a protein and AA
patterns on the concave side in another protein.

The relations between {arg} on the concave side in a protein and AA
patterns on the convex side in another protein.

Frequent patterns are consisted of AAs on the convex and AA
patterns on the concave. For an example, {val, ile} → {gly}, {gly} is on the
convex of binding sites in a protein, and {val, ile} is on the convex of binding
sites in another protein.

Frequent patterns are consisted of AAs on the concave of binding
sites in a protein and AA patterns on the convex of binding sites in another
protein.

