Background
For some prevalent types of cancer such as lung
adenocarcinoma where the effectiveness of standard
chemotherapy is limited, alternative treatments based on
targeting critical genes are desired []. Consequently, it is
important to examine the differences between the interactions
of the proteins encoded by genes between patients whose
cancer progress differently. Identifying such proteins or
groups of proteins helps to identify potential targets for new
treatments. In order to identify a protein or a class of proteins
which is differentially expressed, we need a formal statistical
framework. Previously, a framework for differential network
analysis was developed [] and applied to microarray data
from a pair of networks. In this paper, methods from the
above mentioned were adapted to analyze protein expression
data and include tests for differential connectivity for
individual proteins relative to all other proteins as well as tests
for differential connectivity within a class of proteins.

Methodology
Dataset used:
Herein, the methods are applied to data from a study on lung
adenocarcinoma. The data set is freely available in the
International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) data
repository []. It was also featured as one of the challenge data
sets at the recent Critical Assessment of Massive Data Analysis
(CAMDA) conference []. We used version 14 of the data,
which includes expression values of 174 protein antibodies.
Some antibody IDs correspond to the same gene so the data set
only includes protein expression values for 139 genes. There
are protein expression values for each of the 160 subjects, 109
of whom are in the complete remission group and 51 of whom
are in the progression group.

Model:
To quantify the strength of pairwise interactions between
protein expression values within a group, we use connectivity
scores based on the method of partial least squares.
Specifically, the scores for each protein are computed by fitting
a regression model with all of the other proteins as covariates
using estimates obtained from partial least squares. For each
network, this creates a ρ × ρ square matrix of coefficients for
each pair of proteins where ρ is the number of proteins
common to both networks. Finally, the matrix for the kth
network is symmetrized to obtain the connectivity scores sj,k ;k
where i and j refer to the row and column numbers of the
matrix of scores. See [] and 
[] for a complete description of
the algorithm for obtaining association/interaction scores
based on partial least squares and [] for discussion of a freely
available R package dna which provides a flexible
implementation of the methods.

Statistical tests:
Next, formal statistical tests can be formulated based on these
connectivity scores, similar to the framework proposed in 
[].
To test the differential connectivity of the scores corresponding
to protein a, compared with all other proteins, we use the
mean absolute difference statistic




This statistic measures the difference between the groups for
all pairs of proteins involving the 𝑎th protein. The estimated
p-value for this test statistic is computed by a permutation
procedure. The observed protein expression values from both
groups of proteins are first combined. Then 1000 new
permuted data sets are constructed by randomly permuting
the labels of the combined data set and splitting the combined
data into two new groups. For each permuted data set, the test
statistic is computed, and the distribution of test statistic
values is compiled from the 1000 permuted data sets. If the
null hypothesis that both networks are the same holds, then
the random variable corresponding to the test statistic for the
observed data has the same distribution as the permuted data
sets and we do not expect a large value. On the other hand,
large values of the observed test statistic give evidence against
the null hypothesis in favor of the statement that the
associations/interactions among the two networks differ for
this protein. Hence, the estimated p-value is the proportion of
test statistic values among the permuted data sets which are at
least as large as the observed test statistic, and the hypothesis
that the networks are the same is rejected if the p-value is
sufficiently small. A flowchart summarizing the procedure for
this significance test is given in . A more detailed
mathematical description of a similar permutation test is given
in [].

Alternately, to test the differential connectivity of the scores
within a particular subset A of proteins, we use a similar
statistic. Without loss of generality, suppose that A is the first
L proteins. Then, to test the differential connectivity of the
proteins within the subset of proteins in A, we use the test
statistic




The procedure for obtaining the p-value and performing a
permutation test based on this statistic is analogous to the
procedure described in the previous paragraph for testing the
differential connectivity of an individual protein.

Results &amp; Discussion
The connectivity scores were computed for each group of
proteins. A histogram illustrating the distributions of the
connectivity scores for the proteins in each network is shown
In . Overall, the distributions for the two networks
appear to be very similar visually, which is to be expected
since all of the patients were lung adenocarcinoma patients.
However, differences were identified when the networks were
tested formally with the statistical framework, which shows
how essential these formal tests are when trying to detect
important differences in association. More notably, the pairs of
proteins corresponding to the largest connectivity scores are
very similar for both networks, as shown in . The
vertices in  represent proteins and edges are shown for
a pair of proteins if the connectivity score for the pair exceeds a
specified threshold; two proteins are said to be in the same
module if there is a path connecting them. There are 23 pairs of
proteins with connectivity scores exceeding 0.085 in the
complete remission network and 21 pairs (9 modules)
exceeding 0.085 in the progression network. The largest
module in each network includes 6 proteins (ERCC1, PARP,
Snail, c-Met, Caspase-8, Rb); the difference is that in the
complete remission network, every pair of proteins is
connected while in the progression network, three of the
connections are lost for the Rb protein. There are several
smaller modules which have similar connections based on this
threshold. The connections for the pairs PKC-alpha and PKCalpha_
pS657, Rab25 and SETD2, and ACC1 and ACC_pS79
based on this threshold are identical for the two networks.
Also, the proteins HER2_pY1248 are connected in both
networks, but HER2_pY1248 is also connected to Src_pY416 in
the complete remission network.

Although the overall distributions of connectivity scores are
similar and many of the pairwise interactions between proteins
with the top connectivity scores are similar, there are some
differences between the networks which are statistically
significant. The individual proteins with the smallest p-values
based on the test for differential connectivity are listed in
 (see supplementary material) along with the
corresponding genes which encode the protein, the observed
values of the MDA test statistic, and the estimated p-values
based on 1000 permutations. Several of these proteins have
been connected with lung cancer in previous studies.
Specifically for lung adenocarcinoma, it was recently
demonstrated in [] that expression of the CDH2 gene might
be increased by the inhibition of the microRNA miR-218
through ADAM9 (a protein not included in our data set) which
increases the protein expression of N-Cadherin and
consequently results in metastasis of the cancer. Also, an
inverse relationship was found between the IRS-1 gene and the
presence of neutrophil elastase which affects growth in tumor
cells in subjects with human lung adenocarcinoma 
[].
Furthermore, in vivo and in vitro experiments in 
[]
demonstrate functional roles for a Yap/Taz pathways in the
progression and metastasis of lung adenocarcinoma tumors.
Another recent study by [] a pathway involving PTEN for
both small cell lung cancer and lung adenocarcinoma. The
CASP9 gene which is connected with regulation of apoptosis
and [] polymorphisms of this gene were found to be
associated with the risk of lung cancer. The BCL2L1 gene
inhibits activation of caspases preventing cell death 
[].
Additionally, recent work involving anticancer drug
development for lung cancer based on PARP-1 inhibitors is
discussed in [].

It should be noted that different proteins are differentially
expressed when the groups are analyzed marginally by
traditional statistical tests. For instance, the two sample t-test
identifies ER-alpha (p-value = .02), Cyclin_B1 (p-value = .02),
YB-1 (p-value = .02), GATA3 (p-value = .04), and XBP1 (pvalue=.
04) as significantly different at level .05. Thus,
differential network analysis identifies important differences in
protein expression values not found by analyzing each protein
alone. Also, there are 7 genes (EIF4EBP1, EGFR, SRC, PRKCA,
GSK3A|GSK3B, CDKN1B, and AKT1|AKT2|AKT3) in the
data set which encode 3 or more proteins. The test for
differential connectivity within each of these classes of proteins
is performed for each gene, but only one gene exhibited
significant differences between connectivity scores; the test
statistic for the group of protein antibodies Akt_pT308,
Akt_pS473, and Akt encoded by gene AKT1|AKT2|AKT3 is
Δ= 0.0298 with corresponding p-value 0.022. The role that
AKT plays in lung adenocarcinoma is discussed in []. On the
other hand, for example, the test was not rejected (p-value =
0.114) for the protein antibodies encoded by the three protein
antibodies (p27, p27_pT157, p27_pT198) encoded by CDKN1B.

Conclusions
A method has been presented for testing whether proteins and
groups of proteins interact differently with other proteins in
two groups. The method was applied to protein expression
data on lung adenocarcinoma. Analysis shows that the two
networks are similar in appearance. However, the method was
successful at identifying proteins with statistically significant
differences in the connectivity scores for the complete
remission and progression groups. A group of proteins
encoded by the AKT1|AKT2|AKT3 gene was found to be
significantly different between the two classes. These were
known to be associated with cancer. Thus, we describe a
method for analyzing expression levels to help identify
processes, which differ between cancer patients with different
progressions. This type of analysis finds application in gene
discovery for cancer treatment.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Datta et al, Bioinformation 10(10): 647-651 (2014)

Flow diagram illustrating the test for differential connectivity for an individual protein, starting with the expression
values from both groups. The values from both groups are pooled. Then the labels are randomly permuted 1000 times to form new
pairs of groups for each data set. The connectivity scores are computed for each actual and permuted group. These connectivity
scores are then used to calculate the test statistic for both the observed and permuted data sets. Finally, a p-value is determined by
comparing the observed test statistic with the values of the test statistic based on the permuted data sets and is used to make a
decision on whether there is a significant difference between the scores for the two proteins between the two groups.

Histograms for the distribution of connectivity scores for the complete remission and progression networks. The scores
were computed for each pair of proteins using expression values for 174 proteins from a group of 109 subjects with lung
adenocarcinoma who went into complete remission and from a group of 51 subjects with lung adenocarcinoma whose cancer
progressed. For each network, the connections involving scores greater than 0.085 are illustrated in a graph to the right of each
corresponding histogram. The edges represent pairs of proteins with connectivity scores which exceed 0.085. The proteins in the
graph (with labels for vertices in parentheses) are alpha-Catenin(1), ACC_pS79(2), ACC1(3), c-Met(4), Caspase-3(5), Caspase-8(6),
CD20(7), E-Cadherin(8), EGFR_pY1068(9),ERCC1(a),HER2_pY1248(b),MAPK_pT202_Y204(c), MEK1_pS217_S221(d), p27_pT157(e),
PARP(f), PKC-alpha(g),PKC-alpha_pS657(h),Rab25(i),Rb(j), 6_pS235_S236(k), SETD2(l), Snail(m), Src(n), Src_pY416(o), TIGAR(p),
XBP1(q), YB-1(r), and YB-1_pS102(s).

