Background
Molecular similarity and diversity studies have gained
importance through their wide application in the field of bioinformatics
and chemo-informatics [,
]. The main goal of
structure-based drug design (SBDD) is to find novel lead
compounds with potent and specific activity. Based on the
principle “similar molecules exert similar activity”, ligand
similarity searching has gained importance in virtual screening
strategy [,
]. Ligand similarity can be assessed by means of
comparing their structures using 1D, 2D and 3D approaches
such as tanimoto coefficient [,
], SMILES 
[], COMFA 
[],
COMSIA [] 
etc [,
,
]. 
While, 1D descriptors explain the
chemical nomenclature, physicochemical and biological
properties, 2D descriptors provide information regarding the
fragment counts, topological indices, molecular connectivity
and graphical representation and 3D descriptors detail
molecular surface, volume and interaction energies. Each
descriptor has its own importance in the search of related
molecules. Large numbers of descriptors have been reported to
date and software are available for the calculation of descriptors
(CODESSA [], DRAGON 
[], Molinspiration 
[] and
COMFA [] etc). Atom pair descriptors and topological
descriptors are very popular in 2D similarity searching for more
than past two decades [–]. Atom pair descriptors encode all
atoms in a molecule together with the length of the shortest
bond-by-bond path between them. Topological descriptors are
single valued descriptors that can be calculated from the 2D
graph representation of molecule [,
]. Earlier Bremser 
[]
has described an encoding system HOSE (Hierarchical Ordered
description of the Substructure Environment) code for NMR
spectra prediction. This system describes the structural
neighbors of the particular atom of interest, which in NMR
essentially identifies those atoms within the molecule
influencing the chemical shift of that atom. Grant et al 
[] have
implemented Lingos approach to measure molecular similarity
by converting the molecule into a set of strings. In this
approach molecular pair similarity is assessed based on the
occurrence of substring frequency. In addition to similarity
searching, atom type and bond type information plays an
important role in molecular mechanics calculations, QSAR and
QSPR studies [,
]. A recent study has introduced a new type
of atom pair descriptor namely bond pair descriptor which
includes element type, hybridization state, aliphatic/aromatic
character, and cyclic/acyclic arrangement information for
ligand similarity searching []. Extended-connectivity
fingerprints method uses circular fingerprints for representing
molecular features relevant to molecular activity which can be
used for clustering, similarity searching and virtual screening
[].

Ligand similarity is also measured based on the spatial
alignment with atomic property fields and (a generalized 3D
pharmacophoric potential) was tested on a large diverse dataset
of 115 protein-ligand complexes []. 
Verma et al [] have
developed quantitative structure activity relationship model
based on local similarity indices to understand the binding
mechanism and to improve biological activity. Algorithms
related to finding molecular matched pairs, where pair of
compounds differs only in single localized structural change
have been analyzed in the large volume chemical dataset 
[].
Chemical similarity has also been analyzed based on the
fragment profiles in class specific and class independent
compounds which produced better results in database
screening []. Existing methodologies vary in their
performance for different targets and also select varied set of
actives for specific target. Accumulation of huge chemical
compounds in the databases necessitates the development of
new similarity methods in finding actives for the particular
target protein [,
]. Mostly, biological molecules such as
proteins, nucleic acids and small molecular ligands are mainly
made up of fundamental elements like carbon (C), Hydrogen
(H), nitrogen (N) and oxygen (O). The representation of amino
acid sequence information in terms of 20 simple letter
alphabetic codes and 4 codes for nucleic acids has provided a
good solution to the efficient storage and retrieval of molecular
sequence data. Also the development of powerful algorithms
and the widely used tool for performing sequence analysis such
as BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool) 
[] to mine
biologically related sequences very quickly and efficiently has
been at the core of bioinformatics analysis of genome as well
protein sequences that amount to millions of character strings.
BLAST remains the fundamental resource for most of the
bioinformatics approaches like gene prediction, structure
prediction, function annotation etc. There is no way of
representing molecular structures of ligands in terms of an
alphabetic code. In the present work, we have developed an
amino acid-like alphabetic code to represent atom-atom
bonding preference in ligands to search for similar ligand
molecules in databases. Bonds between atoms are important
and remain the fundamental characteristics of similar
molecules. BLAST program was used for the search and
retrieval of similar molecules. We have implemented our
method for Cyclin-dependent kinase-2 (CDK-2) inhibitors.
CDK-2 is one of the active targets in SBDD and is involved in
regulation of cell cycle proliferation and RNA polymerase II
(RNAP II) transcription cycle []. Earlier studies related to
pharmocophore development have been reported for CDK-2
inhibitors [–] Key features such as hydrogen bond donors,
acceptors and hydrophobic feature required for the activity
have been reported and in addition steric effects and docking
were performed to enhance the retrieval rate of active
compounds. Alphabetic representation of atom-atom bonding
in ligands (inhibitors) provides an easy way of analysis using
sequence alignment tools for similarity searching of CDK-2
inhibitors. A consensus pattern was derived from the alignment
results and this pattern was used as query for database
searching. We use BLAST tool to perform ligand similarity
search to retrieve actives similar to query pattern from the
database. To test the efficiency of approach, similarity
searching has been performed on the compounds having
diverse scaffolds and similar scaffolds. Statistical validation of
the method was performed by database searching using area
under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve 
[].

Methodology
Alphabet Representation:
In the present work, single letter alphabetic codes based on
atom-atom bonding (atom pairs) pairs in ligand structures has
been assigned, which corresponds to particular amino acid in
protein sequences. For example, when a carbon atom is
attached to another carbon (C-C) atom, it is represented as “A”,
like wise when oxygen bonded with nitrogen or vice versa (O-N
or N-O), it is represented as Q. If any halogen atom is bonded
with C atom, it is represented as alphabet “M”. Alphabets are
assigned in such a way that atom pairs involving carbon atom
are given codes of non-polar aliphatic amino acids, atom pairs
involving nitrogen atom are provided with polar uncharged
amino acids, oxygen atom with aromatic amino acids and
hydrogen atom with positively charged amino acids such that
scoring is appropriate for alignment. The alphabetic
assignment for different atom-atom pairs in a ligand has been
given in  (See supplementary material). As an example,
the alphabetic representation for ligand SBC (PDB ID: 2BKZ) is
given in (). As alphabets assigned are in convention
with the property of amino acids, BLOSUM 62 
[] scoring
matrix used in sequence alignment tools has been applied to
score and retrieve similar alphabetic strings. 170 CDK-2
inhibitors (reported in our earlier study) 
[] obtained from
Protein Data Bank were converted to alphabet strings
representation using an in house perl program. After removal
of the ATP molecules and redundant inhibitors, these strings
were aligned using MAFFT [] sequence alignment program.
As gapped alignment is performed with the alphabet strings,
highly similar substrings are aligned with high score
irrespective of the order of the alphabets. From the alignment a
consensus feature was derived based on the position of each
alphabet in the string. Inhibitors that lead to the improper
alignment of alphabetic strings were removed. Finally, 138
CDK-2 inhibitors were used for the common feature derivation.
An alphabet which occurs more than 50% in each position of
the multiple sequence alignment was taken as a threshold to
derive consensus pattern (common feature). Consensus pattern
obtained was used as a query to search databases for actives
and inactives.

Database searching and Statistical validation:
Validation of the methodology was performed using two
databases for the search of CDK-2 actives. In the earlier study,
multi-complex (protein-ligand complex) based and mostfrequent-
feature pharmocophore map model was validated
using 494 compounds dataset which includes 194 active
inhibitors and 300 non- inhibitors for the target CDK-2. The 494
compounds dataset [] and Directory of Useful decoys (DUD,
formally known as the ZINC database) [] dataset reported for
CDK-2 were used separately as a test set for validating the
present alphabet approach. DUD data set contains 72 actives
and for each active 36 decoys with similar physical properties
(e.g. molecular weight, calculated LogP) but dissimilar topology
was reported. These compounds in these databases were also
represented as strings and the consensus pattern extracted was
used as the query to perform database search using BLAST
module in Bioedit [] software. Statistical validation was
performed using receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve
using SPSS 16.0 software and its significance is assessed by the
computation of P value under the null hypothesis that the area
under the curve equals 0.5. The flow chart in 
()
provides a brief overview of the present work.

Discussion
At the initial stage of alphabet algorithm development, we have
generated strings for each of the 200 ligand structures belonging
to eight different protein families (data set from reference 
[]).
We employed the sequence alignment method to find how
these strings are aligned and to explore how related ligands are
grouped on alignment with different ligands. MAFFT based
sequence alignment was performed and these alignments were
clustered to find how these strings are grouped. In the cluster
result we observed groupings among the similar ligands.
Cluster diagram of the 200 ligands is given in 
(). In a
similar way, we tested the present approach by taking in to
account non-bonded atoms in which an alphabet is assigned in
such a way that nearest one atom is left and the next atom is
taken in to consideration. Likewise, nearest two atoms were left
and the next atom is taken in to account in other case. In the
above mentioned two cases, no reasonable similarity was
observed among related ligands. Hence, we considered atomatom
bonding (atom pairs) to do further analysis. With the
above interesting observation, we applied alphabet approach
for similarity searching using common feature obtained from
CDK-2 inhibitors. 138 CDK-2 inhibitors with diverse scaffold
belonging to different chemical classes were used for the
consensus feature derivation. As mentioned afore, alignment of
138 CDK-2 inhibitors for obtaining common feature reported
the pattern “AAAAAALALLAAAAA”. This common feature
has been marked in the ligand RC8 with respect to its position
in the multiple sequence alignment of 138 CDK-2 inhibitors
(). Each alphabet in the conserved feature string
reports the atom-atom bonding preferred in the whole CDK-2
inhibitors. Conserved features of ligand RC8 have been marked
as spheres in (). The reported pattern also provides
relevant information regarding intermolecular interactions. For
example, common feature pattern having the alphabet “A”
represents the C-C bonding in the ligand which has the
possibility to form hydrophobic interaction with the protein.
Alphabet “L” represents the C-N bonding in the ligand which
has possibility to form hydrogen bond (hydrogen donor or
acceptor) with the protein. Residue interactions possible with
the common feature were analyzed in (PDBID_HTMID)
3DDP_RC8 crystal structure and have been mapped in the
CDK-2 binding site (). This occupied region favors the
highly conserved interactions with residues such as ALA 31,
LEU 83 and LEU 134 which has been reported earlier 
[].

Protein BLAST (Bioedit) was performed using the reported
query “AAAAAALALLAAAAA” to search for occurrence of
similar alphabetic (bonding pattern) strings in the databases.
As gapped alignment is possible between query and matched
alphabetic string from database, there exists a high chance to
score and retrieve similar CDK-2 actives. ROC area under the
curve (AUC) value of 0.57 and 0.62 was obtained on validation
with DUD data set and 494 data set compounds respectively.
() provides the details of retrieval rate of actives (true
positives) and inactives (false positives) in the databases. P
value was observed to be highly significant for the 494 data set
(0.0) compared to DUD data set (0.20).

In addition to derivation of common feature from diverse CDK-
2 inhibitors, we have also implemented our alphabetic
approach in 13 CDK-2 inhibitors [] with similar scaffold
obtained from The Binding database (Binding DB) 
[] with 0.7
tanimoto similarity. As mentioned afore, alignment was
performed to derive the consensus feature
“AALLLLLAVAAAAAAALLAAAALLTFFVVM” and database
searching was performed on the local and DUD databases. In
this protocol, both the DUD and local databases were added
with 13 compounds which are used in the consensus feature
development. BLAST results reported the 13 compounds at the
top hit list with high score compared to other actives in both
databases. Area under ROC values of 0.67 and 0.55 
()
with the curve above the reference line (0.5) and P-value of 0.00
and 0.09 for the DUD and local databases were obtained
respectively. In this model, though common feature were
derived from the similar compounds, database searching has
resulted in the retrieval of actives with diverse structure. In
summary, the present alphabetic approach reported most of the
important features required for intermolecular interaction in
138 CDK-2 inhibitors and hence was able to retrieve 60% (app.)
of active compounds in database virtual screening. Common
features of similar scaffold compounds reported maximum
features for the activity such that it performed better in
database searching compared to the common feature of diverse
scaffold compounds. Incorporation of additional atom pair
descriptors in alphabetic form (such as atom type, bond type,
accessibility etc) with simple metrics will be performed in
future algorithm development.

Conclusion
We described the use of an alphabetic approach depending on
the type of atom-atom pairs in a molecule for the purpose of
representation of molecular structures for molecular similarity
search in huge databases. This approach finds application in the
initial screening of huge databases with computational time and
complexity. It should be noted that bonding connectivity
information and protein sequence matrices for alignment were
not included in its current form. The present approach will be
modified further by incorporating scoring matrix to retrieve hits
with improved accuracy rate.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank University Grants Commission, New Delhi for the
award of RGNFS fellowship to N.S.

Citation:Saranya &amp; Selvaraj, Bioinformation 8(11): 498-503 (2012)

Alphabetic representation of atoms pairs in
(PDBID_HTMID) 1E1V_CMG.

Workflow of the alphabet algorithm

Clustering of alphabetic strings of 200 ligands

(A) Common features marked in ligand RC8 has been
boxed with dark line in the strings alignment; (B) Common
features mapped (marked as spheres) in the ligand RC8
structure.

Common features (marked as spheres) of ligand RC8
reported in the (PDBID) 3DDP binding site. Nitrogen atom
marked in yellow favors hydrogen bonding.

ROC curve for the retrieval of actives in (A) DUD and
(B) Local database

ROC curve for the retrieval of actives using query
developed from 13 compounds in (A) DUD database and (B)
Local database

