Background:
Genomic islands are chromosomal regions that have the 
evidence of horizontal gene transfer. The studies of genomic 
islands are extremely important to biomedical research, due to 
the fact that such knowledge can be used to explain why some 
strains of bacteria within the same species are pathogenic while 
others are not, or the phenomena that some strains of bacteria 
can adapt to extreme environments while others cannot.

Current approaches of detecting genomic islands include 
comparative genomic analyses and sequence composition 
analyses. The comparative genome analysis consists of 
collecting the genome sequences of phylogenetically closely 
related species, aligning these genome sequences, and then 
considering those genome segments present in a query genome 
but not in others to be GIs []. Since this type of approach does 
not apply to the genomes that do not have enough number of 
phylogenetically closely related genomes for reference, it cannot 
be applied to all genomes. The second kind of approach, 
sequence composition-based approach, does not require 
reference genomes and can be applied to any genome. It is 
generally believed that each genome has a unique genomic 
sequence signature, and thus genomic islands can be detected 
by analyzing sequence composition. Existing sequence 
composition based tools include AlienHunter 
[], Centroid 
[], 
COLOMBO SIGI-HMM[], IslandPath 
[], INDeGenIUS 
[], and 
PAI-IDA []. The assessment of these computational tools in 
recent studies has shown that none of these tools can predict 
genomic islands accurately in all genomes 
[]. Langille 
[]
further suggested that a computational framework that 
combines multiple prediction results of existing programs 
should be developed for more accurate genomic island 
prediction.

In this paper, we present our ensemble program for improved 
genomic island prediction, based on predicted results of five
existing GI programs. The framework of our approach includes: 
[] 
collecting prediction results from existing programs; (b) 
analyzing and filtering on predicted results; and c) generating 
final consensus GI results (). Experimental tests on 
benchmark datasets have shown that our ensemble program 
could improve prediction accuracy, and thus it may be used for 
the future GI prediction.

Methodology:
Data sets:
Genomic sequences used for GI prediction were collected from 
the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) FTP 
server (
ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Bacteria). The genomic 
islands used for performance evaluation of GI tools were 
obtained by IslandPick [].

Prediction of GIs with existing tools:
In our framework, we used the predicted GI results from five 
GI tools, AlienHunter, COLOMBO SIGI-HMM, INDeGenIUS, 
IslandPath, and PAI-IDA. All five programs use genome 
sequences as program inputs, with some individual programs 
requiring additional inputs such as gene annotations. The 
prediction results from these programs were used in our 
ensemble method.

Ensemble method:
Since GIs could range in size from several kilo base pairs (kb) to 
several hundred kb, it is very unlikely that two different GI 
prediction tools predict exactly same genomic islands. Thus, the 
predicted GIs by different tools often overlap, making it 
difficult to vote predicted results simply based on their 
predicted GIs. To handle this problem, we considered the genes 
within the predicted GI regions to be GI genes, and non-GI genes
otherwise. We collected GI and non-GI gene information based 
on the prediction results by multiple GI tools.

A simple voting scheme could be applied by selecting a 
threshold value, and considering the region, where all 
contained genes meeting the threshold requirement, to be a GI 
region, as shown in . This approach may work fine for 
those candidate GI regions that are far away (), but 
not for those which are close each other (), which are 
supposed to be a big GI region [].

To resolve this problem, we proposed a measure for GI or nonGI based on the overall score of all genes in the region, rather 
than individual gene scores. To do so, we first form candidate 
GI regions, G1, G2, G3, …, Gm, where two neighboring GI regions,
Gi and Gi+1, are separated by a non-GI region (i.e., none of 
programs predicted the region to be a GI). We then merge any 
two neighboring GI regions, Gi and Gi+1, if the average score of 
all genes (including the genes in Gi and Gi+1, and between the 
two regions) meets a predefined threshold value T1. By applying this measurement, we should merge two close GI 
regions (as shown in ), but not for distant GI regions 
(). If two GI regions are merged into a newly formed 
GI region Gi, i+1, then Gi, i+1 and Gi+2 will be picked for the next 
merging test. Otherwise, Gi+1 and Gi+2 will be selected for 
merging test. The merging process will be repeated until it reaches to the last GI region, and we can obtain a set of GI 
regions, G'1, G'2, G'3, …, and G'n

We further filter out GIs from the previous step if (a) the GI is 
short (i.e., containing &lt; eight genes in the GI); and (b) the 
percentage of high GI gene scores (i.e., &gt;1) does not meet a 
threshold value T2, so that we can guarantee that predicted GIs 
are supported by multiple programs. The determination of 
threshold values, T1, and T2 was described in Supplementary 
Material.

Performance evaluation:
To evaluate the performance of our model, we compared the 
predicted GIs with the benchmark dataset []. The benchmark 
dataset contains picked GIs from 118 genomes, and we 
predicted GIs using our EGID algorithm on these 118 genomes. 
True positives (TP) are the nucleotides in the positive 
benchmark dataset predicted to be genomic islands. True 
negatives (TN) are the nucleotides in the negative benchmark 
dataset predicted to be non-genomic islands. False positives 
(FP) are the nucleotides in the negative benchmark dataset 
predicted to be genomic islands. False negatives (FN) are the 
nucleotides within the positive benchmark dataset not
predicted to be genomic islands. We focus on four validation 
measures, recall = TP/(TP+FN), precision = TP/(TP+FP), 
performance coefficient (PC) = TP/(TP+FP+FN) and F-Measure 
= 2*recall*precision/(recall + precision). 

Discussion:
We collected 118 prokaryotic genomes from the National Center 
for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) FTP server, ran our EGID 
program, and generated GI locations 
(
http://www5.esu.edu/cpsc/bioinfo/software/EGID) for each 
genome. We used genomic islands obtained by IslandPick 
[] as 
benchmark, to evaluate the predicted GIs by EGID. We also 
collected predicted GI results of five component programs in 
EGID, and summarized all performance results in 
(, see 
supplementary). As we can see from 
 (see 
supplementary), both COLOMBO SIGI-HMM and IslandPath
have relative high precision rate, but with low recall rate. On 
the other hand, AlienHunter has relative high recall rate, but 
with low precision rate. EGID makes the balance between recall 
and precision, and it reaches relative high recall (0.630) and 
precision rate (0.630). Since PC and F-measure capture both 
recall and precision in a single accuracy measurement, their 
values reflect overall performance more accurately. EGID 
improves 12.14% over the best existing program AlienHunter in 
PC, and 7.88% in F-measure, suggesting the performance 
improvement of our ensemble method. 

In order to view the predicted GIs, we displayed the GI 
locations through one of the popular visualization tools, circus 
[]. As we can see from 
, EGID always picks GIs 
predicted by multiple programs, thus guaranteeing the 
reliability of GIs selected. The circular representations of other 
117 genomes can also be found in our website.

Conclusion:
In this paper, we have reported the development of an 
ensemble algorithm EGID for more accurate GI detection. We 
hope our improved GI prediction program could aid in 
molecular evolution and horizontal gene transfer studies.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This research was partially supported by President Research 
Fund, and FDR major grant at East Stroudsburg University, 
USA.

Citation:Che et al, Bioinformation 7(6): 311-314 (2011)

The flowchart of our computational framework for GI 
prediction

Illustrative examples of candidate GI regions, where 
two candidate GI regions are close in (A) and distant in (B). 
Each vertical bar represents the vote of a GI gene by multiple GI 
tools. The candidate GI regions meeting the threshold value are 
underlined.

Circular representations of the Escherichia coli O157:H7 
str. Sakai (NC_002695) showing predicted GIs, with each circle 
predicted by each program. The predicted GIs from the outer to 
the inner circle are EGID, AlienHunter, COLOMBO SIGI-HMM, 
INDeGenIUS, Island-Path, and PAI-IDA. The shaded parts 
show the predicted GIs by EGID, and evidenced GIs by other 
programs.

