Background
The exponential growth of large­scale molecular sequence data and of
the PubMed scientific literature has prompted active research in
biological literature mining and information extraction to facilitate
genome/proteome annotation and improve the quality of biological
databases []. Kranthammer et al. tagged gene and protein names in
the biomedical text by substituting each letter of a name with a unique
nucleotide sequence and finding “hits” in the literature using the
BLAST algorithm []. Tanabe and Wilbur developed a gene/protein
tagger, AbGene that identifies gene and protein names to extract single
names, filtering for false negatives using a gene name dictionary and
low frequency trigrams, identifying compound names using
combinations of patterns found in known gene names and filtering for
false negatives using contextual rules []. Motivated by the resource
for protein literature mining ­ iProLINK (integrated Protein Literature
INformation and Knowledge) [] and other text mining methodologies
like BioCreAtIvE [], we have used a simple approach to identify and
determine conserved patterns or motifs in protein sequence which is
essential for any biological sequence analysis. Hence, we have
developed a web server ’JUZBOX‘ to extract conserved patterns
(biomedical words) from the protein input sequence provided by the
user.

Methodology
We have compiled an array of lexicon of biomedical words (conserved
patterns/ potential motifs) to find their biochemical functions in the
protein sequence. The words were extracted and processed from
UCMP Glossary© for biological terms and the New International
Webster's Medical Dictionary © J. Radcliffe for medical terms.
Besides, other technical and popular medical terms were also included
to obtain a collection of over 2009 terms. We have processed the
lexicon for the valid biomedical words, here valid words represents
those words having the combination of 20 alphabets of amino acids.
The remaining 6 letters of the English alphabets (B, J, O, U, X, Z) are
treated as non­amino acid characters (because the amino acids
representation with these alphabets are not so common). We jumble
the 6 letters for the sake of usage and convenience and termed as
’JUZBOX‘ and these characters (in a biomedical word) are treated as
invalid characters (to our context). Here we describe an approach
which is based on the generation of valid biomedical terms from any
protein sequences that are characterized by the commonly used 20 single letter amino acid character codes. We also have subjected the
valid biomedical terms manually for pattern and motif analysis to find
the conservation as well as the biological significance. The overall
methodology is illustrated in the following figure ().

Web interface
The current version of JUZBOX is a web based tool and it was
developed by using PHP, a server side scripting language.

Program input
The user can input the protein sequence by pasting in FASTA/ raw
format () and choose the lexicon options (1) PROSITE and (2)Biomedical words. The first option displays only the true positive hits,
i.e. those valid biomedical words have hits in the PROSITE database
and the second option displays all possible combination of valid
biomedical words from the given sequence.

Program output
In the result page (), if the user has selected the first option, it
lists all the true positive hits, i.e. those words which have hits in the
PROSITE database. The second option (Biomedical words) lists out
all valid biomedical words from the given sequence input.

Applications
JUZBOX has been applied to evaluate the potential motifs from the
protein sequence and found some interesting motifs. These motifs are
conserved in major domains which are of biochemical interest, for
example the pattern ’DNA‘ (i.e. Aspartic acid ’D‘ followed by
Asparagine ’N‘ followed by Alanine ’A‘). This pattern is conserved in
more than thousand sequences in the PROSITE database and it has
been found in the SH2 and SH3 domains having varied functional
regions which correspond to the secondary structure. The main focus
is to efficiently extract the relevant structural and functional
information from biomedical words. This provides the foundation for
future knowledge-discovery tools able to identify previously
undiscovered associations of the conserved pattern, its corresponding
motif and functional sites. Undoubtedly, the generation of biomedical
words from protein sequence have applications specific for functional
annotation and it is the only way to cope with the tsunami of
sequences produced in this field.

Future development
We are developing the output options in more attracting form by
providing the meaning for each biomedical word found in the
sequence as well as the biological meaning for those hits like active
site, ion binding site, glycosylation site, phosphorylation site,
myristylation sites etc.

This work was supported by Distributed Information Sub Centre for
Bioinformatics, Indian Institute of Spices Research, Calicut, Kerala, India.

Citation:Paul et al., Bioinformation 4(5): 179-181 (2009)

Flowchart illustrating the methodology (in anti­clock wise direction)

JUZBOX sequence input

JUZBOX result page

