Background:
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NpC) is a malignant tumor of 
epidermoid origin, which occurs mostly in the lateral wall of 
the lympho-epithelium of the nasopharnyx. NpC has a 
geographical distribution, being most common among adults in 
Latin America and Southeastern Asia (prevalence: 15-
50/100,000), and African children. Prevalence of NpC is 2:1 
higher in males, compared to females. Increased risk for NpC is 
associated with HLA-2, HLA-B17, and HLA-Bw26 haplotypes, 
and include other etiological factors (e.g., environment, diet, 
and Epstein-Barr virus infection [EBV; human herpesvirus-4, 
HHV-4, orally transmitted  γ-1 herpesvirus]). Exposure to 
cigarette smoking and other sources of nitrosamine as well as to 
polycyclic hydrocarbons also increase risk for NpC. Due to its 
rather hidden anatomical location, NpC is often difficult to 
detect early and is commonly diagnosed at an advanced stage, 
which curtails survival [–
].

The NpC-susceptibility protein and medullo-blastoma antigen, 
Ankyrin repeat domain 11 (ANKRD11, aka ANR11 or ANCO1), 
is a p53-interacting protein that enhances the activity of p53. As 
a member of the family of ankyrin repeats containing cofactors 
(ANCOs), ANKRD11 interact with p160 co-activators to inhibit 
ligand-dependent transactivation. ANKRD11 enhances the 
DNA-binding properties of mutant p53 (R273H) to the 
CDKN1A promoter, thus mediating the restoration of normal 
p53 function in some cancer-related p53 mutations 
[].

The identification of the proteomic signature of NpC, and 
tumor infiltrating lymphocyte populations (TILs) could ensure 
novel modes of detection and intervention.  This study sought 
to define and to characterize biomarkers of activated signaling 
pathways, and of the populations of TILs in NpC tissue 
microarrays. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and 
immunohistofluorescence (IHF) imaging profiles of certain 
salient such markers converge to provide a novel perspective 
on the cellular immune surveillance in NpC.

We tested the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway because AKT (aka 
AKT1 of the protein kinase B [PKB] family) promotes several 
types of cancer by acting as an anti-apoptotic factor. AKT is 
activated through phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), and is 
critical for transmitting growth promoting signals, in large part, 
but not exclusively, by activating the mammalian target of 
rapamycin (mTOR), a regulator of cell growth, proliferation, 
motility, and survival  [,
]. The PI3K/AKTmTOR pathway is 
often overactive in cancer, and favors cell division while 
reducing apoptosis, and has become the target of many efforts 
toward proteomics-based therapies [].

We tested for the invasion of CD8+ T cells, which are the 
principal population of TIL-Ts in several carcinomas, although 
the CD8 phenotypic cell surface marker is also displayed on 
natural killer and dendritic cells. Because TIL's-T are activated 
effector cells, we monitored cells that expressed the marker of 
activation CD38, the multifunctional ectoenzyme cyclic ADP 
ribose hydrolase, which catalyzes the synthesis and hydrolysis 
of cyclic ADP-ribose (cADPR), a regulator of Ca++ flux. The loss 
of CD38 expression and function in CD8+ cells is associated 
with impaired immune responses, metabolic disturbances, and 
behavioral modifications. Activated B cells can also express 
CD38, and CD38+ B lymphocytes that express surface IgD, 
while remaining IgM-, can be selectively derived from human 
nasopharynx-associated lymphoid tissue. These activated B 
cells give rise to extrafollicular IgD+ plasma cells, which 
however remain stunted for downstream immunoglobulin class 
switch and cell maturation  [–
]. Infection with EBV 
establishes a lytic infection in the oropharynx and a 
contemporaneous latent infection into the B-lymphoid 
population with extrafollicular memory CD38+ B cells 
[].

TILs-B constitutes a newly identified aspect of the immune 
surveillance mechanisms for a variety of malignancies. TILs-B, 
which account for 30-40% of the TILs, generally show evidence 
of maturation and recognize specific tumor and self-antigens. 
The presence of TILs-B yields a favorable outcome for tumor 
immune surveillance because they functionally associate closely 
with TILs-T and other tumor immune surveilling cell 
populations.  In brief, and perhaps particularly in the instance 
of EBV infection of the nasopharyngeal epithelium, we propose 
that infiltrating activated B cells might play an important role to 
enhance T cell responses by producing specific antibody 
populations, by secreting stimulatory cytokines and 
chemokines, by serving as local antigen-presenting cells, and by 
organizing and sustaining the formation of tertiary lymphoid 
structures that can sustain long-term cellular immunity [].  
We also assessed regulatory immune cells expressing forkhead 
box P3 (FoxP3+) among CD8+ and CD38+ TILs, because 
experimental induction or administration of regulatory T cells 
(Tregs, CD4+/CD8+FoxP3+) can lead to marked reductions in 
cellular immunity, suggesting that cellular therapies targeting 
Tregs could help overcome diseases where immunotoxicity 
against certain targets, such as cancer, need to be maximized 
[].  Regulatory B cells (Bregs) have now been identified, 
which potently influences the induction, activation and 
maintenance of function of T effector cells [].

Methodology:
Paraffinized biopsy specimens of NpC tissue arrays were 
purchased from Pantomics, Inc pantomics.com; NPC961 – 
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma tissue array, 96 cores, 1.1 mm, 4 
mm).  The micro-arrays contained 31 cases of primary tumors 
with paired normal tissues, 17 of lymph node metastatic tumors 
and 12 of normal/reactive nasopharyngeal mucosa. Each core 
was obtained from surgical resection, and fixed in 10% neutral 
buffered formalin for 24 hours before mounting.  Triplicates of 
each set of four TMAs with 96 biopsies per slide were used for 
immunohistochemistry experiments, as described previously 
[–].

For IHC, primary antibodies were from Abcam (abcam.com). 
Mouse anti-human Epstein Barr Virus (EBV) Early Antigen 
Diffuse and Latent Membrane Protein were used at a dilution of 
1:100. Mouse anti-human EBV Nuclear Antigen was used at a 
dilution of 1:50. Rabbit anti-human AKT and anti-human Pi3K 
proteins were used at the dilution of 1:50.  Rabbit anti-human 
mTOR protein was used at the dilution of 1:250. Biotinylated 
secondary goat anti-rabbit antibody was used with the 
Vectastatin avidin-biotin complex (ABC) kit 
(VectorLaboratories, vectorlabs.com). Color was developed 
with the Vector Nova Red Substrate kit. For IHF, cell nuclei 
were stained with 4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI), a 
fluorescent stain that binds strongly to A-T rich regions of DNA 
(emission maximum: 461nm, blue visible region).  Mouse 
monoclonal anti-human anti-CD8 antibody conjugated to 
fluorescein (Becton Dickinson, bd.com) (emission maximum: 
521nm: green visible region), and mouse monoclonal antihuman anti-CD38 antibody conjugated to rhodamine (Becton 
Dickinson) (emission maximum: 545nm, red visible region) 
were used. The FoxP3 rabbit anti-human antibody was from 
abcam, and it was used with  a fluorochrome-conjugated antirabbit goat IgG obtained from Sigma.

As previously described  [], slides were scanned at 40x 
magnification. The Aperio Imagescope software (Version 
9.1.19.1569) was used for scoring, additional analysis and 
subsequent magnification. Two independent assessors 
evaluated the expression (signals) of each epitope based on the 
nuclear and cytoplasmic stains. A circle of tissue on the TMA 
was scored from 0 to 100, based on the extent of stain signals 
over the tissue. A score of 50 was interpreted as staining 
covering half of a circle of tissue, score of 75 means ¾ of the
tissue were stained, while a score of 10 simply covers a small 
arc of a circle of tissue. Expressions of markers were ranked as 
low (signal scores: 1-24), negative (signal scores: 0-10), and high 
(signal scores  ≥25).  Expression  level  of  each  EBV  marker  was 
assigned a score of +1. Pooled  results for each sample gave a 
score  of  either  +1  (EBV  negative  or  very  low),  +2  (intermediate 
EBV), +3 (intense staining for EBV markers), +4 (strong positive 
signal for all three EBV markers).

Microphotographs were obtained at 200X or 400 X 
magnifications with a Nikon microscope with bright phase for 
IHC, and with fluorescent illumination for IHF. Confocal 
microscopy was also obtained with an Olympus microscope. 
Statistical evaluation (α=0.05) of the effectiveness of molecular 
markers of EBV as adjunctive techniques for detection of oral 
premalignant and malignant NpC lesions was obtained as 
previously described [,
]. Fractal analysis was as previously 
described [,
].

Discussion:
Early experiments established the EBV status of the NpC 
microarrays. EBV staining is punctate, and was optimized by using 
three distinct antibodies against the epitopes for latent 
membrane protein expression of the early EBV antigen, for 
diffuse expression, and for expression of the nuclear EBV 
antigen. Samples with more definite reactivity with all three 
EBV markers were ranked EBV4Å, and samples with the lesser 
reactivity with barely one of the EBV antigens tested were 
ranked EBVÅ1.  The differences in EBV immunoreactivity 
appeared directly related to the functional activity of the cells, 
as determined by fractal analysis (Benoit fractal analysis, 
meanÅSD; EBV4Å: 1.79Å0.055 vs. 
EBV1Å: 1.50Å0.026; p[nonmatched, equal sample size t test]=0.00005. 
Cellular functional activity was taken as the state of activation 
and transmembrane signaling.  Scoring ranked 
immunoreactivity to Akt and PI3K, which are directly upstream 
to mTOR, and for mTOR as well. NpC samples with low to 
moderate EBV infection had lower PI3K staining, compared to 
EBV4Å tissues (median score across independent evaluators, 
EBV4Å: 13.2 vs. EBV3Å: 10.5 vs. EBV2Å: 5.9 vs. EBV1Å: 9.4).  
Similar trends were obtained with Akt immunostaining 
(median score, EBV4Å: 50.7 vs. EBV3Å: 42.9 vs. EBV2Å: 24.4 vs. 
EBV1Å: 8.9) and with mTOR immunostaining (median score, 
EBV4Å: 45.6 vs. EBV3Å:#x0003A; 33.8 vs. EBV2Å: 29.1 vs. EBV1Å: 11.7). 
Statistical analysis of these scores was rendered difficult due to 
the large amount of random  error.  However, Wilcoxon 
analyses disclosed a difference in scores of Akt  and mTOR 
immunoreactivities between low and moderate EBV infection 
(EBVÅ1-EBVÅ3), compared to EBVÅ4 
(p=0.0006 and p&lt;1.7X10­9, 
respectively).  Akt and mTOR  immunostaining was strongly 
correlated, revealing as much as 45% shared variance.  

Fractal analyses confirmed the  interdependent nature of the 
relationship among PI3K, Akt and mTOR, with respect to cell 
dimension, and presumably active cell growth.  PI3K and Akt 
immunostained EBV4Å were found to be overall larger, and 
presumably more metabolically active than EBV1Å cells 
(respectively, PI3K fractal comparison - EBV4Å: 1.43Å0.03 vs. 
EBV1Å: 1.34Å0.02; p&lt;0.0009; Akt fractal comparison - EBV4Å: 
1.56Å0.08 vs. EBV1Å: 1.42#x0212B;0.03; t test p&lt;0.01295).  By contrast, 
mTOR immunostained EBV4Å were not found to be 
significantly larger than EBV1Å cells (EBV4Å: 1.47Å0.12 vs. 
EBV1Å: 1.38Å0.019; p&lt;0.11), an outcome more likely due to the 
large random error in measurement rather than to the lack of a 
biological effect.

Taken together, our IHC data could signify important 
deregulation in the mTOR pathway in EBVÅ samples of NpC 
biopsies, reflected in part if alteration of the upstream 
regulatory activities of PI3K and Akt.  The observations 
established a direct correspondence between the activation of 
these metabolic pathways and the intensity of EBV infection, as 
defined by the intensity of staining of three distinct EBV 
epitopes.

A second round of experiments sought to characterize which 
cell populations was mTOR-activated in these NpC samples. 
Tri-fluorescence IHF experiments confirmed complete overlap 
of cells immunostained for the NpC susceptibility antigen, 
ANKRD11  [], and for the ectoenzyme cyclic ADP ribose 
hydrolase, CD38, a common marker of lymphocyte activation 
[] 
(). This important control ascertained the 
histologic nature of the NpC biopsies, which were expected to 
be of lympho-epithelial origin in the nasopharynx.  By contrast, 
there appears to be relatively few TILs-T of the CD38 
phenotype (), and these invading CD8Å do not 
express the activation marker CD38. Panel C in  shows, 
nevertheless, that there is a substantial influx of immune cells in 
the NpC lesions, and that these infiltrating lymphocytes express 
both the CD38 activation marker, and the marker of regulatory 
immune cells, FoxP3, indicating a significant migration of Bregs 
in NpC. This observation is confirmed at lower magnification in 
Panel D, which shows the substantial accumulation of 
CD38ÅFoxP3Å cells within the blood vessels of NpC lesions. It 
is quite evident from panels E &amp; F  () that these 
migrating CD38Å lymphocytes correspond to the mTORÅ cells 
analyzed by fractal analysis.  Noteworthy, migrating CD38Å 
lymphocytes are primarily viewed in the blood vessels of tissue 
samples taken adjacent to tumorigenic NpC (), 
but are localized in the tissue parenchyma of the NpC 
lesions proper ().

We utilized confocal microscopy with reversed fluorochromes 
to verify our observations.   Panel G of  confirms the 
relative paucity of invading CD8Å cells in NpC.  Furthermore, 
Panel H  indicates that TILs in NpC found in the blood vessels 
or the tissue parenchyma are activated and express, in this 
present case, high levels of Akt, upstream of the activation of 
mTOR (). 

Conclusion:
Histologically, the nasopharyngeal tissue is lympho-epithelial, 
rich of resident and transient B cells. This confers a distinct and 
unique micro-environment for carcinomas  [,
] predicated 
primarily on the immunoregulatory role of B cells.

Our data confirm that NpC, and adjacent areas, are endowed 
with relatively few TIL's with CD8Å T phenotype. Rather, NpC 
parenchyma exhibit substantial infiltration by TILs that express 
the marker of regulatory lymphocytes, FoxP3  [], the marker 
of activation (CD38), and markers of transmembrane and transcytosolic signaling (PI3K, Akt, mTOR pathway). These 
observations suggest that the predominant immune 
surveillance mechanism for controlling NpC progression is 
mediated by the regulatory role of resident plasma B cell 
population, and Bregs. 

Our data also confirm that CD38-mediated signal transduction 
in B cells induces activation of the PI3K pathway  []. In line 
with recent findings that mTOR activation in B cells leads to a 
significant block in further B cell maturation  [], our results 
suggest that the proteomic signature of TILs-B in NpC may 
determine timely and critical interwoven translational research 
and interventions  [] aimed at redirecting B cell activation 
pathways in NpC immune surveillance.

Recent evidence supports this working model by suggesting 
that Akt emits two mutually counter-balancing signals in 
regulating B cell differentiation and apoptosis: one involves 
mTOR activation, and the other remains to be elucidated  
[].
Therefore, our data may not be an epiphenomenon, but rather 
suggest that the FoxP3Å Bregs population might play an 
important role in modulating the tumor microenvironment 
[] 
of NpC, in a manner akin to other B cell-related immunemodulatory events 
[].

We warmly thank the Evidence-Based Decisions Active Groups 
of Stakeholders (EBD-AGS) of the EBD-Practice-Based Research 
Network and the EBD Study Group for the invaluable critical 
contributions to this work.  We also thank the UCLA Senate for 
funding to FC, and the undergraduate students who 
participated in these studies, Raisa Avezova and David 
Jourabhi.

Citation:Oluwadara et al, Bioinformation 7(5): 271-275 (2011)

Pantomics, NPC961 microarrays were immunostained with fluorescent probes, and microphotography obtained at 200X 
or 400X.  Fields show the three superimposed fluorochromes:  the blue DAPI stain shows the cell nuclei; the green stain represent 
the immunofluorescence contributed by anti-CD38 fluorescein;  the red stain corresponds to rhodamine immunostaining of the 
probant antigen; the whitish/yellowish-light green stain corresponds the overlap of the fluorescien and rhodamine stains.  Panel A 
confirms virtually complete overlap of NpC susceptibility antigen, ANKRD11, with cells expressing the activation marker CD38. 
Panel B shows that the CD8Å, rhodamine-conjugated, cells hardly  overlap with the CD8Å cells, which is confirmed by confocal 
microscopy  (Panel  G),  with  purposeful  reversal  of  the  fluorochromes.    Panel  C  and  D  show  the  disparate  localization  of 
CD38ÅFoxP3Å#x0212B; invading lymphocytes in NpC lesions proper (Panel C), compared to tissue taken adjacent to NpC tumor lesions 
(Panel D).  Panels E and F confirm the distinct localization of immigrating CD38Å lymphocytes in tissue adjacent to NpC lesions
(Panel  E),  compared  to  NpC  lesions  proper  (Panel  F).    Panels E and F show activated TILs expressing mTOR.  Panel H shows by 
confocal microscopy a high level of Akt expression pervasive in lymphocytes still captured in the blood vessels of NpC lesions 
proper, as well as in the tissue parenchyma

