Background
It is well known that there is a direct correlation between the increases in 
worldwide usage of antimicrobial agents and microorganism resistances 
[]. 
Patients infected by various highly resistant bacteria and/or fungi, 
leave no choice to physicians other than in inundate the bacteria/fungi with 
highly potent antimicrobial agents. Treatments such as these not only lead 
to super-resistant bacterial strains, but essentially render once deemed 
“highly potent” antibiotics useless. Furthermore, over the past decades, this 
surge in resistances has directly stimulated rigorous research in the field of 
antimicrobial susceptibilities. The universal metric used to perform 
antimicrobial susceptibility potency  tests is the minimum inhibitory 
concentration (MIC), which is usually measured in units of (µg/ml) 
[]. It 
is important to note that during susceptibility testing, some authors prefer 
to provide zone of inhibition (mm)  readings alongside MIC results, but 
such data is not ubiquitous and therefore not included in the database.  

Another pressing challenge facing the scientific community is the lack of 
comprehensive and centralized data on the specific methods of action of 
antimicrobial agents. Data such as methods of action, physical properties, 
and resistance genes for commonly used antimicrobials such as 
vancomycin, penicillin, and ampicillin  are readily available from various 
sources. But with increasingly emerging resistances worldwide, the 
scientific community needs a deeper understanding of the methods of 
actions of other, traditionally overlooked or even newly discovered agents. 
Surprisingly, the literature contains hundreds of either traditionally 
overlooked or recently discovered antimicrobial agents which often times 
hold promise in their lower MIC values. Through a wide collection of 
susceptibility data, TAMI seeks to alleviate some of the aforementioned 
challenges and ultimately seeks to foster international communication and 
cooperation in research, discovery and most importantly the use of 
antimicrobial agents.

Methodology
Construction of TAMI
The susceptibility data in TABI was  inputted, sorted, and eventually 
published in both print and digital form. Data was collected from dozens of 
journals including: Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, International 
Journal of Antimicrobial Agents, Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, 
Diagnostic Microbiology and Infectious Disease, and European Journal of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences. Specific testing methods such as BSAC agar 
dilution, BSAC disk diffusion, NCCLS broth micro-dilution, Etest strips, 
etc. were generally omitted except in cases where data was deemed 
significantly different  []. 
Due to the inconsistency in nomenclature of 
antimicrobial agents and strains, names which are no longer used have 
been standardized in the data []. 
TAMI's high volume of data overcomes 
this challenge by providing abundant data for the user to deem what data 
points fall as outliers. Google Scholar  [] was utilized for sorting and 
indexing of papers. The electronic, web-based version of the database is 
written in C+ and can be accessed at http://antibiotics.toku-e.com/. 
 shows process for collection and refining of data.

FeaturesTABI contains 960 antimicrobial agents, 24,000+ microorganisms (3,500 
unique strains) and over 400 journal articles. Basic information for many 
of the contained antimicrobials such as methods of action, physical data, 
and resistance genes are included therein. The search function allows for 
searches to be performed by any of  the following criteria: antimicrobial 
name, microorganism name, strain designation (ex. ATCC#), and strain 
resistances (methicillin- resistance). Interactive clickable links for related 
and relevant antimicrobials and microorganisms allow for crossreferencing of MIC data.
Utility to the Greater Biological Community
Although TABI can be used by and can benefit a diverse range of people, 
microbiologists, cell biologists, life-science professionals will in particular 
find the database useful. In addition  to being able to confirm data, the 
database can be used to introduce  other more effective antimicrobials 
and/or literature resources to the  user. Furthermore, by knowing an 
approximate range of antimicrobial concentrations, the user can economize 
in the purchasing of their needed antimicrobial agent and more 
importantly, a reduction in usage will lead to a decreased spike 
in the evergrowing resistance levels of microorganisms 
[].

Future Directions
Although TAMI's scope and content have exceeded previous attempts at 
creating susceptibility databases, in its current state TAMI serves as an 
initial tool which is developing into a world-class database  
[]. The 
editorial board plans to double the number of papers to more than 800 in 
the next year and continue expansion at a pace of at least 100 additional 
papers/ month thereafter. Work on expanding the distribution of TAMI 
through various feedback channels is already underway and content is 
steadily being expanded.

Citation:Amirkia &amp; Qiubao, Bioinformation 5(8): 365-366 (2011) 

Flowchart of construction of The Antimicrobial Index. Papers were primarily found through using MIC relevant keywords in Google scholar 
such as: antimicrobial, in vitro, MIC, and micro g/ml. Data sorting and filtration comprised of omitting irrelevant data such those pertaining to susceptibility 
percentages, overly complex experimental and/or synthetically prepared compounds, time-kill studies, and other non-MIC data. Errors and nomenclature 
variations in the primary text data became increasingly apparent through the entry, merging, and sorting of data in Microsoft Excel. Errors such as 
microorganism or antimicrobial misspellings were revised. Unit differences were standardized to µg/ml. Refined data was subsequently published into the 
online and print versions of TAMI.

