Background
Cancer is now a serious global health problem. Cancer is caused by a complex,
poorly understood interplay of genetic, molecular and environmental factors
[]. 
Some conventional systems such as surgery, chemotherapy, radiation
therapy, immunotherapy, monoclonal antibody therapy or other methods are
being used for cancer treatment. Most of the agents are known to be mutagenic
and or carcinogenic, and are highly toxic for normal cells 
[]. Due to the toxic
and adverse side effects caused by synthetic medicine, herbal medicines are
alternatives to treatment []. 
Plant extracts and natural compounds purified
from plants have been used by humans for many centuries for the treatment of
a variety of inflammation-related diseases, including cancer 
[]. Computer
aided drug design have gained popularity and have become an integral part of
the industrial and academic research for drug development 
[]. Transforming
ligands into active compounds with non-promiscuous-binding behaviour,
known as hits; and then refining them into a structure or series of structures
with relevant biological and drug-like activity, known as leads; are the key
starting points for drug discovery programs 
[–]. Tumorogenesis is a multistep
process that can be activated by any of various environmental carcinogens
(such as cigarette smoke, industrial emissions, gasoline vapors), inflammatory
agents (such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and H2O2), and tumor promoters
(such as phorbol esters and okadaic acid). These carcinogens are known to
modulate the transcription factors (e.g., NF-kB, AP-1, STAT3), anti-apoptotic
proteins (e.g., Akt, Bcl-2, Bcl-XL), proapoptotic proteins (e.g., caspases,
PARP), protein kinases (e.g., IKK, EGFR, HER2, JNK, MAPK), cell cycle
proteins (e.g., cyclins, cyclin-dependent kinases), cell adhesion molecules,
COX-2 and growth factor signalling pathways []. Many ligands acting via
GPCRs, including thrombin, bombesin, radykinin, substance P, endothelin,
serotonin, acetylcholine, gastrin, prostaglandin F2alpha, and lysophosphatidic
acid are known to elicit a mitogenic response in a variety of cell types 
[]. We
used compounds which have potential to downregulate Nuclear Factor kappaB
as reviewed elsewhere [] 
and show their ability to induce apoptosis and inhibit
cell proliferation by blocking G-protein coupled receptor 55 (GPCR55) using
computer aided screening studies.

Methodology
Polyphenolic phytocompounds
We used 60 compounds which are known to have the potential to down
regulate Nuclear Factor kappaB (NFκB) for this study 
[]. These compounds
were already established as possible inhibitors of the NFκB pathway on animal
and cancer cell line models.

T-cell receptor structure
We used the T-cell receptor structure with PDB ID: 2X70 from protein
databank (PDB) for this study.

Software and tools
We used ACD/Chemsketch version 12 [] to draw molecular structures and
calculate chemical properties. The ADMET (Absorbtion, Distribution,
Excretion, Metabolism, Toxicology) properties were calculated for the
phytocompounds using Accord for excel an Accelry's product 
[]. The
docking module in Discovery Studio, an Accelrys Software Inc (2.1) is used for
docking studies [].

Results
 shows the interaction of GPCR55 domain with allixin, anethole,
capsaicin, linearol, syringic acid and Zoladex. The results of drug-receptor
interaction for compounds are given in Table 1 
(see ). 
These compounds were selected from 12 out of the 36 compounds
in the original list of 60 compounds which satisfied Lipinski's RO5 and
ADMET properties.

Discussion
The aim in drug design is the identification of novel small molecular scaffold
exhibiting high binding affinity and selectivity for the target together with a
reasonable absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion and toxicity
(ADMET) profile []. 
The simplest ADME-concerned filter is the Lipinski
RO5 [–]. 
We used the 60 compounds which are known to have the
potential to down regulate Nuclear Factor kappaB (NFκB) for this study 
[]. It
has been suggested that the predictable reactions typically are dose-related.
Hence, there is a need to predict the toxic nature of these compounds 
[].
Thus, these compounds were tested for Lipinski RO5 and ADMET properties.
Analysis suggests that 36 of the 60 compounds satisfied Lipinski RO5 and
ADMET properties analysis.

The computer aided toxicity screening was performed using Accord for Excel
[] 
and thus, 12 compounds with hepatotoxicity value ‘0’ indicating non-toxic
effect. Thus, these 12 compounds have satisfied both the Lipinski's rule of five
and ADMET, achieving the status of ‘oral drug-likeness’ and are chosen for
docking against the receptor GPCR55. Zoladex (low logP and high molecular
weight), a commonly used reference molecule violated criteria for
consideration as oral drug-likeness in Lipinski RO5 and ADMET analysis.
Thus, the need to design compounds satisfying Lipinski RO5 and ADMET
properties is important. A good docking interaction implies the prediction of
ligand confirmation and orientation within targeted binding site and their lower
interactions energies 
[–]. 
Docking results (; 
) show that 5
compounds (allixin, anethole, capsaicin, linearol and syringic acid) have good
molecular interactions with the receptor GPCR55.

Zoladex is being used alone or in combination with tamoxifen as a cytotoxic
chemotherapy in patients with hormone receptor-positive tumours and is found
to be effective when used after adjuvant chemotherapy 
[]. It is also widely
used in the treatment of advanced prostate cancer as well as for breast cancer
[]. 
However, it should be noted that Zoladex violates some of the molecular
properties. Nonetheless, polyphenolic phytocompounds namely allixin,
anethole, capsaicin, linearol and syringic acid satisfy both Lipinski's rule of
five and ADMET properties. They also have produced good results for
molecular interaction with the receptor GPCR55 in docking models. Thus, the
role of these compounds in inhibiting GPCR55 activity is implied for
consideration in cancer related illness.

Conclusion
The compounds allixin, anethole, capsaicin, linearol and syringic acid satisfied
Lipinski's RO5 and ADMET properties. The interactions of these compounds
with GPCR55 were found to be strong in docking models. Thus, their potential
ability to block GPCR55 is implied for consideration in drug design and
development for cancer associated illness.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The financial support extended by the BTIS (Biotechnology information
system), DBT (Department of Biotechnology), Ministry of Science and
Technology, Government of India, India is acknowledged.

Citation:Pitchai et al, Bioinformation 6(6): 226-228 (2011)

Drug-Receptor interaction. The docked complexes are (A) allixin;
(B) anethole; (C) capsaicin; (D) linearol; (E) syringic acid; (F) Zoladex
(Reference drug) with G-protein coupled receptor 55.

