Background
The HIV-1 (human immunodeficiency virus type 1) protease is a C2
symmetric and an aspartic acid homodimeric enzyme, where aspartate
25 plays a pivotal role in binding the substrate []. The HIV-1 protease
does not have a homologue in mammalian cells and has a function to
cleave the Gag-Pol polyprotein precursor into shorter pieces to create
the active protein components for viral packaging and maturation. This
proteolysis occurs late in the viral life cycle and is essential for viral
infectivity []. The protease active site is located in the buried area
(tunnel), where the two subunits meet each other. Highly active
antiretroviral therapy (HAART), using protease inhibitors (PI), is
commonly used in management of HIV infection. These inhibitors are
able to irreversibly bind the HIV-1 protease to block its function.
Among these compounds, Indinavir (Crixivan, MK-639, or IDV) [,]
is a potent and selective protease inhibitor that had approval for AIDS
therapy. But genotypic analyses of the viral populations during the
course of protease inhibitor therapy had shown various mutations that
can occur in as many as 20 amino acids within the protease gene [,]. 
13.7 % of IDV failure were identified for 1021 new viral genotypes
from HIV patients[]. In case of HIV-1 subtype C (African strain), it
had been shown that the most common primary mutation observed in
PI treated patients was L90M [], a main course in multi-PI resistance
establishment []. Even naturally occurring polymorphism, such as
L89M and I93L, located in the hydrophobic core of the enzyme would
possibly change the shape of the substrate-binding cleft and diminish
the potency of IDV []. Only flexibility of the newly synthesized
compounds seems to overcome this effect. Here, we describe the
designing scheme for possible HIV-1 protease inhibitors using a lead
expansion protocol with a pharmacophoric-shape similarity scoring
function.

Methodology
HIV-1 subtype C protease and Indinavir structures
The three dimensional structure of the HIV-1 protease - IDV complex
(PDB code: 2R5P) was retrieved from Protein Data Bank at 2.3 Å
RMSD resolution []. The VADAR (volume, area, dihedral angle
reporter) server [], which is an improved version of the
PROCHECK software, was used for stereochemical validation of
HIV-1 protease. Altogether, 95 % of all residues were in φ-ψ core
areas. Indinavir was obtained from PubChem database (CID:
5362440). IDV initial refinement was performed by means of the
MarvinSketch program provided by ChemAxon [].

Protease active site detection
Protein binding surfaces could have very complicated and irregular
structures. Atoms could form pockets, cavities and tunnels. Solvent
molecules can get into these tunnels from outer environment and move
through them. Buried shape and volume of such tunnels vary in time
due to protein dynamics and kinetics. Here, we analyzed buried
tunnels of the protease using the CAVER module, to identify certain
atomic positions of hidden binding moieties []. Dijkstra's algorithm
was implemented in searching process and started from source node
(starting point), which is located deeply in the protein pocket. Before
the search procedure, 136 water molecules, chloride and sodium ions
were removed from IDV-bound protease (liganded holo-structure)
protein database file. All calculations were performed on 32612 grid
points. Catalytic tunnel (key interaction site) was detected in the
protease structure (). The tunnel coordinates to specify the
starting point in x, y and z axis are 2.5, 6.5, -7.5 respectively. These
coordinates were taken from the AutoDock manual [].IDV

Compound library generation
Pharmacophoric ‐ shape similarity scoring function was used for
compound library generation. This is build-in function integrated in
the MuseTM molecular design workflow to accelerate the identification
and optimization of lead candidates. This function seeks molecules
that have fairly different structures but similar 3D pharmacophores and
shapes. It is appropriate for lead expansion ‐ exploration around an
initial hit. Indinavir compound was used as a reference molecule and
all similarities were measured with respect to it. The reference
structure was also used as the initial population for invention. In our
case a default set of compounds was used if no any other structures
were given. Such generation of multiple compounds with similar
shape but different 3D structure organization would provide more
interesting results in the invention and library screening afterwards.
For lead expansion method we did not specified any seed structures
and preserved cores. 99 undesirable and 35 questionable substructures
were excluded from to be present in invented structures. Structural
ranking was done by means of the Pareto-Borda method to maximize
pharmacophoric-shape similarity in preferential shape similarity
specified range (from 0.35 to 0.50 score units).

ADME/Tox studies
Available decision tree algorithms such as: Benigni-Rossa rulebase,
Verhaar scheme, Cramer rules and START (structural alerts for
reactivity in toxtree) biodegradability were used for the analysis.
Benigni-Rossa rule base predicts the possibility of carcinogenicity and
mutagenecity by discriminant analysis and structural rules [].
START biodegradability estimates biodegradation potential of the
chemical compound based on structural alerts compiled from the
Canadian Environmental Protection Agency.

Protein-ligand docking
The Molegro Virtual Docker [] and the AutoDock software were
implemented to analyze ligand interactions with the HIV-1 protease
binding site. The Molegro Virtual Docker and the AutoDock combine
a rapid energy evaluation through pre-calculated grids of affinity
potentials with a variety of search algorithms to find appropriate
binding positions. In Molegro Virtual Docker docking experiment we
used MolDock scoring function, which is based on a piecewise linear
potential and a re-ranking procedure was applied to the highest ranked
poses to increase docking accuracy. Affinity grid resolution was set to
0.3 Å. Ligand evaluations were based on internal energy of binding,
internal H-bonds formation, Sp2-Sp2 (trigonal planar electron domain
geometry) torsion angles. Binding site was previously detected by
CAVER module and further measured for cavity volume (282.1 Å3),
surface (681.0 Å2) and radius (15.0 Å). Customized search algorithm
was set to MolDock SE (simplex evolution). Number of runs was 10.
Parameter settings were set to 1500 iterations, 50 population sizes,
100.0 kcal/mol of energy threshold for pose generation, 300 simplex
evolution steps and 1.0 neighbor distance factor. All dockings were
performed at 1.0 Å RMSD threshold. For preparing the AutoDock
docking parameter file we used default settings (genetic algorithm
parameters: population size = 150, number of energy evaluations =
2500000, rate of gene mutation = 0.02, rate of crossover = 0.8,
maximum number of generations = 27000, number of GA runs = 10,
initial dihedrals were randomly specified, elitism value was set to 1).
By default, clustering of docked results was done at 0.5 Å RMSD.
Prior to docking, total Kollman and Gasteiger charges were added to
the protein and the ligand.

LIQUID-fuzzy pharmacophore models
The PyMol LIQUID module was utilized to create a pharmacophore
‘fuzzy’ model. At the first model computation LIQUID used standard
cluster radii to calculate cluster sizes at 4.0 Å RMSD for lipophilic
areas and 1.9 Å RMSD for H-bond donors and acceptors []. In our
experiment we set up default cluster radius (2.0 Å) for each potential
pharmacophore point type ().

Discussion
Genetic algorithm produced 1300 compounds (70 generations) of
diverse chemical structure. 500 of top molecules were selected
according to their shape similarity (0.7-0.9 functional scores). These
molecules, which had pharmacophoric score less than 0.8 were
excluded from the list. 227 out of 500 compounds satisfied all that
criteria and were tested for Lipinski's Rule of Five using the
LigandScout pharmacophore software []. Only one compound
(novel hit) did not have rule violations, in contrast to IDV, which had
one violation of Lipinski's rule. A useful parameter, such as
topological polar surface area (TPSA), was defined for these two
molecules as the surface sum over all polar atoms to evaluate
parameters for the prediction of cell permeability and drug transport
properties (Table 1 ). This parameter shows
good drug transport, even in ability to penetrate the blood-brain
barrier. In this case TPSA should not exceed 600 Å2threshold. The
novel hit was analyzed for Cramer rules, carcinogenicity and
biodegradability. It also showed a strong affinity (in comparison with
reference molecule) to the HIV-1 protease binding site. Docking
results revealed the interaction modes for this compound with the
HIV-1 protease. Novel hit adopts IDV binding mode (Asp 25, 29 and
Gly 27) and also has the additional interacting residues (Gly 49-Ile 50,
Asp 29-Ala 28, Asp 30). Moreover, it exceeds IDV in H-bond
formations (10 instead of 9). New compound's nitrile group is creating
H-bonds with donor nitrogen of Gly 49 - Ile 50 amide group ().

Probably this acceptor nitrile group along with the tetrahydropyridine
ring might have some influence on the ligand conformational shift
with subsequent change in binding affinity mode. In both docking
cases, the catalytic function of the Asp 25 residues is completely
blocked. Subsequently, we performed the AutoDock experiments to
validate the above data and revealed reduction in hydrogen bonds
formation presumably due to differences in affinity grid resolution of
Molegro Virtual Docker and AutoDock (0.3 vs 0.375 Å). However,
consistent with previous observation, all crucial amino acids obtained
from Molegro docking experiments are also present in the AutoDock
docking profiles ().The IDV spatial conformation
recruits less docking energy (-15.1 kcal/mol) in comparison to novel
hit and forms H-bonds with amino acid residues of chain B. In this
orientation, the amide nitrogen donor together with carboxyl group
(hydroxyl moiety) of the Asp 29 residue, the Asp 25 carboxyl group
(hydroxyl moiety) and the Gly 27 amide oxygen acceptor make
hydrogen bonds with two hydroxyl functional groups and one amide
nitrogen donor of the ligand molecule.

Although, novel hit conformation interacts with both chains of the
HIV protease but its global minimum in docked energy (-13.8
kcal/mol) with the protease binding site is more than that of IDV,
resulting in decrease of binding affinity and intermolecular force
between the ligand and its receptor. The Asp 29, Ile 50 amide nitrogen
donors form H-bonds with N1 of the tetrahydropyrimidine ring and
nitrogen acceptor of the aminoformonitrile residue. Carbonyl and
hydroxyl moieties of both Asp 25 carboxyl groups are interacting with
amine functional donor groups of novel hit. Asp 25, Asp 29, Gly 27
residues are located in the ‘eye’ areas, whereas Ile 50 residue is
localized in the ‘flap’ region. The ‘flap’ region of the protease plays an
important role in the enzyme “opening” and ligand binding to the
‘flap’ β­hairpins could block “opening” process.Finally, we measured
the hydrogen bond length by measuring the distance between the
donor and acceptor atoms. Usually, longest H-bond length is about 3.5
Å. Anything longer of this parameter would be considered a pure
dipole-dipole interaction. It is well established that hydrogen bonds
have a typical length around 2.5 Å. In our case, all H-bond distances
were in the range from 1.71 to 2.11 Å. Interestingly, one bond in IDV
and two bonds in the hit molecule were detected as ultra-short
hydrogen bonds with donor and acceptor distances of less than 2.0 Å.
This observation supports further that identified the novel hit
compound should have a tendency to form strong hydrogen bonds to
the protease catalytic center.One drawback to IDV and novel hit is
that, they both have a heterocyclic rings with complex substituents.
Those features are responsible for the third class of toxicity (highly
toxic). Both molecules belong to the second class of biodegradability,
which means no alerts for notifying an easily degradable chemical
were found and there was one alert notifying a persistent chemical the
compound under investigation is declared as “persistent chemical”.

Conclusion
In the present study, we generated library of diverse chemical
compounds on the bases of Indinavir and screened them for possible
anti-protease activity. However, mutagenic efficiency of HIV is very
high in generating new viral strains and could be bypassed by creating
drugs with different binding properties and strong affinity to the target
protein. The results are shown in this report, indicate that at least one
compound has binding residues different from the initial hit, with
improved affinity to the protease as well as its QSAR properties.
Further studies on this compound will provide useful information
towards the rational design of HIV-1 protease inhibitors and their
effectiveness.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are grateful to the DFG (SFB630/C6, Da 208/11-1) and
the IZKF (Interdisziplinäres Zentrum für Klinische Forschung der
Universität Würzburg) for the support of this work.

Citation:Shityakov &amp; Dandekar , Bioinformation 4(7): 295-299 (2010)

Chemical structure of IDV and its ‘derivate’- novel hit (N'-cyano-N-{3-[(1S, 2S)-1,2-diamino-2-(4-oxo-3, 4-dihydroquinazolin-7-
yl)ethyl]-5-[(2R)-oxolan-2-yl]pyridin-2-yl}benzenecarboximidamide)

(A) HIV protease catalytic tunnel (binding site) was predicted by PyMol CAVER module. IDV (B) and novel hit (C) interactions with
the HIV-1 protease are shown. H-bonds are depicted as dashed lines. IDV – protease complex was analyzed as a crystal structure. 3D alignment
and ‘fuzzy’ model (D) of the hit ‘native’ conformation (gray) together with its ‘functional’ conformation (yellow) at 2.0 Å RMSD. The shown
potential pharmacophore points are color-coded as follows: lipophilic areas are green, H-bond donors and acceptors are colored in blue and red
respectively.

(A) Indinavir and (B) novel hit docking profiles calculated by AutoDock software. Both ligands are gray. HIV protease chain A and B
amino acids are painted in green and magenta respectively. The hydrogen bonds are shown for each of both molecules; see text for details.

