Background
Quantitative structure –activity relationship (QSAR), is a
type of analysis where some measures of chemical
properties are correlated with biological activity to derive a
mathematical illustration of the underlying structure
activity relationship (SAR) []. Descriptors are numerical
representations of specific molecular features. Such features
can range from very simple ones such as the number of
carbons to more complex and abstract features such as
graph invariants of the molecular graph. Quantitative
structure–activity relationship (QSAR) studies are
unquestionably of great importance in modern chemistry
and biochemistry. To get an insight into the structureactivity
relationship we need molecular descriptors that can
effectively characterize molecular size, molecular branching
or the variations in molecular shapes, and can influence the
structure and its activities [,
]. A number of prospective
studies show that COX enzyme gets increased in inflamed
tissue and that COX is stimulated by interleukin-1 (IL-1) 
[].
Cyclo-oxygenase (COX) converts arachidonic acid derived
from cell membranes to prostaglandins, which have
important signaling and housekeeping functions,
particularly in platelets, the gastrointestinal tract, lungs, and
kidneys. The two COX isoforms are the constitutive form
(COX1) and the inducible form (COX2). Pharmacological
inhibition of COX2 can provide relief from the symptoms of
inflammation and pain []. COX2 inhibitors are a new class
of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).
Because they selectively block the COX2 enzyme, blocking
this enzyme obstructs the production of the chemical
messengers (prostaglandins) that cause the pain and
swelling of arthritis inflammation. The COX2 inhibitor
flurbiprofen is shown at its active site with COX2 
().
Selectivity for COX2 provides the anti-inflammatory action
and also reduces the risk of peptic ulceration. COX2
inhibitors have recently been implicated in cancer
prevention and the slowing of atherosclerosis [,
]. Dataset
containing 15 COX 2 inhibiting drugs were formed and
subjected to descriptor determination. At first a variety of
molecular descriptors were calculated and 7 were finalized
by multiple linear regression. The selected 7 molecular
descriptors were found to confer the known biological
activities of 15 COX2 inhibitors. Moreover, a regression
model was hypothesized based on the results, which would
be helpful for structural optimization of COX2 inhibitors.

One of the first ever a QSAR model is that of Richardson
(1869) where the narcotic effect of a series of alcohols was
correlated with molecular weight. []. Bazoui and colleagues
(2002) derived QSAR for 103 analogues of 1-(2-
hydroxyethoxy) methyl-6-(phenylthio) thymine (HEPT), a
potent inhibitor of the HIV-1 reverse transcriptase, by means
of multiple linear regression (MLR) and artificial neural
network (ANN) techniques. The results showed that the
anti-HIV activity of HEPT derivatives was strongly
dependent on hydrophobic character and also steric factors
of substituent []. Guha and Jurs (2004) developed
Quantitative Structure−Activity Relationship (QSAR)
models to predict the biological activity of 179 artemisinin
analogues. Multiple linear regression and computational
neural network models are developed to link the structures
to their reported biological activity []. Jain and Agrawal
(2006) applied step-wise multiple regression analysis and
reported lipophilicity and topological distance indices are
important for COX2 inhibition []. Khan and colleagues
(2006) studied quantitative structure activity relationship
analysis on a series of N-alkyl imidazole analogues using
combination of various thermodynamic electronic and
spatial descriptors. The study revealed that the electronic
property, i.e., dipole moment contributed positively, and
spatial descriptor (principal moment of inertia at Y axis)
contributed negatively to the biological activity 
[]. Livia
and colleagues (2007) conducted comparative molecular
field analyses (CoMFA) on a large set of estrogen receptor
(ER) modulators. Results indicate that steric, electrostatic,
hydrophobic (lipophilic) and hydrogen bond donor
substituents play a significant role in COX2 inhibitory
activity and selectivity of the compounds 
[].

Methodology
Molecular structure and optimization:
The COX2 inhibiting drugs were collected from several
public sources like drug bank and from literature 
()
[]. 
The structures of the drugs were obtained from
PubChem. ACD-Chemsketch was used to draw the
inhibitors (drugs) structure. The structures were then
optimized using 3D optimizer of ACD Labs Software
() 
and the structures were saved in the pdb format.

The biological activity:
The biological activity of the drugs i.e the IC50 values, were
obtained from the Pubchem database  (see
supplementary material). IC50 values were retrieved based
on its selective inhibition of cyclo-oxygenase 2 enzymes in
human.

QSAR descriptors:
The optimized structures of the 15 drugs have been used for
calculating molecular descriptors using E-Dragon 
[]. The
descriptor types chosen were constitutional descriptors,
information indices, functional group counts, topological
descriptors, atom centered fragments and molecular
properties. This analysis resulted with 142 individual
descriptor values. This total descriptor values were
shortlisted by regression analysis. The normalized values
have then been used to generate QSAR models by the means
of multiple linear regression analysis. The QSAR model was
generated using Build QSAR module 
[].

Discussion
Multiple regression analysis:
Each of the 15 drugs was analyzed for the molecular
descriptors using E-dragon and the results were recorded.
MLR is a method used for modeling linear relationship
between a dependent variable Y (IC50) and independent
variable X (2D descriptors). Out of 142 descriptors for the
series of 15 COX2 inhibitors, 7 were found to be significant
by multiple regression analysis using the SPSS statistical
package  (see supplementary material).

Set of Final Descriptors:
All the suitable descriptors were analyzed and finally the
seven descriptors were found to suite the fifteen COX2
inhibitors. The E-Dragon software was used to calculate the
descriptors for each molecule. The 7 Descriptors found
significant were Ss, SCBO, RBN, nN, SIC0, IC1, and H-055
(). 
The QSAR analysis was done using the Build
QSAR module. These descriptors belong to constitution,
information indices and atom centered fragments category.
These values were used for further calculation and model
generation. The graph has been plotted between the
experimental and the predicted IC50 values.

QSAR Model Generation:
Using the above-mentioned 7 descriptors the QSAR models
were generated using Build QSAR model generator. The
predicted activity value is the predicted IC50 value
generated by the Build QSAR module, residual activity is
the difference between the observed and predicted IC50
values. When the drug bioactivity data and descriptor data
which fall under constitution, information indices and atom
centered fragments category were subjected to multiple
regression analysis the following significant equations were
obtained.

n=015; r=0.966; r²(R) = 0.933; s=2.314; F=18.711 – Model 1

This equation is obtained by analyzing the constitution (Ss,
SCBO, RBN, nN) and information indices (SIC0, IC1)
descriptors, where n is number of molecules under analysis,
r is the correlation coefficient, r²(R) is the squared correlation
coefficient, s is the standard deviation, F is the F statistical
value. The cross validated squared correlation coefficient,
Q2 is 0.495 and standard deviation of sum of square of
difference between predicted and observed values, SPRESS
is 6.377.

n=015; r=0.650; r²(R) = 0.423 s=6.427; F=1.319 – Model 2
This equation is obtained by analyzing the constitution (Ss,
SCBO, RBN, nN) and atom centered fragments (H-055)
descriptors with Q2=1.354 and SPRESS=12.979

n=015; r=0.953; r²(R) =0.908 s=2.317; F=36.332 – Model 3

This equation is obtained by analyzing the information
indices (SIC0, IC1) and atom centered fragments (H-055)
descriptors with Q2=0.661 and SPRESS=4.454

Evaluating the model:
Among the above three models, model 1 has produced high
statistical quality equation (n=015; r=0.966; r²(R) = 0.933;
s=2.314; F=18.711) which was obtained by pooling
constitution (Ss, SCBO, RBN, nN) and information indices
(SIC0, IC1) descriptors. It is seen that model 1 has highest r
and R value i.e. 0.966 and 0.933 respectively and lowest
standard deviation(s = 2.314) when compared to other two
models. The Q2 value is low than the other two, however,
based on the correlation coefficient and the standard
deviation model 1 can be considered as the best one among
the generated models. It is seen that the average observed
activity in model 1 is 2.876; average predicted activity is
3.123467; and the residual activity value does not deviate
beyond ±1 and its average being 0.248  (see
supplementary material). Hence the chosen descriptors best
fit for the COX2 inhibition. The auto correlation between the
descriptors studied was analyzed  (see
supplementary material). The highest correlation is
observed between the descriptors RBN and SIC0 with the
value 0.277.

Graphical Analysis:
The graphical analysis has been performed and the graph is
shown in (). The graph has been plotted between
the predicted and observed IC50 values (). The
predicted activity shows linear relationship with observed
activity because fit of the data to the regression line is good.
The higher the value for r2, less likely the relationship is due
to chance. This QSAR investigation indicates that the
descriptors namely Ss, SCBO, RBN, nN SIC0, IC1 for the set
of cyclo-oxygenase inhibitors studied were found to have a
great deal to positively contribute to biological activity. The
graph is plotted for observed activity versus residual
() 
and predicted activity versus residual 
(). 
The finalized descriptors were found to be the members
of constitutional and information indices. The workflow for
the present comparative QSAR study is shown in 
().
Thus, this work sets sights on to identify the associated
molecular properties of COX2 inhibiting drugs and exploit it
to optimize COX2 inhibiting activity.

Conclusion
COX2 plays a significant role in the development of various
symptoms and conditions, including fever, inflammation,
and pain. The overall result of the conducted comparative
QSAR analysis explicates the exploration of common
structural descriptors of the COX2 inhibiting drugs in
explaining its bioactivity against the cyclo-oxgenase
enzyme. These descriptors indicate simple structural
features like constitution property, information indices and
atom centered fragments which confer to better bioactivity.
This provides insight into the physicochemical nature of the
activity under consideration. The results of this study might
pave the way towards rationalizing the design and
discovery of novel COX2 inhibitor.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors wish to thank Dr. Prof.V. Umashankar, Reader and
Head, Centre for Bioinformatics, Sankar Nethralaya ,
Chennai for his support and AM is grateful to VIT
University for providing laboratory facility.

Citation:Mohanapriya &amp; Achuthan, Bioinformation 8(8): 353-358 (2012)

(a) Cyclo-oxygenase 2 complexes with inhibitor
flurbiprofen. Selective inhibition of cyclo-oxygenase 2
enzyme by the inhibitor flurbiprofen [PDB: 3pgh]. The
cyclo-oxygenase 2 enzyme is shown as cartoon and the
inhibitor as the stick model in green color at its active site.
(b) Interaction between the cyclo-oxygenase and
flurbiprofen. Black dashed line – hydrogen bonds, salt
bridges and metal interactions; green solid lineshydrophobic
interactions. (Image generated using PoseView
software)

The drug dataset (15 drugs) taken for the study.
The structures of the drugs were taken from Pubchem and
drug bank databases. The structures were then drawn and
optimized using ACD labs 3D optimizer.

(a) The graph plotted between predicted and
observed biological activity (r= 0.933). The predicted activity
shows linear relationship with observed activity because fit
of the data to the regression line is good. (b) The graph
plotted between observed and the residual biological
activity. (c) Graph plotted between predicted and the
residual biological activity.

Steps followed for QSAR analysis for cox2
inhibitors. Dataset contains a total of 15 cyclo-oxygenase2
inhibiting drugs. Totally seven descriptors were subjected to
QSAR model generation and validation.

