Background
The genus Mycobacterium considers clinically important
pathogens such as M. tuberculosis, M. leprae, M. bovis and M.
avium. Tuberculosis is a disease which spreads from person
through the air []. Tuberculosis continues a major public health
problem of the world; it has been further aggravated by the
advent of HIV-AIDS. M. tuberculosis (Mtb) is a facultative
intracellular parasite which grows at slow rate. In different
environmental condition Mtb exposed rigorous stages of
disease during infection. Mtb replicates inside the macrophages,
where the condition is mostly hostile for most bacteria. It can
also multiply extracellularly in the open lung cavities which are
found during the late stages of the disease []. In the last
decades, the cost of research and development in the
pharmaceutical industry has been rising steeply and steadily,
but the significant time is required for bringing a new product
to market remains around ten to fifteen years 
[]. Tuberculosis
has always been a major killer, making in India. One of the
natural testing ground for the highly promising M. bovis-BCG,
the only vaccine available for TB even today. The nearcompleted
failure of the BCG vaccination programmed in India
[]. The two main drug resistant are MDR (Multidrug-resistant)
and XDR (extensively drug-resistant), first line anti-TB drug are
rifampicin and isoniazid in case of Multidrug-resistant
tuberculosis (MDR-TB)[]. MDR-TB has additional resistance to
fluroquinolone and second line injectable antibiotics are
amikacin, kanamycin or capreomycin, in case of XDR 
[,
].
More recently, a survey of XDR-TB cases during 2000-2004, in
this period 17,690 TB isolate, 20% were MDR and 2% were XDR.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv was first isolated in 1905, has
remained pathogenic and this strain is most widely used in
tuberculosis research. The complete annotated genome sequence
of H37Rv strain was published in 1998 []. CMP kinase is the
key enzyme in the nucleotide metabolism, which is connected
to the family of nucleoside monophosphate kinase (NMK) 
[].
Substrate specificity studied on recombinant human
UMP/CMP kinase (primidine nucleoside nomophosphate
kinase) has shown that UMP and CMP are far better substrates
than dCMP []. Bacterial cytidylate kinase or cytidine
monophosphate kinase (CMP kinase) catalyses the phosphoryl
transfer from ATP to CMP and dCMP, resulting in the
formation of nucleoside diphosphates. CMP kinase has been
shown to be necessary for bacterial growth in Streptococcus
pneumoniae []. 
The Staphylococcus aureus CMP kinase crystal
structure has been recently resolved []. In the protein
structure of Escherichia coli CMP kinase resembles those of other
NMP kinases sharing common features such as a central fivestranded
β-sheet connected by α-helices, a fingerprint sequence
of Glu-x-x-Gly-x-Gly-Lys (P-loop), and an anion hole in the
central cavity for substrate binding []. However, E. coli CMP
kinase contains an insertion of 40 residues and a short LID
domain, differing from other NMP kinases []. These
differences could allow the rational design of drugs specific for
CMP kinase of pathogenic bacteria, such as M. tuberculosis.
However, there is no information available, which describes the
structural properties of CMP kinase from M. tuberculosis. In this
work, we re-construct the structure of CMPK from Mtb H37Rv
in order to elucidate the structural properties. We acquire better
result in comparison to previous study.

Methodology
Sequence Retrieval and Template selection:
The protein sequence of cytidylate kinase enzyme of
“Mycobacterium tuberculosis” was retrieved from NCBI database
(National Center for Biotechnology Information) which have
230 amino acid residues, accession number is NP_216228 for
modeling. Comparative modeling usually starts by searching
the PDB (Protein Data Bank) of known protein structure using
the target sequence as a query. This search is generally done by
comparing the target sequence with the sequence of each of the
structure in the database. The protein sequence of MbtCMPK
worked as a target sequence. For identification of suitable
template BLASTp was performed against PDB, select templates
for generating the putative 3D structures.

Comparative Modeling:
The method of comparative modeling requires identification of
homologous sequences with known structure. The first step of
comparative modeling scanning and selection of template
protein structure using the target sequence as the query 
[].
BLASTp generally used for template selection procedure 
[].
The BLAST results outputted potential template for modeling is
3R20, the high degree of primary sequence identity (71.40%)
between MtCMPK (target) and Mycobacterium smegmatis
indicates that this crystallographic structure was good model to
be used as template for MtCMPK enzyme. The alignment of the
MtCMPK target and Mycobacterium smegmatis CMPK is shown
in (). A total of 5 models were generated using program
MODELLER 9v10 []. MODELLER implements comparative
protein modeling by satisfaction of spatial restraints.

Analysis of the model:
Modeller generated the several models for the same target, the
best model can be selected for further analysis. We evaluated
the model with the lowest value of the Modeller objective
function and PROCHECK statistics. The overall stereochemical
quality of the models for MtCMPK enzyme using
Ramachandran's plot calculation computed with PROCHECK
[] program, available on NIH (National Institute of Health)
server (http://nihserver.mbi.ucla.edu/SAVES_3/Procheck/)
and the final structure was subsequently checked by VERIFY-
3D graph available at NIH server
(http://nihserver.mbi.ucla.edu/SAVES_3/Verify_3D/). The
summarized data of all five models is in  (see
supplementary material).

Visualization and structural analysis:
Visualization and Structural analysis of final protein model
were carried out with Visual Molecular Dynamics (VMD) 
[]
software. Structural alignment and RMSD calculation with
several models and template were carried out with VMD.

Active site analysis:
After the final model was build, the possible deep cleft active
sites of MtbCMPK were explored applying CASTp program
[]. 
(http://sts.bioengr.uic.edu/castp)

Physiochemical characterization:
For physiochemical characterization, theoretical pI (isoelectric
point), molecular weight, -R and +R (total number of positive
and negative residue), EI (extinction coefficient), II (insstability
index), AI (aliphatic index), and GRAVY (grand average
hydropathy) were computed using the Expasy's ProtParam
server for set of proteins
(http://us.expasy.org./tools/protparam.html). The results are
showing in  (see supplementary material).

Functional characterization:
CYC_REC (http://sunl.softberry.com/berry.phtml?topic) was
used to locate “SS bond” between the pair of cystein residue, if
present. The tool yields position of cystein residue, total
number of cysteins present and pattern, if present of pairs in the
protein sequence as output  (see supplementary
material).

Secondary structure prediction:
ProFunc was employed for calculating the secondary structure
features of cytidylate kinase protein sequence [].

Submission of the modeled protein in protein model database (PMDB):
The model generated of Mycobacterium tuberculosis cytidylate
kinase protein was successfully submitted in Protein model
database without any stereochemical errors. The submitted
model can be accessed via their PMID: PM00779121.

Results &amp; Discussion
Model building, refinement and evaluation:
In earlier work, molecular modeling and dynamic studies of
MtCMPK H37Rv have been done. In this study, the primary
sequence identity between MtCMPK (target) and E.coli CMPK
indicates that ~40% sequence identity (). Medium
accuracy model, obtained with a template-target sequence
identity of 30-50% []. The sequence analysis result based on
BLASTp, there were 220 amino acids only 88 amino acids had
been matched. A total 1000 models had been generated for each
binary complex and the final model selected based on
MODELLER objective function []

In the current research work, experimental structure of
cytidylate kinase of Mycobacterium tuberculosis is not yet
available in PDB (Protein Data Bank), comparative modeling
approach was used in order to derive their structure. BLAST
scanning results had shown higher similarity with
crystallographic structure of 3R20, while the template was
selected on the basis of higher sequence identity. It shows
71.40% sequence identity, with 167 conserved residue and
83.30% sequence similarity. Comparative modeling predicts the
3-D structure of cytidylate kinase model of given protein
sequence (target), based primarily on this alignment to the
template. The model was also checked for phi and psi torsion
angles using the Ramachandran plots. Altogether more than
90% of the residues were found to be in favored and allowed
regions, which validate the quality of homology models. The
modeled structures were also validated by other structure
verification server such as Verify 3D. Verify 3D assigned a 3D-
1D score of &gt;0.2 and residue result is 96.10%. Visualization and
analysis of the model using Visual Molecular Dynamics (VMD)
reveals that there are no steric hindrances between the residue
and thus modeled structure are stable. Structure-structure
superimposition was done in order to calculate Root Mean
Square Deviation (RMSD) between the target and template
sequence. RMSD value is 0.1929 nm. This implies good quality
of the modeled structure. We represent modeled structure of
cytidylate kinase ().

Physiochemical characterization:
The physiochemical properties videlicet, theoretical isoelectric
point (Ip), molecular weight, total number of positive and
negative residues, extinnction coefficient, instability index,
aliphatic index, grand average hydropathy (GRAVY) were
calculated using the Expasy's ProtParam tool in  (see
supplementary material). The calculated pI value for cytidylate
kinase indicated their acidic nature. The computed pI will be
helpful for developing buffer system for purification by
isoelectric focusing method. An extinction coefficient value for
the cytidylate kinase protein at 280 nm is 5960 M-1cm-1. On the
basis of instability index, protein is unstable due to instability
index is greater than 40. The aliphatic index (AI) which is
defined as the relative volume of a protein occupied by
aliphatic side chain is regarded as the positive factor for the
increase of thermal stability of the protein. The very high
aliphatic index of cytidylate kinase protein which indicates that
protein may be stable for a wide range of temperature. The
GRAVY index of protein which indicate no interaction with
water because protein has positive score.

Functional characterization:
The results of primary analysis suggest that the Mycobacterium
tuberculosis cytidylate kinase under study was hydrophobic in
nature. As percentage of Cysteine (C) is very low in cytidylate
kinase under study, it have not disulphide bond linkages
indicated by CYS_REC (Cys_81, score = -2.2). The extensive
hydrogen bonding may provide stability to this protein in
absence of disulphide bonds. Cytidylate kinase have high
percentage of alanine (A), leucine (L), glutamic acid (E). As
these amino acids have high-helical forming propensities, alpha
helix and beeta strands are dominant in that protein. Ten alphahelices
surround the beta-ribbon structure. The helical region
are composed of the residue 19-30, 38-51, 58-66, 89-91, 95-105,
109-120, 134-138, 153-167, 173-189 and 211-225. The seven betaribbon
are composed residues 7-12, 33-37, 69-75, 78-84, 127-132,
145-150 and 202-206. In (), it shows a schematic
drawing of the MtCMPK consist of 230 amino acid with a
predicted molecular mass of 24,177.29 Da and a theoretical pI
value of 5.05.

Submission of modeled proteins in PMDB:
The modeled structure of cytidylate kinase from Mycobacterium
tuberculosis successfully deposit in Protein Model Database
(PMDB). The submitted structure of protein is PMDB ID:
PM0079121.

Conclusion
In this study, we have constructed a 3-D model of cytidylate
kinase from Mycobacterium tuberculosis, using the comparative
modeling approach. Different parameters such as isoelectric
point, molecular weight, total number of positive and negative
residue, extinction coefficient, instability index, aliphatic index
and grand average hydropathy (GRAVY) were computed for
this protein in order to determine their physiochemical
characteristics. In cytidylate kinase was found very low
percentage in amino acid cysteine, and therefore lack presence
of Disulphide Bridge as also inferred from analysis of cys_res
result. In the absent of disulphide bond, extensive hydrogen
bonding is believed to be responsible for stability of the protein.
Polarity studies using CLC protein work bench tool confirmed
cytidylate kinase to be hydrophobic in nature. Secondary
structure analysis predicts alpha-helices are dominant in the
protein. The modeled structure can be accessed through protein
modeled database PMDB via there PMID. This structure will
serve as a cornerstone for functional analysis through
experimentally derived crystal structure.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are grateful to the Department of Bioscience, Shri
Ram College, Muzaffarnagar for providing the necessary
facilities. Authors are grateful to Bioinformation editorial board
members and Bioinformation team of reviewers who have
helped to bring quality to this manuscript. We also thank to Mr.
Ravi datta sharma and Vibha for their generously support and
encouragement.

Citation:Verma &amp; Singh, Bioinformation 9(13): 680-684 (2013)

Sequence Alignment of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
(NP_216228) with Mycobacterium smegmatis (PDB ID: 3R20). The
alignment was performed using EMBOSS.

Sequence Alignment for EcCMPK and MtCMPK. The
sequence identity between EcCMPK and MtCMPK is ~40%.

Ramachandran Plot of the cytidylate kinase
(Mycobacterium tuberculosis) by PROCHECK

Predicted protein structure of cytidylate kinase
(Mycobacterium tuberculosis)

