Parkinson's disease is generally associated with aging, i.e.
elderly individuals. We are gaining many deep insights into
neuropathogenesis in Parkinson's disease and there are many
publications on this topic; we briefly mention a few as they
relate to the increasingly studied miRNAs. Parkinson's disease
results from protein inclusions or Lewy bodies and destruction
of (mid-brain) substantia nigra pars compacta neurons that are
dopaminergic. A novel approach to investigate molecular
processes in human diseases as well as in normal control and
function is through the study of miRNAs. miRNAs are
increasingly associated with many diseases and in Parkinson's
disease [,
].

Up-regulation, beige Regulation, purple Co-expression, brown
Physical Interaction, turquoise dotted Predicted Protein
Interaction, and mauve dotted Predicted TFactor Regulation
(GenePro SA Biosciences, http://www.sabiosciences.com/).

Additional studies used a bioinformatics and computational
approach to the analysis of gene expression using the Gene
Expression Omnibus database at NIH []. They then predicated
Parkinson's disease associated transcription factors, miRNAs,
and identified 11 genes that include a new transcription factor,
N-Myc down-regulated gene 1 (NDRG1) and junction
plakoglobin (JUP).In Parkinson's disease, NDRG1 is regulated
by miRNA-133 [].

miRNA profile analysis indicated miR-34b and miR-34c
decreased expression. These changes were found in the
substantia nigra, frontal cortex, cerebellum, and amygdala. In
aneuroblastoma cell culture line, depletion of miR-34b or miR-
34c resulted in cell death. In addition, depletion of these
miRNAs resulted in decreased expression of Parkin or
parkinson protein 2 (Park2) and parkinson protein 7 (DJ1).
These cellular changes appear to result in mitochondrial
dysfunction in Parkinson's disease [].

 shows an interactive network diagram of input
neighbors to Park2 (parkin) and  shows an interactive
network diagram of input proteins from  (Park2, CASK,
SNCAIP, HSPA4, STUB1, SIM2, CBL, LIMK1, PACRG, SEPT5,
PSMA7, and BAG5). It is left as a puzzle for the interested
reader to identify the various genes and their functions in the
figures [–].

There are no financial conflicts.

Citation:Shapshak, Bioinformation 9(8): 381-382 (2013)

Network of input protein (Park2) with immediate
interactive proteins. In this figure, line-colors and various
interactions with other genes are red Down-regulation, green
Up-regulation, beige Regulation, purple Co-expression, brown
Physical Interaction, turquoise dotted Predicted Protein
Interaction, and mauve dotted Predicted TFactor Regulation
(GenePro SA Biosciences, http://www.sabiosciences.com/).

Network of input proteins from 
(Park2,
CASK, SNCAIP, HSPA4, STUB1, SIM2, CBL, LIMK1, PACRG,
SEPT5, PSMA7, BAG5) and showing additional neighbors of
these proteins (up to 100 total). In this figure, line-colors and
various interactions with other genes are red Down-regulation,
green Up-regulation, beige Regulation, purple Co-expression,
brown Physical Interaction, turquoise dotted Predicted Protein
Interaction, and mauve dotted Predicted TFactor Regulation (5-
GenePro SA Biosciences, http://www.sabiosciences.com/).

