Background
The genome information from humans to microorganisms is rapidly increasing
in the 21st century. An integrated genome database provides a natural index for
molecular biology and information for understanding biological data. To
increase the importance of genome database, the various databases and
browsers have been constructed []. The GRAMENE
(http://www.gramene.org/) 
browses assembled genomes for Oryza sativa, using
genomes browser []. 
The National Center for Biotechnology Information
(NCBI, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) provides analysis and retrieval resources
for the data in GenBank, and also other biological data, made available through
the NCBI Web site []. The Brassica rapa Genome Project
(http://www.brassica-rapa.org/) provides the genome information for Chinese
cabbage Brassica rapa using genome map browser []. In Korea, Web-based
genomic databases have been developed with a knowledge-based approach for
functional gene annotation, gene data mining, and genomic sequencing 
[]. The
NABIC (http://nabic.naas.go.kr/) has constructed agricultural biology-based
infrastructure and provided comprehensive database with agricultural
biotechnology. Major functions are focused on biotechnology development for
agricultural plants with biotechnology information [].

Methodology
Data collection
The biotechnology information on agricultural crops was collected from the
International Rice Genome Sequencing Program
(http://rgp.dna.affrc.go.jp/IRGSP/), the Korean rice genome project from the
National Academy of Agricultural Science (http://www.naas.go.kr), the
Chinese cabbage project (http://www.brassica-rapa.org/BGP/), The
Arabidopsis Information Resource (http://www.arabidopsis.org/), and from
universities and various institutes in Korea. In addition, genome information
was accumulated and collected through several collaborative institutes and
public international institutes.

Database design
The integrated biotechnology database is designed to provide information on
the genome of agricultural crops. The database has two major categories. ‘Over
view‘ panel allows the user to identify the genome of interest. ‘Detailed view’
panel is designed for the detailed annotated information at the chromosome.
The platform was developed using MYSQL, commonly available network
protocols such as Hypertext Transfer Protocol and JAVA language, and the
data was stored in an Oracle relational database management system (Oracle
Database 10g, Redwood, CA, USA, http://www.oracle.com/).

Results and Discussion
The NABIC has provided resources for bioinformatics through the
development of several bioinformatics tools and the construction of integrated
genome information systems. It can be accessed using a web-based graphical
interface, and anonymous users can query and browse the data using various
functions. The Web based relational database provides genome information
from the web site (http://ensembl.naas.go.kr/Rice/) and includes not only
simple text information on individual genome sequences, but also analysis
tables and genetic information for annotation.

Genome browser for Web based relational database
The genome database provides a bioinformatics framework to study biological
function based on genomic sequences of rice, Arabidopsis, and Chinese
cabbage. The database is a source of annotation for genome sequences,
physical maps, sequence comparison, and gene prediction. The database has
developed a portable system, capable of handling very large genomes and
associated requirements for sequence analysis. To achieve scalability and
consistency of annotation, we developed a browser based on a relational
database for rice, Chinese cabbage, and microbes. To advance genome
research, we constructed an integrated genome browser database for sequence
analysis of rice (Oryza sativa), Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), and
Chinese cabbage (Brassica rapa) genomes. The genome browser database
provides annotated genome information from 803,607; 201,419; and 34,797
records mapped to rice, Arabidopsis, and Chinese cabbage, respectively.

The rice browser provides specific genome analysis through two different view
panels (). This overview panel (accessible by clicking) shows the
location of markers and genes. The user can access information about
individual genes along with functional annotation within the entire
chromosome. The detailed view panel shows genomic sequence features, and
the chromosome bar depicts the chromosome banding region for selection. In
the comparative genome analysis between Arabidopsis and Brassica rapa
genomes, users can obtain new gene information resulting from comparative
genomics methods and identify missing regions within a single genome.

The NABIC was established in 2002 with the main objective of analyzing
genome information of agricultural crops, and provides related services to
professional genomic research institutes and societies. The Web based
relational database provides genome information including specific gene
sequences, genome projects, gene identification numbers, gene location, and
genetic information tables for annotation in agricultural plants. In the future,
NABIC will provide a web service to easily construct bioinformatics
workflows and pipelines combining two or more instructions to solve complex
biological tasks such as protein function prediction, genome annotation and
system biology.

This study was conducted with support from the Research Program for
Agricultural Science &amp; Technology Development (Project No. PJ006651 and
PJ006758), National Academy of Agricultural Science, Rural Development
Administration, Republic of Korea.

Citation:Kim et al, Bioinformation 6(6): 246-247 (2011)

Screenshot of the two information view panel for rice. This window has a zoom function and pull-down menus to allow users to select the features
displayed. Floating menus (not shown) allow users to access linked windows with additional information.

