Background
The “oil drop” model proposed by Kauzmann 
[] suggested the protein
molecule to be treated as oil drop in hydrophobic environment directing the
hydrophobic residues toward the central part of protein body with simultaneous
exposure of hydrophilic residues on the protein surface 
[]. The model applied
here uses the 3-D Gauss function as the function expressing the distribution of
hydrophobic interaction in protein body. The highest concentration of
hydrophobic interaction is expected in central part of protein body, as it is for
Gauss function, which decreases towards the surface reaching zero ( or close to
zero) hydrophobicity level, according to its bell-shaped form. The accordance
of hydrophobic interaction in protein with the idealized distribution is shown,
in contrast to the electrostatic interactions distribution, which appeared to
represent the random distribution.

Methodology
Data
The protein 2I5M was selected to demonstrate the example revealing the
differences between distributions of electrostatic, vdW-type and hydrophobic
interactions []. 
It is the protein of length 66 amino acid residues, which is
participating in gene regulation processes. This protein represents bacterial cold
shock proteins (Csp) which are widely used as models for the experimental and
computational analysis of protein stability. The 2I5M is the mutant A46K and
S48R, produced to reveal the particular role in structure stabilization of the
original protein (1CSB).

Model
The tertiary structure of the protein is assumed to include a hydrophobic core
and involve optimization of all other non-bonding interactions (electrostatic,
van der Waals and torsion potential). In contrast to many force fields
incorporating the hydrophobic interaction as the component of internal force
field, the presence of an external force field is expressed via a threedimensional
Gauss function [] 
(see ).
The value of the Gauss function at any point within the protein body can be
treated as the idealized hydrophobicity density, determining the structure of the
protein's hydrophobic core.

According to the “fuzzy oil drop” model, theoretical hydrophobicity can be
calculated with the use of the Gauss function, assuming that the molecule's
geometric center coincides with the origin of the coordinate system. Empirical
hydrophobicity distribution is given by Levitt's function 
[] (see
). Further normalization of both
distributions enables quantitative comparison (observed vs. theoretical values),
which in turn, allows us to analyze the emerging discrepancies.

Kullback-Leibler information entropy
The agreement between the idealized and observed hydrophobicity distribution
is measured according to the Kullback-Leibler relative (divergence) entropy
[], 
which quantifies the distance between both distributions. The distance
between the observed and theoretical distribution (O/T) was calculated in this
study. Since this value can only be interpreted in comparison to other potential
solutions, random distribution of hydrophobicity (O/R) was also estimated by
assigning equal probability of hydrophobicity to each amino acid (Rj equal to
1/N, where N is the number of amino acids) The relation O/T &lt; O/R was taken
as evidence of non-random distribution, approximating theoretical values (see
). 
The calculation O/T and O/R for
hydrophobic, electrostatic and vdW interactions is presented in this paper.

Nonbonding interactions
In order to determine the distribution of non-hydrophobic (i.e. electrostatic and
van der Waals) interactions, structures derived from PDB were processed using
an energy optimization algorithm to eliminate any local collisions. Electrostatic
and van der Waals forces (calculated for each atom separately) were then
aggregated over whole amino acids, mimicking the distribution of hydrophobic
interactions. The distribution of non-bonding interaction was calculated using
Gromacs force field applying the group procedure [,
,
,
,
]. Each
amino acid on each side of the protein molecule was sequentially defined as a
group, to calculate its interaction with the rest of the protein molecule.

Discussion
Distribution of nonbinding interactions in proteins
The characteristics of hydrophobic, electrostatic and vdW interaction is shown
in Table 1(see ). The results expressing the relation
O/T &lt; O/R treated as accordant with assumed “fuzzy oil drop” model are given
in bold. Good accordance between the observed and theoretical distribution of
hydrophobic interaction can be recognized interpreting the values shown in Table 1
(see Supplementary material). The random coil character was
recognized for electrostatic interaction. The “fuzzy oil drop” structure for the
vdW interactions has been found for this protein. The graphic presentation of
the results is shown in .

Conclusion
It should be noted that only one protein was presented in this study although
the larger group of proteins was presented elsewhere 
[]. It was shown that
the accordance of vdW interaction is observed rather rarely, although no
protein has been shown to represent other than random distribution for
electrostatic interaction. These observations which can be extended to larger
number of proteins [,
] suggest that the optimization procedure applied for
pair-wise interaction is proper only for electrostatic interaction (and vdW
interaction). The result of such optimization produces the structure of low
energy (large stabilization) independently on the localization in the protein
body. The optimization of hydrophobic interaction should be treated in
different way. This optimization shall be oriented to fit the expected
hydrophobic interaction accordant with 3-D Gauss function. The pair-wise
interaction for this type of interaction produces different than expected
interaction distribution. Sample folding simulations acknowledging the
presence of an external field (described by a 3D Gauss function which steers
the process towards the generation of a hydrophobic core) were conducted for
BPTI [], 
lysozyme [] and T0215 
[]. Similar computations involving the
presence of a ligand were performed for human hemoglobin 
[] and
ribonuclease []. 
The ligand was intended to affect the folding process in such
a way, as to ensure the creation of a suitable binding pocket. The influence of
the external environment (the cellular membrane) upon the dynamic properties
of transmembrane proteins was verified with the use of the “fuzzy oil drop”
model []. 
The applicability of “fuzzy oil drop” model to mutation influence
on the structure of antifreeze proteins is presented elsewhere 
[].

The “fuzzy oil drop” model applied for the identification of ligand binding sites
[] 
and active sites in hydrolases [] yields insights into the properties of
individual proteins. Deformations in the structure of the hydrophobic core
resulting from interaction with external molecules can be used to identify
binding sites (associated with areas of biological activity). Liang MP et al.
(2003) further elaborated this issue in a comparative study of various software
packages used for identification of ligand binding cavities, taking into account
their efficiency and correctness of results []. A similar comparative analysis
of several packages WebFEATURE [], 
SuMo [], ConSurf 
[], CASTp
[,
], 
PASS [] and QSiteFinder 
[] using methods based on the “fuzzy
oil drop” model, can be found elsewhere []. The 3-D Gauss function
introduced to represent the structure of hydrophobic core is able to describe
only the static form of protein molecule. However the dynamics of protein
structure plays substantial and critical role in respect to its biological function.
This is why the dynamic form of the 3-D Gauss function of different shapes
even being far in respect to the regular ordered form of 3-D Gauss function is
planned to be applied for simulation of dynamic forms of protein. The
structural dynamics of a protein molecule seems to be the effect of external
force field deformation. The source of this deformation is the influence of
molecules present in close neighbourhood of that protein molecule. Simulation
of structural changes of protein molecule as the effect of external force field
deformation is under consideration.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The work was financially supported by Jagiellonian University − Medical
College − project K/ZDS/001531. We would also like to thank Piotr
Nowakowski from ACC CYFRONET AGH for proofreading the document.

Citation:Marchewka et al, Bioinformation 6(8): 300-302 (2011)

Distribution of van der Waals, electrostatic and hydrophobic
interactions (top, middle and bottom respectively) in the 2I5M molecule. Dark
blue line indicates theoretical distribution (accordant with the 3D Gauss
function); pink line shows actual distribution of hydrophobicity in 2I5M;
yellow line corresponds to random distribution.

