Background
Malaria is a common and life-threatening disease in many tropical and
subtropical areas. Five species of the plasmodium parasite can infect humans:
the most serious forms of the disease are caused by P. falciparum. Malaria
caused by P. vivax, P. ovale and P. malariae causes milder disease in humans
that is not generally fatal. A fifth species, P. knowlesi, is a zoonosis that causes
malaria in macaques but can also infect humans. P. falciparum is the most
dangerous of these infections as P. falciparum (or malignant) malaria has the
highest rates of complications and mortality. The closest relative of P.
falciparum is P. reichenowi, a parasite of chimpanzees. P. falciparum and P.
reichenowi are not closely related to the other Plasmodium species that
parasitize humans [,
]. 
It appears that P. reichenowi was the ancestor of P.
falciparum. P. cynomolgi, which infects macaque monkeys, is very closely
related to P. vivax and shares the characteristics of hypnozoites, relapse
parasitemias, reticulocyte specificity and caveolae vesicular complexes in the
infected erythrocyte membrane [,
]. The circumsporozoite (CS) protein is the
most abundant protein on the surface of malaria sporozoites in the early 1980s
[]. 
It is a multifunctional molecule that plays a crucial role at various points of
the malaria life cycle. This abundant protein forms a dense coat on the
circumsporozoite, the form of the parasite that is released into the human
bloodstream upon the bite of a mosquito []. The single-copy CSP gene
encoding the highly immunogenic CSP surface antigen expressed at the
parasite’s sporozoite stage has proven to be a useful marker for defining the
phylogenetic relationship of Plasmodium species 
[]. The merozoite surface
protein 1 (MSP-1) of Plasmodium plays an important role in erythrocyte
invasion by the merozoite and is another potential malaria vaccine candidate
antigen [], 
which has been characterized from P. vivax, P. cynomolgi, P.
knowlesi, P. falciparum and P. yoelii 
[,
]. In this study, the evolutionary
relationships of two single-copy proteins, circumsporozoite protein and
merozoite surface protein-1 of malaria parasite was examined because these
proteins are potential malaria vaccine for pre-erythocytic stage. This analysis
confirms the CS protein of P. falsiperum and P. reichenowi, P. yoelli and P.
berghei, P. coatneyi and P. Knowlesi demonstrates a close relationship and this
may also show similar function and structure among them. The MSP-1 protein
of P. cynomolgi and P. knowlesi are very much similar and demonstrates close
relationship with P. falsiparum.

Methodology
The protein sequences of CSP and MSP-1 of various malarial parasites were
taken from GenBank Database of NCBI (National Center for Biotechnology
Information). All the sequences were taken in their FASTA format. These
sequences have been listed in (see 
).

Sequence analysis
Amino acid sequence alignments of these CS and MSP-1 proteins for
phylogenetic analysis were generated using Clustal W server 
[] and the data
obtained was analyzed to determine the similarity between the protein
sequences of different Plasmodium species. For multiple sequence alignments,
gap open penalty was -7 and gap extension penalty was -1. BLOSUM weight
matrix was used for substitution scoring [,
]. Hydrophilic gap penalties
were used to increase the chances of a gap within a run (5 or more residues) of
hydrophilic amino acids; these are likely to be loop or random coil regions
where gaps are more common. BioEdit 7.0.2 
[] was also used to perform the
protein sequence alignment to determine the number of conserved sites,
parsimony info sites, variable sites and singleton sites.

Determination of the Entropy and hydrophobicity
BioEdit 7.0.2 was used to determine the entropy plot and hydrophobicity
values of CS and MSP-1 proteins. From information theory, Entropy can be
defined as a measure of the unpredictable nature of a set of possible elements.
The higher level of variation within the set, higher the entropy. Entropy is then
calculated as given in . The information content of a
position l, then, is defined as a decrease in uncertainty or entropy at that
position. As an alignment improves in quality, the entropy at each position
(especially conserved regions) should decrease. This gives a measure of
uncertainty at each position relative to other positions. Maximum total
uncertainty will be defined by the maximum number of different characters
found in a column. The mean hydrophobicity value was plotted for the middle
residue of the window. Eisenberg method 
[] and Kyte Doolittle method 
[]
were used to plot hydrophobic moment profile with a window size of 13
residues having six residues on either side of the current residue and rotation
angle, θ =100 degrees. (see )

Phylogenetic Analysis
Phylogenetic and molecular evolutionary analysis was conducted using MEGA
version 4.0 []. 
The multiple alignments of sequences of CS and MSP-1
proteins were used to create phylogenetic trees. The evolutionary history was
inferred using the Neighbour-Joining method 
[]. All the characters were
given equal weights. The bootstrap consensus tree inferred from 10000
replicates was taken to represent the evolutionary history of the taxa analyzed
[]. 
Branches corresponding to partitions reproduced in less than 50%
bootstrap replicates were collapsed. The percentage of replicate trees in which
the associated taxa clustered together in the bootstrap test (1000 replicates) is
shown next to the branches. The tree is drawn to scale, with branch lengths in
the same units as those of the evolutionary distances used to infer the
phylogenetic tree. The evolutionary distances were computed using the poisson
correction method and are in the units of the number of amino acid
substitutions per site. All positions containing gaps and missing data were
eliminated from the dataset (Complete deletion option). Phylogenetic analysis
was conducted in MEGA4.

Results and Discussion
Multiple Sequence Alignment
In the case of CS protein, the protein resulted
into 446 positions out of which 297 are parsimony informative, 378 are
variable sites, and conserved sites were 36 and 71 singleton sites. The most
frequent amino acid of these sequences are Aparagine, Alanine, Glycine,
Proline, Aspartic acid, Lysine, Glutamine and its composition observed 15.46,
13.34, 11.19, 10.07, 6.37, 5.79, 5.28 respectively. MSA of MSP-1 protein
resulted into 465 positions out of which 25 are parsimony informative, 383 are
variable sites, and conserved sites were 20 and 291 singleton sites. By
statistical analysis of multiple aligned sequences it is observed that Lysin,
Glutamic acid, Lucine, Serine, Asparagine, Alanine, Isolucine, Glutamine,
Aspartic acid are the most frequently present amino acids with frequency
percentage of 11.04, 9.76, 8.89, 7.21, 6.73, 6.26, 6.06, 5.86, 5.05 respectively.

Conserved Domain Search
A conserved domain region search in CS protein from amino acid 220-260,
287-320, 387-400 region and we have found four conserved regions from
amino acid positions 90-100, 130-190, 240-260, 360-380 in MSP-1 protein
sequences. This conservation has already been upheld by minimal entropy
shown by respective positions of the previous half of the MSA results.

Entropy Plot of CS proteins and MSP-1 Proteins
An entropy plot, measure of the lack of the information content and the amount
of variability, was generated for all the aligned positions. The plot shows that
entropy rarely touches a scale of 1, showing minimal entropy at several
positions subjected to previous half of the protein sequences, which is a sign of
higher similarities in the region. The lower entropy value implies that the
randomness of these amino acid residues in that particular column of MSA
profile is less and hence those are the most conserved region. These results
have already been upheld by finding conserved regions. According to entropy
plot the conserved region in CS proteins () to be found from 220-260,
287-320 and 387-400 amino acid positions and in MSP-1 proteins ()
the conserved regions belongs from these regions: 90-100, 130-190, 240-260,
360-380 because entropy values of these amino acids are less than 1.

Hydrophobicity profile of CS proteins and MSP-1 proteins
A hydrophobicity profile plot shows that mean hydrophobicity of the protein
for most of the positions in all the species is below zero; occasionally it turns to
be positive. From the profile it is clear that the regions related to conserved
positions also have a characteristic of possessing residues in a balanced way
and the profile is always around zero value. However, the amino acid regions
from 135-200, 220-260, 360-400, 420-435 in CS proteins and 165-185, 240-
290, 330-390, 425-450 amino acid regions in MSP-1 proteins have lower
hydrophobicity, subjected to more conserved part of the protein 
(,
).

Phylogenetic Analysis of CS proteins and MSP−1 proteins
The phylogenetic trees were constructed by using Neighbour–joining method.
In the case of CS proteins the tree is divided into three different clades 
(). 
In the first clade, P. falsiperum shows very much similarity with P.
reichenowi and the bootstrap percentage of this similarity is 100. P. yoelli
shows similarity with P. berghei in a second clade of this tree with 100 boot
strap percentage. But in the third clade P. coatneyi shows very close
relationship between P. knowlesi with 100 boot strap percentage and these two
malaria parasites show similarity with P. vivax and the boot strap percentage of
this similarity is 100. Esmeralda Vargas-Serrato et al. 
[] study also shows
that these two species (P. coatneyi and P. Knowlesi) are very much similar.
The phylogenetic tree of MSP-1 proteins () demonstrates that P.
cynomolgi is highly similar with P. knowlesi and the boot strap percentage of
this similarity is 83. These two malarial parasites show similarity with P.
falsiparum with boot strap percentage of 99. P. yoelli appears with a totally
diverged branch from the main tree. The CS and MSP-1 proteins derived
phylogenetic trees reveal different topologies, conclusively showing that P.
coatneyi and P. knowlesi are evolutionarily closely related and these two
malaria parasites show similarity with P. vivax but in case of MSP 1 the P.
cynomolgi is highly similar with P. knowlesi and the boot strap percentage of
this similarity is 83. P. falsiparum shows very much similarity with these two
malarial parasites.

Conclusion
This study presents a comparative proteomics study and evolutionary analysis
of the CS and MSP-1 proteins based on molecular phylogeny across different
species of malaria parasite. According to this study we have concluded that CS
protein of P. coatneyi and P. knowlesis 
demonstrate a close relationship with P.
vivax and thus it may also show similarity in their structure and function. The
MSP-1 protein of P. cynomolgi and P. knowlesi is very much similar and
demonstrate close relationship with P. falsiparum.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Tripathi et al, Bioinformation 6(8): 320-323 (2011)

Entropy plot (CS protein). X-axis shows the positions of residues in
MSA profile and the Y-axis shows entropy scores for individual positions in
MSA profile. In this plot conserved regions in the profile are to be found from
220-260, 287-320 and 387-400 amino acid positions.

Entropy plot (MSP 1 protein). X-axis shows the positions of MSA
and the Y-axis shows entropy scores for individual positions in MSA. In this
plot conserved regions in the profile are to be found from 90-100, 130-190,
240-260 and 360-380 amino acid positions.

Hydrophobicity plot (CS protein). X-axis demonstrates the positions
of MSA profile and the Y-axis shows hydrophobicity scores for individual
positions in MSA profile. In this plot conserved regions in the profile are to be
found from 135-200, 220-260, 360-400 and 420-435 amino acid positions.

Hydrophobicity plot (MSP 1 protein). X-axis demonstrates the
positions of MSA profile and the Y-axis shows hydrophobicity scores for
individual positions in MSA profile. In this plot conserved regions in the
profile are to be found from 165-185, 240-290, 330-390 and 425-450 amino
acid positions.

Phylogenetic tree of CS Protein.

Phylogenetic tree of MSP-1 Protein.

