Background
In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the GAL1 gene  is one of the structural gene 
of the galactose pathway along with GAL7,  GAL10 and GAL2  
[,
]. 
These structural genes are regulated at the transcriptional level in response 
to Gal4p, Gal80p and Gal3p  []. The Gal4p acts as a transcriptional 
activator[]. 
Gal80p  acts as transcriptional repressor[]. Gal3p acts as a 
ligand sensor where it sequesters Gal80p in the cytoplasm
[]. As a result 
of this effect Gal4p becomes active and turns on the synthesis of GAL 
genes that metabolized the galactose [].

The Gal1p (galactokinase) plays an important role in galactose 
metabolism. It catalyzes the formation of galactose -1-phosphate from 
alpha –D-galactose,  an important step in galactose catabolism 
[,
]. 
Gal + ATP + kinase  =  Gal-1-P + ADP.

This enzyme is needed for inducible galactose uptake 
[]. It can also act 
as a weak transcriptional regulator in the absence of Gal3p  
[]. When 
grown on a medium, where galactose is present as a sole carbon source, 
null mutants for GAL1 are unable to metabolize galactose and grow  
[,
]. 
This protein shares a high similarity of 90% in amino acids with Gal3p 
[]. 
Addition of two amino acids (serine and alanine) at 165th position of  
Gal3p renders kinase activity to Gal3p  []. 
This enzyme is conserved from E. coli, S.cerevisiae, K. lactis to humans 
[].

There are two forms of Gal1p in humans, GALK1 and GALK2. Mutations 
in the GALK1 which is an ortholog of yeast Gal1p have been associated 
with a potentially lethal disease called Galactosemia II 
[]. It is a genetic 
metabolic disorder where organisms are unable to metabolize galactose. It 
is characterized by the accumulation of galactose and galactitol which 
results in formation of cataract []. 
This disease is rare and is associated with isolated gene pool  
[].  
Patients suffering from this disease must avoid intake of food which contains galactose 
[].

Therefore, we wanted to do comparative structural studies between the 
Gal1p proteins of  E. coli,  K. lactis  and  S.cerevisiae and extend it to 
humans to have a better understanding of Gal1p protein. Subsequently, we 
determined the putative functional site residues for Gal1p in order to find 
out which are the functional residues playing important role for the kinase 
activity of the protein in all the organisms mentioned above. Furthermore, 
through the use of protein-protein interaction tool, we determined the 
possible interacting proteins for the Gal1p in the whole genome of 
respective organisms. At last we have performed sequence and structure 
wise comparison to find out the evolutionary relationship of human 
GALK1 with that of E. coli, K. lactis and S.cerevisiae.

Methodology
Input file
The protein sequences of Gal1p from  S. cerevisiae,  K. lactis and  E. coli
were set as input for finding of sequence similarity. These sequences were 
furnished for 3D model development via swiss model and Esypred3D 
(modeller 6v2) software's.

The research work was divided in to following steps: (1) homology 
modeling of Gal1p proteins for  K. lactis  and E. coli. (2) Finding of 
interface amino acids pattern, required for protein-protein interaction 
between Gal1p and other nearby partners. (3) Detecting evolutionary
relationship among the Gal1p of  S. cerevisiae,  K. lactis and  E. coli  and 
assigning reference model for Gal1p of human via sequence and structure 
similarity finding. (4) Generating putative protein-protein interaction map 
among GAL proteins of  K. lactis,  S.cerevisiae and  E. coli  and estimate 
their interaction affinity.

Homology Modeling
The protein sequences of Gal1p from K. lactis and Ecoli were subjected to 
SWISS MODEL and EsyPred3D (Modeller 6v2) software's for homology 
modeling []. 
Then, Procheck was used to generate the ramachandran plot 
that determined the accuracy of the developed model of Gal1p. In addition, 
ProSA (
https://prosa.services.came.sbg.ac.at/prosa.php) was used to find 
the similarity with the known structured proteins from NMR and X ray 
experiments. The  
shows  details of homology modeling and 
Ramachandran plot analysis. Note  that the model structure will be 
generated only when the sequence similarity will be more then 30%.

Model Optimization
The developed model was further refined by calculation of free energy of 
the system and further minimized via GROMOS96 software, incorporated 
in Swiss Pdb Viewer. Here our goal is to find the optimized model 
structure of the Gal1p protein. Energy minimization optimizes all the 
distorted geometries of the protein obtained after the protein modeling. It 
follows some basic steps: (1) firstly, it prepared the query protein as input 
for energy minimization, (2) Secondly, the number of cycles was set to 200 
for Steepest Descent. All parameters for SD were set to be default, (3) The 
bonds, angle, torsion, improper, non bonded and electrostatic bonds were 
selected for molecular dynamics movement, (4) It moved the query protein 
atoms in all possible directions to release internal constraints. During the 
energy minimization step, some times protonation of atoms also takes 
place, (5) Next, It displaced the sidechains by gently pushing away atoms 
that clash, hence removing steric hindrances and (6) Finally, the repaired 
geometry was obtained.

Protein functional sites
The model structures of Gal1p from K. lactis and 
E. coli were subjected to functional site prediction 
servers like PINTS, PROFUNC and QSITEFINDER. These servers predicted 
the active site residues domain for Gal1p.

Comparative genomics study
The amount of sequence and structure similarity among the Gal1p from S. 
cerevisiae, K. lactis and E. coli were determined. The sequence alignment 
was performed via BLAST. Furthermore, the structural similarities 
between Gal1p were estimated by the swiss pdb viewer software  via 
structure-structure superposition tool  []. The above comparative studies 
were extended to human Gal1p. We also used neighbor joining method to 
show the relationship of Human galactokinase with common prokaryotes 
and eukaryotes. In addition, Protein Interaction Network was generated for 
Gal1p from S. cerevisiae, K. lactis and E. coli via STRING (version 8.2). 
Additionally, protein-protein interaction affinity was measured by 
Patchdock software  []. Patchdock algorithm has three major stages: 
firstly, it computes the overall molecular surface of the protein molecule 
followed by finding of the geometric patches on the protein (concave, 
convex and flat surface pieces). Next,  the selection of best patches is 
performed which retain the “hot sopt” patches. Then these patches are 
matched with the patches from another query protein based on hybrid of 
the Geometric Hashing and Pose-Clustering matching techniques. Concave 
patches are matched with convex and flat patches with any type of patches. 
The bad complexes are discarded with unacceptable penetrations of the 
atoms of the receptor to the atoms  of the ligand. Finally, the remaining 
candidates are ranked according to a geometric shape complementarity 
score. Please refer  for overall methodology.

Results
The 3D model structures of Gal1p from Kluyveromyces lactis and E. coli
were generated by swiss model software and EsyPred3D (Modeller 6v2) 
via homology modeling (). We furnished the protein sequences of 
Gal1p through SWISS MODEL and EsyPred3D (Modeller 6v2) by using
default parameters.  The swiss model developed the 3D model structures of 
Gal1p proteins of  K. lactis and  E. coli  by using known galactokinase 
protein from  S.cerevisiae,  2AJ4 (chain B, sequence identity of 60.35%) 
and form human, 1WUU (chain A, sequence identity 42.22%) respectively 
(see ). On the other hand, EsyPred3D 
(Modeller 6v2) used same template proteins for model development but 
with different chains and sequence identities. The query sequence from K. 
lactis selected chain A of 2AJ4 with sequence identity of 55.10% and from 
E. coli  selected chain A of 1WUU, sequence identity of 42.5%  
(see ).

The quality of models was estimated by analysis of Ramachandran plot via 
procheck server. This server predicted the overall accuracy of the 
developed model.  The model for Gal1p of  K. lactis via swiss model 
showed  98.00% of the amino acid residues in favored (A,B,L)+ 
additionally allowed (a,b,l,p) regions  of the Ramachandran plot. On the 
other hand, model via Esypred3D showed 96.70% of the residues are in 
favored (A,B,L)+ additionally allowed (a,b,l,p) regions of the plot 
(). 
The number of bad contacts per 100 residues measured to be only one.  
Additionally, ProSA-Web server was used to major the model similarity 
with structures of known proteins from NMR and X ray experiments. This 
analysis  revealed that the modeled structures for Gal1p of K. lactis and E. 
coli occupied region of  X-ray predicted native protein structures of same 
size with Z score of -10.96 (Gal1p of K. lactis from swiss model software) 
(). 
In addition to this, the Gal1p of E. coli showed similarity to 
Xray determined structures of known proteins with Z score of -9.67. Models 
from EsyPred3D produced no significant hits form ProSA server  
(). 
Based on these analyses, we selected protein models from swiss model 
software for further studies ().

The models were further optimized by energy minimization via 
Gromos96. The Gal1p protein model of  K. lactis was stabilized from 
energy of -10939.251 KJ/mol to -18470.979 KJ/mol. In addition, the model 
of  E. coli Gal1p was stabilized from energy of -8056.374 to -15065.842 
KJ/mol. The DALI server provided  significant match for Gal1p from  K. 
lactis  with 2AJ4 (B) (Z score 59.6, RMSD=0.8A°) and E. coli with 
1WUU(A) (Z score 64.5, RMSD=0.6 A°).  The protein-protein structure 
similarity was estimated by the DALI server. It selected the same template 
proteins that matched with the Swiss model. Furthermore, the structures of 
Gal1p (Kinase enzyme) from (Modeled structure)  K. lactis  and  E. coli
were subjected to functional sites prediction serves like PINTS(24), 
PROFUNC(25) and Q-SITEFINDER(26) for finding of putative active 
sites residues. These servers predicted following active site residues in 
Gal1p of  E. coli R28, G124, S128, S129, S130, H35, D37, G171, D174 
and in Gal1p of K. lactis R43, E49, H50, D52, N201, D205, G153,G155, 
S157, S158, K252, G202  with significant match. The functional sites 
predicted by Q-SITEFINDER server also matched with the Profunc server 
(data not shown).

The sequence (by BLAST method) and structure (by swiss pdb viewer 
method) similarity have been estimated between the Gal1p proteins of 
S.cerevisiae, K. lactis and E. coli. 
The Gal1p from  S.cerevisiae, K. lactis 
and  E. coli did not show any nucleotide  sequence similarity with each 
other but the protein sequence produced significant sequence similarity 
with each other. The Gal1p protein of  S.cerevisiae produced sequence 
identity of 59% and e-value of 7e-175, score 596 with  Gal1p protein of 
K.lactis. However, in case of matching with  E. coli Gal1p the sequence 
identity is 27%, e-value 4e-21, score85.1 which is less then homology of 
Gal1p of  S.cerevisiae with Gal1p of  K.lactis.  Gal1p of  K. lactis  with 
Gal1p of E. coli produced sequence identity of 28 %, e-value 4e-18, score 
75.1. The protein sequence identity was also reflected by Dot matrix plot 
where among all Gal1p proteins, The Gal1p of S.cerevisiae and Gal1p of 
K. lactis are diagonally align with each other 
(). The comparative 
analysis when applied to human GalK1 shows that human Gal1p is closely 
related to E. coli Gal1p. It produced sequence identity of 46%, e-value 2e-
54, score 194 (see ).

We have done the structure-structure superposition by swiss pdb viewer 
and calculated the Root Mean Square Deviation (RMSD) value for finding
the structure similarity among Gal1p proteins.  Superposition of Gal1p of 
S. cerevisiae produced low RMSD with the Gal1p of K. lactis (RMSD = 
0.41A°) as compared to Gal1p of E. coli  (RMSD=  1.23  A°
) and between Gal1p of  K. lactis  &amp; Gal1p of  E. coli RMSD was 1.21 A° 
(Table 2 see ).  
These studies for Human Gal1p showed more similarity to E. coli. 
Superposition between Gal1p of Human with the Gal1p of E. coli 
produced low RMSD (RMSD = 0.52A°) as compared to 
Gal1p of  S.cerevisiae (RMSD= 1.21 A°) 
and Gal1p of  K. lactis (RMSD=1.2 A
°)  (Table 3 see ) We used 
neighbourjoining method to plot the evolutionary tree. Neighbour joining 
method also obtained the same result.  (). We have obtained the 
putative protein-protein interaction network for Gal1p proteins in 
S.cerevisiae,  K. lactis  and  E. coli via string (version 8.2) 
(http://string.embl.de/) software 
().

The D-galactose pathway is regulated by several proteins which are known 
to interact with each other and regulate the synthesis of galactose 
metabolizing enzyme.  The Gal1p may also interact with nearest proteins 
to carry out its function therefore we determined the affinity between the 
Gal1p with other GAL proteins present in the K. lactis, S.cerevisiae and  
E. coli.  In order to estimate the strength  of interaction affinity between the 
Gal1p and other Gal proteins within genome of S.cerevisiae, K. lactis and 
E. coli, we used patchdock software for protein-protein interaction study. 
The Gal1p of  S.cerevisiae produced greater affinity for its Gal4p protein 
with patch dock score 17350 as compared to its other Gal proteins (Table 4 
see ). 
On the other hand, Gal1p of  K. lactis 
produced greater affinity for its Gal80p with patch dock score 17312. The 
Gal1p of  E. coli showed greater interaction for Gal10p (galE) with 
patchdock score 16562 (Table 4 see ).The residues 
making interactions with Gal1p proteins are shown in 
. These 
selections are based on the good geometric shape complementarities 
between the proteins. Others with less complementarities are discarded.

Discussion and Conclusion
Gal1p is a Galactokinase enzyme which participates in Leloir pathway of 
D- Galactose metabolism. Here we have predicted the 3D structure of 
Gal1p of K. lactis and E. coli via comparative homology modeling method. 
The model was developed from SWISS MODEL software and further 
verified by Procheck and ProSA. This is the first report to determine the 
putative structure of Gal1p from K. lactis and E. coli. After, the structure, 
we predicts the functional residues and the putative interactive partners 
along with the strength of affinity. These studies will help in understanding 
the mechanism of action of Gal1p protein. At the same time, this 
information can be used in biotech industries where Gal proteins are used 
for protein production or designing some drugs. Our 3D model may help 
the biologist to understand the role of Gal1p in  K. lactis and  E. coli 
galactose pathway in a better way. Even we also deduced the comparative 
genomics study and confirmed that  S. cerevisiae and  K. lactis Gal1p are 
sharing the common features. Even human Gal1p and E. coli are showing a 
remarkable similarity. This surprising result is in par with other proteins in 
human which are more related to prokaryotes than eukaryotes like some of 
human mitochondrial proteins.

Furthermore, the functional site prediction in Gal1p of K. lactis and E. coli 
helped in protein-protein interaction analysis and provided information 
about the residues involved in mutual interaction with other GAL proteins 
within the genome of K. lactis and  E. coli. This study will help in 
improving the knowledge about the mechanism of GAL proteins 
interactions and may provide useful insight in the regulation of Galactose 
pathway. The above studies may be applied to Human Gal1p, where it can 
help in gaining useful insight into Galactosemia disease. The Model and 
functional site prediction may implicate the role of residues in sever 
condition of Galactosemia disease. This study can be utilized in the future 
for improving the knowledge against Galactosemia.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Ashwani sharma and Pushkar Malakar jointly conceived the idea and wrote 
the paper. Ashwani sharma kindly acknowledge Bioroutes life sciences and 
centre of Drug.Discovery.Research, NewEraProteomics for all support. 
Pushkar Malakar is very thankful to  Council of Scientific and Industrial 
Research (CSIR) for recipient of SRF (Senior Research Fellowship).

Citation:Sharma &amp; Malakar, Bioinformation 5(10): 422-429 (2011)

The overall methodology was divided in to following parts: PART 1: The Gal1p protein sequences from K. lactis and E. coli were furnished for 
putative model development via swiss model and EsyPre3D (Modeller6v2). The Gal1p 3D models were obtained and quality of models was assessed via 
Procheck and ProSA analysis. The verified model was optimized by energy minimization via GROMOS96. Furthermore, stabilized, energy minimized 
Gal1p model was obtained. The optimized GAL1p model was furnished  into functional sites prediction  servers such as PINTS, PROFUNC, 
QSITEFINDER for finding of putative interacting amino acid residues.  PART 2: Protein sequences for other GAL proteins from K. lactis  S.cerevisiae and
E. coli were subjected for the 3D models development via swiss model.  PART 3: Protein models of GAL1p and other GAL proteins from PART 1 and 
PART 2 were subjected to String 8.2 software to develop the protein-protein interaction network for Gal1p form  S. cerevesiae, K. lactis  and E. coli. 
PatchDock software was used to determine the protein-protein interaction affinity between Gal1p and other GAL proteins.

Modeled structure of Gal1p protein from K. lactis and E. coli.

ProSA web server analysis for our Modeled Gal1p structures from K. lactis and 
E. coli shows that the predicted structures are in zone of X ray 
sources with Z score of -10.96 and -9.67.

Dot matrix plot between) Gal1p of S.cerevisiae with Gal1p of K. lactis, 
Gal1p of K. lactis  with Gal1p of E. coli, and Gal1p of S.cerevisiae with 
Gal1p of E. coli.

Evolutionary tree analysis of Gal1p.

GAL1 protein interaction map in (a) S.cerevisiae and (b) 
K. lactis (c) E. coli 
obtained from String (version 8.2) software.

Protein-Protein interaction study between Gal1p protein with in the genome of 
S.cerevisiae, K. lactis and E. coli. (a) Gal1p make interaction 
with Gal4p with score of 17350 in S.cerevisiae,(b) Gal1p make interaction 
with Gal80p(3E1K) with score of 17312 in K. lactis and (c) GalK make 
interaction with GalE with score of 16562 in E. coli.

