Background
Cancer is one of the major causes of death across the
world. It is largely controllable disease and highly
susceptible to modulation by dietary factors.
Epidemiologic evidence suggests an association between
the consumption of fruits and vegetables with reduced
incidence of cancer [, ]. Over the years, numerous
bioactive compounds have been identified that contribute
to these beneficial health effects. Polyphenols are the most
abundant antioxidants in human diet and are widespread
constituents of fruits, vegetables, cereals and in beverages
such as tea, coffee and wine. Polyphenols are gaining
importance because of their various biological activities
such as anti­cancer [], anti-viral [], anti-inflammatory
[], anti-ulcer [] and 
anti-fungal [] along with their antioxidant
properties. As antioxidants, polyphenols may
protect cell constituents against oxidative damage.
Therefore, they can limit the risk of various degenerative
diseases associated with oxidative stress, such as
cardiovascular diseases, diabetes and cancer [,
]. In
complex biological systems, polyphenols exhibit several
additional properties which may be independent of
conventional antioxidant activities leading to novel
mechanism of interacting with cell signaling and
modulating several cell activities [,
].

Flavonoids are polyphenolic compounds which are
fundamental components of the human diet present as
constituents of flowering plants, particularly of food plants.
They are phenyl substituted chromones (benzopyran
derivatives) consisting of a 15-carbon basic skeleton (C6-
C3-C6). Several plants and spices containing flavonoid
derivatives have found application as disease preventive
and therapeutic agents in traditional medicine in Asia for
thousands of years []. Epidemiological investigations
and human clinical trials indicate that flavonoids have
important effects on cancer chemoprevention and
chemotherapy. Many mechanisms of action such as
antiproliferation, cell cycle arrest, induction of apoptosis
and differentiation, inhibition of angiogenesis, reduction of
oxidative damage and reversal of multidrug resistance or a
combination of these mechanisms have been identified
[]. Most of the biological activities are attributed to substitution of prenyl and hydroxyl groups present in the
flavonoid ring system [].

Breast cancer is the leading cause of cancer in women
worldwide, both in the developed and developing
countries. The breast cancer ranked second after cervix in
the developing countries []. It is well established that
estrogen modulates cell function. Studies have shown that
cell proliferation in breast cancer depends on levels of
estrogen and estrogen receptors especially in hormone
dependent breast cancer []. Hence the enzymes involved
in synthesis and regulation of estrogen becomes important
targets for breast cancer therapy. In steroidogenesis,
estrogen is synthesized from cholesterol as starting
molecule to androstenedione, a compound with androgenic
activity and finally converted into estrodiol or estrone by
regulation of three important enzymes, 3 βHSD, 17 βHSD
and Aromatase. Amongst all, aromatase ­ an enzyme of the
cytochrome P450 family is a very well considered and
important pharmacological target, particularly for the
treatment of breast cancer []. Natural polyphenolic
compounds such as flavones, flavonones, resveratrol, and
oleuropein are shown to be strong aromatase inhibitors
[], but inhibit to a lesser extent the other two enzymes
3βHSD and 17βHSD [,]. Abyssinones are prenylated
flavonoids isolated from plant Erythrina abyssinica. These
molecules have gained attention since abyssinone II []
reported to show aromatase inhibitory activity. We have
recently synthesized Abyssinone-I (2a), abyssinone-II (2c)
and related compounds and studied their anti-oxidant
properties [].

In the present study, we have screened a set of flavonones
and their respective chalcones () including
abyssinones for the cytotoxic effect in MCF-7 (breast
cancer) cell line. As these flavonoids are reported to be
effective aromatase inhibitors, docking studies were
carried out to screen potent molecules with high cytotoxic
effect as well as a good inhibition for the 3 βHSD
(E.C.1.1.1.145), 17 βHSD (E.C.1.1.1.62) and/or aromatase
(E.C.1.14.14.1) enzymes, since aromatase inhibitors are
target for new drug synthesis to treat hormone-dependent
cancers, in addition to breast cancer [].

Methodology
Chemicals
MTT [3­(4, 5­ dimethyl­thiazol­2­yl)­2, 5­diphenyl ­2Htetrazolium
bromide], Dimethyl sulfoxide, DMEM (D­
5648) medium from Sigma­Aldrich, Heat inactivated
serum from Gibco BRL, Antibiotic &amp; antimycotic solution
and other chemicals were purchased from Himedia, India.

Cell culture
MCF­7 human breast carcinoma cell line (Purchased from
NCCS, Pune, India) was maintained in DMEM medium
supplemented with 10% FBS and antibiotics solution at
37°C in ambient air with 5% CO2. The sub culturing was
done every 2­3 days. The flavonoids were dissolved in
dimethyl sulfoxide with serial dilution ranging from
2.5μM­100μM. MTT assay: Quantification of cell viability
was performed using the cleavage of MTT to a blue
colored complex (formazan), which is indicator for
mitochondrial succinate dehydrogenase activity in viable
cells []. Cells were seeded in 96 well plates,
supplemented with flavonoids of different concentration
and incubated for 24 hrs. After incubation 20 μl of 5 mg/ml
MTT dissolved in PBS was added to culture well and
further incubated for 4 hrs at 37°C. Supernatants were
removed and 200 μl of DMSO was added to each well. The
optical density was measured at 580 nm with molecular
Devices ELISA reader. Dose response curve were plotted
after converting the mean values in to percentages of
control response. Flavonoid doses resulting in 50%
inhibition of live cells were derived from plotted data.

In-silco analysis
Preparation of proteins
The Comparative Modeled structure of cytochrome P450
aromatase (Pdb code: 1TQA), modeled structure of 3
βHSD [] and crystal structure of 17 βHSD (Pdb code:
1FDT) was considered for docking studies. All the protein structures were prepared for docking by adding polar
hydrogen, except haem all hetero atoms removed and all
the bonds set as rigid using MGLTools 1.5.1.

Preparation of ligands
All the ligands were drawn; geometrically optimized using
ACD/ChemSketch 10.0 and energy minimized using The
Dundee PRODRG2 Server []. All the maximum allowed
torsions in the ligands were set as flexible.

Docking studies using AutoDock 4.0
Using MGLTools 1.5.1, a grid spacing of 0.374 Å with
126x126x126 points for all the proteins were prepared.
Docking for 100 number of GA runs was carried out using
Lamarckian Genetic Algorithm (LGA) and all other
parameters set to default. The top ranked model in the
lowest energy cluster with maximum cluster size was
considered for all further interaction studies.

Discussion
It is already known that flavonoids are steroidogenesis
modulators [] and also have been widely exploited as
inhibitors of aromatase which is a regulatory enzyme in the
synthesis of estrogen []. Out of ten prenylated
compounds screened for cytotoxic activity in MCF cellline,
compound 1c showed the lowest IC50, 2e being least
cytotoxic, while rest showed IC50 values varying from 60
to 70 μM (). Chalcones had higher cytotoxic
effect and their binding affinity with steriodogenic
enzymes was less when compared to flavonones. Though,
1c had good cytotoxic effect, its binding affinity for
steroidogenesis enzymes considered in the present study
was least. Different substitutants on flavonones influence
the binding affinity of the compounds to the enzymes.
Presence of prenyl group in flavonone enhances its binding
affinity to 3 βHSD and 17 βHSD while there was minimal
influence on aromatase binding.

Aromatase
Though natural ligand, androstenedione did not show any
H­bonds in our docking studies, it showed electrostatic
interactions with Val370. Whereas, 7­hydroxy in
flavonones forms H­bonds with Val370 showing
competitive affinity to the same amino acid over natural
ligand. The present study reveals that, flavonones with
protected 4' hydroxyl showed better aromatase inhibitory
activity than their free hydroxyl analogs irrespective of the
presence of prenyl groups. Present docking data matches
well with the aromatase inhibitory assay results reported by
Moriaty et al [].

3 βHSD
Our study showed that, 3, 17 hydroxyls of androstenediol
forms hydrogen bonds with Ser221 and Ile192
respectively. We have also observed that in case of
Abyssinone I (2a) and its analog (2b) carbonyl and oxygen
in 4' position formed hydrogen bonds with Arg198 and
Ser221 respectively. As Ser221 forms hydrogen bond in
both the cases, the interaction might be contributing factor
to the binding affinity of the compounds. The common
electrostatic interactions found between the enzyme and
flavonones 2a, 2b and natural ligand are Val223, Tyr193,
Lys219, Phe199, Ile192, Ser221, Asn318 and Tyr191.

17 βHSD
We found that, 3­hydroxy of Estrone formed hydrogen
bond with Glu194. Whereas, in case of 2a and 2b 7­
hydroxy and 4­carbonyl formed hydrogen bond with
Gly144 and Val188 respectively. Ser142, Pro187, Val188,
Phe226 and Gly186 amino acids of the enzyme were commonly interacting with 2a, 2b and natural ligand
considered.

Conclusion
Steroidogenesis enzymes (aromatase, 17βHSD and
3βHSD) which are potential target of hormone dependent
cancer were considered for docking and screening studies.
This work finds application using these targets to design
drugs for the treatment of hormone dependent cancer. The
competitive binding efficiency of enzyme targets with
prenylated and non­prenylated flavanoids confers them as
steroidogenic modulator. Consequently, the approach is
useful in designing novel molecules for treatment of
hormone dependent cancer.

Citation:Hattiet al, Bioinformation 3(9): 399-402 (2009)

Compounds under study

Graph plot of Binding energies of all the compounds with their respective IC50 values

