Background
Antibiotic resistance of bacteria is a widely spread phenomenon. One
major mechanism that underlies antibiotic resistance in bacteria is the
active extrusion of toxic compounds through the membrane­bound
efflux pumps that are often regulated at the transcriptional level [].
Resistance to antimicrobials is as a result of three main strategies
namely enzymatic inactivation of the drug [], modification of target
sites [] and extrusion by efflux []. The active efflux of toxic
compounds is one of the common mechanisms employed by bacteria
to protect themselves against the deleterious effects of toxic molecules
they encounter in the environment []. TtgR represses the transcription
of TtgABC, a key efflux pump in Pseudomonas putida, which is
highly resistant to antibiotics, solvents and toxic plant secondary
products []. The majority of the efflux systems in bacteria are nondrug­
specific proteins that can recognize and pump out a broad range
of chemically and structurally unrelated compounds from bacteria in
an energy­dependent manner, without drug alteration or degradation
[]. The consequence of this drug extrusion is that, it leads to a
reduced intracellular concentration of the antimicrobial such that the
bacterium can survive under conditions of elevated antimicrobial
concentration [].

Pyranochalcones are widely distributed naturally occurring flavonoids.
Members of the pyranochalcones have been associated with a wide
variety of biological activities such as antimutagenic, antimicrobial,
anti­ulcer and antitumor activities []. Interestingly, Pongachalcone I,
a natural pyranochalcone isolated from Tephrosia deflexa, has been
reported to exhibit antibacterial activity against the bacteria
Pseudomonas putida [,]. 
The present paper reports the in­silico
docking studies to find the key features of Pongachalcone I in
superseding the efflux system of the bacteria, which will be highly
beneficial in advanced drug design and in QSAR studies on antibiotic
resistant bacteria.

Methodology
Substrate
The HTH­type transcriptional regulator TTGR (from PDB code:
2UXI) in Pseudomonas putida (bound with Phloretin) was taken as the
substrate for docking. This substrate is particularly chosen for two
reasons. Firstly, TtgR is a multi­drug binding protein which represses
the transcription of TtgABC. It triggers the pumping out of the toxic
materials making the organism resistant to antibiotics, solvents and
toxic plant secondary products. Secondly, on searching Protein Data
Bank databases, only TtgR was reportedly found to bind with a plant
derived flavonoid, Quercetin. Interestingly, pyranochalcones possess
the structural features of Quercetin, the flavonoid and Phloretin, the
plant antimicrobial.

Crystal structure of transcriptional regulator TtgR (PDB code: 2UXI)
in Pseudomonas putida (bound with Phloretin) was downloaded from
RCSB Protein Data Bank []. The structure was deposited in March
2007 with the resolution of 2.50 A and R­factor of 0.245 (working
set). Ramachandran plot generated by the PROCHECK module
present in PDBsum server [] showed about 91% residues (345
residues) falling in the most favorable region, 9% residues (34
residues) falling in the additionally allowed region while none in the
disallowed region.

Ligands
Pseudomonas putida is resistant to toxic substances or antibiotics, yet
the pyranochalcone Pongachalcone I (from Tephrosia deflexa),
exhibited inhibitory effect on it. Keeping that in mind, this
pyranochalcone was taken as ligand. TtgR efflux pump was able to
’sense‘ a number of compounds like, Phloretin, Quercetin, Chloramphenicol, Tetracycline and Naringenin (). These
compounds were reported to bind with TtgR and subsequently pumped
out from the bacterial system []. Therefore those were also subjected
to docking to examine their binding modes.

All the Ligands was optimized by density functional theory (DFT) at
the level of B3LYP and calculations were carried out with both 6­
31G* basis sets using GAUSSIAN 03 package [,]. The ligands
were grouped into an SDF file for streaming them into simulation in
sequence. The X­ray crystal structures of TtgR bound with Phloretin
(2UXI), Quercetin (2UXH), Chloramphenicol (2UXP) and Naringenin
(2UXU) were downloaded from RCSB Database.

The Simulation Details
The structure of the protein was corrected for missing atoms or
unknown units using Molegro Virtual Docker (MVD) []. 2UXI has
a dimeric structure (A and B) with identical sequence of residues.
Comparing with other TtgR crystal structures (2UXH, 2UXP, 2UXU),
it was marked that one unit i.e., the unit A (sequence A) of the twin
units assumes the major role in binding with a ligand. So to simplify
the simulation, the unit A was taken. All other residue, water etc. were
removed.

To locate the appropriate binding orientations and conformations of
ligands on TtgR, docking was performed by using Molegro Virtual
Docker (MVD) software package []. The identification of ligand
binding modes is done by iteratively evaluating a number of candidate
solutions (ligand conformations) and estimating the energy of their
interactions with the macromolecule. MVD performs flexible ligand
docking, so the optimal geometry of the ligand will be determined
during the docking. The MolDock scoring function (MolDock Score)
used by MVD is derived from the PLP scoring functions originally
proposed by Gehlhaar et al. and later extended by Yang et al. [as cited in ]. The MolDock scoring function further improves these scoring
functions with a new hydrogen bonding term and new charge schemes.
The docking scoring function is shown in  . It
is a Coulomb potential with a distance­dependent dielectric constant
given by: D(r) = 4r. The numerical value of 332.0 fixes the units of the
electrostatic energy to kilocalories per mole. To ensure that no energy
contribution can be higher than the clash penalty the electrostatic
energy is set to a cut­off level corresponding to a distance of 2.0 Å for
distances less than 2.0 Å.

The Docking
At the beginning of docking studies, the compound Phloretin
extracted from 2UXI was allowed to undergo extensive flexible
docking (templeted and untempleted) on the 2UXI [A] unit truncated
from 2UXI as mentioned previously. The best pose of the ligand (in
terms of Molegro Rerank Score), returned by MVD was found to be in
excellent agreement with the orientation of the molecule in the actual
bound state. As in QSAR studies, alignment and bioactive
conformation selection are two important factors for obtaining robust
and meaningful models. The best docked conformation of Phloretin
was taken as template for alignment and templeted docking of rest of
the ligands. The substrate had only one cavity (). The grid
resolution for the binding site was kept at 0.30A.

Study of Ligand­Substrate Interaction
The binding modes of the different docking poses of the ligands were
investigated on Ligandscout 2.0 software package [].
Pharmacophore corresponding to the native ligand Phloretin, and
marged pharmacophore corresponding to all ligands except
Pongachalcone I were also generated to pinpoint the key differences
between the binding modes of the pyranochalcone and other
antimicrobials studied.

Discussion
Flexible docking of Phloretin was carried out in the active site of
TtgR. Ten top ranking poses for each ligand were returned in the
simulation, out of which one best pose for each ligand was selected on
the basis of their Re­rank score. Table 1 (see  ) presents the Interaction energy between the ligand and
protein and Hydrogen Bond Energy for the selected alignment and
conformation of each ligand. The result from the   tells that
Pongachalcone I exhibited the lowest interaction with the substrate.
The binding modes of the ligands were investigated on Ligandscout
2.0 software package []. Phermacophore was generated for the
native ligand Phloretin on TtgR 2UXI [A] unit. The best poses for
each ligands mentioned above, were injected into the active site of the
protein. shows the interaction of the ligands with the protein.

From the study of interactions () reveals that, in the active site
of the protein, ASN 110 and CYS 137 probably are the most
instrumental in binding and sensing the compounds toxic to the
organism. The strategic positions of these residue help on binding the
ligand either from two ends (as in case of Phloretin) or from one end
(as in case of Naringenin). The residues ALA74, SER77, GLU78, VAL96, ILE175 and VAL171 also play crusial role in binding, mostly
by hydrophobic interactions with the ligands. Most interestingly,
Pongachalcone I was not found to interact with ASN 110 or CYS 137
and probably that is why it could remain ’unnoticed‘ by the bacterial
defense mechanisms.

To have a more convincing support for this mechanism, two analysis
were done: Firstly, untempleted flexible docking was performed with
Pongachalcone I on 2UXI [A] as substrate using Molegro suite. All of
the five top ranking poses returned by Molegro were put to the
Phloretin phermacophore using Ligandscout 2.0. But again no
noticeable interaction of Pongachalcone I with the phermacophore
region was obtained, except a weak hydrogen bond type interaction
(3.3 A) with CYS137 in only one of the poses.

Secondly, in order to make the situation more stringent,
phermacophores corresponding to each of Phloretin, Quercetin,
Chloramphenicol, Tetracycline and Naringenin in 2UXI[A] were
generated in. A combined phermacophore was formed comprising all
interaction features/regions of all these compounds. Interestingly, the
pyranochalcone Pongachalcone I did not exhibit any strong interaction
even with this robust phermacophore also ().

Those two studies provided an indication that, Pongachalcone I does
not interact strongly with residues which are primarily responsible for
binding with other antimicrobials or antibiotics.

Apart from those residues, the ligands have shown to interact with a
number of other residues also. But as some of those were present in
the case of Pongachalcone I and others did not have common
occurrence in case of different antimicrobials studied here, it seems
that those residues do not have any primary role in the efflux pump
mechanism in P. putida.

Conclusion
The Protein­Ligand interaction plays a significant role in structural
based drug discovery/designing. In this study, molecular docking has
been employed to identify the potential binding mode of a number of
antimicrobials with TtgR. TtgR represses the transcription of TtgABC, a key efflux pump in Pseudomonas putida, which is highly resistant to
antibiotics, solvents and toxic plant secondary products. The results
were then compared with that of Pongachalcone I, a naturally
occurring pyranochalcone, reported to be active against Pseudomonas
putida. The study reveals that, in the active site of the protein, the
residues ASN 110 and CYS 137 along with ALA74, SER77, GLU78,
VAL96, ILE175 and VAL171 seem to play crucial role in binding
with the ligands and triggering the efflux pump.

Although only the activity of Pongachalcone I against P. putida is
reported, further work is in progress to compare the activities of a
number of naturally occurring pyranochalcones. Stress is given to
naturally occurring pyranochalcones to ensure the existence and
availability of the compounds. That will not only help to explore the
structural features for batter efficacy of this class of compounds but
also will be instrumental in development of newer classes of
antibacterial compounds.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are grateful to CDAC, India and BRAF for providing
supercomputing facility with Gaussian 03 to SC. The authors are also
thankful to Dr. Uday S. Chakraborty, Department of Mathematics,
Assam University for valuable discussions.

Citation:Paul et al, Bioinformation 4(10): 473-477 (2010)

Chemical structure of the ligands used.

The substrate 2UXI[A] showing the cavity (green mesh) at the active site

The interaction of the ligands with the protein

A) The marged phermacophore; B) Interaction with Phloretin (shown for comparison only); C) Interaction with Pongachalcone I.

