Background
Influenza viruses, a cause of significant morbidity and mortality in human
population, possess a segmented genome of negative sense RNA encapsulated
by a virally specified nucleoprotein. There are three types of influenza viruses
that cause illness in humans: type A, B and C, classified according to the
serological reactivity of internal proteins. The most common infectious agent
of upper respiratory tract, Influenza A virus (IVA) is able to persistently reinfect
human populations by continually evading host immunity through the
rapid evolution of surface antigens i.e. antigenic drift 
[,
,
]. Influenza A
virus can be further sub-typed according to the serological reactivity of its
surface antigens (attachment protein of virus), HA (Haemagglutinin) and NA
(Neuraminidase), proteins that are encoded on separate genome segments. To
date, 15 HA subtypes and nine NA subtypes have been identified 
[,
]. IVA
evolves rapidly because of the low fidelity of the RNA-dependent RNA
polymerase. RNA-dependent RNA polymerases generally produce replication
errors in 1/104 bases per replication cycle, whereas DNA polymerases produce
replication errors in 1/109 bases per replication cycle. Due to this phenomenon
individual point mutations lead to amino acid substitutions in the entire
influenza genome, and particularly the ones that occur in the surface
glycoproteins enabling influenza viruses to evade the host immune system and
cause infection and re-infection despite the presence of pre-existing antibody
due to ‘antigenic drift’ []. 
Every new antigenic drift variant of influenza A
appears to have at least four amino acid substitutions located in two or more
antigenic sites of the HA protein []. Furthermore, the segmented nature of the
influenza genome facilitates the exchange of genetic information between
different influenza viruses. This allows the virus to undergo drastic
evolutionary changes resulting in ‘antigenic shift’ and hence emergence of
antigenically novel influenza viruses. The presence of a large reservoir of
influenza A viruses in birds increases the number of viral subtypes available for
reassortment, when two different viruses from two different host species coinfect
a single individual animal, that have the potential to cause major global
pandemics []. 
Due to such processes, human influenza is considered by some
as a non eradicable disease, since the range of antigenically diverse subtypes of
influenza A viruses are present in waterfowl and can be introduced into humans
and may lead to millions of deaths 
[–]. 
Existing drugs and vaccines against
Influenza A virus have limited value and the threat of pandemic persists. Broad
spectrum anti-virals have been developed in the past that target an enzyme
found in all viruses that have RNA genomes (except retroviruses) i.e. viral
RNA-dependent RNA polymerases [,
].

Apart from viral proteases and polymerases, some other viral proteins can act
as potential drug targets. For instance, Inhibitors of virus entry is another new
promising class of drugs that show clinical efficacy. In this regard, inhibitors
that block virus entry into cells, by targeting the virus envelope glycoproteins
have yielded a clinically approved compound for HIV 
[] as well as a
promising lead to treat respiratory syncytial virus infections 
[]. Similarly,
inhibitors of the neuraminidase (glycoprotein) of influenza A and B viruses,
two of which are zanamivir [] and oseltamivir 
[], are now approved for
therapeutic use in humans. By inhibiting specific cell proteins that are required
for virus replication it should be possible to interrupt the virus life cycle 
[].
However, possible cross reactivity with host proteins can cause adverse sideeffects
inhibiting essential host cell functions []. On contrary to agents
typically inhibiting the function of crucial viral proteins, RNAi is the relatively
newly described natural biological phenomenon that achieves the identical goal
by targeting the viral mRNA instead of the proteins they encode. RNA
interference (RNAi) is now being widely used to knockdown gene expression,
in a sequence specific manner, for therapeutic purposes 
[,
]. The efforts to
develop anti-therapeutic agents directly from viral genome sequences has led to
short (21-26 nucleotides) interfering RNA (siRNA), double-stranded RNA
duplexes that mediate sequence-selective inhibition. In this regard, many
experiments have been carried out in the past to clarify possible sequence
requirements of functional siRNAs [,
]. The guidelines explained in three
major previous studies [–
] for selecting functional siRNAs are useful in
selecting siRNA molecules for therapeutic purpose. However, designing
functional siRNAs that target viral sequences is problematic because of their
extraordinarily high genetic diversity. This problem suggests a strong need to
select highly conserved target sites for designing siRNAs from the pool of
various epidemic strains reported to date. Several types of modifications have
been incorporated into the ends of the siRNA duplex to study their influence on
the silencing ability and duration of their effect in the past 
[]. Special care is
suggested while designing siRNA as mismatches particularly in the centre of
the siRNA duplex prevents target RNA cleavage 
[]. The HA and NA have a
central role in adaptation of virus, because of their interaction with host cell
surfaces and proteases. In this study, we used web-based bioinformatics
approach to predict siRNA neutralizing wider range of influenza virus A (IVA)
variants by analyzing haemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) genes A
(IVA). Moreover, reverse translational approach, using highly conserved amino
acid sequences, was used to identify potentially important antiviral siRNAs.

Methodology
Selection &amp; retrieval of sequences
To design siRNA, all the sequences of HA (segment 4) &amp; NA (segment 6)
genes of Influenza Virus A already present in the database
[http://siVirus.rnai.jp
] were initially selected, and then those sequences were
short listed which were derived from viral isolates of a specific geographic
region of Asia i.e. Hong Kong, China, Japan and Russia, for this study.
Sequence data for gene segments 4 (Haemagglutinin) and 6 (Neuraminidase) of
Influenza Virus A was collected for the past 39 years i.e. 1960-1999. The
sequences from corresponding countries as mentioned above were downloaded,
for multiple alignments, from NCBI Influenza Virus Sequence Database
[
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/FLU/FLU.html]. Sequences for siRNA
were retrieved from siVirus based on their degree of conservation, defined as
the proportion of viral sequences that are targeted by the corresponding siRNA,
with complete matches (i.e. 21/21 matches).

siRNA analysis
siVirus interface was used to determine anti-siRNA sequence results. This
interface especially focuses on anti-siRNA design and provides (a) highly
conserved target sites for designing anti-siRNA that would resist viral
mutational escapes (b) selection of effective siRNAs based on guidelines of Ui-
Tei et al., Reynolds et al., Amarzguioui et al. 
[–] (c) Off-target minimized
siRNAs within two mismatches against human genes. Off-target hits are those
which have dissimilarity to the target sequence. It is desirable to select siRNA
that has less off-target hits.

Sequence analysis
TCOFFEE [
http://www.ebi.ac.uk/t-coffee/.html] was used for multiple
alignments to observe conservation and functional sites in the HA and NA
datasets at amino acid level. The consensus in at least 7 amino acids
corresponding to 21 nucleotides was noted. BLAST program was used for
similar sequence searches.

Results and Discussion
To design siRNA against influenza virus A, we analyzed all the sequences for
gene segment 4 (haemagglutinin) and 6 (neuraminidase) of Influenza Virus A
from some of the Asian countries (Tables 3 &amp; 4 see 
)
The selection of effective siRNAs sequences were based on published
guidelines [–]. 
Those guidelines were: (a) A/U at the 5' end of the
antisense strand, (b) G/C at the 5' end of the sense strand, (c) At least 5 A/U
residues at the 5' terminal, one-third of the antisense strand (d) The absence of
any GC stretch of more than 9 nucleotides in length. In case any of the above
mentioned guideline is not fulfilled, then no gene silencing by a particular
siRNA is expected. Furthermore, consensus in amino acid sequences in the HA
(H1, H3, H5 and H9) and NA (N1-N2) of different strains was noted and only
those strings of at least 7 amino acids were retained which were present in all
types studied.

siRNA prediction using siVirus
 
shows a typical output from siVirus for designing anti-influenza
Virus A siRNAs. The sequences from Influenza virus A subtypes A and B,
which are the most prevalent genotypes circulating in Asia, were selected. The
results were sorted by the degree of conservation and filtered to display
siRNAs that satisfy at least one efficacy guideline mentioned above. Out of
90522 siRNA candidates screened, 1006 sequences targeting HA segment,
whereas out of 13576 siRNA candidates screened, 1307 sequences targeting
NA segment of influenza virus A genome were short listed respectively.
Analysis of these siRNA candidates revealed that no conserved siRNAs were
obtained when using 90% conservation stringency parameter. However, on
decreasing the stringency parameter close to 80%, 100% conservation of
siRNAs pertaining to gene segment 4 (haemagglutinin) ( &amp; 
) and
segment 6 (neuraminidase) (Data Not shown) was noted. Further short listing
to select siRNA with no off-target hits, fulfilling all the guidelines mentioned
in approach, provided us 13 siRNAs for haemagglutinin and 13 siRNAs for
neuraminidase (Tables 1 &amp; 2 see )

siRNA prediction using conserved stretches of amino acids
Multiple sequence alignments of amino acids retrieved from NCBI
[
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/FLU/FLU.html] (Tables 3 &amp; 4, see
) resulted in obtaining some conserved strings of
amino acids i.e., RGLFGAIAGFIE, YNAELLV and AIAGFIE in
hemagglutinin (H) among different subtypes of segment 4 (H1, H2, H3, H5,
H9) and RTQSEC and EECSYP in neuraminidase (N) among
different subtypes of segment 6 (N1 and N2) for different Asian strains
(Results not shown). Based on their degree of conservation, we suggest that
these conserved amino acid segments could potentially act as useful targets for
designing therapeutic siRNAs for different subtypes. These conserved amino
acid sequences were reverse translated using a webserver
[
http://www.bioinformatics.org/sms2/rev_trans.html] and we obtained the RNA
sequence “gcgauugcgggcuuuauugaa” for AIAGFIE,
“cgcggcctguuuggcgcgauugcgggcuuuauugaa” for RGLFGAIAGFIE,
“uauaacgcggaacugcuggug” for YNAELLV, “cgcacccaggaaagcgaaugc” for
RTQESEC and “gaagaaugcagcugcuauccg” for EECSCYP. A number of studies
demonstrated inhibition of replication of RNA viruses by RNAi 
[,
],
including HIV, Polio virus, Hepatitis C virus, West Nile virus and Influenza
virus [,
]. 
The approach of identifying siRNAs by reverse translation of the
consensus motifs/conserved amino acid string from different subtypes of
haemagglutinin and neuraminidase can be a useful strategy. This needs to be
incorporated in any such software tool to obtain more effective translation
inhibitor siRNA molecules covering broader range of influenza subtypes. The
approach will also help designing antiviral siRNAs that would resist viral
mutational escapes.

Conclusion
To identify new potential leads for developing antiviral therapies against IVA
we screened an siRNA library targeting haemagglutinin and neuraminidase.
For this it was desirable to select an siRNA that had less off target hits and
hence to be more specific. The current in silico study resulted in finding
various targets for siRNA in haemagglutinin and neuraminidase and the results
may have implications in developing prophylactic as well as therapeutic
treatment against influenza infection. Another interesting finding of the current
study was obtaining few but completely different siRNA targets in HA and NA
genes compared to our conventional siRNA identification approach using web
based tools, when we reverse translated conserved amino acids back to RNA.
We believe that the approach of developing siRNA based on combination of
both approaches i.e. Direct search for siRNA against appropriate targets and
finding the consensus of amino acids of majority of the circulating virus
variants would provide a broad range protection molecule to control the
infection.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank Higher Education Commission of Pakistan and COMSATS Institute
of Information Technology, Islamabad for all the support and facilities
provided to carry out this work.

Citation:Raza et al, Bioinformation 6(9): 340-343 (2011)

siRNA results for Haemagglutinins (A = siRNA sequence; B =
siRNA position; C = siRNA efficacy predictions; D = Off-target search results.
The number of human off-targets within two mismatches; E = Degrees of
conservation; F = Conservation in the user-selected sequences)

Graph showing percentage probability of predicted siRNA for
Haemagglutinins. White Box represents the small fractions of siRNA filtered
through all possible approaches (6.65%)

Result showing conserved regions in haemagglutinin using multiple
sequence alignment

