Background
To rationally develop new anti-infective agents, it is essential to
study the genetics and physiology of microbes. The main cause
of hindrance in the designing of new drugs rationally, is the
lack of structural information of some very well known targets
of drugs for example RpoB protein in M. tuberculosis.

The literature has good amount of data available about the in vitro
identification of mutations in various microbial genes and
the data have been precisely correlated with the phenotypic
expression of resistance. However, unavailability of crystal
structures of some proteins makes it difficult to predict and
understand the exact impact of the mutation on structural
changes and binding of drugs or other inhibitors. The only way
to understand its three dimensional structure and the related
properties to be used in understanding protein-ligand binding
is to model the protein with in-silico approaches using amino
acid sequences as starting point. There are numerous tools
available for this purpose. Some very good tools are too costly
and for most of the scholars affordability is always a concern.
Online or freely available tools generated by academia have
been a great help for such researchers. This study aims to
explore and compare a few freely available on-line tools. As per
the reviewed literature, software chosen for the comparison are
top in the list of available free software for homology modelling
of protein structure. The information about the best software
would allow resource limited settings to still move forward
with their studies while saving cost, time and effort. In order to
fulfil the aim of this study, structure generation of proteins with
known crystal structures was attempted and it was tried to find
the best online homology modelling server.

In this study, the proteins chosen for benchmarking experiment
were different in nature. One was Icl protein of M. tuberculosis
and other was the RpoB protein of Thermus Thermophilus. Since
Icl is a small protein of M. tuberculosis and RpoB is a long
protein of different microorganism, a range of proteins was
covered in this experiment. The other two proteins InhA and
KatG from M. tuberculosis with sizes smaller and larger than the
tested proteins were taken in order to confirm and validate the
results obtained.

Software
Phyre2:
Protein Homology/analogy Recognition engine 2 (PHYRE2) is
a free online homology modelling server [,
]. Phyre2 uses the
alignment of hidden Markov models via HHsearch to
significantly improve accuracy of alignment and detection rate.
Phyre2 also incorporates a new ab-initio folding simulation
called Poing to model those regions of proteins in question
which have no detectable homology to known structures 
[].
Poing is also used to combine multiple templates. Distance
constraints from individual models are treated as linear elastic
springs. Poing then synthesises entire protein in the presence of
these springs and at the same time models unconstrained
regions using its physics simulation [].

Swiss-Model:
It is a web-based integrated service dedicated to protein
structure homology modelling. A personal working
environment is provided for each user where several modelling
projects can be carried out in parallel. Protein sequence and
structure databases necessary for modelling are accessible from
the workspace and are updated in regular intervals. Tools for
template selection, model building and structure quality
evaluation can be invoked from within the workspace 
[].

CPHmodels-3.0:
CPHmodels-3.0 is a web-server predicting 3D-structure of
protein by use of single template homology modelling. The
server employs a hybrid of the scoring functions of
CPHmodels-2.0 and a novel remote homology-modelling
algorithm. The web server is available at 
http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services /CPHmodels/ 
[].

ModWeb:
ModWeb is a server for automated comparative protein
structure modelling (http://salilab.org/modweb). It accepts
one or many sequences in the FASTA format and calculates
models for them based on the best available template structures
from the Protein Data Bank. The structural templates used to
build models in ModPipe consist of a set of non-redundant
chains extracted from structures in the PDB []. Sequencestructure
matches are established using multiple variations of
sequence-sequence, profile-sequence, sequence-profile and
profile-profile alignment methods. Significant alignments (Evalue
better than 1.0) covering at least 30 amino acid residues
are selected for modelling. Models are built for each one of the
sequence-structure matches using comparative modelling by
satisfaction of spatial restraints as implemented in Modeller 
[].
The resulting models are evaluated using several model
assessment schemes like MTALL (Training set is based on the
template structure), MSALL (Training set is based on similar
secondary structure), RMSD (Predicted RMSD), etc and the best
scoring models are returned to the user 
[].

(PS)2:
PS)2 is an automated homology modelling server 
[]. The
method uses an effective consensus strategy by combining PSIBLAST
[], IMPALA 
[], and T-Coffee 
[] in both template
selection and target-template alignment. MODELLER 
[], the
modelling package, is used to built the final three dimensional
structure. The PROCHECK program, after generating a
predicted model with no other refinements, was used to
evaluate the quality of this model based on the G-factor. Finally,
the predicted model is displayed by Chime and automatically
sent to users []. The main drawback of PS2 server is that it
cannot process the sequence more than 800 amino acid.

(PS)2-V2:
(PS)2-v2 is the advanced version of (PS)2, an automatic
homology modelling server []. The method uses a new
substitution matrix called S2A2. This is a 60×60 substitution
matrix based on secondary structure propensities of 20 amino
acids (aa). It is a handy tool for the detection of remote
homologous and target-template alignment. The final 3-D
structure is built using the modelling package MODELLER.
After generated a model, the programs ProQ and ProQres are
used to evaluate the quality of this model based on a number of
structural features predicts the quality of a protein model and
to find correct models in contrast to other methods which are
optimized to find native structures []. Finally, the predicted
model was displayed using software for molecular visualization
(AstexViewer) and automatically sent to users.

Homer:
Homer (HOmology ModellER) is a comparative modelling
server for protein structure prediction. It builds a model
structure from an alignment (in FASTA format) and a single
template structure (PDB format). Homer performs loop
modelling and side-chain optimization on request. The program
utilizes FRST to generate the model and a per-residue energy
profile. Scoring functions are widely used in the final step of
model selection in protein structure prediction. A novel
combination of four knowledge-based potentials recognizing
different features of native protein structures is introduced and
tested. The pairwise, solvation, hydrogen bond, and torsion
angle potentials contain largely orthogonal information. Of
these, the torsion angle potential is found to show the strongest
correlation with model quality. Combining these features with a
linear weighting function, it was possible to construct a robust
energy function capable of discriminating native-like structures
on several benchmarking sets.

Methodology
Common parameters for comparison:
The Expectation value or Expect value (E value) represents the
number of different alignments with low or better scores that is
expected to occur in a database search by chance. The lower the
Expectation value, the more significant the score and the
alignment are. Phyre2 does not provide E-value.

Sequence identity and template selection are other important
parameters to begin with. Sequence identity is the extent to
which two sequences have the same residues at the same
positions when aligned together. Sequence coverage shows how
much sequence is covered for generating the model. Template
selection and the resolution of template are very important.

Templates having finer resolution (generally &lt;2.0Å) are treated
to be good templates. Better template results in better alignment
and finally better three dimensional structures.

Other important parameters which were included for
comparison were RMS deviation of the modelled structure with
the template used and second one was the energy of the structure
obtained calculated by Swiss PDB Viewer [].

Icl modelling and benchmarking:
The Icl protein of M. tuberculosis [Uniprot-Id P0A5H3] was
selected for testing the software followed by the benchmarking
process. Isocitrate lyase (Icl) has 429aa and a good quality
crystal structure [PDB-ID 1F8MA] having a resolution of 1.8Å.
Models of Icl were generated using all the above mentioned
software. No further processing of modelled structures was
done. The models generated by different software were
compared among themselves with respect to certain parameters
as provided in the software (default parameters). For
benchmarking, the original structure with PDB code 1F8M was
taken and all the structures obtained through modelling were
superimposed on it.

RpoB benchmarking:
in-silico structures of RpoB protein of T. Thermophilus [(PDB-ID
1IW7C, 2.60Å) &amp; 1119aa] was modelled through the same
procedure as like Icl.

Validation of the method by applying them on other two proteins:
To validate the results obtained from Icl and RpoB
benchmarking, two new proteins of M. tuberculosis were chosen
whose crystal structures are available. First is Enoyl-[acylcarrier-
protein] reductase [NADH] InhA protein [Uniprot-Id
P0A5Y6] [PDB-ID 3OEW, 2.20 Å] and second is Catalaseperoxidase
KatG protein [Uniprot-Id Q08129] [PDB-ID 2CCA,
2.00 Å]. Crystal structures of these proteins are available with
RCSB-IDs as of 3OEW and 1SJ2 respectively. InhA protein is
269aa long and KatG is 740aa long.

Results
Modelling and benchmarking:
Icl: In Icl modelling 1F8M, 1F8I, 1F61 templates were selected
for model generation. All these were structures of Icl protein of
M. tuberculosis with or without ligand. This showed that all the
software work well in opting the right and best template for
model generation. The structures were modelled by Phyre2,
Swiss-Model, CPHmodels-3.0, Homer, ModWeb, (PS)2, and
(PS)2-V2. Different software picked different templates based on
various selection methods. Some software like Swiss-Model
take one letter amino acid code as the query sequence and other
software like CPHmodels-3.0 take protein sequence in FASTA
format. The detailed results are provided in  (see
supplementary material) and the models generated with
different software were superimposed to see the structural
similarity (). 
Structures generated by (PS)2 and (PS)2-V2
are absolutely same with an RMS deviation of 0.0Å. All the
figures of generated models by individual software are
presented in the supplementary files. The sequence of protein of
Icl is 429aa long. The model generated by Phyre2 and Swiss-
Model is of 429aa and the rest software make 427aa long
structure. Homer generated 425aa long model. The templates
picked by all software were same as like the crystal structure
and hence the results of modelling obviously explain the
benchmarking success.

RpoB: RpoB protein of T. Thermophilus is modelled using the
same software as used for Icl.  shows the results
obtained. For RpoB benchmarking process, different software
selected different templates for homology modelling. 1YNJ (Taq
RNA polymerase) and 1SMY (Thermus thermophilus RNA
polymerase) were selected by Phyre2, 2CW0M (Crystal
structure of T. Thermophilus RNA polymerase holoenzyme at
3.3Å resolution) used by Swiss-Model, 1IW7C (Crystal structure
of the RNA polymerase holoenzyme from T. Thermophilus at
2.6Å resolution) by CPHmodels-3.0, and 2A6HC (Crystal
structure of the T. thermophilus RNA polymerase holoenzyme in
complex with antibiotic sterptolydigin) by ModWeb. Homer
software covered 1117aa out of 1119 for model generation. All
other software covered the whole sequence in generating the
model. All the generated structures were superimposed to the
crystal structures of the protein and also to each other ()
and RMS values were recorded (). Structure generated
by Swiss-Model using template 2CW0M showed RMS deviation
of 0Å.

InhA: Results of InhA benchmarking were as like the results of
Icl and RpoB benchmarking (). In the model generation
of inhA (269aa), every software used different template to
generate the final three dimensional model. Phyre2 covered the
whole sequence. Other software left some residues while
generating the model. The E-value obtained by Swiss-Model,
CPHmodels-3.0, PS2, and PS2-V2 is a non zero value.
Superimposition of models generated and crystal structure
provided the information regarding the difference between the
obtained structures from different software (). The
figure revealed that the model generated by ModWeb had a
loop protruding outside the superimposed core structure
whereas all other software made similar structure alike crystal
structure.

KatG: Modelling of KatG protein of M. tuberculosis having
sequence length of 740aa, showed varied results ().
Except Phyre2 and Swiss –model none other software covered
the whole sequence for model generation. E-value of this model
given by Swiss-Model is 0.00 e-1. Other software except Phyre2
gave 0 as the E-value. . All the generated structures were
superimposed to each other and differences are recorded
(). The figure revealed that the model generated by
(PS)2 had a long loop protruding outside the superimposed core
structure whereas all other software made similar structure as
the crystal structure.

Discussion
Proteins with available crystal structures helped finding the
best software to be used for modelling of proteins with crystal
structure. The default parameters of all the software were
chosen so as to compare them without user-biasness. However,
the option for using advanced parameters as per requirement
and skills is always available. The main idea behind the
benchmarking process with the help of four different proteins
was to judge the software quality to a next level. This step was
to decipher whether these software work well with short as
well as long sequences.

From Icl benchmarking process it was deciphered that all the
software work well for shorter sequences and provide enough
fair results. In Icl benchmarking, Phyre2 and Swiss-Model
covered the whole sequence whereas other software left some
residues either because of the unavailability of the correct
residue profile or to make a smaller but better conformation
having good resolution. Although Phyre2 picked up the right
template and covered the whole sequence, there is a reportable
amount of deviation in the RMS value between in-silico
structure and the template used. It was observed that when
crystal structure of a protein sequence is present, Swiss-Model
could pick it up and made the structure accordingly with low
RMS deviation. In case of non-availability of crystal structure
and hence no proper template, software (Swiss-Model) made
model of higher RMS deviation. This is because the template
selected is of different kind and the alignment is not expected to
be the same.

To confirm if this software also provide good result for long
chain protein sequences, same methodology of model
generation was applied on the RpoB protein of T. Thermophilus
with Uniprot-ID 1IW7 using chain C. In case of Icl modelling
templates selected were more or less same. However, in case of
RpoB modelling there was a variety in template selection. The
reason of this was that sequence-structure alignment might not
be good. On performing a protein-protein blast on the basis of
non redundant or ref-sequence database, 4GZZ (Crystal
structures of bacterial RNA Polymerase paused elongation
complexes) at 4.29Å resolution was found as the best hit.

The decision of choosing the best online software is also
validated with the use of two more proteins one is small protein
InhA (269aa) and second is a relatively long chain protein, KatG
(740aa). Both the proteins are of M. tuberculosis having crystal
structure information in PDB database.  also shows the
results of InhA and KatG protein modelling. For InhA, all
software gave better results as we got in the case of Icl but in
the case of KatG same problem of incomplete sequence
coverage is encountered by almost all software as we got in
RpoB protein. As the length of protein increases, it becomes
difficult for automated software to find the right and best suited
template. The alignment also becomes tedious to perform. This
problem was taken care by Phyre2 that uses multiple templates
to cover the whole sequence and search better folding patterns
to make the complete three dimensional structure of the
protein. This results in increased RMS deviation but overall
quality of structure is highly reliable. Modelled structure can be
used for further analysis after post modelling modifications.

Disclosure statement
No competing financial interests exist.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Nema &amp; Pal, Bioinformation 9(15): 796-801 (2013)

Superimposed figure of all the models of Icl protein of
M. tuberculosis generated by different software phyre2 in orange
(brick colour), HOMER in blue, ModWeb in red, CPHmodels in
green, PS2 in grey, ps2-v2 in pink, swiss-model in cyan. Crystal
structure is in yellow.

Superimposed figure of all the models of RpoB protein
of Thermus thermophilus generated by different software phyre2
in grey, HOMER in blue, ModWeb in pink, CPHmodels in red,
ps2-v2 in green. Crystal structure is in yellow.

Superimposed figure of all the models of InhA protein
of M. tuberculosis generated by different software phyre2 in
blue, Homer in yellow, ModWeb in green, CPHmodels in grey,
(PS)2 in pink, (PS)2-v2 in red, swiss-model in cyan. Crystal
structure is in brick red.

Superimposed figure of all the models of KatG protein
of M. tuberculosis generated by different software phyre2 in
blue, Homer in yellow, ModWeb in green, CPHmodels in cyan,
(PS)2 in pink, (PS)2-v2 in red, swiss-model in grey. Crystal
structure is in brick red.

