Background
Aromatic compounds are unsaturated cyclic and planar
molecules that contain an aromatic ring. They possess
additional stability as a result of the arrangement of the π -
electrons situated above and below the plane of the aromatic
ring. These electrons give rise to what is known as a π-electron
cloud over the ring. Aromaticity is a chemical property
associated with such cyclic and planar compounds and is
attributed to these π-electrons which are free to cycle around
the circular arrangements of atoms found in the aromatic
moieties. It can be considered as a manifestation of cyclic
delocalization and resonance which is found in planar ring
systems such as benzene [,
]. The flat face of an aromatic ring
has a partial negative charge owing to these π electrons. Out of
the 20 amino acids found in protein structures, four are
aromatic. They are phenylalanine, tyrosine, tryptophan and
histidine []. The interactions that take place between the sidechains
of the aromatic amino acid residues are referred to as
aromatic-aromatic interactions. Formally, aromatic-aromatic
interactions are defined as pairs of interacting aromatic residues
which satisfy the following criteria: (i) the centers of the
aromatic rings of the two interacting residues are separated by a
distance between 4.5 Å to 7 Å, (ii) the dihedral angle must fall
between 30° to 90° and (iii) free energies of formation when
such interactions take place should be between -0.6 and -1.3
kcal/mole []. The aromatic interactions are relatively nonpolar
in nature. They have been found to play an important role
in maintaining the overall structure of the protein molecules
and protein-DNA complexes. The interactions between the
aromatic residues within a protein and in protein and DNA
complexes are integral part for the proper functioning of the
protein molecule. This in turn influences various biological
processes that take place within an organism in which the
protein is involved [].

The non-covalent interactions that take place within a protein
contribute to its structural integrity and thereby influence its
function. These non-covalent interactions include hydrogen
bonds, electrostatic and van der Waals interactions. Studies on
the aromatic interactions provided a new insight on the nature
of these biologically important non-covalent interactions in
terms of their driving force, stability and selectivity. Analysis of
the binding patterns of the aromatic residues to nucleic acids
provides some insight into the origin and nature of interactions
that can take place between the amino acids and nucleic acid
bases. The π-system of the aromatic rings gives rise to three
types of interactions involving aromatic moieties: (i) π-π, (ii)
cation-π and (iii) X-H-π. Cationic moieties that are within 6.0 Å
of the face of an aromatic ring may engage in polar cation-π
interactions []. These interactions give rise to three different
types of geometries, namely, edge-to-face or T-shaped, face-toface
and parallel displaced or offset stacked interactions 
(). 
Among these, it has been found that most of the attractive
orientations are usually T-shaped. The face-to-face orientation is
rarely observed as it leads to an unfavorable electrostatic
repulsion force between the two planar faces of the aromatic
rings []. Apart from these three main types of interactions,
there are also various sub-types present under offset stacked
interactions [].

Aromatic interactions also play an important role in scaffolding
in DNA and RNA binding [,
]. However, the role of the
aromatic amino acids in protein-DNA interactions is still not
fully understood. A seminal study was conducted by Luscombe
and co-workers to identify the specificity with which the
aromatic groups bind to nucleotide bases []. They found that
the residue phenylalanine binds preferentially to adenine and
thymine via a stacking interaction. They have speculated that
tryptophan should also be capable of making such interactions.
However, it occurs too infrequently in the DNA binding
regions. They also found that histidine binds specifically to
guanine via hydrogen bonding. They also observed that
although tyrosine is commonly present at the interface between
the protein and DNA, it did not show any particular binding
specificity. Thus, the present study focuses on the aromaticaromatic
interactions in proteins and in protein-DNA
complexes.

Methodology
Dataset:
Structures of proteins and protein-DNA complexes resolved
using X-ray diffraction and NMR were obtained from culled
PDB []. 
X-ray structures having a crystallographic R-factor of
20% and with a resolution of 2.0Å were taken from 90% nonredundant
protein chains. In the case of structures solved using
NMR, the atomic coordinates of the first model were used. The
number of resultant structures obtained was 12,026. The
aromatic amino acids phenylalanine, tyrosine, histidine and
tryptophan (along with its indole ring) were considered. The
distance between the aromatic amino acid residues was
calculated by taking into account the distance between the
centroids of the aromatic rings.

Classification of the Dataset:
Luscombe and coworkers concluded that the protein–DNA
interactions could be split into two classes, namely, those
involving the DNA backbone and those involving the bases
[]. 
It was based on this that the interactions in the protein-
DNA complexes were divided into two types: specific and nonspecific.
Interactions between the aromatic residue side chains
and nucleotide bases were defined as specific and those
between the aromatic residue side chains and the DNA sugarphosphate
backbone were treated as non-specific. Analysis was
carried out keeping in mind that the distance range within
which the aromatic interactions take place. The optimum
distance (the distance at which the maximum number of
interactions takes place) was calculated. The number of
interactions observed for all possible 15 aromatics pairs is given
in  (see supplementary material). The optimum
interacting distance (the distance at which most number of
interactions took place) was analyzed in six intervals as
indicated in  (see supplementary material). The same
method was used for calculating the distance at which the most
number of specific and non-specific interactions took place. The
distance at which the maximum number of interactions took
place was found for specific and non-specific interactions are
given in  (see supplementary material). The orientation
in which the residues preferred to interact with each other was
found by calculating the angle at which the residues made the
maximum number of interactions. Perpendicular and parallel
interactions were also calculated. The interactions where the
angle between the residues was between 85°to 95° were
categorized as perpendicular and those where the angle
between the interacting residues was between 170° to 180° were
designated as being parallel. Locally developed PERL scripts
were used to perform all calculations. All diagrams were
generated using Pymol [] and ISIS Draw 
[].

Discussion
Distance and angle based interactions:
Results obtained show that the aromatic pair phenylalaninetyrosine
has more number of interactions than all other
aromatic pairs () and the interactions are most favorable
in the distance range of 6.0Å to 6.5Å (). The maximum
number of specific interactions is found to be between 6.5Å to
7.0Å and for non-specific, it is observed between 7.0Å to 7.5Å
(). The number of interactions based on angle shows
that a majority of the interactions between the residues fall in
the range of 80°to 100° with the highest number of interactions
occurring in the range 80° to 90° (). From these results,
it can be seen that the majority of interactions in the proteins fall
into the T-shaped orientation. The T-shaped or edge-to-face
interaction can make a significant contribution to the binding
energy of the protein-DNA complex formation []. The π–π
repulsion, in general, does not favor direct face-to-face
interactions []. In specific interactions, the angle at which
maximum number of interactions occurred is once again found
to be in the range 80° to 90° (). This may be due to the
fact that the nucleotide base also interacts in a perpendicular Tshaped
orientation with the residues in the protein. However,
in the case of non-specific interactions, the maximum number of
interactions between the sugar-phosphate backbone and the
side chains of the aromatic residues are found to be between
130° to 140° indicating a more parallel orientation ().
Usually, it is the α-helices that engage in most of the basespecific
interactions. Furthermore, these interactions are found
mainly on the major groove of the DNA []. Analysis of the
aromatic residues involved in DNA-protein complexes indicate
that they play a significant role in binding to the bases and in
strengthening such interactions [].

Promiscuity of Tyrosine:
Tyrosine binds strongly to both DNA and RNA and shows
more promiscuous binding than other aromatic residues. The
manner in which the residue tyrosine binds indicates strength
rather than specificity. Tyrosine residues are also found
frequently at DNA-protein interfaces. Tryptophan is found
mostly in RNA rather than DNA indicating that it may aid in
differentiation of these molecules. This suggests that these sorts
of interactions play a major role in protein-nucleic acid
recognition []. In the present study, tyrosine was frequently
found at the interface between the protein and DNA. This may
be due to the fact that the phenolic hydroxyl group is able to
provide some amount of stability when exposed to solvent 
[].
This could also be one of the reasons why tyrosine residues are
involved in less favorable face-to-face interaction.

Energetics of Aromatic-Aromatic Interactions:
Energy calculations have shown that the T-shaped packing
geometry is the most preferred and therefore most prevalent 
[,
]. Apart from this, parallel displaced interactions are also
observed. In thermophilic proteins, the presence of the aromatic
clusters increased thermal stability []. In DNA-protein
interactions, the apolar surface of the sugar forms an attractive
complementary surface for the aromatic rings []. As
mentioned earlier, the aromatic interactions comprise of van der
Waals interactions and electrostatic forces. It has been found
that 60% of the aromatic residues in proteins are found in pairwise
interactions and out of these, it has been found that the
side-chains interacted in networks of three or more 
[]. The
orientation and packing of the aromatic moieties in a protein is
driven by two main factors, namely, the need to remain in a
hydrophobic environment and exclude water and to form a
large number of weakly polar interactions which are believed to
be electrostatic in nature. These enthalpically favorable
interactions, albeit small, are large in number and are therefore
capable of making a substantial contribution to the overall
structural stability of the protein [].

Propensity of Phenylalanines to interact with each other:
As indicated earlier, a total of 15 different possible pairs of
interactions between the aromatic residues are taken into
consideration. Experimental evidences show that the
interactions between the phenylalanines can stabilize aα-helix.
It has also been observed that the interactions between the two
phenylalanine residues can provide energy up to -3.3kJ/mol to
stabilize aα-helix []. Also, in a separate study which
conducted a comparison of the cross-strand interactions
between the phenylalanines and cyclohexylamines in water, it
is found that phenylalanines showed a preference for selfassociation.
The phe-phe pair is also found to be highly
enthalpically favourable []. This is in concordance with our
results obtained for the aromatic residues with the second
highest number of interactions found to be between two
phenylalanines (). Serrano and co-workers had found
that phenylalanine and tyrosine residues in proteins are
frequently found to be in pair wise interactions. These phe-tyr
interactions have been found to play important roles in protein
folding and stability []. Since T-shaped interactions are
preferred, it can be speculated that the phenolic hydroxyl of the
tyrosine residue interacts in a XH-π type interaction with the
phenylalanine.

Conclusion
Although, different types of aromatic interactions are not vast,
they play a significant role in the overall structure and
conformation of the protein molecules as well as protein-DNA
complexes. The strong preference for the T-shaped interactions
and various optimal distances and angles provide a better
insight into how significant these interactions are to the protein
structure. Aromatic interactions are made more complicated
because the molecules involved are larger and more complex.
This size-wise expansiveness also influences the solvent
accessible surface area. This in turn brings van der Waals and
desolvation parameters which must be taken into consideration.
Thus, it is difficult to rationalize the behavior of the aromatic
interactions in a straightforward manner and further
investigations need to be performed to study how exactly they
influence protein structure.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors acknowledge the facilities offered by the Interactive
Graphics Facility and SERC. One of the authors (KS) thanks the
Department of Biotechnology, Govt. of India for financial
support.

Citation:Anjana et al, Bioinformation 8(24): 1220-1224 (2012)

Schematic representation of the three types of
orientations found in the aromatic-aromatic interactions.

The number of interactions between the aromatic
amino acids (based on angle).

The number of specific and non-specific interactions
(based on angle).

