Background
BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool) has been utilized in
nearly every branch of biology, far beyond the scope of
molecular genetics, molecular biology and protein
biochemistry, and this tool has made great contributions to
many scientific fields since its development [,
]. Currently, the
work of most biologists, bioinformaticians, evolutionists and
medical scientists cannot progress without the use of BLAST.

Although the use of BLAST is common in many scientific
disciplines, bioinformaticians and biologists use BLAST in very
different ways. Bioinformaticians can perform a one-round
BLAST search with a massive number of query sequences using
an informatics command language. In contrast, biologists are
often not familiar with informatics command languages and
usually perform a one-round NCBI BLAST search using one
query or a few (≤ 20) queries. If biologists want to analyze a
massive number of query sequences, they must carry out
thousands of the one-round BLAST search with one query,
which can be very time consuming and tedious. Thus, there is a
need for software that can run a one-round BLAST search with
a massive number of queries and also can be used by biologists
who are not proficient in informatics program languages.

Here, we present “easySEARCH,” a newly developed
bioinformatics program that performs one-round BLAST search
with a massive number of queries using a mouse-click style
interface. Due to its user-friendliness and convenience,
easySEARCH can be widely used by biologists,
bioinformaticians, medical scientists and evolutionists.

Methodology
This software can be run on personal computers (PCs) that run
Windows. If the user has installed this software on his/her PC
from the above-mentioned website, the user will find a
directory called “easySEARCH” on the C drive; the
easySEARCH software file (red icon) can be found in this
directory.

The method for using this software is very user-friendly and
convenient. If the easySEARCH software file (red icon) is
opened, window A will appear (). First, either the
“FormatDB F2” button (in the pull-down menu of Step 1 in
window A) or the “Run FormatDB (F2)” button (in window A)
can be pressed to format a database. In the open window,
window B (), the user can press the “Load DB Fasta
(Click!)” button to load a sequence database (for example, the
“db” database in the “samples” file provided in the
easySEARCH software package) into easySEARCH. The user
can then choose “Nucleotide Sequence” or “Protein Sequence”
from the pull-down menu of the “Input file type” depending on
the user's sequence database. If the “FormatDB” button is
pressed, the database will be formatted. After finishing this
process, the message shows “Complete FormatDB. Go to
BLAST Menu!!” will appear, and the “OK” button should be
pressed.

Next, the “Local BLAST F3” button (in the pull-down menu of
Step2) or the “Run Local BLAST (F3)” button should be pressed.
In the open window, window C (), the button “Upload
file (Click!)” will load a query sequence file (for example, the
“input” query data in the “samples” file provided in the
easySEARCH software package) into easySEARCH. Otherwise,
the user can directly paste query sequences into the yellow box
just below the command sentence “Enter FASTA sequence” in
window C. The user can then check whether the appropriate
BLAST program (blastn, blastp, blastx, tblastn, tblastp and
tblastx), E-value (1e-10 as a default value) and CPU number (1
in the case that one PC is used) have been chosen. The “Run
Local BLAST” button will initiate the BLAST run. After
completion, the message shows “Complete BLAST”. Go to
Parsing menu!!” will appear, and the “OK” button should be
pressed. If the user needs to use NCBI BLAST, the user can
press the “NCBI BLAST F4” button instead of the “Local BLAST
F3” button in the pull-down menu of Step2. Subsequently, a
window will appear in which an NCBL BLAST (based on the
NCBI web-server) can be performed.

Finally, the “Default Parsing F5” button (in the pull-down
menu of Step3) or the “Run default Parsing (F5)” button should
be pressed. In the open window, window D (), the
appropriate parsing options, which will affect the contents of
the BLAST result files, can be selected. Specifically, if certain
contents of interest need to be extracted from a whole BLAST
result file, a keyword (representing the contents of interest) can
be inserted into the “Annotation” box as an optional item. After
parsing (by pressing the “Parsing” button), the “OK” button
should be pressed when the user is prompted with the message,
“Complete Parsing”. Next, a parsing result (window E) and an
alignment file (window F) can be obtained by pressing the
“Parsing Result View (click!)” and “Alignment View (Click!)”
buttons, respectively (). If more professional options are
needed for parsing, the “High Level Parsing” window can be
opened by pressing the button “High Level Parsing F6” in the
pull-down menu of Step 3.

Input
A query sequence file and a sequence database file must be
available in FASTA format. It should be noted that the number
of query sequences for the one-round BLAST process is not
limited in the easySEARCH interface. The NCBI NR database
could be downloaded from
http://210.219.44.213/easyblast_down.html as and when
required.

Output
The outputs of easySEARCH include the parsing result (Excel
format) and the alignment file (Notepad format) ().

Feature
easySEARCH has been written using the Delphi programming
language (version 5.0). This software can enhance the speed of
the BLAST process by parsing line by line with XML validation.

Conclusion
We describe easySEARCH to implement BLAST searches with a
massive set of query sequences. The use of easySEARCH
bypasses the need for command languages because it utilizes a
mouse-click style interface. The practical use of the userfriendly
easySEARCH finds utility by a number of end users.

We thank the members of the Genome Resource Center (GRC)
at the Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology
(KRIBB) for their active assistance in conducting this research
project. Funding: This work was supported by the Ministry of
Education, Science and Technology (MEST) [grant 2009-
0084206] and KRIBB [grant KGM4131211].

Citation:Wook Kim et al, Bioinformation 8(16): 792-794 (2012)

BLAST Process of the easyBLAST. The windows A, B, C and D are the windows that have been used during the BLAST
process by the easyBLAST program. The windows E and F are the windows showing the results produced during the BLAST
process. The detailed explanations of those windows A, B, C, D, E and F are described in the text of this paper.

