Background
Staphylococcus aureus is a major human pathogen of increasing
importance due to the spread of antibiotic resistance. S. aureus
is causing a range of acute and pyogenic infections, including
abscesses, central nervous system infections, endocarditis,
osteomyelitis, pneumonia, urinary tract infections, chronic
lung infections associated with cystic fibrosis, and several
syndromes caused by exotoxins and enterotoxins, including
food poisoning, scalded skin and toxic shock syndromes 
[]. S.
aureus is also a main cause of hospital acquired (nosocomial
infections) of surgical wounds and infections related to
indwelling medical devices []. This bacterium has a thick cell
wall consisting of peptidoglycan, which is required for
maintenance of cellular viability. S. aureus has three surface
determinants which might mediate adherence to damaged
valves and promote endocarditis, namely, 
coagulase, which is mostly secreted in the medium [,],

clumping factor (or fibrinogen-binding protein) [–], and

fibronectin-binding protein [].


Coagulase positive Staphylococci from S. aureus
are very well known pathogens causing a range of infections.
Coagulase has been suspected to assist infection via its
procoagulant and fibrinogen-binding activity [], it did not
appear to promote either adherence to platelet-fibrin clots in
vitro or experimental endocarditis in rats in the present
experiments. By triggering coagulation, vegetation adherent
bacteria might promote additional deposits of platelets and
fibrin on top of the infection nidus and thus become protected
from further mechanical detachment and/or cellular host
defense mechanisms.

Today, the crystal structure of the coagulase in Staphylococcus
aureus remains elusive. Hence, it is imperative to solve the
tertiary structure of a protein or the quaternary structure of its
complexes. Furthermore, information on molecular
recognition provides information on how the protein
functions. The function of an enzyme relies on the structure of
its active site, a cavity in the protein with a shape and size that
enables it to snugly fit the intended substrate. The active site
also contains certain amino acids that are involved in the
chemical reaction catalyzed by the enzyme. During host
infection, coagulase conformationally activates the central
coagulation zymogen, prothrombin, thereby triggering the
cleavage of fibrinogen to fibrin. The association of the
tetrameric complex enables fibrinogen binding at a new site
with high infinity. This model can explain the coagulant
properties and efficient fibrinogen by coagulase []. A study
by Friedrich et al. (2006) presented the crystal structure of SC-
(1–325) bound to bovine α- thrombin, along with a more
detailed description and comparison of the atomic interactions
in the SC-(1–325) human (pre) thrombin and SC-(1–325)
bovine thrombin complexes to define structural differences
responsible for the species specificity of ProT activation by SC
[]. The information from this finding will provide important
information and insights into the action and regulation
mechanism of the coagulase and the crystal structure of
coagulase in S. aureus by using homology modeling approach.

Methodology
Homology search:
The sequence of coagulase in S. aureus (Accession Number:
CAC 84776.1) was obtained from NCBI database 
[]. The
query sequence from coagulase in S. aureus was searched to
find out the related protein structure to be used as a
template(s) by the BLAST program [] against Protein Data
Bank database.

Model building:
The 3D homology models were calculated using crystal
structural coordinates of templates on the basis alignment of
target and template sequence of coagulase. The procedures
were performed by Discovery Studio by Accelerys (San Diego,
CA, USA).

Model Evaluation and Refinement:
Structural evaluations of coagulase model were performed by
using two programs called PROCHECK and Verify 3D. The
predicted model was submitted to the structure evaluation
server (UCLA DOE) []. Model evaluation is important to
check the correctness of the overall fold/structure, errors over
localized regions and stereochemical parameters such as bond
lengths and angles.

Discussion
Homology modeling:
Homology searches in PDB were performed using the
program BLASTP []. There were three templates had been
identified (PDB id: 2AID (Staphylocoagulase bound to bovine
thrombin); 1NU7 (Staphylocoagulase-Thrombin Complex)
and 1NU9 (Staphylocoagulase-Prethrombin-2 complex)) by
comparing and aligning the target sequence with each
sequence in PDB. The sequence identity between the 2AID
(Staphylocoagulase bound to bovine thrombin) is 54%,
meanwhile 1NU7 (Staphylocoagulase-Thrombin Complex)
50% and 1NU9 (Staphylocoagulase-Prethrombin-2 complex)
51%. Then, followed by structural-based alignment of
coagulase from S. aureus against the three selected templates.
1NU9- Chain C and F was selected for the model building
because it hits the highest identity (27.1%) 
().

Model building and Refinement:
The 3D homology model of coagulase in S. aureus (Accession
No. CAC84776.1) was predicted using the crystal structure
coordinates set of Staphylocoagulase 
[] (1NU9) obtained
from homology search and completed with sequencestructure
alignment (). The rest of the steps in
homology modeling were performed by the program
Discovery Studio by Accelerys, build homology model
protocol. It used MODELER automodel to build homology
models. An accurate sequence alignment between the model
and the template protein are essential to achieve high quality
models. There were three annotated model structures of
coagulase predicted. They were coagulase.B99990001,
coagulase.B99990002 and coagulase.B99990003. Hence, the
best model structure of coagulase superimpose to the template
(1NU9) also generated (coagulase) in order to predict the best
models among all of the models. Model of
coagulase.B99990002 () shown the lowest value in
PDF (Probability Density Functions) Total Energy (5700.54),
PDF Physical Energy (1849.15) and DOPE (Discrete Optimized
Protein Energy) score (-500029.3) which indicate the best
model of coagulase compare to the others models.

Model Evaluation:
Structural evaluations of coagulase model were performed by
using two programs called PROCHECK and Verify 3D.
PROCHECK check the stereochemical quality of a protein
structure, producing a number of PostScript plots 
analyzingits overall and residue-by-residue geometry. It includes
PROCHECK-NMR for checking the quality of structures
solved by NMR. PROCHECK have been expended to evaluate
NMR structure quantitatively through a package called
PROCHECK NMR []. The evaluation of coagulase model
revealed that sterochemical and geometrical parameter
implemented in PROCHECK was satisfied in this model.
() shows Ramachandran Plot of the coagulase model
calculated by PROCHECK. It shows a good distribution of 570
amino acid residues of coagulase. About, 99.4% residues are
most favored and additionally allowed region, and only five
residues are generously allowed region.

As methods for determining protein three-dimensional
structure, a continuing problem is how to verify that the final
protein model is correct. The revision of several protein
models to correct errors has prompted the development of
new criteria. For judging the validity of X-ray and NMR
structures, as well as the formation of energetic and empirical
methods to evaluate the correctness of protein models 
[].
Verify3D analyzes the compatibility of an atomic model (3D)
with its own amino acid sequence (1D). The scores of a sliding
21-residue window (from -10 to +10) are added and plotted
for individual residues [,
]. The coagulase protein seems
to be consistent with the respective amino acid with 60.30% of
the residues had an averaged 3D-1D.

The model evaluation of coagulase then was carried out by
referring to the quality of the model built; coagulase.
B99990002. The quality of a model can be approximately
predicted from the sequence similarity of both structure;
coagulase.B99990002 and 1NU9_C_F_chains ().
Alignment of the model is available at CE for protein structure
comparison []. CE is a method for calculating pairwise
structure alignments. CE aligns two polypeptide chains using
characteristics of their local geometry as defined by vectors
between C alpha positions. Matches are termed AFPs (Aligned
Fragment Pairs). Heuristics are used in defining a set of
optimal paths joining AFPs with gaps as needed. The path
with the best RMSD is subject to dynamic programming to
achieve an optimal alignment. For specific families of proteins
additional characteristics are used to weight the alignment
[].

The RMSD of the models is 1.8Å, which indicates 95% model
accuracy referring to similar structure (). Hence, the
z-score value is 6.9. Frequently, z-score is the measure of the
statistical significance of the result relative to an alignment of
random structures. Typically proteins with a similar fold will
have a z-score of 3.5 or better []. The z-score can be used to
filter less significant results or alternatively look for weak
similarities In spite of that, the relationship between backbone
RMSD in Å and structure quality for NMR structure ensemble
and for protein structure comparison show that they were
barely acceptable and have a very closely related to each other.
Therefore, the model predicted was acceptable.

Conclusion
The knowledge of the three-dimensional structure of
coagulase is fundamental in understanding its native
conformation hence the mechanism of the coagulase action.
Furthermore, structure prediction via homology modeling
offers an alternative way to obtain structural information well
before the structure of the new protein is determined by X-ray
crystallography or NMR. Then, this will assist in searching the
answer to design a suitable inhibitor for S. aureus in effort to
explore secreted proteins for vaccine development.

Citation:Mohamed et al, Bioinformation 8(9): 412-414 (2012)

(a) Structural-based alignment of coagulase from S.
aureus and the template PDB ID: 1NU9 (Staphylocoagulase-
Prethrombin-2 complex). The sequence shaded in cyan
represents sequence similarity; (b) The best predicted model
of coagulase (coagulase.B99990002); (c) Ramachandran Plot of
the coagulase model calculated by PROCHECK; (d)
Superposition of the predicted model of coagulase from S.
aureus onto to the template PDB ID: 1NU9.

