Background:
Comparative genomics is a proven and established tool for 
genome analysis, annotation and evolutionary studies  [].
Coding regions, in particular,  can be exploited for developing 
DNA markers, already proved very useful in comparative 
studies. Microsatellites or Simple Sequence Repeats (SSRs) are 
ubiquitous in eukaryotic genomes, with non-random 
distribution in the genomic regions. Microsatellites provide a 
rich source of hypervariable co-dominant markers owing to 
their high mutation rates that generate allelic variation in array 
length  []. Microsatellites have been implicated in genome 
evolution, gene regulation or functional evolution of the genes 
[]. Microsatellites are important tools for comparative mapping 
because of their high polymorphism and transferability. Genic 
Microsatellite Markers (GMMs) have been extensively used in 
different areas such as genome characterization, genome 
mapping, comparative genomics, phylogenetic studies, 
population genetics and molecular breeding [].

In general, microsatellites are identified from both non-coding 
and coding regions of the genome. Standard methods for the 
development of microsatellite markers require considerable 
amount of time, money and labour  []. Moreover, 
microsatellites developed by these standard methods show anelement of biasness depending upon the method or probe used 
for their development. Recently,  researchers have shifted their 
attention from genomic markers to genic markers that represent 
coding sequences or transcriptome []. The advancements in the 
field  of  genomics  have  resulted  in  the  accumulation  of  huge 
amount of sequence data in the public domain including vast 
collection of expressed sequence tags (ESTs) and unigenes. This 
huge sequence data has provided an alternative approach for 
the identification and development of molecular markers. ESTs 
have provided a potentially rich source of GMMs  []. GMMs 
are widely favoured as molecular markers owing to their 
inexpensive development, representation of transcribed 
genes/coding regions and a putative function can often be 
deduced by a homology search. Development of EST-derived 
microsatellite markers, however, suffers with a limitation of 
high redundancy prevailing in EST sequences yielding multiple 
markers at the same locus. To overcome this limitation of ESTs, 
unigenes are derived by clustering ESTs into singletons and 
contigs. Microsatellite markers developed from these unigenes 
can be used to detect variation in the functional genome with 
unique identity and position  []. Parida and co-workers  
[]
identified and characterized microsatellite motifs in the 
unigenes available in five cereal crops (rice, wheat, maize, 
sorghum, barley) and  Arabidopsis. These unigene derived 
microsatellite (UGMS) markers have high inter-specific 
transferability as they are developed from conserved coding 
regions of the genome. Moreover, they also serve as a potential 
tool to study functional diversity and genome evolution 
patterns more accurately. Therefore, these unigene derived
microsatellite markers would be of great use for comparative 
mapping and phylogenetic analysis and to facilitate 
development of syntenic networks for understanding the 
evolution of genes and genomes.

Fabaceae (earlier included in Leguminosae) is the third largest 
and economically important family of flowering plants. 
Members of Fabaceae include  Arachis hypogaea, Cajanus cajan, 
Cicer arietinum,  Glycine max,  Pisum sativum and many other 
important legumes. These crops serve as a source of staple, 
essential food for supplementing dietary proteins for vegetarian 
people. Recent progress towards accumulation of various 
genomic resources (ESTs, unigenes) for legumes have facilitated 
comparative mapping in these plant species. Although a lot has 
been achieved towards development of genic microsatellite 
markers in plants, yet only few studies have been undertaken to 
develop such resources in case of legumes. This study 
concentrates on identifying genic microsatellite repeats in 
legumes and comparative analysis of genic microsatellites in 
legumes, which can further be used as a valuable tool for future 
studies in legumes related to genome evolution, gene tagging 
and genetic diversity.

Methodology:
Sequence resources:
Unigene collections of 11 plant species, including 9 legumes 
namely  Arachis hypogaea  (Aha),  Cajanus cajan  (Cca),  Cicer
arietinum (Car), Glycine max (Gma), Lotus japonicus (Lja), Medicago
truncatula  (Mtr),  Phaseolus vulgaris  (Pvu),  Pisum sativum  (Psa) 
and Vigna unguiculata (Vun), and two model plants, Oryza sativa
(Osa) and  Arabidopsis thaliana  (Ath) were subjected to  in silico
mining of microsatellites  (Supplementary ). Unigene 
sequences for all these species were downloaded from NCBI 
Unigene database  
(
ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/repository/UniGene/) except for  C. 
cajan, C. arietinum  and  P. sativum, as unigene data for these 
legumes were not available in the public domain. For these 
species, large numbers of ESTs are available in NCBI dbEST 
(
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/dbEST/). To nullify 
redundancy prevalent in ESTs, we used the sequence assembly 
program CAP3  [] to cluster ESTs into contigs/singletons and 
generated non-redundant unigenes for each of these legume 
species. The non-redundant unigene sequences were used to 
identify microsatellites and perform gene ontology annotation. 

Microsatellite mining and variability prediction:
A perl script, MISA (MIcroSAtelitte) was used to identify 
microsatellites in all these unigene sequences 
(http://pgrc.ipkgatersleben.de/misa/)  
[]. A simple sequence repeat with 
repeat motif length varying between 1 and 6 bp was identified 
as a microsatellite. Mononucleotide repeats were excluded from 
the analysis because of the abundance of poly A/T repeats 
mostly resulting from sequencing artifacts and poly A tails. 
Repeat-motifs like AG, GA, TC and CT were considered in the 
same class considering complementary sequences and/or 
different reading frames. Compound microsatellites were 
considered with at least two different repeat-motifs without any 
interruption. The analysis of mined microsatellites was done on 
the basis of their motif length (di- to hexa-nucleotide), number 
and type of repeats, relative frequency of occurrence and length 
as class I (≥20 nucleotides) and class II (12 to 20 nucleotides) 
types []. 
GC content was also calculated. Trinucleotide repeats 
were examined for the possible encoded amino acid motif and 
codon biasness.

Assessment of functional relevance of unigenes having SSRs:
Unigene sequences containing microsatellites were used for 
similarity search using Blast2GO  [] to identify their putative 
function. Unigene sequences not showing any match were 
considered as unique to that particular species. The C. arietinum
microsatellite positive unigenes were run through a Gene 
Ontology (GO) assignment database in order to assess 
associations between SSR loci and biological processes, cellular 
components and molecular function of known genes.

Discussion:
The availability of large unigene collections for some legumes 
in public domain allowed us to explore these resources for the 
presence and functional relevance of different microsatellite 
repeats. The unigenes being longer and without redundancy 
offer advantages over the EST sequences for the development of 
microsatellite markers. However, development of 
microsatellites for the species with no sequence information is 
an expensive and time-consuming task.  To overcome this 
limitation, microsatellite markers developed in closely related 
species can be utilized  []. EST-SSRs representing the coding 
regions of the genome, are expected to be conserved with a high 
rate of cross species transferability in comparison to genome 
derived SSRs  []. Success of EST derived SSR markers across 
diverse taxonomic groups has been reported [].

A total of 228090 putative unique sequences were screened for 
the presence of microsatellites, of which 12.18% (27791) 
contained specified repeat motifs excluding mononucleotide 
repeats, yielding 36248 unique  SSRs. In legumes, a total of 
156013 unique sequences were used for microsatellite search, of 
which only 6.85% (10688) contained microsatellites representing 
12220 unique SSRs ( see supplementary material). This 
is a relatively higher abundance of SSRs for plant unique coding 
sequences, compared to the previous reports for some cereals 
[] and wild  Arachis  species  
[]. The variable abundance of 
SSRs is known to be dependent on the SSR search criteria, the 
size of the dataset, the database-mining tools and the species 
concerned []. The frequency of occurrence for unigene-derived 
SSRs was one SSR in every 6.0 kb. In previous reports, this 
frequency ranged from 3.4 kb in rice to 20.0 kb in cotton 
[]. 

In earlier reports, trinucleotide repeats generally formed the 
most common motif in various plant species  [], regardless of 
the EST-SSR search criteria. However, abundance of 
dinucleotide repeats has also been reported in many of the dicot 
species []. We also found trinucleotide repeats to be the most 
abundant followed by dinucleotides with the sole exception of 
C. cajan, where the situation was reversed as dinucleotide 
repeats were more abundant followed by trinucleotide repeats 
(). Dinucleotide and trinucleotide repeats together 
counted for more than 90% of all the microsatellites (). 

Tetranucleotide (˜2.0%), pentanucleotide (&lt;1.0%) and 
hexanucleotide (˜1.0%) repeats showed very low abundance 
among all the species. In terms of single SSR motif, the 
dinucleotide motif AG/CT was most frequent  [,
,
]. The 
two most dominant motif types recorded in our search were AG 
and  AT  in  agreement  with  a  study  on  cultivated  peanut  and 
wild Arachis species 
[]. Low abundance of “CG” repeats may 
be attributed to their tendency of forming secondary structures 
(hairpins), leading to a selective pressure against ‘CG’ 
accumulation in genomes. Microsatellites were also classified 
into two classes on length basis. Firstly, Class I microsatellites, 
which include microsatellites more than equal to 20 nucleotides 
in length, and  secondly, Class II microsatellites including 
microsatellites of less than 20 nucleotides. Class II 
microsatellites are more abundant (&gt;70%) among all the species 
().

Among trinucleotide repeat motifs, AAG motif was the most 
abundant, which is the second most abundant motif in 
Arabidopsis []. In other plant species, the most frequent 
trinucleotide repeat motifs were AAC/TTG in wheat, 
AAG/TTC in soybean, and CCG/GGC in barley, rice, maize 
and sorghum  [,
,
]. The previous studies on  Arabidopsis 
and soybean [] also reported abundance of trinucleotide motif 
AAG, contrasting to the abundance of CCG motif in cereal 
species  []. The trinucleotide repeats code for 21 amino acids
and stop codon. The predicted amino acid pattern for the 
trinucleotide motifs detected is shown in supplementary . 
CTA/CTC/CTG/CTT/TTA/TTG motifs coding for leucine 
were most common followed by 
AGC/AGT/TCA/TCC/TCG/TCT coding for serine and 
glutamic acid (GAA/GAG). Abundance of small/hydrophilic 
amino acid repeat motifs like that of serine in the unigenes of 
cereals and  Arabidopsis  is explainable since these repeats are 
tolerated in many proteins, while strong selection pressure 
possibly eliminates codon repeats encoding for 
hydrophobic/other amino acids  []. Trinucleotide repeats try 
to maintain codon biasness and thus vary their frequency 
significantly to manage frameshift mutations in coding regions 
[]. 

In silico identification of SSRs from various sequence resources 
like genomic sequences, ESTs or unigenes is a low cost and easy 
method for development of microsatellite markers. Such 
markers can be used for understanding the nature and possible 
biological functions. EST-SSRs have been of great interest to 
researchers and there are many recent reports about 
development of EST-SSR markers, in plant materials such as 
soybean [], potato 
[], seabuckthorn 
[] and many more.

To characterize unigene sequences harboring SSRs, we 
performed sequence similarity search against non redundant 
NCBI protein database. On an average, more than 70% of 
unigenes with SSRs showed homology to genes having known 
function for each species under study, with an exception of C. 
cajan,  which had only 30% of such  unigenes. The remaining 
unigenes showing no hit during similarity search were 
considered as organism specific. Most of the unigene sequences 
represented enzymes of general metabolism as reported earlier 
[]. 
On the basis of GO annotation, microsatellite positive 
chickpea unigenes were assigned GO terms associated with 
biological process, cellular component and molecular function. 
In case of biological processes,  C. arietinum  unigenes were 
assigned to thirty three different categories  ().
Majority of unigenes were assigned to the “transport” category 
(15.5%). For the cellular components, unigenes were assigned to 
nineteen different categories with majority of them participated 
in “plastid” category (17.45%)  (). When concentrating 
on molecular functions, the unigenes were assigned to twenty 
two categories with majority covering “binding” category 
(18.18%)  (). In general, microsatellite containing  C.
arietinum unigene sequences matched to proteins having 
distinct molecular functions such as, binding, catalytic, 
transport, enzyme regulators, and structural activities in 
different biological processes, and cellular and sub-cellular 
organization. Unigenes related to biological process such as 
response to abiotic and biotic stresses should be explored as 
candidates for studying their role in response to that particular 
stress or trait. One of the favorable approaches to use them 
could be to assign marker trait association study based on the 
phenotypic data and allele variance across diverse collections.

Conclusion:
The present study has focused on the  in silico
mining/identification of microsatellites from the unique coding 
sequences of nine members of Fabaceae family and two model 
plant species. Microsatellite markers developed from conserved 
coding region of genome show a higher transferability through 
cross-amplifications in related species than microsatellites 
developed using genomic regions. Development of 
microsatellite markers from coding region using computational 
approach has reduced the cost significantly and allowed their 
use for related species with less sequence information. 
Microsatellite dynamics with regard to frequency and types of 
microsatellites showed marked variability in the legume 
unigenes. The trinucleotide repeats were predominant in all the 
unigenes analysed except in  C. cajan. Unigene sequences are 
derived from the expressed portion of the genome, therefore, 
markers developed from these resources can be assayed as gene 
based functional marker for diversity assessment, and gene 
mapping and marker assisted selection. To characterize unigene 
sequences with SSRs, we performed sequence similarity search
against non-redundant NCBI protein database. Unigene 
derived markers may be implicated in biological, cellular and 
molecular functions and provide opportunity to investigate the 
possible role of microsatellites in various gene functions.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors are thankful to GGSIP University, New Delhi, India for 
providing processing charges for this article. Manish Roorkiwal 
acknowledges research fellowship from University Grants 
Commission (UGC).

Citation:Roorkiwal &amp; Sharma, Bioinformation 7(5): 264-270 (2011)

Distribution of microsatellite repeats in various legumes, rice and Arabidopsis. b) Distribution of Class I and Class II 
microsatellite repeats

Gene Ontology annotation of SSR positive Cicer 
arietinum unigenes.  a)  Biological process;  b) Cellular 
component; and c) Molecular function

