Background
The advancements in scientific data collection methods have led
to the piling up of large quantities of data at various biology
and life sciences databases. The advent of DNA microarrays
facilitated the simultaneous monitoring of the expression levels
of thousands of genes across a multitude of samples.
Unraveling the hidden patterns from the gene expression data
offers a distinct opportunity for understanding the important
biological processes. The information thus obtained can be
effectively utilized for important applications like early
diagnosis and classification of various diseases. However, the
complexity of the enormous amount of the genomic data poses
a big challenge to the task of unearthing the hidden patterns
from the massive data banks. Cluster analysis [] is a first step
towards addressing this challenge.

Cluster analysis is one of the major data mining methods which
help identify the natural grouping in a set of data items.
Clustering is the process of partitioning a given set of objects
into disjoint clusters. This is done in such a way that the objects
in the same cluster are similar while objects belonging to
different clusters differ considerably, with respect to their
attributes. Clustering of microarray Gene Expression (GE) data
helps understand the gene functions, gene regulation and
cellular processes []. The genes in the same cluster exhibit
similar expression patterns and are likely to be co-regulated.
Clustering of tissue samples collected from various people
including healthy persons and those infected with diseases like
cancer, based on the similarity in expression patterns, can help
in effective classification of unknown samples which in turn can
lead to early diagnosis of diseases [].

The k-means algorithm [] is effective in producing clusters for
many practical applications. But the computational complexity
of the original k-means algorithm is very high, especially for
large data sets. Moreover, this algorithm results in locally
optimum solutions and produces different types of clusters
depending upon the random choice of the initial centroids.
Several methods were proposed in the literature for improving
the performance of the k-means clustering algorithm 
[–].
However, none of them could find wide acceptance among the
users. Clustering can be thought of as an optimization problem
that maximizes the intra-cluster similarity and minimizes the
inter-cluster similarity among the data points. Attempts were
made to develop hybrid algorithms by combining the k-means
algorithm with meta-heuristic techniques such as Harmony
Search optimization [–], in an attempt to obtain globally
optimum solutions. This technique makes use of a harmony
memory which is initialized with randomly generated feasible
solutions to provide a global solution space. The harmony
memory is then improvised by generating a new solution from
the existing candidate solutions and replacing the current worst
solution by the new solution, if it has a better fitness value. This
process is repeated for several times and the best solution in the
harmony memory is selected as the final solution.

The inadequate clustering accuracy of the existing methods is a
bottleneck in crucial applications in the areas of Biology and
Life Sciences. This paper presents a novel and effective
Harmony Search-K means Hybrid (HSKH) algorithm for
clustering the microarray gene expression data 
[–].

Methodology
The proposed HSKH clustering algorithm consists of two
phases. In the first phase, the initial centroids of the clusters are
determined using an improved Harmony Search optimization
technique. The centroids thus determined are used in the
second phase to form the final clusters by repetitively assigning
the data points to the clusters with the nearest centroids.

The Improved Harmony Search Algorithm:
In this method the harmony memory is initialized with n
number of candidate solutions in a systematic way, where n is
the number of columns in the GE matrix. Each row in the
harmony memory corresponds to a specific clustering solution
represented by k columns. Each column represents a cluster and
the value corresponding to the column indicates the index of
the data-point that represents the centroid of the corresponding
cluster.

First of all, the first column of the GE matrix (Sample-IDs or
Gene-IDs, as the case may be) is sorted based on the value of the
data items present in the second column (expression levels of the
gene in the samples or in the sample of the genes). The sorted data
items are then divided into k equal sets. The index of the data
point which comes at the middle of each set is selected as the
centroid of that cluster. A set of k such centroids will constitute
a candidate solution. The above procedure is repeated for all
the n columns of the Gene Expression matrix and the harmony
memory is initialized with n candidate solutions thus obtained.
Then the fitness values of all the solutions are evaluated as the
Average Distance of Data points to Cluster centroids (ADDC)
(Please see  for equation and
explanation).

Assigning Data Points to Clusters:
After determining the initial centroids using the Improved
Harmony Search algorithm, the data items are assigned to the
clusters with the nearest centroids using a variant of the method
followed in [] 
(Please see ).

Result and Discussion
For evaluating the clustering accuracy of the proposed HSKH
algorithm, two standard Gene Expression data sets, namely, the
Human Fibroblast Serum data [] and the Rat CNS data 
[]
were given as inputs to the original K-means algorithm and the
proposed HSKH algorithm. The accuracy of clustering is
determined in terms of the Silhouette Index 
[] metric. Its value
ranges from -1 to 1, with higher value indicating better solution.

The results of the experiment are compared with the clustering
accuracy of four other methods available in the literature 
[].
The methods considered are Self Organizing Maps (SOM) 
[],
Iterative Fuzzy C Means (IFCM) [], Variable string length
Genetic Algorithm (VGA) [] and Chinese Restaurant
Clustering (CRC) []. The clustering accuracies of the
algorithms for the two data sets are compared in ().

It can be seen from the above experiments that the proposed
HSKH algorithm performs better than the existing methods.
The significant improvement in the clustering accuracy can be
attributed to the improved harmony search method used to
determine the initial centroids of the clusters. As a result of the
refined initial centroids and the efficient assignment of the data
points to the different clusters, our algorithm yields better
clusters in less number of computational steps.

Conclusion
Clustering is a first step towards retrieving useful knowledge
from microarray gene expression data. Accurate clustering is
very much needed in Biology and Life Science applications as
the resulting clusters are used for making crucial inferences on
disease diagnosis and drug development. The conventional
clustering techniques do not generally give sufficiently good
results. The HSKH algorithm proposed in this paper combines
the merits of the Harmony Search Optimization and the
Enhanced K means algorithms, producing a globally optimal
solution with significant improvement in the accuracy of
clustering compared to the original k-means and other known
clustering techniques.

The proposed HSKH algorithm may not be effective in its
present form for certain clustering applications where the
number of clusters k is not known in advance. But it is not a
bottleneck in the case of clustering gene expression data where
the concern is to classify the data into a specified number of
clusters. Development of a clustering technique with automatic
computation of k is suggested as a topic for further research.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Nazeer et al, Bioinformation 9(2): 084-088 (2013)

Performance Comparison of the Algorithms

