Background
Snake venoms are assortment of different biologically active
proteins and polypeptides which are produced and stored in
highly specialized venom glands. Venom toxins are of
biological interest because of their diverse and selective
pharmacological and physiological effects through their
interaction with different molecular targets []. However,
these protein cocktails, often neurotoxins, conferring potency
against a spectrum of targets and prey (reviewed in [,
]).
For instance, Bungarus multicinctus venom contains both α-
bungarotoxin, which blocks acetylcholine receptors on the
postsynaptic membrane of neuromuscular junctions, and β-
bungarotoxin, a kind of beta- neurotoxin from the
phospholipase A2 family, which inhibits neurotransmitter
release from presynaptic membranes []. So far, as many as 16
isoforms of the β-BuTx have been reported from Bungarus
species [] and 8 of them, namely b1–b5 
[] and SPI–SPIII 
[]
have been studied in detail. Structurally, they are covalently
linked heterodimers; chain A is homologous to Group I
PLA2 enzyme, while chain B is structurally similar to Kunitztype
serine protease inhibitors and dendrotoxins. However,
dimerization is a pre-requisite for the proper functionality of
complete bungarotoxin. Beta2-bungarotoxin A chain consists
of 120 amino acid residues in a single chain. A chain has 13
cysteine residues of which 12 form six disulphide bridges. An
extra cysteine residue at the 15thposition forms an inter-chain
disulphide forms the disulphide bridge with chain B at 55th
position [] and also determines the X-ray crystal structure
of beta2 bungarotoxin which showed different conformation
of B chain from native bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitors and
accounts for its lack of protease inhibitor activity. Structurally,
the a helices and the Ca2+ binding loop in chain A are similar
to other PLA2 molecules. However, there is a conformational
change in the region where it interacts with chain B (residue
13–16 and 74–76), as well as in the substrate binding loop
(residue 63–65). Similarly, the C-terminal region of chain B
shows conformational variation due to the interaction with
chain A, and this conformational change accounts for the lack
of protease inhibitor activity. Moreover, ionic interactions
between Glu16 of chain A and Lys 48 of chain B and a
hydrogen bond between Arg 75 of chain A and carbonyl
oxygen atom of Leu58 of chain B in the interface play
important roles with interchain disulphide bridge and
contribute to the overall actability of this covalent complex.
The B-chain consists of 61 amino acid residues which is
homologous to mammalian pancreatic and snake venom
protease inhibitors (Kunitz type) and also the facilitatory
dendrotoxins from mamba (Dendroaspis) venom [,
]. The Bchain,
however, does not have any intrinsic protease inhibitor
activity. The B-chain is thought to act as an affinity probe to
guide the toxin to its target (probably a potassium channel) on
nerve terminals and the different B-chains may account for the
differences in lethality between the isoforms []. β-BuTx
binds to the presynaptic site at the neuromuscular junction
and disrupts the release of acetylcholine. The effect of β-
BuTx on the nerve terminal and summarized the series of
event during neurotoxicity as: (1) initial weak reduction in the
spontaneous acetylcholine release, (2) subsequent
enhancement of the release of acetylcholine and (3) a final
decrease in the release of acetylcholine leading to complete
failure of neurotransmission []. Subsequently, several
studies were done to understand the effect of β-BuTx in the
nerve terminals. As mentioned earlier, chain B is similar to
dendrotoxin from Dendroaspis venoms, which blocks voltage
sensitive K2+channels. Hence, in organ bath assay, when
muscle preparation is pretreated with dendrotoxin, the
neuromuscular block by β-BuTx slows down. This indicates
that both beta bungarotoxin and dendrotoxin target the same
receptor/acceptor and that chain B exhibits the blocking
activity by binding to the voltage gated K2+
channel [].
Chemical modification studies show that the inhibition of
PLA2 activity of chain A restrains the neurotoxic effect,
suggesting the involvement of enzymatic activity in the
neurotoxicity []. Chain B binds to the K+channels in the
target presynaptic site owing to its high affinity interaction
and in turn assists chain A to bind to the presynaptic site. This
novel functional characteristic of beta-bungarotoxin to act on
the pre-synaptic site is of particular interest in pharmacology
for therapeutic development. B. fasciatus is an elapid snake
species indigenous to Bangladesh and south-east Asian
locations also contains bungarotoxins into its venom gland.
While searching for beta-bungarotoxin protein sequences in
NCBI and UnitProtKB/SwissProt Database, reports of only
two isoform of B chain from B. fasciatus are found. So far,
there is no report of existence of A chain in bungarotoxin
from B. fasciatus although significant works has been carried
out on this species. Therefore, we predicted the three
dimensional structure of the B chain using popular web-based
servers and validated the output structure for elucidation of B.
fasciatus, beta-bungarotoxin structure.

Methodology
The complete protein sequences of two beta bungarotoxin BF
B1 (B2KTG2) and BF B2 (B2KTG3) chain of Bungarus fasciatus
were retrieved from the biological database, National Centre
for Biotechnology Information (NCBI), cited at 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov.

Prediction and Identification of Neurotoxin:
Neurotoxic nature of the protein sequences of beta
bungarotoxin from Bungarus fasciatus were confirmed through
online server (www.imtech.res.in/raghava/ntxpred/).
NTXpred predicts neurotoxins and classify them based on
their function and origin. The server uses a number for
predicting neurotoxins using residue composition based on
feed-forwarded neural network (FNN), recurrent neural
network (RNN) and support vector machine (SVM).

Sequence Alignment:
In 3D structure, template may be a predefined layout to give
an idea about the unknown structure of the query molecule.
The NCBI BLAST [] (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool)
was used to identify the template for modeling the three
dimensional structure of beta bungarotoxin B chain. Protein
protein BLAST (blastp) was performed using PSI-BLAST 
[]
search at NCBI server. The sequence of the target molecule
in FASTA format was submitted for blastp against Protein
Data Bank database which yields the suitable template and
finally the alignment was performed with the target protein
sequences with Protein Data Bank (PDB code: 1bun)
template using CLUSTALW [].

Signal Peptide Detection:
SignalP 4.1 server [] was used for the detection of signal
peptide sequence in the amino acid sequences. SignalP 4.1
server predicts the presence and location of signal peptide
cleavage sites in amino acid sequences from different
organisms. The method incorporates a prediction of cleavage
sites and a signal peptide/non-signal peptide prediction based
on a combination of several artificial neural networks.

Secondary Structure Prediction:
The PSIPRED (http://bioinf.cs.ucl.ac.uk/psipred//? Program=psipred) 
protein structure prediction server was used for the
detection of secondary structure and fold recognition.
PSIPRED, [] is considered as a highly accurate secondary
structure prediction method.

Homology modeling:
The X-crystal structural coordinates of beta bungarotoxin of
Bungarus multicinctus were available at 2.45 Å resolution (PDB:
1BUN) and were used as template structure to generate the
three- dimensional model of bungarotoxin. The Swiss-Pdb
Viewer 4.0 homology modeling software was used to generate
the 3-D structure of beta bungarotoxin B.

Validation of the modeled structure:
In order to assess the reliability of the modeled structure of
bungarotoxin B1 and B2 chain, we calculated the root mean
square deviation (RMSD) by superimposing it on the template
structure using a three dimensional structural superposition
(3d-SS) tool []. The backbone conformation of the modeled
structure was calculated by analyzing the phi (Φ) and psi (ψ)
torsion angles using PROCHECK, as determined by
Ramachandran plot statistics. Finally, the quality of the
consistency between the template and the modeled structure
was evaluated using ProSA [], during which the energy
criteria for the modeled structure were compared with the
potential mean force obtained from a large set of known
protein structures.

Function annotations of the protein:
To functionally annotate the B chain, ‘Profunc’ was used and
to find the conserved domains in protein to identify its family,
it was searched against close orthologous family members.
NCBI Conserved Domain Database (NCBI CDD) [] was used
to find the conserved domains or ancient domains in the
protein sequence.

Active site Prediction:
CastP server [] was used to predict the active sites of
bungarotoxin B1 and B2 chain with their respective volume
and area (http://sts.bioengr.uic.edu/castp/calculation.php).
The active pocket (active site) with more volume and area is
always taken for further analysis. The pdb file was uploaded
to get the result.

Stability of proteins:
Disulfide bridges play a major role in the stabilization of the
folding process for several proteins. Prediction of disulfide
bridges from sequence alone is therefore useful for the study
of structural and functional properties of specific proteins. The
online server ‘DISULFIND’ [] 
[http://disulfind.dsi.unifi.it/.] 
was used for predicting the disulfide bonding state of
cysteines and their disulfide connectivity starting from the
sequence alone.

Results &amp; Discussion
Sequence retrieval of Bungarotoxin:
The protein sequences of bungarotoxin from B. fasciatus were
retrieved from the NCBI database having the id as B2KTG2
and B2KTG3. The precursor sequence of beta bungarotoxin
B chain is composed of 85 amino acid residues including a
predicted 24-aa signal peptide and 61-aa mature peptide.
Using Expasy ProtParam tool (http://web.expasy.org/protparam/) 
some physical parameter was obtained for the
concerned sequences. The physicochemical properties like
molecular weight, pI value, and percentage identity with the
template protein were given  (see supplementary
material). To determine the nature of neurotoxin online
neurotoxin prediction server NTXPRED was used. The
alignment result of two bungarotoxin B chain is given in
. The result showed approximately 87.059%
similarity of amino acids between the two sequences. PSI
blast prediction showed that both B chains of beta
bungarotoxin BF B1 and BF B2 act as Ca2+ion channel blocker.
PSIPRED is the protein structure prediction server
(http://bioinf.cs.ucl.ac.uk/psipred/), utilized for the analysis
of the secondary structure of our concerned amino acid
sequences. B chain of beta-2 bungarotoxin from B. multicintus
was also used for the comparison of the B chain from B.
fasciatus. Results obtained from the PSIPRED server are
shown in . BLAST P result for the template
selection of bungarotoxin BF B1 chain and BF B2 against PDB
database showed 87% and 78% sequence similarity with beta-
2 bungarotoxin from B. multicinctus (PDB code: 1BUN B). E
value for the selected template for BF B1 and BF B2 chain
against 1BUN were respectively 1e-32 and 1e-28. The three
dimensional structure of beta bungarotoxin BF B1 and BF B2
chain of B. fasciatus given in  and was evaluated
with scores of target protein and template. In this study, we
observed significantly similarity of score and dope score
(minimum energy was considered), target and template
protein. Though cysteine residues found in both the sequences
at position 7,16,32,40,53,55,57; CYS_REC and DISULFIND
server predicted presence of disulfide bond between 7-57, 16-
40, 32-53 residues. Since cysteine residue at 55 positions has no
bonding partner with A chain (A chain was not found in B.
fasciatus in NCBI database and BLAST search) as in B.
multicinctus, we predict that the free cysteine at position 55 of
BF B1 will form a disulfide bond with cysteine 55 of BF B2.
Active site of the 3D structure predicted by Swiss-Model is
shown in Figures, respectively, and the amino acids involved
in pocket formation in both the models are displayed in
. The possible binding sites of B chain was searched
based on the structural comparison of template and the
model build with CASTP server. Since, BF B1 and BF B2
and the 1BUN_B are well conserved in both sequence and
structure; their biological function should be identical. The
predicted results are interesting and  shows the
amino acid position are predicted to conserved with the
active site.

SignalP 4.1 server was used to recognize the presence and
location of signal peptide cleavage sites in amino acid
sequences . In this analysis, Ramachandran plot
for bungarotoxins of B. fasciatus fulfilled the test ~ 84% in
the most favored region. There was no amino acid residue
present in the disallowed region of the Ramachandran plot.
The overall G – factor of neurotoxins was 0.09 to 0.13 for the
three 3-D structures. The result deduced that 3-D structure of
neurotoxin was favored for a good satisfactory model.
Ramachandran plot for neurotoxin of B. fasciatus was shown
in .Verify 3D analysis revealed that 100% of the
residues had an average 3D-1D score of &lt;0.2, predicting that
the model is perfectly fitted with its sequence. The amino acid
environment was evaluated using ERRAT plots, which assess
the distribution of different types of atoms with respect to
one another in the protein model and is used for making
decision about its reliability . ERRAT showed
an overall quality factor of 92.308 (BF B1) and 92.157 (BF B2),
a result expected for crystallographic models with
resolution &gt;2.5A.

Conclusion
β-BuTx is an interesting pre-synaptic neurotoxin found in
different Bungarus snake sp. and as yet it has been studied
extensively in B. multicinctus. B. fasciatus is a deadly elapid
which is found in Bangladesh, as well Indian subcontinent.
The venom of this species is predominantly neurotoxic which
corroborates with the presence of bungarotoxin in it.
However, in B. fasciatus so far there are reports of existence of
protein that are homologous to the B chain. But in order to
obtain proper functionality two chain of bungerotoxin
(chain A and Chain B) needs to be dimerized. Therefore,
three dimensional structural model of complete β-BuTx from
B. fasciatus was created using only B chain. B chain of β-BuTx
from B. fasciatus contains 13 cyctein residues which are
predicted to form 6 disulfide bonds among them; furthermore
from the predicted structure it is evident that the odd cystein
takes part in forming inter-chain disulfide linkage. Thus, in
absence of chain A in B. fasciatuas two B chain froms
homodimer instead of the heterodimer of conventional β-
BuTx and retains its neurotoxic activity.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Roly et al, Bioinformation 10(10): 617-622 (2014)

Sequence, structure and active site analysis of beta bungarotoxin B chain in Bungarus fasciatus: A) Multiple sequence
alignment of BF B1 and BF B2 with template 1BUN_B used for structure modeling; B) Secondary structure prediction from PSIPRED
server; C) Three dimensional structures of BF B1 and BF B2 predicted from Swiss-Modeller; D) CASTP prediction of the active site
residues on the modeled structures; Active site residues are shown in colored position.

Determination of Signal peptide and different computational analysis of beta bungarotoxin B chain: A)
Prediction of signal pepetide from signalP 4.1; B) Ramachandran plot showing predicted model reliability; C) Z-scorre
QMEAN showing the validation of the models; D) ERRAT value showing overall model quality.

