Background
Interest in glycerol dehydratase GD (EC 4.2.1.30) has increased beyond
academic circles in the past few years because of its role in the
fermentation pathway for producing industrial 1,3- propanediol (1,3-PD).
Two kinds of GD have been characterised to date. The first one catalyses
glycerol conversion to 3-hydroxypropionaldehyde via a radical mechanism
depending on the extensively studied 5’-deoxyadenosylcobalamin (vitamin
coB12) [] 
the other performs the same function but is B12-independent.
Both enzymes belong to the new radical SAM superfamily of proteins
which has been identified in all kingdoms of life and has been shown to
catalyse a diverse array of chemical reactions having significant medical
and biotechnological importance. The GDs specifically belongs to the
lyase family which cleaves carbon-oxygen bonds 
[].

The cofactors required for such common activation mechanism are a [4Fe-
4S] + cluster (three Fe2+ ions and one Fe3+ ion) and S-adenosylmethionine
(SAM). Glycerol dehydratase is a key enzyme for the dihydroxyacetone
(DHA) pathway []. 
The C. butyricum enzyme presents the highest
identity (47%) with E. coli PFL (piruvate formate lyase) according to
Raynaud et al., specifically the C-terminal domain (the radical loop). Its
overall structure is an β/α barrel containing its catalytic properties. The
B12-independent enzyme forms a monomer forming a functional dimer 
[];
however, the B12-dependent one exists as an αβγ heterotrimer dimer. The α
monomer corresponds to the β/αbarrel 
[].

Neither the basic evolutionary biology for this class of protein nor the type
of residues considered to be evolutionary hot spots has been deduced at the
present. This study has examined GD molecular evolutionary history to
determine whether the evolutionary process has been responsible for the
high degree of sequence conservation. Different methodological
approaches were used for analysing synonymous (pS) and nonsynonymous
(pN) changes in 31 GD sequences. PRATT software was used
for predicting the GD motif signature and the Evolutionary Trace server
was used for determining evolutionary traces for the GD protein. Specific
amino acids responsible for selective restriction were then identified,
phylogenetic divergence being produced for this protein. DIVERGE 1.0
software was used in our approach for evaluating all protein sequences.

Methodology
Sequences
An exhaustive search was made in GenBank, EMBL and Swiss-prot
databases for GD nucleotide and protein sequences. This search was
optimised by using BLAST, PSI-BLAST and WU-BLAST software (6)
using the Clostridium butyricum protein sequence as search entry (access
number ABX56860.2). 103 hits were obtained and then filtered by
removing partial and redundant sequences from the population. Complete
protein representations were included by strain; our final working
population consisted of 31 complete protein sequences. SMART software
was used for scrutinising all sequences in the search for typical GD protein
domains [];. GD crystal structures were downloaded from the PDB
database; the 1r9d structure []; was used as template for divergent
functional residue analysis.

Alignment and phylogenetic reconstruction
Muscle software [] was used for gene and protein alignment of the 31
previously collected sequences, using default parameters. dS and dN
percentage changes were computed using a modified version of the Nei-
Gojobori test; the Tajima test was calculated using MEGA 4.0 software
and the SNAP server []. A combined strategy was used for phylogenetic
analysis; the NJ method was used first for phylogenetic reconstruction and
p-distance as a model for distance analysis []. Statistical robustness was
calculated by using 5,000 Bootstrap repeats. MEGA 4.0 software was used
throughout [].

Secondly, the alignment was then analysed using ProtTest 
[] to
determine the protein evolution model having the best fit for GD sequence
alignment. Phylogenetic analysis then used Phyml 3.0.1 
[], using 1,000
Bootstrap repeats. The phylogenetic tree was then visualised using NJplot
software []. The best tree topology was shown.

Analysing type I functional residues
A conceptual statistical framework for modelling functional divergence
was used for estimating the coefficient of functional divergence (θ) as type
I functional divergence level indicator. GD protein alignments were used
for determining divergence points (DIVERGE software 1.0) 
[].

Discussion
Glycerol conversion to 1, 3-PD involves a B12-dependent glycerol
dehydratase coenzyme []. However, one report has described that
Clostridium butyricum VPI1718 glycerol dehydratase (extracted from 1,3-
PD-producing cells) was not stimulated by coenzyme B12 and was
extremely oxygen sensitive, thereby suggesting that it might be a B12-
independent coenzyme []. It seems that B12-dependent and B12-
independent enzymes are orthologous genes which have evolved in
separate lines; however, β/α barrel homology indicate an ancestral
relationship.

GD evolution is characterised by ancient gene duplications (supported by
high basal bootstrap values) followed by bifurcation having long branches,
indicating independent evolution for each clade. Despite similar tree
branching being observed when using both strategies (see methodology),
the second one seemed to be the most parsimonious because it required
less steps to reproduce the topology with a good bootstrap value (Figure
, ). 
Interestingly, the longer basal branches of the tree (1,756 for B12-
independent and 2,175 for B12-dependent nodes) indicated a deep common
ancestor even though each current GD clade has its own evolutionary
mode. This hypothesis has been demonstrated by structural analysis for
both enzymatic types in which the B12-dependent type has additional
chains (contrary to the B12-independent types). JTT+γ was the evolutionary
model which best fit our protein sequences []; 
this was not calculated by MEGA 4.0 but is default in Phyml 1.0 software. This strategy has been
seen to be effective in predicting the best model for GD evolution

Several approaches were applied for testing natural selection. The results
suggested that dS level was higher than dN (Table 1 see 
). 
A 0.000 probability was obtained in the Z-test (dS–dN=3.538).
Tajima D value was 4.857740 and dS/dN was 1.3432 in the SNAP server.
This suggested that birth and death subjected to strong purifying selection
was the model best fitting GD protein evolution.

Such combination has thus sought the best polymorphism by niche,
explored according to species. This indicated that GD genes have been in
the bacterial genome for a long time. It also suggested that GD was a
determinant point of natural selection and thereby cooperated by inducing
the divergence of these kinds of bacterial species. It is possible that the
GD protein belongs to the radical SAM superfamily but the blast result
suggested that it fit better with the RNR-PFL superfamily (data not
shown). Such enzymes are strictly anaerobic (like GD) and it has been
further suggested that the diversity of chemical reactions catalysed by this
class of protein exceeds those catalysed by B12 
[]. Glycerol is the
primary metabolite of GD but has a wide variety of catalysed substrates
according to its evolutionary mode. GD displayed broad spectrum
substrates in this work. GD can catalyse 1, 2-ethanediol → acetaldehyde +
H2O, 1,2-propanediol → propionaldehyde + H2O 
[] and ethylene glycol
→ acetaldehyde + H2O (20) and GD may have a plethora of substrates
which have not yet been discovered.

Several residues have been determined for GD function. GD has been
found at Gly763 within the Clostridia Gly-radical domain (which has been
identified as being the site for free radical formation) and Cys433 located
around it. The active site binding glycerol and 1, 2-propanediol are
mediated by H281, H164, S282, D447, E435, Y640, C433 and Y339
residues (1–4). R782 may be important for functional contact between GD
and its reactivase protein [].

The cut-off value for detecting type I divergent residues was 0.7. Thirtynine
residues were detected here (Q94, E203, Y124, Y137, G162, L172,
k199, Y212, N100, K316, F332, G33, K350, L388, A392, S416, G443,
G463, Q469, K481, F483,Y498, I510, F520, G539, G538, S575,
K578,N582, P640, Y646, L650, A653, T654, G672, C673, K703, E751
and Y753) which can be considered to be hot-spots for GD evolution.
These sites may be the mutational points defining B12-dependent and B12-
independent GD lines (for more details please refer to supporting material).
PRATT was used for obtaining the trace maps for each GD protein 
(). 
Some of these sites fit just at the side of functionally proven residues
from the GD active site (i.e. G162/H163 and Y639/P640). Such changes
protect protein function but generate protein distortions opening up the
sequence space for exploring new niches.

Conclusion
For one hand, GD protein evolution can be clearly explained by birth and
death evolution in purifying selection mode and opens the way forward for
future mutagenesis studies pursuing enzymatic activity improvement based
on the traces identified here. For the other hand, it is important to develop
non conventional data mining strategies looking for the optimal
identification of RNF-PFL proteins family members in the databases.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We would like to thank the Bioprocesses and Bioprospecting research
group from the Biotechnology Institute at the National University of
Colombia and also the ACAC (Asociación Colombiana para el avance de
la ciencia) for their support in this paper. Finally, we give thanks to
Alfonso Benítez Páez for his suggestions about evolutionary topics and
Jason Garry for his contribution towards reviewing the text.

Citation:Escobar etal; Bioinformation 5(4): 173-176 (2010)

(A) Phylogenetic tree developed using MEGA 4.0 software, 31 GD protein sequences were aligned in Muscle. The alignment was used for
constructing a tree using the NJ, p-distance and 5,000 Bootstrap repetitions for statistical robustness (B) Phylogenetic tree developed using Phyml
software, 31 GD protein sequences were aligned in Muscle. The alignment was used for constructing a tree using the JTT + γ evolutionary model
according results from Prottest, 5,000 Bootstrap repetitions was used for statistical robustness. Only nodes having values higher than 50% statistical
significance have been shown (refer to supporting material for phylip sequence format used) C) Determining functionally important phylogenetically
divergent sites for the GD protein. The sites have a θ-value of 0.7 for all 39 sites (yellow), these being statistically significant values (falling within the 5%
region, having a P-value ≫0.05). Green residues considered the enzymatic active site according literature. D) PRATT traces residues for B12 Independent
and dependent types.

