Background
Several species of nematodes have been discovered from the
host G. africana (mole crickets) in Russia, Brazil, India, France,
Germany and Spain [–]. 
In India, from G. africana a number of
nematode species were described that belong to the various
genera viz., Binema Travassos, 1925 
[]; Basirella Biswas and
Chakravarty, 1963 []; Cameronia Basir, 1948a 
[]; Chitwoodiella
Basir, 1948b []; Gryllophila Basir, 1942a 
[]; Indiana Chakravarty,
1943 []; Isobinema Rao, 1958 
[]; Mirzaiella Basir, 1942a 
[];
Mohibiella Farooqui, 1970 []; 
Pteronemella Rao, 1958 
[];
Singhiella Rao, 1958 []. 
The species B. mirzaia (Basir, 1942a)
Basir, 1956 [,
]; C. nisari (Parveen and Jairajpuri, 1985a)
Adamson and Van Waerebeke, 1992a [,
] and M. meerutensis
Singh and Malti, 2003 [] were also reported under the above
genus. Previously, all of the taxonomic studies of these parasites
were based on adult morphology only [, 
–].

During the last decade, for making nematode differentiation
and identification easier, molecular methods have provided
additional tools. Advances in molecular-biology techniques
allowed an objective analysis of the taxonomy of Nematoda for
identification and phylogenetic analyses in nematode species.
Recently, phylogenetic analyses based on the 18S ribosomal
DNA sequences provided new discernment into relationships
within the Nematoda and showed that studies based on
morphological characters need revision [,
]. Phylogenetic
relationship within nematodes has been studied frequently 
[–] 
but phylogenies based on molecular data are still
contradictory in the genus of nematodes harboring G. africana.
18S ribosomal RNA gene represents a well-conserved gene that
has recently been used in the studies resolving the phylogenetic
relationship between nematode species and was also shown to
be a suitable marker for barcoding of nematodes 
[–].

The present study re-examines female parasites of B. mirzaia, C.
nisari and M. meerutensis morphologically and presents
molecular data. Limited data on nematodes of
Travassosinematidae is available till date on databases. For that
reason, D2-D3 domains of SSU rDNA and phylogenetic
analyses were done in this study. The 18S rDNA sequences for
three isolates B. mirzaia, C. nisari and M. meerutensis were
obtained to validate their phylogenetic position.

Methodology
Sample collection and morphological study:
Host insects G. africana collected in Meerut (29° 01' N, 77° 45' E),
U.P., India, were placed in individual vials from the fields.
Insects were anaesthetized with chloroform and dissected
immediately in normal saline under a stereoscopic microscope.
Gut was teased out with fine needle and the contents were
mixed with saline. Nematodes were picked up and being fixed
in hot 70% alcohol for slide preparation. For light microscopy
examination, the nematodes were cleared gradually in
glycerine. Collected samples were preserved in 95% ethanol,
until DNA extraction. Voucher specimens have been deposited
in the Museum, Department of Zoology, Chaudhary Charan
Singh University, Meerut, India.

DNA extraction, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification and sequencing:
Whole body of adults were lysed for DNA extraction and
genomic DNA was extracted using a DNeasy Tissue Kit
(Qiagen, Germany) as per by manufacturer's instruction. A
partial region of the 18S nuclear DNA was amplified using the
primers Nem18SF and Nem18SR []. PCR amplification was
performed in 25 µL of reaction mixture containing 1 U Taq
polymerase (Biotools, Spain), 10 X PCR reaction buffer
(Biotools), 0.4 mM dNTPs mix, 3 µL template, and 10 pM of
each forward and reverse primers, using Thermal Cycler
(Eppendorf Mastercycler personal). The amplification
conditions followed were as an initial denaturation at 94°C for 3
min, followed by 35 cycles each of denaturation at 94°C for 30 s,
annealing at 54°C for 45s, and extension at 72 °C for 1 min with
final extension at 72°C for 10 min. Amplicons were visualized in
agarose gel under UV-illumination by ethidium bromide
staining. Amplicons of the 18S region were subsequently
purified using Purelink™ Quick Gel Extraction Kit (Invitrogen)
followed the manufacturer's instruction. Purified PCR products
were sent to Chromous Biotech Ltd. (Bangalore, India) for DNA
sequencing.

Phylogenetic analysis:
A BLAST search was performed at the NCBI
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) using the sequences obtained
as queries for compared to reported nematode 18S sequences
which were then used in the phylogenetic analysis. Alignment
of sequences was carried out using the ClustalW application of
MEGA vr. 5. Phylogenetic trees obtained for 18S D2–D3
datasets were inferred with Maximum Likelihood (ML),
Maximum Parsimony (MP) and Neighbour-Joining (NJ)
methods using software MEGA Vr. 5 []. For the ML method
analysis, a DNA substitution model was selected using
neighbor-joining tree as a result, the GTR+G model was
selected and applied with a default gamma parameter of 5. The
ML method was conducted using the NNI search strategy and
the gap-containing positions were excluded from the analysis.

The MP method was conducted using the CNI search strategy.
The trees were bootstrapped 1,000 times to assess the degree of
support for the branching indicated by the phylogenetic tree for
each method.

Nucleotide sequence accession numbers:
Sequences of 18S rDNA generated from this study were
submitted in GenBank and are available by the following
accession numbers KC763367–KC7663369.

Results &amp; Discussion
Binema mirzaia (Basir, 1942a) Basir, 1956
Host and site of infection: Gryllotalpa africana Beauv
(Orthoptera: Gryllotalpidae); intestine.
Locality: Meerut (29° 01'N, 77° 45'E), U.P., India.
Voucher material: The slides have been deposited in the
Museum, Department of Zoology, Chaudhary Charan Singh
University, Meerut (U.P.), India, under the voucher no.
Nem/2013/02.
Female redescription (; 
 see supplementary
material): Gravid female long, wide, body striations limited to
anterior part and with smooth cuticle. Nerve-ring surrounds
the corpus, located towards its anterior end. Esophagus long,
consisting of a corpus, isthmus and esophageal bulb. Tail small,
vulva slight posteriorly, vagina muscular and directed
anteriorly. Two ovaries present, one anterior and other
posterior, both are reflexed with loops. Each capsule usually
contained two eggs. The population of this species were
characterized by a comparatively broad and longer female
body, two reflexed ovaries, one anterior and other posterior.
Tail short. Vulva situated at about middle third of the body
about 70% of body length. The morphology and morphometrics
of these B. mirzaia population agree closely with the original
description of this species by Basir, 1942a [] and redescribed by
Basir, 1956 [] (, 
).

Cameronia nisari (Parveen and Jairajpuri, 1985a) Adamson and Van Waerebeke, 1992a
Host and site of infection: Gryllotalpa africana Beauv
(Orthoptera: Gryllotalpidae); intestine.
Locality: Meerut (29° 01'N, 77° 45'E), U.P., India.
Voucher material: The slides have been deposited in the
Museum, Department of Zoology, Chaudhary Charan Singh
University, Meerut (U.P.), India, under the voucher no.
Nem/2013/03.
Female redescription (; 
): Body cylindroid
like, gradually tapering toward extremity with annulated
cuticle. Oral opening surrounded by eight labio-papillae, two
amphids and mouth leads into small, rectangular buccal cavity.
Nerve-ring surrounds the esophagus which consists of a
corpus, isthmus and esophageal bulb. Intestine dilated
anteriorly to form cardia. Excretory pore post-oesophageal and
intestine slightly enlarged anteriorly but the dilatation
constantly remains less in diameter than the esophageal bulb.
Anus situated at posterior end of the body with long, annulated
tail, about 1/14th of the body length. Ovaries reflexed and two
in number. Vulva post-equatorial with lips bulges out body
contour and eggs ellipsoidal. The population of this species
were characterized by a cylindroid shaped female body, taper
towards the extremities, anteriorly dilated intestine forms
cardia, ellipsoidal shaped eggs and annulated tail, about 1/14th
of body length. In the original description of C. nisari by
Parveen and Jairajpuri 1985a [], some measurements were
missing, but the morphology and morphometrics of these C.
nisari population are closely resemble with the present
specimens (, 
).

Mirzaiella meerutensis Singh and Malti, 2003
Host and site of infection: Gryllotalpa africana Beauv
(Orthoptera: Gryllotalpidae); intestine.
Locality: Meerut (29° 01'N, 77° 45'E), U.P., India.
Voucher material: The slides have been deposited in the
Museum, Department of Zoology, Chaudhary Charan Singh
University, Meerut (U.P.), India, under the voucher no.
Nem/2013/01.

Female redescription (; 
): Body cylindroid,
cuticle striated, more prominent in cervical region. Oral pore
surrounded by three lips and leads into buccal cavity. Nervering
located at the anterior end. Esophagus long, corpus
constitutes the major part of esophagus, muscularized
throughout its length. Isthmus short, non-muscular, connects
corpus to esophageal bulb. Esophageal bulb pyriform in outline
and anus located at posterior end. Tail short about 1/8th of the
total body. Two ovaries present, anterior ovary arises in region
of esophagus and posterior ovary reached posterior fourth of
the body. Eggs oval, vagina long, muscular, anteriorly directed
and vulva situated at 2/3rd of the body length. These species
population were characterized by cylindrical female body, short
tail about 1/8th of the total body, oval eggs and position of
vulva 2/3rd of the body. The morphology and measurements of
these population agree closely with the original description of
the species by Singh and Malti, 2003 [] 
(, 
).

The amplification of the D2–D3 expansion segments of 18S
rDNA region of B. mirzaia, C. nisari and M. meerutensis
produced a fragment of 574, 765 and 740 bp respectively, based
on sequencing. Phylogenetic relationship of B. mirzaia, C. nisari
and M. meerutensis with closely related nematode species were
carried out by means of ML, MP and NJ methods of tree
reconstruction (). BLAST at NCBI revealed a close
relationship of B. mirzaia (KC763368) with another species of
same genus, B. korsakowi (JX852712). Similarly, the 18S region
matched M. meerutensis (KC763367) and B. korsakowi (JX852712)
(96 % similarity). ML, MP and NJ analyses showed that M.
meerutensis (KC763367) and B. korsakowi (JX852712) are sister
taxa with bootstrap analysis also indicates that the sister
relationship is reliably supported (). The closest
D2-D3 18S sequence similarity (94%) of C. nisari (KC763369)
was found with parasites of Periplaneta americana viz.,
Hammerschmidtiella indicus (KC335147), Leidynema portentosae
(EF180073) and Thelastoma krausi (EF180068) respectively. Not a
wide range of data was available for comparison of parasites of
nematodes from Travassosinematidae. This analyses evident
three clades, with the P. americana nematodes forming one clade
and potentially including C. nisari, the second clade included
the Binema and Mirzaiella species with high bootstrap values.
The Cosmocercoides and Nemhelix specimens represent third
clade. The topologies of the ML, MP and NJ trees were
congruent for 18S ribosomal marker. Thus, only the
phylogenetic trees obtained by using the ML and NJ method are
presented herein ().

Nematodes are amongst the most diverse and abundant
organisms and are present everywhere. The Order Oxyurida
contains parasites of both invertebrate and vertebrate hosts.
Nematodes parasitizing the invertebrate hosts belong to the
superfamily Thelastomatoidea. This family listed under the
various superfamilies including Travassosinematidae [].
Species of the genus of family Travassosinematidae viz., Binema
Travassos, 1925 []; Mirzaiella Basir, 1942a 
[] and Cameronia
Basir, 1948a [] are widely distributed in West and Northeast
region of India. In India, the following nominal species of three
genera Binema, Mirzaiella and Cameronia are: B. korsakowi
(Sergiev, 1923) Basir, 1956 [,
]; B. ornata Travassos, 
1925 [];
B. mirzaia (Basir, 1942a) Basir, 1956 [,
]; B. anulinervus Shah
and Rizvi, 2004a []; M. asiatica Basir, 1942a 
[]; M. indicus
(Singh and Singh, 1955) Adamson and Waerebeke, 1992b 
[,
]; M. gryllotalpae (Singh and Singh, 1955) Adamson and
Waerebeke, 1992b [,
]; M. alii Farooqui, 1967 
[]; M. haroldi
Farooqui, 1968b []; 
M. meerutensis Singh and Malti, 2003 []
and C. biovata Basir, 1948a []; 
C. psilocephala (Rao, 1958)
Adamson and Van Waerebeke, 1992a [,
]; C. nisari (Parveen
and Jairajpuri, 1985a) Adamson and Van Waerebeke, 1992a 
[,
]; C. basiri Rizvi 
and Jairajpuri, 2002 []; C. travassosi
Farooqui, 1968a []; 
C. aspiculata (Farooqui, 1970) Adamson
and Van Waerebeke, 1992a [,
]; C. klossi Parveen and
Jairajpuri, 1984 []; 
C. triovata Shah, 2007b []; C. manipurensis
Shah, 2007b []. B. mirzaia described by Basir in 1942a and
again re-described in 1956 [,
]. This species was
distinguished from other Binema species in India by the shape
of the tail and having annulation that is prominent only in
cervical region. M. meerutensis described by Singh and Malti
2003 [] 
from Meerut, India having polar flagellated tuft at one
end of the ova and distinguished it from other nominal species
of this genus. In 1985, Parveen and Jairajpuri [] described P.
nisari from G. africana caught in Aligarh, India.

Currently, more than 30 nematode genome sequencing projects
are going on [], however, no sequencing studies are for
nematodes of Travassosinematidae, as molecular data of this
group of parasites is scarce. Molecularly, B. mirzaia is closely
related to the B. korsakowi, however, it is easily distinguishable
by morphology. Surprisingly, difference in DNA sequence less
than 1% showed between the species of B. korsakowi and M.
meerutensis. In 1942a, Basir [] described this genus as type
species M. asiatica and also described another new genus
Gryllocola with type species G. gryllocola from the same host and
in the same year. Later, after a detailed study, he considered
that the Gryllocola species female was synonym of Binema and
male was of M. asiatica. The closeness of M. meerutensis and B.
korsakowi species required further study to clarify that they are
genuinely an independent biological species or not. This paper
is the morphological redescription and first molecular
description of B. mirzaia, C. nisari and M. meerutensis inhabiting
G. africana in India. The results supported the validity of these
three nematode species based on the morphological and
molecular observation. In conclusion, nematode molecular
phylogenetic studies of Travassosinematidae are still at an early
stage as very limited amount of DNA sequence data is available
in comparison to morphological data. Further addition of DNA
sequences may change tree topology because currently only
relatively limited data are available, therefore, more study is
needed to revealed true homology and phylogenetic analyses.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The present study was supported with funds provided by the
University Grants Commission, New Delhi, India to finance
Major Research Project no. 40-406/2011(SR). The authors are
grateful to the Head, Department of Zoology, Chaudhary
Charan Singh University, Meerut (U.P.), India for resources.

Citation:Singh et al, Bioinformation 9(16): 818-823 (2013)

Binema mirzaia. A) Whole body; B) Anterior part; C)
Posterior part; D) Enlarged vulva; E) Eggs. Cameronia nisari. F)
Whole body; G) Anterior part; H) Posterior part; I) Egg; J)
Enlarged vulva. Mirzaiella meerutensis; K) Whole body; L)
Anterior part; M) Posterior part; N) Egg; O) Enlarged vulva.
Scale-bars: A, F, K (10X), 0.10 mm; B-E, G-J, L-O (40X) 0.10 mm

Phylogenetic trees of the partial 18S. A) by using the Maximum Likelihood (ML) method; B) Neighbour Joining (NJ)
analysis, number at nodes are bootstrap values inferred from NJ (above) and MP (below), shown in each node respectively. Newly
obtained sequences in this study are marked with asterisk.

