Background
The genome information research of agricultural plants has
performed through genome projects and integrated databases
have constructed to organize projects based on the informationbased
database from simple sequence to specific metabolism
[]. 
In Korea, the National Agricultural Biotechnology
Information Center (NABIC) has constructed agricultural
biotechnology-based infrastructure and provided the integrated
genome information for agricultural plants [,
]. In 2012, we
developed a biological integrated-based genome database for
agricultural plants. Our database is being focused on genome
analysis tools development for agricultural bioinformatics, the
number of which is now growing rapidly. In addition, this
database has provided integrated genome information for
comparative analysis of sequenced genomes which consist of
various agricultural plants. We hope that this database will
contribute to the genome research field to extend the usefulness
for agricultural hybrid-plants breeding.

Methodology
Data collection:
The genome information was collected from the genome project
from the National Academy of Agricultural Science 
[] and the
New Bio-Green 21 project []. In addition, genomic information
was collected through international public institutes and
collaborative institutes.

Database development
This database is designed to provide information on the
genome of agricultural plants and the platform consists of
multiple layer architecture which can be accessed using a webbased
graphical interface. It has six major categories, such as
genome research, gene expression, rice mutant, analysis tools,
genome annotation, and other sub-databases. The platform was
developed using MYSQL, JAVA language, and commonly
available network protocols as hypertext transfer protocol, and
XML-based model. The collected data were stored in an Oracle
relational database management system (Oracle Database 10g,
Redwood, CA, USA, http://www.oracle.com/).

Implementation and Features
This genome information database consists of multiple sub
systems such as genome research, gene expression, rice mutant,
analysis tools, genome annotation, and other sub-databases
(). The genome research provides a bioinformatics
framework to study biological function based on sequences of
genomes of rice (Oryza sativa), Chinese cabbage (Brassica rapa),
microbes, and viral genomes. In addition, it provides the
functions which as genome annotation, sequence comparison
with molecular markers, and gene prediction with genetic map.
The gene expression provides a web-based tool for multistep
analysis of gene expression data []. This menu has two major
categories which are possible to detect specific markers and
gene clone which mapped locus on a genetic map. It has related
information on expressed sequence tags for 10 species: rice,
wheat, maize, soybean, barley, Chinese cabbage, tomato, hot
pepper, mushroom, and Arabidopsis []. The rice mutant
provides comprehensive information about Ds mutant
phenotypes and insertion site sequence information of rice
mutant lines. This menu has four major categories, such as Blast
for mutant lines, search of phenotype, primer design tool to
identify genotypes, and management menu. The analysis tools
have eight major functions such as blast search of sequences,
gene finding program, transcription/motif analysis, multiple
repeat sequence, and genetic marker analysis. Finally, genome
annotation provides specific genomic analysis through four
different view panels. This menu shows relationships between
the basic sequence and annotated gene information. The user
can access information about individual genes along with
functional annotations within the selected chromosome and can
obtain new information using comparative genomics methods.
In addition, this menu provides improved comparative
annotation from more revised genome information based on
progress made by Chinese cabbage genome project 
[].

Discussion and Future work
The NABIC was established with the main objective of
analyzing the genomic information of agricultural plants and
provides related services to genomic institutes and universities.
The integrated-based database consists of multiple subsystems
and provides a bioinformatics framework to study biological
function based on the genomic sequences of rice, Chinese
cabbage, rice mutant lines, and microorganisms. This database
provides information through a user-friendly Web-interface
from searching gene sequences to genome metabolism
infrastructure analysis. In the 2013, NABIC plans to develop an
upgraded genome database that combines genome information
and related metabolism pathway in the major agricultural
plants. In addition, we will provide an upgraded database to
solve specific biological pathways with next-generation
sequencing information.

This study was conducted with support from the Research
Program for Agricultural Science &amp; Technology Development
(Project No. PJ006651) of the National Academy of Agricultural
Science, and the Next-Generation BioGreen 21 Program (SSAC,
grant number PJ008151), Rural Development Administration,
Republic of Korea.

Citation:Kim et al, Bioinformation 8(21): 1059-1061 (2012)

The screenshot of the genome information database, which shows the six information categories for genomes of
agricultural plants.

