Background
The limitations inherent in traditional taxonomy and
morphology based identification lead to emergence of genomic
approaches to taxon diagnosis that exploit diversity among
DNA sequences to identify organisms [,
]. DNA barcoding
technique is a new approach for taxon recognition and
classification of biological organism based on sequence of a
small fragment (650 base pairs) near the 5'-terminus of the
cytochrome c oxidase I (COI) mitochondrial gene [] and has
been widely used for species-level identification across a wide
range of both invertebrate [] 
and vertebrate [,
] organisms.
DNA barcoding can provide a ‘biological barcode’ to enable
identification of any organism at the species level 
[–] and
allows accurate and relatively simpler species identification.
India has a very important place in globe for variety of fishes
and recognized as one of the 12 mega biodiversity countries of
world []. 
Out of 32,300 extant fish species, 2438 belong to
Indian subcontinent []. The global importance of Indian fish
species demands a well developed system for species
identification, classification and divergence analysis. A
reference database with collection of diverse assemblage of
sequences and other information under the registry of accession
number is essential for performing DNA-based identifications
in unknown samples, because DNA barcodes cannot be a useful
identification tool without a comprehensive and reliable
reference database []. With the advent of the new intellectual
property rights (IPR) regime and implementation of Biological
Diversity Act 2002, it is imperative to record relevant
information on valuable fish genetic resources of the country in
order to avoid conflicts and protect rights on native species
with geographical indications. The DNA barcoding exercise and
development of automated system in the Indian context was
perhaps weighed from two important angles, namely (a)
meeting the taxonomic challenges and providing a robust
identification of species and (b) securing IPRs for some of the
country's important bio resources 
[]. The present study was
focused to collect the DNA barcode information about Indian
fishes from published data sources with objective to develop an
automated web version database integrated with search,
browse, identification and analytical tools. For this, we
developed Fish Barcode Information System (FBIS), a database
on DNA barcodes for 472 Indian aquatic species along with
2334 sequences using MySQL database management system,
Perl and PHP programming languages under Red Hat Linux
Enterprises 5.2 environment and integrated it with tools viz.
‘identification’, ‘database statistics’, ‘divergence estimation’ and
‘keyword search’. Although ‘Barcode of Life Data System
(BOLD)' has been developed as a repository of DNA barcodes
for all living organism at international level 
[], yet our system
is specific for fishes and has multi-fold applications in
identification of larvae/ invasive species/ cryptic species/ new
species, illegal trade of protected species, stock management,
biodiversity assessment, ecosystem monitoring, revisions of
certain taxa, estimation of intra and inter-specific divergence,
phylogenetic relationships, phylogeographic [] and speciation
patterns.

Methodology
Data source:
A majority of sequences and annotation data in FBIS were
generated from the Project entitled ‘DNA Barcoding of Indian
Fishes’ undertaken at ‘National Bureau of Fish Genetic
Resources (NBFGR)’ following systematic DNA extraction,
amplification of COI gene, sequencing and submission of COI
sequences into NCBI GenBank. The DNA barcode information
of Indian shellfish's viz. molluscs and shrimps generated
elsewhere were also downloaded from the GenBank of NCBI.
The entire data was downloaded in GenBank and FASTA
format for annotation and sequence analysis respectively. A
Perl parsing program was written to extract important features
from the files and manage into the database. The phenotypic
and other physical information on habitat, distribution, IUCN
Red List status of the fishes and shellfishes was collected from
FishBase (http://www.fishbase.org). The methodology of data
collection and its integration has been depicted in a data flow
diagram ().

Database structure:
The FBIS database has been developed by using MySQL 5.2
relational database management system under Red Hat Linux
5.2 environment. To manage the DNA barcodes, phenotypic
and physical information, the database was designed at two
sublevel schemas for molecular information and phenotypic
and physical information. The database contains six (6) main
tables for each DNA barcode sequence entry viz. 
fishinfo;

dnabarcode;

barcode_sources;

taxonomy;

molecular_info;

admin_info.


 (see supplementary
materials) describes the details of different tables and its
attributes, while () describes the FBIS structure and
relationships among tables. The design of the database
supported with query-based data integration preserves the
inherent independence of data extracted from various parent
databases.

Web interface and application:
FBIS has been created using open source technology i.e. LAMP
(Linux, Apache, MySQL, PHP/Perl) to develop the database
and web interfaces. MySQL, an object-relational database
management system, works at the backend and provides
commands to retrieve and store DNA barcode data into the
database. PHP along with PERL, a server side scripting
language provides interface and functions to analyze, fetch and
displays data from the database. Besides, functions have been
integrated in the interface to perform administration and
management tasks with data submission facility. Perl DBI
module was used to perform connectivity with MySQL
database for accessing the data in the database. The graphical
representation in the web interface was implemented using
GD.pm (http://search.cpan.org/dist/GD/GD.pm). The whole
FBIS run on Intel Server Class machine under Red Hat
Enterprise Linux 5.2 environment using Apache httpd server.

Results
FBIS contains 2334 barcode records for 472 species belonging to
136 families, till February 2012 and regular update is being
carried out using an automated program. Tools for search and
browsing were integrated for better retrieval and analysis of the
DNA barcode sequence data from the database. In addition,
tools for species identification and sequence divergence
estimation were also implemented to enhance the utility of
FBIS. The details about the web tools integrated in FBIS are
given below.

Keyword search:
This search option was designed to extract and analyse the
relevant information. It uses a general keyword search which
retrieves relevant records from the numerous tables of the
database and provides facility for downloading and viewing
the records. The design of search module has been divided in
two parts: (1) program retrieves the fish name with relevant
keyword; (2) once fish name is identified, the intelligent query
system further process for retrieving all the information about
the particular species.

Specimen record browsing:
The specimen record can be browsed based on alphabetic index
on the first letter of family name of the aquatic species by
navigating into the ‘Records overview’ menu item. We used the
grid format to display records describing scientific name,
family, specimen voucher, longitude-latitude, submission date
and a cross link of NCBI Reference.

Taxonomy browser:
It retrieves taxonomy from phylum to species level and can be
accessed by navigating into the menu bar of FBIS. The browser
shows the hierarchal taxonomic representation of each Phylum,
Class, Order, Family and Genus along with species it contains.
For example, the Phylum ‘Arthropoda’ displays one Class
‘Malacostraca’ followed by 
[] i.e. a number in square bracket to
denote the total number of species available in that Class. The
browser also generates pie diagram on data status and displays
links for viewing the species and downloading all the
corresponding sequences in FASTA format for the selected subtaxon
().

Statistics of physical information:
The statistics application represents the dynamic numerical and
graphical view of the current data statistics of number of COI
sequences, families and species stored in the database. It also
shows the statistics for habitat and conservation category
(IUCN Red List Status) for all existing species of FBIS. The
‘Habitat Statistics’ describes total number of species distributed
in freshwater, marine or other ecosystem. The ‘IUCN Red List
Status’ category provides a link to invoke the physical and
phenotypic information of species along with photograph of
corresponding category.

Species identification:
This tool employs linear search to find out homologous
sequence from the global alignment of all reference sequences.
We used query-optimized search library to prepare the blast
[] 
compatible dataset FBISdb through ‘makeblastdb’ program
maintained outside the main database with new records added
at every occasions of database population. The homologous
reference sequence identity of 100% or 99% with the query
describes as accurately same species and the reference sequence
identifier is used to retrieve same or similar species and other
information from FBIS database through intelligent querying.
With respect to query sequence, a table of top 30 similar and
closely related records is displayed in the result.

Divergence estimation:
In this application, species can be selected through index
navigation from ‘Divergence’ menu item and a sequence
divergence estimation table could be generated with the
alignment of whole FBIS database. The lineage with the respect
to genetic divergence was calculated on the basis of difference
in nucleotide bases in same position during sequence
comparison process and tabular estimation of sequence
divergence among the closely related genera and species is
generated. For example, a query sequence of Tor putitora was
selected to align with FBIS sequence library through BLASTn
program, 250 sequences having more than 85% identity among
the aligned records were obtained. The analysis calculated
0.152% sequence divergence among individuals of T. putitora
and 1.066% divergence for other species belonging to genus Tor,
while it showed 7.721 % divergence with other genera of the
same family ‘Cyprinidae’. The intraspecific and interspecific
divergences can be visualized through dynamic bar diagram as
shown in () along with other statistical details.

Data administration and management:
We integrated various administration, management and data
submission operations in the web interface due to security
reasons. The administrator of FBIS has full privileges for
database administration and management of submission
activities. Users may submit their data in FBIS by sending an
email to the FBIS administrator, which will be verified before
addition to the database.

Discussion
Analysis of 2334 barcode sequences belonging to 472 aquatic
species under phylum Chordata, Mollusca and Arthropoda
showed that FBIS is well suited to the identification of
biological organisms at different taxonomic level. Further, this
archival system has great potential to investigate DNA barcodes
obtained from any fish tissue for taxonomic validation of
species and determining genetic divergence between the query
sequence and the reference sequences available in the database.
The algorithm of FBIS delivers species identification if the query
sequence shows less than 1% divergence to the reference
sequence in FBIS and if the match shows more than 1%
sequence divergence, it may assign the query sequence
belonging to similar/closely related species. This is in
agreement with the report of Avise (2000) who found genetic
divergence to be less than 1% in majority of the records
belonging to same species with the exception of few records
that exhibited greater than 2% divergence for mitochondrial
DNA []. Ratnasingham and Herbert (2007) also used similar
criteria for identification of species through matching of query
sequence with the reference barcode records 
[]. Ward et al.
(2005) reported a divergence level of 0.39% and 9.93% for
individuals within species and species within genera for
Australian fishes respectively 
[], while Lakra et al. (2011)
observed the average distances within species and genera as
0.30% and 6.60% respectively in Indian marine fishes 
[]. Our
system also provides a support for above demonstrations.

The ‘Divergence analysis’ module of our system enables the
user to estimate intraspecific, interspecific and intra-family
average divergence for a species. Further divergence analysis
can be performed either through a query sequence or
navigation through species name from 'Index Browser'. The
present archival system offer several advantages over
traditional taxonomy, image based recognition and digital
taxonomy viz. providing a correct species identification tool for
all life stages, complementing conventional taxonomic studies
especially in securing IPRs for important taxa 
[] and
discriminate among species of a taxon. FBIS, the freely available
open archival system, would be very useful to researchers in
deciding and describing the new species. The online submission
facility will be helpful for updating this database content with
the additional curated and computed data. Keeping in view
India's role in the aquatic animal species trade globally, FBIS
would be useful in providing diagnostics for rapid and easy
identification of species in case of adulterations and for drawing
specific regulations to protect the national market.

Conclusion
The FIBS is a regional DNA barcode archival system for Indian
fishes, and all the applications could be carried out through
interactive user interfaces. The system enables fish species
identification, taxonomic validation and genetic divergence
estimation that may create great interest among the researchers
and stakeholders. There is further scope to expand this archival
system by incorporating novel data mining and visualization
tools for increasing its analytical capabilities.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors are grateful to National Agricultural Bioinformatics
Grid (NABG), under National Agricultural Innovation Project
(NAIP), ICAR, New Delhi for providing financial support and
the Director, NBFGR, Lucknow for providing necessary
facilities and guidance.

Citation:Nagpure et al, Bioinformation 8(10): 483-488 (2012)

Schematic diagram of (A) the database architecture
showing table's relationship and data flow; (B) data flow
diagram showing data resources used in FBIS.

A screen view of FBIS taxonomy browser

A screen view of (A) species index; (B) divergence
estimation; (C) intra-family divergence for Tor putitora

