Background
With the advent of complete genome sequencing of many organisms,
the volume of biological data has been increasing rapidly.
Bioinformatics has hence emerged as an indispensable field to
organize and assemble the plethora of biological data into a more
comprehensive state. For instance, internal sequence repeats (without
any gaps) are an integral part of DNA and protein sequences. In DNA
sequences, these internal repeats present in multiple copies are referred
as ’direct repeat‘. For example, the tandem repeats are repeated
consecutively and act as markers for genomic sequence []. In
addition, these markers are used for the mapping of genes which are
responsible for human genetic diseases []. In eukaryotes, the short
DNA tandem repeats present in the telomeric region of chromosome
forms the common repeat motif []. Moreover, the internal sequence
repeats are known to play an important role in evolution and
approximately 14% of the protein sequences contain internal sequence
repeats []. Understanding the sequence to structure correlation of
internal repeats in protein structures would enhance the knowledge of
researchers to further march forward in the world of molecular
modeling and in-silico drug discovery. Furthermore, eukaryotic
proteins are three times more likely to contain internal sequence
repeats than prokaryotic proteins[] as these eukaryotic repeats have
unique functions. Thus, it is essential to retrieve the information
pertaining to internal sequence repeats in an efficient manner which is
useful to the research community working in the field of structural
biology, molecular modelling and genomics. To this end, we have
developed a web server to obtain all the internal sequence repeats in
both protein and nucleotide sequences by exploiting the utilities of
high-end computing and World Wide Web technologies.

The limitation of the existing programs has already been outlined
earlier []. For example, the number of amino acid residues allowed to
be entered as input is limited to 1000 in the RADAR web server []
and 2000 in the TRUST web server []. On the other hands, REPPER
[] does not pose a limitation on the number of amino acid residues;
however, it allows only one protein sequence to be entered at a given
time. Further, the recently available web servers SWELFE [] and
Censor [] have their own limitations. The SWELFE program
permits a single sequence and uses substitution matrix for its search. In
the Censor program, repeats scanning are made with the help of
reference repeat database, which makes restriction in finding of non
annotated internal repeats. To overcome the above issues, FAIR
(Finding All Identical Repeats) web server has been deployed to
identify the internal sequence repeats in protein as well as DNA
sequences. Moreover, the proposed web server FAIR has been tested
with a protein sequence of more than 35000 residues available in the
genome database. Also, the proposed server accepts many sequences
at a time. The advanced features of the proposed web server are
discussed in detail in the subsequent sections.

Methodology
The proposed web server has been implemented with two different
algorithms for the identification of identical [] and similar []
repeats. Further, various sequences databases like Genome database,
SWISS-PROT [], UniProt/TrEMBL [], 
PIR [] and Protein
Data Bank[] are incorporated in the web server. Options are
provided to view the three-dimensional structure of the repeats found
in the protein data bank. The freely available JAVA plug-in Jmol []
is interfaced for visualizing the three-dimensional structures.

Features
The proposed computing server requires the sequence of interest and
the minimum number of amino acids or nucleotides in a repeat.
Further, the users have to specify the input sequence type (Protein or
DNA). Also, users can specify the number of occurrences of a repeat.
The users need to paste the sequence(s) in FASTA format or upload
the sequence(s) from a file. There are options provided to search for
either the identical or similar sequence repeats in a protein sequence.
Incase of DNA sequences, the above option is limited to identical
match only. The server produces a detailed display with a brief
summary at the end of the output. The user can save the output
produced by the computing server in the hard-disk of their local
machine for further analysis.

Implementation
The computing engine is developed and optimized for Fedora Core
(Version 7.0) and is driven by a - 2.66 GHz Quad-core Intel Xeon
processor equipped with 4 Gigabytes of Random Access Memory. The
operating system is chosen for security and reliability. The computing
engine is tested vigorously using all platforms (windows 98/2000, XP,
Linux and SGI). As mentioned, for the sequence provided in the case
study, the web server displays the results in about two seconds for a
single sequence (number of residues = 1436). However, the
computation time varies depending upon the network speed. The
computing engine is developed using PERL. In addition, Java script is
deployed to develop and validate the web pages. For designing the
web pages, CSS and HTML have been used. The algorithm used in
this computing engine is written in C++ language. The described
computing engine is freely available for academic users and noncommercial
organizations over the World Wide Web at the URL:http://bioserver1.physics.iisc.ernet.in/fair/. 
The users are requested to cite this article in their research publications. Please send your
comments and suggestions to Dr. K. Sekar (sekar@physics.iisc.ernet.in).

Case study
The FAIR web server enables the users to identify the internal
sequence repeats in the protein and nucleotide sequences. Following
are the various options that recognizes FAIR web server as unique.

Identical repeat in protein sequences
 displays a sample output for an input (FASTA format)
protein (probable polypeptide synthase pks12) sequence from
Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv. Identification of repeats in
polyketide synthase would be of immense importance as it is an
important target for drug designing. The total number of amino acid
residues in the input sequence is 4151 (only part of the input is shown
in ). The minimum number of residues in the repeat is set to
be greater than or equal to 120. The results produced by the computing
server are shown in . The computing engine found three long
identical repeats of 215, 128 and 307 length (). The results of
the proposed server are compared with the SWELFE server for the
above input sequence and are reported in Table 1 (see  ). It is interesting to note that the proposed server identified
many identical internal repeats whereas the SWELFE reported only
similar repeats (see Table 1 in for details).

Identical repeat in nucleotide sequence
The complete genome of Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv has
been given as the input. The total number of nucleotides in the input
sequence is 4411532 (here again, only part of the input sequence is
shown in ). For a minimum number of nucleotides in the
repeat as 50, the sample output has been displayed in . These
significant large identical repeats would enable scientists to focus on
sequence to structure correlation and their implications.

Similar repeats in protein sequence
The given input sequence is taken from the protein Hexokinase
1[Homo sapiens], PDB Id: 1CZA []. The protein consists of 917
amino-acid residues and for a minimum number of residues as ten the
output obtained is shown in . Hexokinase I, a protein found in
all mammalian tissues plays an important role as a “house keeping
enzyme”. Further, insights into the occurrence of such structurally
similar repeats would enhance the understanding on the threedimensional
structure of Hexokinase I.

Conclusion
The proposed computing server displays all identical and similar
repeats in the provided input sequence. There is no limitation on the
number of residues in the input sequence. The interesting feature is
that the user will be able to find the occurrence of the resultant repeat
in other sequence and structure databases, if any such repeat is present.
Further, the three-dimensional structure of the corresponding repeat
(identical or similar) can be visualized in the local machine. The
computing engine will be an interactive tool to those working in the
area of structural biology, molecular modeling and Bioinformatics.

Supplementary material
Data 1
All the authors acknowledge the use of the Bioinformatics Centre, the
Interactive graphics facility and the Supercomputer Education and
Research Centre. One of the authors (KS) thanks the Department of
Information Technology (DIT) for financial support. The authors (NB
and NC) thank Dr. K. Sekar for providing an opportunity to undergo
internship program during the summer of 2006.

Citation: Senthilkumar et al, Bioinformation 4(7): 271-275 (2010)

FAIR server output of identical repeats in the protein sequence from Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv.

Different lengths of identical repeats identified in the complete genome of Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv.

Similar sequence repeats obtained in the protein Hexokinase1 (1CZA).

