Background
Phosphorus is an essential nutrient for all life; it is a component
of ATP, phospholipids and nucleic acids []. Phosphorus is
mainly stored as phytate in most foods derived from plants [].
Phytase (EC 3.1.3.8) hydrolyzes phytate into free phosphorus
and lower derivatives of inositol phosphate [].

Previously phytase B (PhyB) identified as an acid phosphatase,
but PhyB was later found to also hydrolyze phytate quite
efficiently at pH 2.5 []. 
PhyB from Aspergillus niger belongs to
the family of histidine acid phosphatases []. This PhyB is more
heat-tolerant than other fungal phytases, with optimal activity
at 58°C [,
]. Due to its broad pH stability, substrate specificity
and suitability to hydrolyze phytate in stomachs under highly
acidic conditions, PhyB is a common supplement in animal feed
[,
].

PhyB is composed of 460 amino acid residues []. The
structure of PhyB can be subdivided into a large α/β–domain
with a twisted six-stranded β-sheet surrounded by several α-
helices, and a small α–domain. A. niger PhyB has five disulfide
bonds at positions 52–368, 109–453, 197–422, 206–279 and 394–
402 (). Two (109–453 and 197–422) maintain the
ordered C-terminal structure. Most of the disulfide bonds are
present in the loops near the surface in the C-terminus. The
conserved catalytic residues, including a catalytic motif of
62RHGXRXP67 and a substrate-binding motif of 318HD319, are
all positioned in the deep crevice at the interface of the large
α/β–domain and the small α–domain ().

An earlier report suggested an essential role for these disulfide
bridges in maintaining the native structure of the enzyme and
its catalytic activity []. Ullah and co-workers reported the
significant role of these disulfide bonds in maintaining the
native conformation of PhyA and PhyB [–
]. They also
provided experimental evidence that phytase denatured with
guanidium hydrochloride could recover activity when the
denaturant was diluted into the reaction system in the absence
of Tris(2carboxyethyl)phosphine but could not recover activity
in the presence of TCEP. The presence of 2 mM TCEP caused
around 70% loss in catalytic activity and a 12% decrease in the
hydrodynamic radius []. X Wang et al. 
[] reported that
these disulfide bonds were necessary for the proper folding of
PhyA. Conformational changes or relationships between
structural changes and biological properties of the enzyme,
however, have not been investigated in detail. Such
conformational changes in the overall structure and active site
of PhyB that occur due to the breakage of all disulfide bonds are
of obvious interest.

The dynamics of the active site of phytases from A. fumigatus
are known, and the roles of the individual residues are
established [,
]. With the assumption that the catalytic
residues of PhyB from A. niger follow similar dynamics, we
have elucidated the role of disulfide bonds in the integrity of
the active site of PhyB by molecular dynamics (MD) simulation.
Our results confirm that disulfide bonds play an important role
in maintaining the integrity of the active site. We independently
simulated fully reduced (RAP) and intact (NAP) PhyB
monomers at 300 K for 20 ns.

Methodology
Simulation Methods:
The crystal structure of A. niger PhyB was obtained from the
database of the Research Collaboratory for Structural
Bioinformatics (RCSB) (PDB ID: 1QFX) []. Some residues
were missing in the crystal structure; these residues were thus
modeled with the Chimera modeling system using 1QFX as the
template [].

Computation:
To investigate the structure in detail, we analyzed a monomer
of the dimer. Chain A of PhyB was solvated using the TIP3P
water model []. A dodecahedral box was selected to perform
MD simulations. PhyB was investigated in the reduced
disulfide (RAP) and native (NAP) forms. The system was
neutralized by adding sodium and chloride ions. All MD
simulations were performed in periodic boundary conditions
using the GROMACS (version 4.5.3) software package 
[] and
the AMBER ff99SB-ILDN force field []. The energy of the
system was minimized using the steepest descent algorithm for
5000 steps to remove any Van der Waals clashes generated by
solvent molecules. An equilibration MD was run for 1 ns to
completely mix and equilibrate the contents of the box.
Complete mixing and equilibration of the contents were
confirmed by a convergence of potential energy of the system.
All MD simulations were performed within NPT (constant
number of atoms, pressure and temperature throughout the
simulation) ensembles. Temperatures were fixed using the
Berendsen temperature coupling algorithm with a coupling
constant of 0.1 ps and pressure was kept constant at one bar
with a coupling constant of 0.5 ps []. The SHAKE algorithm
was used to constrain all bond lengths [,
]. The Particle
Mesh Ewald (PME) method was used to model non-bonded
electrostatic and LJ interactions. NPT simulations were
performed at 300 K to study the effect of temperature. The total
production run of MD simulations was 40 ns including 20 ns
simulations of RAP and NAP at 300 K.

Analysis:
All analysis used the GROMACS package. VMD was used for
visualization []. Secondary structures were calculated using
STRIDE []. Prior to calculation of the atomic positional
fluctuations, we removed the overall translational and
rotational motions by superimposing the Cα–atoms of each
snapshot structure onto those ones of the starting structure of
the trajectory, using the least-squares fitting method. Hydrogen
bonds were analyzed at a distance of 3 Å and a cut-off angle of
120°.

Results &amp; Discussion
Structural properties:
The root mean square deviations (RMSDs) of the backbone α-
carbon atoms of PhyB relative to those in the first snapshot of
the trajectories were calculated for both MD simulations 
(). 
In NAP, the RMSD of the initial structure was nearly steady
around 6 Å. The RMSD of RAP began to depart from that of
NAP after 3 ns of simulation and remained slightly lower than
the NAP RMSD. Both simulations were thus performed using
the same starting structure obtained from 1QFX. The difference
in RMSDs indicated that structural changes beginning after 3 ns
were due to breakage of the disulfide bonds. The radius of
gyration remained unaltered in both simulations ().
Reduction of the disulfide bonds thus did not show the
expansion of the overall structure of PhyB. These results agreed
well with those of Mullaney and Ullah [].

The overall secondary structure of RAP did not change
significantly, but some of the helices were shortened, and some
3/10 helices were lost in the last 1 ns of the simulation. Based
on the assignment of secondary structure  (see
supplementary material), using STRIDE [], a helix from
residues 262 to 280 lost six residues which were converted into
a turn due to the breakage of the Cys206-Cys279 disulfide bond.
The other helix from residues 124 to 134 was lengthened by four
residues by the breakage of the Cys109-Cys453 disulfide bond.
Some of the 3/10 helices were completely lost in RAP: from
residues 256 to 258, 351 to 353 and 434 to 436  (see
supplementary material). These 3/10 helices were in close
proximity to disulfide bonds. The catalytic residue Asp319
moved from the α-helix to the 3/10 helix, which produced a
stable structure. The secondary-structural assignments of the
other residues of the catalytic site remained unchanged. Due to
these small changes in secondary–structural assignments, the
rigidity of the catalytic site was lost in RAP. The structures were
fairly compact in both NAP and RAP, which had nearly the
same order of secondary and tertiary structure regardless of
changes in the α and 3/10 helices. The disulfide bonds thus
enhanced the global stability of PhyB.

Hydrogen bonding:
We also compared H-bond occupancies during the simulation
of two trajectories  (see supplementary material). Apart
from the changes in the pattern of H-bonds of the backbone due
to alterations in secondary structure, the occupancy of some
functionally important H-bonds in the catalytic motif had
notably changed due to the breakage of the disulfide bonds.

The occupancy of the H-bond between the Arg156 and the
His63 side chains decreased from 82.71% in NAP to 25.19% in
RAP. This H-bond is important for the binding of phytate in the
catalytic pocket, and its breakage can greatly affect binding
affinity [,
]. The H-bond between the side chains of catalytic
residues Arg156 and Asn114, which had occupancy of 100% in
NAP, was completely lost in RAP. The occupancy of the Hbond
between the side chains of Arg156 and Glu114 was
reduced from 91.75% to 23.39% in RAP. The change in the
pattern of H-bonding allowed more flexibility in the orientation
of the side chain of the other binding residue, Arg66. In NAP,
the Arg66 side chain was bonded to the side chain of Ser69 with
an 88.71% occupancy, which was reduced to 10% in RAP. The
side chain of Arg66 became highly flexible with the breakage of
this H-bond, reducing the conformational space for the binding
of the substrate and thus affecting the catalytic activity of the
enzyme. The occupancy of the H-bond between the Arg66 main
chain and the Asn249 side chain changed from 61% to 7.55% in
RAP.

The changes in the H-bond occupancies of the active site Arg66
and Arg156 side chains reduced rigidity. This loss of rigidity
was ultimately due to the breakage of disulfide bonds, which
was the main reason for the loss of more than 70% of catalytic
activity. The Arg66 and Arg156 side chains lost some of the
restrictive factors that were important for their spatial
orientations in the catalytic motif and started to rotate after 2.5
ns (). The lower amount of H-bonding in the side
chains of Arg66 and Arg156 destabilized the catalytic Arg66
and Arg156 side chains ().

Dynamic changes:
Fig. 4a shows the root mean square fluctuations (RMSFs) in the
simulated structures. The RMSF values of residues near
disulfide bonds changed significantly, but the overall
fluctuations of all cysteines did not change (). The
larger effect on the fluctuations of neighboring flexible regions
than on the rigid sites of the cysteine residues themselves is in
agreement with the results of previous studies on the scorpion
toxin and cutinase [,
]. The major changes in overall
fluctuations occurred in the active–site residues Arg66 and
Arg156 (). These two residues have rigid side–chain
orientations for allowing productive interactions with the
substrate. As previously reported, the binding of phytase to
phytate seems not to require main–chain interactions but only
side–chain interactions [,
]. The Arg66 and Arg156 side
chains play important roles in binding of the substrate,
formation of the phospho–histidine intermediate and release of
the product []. Our simulations showed that atomic
fluctuations in Arg66 and Arg156 increased drastically after the
disulfide bonds were broken.

The distances between atoms His63NE2 and Asp319OD1 and
between His63NE2 and Asp319OD2 changed  (see
supplementary material). The distance between His63NE2 and
Asp319OD1 is very important for catalysis of the substrate, as
proposed in a previous study on A. fumigatus phytase []. The
increase in flexibility after reduction of the disulfide bonds led
to these alterations in the distances between the side–chain
atoms. As anticipated in the enzymatic dynamics of A.
fumigatus phytase [], the catalytic Asp319 binds to two
phosphate atoms simultaneously, so these distances are very
important for binding and catalysis. Assuming that PhyB
follows similar dynamics, our results suggest that the loss of
PhyB activity is a conformational consequence of broken
disulfide bonds.

Conclusion
The reduction of disulfide bonds alters the functionally
essential network of H-bonds, the distances between atoms and
the dihedral angles in the active–site residues of PhyB. The
catalytically important distance between atom His63NE2 and
atom Asp319OD1 is increased, indicating an abnormal
interaction between the phosphate ion and these two residues.
Arg66 and Arg156 help to stabilize the phospho–histidine
intermediate and the release of the product. Changes in the
mobility of the side–chains of these residues would likely lead
to the loss of activity. Our results thus provide a possible
mechanism for the loss of catalytic activity after the breakage of
disulfide bonds.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We acknowledge the Centre of Excellence in Advanced
Computing, National Chemical Laboratory, Pune, for providing
computational facilities. M Dixit and K Kumar acknowledge
University Grant Commission for senior research fellowships.
SP acknowledges the Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar and JC Bose
fellowships toward the completion of this work.

Citation:Kumar et al, Bioinformation 9(19): 963-967 (2013)

(a) Crystal structure of PhyB: positioning of the five disulfide bonds and catalytic residues. (b) Active site residues in the
native conformation. (c) Root mean square deviations (RMSDs), (d) Radius of gyration of the Cα-atoms. (e) CA-CB-CG-CD Arg66
dihedral angle. (f) CA-CB-CG-CD Arg156 dihedral angle. (g) Root mean square fluctuations (RMSFs) of the Cα-atoms. (h) Atomic
fluctuations of the active site residues during two 20 ns simulations.

