Background
Congenital erythropoietic porphyria (CEP) or Gunther's disease
is a rare inherited autosomal recessive trait and is caused due to
the deficiency of uroporphyrinogen III synthase (UROS), the
fourth enzyme in heme biosynthesis. Only about 150 cases of
CEP have been reported to date [–]. CEP symptoms are
heterogeneous, ranging from severe hemolytic anemia in utero
to milder, later onset forms, with skin lesions due to cutaneous
photosensitivity in adult life []. The deficiency of functional
UROS causes buildup of porphyrins to toxic levels in red blood
cells. The excess porphyrins can then accumulate in the skin
causing oversensitivity to sunlight [,
]. UROS is the central
point for the synthesis of heme, a complex organic molecule, is
a cyclic tetrapyrrole that contains a centrally chelated Fe and
functions in the transport oxygen. The human UROS gene
located on chromosome 10 (10q26.2; Cytogenetic Location:
10q25.2-q26.3; EC 4.2.1.75; 1371 bp mRNA; Entrez Pubmed ref
NP_000366.1, NM_000375.2) and expressed as a 265 amino acid
UROS enzyme catalyzes the cyclization of the linear
tetrapyrrole, hydroxymethylbilane, to the macrocyclic
uroporphyrinogen III which is eventually converted to heme.
Most organisms have the ability to synthesize their own heme
molecules by this largely conserved metabolic pathway 
[,
,
].
UROS enzyme is localized in the cytosol and plays a critical
part in production of heme which is an essential prosthetic
group in many cellular reactions in prokaryotes and eukaryotes.

The presence of this pathway across Bacteria, Archaea, and
Eukarya suggests that heme performs a central function in the
evolution of life. The acquisition by eukaryotes of the heme is
one of the most important events in cellular evolution and any
interference to its synthesis can thus have dire consequences to
the survival of these organisms. Because of the inherent role of
UROS in the synthesis of heme, and considering its role in
many other inherent metabolic pathways in the cell, we aimed
to elucidate if variance in this gene exists in various species
during evolution by using a phylogenetic analysis of published
protein sequences of these genes.

Methodology
Data Set, Sequence Alignment and Construction of Phylogenetic Tree:
The GenBank database [] was queried to retrieve all available
protein sequences of the UROS protein. These sequences were
retrieved and saved in FASTA sequence format. These
sequences were then aligned using Clustal W [] algorithm
using default parameters. The initial first-pass phylogenetic tree
was constructed using Neighbour Joining [] method
(maximum sequence difference of 0.85) using Domain
Enhanced Lookup Time Accelerated Basic Local Alignment
Search Tool [DELTA BLAST] pairwise alignments between a
query and the database sequences searched []. The
evolutionary distance between two retrieved sequences
modeled as expected fraction of amino acid substitutions per
site given the fraction of mismatched amino acids in the aligned
region was taken by the software using Grishin computation
[]. Using the results from DELTA BLAST, we created a firstpass
phylogenetic tree after which we used a purpose-built
computational phylogenetic method using Phylogeny.fr
software. Sequences were aligned with MUSCLE (v3.7) [,
]
configured for highest accuracy (MUSCLE with default
settings). After alignment, ambiguous regions (i.e. containing
gaps and/or poorly aligned) were removed with Gblocks
(v0.91b) using the following parameters: minimum length of a
block after gap cleaning: 10; no gap positions were allowed in
the final alignment; all segments with contiguous nonconserved
positions bigger than 4 were rejected and 85% minimum
number of sequences for a flank position 
[–]. The
phylogenetic tree was reconstructed using the maximum
likelihood method implemented in the PhyML program (v3.0
aLRT) [,
]. The Jones-Taylor-Thornton (JTT) substitution
model was selected assuming an estimated proportion of
invariant sites (of 0.197) and 4 gamma-distributed rate
categories to account for rate heterogeneity across sites. The
gamma shape parameter was estimated directly from the data
(gamma=1.199). Reliability for internal branch was assessed
using the aLRT test (SH-Like). The graphical representation and
edition of the phylogenetic tree were performed with TreeDyn
(v198.3) [].

Results
From the NCBI GenBank database, 163 sequences of UROS
covering the putative conserved HemD domain were used to
construct a first-pass phylogenetic tree. The tree however had
some of the repetitive and unrelated sequences which were
deleted. The short-listed sequences belonged to Porifera,
Arthropoda, Echinodermata, Tunicates, Cephalochordates,
Bacteria, Cnidaria, Fishes, Amphibia, Reptiles, Aves and
Mammalia. The accession information for these sequences is
available in  (see supplementary material). Analysis of
the sequences revealed that there is a high degree of sequence
similarity of UROS enzyme in many of the selected sequences
used for the phylogeny reconstruction. Putative conserved
domains were observed in many taxa at the HemD region
() 
[]. The actual alignment was detected with
superfamily member pfam02602 (E-value: 3.02e-41). BLAST
produced 163 hits (); these sequences were screened
manually and only those related to the sequence in question
(HPSE-1) from different taxa were retained for further analyses.
This produced a total of 39 sequences from 31 taxa. Multiple
sequence alignment results of these short-listed sequences is
presented in (). Using the PhyML program a tree was
constructed for these sequences, the results of which are
presented in ().

Discussion
The evolutionary relationship of UROS enzyme in various
species, taxa and phyla was evaluated using computational
phylogenetics to identify similar genes in the short-listed
organisms. A mix of algorithms and programs were used to
construct a phylogenetic tree [,
]; the neighbor-joining
method was used to calculate genetic distance and ClustalW to
create trees based on multiple sequences. The JTT matrix
method was used to generate mutation data matrices from
protein sequences and the set sequences were clustered at the
85% identity level. In addition, the sequences were aligned, and
the observed exchanges amino acids were tallied 
[].
Following this, the final phylogenetic tree was constructed 
[].
We have used MUSCLE (multiple sequence comparison by logexpectation)
method to achieve the highest scores. Close to four
benchmarks showed that MUSCLE achieved the highest
ranking of any method available at the time of publication.
Using Gblocks, poorly aligned positions and divergent regions
of sequences could be eliminated – these positions may not be
homologous or may have been saturated by multiple
substitutions [,
]. In addition, this program helped to
reduce the necessity of manually editing multiple alignments
with very fast processing. The PhyML software was used since
it was shown to be at least as accurate and slightly faster as
other existing phylogeny programs using simulated data. The
DELTA BLAST algorithm which uses a heuristic method to
identify homologous sequences helped to produce high scoring
sequence alignment between the query and database sequences.
We have used BLAST as a first pass sequence alignment tool to
narrow down the target and most relevant sequences.

The phylogenetic tree indicated that UROS protein is conserved
and plays an important role in organismal evolution 
(
&amp; ). It is interesting to note that the conserved regions as
shown in Homo sapiens are similar to those found in some
other organisms that have this conserved gene. Presence of
UROS in the major organisms indicates that it is crucial for the
development of the physiology of cells. Its high conservation at
certain domains indicates that its function is preserved. In
conclusion, the evolutionary relationship of UROS gene was
established based on the sequence alignment, conserved
sequences and phylogenetic trees. The results of the published
data on protein sequences of the above genes showed that the
sequences are highly conserved especially at certain domains.
Human sequences consistently clustered with their mammal
orthologs within these genes clearly indicate the importance of
these genes in evolution []. The phylogenetic reconstruction
of the metabolic pathways of many organisms is one of the
major goals of genomics. Reconstructions made through
comparative genomics, and results from experiments on model
systems help in understanding the biochemical diversity of life.
Thus, analysis of phyletic patterns re-emphasizes the
importance of certain metabolic enzymes in evolution.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors would like to extend their appreciation to the Research
Centre, College of Applied Medical Sciences and Deanship of
Scientific Research at King Saud University for funding this
research.

Citation:Shaik et al, Bioinformation 8(25): 1265-1270 (2012)

Putative sequence of UROS in super families; UROS (HemD) catalyzes the production of uroporphyrinogen-III, the fourth
step in the biosynthesis of heme. This ubiquitous enzyme is present in eukaryotes, bacteria and archaea. Cd Length: 239 Bit Score:
171.72 E-value: 5.15e-52; 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Structure/cdd/wrpsb.cgi?RID=B6X0K5J901R&amp;mode=all

First pass phylogenetic tree constructed by multiple alignment using BLAST pair wise alignments: Results presented
using Taxonomic name [163 hits]

MUSCLE (3.7) multiple sequence alignment [CLUSTAL format] of short-listed sequences [39 taxons] Similar residues are
colored as the most conserved one (according to BLOSUM62).

Phylogenetic tree using short-listed sequences
[cladogram] built using the PhyML software [39 taxons].

