Background
Bacteria are remarkably adaptable organisms that acquire an
almost limitless competence to survive under unpleasant
conditions. β-lactam antibiotics are the most common treatment
for bacterial infections []. Production of β-Lactamases is the
most important mechanism of resistance against β-lactam drug
in Gram-negative bacteria [,
]. These enzymes hydrolysed the
amide bond of the β-lactam ring inorder to inactivate the
antibiotics [,
]. The drastic emergence of antibiotic resistance
among β-Lactamases is the most serious threat to hospitals and
nosocomial settings []. Class A β-lactamases, that are
considered to be responsible for numerous failures in the
treatment of infectious diseases, are most widespread enzymes
[]. TEM and SHV are class A type β-lactamases commonly
found in Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae, pathogens
and are considered to be mainly responsible for urinary tract,
respiratory tract, and bloodstream infections []. TEM-1 was the
first plasmid-mediated β-lactamase in Gram - negatives,
reported in 1965 from an Escherichia coli and was named after
the patient from which it was isolated (Temoniera) []. Since
then this Class-A β-lactamase has spread worldwide among
different bacterial species []. β-lactam inhibitors came into
existence in order to overcome the problem of antibibiotic
resistance in bacteria []. The emergence of inhibitor resistance
strains fuelled the already persisting problem and has seriously
challenged the future of the β-lactam antibiotics []. Mutations
in several positions of the enzyme are responsible for increased
catalytic activity against these antimicrobials and for resistance
to β-lactamase inhibitors, turning the enzyme into an extendedspectrum
or inhibitor resistant β-lactamase []. One of the
important position where the mutation leads to inhibitor
resistance is S130G []. Ser130 is an important active site
residue that is considered to be playing very important roles
that ranges from protonating the lactam nitrogen leaving group
to facilitating proton transfer to the β-lactam nitrogen during
acylation leading to β-lactam ring opening promoting during
substrate hydrolysis [,
]. It has been reported earlier that
mutation at this residue position compensates for the loss of
activity of enzyme and makes the enzyme to less susceptible to
β-lactamase inhibitors []. That in turn increases the acquired
dosage to many folds. Today, it seems to be very important for
developing an inhibitor against such resistant mutants. Virtual
screening by molecular docking is increasingly important in
drug discovery [,
]. Thus, in the view of present
background we have performed structure based virtual
screening of inhibitors against S130 mutation carrying TEM-76
type Class-A β-lactamase.

Methodology
Protein preparation:
The crystal structure of TEM-1 and TEM-76 were extracted from
protein data bank (pdb id: 1AXB and 1YT4). Each structure was
refined by removing the heteroatoms and water molecules. The
minimization was performed by using a CHARMm force field
[] 
with Dependent Dielectric implicit solvent model along
and conjugates gradient method.

Library Design:
Known inhibitors of beta-lactamases were retrieved from
pubchem. A library of 1442 compounds extracted from zinc
database [] was prepared on the basis of physicochemical
properties of known inhibitors. Further the compounds were
refined for correct protonation.

Virtual Screening:
GOLD (Genetic Optimization for Ligand Docking) 5.0 
[] was
used for virtual screening of the compounds dataset against
selected targets in present study. Docking annealing parameters
for van der Walls and hydrogen bonding were set to 5.0 and 2.5
respectively. The parameters used for genetic algorithm were
population size 100, selection pressure 1.2, number of
operations 1,00,000, number of islands 5, niche size 2, migrate
10, mutate 100 and cross -over 100. The procedure was
repeated twice to confirm the accuracy of our results. Top 100
compounds on the basis with GOLD fitness score were selected
after the first phase of screening. These top 100 selected
compounds were further screened, and this time these
compounds were docked with the active site of TEM-76 in
presence of water molecules. The water molecules within 5Å
around the active site of TEM-76 were retained. Finally, best
five compounds with highest Fitness score against TEM-76 in
both in presence and absence of water molecules. These finally
selected compounds were subjected to dock into the active site
of wild type TEM (TEM-1, pdb id: 1AXB) using the same
protocol as mentioned above to confirm their effectivenss.

Alignment and Visualisation:
The alignment of wild type and S130G mutant of TEM was
done using clustalX. The interaction of the above selected
compounds within the active site of their respective targets was
done using ligplot [] and pymol.

Discussion
Virtual screening of chemical databases has been an efficient
method for discovery and development of new compounds
[]. In this study we have used virtual screening approach in
order to find out compounds with better affinity against the
S130G mutant of TEM betalactamase. The alignment of TEM-76
with its wild type is shown in (). We have also analysed
the affinity of these compounds against TEM-1 (wild type) and
the results were found to be quite impressive. Out of the total of
1,442 compounds selected for screening, five compounds were
found to be affective against both wild type and S130G mutant
of TEM type β-lactamase. Presence of water molecules within
the active site of β-lactamases is considered to be important in
the hydrolysis of drugs, these water molecules appears to
serves as the proton donor that is necessary for drug resistance
in class A enzymes [].

The compounds that were reported here were checked both in
presence and absence of active site water molecules. Out of the
five compounds selected, ZINC02775438 was found to be most
affective followed by ZINC01738195 and ZINC06143162 
 
(see supplementary material). These compounds were able to
make stable complex within the active site of TEM-76 with
goldfitness score of 64.05, 61.88 and 61.13 respectively. It has
been reported earlier that TEM-76 shows little susceptibility
against three clinically used inhibitors viz., clavulanate,
tazobactam, and sulbactam. These traditional inhibitors bind
within the active site of TEM-76 with gold fitness score ranging
between 32-42  (see supplementary material). LN-1-255,
a 6-alkylidene-2'-substituted penicillin sulfone inhibitor, as an
effective β-lactamase inhibitor [] docked with a gold fitness
score of 42.28 against TEM-. Penem-1and Penem-2 [] able to
make complex with gold fitness score of 42.44 and 43.84
respectively against TEM-76 and was comparable with LN
1255. The Gold fitness score of all these inhibitors that were set
as a reference for comparing the efficacy of screened inhibitors.
Hydrophobic interactions and hydrogen bonds play an
important role in stabilizing a ligand energetically within the
active site of a protein [–]. It was observed that the mutated
Glycine residue at 130th position was mostly involved in
making hydrophobic contacts with the selected inhibitors.
Along with G130 other residues were also found to be playing
important role in the binding of inhibitor within the active site
of TEM-76. K-73 was found to be a key residue that was actively
involved in hydrogen bond formation at several instances.

Apart from K-73 there were some other residues that were
actively involved in the positioning of inhibitor within the
active site they include S70, N132, G130, Y105 and V216. G130
that was the mutant residue was found to be making only
hydrophobic contacts with the inhibitors  (see
supplementary material), ( &amp; 
). Finally we
recommend these compounds as potential inhibitors that can be
used in future against the S130G and wild type class A TEM
betalactamase. However, the outcome of these need to be
validated through the experiment analyses.

Conclusion
In this study, we have screened out six inhibitors on the basis of
their insilico binding affinity agsinst S130G inhibitor resistant
mutant of TEM using the GOLD 5.0 program. The compounds
reported in this study were having better binding affinity both
against TEM-76 and its wild type as compare to the known β-
Lactamase inhibitors in current use. All the compounds
reported in this study were reataining the potential to bind
within the active site of TEM-76 also in the presence of water
molecule that is considered to be important agent in the
hydrolysis of drug. The binding modes exihibited by various
docked compounds illustrated the importance of specific
residues within the active site region of the targets. Apart from
G130, role of some other important aminoacids have also been
revealed, that were found to be playing important role in the
positioning of inhibitor within the active site. Thus based on
above outcomes we conclude that these inhibitors can behave as
a lead to drugs against the targets selected for our study.
However, some experimentally work need for validating these
outcomes.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors acknowledge the facilities of Distributed Information
Sub-centre, Interdisciplinary Biotechnology Unit, A.M.U.,
Aligarh. This work was supported by DBT grants,
BT/PR11610/BRB/10/669/2008 and BT/PR11453/BID/07/296/2009
to AUK

Citation:Baig et al, Bioinformation 8(24): 1225-1229 (2012)

Alignment of TEM-1 with TEM-76

Binding of ZINC02775438 within the active site of TEM-76

Interaction of screened out compounds with active site residues

