Background
The food productivity decreases due to the effect of various
abiotic stresses. Drought and salinity are the major abiotic
environment stresses, which negatively affect growth and
productivity of plants. Minimizing these losses and to improve
and manage food productivity by developing stress tolerant
crops is a major challenge globally. More than one abiotic stress
can occur simultaneously; one abiotic stress decreases plant's
ability to resist a second stress. Plant's responses to salt and
drought stress have much in common []. The primary effect of
drought is to generate osmotic stress, whereas salinity also
induces osmotic stress by its effect on the ionic homeostasis in
the plant cell. Reduction in the ability of plants to take up water
under salinity quickly causes reduction in growth rate, along
with a group of other metabolic changes that are identical with
drought stress. Photosynthesis is among the primary process
that are affected by drought and salinity which cause reduced
synthesis of photosynthetic pigments []. These changes in the
amount of photosynthetic pigments are closely associated to
plant biomass yield. Besides photosynthesis, reduced water
potential also disrupts membranes along with other essential
physiological and biochemical processes such as respiration, ion
uptake, carbohydrates and nutrient metabolism []. Reduced
water limits CO2 fixation and reduces NADP+ regeneration in
calvin cycle. These adverse conditions increase the formation of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as H2O2 (hydrogen
peroxide), O2– (superoxide) and OH (hydroxyl) radicals,
through enhanced leakage of electrons to molecular oxygen.
ROS is involved in the stress signal transduction pathway as a
secondary messenger, however excessive ROS production
causes oxidative stress, which damages plant's photosynthetic
pigments, membrane lipids, proteins and nucleic acids. To keep
the levels of active oxygen species under control, plants have
antioxidant defense systems to protect cells from oxidative
damage [].

Sorghum bicolor is a stress-tolerant cereal crop species with
considerable economic importance in drought and salinity
affected arid and semiarid regions of the world. The crop is
grown for food, feed and biofuels. The genome sequencing of S.
bicolor has been recently completed 
[]. Although, currently a
large amount of data are available on gene expression in
response to salt, drought and other stresses, the global response
to these abiotic stresses in sorghum remains largely unexplored.
The increasing availability of genomic sequences of several
plants in combination with high-throughput bioinformatics
tools and databases provide new opportunities for
understanding role of proteins. The stress defence proteins
network has been recently explained in Arabidopsis and rice
using multi-parallel gene expression analysis techniques 
[].
Currently, several computational approaches for functional
identification of proteins such as sequence similarity,
phylogenetic profiles, protein-protein interaction (PPI) and gene
expression are available []. Protein-protein interaction method
is based on the assumption that interacting proteins usually
share same function []. In this paper, we report Gene Ontology
term's functional distances analysis method to identify six
expressed drought responsive proteins in sorghum. Gene
Ontology (GO) term's semantic similarity provides functional
relationship between proteins. The semantic similarity between
two proteins is usually calculated based on the GO terms
similarity []. To identify semantic similarity between GO
terms, several methods have been reported earlier, viz.
Resnik's, Lin'S and JiangConrath's []. Gene Ontology is a
structured and controlled vocabulary, which characterizes the
functional annotation of proteins. Gene Ontology is composed
of three independent ontologies: biological process (BP),
molecular function (MF), and cellular component (CC). In
directed acyclic graph (DAG) the GO terms are structured as ‘isa’
and ‘part-of’ relationships in GO database 
[].

The Gramene plant genome database [] (Release 34b) includes
a wealth of information of proteins from Arabidopsis, rice and
other plant species. However, only little information in
sorghum has been proposed till date. In the present study, 2-DE
based proteomic technique with MALDI-TOF was used to
separate and identify six highly expressed proteins in sorghum.
The drought (no water supply) until 96 hours to investigate
cellular responses was imposed in 7 d old sorghum plants. To
identify drought responsive six expressed proteins, we
proposed a new method to identify proteins using functional
distances between GO terms.

Methodology
Plant material:
Seeds of Sorghum bicolor (L.) genotype csv-17 were used as plant
material and grown hydroponically in Hoagland's solution.
After 7 days of germination, the drought stress (no water
supply) was imposed on germinated seeds and leaves.

Two-dimensional (2-DE) gel electrophoresis:
The method Mechin et al. 
[] was followed for the extraction of
proteins from the plant sample. Protein samples were purified
using 2D-cleanup kit (Bio-Rad) and the protein pellet was
finally resuspended in sample rehydration buffer (8M urea, 2%
CHAPS, 15mM DTT and 0.5% IPG buffer pH 4–7). Protein spots
were visualized by staining with coomassie brilliant blue G-250.
Gel images were captured by GS800 densitometer (Bio-Rad,
USA).

Protein spots identification by mass spectrometry:
The gel spots were washed with proteomic grade de-ionized
water and proteins were identified by using MALDI-TOF mass
spectrometer (Ultraflex III, Bruker Daltonics, Germany). The
expressed proteins were analyzed using mascot sequence
matching software (http://www.matrixscience.com) using
MSDB in the taxonomy group of green plants. While
performing mascot the search parameters were: maximum of
one missed cleavage by trypsin, fixed modification of oxidation,
charged state of +1, peptide mass tolerance of 50 ppm, and
fragment mass tolerance of ±1.0 Da.

Data identification and network illustration:
A total of six expressed proteins in sorghum were identified to
be common with from closely related in Oryza sativa proteins by
homology comparison. Homology search was carried out using
blastp at Uniprot database (http://www.uniprot.org/blast/)
with the following parameters: Database-UniprotKB;
Threshold-0.1; Matrix-blosum-62. The molecular weights of
expressed proteins were determined using the Compute
pI/Mw search tool at expasy server
(http://web.expasy.org/compute_pi). The COGnitor program
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/COG/old/xognitor) was
utilized for functional annotation of proteins. Protein families
were obtained using InterProScan search tool
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/pfa/iprscan) against hidden
markov model (HMM) Pfam database []. The GO-terms were
obtained using Gene Ontology database that cross linked at
Uniprot database. We used GO hierarchies of Arabidosis thaliana
to obtain GO directed acyclic graphs (DAG). This graph was
explained using cytoscape 2.8.1 version [].

Functional distance algorithm:
We proposed an algorithm to obtain functional distances using
sum of distance values between GO terms from root to its
associated terms in GO hierarchy. The ProteInOn tool
(http://xldb.di.fc.ul.pt/tools/proteinon/) was utilized to
calculate the semantic similarities with JiangConrath's
measurement without ignore inferred from electronic
annotation (IEA). The shortest path was confirmed by analysis
of distance values in their corresponding paths. The smallest
distance value of analyzed path was referred as shortest path.
The shortest path algorithm is given as follows:
D1 = 100 - SS (t1, t 2) → (1)
d = arctan = PathA[D1 + Dn]
× π → (2)
2
Where, D1 is the functional distance between GO term's (t1, t2)
and SS is semantic similarity. The pathA is the path of GO
ontologies that connected to the root term. The total distance (d)
to identify shortest path was calculated by summing of
functional distance values between GO terms.

Discussion
Sorghum seedlings were grown hydroponically and drought
stress imposed on 7 d old germinated seeds. The drought stress
induced chlorosis and reduced growth of leaves. The MALDITOF/
MS analysis identified expression of six drought inducible
proteins as compared to corresponding control with water in
sorghum seedlings ().

The whole genome sequencing of Sorghum bicolor has been
recently completed [] and till date no comparable information
on drought inducible proteins from this crop is available.
Hence, the identified homologues in sorghum were described
as hypothetical proteins. Here, very effective bioinformatics
approaches were applied to put functional context of expressed
drought responsive proteins  (see supplementary
material). The COGnitor program based results revealed that
differentially expressed proteins belonged to functional
categories of signal transduction mechanisms (spot S1; S2) and,
carbohydrate transport and metabolism (spot S5). Among the
expressed proteins, cupin1 (spot S3), glycoside hydrolase (spot
S4) and raffinose synthase (spot S6) did not match with any
COG record. Hence, the families of all six expressed proteins
were identified  (see supplementary material).

In this study, we have developed an effective method to
identify proteins using functional distances between
hierarchical structured GO terms. The shortest path was
identified on the bases of the analysis of distance values of their
corresponding paths. In the results the smallest distance value
has been referred as shortest path  (see supplementary
material). While finding shortest paths for assigned GO terms
of six expressed proteins, the most informative common ancestor
(MICA) terms were noted. The identified MICA terms were
facilitated to discover functional annotation of drought stress
responsive proteins. The shortest path method developed in
this study was applied on hierarchical structured GO terms in
molecular function, biological process and cellular component.
The GO terms (n1-n8) were associated with root term molecular
function (GO: 0003674) (). We identified shortest paths
for these terms using sum of term's semantic similarity. The
distance score 13.4 was identified for (n1) term by the following
calculation: arctan=1.3+3.6+7.9+0.6; distance (d) = arctan×π/2.
This value has been referred as shortest path for (n1) GO-term.
The same calculation was performed to find shortest path for
other GO-terms that associated with the root term, molecular
function  (see supplementary material). While finding
the shortest paths, MICA [(M1) “catalytic activity” (GO:
0003824)] was noted for terms [(n1) hydrolase activity,
hydrolyzing O-glycosyl compounds (GO: 0004553) (spot S4)],
[(n2) galactinol-sucrose galactosyltransferase activity (GO:
0047274) (spot S6)], [(n3) protein serine/threonine kinase
activity (GO: 0004674) (spot S1; S2)]. Several functional studies
have revealed that signaling pathways leading to biotic and
abiotic stress resistance are mediated by calcium-dependent
protein kinases (CDPKs) []. Previously, the expression of
glycoside hydrolase proteins under drought stress has been
reported in Arabidopsis and rice []. These proteins are
involved in the metabolism of various carbohydrate containing
compounds and play other major functional roles in the plants.

The second MICA [(M2) “binding” (GO: 0005488)] was noted
for terms [(n4) manganese ion binding (GO: 0030145) (spot S3)],
[(n5) cation binding (GO: 0043169) (spot S4], [(n6) calcium ion
binding (GO: 0005509) (spot S1)] and [(n7) ATP binding (GO:
0005524) (spot S1; S2]. The MICA term “binding” and its
associated terms are involved in numerous functions including
in electron carriers, maintenance of charge balance, and enzyme
activation. These binding processes play important role in
minimizing the adverse effects of abiotic stresses in crop plants
[]. Thus it may be concluded that spots (S1, S2, S3, S4, and S6)
were strongly associated with proteins that are involved in
binding and catalytic activity process.

The GO hierarchy of root term biological process (GO: 0008150)
was associated with GO-terms [(n9) carbohydrate metabolic
process (GO: 0005975) (spots S4, S6)] and [(n10) trehalose
biosynthetic process (GO: 0005992) (spot S5)] (). To
identify shortest path from root to its associated GO-terms, we
have proposed a method based on algorithm described in
methodology. Consequently, we noted the MICA [(M3)
“primary metabolic process” (GO: 0044238)] was noted for its
GO-terms. The GO-terms (n9) and (n10) share a same hierarchy
path (). Previously it has been reported that the several
carbohydrates viz., sucrose, glucose, fructose and starch
accumulate under salt stress and play a major role in osmotic
adjustment, carbon storage and radical scavenging 
[]. Earlier
studies have evaluated that proline, spermine, sucrose,
mannitol, and fructans increase during drought stress 
[]. In
the cellular component root term (GO: 0005575) did not have
any significant MICA for its associated GO term [(n11) apoplast
(GO: 0048046)]. The apoplast is involved in numerous processes
of plants, such as development, nutrition, signalling,
detoxification and defense [].

Conclusion
It can be concluded that the approach applied in this study can
be used to identify proteins. We described isolation and
characterization of six drought stress responsive expressed in
sorghum using 2DE-MS proteomic approaches. We developed a
new method to obtain functional distances between GO terms
and the analysis of distance values to allocate the shortest path
(SP) in GO hierarchy. Further, we observed that identified
proteins belonged to functional categories of signal
transduction mechanisms. These identified proteins may
possibly lead to a distinct mechanism of drought-stress
adaptation in sorghum. The approach applied in this study may
have great importance in further identifying proteins involved
in abiotic and biotic stress conditions in crops.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors gratefully acknowledge liberal use of the facilities
of the DBT supported Centre of Bioinformatics at Banasthali
University, India.

Citation:Sharma et al, Bioinformation 8(13): 595-599 (2012)

2-DE gel showing spots differentially expressed (&gt;1.5-
fold difference) in leaves from Sorghum bicolor plants grown in
drought stress (no water supply) (A) as compared to the
control; (B) the identified spots are marked with arrows.

GO hierarchy network of highly expressed proteins
under drought stress. In the graph M1, M2 and M3 are MICA
terms and (n1-n11) are GO terms of expressed proteins.

