Background
MicroRNA (miRNA) is a short (about 21 to 23 nucleotides) single stranded 
RNA molecule that playing an important role in gene regulation 
[]. 
Thousands of miRNAs have been identified in nematodes, insects, birds, 
amphibians, fishes, plants, mammals, and even viruses using molecular cloning 
and bioinformatics prediction []. 
MicroRNAs have been implicated in processes and pathways such as development, 
cell proliferation, apoptosis, metabolism and morphogenesis, and in diseases 
including cancer [].

Intronic microRNA is a class of miRNAs belongs to intronic regions of protein-coding genes. 
About 50% of these intronic miRNAs reside in introns whose length is longer than 5,000 bps
[]. It is likely that intronic 
miRNAs can have their own independently regulated transcription units, which can be regulated 
by RNA polymerase II (Pol II) or RNA polymerase III (Pol III). It was recently demonstrated 
that RNA Pol III could transcribe human miRNAs through associated repetitive elements 
[]. Although the intronic miRNAs 
and their host genes could be regulated independently, it is possible that intronic 
miRNA can still down-regulate its own host protein-coding gene by targeting the 
untranslated region (UTR) of the host gene []. 
Another biological implication is that intronic miRNAs could play an important role as 
negative feedback regulators.

IntmiR contains a database of published intronic miRNAs which enables to 
retrieve necessary information regarding miRNAs. The database has provides intronic miRNA 
sequence data, references and links to other resources for all published miRNAs 
[]. It currently links the intronic 
miRNAs to their targets, corresponding pathways with each target, associated diseases and related 
tissues [,
,
].
The pathway maps depict molecular relationships from areas of active 
research. Towards this end ‘IntmiR’- provides a comprehensive 
package of information associated with intronic miRNAs.

Database Organization
IntmiR provides a simple search and retrieval interface and database search 
can be by the intronic miRNA or its sequence. It provides all the target genes 
(symbol and name) corresponding to the intronic miRNA or sequence and also the
pathways associated with each target gene if any. It also retrieves all the 
intronic miRNAs and associated pathways given a target gene if any intronic miRNA 
corresponds to that gene. It also accepts intronic miRNA or its sequence and retrieves 
all the diseases and tissues associated along with the corresponding Pubmed ID 
(). There is also facility to 
submit new additions which are added after validation and approval. 
IntmiR thus provides an open access platform which enables an 
easy and comprehensive retrieval of all the necessary information about intronic 
miRNAs and aims to help strengthen the bridge between database developers, 
curators, and users ().

Architecture of IntmiR
IntmiR has a MySQL relational database as the back-end. The Web pages are dynamically 
generated by the PHP scripts hosted on Apache server. Along with PHP scripts, 
JavaScript and AJAX was also used to facilitate continuous site navigation, efficiency 
and validations. IntmiR can be accessed by the users from a standard web browser on any 
operating system. The complete database used to construct IntmiR can be downloaded 
as a flat file or in the Microsoft excel format and IntmiR also 
provides researchers to upload data on new intronic miRNA observed in human and mouse.

Conclusion
IntmiR provides a user-friendly interface, a convenient search option, 
allowing efficient recovery of sequence, regulatory target genes, related diseases and 
pathways and other information. We hope IntmiR provides the first 
comprehensive view of intronic miRNAs and associated regulons in Human and Mouse.

Future Developments
The IntmiR is being constantly developed and supplemented 
with new experimental data from the available literature sources. We are planning 
to update the database annually. Concurrently, its integration with the 
existing databases and its search capabilities are being constantly improved.

Citation:Reshmi et al Bioinformation 5(10): 458-459 (2011)

Organization flowchart of IntmiR.

Screen capture of IntmiR showing search option.

