Background
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), the causative agent of
                tuberculosis (TB), remains a major health threat. Each year, 8 million new TB cases
                appear and 2 million individuals die of TB [[. Moreover, it is estimated that one third of the
                population is latently infected with Mtb, of which ∽10% will
                develop active disease during lifetime. The development of active TB occurs when the
                balance between natural immunity and the pathogen changes (e.g. upon waning of
                protective immune response during adolescence and in HIV patients [[). Further, about half a million
                new multi-drug resistant TB cases are estimated to occur every year
                    [[. The existing
                drugs, although of immense value in controlling the disease to the extent that is
                being done today, have several shortcomings, the most important of them being the
                emergence of drug resistance rendering even the front-line drugs inactive. In
                addition, drugs such as rifampin have high levels of adverse effects making them
                prone for patient incompliance. Another important problem with most of the existing
                antimycobacterials, is their inability to act upon latent forms of the bacillus. In
                addition to these problems, the vicious interactions between the human
                immunodeficiency virus and TB have led to further challenges for anti-tubercular
                drug discovery [[.

The cost of research and development in the pharmaceutical industry has been rising
                steeply and steadily in the last decade, but the amount of time required for
                bringing a new product to market remains around ten to fifteen years
                    [[. This problem
                has been labeled as an “innovation gap,” and it necessitates
                investment in inexpensive technologies that shorten the length of time spent in drug
                discovery. As drug discovery efforts are increasingly becoming rational and much
                less dependent on trial and error, identification of appropriate targets becomes a
                fundamental pre-requisite. As with all the other steps in drug discovery, this stage
                is complicated by the fact that the identified drug target must satisfy a variety of
                criteria to permit progression to the next stage. Important factors in this context
                include homology between target and host (to prevent host toxicity such homology
                must be low or nonexistent [[), activity of the target in the diseased state
                    [[ and the
                essentiality of the target to the pathogen's growth and survival.
                Finding new targets can enhance the discovery process as well as solve the problem
                of drug resistance.

Traditionally, targets have been identified through established knowledge of
                individual protein molecules and their functions, where their function has been
                well-characterized. Here, we use comparative genomics for the identification of
                potential targets for Mtb. These methods have the advantage of speed, low cost and
                even more importantly, provide a systems view of the whole microbe at a time, which
                enables asking questions that are often difficult to address experimentally. Drug
                discovery has witnessed a paradigm shift from the traditional medicinal
                chemistry-based ligand-oriented discovery approaches to rational drug target
                identification and target-driven lead discovery, by targeting the molecular
                mechanisms of the disease.

Methodology
Searching for the M. tuberculosis H37Rv complete genes
The complete genome sequence of M. tuberculosis H37Rv was
                    downloaded using National Center for Biotechnology Information FTP server
                        (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/FTP).

Comparative analysis with human
The protein coding genes from M. tuberculosis H37Rv genome were
                    subjected to BLAST against DEG(http://tubic.tju.edu.cn/deg) to find out the essential genes. The
                    essential genes obtained after DEG search were compared with human genes using
                    BLASTX. Genes which lack the homology with human were considered as potential
                    drug target candidates for further drug development process.

Functional analysis using UNIPROT
The obtained targets genes were further analyzed by UNIPROT (www.uniprot.org)
                    database to find out their functions.

Results
Available data shows 3989 protein coding genes in the M.
                tuberculosis H37Rv genome. These genes were subjected to BLAST with DEG and
                628 genes were found to be essential for M. tuberculosis H37Rv.
                Comparative studies with human were performed to find out genes with or without
                homolog to human. Genes those that were homologous to human were neglected as they
                were functionally similar with those of human. Out of 628 essentials genes, 324
                genes lack similarity to the human genome in BLASTX homology search and were
                identified as potential candidates for further target based drug development. We
                manually annotated all the genes having no homolog to human and removed hypothetical
                and uncharacterized genes to refine the results. The resulting dataset consist of a
                target dataset of 135 potential genes. These were further classified using UNIPROT
                based on functions. The analyzed data shows that of the 135 targets genes, 25 were
                involved in amino-acid biosynthesis, 10 in cell cycle, 8 in transcription, 8 in RNA
                Binding and 5 in Protein transport (). It was also observed from UNIPROT results that some
                target genes are involved in multiple functions in different pathways ().

Discussion
Tuberculosis (TB) is a major cause of illness and death worldwide, especially in Asia
                and Africa. There is a death due to tuberculosis for every 15 seconds (2 million
                deaths per year) and about 8 million individuals develop this disease every year
                    [[. Globally,
                9.2 million new cases and 1.7 million deaths from TB occurred in 2006, of which 0.7
                million cases and 0.2 million deaths were in HIV-positive people [[. The existing drugs have several
                shortcomings, the most important of them being the emergence of drug resistance.
                Existing ’front-line‘ anti-TB drugs include isoniazid and
                rifampicin. The mechanism of action of isoniazid has only become clear in the last
                few years [[.
                Isoniazid is a pro-drug, activated intracellularly by the MTB catalase/peroxidase,
                probably to a radical form that irreversibly modifies the NAD(H)-binding site of one
                or more enzymes involved in lipid synthesis. InhA [theNADHdependent
                enoyl (acyl carrier protein) reductase[ and KasA (the 3-oxoacyl ACP
                synthase) have been demonstrated to be targets for isoniazid [–[. Modifications in the target enzymes and in the
                activating catalase/peroxidase provide the means for MTB to evade the antibiotic
                actions of the drug [–[.

Rifampicin is a well-characterized inhibitor of DNAdependent RNA polymerases.
                Resistance to rifampicin results from mutations in the drug-binding site of the
                polymerase that do not adversely affect the enzyme's activity
                    [[. Resistance
                to other major and ’second-line‘ anti-Mtb drugs is now also
                well known. Pyrazinamide (a close relative of nicotinamide) is also a prodrug,
                requiring activation by the enzyme pyrazinamidase. Mutation in the relevant
                    pncA gene affects pyrazinamide activation, and resistance may
                also be facilitated by alteration of its transport into the Mtb cell
                    [[.
                Streptomycin targets translation by associating with ribosomal proteins and the 16 S
                RNA of the ribosome 30 S subunit. Resistance in Mtb arises from mutations in the
                    rspL gene (encoding the S12 protein target for streptomycin
                binding) and in conserved loop regions of the 16 S RNA, encoded by the
                rrs gene [[. Ethambutol is known to be inhibitory to polyamine function
                and cell-wall synthesis. Mutations in embB, encoding an
                arabinosyltransferase involved in cell-wall biogenesis, are associated with
                ethambutol resistance, but other mechanisms of resistance also appear to be
                operative [[.
                Recently, the second-line anti-Mtb drug ethionamide has been shown to require
                activation by a Mtb flavin mono-oxygenase to convert it into the cytotoxic form
                    [–[. Overexpression of InhA was
                found to confer resistance to both isoniazid and ethionamide, revealing an obvious
                route for development of antibiotic resistance in the pathogen [[.

No new anti-Mtb drugs have been developed for well over 20 years. In view of the
                increasing development of resistance to the current leading anti-Mtb drugs, novel
                strategies are desperately needed to avert the ’global
                catastrophe‘ forecast by the WHO. The timely determination of the genome
                sequence of Mtb H37Rv by Stewart Cole and co-workers in 1998 provided a muchneeded
                boost for TB research, elucidating the genetic constitution of the pathogen and
                revealing many novel gene products for mechanistic and structural characterization,
                and as potential new drug targets [[. Therefore, computational approach for drug targets
                identification, specifically for Mtb, can produce a list of
                reliable targets very rapidly. These methods have the advantage of speed, low cost
                and even more importantly, provide a systems view of the whole microbe at a time.
                Since it is generally believed that the genomes of bacteria contain both genes with
                and without homologues to the human host. Using computational approach for target
                identification is very quick to produce a desirable list. Here we performed database
                search and found total 3989 genes in the M. tuberculosis H37Rv
                genome, we had annotated all the genes and removed all hypothetical genes to refine
                the results. After removing all hypothetical genes, 135 genes have been identified
                as potential drug targets. These genes and their products can be targets for future
                drug development and even screening can be done with the available drugs for
                tuberculosis.

Conclusion
Comparative genome analysis of MTB H37Rv and human provides a simple
                framework for integrating the vast amount of genomic data that can be used in the
                drug target identification. Drugs that specifically target genes with high homology
                to the host can lead to unwanted toxicity, therefore, finding new antituberculosis
                drugs should based on subtractive genome analysis. The analysis shows that 628 of
                the 3989 genes in Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv were found to be
                essential of which 324 genes lack similarity to the human genome. Subsequently
                hypothetical proteins were removed through manual curation. This further resulted in
                a dataset of 135 proteins with essential function and no homology to human.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Asif
                    et al, Bioinformation 4(6): 245-248 (2009)

