Background
Reproduction in female crustaceans is distinguished by production and accumulation of yolk
     proteins in the eggs. These yolk proteins are essential for giving nutrition to the growing
     embryos. Vitellogenesis refers to the progression of molecular biosynthesis of yolk proteins,
     their way of transport and storage in the ovary. Vitellogenesis is synchronized by the complex
     endocrine system in the female crustaceans. Several experiments have established that removal
     of eyestalk in crustaceans speeds up the timing of gonadal maturation and stimulates growth
      [,] . It was
     understood that the eyestalk of neuroendocrine system, the X-organ sinus gland complex secreted
     inhibiting hormone (called VIH) embattled against the gonad. The inhibitory neuropeptide (VIH)
     control was confirmed by evidence that (unilateral and bilateral) eyestalk ablation arouses
     ovarian maturation []. The VIH inhibited the synthesis
     of 97 kDa yolk proteins but not general protein synthesis, implying that the hormone
     exclusively controlled the timing of vitellogenesis in crustaceans []. Consequently, the function of VIH is to hold down yolk production in
     female crustaceans until rich organic reserves are present in ovary or hepatopancreas to feed
     the growing egg. In spite of the isolation and depiction of VIH, the clear-cut mechanism of its
     action on the vitellogenesis is still mysterious.

The X-organ–sinus gland (XO-SG) complex of eyestalk in crustaceans is considered
     as the key rich source of the CHH family peptide production. VIH is a member of CHH family
     peptides. Molecular analysis of VIHs isolated from various crustacean species (lobsters, crabs,
     shrimps, and prawns) shows that they are peptides of 78-83 residues. VIH peptides have
     considerable degree of sequence similarity with MIH, including the conservation of 6 cysteine
     residues at the same relative positions. So VIH is considered as a CHH-II family group. RP-HPLC
     analysis revealed that this neuropeptide is dimorphic in Homarus americanus;
     both isoforms have the same sequence, mass and isoelectric point but varies in hydrophobicity
      []. Ollivaux et al., [] conducted experiments to analyze VIH proteins. They extracted VIHs from the
     European lobster Homarus gammarus and H. americanus by
     RP-HPLC, and analyzed the peptide by Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance (FT-ICR) MS. The
     N-terminal of CHHs and VIHs were determined by ELISA. In both species the VIH had the same
     retention time and molecular masses, and hence suggested that the VIH peptide sequence was
     highly conserved between the two species. The functional significance of such structural
     isoforms is far from clear. Immunocytochemistry and in situ hybridization studies indicate that
     there are no remarkable differences in the number of GIH neuroendocrine cells of XO of female
     and male lobsters, suggesting that this hormone has an endocrine role in male reproduction
      []. Some of the CHH family peptides have inhibitory
     effects on protein synthesis (including VTG and shrimp ovarian peritrophin, SOP) and VTG mRNA
     synthesis in vitro-incubated ovarian fragments [–]. Thus, the synthesis
     of VTG and SOP seems to be mainly under control by CHH family peptides. However, evidence to
     support this hypothesis is limited and further studies are necessary.

Homology-forming can offer a knowledgeable speculation about the structure of a protein (the
     target) from its sequence. Achieving high resolution structures of proteins remains a tricky
     and low yield procedure, but homology forming based on existing structures has gained with
     significant success. The NMR structure of MIH provides insight into how homologous members of
     CHH family (VIHs) are modeled. Homology forming results include precious information about how
     well each region of the model fits its templates, and thus how much confidence is justified.
     Homology modeling methods also have numerous rewards; they are quick, reproducible, and clearly
     accessible. These methods have been shown to be satisfactorily correct [] for optimizing experiments. The idea of this study was to examine amino
     acid sequence, composition, properties of VIH variations. Gene organizations of the VIH
     sequences were also examined and discussed. By using modeler software, we design the structure
     of 4 VIH peptides are predicted.

Methodology
Homology modeling of VIH
The VIH like sequences for selected crustaceans used in this work were published by Ollivaux
      et al.[], Yang and Rao[] and Treerattrakool et al. []. The
      reference used for model creation was the solution structure of the molt-inhibiting hormone
      from the kuruma prawn, Marsupenaeus japonicus [Marja_MIH;
      Protein Data Bank Code: 1J0T; []. The VIH like
      sequences Homarus gammarus (Homga_VIH; accession number:
      ABA42181; VIH, Macrobrachium rosenbergii (Macro_VIH1, Macro
      _VIH2 accession numbers: AF432346, AF432347), and Penaeus monodon
       (Penmo_VIH; accession number: ABG33898) were accessed through GenBank at
      NCBI and homologous sequences were found by BLAST program (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov.ilsprod.lib.neu.edu/BLAST/ basic local alignment
      search tool) [] against PDB.

Homology models of VIHs were constructed using the MODELLER software, a program for relative
      protein structure modeling. The obtained results were expressed as probability density
      functions (pdfs) for the restrained features. The Pdfs were used to describe intra and inter
      residue inter atomic distances
      (Cα‐Cα), as well as bond angles
      (N‐O), dihedral angles and other more spatially extensive regions of the protein
      structure. The 3-D model of a protein is attained by optimizing the resulting model so that it
      violates the input restraints as least as possible. Modeller uses a combination of bond angles
      and dihedral angle pdf’s to optimize the protein structure models it builds.
      Modeller's internal OPTIMIZE routine can be used for PDF based structure optimization. The
      optimization procedure is a variable target function method that applies a conjugate gradients
      algorithm to positions of all non-hydrogen atoms [].
      The coordinates for the structurally conserved regions (SCRs) of VIHs were allocated from the
      template using Homstrad sequence alignment (http://wwwcryst.bioc.cam.ac.uk/homstrad/) based on the structure-based
      alignments.

From the best alignment of reference structures to target sequences, 3- D models containing
      all non-hydrogen atoms were obtained using MODELLER software []. Minimizations of the models were obtained automatically using the method
      implemented in the program. The spatial restraints and CHARMM energy terms enforcing proper
      stereochemistry [] were combined into one objective
      function. The model corresponding to the lowest value of the objective function was used for
      further analysis. The cycle of realignment, modeling and structural validation was repeated
      until no further improvement on the structure was observed.

Validation of VIH like peptides
The final structure was analyzed by Ramachandran's map using PROCHECK (http://biotech.ebi.ac.uk/, a program to check the stereo chemical quality of
      protein structures) []. Reliability of the VIHrelated
      structures was subjected to VERIFY3D [], available
      from NIH MBI Laboratory Servers (http://nihserver.mbi.ucla.edu/Verify_3D/). The assessment with VERIFY3D derives a
      “3D-1D” profile based on the local environment of each residue,
      described by the statistical preferences for: the area of the residue that is hidden, the
      fraction of side- chain area that is covered by polar atoms (oxygen and nitrogen), and the
      local secondary structure. It is also substantiated the reliability of the three dimensional
      structure. A structure-based sequence alignment of the template structure was obtained using
      the program JOY []. The alignment is shown in .

Analysis of amino acid residues in VIH like peptides
Analysis of amino acid content, molecular weight Isoelectric point and phosphorylation sites
      of peptides was performed using software provided by SDSC Biologyworkbench3.2 (website
       http://workbench.sdsc.edu/). Predictions of HTH Motifs in Protein/peptide chains
      were determined according to Dodd and Egan [].

Discussion
Homology modeling of VIH
The results of BLAST search with the PDB revealed that three reference proteins, including
      molt inhibiting hormone (Marja_MIH) from kuruma prawn [], Crystal structure of Toxoplasma gondii micronemal
      protein (2JH1), and Crystal structure of Toxoplasma gondii micronemal protein
      1 bound to 3' sialyl–N-acetyllactoseamine (2JHD), had a considerable sequence
      identity and a similarity of 51%, 48%, 51% and 70% respectively. Structurally conserved
      regions (SCRs) for the model and the template were determined by superimposition of the two
      structures and the multiple sequence alignment from CLUSTALW (). Coordinates from the reference protein (Marja_MIH) to the
      SCRs, Structural variable regions (SVRs), N-termini and C-termini were assigned to the target
      sequence based on the satisfaction of spatial restraints. An initial model was thus generated
      using the above procedure. In this study, VIH signal peptide Homga_VIH;
      residues 1-33, Macro_VIH1; residues 1-40, Macro_VIH2;
      residues 1-33 and Penmo_VIH residues 1-17 region were removed from the model
      because no homologous region occurred in template (Marja_MIH). All models
      contain 79-80 residues corresponding to the A chain of the template MIH (). HPLC analysis revealed that this VIH like peptides dimorphic in
      several crustaceans [–] and the significance of such structural dimorphism is
      far from clear. Nevertheless, they have shown that the difference was at the level of the
      chirality of one amino acid residue. The present VIH data is also in agreement with the
      presence of different CHH and MIH isoforms of peptide demonstrated in other shrimps such as
       P. serratus, P. Japonicus and Macrobrachium rosenbergii
       [–].

Validation of VIH like peptides
Validation of the model was carried out using Ramachandran plot calculations computed with
      PROCHECK program. PROCHECK compares the orientation of residues in the model to those
      permitted by Ramachandran plots, chi-chi2 plots, main and side chain torsions, and residue
      properties. The PROCHECK G factor ranks values above -0.5 as positive candidates for homology
      models (data not shown). The models generated by MODELLER (9.1 version) [], based on the HOMSTRAD alignment, had values exceeding -0.5. The G
      values indicated here predict that the secondary structures of the models are in the high
      probability regime for chi-chi2 values and the models are realistic. The
      φ and ψ distributions of the Ramachandran plots of nonglycine,
      non-proline residues are observed. Altogether, 100% of the residues were in favored and
      allowed regions (data not shown). All residues appeared to be reasonable from . The overall PROCHECK G-factor [] and VERIFY-3D environment profile was good ().

RMS comparisons of the backbone fold
Root mean square (RMS) deviation of each model was calculated from the PDB structure
       Marja_MIH, based on the carbons (Cα), using application SPDBV
       [] (Swiss PDB viewer). As shown in , the average RMS deviations are generally within 1
      Å. This further indicates that the homology model is reliable. Thus, the model was
      built with considerable template structure and most of the parameters were correlated well
      throughout the study.

Secondary structure prediction
The amino acid sequences of template (Marja_MIH), VIH like peptides (models
      generated from the MODELLER) are generated using the JOY program (protein sequence structure
      representation and analysis []. The JOY program uses
      3D coordinates from PDB files to calculate secondary structural and local environmental
      features and displays the same in a color-coded format in the sequence alignment. The
      secondary structures of template, VIH like peptides consists highly conserved 6 cysteine
      residues (Cys8 and Cys45, Cys25 and Cys41 and Cys28 and Cys54), which showed that the models
      are realistic as seen in , and . Finally, all of the VIH peptides
      and Marja_MIH were predicted to contain five α-helix regions
       ().

Identification of phosphorylation site
Prosite patterns illustrate the specificity pattern of a few well known kinases.
      Nevertheless, Prosite patterns are the most extensively used approach for predicting
      phosphorylation sites in novel peptides or proteins. Phosphorylation sites of proteins or
      peptides play a very important role in signal transduction, being responsible for
      proteinmembrane and protein-protein interactions [].
      Phosphorylation usually results in functional changes of the target protein by changing the
      enzyme activity. Amino acid sequence analysis predicts putative Protein kinase C (PKC)
      phosphorylation site (amino acid residues from 07-10), Casein kinase II (CK-2) phosphorylation
      site (amino acid residues from 02-06), and two N-myristoylation sites (amino acid residues
      from 10-16 and 39-45) appeared in MIH and VIH mature peptides (Table 2 in ).

Amino acid composition and Isoelectric point of peptides
The basic amino acid residues (H, K, and R) in MIH mature peptides were lower than VIH-like
      mature peptides ().
      Interestingly, all VIH like peptides contain histidine residue except MIH. The acidic amino
      acid residues (D and E) content in VIH peptides is higher than the MIH mature peptides except
       Penmo_VIH. Separation of proteins may be influenced by isoelectric point
      (pI), electric charge and molecular weight of protein or peptide. Theoretical isoelectric
      points (pI) values for MIH-like mature peptide and some of VIH-like peptides were different
      than VIH peptides (Homga_VIH, Macro_VIH and Macro_VIH2);
      because these mature peptide have different amino acid sequences (relative numbers of anionic
      and cationic groups).

Molecular weight and extinction coefficient of mature peptides
The molecular weight of MIH mature peptide is 9.1 kDa and all VIHlike peptides have between
      9.3 - 9.5 kDa (Table 3 in ). The extinction coefficients of all peptides were determined based on number
      of tryptophan (W), tyrosine (Y) and cysteine (C) residues. The extinction coefficient values
      and absorbance at 280nm for MIH mature peptide and some of VIH-like peptides were higher in
      value than the VIH peptide (Macro_VIH2) (see Table 3 in ). The MIH and all
      VIH contain Proline (P) and Glutamine (Q) residues except in Macro_VIH2. The
      extinction coefficient of a protein is pH dependent, because the conformation of a protein
      changes due to its surrounding pH and so does absorption and scattering of light through a
      solution containing that protein. In the current study, MIH have lower number of tryptophan
      and tyrosine residues. This is the explanation for MIH and VIH (Macro_VIH2)
      showing lower value of extinction coefficient and absorbance at 280 nm.

Conclusion
Among these eyestalk neuro-peptides, some peptides have similar protein structure and share
     conserved special characteristics in amino acid sequence and the peptides do form a unique
     family. Katayama et al., [] have
     reported that the r-MIH was stabilized by nine hydrophobic residues in kuruma prawn. In the
     present investigation, we observed ten hydrophobic and six cysteine residues are conserved in
     all of the peptides as shown in , suggesting that
     the VIH-like peptides and MIH peptides harbor similar folding. Several reports understood that
     all members of the VIH/MIH gene family derived from a common ancestral gene in the course of
     gene mutation and duplication. The 3-D structure of kuruma MIH shows above 40% homology, with
     the VIH like peptides. Nevertheless, consideration of the roles of various members of this VIH
     family peptides, together with sequence information recently reported, strongly suggests that
     these VIH peptides may be multifunctional. This suggests a common fold for the entire family.
     On the other hand, site-directed mutagenesis, antibody recognition information and
     photoaffinity labeling are helpful experiments to authenticate and improve the proposed models.
     To know whether the MIH or VIH peptides are phosphorylated at any specific site might be useful
     to one would have to be investigating in vitro using phospho-specific
     antibodies. In conclusion, we have presented detailed structural analyses of the VIH like
     neuropeptides. The structural identification of these VIH-like peptides provides the basis for
     future functional studies of these novel signaling molecules. The comparative study of VIH-like
     neuropeptides will offer new insights into the functional consequences of peptide diversity and
     peptide evolution.

Supplementary material
Data 1
I thank NSF; IBN-0611447 (USA) for the financial support during my investigation.

Citation:Nagarajuet al, Bioinformation 4(1): 6-11 (2009)

The conformation of VIH peptides and MIH (Marja_MIH) were stabilized by a
      number of conserved hydrophobic interactions in the cluster of ten hydrophobic amino acid
      residues (Y18, V21, I/V24, I/L31, F/Y32, F46, F51, V/L55, I73 and I/L74) and the three
      disulfide bonds. In addition four acidic amino acid residues were strongly conserved in both
      MIH and VIH-like mature peptides at position 16, 27, 63, and 65. Similarly, four basic amino
      acid residues were strongly conserved in both MIH and VIH-like mature peptides at position 15,
      33, 42, and 60. These ten hydrophobic and cysteine residues are conserved in all of the
      peptides as shown in this figure, suggesting that the VIH like peptides and MIH peptides
      harbor similar folding.

Maximum Verify3D scores for each VIH peptides and template and residues with positive
      compatibility score are reasonably folded.

Molecules appear in stick representation in a black window. The default atoms colors are the
      following. ’C‘ white ’O‘ red
      ’N‘ blue ’S‘ yellow
      ’other‘ gray Disulfide Bridges for the residues C8, C45, C25, C41, C28
      and C54.

