Background
Over the last decade, more than 150 complete genomes of
diverse bacteria, archaea and eukaryotes have been sequenced,
and many more are currently in the pipeline []. It is well
known that, in any newly sequenced bacterial genome, as
many as 30–40% of the genes do not have an assigned function
[]. This figure is even higher for archaeal and eukaryotic
genomes and for the relatively large genomes of bacteria with
a complex life style, such as Anabaena, Streptomyces, etc 
[,
].

‘Conserved hypothetical’ proteins pose a challenge not just to
functional genomics, but also to biology in general 
[]. As long
as there are hundreds of conserved proteins of unknown
function even in model organisms, such as Escherichia coli,
Bacillus subtilis or Saccharomyces cerevisiae, any discussion of a
‘complete’ understanding of these organisms as biological
systems will remain in the realm of wishful thinking. Although
it appears likely that the central pathways of information
processing and metabolism are already known, crucial
elements of these systems could still be lurking among the
‘conserved hypotheticals’, and important mechanisms of
signalling and stress response, in all likelihood, would remain
undiscovered [].

Aromatic compounds are widely distributed throughout the
biosphere predominantly in the form of recycled material 
[].
Because of the inherent thermodynamic stability of the
aromatic ring, natural turnover of these compounds is slow
and instead relies on complex microbial degradation
pathways. With aromatic compounds comprising &gt;25% of the
earth׳s biomass, these pathways play a crucial role in the
biogeochemical carbon cycle. However, despite the abundance
of microbial degraders, man-made aromatic pollutants are
often recalcitrant to existing bioprocessing pathways. As a
result, these xenobiotic compounds, many of which are
derived from the processing of crude oil, persist in the
environment causing irreversible damage to the biosphere 
[].
Aromatic ring-hydroxylating dioxygenases, also called Rieske
dioxygenases (RDOs), are class of multi-domain proteins that
catalyze the initial step in microbial aerobic degradation of
many aromatic compounds. Two hydroxyl groups are
introduced into the aromatic ring yielding cyclic cisdihydrodiols
or cis-diol carboxylic acids ()
[Substituents X and Y can be hydrogen atoms or any of several
other groups] [,
]. More than three dozen distinct RDOs have
been identified. RDOs consist of a reductase, an oxygenase and
in some cases, an additional ferredoxin that mediates electron
transfer between the former two components. The oxygenase
component catalyzes the insertion of both atoms of molecular
oxygen into the aromatic substrate, which is believed to occur
at a mononuclear iron site and to be accompanied by electron
insertion from a Rieske-type [2Fe–2S] centre. Either the
reductase or, where present, the intermediary ferredoxin
component, supplies the two electrons from NAD(P)H to the
dioxygenase []. RDOs have been empirically classified
according to the various combinations of subunits and electron
transfer co-factors involved in reducing the oxygenase
component [,
] as mentioned in 
 (see
supplementary material).

Here we present a protocol to data mine and computationally
characterize redox hypothetical proteins possessing multiple
domains. Most proteins consist of multiple domains, and
domains determine the function and evolutionary
relationships of proteins []. Thus, it is important to
understand the principles of domain combinations and their
associated inter domain interactions especially, in hypothetical
proteins.

Primarily, 2Fe-2S (Ferredoxins) and FMN/FAD (Flavodoxins)
were considered due to their vital and diverse roles in
biological systems, the most important amongst it being their
role in Electron Transport Mechanisms. Ferredoxins are small,
acidic, electron transfer proteins that are ubiquitous in
biological redox systems. Members of the 2Fe-2S ferredoxin
family have a general core structure consisting of beta (2)-
alpha-beta (2). They are proteins of around one hundred amino
acids with four conserved cysteine residues to which the 2Fe-
2S cluster is ligated []. Flavoenzymes have the ability to
catalyse a wide range of biochemical reactions. They are
involved in the dehydrogenation of a variety of metabolites, in
electron transfer from and to redox centres, in light emission,
in the activation of oxygen for oxidation and hydroxylation
reactions. About 1% of all eukaryotic and prokaryotic proteins
are predicted to encode a flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) or
Flavin Mono Nucleotide (FMN)-binding domains which are
involved in electron transport [].

Methodology
The proteins belonging to oxidoreductase (Ferredoxin,
Flavodoxin) families were retrieved from the ExPASy Prosite
interface []. However, engineered and mutated sequences
were not considered to avoid redundancy. Additionally, only
reviewed sequence from Uniprot containing a structural entry
were considered. Binding sites of all the proteins belonging to
the same group were analyzed in order to arrive at a consensus
pattern through multiple sequence alignment. Extended
regions which had no information with the other sequences
were clipped to strengthen the alignment. The protocol
adopted is shown in .

The search for Ferredoxin family (PDOC00175) yielded 14
sequences with 2Fe-2S binding signature. As there existed
heterogeneity within the group, the sequences were clustered
based on phylogenetic analysis. The sequence alignment was
performed through ClustalW [] and the tree was obtained
using MEGA (NJ method) []. The tree obtained is shown in
. Further to the clustering, multiple sequence
alignment was performed using Multalin [], for all the 3
clusters (groups) to obtain a representative sequence
containing strong signatures. The multiple sequence alignment
of sequences belonging to group 1 yielded better consensus
compared to the other clusters, which is as depicted in
.

Similarly, the search for flavodoxin family (FNR reductase -
PDOC51384) yielded 7 sequences, whose Phylogenetic tree is
shown in . When multiple sequence alignments of
both the clusters were critically analyzed, the MSA of group 1
exhibited strong signatures of the FNR domain when
compared to cluster 2, which is depicted in . Thus, a
consensus of the cluster of sequences from group 1, for both
the 2Fe-2S and FNR domains respectively, were considered as
possible representative patterns, towards generating the
probable synthetic sequence, which was used as the basis for
BLAST tool [] search against the non-redundant database.
Interestingly, this approach yielded 2078 sequences, and
clearly contained both 2Fe-2S and FNR domains when
analysed through the conserved domain database (CDD) 
[].
Amongst these 2078 sequences, 129 belonged to that special
class of hypothetical proteins, which were taken up for further
characterization and analysis.

Results &amp; Discussions
Upon critical evaluation of the 129 multi-domain hypothetical
sequences through CDD, significant differences in the location
of 2Fe-2S domain, relative to other domains, were found. Of
these 129 sequences, 61 contained an N-terminus 2Fe-2S and a
C-terminus FNR domain while this order was reversed in 25
sequences as shown in the . The remaining 43
sequences contained an N-terminus MOSC domain []
(pfam03473 and pfam03476) which is a super family of betastrand-
rich domains identified in the molybdenum cofactor
sulfurase and several other proteins from both prokaryotes
and eukaryotes. The MOSC domain is predicted to be a sulfurcarrier
domain that receives sulfur abstracted by the pyridoxal
phosphate-dependent NifS-like enzymes, on its conserved
cysteine, and delivers it for the formation of diverse sulfurmetal
clusters. The pie chart in  illustrates the
distribution of the domains amongst these 129 proteins. In the
current study, 25 sequences containing N-terminus FNR and
C-terminus 2Fe-2S domain are considered. 61 sequences which
contain an N-terminus 2Fe-2S and C-terminus FNR domain
has been critically analysed [] while 43 sequences which
contain MOSC domain will be considered for modelling in
near future. The phylogenetic analysis of the sequences
containing a N-terminus FNR and C-terminus 2Fe-2S domains
is depicted in .

The sequences were searched against the PDB database (using
the PDB BLAST tool) towards identification of a suitable
template. This yielded 2PIA [], a phthalate dioxygenase
reductase from Burkholderia cepacia. Phthalate dioxygenase
reductase (PDR) is a prototypical iron-sulfur flavoprotein (36
kilodaltons) that utilizes flavin mononucleotide (FMN) to
mediate electron transfer from the two-electron donor, reduced
nicotinamide adenine nucleotide (NADH), to the one-electron
acceptor, [2Fe-2S]. Of these 25 sequences, 8 sequences had very
low (&lt;20%) sequence identity with the template 2PIA, and
hence were discarded from further analysis due to lack of
clarity. The remaining 17 sequences were considered with
confidence for homology modelling exercises, as they
exhibited high overall similarity with 2PIA. The overall
sequence identity between the query and template was
between 20-30% for all the other sequences except 2 sequences
which was about 30-50%. The  shows the distribution
of the overall sequence identity, identities at the FMN and 2Fe-
2S binding regions for each sequence, which clearly illustrates
the conservation at critical regions of functional relevance.

The FNR family contains two conserved motifs, viz., (R-x-Y-
[ST]) where positively charged Arg residue forms hydrogen
bonds to the pyrophosphate oxygen atom and (G-x(2)-[ST]-
x(2)-L-x(5)-G-x(7)-P-x-G) which is the phosphate-binding motif
[]. Similarly, 4 conserved Cys residues at positions i, i+5, i+8
and variable i+38 is required for binding of 2Fe-2S ligand 
[].
Both the FMN and 2Fe-2S binding regions are highly
conserved in all the 17 models. In view of the poise in the
signatures between the template and the 17 target sequences,
model building exercises were carried out with Swissmodel
automated mode []. The RMSD between the modelled
structure and template for the Ca- atoms confirmed the quality
of the models in spite of seemingly low sequence identity
 
(see supplementary material) and ), in
addition to the satisfaction of various criteria calculated using
ProCheck []. Individual models were analysed for the
binding of ligands through docking studies which was
performed using FlexX algorithm []. To define the structural
and functional aspects of the hypothetical protein sequences,
modelling of GI ID 289441001 is considered as a case study.

2PIA based model for GI ID 289441001
The query protein 289441001 from Mycobacterium tuberculosis
was successfully modelled using SWISS model interface,
where the overall identity between the query and template is
26.3 %. The alignment between the template and query is
shown in . In spite of the low overall sequence
identity, it can be appreciated that the binding regions of 2Fe-
2S and FMN exhibit high conservation. The RMSD between the
modelled structure and template is found to be 0.22 Å (for
93.2% of the atoms superposed) for Ca atoms. The quality of
the model was assessed with PROCHECK (ramachandran map
analysis) where 97.7% of the residues were in allowed region
and only 2.3% residues were in disallowed region.
Interestingly, none of these residues in the outlier regions
belong to the functionally important residues. The 2Fe-2S and
FMN ligands were docked into the model and all the
interactions were found similar to that of the template. The
binding of 2Fe-2S Ligand and FMN are shown in ,
 &amp; 
. 
 (see supplementary material) summarizes the
residues forming the Pharmacophore (4 Å radius) for FMN
ligand in template, FMN ligand redocked to template and
model where high residue conservation is observed. The
docking of the FMN to the template (using the program FlexX)
was done to re-confirm the ligand binding pose, and normalize
the artefacts due to the software, if any. The residues
highlighted in bold forms H-bonds with the FMN, which
further reiterates decent bind of the ligand. The modelled and
docked structures were deposited at the Protein Model Data
Bank (PMDB) [] where all the models were judged to possess
clashes within acceptable limits.  summarises the
details of all the 17 models generated with 2PIA (which
contains 322aa) as the template.

Conclusion
129 hypothetical proteins from across the genomes have been
data mined, and the 3D description of 17 sequences has been
derived with confidence. The statistics related to comparative
modelling and docking studies (with acceptable energy values)
have revealed a strong interaction of 2 redox ligands, viz., 2Fe-
2S and FMN with the binding residues, which further
strengthens the argument of these proteins being involved in
cleavage of aromatic compounds. Though degradation of
aromatic compounds by microorganisms is a well established
Fact [,
], characterization of hypothetical sequences in the
Present study could aid in better understanding of these
microbial systems. A large number of microbial systems
containing these dioxygenases have also been mined and
characterized in the present investigation, which could provide
insights into their degradation properties. Thus, this study on
multi-domain hypothetical proteins could prove critical in two
ways viz., in understanding the mechanism of uptake of
nutrients which contain aromatic ring structures and hence
enabling engineering of these proteins towards effective
degradation of harmful xenobiotics.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Sathyanarayanan &amp; Nagendra, Bioinformation 10(2): 068-075 (2014)

Reaction of ring cleavage mediated by RDO

Protocol used in the present study

Phylogenetic tree of 2Fe-2S family.

MSA of group 1 of 2Fe-2S family

Phylogenetic tree for FNR reductase family

MSA of group 1 of FNR reductase family.

Domain architecture in RDO-reductase class.

Pie-chart showing the distribution of domains in the
129 hypothetical proteins.

Phylogenetic tree of the hypothetical proteins
containing Phylogenetic tree of N-terminus FNR and Cterminus
2Fe-2S

Bar graph showing the overall sequence identity
(blue), identity at FMN binding region (red) and 2Fe-2S
binding region (green) against the model 2PIA (Please see table
3 for cross-reference).

Template to query alignment (FMN motif marked in red and 2Fe-2S binding motif marked in black – C305, C310, C313,
C348).

Modelled structure of GI 289441001.

2Fe-2S interaction in the model with the conserved
cysteins (C305,C310,C313,C348).

A) Surface representation of ligand binding region in model; b) residues at the pharmacophore (4 Å radius) in model; C)
2D representation of the ligand-residue interaction in model

