Background
Dental Informatics (DI) is the application of computer and information 
science to improve dental practice, research and education  
[]. 
Unlike biomedical informatics, DI is a nascent discipline  
[], which faces 
challenges in establishing itself; these include the geographically dispersed 
and small number of experienced DI researchers, as well as the lack of a 
dedicated professional society or standing annual conference for DI 
[]. 

The overarching goal of our research is to establish a DI e-community 
[]
that will help surmount the existing challenges and exploit DI's 
considerable potential to improve  processes and outcomes in dental 
research, practice, and education. To these ends, and with funding from the 
US National Institutes of Health and others, we have established the Dental 
Informatics Online Community (DIOC). The goals of the project are: (1) 
encouraging and supporting the formation of partnerships and collaborative 
projects in dental informatics; (2) promoting the development of dental 
information resources; and (3) disseminating research results and best 
practices globally. We envision that the DIOC provide a dedicated 
professional home for DI researchers and serve as an open, common, and 
worldwide forum for all individuals interested in the field.

Software
The Center for Dental Informatics at the University of Pittsburgh, School 
of Dental Medicine created and maintains the DIOC which is available at 
http://www.dentalinformatics.org  
[].  Table 1 
(see ) 
describes some of the features of the DIOC. The Current 
Awareness Service (CAS) is one of the central aspects of the community. 
As members input data including personal information, interests, and 
research projects, they develop an individual profile that drives the CAS. 
The CAS then automatically generates output in the form of emails tailored 
to the interests of the individual member as new information is added to 
the DIOC. For example, if Member A indicates an interest in 3-D imaging 
and Member B adds a project related to that topic, Member A 
automatically receives an email about the new project. The CAS provides 
all members with real-time updates of information on the site, inviting
them back to review it and encouraging them to contribute to the 
community themselves.  

Although we have not formally assessed the usefulness of the CAS, two 
anecdotal observations indicate that it is useful for members of the 
community. First, we have received messages from librarians who 
appreciate receiving updates from the Publication Archive, which they, in 
turn, forward to dental school faculty and other interested parties. Second, 
projects in the project directory have received a fair degree of comments 
and suggestions, indicating that members intrinsically value notifications 
about new projects.

From the onset of the community, we implemented an audit log 
architecture which provides detailed usage data based on individual actions 
on the Website. As of this writing, 1,095 members have registered with the 
DIOC. Of these, 636 are “active” members, i.e. members who logged in 
multiple times after registering with the site. The number of registered and 
active members, however, underestimates the actual usage of the DIOC. 
More than 45% of all actions on the community are performed by users 
who do not register and/or log-in.

Future Developments
The DIOC is a research-oriented online community which provides 
resources in dental informatics and is a unique place for sharing ideas, 
learning about DI, establishing relationships, conceiving projects, 
accessing information resources and contributing to the field. One key 
factor in the growth and development of the DIOC is to determine how it 
can evolve into a self-sustaining, long-term professional community. 
Clearly, the DIOC will have to demonstrate concrete achievements that its 
members contribute to and identify with in order to increase its value to the 
dental informatics community and  beyond. We are considering the 
development of a strategic plan to help reach that goal. In the near-term, 
we will continue hosting the community, adding features and improving 
the DIOC. In a future evaluation, we will analyze the usage and 
development of the site over time.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Irwin et al, Bioinformation 5(7): 307-309 (2011)

