Background:
RecQ helicase is a member of the helicase superfamily 2 (SF2)
[–
]; it translocates in the 3' to 5' direction and contains the
conserved DEAH box motif []. The enzyme plays an important
role in DNA damage response, chromosomal stability
maintenance and has a vital role in maintaining genome
homeostasis [–
]. RecQ is found to be conserved among both
prokaryotes and eukaryotes, among higher organisms, multiple
paralogs of the enzyme have been observed. In humans, five
members of this family are currently known out of which
mutations in three have been found to be linked to enhanced
sister chromatid exchange and hereditary diseases (Bloom
syndrome, Werner syndrome, and Rothmund-Thomson
syndrome), which display clinical symptoms of premature
aging and predisposition to cancers [–
].Three conserved
sequence elements are commonly found in RecQ helicases,
namely the Helicase domain, the RecQ-C-terminal (RecQ-Ct)
and Helicase-and-RNaseD-like-C-terminal (HRDC) domains
[]. The helicase and RecQ-Ct domains together constitute the
catalytic core of RecQ. In addition to these elements, eukaryotic
RecQ proteins often contain N - and C - terminal extensions that
confer additional functions like exonuclease domain in WRN,
nuclear localization signals in BLM [,
] and the Zn finger and
winged helix motifs in the RecQ-Ct domain [].The complete
structure of RecQ helicases has so far been resistant to attempts
of crystallisation, so the X-ray structure is available for only two
domains of the E.coli RecQ protein. We have adopted the
homology modeling technique to construct the structure of the
enzyme and carried out molecular dynamics (MD) simulations
of the RecQ model and its DNA-docked complex to understand
the mechanism of action of the protein. Although complete
conformational sampling for a multi-domain protein requires
an MD trajectory of very long time scales, snapshots of domain
motions that are viable can be investigated by sampling small
time segments. Studies on related members of the family
suggest that DNA binding enhances the inherent flexibility in
the structure [,
]. Our molecular dynamics (MD) studies
predict that the preferred conformational states of the DNARecQ
complex and RecQ are distinct from each other. Besides,
the DNA binding seems to augment domain flexibility and coordinate
domain movements in the structure that may
eventually facilitate ssDNA binding, culminating in strand
separation.

Methodology
MODELLER9v5 [] was used to generate multiple models of
RecQ (GenPept ID: YP_001465308) using three template
structures (PDB ID: 1WUD, 1OYW, 1N4A). The best model
[] was selected on the basis of DOPE assessment
score, and the MODELLER objective function. Quality of the
best model selected was improved further by performing loop
refinement using MODELLER. After loop refinement the best
model selected on the basis of the objective function was then
subjected to 500 steps of steepest descent and 200 steps of
conjugate gradient energy minimization methods using
GROMACS 3.3-2[]. The energy minimization process
converged for both the methods and the energy minimized
structure thus generated was evaluated using the server
PROCHECK [].

Experimental studies show that E.coli RecQ helicase has strong
strand separation activity for double stranded blunt ended
DNA [], so a blunt ended dsDNA with one complete turn was
used for docking the RecQ protein. The best model generated
for E.coli RecQ from MODELLER9v5 was docked with double
stranded (ds) blunt end DNA (NDB entry BD0026) []
using PATCHDOCK []. The interaction surface of the RecQ
was predicted based on its similarity with its homologue and,
presence of positively charged residues on the predicted
binding surface. Molecular dynamics simulation of the E.coli
RecQ was carried out to confirm that the predicted model is
stable and also to understand the dynamics of the system and to
explore the possible conformational states of the system. MD
simulations were also carried out for E.coli RecQ and its DNA
complex; the results provided insight into the mechanism by
which the enzyme may function.

Discussion:
Failure to crystallize the whole E.coli RecQ protein suggests that
the highly flexible loop connecting the HRDC domain and the
catalytic core domain may be detrimental to it. Bernstein et al.
[] suggested that the HRDC domain preferentially binds
single stranded DNA after strand separation and then moves
closer to the catalytic core domain, facilitated by the flexible
loop. There is no experimental evidence to suggest any
interaction between the catalytic core and HRDC domain. As a
long DNA is the natural substrate of the enzyme, the HRDC
domain need not necessarily move to the catalytic site for the
domain to be able to hold single stranded DNA and for the
protein to be stable. Therefore, the extended structure 
[] predicted by MODELLER9v5 posed to be a reasonable model
for further investigation which was supported by structure
validation based on quality assessment. During the 5 ns MD
simulation, the structure of the RecQ model remained stable
and there were no major changes in the conformation, where as
the structure of the DNA-RecQ complex, changed conformation
and showed significant dynamics. Predominant domain
movements were observed while sampling the structures as the
dynamics evolved. Using single-linkage method of cluster
formation [] the structures at different time steps during the
simulation were clustered to find similar conformational states
attained during the simulation. The trajectories of the RecQ
structure displayed three major clusters; one centered about
840ps structure, the other two about 1440ps and 4760ps
structures but, the representative structures of these clusters
were not very different from each other []. While, in
the DNA-RecQ complex, there were two major clusters; one
centered about 800ps structure and the other one about 3.7 ns
structure and, the representative structures were quite different
from each other []. These observations suggest that in
the absence of DNA the domains are in a stable conformation,
which is clearly not the case for the RecQ-DNA complex. The
helicase domain of RecQ has two subdomains and, analysis of
the RecQ structure at different time steps suggested that on
binding with DNA a hinge movement was induced between the
subdomains. The helicase subdomain2 drifted away from the
subdomain1 carrying with it the RecQ-Ct and HRDC domain.

The root mean square deviation of the domains at different time
step with reference to the starting structure showed fluctuations
which were quite distinct for the 3 major domains. The RMSD
in the helicase domain was more for the RecQ structure (˜2.7Å)
compared to the DNA-RecQ complex (˜2.2Å) while, the RMSD
of the RecQ-Ct domain was more (3.5Å) in the DNA-RecQ
complex as compared to the RecQ structure (˜2.9Å). Similarly,
the HRDC domain deviated less (˜2.3Å) in the RecQ structure
compared to the complex (˜2.7Å). The increase in RMSD of the
RecQ-Ct domain and the HRDC domain may be attributed to
the presence of DNA binding motifs e.g., the winged helix and
helix turn helix motif, which fluctuate more in the DNA bound
form which could enhance DNA binding affinity [] whereas,
stability of helicase domain in the complex form may be
explained by the non-covalent interactions between the enzyme
and its substrate.

To find out the average fluctuation of each residue in the RecQ
protein and in the DNA - RecQ complex, RMSF of each residue
was calculated after fitting to a reference frame and then
converted to B-factor values []. For the RecQ only structure,
regions other than the HRDC domain did not have much
fluctuation []. The HRDC region was expected to be
comparatively more flexible than the rest of the structure as it
was connected by a flexible loop. However, the fluctuation in
the HRDC domain was larger in the DNA-RecQ complex,
where the HRDC domain showed intrinsic fluctuation of amino
acid residues in addition to whole domain motion [].
The fluctuation was more for residues on helix 1 of HRDC
domain when DNA was bound, these residues are known to be
crucial for single strand DNA binding [–
]. It appears that
the ssDNA binding positively charged residues on the surface
of helix 1 of HRDC domain were induced by fluctuations in the
winged helix region of RecQ-Ct domain. Fluctuation was
observed in some residues of helicase subdomain1 []
including two histidine residues (His149 and His156) 
[] which are proposed to be involved in the interaction
between the two subomains []. This observation suggests that
these residues serve as a messenger for the subsequent domains
so that, the changes required in conformation of the protein can
be induced on substrate binding.

Conclusion:
DNA binding at the helicase domain induces fluctuation in the
subsequent domains. The HRDC domain known to bind
ssDNA, helps to tether the separated ssDNA and prevents
reannealing. The HRDC domain contains positively charged
residues on helix 1 which are crucial for its DNA binding
affinity. In other words, upon DNA binding at the interface of
the helicase subdomains, the whole RecQ helicase undergoes a
series of induced motions which are co-ordinated. Comparison
of the behavior of RecQ helicase with its homologue RepA 
[]
and PcrA [] 
helicase display similarility in domain motions.
The subdomains in the structures alternately bind the double
stranded and single stranded DNA and inch forward along the
strand in the 3‘ to 5’ direction and there are periods in the cycle
of motion when the helicase is attached to both the single
stranded and double stranded parts of the substrate 
[]. We
perceived analogous dynamics in the RecQ helicase too from
our MD simulation. The dynamic behaviour of the E.coli RecQ
helicase has been revealed from the simulations for the first
time. The existence of preferred conformational states for the
RecQ protein in the free state and DNA bound state are quite
distinct from each other which gives a molecular basis to
change in shape upon interaction with DNA. Substrate binding
at the interface of the subdomains triggers co-ordinated domain
motions which ordain it the inchworm mechanism of action.

The MD calculations have been performed mostly in the
computer server of the Center for Computational Natural
Sciences and Bioinformatics, IIIT-Hyderabad, INDIA, as part of
the M.S. thesis of NP, SG was faculty here before shifting to her
current position. The authors thank Dr. B. Gopalakrishnan
(A.T.C., TCS, Hyderabad), Dr. B. Prabhakar (IIIT- Hyderabad)
and Dr. Deva Priyakumar (IIIT- Hyderabad) for their valuable
discussions and support.

Citation:Pandey et al, Bioinformation 7(8): 371-374(2011)

The B-factor calculations for (a) the RecQ simulation
and (b) for the RecQ-DNA complex. The HRDC domain
appears in a lighter shade indicating higher flexibility in the
region (c) some residues in helicase domain show fluctuation on
DNA binding (d) these residues include His149 and His156.

The RecQ Model generated from (a) Modeller; (b) the
DNA-bound RecQ complex. The helicase subdomains are
shown in light blue and orange colour, RecQ-Ct domain is
shown in cyan and yellow colour and HRDC domain in
magenta colour.

(a) Representative structures of major clusters for
RecQ at 840ps (green), 1440ps (yellow) and 4760ps (red) time
steps, respectively; (b) Representative structure of major
clusters for DNA-RecQ complex at 800ps (green) and 3700ps
(red) time steps, respectively. Hinge motion moves the helicase
subdomain2 away from the helicase subdomain1.

