Background
Turmeric, a culinary food additive (spice) is powdered rhizome of
the plant Curcuma longa. It has been used for centuries in
indigenous medicine in India for the treatment of a variety of
diseases. [] The yellow pigment (curcuminoids), forming 3-4% by
weight of turmeric is a mixture of curcumin (1, 94%) demethoxy
curcumin (2, 6%) and bis-demethoxy curcumin (3, 0.3%) ().
Aggarwal et al [] have shown that curcumin is potent inhibitor of
tumor initiation in vivo and in vitro studies. Many workers have
shown that curcumin induces apoptosis and is a potent
chemopreventive agent in several cancers. e.g breast, colon , skin,
oral, intestinal carcinogenesis. Fang et al [] characterized an
irreversible inhibition mechanism of thioredoxin reductase (TrxR)
by curcumin. Curcumin binds at the active site of thioredoxin
reductase, and inhibits the process of electron transfer from NADPH
to ribonucleotide TrxR is present in all living cells; but is
overexpressed in tumor cells. However, tumor growth seems to be
crucially dependent on an active thioredoxin redox system, making
it a potential target for anticancer drugs.

Thioredoxin is a key enzyme for DNA synthesis by directly serving
as an electron donor to ribonucleotide reductase. TrxR is an
important enzyme for DNA metabolism which is directly related to
cell proliferation. Thioredoxin reductase (TrxR) catalyzes NADPHdependent
reduction of the redox-active disulfide (S-S) in
thioredoxin (Trx), which serves a wide range of functions in cellular
proliferation, defense against oxidative stress, apoptosis and redox
control. [] The inhibition by curcumin and demethoxy derivatives
was caused by covalent modification of active site CYS496 and
SEC497 residues resulting in the destruction of the Trx reduction
activity. In addition and more importantly, the curcumin-modified
enzyme was converted into an NADPH oxidase with production of
ROS to which cancer cells appear more sensitive. The threedimensional
structure of the SeCYS498 mutant of rat TrxR in
complex with NADP (+) has been determined to 3.0  resolution by
X-ray crystallography. The overall structure is similar to that of
glutathione reductase (GR), including conserved amino acid
residues binding the cofactors FAD and NADPH. [] TrxR can serve as a potential target for anticancer drugs and curcumin has
been reported to be a potent anticancer drug. The combination of
these two factors motivated us for in silico study of three naturally
occurring curcuminoids in terms of binding and docking energies
which is likely to help in designing a new synthetic analog of
curcumin as a potent anticancer drug.

Methodology
The docking study was performed with three naturally occuring
curcuminoids at the active site (CYS497-SEC498) of thioredoxin
reductase. The PDB file that we considered for docking has S atom
so we replaced it by Se atom with same coordinates because
naturally occurring TrxR has SeCys498 amino acids. However,
AutoDock does not recognize Se atom, which might be due to there
is no parameter for Se atom in AutoDock. The grid maps were
calculated with Auto Grid and grid's size was decided accordingly
and the volume calculated by CAST-p program. The dimensions of
the grids for E chain cavity were thus 50 • 50 • 50 Å, with a spacing
of 0.375 Å between the grid points and the center (30.074, 0.267
and -1.792) close to the (S/Se) atom of the E chain of the catalytic
residue CYS498. Similarly for F chain active site of TrxR, the
center of catalytic residue CYS498 (S/Se) was used as the center
(28.922, 7.243 and 42.311) of grid, with the grid points of 50 • 50 • 50 Å and the spacing of 0.375 Å. AutoDock 3 with a genetic search
algorithm was chosen for all dockings. The maximum number of
energy evaluations, the maximum number of generation in the
genetic algorithm and the number of GA per run were 2,500,000,
27, 00000 and 50 respectively. All other run parameters were
maintained at their default settings. As far as the search methods
are concerned, we used genetic algorithm only.

Curcumin was obtained from Cambridge structure database (CSD),
whereas demethoxy curcumin and bis demethoxy curcumin were
generated by drawing the 2-D on ChemSketch and 3-D structures
from CORINA server and optimized with Insight II program
(Accelrys Inc.). Atomic charges were added using calibration given
in the AutoDock empirical free energy function and the numbers of
flexible torsions were defined as seven for all three curcumin molecules. To find out hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic
interactions we used Ligplot [] and HBPLUS programes [] that
automatically generated 2-D diagrams of protein-ligand interactions
from the 3D coordinates in a PDB file. Ligbuilder [] program was
used to design new potent curcumin derivatives and for lead
optimization i.e.to improve bioactivity by precalculated key site of
interaction and pharmacophore of the receptor.

Discussion
TrxR is inhibited by curcumin irreversibly forming an adduct.
Volume and area of the E and F chains of curcumin binding site
were simulated by the CASTp program. [] Volume of E and Fchain
cavity were 2451 Å3 and 4996.9 Å3 respectively, while area
of both active sites was1437.5 Å2 and 3320.9Å2. In E chain active
site 59 amino acid residues and at F chain 135 residues were
accessible to the solvent. However, twenty-two amino acids are
common at both the active sites. All the three naturally occurring
curcuminoids were docked at the active site of E chain whereas the
docking energies were -9.17 kcal,-9.48kcal,-8.48 kcal, and binding
energies were -6.75 kcal,-7.17 kcal, -7.0 kcal respectively [Table 1
in ]. 2D plot of hydrogen bonds and
hydrophobic interactions of curcumin at the E-chain active site were
simulated. Four amino acids namely, HIS108(F), ARG351(F),
LYS29(F) and LEU112(F) of F chain interact with curcumin
molecule. Amongst these four F chain residues three are basic
amino acids. HIS108(F) forms hydrogen bond where ARG351(F),
LYS29(F) and LEU112(F) are in hydrophobic contacts. The
continuous stretch of carboxyl terminal residues of E chain from
SER495 to GLY499 are important in either hydrophobic or in
hydrogen bond formation. SER 483 and TRP467 of E chain are
also important at the active site. Se atom SeCYS498 residue forms
hydrophobic contact with C11 atom of curcumin at a distance of
3.23 Å. Demethoxy curcumin forms two hydrogen bonds with
docking energy of -9.48 and binding energy -7.17. Binding of
demethoxy curcumin at E chain active site is very precise in
comparison to curcumin itself []. 2D plot of hydrogen
bond and hydrophobic interaction of demethoxy curcumin of the Echain
active site has shown that F-chain does not interact with
demethoxy curcumin molecule []. The residues ILE478,
THR481, VAL484, ILE492, GLN494, CYS498 and GLY499 are in
hydrophobic interactions and the residues SER404, PHE405
SER483 and GLY496 are involved in hydrogen bond interactions.
The carboxyl terminal residues of E chain ILE492, GLN494,
GLY496, SEC498, GLY499 are important in either hydrophobic or
in hydrogen bond formation. The Se atom of SeCYS498 is at the
distance of 3.56Å, 3.55 Å and 3.25Å from C13, C12 and C11
respectively.

Bis demethoxy curcumin has only one hydrogen bond with the
docking energy of -8.84 kcal and binding energy -7.0. Bis
demethoxycurcumin has shown very poor binding in comparison to
Curcumin and demthoxy curcumin at same (E chain) active site.
The 2D plot of hydrogen bond and hydrophobic interaction of
bisdemethoxy curcumin at the E-chain active site has shown that the
residue of F-chain does not interact with demthoxy curcumin
molecule at E-chain active site. The aromatic residues PHE405
PHE406 TRP407 and SER495 involved in hydrophobic contacts
and THR481 SER483 GLN494 ILE492 forming hydrogen bond
with bisdemethoxycurcumin molecule. Bis demethoxy curcumin is
not as close as curcumin and demethoxy curcumin were to the
catalytic residues Cys497 and SeCys498 so it can be concluded
methoxy group is crucial for interaction at E chain active site. All
the three naturally occurring curcuminoids were also docked at the
active site of F chain with docking energies -9.75 kcal,-8.13 kcal,-
10.28 kcal, and -7.29 kcal,-9.09 kcal, -8.25 kcal binding energy
were respectively, Table 2 (see ). Docked
conformations of F chain active site and hydrogen bond interaction
given in the Table 2 (see ). The 2D plot
of Hydrogen bond and hydrophobic interaction of Curcumin-1 at
the F-chain active site is as shown that the residue of E-chain does
not interact with curcumin-1 molecule at F-chain active site. Three
aromatic amino acids, PHE405 PHE406 TRP407, two acidic amino
acids, GLU477 and ASP491 and two nonpolar amino acid residues
i.e.VAL484 and ILE492 are involved in hydrophobic interactions.
GLN494 is crucial for interaction and stabilizes the docked
conformation by hydrogen bonds. The catalytic residues Cys497
and SeCys498 do not approach close to the main chain carbon
atoms of curcumin molecule. Demethoxy curcumin also forms two
hydrogen bonds with docking energy of -8.13 and binding energy of
-9.09. The 2D plot of hydrogen bond and hydrophobic interactions
of demethoxy curcumin at the F-chain active site has been shown
that TYR106 residue of E-chain forms hydrogen bond with
demethoxy curcumin molecule at F-chain active site. Three amino
acids PRO473, HIS472 and GLU477 are involved in hydrophobic
contacts. Five amino acids viz. LEU409 (F), TYR116(E),
CYS498(F), GLY499(F) and TRP407(F), form hydrogen bonds
with demethoxy curcumin and also both hydrophobic interactions
(at the distance of 3.60Å from C12 and 3.36Å from C11 atom of
demethoxy curcumin) and forms hydrogen bond with NH of
SeCYS498 and O21 of demethoxy curcumin. Bis-demethoxy
curcumin forms three hydrogen bonds with the docking energy of -
10.28 kcal and the best binding energy -8.25. The 2D plot of
hydrogen bond and hydrophobic interactions of bisdemethoxy
curcumin at the F-chain active site has shown that the residues
CYS59, VAL60 and ILE65 of E-chain interact via hydrophobic
interactions and SER22 forms hydrogen bond with bis-demethoxy
curcumin at F-chain active site. Three aromatic amino acids
PHE405, PHE406 and TRP407 are involved in hydrophobic
interactions. ILE492 and GLN494 are crucial for interaction and
stabilizing bis-demethoxy curcumin molecule by hydrogen bonds.

Pharmacophore and receptor based drug designing
Since docking at the active site of E chain with curcumin and
demethoxy curcumin and at F-chain with demethoxy curcumin
strongly support wet experiment conducted by Fang et al []
[concluded by distance mapping Table 3 (see )]. Hence we did simulation to design and synthesize more
potent bioactive anticancerous curcumin derivative. In this reference
we simulated pharmacophore of E-chain active site for curcumin
and pharmacophore of E and F chain active site for demethoxy
curcumin. Docking with bis- demethoxy curcumin has not produced any significant interaction with the catalytic residues, therefore, bisdemethoxy
curcumin was not considered for further analysis.
Pharmacophore of E-chain active site with curcumin molecule has
shown three hydrophobic sites, two hydrogen bond acceptor sites
and three hydrogen bond donor sites and maximal internal distance
between two features was 18.63Å. Pharmacophore of E-chain active
site with demethoxycurcumin have shown two hydrophobic sites,
two hydrogen bond acceptor sites and four hydrogen bond donor
sites and maximal internal distance between two points was 15.13Å
(). Pharmacophore of F-chain active site with demethoxy
curcumin has shown three hydrophobic sites, one hydrogen bond
acceptor site and four hydrogen bond donor sites and maximal
internal distance between two points was 11.08 Å.

For de-novo design of ligand all parameters (Lipinski rule and
ADMET) for drug like molecule were considered. We took
curcumin as a seed molecule for E chain active site and
demethoxycurcumin as a seed for both E and F chain active sites,
growing points were assigned at OH and OCH3 functional groups in
all cases. Binding of demethoxy curcumin molecule at E-chain
active site was quite precise; hence there was no room to add any
substituent. Whereas curcumin at E-chain active site and demethoxy
curcumin at F-chain active site have shown big spaces in their
hydrophobic pockets so a large hydrophobic moiety could be added
to enhance binding and biological activity. The ligand molecule
which are being proposed for synthesis are
Oc2ccc(/C=C/C(O)CC(=O)/C=C/c1ccc(O)c(OC)c1)nc2OC and
Oc2c(cc(/C=C/C(O)CC(=O)/C=C/c1ccc(O)c(OC)c1)nc2OC)CC all
being analogs of curcumin molecule. In our docking simulation
both chains E and F of thioredoxin reductase were considered
together because active site resides at both junctions of chains.
Since Fang et al, reported [] in their mass spectrometric study that
it forms 1:2 adduct with Cys-SeCYS residue. Conformation of
curcumin molecule at the active site of E-chain is important because
Se atom of SeCYS498 is approaching very close to the Sp2 C-11 of
main chain of Curcumin molecule. Demethoxycurcumin at both E
and F chain active sites is showing more interesting results in
comparison to Curcumin itself. In our docking simulation it is clear
that demethoxycurcumin molecule is apparently more active than
curcumin molecule because the interacting Se atom of catalytic
residue SeCys498 and ligand C atoms are very close to each other in
both E and F-chain active site. Simulation at the E-chain active site
with curcumin and demethoxycurcumin shows the latter to be more
potent while bis demethoxy curcumin is not potent because
interacting Se atom of receptor and ligand C atom are not as close
as it is required for binding. Therefore we can conclude that for
greater binding in the pocket of active site at least one methoxy
group is necessary []. Among all the simulations the demethoxy
curcumin molecule has been found to be most bioactive. It has
shown greatest docking energy at the E-chain active site and
nothing could be added at these functional groups OH, and OCH3.
While demethoxy curcumin molecule at the F chain active site has
shown greatest binding energy among all simulations of docking at
E and F chain active site. Since area and volume of F chain active
site is greater than E-chain active site so it provides sufficient space
to add larger substituent at the OCH3 and OH functional group.

Conclusion
The present results indicate that synthetic curcumin conjugates
could be designed and developed as potent anticancer drugs at TrxR
receptor. Our study has shown that curcumin at the E chain and
demethoxy curcumin at both E and F chain active sites bind
strongly as the Se atom is approaching near to C10, C11 or C12 carbon atom of curcumin molecule where it is already proved that
Se atom forms adduct with C13 atom. Therefore, it is possible to
predict the design of synthetic curcumin derivatives/ conjugates that
may become more potent anti-cancer drugs, which would be in
addition to their current anti-cancerous profile.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Singh &amp; Misra, Bioinformation 4(5):187-192 (2009)

Curcuminoids: (a) Curcumin; (b) Bis-demethoxy curcumin; (c) Demethoxy curcumin

(a) Bound conformation of demethoxy curcumin visualized by ADT in the active site of E-chain of TrxR. Curcumin and TrxR
both molecules are in line model with all interacting residues. (b) 2D representation of 3D structure of [Figure 2 (a)] created with LigPlot.
[] The hydrogen bonds were identified with HBPLUS [] as were the hydrophobic contacts formed between demethoxy curcumin and the
TrxR residues.

Key site of Interaction of demethoxy curcumin and Contour map [] of pharmacophore of the F-chain active site: Simulated by
ligbuilder programme. []

