Background:
Monozygotic (MZ) twins originate when a single egg is
fertilized to form one zygote, which then divides into two
embryos. Although they share the same genotype they are not
phenotypically identical. Within monozygotic twin pairs there
can be significant discordance for some multi-factorial diseases
[,
] 
and they also show a wide range of anthropomorphic
features. However, the nature, source and occurrence of
discordance are poorly understood. Epigenetic modification is a
plausible mechanism to explain twin discordance than genetic
or stochastic mechanisms alone.

Untangling the epigenetic potential:
The first large-scale study of DNA methylation on twins
compared 20 pairs each of MZ and dizygotic (DZ) twins and
showed similar epigenetic profiles in MZ twins, indicating high
heritability. Epigenetic variation, however, accumulated with
increasing age []. 
Since it was not a longitudinal study it did
not allow comparison of epigenetic profiles in the same
individuals over time. Continuing on this line several other
studies provided strong evidence in favor of epigenetic
heritability and an effect of age and other non-genetic factors in
inducing epigenetic variation in MZ twins during their life time
[,
]. 
High resolution DNA methylation assays revealed a large
degree of variation in different tissues and identified almost
6000 unique metastable genomic regions in MZ twins 
[],
indicative of extensive tissue-specific variation in MZ twins.

In another study, epigenetic analysis of different tissues from
newborn MZ twins showed considerable variation in DNA
methylation and the presence of methylation discordance
within twin pairs, suggesting the importance of the maternal
environment in forming the epigenome of a newborn and the
sensitivity of the intrauterine period to induce epigenetic
variation []. A longitudinal study on MZ twins showed
differences in DNA methylation pattern in childhood that were
not stable over their lifetime and the authors concluded that
environmental influences are responsible for the changes in
DNA methylation and they were not heritable []. A more
recent study using bisulphite sequencing, supported the notion
of low heritability and significant variation in DNA methylation
in MZ twins []. Epigenetic differences provide a plausible
explanation for disease discordance between MZ twins and
tempts to speculate on disease risks of individual epigenetic
effects []. Several studies have reported profound phenotypeassociated
DNA methylation differences between MZ
discordant twin pairs in human diseases [,
,
]. DNA
methylation at the imprinted KCNQ1OT1 region accounts for
discordance for Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome in MZ twins
[]. For systemic lupus erythematosus MZ twins displayed
significant changes in the DNA methylation status (49
differentially methylated regions were identified) of immunesystem-
related genes []. In addition, a recent study found
disease-associated differences in DNA methylation in MZ twins
discordant for schizophrenia and bipolar disorders [].

In contrast, a study that used next generation sequencing (NGS)
for the first time in MZ twins identified a very low level of
differences in DNA methylation. CD4+ lymphocyte DNA from
three monozygotic twin pairs that were discordant for multiple
sclerosis were sequenced and only 2, 10 and 176 differentially
methylated sites were identified out of 2 million CpG
dinucleotides interrogated within the three twin pairs []. One
criticism could be that only three pairs of twins were analyzed
and they were heterogeneous mix of males, females and
different ethnicity. Nevertheless, the study provides highresolution
information on DNA methylation and contradicts
with the previous findings that epigenetic differences are the
major reason for disease discordance in MZ twins.

Perspective and speculation:
As presented, the literature provides contradicting evidence
and leaves us with some questions. Firstly, at what stage does
epigenetic variation arise in MZ twins. Secondly, to what extent
do non-genetic factor influence the changes. Thirdly, do
epigenetic changes confer phenotypic variation and heritability
in twins. Finally, what is the role of DNA methylation change in
disease discordant twins.

Studies to date have broadened our understanding of
epigenetic phenomena in MZ twins, but the majority of the
studies are of low resolution and covered a small fraction of
CpG sites. The rapid improvement in NGS technologies are
promising and are capable of resolving DNA methylation status
at single base pair resolution at high genomic coverage and in
multiple samples. Several excellent tools that harness the power
of NGS have been developed recently, such as RRBS (reduced
representation bisulphite sequencing) [], MeCAP-seq
(methylated DNA capture by affinity purification sequencing)
[], and MeDIP-seq (methylated DNA immunoprecipitation
sequencing) [], allowing multiple epigenomes of twins to be
analysed. The advent of single-molecule sequencing has
potential to reveal more epigenetic modifications and provide
deeper insight into complex phenotypic traits in MZ twins.

To obtain a conclusive answer about the role of epigenetics in
twin discordance, future studies will need to be well designed
to consider tissue heterogeneity, the contribution of
environmental factors, and longitudinal stability. It is promising
that several large-scale twin studies, which apply latest
technologies to unravel epigenetic marks, are well underway.
MuTHER (http://www.muther.ac.uk/), EpiTwin
(http://www.twinsuk.ac.uk/projects/epitwin.html), and
ENGAGE (http://www.euengage.org/) consortium are some
examples. As MZ twins share common DNA sequence, they
offer an excellent opportunity to understand the mechanism of
complex traits and disease etiology from an epigenetic
perspective, which is beyond the explanation of Mendelian
genetics.

We acknowledge the support of National Research Centre for
Growth and Development, New Zealand. We are thankful to
Dr. Euan Rodger for his support and valuable inputs on the
manuscript. We thank Dr. Peter Stockwell for his feedback on
the manuscript.

Citation:Chatterjee &amp; Morison, Bioinformation 7(7): 369-370 (2011)

