Background
Protein structures are dynamic molecules which are in constant
motion. The protein motion or flexibility is highly correlated
with various biological processes such as molecular recognition
and catalytic activity. In theory the protein flexibility is studied
by computational models of structure dynamics, atomic normal
mode analysis (NMA) and by simulations of molecular motion,
while experimentally it is probed by techniques such as nuclear
magnetic resonance relaxation times, incoherent neutron
scattering and X-ray structure B-values (Temperature factor or
B- values) [–]. B-value reported in experimental atomicresolution
structures represents the decrease of intensity in
diffraction due to the dynamic disorder caused by the
temperature-dependent vibration of the atoms and the static
disorder, which is related to the orientation of the molecule 
[].
Generally the B-values of C-alpha atoms are used to study the
motion of the backbone. It is clear that B-value data of crystal
structures are influenced by a number of disparate variables
and importantly on the particular refinement procedures 
[]. As
a result, measured B-values in different known structures may
be on different scales; normalized B-values are used to compare
the B-values of different protein structures 
[–]. Earlier works
aimed at analysis of B-values obtained from protein X-ray
crystal structure have shown that the prediction of B-values can
help to unravel protein function along with protein thermal
stability, [,
] side-chain mobility with conformation, 
[,
]
protein disordered regions [,
] and investigating protein
dynamics [].

Statistical analysis has formed a good component of the
research efforts aimed at understanding protein flexibility,
owing to the enormous diversity and complexity. A variety of
approaches have been proposed by different groups to predict
the B-values, mainly dealing with the so called “classification
problem“. In classification problem the amino acid residues are
classified into two states as rigid or flexible on the basis of an
arbitrary B-value cutoff threshold. [,
,
]. In contrast, method
proposed by Yuan et al. [] predicts a series of real values
representing a protein sequence (also regarded as the B-value
profile) only using the single-sequence and multiple-sequence
(multiple sequence alignment) features. This approach achieves
the correlation coefficient of 0.53 which is better than the
previous approaches.

In this study, we have analyzed the B-values from a nonredundant
data set of high-resolution structures to look into the
variations in B-value of residues due to their biochemical
properties as well as the environment around them in protein
three dimensional structures. We have also proposed the
method using Support Vector Regression (SVR) to predict Bvalue
from protein sequence.

Methodology
Dataset:
A non-redundant set of protein chains was selected from the
Protein Data Bank [] (PDB) located at Research Collaboratory
for Structural Bioinformatics (RCSB) having resolution better
than 2.0 Å. These entries were submitted to the PISCES server
[] to identify proteins with low sequence similarity. Following
are the input parameters used for culling: sequence percentage
identity 25%, resolution 2.0 Å, R-factor 0.2, sequence length 60-
10000 amino acids. Final dataset consist only monomeric
protein structures. The multimeric proteins are removed for the
sake of simplicity. Protein chains containing fragments and
missing C-alpha atom coordinates are also removed. The
resulting data set contained 240 protein chains, and the list is
provided in  (see supplementary material). High
resolution protein structures containing B-values data were
taken from Protein Data Bank (PDB) []. Secondary structure
assignments were made using the DSSP program. 
[]. Amino
acid residues are grouped into one of the three secondary
structural states as helix, stand and the rest, termed ‘Others’.

Calculation of normalized B-value:
As B-values from different structures are on different scales, the
raw B-values from the Protein Data Bank (PDB) for each protein
are normalized for reasonable comparison by the following
equation, (see supplementary material for ).

Identification of clefts and cavities:
The CASTp (Computed Atlas of Surface Topography of
proteins) server located at http://sts.bioengr.uic.edu/castp/
was used to identify clefts and cavities for each protein
structure []. CASTp provides a full description of protein
pockets and cavities including volume, surface area, protein
atoms that line the concavity and features of pocket mouth(s)
including identification of mouth atoms as well as
measurement of mouth area and circumference. The default
probe radius of 1.4 Å has been used for our calculations.

Calculation of protein accessible surface area and residue distance from the protein surface:
The calculation of protein accessible surface area (ASA) was
done by the program naccess, [] which implements the
algorithm of Lee and Richards []. All the atoms having
accessible surface area &gt; 0Å2 are considered as the surface
atoms. The Euclidian distance of the C-alpha atom of the
residue from the nearest surface atom is considered as the
effective distance of the residue from the protein surface.

Support Vector Machines implementation:
Support Vector Machines (SVMs) are a class of machine
learning algorithms which can perform pattern recognition and
regression [,
]. SVMs can handle noise and large datasets
very effectively. SVM non-linearly transforms the original input
space into a higher dimensional feature space by means of
kernel functions [,
]. The freely downloadable LIBSVM
package was used for the implementation of SVM with the nu-
SVR SVM type (SVM type for regression) and the widely used
Radial Basis Function (RBF) kernel []. Out of 240 protein
structures considered in this study 70% were randomly picked
for creating the training dataset consisting of 168 cases. The
remaining 30% were used as test set (72 cases). The SVR model
was also tested on 766 cases from previous studies. All the
attributes in training and test datasets were scaled in the range
of -1 to 1.

Parameter Selection and encoding:
Altogether thirty three sequence features were used as
attributes for implementing the SVR model. The attributes were
amino acid type (20 amino acids), amino acid class based on
biochemical features (4 classes) and the amino acid class as
classified by Saha et. al. [] based on the similarity of the
environment of each amino acid residue in protein structures (9
classes).The input feature vectors of SVR are encoded for each
residue in the primary protein sequence based on the sliding
window approach centered at middle residue except near the
N- and C-termini. Different window sizes (from 3 to 21
residues) are tested and the optimized window size is set to 15
residues, which gives the better results. Each residue is
represented by a vector of length 36; 21 for amino acid type
(The first 20 elements in the vector each represent one of the 20
standard amino acids and the twenty first element represents
non-standard amino acids.), 5 for amino acid class based on
biochemical features and 10 for amino acid class based on the
similarity of the environment of each amino acid residue in
protein structures []. Therefore, each residue site in the
protein sequence is encoded by 36*15=540 dimensional vector.

SVM optimization:
The nu-SVR parameter C and the kernel parameters γ had been
optimized using repeated grid search and 5-fold cross
validation. The e-epsilon parameter is set to 0.01 as it gives the
best results. In 5-fold cross-validation, the training dataset was
spilt into 5 subsets, where one of the subsets was used as the
test set while the other 4 subsets were used for training the SVR
model. The trained model was tested using the test set. The
process was repeated 5 times using a different subset for
testing, thereby ensuring that all subsets were used for both
training and testing.

Performance measure:
We have calculated the Pearson correlation coefficient (CC)
between the theoretical and experimental B-values to verify the
performance of SVR method, as given by (see supplementary
material for ).

Discussion
B-value profile for residues in different regions of protein tertiary structure:
The B-value distributions of the residues vary depending on
their positions in the protein tertiary structure. Dataset
considered in this study consists of 63771 residues across 240
protein structures. The normalized B-value ranges from -2.29 to
11.96.  shows the frequency distribution of B-values for
amino acid residues in overall dataset and present in different
position in protein tertiary structure. The frequency distribution
of normalized B-value in overall dataset () shows the
skewed distribution with the flat peak having two maximas at -
0.5 and 1.

Exposed residues have higher B-value than the others which
reside in protein core (). The respective average Bvalues
for the buried, intermediate and exposed residues are –
0.417, 0.210 and 1.092, indicating that the buried residues are on
average, less flexible than the exposed residues. The overall
shapes of the B-value distributions in cavities and pockets
() are similar, except the distribution of B-values for
residues lining the pockets is relatively flat. This may be due to
the fact that cavity lining residues are not solvent accessible
while the residues lining the pockets are solvent accessible.

It () shows the frequency distribution of B-values for
amino acid residues in α-helix, β-strand and others. The β-sheet
and ‘Others’ distributions have maximum values at –0.05 and 0,
respectively. Whereas, the B-value distribution of the residues
in the helical states shows skewed distribution with the flat
peak (maximas at -0.5 and 0). The average B-values for the
helical, sheet and ‘Other’ residues are –0.11, –0.4 and 0.31,
respectively, indicating that the coil residues, in general, have
larger B-values and therefore are more flexible than helical and
sheet residues.

Residue distance from protein surface and B-value:
The accessible surface area of protein and the distance of the
residue from the protein surface are calculated as described in
the “Methods and Materials” section. There is a considerable
variation in the normalized B-value of the residue as a function
of its distance from the protein surface (burial). To discern any
underlying trend we averaged the normalized B-value in a
particular distance bin (size 0.5 Å) () and based on the
average numbers one can derive a linear relationship. The plot
of the normalized B-value of the residue against its distance
from the protein surface () shows that the B-value
decreases as the residue distance from its surface increases. The
R2 value for the straight line which fits on this data is 0.73
(equation y = -0.2111x + 0.3434). The normalized B-value
decreases by 0.1055 with every 0.5Å increase in the distance of
the residue from protein surface.

Dependence of B-value on amino acids types:
Amino acids on the basis of their biochemical characteristics are
divided into 3 types as polar charged, polar uncharged and non
polar hydrophobic amino acids. The frequency distribution of
normalized B-values for each type is shown in (). The
distribution of normalized B-value in polar uncharged residues
is similar to that of the overall distribution in the dataset, while
the distribution of normalized B-value in non polar
hydrophobic and polar charged is similar to the one in buried
and intermediate surface residues, respectively.

Dependence of residue B-value on protein primary sequence:
The frequency distribution of B-value for each amino acid when
the previous position (in protein primary sequence) is occupied
by a particular amino acid (out of 20 amino acids) is shown in
 (see supplementary material). The plot shows how
particular amino acid residue affects the B-value of the next
amino acid residue in the protein primary sequence, like if
valine comes after cysteine in protein primary sequence then
~61% times its normalized B-value falls in bin -0.5 (i.e. in
between -1.0 to -0.5). Similarly glutamine normalized B-value
falls 60% times in between -0.5 and 0.

SVR model and prediction of B-value:
The SVR model was designed using the RBF kernel and the 33
sequence feature input encoding as discussed in “Materials and
Methods”. We set the value of ε to 0.01 and p to 0.01 while
training the model using SVR. The optimized values for the
regularization parameter C and kernel parameter γ are listed in
 (see the supplementary material). We tried eight
different window sizes to build the SVR model. Window size of
15 residues gives the best correlation coefficient (CC).
Parthasarathy &amp; Murthy [] analyzed temperature factor
distribution in high-resolution protein structures. The
frequency distribution of normalized B-value in this study
would match with Parthasarathy and Murthy's work. Our
results show the skewed distribution with the flat peak. We
have used the larger dataset created using more stringent
criteria and it contains protein chains having length greater
than 60 amino acids. Nevertheless,  indicates that the
B-value distribution is flatter and more skewed towards the
positive side if we go from buried to surface residues. It has
been noted that long loops tend to be more flexible than regular
secondary structures such as helices and strands. Moreover,
hydrophobic residues, which are buried, tend to be more rigid
whereas charged residues tend to be more flexible. These
observations match well with the results obtained in this study
(, ).

Proteins are not exactly spherical with smooth surface. Hence, a
protein structural descriptor, the distance of an atom or residue
from protein surface (or the depth) has been proposed to be the
distance between itself (residue or atom) and the nearest water
molecule or protein surface, to measure the extent to which it is
buried [,
]. This parameter is useful in analyzing amide
hydrogen/deuterium exchange rates in nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) experiments []. Predicting protein active
sites [], and improving protein structural alignments 
[].
Previous works have also shown that the average atomic
fluctuation is linearly related to the square of the atomic
distance from the center of mass of the protein which in turn is
used to compute the B-value []. In contrast, if we look from
the protein surface to core, the normalized B-value decreases by
0.1055 with every 0.5Å increase in the distance of the residue
from protein surface.

If structure–sequence relationships exist on a continuum, then
one would expect to observe change in the B-value of amino
acid based on the presence of particular amino acid at the
nearby position in the protein primary sequence. The difference
in the B-value distribution of amino acid based on the presence
of particular amino acid at the presiding position in protein
primary sequence as discussed in the results section – indicate
that the protein primary sequence information can be useful in
predicting the B-value. To investigate the amount of
information required to optimally predict the correct B-value
we have tried different window sizes of 7 to 21 residues in
length. The window size of 15 residues has given the optimal
results. Finally, we have built the SVR model using sliding
window (window size of 15 residues) approach. The model
achieved an average CC of 0.47, which is comparable with the
other similar approaches. Different groups have used different
datasets and methods to predict the B-values from protein
sequence. As such, the direct comparison can't be an
appropriate alternative in this case. Keeping this in mind our
model has performed well on the test dataset as compared to
other methods. Yuan et. al. [] reported an average CC of 0.53
on the dataset of 786 pdb chains, but in their study they have
not mentioned about the training and test dataset. Since the
accuracy obtained on the whole dataset rather than dividing it
in training and test (unseen) dataset is subject to be changed in
case of future events. The method and the approach used in this
study are more appropriate as the model has been tested on
unseen test dataset.

Conclusion
We have compiled a diverse data set using more stringent
criteria and analyzed the usefulness of the local sequence
features in identifying the residue B-value from protein primary
sequence. A quantitative relationship has been derived for the
B-value of the residue and the residues depth from the protein
surface. Finally, we have built the SVR model using the sliding
window approach (window size of 15 residues) to predict the Bvalue
of the amino acid residues from protein primary sequence
and achieve results that are better or at least comparable to
existing and reported methods.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Sonavane et al, Bioinformation 9(3): 134-140 (2013)

Frequency distribution of normalized B-value in bins of 0.5. The plot showing (A) overall distribution; (B) distribution in
solvent accessible and buried residues; (C) residues lining the cavities and the pockets, and; (D) the residues associated with the
different secondary structural elements in the whole dataset.

Plot of relationship between distance of C-alpha atoms
from the protein surface and the normalized B-value. The
average of all the values in a bin (size 0.5 Å) along the x axis is
shown at the upper limit of each bin; while the y value
corresponds to the mean of their normalized B-values (the
vertical bars represent the standard deviations)

Frequency distribution of normalized B-value in polar
charged, polar uncharged and non polar hydrophobic amino
acids.

