Background
Most amino acids in the organisms are coded by more than one
triplet of nucleotides which are called synonymous codons that
usually differ by single nucleotide in the third codon position
but for some amino acids, it differs in the second position also.
Codon usage is specially a genome strategy in which each
genome has a particular codon usage signature that reflects
particular evolutionary forces acting within that genome 
[].
Codon usage pattern reflects a distinct pattern between 
[–]
and within prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms 
[–]. With
time, different pattern in codon usage in bacterial genomes
indicates lateral gene transfer events and the analysis of codon
bias helps establish the fact that the horizontal gene transfer is a
major evolutionary force []. Variation in codon usage bias
depends on various factors such as gene expression level 
[,
] with highly expressed genes showing greater codon usage
bias than lowly expressed genes [], amino acid composition
[], 
gene length [] and tRNA abundance 
[,
]. Within the
genomes which are the source of valuable biological
information [], codon usage pattern has both practical and
theoretical importance in understanding the molecular basics of
biology. This strategy can directly be utilized in molecular
characterization of species and can be used as a molecular
marker for the characterization of molecular evolution. DNA
primers and oligonucleotide probes can also be designed on the
basis of this knowledge []. Natural selection acting through
external environmental factors also influence genomic pattern
of codon usage [], variations in which can quantitatively
predict the level of gene expressivity [].

Among bacteria, primary factor responsible for codon usage
variation is the differences in mutational biases. However,
many species possess additional variation among genes that is
consistent with the natural selection []. Among organisms,
codon bias is maintained by a balance between selection,
mutation and genetic drift [,
] where translational accuracy
appears to be a major responsible factor as certain preferred
codons are translated more accurately and efficiently 
[].
Thermosynechococcus elongatus BP-1 is unicellular rod-shaped
thermophilic cyanobacterium with an optimum growth
temperature of 55°C. During the course of evolution, T.
elongatus is branched very near to the origin of cyanobacteria
[]. 
Because of its ability to undergo natural transformation,
this obligate photoautotroph has widely been used as a model
organism for the study of photosynthesis. We analyzed codon
usage pattern of whole genome of T. elongatus in order to
understand the complete genetic organization and the factors
shaping the codon usage pattern in this organism.

Methodology
Sequence source and parameters:
Complete genome and coding sequences of T. elongatus was
obtained from NCBI
(www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/genomes). Whole genome
consists of 2476 genes. To minimize sampling error, only coding
sequences (CDS) with correct initial and terminal codons and
minimum 100 codons were considered. CDS with uncertain
annotation or annotated as hypothetical were excluded by using
PERL scripts.

Indices of codon usage bias:
Frequency of 59 codons for 18 amino acids (except Met, Trp and
stop codon) was examined by using different codon indices
such as relative synonymous codon usage (RSCU) 
[]; effective
number of codons (Nc) []; codon adaptation index (CAI) 
[];
frequency of G+C in a coding sequence (GC content); frequency
of G+C at third position of codons (GC3s) and frequency of A,
T, G, C at the synonymous 3rd positions of codons (A3, T3, G3,
C3 respectively).

RSCU is the ratio of the observed frequency of codons to the
expected frequency given that all the synonymous codons for
the same amino acids are used equally. RSCU values &gt;1
indicates more frequent use of corresponding codons than the
expected frequency whereas the reverse is true for RSCU value
&lt;1 []. 
Nc measures the bias of synonymous codons and Nc
ranges from 20 (when only one codon is used per amino acid) to
61 (when all codons are used in equal probability) 
[].

CAI is used to estimate the extent of bias towards codons that
were known to be preferred in highly expressed genes. CAI
value ranges from 0 to 1.0, and a higher value indicates a
stronger codon usage bias and higher expression level. CAI is a
well accepted measure of gene expressivity 
[].

These indices were calculated using GCUA [] and CodonW
version 1.4.2 [].

Multivariate analysis:
Correspondence analysis (CA) has been successfully used to
investigate the variation of RSCU values among genes. CA plots
all the genes in a 59-dimensional hyperspace according to their
usage of the 59 informative codons, excluding Met, Trp, and
termination codons. It identifies the axes that represent the most
prominent factors contributing to the variation among genes.
Statistical analysis was performed with SPSS version 16.0.

Discussion
Overall codon usage analysis:
T. elongatus genome contains moderately high (53%) GC content
and therefore, due to compositional constraint, it is expected
that there will be no or very little biasness in distribution of G-,
C-, A- and T- ending codons. Among 18 most widely used
codons, 8 are GC-ending (6 C-ending and 2 G-ending) whereas
10 codons are AT-ending (7 T- ending and 3 A-ending) 

(see supplementary material).

Nc and GC3s was used to further analyze the degree of
heterogeneity in codon usage in T. elongatus. It was observed
that Nc values for the genes range from 34.77 to 61 with a mean
value of 49.17 and standard deviation of 3.65. This reflected a
marked variation of codon usage in the genes. Analysis with
GC3s values also confirmed the heterogeneity of synonymous
codon usage among genes of T. elongatus. Strong influence of
compositional constraints on codon usage bias in the genes
could be understood from the presence of significant negative
correlation (r = -0.558, P&lt; 0.01) between GC3s and Nc. These
results supported our hypothesis that compositional constraints
positively influenced detection of codon usage variation in the
genes in this organism.

Nc plot (plot of Nc vs GC3 content) reflected the determinants
of the codon usage variation among genes in different
organisms. Since Nc is constrained by G+C content, it is plotted
against GC3s of the gene to investigate patterns of codon usage.
It has been suggested that if GC3 content was the only
determinant of the codon usage variation among the genes, the
Nc value would fall on the continuous curve between Nc value
and GC3 content []. 
In the Nc plot of T. elongatus (),
majority of genes with higher GC3s have lower Nc value and
except few genes, majority of genes lay far below the expected
curve suggesting additional codon usage bias. This again
indicated certain additional factors along with compositional
constraint in shaping the codon usage bias of this genome.
Translational selection therefore, also seems to affect codon
usage because of wide range of Nc values for the same GC3
content.

Multivariate statistical analysis:
To examine whether amino acid composition exerts any
constraint on synonymous codon usage, we performed CA on
RSCU values. The first axis accounted for 17.99% of total
variation as compared to 7.77% for the second axis. A much
higher value for the first axis in comparison to the second axis
indicated a single major explanatory axis that accounted for the
codon usage variation in the organism. Bivariate correlation
analysis established the relationships between the first and
second major axes with different codon usage indices and has
led to a significant negative correlation between Nc and GC3s (r
= -0.558, P &lt; 0.01). We therefore, suggest that the genes located
at the right side of the first axis with higher GC3s and GC
content and lower ENC values reflect strong codon bias and
this variations in codon usage is strongly correlated with
nucleotide composition of the genes. The first major axis
showed a significant positive correlation with C3s and G3s but
is negatively correlated with A3s and T3s 
 (see
supplementary material). We showed that highly biased genes,
those with G- and C- ending codons were clustered on the
positive side whereas the codons ending with A and T
predominate on the negative side of the first major axis 
(). Significant negative correlation was observed between Nc
and GC3s (r = -0.558, P &lt;0.01) in comparison to Nc and GC (r = -
0.394). A significant positive correlation was also observed
between Axis 1 and GC3s confirming that GC3s plays an
important role in shaping codon usage bias in this genome.
Moreover, when G3s and C3s are considered separately, the
correlation coefficient exhibited by the positions of genes along
with the first axis with C3s (r=0.542, P &lt;0.01) is significantly
larger than that with G3s (r = 0.151, P &lt;0.01), indicating that the
contribution of C3s to the inter-genomic variation in overall
GC3s content is greater than that of G3s. We therefore,
speculate that the presence of compositional mutational bias
shapes the codon usage bias in T. elongatus genome.

Translational optimal codons:
To identify optimal codons which are preferred among the
highly expressed sequences, we analyzed the codon usage in
10% of genes from both extremes of axis 1.
Among highly biased genes, there were 20 codons with
significantly higher usage (relative to synonyms) that could be
inferred as translational optimal codons 
[]. Among these 20
codons, there were 12 C-ending (60%), 6 G- (30% G) and 2 Tending
codons (10%) but no A-ending codon  (see
supplementary material). This is consistent with the correlation
of Axis 1 with C3s (r = 0.542, P&lt;0.01). Most frequently used stop
codon among highly expressed genes was UAG whereas
among lowly expressed genes it was UGA.

The predominant nature of C-ending codons suggested that
translational selection is also operating in codon usage variation
in this organism. If the compositional constraints are the only
factor in shaping the codon usage variation among the genes,
then A- and T-ending codons should have been present in good
proportion but it is not there.

Differential base usage in third codon position:
The correlation of the frequencies of four bases in the third
position against Nc values of all the genes has been checked
 
(see supplementry material). We considered the highly
biased genes having low Nc values as highly expressed and vice
versa. In all the genes, the frequency of C at third codon position
increased with decreasing Nc values, whereas frequencies of A
and T increases with Nc. However, the frequency of G is not
influenced in the third codon position.

Thus, the influence of mutational bias is reflected in the choice
of bases in the third position. However, this is expected since
the optimal codons are, in general, chosen in accordance with
the mutational bias. It is expected that due to the translational
selection, mutational bias appears to be more prominent in the
third codon position of highly expressed genes 
[].

Relationship between codon bias and gene length:
Selection for translational accuracy is predicted to have a
positive correlation between codon bias and gene length 
[].
From the plot drawn with gene length against Nc (), it
is clear that shorter genes have a much wider variance in Nc
values and vice versa for longer genes. Lower Nc values of
longer genes may be expected due to the direct effect of
translation time on fitness or to the extra energy cost associated
with longer translational timing. Correlation analyses between
gene length and gene position on axis 1, GC3s and Nc values (r
= 0.158, 0.170 and -0.173, respectively, P&lt; 0.01) were all
significantly correlated. The observed significant correlation in
T. elongatus genome revealed that gene length influences codon
usage of this organism. Gene length was negatively correlated
with Nc (r = -0.173) but it showed positive correlation with
GC3s (r = 0.170). Therefore, codon bias is lower in longer genes
than in shorter ones (). It is meaningful that up to
certain extent, translational accuracy also plays a role in
dictating the codon usage variation in this genome.

CAI and codon usage variation: role of gene expressivity:
Codon Adaptation Index (CAI) has been extensively used as a
measure of gene expression level in organisms. Within T.
elongatus genome, CAI showed positive correlation with the
positions of genes along axis 1 and GC3s ( r = 0.274 and r= 0.229
respectively, P&lt;0.01) () but was negatively correlated
with Nc (r =0.389). This has reflected the effect of gene
expression level on codon selection pattern in T. elongatus. Data
suggested that genes with higher expression level exhibing a
greater degree of codon usage bias were distributed at right
side of the first axis and prefered to use G- or C-ending codons.
This result indicated a role of expression levels of genes in
codon usage variation along with compositional constraints and
supported the argument of presence of additional factors along
with compositional constraint in shaping the codon usage bias
in this genome. Furthermore, CAI showed a positive correlation
with C3s (r = 0.605, P &lt;0.01) whereas negative correlation with
G3s (r = -0.243, P &lt;0.01) supporting our hypothesis that the
influence of mutational bias is reflected in the choice of bases in
the third codon position and thus, favor translational selection.

Conclusion
Codon usage pattern was analyzed in T. elongatus genome to
elucidate the factors responsible for variation in codon usage.
From the analysis, it is clear that compositional constraint is not
the only factor responsible for shaping the codon usage
variation in this genome. In T. elongatus, there is a single major
explanatory axis which accounted for codon usage variation.
CA of T. elongatus genes revealed strong correlation of GC3s
with this axis. In addition, a negative correlation was observed
between Nc and GC3s. These results suggested that mutational
bias is the major factor in shaping codon usage in this organism.
Among all the four nucleotides at third position, C3s is found to
directly influence codon usage variation. Thus, the influence of
mutational bias is reflected in the choice of bases in the third
position and supported our hypothesis that compositional
mutation bias possibly plays an important role in shaping the
codon usage bias of this genome. The 3rd base of a codon is said
to wobble and very often, changes in the 3rd base of a codon
might not change the amino acid encoding reflecting that base
compositional mutational bias could lead to different codon
choice within the same protein sequence []. Highly expressed
genes tend to use C- or G- at the synonymous positions
compared with lowly expressed genes. Preference of C-ending
codons in the highly expressed genes might be related to the
translational efficiency of the genes as it has been reported that
RNY (R- purine, N- any nucleotide base, and Y-pyrimidine)
codons are more advantageous for translation []. It is
interesting to note that 68% of the preferred triplets in the
highly expressed genes of T. elongatus are pyrimidine ending
codons suggesting that besides, mutational bias, translational
selections are also operating extent in determining the codon
usage variation in this organism. The interpretation of
pyrimidine selection involves the energy level of the codonanticodon
interaction and is connected to translational fidelity
[]. 
Gene length was also found to influence codon usage and
this fact supported the role of translational accuracy in dictating
the codon usage variation of this genome. Gene expression level
also influences codon selection pattern of this organism. Thus, it
is imperative to note that mutational bias is the major factor in
shaping codon usage in T. elongatus genome but the role of
other factors such as translational selection and accuracy and
gene expression level may not be excluded in codon usage in
this organism.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Financial support from Indian Council of Agricultural Research,
New Delhi, India under National Agricultural Bioinformatics
Grid project is gratefully acknowledged.

Citation:Prabha et al, Bioinformation 8(13): 622-628 (2012)

Position of T. elongatus genes along the two major axes
of variation in the correspondence analysis on RSCU.

Nc plot for T. elongatus genes. The solid line indicates
the expressed Nc value if codon bias is only due to GC3s.

Plot of Nc vs Gene length for T. elongatus genes.

Scatter plot of CAI with Axis 1

