Background
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a novel growing family of
endogenous, small, non- coding, single-stranded RNA
molecules encoded in the genomes of plants and animals that
repress mRNA translation or mediate mRNA degradation in a
sequence-specific manner []. The discovery of the first
microRNA lin-4 in Caenorhabditis elegans by Ambros laboratory
emerged as biology's unusual or unique findings []. These tiny
bits of RNA play a major role in gene regulation, which
involves in negative regulation of gene targets. In recent years,
identification and functional studies of miRNA has made great
progress in research. The exposition of miRNA in plants is still
a continuing process hence, till date a number of plant miRNAs
have been discovered and functionally identified. Key roles of
miRNA in biological processes are revealed by plant studies,
which include regulation of leaf development [], stem
development [], root development 
[], signal transduction,
developmental timing, floral differentiation and development,
and defense response against every sort of stress. Plant miRNAs
are usually evolutionary conserved and are observed in regions
of the genome distinct from previously annotated genes.

Different approaches used for miRNA identification includes,
gene cloning technology and Bioinformatics strategies. Gene
cloning is a conventional method to identify the new miRNA
accurately, even though it has disadvantages, such as difficulty
in finding miRNAs which express at low levels, difficulty in
cloning, degradation of RNA during sample separation etc 
[].
Rapid development in the field of bioinformatics has brought a
number of computational programs and other tools to
successfully predict the miRNA [,
]. This process is purely
based on the genomic databases like expressed sequence tags
EST and other. Since the miRNAs are more conserved in plant
species, it is possible to identify novel miRNAs using
computational techniques. Now a days miRNAs are identified
using the computational or bioinformatics based approach,
since it is very useful in predicting the novel miRNA, which
cannot be done by cloning. Radish (R.sativus) is an edible root
vegetable that has been found to possess a number of
pharmacological and antioxidant properties. Radish is rich in
folic acid, Vitamin C and anthocyanins. These nutrients make it
a very effective cancer-fighting food. It is said that radish is
effective in fighting oral cancer, colon cancer and intestinal
cancer as well as kidney and stomach cancers.

In this study, all previously known plant miRNAs from A.
thaliana, rice, and other plant species were used to search the
R.sativus homologs of miRNAs in the publicly available
expressed sequence tag (EST) (National Center for
Biotechnology Information, NCBI,
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). A total of 48 potential
miRNAs were detected. Using these potential miRNAs
sequences, R.sativus mRNA database was further blasted to find
16 potential miRNA-targeted genes. Most of the target mRNAs
were found to be coding transcription factors which are
involved in regulating plant growth, development and
metabolism.

Methodology
Datasets of miRNAs, EST and mRNA sequences:
To search potential miRNAs in R.sativus, previously known
plant miRNAs including their precursor sequences from
Arabidopsis thaliana, Zea mays, Oryza sativa, Glycine max, Sorghum
bicolor and other plant species were downloaded from the
miRBase (Release 17:April 2011) (http://www.mirbase.org/)
[]. After removal of the repeated sequences, 1,876 were
considered as reference set R.sativus expressed sequence tag
(EST) and mRNA database were downloaded from GenBank
database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov).

Availability of Computational Software:
Comparative software BLAST-2.2.24 [] was downloaded from
NCBI. BLASTX (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST/) was
used for analysis of potential targets. RNA secondary structure
and the free energy were calculated by web server Mfold 3.2 [].

Prediction of R.sativus miRNAs:
The Computational prediction of miRNAs in R.sativus is shown
in . the plant miRNA sequences were initially scanned
to remove repeats. The reference set was subjected to the
BLAST [] search for R.sativus homologs of miRNAs against
EST database. The initial BLAST-2.2.24 search was carried out
with default parameters. Mature miRNA sequence should be no
less than 18 nt, and the mismatches should be less than 4. Later
these precursor sequences were BLASTXed online to remove
the protein coding sequences. Pre-miRNAs secondary structure
was run on MFOLD 3.2 (http://www.bioinfo.rpi.edu/). The
following steps were considered for screening the candidate
miRNA homologs: (1) The RNA sequence folding into an
appropriate stem-loop hairpin secondary structure that contains
the ~22 nt mature miRNA sequence located in one arm of the
hairpin structure; (2) The predicted mature miRNAs with no
more than 6 mismatches with the opposite miRNA* sequence in
the other arm; (3) maximum size of 3 nt for a bulge in the
miRNA sequence was allowed; (4) miRNA precursors with
secondary structures had higher negative minimal free energies
and minimal free energy index (MFEI) than other different type
of RNAs; and MFEI of greater than 0.85 []; (5) The A+U
content of pre-miRNA within 30-70% was considered; (6) no
loop or break in miRNA sequences was allowed. These criteria
significantly reduced false positives and required that the
predicted miRNAs fit the criteria proposed by Ambros and coworkers
[].

Computational prediction of potential targets of miRNAs:
miRNA targets prediction was performed by aligning the
predicted miRNA sequences with mRNA sequences of R.sativus
through the BLAST program. The targets were screened
according to these criteria: the number of mismatches should be
less than 4, and no gaps were allowed at the complementary
sites. After removal of the repeated sequences, the potential
target genes were BLASTed against protein databases to predict
their function.

Results
To signify new miRNAs in R.sativus by Bioinformatics strategy,
the flowchart is shown in . Setting the default e-value,
we began our BLASTn search for homologous miRNA
sequences against the EST databases of R.sativus. After the blast,
all blasted hits with non-coding sequences were retained for
analysis of secondary structure; those meeting the criteria,
discussed in Methodology were termed as miRNA homologs.
Finally, 48 potential R.sativus miRNAs belonging to 9 miRNA
families were identified and they were named according to
Ambros []. The details on predicted R.sativus miRNAs
including family names, Sources, mismatches, mature miRNA
lengths, precursors, A+U Content, and Minimal folding free
energy index (MFEI) were listed in  (see supplementary
material. During the screening of the potential miRNAs,
candidate miRNAs were evaluated for A+U content. The
sequences of the miRNA precursors had A+U content ranging
from 31.57% to 61.90% , which is in agreement with the
previous results []. The length of the 48 predicted miRNAs
ranged from 18nt to 22nt. All the MFEI of these hairpin
structures were over 0.85, which was thought to be gold
standard to differentiate miRNAs from other ones []. The 48
miRNAs represent 9 miRNA families in R.sativus ().
miRNA 156 has nine members; miRNA 160, 319 and 171 have 7
members; miRNA 396 and 162 have 6 members; miRNA 167,
170 and 399 have 4,1 and 1 members respectively. The current
results confirm that the approach for EST analysis is a relatively
efficient way to identify miRNAs.

According to Zhang [], about 10000 ESTs contained one
miRNA, so about 15 miRNAs should be predicted theoretically
from the total of 150665 ESTs, but in this work we found total 48
miRNAs belonging to 9 families showing the higher value than
the previous prediction results and different length of mature
miRNAs from the same precursor were regarded as different
ones, considering they corresponded to different target genes.
Compared to the nucleotide number of animal miRNA
precursors (typically with 70–80), the R.sativus miRNA
precursors show more diversity in structure and size .
The length of miRNA precursors in R.sativus varied from 77 to
181 nucleotides. The different size of the identified miRNAs
within different families suggests that they may offer unique
functions for regulation of miRNA biogenesis or gene
expression []. The diversity of the identified miRNAs can also
be found in the location of mature miRNA sequences. The
sequences of miR 156b/d/f/g/h/i, miR 160/b/c/d/e/f, miR
162/a, miR 167b/c/d, miR 170, miR 319c, miR396a/c/d and
miR399a were located at the 5' end of the miRNA precursors,
while the miR 156a/c/e, miR160a, miR162b/c/d/e, miR167a,
miR 171a/b/c/d/e/f/g, miR319a/b/d/e/f/g and miR
396b/e/f were found at the 3' end. Based on the
complementarity between miRNAs and their target genes in
plants, the R.sativus EST database was searched for homology to
the new miRNA sequences with a BLASTN and BLASTX
algorithm for the discovery of miRNA targets. A total of 16
potential targets for R.sativus miRNAs were identified. These
potential miRNA targets belonged to a number of gene families
that had different biological functions  (see
supplementary material), including the control of transcription
factors, organizing and segregating chromosomes for partition.
The miRNAs and their putative targets with known functions
are listed in .

Discussion
In plant kingdom most of the mature miRNAs are
evolutionarily conserved from species to species. This
information enables us to predict new miRNA homologs or
orthologs by insilico method [].Therefore, we used all
previously known plant mature miRNAs from miRBase to
search for homologs of miRNAs and their target genes in radish
in the publicly available EST and GSS database of R.sativus.
Finally, 48 potential R.sativus miRNAs belonging to 9 miRNA
families were identified. In the present study, the length of
predicted miRNA precursors varies from 77 to 181 NT. The
different sizes of the identified miRNAs within the different
families suggest that they may perform unique functions in the
regulation of miRNA biogenesis or gene expression []. MFEI
is an important characteristic that distinguish miRNA from
other non-coding and coding RNAs. The MFEI is a unique
criterion to designate miRNAs. When the MFEI is more than
0.85, the sequence is most likely to be miRNA. We observed
that the MFEIs of the hairpin structures ranged from 1.34 to 3.73
. 
All the mature sequences of Radish miRNAs are in the
stem portion of the hairpin structures, as shown in .
According to the estimation approximately 10,000 ESTs in
plants contain one miRNA  that means 150,665 ESTs in
R.sativus should contain 15 miRNAs. But in this study, 48
miRNAs were detected, showing higher value than the
previous prediction (). The current results confirm that
the approach of EST analysis is a relatively efficient way to
identify miRNAs.

To understand the biological function of miRNAs in plant
development, it is necessary to identify their targets. In miRNA
target prediction, the screening criterion was set according to
the description in Methodology. Finally, 16 potential targets for
R.sativus miRNAs were identified . The miRNA 156
have been predicted to target Squamosa promoter Binding
Proteins (SBP) or SBP-like (SPL) genes, . It is identified
that, most of the predicted miRNA targets were coding genes
for transcription factors mainly involved in the synthesis of
enzymes participating in regulation of development, growth
and other physiological processes.

The general characteristic of the miRNA sequence is, it is
complementary to their target gene, and in some case single
miRNA can be complementary to more than one target gene.
For example, in this work we identified that the miR156 and
miR396 have more regulatory targets, even though their
structure and sequence is dissimilar. SMC proteins are recently
identified important factors that influence chromosome
structure during mitosis and development. SMC proteins were
identified very first in the budding yeast through genetic
analysis of chromosome segregation. These proteins are known
to involve in both prokaryote and eukaryote chromosome
structure maintainance []. Thioredoxins (Trx) are proteins
which play essential role in the cellular redox reactions. These
are small and molecular weight is approximately 120 KD. Trx
are widely distributed in different forms in bacteria, fungi and
plants etc. Especially plants have different Trx proteins found in
chloroplast Trx f and Trx m, Trx h found in cytosol, ER and
mithochondria []. The findings of this study considerably
broaden the scope of understanding the function of miRNA in
R.sativus.

Conclusion
This paper, with a bioinformatics approach, 48 mature miRNAs
along with 16 target genes were identified in R.sativus. In silico
studies stand as initial point for understanding miRNAs role in
gene regulation. Thus, identification of miRNAs and their target
genes help in understanding function and regulatory
mechanisms in R.sativus.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Muvva et al, Bioinformation 8(2): 098-103 (2012)

Flowchart of R.sativus miRNA prediction

The distribution of new miRNAs in different miRNA
families

Mature and precursor sequences and the predicted stem-loop structures of newly identified miRNAs in R.sativus. The
mature miRNAs are underlined.

