Background
Tuberculosis (TB) still remains as a major public health
problem, despite of significant improvement and advancement
made in the field of diagnosis and therapeutics. INH
(isonicotinic acid Hydrazide) is the cornerstone of treatment for
drug-susceptible TB and it is also widely used to treat latent
Mtb infection. There has been considerable interest to know the
molecular basis of INH resistance, which is less well
characterized and mutations in several genes have been
associated with it. It is proposed that INH enters Mtb as a
prodrug by passive diffusion and is activated by catalaseperoxidase,
encoded by katG [], to generate free radicals, which
then attack multiple targets in the cells. Initial studies utilizing
whole cells of Mtb demonstrated that INH was principally
metabolized to several products, including 4-pyridylmethanol
and isonicotinic acid. The authors speculated that INH could be
oxidized in vivo to yield a number of highly reactive species,
including diazenyl, hydrazide, or acyl radicals, which could
then go on to oxidize or acylate groups in proteins. The
aldehyde, fed exogenously, is quickly reduced to the alcohol []
while in the in vitro system with Mn++ presence, the aldehyde
has been reported to undergo oxidation to the acid and in the
presence of Mn++, the addition of simple amines results in the
efficient formation of the corresponding amides []. One
metabolite in vitro from INH conversion in the presence of
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) (and Mn++) is the
covalent adduct of the acyl pyridine from INH and the
nicotinamide ring system []. It has been proposed to be
important in inhibiting one of the cellular targets associated
with mycolic acid synthesis, InhA []. Studies have shown that
an NADH-dependent enoyl acyl carrier protein (ACP)
reductase, encoded by inhA, and ketoacyl ACP synthase,
encoded by kasA, are two potential intracellular enzymatic
targets for activated INH; and both of these enzymes are
involved in the biosynthesis of mycolic acids 
[,
].

The recent microarray approach has generated new insights
into the action of INH and shows that INH induces several
genes, including kasA and B, fabD, efpA and accD6, which are
presumably involved in fatty acid oxidation 
[,
]. Of which,
accD6, plays an important role in mycolic acid synthesis. Mtb
contains six Acyl-CoA carboxylases (ACCase)
carboxyltransferase domains, accD1–6, whose specific roles in
the pathogen is not well defined but they are important for cell
envelope lipid biosynthesis and that its disruption leads to
pathogen death []. The Mtb genome contains three biotin
carboxylase subunits (AccA1 to -3) and six carboxyltransferase
subunits (AccD1 to -6), with accD6 located in a genetic locus that
contains members of the fatty acid synthase II (FAS II) complex.
accA3, accD4, accD5, and accD6 are expressed at high levels
during the exponential growth phases of Mtb in vitro. Micro
array analysis of Mtb transcripts indicated that the transcripts
for accA3, accD4, accD5, accD6, and accE were repressed during
later growth stages. The accD4 and accD5 have been previously
studied, and the function of accD6 designated as a member of
the FAS II locus, is a functional carboxyltransferase subunit of
the ACCase in Mtb [].

Previous studies using microarray technique have 
[–]
provided the information regarding the up regulation of AccD6
upon exposure to INH. The present study was aimed to
computationally analyze the binding ability of AccD6, via
modeling of AccD6 and docking with activated INH products
such as isonicotinic acid, isonicotinaldehyde, isonicotinamide
and isonicotinyl acyl radical (INADH). The study is first of its
kind to provide structural details of AccD6 as a target in
addition to InhA and its interaction with the activated INH.

Methodology
Homology modeling of AccD6
Modeling was performed using MODELLER 9v3 
[] by the
following steps: 1. Template Selection: The target protein AccD6
was submitted to protein based Basic Local Alignment Search
Tool BLASTp [] from National Center for Biotechnology
Information (NCBI) database and was searched against Protein
Data Bank (PDB). It showed a percentage identity of 43% with
the template protein AccD5 (PDB code-2A7S) that belongs to
same group of AccD6. 2. Target-template alignment: The targettemplate
alignment was done using the MODELLER command
line with the language python. 3. Model Building: The refined
sequence-structure alignment as obtained by MODELLER was
used to construct 3D models of the target with the help of the
known structures of the template. 4. Model Validation of the
models was done by Ramachandran plot [] Combinatorial
Extension (CE) [] and Discrete optimized protein energy
(DOPE) feature in Discovery Studio (DS) []. The model was
validated to eliminate the structural errors present in the
generated model and to improve its quality and stability.

Docking of activated INH with AccD6
Docking was performed using CDOCKER []. The ligand with
all H atoms was built using DS. The AccD6 model was energy
minimized with CHARMm force field before performing
docking. The ligands comprises of activated form of INH
including INADH, isonicotinic acid, isonicotinaldehyde,
isonicotinamide and acetyl-CoA. The CDOCKER protocol is an
implementation of the CDOCKER algorithm in the Discovery
Studio (DS) environment. It allows running a refinement
docking of any number of ligands with a single protein
receptor. CDOCKER is a grid-based molecular docking method
that employs CHARMm. The receptor is held rigid while the
ligands are allowed to flex during the refinement. Docking was
done using the default settings. The default speed selection was
used to avoid a potential reduction in docking accuracy. There
are two methods employed to define the site: a) Finding sites
from the receptor cavities (b) Defining the site as the volume of
a selected ligand.

Results and Discussion
Homology Modeling
In the present study, the structure of AccD6 (an important
enzyme for mycolic acid synthesis in Mtb) was modeled due to
the lack of crystal structure in the PDB. Modeling of AccD6
enables to understand its role in binding of activated INH
(INADH). We provided structural details of AccD6 and its
interaction with the activated INH. In the results of BLAST
search against PDB, 2A7S was identified as the template
protein, which had a sequence identity of 43% with AccD6 of
Mtb. The aligned target and the template sequences were in
PIR format. The template sequence was submitted to Pfam,
PROSITE databases. The pattern, profiles and the domains
obtained were compared with the target sequence. The target
sequence was found to contain carboxyl transferase domain,
which spans a region of 1­471, and in template the same domain
spans a region of 46-546 amino acids. Amino acid sequence of
the target was aligned to the template sequence based on the
secondary structure information for building an accurate model
by ClustalW. The model generated by the above method was
subjected to validation using the following softwares: I)
Ramachandran Plot using RAMPAGE server: The
Ramachandran plot for the modeled structure showed 92% of
the residues in the most favored region, 5.8% in the additional
allowed region, and 2.3% in the generally allowed region and
no residues in the unfavorable region. II) CE (Combinatorial
Extension) method: The model obtained was evaluated using
CE method. Structurally conserved regions (SCRs) for the target
sequence and the templates were determined by
superimposition of two structures through sequence alignment.
The root mean square deviation (RMSD) score was calculated
using the sequence identity and gaps in the alignment
displaying RMSD value of 1.0 Å and Z-score of 8.0. III) ERRAT:
The structure was submitted to structural analysis and
validation server (SAVS), the ERRAT score for the protein was
found to be 75.01%. d) DOPE score: Five models were
generated by the modeling option in the DS environment for
AccD6. Out of these; one of the models with highest dope score
of ­46172.78 was selected for docking.

The initial model was thus generated with the above procedure.
As AccD6 is a hexameric protein, modeling all the six chains in
a single MODELLER program was tedious so each chain was
sequentially modeled as described above. The atom files of all
the six chains (ABCDE and F) modeled sequentially was
compiled as a single file to obtain the hexameric structure of the
protein. The modeled AccD6 was found to contain 25 helices
and beta sheets and 51 turns in a single chain. The amino acids
at the ligand-binding site (i.e. active site) were analyzed to be
Met64, Ala67, Gly97, Gly98, Ala99, Arg100, Leu101, Leu108,
Gly137 and Gly138 which could be the key residues for its
catalytic function ().

Docking of AccD6 with activated INH
The model AccD6 was docked with acetyl-CoA and active
forms of INH viz; INADH, isonicotinic acid,
isonicotinaldehyde, isonicotinamide using CDOCKER. The
values suggest that the ligand INADH could be the correct
inhibitor for AccD6 compared to others. We therefore speculate
that the higher score (69.92kcal/mol) in case of INADH could
be better one on the basis of good-fit, wherein the AccD6
contains sufficient binding space (cleft) enabling the INADH
moiety to fit in perfectly. The other smaller molecules
(isonicotinic acid, isonicotinaldehyde, isonicotinamide) were
unable to produce higher score due to the spatial inconsistency.
Supportingly, the obtained score for INADH was similar to
acetyl-CoA (substrate) reinforcing the concept of good inhibitor
compared to others (, see supplementary material).
Since INADH has structural complexity similar to acetyl-CoA,
also that it produced similar score to that of acetyl-CoA
compared to others, which signifies the classical concept of
inhibitor design on the basis of substrate similarity 
().

The H bond profile at the ligand binding sites of AccD6 with
INADH and acetyl-CoA was illustrated in  and 

(see supplementary material). The H bond profile of AccD6 at
the ligand binding sites indicates residues such as Leu101,
Ala102, and Gly138 forms 3 H bonds with atoms of INADH
molecule whereas the profile for acetyl-CoA indicates 1 H bond
formation with residue Ala99. No H bond was found with the
other ligands such as isonicotinic acid, isonicotinaldehyde,
isonicotinamide. Thus, more number of H bonds in the INADH
molecule also indicates that it is a good inhibitor for the target
(AccD6). Hence the score and H bond profile suggests that
AccD6 has more binding affinity towards INADH, therefore
these observations correlates with earlier reports 
[,
] that the
gene accD6 is switched on during INH exposure.

INH has multiple effects on the tubercle bacillus, and its activity
resulting in cell death is still unclear. One of the first
consequences of INH action on Mtb to be noticed was the loss of
acid fastness, and this was shown to result from inhibition of
the synthesis of mycolic acids []. These long-chain,
unsaturated fatty acids, which contribute to the impermeability
of the cell envelope, are confined essentially to mycobacteria
and are thus a selective target for drugs. The best-known target
is the cell wall mycolic acid synthesis pathway 
[], where
atleast two enzymes, InhA and KasA have been identified as
targets for INH activation. However, in the present study,
AccD6 is identified as the target for INADH. It was speculated
that the active form of INH ranged from production of
nonspecifically toxic free radical species to the generation of a
range of reactive (both reactive oxygen and organic) radicals,
which then attack multiple targets in the tubercle bacillus 
[].
In relation to which, in the present study, the active species
such as isonicotinic acid, isonicotinaldehyde, isonicotinamide
and INADH were taken into account.

Conclusion
In conclusion, we have presented the model structure of AccD6
and predicted its binding ability with INADH, suggesting that
AccD6 could also be the target for INADH in addition to InhA.
There are still many avenues to be explored using AccD6 as a
new target for the structure-based development of novel antimycobacterial
drugs [] since it has been involved in cell wall
synthesis. This study adds new knowledge in the research area
of identification of additional targets for activated INH, and is
in agreement with the report [] which suggests that the
identification of additional targets for activated INH is an
important future endeavour.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are very grateful to Mr. R. Senthilnathan, Library
Department, for his technical help in the figure editing. A.
Nusrath Unissa received financial support from the Indian
Council of Medical Research as Senior Research Fellow.

Citation:Unissa et al, Bioinformation 7(3): 107-111 (2011)

Monomeric structure of AccD6 showing the active site
residues (green) in a) stick model and helices are labeled, b)
space filled model.

Structural similarity between a) Acetyl-CoA and b)
INADH

H bond display indicated in blue dotted lines of
AccD6 with a) acetyl-CoA; b) INADH; c) Isonicotinamide; d)
isonicotinaldehyde; e) Isonicotinic acid

