Background
Gastric cancer (GC) is a complex and heterogeneous disease that
results from multiple epigenetic and genetic steps. This type of
cancer involves a gain of function of oncogenes and a loss of
function of tumor suppressor genes []. In some genetic
disorders, several alterations are selected to provide
proliferative advantages to the carcinogenic cells.

Gastric cancer occurs when malignant cells are found in the
stomach tissue, although they can spread to adjacent tissue.
Each year, approximately one million people worldwide die
due to this disease, and the survival rate five years after
diagnosis is 9–10%. It is believed that preventive measures
(identification of risk markers) along with early diagnosis can be
crucial to reduce the death rate of this neoplasia.

The microRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs with a
length ranging from 17 to 25 nucleotides. They were conserved
throughout evolution and are capable of regulating gene
expression at the post-transcriptional level by either degrading
or repressing the translation of messenger RNA (mRNA)
markers []. miRNAs have been implicated in most major
cellular functions, such as proliferation, differentiation,
apoptosis, stress response, and transcriptional regulation 
[].

The recognition of miRNAs that are differentially expressed
between tumor tissues and healthy tissues may help to identify
miRNAs that are involved in human cancers and to further
establish the pathogenic role of miRNAs in cancers 
[]. miRNAs
modify gene expression by epigenetic mechanisms and affect
the mRNAs responsible for maintaining balance, such as those
corresponding to oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes 
[].

Since the first studies on the involvement of miRNAs in
carcinomas, changes in their expression have been described in
several types of tumors, including gastric cancer. Furthermore,
the differential expression of these molecules suggests that they
can be used to observe genetic profiles of gastric cancer 
[].
Therefore, the anomalous miRNA expression in tumors is
important in the mechanism of carcinogenesis. Consequently,
the tumor development, the type of tissues affected, and their
staging directly influence the risk markers, diagnosis, and
therapeutics.

An artificial neural network (ANN) is a computational
technique inspired by the neuronal structure of intelligent
organisms. ANNs are able to acquire knowledge through
experience, usually by comparing the input data stimuli with
the corresponding output pattern; that is, applying an iterative
training over the available data until the patterns are learned.
The self-organizing maps (SOM) is a specific class of ANN, that
is able to identify the existing similarity patterns in the data
without the need of an output variable to be used as reference
for comparison. In the SOM, the neurons are connected in a grid
topology (map), in which, during the training, clusters are
formed by grouping samples with common characteristics.

In this paper, an ANN was created by unsupervised learning
with self-organizing maps algorithm (SOM) to identify the
expression profile of miRNAs, given the type of differential
expression (under or over expression) observed in healthy
subjects regarding GC.

Methodology
The methodology was divided in three parts: pre-processing of
the data, processing of the data and the analysis of the
generated clusters.

In the pre-processing, the archives were obtained from the next
generation sequencing (NGS) SOLiD platform (Life
Technologies, CA, US) as described by Ribeiro-dos-Santos 
[]. A
total of ten tissue samples, or barcodes, were sequenced:
Healthy Tissue Cardia [], Healthy Tissue Antrum 
[], and eight
GC samples (Tumor Tissue and Adjacent Tissue) extracted from
four patients at the Hospital Universitário João de Barros
Barreto, Belém, Pará - Brazil. The classification of each sample
follows the Tumor-Node-Metastasis (TNM) pattern for GC, as
shown in  (see supplementary material). After
sequencing, the generated archives were processed on quality
filter software so that the low quality reads (reads that were
randomly sequenced) could be removed from the data. A
second filter was then applied to remove the last 10 nucleotides
of the read sequence, which had 35 nucleotides. Finally, all 514
miRNAs had a length of 25 nucleotides (mature miRNA).

In data processing, the relative quantification of miRNA
profiling was performed, and the ANN was developed. The
data from pre-processing were normalized to a value of 3,000
reads. After normalizing the data, the miRNAs that had an
initial expression level greater than 10 miRNA per tissue were
selected. During the differential expression analysis, only the
tissues that exhibited significant differences (p-value &lt; 0.01 and
fold change &gt; 5) were considered. From the total of 514
miRNAs, only 76 miRNAs were of interest for the ANN
processing.  (see supplementary material) shows the 76
miRNAs used in the ANN.

The network was arranged as follows: a 76 x 10 input matrix,
representing the 76 miRNAs (from pre-processing) over 10
samples, represented on a rectangular topology. The matrix׳s
values consist of the number of reads observed for each of the
76 miRNAs found in each sample, as shown in . The
initial weights were randomly determined so that no bias
occurred at the time of allocation of the weights for each input.
During the training process, the Euclidean distance function
Equation 1 (see  for equation and
explanation) was used to differentiate the cluster (neuron grid)
for assigning each data sample. The weight update for
iteratively improve the cluster distinction is given by Equation 2
(see  for equation and explanation).

The third and last part consists of the analysis of the generated
clusters. These clusters formed at the end of running the
network represent Healthy Gastric Tissue and Gastric Cancer.
Several simulations were performed with the SOM type of
ANN, and training took 2,000 iterations. In the following
simulations, the number of iterations was changed to 10,000.

Results
The result reduced the input data that had two dimensions
(quantity of miRNA and input weights) to a single dimension
corresponding to the type of tissue (Healthy Gastric Tissue or
Gastric Cancer) with no loss of information.

Of the ANNs generated, two of them (network 1 and 2) showed
more significant results according to the study's goal, and the
second network had the best result. The first network, Network
1, grouped the samples in two clusters: Healthy Gastric Tissue
and Gastric Cancer, where samples 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, and 10 where
clustered as Healthy and samples 4, 6, and 9 were clustered as
GC. By comparing the results with the samples organization as
shown in () was observed in sample 7 (extracted from a
Diffused Tumor Tiseu at stage T4) was classified incorrectly by
the network.

The second network, identified as Network 2, was generated by
increasing the filter on the miRNAs used as input. For this
network, only the miRNAs that showed specificity or
differential expression in the different types of tissues (Healthy
Gastric Tissue and GC Tissue) were selected [,
]. The findings
showed the molecular signature of nine miRNAs, as follows:
hsa-miR-21, hsa-miR-29a, hsa-miR-29c, hsa-miR-148a, hsa-miR-141,
hsa-let-7b, hsa-miR-31, hsa-miR-451, and hsa-miR-192. The
findings from this network indicated a clustering (grouping) of
samples 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, and 10, representing the healthy group, and
samples 4, 6, 7, and 9, representing GC.  corroborates
the data listed in ().

Discussion
The differential expression of the candidate miRNAs has been
shown to be an excellent tool for understanding the role of
miRNAs in cancer pathogenesis. Many papers report expression
patterns of these molecules in both tumor tissues and healthy
tissues in prostate, lung, ovarian, colon, brain, and liver cancers
[,
,
,
,
], which clearly indicates the aberrant expression
of miRNAs in cancer. These results support the hypothesis that
miRNAs play important roles in all cancers []. The present
work demonstrated that with a SOM ANN, it was possible to
reproduce the expression patterns (or signatures) in different
types of tissue samples – Healthy and GC. Similar results were
reported in several papers that used artificial neural networks to
classify different types of cancer using different input data,
namely pathology imaging, computed tomography (CT),
magnetic resonance, gene selection, and gene expression, for
segmenting sputum color images and analyzing miRNA
expression [,
,
,
].

A recent study demonstrated that more than 50% of miRNA
were located in cancer-associated genomic regions or in fragile
sites [], suggesting that miRNAs may play a more important
role in the pathogenesis of a limited range of human cancers
than previously thought [].

The hsa-miR-29 family of microRNAs (miRNAs) was recently
reported to be aberrantly expressed in multiple cancers.
Increasing evidence shows that the abnormal expression of the
miR-29 family is associated with tumorigenesis and cancer
progression []. In the present study, hsa-miR-29c was found
to be over-expressed in Healthy Tissues and under expressed in
samples with GC, which corroborates the results obtained by [6
and 7].

Another important miRNA described in the literature was hsamiR-
21. This miRNA was over-expressed in most tumor types,
and it acts as an oncogene by targeting many tumor suppressor
genes related to proliferation, apoptosis, and invasion.
Therefore, hsa-miR-21 was associated with a wide variety of
cancers including those of breast, ovaries, cervix, colon, lung,
liver, brain, prostate, pancreas, and thyroid [,
,
,
,
]. The
over expression of hsa-miR-21 has been reported in many
malignancies, all of which contain constitutively activated
STAT3, or even rely on STAT3 for cell survival or growth.

Therefore, aberrantly expressed may result in many
malignancies by blocking the expression of critical apoptosisrelated
genes []. In vivo and 
in vitro studies suggest that hsamiR-
21 may serve as a diagnostic and prognostic marker for
human malignancies []. The findings described above
strengthen the results obtained in the study that showed that
hsa-miR-21 was over-expressed in the GC samples.

Members of the microRNA-148 (hsa-miR-148) family, which
include microRNA-148a (hsa-miR-148a) and microRNA-148b
(hsa-miR-148b), were expressed differently in Tumor and
Healthy Tissues and have been involved in the genesis and
development of disease []. Studies have reported the downregulation
of the expression of hsa-miR-148a in various types of
cancer such as colorectal [], pancreatic, and hepatocellular
carcinoma as well as during cancer metastasis. hsa-miR-148a was
identified as a tumor metastasis suppressor in GC []. hsa-miR-
148a was suppressed by more than 4-fold in GC Tissues
compared with the corresponding Adjacent Tissues, and the
down-regulation of hsa-miR-148a was significantly associated
with the TNM stage and lymph node metastasis []. The overexpression
of hsa-miR-148a suppressed GC cell migration in
vitro, suppressed lung metastasis formation in vivo, and
reduced the mRNA and protein levels. Thus hsa-miR-148a
functions as a tumor metastasis suppressor in gastric cancer,
and the down-regulation contributes to gastric cancer lymph
node metastasis and progression. It may have therapeutic
potential to suppress gastric cancer metastasis [], and also
found to be under-expressed in the heathy samples of gastric
tissue. The other miRNAs that participated in the molecular
signature (hsa-mir-141, hsa-let-7b, hsa-mir-31, hsa-mir-451, and
hsa-mir-192) in the present study were also associated with
different types of cancer [,
].

Several papers reinforce the importance of applying computer
intelligence techniques, such as ANNs, for medical diagnosis,
breast cancer diagnosis, diagnosing cancer, classifying cancer
cells classifying and analyzing brain cancer and predicting
distant metastasis [,
,
,
]. In addition, ANNs were already
used to analise miRNA data for signature analysis in colorectal
cancer [], breast cancer analysis, and gastric cancer 
[]. There
are also papers reporting the use of ANNs to identify miRNA
expression patterns in different stages of GC []. The main
innovation of this study consisted of the methodology used to
develop a SOM ANN that processes the differential expression
of miRNAs to classify (cluster) Tissues with or without GC.

Conclusion
In the present study, a SOM neural network was created to
identify a differential expression profile of nine specific
miRNAs (molecular signature): hsa-mir-21, hsa-mir-29a, hsamir-
29c, hsa-mir-148a, hsa-mir-141, hsa-let-7b, hsa-mir-31, hsamir-
451 and hsa-mir-192. The ANN clustered the samples of
different gastric tissues into two distinct groups: Healthy
Gastric Tissue and Gastric Cancer Tissue. Therefore, this ANN
can be used as an important tool for gastric cancer risk factor or
risk marked analysis.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work was part of the Rede de Pesquisa em Genômica
Populacional Humana (supported by CAPES/Biologia
Computacional) and Rede Paraense de Genômica e Proteômica
(supported by FAPESPA). Financial support; Conselho Nacional
de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico – CNPq;
Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior
– CAPES; Governo do Pará /SEDECT /FAPESPA, PROPESP
/UFPA-FADESP. LARISSA LUZ GOMES supported by IESAM;
FABIANO CORDEIRO MOREIRA supported by CESUPA;
IGOR G. HAMOY is supported by Pós-Doc Junior (PDJ)
fellowship from CNPq/Brazil (162605/2011- 0); SIDNEY
SANTOS supported by CNPq/Produtividade; ÂNDREA
RIBEIRO-DOS-SANTOS supported by CNPq/Produtividade.
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and
analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

Citation:Gomes et al, Bioinformation 10(5): 246-250 (2014)

Results clustering of miRNAs. Iindicated a clustering
(grouping) of samples 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, and 10, representing the
healthy group, and samples 4, 6, 7, and 9, representing GC.

