Background:
Serine proteases are among the most abundant enzymes in 
nature and are involved in a wide range of biological processes, 
including digestion, blood clotting, embryo development, 
signal transduction and the immune response  []. This diverse 
class of enzymes is characterized by the presence of three 
critical amino acids in the catalytic site – serine (Ser), histidine 
(His) and aspartate (Asp), which is referred to as the catalytic 
triad. The presence of this catalytic triad in at least three 
structurally unrelated contexts indicates that it has evolved 
independently at least three times  []. The MEROPS database 
(
http://merops.sanger.ac.uk/) is an exceptional resource for 
information on proteases that employs a useful classification 
system  []. Under this system, families of proteases are 
classified according to statistically significant similarities in the 
amino acid sequence. These protease families are further 
grouped into clans that have dissimilar amino acid sequences, 
but typically have structural homology and/or the same linear 
order of catalytic triad residues. The subtilisin-like (SB) clan of 
serine proteases is comprised  of two distinct families, S8 
(subtilases) and S53 (sedolisins). The catalytic residues are in 
the order Asp, His, Ser in the S8 family, but the S53 family 
contains a catalytic tetrad in the order Glu, Asp and Ser. Only 
the Ser in both families and the His in family S8 and the Glu in 
family S53 are in equivalent positions. The Ser in both families 
is found within a Gly-Thr-Ser-Xaa-Xaa-Xbb-Pro motif (where 
Xaa is an aliphatic amino acid and Xbb is a small amino acid) 
[]. 
This study focuses solely on the S8 family, which contains 
the bacterial serine endopeptidase subtilisin and homologs such 
as proteinase K, kexin and furin. In addition to the distinct 
catalytic triad, the protease structure typically comprises three 
layers of seven-stranded  β sheets between two layers of  α
helices. As is the case with all classical serine proteases, the 
catalytic mechanism involves nucleophilic attack by the Ser 
hydroxyl group on the carbonyl atom of the subtrate, which is 
catalyzed by the His imidazole group as a general base 
(supported by a hydrogen bond to the Asp). The resulting 
tetrahedral intermediate is stabilized by an oxyanion hole. The 
His imidazole group transfers the proton to the amine leaving 
group and the tetrahedral intermediate breaks down to an 
acylenzyme intermediate. In a second addition-elimination 
reaction, the acylenzyme is attacked by a water molecule to 
form a second tetrahedral intermediate. With the protonation of 
the Ser by the His imidazole group, this intermediate breaks 
down and the C-terminus of the substrate is released. Most S8 
family members are non-specific endopeptidases that 
preferentially cleave after hydrophobic residues, with some 
exceptions such as kexin and furin that cleave after dibasic 
amino acids [].  
S8  family  serine  proteases  have  a  wide  variety 
of biological functions, but they are particularly involved in 
nutrition and protein processing. Most notably, studies have 
shown that they are implicated in various diseases and are 
therefore a potential target for pharmacological intervention. 
For example, mutations in human proprotein convertase 
subtilisin-like kexin type 9 (PCSK9) have been associated with 
hypercholesterolemia  [] and other potential targets include 
virulence factors such as the  Streptococcus pyogenes C5a 
peptidase  []. The S8 family serine proteases have also been 
very popular candidates for protein engineering and directed 
evolution, which have yielded commercially successful results 
[]. A structural analysis of these proteases, particularly the 
active site geometry, is of interest for many applications such as
the above. Indeed, much of the information we have on this 
abundant class of enzymes has been deduced from 
experimental three dimensional (3D) structure analysis  [], but 
for many family members there is no structural data available. 
In such cases, in silico molecular modeling is a powerful tool to 
predict the 3D structure of a protein based on the amino acid 
sequence. The LOOPP homology modelling server 
(
http://loopp.org/) is used to computationally build atomically 
detailed models using a set of candidates as structural 
templates and then it ranks the best models  []. In the present 
study, we investigate the structural properties of different S8 
family serine proteases using contemporary molecular 
modeling techniques. Here we present predicted structures 
from the extremophilic archaeon  Pyrococcus furiosus, the 
malarial protozoan parasite  Plasmodium falciparum, and Asian 
rice (Oryza sativa). By encompassing a wide range of taxa, our 
structural analysis provides an evolutionary perspective on this 
protease family. The potential for structure-based rational drug 
design and protein engineering, and future molecular modeling 
strategies is also discussed.

Methodology:
Experimental structure data of SB serine proteases (S8 family) 
for 9 bacteria, 2 fungi, and 1 animal  (, see 
supplementary material) were obtained from the Protein Data 
Bank (PDB, 
http://www.rcsb.org/pdb). Our in-house 
modeling software MODELYN  []  was  used  to  analyze 
structural parameters, including the distance between Cα atoms 
of the catalytic triad. In addition to the experimental structures, 
amino acid sequences of S8  family SB serine proteases  
(, 
see supplementary material) for 1 archaeon (Pyrococcus 
furiosus), 1 protozoan (Plasmodium falciparum), and 1 plant 
(Oryza sativa) were obtained from the MEROPS protease 
database (
http://merops.sanger.ac.uk) 
in FASTA format  []. 
Upon unsuccessful homology-based structure prediction using 
SWISS-MODEL (due to less than 30% sequence similarity with 
known experimental structures), these sequences were 
submitted to the LOOPP server  [] for threading based 
structure prediction. This analysis reported a ranked list of 10 
possible structure predictions  (, see 
Supplementary material) for each of the protease sequences, 
including match scores, sequence identity (%) and the extent of 
sequence coverage (%). Predicted structures were superposed 
with respect to a selected set of Cα atoms and a suitable starting 
scaffold was determined. Root mean square deviation (RMSD) 
values helped to identify the common segments, corresponding 
to the structurally conserved regions. For further refinement of 
the model, PROCHECK was used to check the distribution of φ-
ψ dihedral angles and eliminate Ramachandran outliers. After 
side chain regeneration using SCRWL  
[], the general 
structural parameters of the refined model, such as deviations 
of bond lengths, bond angles from standard values, overall 
atom clashscores and rotamer outliers were validated against 
experimental structure data using MOLPROBITY  
[] and 
MODELYN. The ribbon structure and electrostatic potential 
surface of the structures were determined by MOLMOL 
[]. To 
determine sequence conservation between species, CLUSTALW 
[] 
was used for multiple sequence alignment and PEPSTATS 
[] 
was used to analyze amino acid composition.

Results and Discussion:
For the P. furiosus, P. falciparum and O. sativa proteases 
(, see supplementary material), the threading 
based server LOOPP predicted 10 structures for each sequence 
from 10 different PDB experimental structures (for  O. sativa, 
only the first 5 probable structures were considered). The best 
matched structures for each showed high confidence scores
ranging from 4.7 to 9.0 and sequence identity ranging from 20 
to 30%, with best length coverage between 61 and 93%. For P. 
furiosus, the matched structures were superposed with respect 
to a selected set of Cα atoms (36%), with the structure 1EA7 
having  the best  score of 4.73 (RMSD values were between 0.332 
and 0.746 Å, which helped to identify common segments 
corresponding to structurally conserved regions). From these 
superposed structures, the variable loop regions were identified 
on the starting scaffold derived from 1EA7. For  P. falciparum, 
structures were superposed with respect to selected Cα atoms 
(41%) with the structure 1MEE having the highest score of 3.07 
(RMSD values between 0.298 and 0.642 Å). For  O. sativa were 
superposed with respect to selected Cα atoms (34%), with the 
structure 1XF1 having the best score of 6.3 (RMSD values were 
between 0.431 and 0.612 Å). After this regularization, the 
overall backbone conformations of the predicted structures 
were measured to identify and eliminate Ramachandran 
outliers  ( and 
, see supplementary material). 
The general structural parameters of experimental and 
predicted structures were comparable  (, see 
supplementary material), which validated the threading based 
modeling. Superposition of selected SB proteases on the 
representative X-ray structure (1MEE) of the  Bacillus pumilus
protease found that 22 to 44% of the Cα atoms superposed with 
a RMSD below 1Å (, see supplementary material). The 
superposed structures showed highly conserved core structures 
with large variation in loops outside the core (data not shown). 
The mean Asp, His, Ser Cα atom distances in the 
experimentally determined structures were 7.4 ± 0.06, 8.7 ± 0.04 
and 10.0 ± 0.03 Å respectively. The small standard deviations 
indicated that the structural environment around the catalytic 
triad was highly conserved. The mean values of the predicted 
structures were 7.3 ± 0.09, 9.0 ± 0.30 and 10.3 ± 0.19 Å 
respectively, which was in good agreement with the values 
above. Multiple sequence alignment  () confirmed 
sequence conservation of the catalytic triad residues at Asp32, 
His64, and Ser221. In addition to the previously described 
GlyThr-Ser-Xaa-Xaa-Xbb-Pro motif (where Xaa is an aliphatic 
amino acid and Xbb is a small amino acid) at Ser221  
[], our 
analysis indicated a Xaa-Xaa-Asp-Xcc-Gly-Xaa motif (where Xcc 
is a small polar amino acid) at the Asp32 and a His-Gly-ThrXdd-Xcc motif  
(where Xdd  is  either His or Arg) at His64. Other 
highly conserved residues contribute to important structural 
features, such as the Asn155 (not shown) involved in forming 
the oxyanion hole. The protease model from P. furiosus had 6 α-
helical segments and 7 short β-sheets. The surface electrostatic 
potentials around the catalytic site were mostly negative with a 
patch of positive potential above the catalytic Ser residue 
(). In comparison with other species, the  P. furiosus
protease had a higher proportion of aromatic residues (12.5%) 
and less smaller amino acids (59.3%). These distinctive features 
may be associated with increased stabilization and 
hyperthermophilic adaptation  [,
], which could be utilized 
for protein engineering strategies. The protease model from P. 
falciparum had 9 α-helical segments and 6 β-sheets. The pattern 
of surface electrostatic potential was very different from others 
analyzed, with the surface containing mostly neutral regions 
around the catalytic site  (). This malarial protease
potentially mediates one or more of the serine protease 
activities associated with parasite erythrocyte invasion 
[] and 
therefore the unique neutral regions around the catalytic site 
could be utilized in rational anti-malarial drug design. The
Oryza sativa SB protease model had 6 α-helical segments and 7 
β-sheets. The electrostatic potentials around the catalytic triad 
residues were mostly negative with a positive region near the 
His of the catalytic triad (). This protease is expressed in 
the seed and seedling shoots of the rice plant  [] and could 
potentially have a role in signal transduction or a role in fungal 
resistance like its tobacco ortholog  []. This protease is a 
potential candidate for protein engineering strategies to 
improve rice crops.

The following predicted structures are available in the Protein 
Model Database (PMDB) (
http://mi.caspur.it/PMDB/):
1. SB serine protease from  Pyrococcus furiosus (PMDB ID: 
PM0075943) 2. SB serine protease from  Plasmodium falciparum
(PMDB ID: PM0075941) 3.SB serine protease from Oryza sativa
(PMDB ID: PM0075942)

Conclusion:
The structural geometry of the catalytic core was highly 
conserved across the diverse range of taxa analyzed and this 
was reflected in the sequence conservation motifs flanking the 
catalytic triad residues. Evolutionary divergence was exhibited 
by large variation in secondary structure features outside the 
core, differences in overall amino acid distribution, and unique 
surface electrostatic potential patterns between species. These 
features are probably associated with environmental 
adaptation, subcellular localisation, and functional diversity of 
the different protease orthologs. Indeed, the higher proportion 
of aromatic residues in the extremophilic archaeon  P. furiosus
protease potentially provides stabilization  [] and the 
negatively charged residues around the catalytic site could also 
confer stabilization []. The mostly neutral surface electrostatic 
potential pattern around the catalytic site of the  P. falciparum
protease was very different from others analyzed. Significantly, 
as this protease is potentially associated with malarial 
erythrocyte invasion [], the unique neutral regions around the 
catalytic site could be utilized in rational anti-malarial drug 
design []. 

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors A.L. and C.M. are grateful for the funding and 
infrastructural support provided by the Indian Institute of 
Chemical Biology, Kolkata, West Bengal, India. Authors E.J.R. 
and A.C. acknowledge the support given by the Department of 
Pathology, University of Otago, Dunedin, the Health Research 
Council (E.J.R.), and the National Research Centre for Growth 
and Development (A.C.), New Zealand.

Citation:Laskar et al, Bioinformation 7(5): 239-245 (2011)

Representative Ramachandran plot of  φ-ψ dihedral 
angles of a modeled SB serine protease structure before and 
after backbone refinement. PROCHECK was used to check the 
distribution of  φ-ψ dihedral angles and eliminate 
Ramachandran outliers in each modeled protease structure (A, 
before; B, after refinement). Residues whose  φ-ψ pairs fell 
outside the most favourable (red) and additional allowed 
(yellow) zones are annotated in red. Representative 
Ramachandran plots from the  P. falciparum modeling are 
shown.

Multiple amino acid sequence alignment of SB serine 
proteases. CLUSTALW was used to align amino acid sequences 
of SB serine proteases with experimentally determined and 
predicted 3D structures (highlighted in yellow). Only the 
regions showing the conserved catalytic residues Asp (D), His 
(H), and Ser (S) are shown. Amino acid residues with 100% 
conservation (*) between aligned sequences are either 
highlighted in blue (catalytic residues) or red (other). Other 
residues showing high (:) conservation (highlighted in gray) or 
medium (.) conservation are also indicated.

Modeled SB protease structure from Pyrococcus 
furiosus (PMDB ID: PM0075943).  A) Ribbon model showing 
beta-sheets are shown in (light blue) and with arrow directed to 
C-terminus, alpha-helices (red and yellow), turn/loops (gray), 
and catalytic triad residue side chains (green sticks). B) Surface 
electrostatic potential model showing negative (red), positive 
(blue), and neutral (white) charges.

Modeled SB protease structure from Plasmodium 
falciparum (PMDB ID: PM0075941). A) Ribbon model showing 
beta-sheets are shown in (light blue) and with arrow directed to 
C-terminus, alpha-helices (red  and yellow), turn/loops (gray), 
and catalytic triad residue side chains (green sticks). B) Surface 
electrostatic potential model showing negative (red), positive 
(blue), and neutral (white) charges.

Modeled SB protease structure from Oryza sativa 
(PMDB ID: PM0075942). A) Ribbon model showing beta-sheets 
are  shown  in  (light  blue)  and  with  arrow  directed  
to  Cterminus, alpha-helices (red and yellow), turn/loops (gray), 
and catalytic triad residue side chains (green sticks). B) Surface 
electrostatic potential model showing negative (red), positive 
(blue), and neutral (white) charges.

