Background
Microsatellites also known as simple sequence repeats (SSRs) or
simple sequence length polymorphisms (SSLPs) are small
arrays of tandem repeats of one to six nucleotides that are
interspersed throughout the genome 
[]. They are ubiquitous
and highly abundant in prokaryotes and eukaryotes, present
even in the smallest bacterial genomes. Microsatellites can be
found anywhere in the genome, both in coding and non-coding
regions, may arise through an error in the process responsible
for copying of the genome during cell division and are
unavoidable products of genome replication 
[]. Microsatellites
can be classified as perfect, imperfect and compound repeats.
SSRs were initially considered to be evolutionary neutral but
now they are known to play an important role in genome
evolution and hot spot of recombination due to their high
mutability []. 
They are thought to be involved in gene
expression, regulation and function as transcriptional activating
elements. SSRs are inherently unstable and are inherited in a
mendelian manner and so they can be used for checking genetic
relationships []. 
SSRs are highly variable that is number of
repeat units in the array is different in different members of a
species []. 
SSRs act as powerful genetic markers as they are
locus-specific, co-dominant, PCR-based and highly
polymorphic []. 
Microsatellites are highly applied in the field
of forensics for DNA fingerprinting, paternity studies,
diagnosis and identification of disease and population studies
[,
,
,
].

The growing numbers of completed genome sequences in
eukaryotic organisms from fungi to humans have greatly
assisted understanding of SSRs at the genome- wide level. One
obvious observation from such studies have been that the
distribution of SSRs in the genome is not random in several
respects; differential distribution in terms of abundance of SSRs
in between intronic and intergenic regions 5' and 3' UTRs, and
different chromosomes; and different species have different
frequencies of SSR types and repeat units 
[].

Most of the previous studies on microsatellites distribution are
based on sequence databases in which coding or gene-rich
regions are overrepresented and are generally nuclear- genome
based [] 
but in current sequenced genome revolution, the
complete organellar genomes permit the determination of
frequencies of SSRs at the whole genome level. A significant
feature of organellar genomes is that they are uniparentally
inherited and not perturbed by recombination 
[] thus the
observed variation may be relevant to understand their
maternal mode of transmission. In present study, chloroplast
and mitochondrial genomes of organisms belonging to
Chlorophyta are analysed for SSRs identification and
characterization to detect the degree of polymorphism in them.

Methodology
Organelle genome sequence source:
The mitochondrial and chloroplast genome sequence data,
belonging to Chlorophyta, were retrieved from NCBI’s Genome
data bank www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov. The plant species used in
study are listed in  (see supplementary material)
(chloroplast) and  (see supplementary material)
(mitochondria) with their accession numbers. Selection of
organisms was based on the availability of completely
sequenced chloroplast or mitochondrial genomes.

Identification of SSRs:
SSRs were identified using Perl script MISA 
http://pgrc.ipkgatersleben.
de/misa/misa.html, which detects perfect SSRs
only. The frequency of SSRs according to size and type of
constituting SSRs were determined. MISA considered
identifying motifs of one to six nucleotides in size. The
minimum repeat unit was defined as ten for mononucleotides,
six for dinucleotide and five for all the higher order motifs
including tri-, tetra-, penta-, and hexanucleotides. MISA also
detects compound microsatellites. The maximal number of
interrupting base pairs in a compound microsatellite was set to
100. The occurrence of repeats in genic and intergenic regions
and functional categorization of sequences having
microsatellites was identified based on the sequence annotation
information available in GenBank database.

Discussion
The results obtained from both organelles had not shown any
relation between them, they were different in terms of
frequency and type of microsatellite present. Chloroplast and
mitochondrial genomes sequences are different from nuclear
genome in terms of frequency and SSR patterns present in
them.

Frequency of SSRs in chloroplast and mitochondrial genomes:
The number of SSRs was varying in different organelle
genomes of Chlorophyta. The frequency of SSRs is highest in
members of family Trebouxiophyceae and Chlorophyceae in
chloroplast genomes and, in Chlorophyceae and
Pendinophyceae in case of mitochondrial genomes. In
comparison to chloroplast genomes the frequencies of SSRs in
mitochondrial genomes were much lower. The chloroplast
genomes also contain compound microsatellites in larger
number as compared to mitochondrial genomes. The
chloroplast genomes of members of Trebouxiophyceae and
Chlorophyceae had represented the major compound SSRs
containing genomes; in other family members either the
number of compound SSR was much less or zero. In
mitochondrial genomes no such family based characteristics
were observed. The numbers of compound SSRs was
consistently low in mitochondrial genomes. In chloroplast
genome sequence of Ostreococcus tauri, Nephroselmis olivacea and
mitochondrial genome sequence of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii,
no SSRs were detected. In common algal species existing in both
chloroplast and mitochondrial datasets, there was no
relationship between the frequencies of simple and compound
SSRs. Frequencies of SSRs were less in the Chlorophyta
organelle genomes in comparison with organelle genomes of
members of Streptophyta [,
].

Distribution of SSRs in genic and intergenic regions:
In both chloroplast and mitochondrial genomes the major
proportion of SSRs were detected in intergenic regions as
compared to genic and intragenic regions 
( &amp; 
). In
chloroplast genome sequences maximum microsatellites in
coding regions were represented by Chlorella vulgaris 1.48% of
gross genic region. In other chloroplast genome sequences the
microsatellite content in genic regions ranged from 0.01% to
0.57% of total coding content of genomes. In mitochondrial
genomes the number of SSRs in genic regions was less which
ranged from 0.02% to 0.68% and in almost 50% of available
sequenced mitochondrial genomes no microsatellites in genic
regions were observed. Interestingly the overall content of
microsatellites in genic region of mitochondrial genomes was
more than the chloroplast genomes, despite the fact that the
former has overall less SSR content.

The number of SSRs detected in intergenic regions of
chloroplast and mitochondrial genomes is higher than SSRs in
genic regions, which represented a similar pattern with SSR
distribution in organelle genomes of Streptophytes 
[,
]. The
differences in frequency of microsatellites in genic and
intergenic regions suggest that the polymorphism associated
with coding regions is lower than non-coding region. The
density of microsatellites in mitochondrial genomes of
Streptophyta ranged from 1 SSR/2.06 to SSR/75.27 kb 
[]
whereas in Chlorophyta this density ranged from 1 SSR/1.25 to
1 SSR/56.76 kb  
(see supplementary material)
Polymorphisms associated with a specific locus are due to the
variation in length of the microsatellite, which in turn depends
on the number of repetitions of the basic motif 
[]. The lower
substitution rate of chloroplast DNA compared to the nuclear
genome has been documented [
] and the mutational
processes at simple repeat loci in the chloroplast genome also
occur less frequently than those in the nuclear genome 
[]. The
microsatellite patterns observed on various loci in chloroplast
and mitochondrial genomes of Chlorophyta differed from each
other making it impossible to measure associated relatedness
and polymorphism present within alleles.

SSR Patterns:
Most prominent repeat patterns observed in organelle genomes
of members of Chlorophyta were mono-nucleotide repeats,
poly A/T. The length distribution of SSRs indicated that the
frequency of repeats decreases with repeat length 
( &amp; 
).

Mono-Di-Trinucleotide and other repeats:
In both chloroplast and mitochondrial genomes the most
prominent pattern of poly A/T repeats observed was A/T10 and
others were A/T11-20, in 
chloroplast genomes and A/T11-14, in
mitochondrial genomes. Poly C/G was either absent in most
chloroplast and mitochondrial genomes sequences or in very
less frequency in few genomes. Dinucleotide repeat patterns
were less frequent as compared to mononucleotide repeats in
both organelle genome sequences. In both genome sequences
the maximum dinucleotide repeats observed was poly AT/TA
and most frequent was AT/TA6. In chloroplast genomes other
observations were AT/TA7-12 while in mitochondria, they were
AT/TA8, AT/TA11-13. 
Another rare pattern, AC/GT6, was also
detected in mitochondrial genome of Ostreococcus tauri. The
major di-nucleotide repeat pattern observed in Chlorophyta
organellar genomes had shown the similarity with organelle
and nuclear genomes of higher taxa [,
,
]; but in nuclear
genome of Chlamydomonas it is AC/GT 
[].

Trinucleotide repeats of AAT/TTA5 type were observed in
chloroplast genomes in family members of Chlorophyceae and
mitochondrial genomes of Dunaliella salina. In very minute
amounts other repeat pattern tetra-, penta-, hexa- were also
observed in chloroplast genomes of Chlorophycean members
but mitochondrial genomes were devoid of more than trinucleotide
repeats, except a single panta-nucleotide repeat
observed in Scenedesmus obliquus.

Organelle genomes of streptophytes also revealed a similar
pattern representing abundance of mononucleotide A/T in both
the organellar genomes in comparison to C/G repeats 
[,
,
] 
whereas SSRs in nuclear ESTs of other plant species and
some cereal species tri-nucleotide repeats were the most
abundant class followed by di-nucleotide repeats 
[,
].

Functional categorization of genes having microsatellites:
In all chloroplast genomes, maximum numbers of SSRs were
detected in the genes encoding for beta subunit of RNA
polymerase, followed by genes encoding for cell division
proteins, photosystem II proteins, hypothetical proteins,
photosystem I proteins, group II intron, endonuclease, DNA
polymerase and transport proteins. In mitochondrial genomes,
maximum number of genes containing SSRs encode for NADH
dehydrogenase followed by genes encoding for ribosomal
proteins, ATP synthase genes, hypothetical, cox2 and
transporter proteins. Among the chloroplast and mitochondrial
genomes of major cereals maximum number of SSRs was found
in rpo and ndh gene clusters 
[-.

Conclusion
To studying the distribution pattern of SSRs in organellar
genomes of green algae, the mitochondrial and chloroplast
genomes of Chlorophyta have been analysed and it is
concluded that distribution pattern varies significantly in
mitochondrial and chloroplast genomes. The distribution of SSR
pattern diversed with the genomic regions, characterized by
species and organelle examined. The number of SSRs in
chloroplast genomes is higher in comparison to mitochondrial
genomes and maximum numbers of SSRs are found in
intergenic regions than genic regions in both chloroplast and
mitochondrial genomes. Mononucleotides are found to be the
most abundant repeat type in both organelles and the repeat
motifs are not evenly distributed. The overall representation of
SSRs in mitochondrial and chloroplast genomes of Chlorophyta
demonstrated that distribution pattern of SSRs in organellar
genomes is not uniform and two organelles showed different
patterns and arrangement of microsatellites. The study is
important in term of revealing the simple repeat patterns in
organellar genomes of lower plant species and to measure their
abundance and polymorphism. This can be used to suggest the
evolution of chloroplast and mitochondrial genomes
independent of nuclear genomes. Significant differences in SSR
patterns among members of same family also suggest that
organellar genomes can be affected by evolutionary factors with
different rate and randomness in contrast to nuclear genomes.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors acknowledge access to the Dept. of Biotechnology,
Govt. of India, Centre for Bioinformatics facility at Department
of Biosciences and Biotechnology, Banasthali University, India,
through out during this research work.

Citation:Kuntal et al, Bioinformation 8(6): 255-259 (2012)

Frequency of different type of microsatellite repeats
and abundance of SSRs in genic and intergenic regions of
chloroplast genomes

Frequency of different type of microsatellite repeats
and abundance of SSRs in genic and intergenic regions of
mitochondrial genomes.

