Background
Catechol and its derivatives are key metabolic intermediates in
the aerobic degradation of aromatic hydrocarbons by bacteria.
Catechol dioxygenases one such enzyme plays a major role in
the metabolism of aromatic hydrocarbons []. Catechol
dioxygenases can be divided into two major groups: those that
cleave the aromatic ring between the vicinal diols (the intradiol
dioxygenase group) and those that cleave the ring to one side of
the vicinal diols (the extradiol dioxygenase group) []. Catechol
2, 3-dioxygenase (C23O), also called meta-cleavage
dioxygenase, which belongs to the extradiol dioxygenase group
and catalyzes the meta-ring cleavage of (substituted) catechols
[]. 
A wide variety of C23Os was reported from various bacteria
in which most of them are able to catalyze catechol more
efficiently than the substituted catechols, including methylcatechols,
although some rare exceptions. For example, the
C23O from Pseudomonas putida strain was capable to grow on
toluidine and cleaves 3-methylcatechol at a higher rate than
catechol []. Catechol 2, 3-dioxygenase is present in several
types of bacteria that degrade environmental pollutants, and it
is one of the key biochemical “pathways” through which the
contaminants are degraded. These enzymes metabolize the
aromatic rings compounds such as toluene, xylene, naphthalene
and biphenyl derivatives, which are the environmental
pollutant of serious concern [].

The Catechol-2, 3-dioxygenase enzyme has potential uses in
bioremediation of Petroleum hydrocarbon compounds.
However, the lack of characterization of the enzyme has limited
its development as a practical biocatalyst. It is desirable to
widen the substrate specificity of the enzyme to make it a more
generic catalyst for breaking down these pollutants []. The
binding properties of Petroleum hydrocarbon compounds
along with identification of active site residues could be used
for site directed mutagenesis in order to identify their role in
activity and substrate specificity. Consequently, these enzymes
were the subject of different studies and have been suitable
targets for site directed mutagenesis to improve their activities
[]. Selecting the best mutant which had the best activity in oil
degradation and use them in the future for cleaning oil spills in
the environment []. Present study utilizes protein-ligand
docking as a tool to screen various petroleum hydrocarbons in
order predicts the potential target for degradation of the
substrates.

Methodology
Structure prediction of Catechol 2, 3-dioxygenase (C23O):
The three dimensional structure of Catechol 2, 3-dioxygenase
was generated using the homology modeling method. Protein
sequence of C23O (314aa, UniProtKB accession number:
Q7M0R6) from Burkholderia cepacia was retrieved from Uniprot
(http://www.uniprot.org/). A BLASTp search was made
against the PDB database (PDB, http://www.rscb.org/pdb/) to
spot the most appropriate template for homology modeling.
Accordingly, the structure of Catechol 2, 3-dioxygenase from
Pseudomonas putida [] was selected as best template based on
their sequence percentage identity (41%) and query coverage
(99%) (). The alignment of both template and target was
done using the align2D script in the Modeler9V8. Then the
aligned sequence is used for model generation using the
model_ligand.py script in the Modeler9V8 [,
]. The
modeling protocol is referred from our previous work 
[,
].
Here, the coordinate information of the template FE2+ was also
used for the C23O model generation. From the ten models best
model is chosen based on their Discrete Optimized Protein
Energy (DOPE) and Modeler Objective Function (MOF) scores.
The best model was validated using structural analysis and
verification server (SAVES), which includes various tools like
Ramachandran plot [], ERRAT 
[] and VERIFY_3D 
[].

Molecular dynamics simulation:
The molecular dynamics simulation of Catechol-2, 3-
dioxygenase was carried out using GROMACS 4.5.4 [,
]
molecular dynamics package. The atoms of the molecule was
treated with OPLS-AA/L all-atom force field [] and solvated
with TIP4P water model, which extended to 1.50 nm triclinic
box from the molecule to edge of the box. In order to neutralize
the system 10 Na2+ were replaced with SOL molecule. The
50,000 steps of steepest descent and conjugate gradient energy
minimization algorithm was used to minimize the protein with
a tolerance of 1000 kJ mol-1 nm-1. The PME 
[] method was
used for long-range interaction with a 1.2 nm cut-off and 0.16
nm Fourier spacing also used. Then, the energy minimized
solvated system was considered a sensible one in terms of
geometry and solvent orientations and used further. The
molecular bond angles and geometry of the water were
constrained with LINCS [] and SETTLE 
[] algorithm
respectively. Consecutively to regulate the temperature (310 K)
and pressure (1 atm) of the system, the V-rescale weak coupling
and Parrinello-Rahman method [] were used respectively.
Both NVT (constant number of particles, Volume and
Temperature) and NPT (constant number of particles, Pressure
and Temperature) position restraint method was used for 100
ps. These results show that, the system is well equilibrated in
terms of temperature, pressure, density and total energy. In
continuation with that, this pre-equilibrated system was
subjected to 10000 ps (10 ns) production MDS with a time-step
of 2 fs. In every 2 ps the structural coordinates are saved and
analyzed. The above-mentioned protocol was referred from our
previous work [].

Molecular Docking:
The docking of substrate into the Catechol-2, 3-dioxygenase was
carried using Autodock 4.0 software package [] (Morris, et al.
1998). This software contains AutoTor, AutoGrid and
AutoDock, in which AutoTor defines the rotatable bonds and
root to detect the rotation. AutoGrid generates grid map for
each substrate, here the grid box was generated based on the
FE2+ atom. The box size was set to 50 × 50 × 50 Å in the x, y, and
z axes. The spacing between grid points was 0.375 Å. AutoDock
menu helps for docking methodology. Lamarckian genetic
algorithm (LGA) was used for the conformer searching in the
grid box mentioned. This method is used to calculate the
binding energy for each molecule as a scoring function. In
docking protocol the number of individuals in each population
is set to 150 and the maximum number of energy evaluations is
set to 2,50,00,000, whereas the maximum number of generations
was set to 1000. The maximum number of top individuals, the
rate of gene mutation and crossover were set as default value.
The docking protocols are used from the work of Mannu et al.
[].

Discussion
Model validation:
The modeled structure of C23O was subjected to validation
analysis and compared with crystallographic C23O structure
using WHATIF server. The modeled structure shows 89.3%
favored region and 10.7% in the allowed region of
Ramachandran plot and Z-score (-1.635) of Ramachandran plot
also shows the quality of the model. In terms of the quality
packing, the WHATIF results show that the backbone-backbone
contacts (-0.48), backbone-sidechain contacts (-3.27), sidechainbackbone
contacts (-2.16) and sidechain-sidechain contacts (-
1.95). The overall quality value for all contacts is -2.32, which is
a normal range value and the second generation packing score
(-2.32) for all contacts also confirms the quality of the packing.
In addition, the overall quality factor predicted by ERRAT
shows that 81.311 % () for Catechol-2, 3-dioxygenase
from Burkholderia cepacia, which is somewhat lesser than the
template (86.288) structure quality and maintained. Moreover,
the Verify3D results () illustrate that the compatibility
score of target-template, which gave on clear cut values for the
similar compatibility except in the region of 150-200 residues.
All these results suggest that the modeled structure is valid one
to use for further studies.

Structural analysis of Catechol-2, 3-dioxygenase:
The modeled Catechol 2, 3-dioxygenase from Burkholderia
cepacia comprises N-terminal (1-147) and C-terminal domains
(148-314). As like Catechol-2, 3-dioxygenase from Pseudomonas
putida mt-2 [], these two domains are structurally similar to
each other and separated by a local twofold axis. The Nterminal
domains contains totally eight β stands (β1, β2, β3, β4,
β5, β6, β7 and β8) and two α helices (α1 and α2), whereas the Cterminal
domain contains nine β stands (β9, β10, β11, β12, β13,
β14, β15, β16 and β17) and four α helices (α3, α4, α5 and α6).
There is one Fe-binding site is present in the β barrel of the Cterminal
domain which is located at the end of a large pocket
and appropriate to accept the substrate molecules. The residues
H150 Nε2, H220 Nε2 and E271 Oε1 coordinate the Fe atom by
the distance of 2.45, 2.63 and 2.13 Å respectively ().
These residues are lie in the β9, β13 and β16 respectively and
are conserved not only in Catechol-2, 3-dioxygenase family and
also in 2, 3-dihydroxybiphenyl-1, 2-dioxygenases. As like
Catechol 2,3-dioxygenase from Pseudomonas putida mt-2 and 2,3
dihydroxy biphenyl 1,2-dioxygenases [,
] this proteins also
has notable structural feature like each domain contains of an
eight-stranded half-opened β barrel. The super impose of
template and target Catechol-2, 3-dioxygenase shows that it has
0.173 Å RMSD and the C terminal loop region of N158-V166 is
varied 3.78 Å from the template structure. The half-opened β
barrel in each N and C-terminal domains composed of two
repeated βαβββ motifs which is shown in ().

Molecular dynamics simulation:
In order to evaluate the stability of the Catechol-2, 3-
dioxygenase from Burkholderia cepacia the molecular dynamics
simulation of 10 ns was performed. The minimum potential
energy () of the protein -8.60324e+05 (7038th ps) prove
that the modeled structure was energetically stable during the
production MD run. The RMSD profile shows that the first 2000
ps the protein backbone rise to equilibrate and remains quite
stable until the 10th ns of production MD with the maximum
RMSD of 0.35 nm. This longest period of equilibration confirms
the prolonged stability of the protein (). Moreover, the
RMS fluctuation of Catechol-2, 3-dioxygenase was also
calculated and described in (), showed it has three
flexible regions. The first flexible region is a coil (124-140),
which connects the N-terminal and C-terminal domain and
fluctuate more with a maximum RMSD deviation of 0.45 nm.
The second flexible region is the loop one (160-165), which
connects the β9 and α3 with a maximum RMSD ranges from
0.25 to 0.35 nm. Whereas the third one is very important β-
hairpin motif which connects β10 and β11 (185-193), in
combination with C-terminal tail region this motif covers the
open side of the C-terminal domain bowl structure which offers
a way for the substrate binding near to the Iron atom 
(). 
This flexibility furnishes open and close conformation of the
C-terminal domain bowl with the RMSD deviation of 0.35 nm.

Molecular Docking:
The Fe atom containing Catechol-2, 3-dioxygenase from
Burkholderia cepacia has the cabability of degrading the
hydrocarbons like Benzene, O-xylene, Toluene, Fluorene,
Naphthalene, Carbazol, Pyrene, Dibenzothiophene,
Anthracene, Phenanthrene, Biphenyl and Chrysene ()
from crude oil. The present study described the catalytic
mechanism of Catechol- 2, 3-dioxygenase with its substrate
through molecular docking analysis. Accordingly, the above
mentioned substrates were prepared and docking with the
active site of Catechol-2, 3-dioxygenase and analyzed. From the
 (see supplementary material), each Hydrogen Bond
(HB) and Van der Waals interaction made between substrate
and enzyme, along with Free energy of binding, estimated
inhibition constant (Ki) and substrate distances with Fe atom
were shown. The docking results reveal that the benzene, Oxylene,
Toluene, Fluorene, Naphthalene, Carbazol, Pyrene,
Dibenzothiophene, Anthracene, Phenanthrene, Biphenyl makes
HB and VdW interaction with the active site residues of H150,
L152, W198, H206, H220, H252, I254, T255, Y261, E271, L276 and
F309 and shown the free energy binding of -3.72, -4.00, -4.21, -
4.57, -4.63, -4.29, -3.93, -3.50, -3.30, -2.14 and -1.20 respectively.
Chrysene shows positive energy of binding in the active site
atom of Fe. Except Pyrene, all above-mentioned substrates
made close contact with Fe atom by the distance ranges from
1.67 to 2.43 Å. In addition, the above-mentioned substrate
except pyrene, all other made π-π stacking interaction with
H252 by the distance of ranges from 3.40 to 3.90 Å ( &amp;
). The pyrene molecule is present 7.40 away from the Fe atom
and makes T-shaped stacking interaction with F309 with a
distance of 3.10 Å. Moreover, the catalytic Fe atom retains their
coordinate interaction with H150, H220 and E271 by the
distance of 2.45, 2.63 and 2.13 Å respectively. All these docking
results reveal that, except Chrysene, all other substrate has good
free energy of binding to hold enough in the active site and
makes strong VdW interaction with Catechol-2,3-dioxygenase.
These results suggest that, the enzyme is capable of catalyzing
the above-mentioned substrate.

Conclusion
In order to understand the mechanism of Catechol 2, 3-
dioxygenase in the degradation of environmental pollutants,
the three-dimensional structure was modeled and analyzed
their stability through 10 ns molecular dynamics simulation
studies. The validation results ERRAT shows 81.311 % overall
quality factor. The compatibility score predicted by Verify3D
explains the compatibility nature of modeled enzyme is quite
same with the template structure. These two successive
validation results suggest that the modeled structure is reliable
one for further studies. In addition to that the 10 ns MD
simulation also carried out to check the stability of modeled
enzyme and shows it has lowest potential energy to sustain its
three-dimensional structure. The docking studies of various
petroleum hydrocarbons with Catechol 2,3-dioxygenase
illustrates that except Chrysene and Pyrene all other are able to
form strong interaction with H150, L152, W198, H206, H220,
H252, I254, T255, Y261, E271, L276 and F309 with free energy of
binding ranges from -4.63 to -1.20. Chrysene shows positive
energy of binding with the active site of Fe, whereas the pyrene
shows negative energy of binding, though it's docked far from
the active site atom of Fe due to its larger molecular nature.
Except pyrene all the substrates has close contact with Fe atom
with a distance ranges from 1.67 to 2.43 Å and also made a
strong π-π stacking interaction with H252 by the distance
ranges from 3.40 to 3.90 Å. In conclusion all the substrate except
Chrysene is made good interaction with active site residues
which in turn suggest that this enzyme is capable of
metabolizing these aforementioned compounds.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors thank University Board of Research and
Department of Microbiology, Ahmadu Bello University,Zaria,
Nigeria for supporting the present study.R. Krishna thanks
University Grant Commission (UGC), Government of India for
providing financial assistance (F.No.37-313/2009 (SR)) to carry
out the Research work. Kannan M. (No.F. 14-2(SC)/2009 (SAIII))
also thanks UGC for Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship to
pursue their PhD degree. R. Krishna also thanks Department of
Biotechnology and Department of Information technology,
Government of India, New Delhi for their financial support to
Centre for Bioinformatics, Pondicherry University.

Citation:Ajao et al, Bioinformation 8(18): 848-854 (2012)

The sequence alignments between Catechol 2, 3-
dioxygenase from Burkholderia cepacia and Pseudomonas
Putida. The symbol asterisks represents single fully conserved
residues, colons: fully conserved strong groups, periods: fully
conserved and dot: weaker groups. The sequences were aligned
with ClustalX 2.0.10.

The validation results of Catechol 2, 3-dioxygenase
using ERRAT and Verify3D a) The overall quality factor
predicted by ERRAT shows that 81.311 %. b) The compatibility
score for both template and target structure which shows that
similar nature of the compatibility.

Three dimensional structure of Catechol 2,3-
dioxygenase with catalytic Fe atom. a) It contains 18 strands
and 5 helices named from β1-β17 and α1-α5, in which the active
site residues H150, H220 and E271 coordinating with Fe atoms
are clearly pictured in the enlarged portion; b) The four
repeated βαβββ motifs are shown in each N and C-terminal
domain. The figure was prepared using protein molecular
viewer PyMol and Chimera.

The molecular dynamics simulation results. a)
Potential energy graph illustrates the energetically stable nature
of Catechol 2,3-dioxygenase; b) RMSD profile explains the
equilibration nature of the protein throughout the 10 ns MD
simulation; c) RMS fluctuation describes about the three
different flexible regions during the production MD run.

The 2D structure of substrates used for docking
analysis. I) Benzene, II) O-xylem, III) Toluene, IV) Fluorene, V)
Naphthalene, VI) Carbazol, VII) Pyrene, VIII)
Dibenzothiophene, IX) Anthracene, X) Phenanthrene, XII)
Biphenyl and XII) Chrysene.

The molecular interaction of substrate with Catechol-
2, 3-dioxygenase. a) Benzene b) O-xylene c) Toluene d) Fluorene
e) Napthalene and f) Carbazole interacting with Fe atom in the
active site. Fe atom shown in Spear format and the interacting
residues are shown in stick format colored by heteroatom,
whereas the substrates are shown in yellow color. The
hydrogen bond formed between coordinated active site
residues with Fe atoms are shown in dashed line. The π-π
stacking interactions are shown in dark line. These figures are
prepared using chimera software

The molecular interaction of substrate with Catechol 2,
3-dioxygenase. a) Pyrene, b) Dibenzothiophene, c) Anthracene,
d) Phenanthrene, e) Biphenyl and f) Chrysene interacting with
Fe atom in the active site. Fe atom shown in Spear format and
the interacting residues are shown in stick format colored by
heteroatom, whereas the substrates are shown in yellow color.
The hydrogen bond formed between coordinated active site
residues with Fe atoms are shown in dashed line. The π-π
stacking interactions are shown in dark line. These figures are
prepared using chimera software.

