Background
Rice is one of the most important crops in Korea and in the Northeast
Asia. To reveal the genomic relationship among genetic markers has
become a necessary step. In rice, several genetic marker database
based on various genetic markers have been constructed for the
purpose of displaying positional relationships among mapped
markers in each chromosome []. A Single Nucleotide
Polymorphism (SNP) is a DNA sequence variation occurring when a
single nucleotide in the genome differs between members of a
species. The SNP marker may be considered the ultimate genetic
marker as they represent the finest resolution of a DNA sequence and
SNP marker is the most frequently found DNA sequence variations
[]. The development of high-throughput methods for the detection
of SNPs has led to a revolution in their use as molecular markers
within DNA sequence data []. To increase the importance of SNP
markers, various databases have been constructed. The SNP
Database Network in Japan [] provides an integrated menu for SNP
searching and marker annotation. The dbSNP [] provides a function
for SNP discovery across the entire plant genome. The AutoSNPdb
[] provides an annotated single nucleotide polymorphism database
for the important crops rice, barley and Brassica. The OryzaSNP []
has generated a large fraction of the SNPs present in cultivated rice
through 20 rice genomes. The National Academy of Agricultural
Science (NAAS) of Rural Development Administration (RDA)
developed a web-based database system to provide information about
SNP and QTL markers in rice. The genetic marker database provides
7,227 SNP markers on each of 12 chromosomes by using genetic
map in rice []. We have released a major update that comprises
various new features for annotation including localization of the gene
(RSN) information of SNP marker. General improvements to
accuracy of gene location information are included along with novel
functionality that allows users to compare the different method for
varying sets of SNP markers.

Methodology
Dataset
The SNP markers were collected from the SNP project (Oryza sativa,
Nipponbare: Japonica and China93-11: Indica) of NAAS []. As a
result of this project, we have investigated SNPs for genetic markers
in rice genome. A total of 12,829 potential SNPs in 3,356 genes were
detected from 22,423 non-redundant genes which were generated by
pair-wise alignment between ESTs and genomic sequences of rice. In
order to construct a database of SNP markers, we analyzed the
variation in gene sequences between japonica and indica rice using
EST sequence data of 12,829 potential SNPs.

Database development
Using the collected SNP markers, a marker database was constructed
to distinguish SNP markers. The database platform was developed
using MYSQL and JAVA languages. The data was stored in Oracle
relational database management system (RDBMS). The logical and
physical schema of the database followed the standard principles of
relational database by ERWin Data Modeler software.

Implementation and features
The SNP marker database [] features three major functions: map
viewing, marker searching and gene annotation. Map viewer
provides SNP markers information including sequence and location
information on chromosome using a genetic map. The marker viewer
allows that users can access the information of 12,829 SNP markers.
Gene annotation menu provides a table of detailed annotation
information. When using keyword search or inputting identification
number, users can view a table of detailed annotation information
through GO, MIPS, EC, SNP and Marker view tables. A specific
annotation table provides information such as marker name, EST
number, gene definition and general marker information ().

Future work
The SNP marker database of NAAS consists of three major
functional categories: map viewing, marker searching and gene
annotation. The database provides 12,829 SNP markers including
gene location information on each of 12 chromosomes in rice. Users
are assisted in tracing any new structures of the chromosomes and
gene positional functions using specific SNP markers. In the future,
NAAS plans to develop an integrated marker database that combines
an SNP marker database and the other genetic marker database for
rice.

This work was supported by the National Academy of Agricultural
Science and the Biogreen 21 Program of Rural Development
Administration (Project number: 200901FHT020711430).

Citation:Kimet al, Bioinformation 4(6): 269-270 (2009)

A snap shot of the marker search results table through marker database (A). The individual view table shows samples of search
results such as the (B) Gene Ontology (GO) information table (ex: AK058206) by clicking a specific accession number in the ’GO‘ menu and
the (C) general information view table with related marker information (ex: AK058206) by clicking a ’Marker‘ menu.

