Background
Exome sequencing technology is being employed to identify 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and/or insertions and 
deletions (INDELs) in genetic disease research. The schema for 
UCSC Genes (knownGene.txt) [] has been widely employed 
for use in both standard and customized downstream analysis 
tools and scripts. However, even for many popular model 
organisms (e.g. Arabidopsis), sequence and annotation data 
tables (including knownGene.txt) have not yet been made 
available to the public. SNPAAMapper [], a genome-wide SNP 
analysis and annotation pipeline using whole-genome and/or 
whole-exome sequencing data, has been developed to perform 
the downstream annotation for detected variants; this tool can 
classify variants by regions and report the hit class and requires 
knownGene.txt as one of its input files. We have developed a 
tool - Tbl2KnownGene [], a .tbl file parser that can process the 
contents of a National Center for Biotechnology Information 
(NCBI) .tbl file (e.g. the one for Arabidopsis genome (TAIR10)) 
[,
] and produce a UCSC Known Genes annotation feature 
table. Arabidopsis chromosomes are annotated as .tbl files by 
TAIR, so their knownGene.txt format files are not available.

In this study, we have developed SNPAAMapperT2K, a 
genome-wide SNP analysis pipeline for species that has .tbl but 
not knownGene.txt files available. We have generated 
annotation files for Arabidopsis and users can easily download 
them onto their computers and run their sequence read files 
against the supporting files.

Our pipeline can be easily extended to analyze SNP annotation 
for other species which were annotated using .tbl files, but do 
not have annotated knownGene.txt files available.

Methodology
The SNPAAMapperT2K algorithm consists of two major 
modules: the first module converts NCBI .tbl file to UCSC 
knownGene.txt file format, and the second module uses 
converted KnownGene files and calls BWA [] and SAMTools 
[] and custom scripts to report the hit class. The workflow of 
SNPAAMapperT2K is shown in .

SNPAAMapperT2K Input and Output:
The inputs are NCBI .tbl files (e.g. the chromosome files of
Arabidopsis), TAIR10 sequence annotation files, and short read 
sequence files. The outputs are annotated variant files. A subset 
(non-synonymous SNPs) of annotated variants by 
SNPAAMapperT2K is shown in  (see supplementary 
material).

Conclusions
Efficient pipelines/tools are needed for downstream genome
wide variant analyses for next-generation sequencing data. We 
developed a bioinformatics pipeline − SNPAAMapperT2K that 
parses the contents of a NCBI .tbl annotation table, produces a 
UCSC Known Genes annotation table, and finally calls 
customized scripts to classify variants and annotate their hit 
classes. The pipeline was tested with a deeply sequenced 
Arabidopsis thaliana strain (Seattle-0) from 1001 Genomes Data 
Center [].

Supplementary material
Data 1
This research was supported by the Indiana State University 
Start-Up funds to YB.

Citation:Bai, Bioinformation 10(11): 711-715 (2014)

The Workflow of SNPAAMapperT2K

