Background
Dengue viral infection has become a serious issue about
human health []. Dengue virus (DENV) belongs to Flaviviradae
family []. In recent years, it has been reported in more than
100 countries [], Asia, Central and South America and Africa
are the major affected regions with this infection [,
].
According to recent studies, it has been found that NS3 protein
is most important non-structural protein involved in DENV
infection. This region is named as NS3pro and its activity
depends on a cofactor named as NS2B. These two collectively
forms a complex known as NS2B-NS3pro complex. Any
disruption in functional activities of NS2B-NS3pro complex
inhibits viral replication []. Different compounds like,
chemistry-derived benz[d]isothiazol-3(2H)-one derivatives (2-
[2-Phenyl-1-(2-p-cyanophenyl-1,3,4-oxadiazol-5-yl)ethyl]-1,2-
benzisothiazol-3(2H)-one (a), 2-[2-Phenyl-1-(2-p-fluorophenyl-
1,3,4-oxadiazol-5-yl)ethyl]-1,2-benzisothiazol-3(2H)-one (b), 2-
[2-Phenyl-1-(2-p-methoxyphenyl-1,3,4-oxadiazol-5-yl)ethyl]-
1,2-benzisothiazol-3(2H)-one(c),2-[2-Phenyl-1-(2-phenyl-1,3,4-
oxadiazol-5-yl)ethyl]-1,2-benzisothiazol-3(2H)-one (c), 2-[2-
Phenyl-1-(2-p-chlorophenyl-1,3,4-oxadiazol-5-yl)ethyl]-1,2-
benzisothiazol-3(2H)-one) (d) [], SK-12 
[] and kalata B1
analogues have been reported as DENV NS2B-NS3 protease
inhibitors []. But there is no effective drug available for the
treatment of DENV infection yet []. Therefore, present study
has been designed to increase the spectrum of DENV
NS2/NS3 protease inhibitors. Total 940 phytochemicals of
different classes (Aromatic, carbohydrates, lignin, saponins,
steroids, tannins, Terpenoids, Xanthones) possessing antiviral
activity against Dengue virus were computationally screened
against Dengue virus. The main idea behind this study was to
target the sites of Dengue virus NS2B/NS3 to identify novel
phytochemicals that could inhibit the DENV infection. The
results of this study will offer useful information about drug
development.

Methodology
940 phytochemicals have been docked against DENV
NS2B/NS3 protease using the Molecular Operating
Environment (MOE) software package.

Retrieval and refinement of receptor:
3D structure of DENV NS2B/NS3 protease was retrieved from
the Protein Data Bank (PDB) using PDB ID: 2FOM. To refine
the structure, water molecules were removed from the
structure and 3D protonateion was done by using MOE to
change the state into ionization level. Moreover, energy
minimization was done using default parameters.

Ligand database preparation:
940 phytochemicals of 8 classes were retrieved from MAPS
database []. Energy minimization was done by using default
parameters of MOE. Phytochemicals were stored in .mol
format and made a database in .mdb format by using MOE.

Molecular Docking:
Active site residues were find out by using site finder option of
MOE. Docking algorithm of MOE was used to dock
phytochemicals database with the catalytic triad (His 51, Asp
75, Ser 135) of DENV NS2/NS3 protease. The parameters were
set as (Re-scoring function: London dG, placement: triangle
matcher, Retain: 10, Refinement: Force field, and Re-scoring 2:
London dG). Top conformation for each phytochemical was
selected on the basis of minimum S score and were further
evaluated to study the interactions by using ligx option of
MOE.

Results &amp; Discussion
Molecular Docking:
DENV has four serotypes [] but the binding site of NS2BNS3
has same substrate specificities thus, any inhibitor against
the binding pocket of NS2/NS3 protease could work against
all the serotypes []. 940 phytochemicals were
computationally screened. MOE provided ten conformations
for each phytochemical. The negative and low score for any
ligand shows favorable interactions between ligand and the
receptor protein. Hence, top conformation for each
phytochemical having minimum S score were further analyzed
for interaction analysis.

Interaction analysis:
Through intraction analysis six phytochemicals were found
that bound deeply inside active site pocket and successfully
blocked DENV NS2B-NS3 protease and may serve as
important drug candidates against NS3 protease. Beside
minimum S score, (-)-Gossypol also had potential interactions
with His51, Ser135 and strong hydrophobic contact with Asp75
of catalytic triad, thus it placed at the top. All other
phytochemicals (Mangostenone C; Garcidepsidone A; 4-
hydroxyacetophenone4-O-(6'-O-beta-D-apiofuranosyl)-beta-Dglucopyranoside;
Demethylcalabaxanthone; Mangostanin) also
have potential interaction and significant hydrophobic contact
with active residues of catalytic triad and thus, it can be
concluded that these phytochemicals could be use as potential
drug against Dengue virus NS2B/NS3 Protease. Details about
selected phytochemicals and interacting residues of the DENV
NS2B/NS3 Protease with phytochemicals are shown in 

(see supplementary material). Interactions between Dengue
virus NS2B/NS3 Protease catalytic triad and selected
phytochemicals are shown in . Binding mode of
ligands with receptor pocket that shows how deeply ligand
bind inside receptor pocket is shown in .

Conclusion
Dengue is a global health challenge, no vaccine has been
developed to target this disease yet. Improved strategies are
required to develop drug candidates that can inhibit DENV
infection. Present study focused on the screening and docking
of medicinal plant phytochemicals against NS2/NS3 protease.
This study has found possible binding of phytochemicals
which interacts with the active sites of DENV NS2/NS3
protease. Moreover, It was found that phytochemicals of genus
Garcinia have greater ability to inhibit DENV replication. This
study will be helpful in drug designing before synthesizing
and testing them. Thus, it can be concluded from this study
that Garcinia phytochemicals could serve as future drug
candidates.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors would like to acknowledge Government College
University, Faisalabad (GCUF), 38000, Punjab, Pakistan.

Citation:Qamar et al, Bioinformation 10(3): 115-118 (2014)

A) (-)-Gossypol interaction with DENV NS2B/NS3pro; B) Mangostenone C interaction with DENV NS2B/NS3pro; C)
Garcidepsidone A interaction with DENV NS2B/NS3pro; D) 4-hydroxyacetophenone 4-O-(6'-O-beta-D-apiofuranosyl)-beta-Dglucopyranoside
interaction with DENV NS2B/NS3pro; E) Demethylcalabaxanthone intraction with DENV NS2B/NS3pro; F)
Mangostanin interaction with DENV NS2B/NS3pro.

A) Binding mode of (-)-Gossypol with receptor pocket; B) Binding mode of Mangostenone C with receptor pocket; C)
Binding mode of Garcidepsidone A with receptor pocket; D) Binding mode of 4-hydroxyacetophenone 4-O-(6'-O-beta-D
apiofuranosyl)-beta-D-glucopyranoside with receptor pocket; E) Binding mode of Demethylcalabaxanthone with receptor pocket,;
F) Binding mode of Mangostanin with receptor pocket.

