Background
In insects, body fat plays a major role []. Insects store lipids as 
glycogen and triglycerides in the adipocytes. The metabolism of 
lipids is important in insects for growth and reproduction and 
provides energy during non-feeding periods. In the resting 
locust, the major source of energy is Trehalose (a hemolymph) 
[]. One advantage of using lipids as a source of energy is that 
they weigh less than isocaloric amounts of carbohydrates [,
]. 
The main storage form of lipids is as triglycerides which are 
released as diglycerides during flight [,
].

Based on the tissue of origin, the intracellular fatty acid-binding proteins 
(FABPs) are divided into three categories: (i) hepatic-type FABPS, 
(ii) intestinal-type FABPS and (iii) muscle/cardiac-type FABPs. These proteins 
are 14-15 kDa in size and are important for the uptake, metabolism and transport 
of long-chain fatty acids. They are also responsible for the modulation of cell growth 
and proliferation. Human muscle and bovine heart fatty acid binding proteins bind 
long-chain fatty acids in the cytosol of muscle tissues.

According to the Portal hypothesis proposed for the uptake of 
fatty acids by FABPS, the fatty acid first adsorbs to the protein 
surface and then searches for an opening or portal by which it 
can enter the protein cavity. After finding the opening, the fatty 
acid enters the protein cavity. The next step is the protonation 
of the ligand, before de-solvation, which demands a large 
amount of energy (30 kJ mol-1). Since the insertion of the 
negative charged ligand into the low dielectric matrix of the 
protein is energetically unfavorable, ligand-binding to the 
protein occurs before the protonation of the ligand. The 
insertion of the charged head-group of the ligand fatty acid 
inside the protein cavity requires energy in the amount of 300 kJ 
mol-1[]. Molecular dynamics simulations of I-FABP have 
shown that the ligand first adsorbs to the protein surface. The 
rate limiting step is the de-solvation of the carboxylate head 
group of the fatty acid anion [].

The β-sheet of human muscle fatty acid binding protein 
displays ten β-strands arranged anti-parallel to each other in 
which each strand is hydrogen bonded to its neighbor. This 
arrangement is completed by the formation of hydrogen bonds 
between the first and the last β-strand (). The β-sheet 
is folded to form a β-barrel and contains an interior and an 
exterior surface. The interior surface serves as a cavity or a 
pit where the ligand binds []. The volume of this cavity 
varies between 300 and 700 Å3 []. 
In this project, 2-D NMR data, specifically information provided by 
the Nuclear Overhauser Effect (NOE), was used to build a model of 
the β-sheet of Lm-FABP using the Rigid Body Assembly method and 
bovine heart FABP as a template [].

Methodology
The methodology used in the study is summarized in 
 (see supplementary material).

Protein expression and purification:
Lm-FABP was expressed in E.coli cells using previously published protocols 
[]. The cDNA of the protein 
was isolated after digestion with restriction endonucleases, NcoI and BamHI and 
ligated with the pET3d vector. The plasmid pET3d/Lm-FABP was used to transform the 
E. coli D12 strain BL21 (DE3) cells. Lm-FABP was purified by the use of previously 
published protocols []. The protocol included cell lysis, 
centrifugation and purification by a Sepharose HR 26/10 FPLC column. Lm-FABP 
eluted with 50 mM Tris/HCl (pH 8.0). The fractions were analyzed by SDS/PAGE and 
Western blotting. Fractions containing Lm-FABP were further purified by gel 
filtration chromatography using a Sephacryl S-100 column.

NMR experiments:
2-D homonuclear NMR spectra were acquired for protein 
sample bound to native fatty acids in 20 mM phosphate buffer 
(10% D2O, 0.05% NaN3) at pH 5.5 and 35 °C. These spectra were 
acquired in the “phase sensitive” mode with pre-saturation of 
the water signal to obtain maximum signal-to-noise ratio. All 
the chemical shifts were referenced with respect to sodium 3-
(trimethylsilyl) [2,2,3,3-2H4] propionate (TSP). Once the spectra 
had been acquired, they were analyzed to assign chemical shifts 
and to collect NOE constraints that consist of sequential, 
medium range and long range constraints. 

Amino Acid Sequence Alignment:
Before analysis of the NMR data, the amino acid sequence of 
Lm-FABP was analyzed. The sequence is characterized by the 
presence of thirty one amino acids with aliphatic side chains. It 
also contains three Proline residues (Pro39, Pro91 &amp; Pro103). 
The sequence also contains one Cysteine residue (Cys115). 
There are ten aromatic amino acid residues (seven 
Phenylalanines and three Tyrosines) and two Histidines 
(His102 and His96), also present in the sequence. In addition, 
the sequence is characterized by two Methionines, (f-Met 0 and 
Met 21).

A comparison of the sequence of Lm-FABP with the bovine heart 
FABP was performed using the FSSP data-base. The alignment revealed 
42% sequence homology between two proteins. There are three insertions 
(Ile 7, Leu 46 and Asn 92) and two deletions (Gly 99 and Ala 132) 
in the sequence of Lm-FABP as compared to bovine heart FABP. The amino 
acid insertions are exactly the same if the sequence of Lm-FABP is 
compared to human muscle FABP. The only amino acid deleted is Gly 99.

Spin System Identification:
2-D homonuclear COSY and TOCSY spectra were used to 
identify amino acid spin systems comprising J-coupled 1H. The 
amide 1H chemical shift dispersion in the 2-D TOCSY ranged 
from 10.18-6.78 ppm. The scalar coupled NH and CαH 1H were 
recognized in the “finger print” region of the 2-D COSY 
spectrum, as shown in (). To identify spin systems 
representing individual amino acids (comprising NH and CαH 
along with the side-chains 1H), the program AURELIA 
[] was 
used to peak-pick the 2-D data. Initially, about 165 spin systems 
were identified. These included some doublets due to the 
presence of spin system heterogeneity. This list later was 
narrowed down to about 145 spin systems for 130 non-Proline 
amino acids in the protein. The three Proline residues present in 
the sequence were identified separately since they don't possess 
an amide 1H.

NMR Chemical Shift Assignment:
The strategy of sequential 1H chemical shift assignment was 
followed to assign the backbone and side-chain NMR chemical 
shifts of Lm-FABP (data not shown).

Identification of Secondary Structure Elements:
Secondary structure elements () were identified by 
characteristic Nuclear Overhauser Effect (NOE) cross-peaks as 
shown in  (see supplementary material). The 
sequential NOEs observed for α-helices consist of a strong dNN 
and a weak dαN NOE cross-peak for each “i-1” and “i” amino 
acid residue. In addition to these medium range NOEs are also 
observed as shown in schematic. For β-strands, the 
characteristic NOE information is a strong dαN and a weak dNN 
cross-peak for “i-1” and “i” amino acid residues. For the β-
turns, a strong-weak dNN and strong to medium dαN NOE 
crosspeaks are expected for “i-1” and “i” amino acid residues.

Homology Modeling of β-sheet:
The β-sheet of Lm-FABP () was modeled after the β-
sheet of Bovine Heart FABP using the Rigid Body Assembly 
method []. This method starts with the identification of the 
conserved β-sheet of bovine H-FABP and then assembly of the 
model of β-sheet of Lm-FABP from the H-FABP template using 
the inter-strand NOE cross-peak intensities in 
 (see supplementary material).

Discussion
Many structures of human, bovine and insect FABPs are known 
via X-ray crystallography or NMR [–]. 
These structures have provided details about ligand-binding property of FABPs. 
The FABPs display a ten-stranded β-sheet structure and a large, hydrophilic, 
water-filled inner cavity that serves as a ligand-binding site for hydrophobic 
ligands such as fatty acids and retinoids []. 
The β-sheet of Lm-FABP shown in () 
closely resembles that of the other FABPs. The fatty acid is bound to 
FABPs by electrostatic and hydrogen bond interactions of its carboxylate 
head group with charged or polar residues inside the protein and by interactions 
of its tail with hydrophobic residues. A “gap” is observed between βD and 
βE in the β-sheet which can serve as a portal for entry of long chain 
fatty acids in the inner cavity of the protein.

A description of the ligand-binding process is given by the 
Portal hypothesis which describes the entry of long chain fatty 
acids inside the protein cavity through an opening or portal. 
The Portal hypothesis is supported by many experimental 
studies, most of which were carried out using either the I-FABP 
or ALBP. Crystallographic studies of both these proteins have 
indicated that the lipid tail is located near the suggested entry 
site [,
]. NMR measurements of I-FABP have suggested that 
the protein exhibits a pronounced backbone disorder at the 
portal region and is more mobile than the rest of the protein 
suggesting that this region may be involved in ligand insertion 
[,
,
,
].

Conclusion
The information provided by the Nuclear Overhauled Effect 
was used to build a model of the β-sheet of Lm-FABP using the 
Rigid Body Assembly method and bovine heart FABP as a 
template. The β-sheet structure of Lm-FABP displays a typical 
structure of 10 anti-parallel β-strands arranged to form a sheet. 
A “gap” is observed between βD and βE. A β -bulge is also 
present between Ser 13 and Gln 14 which is a difference from 
the structure of bovine heart fatty acid binding protein. The 
observed “gap” between βD and βE provides evidence for the 
presence of a portal between the polypeptide chains which 
allows long chain fatty acids to enter the protein cavity and 
bind to the protein.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We would like to thank HEJ Research Institute of Chemistry 
(Karachi, Pakistan) for the use of their 600 MHz NMR 
spectrometer.

Citation:Kizilbash et al, Bioinformation 9(20): 1003-1009 (2013)

Backbone of human muscle FABP showing the 
arrangement of two α-helices (αI and αII) and ten b-strands (bA, 
bB, bC, bD, bE, bF, bG, bH, 
bI and bJ) [].

Comparison of secondary structure elements of Lm-FABP and bovine heart FABP showing the three 
insertions (Ile 7, Leu 46 and Asn 92) and the two deletions (Gly 99 and Ala 132).

β-sheet of Lm-FABP modeled after bovine heart FABP 
by the use of 2-D NMR data and the Rigid Body Assembly 
method [].

