Background:
A horizontally transferred event is defined as movement of 
genetic material between phylogenetically unrelated organisms 
by mechanisms other than vertical descent. These regions from 
diverse organisms, called Genomic Islands (GIs), are typically 
10-200Kb in size (containing clusters of genes). Any biological 
advantage provided to the recipient organism by transferred 
DNA creates selective pressure for its retention in the host 
genome and several pathways of horizontal transfer have been 
established influencing traits such as antibiotic resistance, 
symbiosis and fitness, virulence and adaptation 
[]. For 
example, horizontal gene transfer has been demonstrated in 
many pathogenic strains of bacteria and shown to be 
responsible for its virulence. The identification of genomic 
islands also forms the first step in the annotation of newly 
sequenced genomes. Various bioinformatics approaches have 
been proposed in their identification 
[]. In the genomic era, 
with availability of large number of bacterial genomes, the 
preferred methods are based on nucleotide base compositions 
and comparative genomics. In IGIPT, we have implemented 
thirteen measures that capture anomaly in nucleotide 
composition, providing both genome-based and gene-based 
search on a single platform.

Methodology:
In any genome, vertically transmitted genes experience a 
particular set of directional mutation pressures mediated by the 
specific features of the replication machinery of the cell, such as 
balance of dNTP pools, mutational biases of the DNA 
polymerases, efficiency of mismatch repair systems and so on 
[]. 
As a result each genome exhibits its own unique signatures, 
viz., distinct variations in the GC content, dinucleotide relative 
abundance, variations in usage of k-mer words, codons and 
amino acids. These measures, called parametric methods, are 
the most widely used approaches as the putative transferred 
genes can be identified without relying on comparisons with 
other organisms, thus providing an independent means of 
assessing the impact of gene transfer across lineages. The 
parametric measures implemented in IGIPT are broadly 
classified as genome-based or gene-based, depending on the 
analysis (shown as left- and right panel in 
). These 
measures are computed in a sliding window and regions 
deviant from the genomic average by user defined standard 
deviation (default 1.5σ) are identified as probable GIs.

Measures at Genome Level:
The major advantage of these measures is that they do not 
require pre-existing annotation or comparison of homologous 
sequences, and can, therefore, be applied directly to newly 
sequenced genomes. The input to these measures is the 
complete genome/contig in Fasta format.

GC content:
It computes the frequency of G and C nucleotides, called the GC 
content [].

Genomic signature:
The set of dinucleotide relative abundance values constitutes a 
“genomic signature” of an organism.
Please see .

k-mer Distributions:
It has been proposed by Karlin that most horizontally acquired 
genomic regions have distinct word (k-mer) compositions 
[].
Please see .

Measures at the Gene Level:
This module identifies horizontally acquired genes in a fully 
annotated gene set of the organism (in multi-fasta format). In 
the absence of this information, IGIPT provides comparison of 
two gene sets, one a representative gene set of the organism and 
the other whose horizontal acquisition needs to be confirmed 
(e.g., genes in predicted GIs from genome-based measures). 
This feature also allows comparison of predicted gene(s) with 
highly expressed genes of the organism, e.g., ribosomal genes, 
chaperon genes, etc. to reduce false predictions.

Codon usage Bias:
The unequal usage of synonymous codons has been extensively 
studied and virtually every codon has been shown to be preferentially 
used in some organisms and rarely used in others.
Please see .

Amino Acid Bias:
This bias refers to the deviation in the frequency of usage of 
individual amino acids over the average usage of all 20 amino 
acids.Please see .

GC Content at Codon Positions:
This involves comparing the frequency of G or C at the three 
codon positions, GC1, GC2 and GC3, for a given gene set with 
the core gene set (or genomic average or highly expressed 
genes) of the organism [].

IGIPT provides an option to download the predicted 
horizontally transferred regions/genes and its flanking regions 
(lower panel in ) to facilitate analysis of conserved 
structural features in the vicinity of probable GIs, e.g., genes 
coding for integrases or transposases required for chromosomal 
integration and excision are flanked by direct repeats and are 
inserted in the vicinity of tRNA and tmRNA genes 
[]. This 
feature is also useful for further analysis such as comparative 
genomics or phylogenetic analysis of putative GIs. The output 
of IGIPT is windows/genes filtered based on standard 
deviation and also provides option to download unfiltered 
output in MS excel format.

Conclusion:
Evolution of species by horizontal gene transfer is very 
common not only in prokaryotes but also in eukaryotes. It gives 
unique functionality to the organism to adapt to different 
environmental conditions and their identification is particularly 
useful in pathogens for identifying virulent genes. Since no 
single measure truly identifies a horizontally acquired region, 
by integrating numerous parametric measures on a single 
platform, IGIPT allows the users to analyze the predicted 
horizontally transferred regions/genes by thirteen different 
measures simultaneously, thus greatly increasing the 
confidence of prediction. A drawback of these parametric 
methods is that regions acquired from donors with similar 
compositional bias as the host genome will not be identified.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Jain et al, Bioinformation 7(6): 307-310 (2011)

Snapshot of the web-server IGIPT.

