Background
Aflatoxins, a group of polyketide-derived compounds [], are toxic and carcinogenic secondary metabolites synthesised only by such Aspergillus species as Aspergillus flavus, Aspergillus parasiticus 
and Aspergillus nominus [,]. However, sterigmatocystin, which is the penultimate precursor of aflatoxin, is produced by several species of Aspergillus []. Most genes encoding the aflatoxin biosynthetic 
enzymes have been identified. These genes make up a large gene cluster in the fungal genome of about 90 kb []. The genomic DNA regions that represent the complete sequence of the well-organized aflatoxin 
pathway cluster are available for each species, A. flavus, A. parasiticus and A. nomius (EMBL ID: AF391094, AY510451, AY510454, respectively). The aflatoxin biosynthetic pathway starts with the reception of 
acetyl-CoA and malonyl-CoA substrates, which produce hexanoic acid by a repetitive reaction sequence (Mahanti and colleagues 1996). Aspergillus species use the HexA/B multienzymatic complex, a close homologue 
to the fatty acid synthase (FAS) system, to catalyze the first step of the aflatoxin biosynthetic pathway []. Thus, FAS is responsible for fatty acid synthesis in primary metabolism, while HexA/B synthesises 
the carbon acyl chain in secondary metabolism. In the aflatoxin gene cluster, fas1 and fas2, large genes that encode for HexB and HexA respectively, are located side by side. These genes are also named hexA 
and hexB because of the hexanoate synthase α and β subunits, respectively. The same reaction that occurs in fatty acid synthesis is considered to be involved in the formation of hexanoate in aflatoxin synthesis 
[]. The FAS from bacteria and plants is a complex of at least seven different polypeptides []. In fungi, all seven activities reside in two polypeptides: 210-kD α(Fas-2, HexA) and 230-kD β ( (Fas-1, HexB) []. 
In vertebrates, they are located in a single, large, 270-kD polypeptide []. As far as the structure of fungal FAS is concerned, the acyl carrier protein (ACP), the ketoacylreductase (KR) (E.C. 1.1.1.100) and the 
ketoacyl synthase (KS) (E.C. 2.3.1.41) domains are distributed in the α-chain; and the acetyl transferase domain (AT) (E.C. 2.1.3.39), the enoylreductase (ER) (E.C. 1.3.1.9), the dehydratase (DH) (E.C. 4.2.1.61) 
and the malonyl-ACP transferase (MPT) (E.C. 2.1.3.39) domains are distributed in the β-chain [].

In the aflatoxin gene cluster, the pksA, which is also a large gene encoding for a polyketide synthase (Pks), is located 3987 bp upstream from the fas2 gene position. Fungal polyketide synthases involved in the 
aflatoxin biosynthesis are defined as iterative type I synthases which are multidomain enzymes that are similar to the FAS system []. Polyketide synthases catalyze the second step of the aflatoxin biosynthetic 
pathway, in which hexanoyltethrahydroxyanthrone is formed from the hexanoate resulting from step one []. As far as the structure of these proteins is concerned, the KS, AT, and ACP domains are essential for both 
FAS (HexA/B) and Pks, whereas the KR, DH, and ER domains are present in FAS (HexA/B), but are absent in aflatoxin-related Pks. This absence causes the formation of a β-polyketone which, with a subsequent cyclation, 
produces an anthrone that has a hexanoyl and four hydroxyls as the final reaction product.

In this study we have phylogenetically analysed the amino acid sequences of fungal FAS (HexA/B) and Pks enzymes. Some protein domains are essential for both FAS (HexA/B) and Pks, but their biological function is 
very different so evolutionary relationships and protein-level features should be indicated.

Methodology
Sequences of Fas-1 (HexB), Fas-2 (HexA) and Pks were extracted from the UniProt and Aspergillus flavus database (http://www.aspergillusflavus.org). To construct the FAS phylogenetic tree, 36 sequences were used from 
22 fungal organisms. Most organisms belonged to the Ascomycota phylum and only two sequences belonged to Basidiomycota. The UniProt sequences were retrieved using the BlastP search [] on default settings against all 
organisms found in UniProt. The sequences used as queries during the blast were the A. flavus FAS aflatoxin sequences (Q5VDA2, Q5VDA1). From the original BlastP results, 32 sequences were selected. These sequences had 
an E-value of 0.0, there were no duplicates and they appeared both in HexA and HexB. For the Pks phylogenetic tree, 39 sequences were used, mostly belonging to the Aspergillus species. The remaining sequences were 
obtained from other Pezizomycotina organisms such as Gibberella zeae or Emericella nidulans. Sequences were extracted from the UniProt database using the BlastP program, with default parameters, and the sequence used 
as the query was the A. flavus aflatoxin Pks (Q5VDF2). From the group of similar sequences that resulted from the blast, we selected 35 in accordance with the species they belonged to. Thus all the results belonging 
to the Aspergillus species were selected as were the sequences that belonged to organisms that had previously appeared in our analysis of the FAS proteins (i.e. Neurospora Crassa) or which were taxonomically related 
to them (Bipolaris oryzae).

To select the A. flavus sequences, we initially ran a blast of the Aspergillus flavus database using the same sequences we had used as queries in the initial blast search of UniProt, and obtained four different sequences 
for each protein. Some of these were not complete so we took the various segments and made an initial study. ClustalW was used for the multialignment and the subsequent phylogenetic tree construction in its default settings. 
Once the first version of the phylogenetic tree had been constructed we used the sequences that appeared closely clustered to the genes extracted from the Aspergillus flavus database to run a second BlastP. Once the complete 
sequences of the protein homologues of A. flavus had been added to the initial sequences obtained from UniProt, the final phylogenetic tree construction was carried out using ClustalW []. The tree was built by neighbour-joining 
(NJ) and the parameter values were on default settings. Bootstrap values were generated by 1000 replications of the bootstrap procedure. Trees were represented using the program MEGA 3.1 [].

Results and discussion
Phylogenetic analysis
 show the phylogenetic tree based on HexA and HexB sequence multialignment. The fact that these two proteins are involved in different kinds of metabolism means that within a single species there can be several 
homologues. We made two phylogenetic trees, one for each protein, which contained sequences belonging to 22 fungal species. Of these species, seven had at least two homologues, and the maximum was five (A. Oryzae). The A. flavus 
species contain four homologues for both the HexA and the HexB proteins.

The two trees share many of their features and show that in most cases the evolution of the two proteins is very similar. In the case of HexA (), we find four main clusters strongly supported by bootstrap values. Each one 
of them has a homologue of A. flavus. These sequences are always closely related to a matching sequence in A. oryzae, according to the similarity between the two species []. The cluster coloured in blue contains the proteins that belong 
to the aflatoxin gene cluster. Closely related to them is the gene product belonging to the sterigmatocystin cluster and a hypothetical protein from Coccidioides immitis (Q1DM99). The fact that C. immitis has two apparent homologues of HexA 
makes us think that it is related to some kind of secondary metabolism.

The second cluster coloured in green, gathers proteins involved in the synthesis of fatty acids. In this cluster, we find many of the organisms that have only one gene encoding for Fas-2, such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae or Candida albicans. 
We also find the HexA homologues involved in the primary metabolism of E. nidulans and C. immitis, as well as the A. flavus sequence AFSG001384 and the A. oryzae sequence Q2U734. From the data obtained, we can deduce that these A. flavus and 
A. oryzae sequences are also involved in primary metabolism. Proteins from other species are also described as hypothetical proteins whose function can be deduced by the same reasoning, so they are probably Fas-2 proteins (i.e. Q41B77 G. zeae). 
A. parasiticus and A. nomius do not appear in this group but that is probably because their enzymes have not yet been sequenced or introduced into the Uniprot database. The remaining homologues are distributed in two clusters, coloured in black. 
Their function has not been described but they may belong to some kind of secondary metabolism.

The phylogenetic tree belonging to the HexB () protein is nearly a duplicate of the HexA tree. The main clusters are supported by high bootstrap values. The aflatoxin cluster remains completely unchanged, and even the branching pattern 
is the same. The main difference in the tree is found in the hypothetical protein clusters (coloured in black). Instead of two hypothetical protein clusters there are three, but the low value of the bootstrap that situates E. nidulans (Q5AV07) closer 
to P. nodorum than to the two Aspergillus indicates that that this grouping is not statistically supported. The other difference between the two trees is the position of Schizosaccharomyces pombe within the fatty acid cluster. Although it appears close 
to the Pezizomycotina in the tree representing HexA evolution, in the HexB tree it appears to have separated from the ancestral organism before the Pezizomycotina and the Saccharomycotina branched into two different groups.

The function of the other clusters is difficult to determine. Most of them are composed of hypothetical proteins and Pks proteins of unknown functions. However, there are cases in which we may be able to computationally determine the function of a 
Pks protein because of its similarity with other proteins which have a known function. This is the case of one of the A. flavus Pks sequences (AFSG011713). This protein is clustered in a group of proteins that are involved in the synthesis of several 
pigments (Bikaverin, Aurofusarin and Conidial yellow pigment) (coloured in purple). This particular sequence of A. flavus is 72% similar to the protein belonging to E. nidulans (Q03149) and 71% similar to the one belonging to A. fumigatus (Q4WZA8). 
Both these proteins participate in the synthesis of Conidial yellow pigment so it is very likely that AFSG011713 also synthesises this same compound [].

 shows the phylogenetic tree based on the Pks sequence multialigment. The phylogenetic tree is distributed in five highly bootstrap supported clusters. The sequences that belong to the aflatoxin biosynthetic cluster are clustered together, 
as expected, and close to them we find the genes that participate in the sterigmatocystin biosynthesis. The other sequence in this cluster belongs to Gibberella moniliformis and, while its exact function remains unclear, it has previously been found 
to be closely related to the aflatoxin Pks genes [].

Other clusters have sequences with known functions, but there is not enough evidence to derive these functions to the other proteins in the cluster. For example, in this same cluster, Gibberella fujikuroi (Q9P855) is involved in the synthesis of the 
red pigment, bikaverin. Closely clustered with this sequence we find another homologue of the Pks of aflatoxin biosynthesis for A. flavus (AFSG005452) and its matching A. oryzae sequence (Q2TXQ8). These two sequences may have the same function as the 
sequence that belongs to Gibberella fujikori, and yet they only share about 50% of similarity. Further studies should be made to safely assign this function to these sequences.

The phylogenetic trees are consistent with the great similarity between A. flavus and A. oryzae. The former is a plant, animal and human pathogen that can produce aflatoxins. A. Oryzae, on the other hand, is not recognized as a pathogen and, although 
it has the aflatoxin gene cluster, it is unable to synthesise this mycotoxin. As the clusters drawn in the tree show, for each sequence of A. flavus there is a corresponding sequence of A. oryzae.

ACP domain: comparison between primary and secondary metabolism
Aspergillus species have several homologous FAS proteins which are believed to participate in different kinds of metabolism. Two of these proteins are involved in the synthesis of fatty acids and aflatoxins. The differences between the two kinds of 
proteins can be found on the sequence level. A conserved pattern has been described in the ACP domain of Fas-2, which holds the binding site (prosite: PS00012 Phosphopantetheine attachment site). This prosite is built around the active Ser which unites 
the phosphopantetheine prostetic group so that it can attach activated fatty acids. If we look for this conserved pattern in the multialignment, we find that it has been aligned together in all the fungal sequences. Comparison of the use of amino acids 
around this Ser position shows that there are two kinds of differences (results not shown). The first kind is easily explained by the different origins of the sequences. So in the second position downstream from the active Ser we find that sequences of 
the organisms that belong to the Eurotiomycetes class opt for a Leu while the sequences that belong to the Saccharomycotina class have a Val. The chemical proprieties of these two amino acids are not very different so it is not surprising to see that 
they can be interchanged in organisms as closely related as the ones we have been comparing. Other differences between the sequences are easily attributed to the different functions that the two proteins have. So we find that in the fourth position 
upstream from the active Ser we have a Val for the sequences belonging to primary metabolism, a Ser for the aflatoxin sequences and a Cys for the sequence of E. nidulans that participates in sterigmatocystin biosynthesis. The chemical properties of 
these amino acids are considerably different. They are not as easily interchanged as the Val and Leu amino acids we compared before and could introduce some differences into the protein structure, especially as they are situated so closely to the active 
site. In addition, the Arg located one position upstream from the ACP binding Ser site in sequences involved in aflatoxin biosynthesis means that the prosite is not noticed.

The ACP domain is a shared domain between Pks and HexA and, although they have the same function, there are differences between the two domains. While the ACP domain found in the HexA protein is located at the N-terminal end of the protein, the one 
found in the Pks is located at the C-terminal end. This domain also has a fragment of the sequence surrounding the binding site that nearly complies with the consensus pattern of the prosite found in the HexA protein of primary metabolism. Comparison 
between the three conserved parts of the phosphopantetheine attachment site (results not shown) demonstrates that while the binding site remains conserved there are substantial differences between the surrounding amino acids. Only one other amino acid 
(Gly) remains unchanged: it is in the third position upstream from the active Ser and it is already established in the consensus pattern that few other amino acids can occupy its place.

Conserved patterns in the KS and AT protein domains
While HexA, HexB and Pks have different functions, they share several enzymatic activities which are found in specific domains in all the polypeptides: namely, the KS, AT and ACP. In order to find patterns that have been conserved in the different 
domains through evolution and then use them to identify other homologous sequences, we compared each of the domains to a group of bacterial sequences. To this end, each domain from the A. flavus aflatoxin proteins was used to run a BlastP search of 
all bacterial sequences (results not shown). A multialignment was done so we could find the pattern signatures that would define each domain. The motives shared by both fungi and bacteria from some of the domains are shown in  and .

 shows a comparative analysis of the HexA- Pks-KS domain. The sequences selected as examples in  belong to several clusters. The first sequences were taken from the phylogenetic representation of the aflatoxin cluster. The remaining 
sequences belong to A. flavus and its matching A. oryzae sequences. A few more sequences were added for each cluster so that they would properly represent the cluster. In the HexA group of sequences, the Saccharomyces cerevisiae sequence for primary 
metabolism was added as a reference. On the other hand, in the Pks group, the sequence belonging to A. parasiticus, whose function has yet to be determined, was added because of the singular localization of the ACP domain, which appears much farther 
to the C-terminal side of the sequence than the ACP of the other sequences of the multialignment. This domain is located on opposite sides in the two protein sequences. One of the motives we located that is maintained by the bacterial and fungal 
organisms is the prosite detected for KS (prosite: PS00606, Beta-ketoacyl synthase active site). This domain catalyzes the condensation of malonyl-ACP with the growing fatty acid chain and its active site is on a Cys. Of the whole prosite, only the 
active site and the amino acid one position upstream from it (Ala) are conserved. The remaining amino acids differ mostly when the proteins are hypothetical.  shows a similar analysis for the AT domain. This domain in Pks is in a central region 
while in the HexB it is in the C-terminal region. In this case, there were not as many regions located which were conserved in HexB, Pks and the homologous bacterial sequences. However, quite a large region of conserved amino acids surrounds the malonyl 
binding site and it is conserved in all the sequences we have studied. Curiously, this conserved region is larger than the one found in the KS prosite.

Aspergillus species
Aspergillus species are closely related fungi which, despite their similarities, also have important differences. One very clear example of this is their capacity to synthesise aflatoxins [,]. A few Aspergillus species can synthesise aflatoxins using 
the aflatoxin biosynthetic cluster (A. flavus, A. parasiticus, A. nomius). Other organisms cannot catalyze the final steps of the aflatoxin pathway and produce instead one of its intermediate metabolits (E. nidulans). Despite having the complete aflatoxin 
cluster, some species cannot synthesise this mycotoxin (A. oryzae). Finally, some species do not even have the aflatoxin cluster (A. fumigatus). Of all these species only the genome of A. oryzae, E. nidulans and A. fumigatus is completely sequenced while 
the whole genome sequencing project for Aspergillus flavus, funded by the USDA/NRI Microbial Genome Sequencing Project and the USDA/ARS, is complete. Therefore, in order to obtain information about the sequences extracted from the A. flavus genome project, 
we will mostly rely on the information provided by their three organisms.

In this study, we found that for the HexA and HexB proteins, five homologues of the protein that belongs to the aflatoxin gene cluster were found in A. oryzae; four in both E. nidulans and A. flavus; and only one in A. fumigatus. Of the four homologues 
in A. flavus, the one resulting from fatty acid synthesis was found in the three other organisms as it is an essential part of fungal primary metabolism. Another homologue belongs to the aflatoxin gene cluster. The similarity between A. flavus and A. oryzae 
can be seen by comparing the proteins belonging to this cluster. Despite being unable to produce aflatoxins, the proteins from the A. oryzae cluster are closer to A. flavus than any other aflatoxin-producing organism. While E. nidulans has a sterigmatocystin 
homologue within the selected sequences, A. fumigatus has no other homologue to the fatty acid synthase proteins, which shows that it lacks any secondary metabolism related to aflatoxin production. The function of the remaining proteins remains unknown but 
since A. fumigatus has none of these homologues we believe they may be related to some kind of undiscovered secondary metabolism. As far as the Pks proteins are concerned, A. oryzae and A. nidulans both have seven homologues while A. fumigatus and A. flavus 
have only four. 

We thank John Bates of the Language Service of the Rovira i Virgili University for his help with writing the manuscript. This study was funded by the “Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia”, project reference AGL2007-65678.

Phylogenetic tree of fungal HexA, HexB based on protein sequence multialignment. Tree branch lengths are drawn proportional to the amount of sequence changes. Thick branches indicate bootstraps of over 900, thin branches indicate bootstraps 
between 900 and 750, and lesser bootstraps are indicated by dots. Sequences are indicated by UniProt code and species name (A. flavus gene name). Branches corresponding to proteins involved in the aflatoxin gene cluster are denoted in blue, and those 
involved in primary metabolism are in green. A. flavus sequences are marked in red. Sequences described as hypothetical proteins are marked with an asterisk (*). 

Phylogenetic tree of fungal Pks based on protein sequence multialignment. Tree branch lengths are drawn proportional to the amount of sequence changes. Thick branches indicate bootstraps of over 900, thin branches indicate bootstraps between 
900 and 750, and lesser bootstraps are indicated by dots. Sequences are indicated by UniProt code and species name (A. flavus gene name). Branches corresponding to proteins involved in the aflatoxin gene cluster are denoted in blue, those involved in the 
synthesis of non-melanin pigments are marked in purple. A. flavus sequences are written in red. Sequences described as hypothetical proteins are marked with an asterisk (*). 

Extract of the HexA and Pks multialigments from selected sequences corresponding to the predicted KS domain (Pfam references denoted). Diagrams of sequence domain organization are shown. Highlighted in blue are the residues that are strictly 
conserved in this fragment of the fungal multialigment. Highlighted in yellow are the residues that are also conserved in bacterial sequences. Protein sequences are named by their UniProt code and species name, gaps are denoted by a dash. Numbers on the 
right side represent the residue position on the N-terminus. Numbers between brackets denote the length of the omitted fragment. 

Extract of the HexB and Pks multialigments from selected sequences corresponding to the predicted MPT and AT domains (Pfam references are denoted). Diagrams of sequence domain organization are shown. Highlighted in blue are the residues that 
are strictly conserved in this fragment of the fungal multialigment. Highlighted in yellow are the residues that are also conserved in bacterial sequences. Protein sequences are named by their UniProt code and species name. Numbers on the right side 
represent the residue position on the N-terminus. Numbers between brackets denote the length of the omitted fragments. 

