Background
Myoglobin is a cytoplasmic hemoprotein expressed solely in
cardiac myocytes and oxidative skeletal muscle fibers 
[].
Hemoproteins are widely distributed among prokaryotes,
unicellular eukaryotes, plants and animals []. Myoglobin, a
mobile carrier of oxygen, is developed in red muscle in
response to mitochondrial demand for oxygen and transports
oxygen from the sarcolemma to the mitochondria of vertebrate
heart and red muscle cells []. Myoglobin was so named
because of its functional and structural similarity to
hemoglobin []. Myoglobin facilitates oxygen transport from
the erythrocyte to the mitochondria in cardiomyocytes and
oxidative skeletal myofibers []. Under some circumstances it
also may provide a reserve of oxygen after interruption in
oxygen delivery []. Skeletal muscle myoglobin concentration is
positively and significantly correlated with dive duration in
some species []. Myoglobin concentration in skeletal muscle is
also increased in humans and other species living at high
altitude []. Calculations of oxygen flux by simple diffusion
suggest that, in the absence of myoglobin, oxygen pressure at
the centre of myocytes working in normal oxygen (normoxic)
levels would fall to levels insufficient to maintain
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation []. In support of this
prediction, contractile function of cardiac or skeletal muscles is
sensitive to chemical agents (nitrite, hydroxylamine or
hydroperoxides) or carbon monoxide administered to reduce
effective concentrations of oxymyoglobin [].

These studies utilized chemical agents such as carbon
monoxide or sodium nitrite to inactivate myoglobin. These
agents function either in the binding of the heme domain of
myoglobin (i.e. carbon monoxide) or in the oxidation of
myoglobin (i.e. sodium nitrite) that inhibits the binding to
oxygen. Use of these chemical agents to inhibit myoglobin
function results in a reduction of oxygen consumption,
adenosine triphosphate synthesis and muscle contractility 
[].
Although myoglobin does not cross the mitochondrial
membrane, a process termed myoglobin-mediated oxidative
phosphorylation have proposed []. This is distinguished from
a role for myoglobin bulk transport of oxygen or as a reservoir
for oxygen on the premise that reducing or oxidizing
equivalents transduce the effect of oxymyoglobin across the
mitochondrial membrane and enhance mitochondrial oxidative
phosphorylation. Myoglobin may also function as a nitric oxide
(NO) scavenger []. In beating heart and exercising skeletal
muscle, myoglobin acts as a short-term oxygen store (i.e. an
oxygen buffer). The high concentration of skeletal myoglobin in
aquatic mammals was thought to enable a long-term oxygen
supply during diving []. Essentially all of the oxygen
consumed by skeletal muscle and heart is taken up by
cytochrome oxidase. Myoglobin is developed in skeletal muscle
more or less in proportion to the cytochrome oxidase content of
the muscle []. Since myoglobin cannot cross the mitochondrial
outer membrane, cytochrome oxidase, located in the inner
mitochondrial membrane and cristae, must be supplied by
dissolved oxygen diffusing from the sarcoplasm. The
exceedingly thin mitochondrial outer membrane will scarcely
impede oxygen diffusion []. Fully reduced cytochrome
oxidase combines very rapidly with oxygen to form an
oxygenated intermediate [].

Cytochrome oxidase is the major route by which NO is
removed from mitochondria-rich cells []. Related to its role as
a tissue reservoir of O2, myoglobin has been proposed to also
serve as a buffer of intracellular PO- in a number of species
including the human, rodent and bovine models. Similar to the
role of creatine phosphokinase, which functions to buffer ATP
concentrations when muscle activity increases, myoglobin
functions to buffer O2 concentrations under similar conditions.
Myoglobin desaturates rapidly at the onset of muscle activity,
increasing the PO• gradient from capillary blood to cytoplasm.
Furthermore, it has been proposed that desaturated myoglobin
close to the cell membrane then binds O2 and diffuses to the
mitochondria, providing a parallel path that supplements
simple diffusion of dissolved O2. NO has been shown to inhibit
cytochrome oxidase and thus impair mitochondrial respiration
[]. 
Since, there is no adequate information related to the active
site, ligand binding sites, antigenic determinants and the nature
about myoglobin in Channa striata (snakehead murrel). So, this
study deals with the identification of active site, ligand binding
sites, antigenic determinants and accessible surface area
analysis in protein model of Channa striata.

Methodology
Template selection from RCSB PDB and isolation of myoglobin:
The Protein- Hemoglobin was isolated from RCSB PDB 
[] as
template and myoglobin was isolated by comparing against a
complete Non-Redundant Protein Database using The NCBI
PSI-BLAST with 27% similarity of the template ensuring that
those protein in the first step truly had no myoglobin in Channa
striata.

Visualization and Model Validation:
The protein structure was predicted by homology modeling
with different server CPH model and SAVES
(http://www.cbs.dtu.dk /services/CPHmodels, 
http://nihserver.mbi.ucla.edu/SAVES/). The program CPH models
3.0 server [] was used to build the model as PDB file of
myoglobin according to the homology modeling method. The
PDB of myoglobin was visualized by using PyMOL version 1.3
(http://pymol.sourceforge.net/) 
[]. The structure which was
obtained from homology modeling was validated by SAVES.
The steriochemical quality of the model was verified with
program PROCHECK [] in order to select best model. 3Dprofiling
of the residue was done by VERIFY 3D Structure
evaluation Server []. ERRAT was used for verifying protein
structure for evaluating the progress of crystallographic model
building and refinement []. The model was submitted to the
ProSA-WEB [] to obtain the Z-Score.

Prediction of Protein Structure:
Secondary structure of the protein was predicted through
SOPMA program (Self-Optimized Prediction Method), the
program determined individual role of amino acid for building
the secondary structure with their positions 
(http://npsapbil.ibcp.fr /cgibin/npsa_automat.pl?page =/NPSA
/npsa_sopma.html) [].

Prediction of active site:
One of the keenest areas in the bioinformatics is the active sites
of the protein and its residual identification. The structure was
used to find out the ligand binding efficiency with the
predicted model and to detect whether the protein was better
or weak with other reported sources. “CASTp” was used for
identification of active site from the protein structure 
[].

Predicting of Antigenic Peptides:
This program predicts those segments from within a protein
sequence that are likely to be antigenic by eliciting an antibody
response. Antigenic peptides are determined using the method
of Kolaskar and Tongaonkar. Predictions are based on a table
that reflects the occurrence of amino acid residues in
experimentally known segmental epitopes (http://imed.med.ucm.es/Tools/antigenic.pl) 
[].

Prediction of ligand site:
3DLigandSite is an automated method for the prediction of
ligand binding sites. The structure is used to search a structural
library to identify homologous structures with bound ligands.
These ligands are superimposed onto the protein structure to
predict a ligand binding site. “3DLigandSite” was used for
identification of ligand binding site from the protein structure
[].

Discussion
Template selection from RSCP PDB and isolation of absent myoglobin:
The Hemoglobin from the Gasterophilus intestinalis (PDB ID:
2C0K) was selected from RCSB PDB and was compared against
complete Non-Redundant Protein Database using The NCBI
PSI-BLAST and myoglobin in Channa striata with 27% similarity
of template which is absent in PDB, is used as subject for study
(Accession: AGG38019.1)

Visualization and Model Validation:
The three dimensional structure of myoglobin was generated
by using PyMOL program (). To verify the predicted
structure, validation was carried out with PROCHECK
program. Ramachandran plot of non-glycine and non-proline
residue in the structure showed that 94.5% of the total amino
acids were presented in most favored regions and the other
5.5% of amino acids were presented in allowed regions
including disallowed region with 0.0%. VERIFY_3D shows
99.32% of the residues had an averaged 3D-1D score greater
than 0.2 indicates that the environment profile of the model is
good. ERRAT2 shows 99.275% overall quality factors indicating
good resolution structure. Moreover, quality of the model can
be compared to reference structure of high resolution obtained
from X-Ray crystallography analysis through Z score and “0” is
the average Z score for good model. The Z score of myoglobin
is -7.8 showing the possibility to be a better model.

Prediction of Protein Structure:
The secondary analysis indicates whether a given amino acid is
located in helix strand or coil. The result obtained from SOPMA
described that about 70.75% of amino acids presented in alpha
helix, 6.12% of amino acids in beta turn, and 23.13% of amino
acids in random coil.

Prediction of Active Site:
A total of 15 active sites were evaluated in the structure
through CASTp software with ideal parameters. All 15 pockets
were characterized to find out its residues around probe radius
of 1.4Ǻ and among them, largest active site has an area of 803.6
Ǻ and volume of 905.3 Ǻ. The green color () shows the
largest active site position in the build protein which lies
between amino acid 1 and 147.

Predicting of Antigenic Determinants:
There are total 8 antigenic determinants in the sequence. These
antigenic determinants are: PHE4-GLY12, ARG20-THR31,
GLU35-ASP50, THR53-GLU70, GLY76-HIS89, HIS93-PHE100,
LEU102-GLU109 and ALA124-THR134.

Prediction of Heme Binding Sites:
There are total 17 ligand binding sites present in the structure.
These sites are THR36, LEU39, PHE40, PRO41, LYS42, HIS60,
THR63, VAL64, LYS67, LEU85, SER88, HIS89, HIS93, ILE95,
ASN99, PHE100 and ILE103 which can bind to one cluster of 25
ligands (heme). Accessible surface area (ASA) analysis of the
predicted model showed the amino acids with low ASA value
are buried inside the catalytic cleft and with high ASA values
are on the surface of the cleft. Some of the residues were found
to have high ASA values (GLU15, PRO41, LYS42, LYS83,
LYS92, HIS93) and some others were found to have low ASA
values (VAL7, VAL14, GLY22, LEU26, ILE51, VAL57, GLY61,
LEU72, LEU82, ALA90, ALA108, LEU111, GLY121, LEU125,
VAL128, TYR140). The active site amino acids, which are
hydrophobic, are VAL7, VAL14, GLY22, LEU72, LEU82,
LEU111, VAL128 with low ASA values. While those active site
amino acids, which is hydrophilic are LYS42, LYS92, HIS93
with high values. The protein has 22% amino acids are
hydrophilic, 50% are hydrophobic and 27% others. Molecular
weight of the protein is 15806.42 g/mol, isoelectric point is
pH=7.51. The protein has poor water solubility.

Conclusion
In this study, we proposed a valid and stable 3D model of
Myoglobin in Channa striata whose structure is not present in
PDB (Protein Data Bank). Further analysis provides
information about its active sites, ligand binding sites, antigenic
determinants and their ASA value analysis in the predicted
model. On the basis of the findings, it could be concluded that
further characterization of Myoglobin in Channa striata will be
important as the nitric oxide (NO) scavenger and myoglobinmediated
oxidative phosphorylation. This study can be used in
broad screening on inhibitors of the protein and can be
effectively used to raise monoclonal antibodies against its
antigenic determinants sites that can be used to support the
drug design project and can be further implemented in future
studies.

Citation:Parveen &amp; Mishra, Bioinformation 10(1): 019-022 (2014)

3-D structure of the predicted model by PyMOL.

Active site in predicted model computed with CASTp.
Green color represents active site with largest area and volume
and other colors represent the remaining active site with
different areas and volumes.

