Background
The biological process by which a cellular entity such as a
protein is transported and maintained in a particular location of
the cell such as mitochondria, cytoplasm etc is called cellular
localization [–]. Many tools are available till date. These
mediate the targeting of secretory precursor proteins to the
correct sub cellular compartments in prokaryotes and
eukaryotes. Identifying these transient peptides is crucial to the
medical, food and beverage and biotechnology industries 
[].
Endoplasmic Reticulum most all proteins that are transported
to the ER have a sequence consisting of 5-10 hydrophobic
amino acids on the N-terminus. The protein is guided to the ER
by a SRP, which moves between the ER and the cytoplasm. It
binds to the signal peptide. There are two types of signal
peptides directing to peroxisome, which are called PTS. One is
PTS1, which is made of three amino acids on the C-terminus.
The other is PTS2, which is made of a 9-amino-acid sequence
often present on the N-terminus of the protein. 
N-terminus signal peptides often target the mitochondrial matrix, endoplasmic reticulum;

C-terminus signal peptides often target the peroxisome [–].




Structure of a Signal Peptide:
A signal peptide consists of three regions: A n-region, A hregion,
A c-region.  it shows the n-region is the
positively charged hydrophilic region, where the SRP attaches.
The h-region is the hydrophobic central region, this part is
essential for the interaction with the signal recognition particle
and, subsequently, the translocase complex embedded in the
membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum. Upon transit through
this membrane, the signal peptide is cleaved from the nascent
polypeptide chain by signal peptidases and is then in most
cases rapidly degraded by other proteases. The c-region consists
of the signal peptidase cleavage site [–].

Outer membrane proteins:
OMPs are an important class of proteins usually found in gramnegative
bacteria, mitochondria and chloroplasts. The
discrimination of these proteins from the other types of proteins
is necessary to accelerate drug discovery and genome
annotation. Many OMP identification methods already exist
and some web servers have also been freely available to the
research community [–].

Functional Importance:
Bacterial OMPs are very essential for their survival. They play a
major role in the pathogenesis of the organism. The bacterial
adaptation to host niches is possible through the outer
membrane proteins. They provide resistance against
antimicrobial peptides that are produced during the host innate
immune response. Some of them like OMPP1, FadL etc are
involved in toluene catabolism and degradation of aromatic
hydrocarbons. These proteins are also involved in the
translocation of long-chain fatty acids across the outer
membrane. OmpW belongs to a family of evolutionary related
proteins which may form the receptor for S4 colicins in
Escherichia coli. Until date many localization predictors are
available, however such protein localization programs are
currently least accurate when predicting OMPs, and so there is
a current need for the development of a better OMP classifier
[]. Thus the objective of this project is to develop an algorithm
that can: 
Predict the bacterial signal peptides;

Characterize bacterial OMPs.




Methodology
Many databases are available for signal peptide as well as
localization. The signal peptide was predicted with the help of
datasets from the signal sequence database. The datasets used
by SigLocPred for the prediction of the bacterial OMPs was
taken from the PSORTdb. PSORTdb is a database for the
protein subcellular localizations for both bacteria and archaea.
The database is subdivided into two other databases called the
cPSORTdb and ePSORTdb. The cPSORTdb contains
precomputed genomes or proteomes while the ePSORTdb
contains experimentally derived localizations. The dataset
contains about more than 1500 sequences whose localization is
experimentally determined as outer membrane 
[–].

Frequencies of Amino Acids in Signal Peptide:
Proteins have specific amino acids residue positions. The
() explains the residue position just before the cleavage
position is said to be +1 position or P1, similarly the position
just after the cleavage site is said to be in -1 position or
P1'position. The () shows some specific amino acids
that tend to occur in these positions at a certain frequency. In a
study done with 2352 eukaryotic and bacterial signal peptides it
was found that, in bacteria, P1 and P3 favors small, aliphatic
residues like Ala and Val. P2 of gram-positive bacteria exhibits
Ser (12.5%), Gln (11.9%),Phe (11.9%), Ala (11.3%) and for gramnegative
bacteria Leu (17.6%), Gln (14.3%), Phe (11.4%), His
(11.4%) are preferred. In the case of signal peptide of grampositive
bacteria P1' is mostly occupied by Ala (36.3%), Asp
(11.3%), Ser (10.7%) and Glu (9.5%). While, P2' is populated by
Thr (14.3%), Glu/ (13.7%), (Pro) (13.1%), Ser (10.7%) and Asp
(10.7%). Similarly in the case of gram-negative bacteria P1' is
populated by Ala (41.7%), Gln (12.1%), Asp (7.2%) and Glu
(6.2%) whereas P2' is largely distributed between Asp (17.3%),
Glu (16.9%), Pro (10.8%) and Thr (10.8%) [–].

PERL:
PERL is a scripting language. Practical Extraction and
Reporting Language is a high-level, general-purpose,
interpreted, dynamic programming language PERL is
nicknamed “the Swiss Army chainsaw of programming
languages” because of its flexibility and power 
[–].

Prediction of Signal Peptides:
 shows the algorithm and perl code for The SigLocPred
algorithm uses the datasets of confirmed signal sequences in
combination with the frequency of occurrence of amino acids
flanking the cleavage site. The program written in the PERL
language allows the user to input the file name of the input
sequence. The filename which contains the bacterial
polypeptide sequence whose signal peptide have to be
determined. The input sequence is taken as a string and a
substring of first 30 amino acids is considered. This is because
in bacteria the average length of amino acids is about 25 amino
acids. At first, this substring is pattern searched against the
dataset for confirmed bacterial signal peptides. By comparing
the substring with the dataset position by position the program
finds out whether the signal peptide for the given input amino
acid sequence is confirmed. If the pattern is found the program
displays the signal peptide. If the pattern is not found in the
dataset it means that the signal peptide for the user given
protein is not yet confirmed and then the position-specific
amino acid frequency is used to predict the signal peptide for
the input sequence. Here the substring is searched for specific
amino acids that tend to appear frequently in certain positions.
And thus the signal peptide is predicted. In both the cases the
cleavage site of the signal peptidase will be determined.

Prediction of Bacterial Omps:
The SigLocPred algorithm uses the dataset collected from the
PSORTdb. This dataset contains around 1500 sequences. These
sequences are those bacterial proteins whose location is
confirmed as outer membrane. The user gives the name of the
file which consist s of the input sequences. The () shows
the perl code structure to predict whether the user inputted
sequence is an outer membrane protein or not. The sequence
that is being entered by the user is treated as an array. Now this
array is being pattern matched with the dataset. This is done by
using a loop. If the user given sequence is found in the dataset
the sequence is an OMP. Otherwise, the input sequence is not
an OMP. If the user wants to find a homologous sequence,
stand alone blast can be used. Using stand alone blast one can
convert the datasets into database against which the query
sequence can be blasted. A threshold value can be mentioned
by the user according to his interest. And, since the homologous
proteins tend to occur in the same location, one can predict
whether the query sequence is probably an OMP.

Results and Discussion
Until date many localization predictors are available, however
such protein localization programs are currently least accurate
when predicting OMPs, and so there is a current need for the
development of a better OMP classifier. There is a current need
for the development of a better OMP classifier since the existing
methods were least accurate in it. And, SIGLOCPRED is one
such algorithm that meets the need of Bioinformatician.
SIGLOCPRED predicts the signal peptide for all bacterial
proteins and also predict whether the input sequence is an
outer membrane protein or not. The user just has to give the
input as the filename containing the query sequence and the
algorithm predicts the signal peptide and the OMP. The output
of the signal peptide prediction includes: 
The signal peptide of the query sequence;

The cleavage site. Thus in the OMP
prediction, the algorithm output is simply the query sequence
along with the statements “THE PROTEIN IS LOCATED IN
THE OUTER MEMBRANE” and “THE PROTEIN IS NOT
LOCATED IN THE OUTER MEMBRANE” for OMPs and other
proteins respectively.




Conclusion
The prediction of signal peptide was done on the basis of
occurrence of certain amino acids in specific positions in the
signal peptide. The OMP prediction is done such that it predicts
whether the entered query sequence is a probable OMP or not.
SigLocPred provides efficient prediction of the signal peptides
of all bacterial, both gram-negative and gram-positive proteins.
In addition it also specifies between which two amino acids the
cleavage site occurs. The current need of the research
community is a method that predicts the OMPs, and
SigLocPred, a program written in PERL language is such a
method. It confirms whether the query sequence is an OMP or
not. Moreover, SigLocPred uses confirmed signal peptides and
sequences with outer membrane as location as datasets, thus
giving way to an efficient prediction.

Citation:Dhanaraj et al Bioinformation 8(20): 970-973 (2012)

Signal Peptide Structure.

Protein showing The Signal Peptide and Mature
Protein.

Frequencies of Amino Acids in each Position.

(A) Sample Code for Signal Peptide Prediction; (B) Flowchart of Algorithm for Signal Peptide Prediction.

Sample Code for OMP Prediction.

