Background
The genus Clostridium comprises of over 150 different species of 
Gram positive, spore-forming, anaerobic rod shaped bacteria 
belonging to the fermicutes. Pathogenic species for humans and 
animals primarily include Clostridium perfringens, Clostridium 
botulinum, Clostridium difficile and C. tetani. C. perfringens is 
responsible for various diseases; some of the major ones are 
food poisoning, wound and surgical infections that lead to gas 
gangrene, and severe uterine infections []. C. 
perfringens produces various toxins - alpha, beta, iota, epsilon 
and theta. Each type of toxin is associated with a specific 
disease []. After the appearance of clinical signs of the disease 
caused by C. perfringens, progression of disease is very rapid, 
and therefore the use of antibiotics offers limited help 
[]. Thus, 
vaccination offers a promising defence against the disease.
Conventional vaccines are usually toxoid based and hence have 
several inherent issues. The toxoid-based vaccines contain 
significant amounts of undesirable proteins that often generate 
inflammatory response in the host. Besides, there is a risk of 
reversion of the toxin if the inactivation is improper or partial. 
Therefore, it would be beneficial to find drug targets or vaccine 
candidates that target the Clostridium species itself instead of 
the toxins that are produced by the organism.

Clostridium species are obligate fermenters of sugars and/or 
amino acids. Unlike most other Clostridia, Clostridium 
perfringens is non-motile and cannot grow in an environment 
where amino acid supply is limited. This is due to the fact that 
it lacks several genes that are required to biosynthesize many 
amino acids (arginine, aromatic amino acids, branched-chain 
amino acids, glutamate, histidine, lysine, methionine, serine, 
and threonine) essential to its existence []. Thus the bacteria 
rely completely on the effective transport process of a variety of 
essential amino acids from extracellular milieu []. This rate 
limiting step to bacterial growth offers a potential target to 
combat Clostridium perfringens, as reduction in intracellular 
metabolic precursors subsequently results in nutrient 
starvation. In the present study, we have identified a 
component of the glutamate transport system using domain 
conservation analysis. This component is essential for C. 
perfringens but does not exist in its host and thus is a potential 
drug target and vaccine candidate.

Methodology
Comparison of nonessential/essential amino acids of host-pathogen:
In order to identify putative drug targets, the essential amino 
acids for C. perfringens and nonessential amino acids for Homo
sapiens were extracted from the literature [–
]. 

Domain profile conservation in periplasmic glutamate binding bacterial proteins:
Amino acid sequences of experimentally characterized solute 
specific binding protein of glutamate ABC-transporter system 
from three different bacterial species (E. coli K 12, P. putida
KT2440 and Campylobacter jejuni NCTC 11168) [–
] were taken 
from Uniprot Knowledge Base (ID: P37902, Q88NY2, Q0P9X8).

The aligned consensus obtained after multiple sequence 
alignment of these three sequences was used to search 
Clostridium homologue using BLASTP analysis in C. perfringens
Type-A strains. The domain consensus sequence for glutamate 
and aspartate transporter subunit was derived from NCBI CDD 
database entry PRK10797, a member of the superfamily cl19131. 
The T-coffee sequence alignment was used to confirm the 
conservation of domain profile in C. perfringens protein 
sequences (http://tcoffee.crg.cat/) 
[]. Further, STRING 
database search was used to predict the functional partners of 
the aligned consensus of putative proteins from C. perfringens
type-A strains (http://string-db.org/) 
[].

Homology modeling and glutamate binding site prediction of CPR_1324:
The protein sequence of the CPR_1324 from C. perfringens 
TypeA-SM101 was used for structure prediction based on the 
availability of the crystal structure of a polar amino acid ABC 
uptake transporter substrate binding protein from Streptococcus 
thermophilus (PDB 3HV1). The sequence was submitted to 
SWISS MODEL SERVER [] and the homology model was 
built with ProMod Version 3.70. The global and per-residue 
model quality was assessed using QMEAN scoring function 
[]. Molegro Virtual Docker was for active site prediction 
(active site region was considered as the region in the 2-6 Å
radius of the bound ligand). The residues within the cavity, 
which are important for glutamate binding, were also analysed 
to confirm its function.

Results &amp; Discussion
Clostridium perfringens is an anaerobic flesh eater which is 
incapable of synthesizing many of the amino acids required for 
its growth. These essential amino acids are extracted from the 
host by releasing various toxins and hydrolyzing enzymes that 
cause necrosis of soft tissues. These amino acids are then either 
actively transported through ATP hydrolysis (ABC Importers) 
or facilitated by sodium motive force (MFS Symporters). ABC 
transporters encoded in bacterial genomes correlate with this 
requirement for survival in physiological niches. Therefore, it is 
not surprising that these transport systems play either a direct 
or indirect role in the virulence of bacteria. There is increasing 
evidence for the virulence associated with the genes encoding 
the permease components involved in the uptake of amino 
acids and oligopeptides []. ABC-transporters, a protein of the 
permease component of C. perfringens, has been identified as 
one of genes unique to a number of pathogenic bacteria 
Including C. perfringens []. An additional tier of specificity can 
be introduced by exploiting the essential amino acids required 
for bacterial growth for which mammalian host cells lack ABC 
import systems. To this end, a comparison of 
nonessential/essential amino acids need of humans and C. 
perfringens was carried out to identify the target transporter 
system for an amino acid which is essential for the pathogen 
and non-essential for the human host  (see 
supplementary material). Based on literature search, it was 
evident that humans essentially lack extracytoplasmic solute
receptor (ESR) dependent uptake systems for their nonessential 
amino acids such as glutamic acid, aspartic acid and alanine 
[]. 
Previous studies on the amino acids requirements of C. 
perfringens show that alanine and aspartic acid are not 
stringently essential for some strains of C. perfringens. Glutamic 
acid, however, is an essential amino acid across various strains 
of C. perfringens. It is one of the most important metabolites in 
bacterial cells, playing a central link between the metabolism of 
carbon and nitrogen. It serves as the amino group donor for 
nearly all nitrogen-containing metabolites of the cell and thus 
its metabolism is tightly controlled under all conditions of 
nutrient supply. This makes its transport system a very 
attractive target for vaccine and drug development. In the 
absence or in the presence of a low sodium ion concentration 
(&lt;20 mM), that slows down the activity of sodium-driven 
secondary transporters, the glutamate is taken predominantly 
by polar amino acid transporter (PAAT) []. This is a typical 
prokaryote extracellular solute binding protein-dependent 
uptake system. The specificity of such transporters mainly 
depends on the nature of their periplasmic ligand binding 
protein. This solute specific component also stimulates the 
ATPase activity of ATP Binding Cassettes (ABC) of the 
importer, thereby initiating the translocation process. Very few 
such solute specific binding proteins of glutamate ABC-
transporter system in different bacterial species have been 
experimentally characterized. Three such proteins from E. coli K 
12, Pseudomonas putida KT2440 and Campylobacter jejuni NCTC 
11168 are GltI, AatJ (PP1071) and PEB1a (CJ0921c) respectively 
[–
]. The aligned consensus of these three sequences 
revealed putative gene/ORF for periplasmic glutamate binding 
protein in C. perfringens Type-A strains 
 (see 
supplementary material). The score of T-coffee sequence 
alignment between the experimentally proven glutamate 
binding proteins and the NCBI domain consensus sequence for 
glutamate and aspartate transporter subunit was 84 
(). This score was used as a threshold for confirming the 
conservation of domain profile in C. perfringens protein 
sequences. A score of 92 was obtained when the consensus of 
putative sequences of C. perfringens Type-A strains was aligned 
with standard domain sequence (). As the conservation 
score is significantly higher than that of well-established 
periplasmic glutamate receptors, this confirms the presence of 
homologue sequences in Clostridium. The STRING database 
search predicts that these homologue sequences belong to the 
COG0834 family with functional partners of ABC-type amino 
acid transport. This further predicts a functional glutamate 
importer in Clostridium (). 

Sequence homology search of C. perfringens TypeA-
SM101 CPR_1324 from other species revealed PDB 3HV1 to be 
the best template for homology modeling of the target sequence 
as both shared 41% identity (). PDB 3HV1 is the crystal 
structure of a polar amino acid ABC uptake transporter 
substrate binding protein from Streptococcus thermophilus. This 
belongs to bacterial extracellular solute-binding proteins, 
family 3 (PFAM Family SBP_bac_3). In all known bacterial 
solute-binding proteins, the bound ligand is situated in a cleft 
between two major protein domains which close over the 
solute. As shown in , the homology modeled structure 
of the CPR_1324 from C. perfringens shows distinct two lobes, a 
characteristic of substrate binding proteins. Comparative 
sequence analyses and motif search prediction indicated that 
residues 118-KNRQVIV-124 lie in the substrate binding cleft 
(). Thus, it becomes evident from the model that the 
carboxylate of glutamate is mainly stabilized by electrostatic 
interactions with basic residues in the same way as observed 
with other binding proteins. The quality of the model was 
evaluated using the QMEAN program and assessed using its 
score of -3.73 which shows that the predicted model is of good 
quality. It is evident from the figure that the substrate binding
cleft is conserved between two structural lobes. Thus, the 
predicted model structure of C. perfringens CPR_1324 is 
comparable to the structurally resolved PDB 3HV1, a standard 
glutamate ABC uptake transporter substrate binding protein.

Conclusion
Glutamate is an essential amino acid to almost all strains of 
Clostridium perfringens. Its transport through importers is 
critical in regulation of amino acid metabolism. Inhibition of the 
solute specific component of this permease offers an attractive 
drug target to prevent bacterial growth. We identified 
periplasmic glutamate binding protein of C. perfringens Type-A 
strains to be a possible immunogenic virulent factor. It offers a 
strong putative target for vaccine development as its close 
homologue PEB1a from C. jejuni has already been reported to 
confer protection when used as antibacterial vaccine [].

Supplementary material
Data 1
Financial assistance from the Department of Biotechnology, 
New Delhi, India is acknowledged. BB and AKS acknowledge 
the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, New Delhi, 
India, and the Department of Biotechnology, New Delhi, India
for research respectively fellowships.

Citation:Bhatia et al, Bioinformation 10(7): 401-405 (2014)

A) Multiple sequence t-coffee alignment of the glutamate binding consensus sequence from domain profile (CDD 
PRK10797) and sequences of characterized bacterial components of glutamate permease. Color coding indicates the extent of 
conservation; B) The t-coffee alignment of putative C. perfringens glutamate binding sequence of ABC transporter and standard 
domain consensus (CDD PRK10797).

A) Amino acid sequence alignment of the target, amino acid ABC transporter (binding protein) of C. perfringens SM101 
(Accession No. YP_698644) and the template i.e. polar amino acid ABC uptake transporter substrate binding protein of 
Streptococcus thermophilus LMG 18311 (Accession No. YP_139361). Amino acid sequence of the the template (3HV1) shows 41% 
sequence identity, “*” - single, fully conserved residue; “:” - conservation of strong groups; “.” - conservation of weak groups; - no 
consensus; B) Homology modelled structure of the amino acid ABC transporter (binding protein) of C. perfringens SM101 
(Accession No. YP_698644) derived from SWISS-MODEL server; C) The putative glutamate binding site (a stretch from amino 
acids 118 to 124) on the modelled structure are shown. Only three amino acids are shown in red.

