Background
In developing countries including India textile, leather and paper industries
represent an important economic sector. Huge amount of capital and
Human resource is engaged in these industries. These industries are one of
the most important sources of Environmental pollution. Mills of these
industries emancipate enormous amount of waste matter each year, that
contain variety of chemicals such as formaldehyde, chlorine, heavy metals
(such as lead and mercury) and toxic dyes, which lay noteworthy
foundation of environmental degradation and human illnesses. Most -the
dyes that are released from these industries are polymers possessing very
complex structure and are very difficult to decompose biologically 
[].
Many reactive dyes are not degraded in ordinary aerobic sewage treatment
processes and that they can be discharged unaffected from the treatment
plant []. 
An even very minute concentration of dyes in effluent is visible
and is often carcinogenic []. 
Laccase belongs to group of enzyme named
as large blue copper proteins or blue copper oxidases possessing
polyphenol oxidase activity. It functions by generally reducing oxygen to
water simultaneously oxidizing a polyphenolic substrate .Laccase has
evolved with a remarkable property of non‐specificity of its reducing
substrates and encompass vast range of substrates oxidized 
[], making it a
marvelous contrivance to oxidize toxic dyes which are generally
polyphenols[]. 
Knowledge of 3D structure of Laccase can aid us to
uncover the mystery of how Laccase has attained such huge functional
diversity. To experimentally discover functionality of any protein, the
information of its 3D structure remains an indispensable fact, which is
achieved using techniques like X‐Ray Crystallography or NMR
spectroscopy. Experimental techniques are very tedious and prolonged and
not always succeed in determining structure for all proteins especially
membrane proteins []. 
Moreover, the rate at which protein sequence data
is accumulating is far more than the structural information available, thus
creating a gap between available sequences and experimentally solved
structures. Computational methods like homology modeling can help
reduce this gap. It is known that existing proteins are result of continuous
evolution of previously existing ones, thus proteins can be grouped into
families. Members in same family are similar and thus have similar folds;
this fact allows predicting the structure of other members of family if
structure of single member is known and the technique by which this task
is achieved is termed as Homology Modeling. Modeller 
[] is stand‐alonepackage 
for homology modeling that accomplishes the job by method
called ‘Satisfaction of spatial restraints’ using a set of restraints derived
from the alignment and expressed as Probability Density Functions, finally
the model is obtained by minimizing the violations to these restraints.
Studies have proved that Modeller outperforms most of other homology
modeling suits, it's fast, reliable and freely available and hence we selected
it in current study [].

Methodology
Sequence Retrieval and Template selection
The sequence of laccase enzyme of “Pycnoporus cinnabarinus” was
retrieved from SWISS‐PROT [] database with accession number O59896.
The complete sequence length of Laccase was reported as 518 amino acid
residues which is synthesized as inactive precursor having first 21 residues
as signaling peptide, the remaining 22 to 518 residues constitute the
functional domains of the enzyme []. 
Hence while searching template,first 21 amino acid residues were removed. A template selection search
was performed using BLAST‐P [] 
against PDB [] database from
NCBI interface simultaneously ”Template Identification Tool” at Swiss‐
Model interface [] 
provided by Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics was utilized for template selection. 
In results, 12 significant hits with E‐value zero were observed, the best of these 
comprise of model 3FPX‐A and 3DIV‐A from species Trametes hirsute 
and Cerrena maxima sharing 84 % and 82% sequence identity with query sequence. 
The remaining three, of which two models 2QT6‐B and 2VDZ‐A are Laccase from Lentinus
tigrinus and Coriolopsis gallica respectively showing 77 % sequence
identity with query sequence, while template 1GYC‐A from species
Tremetes versicolor seems to have 78 % sequence identical to that of
laccase from Pycnoporus cinnabarinus. Similar results were obtained from
NCBI BLAST‐P server.

Sequence Analysis
Elementary domain analysis carried out on “InterPro Domain Scan”
[]
revealed presence of one Multicopper oxidase domains of type I, II and III
each from residue number 163 ‐ 305, 365 ‐ 492, 30 ‐ 152 respectively, in
addition one copper binding site is predicted around residue number 125 to
145. Phylogenetic analysis was performed using traditional approach i.e.
Multiple sequence alignment (MSA) was constructed using Clustal-Xversion 1.81 
[] 
followed by tree reconstruction using Phylip Package
[]. 
1000 datasets of query sequence were generated by resampling the
original MSA using Seqboot followed by estimation of unrooted
phylogeny for each dataset by using Protpars. Subsequently using family
of consensus tree methods called the Ml methods implemented in
Consense program, a consensus tree was drawn following majority rule
consensus. Laccase from species Coriolus zonatus was used as an outgroup
in tree reconstruction process. Finally, a rooted tree without using branch
length was generated (see ) using Drawgram program. 

clearly illustrates that Templates 3FPX and 3DIV are closest ancestor of
query sequence and thus were used as templates for further modeling
process. One interesting fact to note is that template 1GYC, which has
higher sequence identity (78 %) to query, is distantly related as compared
to templates 2VDZ and 2QT6 which shares less sequence identity (77 %).

Modeling of the structure
The Align2D command from Modeller was utilized to align query
sequence to template structures, followed by generation of models by
Loop‐Model class. Five models were allowed to be build from each
template and single loopmodel was generated after refinement process.
Thus five models from each template were generated. At the same time
SWISS‐MODEL server was also used to generate models using same template. 
Energy minimization was carried out by first implementing the
Conjugate Gradient and subsequently Molecular Dynamics(MD) approach;
Conjugate Gradient was allowed to perform 200 optimizing iterations
using a modified version of the Beale restart conjugate gradients method,
while Molecular Dynamics optimization was performed at 300 Kelvin for
500 MD steps using the leap‐frog Verlet integrator.

Model Evaluation
Models so produced were ranked on QMEAN server []. All the models
created by means of Modeller using template 3FPX had Qmean score
above 0.83 indicating good quality of each model produced, while only
one model (Model 2.pdb) generated using template 3DIV had Qmean score above 0.83 
(See Table 1 in ); 
also Models generated by using Swiss model Automated homology modeling server
had score 0.85 and 0.84 for template 3FPX and 3DIV respectively. Models
deduced by template 3DIV showed poor QMEAN score despite of the
method used (Modeller or SwissModel server). Models were evaluated on
basis of geometrical and stereochemical constraints using ProCheck 
[]
and factors like unfavorable atomic contacts, side chain planarity
problems, connections to aromatic rings out of plane etc were assessed
using WhatCheck (WhatIf) [] 
utilities available at SIB server. Finally the models were visualized using Chimera software 
[].

Discussion
It is evident from Table 2 (see ) and 

that best model created using template 3FPX employing Modeller program
(Model1.pdb) has more than 91 % of its Non Proline and Non Glycine
amino acid residues in core region, 7.7 % in allowed region, 0.5 % in
generously allowed regions and only 0.5 % in disallowed region as
compared to models created using SWISSMODEL (Model 3FPX
swissmodel.pdb) have only 82 % of its Non Proline and Non Glycine
amino acid residues in core region, 16.4 % in allowed region, 0.5 % in
generously allowed regions and none of its amino acid residue lie in
disallowed region, in other words approximately only 8 % of residues
created using template 3FPX employing Modeller lie outside Core region
as compared to 17.2 % of residues created using template 3FPX employing
SWISSMODEL remain outside Core region indicating that models created
using Modeller are better in terms of geometrical and stereo chemical
properties; Similarly in case of best model created using template 3DIV by
means of Modeller(Model1.pdb) has around 89 % of its Non Proline and
Non Glycine amino acid residues in core region, 9.6 % in allowed region,
0.7 % in generously allowed regions and none of its amino acid residue lie
in disallowed region as compared to models created using
SWISSMODEL(Model 3DIV swissmodel.pdb) that have 83% of its Non
Proline and Non Glycine amino acid residues in core region, 15.4% in
allowed region, 0.5 % in generously allowed regions and 0.7% in
disallowed, in other words approximately only 10.3 % of residues created
using template 3FPX employing Modeller lie outside Core region as
compared to 16.8 % of residues created using template 3FPX employing
SWISSMODEL region again demonstrating that models created using
Modeller are better in terms of geometrical and stereo chemical properties
(Table 3 see  and 
).

The WhatIf report reveals 5 errors regarding Side chain planarity problems
in models created using 3FPX as template utilizing SWISSMODEL in
contrast only two out of five models created using Modeller showed that
error containing single residue possessing side chain planarity problem;
none of model possessed error of Connections to aromatic rings out of
plane in case of MODELLER while 6 same errors were identified in model
created at SWISSMODEL server.

In case of models created using 3DIV as template utilizing Modeller
reported single side chain planarity problem error in only one model out of
five, in contrast 18 side chain planarity problem errors were observed in
model created using SWISSMODEL. None of aromatic rings had
connection out of plane in any model created using MODELLER while 8
residues had aromatic rings that had connection out of plane in model
generated at SWISSMODEL server.

Domain Analysis
As predicted in sequence, all the three domains are detected in structure.
The type III copper binding domain containing Plastocyanin fold is shown
in Ribbon representation in  
with copper binding site in Sticks
representation among ASN 130 and PRO 132, the predicted copper
binding residues in Magenta. Type I and Type II domains are depicted in
 and 
 respectively, while 
 represents the
entire tertiary structure of Laccase with all the three domains.

Conclusion
Finally to conclude, Model 1 constructed using template 3FPX employing
MODELLER performs better in ProCheck and WhatIf structure validation
test as compared to models made at SWISSMODEL server. The same
model also outperforms the models created using 3DIV as template.
Furthermore we can utilize the resulting models of this work in Molecular
Docking studies to gain more insight of its interaction with its mediators
like Vanillin and ABTS that are known to enhance its activity

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Meshram etal; Bioinformation 5(4): 150-154 (2010)

Evolutionary relationship of query sequence with templates

Alignment of query sequence with 3FPX template

A Procheck results for best model created employing Modeller using 
3FPX as template B Procheck results for best model created utilizing
Modeller using 3DIV as template

A Type III copper binding Domain (Sky Blue Ribbons) with side chains of 
residues of metal binding site (Red sticks); B All three domains with
green coloured (Type III), orange coloured (Type I), dark magenta coloured (Type II); 
C Type I copper binding domain with β‐sheets in Magenta, Helices
in Orange and Loops in Grey; D Type II copper binding domain with rainbow colouring scheme.

