Background
Narrowing of airways is a symptom of allergies caused by
tracheal smooth muscle contractions. Histamine plays an
important role in airway of smooth muscle contraction.
Activation of histamine H1 receptors induce airway obstruction
in human by histamine []. The therapies of allergies symptoms
in respiratory tract can use the substances that inhibit the
interaction of histamin with its receptors. This substance is
named histamin receptor antagonists (antihistamins). The drugs
have been used extensively to treat allergies. The mechanism of
antihistamins is antagonising the histamin receptors, especially
the H1 receptor [].

Various natural compounds isolated from plants have been
developed and used as medicines to treat various diseases.
Recently, the studies of new drug development from various
plants are continuing such as marmin [(7 - (6 ', 7'-
dihydroxygeranyl-oxy) coumarine], skimmianine [4,7,8 -
(trimetoxyfuro (2.3 - b) quinolin], aegeline [N-[2-hydroxy-2 (4-
metoxyfenyl) ethyl]-3-phenyl-2-propenamide], aurapten,
zeorin, and dustanin. They are the active compounds contained
in stem bark and cortex roots of Aegle marmelos Correa 
[–].
Reportedly, marmin is very potent to inhibit the histamin
release from cultured RBL-2H3 cells through inhibition of Ca2+
uptake in vitro. Marmin at a concentration of 100 µM
suppressed the release of histamin by more than 60% (which is
induced by thapsigargin and DNP24-BSA) and by more than
50% (which is induced by ionomycin) in comparison to those of
the control group []. Marmin was also able to inhibit the influx
of Ca2+ extracellular into RBL-2H3 cells, then inhibit the release
of histamin by 70% in comparison to those of the control group
[]. 
Skimmianine at a concentration of 100 µM depleted the
release of histamin by 60% (which are induced by DNP24-BSA
and thapsigargin) and by more than 70% (which is induced by
ionomycin) in comparison to those of the control group 
[].

Methodology
Collection of histamine protein sequence:
The structure of protein as a target was downloaded from the
Protein Data Bank website (http://www.rcsb.org/pdb). The
protein was H1 histamine receptor (PDB code of 3RZE). As a
ligand assay used six active compounds of Aegle Marmelos
Correa, these were (E, R)-marmin, skimmianine, (S)-aegeline,
auraptene, zeorine, and dustanine. For comparison of
antihistamine, cetirizine, diphenhydramine and
chlorpheniramine were used  (see supplementary
material).

Protein Preparation:
Homology modelling was accomplished by using YASARA
program. FASTA files of 3RZE (the enzyme was downloaded
from website: http/www.pdb.org).First, 3RZE pdb file inserted
to the YASARA program. Removing part of the system was not
required in docking protocol (merely require a single protein
and ligand, including water if essential). Subsequently, 5EH
should have removed that still appear in the system. Thus,
Adding hydrogen into the system by YASARA program, since
the resolution of crystal structures are not able to predict the
presence of hydrogen. Adding hydrogen into a single protein
has a result of 3RZE.yob.Then, removing the original ligand,
take only the target protein alone with a pocket for simulating
docking. 3RZE.yob must be changed into protein.mol2 because
docking simulation only though that a pocked used to attach by
ligand was a protein.

Ref_ligand Preparation:
Ref_ligand preparation was done by using YASARA program.
3RZE.yob was needed to get a ref_ligand. Ref_ligand is helped
a ligand finding coordinates pocket, so it was very important of
simulation by molecular docking. Chemical compounds were
on the 3RZE.yob must have to remove, except for 5EH and
D7V. ref_ligand.mol2 was a result of 5EH and D7V by
removing chemical compound that still exist on a protein.

Ligand Preparation:
Three dimensional (3D) configuration structure and initial of
ligand were contributed significantly in quality of molecular
docking simulations. Differences in decision of protonation
states and tautomers of the ligands for SBVS input can lead to
different solutions of the SBVS protocols [,
]. Marvin of
ChemAxon was chosen to be applied since the application
provides features to perform protonation analysis in desired pH
as well as tautomers and conformers generations 
[].
ChemAxon also provides objective functions that enable us to
assess and choose the most plausible tautomer and the 3D
configurations of the ligand in appropriate protonation state 
[].
(E, R)-marmine, skimmianine, (S)-aegeline, auraptene, zeorine,
and dustanine were ligands for docking simulation. The results
are deposited as a mol2 file to be applied further in molecular
docking simulations using PLANTS []. Save as ligand.mol2.

Simulation Docking PLANTS:
The active constituents that were docked with the protein are
(E, R)-marmin, skimmianine, (S)-aegeline, auraptene, zeorine,
and dustanine. After the docking process was finishing, you
will see 10 of ligand conformation that binds to the 3RZE with
different energies. For evaluation and outcome interpretation
data of docking were chosen ten conformations which have the
smallest score.

Results &amp; Discussion
Docking protocol which used in this step like the docking's
protocol validation step, there are docking each of 10 ligands
conformation and ligands comparison test on the protein which
has been prepared before. Based on the docking score, marmin
compound, skimmianin, aegelin, cetirizin, diphenhydramine
and chlorpheniramine were docked onto the histamine H1
receptor, and obtained the following results showed in 
().

Based on results of visualization above ( &amp; 
) show that
the ligands (marmin, skimmianine, aegeline, auraptene,
zeorine, and dustanine) may interact with the amino acid
residues, Asp107, Lys179, Lys191, Asn198, and Trp428 of the
histamine H1 receptor including have different bond distances
of each. Based on those interactions, the hydrogen bonds form
and van der Waals forces were predicted.  shows that
which amino acid residues dominantly play role in receptorligand
interactions, they were in helix III, V, and VI. According
to Shimamura et al (2011) and Rahim (2010) both of amino acids
Asp107 and Trp428 were amino acid playing important role on
binding of histamine receptor as antagonists, as well as in
GPCR activation [,
]. When viewed from the distance of
amino acid's interaction, native ligand, ligands, and ligand's
comparison to Asp107 and Trp428, native ligand and ligand's
comparison have more closer the bond distances (smaller
energy).

In previous study, marmin was reported to be a very potent
inhibitor of the histamine release from RBL-2H3 cell cultures by
inhibition on Ca2+ uptake. Marmin at a concentration of 100 µM
suppressed the release of histamine by more than 60% (which is
induced by thapsigargin and DNP24-BSA) and by more than
50% (which is induced by ionomycin) in comparison to the
control []. Marmin also able to inhibit extracellular Ca2+ influx
into RBL-2H3 cells, and inhibited the release of histamine by &gt;
70% in comparition to the control []. Skimmianine at a
concentration of 100 µM succeeded to deplete the release of
histamine by 60% (which is induced by thapsigargin and
DNP24-BSA) and by more than 70% (which is induced by
ionomycin) in comparison to the control cell []. Aegeline at a
concentration of 100 µM suppressed the release of histamine by
40% (which is induced by DNP24-BSA) and by more than 50%
(which is induced by thapsigargin and ionomycin) in
comparison to the control cell []. 
The results of Nugroho et al.
study (2011) showed that Marmin has an activity as competitive
reversible antagonist of H1 receptor, non-competitive reversible
antagonist of ACh Mus3-receptor, and no effect on β2-
adrenergic receptor. These results showed that marmin,
skimmianine, and aegeline are potential to develop as an antiallergic
agent, especially as histamine H1 receptor antagonists
(antihistamines H1) [].

Cetirizin is a second-generation of H1 antihistamines (secondgeneration
antihistamines) that non-sedative antihistamine than
another and selectively binds to the histamine H1 receptor, and
also acts as an inverse agonist []. Diphenhydramine, also acts
as an inverse agonist at the histamine H1 receptor 
[].
Chlorpheniramine is a first-generation of antihistamines are
widely used in the treatment of allergies, which competes with
endogenous compound of histamine in histamine H1 receptor
and also inhibits the action of endogenous histamine 
[]. All of
three antihistamines are used as a comparison to determine
whether the active compounds of Aegle Marmelos Correa has an
antihistamine effect.

Virtual screening demonstrated interaction between the ligand
and amino acids of the protein histamine-1 receptor []. The
histamin-1 receptor have many kinds of amino acids, however
only spesific amino acids contributing to the histaminrgic
activity, they are Asp107, Lys179, Lys191, Asn198, and Trp428.
Based on the calculation of bond distance, cetirizin exhibited
closer proximity distance of the amino acids Asp107, Lys191,
and Trp428 than (E, R)-Marmin. Cetirizin has a distance of 1.72
angstrom on amino acids Asp107, 3:36 angstrom on amino acids
Lys191, and 3:26 angstrom on Trp428. Whereas (E, R)-Marmin
has distances of 2.69 angstrom; 3.85; and 4.97 angstrom
respectively. The closest a ligand to the receptor indicates that
the greatest intrinsic activity appeared. The proximity result of
cetirizin has required less energy (-109.4690) than (E, R)-
Marmin (-102.2860) for binding to the active site of histamine-1
receptor. However (E, R)-marmin still had antihistamin activity
more higher than auraptene, histamin, skimmianine. Those
results were not only based on the docking score, but based also
on the interaction distance ligand to the active site of a protein.
It was caused by the distance of auraptene, histamin,
skimmianine were higher than that of (E, R)-marmin.

Conclusions
Natural compounds with the best score on H1 antihistamines
assay is native ligand 5EH. Based on molecular docking, Amino
acid residues involved in ligand protein interactions were
Asp107, Lys179, Lys191, Asn198, and Trp428.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Nugroho et al, Bioinformation 9(8): 383-387 (2013)

Docking score of ligand molecules test and ligand's
comparison on 3RZE. Note : docking score that shown is
scoring which obtained from ligand binding protein with the
lowest energy

Visualization of ligand interactions with amino acid
residues of H1 histamine receptor, Asp107, Lys179, Lys191,
Asn198, and Trp428. Note: amino acid residues (black); native
ligand of 5EH (blue); native ligand of D7V (red); (E,R)-marmin
(gray); skimmianine (orange); (S)-aegeline (yellow); auraptene
(green); zeorine (white); dustanine (pink); histamine (cyan);
cetirizine (purple); diphenhydramine (green bright);
chlorpheniramine (magenta)

Visualization the distance of ligand interactions with amino acid residues of H1 histamine receptor Asp107, Lys179,
Lys191, Asn198, and Trp428, respectively (a) (E,R)-marmin (b) (S)-aegeline (c) auraptene. Each ligand forming Hydrogen bonds
(black dotted line) with active site residues depicted as line.

