Background
Multidrug resistance in bacteria is becoming common, both in the 
community and nosocomial settings  []. Extended spectrum β-lactamases 
(ESBLs) are the enzymes produced by resistant bacteria which hydrolyze 
advanced-generation cephalosporin  antibiotics (such as cefotaxime and 
ceftazidime) and cause resistance against these drugs, SHV enzymes are 
among the most prevalent ESBLs []. ESBLs coding genes are transferred 
through horizontal gene transfer as they are mostly present on plasmids 
[,]. 
The frequent emergence of SHVs variants may lead us to understand 
the structure of newly identified enzymes so that potential and versatile 
drug candidates can be designed to cope up with the problem of resistance. 
SHV-variants up to SHV-131 have already been reported []. Identification 
of the amino acid residues crucial to the interaction between SHV-variants 
(the bacterial enzymes) and  β-drug molecules is a topic of priority 
research. This information might be useful for the scientists involved in 
designing SHV-resistant drugs. Effective formulations consisting of  β-
lactam antibiotic and SHV-inhibitor might be designed to be given as a 
single drug to patients infected with SHV-producing bacteria.

It has been observed earlier that hydrogen bonds play a crucial role in the 
binding of ceftazidime to SHV-57 []. They concluded that the substitution 
of arginine for leucine-169 in the  Ω-loop is important for substrate 
specificity and causes ceftazidime resistance in SHV-57 producing bacteria 
[]. This is first study reporting modeling of SHV-105/95/89/61 or 48 and 
their docking with advanced generation cephalosporins . Also, there was 
no X-ray crystallographic structure available with the Protein Data Bank 
for these variants of SHV-family at the time of communicating this paper.

In view of the present background, we have initiated our study to identify 
the mode of interaction of recent SHV-variants with advanced generation 
cephalosporins. Aims of the study were: 
Modeling of recent SHV variants,

Docking of advance generation cephalosporins with modeled 
SHV enzymes to identify amino acid residues crucial to their interaction, and

predicting comparative efficacies of these drugs against the said 
enzymes on the basis of interaction energies of docking.




Methodology
Homology Modeling
The recent variants of SHV (SHV-105, SHV-95, SHV-89, SHV-61 and 
SHV-48) selected for the study whose structures are not available were 
searched from the database  maintained exclusively for  β-lactamase 
enzymes [].  
The sequences used in the present study appear in Swissprot 
[] 
with Primary (citable) accession number:B6E133 (SHV-105), A3FFR5 
(SHV-95),  Q3HUP1 (SHV-89),  Q2WEB8 (SHV-61) and Q83YP9 (SHV-
48). The crystal structure of SHV-1 β-lactamase (Pdb : 3D4F) available at 
RCSB Protein Data Bank [] 
was used as a template for constructing the 3-
D models of our selected recent  SHV variants. Homology modeling was 
done for generating structures of  these recent SHV variants through 
Modeller9v3. The swissprot sequence  with Primary (citable) accession 
D2KB79 was used as a reference sequence for detecting mutations.

Energy Minimization and Model Validation
Models generated were further subjected to energy minimization using 
Steepest descent algorithm with 200 steps and at RMS gradient 0.1 .The 
stereochemistry quality of the structures where validated with 
PROCHECK, WHATIF and Verify 3D.  Quality factors for the enzyme 
models were calculated using ERRAT2 [].

Molecular Docking study
PDB structures of advanced generation cephalosporins were retrieved from 
Drug bank [].  The drugs were docked into each of the energy minimized 
modeled enzyme-structures using AUTODOCK4.0 []. For the inhibitors, 
charges of the Gasteiger type were assigned.  The MMFF94 force field was 
used for energy minimization of ligand molecules. Gasteiger partial 
charges were added to the ligand atoms. Non-polar hydrogen atoms were 
merged, and rotatable bonds were defined. Docking calculations were 
carried out on the protein models. Essential hydrogen atoms, Kollman 
charges , and solvation parameters were added with the aid of AutoDock 
tools. Affinity (grid) maps of 60×60×60 Å grid points and 0.375 Å spacing 
were generated using the Autogrid program. AutoDock parameter set and 
distance-dependent dielectric functions were used in the calculation of the 
van der Waals and the electrostatic terms, respectively. Docking 
simulations were performed using the Lamarckian genetic algorithm 
(LGA). The docking parameters set to perform each docking experiment 
was derived from 15 different runs that were set to terminate after a 
maximum of 2500000 energy evaluations, elitism of 1, mutation rate 0.02, 
cross-over rate of 0.8, local search rate of 0.06. The population size was set 
to 150. The best run coordinates of the drugs with enzyme were visualized 
and analyzed through Discovery Studio 2.5 for analysis of their mode of 
interaction with binding site residues.

Results and Discussion
The genes for SHV-48 and SHV-95 were originally reported from 
Acinetobacter baumannii and  Citrobacter freundii, respectively while 
those for SHV-48, SHV-89 and SHV-105 were reported from  K. 
pneumoniae strains.  shows multiple sequence alignment of these 
enzymes with a reference sequence  [SHV-1, Primary (citable) accession 
D2KB79].  MULTALIN alignments revealed that the SDN loop (positions 
130-132) and KTG motif (positions 234-236) were conserved in all the 
study SHV sequences. These are typical structures of class A enzymes 
[].

The aminoacid residues in most favoured region as revealed by 
Ramachandran plot were found to be close to 90% in all the generated 
protein structures modeled from blaSHV 
For instance, percent amino acid.
residues in disallowed regions of the Ramachandran plot for the modeled 
SHV enzyme were zero (data not shown). All the enzyme structures were 
modeled using 3D4F.pdb as template. The target sequences possessed 
more than 80% sequence-identity with the said template. The Errat2 
expresses the overall quality of all the modeled structures was found to be 
above 93 in each case. Ramachandran Z-score expresses how well the 
backbone conformations of all the residues correspond to the known 
allowed areas in the Ramachandran plot. Accordingly, the Ramachandran 
Z-scores for modeled SHV-48, SHV-61, SHV-89, SHV-95 and SHV-105 
enzymes were found to be -2.560, -2.577, -3.013, -2.752 and -2.872, 
respectively. More than 90% of the residues in each modeled enzymes had 
an averaged 3D-1D score &gt; 0.2 (data not shown)This is the first 
time our data showed the efficacies of advanced generation 
cephalosporin with recent SHV variants. blaSHV is among the most 
prevalent ESBLs. The drug that was showing least binding energy with the 
enzyme was found to have higher minimum inhibitory concentration 
(MIC) i.e that drug was not showing better efficacy while the drug 
complexed with enzyme with higher  binding energy was showing lower 
MIC and was considered to be a better drug this has also been shown 
earlier []. 
shows binding pocket residues and the interaction of 
each of the modeled enzyme structures with cefepime, ceftazidime and 
cefatoxime separately. Most SHV type ESBLs have the G238S substitution 
alone or combined with alterations  at position 240. Accordingly, G238S 
substitution was observed in SHV-48, SHV-95 and SHV-105 while G240 
was conserved in all the studied variants. It is the premier substitution that 
preserves penicillin and cephalosporin resistance in general and is found on 
the β3 strand []. 
It was analyzed that out of the 15 docking interactions 
in this study, residues A237, R275, S70, K234, R244, N132 and S130 were 
found crucial. Of 15 docks performed, cephalosporine  showed interaction 
with these important residues viz  A237 (11 instances), R275 (6 instances), 
S70 (6 instances) K234 (6 instances), R234 (6 instances), R244 (5 
instances),  N132 (5 instances) and S130 (5 instances). Amino acid 
residues involved in H-bond formation with reference to each of the 
docked complexes studied are listed in  Table 1 (see 
). 
This information might be useful for designing potential and 
versatile drug candidates.

Our data revealed that  the cefatoxime was found to be the best antibiotic 
against all the variants used in this study except SHV-48 where 
ceftazidime was more effective.  Moreover, cefapime was observed as least 
effective antibiotic against these variants.  The interaction energies are 
given in Table 1 (see ). It was also found in the 
study that the amino acid residues at position A237, R275, S70, K234, 
R244, N132 and S130 were playing crucial role in the interaction of SHV 
variants with these antibiotics. Furthermore, our study also revealed that 
R275 was reported first time in such interactions. Minimum free energy of 
interaction or tight binding for an enzyme-drug -complex is regarded as an 
indicator of resistance (High MIC) against drug. Interaction energy and Ki 
value calculated for each of the docked complexes are shown in table 1. In 
earlier studies it has also been observed that the calculated binding free 
energy values are with inverse proportional to the corresponding MIC 
values for enzyme-drug complexes  []. Moreover, previously, authors 
have used interaction energies of docking to compare the efficacy of 
different neuraminidase inhibitors against newly evolved strains of H1N1 
viruses  []. 
Our data is consistent with the earlier studies  [,
].
Accordingly, interaction energy and Ki calculations confirmed cefatoxime 
to be the most efficient antibiotic against all the studied bacterial enzymes. 
It was found that Cefatoxime is the drug that showed resistance against the 
action of SHVs and hence may be the drug of choice.

The homology models of the 3-D structures of SHV-48, SHV-61, SHV-89, 
SHV-95 and SHV-105 enzymes were submitted to PMDB  [] and were 
assigned the identifiers PM0076258, PM0076262, PM0076259, 
PM0076260, and PM0076261, respectively.

Conclusions
This study concludes the role of crucial amino acid residues involve in 
‘SHV-cephalosporins’ interactions. Moreover, we have first time identified 
a significant role of arginine at  position 275 in binding site of SHV 
variants. This information would be useful in designing new drugs against 
recent SHV variants. Furthermore, on the basis of interaction energies, 
cefatoxime was found to be the best  and most effective drug against the 
studied SHV enzymes.

Authors' contributions
MHB performed the in silico studies and write first draft of manuscript. 
AUK designed the problem, wrrote the manuscript and was a guide 
throughout the study. GW helped in discussion.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We acknowledge the DBT Govt. of India for the financial support as well 
as traineeship to MHB. Author is also thankful to Prof M Saleemuddin for 
providing internal support.

Citation:Khan et al, Bioinformation 5(8):331- 335 (2011)

Multiple sequence alignment of recent SHV-variants

(a)Interaction of modeled SHV-105 with Cefepime; (b)Interaction of modeled SHV-105 with  Cefatoxime; (c)Interaction of modeled SHV-
105 Ceftazidime; (d)Interaction of modeled SHV-95 with Cefepime; (e)Interaction of modeled SHV-95 Cefatoxime: (f)Interaction of modeled SHV-95 
Ceftazidime; (g)Interaction of modeled SHV-89 with Cefepime; (h)Interaction of modeled SHV-89Cefatoxime; (i)Interaction of modeled SHV-89 
Ceftazidime; (j)Interaction of modeled SHV-61 with Cefepime; (k)Interaction of modeled SHV-61 Cefatoxime; (l)Interaction of  modeled SHV-
61Ceftazidime; (m)Interaction of modeled SHV-48 with Cefepime; (n)Interaction of modeled SHV-48Cefatoxime; (o)Interaction of modeled SHV-
48Ceftazidime

