Background
Fishes are the most diverse group of vertebrates, with ca. 32200
species (http://www.fishbase.org) characterized by great
diversity of their morphology, physiology, ecology, life history
and behaviour. The classical methodology for identification of
fish species is based on morphometric and meristic
characteristics that cannot precisely identify and characterize
closely related fish species and subspecies leading to problems
of fisheries management []. Cytogenetic markers are authentic
tools for characterization of fish species as well as to screen
putative hybrids [,
]. These markers were found useful for
detection of intraspecific stocks and populations within species
[] and in resolving taxonomic ambiguities between some
species []. Cytogenetic investigations, thus have gained
importance in species characterization, evolution and
systematics, mutagenesis, environmental toxicology,
aquaculture [–] and eventually for conservation and
sustainable utilization of aquatic biodiversity. India is rich in
fish diversity, which is reflected in its large number of
documented 2438 finfish species [] which includes 1370 (63%)
species from marine ecosystem; however the basic karyomorphological
data is available for about 200 species [–].
Further, marine fishes have not received much deserved
attention towards their genetic characterization since a little
over 45 marine species have been cytogenetically characterized
[,
,
]. Attempts were made worldwide for documenting
cytogenetic information in the form of digital databases such as
Atlas of Genetics and Cytogenetics in Oncology and
Haematology (http://atlasgeneticsoncology.org/), Cytogenetics
and Chromosome disorders (http://www.vivo.colostate.
edu/hbooks/genetics /medgen/chromo/index.html), Cytogenetics
Gallery(http://www.pathology.washington.edu/galleries/cytogallery
/main.php), General Cytogenetics Information, Cytogenetics Resources
(http://www .kumc.edu /gec/prof/ cytogene.html), Human
Cytogenetic Database (http:// www. ncbi.nlm. nih.gov/ pmc/
articles/ PMC1016683/), Online Cytogenetics of Animals (OCOA)
(http://www.angis.org.au/ Databases/Birx/ocoa/) etc. As
digital databases are not available on fish chromosomes in
public domain, we developed an Internet-database named ‘Fish
Karyome’ with a view to systematically maintain the karyotype
information from various published sources about Indian fish
species from different eco regions. In addition to the
karyological information, we also collected the phenotypic
information of the fishes. At present, Fish Karyome contains
karyotype information about 171 finfish species. The database
has been opened to the public on web page that provides
information on chromosome number and morphology, sex
chromosomes, karyotype formula and cytogenetic markers like
nucleolar organiser regions, constitutive heterochromatic bands
etc. Additionally, it provides images of karyotype, fish images,
taxonomy, locality, geographical distribution, IUCN Red list
status and references.

Methodology
Data overview:
To develop the Fish Karyome database a majority of the
information was taken from ‘Fish Chromosome Atlas of India’
[] 
and ‘Fish Chromosome Search Software’ 
[]. Additionally,
we collected karyotype and the phenotypic information
including the photograph of fishes from different published
sources.  (see supplementary material) shows the list of
parameters selected to collect the karyotype and phenotypic
information about the fish species. At present, we have
documented 377 karyological and phenotypic records of 171
Indian fish species from 43 families and 10 orders.

Development of the Internet-database
Database structure and development:
We used SQL Server 2008, a relational database management
systems to build the database. The database contains
interrelated eight tables to store the relevant information about
171 fish species of India.  (see supplementary material)
shows the table names with description and () shows
the structure of the database.

Web interface:
The web interface for the database was developed using
ASP.NET's Integrated Development Environment. We
incorporated user friendly tools in the interface integrated with
database to provide convenience to work with the database.
The web interface utilizes HTML (Hyper Text Markup
Language), CSS (Cascading Style Sheets) and ASP Scripts
(Active Server pages) to provide the static and dynamic content
to the user. We included all the database management functions
in the web interface for security reasons. The web interface
along with database was implemented on Windows Sever
running Internet Information Server. () shows the
architecture of the web database and sample screen view of the
web interface integrated with database.

Results
Accessing the Fish Karyome database content:
At present, our database provides karyological and phenotypic
information about 171 fish species of India to the public on web
page at URL: http://www.nbfgr.res.in/fishkaryome/ When
the home page is accessed, a user web interface with six
hyperlinks entitled “About us”, “Family search”, “Keyword
search”, “Specific search”, “Acknowledgement”, “Contact” and
“Feedback” is displayed. The user can get relevant information
and work with the database through these hyperlinks. To access
and update the database content, we integrated various search,
browsing, and data submission tools through user login section
only for authenticated users in our database through the web
interface.

Querying the database:
The web interface of the database provides a rich set of
functions for searching the database. These search functions are
‘Family Search’, ‘Specific Search’ and ‘Keyword Search’. These
search function allows the user to make query with the database
in the interactive way.

Family search:
This search allows the user to select a family from the list box
displaying 43 families to view individual fish species available
in the selected family. () shows the sample screen view
of ‘Family search’ further selection of the fish species by the user
provides the detailed karyotype and phenotypic information
along with images.

Specific search:
This search provides the three options namely ‘Order’, ‘Species’
and ‘Locality’ to the user to view the information by selecting
the option of interest. Clicking the radio button against the each
option eventually provides the scientific name, common name
and references information on fish species along with link. The
link provides the detailed karyotype and phenotypic
information about 171 fish species belonging to 10 orders and
88 localities.

Keyword Search:
This is a simple text based search that allows the user to
perform the search on all fields of the database based on the
keyword using all, any one and exactly tools, either of the
search criteria. This provides freedom to the user to query with
the database and view the information based on the keyword of
interest.

Data Management:
To work with data, we integrated the database management
functions in the web interface for security reasons. These
functions are only available to the authenticated users and here
the user can not only submit and upload the data but also
modify the submitted data through query with the database.

Discussion
Genetic characterization of fish particularly economically
important and threatened species is pre-requisite for genetic
improvement programs and planning for their sustainable
conservation. Some of the classical cytogenetic markers have
been utilized earlier for characterization of fish species as well
as to establish phylogenetic relationship and resolving
taxonomic ambiguity [,
]. Additionally, cytogenetic markers
have been found useful for genetic discrimination of mahseer
species i.e. T. khudree, T. mussullah, T. putitora, T. tor, T.
chelynoides, T. progeneius and Neolissochilus hexagonolepis based
on the karyomorphology, number and position of nucleolar
organizer regions (NORs) []. In the past efforts were made to
develop the databases for vertebrates [], on chromosome
research [] and chromosome images 
[]. 
[] Constructed a
database system named CHRONIS (Chromosome and Nano-
Information System) to collect images of animal chromosomes
and related nano-technological information. Keeping in view
the growing importance of fish karyological information in
documentation and management of fish genetic resources 
[,
] 
the Fish Karyome is a new database from where the
karyological information could be shared with the scientific
community. The review of literature on database related to fish
cytogenetics indicated that no such database is available in
India and globally that provides the comprehensive karyotype
information in addition to phenotypic information on fishes.
Researchers can use our database to access images of
chromosomal complements of a particular species and to make
a comparative study of karyotypes of closely related fishes. The
database has wide range of applications in species
characterization and identification, chromosomal mapping,
searching sex determination, karyo-evolution and systematics
of fishes.

Conclusions and future directions:
To the best of our knowledge this is the first endeavour to
construct an integrated database of karyotype images and
information on Indian fishes. Our database system contains
classical karyotype images of fish chromosomes as well as
phenotypic information and is a powerful research tool for
researchers working on fish chromosomes. The database has
been kept open through World Wide Web for everyone to view
the records of karyological information. We have also provided
a submission panel that allows the users to upload their data
voluntarily from the panel. It is planned to make further
modifications to improve the usability of the database by
including the chromosome images of more fish species and by
linking our database to other genomic resource databases. We
also intend to rearrange all the karyotype images stored in our
database according to the taxonomic trees. It is expected that
Fish Karyome will become a more useful tool for researchers
working in the field of fish cytogenetics and genomics.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors are thankful to the National Agricultural
Bioinformatics Grid (NABG), under National Agricultural
Innovation Project (NAIP), ICAR, and New Delhi for providing
financial support and the Director, NBFGR, Lucknow for
providing necessary facilities to carry out this part of work.

Citation:Nagpure et al, Bioinformation 8(9): 440-444 (2012)

Architecture and sample screen viwe of the web
interface of Fish Karyome Database

E R- Diagram representing structure of the database
for Fish Karyome

Family search for displaying the information

