Background
Wheat (Triticum aestivum) is the important grain crop of the family Gramineae
(Poaceae) and the genus Triticum. Wheat, a polyploid (2n = 6x, AABBDD
genomes), has a large genome of 16x109 bp []. Abiotic stress such as drought,
salinity, extreme temperatures, chemical toxicity and oxidative stress are
serious threats to agricultural productivity. Production of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) such as hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), superoxide (O2.−), and the
hydroxyl radical (OH•), during environmental stress, is one of the main reasons
for decreases in productivity, injury, and death in plants. Plants have evolved
very efficient antioxidant enzyme systems to scavenge ROS and also protects
from injury caused by the oxidative stress []. Superoxide dismutase (SOD) is
an important antioxidant enzyme protecting many cellular components by
transforming superoxide anions (O2−) into H2O2 and O2. Based on the metal
cofactor the SOD enzyme is classified into three types Fe-SOD located in
chloroplast, CuZn-SOD located in chloroplast and cytosol, Mn-SOD located
mitochondria and peroxisomes, contains Mn(III) at the active site 
[].
Manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) is the primary antioxidant enzyme,
widely distributed in prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms and has been
proven to be the only form of SOD essential for the survival of aerobic life 
[].
MnSOD precursor protein encoded in the nucleus, is targeted to the
mitochondrial matrix, and is processed to become the active MnSOD enzyme
form after removal of the mitochondria-targeting leader sequence. The role of
MnSOD in plants has been extensively studied owing to the unique property of
mitochondrial protection and a possible role in tolerance of environmental
stresses such as chilling, freezing, oxidative stress, aluminum toxicity, etc. 
[].
The MnSOD holoenzyme in plants is composed of 4 subunits with a total
molecular mass of around 91 kDa []. 
In bread wheat (2n = 6x = 42) mapping
of 58 wheat ESTs revealed the presence of a total of 5 MnSOD genes on the
long arms of the 2A, 2B, and 2D chromosomes hexaploid genome 
[].

There is increasing interest in the MnSOD genes in plants for enhancing
tolerance of environmental stresses; however, there is insufficient information
available on the gene structure and regulatory elements of the wheat MnSOD
gene. A detailed analysis of the MnSOD sequences, their probable structures
and mode of action is yet to be accomplished. In this study, MnSOD of
Triticum aestivum was selected for which three dimensional structures were
neither available at the protein data bank (PDB) nor at the ModBase database.
Hence, we describe the structure model of MnSOD from bread wheat.

Methodology
Template Selection
The sequence of the wheat mitochondrial MnSOD was retrieved from
SwissProt database with accession number Q56DH8. Template selection was
done using BLASTp [] 
for the query sequence against PDB (Protein Data
Bank) database []. 
The target subsequently selected was the x-ray crystal
structure with PDB code 1N0J with a resolution of 2.2 Å.

Sequence analysis
All sequence alignments were completed using ClustalW 
[]. ScanProsite 
[]
was used to identify consensus pattern.

Homology Modeling
The 3D structure model of bread wheat MnSOD was development using
MODELLER™ 9v8 []. 
Five models were built by model-output.py program
of MODELLER™. The model with the lowest DOPE (Discrete Optimized
Protein Energy) score was considered for further refinement and validation.
Model was also generated by online modeling server, Swiss model 
[] using
same template.

Model Optimization
The model was subjected for energy minimization. The minimization was
carried out using GROMOS96 implemented incorporated in Swiss PDB
Viewer []. 
The GROMOS96 helped in minimization of bond stretch energy
of the modeled protein. It incorporated both bonded and non bonded form of
energy occupied in the protein molecule.

Model Evaluation
The model was evaluated on the basis of geometrical and stereo-chemical
constraints using PROCHECK [], ProSA-Web 
[] and Verify 3d 
[].
RMSD (Root Mean Square Deviation) analysis of the predicted model from its
template was calculated using SUPERPOSE [].

Prediction of Accessible Surface Area (ASA)
Accessible surface area of the model was predicted using ASAP server 
[].

Phylogenetic Analysis
Protein sequences identical to bread wheat mitochondrial MnSOD were
searched using NCBI BLAST program in Glycine max, Hordeum vulgare,
Oryza sativa, Zea mays and Arabidopsis thaliana. Secondary structure
prediction of wheat mitochondrial MnSOD using PROMALS3D was
performed []. 
For evaluating the phylogenetic relationship, the selected
sequences were aligned using alignment explorer in Mega 4.0 
[] with default
parameters. Unrooted phylogenetic tree of 16 MnSOD sequences was
constructed by the neighbor-joining (NJ) method in Mega 4 program. The level
of confidence was estimated using bootstrap of 1000 replications.

Discussion
The enzyme MnSOD is 231 amino acid residues long. Sequence search using
BLAST identified the crystal structure with PDB ID: 1N0J. The human
MnSOD (PDB ID: 1N0J) showed 58% sequence identity to the query sequence
with an E-value of 1e-59. ScanProsite server identified the fragment
DVWEHAYY from 192-199 residues as a consensus pattern. The sequence
alignment revealed that the metal ion interacting residues His53, His103,
Asp192 and His196 were conserved both in target and template 
(). We
then developed structures for bread wheat MnSOD using MODELLER™. Five
models were generated using this procedure. The model with the lowest DOPE
(Discrete Optimized Protein Energy, a statistical potential used to assess
homology models) score of -23108.04 was considered to be thermodynamically
stable and chosen for further refinement and validation. The stereochemical
quality and accuracy of the predicted model was evaluated using
Ramachandran plot in Procheck. The MODELLER™ generated model
produced 91.5% residue falling in most favored region, 6.9% residues in
additionally allowed region, 1.6% residues in generously allowed and with no
residues in the disallowed region of the Ramachandran plot. This model is also
compared with the Swiss Model with 90.0% residues in most favored region,
7.7% residues in additionally allowed region and 2.3% residues in generously
allowed region. Hence, the structure produced using MODELLER™ was used
for further analysis.

ProSA-Web analysis of the model revealed a Z-score value (a measure of
model quality as it measures the total energy of the structures) of -7.08
(negative value imply model accuracy) (). Verify3D showed 84.05%
of the residues had a score greater than 0.2 for a good quality model. The
degree of structure similarity is measured using RSMD (root-mean-square
distance) between equivalent atom pairs. RSMD analysis of the MnSOD model
was measured from its template using SuperPose. The Cα RMSD and
backbone RSMD deviation for the model and the template crystal structure
were 1.22Å, and 1.17Å respectively. Thus, the MODELLER™ developed
model was evaluated using several methods for reliability and accuracy.

Sequence and structural alignment of wheat mitochondrial MnSOD with its
homologous sequences revealed that 8 helices and 3 strands were conserved in
all the selected plant species (). It showed high sequence similarity at
the C-terminal with 3β sheets (β1-β3) and 3α 
helices (α6-α9) at the N-terminal.
Accessible surface area prediction for MnSOD showed zero ASA values for
metal ion interacting residue (His55, His103, Asp192, His196). Residues with
ASA = 0 are buried and those with ASA &gt; 0 are solvent exposed. Thus, the
metal ion binding residues were buried and not accessible to solvent. Thus, the
model provides molecular insight to metal binding molecular function towards
the understanding of oxidative stress resistance in plants.

Phylogenetic analysis showed a clear demarcation of MnSODs into two large
clusters. Cluster I comprised of sequences from monocot (Hordeum vulgare,
Oryza sativa, Zea mays and Triticum aestivum) whereas cluster II included
sequences from dicot (Glycine max and Arabidopsis thaliana) 
(). Each
cluster has two subgroups; cluster Ia contained those from maize and rice,
while cluster Ib have bread wheat. However, barley SOD clustered together
with wheat indicated that wheat and barley are highly similar in comparison to
rice, maize, soybean. In cluster IIa and IIb, soybean and Arabidopsis SODs
form a distinct clade supported by highest bootstrap values. All the major
clusters gave bootstrap values &gt; 60. The tree showed a distinct crop-specific
clustering of sequences, representing clear crop specific sequence difference.
The predicted model could be further explored for identification of ligand
binding sites which may be useful to understand specific role of functional site
residues during catalysis. Thus, the distinction of bread wheat (a monocot)
MnSOD from dicots is shown using phylogenetic analysis.

Conclusion
The molecular structure of bread wheat MnSOD is important for the
understanding of its molecular function against oxidative stress. Superoxide
dismutase (SOD) acts as defense against oxidative and genetic stress in plants.
Hence, the structure model of bread wheat MnSOD developed using homology
model is described. The model provides molecular insight to metal binding
molecular function towards the understanding of oxidative stress resistance in
plants. The distinction of bread wheat (a monocot) MnSOD from dicots is also
shown using phylogenetic analysis.

The authors thankfully acknowledge the financial support for Agri
Bioinformatics Promotion Program by Bioinformatics Initiative Division,
Department of Information Technology, Ministry of Communications &amp;
Information Technology, Government of India, New Delhi. The authors are
grateful to the Project Director, Directorate of Wheat Research, Karnal,
Haryana, India for providing the necessary facilities, constant support and
encouragement throughout the study.

Citation:Sheoran et al Bioinformation 6(6): 209-211 (2011)

(A) Pairwise alignment of MnSOD from Triticum aestivum and the
template (PDB ID: 1N0J). Dash represents insertion and deletion; conserved
residues involved in metal binding are in red and shaded region showed the
consensus pattern; (B) MnSOD structure model produced using Accelrys
Discovery Studio v2.5.

ProSA-web analysis for modeled MnSOD revealed a Z-score value
of -7.08 (similar to the native conformations of the template).

Sequence alignment of MnSODs from wheat, barley, maize, soybean, 
rice and Arabidopsis and the predicted secondary structure elements of the wheat
mitochondrial MnSOD (TaMitMnSOD). Alpha helices and beta strands are represented 
as rods and arrows. Conserved residues in all plants are shown by shaded
region.

Phylogenetic analysis of MnSODs homologues from six plant
species was constructed by the Neighbor-joining method using the MEGA 4
program. Bootstrap values are indicated against each branch. Phylogenetic
analysis showed two large clusters of MnSODs. Cluster I comprised of
sequences from monocot (Hordeum vulgare, Oryza sativa, Zea mays and
Triticum aestivum) and cluster II included sequences from dicot (Glycine max
and Arabidopsis thaliana).

