Background
Skin ageing is a hot research topic. Skin research has led to the
development many products to keep skin younger and healthier for a
long period. There are many preparations like Botox injections, laser
treatment, fat graft implantation, etc., for skin ageing. However, these
products are often expensive and usually have side effects. Hence,
there is a need to analyze the molecular pathways for skin ageing and
to inhibit potential targets. There are various symptoms for skin ageing
but one of the most prominent sign of skin ageing is wrinkle
formation. Wrinkle appears on the skin both due to intrinsic and
chronological skin ageing (occurs with the passage of time) and
premature skin ageing (influence of external factors like UV rays,
stress and pollution). Data suggest that there are five receptors (EGFR,
PDGFR, PAFR, IL1R and TNFRB) that are activated by stress. They
stimulate their corresponding adapter proteins, mitogen activated
protein kinases (MAPKs) and transfer the signal down to the nucleus
to transcription factor activation protein 1 (AP-1). AP-1 further
induces the transcription of matrix metalloproteinase's (MMPs).

MMPs(1,3,9) degrade collagen. The excessive degradation of collagen
leads to loss of skin integrity towards wrinkle formation. Signaling
cascade studies show that EGFR, PDGFR and PAFR through MAPK1
bring activation of AP-1. TNFRB through MAPK9 and IL1R through
MAPK8 activation of AP-1 are known. However, different MAPKs
were involved leading to activation of AP-1. Hence, if collagen
degradation, activated by different stressors through different receptors
is to be inhibited; AP-1 should be targeted []. AP-1 is made up of two
subunits, namely c-fos and c-jun. It is known that c-jun expression is
limiting AP-1 activation in human skin as c-fos concentration is
constant, while c-jun concentration increases in photo-aged skin and
old skin []. Moreover, c-fos-regulated genes exert a protective
function and its deficiency makes the cells hypersensitive to a broad
spectrum of DNA-damaging agents. Therefore, c-jun is a preferential
choice for inhibition. c-jun is 331 residues long. It consists of a leucine
zipper domain and a basic region. c-jun interacts with DNA by the
leucine zipper domain.

In c-jun, the transcription activation domain residues are 91-186, the
transcription repression domain residues are 31-57 and the promoter
region for T antigen-dependent DNA unwinding (required for the
initiation of polyoma virus DNA replication) residues are 91-186. The
region 241- 252 residues of c-jun can increase DNA bending and
binding at the AP-1 site []. Residues 252-281 in c-jun are the basic
sub-domain, which is responsible for the sequence specific recognition
site of DNA []. Studies performed so far have targeted MAPKs to
inhibit the activation of c-jun. It has been shown that three types of
MAPK are involved in collagen degradation. Therefore, to completely
inhibit the degradation of collagen (wrinkle formation) activated by
various stressors, c-jun is targeted. However, the complete structure
for c-jun is still not available for inhibitor design. Therefore,
homology modeling is performed to construct the 3D structure for cjun
followed by inhibitor design through docking.

Methodology
Homology modeling
3D structure modeling is the first step towards successful in silico drug
designing. A suitable template with sufficient query sequence length
coverage and sequence identity is not as yet available. Therefore,
segment based homology modeling approach is used in this study.
Fold recognition was employed for loop modeling in this procedure.
BLAST and PSI BLAST were used for the selection of PDB templates
and templates with ≫ 40% sequence identity with the target sequence
were selected (Table 1 in ). LOMETS (Local
Meta Threading Server) was used to select templates for loop
modeling. The server selects fold not only on the basis of secondary
structure but also considers mutations, solvent accessibility and
pairwise residue contacts []. Subsequently, the target sequence and
templates were aligned using MODELLER 9v5 and thus, a 3D model
was constructed. The constructed model was energy minimized in
GROMACS force field using Steepest Descent Minimization
Algorithms. The model was evaluated using PROCHECK, WHAT
CHECK and RMSD, RMSF calculations. RMSD and RMSF
calculations are good indicators of the uncertainty in the atomic
coordinates and the favorable value is within 0.2 nm. PROCHECK
validates the model for covalent bond distances, angles, atom
nomenclature and stereo-chemistry []. What-check was used to
evaluate the folding pattern of the model [].

Ligand and receptor interaction
Inhibitors are not yet available for c-jun. Therefore, it is important to
design suitable inhibitors for c-jun. Ligands were designed using
LIGAND SCOUT 2.02. The designed ligand and receptor interaction
at desired position are performed using AUTODOCK version 1.5.2.
Ligand analogues have been constructed using CHEMSKETCH and
docking was performed by Molegro Virtual Docker (MVD). We used
MVD because it showed higher docking accuracy than other state-ofthe-
art docking products (MVD: 87%, Glide: 82%, Surflex: 75%,
FlexX: 58%) in the market []. During virtual screening, the following
parameters were fixed: number of runs 10, population size 50,
crossover rate 0.9, scaling factor 0.5, maximum iteration 2,000 and
grid resolution 0.30. The docked results were evaluated on the basis of
binding affinity, moledock score and re-ranking. Binding affinity
(kg/mol) is measured on the basis of known experimental data. The
MolDock scoring function takes into consideration directional
hydrogen bonding and charges. The docking scoring function, E score,
is defined by the energy terms in equation 1 (see ). Re-rank-score in MVD provides an estimate for interaction.

Discussion
Model evaluation
The constructed 3D model is shown in . The results of
PROCHECK parameters like Ramachandran plot (90.8 core, 7.7
allowed, 1.1 generous, 0.4 disallowed), main chain (6), side chain (5),
bond length (97.8), bond angle (93.4) and list of all planar groups
(100) were within favorable limits for the constructed model. The
folding patterns evaluated by WHAT CHECK is similar to the
comparative study of various tools for secondary structure prediction
(GOR, JFRED, HNN, NN predict, PORTER, SOPMA and SSpro).
Therefore, the constructed model holds good for folding patterns. The
RMSD value calculated for model backbone after first fit to backbone
at 9000 cycles (9ps time) gave a constant deviation of 0.125 nm.
RMSF value calculated for the model was between 0.025-0.125 nm.
The RMSD and RMSF values calculated were within the favorable
limit of 0.2 nm.

Inhibition site
Literature studies have shown that phosporylation and consequently
dephosphorylation brings about the activation of c-jun. The NH2
terminal phosphorylation of c-jun in response to growth factors and
UV rays is responsible for COOH terminal dephosphorylation. The
NH2 terminal amino acid that undergoes phosphorylation is serine 63,
serine 73 and threonine 91. This initiates dephosphorylation of
residues threonine 231, serine 243 and serine 249. Dephosphorylation
decreases the electrostatic repulsions between the phosphate groups on
c-jun and the DNA-binding site, hence enhancing c-jun binding on
DNA [–]. Hence, the 3 phosphorylation sites should be inhibited
simultaneously in order to suppress the binding of c-jun on DNA and
transcription of MMPs.

Ligand design
Novel ligands have been designed with ligand scout 2.02. The
constructed ligand that showed interaction at desired phosphorylation
inhibition sites by AUTODOCK were considered as reference ligand.
We developed 3 reference ligands for the three inhibitory sites.  shows the interactions of the reference ligand at the desired site on
receptor. The reference ligand for site 1 shows interaction with ser 63
(desired) and asp 65. Similarly, reference ligand designed for site 2
shows interaction with ser 73 (desired) and glu77. The reference
ligand for site 3 shows interaction with ser 83, gly 86, his 87, thr 90
and thr 91 (desired). The R1 symbol on each reference ligand identifies
the site, where desired interaction is seen between ligand and receptor.
All the three reference ligands interacted well at the desired sites for
corresponding phosphorylation.

Virtual screening
The reference ligands however showed desired interaction on receptor
but have low binding affinity with the receptor as demonstrated by
MVD. Various analogues have been constructed by adding different
functional groups (from + inductive effect to –inductive effect) at the
sites R1 and R2 to obtain ligands having greater binding affinity with
the receptor. Additional functional groups at R1 increased the affinity
of ligand at the desired inhibitory site. However, attachment of
different functional groups at R2 created an environment by interacting
with neighboring residues as shown in . The designed
analogues also gave better calculations for binding affinity, moldock
score and re-ranking score than their corresponding reference ligands,
listed in Table 2 (See ). Thus, the designed
analogues showed interaction at desired inhibitory site with good
docking score, for potential testing as a ligand.

Conclusion
Wrinkle formation is one of the most prominent signs of skin ageing.
There is a tremendous demand for products that can completely inhibit
collagen degradation. However, these products have side effects.
Therefore, it is important to design inhibitors for targets like c-jun that
are associated with wrinkle formation. Here, we show the use of
modeling and virtual screening in the potential design of inhibitors for
c-jun. It should be noted that these predicted data should be validated
using suitable assays for further consideration in future studies.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Chauhan &amp; Shakya, Bioinformation 4(6): 223-228 (2009)

3D model of c-jun. The model is generated using MODELLER.

The docking view showing the binding of designed reference ligands with receptor at desired site.

The docking view of analogues and receptor for three different inhibition site.

