Background
Bacteriophage genomes are in a state of constant flux, reflecting a propensity to
undergo rampant recombination []. As such, phages are an important vector
for horizontal gene transfer (HGT) within and between bacterial species 
[]. In
addition, integrated temperate phage (prophage) frequently constitutes the
single greatest source of genomic variation among closely related bacterial
strains []. 
The lysogenic bacteriophage APSE infects Candidatus
Hamiltonella defensa which is a facultative endosymbiont of aphids and other
sap-feeding insects. This endosymbiont has established a beneficial association
with aphids, increasing survivorship following attack by parasitoid wasps.
Different strains of APSE phages have been found in aphids other than
Acyrthosiphon pisum []. 
The Inteins are basically ‘protein introns’ found
inside other proteins which remove themselves from their host proteins posttranslationally
by autoproteolytic protein-splicing reaction 
[]. Besides their
protein splicing activity, many inteins also have endonucleolytic activity which
is believed to mediate the homing of their genes to corresponding unoccupied
integration sites. Both these functions benefit the inteins in two ways. One,
protein splicing averts deleterious effects caused by their insertion into the
protein hosts and next homing disseminates inteins by horizontal gene transfer.
Inteins therefore appear to be selfish genetic elements 
[]. Since their first
discovery in 1990 [], 
inteins have been identified in a wide variety of
organisms, including bacteria, archaea, and unicellular eukaryotes, with
sporadic distribution []. Similarly, they are observed in many unrelated
bacterial clades, but appear often limited to several species within each clade. It
was suggested that viruses were potential “vectors” of inteins across species
and are responsible for the sporadic distribution of inteins 
[]. Accordingly,
inteins have been identified in many bacteriophages and prophages. Here, we
describe the first report of DNA polymerase A intein at dpola insertion site in a
bacteriophage genome.

Methodology
Sequence homology searches were carried out using BLAST programs 
[]
against the NCBI Protein database and the New England Biolabs Intein
Database []. 
Intein sequence motifs were identified by comparing with the
other motifs using EMBOSS pairwise alignment [] available at EBI. The
Intein sequences and annotation data for the APSE 2, 4 &amp; 5 was deposited in
intein database (InBase, http://www.neb.com/neb/inteins.html; Perler, 2002)
[]. 
Multiple sequence alignments were generated with the help of PRALINE
[] 
using the homology extended alignment strategy []. Three PSI-BLAST
iterations were carried out against all non redundant databases with the e value
cut off set to 0.01. The alignment file was retrieved for further phylogenetic
tree construction using ClustalX version 2.0 []. The tree thus generated is
provided in . Conserved sequences in other DNA
polymerase A family and APSE were identified using PRALINE program
using standard progressive strategy [].

Results
APSE dpol intein
While searching for inteins in sequence databases with previously identified
intein blocks (NCBI BLAST), we identified APSE family A DNA polymerase
with some high homology. Hence we proceeded further to analyse for presence
of any intein. Sequence homology searches (BLAST against NCBI non
redundant protein databases) with the DNA polymerase family A gene
sequences of APSE 2, 4 &amp; 5 (retrieved from NCBI protein with accession
numbers APSE 2− YP_002308549, APSE 4− ACJ10154.1, APSE 5−
ACJ10149.1 respectively) showed a high homology against previously
identified DNA polymerase A inteins from salmonella phages (SETP3,
SETP5&amp; SETP12), some other phages like Glycaspis brimblecombei
secondary endosymbiont phage1, Bordetella phage BPP-1 and prokaryotic
DNA polymerases like Escherichia coli, Yersinia pseudotuberculosis. However
APSE 2, 4 &amp; 5 family A DNA polymerase is much larger than APSE 3 by
approximately 300 amino acids. Their pairwise alignment with other DNA
polymerase family A sequences revealed an extraneous segment. Focusing on
this extra segment we identified a 306 amino acid intein in APSE dpolA at
position S608 in APSE 2, L388 in APSE 4 &amp; 5. Interestingly this intein
segment was not found in dpolA gene of APSE 3, but APSE 1 intein was
previously reported in InBase []. The absence of intein in the APSE-3 DNA
polymerase family A is quite surprising and the reason behind that is unknown.

Though salmonella phage consists of homologous DNA polymerase family A
intein, the insertion site between APSE (dpola insertion site) and salmonella
phage (dpolb insertion site) differs. This makes the APSE DNA polymerase
family A intein to be unique in that family. Removing this 306 aa intein region
from dpolA sequence of APSE 2, 4 &amp; 5 showed a better optimal alignment
with the other counterparts.

Canonical blocks of intein
A BLAST search for DNA polymerase family A intein against InBase reported
several hits with known inteins. But a high sequence similarity of over 99%
was observed with Salmonella phage intein family A polymerase. The specific
blocks of those inteins were used to identify the APSE dpolA intein blocks and
further splice junctions were also characterized using pairwise alignment
(). The splice junction amino acids were also identified to be similar to
the previously identified inteins and held to the specific intein motifs. There is
a difference in the conservation of splice junction amino acid residues when
compared to inteinless prokaryotic DNA polymerase family A and which was
found to be 2% difference in the base composition (GC %) between the intein
and the gene, though these differences are not that significant still these can be
a valid reason to say that the inteins are recently acquired 
[].

Identification of conserved region at insertion site
Upon removing the intein segment from dpolA protein of APSE 1, 2, 4 &amp; 5 and
multiple sequence alignment along with other inteinless dpolA proteins of
APSE3, E. coli and Y. pseudotuberculosis revealed a highly conserved amino
acid domain exactly around the insertion site of the intein (YGGK*|*ENI)
().

APSE intein belong to a specific prototype allele
Perler et al. (1997) observed that inteins present in the same location within
homologous genes (“intein alleles”) tend to be more similar with each other
than with inteins in different locations of the same gene or in different genes.
This phenomenon appears not only the simple consequence of regular vertical
transmission of inteins, but also the result of lateral acquisitions through
“homing” at the same site of highly similar genes (i.e. “alleles”) by the
mechanism involving gene conversion []. Neither Salmonella phage (SETP3,
SETP5 and SETP12) inteins nor APSE (1, 2, 4 &amp; 5) has a homing
endonuclease domain or any endonuclease activity. The absence of homing
endonuclease domain nullifies the theory of any lateral transmission to this or
from this phage. Still it is tempting to say that these DNA phages might act as
central reservoir for transmission of the inteins at least to the level of its host as
it was already proved that bacteriophages are a central mechanism for HGT in
bacteria []. Moreover, these APSE phages may act as a conduit for ongoing
gene exchange among heritable endosymbionts []. Multiple sequence
alignment of APSE intein and its only identified DNA polymerase family A
counterpart salmonella phage showed difference in the insertion site of the
intein. From that it was identified that APSE 1, 2, 4 &amp; 5 DNA polymerase
family A intein insertion site was dpola rather than that of SETP 3, 5 &amp; 12
which belong to dpolb insertion site. This makes the APSE intein unique and
the only identified Family A DNA polymerase intein in dpola insertion site
().

Shift in base composition
A shift in the base compositions between intein and extein coding sequences
indicates recent acquisition of inteins []. Analysis of base composition of
family A DNA polymerase gene of APSE and its specific intein showed a
difference of 2% GC content between them (Gene-45% GC content, intein-
47% GC content).

Conclusion
We have characterized a new bacteriophage intein found in the prokaryotictype
putative DNA polymerase family A of APSE by bioinformatics methods.
The conservation of the active site motifs for splicing as well as its insertion at
a catalytically important site of the PolA sequence suggests that the intein is
most likely to be functional. This intein was found to be absent in APSE 3.
Conserved region was identified at the insertion site of the intein and the
inteinless prokaryotic DNA polymerase family A proteins. The canonical
blocks of inteins and their splice junctions were identified and characterized by
bioinformatics method. The insertion site of intein within APSE family A DNA
polymerase extein was identified to be dpola. Hence we propose this as a
unique intein of family A DNA polymerase (dpola insertion site) and also the
only reported intein in podoviridae family till date.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This research was supported by the Bioinformatics Infrastructure Facility grant
funded by the Department of Biotechnology (DBT), Government of India
(GOI) (Grant No. BT/BI/25/001/2006). Financial support provided to
Senguttuvan Rajarajan by the DBT, GOI (Grant No. BT/HRD/TTC/04/2008) in
the form of studentship is thankfully acknowledged.

Citation:Rajarajan et al Bioinformation 6(4): 149-152 (2011)

The APSE1, 2, 4 &amp; 5 DNA Polymerase family A inteins. The inteins
are named according to the intein nomenclature. The inteins are shown along
with their N terminal extein, C terminal extein and its splice junction.
Conserved intein sequence motifs are indicated by bold letters.

Sequence alignment of APSE phage DNA polymerase family A
protein excluding the intein with other prokaryotic DNA polymerase family A
shows the presence of conserved region around the insertion site
(YGGK*|*ENI). The splice junction amino acids (­1 and +1 extein residues)
shows conservation.

Sequence alignment of APSE 1, 2, 4 &amp; 5 DNA polymerase family A
with salmonella phage 3, 12, &amp; 5 DNA polymerase family A shows the
difference in insertion site. Block A of both the intein domains are indicated
within boxes. The order of the sequences taken for alignment is APSE 1, 2
SETP 3, 12, 5, APSE 4 &amp; 5 from top to bottom respectively.

