Background
Banana belonging to family Musaceae is the fourth most
important crop after rice, wheat and corn. Its fruit is cheap and
can be used by both rich and poor alike considering it'snutritive
and fruit value and hence it could be otherwise being
considered as poor man's apple. Not only its nutritive value for
carbohydrates, vitamins and minerals, banana also possesses
potential applications in therapeutic as well as in industry.
Banana flower and pseudostem have anti-diabetic and antiadvanced
glycation end-products (AGEs) properties and are
being beneficial as food supplements for diabetes []. Banana
flakes can be used as safe and cost-effective treatments for
diarrhoea in critically ill tube-fed patients []. Banana could also
have a wider utility as a good source of natural antioxidants
with free radical scavenging activities, in the production of
alcohol, food and sugar industries and also as a drug binder
and disintegrant in pharmaceuticals []. Banana fruit and its
organic residues have the potential use as feed stocks in the
production of ethanol [].

Among the horticultural crops, banana occupies an important
place cultivated varieties are grown for domestic supply while
the wild species are distributing freely across undisturbed hilly
terrains. Due to the practice of monoculture of a few selected
cultivars and destruction of habitats by human encroachment,
banana resources of Manipur are rapidly eroding and thus,
there is need for further exploration, conservation and
documentation of these resources for future exploitation.

The state of Manipur is situated in the northeastern border of
India, lying between 23°50' and 25°41' North latitudes and
93°61' and 94°47' East longitudes covering a total geographical
area of 22, 327 sq km, of which about 90 per cent are constituted
of mountains and 10 percent are the central valleys. The region
is also experiencing different type of climatic zones ranging
from Tropical to Montane Temperate forests, including the
elements of adjoining Myanmar flora. It is mostly in the tropical
semi evergreen and sub tropical forest of Manipur where the
wild banana species are harboured and thus flourishing many
banana forests. Being easy accessibility, these semi-evergreen
forests are exposed to large scale exploitation and destruction as
a result of shifting cultivation and thus leading to genetic
erosion of banana, especially of wild type species.

Banana crops are also closely related to the socio-economic and
cultural activities of the people of Manipur. Vegetative parts of
the plant are symbol of goodwill in various ceremonies. Leaves
are used as a substitute for dining plates and as well as for
wrapping materials. Inner core of pseudostem (pith) and young
inflorescence are consumed as vegetables. During social festival
and other religious ceremonies, banana fruits, particularly of
Meitei hei cultivars are in a huge demand with high price.
Moreover, banana plants are important sources of rural income
for people living in and around the hills of Manipur and they
are also one of the components of the diet.

India is recognized as one of the major centres of origin and
diversity of banana at the global level along with Southeast
Asian countries and Papua New Guinea [] and Northeast India
is located within this centre of origin and diversity of banana.
Though, wild and cultivated varieties of banana are spreading
across the state of Manipur, little is known about this great
wealth of Musa germplasm that comprises some of the rarest
and unique cultivars like Meitei hei with pleasant taste and
adaptability to local conditions and there is still need for further
exploration and documentation so as to acquire more data on
wild and cultivated Musaceae species of Manipur under natural
condition.

Advance research on banana ranging from identification to
expression profiling of gene unraveled conundrum on fruit,
flower and plant parts retain since long and expands horizon to
understand the molecular basis of evolution. Databases
Retrieving comprehensive information on the family Musaceae
will be extremely useful to modern researchers, and would
have enabled new insights and discoveries concerning
evolutionary relationship of gene and gene products
anticipated. Though attempt has been made by Uma [] for
systematic documentation of the Musaceae found in the
Northeast India, online interface will certainly be useful to the
users to interpret and retrieve the desired information more
effectively. Thus, we have designed a sophisticated web based
database to provide comprehensive information on banana
available in Manipur. Present study will be useful for
sustainable utilization of banana which is declining faster from
the region so that conservation strategies could be implemented
effectively.

The database DEBDOM is first source that can provide
comprehensive information related to the banana resources of
Manipur and is a unique public domain web-interface that
elaborates Database Exploring Banana Diversity Of Manipur
(http://ibsd.gov.in/debdom/) which provides access to the
taxonomy, morphology (male bud, bract, leaf, flower, fruit, seed
etc.), geographical location, economic status, uses and links.
And moreover, DEBDOMs' sophisticated web-based graphical
user interface allows efficient retrieval of data where the reliable
data content and links add an extra advantage while retrieving
data so that it will make DEBDOM a comprehensive and
intricate tool ().

Methodology
Explorations were carried out in all districts of Manipur
(Imphal West, Imphal East, Bishnupur, Thoubal, Senapati,
Tamenglong, Churchanpur, Chandel and Ukhrul) from 2010 to
2012. Preliminary information on banana growing areas of
Manipur was gathered from local banana mini-markets.
Suckers of banana were collected from their habitat and
maintained at Bioresources Park, IBSD (Institute of Bioresources
and Sustainable Development), Haraorou, Imphal. In the
exploration, more than 25 accessions of Musaceae were
collected and maintained.

Characterization and documentation of banana genotypes were
carried out based on Descriptors for Banana (Musa spp)
published by IPGRI-INIBAP/CIRAD (1996) []. Photographs
and GPS data were also recorded from the collection site in
order to extrapolate GPS navigation. Proper identification of
banana accessions were carried out using taxonomic keys and
standard referenced catalogues [–]. Samples were collected
from healthy plants as suckers and information on utility and
diseases were also gathered from the sites of collection.
Collected samples were cleaned by cutting root and other
debris and allowed staying for 3-5 days before transferring to
field.

Database Content
The database DEBDOM illustrated an extensive compilation on
the diversity of banana of Manipur that can be visualized and
analyzed by graphical web-interface. This database comprised
28 banana cultivars/landraces, of which mostly are used for
edible purposes. Studies on the phylogenetic relationships
amongst the genotypes are in progress so that it will give input
in understanding the taxonomic conundrum retain since long.
Molecular expansion and genomic studies are also taken up and
it will keep on updated as and when the database is available.

Design and Implementation
The database DEBDOM has been developed by extracting
seamlessly integrating data from extensive questionnaire
compiled in MS Excel. This data compiled in MySQL 5.1.41
(www.mysql.com) relational database along with cross
references to taxonomy, morphology, gallery, links and site of
collection.  demonstrates the architecture and outline
display of DEBDOM database. The MySQL database was
normalized and indexed to ensure efficient and accurate data
retrieval through the query option available in DEBDOM webinterface
and molecular and biochemical aspects of individual
cultivar/s will further be updated after validation of results.

The DEBDOM web interface developed in Apache 2.2 Handler
CGI 1.1 (www.apache.org) runs on the Windows 2003 web
server and utilizes the MySQL (XAMPP-win32-1.7.7) module to
query and retrieve data from back end MySQL 5.2 database
(www.mysql.com). The graphical display of cultivars in flash at
front end was implemented with JAVA Script 1.6 programming
(http://www.javascriptsource.com). The Google map API
developer implemented for graphical representation with
respect to the GPS coordinates highlighting the specific site of
collection for the cultivar/s.

Utility
Collection, characterization and conservation are starting points
of any breeding strategy for crop improvement. It is through
prospection and collection, the germplasm gene pool can be
enhanced. In this study, maximum morphological characters
were included about the cultivated and wild Musaceae species
available in Manipur and thus provided detailed characteristic
of banana accessions and it would help in proper identification
of duplicates and synonyms that were existed in different
language and dialects. Moreover, characterization based on
morphological descriptors is very much prerequisite for any
crop improvement programme as evaluation and selection of
superior genotypes is mainly relies on good agronomic
characteristics that are highly heritable in all environments.

It is also known that wild species are of relevance for genetic
improvement as they can show traits of agronomic value which
cultivars do not have because of their narrow genetic bases and
introgression of such traits by breeding or genetic
transformation would have resulted in cultivars with resistance
or tolerance to disease and/ or environmental stress. Besides,
insufficient knowledge on wild species is also hampering in the
establishment of phylogeny and genetic dynamics behind them.
Thus, in view of food security, job creation, sustainability and
supply for domestic consumption as well as export markets,
cultivation and conservation of local varieties as well as wild
species that are well adapted to local conditions is of utmost
important.

Authors are thankful to the Department of Biotechnology
(DBT), New Delhi for providing financial support and
working facilities in the Medicinal Plants and Horticultural
Resources Division and Bioresources Database and
Bioinformatics Division, Institute of Bioresources and
Sustainable Development, Imphal.

Citation:Singh et al, Bioinformation 9(5): 270-273 (2013)

Snapshot demonstrating Home, Male flower, Gallery and Links page/s of DEBDOM.

Basic architecture of DEBDOM displaying various fields and subfields which holds key information on cultivar/s.

