Background
Insulin Secretion by beta cells, is essential for maintenance of
glucose homeostasis. Higher insulin demand in response to
metabolic stress (obesity, aging, pregnancy and genetic insulin
resistance) requires an increased functional beta cell mass
and/or enhanced insulin secretion capacity [–]. Beta cell mass
is directly proportional to beta cell size and number. Beta cells
number is dynamic and depends on balance of gain
(proliferation, neogenesis) and loss (apoptosis) of beta cells 
[].
Inadequate compensation of functional beta cell mass results in
insulin insufficiency and Type 2 diabetes (T2D) [].
Susceptibility of the T2D also depend on genetic factors, a
subset of people with risk factors (obesity, Insulin Resistance)
develop T2D, while others do not [].

T2D at present is incurable and global prevalence is increasing
every year []. There is an urgent need to identify new
therapeutic targets for treatment as well as improvement of
glycemic control in T2D. Increased functional beta cells, as well
as ex vivo expansion of islet and prevention of apoptosis for
better islet transplantation regimen are some of the newer
approaches for T2D treatment []. Animal models of Obesity
and T2D, have advanced understanding of the beta cell
proliferation as well as survival, in response to insulin
resistance (IR) and T2D []. C57BL/6J ob/ob mice and BTBR
ob/ob mice are mouse models of obesity with different T2D
susceptibility. BTBR ob/ob mice develop severe T2D (fasting
blood glucose of 400mg/dL at 10 wks of age) while C57BL/6J
ob/ob mice has mildly elevated blood glucose levels
(&lt;250mg/dL at all ages) []. These mice offer promises of
novel insights into human T2D and thus are valuable model
system to study link between Obesity/IR and T2D [].

Role of growth factors (GLP-1, PTHrP, Lactogens, HGF,
IGFs/Insulin), insulin signaling pathways and its downstream
effectors (IRS1/2, P85, PI3K, AKT, FOXO1) and cell cycle
proteins (CDK4, Cyclin D2) in positive regulation of
proliferation and survival of beta cells have been well
documented, on contrary, genes involved in JNK1 pathway, ER
stress response and cytokine induced nitric oxide (NO)
production and BCL2 family (apoptosis) induces beta cell death
and decreased survival of beta cells []. Islet gene expression
patterns at different physiological stresses (IR, obesity,
pregnancy) provide us the clues for the reconfiguration of islets
to pathogenesis of T2D and IR []. Deriving a ‘consensus’
expression status of each gene in a genelist, across multiple
studies provide a clear expression status, under specific
physiological conditions and/or cell-types and have previously
been used for different physiological conditions in uterus and
testis as well as development of two new databases (Uterus and
testis) [–]. 
In this study we aimed to identify a ‘cluster’ of
significantly upregulated genes in C57BL/6J ob/ob islets (as
compared to BTBR ob/ob islets) using ‘consensus’ status of
these genes across other studies, involved in successful beta cell
compensation (islets of C57BL/6J ob/ob obese vs lean at 4
months and 10 months of age, islets of pregnant mice vs non
pregnant mice). Information (biological processes, Molecular
function, cellular component, protein-protein
Interaction/associations, gene deletion/knockout/inhibition
studies) of all the genes in ‘cluster’ were collected by text
mining using different literature search tools, gene information
databases and protein-protein interaction databases. Beta cell
specific function of these genes were also inferred using meta
analysis tool of Beta Cell Biology Consortium by studying the
expression pattern of these genes in microarray studies related
to beta-cell stimulation/injury, pancreas development and
growth and cell differentiation. We believe this approach would
help us identify novel genes involved in preventing beta cell
dysfunction in response to metabolic stress.

Methodology
Data retrieval and gene expression analysis:
Published datasets archived in publicly available Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO) repository was used for re-analysis
using GEO2R (NCBI online gene expression tool) 
[]. Datasets
published by Lan et al (2003) in GEO reference series GSE2899
and data sets GDS1443, was used for gene expression analysis
of islets in diabetic resistant C57BL/6J ob/ob mice and diabetic
BTBR ob/ob mice, using Affymetrix MGU74A array platform
[]. Other datasets were from GSE10785 series (Islets of
C57BL/6J ob/ob mice vs Lean at 4 wks and 10wks of age
respectively, Rosetta/Merck Mouse 44k 1.0 microarray) and
GSE22125 (12.5 dpc pregnant mice vs non pregnant using
Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array platform) [,
]. p&lt;
0.05 was taken for a gene to be called significant, with no
conflict between different reporters.

A ‘cluster’ of genes overexpressed in non diabetic C57BL/6J
ob/ob mice (as compared to diabetic BTBR ob/ob mice) were
selected, based on ‘consensus’ over expression status approach
i.e., the shortlisted genes were significantly upregulated in
C57BL/6J ob/ob mice as well as also significantly
overexpressed in two other studies involving successful beta
cell compensation (C57BL/6J ob/ob vs lean 4 wks and 10 wks
old respectively, 12.5 dpc pregnant vs non pregnant mice).
Information (biological processes, Molecular function, cellular
component, protein-protein Interaction/associations, gene
deletion/knockout/inhibition) of all the genes in ‘cluster’ were
collected by text mining usinsg different literature search tools
(PubMed , HighWire Press, Google Scholar and iHOP) [,
],
gene information databases (entrez gene, rat genome database,
mouse genome database) [–] 
and protein protein interaction databases (HPRD, MINT, STRING, Genemania) 
[–]. Beta
cell specific information was prioritized, when not available, the
information on these genes in other cell types were extracted.
Meta analysis tool of beta cell biology consortium
(www.betacell.org) funded by NIDDK U01DK072473, was also
used for analyzing the expression pattern of these genes
(cluster) in studies related to beta-cell stimulation/injury,
pancreas development and growth and Cell differentiation,
tissue expression and survey (pancreatic) []. For a gene to be
called significant, fold cutoff of at least 1.5 was taken and
default significance parameter of the database was used (at least
one reporter with confidence greater than 80% and no conflicts
between two reporters).

Discussion
By using ‘consensus’ overexpression approach we identified a
‘cluster’ of genes with probable role in diabetes resistance in
response to diabetogenic insult (). The function of other
genes in beta cell compensation was inferred by their role
(biological process and molecular function) in other cell types
using literature mining, databases and meta analysis tools.
Expression pattern analysis of selected genes in studies related
to cell differentiation, beta-cell stimulation/injury, pancreas
development revealed their probable role in regulating these
biological processes. Literature mining revealed role of PSEN1
in inhibiting apoptosis in beta cells, while the function of other
genes in beta cells remain unknown. We have inferred their
probable role in beta cells by extracting information on these
genes in other cell types. Majority of the genes in the ‘cluster’
were related to cell survival and prevention of apotosis.

Information (biological processes, Molecular function, cellular
component, protein-protein interaction/associations, gene
deletion/knockout/inhibition) of all the genes in ‘cluster’ were
collected by text mining using different literature search tools.
DAD1 and PSEN1 are known to inhibit apotosis [,
]. DAD1
interacts with MCL1 (BCL2 family) and prevents apoptosis 
[].
Deletion of PSEN1 as well as DAD1 leads to embryonic death in
mice [,
]. SSR4 and H13 are known to promote protein
quality control and thus involved in protective unfolded
response. SSR4 interacts with sec61 translocon, and also forms
TRAP complex with SSR1, SSR2 and SSR3 subunits. Deletion of
SSR4 results in disruption of the TRAP complex and delay of
endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation of misfolded
glycoproteins and simultaneous overexpression of all the
subunits (SSR1, SSR2, SSR3, SSR4) led to accelerated ER
associated degradation []. PROM1 (also known as CD133),
initially identified as stem cell marker (hemopoeitic stem cells
and progenitor cells). PROM1 is known to be immunolocalized
in Ductal epithelial cells of human, mouse and rat pancreas.
PROM1 positive cells were also observed as small cells within
pancreatic islets in young diet fed obese as well as control mice.
However, at higher age (150 days), these cells were exclusively
observed in islet peripheries and ducts of obese mice 
[].
PROM1 is known to be involved in plasma membrane
organization and play a role in AKT and MAPK pathway 
[].
DNYLT3 interacts with BUB3 and regulate mitotic cell cycle,
deletion of DNYLT3 increases mitotic index in NRK cells 
[]
PLK1 is involved in cell cycle progression and DNA replication
in S phase and DNA damage repair []. ALDH18A1 and
ANPEP are known to be involved in metabolic processes and
role of FAM111A is unknown [,
].

The role of nutrients (especially glucose) and cytokines on beta
cell survival and function is well known. Rat Islets cultured in
presence of intermediate glucose concentration (10mM/L)
showed optimum beta cell function, while beta cell impairment
was observed in islet cultured at low concentration ( 2 mM/L
and 5mM/L) and high concentration (30mM/L), with little
effect on beta cell survival []. Beta cell impairment and
apoptosis is induced by pro inflammatory cytokines 
[]. Meta
analysis tool of Beta Cell Biology Consortium revealed
expression pattern of these genes across studies related to beta
cell stimulation/injury (glucose, cytokines) []. At high
glucose concentration (30mM vs 5mM/2mM glucose) Dad1,
Aldh18A, H13, Fam111a and Ssr4 were up regulated while
Prom1 was down regulated. H13 and Ssr4 genes were
upregulated when cultured on intermediate levels of glucose as
compared to low level of glucose (10mM vs. 5mM/2mM
glucose). These genes may have a functional significance in beta
cell survival and insulin secretion response to prolonged
plasma glucose levels (hyperglycemia/hypoglycemia).
Treatment of cytokine (IL-1β + IFN-γ) to Ins1 cells resulted in
upregulation of Psen1, Ssr4, Dad1, Fam111a and plk1 while
treatment of inducible NO synthase (iNOS) blocker NGmonomethyl-
l-arginine (NMA) and cytokines led to
overexpression of Ssr4 , Fam111a and Plk1 ().

Understanding the process of pancreatic organogenesis and
beta cell differentiation/islet regeneration in vitro and in vivo,
will benefit the patients with T2D, in restoration of β cell mass
[]. Sox17 is essential for endoderm development 
[]. Meta
analysis tool of Beta Cell Biology Consortium revealed
expression pattern of these genes across microarray studies
related to beta cell differentiation []. Aldh18a1, Prom1, Rfc4,
Anpep, Fam111a and Plk1 were downregulated in
hSOX17positive ‘stage 1’ cells (hESCs treated with activin A
and Wnt3a to form definite endoderm) as compared to
uninduced ‘H9’ hESCs. Dad1, Ssr4 and Dynlt3 were
upregulated and Rfc4, lig3, Fam111a and Plk1 were
downregulated in hSOX17positive ‘stage 2’ cells (hESCs
induced to form cells resembling primitive gut tube-stage
endoderm) as compared to uninduced ‘H9’ hESC cells.
Comparative gene expression analysis between hSOX17positive
‘stage 1’ and hSOX17positive ‘stage 2’ revealed upregulation of
Dynlt3, Prom1, Ssr4 and Anpep and downregulation of lig3
gene. Neurogenin3 (Ngn3) directs embryonic stem cells
towards endocrine lineage and also regulate beta cell
regeneration and differentiation [–]. Dynlt3 was
upregulated, and Fam111a and Plk1 were downregulated in
Purified Ngn3-positive progenitor cells in mice embryo (as
compared to Ngn3- negative cells at 15 days of development).
Aldh18a1 and Dynlt3 may be a potential Ngn3 target genes, as
they were upregulated in Ngn3 induced potential endocrine
pancreas progenitors (ESC differentiation using successive
Activin A and Retinoic acid treatment and induction of Ngn3)
as compared to uninduced ESCs. In a model of islet
dysmorphogenesis (Pdx1PBHnf6 transgenic mice) at late
gestation (e18.5) stage underexpressed Aldh18a1 when
compared to wild type mice. These transgenic mice at postnatal
day one (P1) overexpressed Rfc4 and underexpressed Fam111a
when compared to wild type mice ().

With some genes been quoted more frequently than the others,
a high data divide exists in literature. The frequently quoted
genes may not be the most important genes for the cell 
[–].
Further characterizing less quoted genes may help us in
understanding the biological processes as well as
pathophysiology of metabolic disorders like T2D. Previous
study by Keller et al [], the involvement of cell cycle
regulating genes in predicting diabetes susceptibility,C57BL/6J
ob/ob mice has obesity dependent increase in beta cell
replication on the other hand BTBR ob/ob beta cells failed to
increase proliferation in response to obesity []. In adult
humans, beta cell proliferation is limited while increase in β-cell
mass is primarily by beta cell expansion []. Prevention of β-
cell apoptosis may lead to restoration of β-cell mass in T2D
patients [,
]. Among ‘cluster’ of 11 genes, 6 genes (Dad1,
Psen1, Ssr4, Rfc4, H13, Plk1) have a role in cell survival. We
advocate these genes to be potentially involved in successful
beta cells compensation and prevent T2D in humans, by
conferring protection against diabetogenic insults.

Competing Interests
The authors have declared that no competing interest exists

We acknowledge Mrs. Mangala Kudali, (IBAB, Bangalore),
Akhilesh B (IBAB, Bangalore) and Sravanthi D (IBAB,
Bangalore) for their inputs. We also acknowledge Startbioinfo
(http://www.startbioinfo.com/) for compiled resource lists.

Citation:Singh et al, Bioinformation 9(1): 037-041 (2013)

Gene expression patterns. The figure shows the
expression pattern of ‘cluster’ of genes across different studies
(successful beta cell compensation C57bl6 mice). Only those
genes which were significantly overexpressed in C57BL/6
ob/ob mice as compared to BTBR ob/ob mice ,and also show
‘consensus’ overexpression in other studies were considered.
Genes considered to be significant at p&lt;0.05.

Gene expression patterns. The figure shows the expression pattern of selected genes in studies related to cell
differentiation, beta-cell stimulation/injury, pancreas development and growth and tissue expression and survey (pancreatic).
Meta analysis tool (http://genomics.betacell.org) of Beta Cell Biology Consortium 
(www.betacell.org) for analyzing the expression
pattern of these genes. Fold cutoff of at least 1.5 was taken and default significance parameter of the database was used (at least one
reporter with confidence greater than 80% and no conflicts between two reporters). Red block: significantly upregulated; Green
block: significantly downregulated; White block: not significant/ no evidence.

