Background
Cereal cyst nematode (CCN), Heterodera avenae Wollenweber, 1924, has
become an endemic problem in different agro-climatic zones from the Northern Hill
regions to Central India since its first report in India. Yield loss of
41.6% has been recorded in wheat in the state of Rajasthan []. Based on comparison of yields from
nematicide-treated and untreated fields, the average avoidable losses ranged from 32
– 44 % in barley and 24 – 35% in wheat []. Besides barley and wheat, in India,
CCN is reported on oats, triticale, rye, maize and other graminaceous plants in
India. Efforts are also underway to develop resistant cultivars in wheat. Several
accessions from Australia and ICARDA (International Center for Agricultural Research
in the Dry Areas) as well as species of Aegilops are being used in
breeding for resistance to CCN []. Large variation in the disease reaction of these accessions and
wild Triticum as well as their crosses with native cultivars has
resulted in varying reports under multi-location trials. Although a part of this
variation can be attributed to different experimental conditions, most of it could
be due to the genetic variability of the nematode. Earlier work in India to
determine variability in H. avenae using international
differentials including clones of a few grasses, revealed the occurrence of 5
biotypes in the state of Rajasthan alone []. Later, five Indian CCN populations were screened against
differential varieties listed under the International Testing Program in addition to
some local wheat and barley varieties and grasses []. Based on the host responses, the authors grouped
the populations into two biotypes. Biotype I comprised populations from the state of
Rajasthan (Jaipur and Udaipur) and Haryana (Narnaul), the other hand, biotype II
included populations from Punjab (Hoshiarpur and Ludhiana). Similar screening tests
in subsequent years revealed that populations from the states of Delhi and Uttar
Pradesh belonged to biotype I and those of Himachal Pradesh to biotype II
[]. However, these
studies lack information on the genetic basis of the biotype differentiation. The
H. avenae is a species complex presently containing eleven
valid species and several undescribed species []. Though some of the species can be easily identified
based on morphology, others are less distinct. The ‘Gotland strain’
of H. filipjevi is morphologically indistinguishable from true
H. avenae. Differences in protein patterns and in rDNA between
different populations of H. avenae and the ‘Gotland
strain’ or H. filipjevi have been reported by several
authors []. In India,
H. filipjevi has been reported from Punjab, Ambala and Himachal
Pradesh []. Considerable
genetic variation was reported among seven Indian populations of H.
avenae that could be responsible for differential host reactions in
multi location trials [].

The present management options to reduce the yield losses caused by H.
avenae are not adequate as most of the nematicides are either not
available or discontinued []. In view of this there is an urgent need to design some
alternate modern management options for which nematode genomics will be very useful.
Population homogeneity is essential for maintaining the quality control in data
generation using Next Generation Sequencing approaches. In order to sequence the
transcriptome and whole genome of the cereal cyst nematode, H.
avenae from India, characterization of genetic uniformity of the
population to be used for sequencing is a pre-requisite. As already mentioned, this
species is more complex and morphological traits alone are not sufficient, molecular
characterisation using coding and non coding regions of rDNA is of immense value to
distinguish the species complex of H. avenea that consists of 12
sub species []. PCR-RFLP of
rDNA is also a very useful approach for determining the population homogeneity
within a given species [,
, ]. Therefore, in the present study, sequencing and
PCR-RFLP of rDNA was used to confirm the species identity and to determine the
genetic homogeneity of an Indian population of H. avenae. That will
be used in whole genome and transcriptome sequencing by next generation sequencing
platform.

Methodology
Collection of biological material:
Soil and root samples were collected from H. avenae infested
wheat fields from Indian Agricultural Research Institute (IARI), New Delhi. The
samples were processed using Cobb's sieving technique and 25 and 60 mesh
sieves were used for washing the soil samples. The cysts were collected using a
stereobinocular microscope (ZEISS stemi 2000-C) and used for DNA extraction.

Sample preparation:
DNA was extracted from single cysts according to the method described by Subbotin
[]. DNA was
extracted from about 200 cysts separately to study variation within the
population (). A single cyst was
transferred into 10 µl of double distilled water in an Eppendorf tube
and crushed with a microhomogenizer. Eight µl of nematode lysis buffer
(125 mM KCl, 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.3, 3.75 mM MgCl2, 2.5 DTT, 1.125 %
Tween 20, 0.025% gelatin) and 2 µl of proteinase K (600
(g/ml) were added. The tubes were incubated at 650 C (1h) and 950C (10
min) consecutively.

PCR amplification and PCR-RFLP:
After centrifugation (1 min: 13000 rpm) 10 µl of the DNA suspension was
added to the PCR reaction mixture containing 0.2 mM dNTP's, 0.2
µM of each of the primer (reverse and forward) and 2.5 µl
10× buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.3, 50 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2), 1 unit of
Taq polymerase (Fermentas), and double distilled water to a final volume of 25
µl. Primers (5') TTGATTACGTCCCTGCCCTTT (3') and
(5') TTCACTCGCCGTTACTAAGG (3') as described by Joyce et
al., 1994 were used in the PCR reaction. Amplification reactions
were performed in MJ Research DNA thermal cycler. Each cycle has denaturation at
95° C for 30 seconds, annealing at 55°C for 30 seconds,
extension at 72°C for 90 seconds and the cycle was repeated 44 times
with a final extension of 72°C for 5 min. Five µl aliquots of
amplification products were loaded on 1.2 % agarose gels prepared in 1X
TAE (tris-acetate-EDTA) buffer (pH 8.0), separated by electrophoresis (5
V/cm for 2.5 h) and stained with ethidium bromide. The gels were
visualized using a gel documentation system (Alpha Image Analyzer, USA). Five to
seven microliters of each PCR product was digested with one of the following 5
enzymes: Alu1, Pst1, Hinf1, BsuR1, and Msp1
(MBI Fermentas, Germany) in the buffer stipulated by the manufacturer. The
digested DNA was loaded on a 1.5% agarose prepared in TAE buffer,
separated by electrophoresis, stained with ethidium bromide and visualized using
gel documentation system. Procedures for obtaining PCR amplified products and
endonuclease digestion of these products was repeated twice to verify the
results.

Cloning, sequencing and analysis:
Fresh PCR products were purified with a PCR purification kit (Qiagen, Germany) as
per manufacturer's protocols, and 2 µl of purified product was
used for TA cloning using pGEM T vector (Promega, Madison, USA). Recombinant
colonies were identified using an ampicillin and blue white colony selection
method, and were confirmed by PCR using the same primers used for PCR
amplification. Plasmids were prepared and the inserts were sequenced and
analyzed. Multiple sequence alignment (MSA) was done by MUSCLE, alignment
curation by Gblock (www.phylogeny.fr). Secondary structure analysis was done by
Mfold []. Restriction
map was generated by NEBcutter [].

Discussion
The wheat roots collected from fields were infested by H. avenae and
white females attached to the roots were handpicked under the microscope and used
for DNA extraction. PCR amplification of the rDNA ITS 1 and 2 regions of 200
individual cysts generated one fragment of approximately 1050 bp ()- ITS amplification is shown for only
96 individual cysts). Initial analysis by restriction digestion of the PCR product
with all the five restriction enzymes AluI, PstI,
HinfI, BsuRI, and MspI did
not indicate any variation in the restriction profile of the ITS region among the
different individuals ( -
Restriction profile is shown only for 56 cysts for each restriction enzyme).
Pst1 and Hinf1 can accurately differentiate
H. avenae from H. filipjevi [, ]. The restriction profile generated by these two enzymes
provided the primary confirmation of the species indicating that all the analyzed
individual cysts were H. avenae. Therefore the PCR amplified ITS
fragment of five individuals randomly selected were cloned separately and sequenced.
Removal of primer sequences in the flanking 18S and 28S gave 566 and 215 bp ITS 1
and 2 sequences respectively.

After sequencing it was deposited in GenBank (accession numbers: KC152906). MSA of
five geographical isolates taken for this study (India - KC152906, China - GU377252,
Israel - AY148363, Germany - AY148387 and Australia - HM560737) and pairwise
comparison showed differences in ITS1 ranging from 0.3–1.4%. Even though
some sequence differences were seen in the ITS1 region, they were not significant
enough in generating differences in the restriction profiles. Single base deletions
were more common in the ITS1 region of the Australian, China and German isolates may
be due to the geographical isolation (). All isolates of H. avenae used in this study are given
in  (see
supplementary material). Subbotin et al [] reported that absence of
AluI and RsaI sites in the European population
could be used to differentiate the European and Indian populations as these two
restriction sites were present in the Indian population. However, the sequence
analysis and comparison in the present study revealed that these two restriction
sites were present in all the populations used in the analysis. Further, position of
the restriction sites for MspI, AluI and
RsaI remained identical in both Indian and the Chinese
population and there was a slight shift in the German population. The length of ITS
2 was 215 bp and there was no difference in the ITS2 sequences of H.
avenae isolates from different geographical locations except for the
German population suggesting ITS2 region is more conserved than ITS1. Conformational
analysis of the ITS2 - rDNA genes of H. avenae isolates resulted in
secondary structure that predicted most energy efficient shape for each isolate. The
delta G (ΔG) values were -81 for the isolates from India and Israel. Whereas
84.6 for Australian and -78.3 kcal/mol for the German population. This shows
that the isolates with lower delta values are thermodynamically more stable so that
they can possibly adapt to specific conditions prevalent in their respective habitat
[].

Present study revealed that Indian isolate of cereal cyst nematode, H.
avenae is quite homogeneous and suitable for generating unbiased
sequence information by using next generation sequencing approach. Further, we
observed no significant difference among the five geographical populations
originating from five countries. However about 10 resistant genes have been reported
globally to confer either total or partial resistance to different CCN pathotypes of
H. avenae []. In view of this it will be informative to sequence one or more
pathotypes so for better understanding of the biology of this important nematode
pest on wheat for its management.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We would like to acknowledge and extend our gratitude to Department of Biotechnology,
Government of India for financial support under the Indo Australia Strategic
Research fund (PR12678) and IARI, ICAR, New Delhi, India for infrastructure
facilities.

Citation:Rao et al, Bioinformation 9(2): 067-071
(2013)

White females of Heterodera avenae from IARI fields

A) PCR-amplified 1050bp rDNA fragment from 24 individual cysts /
females of Heterodera avenae; B-F) PCR-RFLP profile of rDNA
of 26 individual females /cysts of H. avenae from
IARI, New Delhi. M- 100bp ladder. B - Alu1:
C-Pst1: D - Hinf1: E -
BsuR1: F- Msp1.

Multiple sequence alignment of ITS1 region of five geographical isolates of
Heterodera avenae

