The gene product, phosphodiesterase 4D (PDE4D) is anchored
at the centrosome-Golgi cell region by phosphodiesterase 4D
interacting protein (PDE4DIP). PDE4D is a member of a family
of phosphohydrolyases. These enzymes are involved in signal
transduction and hydrolyze 3' cyclic phosphate bonds in 3', 5'-
cGMP and 3',5'-cAMP to energyze several reactions in the cell.
The latter are termed second messengers and their rates of
degradation are regulated. Eleven subtypes of PDEs comprise
reactions related to memory and learning as well as other
processes including immune cell activation, hormonesecretion,
smooth vascular muscle action, platelet aggregation, and
cardiac contractility [].

The use of GenePro SA Biosciences [] indicates that PDE4DIP
interacts with 23 other genes ANKRD12, ARFGEF2, ATIC,
ATP2A2, CDK5R2, CDK6, DPYS, FCGR2B, FGFR2, FTH1,
GART, HN1L, KCNMA1, MBNL2, NF1, PLCL2, PRUNE,
SERINC3, SFPQ, STAT5B, TPM1, TULP1, and TXNIP. When
PDE4DIP and the 23 genes are used asinput then the output is
as shown in (). 
 shows 100 interactions related
toPDE4DIP, which is expressed in multiple regions of brain 
[].

As a further example illustrating gene product interactions
implicated in the disease Schizophrenia, () shows
interactions between Disrupted in Schizophrenia 1 (DISC1) and
dysbindin (DTNBP1) []. In addition, PDE4DIP is included 
[].

As an exercise, it is suggested for the interested reader to track
and categorize the various interacting genes identified in the
figures.

There are no financial conflicts.

Citation:Shapshak, Bioinformation 8(16): 740-741 (2012)

PDE4DIPinteractions. In this figure, line-colors and
various interactions with other genes are red Down-regulation,
green Up-regulation, beige Regulation, purple Co-expression,
brown Physical Interaction, turquoise dotted Predicted Protein
Interaction, and mauve dotted Predicted TFactor Regulation.
(GenePro SA Biosciences, http://www.sabiosciences.com/).

DISC1, DTNBP1, and PDE4DIPinteractions. In this
figure, line-colors and various interactions with other genes are
red Down-regulation, green Up-regulation, beige Regulation,
purple Co-expression, brown Physical Interaction, turquoise
dotted Predicted Protein Interaction, and mauve dotted
Predicted TFactor Regulation. (GenePro SA Biosciences,
http://www.sabiosciences.com/).

