Background
Cytokines are a family of low molecular weight soluble proteins, peptides, or
                glycoproteins which are released by many different types of cells as neutrophils,
                lymphocytes, monocytes, macrophages, Natural Killer, endothelial and epithelial
                cells and function as intercellular signaling molecules to control cellular
                proliferation, differentiation and function []. They are important in innate and adaptive
                immune response and they mediate processes as inflammation, hematopoiesis,
                phagocytosis and apoptosis []. These proteins are produced ex novo in
                response to an immune stimulus, and generally operate on short-haul for short
                periods and at very low concentration. Cytokines act by binding specific membrane
                receptors and subsequent transduction of the signal through second messengers,
                generally a tyrosine kinase that trigger a cascade process that leads to the
                activation of a specific set of genes []. In relation to their structure and predominant biological
                activity, in humans they are produced in the different types of cells involved in
                the immune system and are subdivided in sub-families []. To understand the biology of
                the cytokines it is necessary to refer to a complex molecular network, in which the
                positive and negative action of cytokines is balanced by reciprocal interactions,
                regulated by implicated cells as well as other inducing and inhibiting molecules.
                Cytokines are described as multi-functional molecules, which play important
                biological activity in host defense system against pathogens, in homeostasis, tissue
                repair, cell growth and development []. Because cytokines and related receptors function in a
                complex regulatory network where one cytokine influences production of many other
                cytokines and vice versa, there is a need for profiling an array of cytokines in a
                given pathological condition. In fact, some profound changes in the cytokine
                profile, that were observed during the course of various diseases, have highlighted
                that these molecules play a pivotal role also in promoting tumorigenesis and
                metastatic networks []. Cytokines are defined as chemokines, interleukins, and
                lymphokines depending upon their targets and function. Initially, the interleukins
                were used to define cytokines that targeted leukocytes, but the term is now used to
                describe newer cytokines with no bearing on the presumed function or target. The
                chemokine term is used to describe cytokines that are important in chemoattraction
                between cells. Hence, with essential and comprehensive information on all known
                cytokines we projected an annotated database that includes hundreds of entries with
                detailed descriptions of cytokine genes, proteins, cell sources and biological
                activities.

Methodology
Data collection
Some databases were used to collect gene and protein data regarding the human
                    cytokine family: Pubmed and OMIM for biological activity, ENSEMBL for gene
                    records, SRS retrieval system for searching DNA and protein sequences, PDB for
                    threedimensional structures [], DSSP for secondary structure assignment
                        [] and CATH
                    and SCOP for structural classification [–]. Search form is based on a CGI script written in PERL
                    language.

Features of Cytokine Database
The human cytokine family was subdivided in 12 sub-families: Interleukin,
                    Interferon, Colony-Stimulating Factors, Tumor Necrosis Factors, TNF superfamily,
                    Transforming Growth Factors, Adipokine, Adipose derived hormones, CXC chemokine,
                    C chemokine, CX3 chemokine, CC chemokine. The user can click on the image near
                    to the name of each cytokine family and have a short description of the
                    structures of these families. Moreover, in these pages there are the links
                    related to the comparisons between the structures belonging to each family
                    obtained by MultiProt (Multiple Protein Structure Alignment) and MASS (Multiple
                    Protein Structure Alignment by Secondary Structures) servers [–].

In each subgroup, all the known cytokines were inserted. The user can select a
                    sub-family and choose the protein of which want have information (). The output page for each cytokine
                    reports the cell type, where the protein is located, Entrez Gene, the target
                    receptors and cells, the main effects, the description of biological activity,
                    the references, EMBL code, Ensembl protein_coding gene, the number of
                    transcripts, associated peptides and exons, the number and the code of
                    transcript, the number and the code of associated peptides, the number and the
                    code of exons, the chromosome location, CCDS, RefSeq DNA, RefSeq peptide,
                    Protein ID, UniProt code, Sequence isoforms, amino acid sequence, PDB code, CATH
                    and SCOP classifications, and structural features (). Moreover, in the output page there are the links for the
                    nucleotide sequence () and the
                    scheme of gene localization on the related chromosome ().

Utility
The database can find utility in the scientific community for a quick review of the
                cytokines and their involvement in disease and use in clinical treatment. References
                are also provided for each protein and updated with recent published paper.

Conclusions and future development
The main objective of CytokineDB is to provide an easy access to cytokines and
                chemokines for researchers working in immunological laboratories and for other users
                of scientific discipline. Database categorization reveals an user-friendly access to
                data. The database shall be updated periodically by including information regarding
                human cytokine receptors and cytokines as well as from other organisms.

Citation:Costantini
                    et al, Bioinformation 4(3): 92-93 (2009)

Example of input page in CytokineDB

Example of output page in Cytokine DB

