Background
In human, CYP26A1 mapped to chromosomes 10q23-q24 is
expressed in the liver, heart, pituitary gland, adrenal gland,
testis, brain and placenta. It is thought that the principle role of
CYP26A1 is homeostatic for the regulation of intercellular
ATRA (Anti Trans Retinoic Acid) steady state levels via a
negative feedback loop (similar to CYP26A1 cholecalciferol
metabolism). The enzyme is an important regulator of
differentiation and a possible modulator of disease states in
indirectly controlling ATRA and other retinoid concentrations.

Retinoic acid has been used in a number of clinical situations,
especially oncology and dermatology. In Oncology ATRA has
shown spectacular success in the treatment of acute
promyelocytic leukaemia. Although other CYPs are also
induced by ATRA, it is thought that CYP26A1 is likely to be the
most important enzyme involved in its degradation []. ATRA
regulates epithelial differentiation and growth through
activation of specific nuclear retinoic acid receptors (RARs). We
identified compounds capable of inhibiting the metabolic
breakdown of the retinoid because high rate metabolism largely
impairs the biological efficiency of RA.

QSAR studies are of importance in molecular biochemistry. It is
essential that appropriate descriptors are employed, whether
they are theoretical, empirical or derived from available
experimental characteristics of structure to obtain significant
correlation. QSAR represents an attempt to correlate structural
or property descriptors of compound with activities. These
physiochemical descriptors include parameters to account for
hydrophobicity, topology, electronic parameters and steric
effects. These are determined empirically by computational
methods. Quantitative Structure Activity Relationship (QSAR)
is currently being applied in many disciplines pertaining to
drug design and environmental risk assessments [].

An insight to structure activity relationship is established using
molecular descriptors that effectively characterize molecular
size, molecular branching or the variations in molecular shapes
affecting the structure and its molecular activity. Structural
invariants derived from molecular structure are important for
the understanding of a particular structure/property activity
relationship. Several graph theoretical invariants have been
generalized to produce structure dependent descriptors. It
should be noted that most biological activities are dominated by
molecular size in such generalization.

The activities and properties are related using the general
mathematical function, F: Biological activity = f [structure
(physicochemical descriptors as structural parameters)].
Biological activity is often defined as a measure of log 1/C, ki,
IC50, EC50, log k and Km as described elsewhere 
[–]. The
relationship is often not a mathematical expression derived by
statistical or related techniques. The parameters describe
structural and physiochemical properties as independent
variables and the biological activities as dependent variable for
usage in multiple linear regression (MLR) analysis. We describe
the QSAR of 15 triazoles derivatives with relationship between
structural and physiochemical parameters to known biological
activity log IC50 values.

Methodology:
The physiochemical properties used in the study are molar
refractivity, molar volume, parachor, index of refraction,
surface tension and polarizibility to co-relate with biological
activity (log IC50 inhibitory concentration). The physiochemical
properties were estimated using Chemsketch 5.0 (from ACD
Lab) and multiple linear regressions are done by SPSS Software
[,
]. 
The physicochemical parameters used in the study are
described below.

Density (D):
Density is a steric parameter calculated by ACD Lab Chem
Sketch Software. This parameter is related to the bulk and size
of the substituent.

Molecular weight (MW):
Molecular weight descriptor has been used as a descriptor in
systems such as transport studies where diffusion is the mode
of operation. It is an important variable in QSAR studies
pertaining to cross resistance of various drugs in multi-drug
resistant cell lines.

Molar refractivity (MR):
Molar refractivity is generally considered to be a measure of
overall bulkiness and is related to London dispersion forces
using MR=4πNα/3; where N is Avogadro number and α is the
polarizability of the molecule. It gives no information about
shape and is generally scaled 0.1 and has been extensively used
in QSAR.

Parachor (Pc):
This parameter is calculated by ACD Lab Chem Sketch
Software (Chem Sketch). The Parachor may be defined as the
molar volume of a liquid at a temperature at which its surface
tension is unity. Parachor is obtained experimentally using Pc=
(MW/d) γ ¼ where, Pc is a molar volume term that is corrected
by surface tension (γ) rise to the power 1/4.

Indicator variables::
These are not QSAR parameters but are used to indicate the
significance of any particular group or species at a particular
substitution site in a given series of drugs.

Discussion:
QSAR was performed on a series of 15, 4-alkyl/aryl-substituted
1-[benzofuran-2-yl-phenylmethyl]-1 H-triazoles derivatives
with the physicochemical parameters (, see
supplementary material), the biological activity (pIC50) is a
measure of inhibitory activity indicators (, see
supplementary material). We have used Hansch analysis 
[] for
developing these models. The QSAR multiple regression
analyses were performed with SPSS (version 14.0) package.
Their activity data and the physicochemical parameters
evaluated in the correlation are listed in (,
supplementary material). Linear regression analysis was
performed on present series of triazoles derivaties according to
physiochemical properties given in (, See
supplementary material). These parameters were found to be
useful in QSAR based drug modeling (please see
supplementary material for ). The
effect of substituent indicator parameters –I6 (CH2CH2CH2), +
I20 (CH-(CH2CH3)2) at R (see ), IR2 position was
studied (see , supplementary material) in equations 2 to7.

Analysis through univariate correlation produced very low
correlation coefficient (see  in supplementary
material). Bivariate analysis gave a slightly improved value.
Tetra and penta variate analysis results are encouraging with
high correlation coefficient. The high value of F-test ratio and
low value of standard error of estimation support reports
described elsewhere [,
].

We estimated the log IC50 values with the observed ones (
, See supplementary material) for comparison. Such
correlations are graphically represented in . In bivariate
analysis, correlation coefficient are little higher. However, it is
not sufficient to describe the structure activity relationship in a
quantitative manner. Correlation coefficients show best result
obtained using St (surface tension), D (density), Pz
(polarizability) with I6 (CH2CH2CH3) and I20 (CH-
(CH2CH3)2). The mathematical model obtained from
physiochemical properties are given in  (see
supplementary material). Results are compared with observed
values of log IC50 (, See supplementary material).
Substitution effects are shown using the indicator parameters.

Equations suggest that the positive correlation coefficient of
structural parameters D, St, IOR show a direct relationship with
biological activity log IC50. Parameters like Pz have negative
correlation coefficient with inverse relationship for biological
activity log IC50. The positive sign for parameter D, St and IOR
explains that as the bulkiness of the compound increases the
potency of the drug likeliness to increase. The negative sign of
the regression coefficient of Pz means less electronegative
substituent for increased activity [].

The  (supplementary material) suggests that the
positive correlation coefficient of structural parameters Index of
Refractivity (IOR) shows direct relationship with biological
activity logIC50. The positive correlation coefficient of Indicator
IR2 for substituent 15 shows positive impact on the biological
activity quantitatively. The negative (­ve) correlation coefficient
of indicator IR CH2CH2&gt;CH3 at position 3 show inverse
relationship with biological activity.

Predicted and residual values for the best model equation 4 are
given in (, See supplementary material). In this
equation the F ratio value is much higher than the theoretical F
value [F3, 11=33.052] indicating the statistical significance of
this model equation. Predicted values are the calculated
activities from the equation and the residual values are the
difference between the observed biological activities and the
calculated activities.

Conclusion
The study shows that the biological activity log IC50 is structure
specific in nature for a particular series of derivatives. Model
equations suggest that the presence of CH2CH2CH3 at R
position show negative and substituent 15 at R2 position have
positive impact on the biological activity. Thus, compound
R115866 shows the best correlation for further consideration.
The name and molecular structure of compound is R115866 –
N- [4-[2- ethyl – 1- (1H-1, 2, 4-triazol-1-yl) butyl] phenyl]-2-
benzothiazolamine ().

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Yadav, Bioinformation 7(8): 388-392 (2011)

(A): Parent structure of 1-[benzofuran-2-yl-(4-
alkyl/aryl-phenyl)-methyl]-1H-triazoles; (B): 2D structure of
R115866 model compound.

