Background
Cadmium, is an ubiquitous environmental contaminant,
damages several major organs in humans and other mammals.
The molecular mechanisms for damage are not known. At high
doses (5 mg/kg cadmium chloride or higher), testicular damage
in mice, rats, and other rodents includes interstitial edema,
hemorrhage, and changes in spermatogenesis with necrosis that
is evident by 48 hr []. Cadmium is a highly reactive metal,
adversely affecting many mammalian organ systems, including
kidney, liver, lung, pancreas, testis, prostate, ovary, and
placenta []. In humans, chronic environmental and
occupational exposure causes severe bone and kidney damage
and acute occupational exposure from cadmium fumes causes
pulmonary edema []. Cadmium-induced testicular damage in
mice, rats, and other rodents includes interstitial edema and
hemorrhage, accompanied by damage to seminiferous tubules
affecting sperm cells and their precursors []. Testicular
endothelial tissue is a primary target of systemically
administered cadmium, with edema detected 1 h after an
injection of a very high dose of CdCl2 (10 mg/kg, SC) in rats 
[].
At lower doses, however, peritubular cells and the seminiferous
epithelium have been shown to be primary targets []. For
example, a single low dose of CdCl2 (1 mg/kg, I.P) in rats
caused failure of spermiation and fragmentation of basal Sertoli
cell junction, microfilament bundles in the absence of edema or
necrosis []. Similarly, a study investigating Sertoli cell
junctional dynamics in rats using a moderate dose of CdCl2 (3
mg/kg, I.P) found that damage to Sertoli cell barriers occurred
prior to damage to vascular endothelial barriers []. Therefore,
seminiferous epithelial toxicity is not necessarily a consequence
of vascular damage. A disruption of cell-to-cell endothelial and
epithelial junctions, possibly due to disruption of the internal
cytoskeleton, has been proposed as a mechanism for cadmium
toxicity in the testis [] and other organ 
[,
].

L-Carnitine (L-β-hydroxy-γ-N-trimethylaminobutyric acid (LC)
is present in the free or acy L-Carnitine form in the plasma [,
]. LC plays an important role in lipid metabolism; it acts an
essential cofactor for the â-oxidation of fatty acids by facilitating
the transport of long-chain fatty acids across the mitochondrial
membrane as acyL-Carnitine esters. It can activate carnitine
palmityl transferase-1 (CPT-1), the key enzyme in fatty acid
oxidation []. Furthermore, because LC shuttles acetyl groups
from inside to outside the mitochondrial membrane, it increases
the CoA-SH/acetyl-CoA ratio in the mitochondrion by forming
Acetyl L-Carnitine (ALC) with the help of carnitine
acetyltransferase (CAT) [], whose activity relieves inhibition
of the PDH complex and increases glycometabolism [,
].
According to a previous study, significantly reduced lactate
plasma levels suggested that LC can also stimulate the activity
of pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) [].In addition, LC was
defined as a biomarker to assess the function of the
mitochondria []. Evidences showed that a combination of
nutrients, including LC, can improve mitochondrial
dysfunction in the liver of type 2 diabetic in rats []. Recently,
Karanth et al. [] proposed that LC supplements enhanced the
activity of mitochondrial enzymes and the respiratory chain
enzymes. However, a recent study showed that LC played a
role in reducing steatosis in patients with hepatitis C treated
with alpha-interferon (IFN) alpha and ribavirin []. LC
supplements in patients with NASH (non-alcoholic
steatohepatitis) greatly improved glucose plasma levels, lipid
profiles and histological manifestations []. Another author
mentioned that L-Carnitine had a significant effect on
improving semen parameters and seems to be an appropriate
choice for idiopathic infertile men []. Carnitine (β-hydroxy-γ-
N-trimethylaminobutyric acid) is widely distributed in food
from animal's sources but there is limited availability in plants
[]. 
In humans, 75% of carnitine is obtained from the diet 
[].
L-Carnitine (the biologically active stereoisomer) is absorbed
from foods via both active and passive transport across
enterocyte (intestinal cell) membranes []. The bioavailability
of L-Carnitine varies due to dietary composition. Bioavailability
of L-Carnitine in individuals such as vegetarians who are
adapted to low-carnitine diets is higher (66% to 86% of available
carnitine) than regular red-meat eaters adapted to highcarnitine
diets (54% to 72% of available carnitine) []. Carnitine
not obtained from food is synthesized endogenously from two
essential amino acids, lysine and methionine. This occurs in
kidney, liver and brain []. Cardiac and skeletal muscle,
harboring the highest concentrations, cannot synthesize
carnitine and so must acquire carnitine from plasma.
Unabsorbed L-Carnitine is mostly degraded by microorganisms
in the large intestine []. Almost all carnitine (99%) is
intracellular []. Carnitine influences carbohydrate
metabolism. Aberrations in carnitine regulation are implicated
in complications of diabetes mellitus, hemodialysis, trauma,
malnutrition, cardiomyopathy, obesity, fasting, drug
interactions, endocrine imbalances and other disorders.
Understanding the potential of LC to upregulate Hsp in injured
testis tissue would be highly valuable, since these proteins
could attenuate the antioxidant tolerance in this type of testis.
Since the first report [] on the heat-induced appearance of
chromosomal puffing in salivary gland tissue of Drosophila
busckii in 1962, a new research domain has been intensively
explored. This research resulted in the discovery of a large
number of related proteins and their physiological role in many
prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms, tissues, and individual
cells and at the level of subcellular structures. These proteins
were originally called “heat shock proteins” 
[], because they
were discovered in salivary glands and other tissues of
Drosophila melanogaster recovering from a so-called transient
sublethal heat shock, during which body temperature was
increased ~5°C above normal body core temperature 
[]. Such
a mild heat shock elicited a heat shock response, characterized
by the synthesis of new heat shock proteins normally almost
absent in tissues of adult animals and by an increased synthesis
of constitutively present or cognate heat shock proteins. This
event was followed by a transient increased tolerance to high,
normally lethal temperatures (thermotolerance). Later it was
found that not only the tolerance to enhanced temperature
increases, but also the resistance toward other events like
hypoxia, ischemia, inflammation, and exposure to such cellular
toxins as heavy metals, endotoxins, and reactive oxygen species
(cross-tolerance), all imposing serious stress upon tissues and
their composing cells []. Although the physiological role of
heat shock proteins and their protective potential under
pathophysiological circumstances have been studied in detail in
animal models, knowledge of the role and effects of these
proteins in humans is still limited. Where possible the relevance
of the observations for the human situation is discussed.

The aim of the present study was to explore the preventive and
therapeutic effect of LC on testis toxicity induced by cadmium
chloride with regard to DNA damage. We also intended to
determine the protective role of HSP70 against cadmium that
may provide theoretical evidence for LC as a clinical therapy for
testis injury.

Methodology
The current study was carried out on 40 male Wistar rats. Their
average weight was 200-250 g. They were 12-16 weeks old. They
were housed in a controlled environment and get free access to
water ad labitum. Rats were divided into four groups (10 rats
each) according to the following experimental design. Group I:
was received saline solution (0.5 ml/100 g body weight) and
kept as control. Group II: was received 500mg / kg body weight
L-Carnitine IP []. L-Carnitine was obtained from the Sisco
Research Laboratories (P) Ltd, Mumbai, India. Group III: was
administered IP 1.2 mg cadmium chloride (BDH Chemicals Ltd,
Poole) that was dissolved in 0.9 % (w/v) NaCl to give a solution
containing 0.12 mg CdCl2/0.1 ml. The solution was sterilized by
autoclaving at 13 lb/in2 for 15 min; the pH after autoclaving
was 6.5 []. Group IV: was treated simultaneously with LCarnitine
(the same dose as mentioned for group II) and
cadmium chloride (the same dose as in group III). 5 rats/ group
were killed, 10 days post treatment and other five rats/group
were sacrificed, 56 days post treatment and the testes of
experimental groups were collected. The testes were frozen till
measure the DNA damage by comet assay and the level of heat
shock protein by ELISA Technique.

Comet Assay:
1 g of crushed samples were transferred to 1 ml ice-cold PBS.
This suspension was stirred for 5 min and filtered. Cell
suspension (100 µl) was mixed with 600 µl of low-melting
agarose (0.8% in PBS). 100 µl of this mixture was spread on precoated
slides. The coated slides were immersed in lyses buffer
(0.045 M TBE, pH 8.4, containing 2.5% SDS) for 15 min. The
slides were placed in electrophoresis chamber containing the
same TBE buffer, but devoid of SDS. The electrophoresis
conditions were 2 V/cm for 2 min and 100 mA. Staining with
ethidium bromide 20 µg/ml at 4°C. The observation was with
the samples still humid, the DNA fragment migration patterns
of 100 cells for each dose level were evaluated with a
fluorescence microscope (With excitation filter 420-490nm [issue
510nm]). The comets tails lengths were measured from the
middle of the nucleus to the end of the tail with 40× increase for
the count and measure the size of the comet. For visualization
of DNA damage, observations are made of EtBr-stained DNA
using a 40× objective on a fluorescent microscope 
[].

Although any image analysis system may be suitable for the
quantitation of SCGE data, we use a Comet 5 image analysis
software developed by Kinetic Imaging, Ltd. (Liverpool, UK)
linked to a CCD camera to assess the quantitative and
qualitative extent of DNA damage in the cells by measuring the
length of DNA migration and the percentage of migrated DNA.
Finally, the program calculates tail moment. Generally, 50 to
100 randomly selected cells are analyzed per sample.

Measurement of HSP-70:
The testes were homogenated, to investigate HSP70 using
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay Kit (E90873Ra, Uscan-
USA).

Statistical Analysis:
The data were expressed as the mean ±S.E. and were analyzed
by means of one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). Statistical
evaluation of data was done following Student's t-test. A
difference was considered significant at p&lt;0.05.

Results
Comet assay in different groups:
As shown in  (see supplementary material)and Figure
1, no remarkable alterations of tailed cells, tail length, tail DNA
% and tail moments were noticed in L-Carnitine treated group
through the whole experiment as compared with control group
(3.6±1.1-3±0.92,96.4±4.28-97±2.9, 1.42±0.4-1.38±0.2, 1.34±0.3-
,1.39±0.4-1.8±0.2 vs3±1.2-2.8±0.5, 97±2.8-97.2±3.9, 1.26±0.2-
1.38±0.3, 1.2±0.2-1.27±0.4, 1.54±0.3-1.77±0.1), but CdCl2 treated
rats (on days 10 and 56) induced significant elevations of tailed
cells, tail length, tail DNA %, tail moments as compared to
control group (15.32±4.7- 22±3.6, 84.68±3.2- 78±4.0, 4.98±.0.2-
7.41±1.42 , 5.17±1.21-7.38±1.5, 29.26±3.9-54.87±5.7, 27 vs 3±1.2-
2.8±0.5, 97±2.8-97.2±3.9, 1.26±0.2-1.38±0.3, 1.2±0.2-1.27±0.4,
1.54±0.3-1.77±0.1). Synchronized exposure to cadmium chloride
and L-Carnitine induce significant reduction in tailed cells, tail
length, tail DNA %, tail moments as compared to cadmium
chloride treated group (13.6±4.2-17±3.5, 86.4±4.7-83±3.5,
4.73±0.3-5.67±1.33, 4.69±1.0-5.53±0.3, 22.24±2.7-31.40±3.5 vs
15.32±4.7- 22±3.6, 84.68±3.2- 78±4.0, 4.98±.0.2-7.41±1.42,
5.17±1.21-7.38±1.5, 29.26±3.9-54.87±5.7, 27.97±3.7-42.11±3.4).
Figure 3 demonstrated the effect of cadmium chloride and LCarnitine
on DNA damage using Comet Assay, the white
arrows pointed to comet tail of affected nuclei.

Heat shock proteins in different groups:
As Shown in  and 
, CdCl2 treated rats (on days
10 and 56) induced significant elevations in HSP70 as compared
to control (27.97±3.7-42.11±3.4 vs 6.31±2.4-5.68±1.3). Meanwhile,
simultaneous administration of cadmium chloride and LCarnitine
(on day 10 and 56) induced significant reduction in
HSP70 as compared to cadmium chloride treated group
(23.93±2.5-30.11±3.5 vs27.97±3.7-42.11±3.4).

Discussion
Cadmium is a ubiquitous environmental pollutant and it can
affect human health through the food chain or via other
approaches. As an example, heavy smoking is the commonest
source human intake of cadmium that tends to accumulate in
testis, and notably it has been associated with low sperm count
and motility []. The accumulation and toxic effects of
cadmium have attracted considerable attention. Previous
studies have shown that testis is the target organ of cadmium
and that cadmium can damage testicular tissue and reduce
spermatogenesis [,
]. Kusakabe et al, using ELISA, have
reported that low concentration (2.5 µM) of cadmium doesn't
induce DNA damage of rat Sertoli cells []. We found, using
the single-cell gel electrophoresis (comet assay), that cadmium
chloride exposure with 1.2 mg produce significant elevations of
tail moment in compare with control group as shown in 
and 
, the affected nuclei of comet tail are also shown in
(, ). Cadmium uptake has been shown to be
concentration-dependent due to an increase in active
transepithelial ion transport []. Cadmium exposure produces
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and results in the formation of
denatured or abnormal proteins [].

Another author's added cellular damage, such as DNA adducts,
DNA strand breaks, chromosomal aberrations and the presence
of micronuclei also occur following cadmium exposure [].
The previous author added that relative amount of DNA
damage is dependent on both the concentration of cadmium
and the length of exposure []. However, cadmium not only
induces DNA damage, but also interferes with DNA repair
processes and enhances genotoxicity [,
]. Additionally,
cadmium exposure also affects cellular calcium homeostasis
and calcium-mediated functions in kidney cells by increasing
intracellular calcium []. Changes in cell morphology are also
observed, including an alteration of cell shape, a loss of cell-cell
attachment and monolayer integrity, as well as disruption of
actin filament distribution when treated with cadmium [].
Going with the aforementioned results, it has been shown in
this investigation that administration of cadmium chloride can
exert DNA damage with increased duration to 56 days. Also,
the level of hsp70 increased with increasing duration of
treatment to a maximum at 56 days of cadmium chloride
treatment.In another study, both hsp30 and hsp70 mRNA
accumulation increased with increasing duration of treatment
from 8 to 16h, respectively, []. Further, enhanced synthesis of
HSPs was demonstrated in mouse lymphocytes treated with
elevated temperature plus ethanol [].

The mechanism by which synergistic accumulation of HSPs was
produced is not yet known; however, it could be explained by
an increase in either the rate of transcription or stability of hsp70
mRNA, or stability of their proteins [].In this study, it was
also plausible that cadmium stressor caused a significant
increase in denatured or misfolded protein, thereby increasing
the magnitude of Hsp70 response. This may be the case since
cadmium affect protein structure through different means. Cd
could induce DNA damage such as single- and double-strand
breaks, modified bases, abasic sites, DNA-protein crosslink, and
oxidized bases and even bulky adducts in organisms 
[–].
Our finding supports this claim that DNA damage detected by
comet assay can be considered as a powerful biomarker assay in
risk assessment of environmental pollutants like cadmium. In
the present study, we anticipated noticing improvement in the
testes cells after simultaneous administration of cadmium
chloride and L-Carnitine that induce significant reduction of
HSP-70 and tail moment in compare with cadmium chloride
treated group. Carnitine, a branched non-essential amino acid,
is synthesized from the essential amino acids lysine and
methionine. Ascorbic acid, ferrous iron, pyridoxine and niacin
are also necessary cofactors and deficiencies of any of these can
lead to carnitine deficiency []. The pathway in mammals is
unique using protein-bound lysine that is enzymatically
methylated to form trimethyllysine as a post-translational
modification of protein synthesis []. Trimethyllysine
undergoes four enzymatic reactions in the course of
endogenous L-Carnitine biosynthesis. One of the enzymes in
this pathway, γ-butyrobetaine hydroxylase, is absent from
cardiac and skeletal muscle but highly expressed in human
liver, testes, and kidney []. In accordance with the previous
information, our results revealed that that L-Carnitine
treatment didn't exert any significant change on HSP70 level
and the different parameters of DNA damage of rat's test
homogenates in compare to control group throughout the
whole experiment.

A study reported that benefits of carnitine are comparable with
other drugs of choice in terms of effectiveness in preventing
DNA damage to neural disorder []. Another study 
[]
suggested that L-Carnitine protection against the cytotoxicity of
Cd may be related to the maintenance of normal redox balance
inside the cell. L-Carnitine could exert a direct antioxidant
action by the transport of long-chain fatty acids into the
mitochondrial matrix, with subsequent increase in β-oxidation,
acetyl-CoA and ATP production []. The testicular toxicity of
cadmium appears to be mediated by a rapid apoptotic process
as revealed by an increase in the number of TUNEL-positive
cells in the seminiferous tubules of treated rats []. Our
investigation showed that DNA damage level increased in the
testes of the CdCl2-treated rats. The mechanism of Cd-induced
DNA base oxidation has not been fully elucidated. The
available data indicates that Cd exposure induces oxidative
DNA damage due to an excess of oxygen-derived free radicals
[]. Interestingly, the current work, however, is the first to
show DNA damage-related increase HSPs-70after cadmium
exposure in testis cells. And also the first to show protected
DNA-related decrease in HSPs-70 in testis cells of rats after LCarnitine
administration. Our findings that L-Carnitine
administration to Cd-exposed rats minimized DNA damage in
the rat testis could probably be related to its antioxidant
proprieties [] showed that L-Carnitine pretreatment can
prevent testicular atrophy. In our study, the ability of LCarnitine
to reduce the cytotoxicity of Cd in testis cells could be
due to enhancing efflux of Cd and decreasing its accumulation
in the nuclei of this target cell population in the rat testis and
could be also through upregulation of HSP70. Another authors
mentioned that L-Carnitine's ability to restore glutathione
levels has broad implications beyond the obvious antioxidant
benefit. They added that our bodies' glutathione status is
intimately connected with the production of a special class of
proteins whose function is to protect the structural and
functional integrity of countless other proteins (which constitute
most of the cellular machinery of life) from damage caused by
such factors as excessive heat or cold, infection, inflammation,
oxygen deprivation, cellular trauma, and toxic agents. The
special proteins also protect against disruptions of redox
homeostasis, the delicate balance between the oxidative and
reductive (antioxidative) forces within our cells []. Carnitine
has also been shown to modulate DNA damage and apoptosis
by down-regulating proapoptotic Fas signals and suppressing
the generation of ceramide, a key mediator of apoptosis [].

Apoptosis is a consequence of a cascade of biochemical events,
is encountered in all tissues and, characterized by blebbing of
the plasmalemma, volume loss, condensation of the nucleus
and lytic DNA degradation, ultimately leads to the
programmed death of the cell. A key role in this process is
played by the caspases, enzymes that cleave substrates once
activated. Enhanced tissue levels of HSPs have been reported to
inhibit intentionally induced apoptosis. For instance, in Hsp70-
overexpressing pulmonary endothelial cells, endotoxin-induced
apoptosis is attenuated []. It is quite clear that induction of
several members of the heat-shock protein family results in
both acquired thermotolerance and decreased sensitivity to a
broad range of cytotoxic stimuli []. HSP70 is the best studied
of these proteins, and genetic studies have provided
unambiguous support for HSP70 as a cytoprotective molecule
[]. Heat-shock proteins, including HSP70, can modify the
antioxidant potential of cells. Although we did not perform
traditional antioxidant experiments in the current study, recent
data with stably transfected cell lines suggest an important
antioxidant role for HSP70 []. These observations also provide
support for the general concept that reactive oxygen
intermediates play an important role in DNA degradation [].
Although the role for reactive oxygen intermediates in DNA
damage has been challenged [], significant evidence exists to
support this hypothesis; including an enhanced apoptotic
response to a variety of stimuli in cells that under express
enzymatic antioxidants []. Liu et al., suggest that cadmium,
like other proapoptotic stimuli in other cells, generates reactive
oxygen intermediates early in the course of apoptosis,
providing kinetic support for the signaling potential of these
free radicals. Thus HSP70 itself, or proteins modified by the
induction of HSP-70 might reduce the accumulation of Oi
immediately after exposure to cadmium and inhibit the ensuing
process of DNA damage. In conclusion, Cd altered testicular
function by inducing DNA damage, which could be reversed by
administration of L-Carnitine suggesting the manipulation of
HSP70 that may have clinical implications for the treatment of
acute testis injury.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This research project was supported by a grant from the
research center of the Center for Female Scientific and Medical
College in King Saud University.

Citation:Selim et al, Bioinformation 8(1): 058-064 (2012)

Demonstrates that cadmium chloride exposure
produce significant elevations of tail moment in compare with
control group. However, L-Carnitine induces non significant
change of tail moment. Synchronized administration of
cadmium chloride and L-Carnitine evokes significant reduction
of tail moment in compare with cadmium chloride group.

Elucidates that cadmium exposure induced significant
elevations HSP70 in testis homogenates, either at 10 or 56 days
post treatment. Meanwhile, simultaneous administration of
cadmium chloride and L-Carnitine induce significant reduction
of HSP70 in compare with cadmium chloride treated group. LCarnitine
treated group didn't show any remarkable alterations
in compare with control group.

Demonstrates the effect of cadmium and L-Carnitine
on DNA damage using comet assay after 10 days the white
arrows pointed to comet tail of affected nuclei

Demonstrates the effect of cadmium and L-Carnitine
on DNA damage using comet assay after 56 days, the white
arrows heads pointed to comet tail of affected nuclei

