Background
Wolbachia is a type of gram negative bacterium commonly
found in arthropods and nematodes. It is transmitted in host
cytoplasm and is known to cause reproductive alterations such
as cytoplasmic incompatibility, male killing, parthenogenesis,
and feminization []. The mechanism that causes these
reproductive alterations is unknown and it is suspected that
Wolbachia proteins would play a decisive role in causing
reproductive manipulations by interacting with the other host
proteins []. The outer membrane of gram negative bacteria
contains porins, which help to transfer molecules, and
lipopolysaccarides []. Analysis of Wolbachia genomes shows a
pattern of paralogous genes which have similar function, this
copy is free to mutate and acquire new functions. Outer
membrane protein (OMP) performs various functions including
import and export of nutrients, and export of virulence factors
or protein through bacterial type IV secretion; OMP also has a
role in positive selection and mediates host bacterial
interactions []. OMPs are highly variable and are among the
fastest evolving microbial proteins [,
]. OMPs show a
characteristic transmembrane β-barrel structure, formed by an
even number of antiparallel sheets, connected to loops of
variable length (including hyper variable and conserved
regions) at the extracellular side and to short turns containing
both N and C termini at the periplasmic side []. Keeping this in
view here we investigate one such outer membrane protein of
Wolbachia which is known as Wolbachia surface protein with
molecular weight of 24 KD and know to be mosaic in nature. 
[–]. 
The reduced constraints in the overall protein structure is
expected based on WSP's large amino acid variation and
extensive differences in length of the exposed loops. WSP must
be particularly versatile, in order to accommodate such
variability, which appears to be maintained by a constant
synonymous variants per protein type. Nevertheless some
nucleotide haplotypes are particularly common, suggesting
recent spread (via lateral gene transfer or strain transfer) rather
than maintenance by selection []. From this we had concluded
that recombination have played a role in larger extent in
maintaining the diversity of Wolbachia strains causing different
phenotypes. In order to provide necessary information about
the variation of this protein isolated from different sources.
Here we investigate the molecular evolution, the prediction of
protein structure and the biophysical properties of WSP in D.
melanogaster, A. tabida and B. malayi, which help in identification
of drug target.

Methodology
Sequence selection:
The protein sequences of Drosophila melanogaster (NP_966785.1),
Asobara tabida (AAW78819.1) and Bulgaria malayi (AAW70873.1)
were selected from the SWISSPROT database, for analysis of
structural variations in WSP of a Wolbachia endosymboint.

Evolutionary analysis of protein sequences and structures:
The evolutionary changes present in protein sequences on D.
menalogaster, A. tabida and B. malayi was predicted using MEGA
software (http://www.megasoftware.net/) and structural
variations were identified using Phyre online server
(http://www.sbg.bio.ic.ac.uk/~phyre/) to find the fold
recognition.

Protein structure prediction:
The biophysical properties of primary protein sequences were
predicted using Protparam,. Three dimensional protein
structures were predicted using SOPMA and Swiss Model. The
three dimensional structure can be used for potential drug
targets.

Homology Modeling:
The three-dimensional structure of WSP protein was modeled
using MODELLER software and structural variations present in
D. menalogaster, A. tabida and B. malayi were predicted.

Structure validation and active site prediction:
The modeled WSP structure was used for structure validation
using SAVS (Structure Validation and Analysis Server). The
PROCHECK checks the stereo chemical quality of a protein
structure, producing a number of PostScript plots analyzing its
residue-by-residue geometry. The active site prediction was
identified by using CastP; these results show the surface
topography of active site amino acids.

Result
Sequence similarity search:
The protein sequence of WSP was submitted into Protein
BLAST and picked out its homologs with the help of PDB. The
template crystal structure of Neisserial Surface Protein A
(NspA) [PDB ID: 1P4T] from Neisseria meningitides showing 34%
identity with the given target sequence ().

Genetic analysis of protein sequences:
The genetic variations of WSP sequence was analyzed using
MEGA software. The multiple sequence alignment and
statistical data calculations in D. melanogaster, A. tabida and B.
malayi have evolutionarily diverged. The results indicate that
the sequence alignment and distribution amino acids
arrangement in WSP is highly variable. The multiple
alignments of WSP results show 0.021, 1.271 and 1.271
distances. The total mean distance is 0.0855.

Protein structural prediction:
The primary structure prediction of WSP sequences in D.
melanogaster, A. tabida and B. malayi shows instability index of
23.72, 21.99 and 30.79 respectively. The complexity of all protein
structures is stable. The grand average of hydropathicity of all
three organism proteins also shows -0.122, -0.227 and -0.386
respectively. The variability of amino acids in all these
organisms is varying depending on molecular weight,
hydropathycity and aliphatic index, indicating small
evolutionary changes present in protein sequences. The
secondary structural variations were predicted using SOPMA.
The structural alignment of α-helices, β-sheets, and random
coils for these three organisms' are shown in 
(see
supplementary material).

Three dimensional protein structure predictions:
The three dimensional structure of WSP in D.melanogaster,
A.tabida and B.malayi shows 8-stranded beta barrel of
approximately 80.747 Å. The pair-wise sequence alignment is
shown in ().The three dimensional structures of protein
sequences in WSP in D.melanogaster, A.tabida and B.malayi are
shown in (). The three dimensional modelled structure
WSP is 8-stranded beta barrel ~80 long with extended loops on
C-terminals exposed towards extracellular surface. The Nterminus
of the 3D-structure is towards periplasmic space.

Homology Modelling:
The sequence identity of WSP in D.melanogaster, A.tabida and
B.malayi is identical to outer membrane protein NspA from
Neisseria meningitides (PDB ID: 1P4TA), which is a promising
vaccine candidate because of its highly conserved character
among meningococcal strains and because it induces
bactericidal antibodies. NspA is a homolog of the Opa proteins,
which mediate adhesion to host cells. In model protein
structure the minimum and maximum barrel lengths are 18.7Å
and 26.4 Å respectively. The maximum barrel length is similar
to the width of porins too (2POR). This thickness is not
sufficient to transverse the bacterial lipid membrane, which is
approximately 80Å thick. However, in experiments with OMP
W of E.coli, of similar barrel length, it has shown to work as a
channel to transport small compounds across the planar lipid
bilayers [].

The template structure on WSP in D.melanogaster and A.tabida
shows one salt bridge Ile74-ser195, two Tyrosines 82 and 192
blocks the channel by making a barrier, protected by salt bridge
on each side. B.malayi is Glu148-val217 having salt bridge and
tyrosine blocks 157, 158, 159 and end with tyr212. The coordination
of proline 110, 137, 140, 154, 157, 182 residues in the
cavity is charged, blocking the way unlike as in porin, and B.
malayi is present the porins on 169 and 190 positions. The
overall modelled structure of WSP in D. melanogaster, A. tabida
shows 8-stranded beta-barrel that is approximately 80 Å long
with extended loops exposed towards the extracellular surface.
The N terminus of the modelled structure is towards
periplasmic space. The 32 residues on the N-terminus are
missing. The peptide groups are on amino acid positions 105-
163 and 70-128. In the WSP of B.malayi the peptide groups are
on positions 147-161 and 162-171. For D.melangaster, A.tabida and
B.malayi electrostatic surface interaction is present at -2758.73, -
2328.22 and -5086.79 respectively. The proteolytic cleavage
helps for signaling peptide cleavage from protein transport in to
the cytoplasm region. The active sites identified through of
WSP in D. melanogaster, A. tabida and B. malayi is as shown in
the  (see supplementary material).

Discussion
It seems to be a necessary application of Biophysical methods,
especially structural ones (X-ray crystallography and NMR) to
characterize molecular process of proteins involved in
interaction with the host. There are numerous examples of
studies of entire complexes between proteins and their ligands
that provide direct or reliable evidence related to structure and
function of the protein. Further the Insilco predictions of
protein complexes will help in revealing the interactions with
the host which greatly enhances the hypothesis and
experimental investigations. The mechanisms of Wolbachia-host
interaction are important in understanding of the bacterial life
and their pathogenicity as well as generation of new drug
targets. Wolbachia are a diverse group of intracellular bacteria
that show impressive adaptations within invertebrate cells and
in manipulating the biology of their hosts.

The WSP plays a crucial role in causing various reproductive
manipulations by interacting with the host proteins. The
structure of WSP contains porins and acts an ion channel which
helps in the transfer of molecules. The Insilco prediction of WSP
structure had similarity to NspA which shows about 34% in D.
melanogaster, A. tabida and B. malayi. The genetic analysis and
molecular evolution of WSP in B. malayi is less diverged than D.
menalogaster &amp; A. tabida, the evolutionary difference shows
0.021, 1.271 and 1.271 distances respectively. The total mean
distance is 0.0855. This result indicates that WSP is less
diverged in all these species. The structural prediction indicates
that the WSP is a stable protein with various instability indexes
as shown in the results. The distribution of amino acids in WSP
complex protein  (see supplementary material) shows
random distribution of alpha helix, extended strands, beta turns
and more distribution of random coils from all these organisms.

The three dimensional structure of WSP were predicted using
Swiss Model. The WSP complex structure shows 8-stranded
beta barrel weight of ~80.747 Å, length 18.7Å and width of 26.4
Å which is similar to the width of porins too, it is present in
cytoplasmic or periplasmic membrane of arthropods and
nematodes. The C-terminal contains phenylalanine which binds
to bacterial membrane and helps for apoptosis in B. malayi and
A. tabida, but absent in the case of D. menalogaster. The gene
encoding WSP shows homology with genes encoding outer
membrane protein of the closely related to NspA. The predicted
complex structure were observed in PROCHECK 3D-validation
shows 84.15% of steriochemical rotation of torsion angles and
no amino acid changes in protein complex. The identification of
active site amino acids present in WSP complex structure was
predicted using CastP. A greater number of variable active sites
are present in these organisms and these protein structures can
be used for drug binding sites. In WSP, there is less
recombination impact and divergence of amino acids
distribution in D. melanogaster and A. tabida but more diverged
in B. malayi.

The complex protein shows possibility of polymorphism as its
significant feature of evolution. However, it has been shown
that recombination and selection have played a key role in
adaptive evolution []. This variation may be the effect of
mutation and recombination. However, we conclude the remote
possibility of polymorphism in WSP due to positive selection
[], further such variation in course of host pathogen
interactions having variable antigenic property, goodwill to
sexual selection, and as potential drug targets has been proved.
The host pathogen interaction and immune response is
supported by positive selection, although it needs further
confirmed by the replication of the results of our study.

Conclusion
Generally, most of the nematode depends on this bacterium
Wolbachia for their survival. For e.g. Brugia malayi, Wuchereria
bancrofti, Onchocerca volvulus, etc., nematode which cause
Lymphatic filariasis and River Blindness in humans are so
much dependent on Wolbachia that in the absence leads to
reduced growth rates followed by eventual death. The initial
work on Wolbachia surface protein as shown that it may function
to inhibit apoptosis of host, antigenic role and it shows strong
immune response against human who are infected with
filariasis.

The Biophysical characterization of the protein would provide
the clues to its biological functions, physiological role. Although
work has been iniated in this regard, the comparison between
different sources of Wolbachia or has not been undertaken. Here
we predict the structure of Wolbachia surface protein from three
different sources which behaves as parasitic in D.melanogaster,
mutalistic in B.malayi, both parasitic and mutalistic in A.tabida.
The comparative analysis will highlight the multiple roles of
Wolbachia surface protein which extend to combating pests, major
vectors specifically through gene drive strategies. Further the
function of WSP would facilitate, and is a prerequisite for the
development of new drug targets.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors would like to thank to Bangalore University and
DAE Board of research in Nuclear Sciences (BRNS) Grant No
2012/37B/BRNS/No.953 for their financial assistance during
the work. We would like to thank our team members for their
contribution and support. First author would like to thank Dr.
Manish Chandra Patak, IISER Bhopal, ITI (Gas Rahat) Building,
Govindpura, Bhopal 462023 India for his review and also would
like to thank Mr.S.Sampath Kumar, Mr. C.H. Huchesh, Mr. H.
Ravikumar, Dr. N.S.Surendra, Mr. Kunal A and ChethanaV.C
for their support during the study.

Citation:Uday &amp; Puttaraju, Bioinformation 8(15): 711-715 (2012)

An alignment between WSP (Target) and Nspa (Template).

Three dimensional structure of WSP in D.melanogaster,
B.malayi and A.tabida. The WSP in D.melanogaster structure, the
red gating helix is absent unlike in A. tabida &amp; B.malayi, the
B.malayi has higher internal radius than others.

