Background
Late embryogenesis abundant (LEA) proteins accumulate in
seeds and pollen during maturation and in vegetative tissues in
responses to drought, salinity, temperature stress and abscisic
acid [,
]. After 32 years since the first LEA protein discovered
[], the molecular functions and mechanisms of most LEA
proteins remain largely unknown []. LEA proteins are widely
assumed to play a role in cellular dehydration tolerance and in
controlling water uptake during imbibition []. According to
the features of particular motifs, sequence similarity or biased
amino acid composition, LEA proteins are classified into
different groups. Group 1 LEA proteins are small (8-12 kD),
acidic (pI 5.4-6.6) and highly hydrophilic, and contain 20-mer
motif TVVPGGTGGKSVEAQEHLAE []. Based on consensus
protein or oligonucleotide probability profile (POPP) analysis,
group 1 is subdivided as la and 1b, and group 1a is
hypothesized to match with chromosomal and nuclear proteins
with a possible DNA binding function []. However, no further
computational and experimental data supports this hypothesis.
Recently, we have found that group 1a LEA protein EMB564 is
greatly expressed in maize seeds and its abundance is
associated with seed vigor []. This implies a relationship
between EMB564 and seed vigor. Currently, there are still no
clear annotations for group 1 LEA proteins (including EMB564)
relating to their molecular functions and subcellular locations in
the Universal Protein Resource KnowledgeBase (UniProtKB)
(http:// www.uniprot.org). In the present paper, we have
analyzed the subcellular localization, DNA/RNA-binding
propensity and three-dimensional (3D) structure of EMB564 in
order to elucidate the molecular basis of its functions. Our
analysis highlights EMB564 functioning within the cell nucleus.

Methodology
Subcellular localization of EMB564 protein:
The protein sequences of EMB564 and other proteins examined
in this paper were retrieved from UniProtKB. Subcellular
localization of EMB564 was predicted with CELLO, PlantmPLoc,
WoLF PSORT, Predotar and TargetP, respectively.

DNA/RNA-binding prediction:
DNA-binding propensity was predicted using Loctree
(https://rostlab.org/owiki/index.php/Loctree) and
DNAbinder (http://www.imtech.res.in/raghava/dnabinder).
DNA and RNA binding residues were predicted using BindN
(http://bioinfo.ggc.org/bindn) and DP-Bind 
(http://lcg.rit.albany.edu/dp-bind).

Homology search:
Standalone PSI-Blast (
http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/ sss/psiblast/) was performed for 3 iterations (E-value: 0.001) using
the protein sequence of EMB564 as a query to search remote
homologues against the UniProtKB/TrEMBL.

Protein modeling and function assignments:
The 3D model of EMB564 was built using the on-line server ITASSER
(http://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/I-TASSER) in
automatic model []. Function assignment was made by
comparing the 3D model of EMB564 against those in the Protein
Data Bank using the Dali server (DaliLite v.3 in -q mode) [].

Discussion
Nucleus location of EMB564:
To date, despite the intensive characterization of many LEA
proteins, their molecular functions are enigmatic and largely
unknown []. Computational analysis will provide insights on
the molecular basis of biological functions of these LEA
proteins, especially on their subcellular locations, sequence
binding sites, homology and modeling. According to our
examination of the scientific literature, only 22 LEA proteins
have been experimentally localized in the subcellular
compartments, but no any group 1 LEA proteins are
experimentally localized. In this study, we used five popular
predictors (CELLO, Plant-mPLoc, WoLF PSORT, Predotar and
TargetP), rather than relying on a single predictor, to predict the
subcellular localization of EMB564 protein. These predictors use
both defined characteristics and machine-learning techniques.
All prediction results support the nucleus location of EMB564
 
(see supplementary material). Therefore, the predicted
nucleus location of EMB564 is highly reliable. After its
synthesis, how EMB564 is targeted to the nucleus remains
unclear, since it does not contain any known nuclear
localization signals []. Our analysis indicated that EMB564
does contain many positively charged lysines or arginines
exposed on the protein surface as nuclear (chromosomal)
proteins. Due to its small size, EMB564 may diffuse through the
nuclear pore into the nucleus []. It is also possible that small
LEA proteins may be co-transported to the nucleus through
protein-protein interactions [].

Sequence similarity of EMB564 with DNA helicase:
LOCtree predicted EMB564 as a DNA-binding protein with 90%
reliability. Likewise, DNAbinder predicted EMB564 as a DNAbinding
protein. Furthermore, the prediction results of DP-Bind
and BindN indicate that EMB564 contains three major DNAbinding
segments: PGGTGGKS (residues 23-30),
EGRSRGGQTRREQ (residues 39-51) and KKGGLSTT (residues
62-69) (). BindN predicted similar DNA-residues as
DP-Bind but some more along the sequence of EMB564 
(). The remote sequence similarities of EMB564 with DNAbinding
proteins were searched using PSI-Blast. The first
iteration of PSI-Blast retrieved many homologues with 23%-98%
identities, such as group 1 LEA proteins, stress proteins and
uncharacterized proteins. Strikingly, four DNA/RNA helicases
with identities 33%-41% were retrieved from the bacteria
Brachybacterium faecium (C7M9T8) and Fulvimarina pelagi
(Q0G1N7) and the single celled green alga Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii (Q9FPR8, A8JGB2). The second iteration also
retrieved C7M9T8, Q0G1N7 and other three bacterial RNA
helicase. Likewise, using the sequences of other group 1a LEA
proteins as a query, the above-described helicases were also
retrieved.

C7M9T8 is chosen for further analysis due to its relatively high
similarity with EMB564. Alignment analysis indicates that
EMB564 is homologous with C7M9T8 at the C-terminal 
(). 
Moreover, the C-terminal sequence of C7M9T8 shares high
identity with the well-characterized single-stranded DNAbinding
protein 2 (SSB2, Q9X8U3) (). EMB564 share
the similar DNA/RNA-binding sequence [E/S]
G[Q/R][G/S]RGGQ as C7M9T8 and Q9X8U3 (). In
addition, by the domain prediction protocol Ginzu in de novo 3D
modeling server Robetta (http://robetta.bakerlab.org/), we
found that EMB564 contains a domain homologous with the
domain involved in branched DNA processing in ATPdependent
RNA helicase (Q8TZH8; PDB: 1wp9-A) from
Pyrococcus furiosus. Q8TZH8 is annotated in UniProtKB as DNA
binding, ATP-dependent helicase activity and nuclease activity
in DNA repair etc. In summary, the above-described analyses
implied EMB564 protein having DNA/RNA-binding ability.

Structure similarity of EMB564 with DNA-binding proteins:
Currently, no information on LEA proteins is available in the
protein structural databases. The 3D model of EMB564 built
using the I-TASSER server is given in (). It consists of
α-helices and random coils: an N-terminal α-helix and a long
coil, followed by three α-helices which are linked by short coils
and parallel to each other in space, and a C-terminal coil. DNAbinding
residues locate at the surface of the 3D model
(indicated by vertical box). 3D structure comparison may reveal
biologically interesting similarities that are not detectable by
comparing sequences, since even remotely homologous
proteins generally have quite similar 3D structure []. DALI
comparison indicated that EMB564 structurally resembles a
variety of nuclear (chromosomal) proteins involving in the
regulation of cell division, chromosomal replication,
DNA/RNA polymerase and helicase ().

Conclusion
Our results indicate that EMB564 is localized in the cell nucleus,
it has a high propensity of binding DNA, its sequence is
homologous with DNA helicases, and finally, its 3D model
structurally resembles a variety of DNA-binding and nuclear
proteins. Therefore, we propose that EMB564 is most likely to
function within the nucleus by binding DNA. This paper
provides new data to support the hypothesis by Wise et al. 
[]
that group 1a LEA proteins may act as nucleus proteins that
unwind or repair DNA and regulate transcription. It will help
to understand the mechanism underlying the biological
function of group 1 LEA proteins.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work was supported by State Key Laboratory of Crop
Biology (Grant no. 2012KF01) at Shandong Agricultural
University, China.

Citation:Wu et al, Bioinformation 9(6): 276-280 (2013)

DNA-binding residues in EMB564 and its similarity with DNA-binding proteins. Two conserved motifs in EMb564
sequence, characteristic of group 1a LEA proteins, are marked in red color. A) DNA-binding residues predicted by DP-Bind (a) and
BindN. (b), respectively; B), C) and D), sequence alignments by T-Coffee. * Single, fully conserved residue; : conservation of strong
groups; conservation of weak groups; - no consensus. C7M9T8 = DNA/RNA helicase, Q9X8U3 = single-stranded DNA-binding
protein 2.

The 3D model of EMB564 and its structure
homologues. A) The 3D model of EMB564 was built using the ITASSER
server and deposited in the PMDB database
(http://www.caspur.it/PMDB, id: PM0078754). Predicted
DNA-binding residues are indicated by boxes; B) Six
representative structure homologues with EMB564 determined
in the DALI server using the 3D model of EMB564 as a query
against those in PDB.

