Background
Understanding receptor ligand interaction of insulin and its
receptor has generated considerable current interest. At the
present moment there are many studies that report both
experimental and in-silico observations to document insulin
insulin –receptor interactions [,
]. Taking into consideration
many limitations of such understanding theoretical modeling
studies have been also published to develop a model of such
interactions []. Such studies are critical taking into
consideration the wide spread emergence of diabetes mellitus
and insulin resistance throughout the globe []. To meet the
need of the diabetes therapeutics that overcomes the limitations
of human recombinant insulin therapy engineered insulins are
currently in use []. Clinical studies have proved that use of
engineered insulins particularly insulin lispro and glargine are
effective to control hyperglycemia and related complications
and perhaps are better therapeutic alternative when compared
with human recombinant insulin therapy []. Although the
therapeutic efficacy of insulin lispro and insulin glargine are
considered to be proved and they are in regular clinical use but
biological functions are not exactly identical to human insulin
particularly when mutagenicity or receptor binding affinity of
the above molecules are concerned []. These may be important
for practical point of view and already a group of studies
claimed that insulin glargine use is associated with
development of cancers although opposing view is also present
[,
]. Therefore it is need of the hour to study engineered
insulin insulin receptor interactions which is lacking at the
present moment. In-vitro studies have confirmed that L1-CR-L2
ectodomain of insulin receptor binds with insulin with
considerable affinity [] without participation of alpha CT
region of insulin receptor which may be required for insulin
binding to IR in-vivo (particularly relevant for insulin dimmers
and hexamers) []. But at the present moment there is
complete absence of computational or experimental observation
suggesting the mode of recombinant insulin interactions with
L1-CR-L2 ectodomain of insulin receptor. Therefore, in this
work we are reporting insulin receptor (L1-CR-L2 ectodomain),
insulin lispro and insulin glargine interactions in comparison
with human insulin using tools of computational biology.

Methodology
The structure of human recombinant insulin, PDB code 1A7F is
used for this study []. To get the active conformation of human
insulin and truncated insulin uptoB26 residue three mutations
at positions B16, B24 and B30 in this structure have been
modified using MODELLER []. Further, the 3D structure of
the insulin analogues – lispro and glargine have been modeled
by using 1A7F as template structure in MODELLER. It is to be
noted that in these cases also the mutations at positions B16,
B24 and B30 have been considered. Insulin lispro is identical to
human insulin but structurally contains just a transposition in
the B28 and B29 amino acids. Insulin glargine has Glycine
residue at position A21 of insulin instead of Asparagine and
extra addition of two Arginine residues after B30 position. The
ligand binding domain of insulin receptor (IR) is taken from
PDB structure 2HR7 []. The ligand receptor complexes of
human recombinant insulin, truncated insulin upto B26, insulin
lispro, and glargine have been built using docking tool
(AUTODOCK 4.0) []. The same is performed with mutated
insulin receptor (F89L, F89W and F89A). In all these docking
(both wild type and mutated receptor) the grid center is on x=
6.552, y=37.946 and z=58.854. F89L, F89W and F89A mutated
insulin receptors have been constructed using MODELLER.
PROFACE is used to calculate interface area, interface residues
and interacting residues of ligand receptor complexes [].
Molecular diagrams are drawn by pymol [].

Results
Interface area of different insulin-insulin receptor complexes:
Interface areas of human insulin, truncated insulin and
recombinant insulin's with insulin receptor complexes both in
wild type and mutated forms have been worked out and are
given in  (see supplementary material). In case of
insulin-insulin receptor complex, the interface area is 1507 Å2
while in cases of recombinant insulins (lispro and glargine) the
interface area is less, 1325 and 1449 Å2, respectively. There is
evidence that receptor binding affinity of lispro and glargine is
less than normal human insulin []. It is known that residues
upto B26 of insulin are important for insulin receptor binding
[,
]. So we have truncated the wild type human insulin upto
B26 residues and docked this truncated insulin with insulin
receptor and F89L, F89W and F89A mutated insulin receptors.
Truncated insulin-insulin receptor complex has 1835 Å2
interface area while with mutated receptors interface area is
less, 876, 1669 and 1551 Å2, respectively. In case of truncated
insulin-F89L mutated receptor the interface area is lowest.
Mutated insulin receptor has less affinity towards insulin and
F89 is a key residue of insulin receptor for insulin binding 
[].
We have mutated F89 by leucine, tryptophan and alanine and
performed docking. The interface area is 1487 Å2 between
insulin-insulin receptor with F89L mutation. But in cases of
tryptophan and alanine mutations the values are slightly
higher, 1525 and 1685 Å2, respectively. However, recombinant
insulins – lispro and glargine have interaction with higher
interface area with mutated insulin receptors in compared to
wild type insulin receptor.

Interface and interacting residues of different complexes:
Interface and interacting residues of insulin and truncated
insulin with wild type insulin receptor are given in 
 (see
supplementary material). The residues of insulin receptor
which are present at the interfaces of both the complexes are
mostly located on the β-sheet region of the ligand binding
domain (). Using induced fit model Lou et al., 2006
have found that truncated insulin is bound with insulin
receptor through this β-sheet region []. We have also
observed same result. The residues of insulin receptor that are
known for binding with insulin are also common in our
docking study. It is established that residues upto B25 of insulin
B chain are required for insulin binding [,
]. Both in normal
and truncated insulins we have obtained similar results 
(, ). Lispro and glargine have also made
complexes with insulin receptor in almost same orientation
( &amp; ). But, the residues located only on the
middle strands of β-sheet have mainly interactions with lispro
and glargine.

Discussion
The receptor ligand interactions of insulin and insulin receptors
are experimentally worked out [,
,
,
,
]. But that is not
the case with insulin lispro and glargine. Keeping in view the
widespread use of these two engineered insulin in diabetic
individuals our observed results are important. From
experimental studies, the critical moieties of insulin insulin
receptor interactions are known [,
,
]. When we have
docked B26 truncated insulin with insulin receptor the
interaction happened through the experimentally known β
strand region with the majority of the amino acid interactions
are same as observed in experimental study ( &amp;
) []. When we have docked the insulin with its receptor
similar results are observed ( &amp; 
). But when we
have docked B26 truncated insulin with F89L or F89A or F89W
mutated insulin receptor the binding is observed to be
drastically reduced ( &amp; 
) and similar
phenomenon is observed when insulin is docked with F89L
mutated receptor ( &amp; 
). Since F89 of insulin
receptor is experimentally proved to be critical for insulin
binding and various mutations of F89 are known to reduce the
insulin binding very significantly [] we are in the opinion that
our above mentioned observed results are in conformity with
the experimental results and the mode of docking studies we
have relied upon can give us realistic information. In case of
F89W and F89A of insulin receptor mutations docking results
with insulin have produced unrealistic results () which
are not in accordance with the experimental observations 
[].
Therefore from docking studies with insulin molecule we
should not rely on the results obtained with F89W or F89A
mutated receptor. There is possibility that since alanine is a
small residue and the hydrophobicity of phenylalanine and
tryptophan is similar the docking results are producing
unrealistic results. Therefore the tail of the insulin has the
potential to produce unrealistic docking results with insulin
receptor which is not apparent in B26 truncated insulin. There is
evidence that the tail of insulin has flexibility while receptor
binding [,
] which the docking procedure is also not taking
into account and can be counted as an explanation for such
unrealistic docking results.

In case of insulin lispro and insulin glargine docking with
insulin receptor, it is showing interactions with residues of the
middle part of β sheet of insulin receptor and this is making the
receptor ligand interactions with a smaller binding area 
( &amp; ). 
It is known from experimental studies that
activity of lispro and glargine is less when compared to human
insulin []. Taking these facts into consideration we feel that the
observed docking results has realistic implications although
experimental validation of the observed results in this
connection is lacking at the present moment. We feel that since
these two molecules are approved drug to treat diabetes
mellitus, urgent experimental validation of the docking result is
important. Even with F89L insulin receptor mutation docking
with lispro and glargine is producing receptor ligand complex
with more binding area (). Experimental validation is
lacking at the present moment for such observation which
should be done taking into consideration widespread use of
lispro and glargine in diabetic subjects. Although lispro and
glargine produces physiologically comparable functions our
body does not produce it. The interface area and interacting
residues of insulin and insulin receptor which regulate binding
energy are important for proper function and binding energy
will be changed in case of glargine and lispro. However,
experimental validation of these results are lacking at the
present moment and requires urgent validation particularly
with reference of carcinogenicity of glargine as claimed in some
studies. The difference in interaction pattern of lispro and
glargine with insulin receptor is due to altered mode of binding
mainly due to change in the amino acid residues beyond B26.
Therefore we are in opinion that the tail region of insulin
beyond B26 is a critical regulator of insulin insulin receptor
interactions detail of which cannot be understandable from
docking studies due to lack of consideration of the flexibility of
the tail region while docking studies. We advocate urgent
validation of lispro and glargine interaction with insulin
receptor keeping the observations of this study into
consideration.

So far we have discussed the results of the docking studies of
insulin receptor (L1-CR-L2) ectodomain with insulin and its
analogues based on the previous experimental observations
[]. But a question is unanswered - will the findings of docking
results be exactly simulated in-vivo state? The answer in one
word is No since now it is established that A2, A3, A4, A8, A14,
B25, and B27 residues of insulin interact with the alpha CT
segment of insulin receptor [] some of which are observed to
be interacting with the insulin receptor in our study ().
This result is obtained due to the fact that we have not docked
an alpha CT interacted insulin molecule with insulin receptor
because alpha CT binding is not absolutely necessary for insulin
binding to its receptor. In fact in vitro studies with expressed
L1-CR-L2 ectodomain of insulin receptor had shown binding
with insulin without even presence of alpha CT region 
[,
].
The previous experimental studies have done binding studies
of insulin with only L1-CR-L2 ectodomain of insulin receptor.
The basic objective of this paper is to predict the interactions of
recombinant insulins with the L1-CR-L2 ectodomain of insulin
receptor so that analogous experiments can be framed keeping
previous experimental design in mind for the purpose of
screening of novel peptide binding with insulin receptor. We
think that our observations demonstrate result in that direction.

Supplementary material
Data 1
RB and DB acknowledge DST, New Delhi for financial
assistance for the work.

Citation:Bhattacharyya &amp; Banerjee, Bioinformation 8(22): 1082-1086 (2012)

Ligand –receptor interactions between a) insulin-insulin receptor; b) truncated insulin-insulin receptor; c) insulin-F89L
mutated insulin receptor and d) truncated insulin-F89L mutated insulin receptor; e) lispro-insulin receptor and f) glargine-insulin
receptor are shown. The ligand binding region of insulin receptor is represented in green cartoon while insulin, lispro and glargine
are represented in cyan cartoon. In , the residues of insulin receptor which are important for insulin binding are shown in
stick mode with carbon, nitrogen and oxygen atoms are in yellow, blue and red color, respectively. Four residues of
insulin/lispro/glargine – AsnA21/GlyA21 (in case of glargine), TyrB16, PheB24 and PheB25 are shown in stick mode with carbon,
nitrogen and oxygen atoms in cyan, blue and red color, respectively. In , the residues of insulin receptor which are
involved in binding with lispro and glargine are shown in stick mode with carbon, nitrogen and oxygen atoms are in yellow, blue
and red color, respectively. All residues are labeled by one-letter amino acid code and residue number with chain id in case of
insulin/lispro/glargine only.

