Background
Cancer is considered to be the second leading cause of death 
throughout the world []. Tumor lysis syndrome (TLS) is one of 
the fatal complications of anticancer therapy. It occurs due to 
necrosis of the neoplastic cells and sometimes may also occurs
spontaneously. Tumor lysis syndrome is a collection of 
metabolic abnormalities which results in the release of 
intracellular contents following the lysis of malignant cells and 
is characterized by hyperuricemia, hyperkalemia, 
hyperphosphatemia and hypocalcaemia which results from 
massive cells death and release of intracellular uric acid, 
potassium and phosphate []. The release of intracellular 
metabolites includes nucleic acids, protein, and phosphorus, 
potassium leads to hyperuricemia, hyperkalemia, 
hyperphosphatemia, hypocalcaemia and uricemia 
[].
Electrolytes and metabolic disturbances can lead to renal 
insufficiency cardiac arrhythmias seizures and even death due 
to multiple organ failure [].

Tumor lysis occurs in those neoplasms that have high cell turn 
over, large tumor burden and sensitivity to chemotherapy or 
radio therapy. Most of the cases of TLS occur after the 
treatment for haematological malignancies such as ALL and 
Burkitt׳s lymphoma followed by chemotherapy, radio therapy,
hormonal therapy or Immunotherapy. TLS occurs rarely in 
solid tumors but it is associated with breast cancer, small cell 
lung cancer, medulloblastoma and adenocarcinoma. Risk 
factors for TLS include high tumor burden, high rate of 
proliferation and disease that is highly responsive to therapy. 
The classification is based according to LTLS and CTLS criteria. 
Studies have indicated the usefulness of blood creatinine, uric 
acid, LDH, albumin, Na, K, Ca and P in diagnosis, prognosis 
and management of TLS [].

Pathogenesis of TLS is complex and may affect multiple organs. 
Clinical consequences include cardiac arrhythmias, seizures, 
mental confusion, congestive heart failure, hypotension, tetany, 
fainting, renal failure and sudden death. Increased level of 
potassium from lysed tumor cells causes hyperkalemia that can 
cause cardiac arrhythmias. Hypocalcaemia observed is 
secondary to hyperphosphatemia and is due to formation of 
calcium phosphate crystals in renal tubules which can result in 
obstructive nephropathy due to nephro-calcinosis. 
Hypocalcemia can also cause seizures [].

Methodology
A total of 50 patients receiving anticancer therapy in different 
age groups (arbitrary) were involved in this study. We used 15 
individuals with no systemic disease as controls. The samples 
were collected from patients at the Institute of Nuclear 
Medicine and Oncology (INMOL) Hospital, Lahore and Jinnah 
Hospital, Lahore, Pakistan. Informed consent was taken from 
all the individuals participated in this study. The study was 
also approved from the institutional ethical review committee.

Exclusion Criteria:
Patients suffering from diabetes, hypertension, myocardial 
infarction or any other hepatic, pulmonary, pancreatic or renal 
diseases were excluded from the present study.

Sample Collection:
5.0 ml of venous blood was drawn from healthy individuals 
(controls) and cancer patients undergoing anticancer therapy.

Blood Analysis:
Blood was centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 10 minutes and serum 
was separated. Blood samples were collected into EDTA tubes.

Biochemical Analysis of Samples:
The samples were processed and analyzed for the estimation of 
SOD, MDA, catalase and GSH by spectrophotometer method. 
Liver function tests (LFTs) and renal function tests (RFTs) were 
done by commercially available kits.

Results
 (see supplementary material) summarizes all the 
results. Measurement of ALT showed that the value of ALT 
was significant and higher in case of tumor lysis syndrome. It is 
most often consequence of chemotherapy which causes the 
breakdown of hepatocytes resulting in the release of this 
enzyme into the circulation due to which the level of ALT 
increases. The value of AST was significantly higher in case of 
patient group. It is considered to be one of the indications of 
abnormal liver function tests which occur in case of TLS 
resulting mainly due to the induction of chemotherapy. The
mean values of AST in case of control group is 24.06 ± 6.02, 
where as in case of patients of TLS it is 56.90 ± 17.34 IU/L 
which shows that AST is highly significant in case of patients 
suffering from TLS. The mean values of ALP in case of patient 
group is 375.12 ± 34.98 as compared to normal group in which 
it is 206.80 ± 4.50 which shows that there is a significant 
difference between the control and patient group. MDA is 
produced in case of Lipid Peroxidation process which occurs in 
TLS. It was observed that a significant increase in the level of 
MDA was present in case of patients suffering from TLS. The 
mean values for control group were 1.23 ±0.8 as compared with 
patient group in which mean values were 8.66 ± 1.37 which 
showed a significant increase in the level of MDA. Superoxide 
dismutase is one of the anti-oxidant enzymes. When 
measurement of SOD level was done in case of both these 
groups a significant difference was observed between the two 
groups. In case of control group the mean values were .476 ± 
.176, whereas in case of TLS patients mean values obtained 
were .15± .11 which showed a significant decrease in the level 
of SOD in case of patients undergoing TLS as a result of 
anticancer therapy. In case of hematological malignancies as 
well as solid organ tumors, the assessment of glutathione was 
done and it was observed that a highly significant difference 
were present. The mean values were 9.82 ± 1.09, whereas in the 
TLS patient group the mean values were 2.25 ± .772, which
indicate that GSH is effective parameter of oxidative stress in 
cases of TLS. Catalase is common enzyme found in all living 
organisms. It is an anti-oxidative enzyme. The data displayed a 
significant difference is present between the values of the 
control and patient group. The mean values in case of control 
group is 4.35 ± .703, on the other aspect patient group showed 
the mean values .765 ± .579. Moreover, positive correlation was 
found among the parameters of oxidative stress and other 
circulating biomarkers of TLS  (see supplementary 
material).

Discussion
Tumor lysis syndrome (TLS) is associated with the 
hematological cancer that is encountered in case of emergency 
by physicians. The symptoms of TLS are observed after the 
initiation of cancer treatment, although the symptoms of TLS 
without the cancer treatment have also been recognized. TLS 
exhibits variations in various tumor cases and it is independent 
of age and gender. The risk of TLS depends upon various 
parameters like burden of tumor, type of malignancy levels of 
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) in serum and sensitivity of tumor 
to cancer treatment as well as involvement of bone marrow 
[].
5-20% of cancer patients show TLS symptoms that represents 
serious complications often lead to death. It is necessary to 
recognize the risk factors of TLS as well as treatment in order to 
adequate management of tumor []. Various metabolic 
abnormalities are appeared in patients, receiving cancer 
treatment, that are due to the rapid release of cellular 
metabolites like proteins, nucleic acids and electrolytes 
(phosphorus and potassium) from lysed malignant cells. These 
metabolites can lead to increase in uric acid (hyperuricaemia), 
high levels of potassium in blood (hyperkalaemia), increased 
concentration of phosphate (hyperphosphatemia), increased 
urea in blood (uraemia), and with or without low levels of 
calcium (hypocalcaemia) in blood. These metabolic 
abnormalities lead to acute renal failure (ARF), seizures,
arrhythmias and even death of the patient. Rapid turnover of 
malignant cells leads to considerable discharge of above 
mentioned intracellular contents into circulatory system.

Hyperkalaemia in TLS patients can cause serious problem like 
arrhythmias. Similarly hyperphosphatemia lead to 
arrhythmias, neuro-muscular irritability and seizures as well as 
precipitation as crystals of calcium phosphate in kidney that 
cause acute kidney injury (AKI) []. Hyperuricaemia, similarly, 
induces AKI with or without the formation of crystals through 
the mechanisms of impaired auto-regulation, renal 
vasoconstriction, oxidation, inflammation and decreased renal 
blood flow [–]. 
Through the process of excretion from the 
kidney, phosphate, urate as well as xanthine are removed from 
the body that may precipitate in any region of the renal 
collecting system. When the crystals of uric acid, calcium 
phosphate and xanthine are formed in the tubular system of 
kidney, they induce obstruction as well as inflammation 
[].
Moreover, the breakdown of tumor cells in TLS releases 
cytokines in the blood circulation that initiate inflammatory 
action in various organs that lead to organ failure, referred as 
systemic inflammatory response syndrome [–
]. In the 
present study the values of ALT and AST were significantly 
higher due to consequence of chemotherapy which causes liver 
damage. MDA levels were found high whereas SOD levels 
decreased significantly (). In Correlation matrix inverse 
correlation-ship was observed between MDA and SOD where 
as positive correlation-ship was observed between SOD and 
catalase .

Conclusion
TLS is associated with anticancer therapy (chemo/radio) in 
cancer patients. Therapies in cancer patients are known to 
deplete SOD levels (an antioxidant agent in biological system) 
resulting in lipid peroxidation increase which is reflected by 
increased serum levels of MDA. An inverse relation was 
observed between MDA and GSH (GSH vs MDA, r = -0.534**) 
while a positive relation was observed between SOD and
catalase (SOD vs CAT, r = 0.624*) as shown in 
. Thus, 
the use of biological biomarkers (SOD, MDA, catalase and 
GSH) in addition to other parameters (electrolytes, LFTs, BUN, 
WBCs, platelets, Hb and RFTs) in blood is promising in TLS 
diagnosis.

Conflict of interest
The authors declared that they have no conflict of interest.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are thankful to all persons who participated in this study.

Citation:Rasool et al, Bioinformation 10(11): 703-707 (2014)

