Background
Data pertaining to hypothetical proteins expressed in many eukaryotes would
help researchers to search for potential proteins of interest with unknown
functions []. 
However, many such hypothetical protein encoding genes are
conserved over various species, which can be revealed from comparative
genome analysis [–]. 
To predict a function for each of the protein coding
regions, a comparative sequence analysis against all functionally elucidated
sequences in protein sequence databases would reveal the necessary
information for sequence retrieval, functional prediction and homologous
sequences [,
], 
further which, multiple sequence alignments would reveal
possible functional insights on cellular process or biological function 
[,
]. A
hypothetical protein showing one or more significant structural homolog is
predicted to have similar molecular properties 
[,
]. On the other hand,
conserved hypothetical proteins are found in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes,
the function of which can be predicted by domain homology searches,
secondary, tertiary structure predictions, and gene annotations. Hence, data on
hypothetical proteins from NCBI database was collected and organized in the
form of a database using html and javascript. The database contains
information regarding gene/protein sequences, chromosome number and
location, secondary and tertiary structure information, ProFunc server data,
primary analysis tools (mol.wt, ionization constant etc.), expression levels of
the sequences and related data.

Methodology
Construction of database
HypoDB is constructed using html and JavaScript and can be accessed at
http://www.trimslabs.com/database/hypodb/index.html. Data were collected
from NCBI GenBank and SWISS-PROT databases. HypoDB includes
hypothetical proteins of 8 organisms. The complete list of organisms with their
scientific and general names was given in (see 
). 
They are provided as records and organized to simplify the task of
finding relevant data for proteins in the related organism. In order to make the
database available online, HTML pages are constructed using Javascript.
Hypothetical protein database contains information on hypothetical gene and
protein sequences in the form of records. The data were categorized based on
the number of hypothetical genes and proteins in each chromosome of six
eukaryotes. Each record when accessed returns the nucleotide and protein
sequence and annotation such as accession numbers, source organism and
chromosome number. An example of an entry in human chromosome 1,
LOC100131311 is given in Table 2 (see ).

Utility
The database is of much utility to researchers working in the fields of
functional proteomics and genomics. Such data on hypothetical genes and
proteins represents a prominent research area to annotate the genes of interest
and predict functional regions. However, given the insight into the
technological advances in bioinformatics, function prediction and assigning
functionally important sites within the protein sequence is advantageous to
identify the mutations that might have resulted to unknown function of the
particular gene. Therefore, this database of hypothetical genes and proteins
would be a useful source to study or predict the functional regions of a protein.
Data was segregated based on the number of entries in each chromosome of six
eukaryotes, provided with an easy way of access.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Adinarayana et al, Bioinformation 6(3): 128-130 (2011)

