Background
Breast cancer is the second most common types of cancer and it is found to
be the fifth major cause of cancer death [] and it starts from the cells in the
breast and spreads to other regions. The initial symptom of breast cancer is a
lump formed in the breast which is different from surrounding tissue. The
primary risk factors are identified as age, sex, high-fat diet, alcohol intake and
obesity. The most common screening method for breast cancer is a
combination of X-ray mammography and Breast examination

According to the American Cancer Society about 1.3 million women are
diagnosed annually with breast cancer. [] Early detection has been
developed for breast cancer during the past few years and national screening
programmes for breast cancer are introduced in many of the countries. Digital
technology and blood test are being performed for early detection of the
disease. [] Herceptin and Tamoxifen are the major drugs used in the
treatment of Breast Cancer currently. [–]

The number of breast cancer cases arose tremendously in recent years, thus
there is a need to create a comprehensive database which holds all the
information pertaining to breast cancer. Breast cancer database by Institute of
Bioinformatics, Breast cancer Information core by National Human genome
Research Institute and the database by National Cancer Institute are the major
databases available in web for Breast cancer Information. [–]

The current release of Breast cancer database (BCDB) provides information
about risk factors, symptoms, diagnosis and treatment taken from relevant
literatures. Links to all other breast cancer resources in the web are linked.
The number of genes responsible for breast cancer is gradually increasing and
the main bottleneck in breast cancer database creation is to give the complete
information about the disease to the researcher. This challenge has been
overcome partly in the BCDB, which holds the summary of genes and their
corresponding proteins involved in breast cancer along with the drugs used in
the treatment. It helps the researcher to accomplish molecular docking and
drug designing studies.

Methodology
It is found that 2948 genes are involved in breast cancer. [] Literature survey
and analysis revealed that 466 genes play an imperative role in causing the
disease. Information on those 466 genes which play active role in breast
cancer was retrieved from NCBI (National Center for Biotechnology
Information) database. [] The data are normalized to reduce and eliminate
redundancy. The protein functional information was extracted from UniProt
database which is curated manually. [] About 60 drug molecules are found
to be used in the treatment of breast cancer and this information was obtained
from DrugBank database. [] The structures of proteins were extracted from
PDB (Protein Data Bank) which is a world wide repository of information
about the three dimensional structures of large biological molecules. []

PHP (Hypertext preprocessor) has been used as a front-end tool owing to its
ability to be used as a general purpose scripting language, especially suited
for web applications and it can be embedded in HTML. MySQL was applied
to construct a back-end, because of its capability to support very large
databases. It is compatible with vast majority of operating systems (UNIX,
Windows) and a powerful relational database management system (RDBMS).
JavaScript is used for client-side validation purpose. The Database was
developed using WAMP5 (Windows Apache MySQL PHP) package. []

Database feaures
BCDB acts as a complete web source for Breast cancer information. The
database can be searchable at gene, protein and drug level. The genes can be
searched by providing the gene name or taxonomic lineage and the proteins
can be queried by offering the Protein name, accession number, PDB ID, and
Structure name. The drug can be browsed by providing the drug name, drug
bank id, IUPAC name, and molecular weight. Resources page includes Breast
cancer clinical trials, risk calculator, tutorials, Microarray datasets for Breast
cancer, Hospitals, Research Institutes, and Journals. Breast cancer research
community can be browsed through this web page.

The Breast cancer database is made up of three components: Genes, proteins
and drugs. Gene part contains entire set of genes involved in breast cancer.
Viewers can also browse through individual chromosomes and view the
genes involved in breast cancer for quick reference. The gene section is
carefully designed by taking 12 important parameters into consideration that
comprises gene id, gene name, gene type, gene symbol, organism, taxonomic
lineage, gene function, proteins coded by the gene, gene description, other
names and NCBI link for retrieving gene sequence. PubMed reference is also
provided for individual genes (&amp;).

Protein table consists of the protein sequence in FASTA format, PDB file and
the protein structure which gives unique appearance to the database. Drug
table encloses information about 60 drugs taken from drug bank database
which is created based upon 16 different parameters which includes drug id,
drugbank id, drug name, drug category, IUPAC name, molecular weight,
action, description, logP value, indication, pharmacology, toxicity, protein
binding and biotransformation. The chemical structure of the drug and its
PDB file is also available in the database. Search box is also provided in
BCDB. User can query the database using genename (or) geneid, protein
name (or) Proteinid, and drug name.

Future developments
The database will be updated periodically so as to ensure that users get latest
information on breast cancer. The database will be linked to other breast
cancer databases in near future for easy accessing of information

Conclusion
Breast Cancer Database (BCDB) gives the comprehensive information about
the disease to a researcher and general awareness to a common man. It is a
comprehensive database with data related to every aspect of breast cancer and
access to genes and proteins involved in breast cancer. Breast cancer glossary
is linked with the database which describes all the terms related to breast
cancer. Latest news on breast cancer is also provided in the database to help
the user.

I am thankful to Ms. TK Subazini, PhD scholar, AU-KBC Research centre,
and MIT campus of Anna University Chennai, for her valuable suggestions.

Citation:Mohandass etal Bioinformation 5(1): 1-3 (2010)

Home Page of BCDB database

Schematic diagram representing BCDB

