Background
Increased rate of morbidity and mortality among the immunocompromised 
patients are mainly due to Human Cytomegalovirus (HCMV; species 
Human herpesvirus 5) infection and specifically causes sight threatening 
problems as per the frequent reports  []. DNA polymerase of HCMV 
(strain AD 169), a 1242 amino acids long protein coded by 3,729-bp gene 
UL54, is mainly targeted to control the severity of HCMV  []  by the 
phosphorylated forms of Ganciclovir (GCV), Cidofovir (CDV) and 
Foscarnet (PFA)  []. Many Clinical studies have documented increased 
frequency of HCMV resistance towards GCV, CDV and PFA in relation to 
UL54 mutations  []. The Crystal structure of UL54 is solved only for 
Cterminal peptide region which is in complex with UL44 []. The complete 
crystal structure of UL54 is yet to be resolved.

Therefore, this study attempts to explain the probable structural factors 
conferring inhibitor resistance due to the novel Glutamine (Gln) deletion at 
639th position coupled with the most frequently reported missense 
mutation, Serine(Ser) to Leucine(Leu) at 655th
 position  [] in the DNA 
polymerase type ‐ II domain, through sequencing and structural 
bioinformatics approaches. Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) amplified 
form of this viral strain DNA was produced using primers which were 
custom-designed in the laboratory. The viral strain isolated patient was 
non-responsive to GCV treatment as per the clinical records.

Since the minimum inhibitory concentration of GCV could not be 
established in the laboratory, this study was formulated to predict the
phenotypic effects of the observed coupled mutation by modeling the 3 
Dimensional (3D) structure of UL54, and its role in binding of the 
currently practiced drugs. Hence, we attempted to predict the in silico
structural models for the wild type (WT) UL54 and for the coupled mutant 
(MT). To get the deeper insight into the mechanisms behind the drug 
resistance, molecular docking studies were performed for the WT and MT 
with GCV, PFA and CDV.

Methodology
Clinical Specimen
Five ml of peripheral blood sample was collected in EDTA anticoagulant 
from a renal transplanted patient who was receiving valganciclovir 400 mg 
twice a day for three months. The specimen was transported in ice to L &amp; 
T Microbiology Research Center. Two hundred micro liters of DNA was 
subjected to DNA extraction using QIAGEN blood extraction kit (Hilden, 
Germany). The DNA was extracted according to the manufacturer's 
instructions. HCMV copy numbers were estimated using the kit and 
protocol as described earlier. The DNA extract of the blood sample was 
screened for the presence of mutations conferring GCV resistance by PCR 
‐DNA sequencing. Partial UL97 region was amplified using primers and 
protocols as described earlier  [,
]. For UL54 DNA region, the 
amplification primers were designed using Primer Premier 5 software. Out 
of the 3729bp coding region of the UL54 gene, a 1900 nucleotide region 
harboring extensive mutations was targeted. The 1900bp was amplified as 
four overlapping regions and each of the four regions were amplified by
nested PCRs to obtain better sensitivity, with the standardized primers with 
optimal annealing temperatures (Table 1 see ).

Specificity of the primers
The specificity of the primer sets were determined against DNA extracted 
from  Staphylococcus aureus  ATCC 6538,  Bacillus subtilis  lab isolate, 
Escherichia coli ATCC 4157,  Pseudomonas aeruginosa  ATCC 9742, 
Klebsiella pneumoniae lab isolate,  Mycobacterium tuberculosis  H37 RV, 
Proteus vulgaris  lab isolate,  Haemophilus influenza  ATCC16211, 
Acinetobacter ATCC 9956,  Salmonella typhi  lab isolate,  Enterobacter 
aerogenes  lab isolate,  Citrobacter koseri  lab isolate,  Candida albicans 
ATCC90028, Culture infiltrate of Marmoset cell line infected EBV B958, 
Varicella  Zoster virus (OKA vaccine strain), Herpes Simplex Virus 1 - 
ATCC 733-VR and human DNA. DNA extracted from HCMV AD 169 
(ATCC VR 538) was used as a positive control. The DNA extract from 
peripheral blood of a renal transplant recipient was amplified with primers 
specific for all four regions with DNA extracts of HCMV AD 169 as 
positive control and deionized autoclaved water was used as negative 
control. The amplified product was visualized in a 2% agarose gel 
electrophoresis along with the molecular weight marker. All universal 
precautions were taken for setting up the PCR reaction.

The PCR amplified products of UL97 and UL54 were further purified by 
gel elution using QIAGEN gel elution kit. The eluted products were cycle 
sequenced with the reverse primers using ABI big Dye terminator. The 
cycle sequenced products were further purified and denatured with 
formamide and were loaded in ABI sequencer. The sequenced data was 
BLAST analyzed.

Structural bioinformatics approaches
The amino acid sequence of HCMV UL54 (Accession No: P08546) 
retrieved from SWISSPROT database (http://www.uniprot.org/), and found 
to be 1242 amino acids in length. As per the SWISSPROT entry, the 
complete crystal data of UL54 is yet to be determined, and only partial 
structure information is available for the last 20 residues of the C-terminal, 
which interacts with UL44. Therefore, in this study we attempted to predict 
the complete structure of UL54 WT and MT with the reported mutations, 
through structural bioinformatics approaches.

Fold Recognition based method was implemented using ITASSER server 
[] 
to model the WT protein. The generated structure was energy 
minimized for 500 steps of conjugate gradient using OPLS force field of 
Gromacs 3.3.4 in order to refine the structure to its near native 
conformation  []. 
Since MT sequence shared 98% sequence identity to 
WT, homology modeling was implemented to generate the MT model with 
WT model as a template using MODELLER 9v7  []. The modeled 
structures of WT and MT were validated by analyzing Ramachandran plot 
generated by PROCHECK [].

Docking of ligands with UL54
Triphosphate form of Ganciclovir [PubChem: 506602], Foscarnet 
[PubChem: 3415] and diphosphate form of Cidofovir [PubChem: 163311] 
were the set of inhibitors studied in this work. The structural coordinates of 
these ligand molecules were retrieved from NCBI-Pubchem Compound 
database  [] and the ligands were further geometry optimized using 
gromos96 force field via PRODRG server [].

Automated docking of ligands to their macromolecular receptors was 
performed using AutoDock4 molecular docking suite  
[]. Kollman 
United atom charges [] and polar hydrogens were added to the receptor 
molecules (WT &amp; MT) and Gasteiger charges  
[] were added to the 
ligand molecules (GCV, CDV, PFA) for optimization of the docking 
process. In this docking simulation, semi-flexible docking protocols  
[]
were implemented, wherein, the target protein UL54 was kept rigid, and 
the ligands being docked were kept flexible in order to investigate an 
arbitrary number of torsional degrees of freedom. Preliminary docking 
studies were performed to identify potential binding sites of inhibitors by 
generating a grid box which could potentially cover the entire surface of
the macromolecule. The grid box size was set to 126x126x126Å and was 
kept constant for all the ligands. The spacing between the grid points was 
set to 0.836 Å. The docking parameters were set to the default values 
provided by the software, except for the maximum number of energy 
evaluations before the Lamarckian Genetic Algorithm (LGA) terminates, 
which was set to 50000 generations to improve precision. Graphical User 
Interface program of “Auto Dock 4.0 Tools” was used to prepare, run, and 
analyze the docking simulations. Finally, the plausible protein-ligand 
hydrogen bonding interactions within 3Å distances in the docked 
complexes were analyzed using DS visualizer tool []. 

Discussion
HCMV copy number in the peripheral blood of patient was estimated as 
83,478 copies/ml. The primers designed for UL54 were specific in 
amplifying only HCMV DNA. The UL97 amplified product on sequencing 
with reverse primers did not show any mutations. All the four sets of 
primers targeted against the partial gene sequence of UL54 gave an 
amplified product with the specimen DNA  (). The amplified 
product of the fourth region on sequence analysis (done with reverse 
primers) showed a deletion of Glu at 639th
position (). The patient 
expired and was non-responsive to GCV treatment. The protein sequence 
of the same sample contained Leu at the 655th
position instead of Ser (). 
(Gen Bank Accession number: BankIt1396010 Strain HQ340161).

Hence, the present study was attempted to understand the complexity 
behind the phenotypic changes due to structural variation via structural 
bioinformatics approaches. Since the crystal coordinate information of 
UL54 is not available for the entire structure and crystallized only for the 
short peptide of C-terminal region, the structure is elucidated. Hence, 
UL54 -WT structure was generated using ITASSER, a top ranked protein 
structure prediction server as per CASP  [], which utilizes fold 
recognition strategy to model the proteins. Moreover, in this, ITASSER 
server will make use of the folds conferred by crystal structure of Ctermini 
region of UL54 present in PDB for modeling the entire UL54 
protein. From the results, the top scoring model with C-Score of -1.59 and 
TM-Pred value 0.52±0.15 was chosen as a significant model. In order to 
remove the steric clashes and to optimize the stereo chemical properties, 
the chosen model was further optimized by energy minimization through 
500 steps of conjugate gradient algorithm using Gromacs 3.3.4. The 
backbone conformation of the refined model was validated using 
Ramachandran plot obtained through PROCHECK. The generated model 
was found to be highly plausible, as none of the residues were found to 
span the disallowed region of Ramachandran plot.

To further validate the plausibility of the structure generated, the crystal 
structure of Herpes Simplex Virus type 1 DNA polymerase (HSV-1) 
[], 
which is reported to be a probable remote homologue of HCMV-UL54 
[] 
sharing 29.7 % of sequence identity as predicted using pairwise 
alignment program of EMBOSS (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/emboss/align/), 
was superposed to WT using PyMOL  [] and the Root Mean 
Square Deviation (RMSD) between the backbone was found to be 2.34 Å. 
Hence, this was suggestive of fold level homology of the generated model 
().

The structure of MT UL54 with the deletion of Gln at 639th position 
coupled with the missense mutation, Ser to Leu at 655th position, shared 
98% of sequence identity with the generated WT model. Hence, the WT 
model was chosen as a template to model the 3D structure for MT based on 
homology modeling approach using MODELLER 9v7. The predicted MT 
structure was further validated by superposing its backbone using PyMOL 
with that of WT structure and the Root Mean Square Deviation (RMSD) 
was found to be 0.2 Å, and was suggestive of fold level similarity and 
structure plausibility. Furthermore, the backbone conformation of the 
model generated was validated using PROCHECK. The generated model 
as found to be highly plausible  (), since none of the residues 
spanned the disallowed region of Ramachandran plot. 

Comparison of GCV inhibitory effects in WT and MT of UL54
Triphosphorylated form of GCV was used for the docking purposes. In 
case of WT, GCV formed hydrogen bonding interactions with Asp717, 
Arg784, Leu721, Ser913 and Glu951 of UL54 WT  (). The 
functional motif of UL54, DNA polymerase family B signature, found to 
span the 908 to 916th residual position was identified using ScanProsite 
(http://expasy.org/tools/scanprosite/). 
Among the observed hydrogen bonding residues, Ser913 was found to interact with GCV, which forms a 
part of the above mentioned signature. This suggests that this residue may 
play an important role in polymerization inhibitory activity of GCV. The 
binding free energy and Ki of WT with GCV was found to be -
1.67Kcal/mol and of 59.67mM, respectively. In case of docking of MT 
with GCV, the drug was found to be hydrogen bonded with Arg64, Glu72 
and Asp346, and these residues were not part of the DNA polymerase 
family B signature motif. Furthermore, the stability of the MT-GCV 
complex was less in comparison to WT-GCV complex with the binding 
energy of -0.88 Kcal /mol  (Table 2 see ). 
Moreover, the Ki for MT-GCV showed more than 3 fold increment with 
226.71mM value in comparison to WT-GCV. These results indicate that 
the acquired mutation is an adaptive evolution of resistance strain, wherein 
it has reduced the affinity of GCV with MT by conferring structural 
variations ().

Comparison of GCV inhibitory effects in WT and MT of UL54
Triphosphorylated form of GCV was used for the docking purposes. In 
case of WT, GCV formed hydrogen bonding interactions with Asp717, 
Arg784, Leu721, Ser913 and Glu951 of UL54 WT  (). The 
functional motif of UL54, DNA polymerase family B signature was found 
to span from 908 to 916th residual position was identified using ScanProsite 
(http://expasy.org/tools/scanprosite/). Among the observed hydrogen 
bonding residues, Ser913 was found to interact with GCV, which forms a 
part of the above mentioned signature. This suggests that this residue may 
play an important role in polymerization inhibitory activity of GCV. The 
binding free energy and Ki of WT with GCV was found to be -
1.67Kcal/mol and of 59.67mM, respectively. In case of docking of MT 
with GCV, the drug was found to be hydrogen bonded with Arg64, Glu72 
and Asp346, and these residues were not the part of DNA polymerase 
family B signature motif. Furthermore, the stability of the MT-GCV 
complex was less in comparison to WT-GCV complex with the binding 
energy of -0.88 Kcal /mol  (). Moreover, the Ki for MT-GCV 
showed more than 3 fold increment with 226.71mM value in comparison 
to WT-GCV. These results indicate that the acquired mutation is an 
adaptive evolution of resistance strain, wherein it has reduced the affinity 
of GCV with MT by conferring structural variations ().

Increased binding affinity of CDV to UL54 mutant
Since cidofovir is a nucleoside analogue used for anti-HCMV treatment, 
the diphosphorylated form of Cidofovir was used for docking purposes in 
this study. CDV-WT docked complex showed hydrogen bonding with 
Met1, Gly441, Phe443, Lys453 and Arg 454. Whereas,  in case of 
MTCDV complex, except for Lys453 of DNA polymerase type-II domain, 
other hydrogen bonding interactions as observed in WT were lost. 
Alternatively, CDV formed stable hydrogen bonding interactions with 
Trp216, Arg220, Glu224 and Arg237 of MT. This pattern of MT-CDV 
complex formation was found to be more stable with a binding energy of -
6.16 Kcal/mol in comparison to WT-CDV wherein, it was -5.62 Kcal/mol. 
Moreover, the Ki value for MT-CDV was found to be 30.47 µM, which 
was two fold lesser than WT-CDV with 75.83µM 
() 
().

Docking analysis of PFA
WT- PFA complex showed hydrogen bonding interactions with Met1, 
Lys453 and Arg454 with binding energy of -6.04 Kcal/mol and a Ki value 
of 37.3µM, whereas, in case of MT-PFA complex, the binding energy and
Ki value were found to be increased to -5.81 Kcal/mol and 54.83 µM, 
respectively. In both the cases, Met1 and Arg454 binding residues were 
conserved and Lys453 hydrogen bonding was lost in MT-PFA. This is 
suggestive of MT resistance towards PFA () 
().

Conclusion
In the present study, the structural bioinformatics analysis reveals the 
probable mechanisms of drug interactions conferred by GCV, CDV and 
PFA with UL54-WT as well as with the MT. Lys453 of UL54 was 
predicted to play an important role in conferring stability of the complex 
formation as it was found to exhibit interaction in cases of WT-PFA, WTCDV 
and MT-CDV. Furthermore, the observed variant was found to be 
more susceptible to CDV in comparison to other drugs. Hence, this study 
provides deeper insights on mutation and drug resistance relationship in 
UL54 of HCMV.  

Supplementary material
Data 1
The research work was carried out with the Indian Council of Medical 
Research grant. Project No. 5/8/7/17/2006-ECD-I. Authors are also 
thankful to Vision Research Foundation for providing Bioinformatics core 
facility.

Citation:Malathi et al, Bioinformation 5(9): 390-395 (2011)

The amplified products of region IV of the specimens along with others specimens detected positive to HCMV. Agarose Gel 
Electrophoretogram of PCR amplified product targeting Human cytomegalovirus UL54 gene of Region IV. Round II applied on Clinical Specimens. 
Some of the specimens positive for the region IV along with sample 2256 is shown. Lanes NC2: Negative Control - II round NC1: Negative Control - I round PC:  Positive Control DNA extract from Human cytomegalovirus AD 169 
 MWM: Molecular weight marker 100 bp Ladder. Specimens positive for UL54 partial region: 2526, 4474, 4869, 1650, 4069

Electrophoretogram of the DNA sequenced product. DNA sequencing performed with the PCR amplified product of UL54 II round product 
region IV of a clinical specimen of 2526.

Superposition of crystal structure of HSV-1(magenta) with WT (blue) shows backbone RMSD of 2.343Å.

(a) Superposition of WT (blue) with MT(red) shows backbone RMSD of 0.2Å. (b) Zoom view of Glu639 deletion. (c) Zoom view of Missense 
Mutation Ser 655 Leu.

Docking analysis of WT and MT with GCV, PFA and CDV .CDV-MT and CDV-WT represents the hydrogen bonding interaction of 
diphosphorylated form of Cidofovir (blue) with MT and WT, respectively. GCV-MT and GCV-WT represents the hydrogen bonding interaction of 
triphosphorylate form of Ganciclovir (blue) with MT and WT, respectively. PFA-MT and PFA-WT represents the hydrogen bonding interaction of PFA 
(blue) with MT and WT, respectively. Dotted lines (green) represent the hydrogen bonding interaction.

