Background
MODERN biology is driven by large scale processing of
heterogeneous data, which may come from diverse sources,
such as sequences from GenBank, EMBL, PDB, DDJB,
PROSITE, NGS and many other secondary databases. The
interface which allows access to these different data sources
vary widely. Therefore, in order to access these resources a
researcher needs to be an expert in very different areas of
computer science such as databases, networking, scripting
languages etc. Furthermore, algorithms/tools used to extract
biologically relevant information tend to be developed at faster
pace by researchers but in isolation. There is hardly any code
sharing among the data analysis algorithms however there is an
increase in code complexity.

Gene sequence analysis and study of evolutionary relationships
among organisms are two major areas of interest to biologists.
Gene sequence analysis involves identification of stretches of
sequence in DNA that are biologically functional whereas
evolutionary studies infer biological relationships among
different organisms. in-silico identification of coding regions in
genomes and phylogeny studies are important problems that
have been brought into focus through advances in genomic
sequencing. Availability of diversified tools available on
different platforms, structures and heterogeneous databases
makes this analysis, a difficult task for biologists. So, there is an
urgent need for development of solutions for integration of
various tools and database to assist biologist from burden on
executing them independently on different platforms.

Workflow Management System (WMS) is the integration of
several bioinformatics tools with multiple databases, to
automate the analysis and storage of genomic sequences.
Several WMSs were developed for researchers to perform
computational analysis with ease using various computational
tools. These workflow systems, differs in scope and approach of
integration for their execution. Many of these WMS are
available as web based servers to provide access to powerful
computing resources through familiar graphical-based
environment for inexperienced users. This saves time for
installing software on their own computer and analyzing
biological data. Standalone workflow systems integrate
various bioinformatics tools within desktop applications using
graphically specified workflows. This also provides access to
distributed computational resources to biologists.

Although, many WMS are developed in the area of gene
sequence analysis and evolutionary studies but no attempt has
been made to compile these at one place along with
bioinformatics tools used at each stage of analysis. The
objective of this article is to provide comprehensive information
on available WMS along with their limitations and practical
considerations on their usage to biotechnologists, molecular
biologists and other researchers. It also provides review of
various tools to computational scientists, who are actively
involved in the development of WMS.

Workflow Management Systems for Gene Sequence Analysis:
Gene sequence analysis involves identification of features such
as genes, transcription initiation and poly(A) cleavage sites, 5'
as well as 3'-untranslated regions (UTRs) and promoter regions
etc. in genome, derived through, transformation of raw
genomic sequences into information by integrating
computational tools, auxiliary biological data, and biological
knowledge. Identification and in-silico annotation of coding and
non-coding sequences from a variety of genomes is necessary
due to exponential increase in raw sequence data. Due to
availability of advanced sequencing technologies, large volume
of multi-species genomic data is generated. Manual curation
and annotation of this data is a difficult and time consuming
task. The development of automatic in-silico computational
solution to aid the manual curation process is highly desirable.
As, genome annotation involves performing various tasks like
gene finding, repeat finding, Expressed Sequenced Tags
(EST)/cDNA alignment, homology searching and protein
family searching etc. Attempts have been made to develop
various biological workflows through integration of various
computational tools through development of automatic
pipelines to perform this genomic annotation. The generic
solution of this workflow is given in (). 
 (see
supplementary material) lists some of the important
computational tools used for performing different tasks in the
process. Major workflows for gene sequence analysis along
with important tools which are integrated are compared in
 (see supplementary material).

ESTpass [] is a workflow, used for processing and annotating
sequence data from ESTs. The major advantages of ESTpass
are, the integration of cleansing and annotating processes,
rigorous chimeric EST detection, exhaustive annotation, email
reporting to inform users about progress and to send results.
PSEUDOPIPE [] is a homology-based computational pipeline,
which helps to search a mammalian genome and identify
pseudogene sequences in a comprehensive and consistent
manner. The output of PSEUDOPIPE is the complete
annotation of pseudogenes in genome, their chromosomal
location, nucleotide sequences, name and sequence of the
parent gene, and alignment of the pseudogene with the
functional gene. Tiger Gene Indices Clustering tools (TGICL)
[] 
is a pipeline for analysis of large EST and mRNA databases
in which sequences are first clustered based on pair wise
sequence similarity, and then assembled by individual clusters
to produce longer, more complete consensus sequences. TGICL
is used to generate TIGR Gene Indices representing
independent analyses for nearly 60 species with EST collections
of fewer than 10000 to more than 4000000 sequences. EGene 
[]
is a generic, flexible and modular pipeline generation system
that makes pipeline construction a modular job. EGene allows
for third-party programs to be used and integrated according to
the needs of distinct projects and without any previous
experience of programming or formal language. A series of
components to build pipelines for sequence processing is
provided along with this.

MAKER [] is a portable and easy to configure
genome annotation pipeline. MAKER identifies repeats, aligns
ESTs and proteins to a genome, produces Ab-initio gene
predictions and automatically synthesizes these data into gene
annotations having evidence-based quality values. MAKER's
modular construction allows it to break annotation process
down into a series of five discrete activities that are easily
interoperable: compute, filter/cluster, polish, synthesis, and
annotate. Protein Annotation Toolkit (PAT) [] is an integrated
bio-computing server that provides a standardized web
interface to a wide range of protein analysis tools. It is designed
as a streamlined analysis environment that implements many
features, which strongly simplify studies dealing with protein
sequences/structures and improve productivity. Pipeline for
Protein Annotation (PIPA) [] annotates protein functions by
combining the results of multiple programs and databases,
such as InterPro and the Conserved Domains Database, into
common Gene Ontology (GO) terms. The major algorithms
implemented in PIPA are: (1) a profile database generation
algorithm, which generates customized profile databases to
predict particular protein functions, (2) an automated ontology
mapping generation algorithm, which maps various
classification schemes into GO, and (3) a consensus algorithm
to reconcile annotations from the integrated programs and
databases. Automatic and manual Functional Annotation in a
Web services Environment (AFAWE) [] simplifies the task of
manual functional annotation by running different tools and
workflows for automatic function prediction and displaying
results in a way that facilitates comparison. AFAWE includes
analyses for homolog detection, protein domain search and
phylogenomics.

Workflow Management Systems for Phylogenetic Analysis:
Phylogeny and evolutionary analyses of sequences are among
the most often used methodologies in laboratories working on
functional, comparative and structural genomics. Phylogenetics
analysis involves performing various tasks like multiple
sequence alignment of uploaded sequences, curation of
alignment obtained, construction of phylogenetics tress and
their visualization as shown in ().

Further, execution of each of these tasks requires, use of
specialized bioinformatics tools. As, there were many tools or
web servers were developed for phylogenetic and evolutionary
analysis, many workflows have been developed to automate
this process. Several web sites offer phylogenetic tree
reconstruction. Some offer a single tool, while others bring
together many of the most popular programs for phylogenetic
reconstruction. The workflow pipeline integrates these
commonly used computational tools in a flexible way and
allows the user to plug in custom sequence databases as well as
alternative analysis tools. This section describes the important
workflow management systems developed for phylogenetic
analysis.  (see supplementary material) lists some of
the important computational tools used for performing
different tasks in this process. Major workflows for
phylogenetic analysis along with important tools which are
integrated are compared in  (see supplementary
material).

Phylogena [] is a user-friendly, interactive graphical user
interface running on desktop computers that automatically
performs a Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) with
respect toquery sequences, selects a representative subset of
them, then creates a multiple alignment from the selected
sequences, and finally computes a phylogenetic tree. Phylemon
[] 
is an online platform for phylogenetic and evolutionary
analyses of molecular sequence data. Phylemon also provides
facilities for file format conversion, gene concatenation, tree
visualization and the computation of distances between trees.
Automated Simultaneous Analysis Phylogenetics (ASAP) 
[]
is an automated technique developed to assemble
multigene/multi species matrices and to evaluate the
significance of individual genes within the context of a given
phylogenetic hypothesis. Matrix assembly at the genome scale
involves the acquisition of hundreds to thousands of gene
regions for the taxa of interest, the formatting of these
sequences for use in an alignment program, aligning them, and
finally eexport of the data partitions into formats used by
phylogenetic analysis packages. Hal [] is command line
programs that brings together a number of bioinformatic
applications into an efficient pipeline that inputs unaligned
proteins sequences in fasta format and generate species trees
from super alignments containing several orthologous protein
sequences in a fully automated manner. The BioExtract 
[]
Server was used to create a workflow for comparing and
aligning a number of nucleotide sequences to build a
phylogenetic evolutionary tree. The web server Phylogeny.fr
[] is designed for non-specialists and has up-to-date
programs that are often designed for experts. Armadillo v1.1
[] is a novel workflow platform dedicated to designing and
conducting phylogenetic studies, including comprehensive
simulations. As Armadillo is an open-source project, it allows
scientists to develop their own modules as well as to integrate
existing computer applications. TreeDomViewer 
[] is a
visualization tool available as a web-based interface that
combines phylogenetic tree description, multiple sequence
alignment and InterProScan data of sequences and generates a
phylogenetic tree projecting the corresponding protein domain
information onto the multiple sequence alignment.

Conclusion
Analysis of ‘omics’ data using integrated bioinformatics tools
through workflow management systems will help in increasing
the productivity of researchers by reducing the time and effort
spent on searching and executing each tool independently on
different platforms. This article attempt to compare the
features and performance of workflows developed for gene
sequence analysis and evolutionary studies. Some of the
important issues that must be addressed by these workflows
are security, scheduling, load balancing and resource pooling.
There is a need to design workflows through object oriented
approach for its better re-usability, transportability, code
sharing and ultimately reducing the efforts.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Sharma et al, Bioinformation 9(13): 663-672 (2013)

General gene sequence analysis workflow system

General phylogenetic workflow system

