Background
Theobroma cacao (cocoa) is a diploid tree grown in tropical
countries []. Worldwide many people depend on cocoa for
their income. Cocoa is grown in a range of conditions such as
full sun, or more traditionally under shade. In India, cocoa has
been grown as a mixed crop under arecanut, coconut and oil
palm shades. Demand for cocoa has been increased
tremendously not only as a raw material for chocolate industry,
but also for its flavor and other properties which imparts
several health benefits [,
]. Diseases are major problem for
decline in cocoa production and causing annual crop loss of 20–
30 % []. The major diseases of cocoa include black pod
(Phytophthora spp.), witches' broom (Crini pellis perniciosa), and
frosty pod rot (Moniliophthora roreri) causing heavy loss in
production worldwide. Phytophthora megakarya, causative agent
for black pod disease in West African countries is the most
damaging pathogen in cocoa industry. Although Phytophthora
megakarya only exists in Africa, the species Phytophthora
palmivora and Phytophthora capsici are responsible for the disease
in South America and India. Fungicides are used to control the
disease with varying success and at significant cost to small
hold farmers [,
]. Genomic research provides new tools to
study the genetic and molecular bases of different traits.
Complete genome of the cocoa has been recently published [].
Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs) are sequenced regions of
cDNA copies of mRNA that are expressed under different
conditions and represents part of the transcribed portion of the
genome []. ESTs can be used for gene annotation, gene
discovery and sequence determination. Various cocoa EST
sequencing projects have been done to understand the
transcriptome of cocoa [,
]. The EST sequence information is
essential for the molecular based assays leading to cocoa crop
improvement. With the objective of identifying the functional
genes expressed in diseased condition (black pod), we analyzed
4 libraries of ESTs derived from Phytophthora megakarya infected
cocoa leaf and pod tissues. These studies would lead to the
development of secondary cocoa EST database for specific
stress conditions (biotic, abiotic) that will be helpful for the
researchers of cocoa crop improvement.

Methodology
Primary sequence source:
Four libraries of EST sequences derived from Phytophthora
megakarya infected cocoa leaf and pod tissues belonging to the
genotypes PNG and UPA134 were used in this study. Totally
6379 redundant EST sequences were retrieved from ESTtik
database [] 
 (see supplementary material).

EST Analysis:
EST analysis includes the following steps: 1) EST preprocessing,
2) EST assembly, and 3) functional annotation. The
implemented steps are illustrated in .

EST pre -processing and assembly:
EST processing like removal of vector contamination, trimming
poly A/ T tail and low complexity region, removal of linker and
adaptor sequence were performed using SeqClean [] tool.
Vector contamination database UniVec was configured with
local Blast [] and used in SeqClean tool. Repeatmasker
(http://www.repeatmasker.org) 
[] tool was used to remove
the low complexity regions from the EST sequences. Clustering
and assembling were done by adopting CAP3 tool 
[].

Primary sequence analysis:
The primary sequence analysis of GC percentage, average
length of contigs and length range of contigs were processed
using custom developed perl script (DSA.pl). For the detection
of number of clustered sequences present in different contigs
the CAP3 assembly files (.ace) were analyzed using a perl script
(cap3_analyzer.pl).

Functional annotation:
Non redundant EST sequences were subjected to blastx 
[]
similarity search. Further, the homologous sequences were
made stringent by selecting those having E-value below e-10.
Gene Ontology [] search, enzyme search, Interproscan and
KEGG mapping were done using Blast2go 
(www.blast2go.org)
tool [].

Database design:
The information which was obtained from the processing and
annotation of the EST sequences were deposited in a MySQL
relational database. Three different tables were created using
SQL for storing sequences, blast hit and functional annotation.

Results and Discussion
EST pre -processing and assembly:
The 6379 EST sequences retrieved from ESTtik database were
processed using SeqClean tool resulting in 6349 good quality
EST sequences which were used for further analysis. By the
contig assembly using CAP3 tool 3333 non redundant EST (907
contigs and 2426 singletons) sequences were obtained 

(see supplementary material).

Primary sequence analysis:
The primary sequence analysis showed that total GC content of
non redundant EST collection as 42.7%, average length of the
EST collections is 419 residues/ sequence and the sequence
length ranged from 101 residues to 2576 residues 
 (see
supplementary material). CAP3 clustered the total ESTs in to
907 contigs. Number of sequences in different contigs ranged
from 2 to 141. Contig374 contained the maximum number of
sequences i.e. 141 ().

Functional annotation:
Similarity search (blastx) was executed against the nonredundant
database. Totally 1230 orthologous genes were
annotated with a significant E-value of &lt; e-10. The blast result
showed that contig473 (2 sequence assembled) showed high
similarity (95.75% with E-value 3.5E-138) to heat shock protein
and contig396 (3 sequence assembled) showed high similarity
(93% with E-value 1.9E-71) to low molecular weight heat shock
protein. Contig338, contig345, contig668 and contig687 showed
similarity in defense of related proteins.

Various biotic stress related proteins like GTP-binding protein
(Contig366, Contig635), chitinase (contig568), beta-cyanoalanine
synthase (Contig292), metallothionein (contig 542), thaumatin,
trypsin inhibitor (contig810) heat shock protein,
hydroxyproline-rich glycoprotein(Contig526), Omethyltransferase(
Contig846), abc transporter family proteins,
12-oxophytodienoate reductase (Contig230, Contig379),
carbonic anhydrase (Contig576), glutamine synthetase
(Contig308), thioredoxin (Contig80, Contig280, Contig667),
cyclophilin (Contig758), f-box family protein (Contig660),
glutathione peroxidase (Contig184), ascorbate peroxidase
(Contig573, Contig487), lipid transfer protein (Contig480,
Contig342, ), cellulose synthase (Contig356), expansin, and
pathogen related protein (contig 868) could be identified in the
present study. Other major proteins involved in cell growth,
cellular communication, cellular transport, transport
mechanisms, energy pathway, protein destination and protein
synthesis process can also be found in our EST collection (see
). Gesteira et al 
[] identified
pathogenesis related proteins, receptor kinase, MAP kinase and
trypsin inhibitors as proteins related to Moniliophthora
perniciosa infection in cocoa through comparative analysis of
EST. In a similar work, Verica et al 
[] identified proteins like
chitinase, heat-shock proteins and beta-cyanoalanine synthase
in cocoa were upregulated when treated with inducer of
defense response. The cDNAs developed for the differently
expressed genes in cocoa in response to witche's broom disease
were putatively categorized as belonging to signal transduction,
response to biotic and abiotic stress, metabolism, RNA and
DNA metabolism, protein metabolism and cellular maintenance
classes []. Gene Ontology classification (GO), HMMER search
against Pfam database, Interproscan and Enzyme search were
done using Blast2go tool. Gene ontology results revealed that
most of the sequences were related to cellular function; stress
response and biological process (see ).
Enzyme search against KEGG, annotated 272 enzymes
belonging to 114 metabolic pathways. The annotated enzymes
were aldehyde dehydrogenase (E.C: 1.2.1.3), catalase (E.C:
1.11.1.6), acetyl-CoA C-acetyltransferase (E.C: 2.3.1.9), threonine
ammonia-lyase (E.C: 4.3.1.19), acetolactate synthase (E.C:
2.2.1.6), dihydroxy-acid dehydratase (E.C: 4.2.1.9), Omethyltransferase
(E.C: 2.1.1.68) and cinnamoyl-CoA reductase
(E.C: 1.2.1.44) and most of them play an important role in amino
acid biosynthesis. Many other enzymes involved in
biosynthesis of secondary metabolites, fatty acid metabolism,
and fructose and mannose metabolism were annotated.
Three different tables were created using SQL commands in
MySQL relational database management system. The results
obtained in EST processing and primary sequence analysis were
organized in the first table. The second table possessed the
information obtained in similarity search and further functional
annotation results were saved in the third table. These three
tables were logically linked. Each row in the table was assigned
a unique serial number. All the information was deposited in
3333 rows in each table that can be retrieved by either logical or
key word search.

Conclusion
Four libraries of EST sequences derived from Phytophthora
megakarya infected cocoa tissues have been analysed. Functional
annotation resulted in 1230 orthologous genes, which included
272 enzymes and others were defense related and cellular
functional genes. The annotated information was organized in a
MySQL database. This information will be useful for the
reconstruction of biotic stress response pathways in cocoa.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The work was supported by a grant from Department of
Information Technology (DIT), Government of India. We are
thankful to Dr. George V. Thomas, Director, CPCRI, Kasaragod
for the encouragement, guidance and facilities.

Citation:Naganeeswaran et al, Bioinformation 8(2): 065-069 (2012)

EST analysis work flow

Contigs vs number of sequences clustered in
corresponding contigs.

