Background
Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) is a global health problem which
affects 170 million people worldwide and 10 million people in
Pakistan []. HCV causes acute and chronic hepatitis and is a
major cause of liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma 
[].
HCV is a member of Flaviviridae family with a positive-sense
single-stranded RNA genome which encodes three structural
proteins (Core, E1, E2) and six non-structural proteins (NS2,
NS3, NS4A, NS4B, NS5A &amp; NS5B) []. Among all HCV proteins,
NS3/4A serine protease and NS5B polymerase are important
drug targets to develop anti-HCV agents []. The Major role of
NS3/4A is the proteolytic processing at NS4A/4B, NS4B/5A,
and NS5A/5B sites, and it plays an important role in HCV
replication. Because of its involvement in viral replication, it
has emerged as a potential drug target for HCV. There is no
vaccination available for HCV treatment and current standard
of care is a combination therapy of Pegylated interferon alpha
(PegIFN-α) injections with oral antiviral nucleoside analogue
ribavirin (RBV) which leads to clearance of HCV in 50%
genotype 1 cases and 80% of genotype 2 cases but this treatment
has slow response rates and side effects in genotype 1a and 1b
patients [–]. 
Current treatment is costly, less efficient and has
several side effects thus, there is a strong need of developing
antiviral agents that are less toxic and has potential to target all
genotypes of HCV with the same efficiency. Recently, two NS3
protease inhibitors have been approved as triple therapy (PEGIFN-
α , ribavirin and Boceprevir or Telaprevir) against HCV 
[].
But still there is a strong need to develop specific compounds
that can target important factors of the HCV life cycle 
[].

Medicinal plants are being tested against HCV and many of
them have proven to be beneficial as apposite substitute sources
of antiviral mediators. Medicinal plants have low cost, multiple
target activities, inconsequential side-effects and stumpy
prospective to cause resistance therefore, are preferred over
conventional treatment [–
]. Phytochemicals of medicinal
plants such as alkaloids, organosulfur compounds, limonoids,
lignans, furyl compounds, polyines, thiophenes, proteins,
peptides, flavonoids, terpenoids, sulphides, polyphenolics,
coumarins, saponins, chlorophyllins have functions like
scavenging, antioxidant activities, hampering viral entry, DNA
and RNA replication against variety of viruses []. Recently,
our group reported that flavonoids of Acacia nilotica displayed
novel inhibition of HCV titer in liver infected cells [].
Therefore, this study was designed to screen phytochemical of
Accacia nilotica against HCV NS3/4A protease using in-silico
approaches.

Methodology
This study was designed to dock Accacia nilotica Flavonoids
against HCV NS3/4A protein with the following
communications. Intel (R) xenon (R) CPU E5620@2.40GHz
system having 3.8GB RAM with the open 11.4 (X 86_64)
operating platform. Protein-ligand docking was carried out
using the MOE (Molecular Operating Environment) software
package. Interactions between HCV NS3/4A protease and
ligands were imagined using ligPlot feature of MOE software.

Ligand preparation
A literature search was performed to find Accacia nilotica
Flavonoid Structures. Chemical structures of Favonoids were
constructed using ChemDraw software () and were
converted into their respective 3D structures. 3D structures
were optimized by adding hydrogens through MOE software
package. Energies of selected molecules were minimized with
parameters (gradient: 0.05, Force Field: MMFF94X, Chiral
Constraint and Current Geometry). Molecules were then saved
in mdb format and were used as input file for MOE-Docking.

Preparation of Receptor Protein
HCV NS3/4A protease structure was retrieved from Protein
Data Bank using PDB ID: 2FM2 and was optimized by
removing water molecules, 3D protonation and Energy
minimization. Energy minimization was carried out using
parameters (gradient: 0.05, Force Field: MMFF94X+Solvation
and Chiral Constraint: Current Geometry). Energy
minimization was terminated when the root mean square
gradient falls below the 0.05. The minimized structure was used
as the receptor protein for Docking.

Molecular Docking
MOE docking program with default parameters was used to
bind the selected ligands with receptor protein and to find the
correct conformation (with the rotation of bonds, structure of
molecule is not rigid) of the ligand so as to obtain minimum
energy structure. After docking, best conformations were
analyzed for hydrogen bonding/π-π interactions.

Results &amp; Discussion
Docking Analysis
All ligands were docked with the active site of NS3/4A protease
enzyme and top ranked conformations of each ligand were
saved in a separate database. Compound 01 was ranked as top
docked molecule on the basis of S-Score obtained from MOE
docking algorithm. Thus, it can be inferred that this compound
can serve as potential inhibitor against NS3/4A protease. All
other compounds were having S-Score close to each other. All
compounds were studied in detail to obtain their interaction
information that can be important for the inhibition of NS3/4A
protease enzyme. Interaction diagrams were obtained using
MOE ligand interaction analysis feature.

Binding interactions of Ligands and Protein
The most active Compound 01 was ranked as first on the
docking score. It is clear from ( &amp; 
) that this
compound was bound deep into the binding cavity of NS3
protease making interactions with the residues Lys 136 and Asp
81. On the basis of docking score Compound 02, Compound 03,
Compound 04, Compound 05, Compound 06, Compound 07,
Compound 08, Compound 09, Compound 10, and Compound
11 were ranked close to each other as shown in  (see
supplementary material). Among all these compounds,
Compound 02, Compound 03, and Compound 04 showed three
interactions with the residues of the binding cavity of protein.
The compound 02 can be seen from ( &amp; 
) that it was
docked tightly into the binding site of protein. There were some
five prominent interactions observed between the Compound
02 and the binding site residues Gln 41 and Arg 155 and His 57.
The solvent contact was found almost all over the ligand. The
compounds Compound 03 and Compound 04 showed almost
similar interactions with the protein. Both compounds were
having interactions with Gln 41, Ser 139 and Arg 155. The
Compound 03 can be seen clearly in ( &amp; 
) making
four interactions with the residues Gln 41, Ser 139 and Arg 155.
The compound Compound 04 is having three interactions with
binding site residues Gln 41, Ser 139 and Arg 155 of protein
( &amp; ).

Conclusion
To recognize binding interactions of Accacia nilotica
phytochemicals with NS3/4A protease, molecular docking was
performed to find a potential inhibitor against NS3/4A protease
of HCV. After post docking analysis, important interactions
were found between active compounds and active site of
NS3/4A protease. Thus, molecular docking can be helpful to
find the relative binding affinities of active compounds prior to
synthesis and biochemical testing of new inhibitors. It can be
concluded from the study that phytochemical of Accacia nilotica
may serve as a potential drug candidate with relatively simple
structural changes against HCV NS3/4A protease.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are thankful to Zaheer-ul-Haq Qasmi for providing MOE
software

Citation:Khan et al, Bioinformation 9(14): 710-714 (2013)

Chemical Structure of Accacia nilotica phytochmicals
constructed using Chemdraw Software.

The 2D pictures of the docked conformations of most
active compounds.

A) Interactions between Compound 01 and active site
of NS3/4A; B) Interactions between Compound 02 and active
site of NS3/4, C) Interactions between Compound 03 and active
site of NS3/4, D) Interactions between Compound 04 and active
site of NS3/4A. , E) Interactions between Compound 05 and
active site of NS3/4A; F) Interactions between Compound 06
and active site of NS3/4A; G) Interactions between Compound
07 and active site of NS3/4A; H) Interactions between
Compound 08 and active site of NS3/4A; I) Interactions
between Compound 09 and active site of NS3/4A; J)
Interactions between Compound 10 and active site of NS3.

