Background
Vegetable oils and fats are integral part of human diet. The world population is
growing with an alarming rate, and the demand for vegetable oils and fats is
increasing steadily. Coconut, corn, cotton, oil palm, peanut, rapeseed,
safflower, sesame, soybean, sunflower, and flax are the main vegetable oil
producing crops [–]. 
The African oil palm (E. guineensis Jacq.), and the
American oil palm (E. oleifera) are cultivated in the tropics for vegetable oil
production. In the African oil palm there are three fruit forms namely, Dura,
Tenera, and Pisifera. Elaeis guineensis Jacq. Tenera is a hybrid of Dura (♀)
and Pisifera (♂), and is known for the high oil yield 
[]. Hence, for the
commercial cultivation farmers and plantation companies favor E. guineensis
Jacq. Tenera. One hectare of oil palm in good growing conditions produces
about 4.5 tonnes (t) oil per year, 0.50 t kernel oil and 0.45 t palm kernel cake
[]. 
This yield is almost three times the yield of coconut, and more than ten
times that of soybean []. 
Elaeis oleifera a close relative of the E. guineensis is
low oil yielding and not preferred for the commercial plantation, even though
its oil contains more (69 %) oleic acid in comparison to commercially
cultivated oil palm, E. guineensis Jacq. Tenera. In the world market of fats and
oils, palm oil is considered as a market leader, constituting about 35 % of the
world trade in fats and oils. Malaysia is the largest producer and exporter of the
palm oil, and accounts for about 50 % of the world’s palm oil output and 62 %
of the net export trade in palm oil [–]. 
Palm oil has a great potential to fulfill
the increasing demand for vegetable oil from both food and non-food
industries. However, like other vegetable oils such as soybean oil, to get a good
price in the market it is important to develop different varieties with desired
fatty acid composition. To achieve this goal, conventional crop improvement
methods are not only tedious but also time-consuming 
[]. Oil palm genetic
engineering may save 80-90% of the time required for insertion of gene/s for
new trait/s in it through conventional crop breeding 
[]. Therefore, out of all
existing methods available for crop improvement, perhaps genetic engineering
is the best method to manipulate fatty acid profile in oil palm in a short period.
Palm oil and palm kernel oil are the main commercial products of the oil palm
fruits. Palm kernel oil is the main source of lauric acid (C12:0), which is
mainly used to fulfill the needs of soap, detergent, and cosmetic industries 
[].
Oil obtained from mesocarp of commercially cultivated oil palm (E. guineensis
Jacq. Tenera) fruits contains 53.3% saturated fatty acids, while commercially
less important E. oleifera contains 28% saturated fatty acids 
[]. Among the
saturated fatty acids, palmitic acid (C16:0) is predominantly accumulated.
Elaeis guineensis Jacq. Tenera oil typically contains 44.0% C16:0, while in E.
oleifera oil, it is 25.0% []. 
Lowering down the saturated fatty acid content in
palm oil is one of the ways for palm oil nutritional value improvement.

The PATE enzyme is known to have C16:0-ACP substrate specificity 
[–].
Therefore, it is necessary to knockout the expression of PATE gene in order to
minimize the percentage of C16:0 in palm oil. Palm oil will be healthier for the
human consumption and will get more price in the market if the C16:0
percentage in palm oil could be reduced to make it low palmitate 
[–]. The
silencing of PATE gene can be accomplished through any one of the several
different methods of gene silencing such as, transcriptional gene silencing
(TGS), cosuppression, post-transcriptional gene silencing (PTGS) using
antisense, direct inverted repeats (IR), intron-spliced inverted repeat (ISIR)
mediated gene silencing, and site-directed mutagenesis (SDM) 
[–].
Cosuppression and PTGS with antisense, IR and/or ISIR trans-genes markedly
reduces the steady state mRNA levels of endogenous genes similar in
transcribed sequence. These methods are proved to be very effective for gene
silencing in oil producing, and other model plants like Arabidopsis 
[–]. A
generic primary cloning vector, pHANNIBAL developed by CSIRO is very
useful for the construction of novel transformation vectors with antisense,
inverted repeats, and intron-spliced inverted repeats of the gene of interest 
[–, 
–]. 
This paper reports the construction of novel transformation vectors
with constitutive and oil palm fruit mesocarp-tissue-specific promoter for the
oil palm PATE gene silencing using pHANNIBAL, pCAMBIA 1301 and 619
bp long 5' region of oil palm PATE gene fragments.

Methodology
Plasmid vectors and bacterial strains
Two cloning plasmid vectors, pHANNIBAL and pCAMBIA 1301 were used in
the construction of 6 different transformation vectors for oil palm PATE gene
silencing. The PCV, pHANNIBAL, a derivative of cloning vector pART7 was
kindly provided by CSIRO, Australia [–]. The BCV, pCAMBIA 1301 was
available in our laboratory (UKM, Bangi, Malaysia) []. The restriction
enzymes map of PCV and BCV is shown in 
. The
PCR cloning vector, pGEM®-T Easy was used for the cloning of PCR
amplified antisense and sense PATE gene fragments. Bacterium, E. coli strain
DH5-α was used for preparation of the competent cells to harbor the plasmids.
Prepared competent cells were stored at −70 °C until the use.

Construction of transformation vectors for PATE gene silencing
Plasmid, pPATE-RT is a recombinant PCR cloning vector (pGEM®-T Easy),
which carries a 629 bp long (GenBank AF507115) fragment of E. guineensis
Jacq. Tenera PATE gene previously isolated in our laboratory. We used this
PATE gene fragment as template to synthesize antisense and sense PATE
fragments in the vector construction. For the construction of 6 different
transformation vectors for PATE gene silencing, standard gene cloning
methods were used []. 
Construction of expression cassettes with antisense,
ISIR and IR of PATE gene fragment was completed using pHANNIBAL. The
expression cassettes from PCVs were then sub-cloned as a SacI-PstI fragment
into pCAMBIA 1301.

Plasmid DNA extraction
During preparation of constructs in PCV, selected and well-isolated colonies
from the LB agar plates were inoculated aseptically and separately in universal
bottles containing 10 ml LB medium, supplemented with 50 µg/ml Ampicillin
(Ampicillin Sodium Salt, MF = C16H18N3NaO4S; Amersham Life Science).
But, the BCV carries a Kanamycin resistant gene, and hence cultures were
supplemented with 50 µg/ml Kanamycin. Cultures were incubated at 37 °C,
250 RPM for 16 hours. Alkaline lysis method was used for pDNA preparation.
For confirmation of the intactness, and quality of the extracted pDNA, it was
electrophoresed on 1% agarose gel.

PCR for RE sites addition and PATE amplification
To incorporate PATE gene fragment in antisense orientation in pHANNIBAL,
XbaI and BamHI restriction sites were used. The forward primer [F-XbaI (5'-
AGCTCTAGAATCTTTGGTCTTTCATTCCC-3')] and reverse primer [RBamHI
(5'- ATTGGATCCTTCCAATCAAGAAGGGTCC-3')] were designed
with flanking sequence of the XbaI, and BamHI restriction site (underlined
nucleotides) respectively and used in amplification of the antisense PATE gene
fragments. For amplification of 619 bp long sense PATE gene fragment,
forward primer [F-XhoI (5'-ATTCTCGAGATCTTTGGTCTTTCATTCCC-
3')] and reverse primer [R-EcoRI (5'-AACGAATTCTTCCAA
TCAAGAAGGGTCC-3')] were designed with XhoI, and EcoRI restriction site
(underlined) flanking sequence, respectively. The PCR for amplification of
antisense and sense PATE gene fragments was completed under following
conditions. Hot start 94 °C for 5 min, followed by 35 cycles of 33 sec at 94 °C,
1 min at 62 °C, 1.30 min at 72 °C and a final extension at 72 °C for 5 minutes.
For the synthesis and amplification of the MSP, forward primer [PF-SacI/NotI
(5'-GAGCTCGCGGCCGCGAATTTATCTGACAAAGGTGC-3')] with
flanking nt sequence for SacI, and NotI restriction sites (underlined) and
reverse primer [PR-EcoRI (5'-CACGAATTCGAACTAGTAAGTGAAGA
TCTTGG-3')] with flanking nt sequence for EcoRI RE were used.
Amplification of MSP by PCR was carried out using the following conditions:
40 cycles of 33 sec at 94 °C, 1 min at 63 °C, 1 min and 30 sec at 72 °C, and a
final extension of 1 cycle of 5 min at 72 °C.

PCR product purification
The PCR products were purified from the PCR reaction mixture using
NucleoSpin® Extraction Kit (Ready-to-use system for fast purification of
nucleic acids), BD Biosciences Clontech, USA. The DNA bands of expression
cassettes and plasmid DNA were excised from agarose gel with the help of
surgical blade, and DNA was purified using NucleoSpin® Extraction Kit.
Quantitative estimation of purified DNA was calculated using UV-160 A, UVvisible
recording spectrophotometer (SHIMADZU).

Ligation reaction
Ligation reactions for incorporation of 619 bp long antisense and sense PATE
gene fragments and MSP into pHANNIBAL and ligation reactions to
incorporate expression cassettes into pCAMBIA 1301 were assembled in 10.00
µl volume by adding: ˜ 200 ng vector, ˜ 600 ng insert, 10X Ligase buffer, 3
units of T-4 DNA Ligase; sterile distilled water was added finally to adjust the
final volume of reaction to 10 µl. Recombination reactions for cohesive ends
were incubated at 16 (+1) °C, whereas blunt end ligation reactions were
incubated at 8 (+1) °C for 18 h.

Transformation of E. coli competent cells
The preparation of frozen stocks of competent cells (using the protocol-I) and
transformation of E. coli strain DH5-α competent cells with ligated product by
using heat shock method was performed [].

Analysis of recombinant plasmids by restriction enzymes
To confirm integration of antisense and sense PATE gene fragments, extracted
recombinant plasmid DNA (20 µg pDNA) samples were double-digested with
respective REs. For instance, for the confirmation of the antisense PATE gene
fragment insert in pAPATE-H, it was double digested with XbaI-BamHI by
incubating digestion reactions at 37°C, for 4 h. For the characterization of the
recombinant plasmids, pDNAs were double-digested with different
combinations of RE to confirm the size, orientation and location of the inserts
and the components of the cassettes.

Nucleotide sequencing
To confirm the identity of the PATE gene fragment or MSP promoter in
constructs, nucleotide sequencing of the inserts was carried out using
automated DNA sequencer. The pair of primers used for synthesis of PATE
(antisense or sense) and MSP by PCR technique was used in sequencing
reactions for the sequencing of respective inserts. Nucleotide sequence was
analyzed by using nucleotide-nucleotide blast (blastn) program 
[].

Construction of transformation vectors using MSP
The MSP was isolated previously in our laboratory from Elaeis oleifera 
[].
Three transformation vectors (with antisense, ISIR and IR of PATE gene
fragment) were constructed for PATE gene silencing using MSP. From the
already prepared expression cassette, CaMV 35S promoter was replaced with
MSP to control expression of the constructs designed against oil palm PATE
gene. MSP was used in the constructs to express constructs in oil palm
mesocarp tissue-specific manner.

Transfer of expression cassettes from PCV into BCV
The SacI and PstI restriction sites were used to separate expression cassettes
with antisense, ISIR and IR of PATE gene fragment from the respective PCV.
The separated and purified expression cassettes were incorporated as SacI-PstI
fragment into BCV (pCAMBIA 1301). The BCV carries a Kanamycin resistant
gene, and hence transformed bacteria were selected on LB-agar plates
supplemented with 50 µg/ml Kanamycin.

Results
Six different types of transformation vectors for PATE gene silencing were
constructed. A set of three constructs (with antisense, ISIR and IR of PATE)
was constructed using constitutive (CaMV 35S) promoter. Another set of three
constructs was with the same design of expression cassettes except that the
CaMV35S promoter was replaced with MSP.  shows the six different
constructed expression cassettes and their design for PATE gene silencing. The
expression cassette with antisense PATE gene fragment was prepared using
619 bp long PATE gene fragment from plasmid, pPATE-RT and
pHANNIBAL. Based on the restriction enzymes map of PCV and PATE gene
fragment, antisense PATE gene fragment was incorporated in pHANNIBAL
using XbaI and BamHI REs without discarding intron sequence. The intron
sequence was kept as it is because it will be spliced out during the mRNA
maturation; and hence its removal was not necessary. The strategy used for the
construction of transformation vector (pAPATE-PC) with CaMV 35S promoter
driven antisense PATE gene fragment is shown in 
.
Double-digestion of pAPATE-H with SacI-ClaI released ˜ 2173 bp long DNA
fragment (lane 5, ). This fragment contains CaMV 35S promoter and
an intron. Double-digestion of pAPATE-H with XhoI-ClaI released DNA
fragments of ˜ 812 bp in length (lane 6, ). This fragment is of intron.
The DNA fragment of ˜ 1447 bp in size was released from pAPATE-H as a
result of its double-digestion with XhoI-XbaI 
(lane 7, ). This
fragment comprises an intron, and antisense PATE gene fragment. The doubledigestion
of pAPATE-H with SacI-PstI released 3531 bp long entire expression
cassette with CaMV 35S driven antisense PATE gene fragment 
(lane 8, ). 
After completion of the REs analysis of prepared antisense PATE gene
fragments expression cassette, it was sub-cloned into pCAMBIA 1301 to have
a selection marker, reporter gene, and other elements of the BCV.

The REs analysis of the plasmid, pAPATE-PC was carried out to confirm the
location, orientation, and length of the expression cassette and its elements.
Digestion of plasmid, pAPATE-PC with EcoRI released 1373 bp long DNA
fragment of CaMV 35S promoter (lane 3, ). As expected double
digestion of pAPATE-PC with EcoRI-PstI released two DNA fragments,
smaller one was of 1373 bp long CaMV 35S promoter; and another bigger one
was of 2164 bp in size (lane 4, ). This fragment contains intron,
antisense PATE gene fragment and OCS terminator of the expression cassette.

The double-digestion of pAPATE-PC with SacI-KpnI released one DNA
fragment of 1377 bp in size (lane 5, ). This DNA fragment is of
CaMV 35S promoter. Double-digestion of pAPATE-PC with SacI-PstI
released the entire 3531 bp long ‘antisense PATE gene fragment expression
cassette’ (lane 6, ). Once the antisense PATE gene fragment is
inserted in pHANNIBAL using XbaI and BamHI sites, the resulting plasmid
can be used to make expression cassettes with ISIR and IR of PATE for the
PATE gene silencing. For the construction of hpRNA generating
transformation vector for PATE gene silencing, construct should have PATE
gene fragments sequence either in ISIR or in an IR in its expression cassette.
The strategy used for the construction of transformation vector (pISIRPATEPC)
with CaMV 35S promoter driven ISIR of PATE gene fragment is shown in
. The REs analysis of pISIRPATE-H and
pISIRPATE-PC is depicted in , respectively. The
pISIRPATE-H was used in construction of expression cassette with IR of
PATE gene fragment. The intron fragment was taken out from pISIRPATE-H
to make an expression cassette with direct IR of PATE gene fragments
(). The REs analysis was carried out for both
pIRPATE-H and pIRPATE-PC. The REs analysis results for pIRPATE-H and
pIRPATE-PC are shown in , respectively.

The MSP was isolated previously in our laboratory and cloned in a PCR
cloning vector, pGEM®-T Easy []. This plasmid DNA was designated as
pSESQ-PRO. Before PCR amplification of MSP its presence was confirmed in
pSESQ-PRO by digesting it with EcoRI RE. Since EcoRI sites are located
adjacent to the MSP DNA insert in pSESQ-PRO. The 1399 bp long MSP DNA
fragment was released from the plasmid (pSESQ-PRO) as a result of its
digestion with EcoRI (figure not shown). The released DNA fragment contains
1293 bp of MSP, 96 bp of the gene, and 10 bp from the MCS of PCR cloning
vector. In construction of the pMAPATE-PC, antisense expression cassette of
PATE gene fragment from pAPATE-H was used by replacing CaMV 35S
promoter with MSP. The strategy used in construction of pMAPATE-PC is
shown in . The REs analysis of plasmids,
pMAPATE-H and pMAPATE-PC is shown in . The ISIR of
PATE gene fragment under MSP was constructed using pMAPATE-H and
PCR amplified sense PATE fragment from pPATE-RT 
(). 
To confirm the presence of MSP and components of ISIR of PATE
in expression cassette, REs analysis was carried out for pMISIRPATE-H and
pMISIRPATE-PC. The results are shown in . The
pMISIRPATE-H carries the ISIR of PATE gene fragments. Hence to make IR
of PATE gene fragments in the expression cassette, intron was taken out by
using KpnI and ClaI REs (). The sticky ends were
made blunt by using T-4 DNA polymerase; and blunt ends were ligated to
make IR of existing PATE gene fragments from the pMISIRPATE-H. The
ligated plasmid was designated as pMIRPATE-H. The REs analysis of this
plasmid and transformation vector (pMIRPATE-PC) was carried out; and the
results are depicted in .

Discussion
The presence of XhoI, EcoRI, KpnI, 
ClaI, HindIII, BamHI, XbaI, SacI, and PstI
REs in pHANNIBAL DNA was confirmed prior to synthesis and insertion of
antisense PATE into pHANNIBAL. It was necessary to confirm the identity of
the plasmid, and to confirm uniqueness of REs so that the strategy can be
implemented and the expected sizes of the fragments can be recognized. Our
results confirmed the uniqueness of 9 REs sites (XhoI, 
EcoRI, KpnI, ClaI,
HindIII, BamHI, XbaI, 
SacI, and PstI) and the identity of the pHANNIBAL
[]. 
In construction of novel transformation vectors two (CaMV 35S and
MSP) promoters were used. The use of the tissue-specific gene promoters
enables tissue-specific expression of the gene/s. Therefore kernel and mesocarp
tissue-specific gene promoters were isolated previously in our laboratory after
isolation of tissue-specific genes by differential display method 
[–]. Fatty
acid biosynthesis pathway in oil palms (E. guineensis Jacq. Tenera and E.
oleifera) can be manipulated genetically at different levels using key genes and
tissue-specific promoters. The reduction in level of the saturated fatty acid
content in palm oil is one of the ways to improve nutritional value of palm oil.
To achieve this goal, down-regulation of the PATE gene holds the key, since
reducing palmitate content lowers down level of the saturated fatty acids
significantly in palm oil.

The research findings reported by Smith et al. (2000) showed that PTGS using
antisense and/or cosuppression construct usually leads to modest proportion of
silencing and silenced individuals in comparison to gene silencing induced by
constructs with ISIR and IR [,
]. Therefore, a new generation of
transformation vectors with ISIR, and IR of PATE gene fragments for PATE
gene silencing was constructed. The construction of 2 transformation vectors
with antisense construct (pAPATE-PC and pMAPATE-PC) was carried out
along with the constructs with ISIR (pISIRPATE-PC and pMISIRPATE-PC)
and IR (pIRPATE-PC and pMIRPATE-PC) of PATE for PATE gene silencing
to compare the efficiency of the constructs in PATE gene silencing in oil palm.
The CaMV 35S promoter was used for three reasons. Firstly, to determine
whether there is an effect of PATE gene silencing on fatty acid profile in the
leaves instead of waiting for flowering and fruiting of the transgenic oil palm to
be obtained. Secondly, to determine the effect of PATE gene silencing on fatty
acid profile of the palm oil obtained from mesocarp. And, the third reason was
to compare the efficiency of CaMV 35S promoter with MSP 
[].

The REs analysis of the PCVs and six (pAPATE-PC, pISIRPATE-PC,
pIRPATE-PC, pMAPATE-PC, pMISIRPATE-PC, and pMIRPATE-PC)
transformation vectors confirmed the length, orientation, presence and location
of the MSP/CaMV 35S promoter and PATE gene fragment in the respective
expression cassettes. The identity of the 619 bp long PATE gene fragments was
confirmed by its sequencing from pAPATE-H and pAPATE-PC. Nucleotide
sequence of antisense PATE gene fragment from pAPATE-PC showed 100 %
homology with the template PATE sequence (Figure not shown). This result of
sequence analysis confirmed the identity of the PATE gene fragments. All six
transformation vectors targeted against PATE gene are ready for the oil palm
genetic transformation experiments. The genetic engineering of the oil palm to
minimize C16:0 can be done using constructs constructed in this study.
Immature zygotic embryos (IZEs), non-embryogenic and embryogenic-callus
can be used as target tissues in the oil palm genetic transformation 
[–]. The
pHANNIBAL is a derivative of pART7 [, 
–]. Both, the pART7 and
pHANNIBAL are originally designed in such a way that the entire expression
cassette cartridge can be removed from them as a NotI fragment to bring in
directly into the specially designed BCV, pART27 
[–]. However, the
strategies used in this study highlights that various designs of expression
cassettes constructed using pHANNIBAL (PCV) can be sub-cloned into
pCAMBIA 1301. Hence, strategies used to construct transformation vectors in
this study also highlight the compatibility of pHANNIBAL and pCAMBIA
1301.

The research findings of the Wesley et al., (2001) suggest that ihpRNA and
hpRNA constructs containing sense and anti-sense arms ranging from 98 to
853 nt leads to efficient silencing in a wide range of plant species 
[]. In our
all 6 constructs, the size of the PATE gene fragment used is 619 nt. Hence
these constructs should be equally effective and efficient [,
]. Based on the
nt's complementary nature, the predicted RNA structure of the constructs
encoding antisense PATE and self-complementary hpRNA (from ISIR and or
IR of PATE gene fragments) to efficiently silence PATE gene (in oil palm) is
depicted in . The PCV (pHANNIBAL) is a generic vector that allows
simply, single PCR product from a gene of interest to be easily converted into a
highly effective and efficient ihpRNA silencing construct 
[]. Because of this
PCV's proven effectiveness and efficiency of resulting construct, this vector is
a choice in constructing effective and efficient constructs for PTGS of targeted
gene/s. This PCV is used in peanut to facilitate its genetic engineering for
alleviating peanut allergy [] 
and in other plants for PTGS of different genes
[,
,
]. 
By realizing the efficiency and effectiveness of the construct
designs which pHANNIBAL enables, pHANNIBAL-like silencing vectors are
also developed for gene silencing in fungi []. Therefore, we strongly believe
that the integration of expression cassettes (containing ISIR and IR of PATE
gene fragments) into oil palm genome will lead to the effective PATE gene
silencing. As a result of it, C16:0 content will be minimized significantly in the
palm oil. It is reported that the silencing effect of such kind of constructs are
stably inherited over many generations [], and oil palm should not be
exception for it.

The optimized physical and biological parameters reported by Parveez et al.
(2000) for the particle bombardment mediated genetic engineering of oil palm
can be used to accelerate the genetic transformation of oil palm with constructs
reported in this study to knockout the PATE gene expression 
[]. Recently,
constitutive and oil palm leaf-specific promoters (and their potential
applications) has been reported by Masura et al. 
[] and Masani et al. 
[],
respectively. These types of promoters can be used to drive expression
cassettes of PATE gene for its silencing. However, we have used MSP which is
known to regulate gene expression in oil palm fruit-tissue-specific manner 
[].
Therefore, ISIR, IR and antisense construct of PATE gene fragments from
pMISIRPATE-PC, pMIRPATE-PC, and pMAPATE-PC will express only in
the fruit mesocarp tissues of the oil palm after its transformation. Whereas,
ISIR, IR and antisense construct of PATE gene fragments from pISIRPATEPC,
pIRPATE-PC, and pAPATE-PC will express constitutively. This will help
to determine and compare the efficiency and effectiveness of the 2 promoter
used. However, we strongly believe that genetic engineering of oil palm with
pISIRPATE-PC, pIRPATE-PC, pMISIRPATE-PC and pMIRPATE-PC vectors
will facilitate development of low saturated fatty acids producing oil palms 
[].
Based on the literature and our understanding, we hypothesize that 4
(pISIRPATE-PC, pIRPATE-PC, pMISIRPATE-PC and pMIRPATE-PC) out
of 6 transformation vectors constructed in this study will be efficient and
effective in PATE gene silencing in oil palm. Nevertheless, these constructs
with efficient and effective construct design for PATE gene silencing are
bound to facilitate the efforts of genetic engineering in oil palm to produce
palm oil with low saturated fatty acids.

Conclusion
Six different transformation vectors namely, pAPATE-PC, pISIRPATE-PC,
pIRPATE-PC, pMAPATE-PC, pMISIRPATE-PC, and pMIRPATE-PC are
constructed for the PTGS of the PATE gene. The results of the RE sites
analyses and nucleotide sequence analyses of the PATE gene fragments and
MSP confirms that 619 bp long PATE gene fragments insert are at the right
locations and orientations in the constructs. The PATE gene fragment insert is
in antisense orientation in pAPATE-PC and pMAPATE-PC, in ISIR orientation
in pISIRPATE-PC and pMISIRPATE-PC, and in direct IR orientation in
pIRPATE-PC and pMIRPATE-PC. In all six transformation vectors, all the
elements of the respective expression cassettes targeted against PATE gene are
at the right place and orientation. But, to take this research forward,
transformation of E. guineensis Jacq. Tenera and E. oleifera with constructed
constructs needs to be done in order to obtain transgenic oil palms for the low
C16:0 palm oil in a reasonable time.

Disclosure
Authors attest that there are no conflicts of interest to declare.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors are grateful to the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation
(MOSTI) of Malaysian Government for research funding [Grant Code: IRPA:
01-02-02-0014 / PR00 15-07-07], and to the Commonwealth Scientific and
Industrial Research Organization [CSIRO], Australia for providing the primary
cloning vector, pHANNIBAL.

Citation:Bhore &amp; Shah, Bioinformation 6(6): 212-220 (2011)

The expression cassettes from six transformation vectors constructed
for PATE gene silencing. aPATE, antisense Palmitoyl-ACP Thioesterase gene
fragment (619 bp); CaMV 35S, Cauliflower mosaic virus 35S promoter; MSP,
Oil palm mesocarp tissue-specific promoter; sPATE, sense Palmitoyl-ACP
Thioesterase gene fragment (619 bp); OCS, Octopine synthase terminator.
*Figure drawing is not to the scale.

Agarose gel showing REs analysis of constructed plasmid vectors.
(A) REs analysis of pAPATE-H. Lane 2, undigested pAPATE-H; lane 3,
digested with SacI- XhoI; lane 4, digested with SacI-EcoRI; lane 5, digested
with SacI-ClaI; lane 6, digested with XhoI-ClaI; lane 7, digested with XhoIXbaI;
lane 8, digested with NotI; and lane 9, 100 bp DNA markers. (B) REs
analysis of pAPATE-PC. Lane 2, undigested pAPATE-PC; lane 3, digested
with EcoRI; lane 4, digested with EcoRI-PstI; lane 5, digested with SacI-KpnI;
lane 6, digested with SacI-PstI; and lane 7, 100 bp DNA markers. (C) REs
analysis of pISIRPATE-H. Lane 2, undigested pISIRPATE-H; lane 3, digested
with SacI-XhoI; lane 4, digested with SacI-EcoRI; lane 5, digested with SacIClaI;
lane 6, digested with XhoI-ClaI; lane 7, digested with XhoI-XbaI; lane 8,
digested with NotI; and lane 9, 100 bp DNA markers. (D) REs analysis of
pISIRPATE-PC. Lane 2, undigested pISIRPATE-PC; lane 3, digested with
EcoRI; lane 4, digested with EcoRI-PstI; lane 5, digested with SacI-KpnI; lane
6, digested with SacI-PstI; and lane 7, 100bp DNA markers. (E) REs analysis
of pIRPATE-H. Lane 2, undigested pIRPATE-H; lane 3, digested with SacIXhoI;
lane 4, digested with SacI-BamHI; lane 5, digested with XhoI-XbaI; lane
6, digested with NotI; and lane 7, shows the 100 bp DNA markers. (F) REs
analysis of pIRPATE-PC. Lane 2, undigested pIRPATE-PC; lane 3, digested
with SacI-XhoI; lane 4, digested with SacI-XbaI; lanes 5, digested with SacIPstI;
and lane 7, 100 bp DNA markers; in A-F, Lane 1 shows λ DNA HindIII
markers.

Agarose gel pictures showing REs analysis of the constructed
plasmid vectors in which PATE gene fragments were kept under the control of
MSP. (A) REs analysis of pMAPATE-H. Lane 2, the undigested DNA of
pMAPATE-H; lane 3, digested with SacI-EcoRI; lane 4, digested with SacIKpnI;
lane 5, digested with SacI-ClaI; lane 6, digested with EcoRI-ClaI; lane 7,
digested with EcoRI-XbaI; lane 8, digested with SacI-PstI; and lane 9, 100 bp
DNA markers. (B) REs analysis of pMAPATE-PC. Lane 2, undigested
pMAPATE-PC; lane 3, digested with EcoRI; lane 4, digested with EcoRI-PstI;
lane 5, digested with SacI-KpnI; lane 6, digested with SacI-PstI; and lane 7,
100 bp DNA markers. (C) REs analysis of pMISIRPATE-H. Lane 2,
undigested pMISIRPATE-H; lane 3, digested with SacI-EcoRI; lane 4, digested
with SacI-KpnI; lane 5, digested with SacI-ClaI; lane 6, digested with EcoRIClaI;
lane 7, digested with EcoRI-XbaI; lane 8, digested with NotI; and lane 9,
100 bp markers. (D) REs analysis of pMISIRPATE-PC. Lane 2, undigested
plasmid DNA of pMISIRPATE-PC; lane 3, digested with EcoRI; lane 4,
digested with EcoRI-PstI; lane 5, digested with SacI-KpnI; lane 6, digested
with SacI-PstI, and lane 7, 100 bp markers. (E) REs analysis of pMIRPATE-H.
Lane 2, Undigested plasmid DNA of pMIRPATE-H; lane 3, digested with
SacI-EcoRI; lane 4, digested with SacI-PstI; lane 5, digested with EcoRI-XbaI;
lane 6, digested with NotI; and lane 7, 100 bp markers. (F) REs analysis of
pMIRPATE-PC. Lane 2, undigested pMIRPATE-PC; lane 3, digested with
EcoRI; lane 4, digested with SacI-XbaI; lane 5, digested with SacI-PstI.; and
lane 6, 1 kb DNA ladder. In A-F, Lane 1 shows λ DNA HindIII markers.

The predicted mRNA structure of the constructs encoding antisense
PATE and self-complementary hpRNA (from ISIR and or IR of PATE gene
fragments) to efficiently silence PATE gene (in oil palm). In the 6 constructs
targeted against PATE gene, in 3 constructs expression of PATE is driven by
CaMV 35S promoter; and in another 3 constructs expression is driven by MSP.
Thick blue arrows indicates the 619 nt PATE sequence; long, black, thick lines
in predicted RNA structure for antisense indicate endogenous PATE gene
mRNA. Pink color loops indicate the loop formed by intron; pink dots indicate
the nucleotides from intron junction sequences left after intron deletion; and
short lines within the stem of hairpin structures indicates base pairing. *Note
this figure is not drawn to the scale.

