Background:
Over the last century, human life expectancy has been steadily 
increasing all around the world. The major cause of mortality is 
no longer infectious disease. Alternatively, it can be attributed 
to various metabolic disorders  []. However, fundamental 
causes of the wide spread ageing process are still not clearly 
known and are still under investigation. Ageing research has 
benefited a lot from the application of genetics in the past 
decades.  It  has  been  argued  that  regulatory  genes  affecting 
multiple pathways and processes are most likely to have 
significant effects on longevity  []. Numerous ageing-related 
genes have already been identified  [,
]. DNA repair genes 
could be designated as a major type of genes associating with 
ageing process  [–
]. Persuasive evidence has also shown that 
Nuclear DNA damage serves as a direct cause of ageing []. In 
humans, most serious ageing disease is subject to DNA repair 
defects. To date, over 150  DNA repair genes have been 
identified  [,
]. It is not simply inherited genetics that 
determines who will live the longest in an energetic, 
diseasefree state. There is no single cause of growing old, but the 
various mechanisms that characterize ageing are often 
interrelated. Scientists are identifying many interrelated 
pathways of ageing. This provides us with an unprecedented 
opportunity to gain at least partial control over this devastating 
process. The insulin/IGF1 signaling pathway is the best 
characterized pathway affecting longevity. From simpler
organisms such as C. elegans, D.mealanogaster and mouse up 
to humans, several studies have affirmed the positive role it 
played in ageing. Another critical pathway in longevity is TOR 
that involved in the anti-fungal effects of drug rapamycin  
[].
Base Excision Repair pathway is best established in organelles 
when DNA repair in organelles is characterized as a 
fundamental process in ageing [].

However, conceptual approaches have not quite caught up with 
the technology. This creates an opportunity for the application 
of bioinformatics approaches in ageing research. Data mining, a 
branch of computer science  [], is the process of extracting 
patterns from large data sets. It commonly involves 4 classes of 
tasks: clustering, classification, regression and association rule 
learning. Decision Tree learning and Naive Bayesian algorithms 
stand as the first application of data-mining based methods for 
analyzing DNA repair genes [].

J48 algorithm, a decision tree induction algorithm, constructs a 
decision tree that each interior node corresponds to one of the 
input variables; each leaf represents a value of the target 
variable given the values of the input variables represented by 
the path from the root to the leaf. It is simple to understand and 
easy to interpret by biologists. The drawback of this method 
comes from its generalization ability in constructing simple tree.

Naive Bayesian classifiers can be efficiently trained in a 
supervised learning setting through the maximization of the 
classification probability. The classification probability can be 
expressed as the product of two parts. The first part is the 
continuous product of empirical conditional probability of 
different attributes in the current data instance given that the 
instance belongs to some class. The second part is the empirical 
prior probability of the class. Over fitting in small dataset also 
can be detected in the use of Naive Bayesian algorithms. Two 
types of ageing related datasets are used to testify the 
robustness of the above two algorithms. One type of datasets 
includes  only  gene  expression  attributes. The other type of 
dataset involves multiple types  of attributes rather than gene 
expression attributes. Results show that for the former type of 
dataset, two algorithms tend to exhibit weak performance in 
classification, achieving 51.1% and 52.1% AUC values 
respectively. More robust methods can be introduced to 
improve the classification accuracy for the data set. SVM 
constructs a hyperplane or a set of hyperplanes in a high or 
infinite dimensional space. The general principle for 
constructing a hyperplane is to minimize the generalization 
error of the classifier while maximizing the distance from it to 
the nearest data point on each side. SVMs find successful 
applications in many different areas. For example, in  
[], 
physico-chemically weighted kernel was constructed in 
conjunction with SVMs for the classification of protein datasets 
and glycan dataset [].

Recent development of kernel methods has emphasized the 
need to consider a combination of multiple kernels in 
realworld applications. An evolutionary approach was proposed 
for finding the optimal weights of a combined kernel used by 
SVMs  []. 
We apply SVM in the classification of the gene 
expression based ageing data. Using the linear combination of 
linear kernel and polynomial kernel of degree 3, better 
discrimination performance can be achieved. Moreover, the
significant genes identified cannot only target the well-known 
pathway involved in ageing, but also, we identify novel genes 
(genes that Naive Bayesian Algorithm and Decision Tree 
Algorithm failed to identify). This would give potential clues 
for biologists for the investigation of the specific function of the 
selected genes.

Methodology
We employ linearly combined kernels with SVM to accomplish 
the task of classification for DNA repair genes. We first describe 
the working mechanism of SVM, and the obtaining of 
hyperplane after training. In a further step, the combination of 
kernels is introduced in order to better fit the training data. 
Experiments on both binary classification and significant gene 
selection are performed on the proposed kernel with SVMs.

Support Vector Machine
In a usual context, we try to maximize classification 
performance for the training data when training a classifier. 
Fitting to the training data and generalization ability for 
unknown data acts as a trade-off pair since if the classifier is too 
fit for the training data, generalization ability would be 
degraded. SVM is trained so as  to maximize the generalization 
ability.

SVM is primarily a classifier method that performs classification 
tasks by constructing hyperplanes in a multidimensional space 
that separates cases of different class labels. The original objects 
are mapped using a set of mathematical functions, known as 
kernels. Kernels work by embedding data instances into a 
feature space. They have gained increasing popularity in 
computational biology  [] due to their outstanding 
performance in processing complicated data. The following is a 
flow chart of training SVM for hyperplane construction. Please 
see kernel function flowchart in .

Combination of Kernels
One of the most important steps in SVM classification systems 
is the construction of appropriate kernel functions. In the case 
of linearly separable data, linear kernel is one of the most 
straightforward choices. There is no need to map data instances 
into a high-dimensional space. Polynomial kernel is suitable for 
problems where all the training data are in normalized form 
[]. 
As RBF kernels use the Euclidean distance, they are not 
robust to outliers. Real-world applications have posed a need 
for emphasis on the combination of kernels. Here, we propose 
the combination of linear kernel and polynomial kernel of 
degree 3 in fulfilling the task of classification of the normalized 
ageing data. In this context, the hyperplane can be presented as 
shown in 

Classification Accuracy:
Classification accuracy is measured in terms of AUC value by 
10-fold cross validation, the same as previous studies  
[]. The 
AUC value is the Area under of ROC curve. It measures 
discrimination, the ability of correctly classifying the data 
instances. The larger of AUC value is, the better of the 
predictive ability of the classification model will be. ROC 
analysis has been introduced in other areas like machine 
learning and data mining. In 10-fold cross validation, the 
dataset is randomly partitioned into 10 folds of approximately 
equal size. The 9 folds are used as training data with the
remaining fold used for validation. The cross-validation process 
is then repeated 10 times, each of the 10 folds used exactly once 
as the validation data. The 10 results from the folds then can be 
averaged (or otherwise combined) to produce a single 
estimation. 

Selection of Important Genes:
Important genes are selected through the procedure of training 
for the whole dataset. In the process, a hyperplane is obtained 
in the meanwhile assigning different function values for each 
data instances. Important genes are chosen when the 
corresponding function value ranks in the top 5 range, i.e. [F, I] 
= sort (F_value); ImpG = Genelist (I (end -4, end)). Here F_value 
is the function value obtained through training. Genelist is the 
gene symbols for the whole data set. ImpG are the selected top 
5 genes. As the function value to some extent measures the 
distance between the hyperplane and the data instance, the 
larger the function value is the more discriminative of the data 
instance from the other ones will be. The selected genes are then 
compared with the current biological results to see if they can 
target some essential pathways associated with ageing process. 
Furthermore, for the case of novel genes detected, biologists 
might find a clue for future investigation of the novel critical 
pathways relating to ageing.

Results and Discussion
Materials:
A set of DNA repair gene symbols was obtained from 
[] and 
it consists of both positive and negative data. Ageing-related 
genes were included in the GenAge database, while 
nonageing-related genes were not included. Attributes of the 
aforementioned lists of genes were obtained through 
Genevestigator's Anatomy tool  [], which is a system for 
analyzing gene expression and gene regulation. Each attribute 
correlates to an anatomical category, the value of which is the 
average expression level of a given gene for all probes in the 
corresponding anatomical category. The data set with gene 
expression attributes is then constructed and is shown in 
 (see supplementary material).

Classification Results:
The effectiveness of our proposed method was evaluated in 
comparison with the J48 and Naive Bayesian Algorithm in 
terms of classification accuracy using the same dataset. The 10-
fold cross-validation was utilized for training and testing of the 
data set.   presents the performance of the SVM 
classifier for the combined kernel for 10 times of 10-fold crossvalidation. 
Here X.label stands for the time to perform 10-fold 
cross-validation and Y.label represents the averaged AUC 
value. It can be seen clearly that for the ten time 10-fold 
crossvalidation, the AUC values can reach up to 67%. Even the 
lowest AUC value is around 64%, which is much higher than 
51.1% and 52.1%. This is a significant improvement when 
compared to the previous two data-mining approaches: J48 and 
Naive Bayesian Algorithm. For the two methods, with the same 
standard of 10-fold cross-validation, they can only attain 51.1% 
and 52.1% respectively.

In order to get a clear idea on the superiority of our proposed 
combined kernel for classification in the ageing data. 
 
(see supplementary material)  describes in detail the 
performance of 10 times, 10-fold cross-validation of the model. 
Every row represents the performance of a 10-fold crossvalidation.  
For instance, the first row of    (see 
supplementary material) shows the performance of first run of 
10-fold cross-validation. The data set is partitioned into 10-
folds. 9 out of 10-folds are selected for training the SVM model
with the remaining 1 fold for testing. 0.957 is the AUC value for 
testing the first fold in the first run. Similarly, the procedure 
will repeat 9 times until all the 10 folds are used for testing. 
Hence, the first row illustrates that in the first run, the AUC 
values for the 10-folds are 0.957, 0.918, 0.837 etc. We use the 
Averaged AUC value in this run to ensure an unbiased measure 
for the performance in this run. The reason why different AUC 
values will be obtained for different runs of 10-fold 
crossvalidation is that for different runs, different partitions will be 
generated. In this case, the models trained will be different as 
the data instances used for model construction will be different. 
But in general, the difference will be slight as can be seen from 
the Table 3  (see )  that in each row the 
AUC values are around 0.65. 

The construction of hyperplane is determined through training 
process. In the supplementary file“Svmstruct”  
[], we report 
the SVMstruct used for hyperplane construction, which was 
included in a separate file. The support vectors, the 
corresponding   and the bias term   are included. This time there 
are in total 133 data instances employed for training, and the 
remaining 15 data instances are used for testing. In the training 
process, 95 data instances are selected as support vectors. 
Detailed information can be accessed in supplementary files. 
The decision function is then expressed as shown in 
.

With the decision function, in the test of 15 data instances, we 
can get the function value and further determine the classes 
they belong to according to the  sign of the function value. We 
present the results in a table which is attached in additional file 
2 [].

Selection of Important Genes:
Using the whole data set in training, we can obtain a 
hyperplane and each instance is then assigned a score 
measuring the distance of the instance to the hyperplane. Five 
Important genes are selected according to their scores ranking 
and they are: PCNA, PARP1, APEX1, MLH1 and XRCC6. 
Compared to the genes selected by J48 and Naive Bayesian 
Algorithm, in the significant pathway identified, we have 
targeted APEX1 and XRCC6 as well. Moreover, PCNA is not 
included by J48 and Naive Bayes Algorithm but is detected by 
our method. This further validates the robustness of our 
proposed kernel. The novel genes not associated in the pathway 
are PARP1 and MLH1.

For PARP1, it is an essential component in the cellular 
responses to various kinds of insults to genomic DNA, 
including oxidative DNA damage, telomere erosion, or 
improper segregation of chromosomes. The 
PARP1proteinisakey component in repair of single-strand 
breaks [] and it is seen as a BER modulator. PARP1 and WRN 
interact physically and co-operate functionally in preventing 
carcinogenesis in-vivo [] when the WRN protein is associated 
with Werner's syndrome that is the one of most representative 
characteristics of accelerated ageing  []. PARP1 has also been 
shown to link with DNA double-strand break pathway, 
exhibiting various symptoms of accelerated ageing [].  

As for MLH1, in the “Entrez Gene summary for MLH1”, it was 
identified as a locus frequently mutated in hereditary non
polyposis colon cancer (HNPCC). It is a human homolog of the 
E. coli DNA mismatch repair gene mutL, consistent with the 
characteristic alterations in micro satellite sequences 
(RER+phenotype) found in HNPCC. Alternative splicing results 
in multiple transcript variants encode distinct isoforms. 
Additional transcript variants have been described, but their 
natures have not been fully  determined. This fact would 
provide some potential clues for the biologists in further 
investigation of the specific role MLH1 played in ageing 
process. 

Conclusion:
We proposed a linearly combined kernel in SVM classification 
of DNA repair genes data set. Experiments are given to 
demonstrate the power of the proposed kernel when compared 
with the two previously proposed data-mining based 
approaches: J48 and Naive Bayesian Algorithm. Not only the 
AUC value for the classification has been improved to 10-15%, 
but still, the robust kernel can identify the same genes 
associated with the important pathways targeted by J48 and 
Naive Bayesian Algorithm. In a further perspective, our method 
detects other genes like PCNA that plays critical role in the 
same pathway while the two methods failed to identify. The 
promising perspective lies in that,  we  have  also  detected  novel 
genes associated with ageing while the full natures of which are 
expecting to be explored. This would give a clue for the 
biologists in further investigation of the specific roles they 
played in ageing. 

Author's contributions:
JH came up with the idea. JH and WKC designed the research. 
JH performed the research and analyzed the results. WKC 
supported the provided guidance on how to conduct the 
research. JH and WKC wrote the paper. Both authors read and 
approved the final manuscript.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Preliminary version of the paper has been presented and 
published in 7th International Symposium on Bioinformatics 
Research and Applications. Research supported in part by GRF 
Grant, HKU Strategy Research Theme fund on Computational 
Sciences, National Natural Science Foundation of China Grant 
No. 10971075 and Guangdong Provincial Natural Science Grant 
No. 9151063101000021.

Citation:Hao Jiang &amp; Wai-Ki Ching, Bioinformation 7(5): 257-263 (2011)

Performance of Combined Kernel with SVM

