Background
G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) possess seven
transmembrane hydrophobic helices, with three extracellular
loops and three intracellular loops alternating each other 
[].
GPCRs retain a wide variety of functional domains 
[] within
and across species to activate G-proteins, bind with diverse
ligands, participate in signaling pathways and oligomerization,
and are also implicated in diseases [,
]. The relevance to
various diseases has been the reason that GPCRs are primary
targets (about 75% of drug targets) in the pharmaceutical
industry [,
]. 
The conserved amino acid (AA) patterns i.e.,
motifs present in the helices and in the loop regions could be
quite critical in preserving common function despite
evolutionary pressures. It is equally interesting to observe the
differences to explain the impact of amino acid substitutions
(AAS) in functional diversity and genetic abnormalities due to
single-residue mutations. For example, a single residue
mutation (P23H) in rhodopsin gives rise to a severe genetic
abnormality, Retinitis pigmentosa, affecting protein stability
ultimately leading to blindness []. In another instance, of
aspartate receptor with only two transmembrane helices, a
single amino acid mutation (hydrophobic to another
hydrophobic residue) was sufficient to impair its methylation
function that is mediated by dimerization []. In the current
study, starting from a cross-genome survey of H. sapiens and D.
melanogaster GPCRs, leading to 32 clusters of eight major types
as explained in our previous publication [], we report the
analysis of AAS and conserved motifs in all 32 clusters of
GPCRs. This study was further extended to a cross-genome
analysis of H. sapiens and C. elegans GPCRs.

Methodology
 
summarizes stepwise procedure for the identification
of conserved AA (motifs) and residues exchanged at each
position on MSA. This is split into four major steps:

Step 1: GPCR cluster Dataset
A dataset of 32 clusters was created from our previous work 
[]
for selected H. sapiens and D. melanogaster (fruit fly) candidate
GPCRs. The cluster association was established
phylogenetically for eight major types like peptide receptors
(PR), chemokine receptors (CMK), nucleotide and lipid
receptors (N&amp;L), biogenic amine receptors (BGAR), secretin
receptors (SEC), cell adhesion receptors (CAR), glutamate
receptors (GLU) and frizzled /smoothened (FRZ). The crossgenome
GPCR cluster dataset was used in the current study for
identifying key motifs and AA exchange patterns. (Please refer
to  for flow-chart).

Step 2: Alignment Procedure
Although the phylogenetically established GPCR cluster
association was highly reliable in guiding the set of homologous
sequences from the human and fruit fly genome, alignment
tools play a crucial role in understanding sequence features,
especially at remote homology. In the current study,
CLUSTALW [] 
was used for aligning sequences of human
and fruit fly GPCR cluster dataset whereas MAFFT 
[] was
used to align human and C. elegans GPCRs for the 32 clusters.
Alignments were manually examined and curated, where
required, to retain equivalences of helices.

Step 3: Detection of Motifs and replacing amino acids
Cross-genome alignments for 32 clusters were taken as input to
our in-house program to identify residue conservation and
substitutions. AA conservation at an alignment position is
simply an average of all possible pairwise sequences and the
score is consulted from a normalized AA exchange matrix. A
motif is defined by at least three consecutive conserved AAs
with high amino acid conservation (more than 60%
conservation score). The conservation of each residue in the set
of aligned sequences was noted as ‘consensus’ and documented
if the percentage conservation at a position is from 60 to 100%.

Step 4: Analysis of Identified Motifs
Once motifs were identified, the amino acids observed in the
identified pattern were recorded and classified based on their
property. The properties of substituting AA residues were
denoted by a symbolic representation. The symbols 
@,*, +, ­, $
were used to represent the hydrophobic, aromatic, polar
positive, polar negative and polar uncharged property of AA
residues respectively. This symbolic representation at each
position in the MSA helps to understand the extent of permitted
amino acid exchanges and the proportion of AA conservation
and replacement in the alignment. Separately, each sequence of
the cross-genome alignment was annotated for membrane
topology using HMMTOP 2.1 []. Incorporating the
knowledge of predicted membrane topology and the identified
motifs with AA substitutions in MSA enables us to understand
the significant residue conservation and substitutions in TM
helices and loop regions at cross-genome level.

Results &amp; Discussion
32 multiple sequence alignments from the GPCR cluster dataset
were analyzed for the presence of motifs for human-Drosophila
GPCRs and human-C. elegans GPCRs as described in Methods.
(
http://caps.ncbs.res.in/download/crossgenomeGPCRs/align.
zip provides full alignments for all 32 clusters). A total of 33
motifs were identified and 76% of them are within TM helices,
predominantly in TM2 and TM7 (Table 1, see ) 
in the human and Drosophila GPCR cluster dataset.
Interestingly, peptide receptors retain 21 motifs and covers
nearly 64% of the identified motifs, whereas other receptor
types like chemokine receptors, nucleotide and lipid receptors
and biogenic amine receptors contain 52%, 18% and 36% of
motifs in the cross-genome cluster dataset. This could be due to
the direct involvement of TM helices in ligand binding in the
case of peptide receptors. In the current study, we have not
included the N' and C' termini of the sequence and the study is
focused only to selected set of sequences for the eight particular
receptor types. The overall residue conservation is observed in
the helices and the loop regions of human only, human-
Drosophila and human-C. elegans GPCR clusters.(refer panels a -
i in ).We found significant conservation in TM3 for the
human-only and human-Drosophila GPCR clusters (refer panels
a, d in ) 
and the ranking of conservation in the helices
and loop regions are given in  Table S1 for
human-only, human-Drosophila, human-C. elegans GPCR
clusters. Notably, due to the occurrence of classical motif
(E/DRY), significant motif conservation occurs in the
intracellular loop (ICL2) of human GPCR clusters (refer panel b
in ) and ECL2 retains high conservation in all the three
cluster associations suggesting the crucial involvement and
conservation of ligand binding residues in ECL2 loop (refer
panels c, f and i in ). Aside from this, it is hard to obtain
good-quality alignments of GPCRs from all three genomes
simultaneously or to find motifs owing to poor sequence
identity and high evolutionary divergence.

Motifs observed in human-D. melanogaster cross-genome
clusters
Motifs observed in transmembrane helices
We observed around 11 motifs occurring in single receptor
type. Notably, VGL motif in transmembrane helix 1 (TM1), LGF
motif in TM5 and NSC motif in TM7 are observed exclusively in
peptide receptors (). Chemokine receptors exclusively
possess YLLNLA motif in TM2 and HCC motif in TM7. On the
other hand, the observed GNL motif in TM1, VMP motif in
TM2, TASI motif in TM3, PFF motif in TM6, WLGY motif in
TM7 are identified solely in biogenic amine type receptors.
Further, the conservation of these motifs can be correlated to
the cluster- or receptor-type specific properties at the sequence
level.

We also observed around nine motifs occurring in two different
types of receptors from our cluster dataset. SLA motif in TM2 is
observed both in peptide and biogenic amine receptors.
Interestingly, peptide and chemokine type receptors retain
prominent conservation of motifs, with LFL, TLP and LPF
motifs in TM2, AIA motif in TM3, LPL motif in TM5 and LYA
in TM7 which explains the sequence conservation across two
different receptor types and provide clues to common sequence
properties () among them. In a similar manner, IYL
motif in TM2 and CIS motif in TM3 are observed not only in
chemokine type receptors, but also in nucleotide and lipid type
receptors. This emphasizes the utility of cross-genome
clustering techniques, knowledge on receptor types for
inferring the conservation of motifs across different receptor
types at the cross-genome level. The significant occurrence of
motifs in multi receptor type is also tabulated (). The
NLA motif in TM2 occurs in three different receptor types like
peptide, chemokine and nucleotide and lipid type receptors
(). This motif has been observed for the maximum
occurrence in our cluster dataset. The other motif DLL is also
observed in TM2 helix in few clusters of peptide, chemokine,
nucleotide, lipid and biogenic amine receptors. The same motif
is also observed as ADL in TM2 in few clusters of all these four
types of receptors () and as ADLL motif in TM2 is
observed in all three types of receptors, except peptide type
receptors. The CWLP motif in TM6 is identified in peptide,
chemokine, biogenic amine type receptors but not in nucleotide
and lipid type receptors. In a broader sense, this significant
conservation of motifs in TM2 explains the conservation of
motifs not only with reference to the amino acid residues, but
also with reference to their topology.

Motifs observed in loop regions
While observing motifs in the loop regions, eight different
motifs were noted. The well-known E/DRY motif in ICL2 has
the conservation as DRYLA in peptide (Cluster 3) and
chemokine type receptors (Cluster 12) [] and RYL in
nucleotide and lipid type receptors (Cluster 15). ASG motif in
ICL1 is conserved exclusively in glutamate receptors, whereas
MRTVTN in ICL1 and LDR motif in ICL2 were conserved
exclusively in peptide type receptors. Notably, WPFG and LCK
motifs were found exclusively in ECL2 of peptide type
receptors (Clusters 2 and 3 in , 
 Table S2).
Interestingly, KLRN motif is observed in biogenic amine
receptors (Cluster 21) and in secretin receptors (Cluster 26) in
ICL1 (please see , 
 Table S2). Notably,
Cluster 26 has a set of homologous sequences from Drosophila
only GPCR clusters. However, Cluster 21 has GPCR sequences
from both human and Drosophila genomes and we could
identify common motifs observed across two taxa. This cluster
can be a best illustration to emphasize the need of cross-genome
phylogenetic analysis at sequence level even at distant
relationships and during strong evolutionary drifts.

As prior studies [] explain the important role of conserved AA
in the ECL2 for the participation of ligand binding, this study
reports around eight such motifs distributed in PR, N&amp;L,
BGAR, GLU, FRZ/SMT receptors. However, several motifs
were identified in only one of the 32 cluster of receptors
( Table S3). For example, CLP motif from PR
(Cluster 7) has AAS in the pattern as [C/P][L/F][P/C/S]. In the
current study, there are 133 cluster-specific motifs observed in
transmembrane helices and 59 cluster-specific motifs observed
in the loop regions ( Table S3). The average
sequence length of each of the TM - helices and loops were
calculated from set of sequences based on the HMMTOP
boundary predictions ( Table S4) and the
average percentage of residue conservation in each TM helix
and loop region was examined for the eight types of receptors
( Table S5). Interestingly, overall, the maximum
amino acid conservation occurs as 42% and 46% in TM2 and
TM3, respectively. Significant conservation of 55%, 80%, 61%
occurs in TM1, TM2, TM3 within CMK receptors. Although the
occurrence of motifs (consecutively preserved as three residues)
is high in PR, it retains only 30-50% of conservation at TM2,
TM6 and TM7. Generally, AA conservation is high at TM2 for
BGAR, SEC, GLU, and FRZ type receptors. In most of the
clusters, as expected, percentage residue conservation in ICL2 is
higher than the other loop regions ( Table S1).

Motifs observed in human-C. elegans GPCR cross-genome clusters
Since the selected human-C. elegans GPCRs possess remote
homology, the motifs are limited and are documented at the
30% – 100% conservation (refer Supplementary Tables S6 and
S7). 295 motifs could be observed in the human and C. elegans
GPCR clusters. This study will be further analyzed for
comparative genome sequence analysis with other genome
clusters in future.

Biological relevance of few previously observed GPCR motifs:
The detailed report on conserved motifs and substitutions in
cross-genome GPCR cluster dataset for 32 clusters is given in
 Table S2. However, to impart the feel for
possible biological relevance, we will discuss few well-known
motifs and substitutions.

Conserved E/DRY and NPXXY motifs in GPCR dataset
As cited earlier [], 
the highly conserved characteristic E/DRY
motif located at the boundary between transmembrane domain
(TM3) and intracellular loop (ICL2) of Family A GPCRs play a
pivotal role in regulating GPCR conformational states. The
importance of DRY motif in connection with active MG4R in
humans is well known []. Notably, in the cross-genome GPCR
alignments, the preservation of characteristic DRY motif was
observed in our current study (refer panel a in 
). Tyr
residue in this motif is highly conserved or retained an aromatic
residue in most of the clusters in human GPCRs (example in
chemokine receptors in Cluster 12, 13). However, in peptide
receptors of Drosophila, there is a weak conservation of Tyrosine
(refer panel a in ). Arg is conserved comparatively well
and the substitution is of polar uncharged ($) or positively
charged residue (+) of the same kind (for e.g. in biogenic amine
receptors in Cluster 24) ( Table S2).

Conserved KLR/RLAR motif in Human Secretin receptor Dataset
Another highly conserved motif is seen within the third
endoloop of the Family B Human Secretin receptor is KLR /
RLAR motif []. Block deletion of KLRT and mutation of
Lys323 (K323I) is known to reduce cAMP accumulation, and
these mutations do not affect ligand interaction. Thus, KLRT
region at the N-end of the third endoloop, particularly Lys323,
is important for G protein coupling []. Also, it is noticed that
for the RLAR motif, substitutions from Arg (R330) to Ala
(342A), Glu (342E), or Ile (342I) as well as block deletion of the
RLAR motif were all found to be defective in both secretinbinding
and cAMP production (Chan et al., 2001) 
[]. KLK/R
and RLAR/K pattern is seen to be conserved in the two
proteins GLR and GLP1 (refer panel b in Figure 3), which
belong to the secretin family noted in Cluster 25 of our GPCR
cluster dataset.

Conserved PMNYM / PMSYM motif in Human Adenosine
receptor Dataset
The PMNYM / PMSYM pattern is conserved in the TM5 of
GPCRs []. TM5 has been suggested to self associate and may
be involved in the dimerization of the receptor A2aR (Human
adenosine receptor). In adenosine A2b receptor, asparagine (N)
residue is replaced by serine (S) generating the motif PMSYM,
thus differentiating the two isoforms of receptors functionally
(refer panel C in ). It is suggested that the motif
PMNYM of A2aR and PMSYM of A2bR may be involved in TM
assembly of the two isoforms of the receptors, respectively.
Such information may provide an insight into the molecular
mechanism of receptor-ligand interaction leading to design of
tailored compounds. A careful observation of the alignment
(please refer to Step 2 in Methods and ) reveals this
important PMNYM/PMSYM motif in GPCR Cluster 23 albeit
not identified at a score threshold of 60% (refer panel C in
).

Conclusion
Our approach for identifying conserved motifs and substituting
AA residues are effective in recognizing functionally important
residues in our GPCR cluster dataset. Along with the wellknown
characteristic motifs (refer panel a, b, c in 
),
other preserved motif patterns in the MSA were also identified
for their occurrence at 60-100% conservation. We have reported
the residue conservation/identity, permitted AAS (based on
their respective physiochemical property) at each position and
cluster-specific motifs. This current approach can be applied to
other membrane-bound receptors (such as olfactory receptors)
and protein families to detect the conserved motifs. It will be
interesting to map the identified motifs on predicted topology
in MSA which may be helpful to perform evolutionary studies
at the cross-genome level. Due to remote homology, there are
chances of missing the key motifs in the generated MSA,
especially in cross-genome GPCR alignments. Our approach
(based on the recognition of motifs, derived from average AAS
scores) is helpful in recognizing both classical and newer
motifs, which have not been hitherto attributed any functional
significance. Our approach of analyzing sequence properties in
the set of aligned sequences can be applicable to compare with a
reference sequence (of known 3D structure) to understand
sequence similarity in the predicted topology and preserved
motifs with AAS at each position. This method can be used as a
guiding principle for 3-D modeling of GPCR sequences.
Homology modeling, together with such motif analysis could
uncover additional spatial clusters or ‘spatial motifs’, which
may be critical for function.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Nagarathnam et al, Bioinformation 7(1): 15-20 (2011)

Flowchart depicting the methodology of the study

Percentage residue conservation in TM helices and Loops in GPCR Clusters. Percentage residue conservation in the TM
regions, intracellular loop, extra cellular loop of human GPCR clusters (shown in panels a, b, c), human-Drosophila GPCR clusters
(shown in panels d, e, f), and human-C. elegans GPCR clusters (shown in panels g, h, i ).

Alignments showing conserved E/DRY, KLR/RLAR
and PMNYM/PMSYM motifs in GPCR clusters (noted in the
panel a, b, c respectively).

