Background
Protein (PZ) is a Vitamin K-dependent protein with 360
residues and a molecular weight of 62 KD, being homolog to
the coagulation factors FVII, FIX, FX, and the PC. The PZ has
significant differences to other serine proteases by lack of
histidine and serine residues in the catalytic triad, causing loss
of proteolytic function [,
]. PZ serves as a cofactor, mediating
inhibition of the FX by the ZPI in the presence of Ca2+ ions and
phospholipids []. In relation to other coagulation proteins, the
PZ has 4 domains, including the GLA domain (residue 1- 46),
the EGF1 (47- 83), the EGF2 (85-126), and the SP domain (135-
360) with 11 disulfide bonds within and between the domains
[,
]. 
The Vitamin K-Dependent (VKD) proteins contain 10-12
γ- carboxy glutamic acid (Gla) residues in the GLA domain,
consisting of three turns of alpha-helix that is conserved in
other VKD dependent proteins. Additional feature of PZ is the
existence of 13 Gla residues in the GLA domain, which is
necessary to bind to Ca2+ and membrane. A significant section
in the N-terminus of the GLA domain is the ω-loop including 1-
11 residues responsible for the high-affinity binding to
phospholipid membrane, and for membrane penetrating that is
mediated by the so-called “keel” region of hydrophobic
residues and dominant plane of Ca2+ ions 
[–]. The ω-loop
contains two groups of hydrophobic and Gla residues with
negative 2 charge. Previous data regarding PZ showed that
binding of Ca2+ in the BHA make no structural effect, but
neutralize it due to lack of Ca2+ network in this domain in
opposite another VKD proteins []. To date, there is no data
about importance and effect of Ca2+ in the complex of PZZPI
and cofactor role of PZ. ZPI is a serpin with 72 KD molecular
weight and 423 amino acid residues. Inhibition of FX by ZPI is
PZ-dependent and increases the rate of inhibition to 1000 folds
in contrast to free ZPI. It is known that the ZPI inhibit FXIa and
FIXa but didn’t require PZ. Also it has been suggested that ZPI
secretion, localization, clearance, even stabilization has been
affected by PZ [,
,
]. The ZPI inhibits factor X, while the FX
inhibition takes place by anti-thrombin and the tissue factor
pathway inhibitor (TFPI) [,
]. PZ binding to ZPI and factor
X is accompanied by the SP domain and the GLA domaincalcium
ions- on the same phospholipid surfaces, respectively.

The Binding of the PZ and the FX decreases the rate of the FXa
inhibition by anti-thrombin and enhances the inhibition by ZPI.
In the other hand, the binding of the PZ to the ZPI increases
inhibition of the FX and then reduces formation of the
prothrombinase complex by delay the initiation and diminish
generation of thrombin. These support the anticoagulant and
critical role of PZ. So this is implied that PZ accelerate inhibition
FX by 3 mechanisms, 1) bind and bring ZPI to the membrane for
binding to FX, 2) prevention of FX inhibition by another
inhibitor like antithrombine and 3) prevention ZPI to inhibit
another coagulation factor. So due to this important effect and
role of PZ we prepared and investigated complete complex of
PZZPI. The previous study on x-ray crystal structure of PZZPI
complex is incomplete due to missing GLA domain [,
]. In
present work we constructed full model of PZZPI complex and
employed molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to investigate
structural changes of GLA domain of PZ in the presence and
absence of Ca2+ and relationship between GLA domain and
binding site in ZPI. The results of over 100 ns of MD
simulations suggest a new cofactor role for PZ. In addition
homology modeling of PZ had been reported in free PZ not in
the complex form. While it appears that all PZ are in bound
form to ZPI in plasma []. Finally this study exhibit more
details about structural feature and mechanisms to know more
about important cofactor role of PZ.

Methodology
We add missing GLA domain of crystal structure PZZPI
(3H5C.pdb with resolution 3.26Å) [], by superimposing
residues 49- 86 of full homology model PZ to same segment of
crystal structure using visual molecular dynamic (VMD)
() [,
]. Then we prepared two system of complex
with and without Ca2+ for MD simulation. Protein was solvated
in a water box with 124, 133, 130Å dimensions. 12 Na+ and 14
Cl- ions neutralized system with Ca2+ ions but complex of
PZZPI without Ca2+ neutralized by 23Na+ and 3Cl- due to lack
of Ca2+ using VMD. We utilized cutoff of 12 Å for short-range
non-bonded interactions. The system with Ca2+ ions contains 11
Ca2+ ions, and 57204 water molecules (TIP3W), 183453 atoms.
We initially performed energy minimization for two systems
(with and without Ca2+) in 10000 step in 20ps.All simulation
was performed at NPT at 310k and a pressure of 1 atm and set
2fs for time step. The MD simulation was carried out for 100ns
using NAMD Version 2.7 and Charmm 27 force field [,
].

Discussion
Prominent differences between Ca2+-bound form and free form
structure were established by following methods: 3.1 RMSD
Root mean square deviations (RMSD) of protein Z and Zdependent
protease inhibitor (PZZPI) complex in the presence
and the absence of Ca2+ shows stability of two complexes. The
RMSD ranges to 1 and 0.8 Å for pzzpica and pzzpi, respectively
(). The RMSD of the GLA domain exposes in contrast
to other domains of protein Z more differences in the presence
of Ca2+ (). The Ca2+ bound GLA domain attains 0.12 Å,
but it makes 0.91 Å in Ca2+ free conformation. We postulate
therefore that Ca2+ affects on the decreasing square deviation
(SD) of the GLA domain and increases its stability. 3.2 RMSF:
Root mean square fluctuation (RMSF) plot of the GLA domain
of two proteins exhibits different fluctuation curves, excluding
the Disulfide Bridge containing regions 18 to 23, which causes
rigidity in this region. We suggest further that the presence of
Ca2+ ions increase the fluctuation curve of the PZZPI. Major
fluctuation was observed for residues around the ω-loop. The
bound form represents two distinct hot points at around 5, 6, 9,
and 10 (). 3.3 
Orientation of ω-loop residue we observed
changes in orientation of two hydrophobic and negative charge
groups of ω-loop in the presence and in the absence of Ca2+
(). Gla residues placed toward Ca2+ line within ω-loop
and hydrophobic residues like leu5,6 placed to solvent and
more exposed area but Gla residues in the absence of Ca2+
become more exposed and impair cohesion of the hydrophobic
residues. Data of solvent accessible surface area demonstrated
these result which Gla 7and 8 which are key residues in binding
to Ca2+ have SASA in the absence more than presence of Ca2+.
The opposite way, leu5 and 6 have SASA in the presence of
Ca2+more than in its absence. The number of SASA differences
for these residues is significant and this data is in agreement
with Maria et al experimental results about factor X 
()
(see supplementary material) []. This imply that Ca2+ ions
give a favorable conformation to ω-loop by making a powerful
hydrophobic region anterior and trapping of GLA residues
inside of ω-loop, which is necessary for membrane penetration.

3.4 Network of Ala1 The network of Ala1 plays critical role in the
conformation of interior loop of the GLA domain due to
involving in different H-bond to hydrophobic and Gla residues
along with Ca2+ ions [,
]. We observed that in the presence
of Ca2+ ions Ala1 keeps binding to Gla 21, 27, an Ile22, but it
losses H-bond to the Gla 27 during simulation that has effect on
the conformation of the ω-loop (data has not been shown).
Further, Ala1 keeps the binding to Ca2+ () and
participates in dominant plane in the GLA domain and binding
to residue of Ile 21of first disulfide loop and Gla residues. This
would underline the critical role of Ala1 in the w-loop, and
explains how the Ca ions impress the network of H-bond. 3.5
Distance between center mass of GLA domain to ZPI binding residues
Membrane binding of PZ causes the binding of ZPI to the
membrane. The distance between the centre mass of the GLA
domain and interaction region of ZPI with PZ show remarkable
differences. This implies that Ca2+ may change the distance by
effecting the conformation of the GLA domain () 
[].
The distance between the dominant planes of calcium ions in
the GLA domain has been indicated in the active site of factors
FX and FVII about 61 and 83Å [–
]. In the present study, we
calculated the distance between the calcium ion plane and the
Ser 196 residue in the pseudo active site of the PZ 
[], which
was estimated around 83Å, as it was measured for FX 
(). 
Apparently, the PZ situates the ZPI in a good height
to bind to the FX on the surface of membrane.

Conclusion
Previous studies have been investigated the role of the Ca2+ in
the coagulation factors FIX, FX, protein S, and FVII 
[–
–
–
]. 
Additionally, we prepared complete PZZPI complex in the
presence and in the absence of Ca2+ to investigate different
structural features and elaborate the effect of Ca2+ ions on
structural-functional properties of the mentioned complex. Our
data revealed prominent difference between Ca2+ bound and
Ca2+ free form structure. Binding of Ca2+ to the coagulation
protein is a fundamental process for the membrane attaching of
various blood coagulation factors. The GLA domain is a
sufficient domain with Gla residues responsible for interacting
to Ca2+ ions. It has been demonstrated that Ca2+ions play two
distinct roles in the biology of coagulation factors. They play a
critical role in folding of the GLA domain and in protein
anchoring due to direct contacting to lipids []. Here, we
constructed the full complex of protein Z and protein Zdependent
protease inhibitor with Gla domain, and carried out
a MD simulation for the mentioned complex in the presence
and in the absence of Ca2+. Furthermore, we investigated the
effect of Ca2+ions on the PZZPI complex. The presence of Ca2+ is
apparently essential to the optimal orientation of PZ and ZPI to
place in an appropriate height to membrane. The presented
model can be utilized for simulating the entire complex at the
membrane surface and to study of membrane binding and the
inhibitory effect on FX.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank Dr.zenmei and Prof.Tajkhorshid for their advices and
running our systems at illinois university. We would like to
give special thanks to Prof.Pedersen at university of North
Carolina for his advice. Also we appreciate prof. rezaie at Saint
Louis University for his comments.

Citation:Karimi et al, Bioinformation 8(9): 407-411 (2012)

(A) the root mean square deviation (RMSDs) of the
backbone atoms of protein Z and ZPI complex in the presence
and absence of Ca2+ ions; (B) RMSD of GLA domain during
100 ns simulation in the presence and absence of Ca2+ ions; (C)
Root mean square fluctuation (RMSF) of GLA domain in the
presence and absence of Ca2+ ions. Gray curve exhibits the
PZZPI without Ca2+ and Black curve is PZZPI with Ca2+ ion.

(A) Distance between ala1 (o atom) and cal364 during
simulation; (B) Illustration of 3-d structure of gla domain (blue
cartoon) shows orientation of gla 7, 8 (red residues) and leu 5, 6
(green residues) in the absence (right picture) and presence of
Ca2+ ions (cyan sphere, left picture).

(A) Graph of Distance between center mass of Gla
domain and ZPI binding residues. Gray curve is PZZPI without
Ca2+ and Black curve is PZZPI with Ca2+ ion; (B) Plot of
distance between Ser 196 to dominant plane of Ca2+ ions
during simulation of 100ns which it has been calculated with
VMD DisRg Plug-in; (C) The illustration shows distance
between ser196 and center of mass of Ca2+ ions in the PZZPI
complex. Protein Z and ZPI have been shown with blue and red
color respectively and orange spheres show Ca2+ ions.

