Background
Sphingolipids, mainly sphingomyelin (SM) and
glycosphingolipids, are essential constituents of mammalian
cells, where they can be found predominantly in the outer
leaflet of the plasma membrane []. Products of SM metabolism,
such as ceramide, sphingosine, sphingosine 1-phosphate, and
SM itself, have been recognized as potentially important
signaling molecules, which participate in transduction
pathways involved in regulation of several processes in
mammalian cells. Sphingomyelinases (SMases; EC3.1.4.12) are
actually sphingomyelin phosphodiesterases (SMPDs) that
catalyze hydrolysis of membrane SM to form ceramide 
[].
Ceramide has been suggested to play important roles in cellcycle
arrest, apoptosis, inflammation, and eukaryotic stress
responses []. Production of ceramide by hydrolysis of
sphingomyelin activates proline-directed protein kinases, which
might be responsible for activation of phospholipase A2 (PLA2)
[,
]. 
Production of arachidonic acid by PLA leads to the
generation of proinflammatory metabolites []. Currently, five
types of SMases have been identified and classified according to
optimum pH and metal ion dependence ­ the ubiquitous
lysosomal acid SMase, the zinc-dependent secreted acid SMase,
a neutral Mg2+­dependent SMase, a neutral Mg2+­independent
SMase and alkaline SMase [–]. Of these, Mg2+­dependent
neutral SMase (N-SMase) has emerged as the major candidate
for stress-induced ceramide responses. Neutral Mg2+­dependent
sphingomyelinases are integral membrane proteins in
mammals, and soluble proteins in bacteria. The mammalian
sphingomyelinases are thought to play a key role in
sphingolipid metabolism and there is increasing evidence
implicating SM metabolism in cell signaling, cell proliferation
and apoptosis [–]. Sequence analysis of these proteins and
other eukaryotic N-SMases revealed that they contain either Nor
C-terminal extensions encoding predicted membranespanning
regions, which will localize the proteins to
membranes and promote interfacial catalysis. Subsequent
research found that N-SMase activity was induced by a variety
of stimuli including cytokines, cellular stresses such as UV light
and chemotherapeutic drugs and pathological stimuli like
amyloid-β peptides and lipopolysacchride 
[–]. Because of
its role in the regulation of important cellular processes, and the
continuous availability of substrate SM, the activity of N-SMase
must be strictly controlled in cells []. Studies addressing the
activation of N-SMase by external receptors have strongly
focused on the 55 kDa receptor for tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-α) [,
]. 
A region of this TNF-α receptor, the N-SMase
activating domain (NSD) adjacent to the death domain, is
specifically required for activation of N-SMase through binding
of a novel adaptor protein - the factor associated with neutral
sphingomyelinase activation (FAN) []. The importance of
FAN was subsequently confirmed in studies showing that
overexpression enhances TNF-stimulated N-SMase activity 
[,
]; 
therefore, it is likely to play a prominent role in the
regulation of major inflammatory cellular responses. In view of
the biological importance of N-SMase, we focused our attention
to predict the three-dimensional structure of this enzyme and
its interacting proteins, specifically TNF-R55 and FAN, using
fold recognition and threading methods, with the ultimate aim
to gain new insight into their structure and function. This will
enable us to understand the catalytic behavior of this enzyme as
well as the molecular basis of its activation and regulation.

Methodology
The detail methodologies are provided in supplementary data
(available with authors).

Discussion
Model of human N-SMase
In the absence of experimentally determined protein structures,
homology-based models may serve as starting points for
investigation of sequence-structure-function relationships
between diverged enzymes. Although homology-modeled
structures may often not be accurate enough to allow
characterization of protein-protein or protein-inhibitor
interactions at the atomic level, they can suggest which
sequence regions or individual amino acids are essential
components of the binding surfaces
[
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/5/2]. However,
homology modeling requires a homologous template structure
to be identified and the sequence of the protein of interest (the
target) to be correctly aligned to the template. The primary
protein sequence of human N-SMase was retrieved from the
UniProt database (accession number: O60906; Sphingomyelin
phosphodiesterase 2, Gene name SMPD2), and the sequence
was submitted to NCBI BLAST against the Protein data bank
(PDB), in order to identify a template for structure prediction.
This analysis revealed the presence of an ENDO/EXO
phosphate domain and two transmembrane regions at the Cterminus
of N-SMase, which was further confirmed by the
SMART server [
http://smart.emblheidelberg.de/help/smart_glossary.shtml]. However, it did not
identify any structural templates with sufficient sequence
homology and coverage. Thus, in order to identify a template
structure for modeling of N-SMase, we used a threading
approach, which allows assessing the compatibility of the target
sequence with available protein folds based not only on
sequence similarity but also on structural considerations (e.g.
secondary structure elements). In comparative modeling
techniques, the best template is usually chosen based on the
percentage of sequence identity between the target and the
template proteins. If the overall similarity with the template is
low, then the selection can be quite a difficult task as different
algorithms may give different hits which may also include false
positive results. In this situation, considering results from
different servers may provide a more reliable indication.
Therefore, the N-SMase sequence was submitted to the
GeneSilico metaserver and, additionally, to FUGUE. Out of nine
individual servers covered by GeneSilico, eight reported
bacterial neutral sphingomyelinase C from Listeria ivanovii
(PDBID 1ZWX). Two other templates (2DDS and 2DDR) are
also reported by several servers. Despite only 18 % sequence
identity with N-SMase, 1ZWX outperformed the rest of the
proposed templates; most importantly, the catalytic residues of
the two enzymes aligned well with each other. This was not the
case for the other templates (2DDS or 2DDR) in which not all of
the catalytic residues aligned with catalytic residues of the
target sequence. In order to assess the validity of our selected
template, we applied the FUGUE program which is able to
detect distant homologs by profile matching between the target
sequence and a library of known structures. Indeed, FUGUE
reported 1ZWX as a template. Therefore, the single consensus
template returned by almost all servers (bacterial neutral
sphingomyelinase C) was chosen for subsequent calculations.
This template gave a reasonably low E-value and, at the same
time, provided good coverage of the target sequence (Table 1,
see ).

The length of the N-SMase sequence is 423 amino acids, out of
which we were able to model the catalytic domain
(ENDO/EXO phosphate domain) residues from 1 to 281.
Sequence searches and alignments have shown that N-SMases
across the phyla share the same basic residues, and domain
analysis of the N-SMase family reveals a conserved catalytic
domain []. 
The other two transmembrane regions at the Cterminus
of N-SMase (residues 282 to 423) were not modeled
due to unsatisfactory alignments. Assessment of the reliability
of the target-template alignment was achieved by comparing
the secondary structure elements of 1ZWX with the consensus
predicted secondary structure of the N-SMase catalytic domain.
The target-template alignment is shown in Supplementary
Figure 1 (available with authors). Fifty models comprising all
non-hydrogen atoms were generated using Modeller9v7,
structure number 49 was selected as the best model based on
the lowest MOF and DOPE score calculated by the program; its
loops were optimized using MODLOOP. The alignment shows
that the conserved catalytic residues of N-SMase (Glu48,
His135, Asp184, and Asp237) aligned well with the catalytic
residues of 1ZWX (Glu88, His179, Asp239, Asp282). These
include a histidine (His), which is important in acid-base
function, a glutamate (Glu) which is essential for Mg2+ binding,
and several aspartate (Asp) residues for substrate recognition
[,
]. 
It has been reported by Yamada et al. (1988) that the
presence of Mg2+ ions interacting with Glu residues increases
the activity several fold and also enhances the stability of the
protein []. 
Therefore, we docked Mg2+ ion in the modeled
structure using Molegro Virtual Docker (MVD) software
[
http://www.molegro.com/products.php]. The amino acids
involved in metal ion binding of N-SMase are Glu48, His135,
His271, and Asn14.

The final N-SMase model, which is illustrated in
Supplementary Figure 2 (available with authors), was evaluated
using PROCHECK, Verify3D and PROVE. Ramachandran plot
generated by PROCHECK showed that 88.3% of the residues
were located in the most favored regions, 11.3% in additional
allowed regions another 0.4% in generously allowed regions
and there were no residues in disallowed regions. In the
Verify3D analysis, it was found that 83.3% of the residues
scored more than 0.2. For the quality of the model to be
considered satisfactory, it is expected to have a Verify3D score
greater than 80%. Analysis of the entire structure using the
PROVE program gave an average Z-score of 1.783, indicating
reasonable packing quality. In PROVE, Z-scores above 4.0 and
below ­4.0 suggest the presence of significant errors in the
structure in terms of packing of buried atoms. Together, the
PROCHECK, Verify3D and PROVE evaluation indicates that
the homology model of N-SMase is plausible in terms of prior
knowledge, as has to be expected for a valid model. Further, to
investigate how well the modeled structure matches the X-ray
structure of the template, the N-SMase homology model and
the crystal structure of bacterial neutral sphingomyelinase C
from Listeria where superimposed with respect to their
backbone atoms, yielding and RMS distance of 2.17 Å. We
conclude that, despite low overall sequence identity with the
template, our N-SMase model meets the quality criteria
commonly applied to homology modeled structures, and
therefore is considered suitable for further investigation, such
as in silico complex formation with physiological binding
partners.

Model of TNF-R55 NSD
The domain within the cytoplasmic portion of TNF-R55
responsible for initiating this N-SMase pathway has been
functionally mapped to a small region adjacent to the death
domain and designated NSD (N-SMase activating domain) 
[].
The NSD comprises of 11 amino acids from pos. 338 to 348
(LQKWEDSAHKP) directly preceding the N terminus of the
death domain. Considering the importance of this interaction,
we predicted the structure of FAN binding NSD motif using the
I-TASSER method. The resulting model is in good agreement
with its predicted secondary structure, and it has about 90.6%
of amino acid residues in the favored region and about 9.4% of
residues in the additional allowed region of the Ramachandran
plot. The structure was used for identifying the binding sites for
proposed protein-protein interactions. The modeled structure is
shown in Supplementary Figure 3 (available with authors).

Model of FAN:
The cytoplasmic domain of TNF-R55 is responsible for TNFinduced
activation of N-SMase but there is no direct association
between TNF-R55 and N-SMase, which could provide hints on
the activation mechanism. Indeed, an adaptor protein termed
FAN (factor associated with N-SMase activation) has been
reported to couple the TNF-R55 to N-SMase 
[]. FAN
represents a member of the WD40 (or WD-repeat) family that
includes mainly regulatory proteins. The WD-repeat motif
consists of a conserved core of 23-41 amino acids, usually
bounded by Gly-His (GH) and Trp-Asp (WD); several of these
motifs arranged in tandem typically give rise to so-called β-
propeller folds which are mainly implicated in protein-protein
interactions. Since FAN appears to be crucially involved in
TNF-induced activation of the N-SMase pathway, we predicted
its molecular structure by homology modeling, with the aim to
investigate complex formation with relevant partners.

The amino acid sequence of human FAN was retrieved from the
UniProt database (Primary accession number: Q92636, Factor
associated with neutral sphingomyelinase activation, Gene
name FAN). Sequence analysis indicates that the protein
contains three domains, namely a BEACH domain, a GRAM
domain and the C-terminal WD repeat domain; the latter has
been shown to be responsible for N-SMase activation 
[].
Therefore, we decided to focus on WD repeat domain residues
703-916. The NCBI BLAST server was used to find homologous
proteins for comparative modeling. Based on these results, WD
repeat-containing protein 5 from Escherichia coli (PDB code:
3EMH) was selected as a template, with 27.8% identity and 48%
similarity between sequences; for the alignment please refer to
Supplementary Figure 4 (available with author). The final
model (Supplementary Figure 5 available with authors) is in
good agreement with its secondary structure prediction, and it
has about 85.9% of amino acid residues in the favored region
and about 13% of residues in the additional allowed region of
the Ramachandran plot. The model was further evaluated with
Verify3D and it was found that 85.7% of the residues scored
more than 0.2; analysis of the entire structure using the PROVE
program gave a Z-score of 1.584.

Molecular dynamics simulation
To gain insight into stability and dynamics of the predicted
structures, explicit solvent MD simulations were performed for
all three proteins (N-SMase, FAN, and NSD) for 3 ns. The total
energy of the system and the RMSD from the starting structure
are essential to evaluate the sustainability and convergence of
any MD simulation. For the three proteins considered here,
Supplementary Figure 6 (available with authors) presents the
RMSD of Cα backbone atoms with respect to the initial
structure. The graphs clearly show that the RMSD mostly did
not exceed 3.5 Å for N-SMase and FAN (panels 1A and 2A,
respectively), and about 3.0 Å in case of NSD (panel 3A). These
results suggest that a relatively stable conformation of all three
proteins is achieved through MD simulation. Furthermore,
from the analysis of the MD trajectories we note a gradual
decrease in the potential energy of the models (panels 1B, 2B,
3B), which indicates that the structures are energetically stable
during MD.

In order to identify major motion of the protein Principle
Component Analysis (PCA) tool is used. The method is based
on the calculation and diagonalization of the covariance matrix
of atomic fluctuation, which yields a set of eigenvalues and
eigenvectors. The covariance matrix of N-SMase, FAN, and
NSD were constructed based on a trajectory of 1501 frames with
dimension 2529 for N-SMase, 2682 for FAN and 99 for NSD.
These dimensions were given by 843 backbone elements for NSMase,
894 for FAN, and 33 for NSD, with eigenvalues sums of
10.7083, 11.1347 and 1.70545 nm2. These eigenvalues were
plotted against the eigenvectors of each protein yielded steep
eigenvalue curves (Supplementary Figure 7 available with
authors). Thus the largest eigenvalues describe the dominant
motion within the simulation and it reveals that 90% of the
backbone motion is covered by the first 20 eigenvectors. These
result shows that most of the internal motion of the protein is
restricted to a subspace with very small dimension.
Furthermore, the motion along the principle modes was
analyzed by projecting the atomic trajectories onto the
corresponding eigenvectors. Supplementary Figure 8 (available
with authors) panels 1A, 2A, 3A) shows the first three, the
tenth and the twentieth projection of the backbone trajectory on
the eigenvectors obtained from backbone covariance matrix are
plotted against the time for each of N-SMase, FAN, and NSD. It
is clear from the figure that the motion of the backbone reached
their equilibrium fluctuations in the first ten eigenvectors.
Supplementary Figure 8 (available with authors) (panels 1B, 2B
and 3B) shows the trajectory projected on the planes defined by
two eigenvectors (the tenth and twentieth) from the backbone
coordinate covariance matrix of N-SMase, FAN, and NSD are
strongly correlated and belong to same set. This indicates that
the trajectories fill the expected range almost completely and
there is no high projection observed far from the diagonal. The
result obtained shows that modeled structures show prolonged
stability in the time scale of 3 ns MD simulation, which in turn
favors the selection of these structures for further analysis.

Protein-protein docking
Protein-protein interaction is critical to understand many
biological processes such as the regulation of protein activities.
It has been reported that human N-SMase is activated by TNF
through FAN []. 
To gain structural insight into the role of
different residues in this interaction, we performed proteinprotein
docking for TNF-R55 NSD, FAN and N-SMase; in doing
so, we made use of available experimental evidence for a rough
pre-orientation of the proposed binding surfaces. We used
different docking servers (i.e. PATCHDOCK, FIREDOCK,
GRAMMX, CLUSPRO) to obtain possible complexes. It has
been reported that TNF-R55 NSD binding to FAN leads to a
conformational change in the FAN protein, enabling it to
mediate activation of N-SMase. Therefore, we first docked TNFR55
NSD with FAN and, using this assembly, we investigated
association with N-SMase to obtain the ternary complex. The
best cluster returned by the PATCHDOCK server was chosen
based on its calculated binding energy (­62.72 kcal/mol), and
was further refined by FIREDOCK.

For this protein complex (), we evaluated the
interacting residues, the attractive and repulsive van der Waals
(VdW) energies, and atomic contact energies (ACE, Table 2, see
). These predicted functional sites can
be considered one of the most essential structural regions to
increase the enzyme activity by conformational changes
without compromising the integrity of the TNF-R55 NSD-FANN-
SMase complex. Analysis of the protein complex using
Dimplot (not shown) confirms that FAN couples TNF-R55 and
N-SMase; this is in agreement with experimental data,
suggesting a crucial role in mediating TNF-induced activation
of the N-SMase pathway, which in turn regulates important
mitogenic and proinflammatory responses.

Molecular dynamics of the TNF-R55-FAN-N-SMase complex
The TNF-R55-FAN-N-SMase complex has been subjected to
molecular dynamics using the same protocols as described in
the Methods section, but for a total duration of 1000 ps.
Trajectory analysis confirms the stability of the complex.
Specifically, protein conformations in the predicted interaction
site were found to be stable during the simulation with respect
to starting structures. Conformational changes during the
simulation were monitored by Cα RMSD computed for the
complex (Supplementary Figure 9 available with authors)
Furthermore, the gradual decrease in potential energy of the
model from ­165,000 kJ/mol to ­166,000 kJ/mol indicates that
the complex is energetically stable during MD.

Protein-ligand docking studies
To study the molecular basis of interaction and affinity of
glutathione (GSH), which inhibits the N-SMase in vitro [54], a
library of selected ligands were docked into the active site of the
enzyme. The docking results for these ligands are given in
Supplementary Table 3. Out of 15 candidate complexes
generated by XP docking, potential hits were selected by visual
inspection and studied in detail. The two-dimensional
molecular structures of the ligands are displayed in 
.
Docking of Ligand 900 into N-SMase suggested hydrogen-bond
interactions with four residues, Glu48, His135, Asp177 and
Asp179 (Supplementary Figure 10a available with authors).
This implies a competitive mechanism of inhibition as these
residues are part of the conserved catalytic site. The various
residues involved in van der Waals interaction are His181,
Glu139, Ala138, His 135, Trp16, which provide stability to the
complex. The observed Glide docking and emodel scores for
ligand 900 were ­9.90 and ­53.30, respectively. Six residues of
the N-SMase binding site, His271, Ser209, Gln224, Asn179,
Asp177, and Glu39, establish hydrogen bonding interaction
with Ligand 901, in addition to the participation of Val234,
Pro231, Lys228, Leu227, and Ser209 in van der Waals contacts
(Supplementary Figure 10b). This compound mainly binds to
the substrate recognition site and displays a different binding
mode with Glide docking and emodel scores ­9.26 and ­68.26.
The Glide emodel value of Ligand 902 is very low at ­71.73
(Table 3, see ), which suggests an
energetically favorable interaction with the protein. Ligand 902
suggests its binding to five residues of N-SMase, forming five
hydrogen bonds (Supplementary Figure 10c available with
authors). The lengths of these bonds are less when compared to
other ligands, which supports the concept of a stronger
interaction. Among the residues involved, Glu48, Asn179 and
Asp177 play important roles in catalysis and substrate
recognition. The docking of Ligands 903 and 904 suggests
interaction with five and three residues of N-SMase,
respectively (Supplementary Figure 10d and 10e available with
authors). Ligand 903 binds to His271, Tyr140, Ser113, Asp110
and Glu48, forming a total of five hydrogen bonds; in case of
Ligand 904, three bonds are observed. Nevertheless, the emodel
score of Ligand 904 is lower than for Ligand 903 (­68.15 vs.­
57.68). The well-known inhibitor GSH, i.e. Ligand 905, was
docked in the active site of N-SMase. The docking results show
that it forms four hydrogen bonds with the N-SMase binding
site (Supplementary Figure 9f available with authors). The
residues involved are Arg151, Tyr140, Glu139 and Hie271;
Ile236, Ser209, His181, Glu139, Ala138, His135, Lys115 and
Trp50, which are engaged in van der Waals contacts, thus
enhancing the stability of the complex. The observed Glide
docking score is ­5.72 and emodel score is ­47.92. As a control
we re-docked co-crystal structure of bacterial neutral
Sphingomyelinase (PDBID 2DDT) using Glide docking tool.
The co-crystal ligand 2-(N-Morpholino)-Ethanesulfonic Acid is
docked into the 2DDT structure. The supplementary Figure 11
(available with authors) shows that Glide docking tool
predicted the correct binding pose of the ligand where it has
three hydrogen bond interactions exactly as in the experimental
results. The Glide docking score and emodel score are ­6.416
and ­43.620 respectively. This docking result shows evidence
that Glide can predict ligand conformations quite well. The
ligands predicted in this study can be suitable inhibitors for NSMase.

Conclusion
The main objective of our work was to construct a model of NSMase,
as knowledge of the three-dimensional structure is
essential for a better understanding of the functional
mechanism. After comparative modeling, structural refinement
by 3 ns MD simulation improved the general quality of the
structure as assessed by various model evaluation methods.
Despite the low sequence identity between human N-SMase
and its homolog from L. ivanovii, which was used as the
template, the final model therefore does have acceptable
profiles in our structural analysis. Furthermore, we have
predicted the structure of a ternary complex which provides a
better understanding of the molecular interactions with FAN
and TNF-R55 NSD. We hope that our models will inspire new
experimental efforts in this area; specifically, the critical
residues identified by our in silico approach can be readily
tested for their biological relevance. From the analysis of ligand
docking, we conclude that the N-SMase residues most crucial
for interaction with these compounds are His135, Glu48,
Asp177, and Asn179. We believe that the ligands reported here
may emerge as potent inhibitors of N-SMase, possibly opening
up a new avenue towards management of excessive
inflammatory responses in humans.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We acknowledge the facilities supported by Centre of
Excellence grants from the Department of Information
Technology (DIT) and the financial assistance in the form of
Major Research Project (37-314/2009) from the University Grant
Commission (UGC), Government of India, New Delhi.

Citation:Dinesh et al, Bioinformation 7(1): 21-28 (2011)

Model of the TNF-R55 NSD-FAN-N-SMase ternary
complex. The molecules are displayed in cartoon sketch and the
interaction surface is in mesh representation. The figure was
prepared using Discovery Studio 2.0.

Two dimensional molecular structures of the ligands
identified in our docking studies with N-SMase, along with
their IUPAC names. The figure was prepared using Marvin
View 5.1.

