Background
The development of user-friendly data-mining applications
have for long been trailing the ever-increasing rate of genomic
data generation. Even so, current next-generation sequencing
technologies allow both faster and cheaper sequencing of
genomes than what was previously possible. Genome projects
have progressed from sequencing single chromosomes to
genomes of multiple species and whole microbial communities
(metagenomics). Translated searches (e.g. BlastX) of such
multiple genomic sequences against protein databases are
highly valuable for the early exploration of encoded functions.
Translated searches normally precede and often complement
gene prediction and annotation, which in turn require careful
manual curation. Such search results can often also reveal
regions of poorer quality of sequencing and/or assembly
through detection of frameshifts. However, interpreting BlastX
outputs by non-expert users is often limited by large
impenetrable text-based flat files. There is therefore a need for
intuitive visualisation and flexible mining of encoded
functions directly from genomic sequences, which due to
confidentiality often need to be analysed in-house. As data
management increasingly is becoming a bottleneck for the
growing amount of genomic information, text-based flat-files
of automatic annotation are not an optimal solution. Relational
databases, on the other hand, offer greater speed and a more
flexible query-space, in addition to safer and more centralized
storage that can be distributed across networks. A number of
various tools for analysing, storing and visualising Blast results
have been designed, which has been comprehensively
reviewed []. Of these, no software application has exclusively
exploited translated searches when combined with multiquery
analysis aided by an intuitive GUI. To meet these
challenges we developed BlastXtract2, which is a substantial
improvement over its first version [].

Methodology
BlastXtract2 was written in Perl with CGI, DBI and BioPerl
Graphics modules installed. It runs on a Linux-based server
and has been successfully tested on Ubuntu, Debian and
Fedora. As it interacts with relational databases BlastXtract2
requires either MySQL or PostgreSQL to be installed in
addition to the Apache web-server. The functionality and
improvements over its previous version are further described
in the Implementation section below.

Implementation
The first version of BlastXtract could only visualize and
manage translated search results of a single sequence against a
single protein database.  illustrates the extensive
updates of functionality that BlastXtract2 has undergone. Now,
translated searches of multiple sequences against multiple
sequence databases can be parsed and imported into a
relational database as a single dataset, either via a locally
installed web-server or from the command-line. The multiple
sequences may represent assembled contigs of a draft genome,
scaffolds, or a metagenome. Search results against an arbitrary
number of databases can subsequently be mined in parallel. In
addition to the traditional and tabular outputs of the
omnipresent local aligner BlastX [], output data from the
slower but more sensitive global aligner FastX [], and the
much faster BLAT [] and PAUDA 
[], can also be parsed and
imported into BlastXtraxt2. Moreover, while gene prediction is
not the primary aim of BlastXtract2 there is an option to
upload GFF files of gene predictions of the (meta)genomic
sequences, as useful validation of the same when viewed in
parallel with the multiple translated searches. Once uploaded,
the search results can be displayed and browsed using either
the graphical overview or the more detailed text-based table
(). By clicking on a hit in the graphical overview, the
latter table appears with specific details for that particular hit,
while retaining the graphical overview on the same page. Hit
features are coloured according to their reading frame, which
facilitates immediate detection of potential frameshifts as
differentially coloured high-scoring segment pairs (HSPs)
belonging to the same hit, which also are connected by dashed
lines (). Searching datasets in BlastXtract2 can be
refined by entering query sequence ranges, words in hitdescriptions,
E-value and Percent Identity cut-offs. A new
feature also allows extraction of amino acid sequences of any
search result, which can be useful for downstream sequence
analysis. Functional COG categories are automatically
assigned if the (meta)genomic sequences are searched against a
slightly modified COG database (see README.md for
instructions). The hits are subsequently colour coded
according to COG categories and summarised in a separate

Utility
As outlined in the Implementation section above, BlastXtract2
has undergone numerous improvements since its first version.
These improvements have significantly increased its
usefulness in the early exploration of both assembled
sequences of both isolate genomes and metagenomes. This is
something which our lab-members and collaborators attest to
after having to mine multiple contigs as part of genomic and
metagenomic projects.

Conclusion and future development
In response to the lack of user-friendly graphical tools to
augment manual annotation of (meta)genomes, we have
developed BlastXtract2. In contrast to existing software
applications for managing BLAST results, BlastXtract2
exclusively targets and utilises translated searches from a
wider range of commonly used tools of varying speeds and
sensitivities. Its intuitive visualisation of hits and HSPs
facilitates rapid functional interpretation and detection of
frameshifts prior to, and in parallel with, manual gene finding
and annotation. That in combination with efficient storage and
data-mining features, makes BlastXtract2 a valuable and
unique addition to any scientist delving into un-annotated
(meta)genomic sequences. Future developments may include
parsing of even more formats and a paging function that
allows an even higher number of contigs to be simultaneously
browsed and searched.

Funding: This publication has emanated from research
conducted with the financial support of Science Foundation
Ireland under Grant Number 11/SIRG/B2162.

Citation:Weerd et al, Bioinformation 11(4): 173-175 (2015)

A) Screen-dump from BlastXtract2 web-server displaying gene predictions and BlastX hits in two contigs from a human
gut metagenome against two databases. Note how the HSP visualisations highlight the incongruent gene predictions and potential
frameshifts. COG hits are coloured by functional category; B) Flow-diagram of BlastXtract2 functionality where updated features
are marked in blue.

