Background
The glycerophospholipids in the brain contain a high 
proportion of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) derived 
from essential fatty acids, linoleic acid and alpha-linolenic acid. 
The main PUFAs in the brain are docosahexaenoic acid (DHA, 
all cis4,7,10,13,16,19-22:6), derived from omega 3 fatty acid, 
alpha-linolenic acid, arachidonic acid (AA, all cis5,8,11,14-20:4) 
and docosatetraenoic acid (all cis7,10,13,16-22:4) are derived 
from the omega-6 fatty acid. Experimental studies in animals 
have shown that diet lacking of omega-3 PUFAs lead to 
substantial disturbances in neural function, which in most 
circumstances can be restored by the inclusion of omega 3 
PUFA in the diet []. Pre-clinical and clinical evidence suggests 
roles for PUFAs in bipolar disorder. omega-3 PUFAs seem to be 
an effective adjunctive treatment for unipolar and bipolar 
depression, but further large-scale, well-controlled trials are 
needed to examine its clinical utility in bipolar disorder
[]. Low 
levels of BDNF accompany impaired glucose metabolism. 
Decreased brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) may be a 
pathogenetic factor, involved not only in dementia and 
depression, but also in type 2 diabetes, potentially explaining 
the clustering of these conditions in epidemiological studies 
[]. 
It is reported that peripheral injection of BDNF exhibits 
hypophagic and hypoglycemic effects in obese hyperglycemic 
animals, indicating its anti-obesity and anti-diabetic effects. In 
the prevention study using 4 week-old db/db mice, treatment 
with BDNF prevented the age-related increase in blood glucose 
concentrations. These results showed for the first time that 
BDNF prevents the development of diabetes in pre-diabetic 
db/db mice []. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is a 
potent neurotrophic factor that is implicated in the regulation of 
food intake and body weight. Polyunsaturated fatty acids 
(PUFAs) localized in cell membranes have been shown to alter 
the levels of BDNF in the brain, suggesting that PUFAs and 
BDNF might interact with each other. To decipher the molecular 
mechanism through which PUFAs modulates BDNF's activity, 
molecular docking was performed for BDNF with PUFAs and 
its metabolites, with 4-Methyl Catechol as control. PUFAs and 
their metabolites especially, LXA4, modulate insulin resistance 
by establishing an interaction with BDNF. Similar interaction(s) 
were noted between BDNF, resolvins and protectins but were of 
lesser intensity compared to LXA4 []. Using molegro virtual 
docker software, we have proceed further taking omega-3, 
omega-6 fatty acids and metabolites to study the binding 
affinity of PUFAs with BDNF. This docking studies will give an 
idea to the binding affinity of PUFA's which were not discussed 
previously [] and the best binding molecule is given 
importance for further research.

Methodology
Optimization of the BDNF protein structure:
The protein structure of BDNF is optimized by using Chiron 
[]. 
It rapidly minimizes clashes, at the same time causing minimal perturbation 
of the protein backbone. The resulting structure will have a normalized 
clash score, that is comparable to high-resolution protein structure (&lt;2.5 Å).

Ligand molecules:
The ligand molecules are obtained from PubChem database 
which includes ten omega-3 fatty acid, six omega-6 fatty acid 
structures in the 3D sdf format that can be directly used for the 
docking studies.

Docking the ligand molecule with BDNF:
Docking of ligand molecules with BDNF was performed by 
using molegro virtual docker software []. This software Binds 
ligand molecule to BDNF, iteratively evaluate the number of 
candidate solutions (ligand conformations) and estimates the 
energy of their interactions with macromolecule. MVD 
performed a flexible docking by choosing fixed bonds, this 
flexible docking gave the binding energies of different PUFA's 
with BDNF and best molecule was evaluated for further research.

The MolDock [] scoring function improves the scoring 
functions with a new hydrogen bonding term and new charge 
schemes. An interactive optimization technique which is 
inspired by evolutionary algorithms (EA) is used for flexible 
cavity detection algorithm [,
]. The dock scoring function 
(Escore) is defined by the following energy terms:
Escore = Einter +Eintra 
Where Einter is the ligand-protein interaction energy:
Einter = Σ Σ [EPLP(rij)+332.0qiqj/4r2ij] i∈ligand j∈protein 

This summation runs over all heavy atoms in ligand and heavy 
atoms in the protein, including cofactor atoms and water 
molecule atoms that might present in docking process. The EPLP 
term is a piecewise linear potential described below. The second 
term describes the electrostatic interactions between charged 
atoms.

Eintra is the internal energy of the ligand: (Please see 
)

The double summation is between all atom pairs in the ligand, 
excluding atom pairs which are connected by two bonds or less. 
The second term is a torsional energy term, parameterized 
according to the hybridization types of the bonded atoms, while
θ is the torsional angle of the bond. The last term Eclash assigns a 
penalty of 1000 if the distance between two heavy atoms (More 
than two bonds apart) is less than 2.0 A. This Eclash term 
punishes non-feasible ligand conformations.

Generation of cavities for binding:
Cavities were generated in order to narrow down the potential 
binding site of a protein. After generating the cavity, docking 
was done with the PUFA's on BDNF receptor molecule.

Generation of poses in the cavity:
Cavity identifies five poses which were found by search 
algorithm. This option greatly reduces the overall docking 
process and increases the accuracy of the docking procedure. 
All poses in the runs were clustered, and similar poses were 
removed to find the best-scoring pose.

Docking procedure for omega-3, omega-6 PUFA's and their metabolites with BDNF:
We took the structures of ten omega-3 PUFAs, six structures of 
the omega-6 PUFAs and three metabolites LXA_4, NPD1, 
HDHA which ware docked against the BDNF protein structure. 
The results are tabulated according to the highest energy cavity 
of each PUFA and metabolite (, 
, ).

Results &amp; Discussion
We can disclose that Table no.1 confirms 12-Hydroxy-5,8,10,14-
eicosatetraenoic acid(5312983) have high dock score than the 
remaining other omega-3 PUFA molecules, Table no.2 has 
evidence that docosa-4,7,10,13,16-pentaenoic acid(5282848) have 
high dock score than remaining omega-6 PUFAs molecules and 
from the Table.3 we can substantiate that metabolites like 
LXA_4 (5280914) have high dock score than omega-3, omega-6 
PUFAs.  frame up the interaction of BDNF molecule 
with best metabolites (LXA_4), omega-3 and omega-6 
molecules.

Conclusion
From the results we conclude that the metabolites of PUFAs 
(LXA_4, NPD1, HDHA) have higher binding affinity towards 
BDNF, than the PUFAs in the original form like omega-3 and 
omega-6. This suggests that metabolites of PUFAs may bind to 
BDNF in order to increase its activity in cognitive functioning, 
there by mitigating the type-2 diabetes. LXA_4 have shown high 
affinity towards binding to BDNF, when compared to omega-3 
and omega-6 PUFAs. Hence in-silico method proves that 
metabolites of PUFAs are showing more binding affinity. 
Therefore more extensive wet lab research is needed to support 
our results.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors would like to thank Department of Science and 
Technology, Government of India.

Citation:Kumar et al, Bioinformation 9(18): 908-911 (2013)

Binding energies of omega-3 fatty acids with BDNF.

Binding energies of omega-6 fatty acids with BDNF.

Binding energies of metabolites of PUFAS with BDNF.

a) BDNF-LXA_4; b) BDNF-NPD1; c) BDNF-HDHA; d) BDNF-12-Hydroxy-5,8,10,14-eicosatetraenoic acid(omega-3 PUFA); e) BDNF- docosa-4,7,10,13,16- pentaenoic acid(omega-6 PUFA).

