Background
A recent study by Yadav, P. K. et al. used a bioinformatic approach
to identify potential drug targets in communityacquired methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (CA-MRSA) []. In this work, the BLASTp program was used to search
metabolically relevant gene products in CA-MRSA against the proteome of Homo
sapiens. A collection of non-homologous gene products was generated and
further refined by the identification of essential genes in the DEG 6.8 database
[]. Using this approach,
Yadav, P. K. et al. identified purine nucleoside phosphorylase
(PNP; EC: 2.4.2.1) as an essential enzyme and potential drug target in CA-MRSA
[].

PNP catalyzes the reversible phosphorolysis of 6-oxypurine ribonucleosides to the
corresponding purine nucleobases and ribose 1-phosphate () []. PNP is a key enzyme involved in the purine salvage pathway and
is essential in humans for the formation of uric acid []. Our laboratory has previously investigated the
catalytic mechanism and transition state structure of PNP () using kinetic isotope effect (KIE) analysis
[, ]. Transition state analysis was used in the design of
transition state analogs for PNP, including immucillin-H (ImmH; ), which is a potent inhibitor of bovine PNP
(Ki = 23 pM) [], human PNP (Ki = 58 pM) [], and bacterial PNP (Ki
= 28 pM; M. tuberculosis) []. ImmH is currently in clinical trials for the treatment of
leukemia [, ].

Yadav, P. K. et al. used non-homology between gene products in
CA-MRSA and Homo sapiens as a key parameter to select potential
drug targets. We were interested to find the authors identified PNP as a candidate
despite the presence of PNP homologs in both CA-MRSA (NCBI Gene ID: 1004861) and
Homo sapiens (NCBI Gene ID: 4860). An independent analysis of
the DEG 6.8 database following the methodology outlined by Yadav, P. K. et
al. was unable to identify PNP as an essential enzyme in CA-MRSA.
Moreover, we conducted a series of cellular growth assays using a laboratory strain
of Staphylococcus aureus and ImmH, a potent inhibitor of PNP
developed by our laboratory. These assays indicate that ImmH causes non-lethal
attenuation of growth in Staphylococcus aureus, suggesting that PNP
activity is not essential to the organism.

Methodology
Database searches:
The DEG 6.8 database was accessed at URL: http://www.essentialgene.org and searches were
executed for DEG accession number: DEG10020139.

Staphylococcus aureus growth assays with ImmH:
The effect of ImmH on Staphylococcus aureus subsp.
aureus Rosenbach growth was assessed by comparison of
bacterial cultures grown on solid media (LB agar) in the presence and absence of
inhibitor. Control plates (no inhibitor) were prepared using an LB agar mix
(Fisher Scientific) with no additional additives; plates containing inhibitor
were prepared by adding ImmH to molten LB agar (final concentration of ImmH
= 100 µM) just prior to pouring. Each plate of solid media was
inoculated with Staphylococcus aureus using 30 µL of a
culture in liquid LB. The inoculated plates were incubated at 37 °C for
18 h and then removed from the incubator for analysis (). The plates were returned to the incubator for
an additional 24 h (42 h total) and then removed for analysis (). All experiments on solid media
were performed in triplicate and cell culture work was carried out under aseptic
conditions in a laminar flow hood.

Discussion
Yadav, P. K. et al. report PNP (EC: 2.4.2.1) is an essential enzyme
in Staphylococcus aureus N315 based on identification of the gene
pnp (DEG10020139) in the DEG 6.8 database []. A search of the DEG database for
accession number DEG10020139 returned an entry for the gene pnpA
(NCBI Gene ID: 1123948), which codes for polyribonucleotide nucleotidyltransferase
(EC: 2.7.7.8), an enzyme that exhibits 3´-to-5´ exonuclease activity. A subsequent
search of the DEG database for essential genes in Staphylococcus
aureus N315 returned 302 entries (see ).
Examination of these genes failed to identify an entry for PNP (EC: 2.4.2.1). Based
on these findings, we believe PNP (EC: 2.4.2.1) was incorrectly reported as an
essential gene product in Staphylococcus aureus N315.

To investigate further the essentiality of PNP, we used ImmH to probe the effect of
PNP inhibition on Staphylococcus aureus growth. It was found that
the growth of Staphylococcus aureus cultures after 18 h at 37
°C was attenuated (relative to controls) in the presence of 100 µM
ImmH (). This observation is
consistent with ImmH acting to inhibit PNP and block the purine salvage pathway.
When the same cultures were incubated for an additional 24 h at 37 °C (42 h
total), bacterial growth recovered and appeared indistinguishable from the controls
(). These data suggest the
inhibition of PNP is non-lethal to Staphylococcus aureus, but
rather only slows bacterial growth. Based on these results, we propose that PNP is
not an essential enzyme in Staphylococcus aureus and that the
inhibition of PNP activity can be compensated for by de novo
nucleoside biosynthesis.

Conclusion
In conclusion, we believe PNP (EC: 2.4.2.1) was incorrectly cited as an essential
enzyme in CA-MRSA by Yadav, P. K. et al. A follow-up analysis using
the methodology outlined by the authors was unable to identify PNP as an essential
enzyme in CA-MRSA, but instead found the correct citation should be for
polyribonucleotide nucleotidyltransferase (EC: 2.7.7.8). In addition, cellular
growth assays using ImmH, a potent inhibitor of PNP, suggest that inhibition of PNP
activity is not lethal to Staphylococcus aureus. These data further
suggest that PNP is not an essential enzyme in Staphylococcus
aureus and thus, may be of limited use as a therapeutic target in
CA-MRSA.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Stratton &amp; Schramm, Bioinformation 9(1): 009-017
(2013)

PNP-catalyzed Phosphorolysis of Inosine and PNP Transition State Structure.
(A) PNP catalyzes the reversible phosphorolysis of purine nucleosides to
form ribose 1- phosphate and a purine nucleobase. Here, the PNP-catalyzed
phosphorolysis of inosine is shown. (B) Transition state structure of the
PNP-catalyzed phosphorolysis of inosine. (C) Immucillin H (ImmH) is a
transition state analog and powerful inhibitor of PNP.

Effect of ImmH on Staphylococcus aureus Growth. (A) Growth
of Staphylococcus aureus after 18 h incubation at 37
°C (Control / no ImmH). (B) Growth of Staphylococcus
aureus in the presence of 100 µM ImmH after 18 h
incubation at 37 °C. (C) Growth of Staphylococcus
aureus after 42 h incubation at 37 °C
(Control/no ImmH). (D) Growth of Staphylococcus
aureus in the presence of 100 µM ImmH after 42 h
incubation at 37 °C.

