Background:
Breast cancer is one of the major causes of death in human. The
incidence of breast cancer is increasing since 1960s with the
reduction in survival rate []. While most breast cancers arise
sporadically, approximately 10% of all cases are associated with
hereditary cancer []. In recent years, several gene mutations
have been identified to be responsible for familial breast cancers
[]. Among them the oncogenic mutations leading to cancer
mostly target the genes encoding receptors or downstream
signaling components. Many reports suggest that dysfunction
of WNT signaling pathway is one of the leading cause of cancer
in humans []. WNT was first identified as an oncogene in
mouse mammary tumours in early 1980s postulating that WNT
proteins or components of their signaling pathway could be the
underlying cause of breast cancer in humans []. WNT proteins
belong to a large family of secreted proteins that act as
extracellular signaling factors. These growth factors are highly
conserved and influence many cellular functions such as
differentiation, migration, proliferation, apoptosis, and stem cell
renewal [–]. Altogether, there exist 19 WNT genes that encode
highly similar proteins. The dynamic expression pattern of
WNT genes may induce multiple signaling pathways
depending upon the receptor involved, co-receptor expression
and the intracellular signaling proteins [–]. However there
lies a functional redundancy among the WNT family
members[].

Notably, WNT genes have rarely been found to be mutated in
cancer; however, mutations routinely occur at their
downstream targets []. For example, 85% of colon cancer
cases were due to the loss of function mutations in APC
resulting in the elevated β-catenin levels []. Similarly, loss of
Axin-1 resulted in hepatocelluar carcinoma []. In breast
carcinoma cells, expression of β-catenin is less with poor
prognosis rate. Moreover, β-catenin is not localized into the
nucleus in breast cancer, indicating that WNT signaling may be
uncommon in breast tumours. However, other studies reported
a positive role of WNT signaling in breast cancer [] and levels
of WNTs or other components of WNT pathway are known to
be altered in 50% of breast cancer cases. During the recent years,
an increasing number of WNT genes have been implicated in
the development of mammary gland. These include WNT-2,
WNT-4, WNT-5A, WNT-5B, WNT-6, WNT-7B, WNT-10A and
WNT-10B []. In mouse, several WNT genes including WNT-
10A, WNT-10B and WNT-6 express within mammary line
between E11.25 and E11.5 (40-42 somite stage) []. More often,
WNT genes regulate the developmental and morphological
aspects of mammary gland, suggesting that malfunctioning of
these genes may cause breast cancer. For example, WNT-2 that
normally expresses in stromal compartment was found to be
involved in breast carcinoma []. Similarly, WNT-5A and
WNT-7B over-expression in mammary tumourigenesis had also
been reported []. It is quite surprising that in human
chromosomes, most of WNT genes are located in the form of
clusters and are well conserved. For example, WNT-10A, WNT-
10B, WNT-3A and WNT-3 genes that are located in
chromosomal regions 2q35, 12q13, 1q42 and 17q21 are
homologous to WNT-6, WNT-1, WNT-9A and WNT-9B,
respectively. These data reveal that ancestrally they were
clustered together and duplicated or diverse later on during the
course of evolution. In the current study, the expression pattern
of two of these conserved clusters, WNT-1/-10B and WNT-6/-
10A was ascertained in human breast carcinoma tissues in
parallel to their detailed phylogenetic and syntenic analyses.
The combined in-silico data enlighten the facts that these genes
are not only syntenic but also functionally co-regulate each
other. Also, their intergenic regions were analysed for finding
the binding sites of regulatory elements. The study was further
broadened by increasing the number of species in phylogenetic
analysis as well as in the syntenic and intergenic analysis. In
order to learn the phylogeny of all 19 WNT paralogs, almost all
species from every clad were included to examine the
duplication and speciation events.

Methodology:
Sequence isolation:
From the NCBI database, putative sequences of human WNT
family members including WNT-1, WNT-2, WNT-2B, WNT-3,
WNT-3A, WNT-4, WNT-5A, WNT-5B, WNT-6, WNT-7A, WNT-
7B, WNT-8A, WNT-8B, WNT-9A, WNT-9B, WNT-10A, WNT-
10B, WNT-11 and WNT-16 were retrieved. Genbank accession
numbers of WNT-1, WNT-6, WNT-10A and WNT-10B mRNAs
are [GenBank:X03072, GenBank:AF079522, GenBank:AB059569
and GenBank:X97057], respectively. Their choromosomal
locations and detailed gene annotation studies were performed
by using ENSEMBL genome browser. The Gene Ontology (GO)
hierarchy annotations were downloaded from the Gene
Ontology database.

Phylogenetic analysis:
By exploiting the knowledge of 19 paralogs of WNT gene
family, we studied the evolutionary relationship among these
paralogs. For each paralog, the closest putative orthologous
sequence was collected using ENSEMBL BLASTP from various
vertebrates representing Primates, Rodents, Mammals, and
Fish. Orthologous sequences from tunicates (closest relative of
vertebrate) and deuterostomes were also assembled to perform
a more robust and thorough phylogenetic analysis. Species
included in this study are Human (Homo sapien), Macaque
(Macaca mullata), Mouse (Mus musculus), Rat (Rattus norvegicus),
cattle (Bos Taurus), Zebra fish (Danio rerio), Puffer fish (Tetradon
nigroviridis), Fruitfly (Drosophila melanogaster) and Nematode
(Caenorhabditis elegans). Multiple sequence alignment (MSA)
was performed by ClustalW with default settings and manually
refined the alignment by removing the common gaps of the
sequences. MEGA 5.0 was used to construct the trees by using
distance based method, Neighbour joining Algorithm.

Tissue Samples collection:
Freshly excised breast tumour tissues and adjacent normal
breast tissue samples were obtained by surgical operation from
80 volunteers (30-50 years) at the affiliated hospital (Pakistan
Institute of Medical Sciences, Islamabad). These tissues were
frozen in liquid nitrogen as soon as mastectomy was
performed.

RNA Extraction, cDNA Synthesis and RT PCR analysis:
Total RNA was extracted from normal as well as cancerous
breast tissues by using the RNA mini kit according to the
manufacturer's instructions (Invitrogen). Quantification of
extracted RNA was performed by nanodrop (ND-1000) and
readjusted by DEPC water. The integrity of RNA samples was
tested by formaldehyde gel electrophoresis. Subsequently,
cDNA synthesis was carried out from 1 µg of total RNA using
the first strand cDNA systhesis system (Fermentas) and
priming with random hexamer primers as per their standard
protocol. Human β-actin primers 5'-
AGCGAGCATCCCCCAAAGTT-3' (forward primer) and 5'-
GGGCACGAAGGCTCATCATT-3' (reverse primer) were used
as positive control. The sequences for the primers used are as
follows: for WNT-1, 5'-GGTTTCTGCTACGCTGCTG-3'
(forward primer) and 5'-TCTGTAAGCAGGTTCGTGGA-3'
(reverse primer); for WNT-6, 5'-
GGTTATGGACCCTACCAGCA-3' (forward primer) and 5'-
GGAACTGGAACTGGCACTCT-3' (reverse primer); for WNT-
10A, 5'-GGGAGCCTCACAGAGACATC-3' (forward primer)
and 5'-CCAGCACGTCTTGAGCTG-3' (reverse primer) and for
WNT-10B, 5'-GGCTTGCTAGCTCTCTCGAT-3' (forward
primer) and 5'-CTGGGTTCTGTCCCCTTGT-3' (reverse
primer). Standard PCR reactions were performed by using 2µl
of cDNA template and 1µl of each forward and reverse primer
in a 25 µl reaction volume. Cycling conditions were 5 min at
95°C, 1 min at 59 - 61°C and 1 min at 72°C. After 35 cycles, the
products were resolved by agarose gel electrophoresis and
stained with ethidium bromide.

Elucidation of super secondary structures:
Sequence conservation analysis of the WNT-6/-10A and WNT-
1/-10B clusters were carried out carefully by visualizing the
MSA in GeneDoc tool (K.B. Nicholas and H.B.J. Nicholas) and
conserved regions were inspected for presence of domains or
motifs. To detect the conserved domains within orthologs,
PFAM, PRINTS, BLOCKS, PROSITE, PRODOM and
InterproScan databases were used.

In silico Intergenic and Intragenic Study:
In order to study the intergenic regions for WNT-6/-10A and
WNT-1/-10B clusters, their exon-intron structures were refined
in detail. Both WNT-10A consist of four exons with three
introns, WNT-10B has five exons while WNT-1 and WNT-6
comprise four exons and three introns, respectively.
Transcriptional orientation of conserved clusters was analysed
by using ENSEMBL genome browser. In order to validate the
co-regulation of these clusters in various species, Co-express db
and GO db were used. Almost 7KB upstream and downstream
regulatory sequences of all four homologs WNT-1, WNT-6,
WNT-10A and WNT-10B were extracted from ENSEMBL
database and were analysed for the presence of transcriptional
factor binding sites by using TrFAST (Transcription factor
search and analysis tool) tool (unpublished data) to discover
the new unified motifs in these intergenic regions. Furthermore,
in order to find the methylation sites near the transcription
factor binding sites, Methylator tool was used.

Results and Discussion:
Phylogenetic Analysis:
Our findings including orthologous sequences search,
conservation pattern analysis in parallel to their genomic
annotations studies, extracted newer details about WNT genes
in corroboration with the previously documented data 
[]. In
order to resolve the phylogenetic relationship among WNT
family proteins, an un-rooted tree was constructed for the 19
WNTs by neighbour joining method (). Some of the
WNTs including WNT-7A/-7B, WNT-2/-2B, WNT-3/-3A,
WNT-5A/-5B, WNT-9A/-9B and WNT-8A/-8B are observed in
the form of clusters showing the ancestral duplication before
vertebrate-invertebrate split. It seems from the tree that one of
the homolog of these clusters was present in ancestral genome
and subsequently diverged. However, the other copy has
evolved either through simultaneous or by whole genome
duplications. The most recent cluster found in the tree consists
of WNT-7A/-7B, with Drosophila DW-2 making an out-group to
it. Clearly, two copies of WNT-7B are distantly related to each
other in Tetradon norvegicus while closely related in case of
Danio rerio (zebra fish). WNT-3/-3A being most greatly
conserved with WNT-7A/-7B lie next to it, followed by WNT-4
and another cluster of WNT-2/-2B and WNT-5A/-5B. A
conserved cluster of WNT-8A/-8B is found aligned with above
mentioned clusters. Going deeper into tree, a cluster including
WNT-10A/-10B received a spectacular bootstrap support (100%)
with WNT-1 and WNT-6 falling outside. Also, the two relevant
branches of WNT-1 and WNT-6 contain a very significant
bootstrap values (i.e. 100% and 93% respectively). Drosophila
contains independent copies of both WNT-6 and WNT-10,
showing the exact/true relationship to the given cluster.
Notably, WNT-10B is independently duplicated in case of
Tetradon norvegicus and WNT-16 is the closest relative of this
gene cluster, obeying the true specie tree pattern. The last
cluster under observation in the phylogenetic tree comprises
WNT-11, WNT-9A and -9B, falls outside the whole tree 
().

The tree topology of WNT protein family is an extended form of
(((AB) C) D) type topology. Phylogeny of vertebrate WNT
proteins suggests that most of the duplication events occurred
after vertebrate and invertebrate split and prior to fishtetrapoda
divergence. However, this observation is not valid for
all 19 WNT paralogs. The duplication events which gave rise to
WNT-7A/-7B, WNT-1, WNT-6 and WNT-10A/-10B seem to be
occurred prior to urochordate-vertebrate split (), thus
concluding that these three genes (WNT-1, WNT-6, WNT-
10)were conserved in ancestor and remained conserved till
Homo sapien together with the orientation of these clusters.
Altogether, we hypothesize that WNT-1, WNT-6, WNT-10A and
WNT-10B have been originated due to ancestral duplication
events and are involved in various basic developmental
processes or signaling pathways.

tree clearly indicates the fact that there is an independent copy
of WNT-1, WNT-10 and WNT-6 in Drosophila melanogaster,
which depicts the ultra-conservation of this cluster in
invertebrates along with its chromosomal orientation. Unrooted
tree is constructed using MEGA 5.0 and one of distance
based method (Neighbour Joining Algorithm). Bootstrap values
are shown for individual branches to confirm the validity of
clustering.

Synthetic Analysis:
Both clusters WNT-10A/-6 and WNT-1/-10B lie at the same loci
on human chromosomes 2q35 and 12q13, respectively. In order
to explore the synteny of these four genes (WNT-1, WNT-6,
WNT-10A, WNT-10B), ˜1MB locus of human chromosome 2
and 12 was studied and compared with macaque and mouse,
which revealed that all the neighbouring genes were almost
similar in organization and at sequence level. By performing
MSA of WNT orthologs, several conserved elements had been
isolated that were found to be necessary for multiple coregulatory
functions. Higher syntenic conservation was
achieved in case of WNT-6/-10A cluster as compared to WNT-1/-
10B in vertebrates that was consisted of about 105 MB syntenic
region at chromosome 2q35, while the other cluster WNT-1/-10B
exhibited approximately 17 MB region conservation with its
ortholog ().

Interesting fact about these syntenic regions is that they also
comprise similar pattern of organization for the neighbouring
genes and their respective genetic paralogs including PRKAG3,
DHH, IHH, DNAJB2, DNAJC2 and LMBR1. Surprisingly, the
locations of these WNT clusters differ between lineages. For
example, WNT-6 is located upstream of WNT-10A; while its
homolog WNT-1 is located downstream to WNT-10B 
(). 
Similar is the case with PRKAG3 and its genetic paralog
PRKAG1. IHH, paralog of DHH is exhibiting the similar
organization but it lacks LMBR1 gene, which is present
downstream to DHH (). Three genetic paralogs of
TUBA gene (TUBA1A, TUBA1B and TUBA1C) are present at
WNT-1 gene locus while absent in case of WNT-6 locus.

Functional Annotation Assay:
Protein sequences of WNT-1, WNT-6, WNT-10A and WNT-10B
collected from Human (Homo sapien), Mouse (Mus musculus),
Macaque (Macaca mullata) and Zebrafish (Danio rerio) were
subsequently aligned. Based on the multiple sequence
alignment (MSA), it is evident that there exists more than 80%
conservation at sequence level among the selected species.
Figure 5A, B and C represent the MSA of WNT-1 and WNT-6
proteins while Figure 6A, B and C represent the MSA of WNT-
10A and WNT-10B. These results reveal that WNT proteins
exhibit distinctive distribution of conserved motifs and share
similar pattern or number of conserved motifs. WNT family
signature (C-[KR]-C-H-G-[LIVMT]-S-G-x-C) present in WNT
ligands is involved in WNT receptor signaling pathway as well
as in calcium modulating pathway and signal transduction
activity []. They also comprise palmitoylation site
(ECKWQFRFRRWNC) which is required for accurate
processing of WNTs []. Somatostatin receptor Type-1
signature (SPGTRGRACNSSAPDLDGCD) is involved in Gprotein
coupled receptor activity. HIV TAT domain signature
(CLCRFHWCCVVQ) was also found conserved in WNT
proteins, which is a signature for trans-activating response
element of HIV and has proven to be a successful antiviral drug
developmental target []. A conserved motif of cysteine-knot
family signature is found in all WNTs at specie level. Almost
22-23 conserved cysteines are present at the C-terminus of
WNTs, which help in proper folding of WNTs due to formation
of disulphide bridges. Secondly, these conserved cysteine
motifs help WNT ligands to bind with Frizzled (FZD) receptors
to initiate the WNT signaling cascade.

In WNT-10A/WNT-6 cluster, both genes co-regulate in Mus
musculus. By genomic annotation of WNT-10A and WNT-6 in
mice, we came to know that both genes play important role in
G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) binding, signal
transduction activity, pattern and axis formation, female gonad
development, uteric bud morphogenesis, odontogenesis,
nephron tube formation and in WNT receptor signaling
pathway [].The data is further supported by co-regulation
values calculated by co-express database. Although the coregulation
value is less than 0.5 but the Mutual Rank (MR)
score, i.e. 9.9, strongly implicate their co-expression in WNT
signaling pathway. In humans, WNT-10A and WNT-6 also
regulate the same basic developmental processes like
odontogenesis, cell response to stimuli and WNT receptor
signaling pathway. Along with this WNT-10A is also involved
in tongue, skin and hair development []. Homologous cluster
of WNT-1/WNT-10B is involved in regulation of WNT
signaling pathway and Notch pathway and in several
transcriptional regulatory activities. WNT-1 and WNT-10B are
also involved in brain segmentation, mid brain-hind brain
boundary development, axis specification and differentiation
and growth of mesoderm and mammary glands. Moreover,
they also exhibit GPCR and FZD binding activity. In humans,
WNT-1 and WNT-10B are important developmental proteins
being probable ligands for CNS development and in various
regions of tissues [].

Expression of WNT ligands in breast cancer:
Conventionally, several WNTs out of 19 manifest in human
breast including WNT-1, -2, -4, -5A, -5B, -7A, -8B, -9A, -9B, -10B,
and -11. However WNT-1 and WNT-4 exhibit an up-regulation
in tumour []. 
Being putative paralog of WNT-10A, presence of
human NT-10B in both cancerous as well as in non-cancerous
cell lines is obvious. It also shows differential expression in case
of benign and malignant tumours []. WNT-3A, WNT-4, WNT-
6, WNT-8B and WNT-9A play a positive role in breast cancer
malignancy, while in several malignant tumours, the expression
of WNT-5A, WNT-9B and WNT-16 are switched off 
[]. Some
of the WNTs like WNT-3, WNT-4 and WNT-7B express in breast
cancer cell lines. While WNT-2, WNT-3, WNT-4 and WNT-7B
expression has also been monitored in breast cancer tissues (in
case of mice, WNT-1 and WNT-3 are involved in tumorgenesis).
Various WNT ligands, including, WNT-3A, WNT-4, WNT-6,
WNT-8B, WNT-9A and WNT-10B ectopically up-regulate in
human mammary epithelial cells (HMEC). However, WNT-5A
and WNT-5B exhibit totally opposite pattern of signaling 
[].

Expression investigation of WNT-1, WNT-6, WNT-10A and
WNT-10B were performed for invasive ductal carcinoma of
breast (mammary glands) in human in order to confirm their
co-regulation. RNA was extracted from each control and
diseased sample and then preceded to cDNA synthesis and
PCR amplification. Our results confirmed that all these WNTs
express in human breast. WNT-1 and WNT-6 were found to be
up-regulated in tumour samples while WNT-10A and WNT-10B
up-regulated in normal tissue ( and 
).

Intergenic Study for the analysis of cis-regulatory elements:
WNT signaling pathway alters the expression of target genes in
an instructive fashion and hence determines the cell fate.
Normally, the genes regulated directly or indirectly by WNTs
are quite often regulatory growth factors, which play a key role
in controlling development []. Some of the best-studied
examples include members of the HMG-box proteins binding to
the specific sites at the target gene promoter region.We
examined the conserved intergenic region of about 7 KB
between WNT-6 and WNT-10A () and have
speculated that TCF-4 and SOX-9 are the responsible regulatory
elements, that may act as activator and inhibitors respectively,
hence interceding the signaling pathway. The regulatory region
used for analysis was further extended from 7 KB downstream
of WNT-6 () to 7 KB upstream of WNT-10A 
(). 
The putative transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs)
were found by using TrFAST tool created in our lab
(unpublished data). The criterion used to select a TFBS was
based on two key points. Firstly, the presence of consensus
transcription factor sequence at regulator region and secondly,
similar conservation pattern in all orthologous species.
The common transcriptional regulatory network model that we
obtained from in-silico study may regulate WNT signaling in
various cellular contexts. 5' upstream region of WNT-10A
contains the binding sites for myc family (n-myc and c-myc) of
transcription factors, TCF-4 and SOX family (SOX-2). Similarly,
5' flanking region of WNT-6 also contain these TFBS, however,
their number almost doubled than that of WNT-10A.
Association of SOX-2 with cyclinD1 promoter, containing TCFbinding
sites raise the β-catenin aroused cyclinD1 transcription
[].

Furthermore, in-silico analysis revealed that all these conserved
non-coding elements (CNEs) are present in Homo sapien, Macaca
mulata, Mus musculus and Danio rerio (the species under
observation for intergenic analysis), irrespective of the exact
orientation on genome. The second homologous WNT cluster of
WNT-1 and WNT-10B (, and 
) exhibits more or
less the similar pattern of gene expression due to the plethora of
TFBSs located at their upstream and downstream regulatory
regions. The binding sites downstream of WNT-10B are same as
upstream of WNT-1, and there are also various sites of TCF-4,
SOX-2 and myc family present downstream of WNT-10B , due
to which it might shows mild expression in tumour breast
samples relative to WNT-1, which is found to be down
regulated. Other studies, however led us to the conclusion that
both TCF-4 and SOX-2 can be transactivators in some specific
promoter context, thus raising the β-catenin dependent
transcription in human breast carcinoma. Similarly, SOX-9
binding sites were localized at the downstream region of WNT-
10A. Recent studies suggest that SOX-9 antagonizes the WNT
signaling either by promoting the β-catenin degradation or by
inhibiting β-catenin transcriptional activity []. Increased
cytoplasmic expression of SOX-9 has been reported to associate
with higher grade human breast tumours []. These findings
support our data that SOX-9 could be a mediator for the
inhibition of WNT-10A expression in invasive breast cancer.

Conclusion:
Regulation of ancestrally duplicated WNT cluster in breast
cancer in comparison to the surrounding tissue is not surprising
by considering the structural similarity of TCF and SOX factors,
their affinity for binding with DNA sequences and in chromatin
remodelling. Genetic studies have shown that SOX-9 inhibits
the association between TCF and β-catenin by competing the
binding for β-catenin []. Similarly, for some target promoters,
both SOX and TCF may compete for DNA binding or repress
the transcription by direct interaction. Although, it is unknown
how SOX represses the WNT signaling, it is likely that either
SOX factors inhibit TCF-4 and DNA binding or appear to block
the binding of TCF-4 and β-catenin.

The findings reported herein suggest that there exists a
coordinated expression pattern of WNT-1/-10B and WNT-6/-10A
clusters in human breast cancer. Expression studies revealed an
up-regulation of WNT-1 and WNT-6 in tumour tissues.
However, to our surprise, the expressions of their
corresponding homologues WNT-10B and WNT-10A were
decreased in the same tissues. These findings led us to study the
functional synergy of this co-expression. The existence of
conserved binding sites for the TCF-4 and SOX family of TFs at
the flanking regions of WNT-10A/WNT-6 and WNT-1/WNT-10B
indicated a co-operative regulation of transcriptional activity.
Existence of 20 SOX proteins and almost same number of WNT
molecules in vertebrates working in a co-operative manner
require more attention to delineate the cell-specific
transcriptional events and their contribution in the
tumourigenesis.

Competing interests:
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors' contributions:
QA, , 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
 
experimental design, Phylogenetic and syntenic analysis and
results compilation; US, , 
,
Transcription factor binding site prediction and analysis using
TrFAST tool; SN, Manuscript writing and editing; SR, research
design, manuscript preparation, editing and analysis. All
authors read and approve the final manuscript.

We are thankful to Pakistan Institute of Medical Sciences,
Islamabad, Pakistan for providing human breast cancer samples
used in this study. We also thank Nousheen and Zahida for
providing expert technical assistance and for critical reading of
the manuscript. This study was supported by HEC, Pakistan.

Citation:Ain et al, Bioinformation 7(7): 339-346 (2011)

A comprehensive phylogenetic analysis of WNT
family, displaying all 19 paralogs in Primates (Homo sapiens),
Rodents (Rattus norvegicus), Fish (Tetradon nigroviridis) and
Deuterostome (Drosophila melanogaster). An un-rooted tree is
constructed using MEGA 5.0 and Neighbour-joining algorithm,
boot strap values are shown at each cluster validating the
clustering of genes and species. P-distance is used as a measure
of evolutionary distance, which also includes the correction for
hidden changes.

Elaborated phylogenetic history of WNT-6/-1 and
WNT-10A/-10B clusters closely related to each other from Homo
sapiens to Caenorhabditis elegans. Independent duplication is
observed in case of Tetradon norvegicus WNT-10B. Both clusters
illustrate the true reconciliation with species tree. Moreover, the
tree clearly indicates the fact that there is an independent copy
of WNT-1, WNT-10 and WNT-6 in Drosophila melanogaster,
which depicts the ultra-conservation of this cluster in
invertebrates along with its chromosomal orientation. Unrooted
tree is constructed using MEGA 5.0 and one of distance
based method (Neighbour Joining Algorithm). Bootstrap values
are shown for individual branches to confirm the validity of
clustering.

Chromosomal location of two clusters of WNT (WNT-
1/-6 and WNT-10A/-10B) and their surrounding syntenic regions
in Human, Macaque and Mouse. (A) 105 MB region of
chromosome 2 in Homo sapiens is conserved with Macaca mulatta
(chromosome 12). 50 MB region of Mus musculus chromosome 1
has similar gene order syntenic with this 105 MB region. This
conserved region in Homo sapiens, Mucaca mulatta and Mus
musculus contains a cluster of WNT-10A and WNT-6 (B)
Chromosomal location of WNT-1 and WNT-10B genes in Homo
sapiens, Macaca mulatta and Mus musculus. The conserved
region, approximately 17MB (in blue) contains the other two
WNT genes under study in form of a cluster.

Synteny of a conserved locus (1 MB in size) in Homo sapiens, Macaca mulatta, Mus musculus and Danio rerio. (A) WNT-10A
and WNT-6, seems to remain conserved in all species. (B) Shows the other homologous cluster of WNT-1 and WNT-10B. Interesting
information here is the conserved regulatory region between WNT-10A and WNT-6 and WNT-10B and WNT-1. This region is
almost 7KB in Human, Mouse and Macaque. However in case of Zebra fish it is of 38KB, which means that independent
duplications have occurred in this particular intergenic sequence, which is strange and under study. (C) Chromosomal co-linearity
of homologous WNT clusters in Homo sapiens. WNT10-A is homologous to WNT-10B, while WNT-6 is homologous to WNT-1 at
human chromosomes 2 and 12, respectively. Along with these, there are also some other genes whose genetic paralogs exist on
these locus including PRKAG3, IHH and DNAJB2, despite of the fact that their exact orientation is not same.

Alignment file of WNT-1 and WNT-6 showing the
conservation of sequence between four species and also
displaying conserved sequence motifs. (A) Sequence alignments
of WNT-1 and WNT-6 illustrating the conserved sequence
motifs. The conserved motifs including Palmitoylation site
(IPR014788), WNT family signature (PS00246), Claudin-5
signature, S locus related glycoprotein 1 binding pollen coat
and Somatostatin receptor signature (IPB001116A) are
represented by colours as indicated. Motif enrichment analysis
is performed by using PRINTS, PRODOM, Blocks, PFAM and
InterProScan, respectively. (B) MSA of WNT-1 sequences and
(C) MSA of WNT-6 derived from Homo sapiens, Macaca mullata,
Mus musculus and Danio rerio. Black colour is indicating the
level of conservation at amino acid level.

Multiple sequence alignment of WNT-10A and WNT-
10B. (A) Sequence alignments of WNT-10A and WNT-10B
illustrating the conserved sequence motifs. The conserved
motifs including Palmitoylation site (IPR014788), WNT family
signature (PS00246), Claudin-5/-8 signature, Rhodopsin like
GPCR family signature (IPR000276), HIV- TAT domain
(IPR001831) and 4-disulphide core signature (IPR015874) are
represented by colours as indicated. Motif enrichment analysis
is performed by using PRINTS, PRODOM, BLOCKs, PFAM and
InterProScan, respectively. (B) MSA of WNT-10A sequences and
(C) MSA of WNT-10B derived from Homo sapiens, Macaca
mullata, Mus musculus and Danio rerio. Black color indicates the
level of conservation at amino acid level.

Reverse Transcriptase PCR analysis of WNT-1, WNT-
6, WNT-10A and WNT-10B. (A) Expression analysis of two
homologs WNT-6 and WNT-10A, working in synergistic
manner. WNT-6 showing up-regulation in tumour whereas
WNT-10A in normal. (B) Expression analysis of WNT-1 and
WNT-10B, also acting synergistically, WNT-1 up regulating in
tumour just like its closest homolog WNT-6 and WNT-10B up
regulating in normal tissue sample like WNT-10A. β-actin is
shown as positive control.

Determination of novel cis-regulatory elements
(CREs) at intergenic region of co-linear WNT genes (WNT-6 and
WNT-10A) forming a cluster. (A) Intergenic region of 7000bp
between WNT-6 and WNT-10A showing conserved motifs of
TCF-4, SOX family, myc family, TBF and TBP. (B) 7000bp
downstream region of WNT-10A. Transcription factor binding
sites are present for Sox-9 and TCF-4. In case of mouse, there is
also a conserved site of LEF-1 along with TCF-4. (C) 5'upstream
regulatory region analysis of WNT-6. This analysis is showing
the similar results as depicted in A and B. TFBSs of TCF-4 and
SOX remained conserved in almost all orthologs, supporting
the hypothesis.

(A)Novel cis-regulatory elements (CREs) at intergenic
region of homologous WNT-1 and WNT-10B genes.(A)
Intergenic region of 7KB between WNT-1 and WNT-10B
showing conserved motifs of TCF-4, SOX family, myc family,
TBF and TBP. Presence of multiple binding sites for TCF-4 and
Sox-9 in human and macaque strongly provide the evidence
supporting the hypothesis that these two might be the
responsible regulatory elements acting as activator and
suppressor. C-myc and n-myc binding sites are also shown to
be conserved in vertebrates that might play role in
tumorgenesis. (B) Downstream regulatory region of WNT-1
showing multiple sites for Sox-9 and TCF-4, depicting their
strong conservation in case of both genes of WNT-1/WNT-10B
cluster. Additionally, overlapping TFBSs were also analyzed
using TrFAST tool (unpublished data) and are shown. TBP and
TBF showing strong conservation in fish are DNA binding
motifs; (C) Shows the similar results as elucidated in A and B.
TFBSs of TCF-4 and SOX remain conserved in almost all
orthologs.

