Background
Diabetes is a progressive metabolic disorder characterized by
chronic hyperglycaemia that may result from defects in insulin
secretion, insulin action, or both. The problem of diabetes is
increasing worldwide, predominantly in developing countries.
The reasons are complex, but are largely accredited to lifestyle
changes like diet causing rapid increase in weight (obesity) and
physical inactivity []. The chronic hyperglycaemia of diabetes
is often associated with macro and micro vascular
complications []. The prevalence of diabetes mellitus is
growing rapidly worldwide and is reaching epidemic
proportions. It is estimated that there are currently 285 million
people with diabetes worldwide and this number is set to
increase to 438 million by the year 2030 [].

Many Indian plants are being examined for their beneficial use
in diabetes and reports occur in numerous scientific journals of
the merits of using such plants. Previous efforts were made to
compile the information of the reported medicinal plants and
develop a database exclusively for diabetes but such efforts
were not comprehensive. Hence, the basic objective in
compiling the InDiaMed database of the Indian medicinal
plants is to provide a single source of comprehensive literature
about the conventional medicinal plants used for the treatment
of diabetes. Extensive literature survey on Indian flora with
potential anti-diabetic activity was undertaken and, attempt
made to compile all the relevant data for later scientific use.
Additionally, of late, many strategies have been evaluated for
combating the menace of diabetes and the use of poly-herbal
ayurvedic formulations has shown substantial promise as the
adjuvant therapy for diabetes. The information on such poly
herbal formulation is the elite feature of this database. We
expect that this database to be an important tool to researchers
worldwide. One can easily identify plants of interest, and find
the scientific details to further knowledge and understanding.

Methodology
Data Collection:
Data of anti-diabetic plants were collected from literature
sources such as PubMed [], Science Direct 
[], Biomed Central
[], Wiley journals 
[], Journal of Ethanopharmacology 
[], and
through collection of folklore medicinal usage. Currently,
information on 407 Indian medicinal plants have been collected
and curated in the database. The information regarding the
poly-herbal formulations are collected from the products
website, or from the published literature of the formulation (see
supplementary material).

Database Design:
The Database was constructed using ASP.NET as the front-end
and MS ACCESS as the back end. It is a user-friendly web based
application and connects to the database of the comprehensive
Indian Diabetic Medicinal Plants. The web application has been
built with a simple and advanced search options. In simple
search mode, one can search for a plant by using its botanical
name while in advanced search extensive and boolean search
options have been built. The detailed flow schema of the
database and its access is shown in the ().

Software:
Asp.Net was used for User Interface Design, C#.Net for
Application Development and MYSQL for backend with all the
development carried out on a Windows OS-7.0 platform.

Database Features and Utility
The InDiaMed database resides as an open access, public
domain web database. All the plants of the database are
classified into six groups based on the quantum of research
done and are subsequently assigned a color code. The color
code is given according to number of citations for the plant in
google scholar which provides a basis for the scientific
community and industries for a quick and informative
conclusion on these anti-diabetic plants. There is also a
provision for the researchers to add a new plant data of their
interest which they claim to have anti-diabetic property.

The record entry in the database contains the following
information about the plant (a) Scientific Name (b) Common
name (c) Local name (d) Part of the plant identified for diabetes
activity (e) Active constituents (This section further has sub
sections viz.Name of the compound, IUPAC name, CAS
number, Molecular weight, Molecular formula and structure of
the compound) (f) Mechanism of action (g) Animal Data (h)
Clinical studies (i) Geographical distribution. The database also
includes information regarding the most widely used polyherbal
formulations for diabetes as a separate field. Apart from
the technical information, the database also provides the
current state of the epidemiological status of diabetes in India.
A snap shot of the home page of InDiaMed database webpage
is shown in ().

Future Development
As a part of future development releases, we plan to update
comprehensive botanical and taxonomical data of all the
medicinal plants in the database. Various biochemical pathways
pertaining to glucose metabolism and the active constituents of
the plants which alter the enzymes will be presented in the
database as links. Information regarding 60 genes which are
responsible for diabetes and their respective enzymes which are
altered by various medicinal plants will be updated as ongoing
research continues.

Conflicts of Interests
The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.

The Support of National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education
and Research (NIPER), Hyderabad to Indian Institute of
Biotechnology, Hyderabad is gratefully acknowledged.

Citation:Tota et al, Bioinformation 9(7): 378-380 (2013)

A detailed flow schema of the InDiaMed database

A snap shot of the home page of InDiaMed database
webpage.

