Background
With the progression and success rates of several genome projects, we are 
provided with exponentially increasing number of proteins. This protein 
sequence data also include vital hidden information of pathogenic response 
of an organism. Sequences from pathogens provide a huge amount of 
potential vaccine candidates. The first step in the development of peptide 
vaccines is the identification of the immunodominant peptides along with 
proteins sequence. Theoretically every sub-sequence along with the protein 
could be antigenic. The experimental identification of peptide binding 
affinity to Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC)  [] molecules 
requires a binding assay of each peptide, which is a time consuming and 
costly process. Therefore, a number of alternative research efforts have 
been carried out in an attempt to discover the laws of binding peptide 
sequence patterns. One could perform several computational analyses to 
screen and develop libraries of such peptides. Such libraries could help the 
research and development process of several pharmaceutical companies 
saving them money and time and will also insure less hazardous situation 
to handle the pathogens.

One of the major roles of immune system is to recognize and destroy cells 
expressing non-self or mutated proteins. The cascade of immune response 
begins when the cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) recognizes the specific 
antigen and trigger the specific immune response against them  
[]. If the 
antigens aren't recognized properly on the early onset of the infection, 
might even lead to lethal diseases. MHC molecules play an important role 
in the immune system. MHC helps T-Lymphocyte cells to identify the 
antigens and to trigger the immune response. The complex of bound 
peptide and MHC complex induces the naïve T cells to proliferate and 
differentiate into armed effector T cells that help to remove the antigens. 
There is a great diversity in the selectivity of peptides by MHC molecules
which makes it difficult for pathogens to escape the immune response. 
Each different MHC molecule can bind to a set of different peptides  
[].
This brings into the consideration, the several supertypes of MHC 
molecules with different alleles in many supertypes.

The  env gene in HIV encodes a single protein,  gp160. When  gp160 is 
synthesized in the cell, cellular enzymes add complex carbohydrates and 
turn it from a protein into a glycoprotein - hence the name gp160 rather 
than ‘p160’. gp160 is found on the outer surface or envelope of the HIV. It 
is composed of gp120, which protrudes from the envelope, and gp41, 
which is embedded in the envelope. gp160 is the unit that helps the virus to 
adhere and to interact with the surface proteins of host. The majority of 
HIV subunit vaccines are based on the envelope proteins of HIV namely 
gp120 and gp41, which form the gp160 glycoprotein complex, or on 
selected epitopes identified within these proteins [,
].


HLA-A2 is a human leukocyte antigen  serotype within HLA-A “A” 
serotype group. The serotype is determined by the antibody recognition ofα2
 subset of HLA-A α-chains. For A2, the alpha “A” chain are encoded by 
the HLA-A*02 allele group and the β-chain are encoded by B2M locus 
[]. 
The serotype identifies the gene products of many HLA-A*02 alleles, 
including HLA-A*0201, *0202, *0203, *0206, and *0207 gene products. 
A2 is the most diverse serotype, showing diversity in Eastern Africa and 
Southwest Asia. While the frequency of A*0201 in Northern Asia is high, 
its diversity is limited to A*0201 the less common Asian variants A*0203, 
A*0206. Due to its diversity, it is an interesting entity to study the antigenantibody interactions. 

This study deals with a comparative analysis of epitope and MHC binding 
peptide prediction on envelope proteins of HIV-1. The potential value of a
preventative and cost-effective vaccine stratagem to protect against HIV is 
inevitable. Based on this analysis a putative vaccine candidate library has 
been fabricated which focuses mainly on the performance of servers used 
and their predicted accuracy with their respective parameters. Generated 
library will be a useful resource in the process of vaccine design for HIV-1 
and it will also help in the generation of similar libraries for other 
pathogens.

Material and methods
Here in this study, we tested the same sequences over several servers with 
the similar prediction conditions and compared the results obtained. The 
protein sequences were fetched from the National Center for 
Biotechnology Information (NCBI) through their enterz search engine. We 
considered HIV-1 surface and envelope proteins in our study. 

In our study, we compared 8 comprehensive servers  (see 
), 
based on their results and scores they assigned 
to different peptides predicted. Additional information provided by every 
server has also been analyzed along with the results. Analysis has been 
performed on the basis of final score given by the server. Basic description 
and working principles of servers is given in the text following.

ANNpred [] 
is based on Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) for 30 MHC 
alleles.  ComPred is a comprehensive method for prediction of MHC 
binding peptides or CTL epitopes of 67 MHC alleles. The prediction for 30 
alleles is based on the hybrid approach of Artificial Neural Networks 
(ANNs) and Quantitative Matrices (QM). The prediction for rest 37 MHC 
alleles is based on the quantitative matrices. The predicted MHC binders in 
ComPred and in ANNpred, both are filtered to potential CTL epitopes by 
using Proteasomal matrices.

The Predep [] 
algorithm uses the pair-wise potential table of Miyazawa &amp; 
Jernigan [], 
and is able to identify good binders only for MHC molecules 
with hydrophobic binding pockets. This server returns the peptide “energy 
score” value. The peptides are ranked according to their energy score (the 
lower the better).

RankPep [] 
server predicts MHC-I and MHC-II peptide binders from 
protein sequence or sequence alignments using Position Specific Scoring 
Matrices (PSSMs) or profiles from set aligned peptides known to bind to a 
given MHC molecule as the predictor of MHC-peptide binding. In 
addition, it predicts those MHC-I ligands with a C-terminal end is that 
likely to be the result of proteasomal cleavage. Profiles basically consist of 
a table listing the observed sequence-weighted frequency of all amino 
acids in every column of a sequence alignment. This server includes a 
selection of 102 and 80 PSSMs for the prediction of peptide binding MHCI 
and MHCII molecules, respectively.

HLA-BIND [] 
allows users to locate and rank peptides that contain 
peptide-binding motifs for HLA class I molecules. By default, this server 
predicts 9-mer peptides using 20-by-9 coefficient matrix for the selected 
HLA molecule for the scoring. The estimated numerical score for the 
subsequence in case of HLA-A2 is calculated based upon the half-time of 
dissociation of complexes containing the peptide at 37°C at pH 6.5. For 
other molecules, the estimate is based on the observed anchor residue 
preferences. 

ProPred1 [] 
is a matrix based method that allows the prediction of MHC 
binding sites in an antigenic sequence for 47 MHC class-I alleles. The 
matrices used in ProPred1 have been obtained from BIMAS  
[] server 
and matrices described by Toes  []. ProPred1 also allows the prediction 
of the standard proteasome and immunoproteasome cleavage sites in an 
antigenic sequence. It allows filtering of MHC binders, who have cleavage 
site at C terminus. The most of matrices in Propred1 is multiplication type 
where the score of each predicted peptide is calculated by multiplying 
scores of each position.

We carried out the multiple sequence alignment (MSA) of various HIV 
envelop protein sequences through ClustalX, to select one representative
sequence. We selected CAQ63623.1, being the most consistent based on 
the blocks appeared among all the sequences in their MSA. Resulted and 
computed epitopes were ranked according to comparative and statistical 
analysis system. Additionally all the epitopes have been compared with the 
LANL immunological database collection of T-cells  [].  As the protein 
is an envelope protein that helps the virus to attach with the host cell, our 
hypothesis is that, if the CTL can trigger an immune response against the 
antigen virus targeting the envelop proteins, then virus will not be able to 
cause any infection.

Results and discussion
Three-tier screening was performed on the results obtained from various 
servers. Pre-screening: to collect the top 25 scoring peptides from all the 
servers. In the second round, out of the top 25 scoring peptides we selected 
20 most consistent and common peptide sequences and compared the ranks 
and their respective positions results from every server against all other 
servers. This yielded a comprehensive list of 158 peptides (data not 
shown). Out of the comprehensive list, we selected the peptides with at 
least 50% occurrence and calculated their average rank  (see 
). Following this approach, we were able to 
analyze the selected sequence through various approaches viz, ANN, 
SVM, PSSM, etc and against various database as well. This three tier 
scanning increases the chances of accuracy and reduces the false-positive 
hits if any. Hence the obtained library is the collective favorable results of 
all the servers together.

An interesting aspect of this analysis was extraction of few interesting 
plausible epitopes while compared with LANL immunological database 
collection of T-cells  []. Four epitopic peptide sequences viz. 
‘WLWYIKIFI’, ‘NVWATHACV’, ‘LLDTIAIAV’, ‘YIKIFIMIV’, have 
been found in LALN database. The most important looks ‘WLWYIKIFI’, 
as it has been ranked 2nd in our analytical system and is for HLA A*0201, 
A2 and A2.1. Besides that we also propose another plausible epitopic 
sequence ‘TLFNNSWTL’, as it has been ranked one in our system and can 
be verified experimentally and might be a part of immunological databases 
in future. Other sequences can also included in the immunological 
databases after successful experimental verification. 

Conclusion and Future Prospects
Design and development of an effective HIV vaccine is exigent because of 
complex host-virus pathogenesis. From the study carried out and results 
obtained it is proposed that the given library contains the most putative 
vaccine peptide candidates for HIV-1. If we can target these peptide 
candidates, we might be able to have substantial vaccine for the cure of 
this disease. The putative vaccine candidates obtained might support our 
proposed hypothesis and will help in hindering the antigenic effect of the 
virus. Further, similar study can be carried out to design a consolidate 
library over the whole proteome level which might provide many more 
putative candidates, increasing the success rate of winning over the disease 
analysis. This study also proposes a model for carrying analyses on 
specific data with diversified techniques to extract something attentiongrabbing and decisive.

We would like to extend this work towards the integration of various 
features of many servers used and would also like to apply more statistical 
techniques to make results more significant and better. Structural aspects 
of epitopes will also be incorporated to make results more robust and 
significant.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors would like to thank the organizing committee of INBIX'10, 
Bioclues organization and Bioinformatics organization to give us an 
opportunity to present our work at INBIX'10.

Citation:Gupta et al, Bioinformation 5(9): 386-389 (2011)

