Background
Diabetic retinopathy (DR) is one of the leading chronic diseases,
caused by complications of diabetes that eventually leads to the
blindness. It is estimated that diabetes mellitus type 2 affects 4
percent of the world׳s population and almost half of whom
have some degree of DR at any given time []. In India, there
has been epidemic increase in type 2 diabetes and DR as
reported by World Health Organization (WHO) []. Visual
disability from diabetes is thus a substantial public health
problem; however this morbidity is largely preventable and
treatable. Taking effective precautionary steps at right time, the
quality of life may be preserved []. DR is broadly classified in
two categories: i) Nonproliferative DR (NPDR) and ii)
Proliferative DR (PDR). NPDR happens when the blood vessels
leak and then close. PDR is the advanced stage of DR where the
new abnormal blood vessels grow. Due to lack of oxygen, it
causes fragile new blood vessel grow along retina and filled the
eye with clear gel like vitreous humour. If treatment is delayed
this can cause vessel to bleed and cause cloud vision and
destroy retina.

Therefore, an automated DR diagnostic system is required and
will have to be implemented [,
]. Ophthalmologists use color
fundus images of eye, optic disk (bright circular regions of eye
where blood vessels emanate) and other features (exudates,
microaneurysms, hemorrhages, fovea etc) to study the diseases
like DR. Exudates are yellow lipid deposits which appear as
bright yellow lesions. Microaneurysms are small occular
pouches in eye caused by local distension of capillary walls and
appear as small red dots. DR may lead to bigger blood clots
called hemorrhages. The fovea is defined as center of retina and
is region of highest visual acuity. The thicknesses of blood
vessels in optic disk, spatial distribution of exudates, micro
aneurysms and hemorrhages, especially in relation to the fovea
can be used to determine the severity of DR []. The present
research work is the use of DR patient׳s eye images to extract
various discussed features and develop a computer based
algorithm and model for quick and reliable detection of DR
severity.

Methodology
Blood vessel detection:
Automated detection of blood vessel is difficult task as the
diameter of blood vessel can vary from very small to large.
Most blood vessel detection algorithms are window based and
emphasis the surrounding window around a given pixel that
matches with a predefined model. The detection of blood
vessels using Gabor filters and scheme production is in
frequent use. The proposed method is beneficiary for both the
detection of large and small vessels but also good for removing
the noise and enhancement of responses of line filters. The
stated method for vessels detection involves the following
steps:

Inverted Green Channel:
The analysis of RGB components of fundus images show that
Green channel has best background contrast whereas Blue and
Red Channel are very noisy. Therefore the input image to our
system has green channel extracted only. An iterative algorithm
proposed in is used to remove the strong contrast between the
retinal fundus and image outside the aperture []. The Gabor
wavelet transform is implemented using the fast fourier
transformation algorithm. 2-D Gabor wavelet has directional
selectiveness capability of detecting oriented features and fine
tuning to specific frequency [].

Line Operators:
We are focused on calculating two features at each pixel of
image using orthogonal line operators. The first feature
includes calculation of difference S= L − N where L denotes the
maximum gray level obtained when the line operator is
convoluted up to 360° for each pixel and N denotes average
gray level. S is calculated for squared window Centered on
each pixel []. The second feature of line operator is evaluated
along gray level of line orthogonal to the first feature. This line
has three pixels length centered at the midpoint of the basic line
operator and perpendicular to it. Its average value is denoted
by L0 and its strength is obtained by S0= L0-N. This L0
separates the pixels of thin vessels as it would be very low and
pixels in background will have high L0 value. On the basis of
the pixel density of blood vessel to the pixel density is used to
estimate level of diabetes (normal, mild, moderate and severe).
In this case number of pixels occupied by the blood vessel was
calculated and then the number of pixels in eye of the fundus
image was calculated. After that the ratio of blood vessel by eye
pixels count was obtained and store in a text file as ‘data.txt’
which is going to be used as training data. Now training data
were used to train kNN classifier.

Optic Disc Detection:
It is mostly circular or elliptical in shape and its color is bright
yellowish or white []. Its intensity range lie in red color range
hence it is good to do analysis on red channel (Please see
 further explanation and equation).

Exudates detection:
Exudates are the darkest spots in the retinal images which have
sharp boundaries with black background. For finding the
boundary of each exudate we have applied the morphological
operation on the retinal image. Exudates respond when dilation
is applied on the image because exudates have brighter edges
and dark yellow color. It occupies most of the part of the green
channel we apply dilation on the green channel of the eye
image to extract exudates []. In order to perform dilation we
have built-in Mat lab function Imdilate. We have selected
rectangle with height and width as 25 and 25 using this we
have developed a matrix which stores information of this object
and traverse over the input image and dilate it. We have dilated
the image to remove the blood vessels. After applying dilation
on the image with SE as rectangle then we got an image with no
blood vessels in it []. We had applied dilation again with SE
as disc on the original image then we will get an image with
highlighted bright exudates with no blood vessels. Then we
had subtracted the both outputs in order to get exudates with
sharp edges with no blood vessels in it []. Exudates are bright
yellow or white in color and have high intensity in the green
channel. We have localize the exudate patches more accurately
by taking all the candidate regions whose mean intensities in
the green channel are greater than a fraction (obtained by
training) of the maximum intensity in the channel []. After
this the contours which satisfy both conditions remain in the
output while other may be discarded []. We have extracted
optical disc object from the original image then we subtracted
both the outputs and the resultant output contain exudates only
[].

Results &amp; Discussion
The results were obtained from fundus images which were
used for detection and diagnosis of DR. The individual
segmentation modules were developed using MATLAB, later
integrated with other computational approaches as mentioned
in methodology. We have to determine the thickness of the
blood vessels because diseased eye have more thick blood
vessels when compared to normal eye. In order to determine
the thickness of the blood vessels we had applied the edge
detection algorithms like sobel operator, Morphological edge
detector etc, through this we had calculated the thickness of the
diseased blood vessels and compared with normal eye image
data. In this way we have estimate the disease level and
severity of DR (). Image enhancement process has been
applied on filtered image () by using adaptive
threshold as shown in . The output image is a brighter
and contains blood vessel and exudates that has to be removed.
It is done by applying closing morphological operation (erosion
and dilation) so that the blood vessel is removed from the
image. The erosion operation narrows and remove blood vessel
while the dilation operation restore the image without blood
vessel as shown in . The image as shown in 

consists of small bright spots that are mostly exudates or fats
etc. Such small bright spots (that covers less than 1% pixels of
image) are removed from the image by bwareaopen built-in
method in Matlab as shown in . After that we have
identified the size of the optical disc in eye because diseased
eye have expanded optical disc size compare with standard eye
data (). In order to find boundaries and the border of
the optical disc in the eye image, we have implemented
different algorithms as discussed in methadology. Hemorrhage
is mainly caused due to clotting of blood these clotting of blood
in eye is identified as dark spots. In diseased eye there is huge
percentage of dark spots. So we have identified these dark
spots in  as output image. The output image was
binary threshold to a particular value such that image contains
clear boundaries of the exudates. After getting the boundaries
we have two types of exudates present in it soft exudates and
hard exudates. Hard exudates have closed boundaries in the
threshold image while the soft exudates breaks in the contours
are connected by smoothing spines.

The complete flow chart of this study was given in to Figure 4
in which the overall steps from pre processing of image to
result and analyses have been shown. The total area occupied
and the area occupied in the fovea region is calculated
corresponding to the exudates, based on the number of pixels
and the severity level was determined as none, mild, moderate
and severe. , 
,  show the results of DR severity of a
typical patient, based on the fundus image.  &amp; 
 show
the pixel count of blood vessel and optic disc. Pixel density and
eye ratio are listed in  &amp; 
 to know about the severity of
DR. From the above datasets and results we may observe that
the severity of disease on the basis of available image/data in
the case of blood vessel vary as per the pixel density of the
blood vessel. It confirms the hypothesis that increasing
thickness of blood with severity leads to increase in the blood
vessel density in the images. While in the case of optic disc the
severity seems to be dependent on the ratio of area covered by
optic disc on the eye image. More severity leads to lesser
coverage of brighter optic disc area because we know that with
severity the brightness of eye become lesser as compared to
mild or moderate in which case the optic disc is bright and that
are covered more than 2%. This study shows the feasibility of
the computational model of the analysis of DR.

Conclusion
We implemented algorithms to extract features like blood
vessels, exudates, optic disc and to find level of severity of
these mentioned features in the input eye image. The algorithm
implemented is automated so that every image diagnosis is not
depends on human value for features. These generalized
algorithms are independent of camera used ophthalmologist
because the calculation doesn׳t depend on the size of pixels or
dimension of image or format of image. Our techniques or
algorithms are combined with some learning methods (KNN
classification) for possibly even better results. We have mainly
focused on adaptability and accuracy in this work and may
implement these finding in new features extraction such as
macula, fats and color of fundus image. We automate these
features detection technique and increase the efficiency of the
proposed algorithms.

Automation is where there is a room for improvement because
the learning algorithm used are slower and much simpler
method by introducing more new methods such as Neural
networks, Support Vector Machine or Principal components
Analysis. Further speed of the system can be enhance by
introducing parallelism through CUDA, OpenCL libraries such
that it can take advantage of hardware with the massive level of
parallelism. Such a model/system can be of significant benefit
for mass diagnosis in rural areas especially in India where
patient to ophthalmologist ratio is high []. In this paper we
have identified and concentrated on some features such as
thickness of blood vessels, fovea region, and blood clotting
area. On the basis of these feature we have estimated the
condition of the DR patient and applied several images
processing algorithm for finding the best result. For automatic
classification we use KNN classifier that predict the severity
condition based on features value. A major advantage of this
algorithm is that the accuracy achieved for detection is very
high which implies greater accuracy of DR detection. Therefore,
computational modelling and analyses done here can serve as
foundation chunks for the advance research in DR and
eventually help in their better management.

Conflict of Interest
The authors have declared no conflict of interest.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors are thankful to Dept. of Information Technology and
Dept. of Biotechnology, NIT, Raipur, India for providing
facility, space and resources for this work.

Citation:Mishra et al, Bioinformation 10(9): 556-561 (2014)

Automated blood vessel detection: a) Input Image b)
Green channel of Image c) Mask eye of image d) Blood vessel
after Gabor Filter e) Final Output Image.

Set of multimodal photographs of eye analysed for
optic disc detection a) Input Image b) Applying Adaptive
Histogram Equalization c) After Closing Morphological
Operation d) After Image Segmentation e) After removing
small regions f) Optic Disc Mapped.

Set of multimodal photographs of eye for the
detection of exudates a) Input Image b) Image enhancement c)
Image Segmentation d) Optic Disc segmentation e) Image
Subtraction f) Output image.

A flow chart for the detection of DR on the basis of
computational approach.

