Background
Due to the nature of the genetic code in human and in many other organisms, apart from 
two cases (methionine and tryptophan), more than one equivalent (synonymous) codon 
can be used by the cell to specify the same amino acid []. This versatility is expressed 
differently in organisms so that they vary in codon usage [–] and this, as well as the 
arrangement of synonymous codons, may affect protein translation [–]. Variations in codon 
usage between organisms are usually estimated in entire collections of protein-coding 
sequences (ORFeome). Studies in ORFeomes have led to the identification of context-dependent 
regularities in codon bias [] and of tendencies in dicodon frequency 
[,
]. Dicodon 
tendencies naturally reflect in intercodon dinucleotide frequencies, which may be a strong 
selective force in genes [].

A different alternative to investigate codon usage and synonymous codon distribution is the analysis 
of sequences encoding identical peptides in separate organisms. In principle, such an approach avoids 
potential effects of amino acid composition [] and protein sequence 
[]. We thus explored if the 
comparison of sequences encoding the same peptides in different organisms could directly reveal 
specific tendencies in coding DNA. After initial practical examination of the proposed strategy, it 
became clear that in order to have a manageable amount of data, and at the same time a not too small 
number of sequences, the length of encoded peptides could not be less than 6 amino acids. We therefore 
collected sequences encoding peptides ≥6 amino acids in length from human, Drosophila melanogaster and Escherichia coli.

We evaluated tendencies in synonymous codon distribution 
through the comparison of intercodon dinucleotide frequencies 
in native and synonymous codon-shuffled sequences, as earlier 
described []. With such method distinct propensities were 
found in human, in D. melanogaster and in E. coli. In addition, 
we briefly investigated the possibility of generating new sequences 
with converted codon usage for possible heterologous protein expression.

Methodology
Data retrieval and software:
The human ORFeome version hORFeome v3.1 consisting of over 12,000 human coding 
sequences was downloaded from http://horfdb.dfci.harvard.edu/. Annotations 
were edited out and sequences were curated to remove out-of-frame sequences, 
sequences lacking stop codons, and sequences not starting with ATG. The 
enteropathogenic E2348/69 Escherichia coli (E. coli), Drosophila melanogaster 
and the Aequorea victoria green fluorescent protein coding sequences were 
obtained from http://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov and, if needed, they were equally 
curated before analysis. To collect and analyze sequences we used either 
one or a combination of the programs Word (Microsoft Inc, MS), Excel (MS) 
and OMIGA 2.0 (Oxford Molecular Ltd, UK).

Sequences encoding identical peptides:
The above described coding sequences were translated in silico and the produced 
protein sequences were compared using the OMIGA Dot Plot program to identify equal 
peptides in the different organisms. The identified peptide sequences were then 
used to retrieve the partnering coding sequences with the OMIGA Dot Plot in the mode 
DNA vs. protein. The gathered coding sequences were then filtered in Excel to remove 
duplicates and to produce equally-sized collections of human and E. coli sequences 
(1,551 sequences, Supplementary Table 1 (Available with authors) and human and 
D. melanogaster sequences (2,631 sequences, Supplementary Table 2 
(Available with authors). The final human E. coli set was composed of 
sequences encoding peptides 8-16 amino acids long while the human-D. melanogaster 
set was comprised of sequences encoding peptides 6 amino acids long.

Shuffling of synonymous codons:
The shuffling of coding sequences was carried out in an Excel 
spreadsheet and the process was mainly based in the controlled ordering 
of cells in columns. Basically, individual codons and their matching 
amino acids were placed in adjacent columns, an extra column that contained 
identifying labels for each peptide-coding sequence was also inserted. 
For the purpose of shuffling an additional column with random numbers was 
used to rearrange synonymous codons without changing the ordering of amino 
acids; the identifying labels served to prevent exchange between sequences. 
Six sequential synonymous codon shuffles were carried out and five independent 
replicas were generated to compute the mean and standard deviation.

Intercodon dinucleotide frequencies:
We calculated differences in intercodon dinucleotide frequencies as 
before [] by comparing 
native frequencies to those in the shuffled sequences, except that we here 
report the percent increment, or decrement, in intercodon dinucleotide frequency.

Codon replacement:
For replacement of human for E. coli codons the human sequences were 
shuffled together with E. coli sequences using a procedure 
analogous to the one described above. However, in this case codon 
identifying labels were arranged so that there was interchange between 
human and E. coli sequences if they coded for the same peptide. 
The shuffling mixture was composed of one copy of human sequences and 68 copies 
of the E. coli sequences. The use of excess copies of the E. coli sequences 
increased the probability of replacement of human codons for E. coli codons. 
Additionally, codon replacement involved the swapping of pairs of synonymous 
codons, which was done to preserve global dinucleotide composition. The method 
was designed so that it allowed only the exchange of codon pairs in which the 
individual codons differed at the wobble position, e.g. the AGCCTC (SerLeu) 
codon pair could be exchanged by AGTCTT (SerLeu) but not by TCCCTG (SerLeu) or viceversa.

Results &amp; Discussion
Search for identical peptides:
The basis of our proposal is the identity between peptides from different organisms, 
so we investigated if such identical peptides could occur by chance. 
We hence randomly swapped amino acids in E. coli proteins prior to comparison 
with human proteins. After such shuffling virtually no equivalent peptides were 
detected, which indicated that peptide sequence identity was dependent on biological 
protein sequences. Actually, peptide sequence identity could also be demonstrated 
with standard data search procedures such as the BLAST program at 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov provided compositional adjustments are not applied. 
In this way BLAST would promptly reveal numerous identical peptide sequences 
in human and E. coli that are often part of similar proteins.

Codon usage in sequences encoding identical peptides:
To investigate if there were differences between human and E. coli 
sequences coding for the same peptides we determined codon frequencies, 
given that sequences encoded the same peptides this was equivalent to 
estimating codon usage. We present codon frequencies for 1,551 human and 
E. coli sequences coding for the same peptides (). As seen, 
there were disparities in codon frequency between the two organisms among 
which perhaps the most noticeable are the higher frequencies of the GCG, 
CCG, CGC and CGT codons in E. coli than in human and the lower frequencies 
of the arginine codons AGA and AGG in E. coli than in human. In the first case, 
the higher relative frequency in E. coli could be explained by an overall 
avoidance of the dinucleotide CG in human DNA [–], although in the present 
analysis CGG would be an exception to such proposal. Conversely, the lower 
relative frequency of AGA and AGG codons in E. coli possibly relates to potential 
interference with protein expression []. The reason for it may be, as
proposed [], avoidance of latent 
complementarity with the anti-Shine-Dalgarno sequence in the 16S 
ribosomal RNA, which could slow down translation. If such proposition 
is correct, a higher occurrence of AGA and AGG codons in human sequences 
would be explained by the absence of an anti-Shine-Dalgarno sequence in human ribosomal RNA.

In the above example human sequences were compared to prokaryotic sequences, 
we then wished to determine if analogous results would be obtained if 
sequences were from less distant organisms. Codon frequency analysis for 
2,631 sequences coding for the same peptides in human and D. melanogaster 
() showed differences in codon usage that were not as marked as 
between human and E. coli, but noticeable dissimilarities are the predominance 
of the TCG serine codon in D. melanogaster and the reciprocal preponderance 
of the TCT serine codon in human. These differences could also be associated 
to the tendency to avoid the dinucleotide CG in human since there was a mild, 
but persistent, lower frequency of codons CCG, CGC, CGA and CGT in human 
sequences ().

Intercodon dinucleotide frequencies:
The above examples demonstrated utility of the proposed approach to study codon 
usage differences between species, but besides codon usage there is 
another interesting property that should be measurable, especially under 
constant peptide sequence, i.e. tendencies in synonymous codon allocation. 
One way that kind of tendencies can be assessed is by comparison of intercodon 
dinucleotide frequencies. Intercodon dinucleotides are of interest because 
they can be a strong selective force in genes [] and they have been proposed 
to affect 3-base periodicity in coding DNA [], which may in turn be 
important for gene expression [].

To investigate differences in intercodon dinucleotides we 
contrasted native frequencies with frequencies in a shuffled control. 
Shuffling of synonymous codons in sequences was carried out as schematized 
(), the scheme shows that synonymous 
codon exchange was allowed only internally, in this way codon composition 
of individual sequences was completely preserved.

To help appreciate the degree of variation in intercodon 
dinucleotide frequencies after shuffling of synonymous codons we 
calculated the frequency change in percentage. Percent changes 
in intercodon dinucleotide frequencies are shown () for 
human and E. coli, among the most prominent dissimilarities are 
the increments in CG and TA in human. The result means that in 
native human sequences NNC codons (where N may be A, C, G or T) tend to 
avoid GNN codons as their immediate downstream neighbors while NNT codons 
tend to avoid ANN codons. This agrees with previously reported data 
[]. Oppositely, 
in E. coli sequences there was no avoidance of CG or TA dinucleotides, in fact, 
even though with relatively small percentage values, results would rather suggest 
preference of codons NNC and NNT for codons GNN and ANN respectively in E. coli.

In contrast to the differences between human and E. coli sequences, 
where most changes in intercodon dinucleotide frequencies occurred in 
opposite directions, in human and D. melanogaster changes happened both 
in opposite directions and in the same direction (). Noticeably, 
dinucleotide frequency changes in the two sets of human sequences were 
qualitatively very similar, even though the sequences used for comparison 
with E. coli ()were different to those used for comparison with 
D. melanogaster (). This suggests that similar forces may have 
shaped synonymous codon allocation in the two sets of human sequences, and 
possibly in the entire human ORFeome. Such suggestion would agree with our 
previous results [] and with an ongoing analysis of over 3,000 sequences 
in human and a nematode wherein intercodon dinucleotide tendencies in human 
coding sequences were also qualitatively very similar.

Codon replacement in sequences:
Taking advantage that we had matching coding sequences we 
explored if it was possible to replace codons in the human sequences 
by those in E. coli sequences. Such codon replacement under equal 
peptide sequence could reveal to which extent codon tendencies, e.g. 
intercodon dinucleotides, were dependent on codon usage. Codon substitution 
was carried out by exchanging pairs of synonymous codons in a mixture of human 
and E. coli sequences as explained under Methodology. The shuffling procedure 
is schematized ().

After replacement we found that the codon usage in the “ecolized” human 
sequences partially differed from those in E. coli, for instance, 
the AGA and AGG codons, which we showed () were more frequent in 
human than in E. coli, still had a higher frequency in the changed sequences 
(). This showed that codon replacement as performed was unable to 
completely incorporate the E. coli codon usage into human sequences.

With this impediment we did not proceed to other analysis of the codon-converted sequences. 
However, to test if the obstacle to full codon switch was in some way dependent on the 
overall codon availability in the donor E. coli sequences, we shuffled synonymous codons 
individually; in this case nearly perfect codon change was achieved 
(). So, codon 
pairs seem to be a fundamental property of coding sequences in different species. This would 
agree with the proposal of general and species specific codon-pair context rules 
[].

Rebuilding a protein-coding sequence in pieces:
We also briefly tested an alternative way of codon substitution, namely, the 
reconstruction of a coding sequence in pieces. We hence used human sequences to 
rebuild the 238-codon sequence for the green fluorescent protein (GFP) from the 
jellyfish Aequorea victoria. As a way to test the feasibility of the approach we 
searched for common tetrapeptides, the identified peptides were then used to retrieve 
the corresponding human coding DNA, duplicated DNA sequences were avoided.

Next, we chose those human coding sequences that matched 59 non-overlapping tetrapeptides that 
comprised the GFP protein sequence, except for the last two amino acids. We found that multiple 
human sequences could code for the same tetrapeptide; on the average 54 sequences per 
tetra-peptide, with a minimum of 6 and a maximum of 113 sequences, except for the tetrapeptide 
DNHY for which there were only 3 coding sequences.

We then applied the online program WebLogo [] to define a consensus for each 
tetrapeptide-coding sequence, even though this was not optimal in terms of the imbalance 
in sequence numbers, we opted for this alternative to avoid an arbitrary selection of sequences. 
The consensus sequences for each tetrapeptide were then manually ordered to re-create the entire 
GFP coding DNA. A graphical summary of the procedure is presented in 
() and the 
codon-converted sequence is given elsewhere Supplementary 
Table 3 (Available with authors).

Inevitably, codon numbers are small for a 238-amino acid protein, and 
this complicated analysis of the converted sequence; however, to get a 
rough idea of the efficiency of the procedure we computed codon usage 
() 
and intercodon dinucleotide frequencies () in the “humanized” GFP. 
The obtained values approximated more those in the human ORFeome than in GFP, which 
suggested satisfactory conversion of the GFP coding sequence. Conceivably, analogous 
automatized reconstruction of coding sequences could swiftly produce codon-converted 
sequences which might be directly tested for heterologous protein expression.

Conclusions
The primary goal of this work was to examine the likelihood of using sequences 
encoding identical peptides to characterize coding DNA from different organisms; 
results provided proof-of-principle of the proposed approach. We also explored a 
potential practical utility of the proposed method. Accordingly, replacement of human 
by E. coli codons in sequences coding for the same peptides via the exchange of pairs 
of synonymous codons was attempted, however, the experiment revealed that exchange of 
codon pairs precluded full codon replacement. Such results indicate that codon pairs 
are a primordial genomic feature. Finally, we showed that it is possible to rebuild a 
protein coding sequence with sequences from a different organism, such procedure 
could find applicability in heterologous gene expression.

Citation:Sánchez et al, Bioinformation 9(10): 511-517 (2013)

Scheme depicting the procedure to replace GFP codons by human codons using human sequences encoding identical tetrapeptides. Roman numerals in parentheses are used to indicate the sequence of the process. Drawings are not to scale. The horizontal bars represent either the human ORFeome (red bar on top) as indicated, or the collection of human proteins (blue) upon ORFeome translation (Roman numeral I). The green horizontal bar represents the GFP protein. As indicated, a segmented green horizontal bar is used to represent 59 tetrapeptides integrating GFP, except for the last two amino acids. The red squares below the segmented GFP green bar represent the multiple human sequences used to reconstruct the GFP coding sequence after defining a consensus (Roman numeral V) for each tetrapeptide-coding sequence.

Codon frequencies in sets of sequences encoding identical peptides. Human sequences were different in A and B. The origin of codons is indicated above each graph. The x-axis shows codon sequences and the corresponding encoded amino acid (one letter code). In both panels neither methionine nor tryptophan codons are shown as they had identical frequency because they are encoded by a single codon each. In the y-axis absolute codon frequencies are shown.

Procedure used to exchange synonymous codons in sequences. In the drawing the exchange of synonymous codons is represented. Arrows indicate that for each peptide-coding sequence the exchange of synonymous codons is allowed internally but not with sequences encoding other peptides (symbol forbidden over arrows).

Percent increment or decrement in intercodon dinucleotide frequencies after shuffling of synonymous codons in sequences encoding identical peptides in human and E. coli (A) or in human and D. melanogaster (B). In the x-axis intercodon dinucleotide sequences are shown. In the y-axis the change in percentage in intercodon dinucleotide frequency is shown. Standard deviations are shown above bars.

Procedure used to replace human for E. coil codons by exchange of pairs of synonymous codons in sequences coding for identical peptides. The exchange occurs between one copy of the human sequences (sequence on top) and 68 copies of sequences from E. coli (symbolized by two sequences in the bottom). The dotted line indicates the boundary between independent peptides. Arrows indicate the exchange of pairs of synonymous codons. The forbidden symbol over arrows indicates changes that are not allowed. Codon exchange downwards, i.e. towards E. coli sequences, is not shown because its effects are virtually irrelevant due to the disparity in the number of copies.

Codon composition of human sequences encoding identical peptides before and after shuffling either as pairs of synonymous codons or as individual codons for replacement of human codons by those in E. coli. In the x-axis codon sequence and encoded amino acid one letter code) are shown. The y-axis shows absolute frequency. Above bars of shuffled sequences standard deviations are shown. For comparison, codon compositions of intact E. coli sequences are shown.

Codon usage in GFP Aequorea victoria coding DNA after reconstruction with human coding sequence. Codon usage (Y axis) is expressed as fraction of the unit. In the X-axis codons and corresponding encoded amino acid (one letter code) are shown. Positions where bars are missing indicate absence of that codon either in reconstructed GFP and / or in the original GFP. Codons for Met (ATG), TRP (TGG) and stop codon are omitted. To ease visual appreciation comparisons between converted GFP (GFP humanized) and human and GFP codon usage, we show in panel A the comparison between GFP humanized and human while in panel B we show the comparison between GFP humanized and GFP.

Intercodon dinucleotide frequencies in GFP Aequorea victoria coding DNA after reconstruction with human coding sequences. In the x-axis intercodon dinucleotide sequences are shown. In the y-axis intercodon dinucleotide frequency is given as fraction. To ease visual appreciation of comparisons between converted GFP (GFP humanized) and human and GFP, we show in panel (A) the comparison between GFP humanized and human and in panel (B) the comparison between GFP humanized and GFP.

