Background
Dengue viruses (DENV) cause a major viral mosquito-borne
human infection which are the member of flavivirus genus and
there are 4 distinct serotypes (DENV1-4) []. DENV has spread
widely in tropical and subtropical regions due to recent changes
in human ecology and travellers to areas where DENV is
endemic are the potential source of the spread []. About 50
million, dengue infections have been occurred annually and 2.5
billion people live in dengue endemic countries []. DENV can
be transmitted to human by the bite of the infected vector. Aedes
aegypti and Aedes albopictus are the vectors of dengue which
found in tropical areas. Primary infection provides homotypic
immunity and probably lifelong but not heterologous
immunity. The infection results in a spectrum of clinical illness
ranging from asymptomatic to severe symptom including
dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) and dengue shock syndrome
(DSS) which results from secondary infection [].

The genome of DENV is a single-stranded positive-sense RNA
of approximately 11 kb and contains a single open reading
frame that is expressed as a large polyprotein. The RNA
genome is capped at the 5' end and lack a 3' terminal poly (A)
tail. The gene organization is 5'UTR-capsid (C)-premembrane /
membrane (prM/M)-envelope (E)-nonstructural protein 1 (
NS1)-NS2A-MS2B-NS3-NS4A-NS4B-NS5-3'UTR. This
polypeptide is co-translationally and post-translationally
processed by viral and cellular protease into 3 structural
proteins (C, M and E) and 7 nonstructural proteins (NS1-NS5)
[].

The envelope protein is responsible for several activities,
including dengue binding to the host cell receptors and entry
into the target cell. Hence, this protein affects host range,
cellular tropism and, in part, the virulence of virus 
[].
Moreover, the protective and neutralizing antibody can be
induced by envelope protein []. It is now concerned that it
should be the target for dengue vaccine development.
Although, the structure-function relationships of the dengue
virus glycoprotein E was illustrated but the location of welldefined
B-cell for glycoprotein E are still unknown. This study
was performed to find the regions associated with the
attenuation of DENV3, to find B-cell epitopes related to
neutralizing antibody inducement and we expected that these
data could be used in chimeric or peptide vaccine development.

Methodology
Samples:
The parental strain (D3V 16562, represented by P) and its 2
derivatives (D3V 16562 Vero-23 and D3V 16562 Vero-33,
represented by V1 and V2, respectively) were obtained from
Assoc. Prof. Sutee Yoksan, Center for Vaccine Development,
Mahidol University, Thailand.

Primer design:
All whole genome DENV3 in Genbank were aligned by
CLUSTALW to find conserved region among them. 5 primer
pairs were designed which cover the whole genome.

cDNA synthesis:
RNA was extracted by using E.A.N.A.™ Viral RNA Kit (Omega,
Norcross, GA, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol
and use immediately or store at -80°C until use. cDNA was
synthesized by using the SuperScript®VILO™ cDNA Synthesis
Kit (Invitrogen Life Technologies,CA, USA) according to the
manufacturer's protocol and store at -20°C

Polymerase Chain Reaction:
cDNA of all DENV3 was amplified by using Platinum® Taq
DNA Polymerase High Fidelity (Invitrogen Life
Technologies,CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's
protocol. The designed forward and reverse oligonucleotide
primers,  (see supplementary material), were used to
amplify 5 overlapping amplicons. The cycling conditions for 35
cycles are listed below:

Initial denaturation 95°C 30 second
Initial denaturation 95°C 30 second
Initial annealing 56°C 30 second
Initial extension 68°C 2.30 minutes
Final extension 68°C 5 minutes

PCR product (about 2kb) were separated in a 1% agarose gel
and visualized under UV light with SYBR Gold (Invitrogen Life
Technologies,CA, USA)

Transformation and Analyzing Transformants:
The reaction was done by using TOPO TA Cloning® Kit for
Sequencing (Invitrogen Life Technologies,CA, USA) according
to the manufacturer's protocol. Each transformation was spread
on prewarmed selective plate and incubated overnight at 37°C.
2-6 colonies were taken and cultured overnight in LB medium
containing 50 µg/ml kanamycin. To isolate plasmid,
PureLink™ Quick Plasmid Miniprep Kit (Invitrogen Life
Technologies,CA, USA) was applied and processed accordingly
the manufacturer's protocol. The insertion of PCR product
could be checked by the methods below.

Polymerase Chain Reaction:
About 5-10 colonies were picked and resuspended invidually in
50 µl of the PCR cocktail which comprised forward and reverse
primers of the target and follow the cycle above.

Restriction analysis:
Plasmid was cut by using FastDigest® EcoRI (Fermentas, Glen
Burnie, Maryland, USA) according to the manufacturer's
protocol and check the result on 1% agarose gel.

Sequence analysis:
Sequence alignment will be performed using CLUSTALW
algorithm [] and optimized by visual inspection.

5' and 3'UTR secondary structure Prediction:
We predicted secondary structure of 5' and 3' UTR of all
DENV3 via entering the sequences into the RNAfold
WebServer (http://rna.tbi.univie.ac.at/cgi-bin/RNAfold.cgi) to
assess and anticipate the viral replication and mRNA
translation.

B cell epitopes prediction:
The IEDB Analysis Resource 
(http://tools.immuneepitope.org
/tools/bcell/iedb_input) shows the peptide sequences of
envelope protein which play a role of antibody response
inducement. Antigenic peptides are determined using the
method of Kolaskar and Tongaonkar []. We enter the amino
acid sequence of E of all DENV3 strains.

Results &amp; Discussion
Identification of nucleotide and amino acid substitutions in
heterogeneous regions at full genomic scale of DENV3 and its derivatives:
In current, vaccine development is still not succeeded because
of some reasonable factors such as lacking of a good animal
model and fact that humans and mosquitoes represent the only
two natural hosts [] and reliable surrogate markers of
immunity []. However, biological markers are normally
utilized to evaluate live-attenuated DENV vaccine. These
markers are comprised of plaque size, temperature sensitivity,
neurovirulence and neutralizing antibody. In this study, we had
2 derivatives which act as the candidate DENV3 vaccines and
they showed the similar biological markers. Then, we expected
that the full-length genome comparison could aid us in
indication of which derivative is the most reliable to vaccine
development. This study showed that the full-length RNA
genomes were 10,696 nt. The single open reading frame (ORF)
was located at 95-10,267 nucleotide position, coding for a
polyprotein of 3,390 amino acids. Chao et al. 
[] reported that
the transitions were generally higher than transversions but we
found that the transversions were higher than the transitions
and the replacement rates of derivatives are alike. The
transitions and transversions of V1 were 39.4% and 60.6% while
those of V2 were 40.8% and 59.2%. In addition, the most
transitions are A → G or G → A with 73.08% of V1 and 62.07%
of V2. The substitutions in 5'UTR, prM, E, NS1, NS2A, NS3,
NS5, and 3'UTR were 4, 1, 2, 2, 1, 3, 19, and 2, respectively and
there was no substitution in NS2B, NS4A, and NS4B. This result
accorded with Cáceres et al. 
[] who reported that the
substitutions were mostly found in NS5. However, we focused
on 5'UTR, E, NS5, and 3'UTR because they concerned with viral
replication, viral translation, and neutralizing antibody
inducement.

5' and 3' UTR secondary structure prediction:
The untranslated regions of the genome play roles in the
regulation of translation and genome replication [14, 15]. The
secondary structure of 5'UTR influences the translation of the
genome and serves as a site of initiation for positive-strand
synthesis during RNA replication which 5'UTR is in the
negative strand. The 3'UTR enhances translation of mRNA and
can interact with the viral replicase proteins NS3 and NS5 
[].
In this study, 5'UTR secondary structure of P and V1 were
similar but V2 was distinct () because of nucleotide
substitution. Sirigulpanit et al., 
[] reported that mutation in
5'UTR caused the partial attenuation of DENV2. We could say
that the translation and replication of V2 was not as good as P
due to unusual structure of V2. Furthermore, it could be one of
the reasonable factors for the attenuation of V2. However, this
incident was opposite 3'UTR that is to say the 3'UTR secondary
structure of P and V2 were similar but V1 was different 
(). Blaney JE Jr et al., 
[] reported that deletions in 3'UTR
caused the attenuation of DENV3. It could be said that the
unusual structure of V1 could cause lower replication than P
because of low interaction efficacy of 3'UTR and the viral
replicase proteins and this could cause the attenuation of V1.

Envelope protein and B-cell epitopes prediction:
The changes in envelope could affect immunogenicity or cell
entry []. If there were a lot of changes in envelope of
derivative, it might hard entry the cell. The question is if only
envelope is interested for vaccine development, which
derivative is suit for the aim. To answer this question,
nucleotide and amino acid sequences of envelopes were
examined. In this study, the substitutions in envelope of V1 and
V2 were 10 and 4, respectively. It could be said that the cell
entry ability of V2 was more similar to P than V1. Then, we
could assume that V2 was better for live-attenuated vaccine
development.

The envelope is capable of inducing a protective immune
response that is neutralizing antibody [,
]. To define
epitopes which were able to induce neutralizing antibody, the
envelopes were analyzed by programs. Ilyas et al., 
[] showed
the result of 9 predicted B-cell epitopes of DENV3 envelope
while Zhong et al., [] showed 20 predicted B-cell epitopes
which was similar to this study. We found 21 epitopes, 

(see supplementary material), 17 epitopes of viruses shared the
same sequences. Most monoclonal antibodies that neutralize
virus infectivity do so, at least in part, by the blocking of virus
adsorption. However, monoclonal antibodies specific for
domain III were the strongest blockers of virus adsorption 
[–]. 
In this study, there was the peptide sequence at position
297-309 of derivatives was in domain III (immunoglobulin-like
domain). We believed that this peptide sequence could induce
DENV3 neutralizing antibody and be likely to use for peptide
vaccine development.
NS5

The most substitutions located at the third nucleotide of codon
(data not shown), however, data in Table 3 (see supplementary
material), showed the substitutions of derivatives which
located at either the first or second nucleotide of codon. In NS5,
G→A at 9346 and A→C at 9415 of V1 whereas G→C at 9346 and
A→G at 9415 of V2. Because of these replacements, amino acids
at 3116 and 3139 were definitely different among them. In
addition, G→A at 10046 of V2 caused amino acid change
(Tryptophan →stop codon) at 3349. Amino acid change at 3349
resulted in unusual NS5 protein of V2. Takahashi et al., 
[]
reported that NS5 is central to the function of the DENV
replication and substitution in NS5 could reduce DENV2
replication, hence, the attenuation of V2 could be concerned
owing to the reduction of enzyme activity which resulted from
unusual NS5 protein of V2.

Conclusion
We compared the full-length genome of viruses to find the
regions which could cause the attenuation of virus. The main
cause of the attenuation of V1 resulted from nucleotide
substitutions in 3'UTR and NS5 whereas the attenuation of V2
resulted from nucleotide substitutions in 5'UTR and NS5,
especially NS5 of V2 which was shorter than P and V1.
Additionally, secondary structures of 5' and 3'UTR implied the
low efficacy of the replication and translation which related to
virus attenuation. The peptide sequence at position 297-309 was
epitope in domain III of envelope which could induce
neutralizing antibody. We expected that the sequences of
5'UTR, 3'UTR, and NS5 of V1 and V2 could be used for
chimeric DENV vaccine development and the peptide sequence
at 297-309 could be used for peptide vaccine development.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This research was supported by Center for Vaccine
Development, Mahidol University and partial funding from
Faculty of Science, Silpakorn University, Grant No. RGP 54-11.

Citation:Thaisonthi et al, Bioinformation 9(12): 622-628 (2013)

5'UTR secondary structure prediction of a) D3V 16562; b) D3V 16562 Vero-23; c) D3V 16562 Vero-33.

3'UTR secondary structure prediction of a) D3V 16562; b) D3V 16562 Vero-23; c) D3V 16562 Vero-33.

