Background
Influenza A viruses are single-stranded RNA viruses of
negative sense with an eight-segmented genome and belong to
the family Orthomyxoviridae []. The hemagglutinin (HA) is an
envelope glycoprotein in Influenza A that is responsible for the
sialic acid binding as well as host recognition 
[]. It is also a key
antigen against which humoral immune responses are directed
[], 
and hence the study on it is needed for understanding the
biology, and the control and prevention of Influenza A viruses
[]. 
Influenza A viruses are sub-typed according to the
reactivity of their surface antigens, haemagglutinin (HA) and
neuraminidase (NA), combination of the HA and NA
represents a subtype []. The emergence of new subtypes is
driven by two mechanisms, i.e., re-assortment and mutation,
termed also as genetic shift and genetic drift respectively 
[].
Previous study showed that the re-assortment does the mixing
of two genomes of Influenza A virus, during which HA and NA
could come from different lineages. Besides, purifying selection
helped them to adapt with host []. In some cases, positive
selection has taken place that could be the cause of new
subtypes []. Besides these concepts, we performed a
computational approach to study the evolution of Influenza
virus from a different point of view, by investigating the
presence of palindromes in the gene of Influenza viruses, each
from different subtypes. Although some previous statistical and
experimental studies of palindromes in other classes of viral
genomes, such as the double stranded DNA viruses,
bacteriophages, retro viruses, etc., have been performed 
[–],
this is a novel approach to analyze the gene pattern and
evolution of Influenza A. Prior study revealed that the
hemagglutinin gene of pandemic-2009 H1N1 has directly come
from the triple re-assortant H1N2 through re-assortment, and
similarly that of triple re-assortant H1N2 came from the
classical swine H1N1 through the same mechanism 
[]. We
have compared the palindrome as well as RNA structure of
these segments. The proposition of this study would disclose a
new dimension to detect the complicated evolution of Influenza
A virus.

Methodology
The nucleotide sequences of hemagglutinin (HA) of Influenza A
and Influenza B have been retrieved from Influenza database at
NCBI (
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/FLU/), as HA
being the virulent factor for Influenza viruses 
[]. HA sequences
from each of the 12 highly virulent subtypes of Influenza A
were downloaded. The classical swine H1N1 was included,
since it is involved in re-assortment, for the emergence of triple
re-assortant H1N2 subtype from which the HA has been
derived in the 2009-pandemic H1N1 []. To search for the
presence of palindromic sequence in the HA gene, all retrieved
sequences of 12 subtypes of Influenza A and 6 sequences of
Influenza B were submitted to the program “Palindrome” from
Mobyle Portal @ Pasteur [] (a web-based site with repository
of sequence and structural analysis). Palindromes of length
more than or equal to 10 bases were only considered. Mismatch
was not allowed in software parameter. The structural changes
among the HA gene segments involved in re-assortment were
identified using M-fold [] program for the comparative
folding pattern in the palindromic site, to analyze the influence
of palindrome in the folding pattern of the RNA of the virus.

Discussion
Palindromes in nucleic acid consist of nucleotide sequences that
read the same from the 5'-end to the 3'-end 
[]. The presence of
palindrome in a gene sequence decreases the sequence entropy
[]. Thus the presence of palindrome in a gene sequence is
evolutionary important. Search for palindrome results in the
presence of one or more palindromes in each subtype of
Influenza A as listed in  (see supplementary material).
However, reports lack palindrome in Influenza B. Palindrome
of each subtype is unique and not similar to other subtypes. The
frequent occurrence of palindrome in Influenza A and
nullification of palindromic occurence in Influenza B signify
that palindrome is specific to Influenza A, which is much more
dangerous than Influenza B with regard to disease causing
ability. This also correlates the palindromic occurrence with the
event of expedited gene exchange in Influenza A termed as reassortment,
which is a special mechanism of producing new
subtype, since Influenza B lacks both palindromes and the reassortment
event. Thus we hypothesize that palindromes play a
significant role in the re-assortment of Influenza A virus. The
HA gene of pandemic-2009 A/H1N1 virus directly came from
triple re-assortant virus H1N2, and H1N2 came from classical
swine H1N1 through re-assortment []. The lineages from
where HA came through re-assortment in the 2009 pandemic
influenza virus were compared, which disclosed the loss and
gain of new palindrome during re-assortment. HA gene of
pandemic-2009 H1N1 was found to have two palindromes with
10 and 13 arm-size, H1N2 with only a 10 arm-sized palindrome,
which is different from H1N1, but the 13-arm palindrome of
2009 H1N1 was similar to the palindrome of classical swine
H1N1 (as marked in bold in , see 
supplementary material). 
This indicates HA from H1N1 has been mutated in
such a way that it had lost its own palindrome and gained a
new during re-assortment. HA segment of pandemic-2009
H1N1 regained the palindrome of classical swine H1N1,
although that palindrome disappeared when it was in triple reassortant
H1N2 subtype. Interestingly in the second event of reassortment
during 2009, HA gene came from H1N2 directly, but
mutated in a mysterious way so that it gained a new
palindrome to that of H1N2, whereas regained the palindrome
of classical swine H1N1. This disclosure suggested that the
change in palindrome is prerequisite for the event of reassortment.
In addition, the lack of palindrome does not allow
Influenza B to re-assort. Thus the palindromes have significant
influence on the re-assortment event driving the evolution of
Influenza A virus.

Determination of folding pattern by Mfold revealed the
influence of palindrome in RNA folding. Change in palindrome
causes change in RNA structure by changing the fold length
and pattern as shown in . It was reported that there is
no positive selection in HA of H1N1 rather purifying selection
act on it []. 
Thus the mutations in HA have less effect on amino
acid level, but on its own RNA gene structure. The change in
gene structure, with the aid of palindrome, influences the
molecular mechanism of replication, expression and other
molecular signaling [–
]. Influence of palindrome in RNA
structure of Influenza gene could determine the rate of
replication and gene expression, as well as viral packaging
through which the re-assortment takes place.

Conclusion
Influenza A viruses are evolving very frequently causing risks
to human and several animals. The insight into their
evolutionary mechanisms is necessary to prevent their disease
causing ability. Here, the novel approach to find the relation
between the palindrome in gene and the re-assortment process
reveals the evolutionary mechanisms. This study concludes that
palindromic change thus drives the event of genetic shift or reassortment
in Influenza A virus.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are thankful to Shakhinur Islam Mondal and Mohammad
Lashkar for their valuable suggestions and supervision in this
study.

Citation:Zubaer &amp; Thapa, Bioinformation 7(3): 115-119 (2011)

The change in the RNA folding due to the loss and gain of the palindrome in HA gene during the re-assortment event for
the emergence of virulent pandemic virus. Classical swine A/H1N1 covers 590- 1100 of palindrome while folding, H1N2 folds at
620- 1270 position, and A/H1N1/2009 palindrome folds at 610- 1110. The folding position and folding pattern are different from
each other.

