Background
Statistical considerations highlight that the number of theoretical proteins is enormously greater than the number of natural 
proteins. The simple combination of the 20 natural amino acids in a sequence of only 100 residues results in a number of 10130 possible 
sequences. These unknown proteins are called  “never born proteins” []. The study 
of the properties of these proteins, especially when compared with natural proteins, may provide important information about the 
relationship existent between sequences and structures. Today several programs for the ab initio proteins structure prediction are 
available. They are extremely important for studying proteins of unknown crystal structure. CASP international competition 
[] opens the opportunity to distinguish several models for their reliability 
of prediction. Using these programs, especially in conjunction with high throughput computing platforms as Grids 
[], may be the ideal solution to study problems such as NBPs, very difficult to 
investigate using traditional methods. On other hand NBPs represent a good test for the reliability of these programs. Many of these are 
in fact based on algorithms that extract the information needed to predict the three-dimensional structure of a given protein from 
databases of natural proteins structures. Others instead are based only on the simulation of amino acids physico-chemical properties. 
NBPs are proteins whose sequence is generated completely randomly and the prediction of their structure represents an extremely 
challenging utilization of these software packages. In this work we describe the results obtained from comparison of 10.000 predictions 
obtained with two different models, one for each class described above, starting from amino acid sequences with no significant homology 
with natural proteins.

Methodology
Random amino acid sequences (70 amino acids long) were generated using the utility RandomBlast whose implementation has been 
described in detail elsewhere []. The three-dimensional structures for NBPs 
were predicted with the “Rosetta abinitio” software (Rosetta) [] and the 
“Fuzzy oil drop method” (Twostage) [,]. 
The RMSD was calculated only for the backbone atoms. Couples with RMSD less than 6.80 Å were subjected to energy minimization 
using the software CHARMM [] in order to reduce the possible clashes between 
atoms introduced by the prediction software. The RMSD was recalculated for the resulting structure. The structure alignment and its 
graphic representation were obtained through the use of the CE protein structures alignment software 
[].

Results
Table 1 (under ) clearly shows that RMS-D values obtained are never 
lower than 5.86 Å which represents the best value produced by the pair of predictions for the sequence 7033.

Although this is not an exciting result, it is important in that highlights the challenging conditions in which the two software 
packages were tested. For both methods taken in consideration, the predicted structure is formed largely by alpha helices 
( and ). The related topology maps 
( and ) show that both predictions are 
characterized by the presence in the C-terminus region of two segments of alpha helix (Rosetta, residues 43-50 and 51-61; Twostage, 
43-49 and 62-58 ), the first of which can be viewed as the central axis of the molecule. Around this central axis are two other 
alpha-helix regions interspersed by short loops, which seem to embrace the center with the shape of a ring (Rosetta, 20-28 and 29-36; 
Twostage, 21-29 and 35-39). In total disagreement however, is the prediction for the N-terminus region for which Rosetta predicts the 
presence of a short beta-sheet while Twostage identifies a further stretch of alpha helix (Rosetta, 5-2 and 8-12; Twostage, 9 -14). The 
overlap of the predicted structures relative to sequence number 7033 (), illustrates some 
agreement between the two predictions. The structural alignment () clearly shows the 
presence of a good structural similarity and if the region of disagreement at the N-terminus is excluded, the calculated RMSD value 
decreases to ∼4.39 Å, reinforcing the agreement between the two methods.

Conclusion
This work highlights the difficulty to approach the structural study of proteins like the NBPs. On the other hand it is difficult to 
think to classic wet lab experiments to approach this problem, especially if one wants to approach the problem in its entirety. The 
results obtained with this research show that a computational approach shows its weakness as well, especially given the low degree of 
comparability of the results obtained using two different methods. However this work allows recognizing the limits and the predictive 
ability of ab initio protein structure prediction software packages. Evidence that a low number of predictions are in agreement between 
the two models can lead to underestimate the effective potential of these methods. At the same time, it must be noted that the programs 
tested in this study are in agreement in predicting that many of the sequences studied do not have a properly folded structure (data not 
shown). Finally, evidence that hypothetical proteins such as 7033, can be predicted with sufficient reliability opens up new scenarios 
of biomedical interest; in other words, from NBPs to new “possible born drugs”.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work has been supported by the European Commission EUChinaGRID project grant (contract number: 026634).

Schematic representation of topology maps, structural alignment and graphics representation of predicted structures for 
sequence n° 7033. (1a and 1b) Topology maps. (1c) Structural alignment between structures predicted with two different methods. 
(1d and 1e) Structures obtained with Rosetta and Two stage, respectively. (1f) Superimposition of the two 
proposed prediction.

