Background
Bioterrorism is one of the biggest threats that human life faces
today []. 
In definition, a bioterrorism attack is the deliberate
release of viruses, bacteria, or other germs (agents) used to
cause illness or death in people, animals, or plants [,
].
Bioterrorism poses a global threat to life and well being of the
people [] and therefore there is a definite need to promote
research in the field of biodefense for development of vaccines,
therapeutics and diagnostic methods as a part of preparedness
to any such bioterror attack in the future. Organisms including
bacterial species such as Bacillus anthracis, Yersinia pestis, viral
species such as Ebola, Variola, Hendra, and few microbe toxins
have been reported as agents of Bioterrorism 
[–]. Currently
several parallel databases/resources viz. Centre for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC), Pubmed, KEGG, and Sherlock
Microbial Identification System (MIS) [] are available for
studying the prevention and diagnostic of bioterror agentsbut
most of them have been realized to be segregated in terms of
information or have a limited access. Similarly, CHEMM 
[],
another online resource that provides information related to
emergency preparedness for multiple conditions/events. The
dataset is very huge related to conditions and not limited to
bioterrorism while CDC, provides online information related to
different disease conditions and is quit general. To address
above issues, we have developed an open access repository
named BIRS-Bioterrorism Information Retrieval System, which
is non-redundant, free-access and normalized for
comprehensive information on biological weapons and toxins.
The database is important for researchers in the pharma
industry to develop rapid diagnostics and designing drugs/
vaccine molecule against such organisms.

Methodology
Data Collection:
Generic information about the biological agents was collected
from Centre for Disease Control and Prevention 
[] and
literature mining. Unique metabolicpathway information was
collected from KEGG database [] and the literature was
collected and compiled from Pubmed. The records are
organized in alphabetical order to simplify the task of finding
scientific data related to the organisms involved in the spread of
bioterrorism. A detailed flowchart of data collection can be seen
in ().

Architecture and Design of BIRS:
BIRS has been developed with MySQL client version 5.0.51 as
back-end and PHP 5.3.19 as the front end. The database has
been developed and compiled using RDBMS technology with a
user friendly interface that presents a non-redundant, high
performance data repository. While designing BIRS we cared
for normalization, to eliminate data redundancy and build a
consistent database. The database is comprised of three tables
viz. Generic-Information, Pathways, Literature and follow
architecture of a relational database. The database can be
accessed by (i) browsing through the web interface (),
(ii) simply searching using the search functionality ().
Advanced search options are also available for precise retrieval
of information.

Data Flow Information:
The data flow occurs in two levels that is shown by the flow
diagrams: Level 0: The user sends a query on the web
application and from the application the query is transferred to
the database, after processing the query, the database returns
the adequate information back to the web application, which is
visible to the user in form of a table (); Level 1: The
user sends a query on the web application and from the
application the query is transferred to the different tables of the
database like generic information, pathway information etc.
query then gets processed at the server and the relevant
information is returned to the web application in form of a table
for the user to see ().

Utility
BIRS would serve as an open-access repository that enlists
organisms having the potential to be used as an agent of
bioterrorism. The database finds utility to the scientific
community for a quick review on literature, metabolic
pathways, and generic information about these organisms.
Further, it may also find application in the discovery of
potential drug targets to control bioterrorism. This repository
could also be useful for veterinarians to access existing
information on the most-deadly animal and human diseases
that could possibly damage or wipe out the livestock industry.
BIRS uses Wordpress 3.5 as its content management system, to
provide the end-users with a better user interface and advanced
widgets for intuitive browsing and searching experience.

Caveats
BIRS does not include enzyme and protein information of the
organisms, as the data on bioterror agents was scarce.

Future development
As and when in future, more information such as enzymes and
proteins related to the organisms will be added and the
database would be further refined and updated with links to
new bioterror agents.

The authors are thankful to Jaypee Institute of Information
Technology University, Noida for providing infrastructure
facilities for carrying out the work. Further, we are also
thankful to Dr. Sanjay Gupta for his support and idea.

Citation:Tewari et al, Bioinformation 9(2): 112-115 (2013)

Data Collection Flowchart

a) Data Flow Diagram LEVEL–0; b) Data Flow Diagram LEVEL – 1

Snapshot of BIRS Web Application (a) Homepage for BIRS; (b) Search page for BIRS; (c) Search results page for BIRS.

