Background
PubMed, the most popular and publicly available life science
literature retrieval tool, is generally used for retrieval of specific
information from MEDLINE rather than as an exploratory
medium. There are several other retrieval tools for searching
MEDLINE such as GoPubMed [] and EBIMed 
[] that have
been designed to provide improved retrieval from literature
and other related information sources. However, it is desirable
to have a mechanism which (a) utilizes the strengths of PubMed
(b) enables users to search, explore and manage the literature
more effectively and (c) enables integration with structured
knowledge sources. We have developed TPX (TCS Pubmed
eXplorer), a web-based tool which supports concept-assisted
search and navigation that relies on PubMed as the underlying
search engine to search the MEDLINE database.

In addition, many users have local collections of
free/purchased articles as well as other text documents related
to their specific areas of research in the biomedical domain.
Exploring and information retrieval from these collections for
purpose of extracting specific information remains a challenge.
TPX can be configured on request to give the user the ability to
explore the user's own locally available collection of articles. To
demonstrate this option, TPX has been configured to access the
Open Access subset of PMC articles using the full-text search
mode. In addition, while searching through local repositories,
users can limit co-occurring terms to be within the same
sentence, paragraph or the entire article.

Tool features
Concept Identification:
TPX is equipped with a dictionary-based Named Entity
Recognition (NER) system that identifies various biological
concepts in an article using approximate string matching rules.
The NER system identifies a wide range of concept categories
such as genes, proteins, diseases, symptoms, chemicals and
drugs, processes, functions, localization, experimental methods
and cell lines derived from ontologies like MeSH 
[], Gene
Ontology [] and other sources like Entrez Gene 
[], UniProt 
[],
Expasy Enzyme [], NCBI Taxonomy 
[] and HyperCLDB 
[].
The dictionaries are modular - so that specified types can be
selectively used and dictionaries can be added/removed on
request. Local abbreviation-handling is also integral to the tool
[]. Individual users can further include custom categories and
concepts to augment the provided dictionaries. These custom
concepts are recognized in articles and also used for identifying
co-occurrences in the full-text mode. SNPs and other mutation
mentions are currently tagged and highlighted on-the-fly using
a pattern-based NER system.

Tagged Abstracts:
The abstracts retrieved in PubMed/full-text mode are displayed
with the identified entities highlighted with predefined colors
().

The properties for each of the identified entities can be viewed
by clicking it. The properties include external links to respective
information sources, facility to explore associated concepts,
feedback, etc. The tool provides a facility for the users to
suggest entities that have been missed out by the NER system.
Through user preferences, the user can customize highlighting
only those concepts belonging to categories of interest.

Concept Assisted Search and Navigation:
The identified concepts from the analyzed article set of the
search results are ranked on-the-fly according to their relevance
to the article collection. The ranked concepts are categorized
under the respective categories allowing the user to explore the
articles with respect to the categorized concepts. These concepts
can be exported and saved into file in various formats. Users
can select concepts of interest and this selection can either be
used to filter the result or be used in query refinement. Entity
co-occurrences (at sentence or paragraph level) in full-text
articles can be searched in the full-text mode, using terms in the
system dictionaries as well as user-created terms.

Concept Association Map:
The tool has a pairwise concept association map incorporated.
These associations are pre-computed and ranked according to
their relevance to the whole of the tagged MEDLINE corpus.

The user can explore the associations starting from a concept of
interest by selecting it in the tagged abstract. For each
association, a set of relevant article abstracts are displayed. In
addition, through the Concept Panel or Association Viewer,
users can retrieve sub-maps of the association map such as
associations between proteins and chemicals related to a disease
like breast cancer. These sub-maps can be exported and saved
into file as a list of associations.

Notes, Comments, Labels and Pinned Abstracts:
Users can store personal notes and comments for each abstract.
Notes are specific to a user, while comments are visible to all
users. Users can bookmark articles of interest using custom
labels. Alternatively, the ‘article pinning’ option allows users to
bookmark important articles without attaching specific labels to
them. All such data can be viewed under the user's Briefcase.

Conclusion
We have developed TPX, a search analysis and exploration tool
whose various features aid in faster information hunt in
addition to enhanced exploration and management of
PubMed/local repository search results. The user terms/types
feature makes TPX an ideal “personal information assistant” for
scientists and biomedical literature curators. We believe that
relying on PubMed as the basic search/indexing engine and
having an advanced search analysis tool that performs
customized off-line and on-the-fly analysis of the search result
is an effective way of integrating biomedical literature with inhouse
and other external knowledge sources. TPX, with the
ability to point to external websites in addition to local
repositories is a step towards faster, personalized biomedical
literature analysis.

Citation:Joseph et al, Bioinformation 8(12): 578-580 (2012)

Shows a screen-shot of the tool

