Background
Recent research has revealed that cancer is a disease involving
complex changes in the human genome. As a result of the
innate complexities of the disease, no single or even
combination of drugs, works for all cancers and drugs are
normally targeted to specific cancers based on certain
characteristics called validated targets that are often
upregulated in cancer cells to allow their unchecked growth 
[].
Majority of research in the afore mentioned areas is focused on
cancer-specific mechanisms and the corresponding molecular
targets, but the search for improved cytotoxic agents which act
on ubiquitous targets such as DNA still represent an important
part of new anticancer drug innovation 
[]. Innovation of
anticancer drug is always an attractive challenge and is
classified in different ways according to their nature, sources,
mechanisms of action etc, which may be of microbial products,
synthetic chemicals, and plant or animal extracts 
[]. Rapid
advances in peptide therapeutics, has enabled the scientific
community to explore wider horizons to discover novel
therapeutic agents like Bacteriocins. These are small peptides
(30 –60) amino acid with antimicrobial properties against
bacteria usually of the same or closely related species (narrow
spectrum), and sometimes against a wide spectrum of species
[,
]. Bacteriocins promises to be effective therapeutic agent
and its biochemical properties have been studied; their
antineoplastic capability has also identified after its discovery in
the late 1970s by using crude bacteriocin preparation toxic to
mammalian cells []. Common bacteriocins like Pyocin, colicin,
ped-iocin, and microcin have been shown to possess inhibitory
properties against different neoplastic line cells 
[], Azurin, is
an important bacteriocins, a member of the cupredoxin family
of redox proteins, secreted by the bacterium Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, which can preferentially penetrate human cancer
cells and exerts cytostatic and apoptotic effects with no
apparent activity on normal cells. A 28 amino acid long peptide
derived from Azurin, termed as p28 (consisting of amino acid
residues 50 to 77 of the 128 amino acids long Azurin) possessed
entry specificity in cancer cells but not the healthy ones 
[]. The
discovery of the unique capabilities of azurin and p28 in
interfering in cancer cell growth and promote their cell death,
but also its ability to prevent tumor emergence, brings about a
wonderful prospect of looking out other bacteriocins, which
might have similar properties or even better antineoplastic
effect.

A comprehensive expedition to identify and subsequently
characterize such potentially beneficial bacteriocins from
common bacterial species which are usually an integral part of a
human microflora can lead us to identify the novel anticancer
molecules. The focus of the study was to enumerate, identify
bacteriocins from commensal bacteria - Lactobacillus salivarius
which is a gram-positive bacillus, inhabiting human oral
cavities, intestines, and vagina. An attempt has been made to
comprehensively characterize these identified bacteriocins and
subsequently check its antineoplastic capacity by carrying out
molecular docking studies.

Methodology
Literature Mining:
A comprehensive search of all eligible studies on bacteriocins ,
Lactobacillus salavarius &amp; their antineoplastic properties (as on
April 2012) was made by searching the electronic literature
(PubMed database) for relevant published reports and by
manual searching of reference lists of articles on this topic. Only
studies in the English language were included in the analysis.

Identification of bacteriocins from Lactobacillus salavarius genome:
The entire genome of Lactobacillus salavarius was scanned in
order to recognize putative bacteriocin ORFs. BAGEL
(http://bioinformatics.biol.rug.nl/websoftware/bagel.) a web
server that identifies putative bacteriocin ORFs in a DNA
sequence using novel, knowledge-based bacteriocin databases
and motif databases was employed. Bagel identified 28 putative
bacteriocins, out of these 22 bacteriocins which were
hypothetical were taken up for further analysis and
characterization. The protein sequences of these 22 hypothetical
bacteriocins were retrieved from NCBI Reference Sequences
database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/RefSeq/).

Functional Annotations of Hypothetical bacteriocin:
All the chosen bacteriocin protein sequences were subjected to
the protein function prediction server tools - Prot fun2.2
(http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/ProtFun/) and Kihara
Bioinformatics (http://kiharalab.org/pfp/). These servers
perform automated function prediction that provides the most
probable annotations for a query sequence in each of the three
branches of the Gene Ontology: biological process, molecular
function, and cellular component. Rather than utilizing precise
pattern matching to identify functional motifs in the sequences
and structures of these proteins, these servers are we designed
to increase the coverage of function annotation by lowering
resolution of predictions when a detailed function is not
predictable [].

Sub- Cellular Localization Prediction:
Sub-cellular localization tools such as Balanced Sub-cellular
Localization Predictor. BaCelLo
(http://gpcr.biocomp.unibo.it/bacello/pred.htm)was utilized.
BaCelLo is useful in identifying the putative location (secretory
way, cytoplasm, nucleus, mitochondrion and chloroplast) of the
bacteriocins under investigation; it is based on different SVMs
organized in a decision tree. After thorough functional
characterization, the properties of the analyzed bacteriocins
were compared to that of Azurin an only those hypothetical
bacteriocins which seems to posses properties very similar to
azurin were chosen and subjected to further studies.

Protein Structure Prediction and Structure Assessment:
The three hypothetical bacteriocins, namely Lsl_003, Lsl_0554,
and Lsl_0510 were chosen after functional annotation and sub –
cellular localization analysis and after comparison against
Azurin were modeled using ab-initio method employing Quark
algorithm (http://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/QUARK/).
QUARK models are built from small fragments (1-20 residues
long) by replica-exchange Monte Carlo simulation under the
guide of an atomic-level knowledge-based force field. Protein
models obtained after ab intio modeling were verified for their
accuracy by using Ramachandran plot. The molprobility server
(http://molprobity.biochem.duke.edu/) was employed for this
purpose.

Docking Studies of Bacteriocin against the Cancer Target:
Molecular docking analysis were carried out to study the
binding affinity of our characterized bacteriocins towards
common cancer targets such as p53 (with mutant core domain),
Rb1 and AR in order to understand the probable efficiency of
these bacteriocins to act as antineoplastic agents. The protein
structures 2J1X - p53 core domain mutant M133L-V203AY220C-
N239Y-N268D, 1AD6 – RB1 and 1Z95 – AR were
downloaded from the Protein Database (http://www.rcsb.org).
Hex 4.5 was employed for performing rigid docking between
the chosen bacteriocins and selected cancer targets by SP
Fourier Transform, FFT steric scan, FFT final search and MM
refinement []. The clustering histogram with the scoring
function was generated to analyze the binding energy of each
selected conformations. Based on the docking results,
preferably in terms of ETotal, minimum energy value, the
effectiveness of all cancer receptor and bacteriocins (drug
molecules) to interact with each other were observed and the
relative affinity of binding was studied. The detail workflow of
the study has been illustrated in ().

Discussion
Any therapeutic agents with a goal to eradicate cancer needs to
capable of inhibiting the growth and kill, any preformed tumor
and should also inhibit oncogenic transformation of normal
cells to cancer cells. The biologists have a recognized a new
class of anticancer agents possessing both these properties-
Bacteriocins. These are bacterial proteins, which have evolved
and designed efficiently by force of natural selection over eons.
Goal of our study was to identify bacteriocins from Lactobacillus
salavarius and characterize them as potential anticancer drug, by
employing suitable Bioinformatics techniques.

Functional Annotation:
A Total of 28 bacteriocins were retrieved after comprehensive
scanning of Lactobacillus salavarius genome using the Bagel tool
[Anne de jong, Nucleac acid research, 2006]. Out of these 22
bacteriocins are hypothetical. To characterize them, they were
subjected to function prediction servers and out of these, 3
bacteriocins were chosen which possessed the ideal properties
indicative of anticancer activity comparable to that of Azurin- a
member of the cupredoxin family of copper containing redox
proteins capable of preferentially penetrating human cancer
cells and exert cytostatic and cytotoxic (apoptotic) effects with
no apparent activity on normal cells. Azurin's mode of action
involves inhibition of cell signaling, inhibition of angiogenesis
and stabilization of p53. The ability of Azurin to preferentially
&amp; rapidly penetrate cancer cells and promote significant anticancer
activity without membrane disruption suggests this
unique molecule may be effective against different types of
solid tumours with fewer side effects than current anticancer
therapeutics []. Owing to these characteristics, Azurin was
chosen as the control for the study. The properties of the
bacteriocins from Lactobacillus salavarius under study were
compared against Azurin and inferences were accordingly
drawn. Functional characterization can reveal unknown
mechanisms by which the bacteriocins under study might
exercise anticancer effect. The results from function prediction
servers Protfun2.2, Khara bioinformatics, Interproscan, The no:
of Protein phosphorylation, sites were initially predicted.
Predicting the number of Protein phosphorylation, sites is
crucial in any research pursuit attempting to identifying
proteins which can be potential anti neoplastic agents. This is
partly because of its early links to metabolic regulation and
cancer [] 
has been the most widely studied PTM. There is also
a requirement of not only the modified residue and
surrounding sequence, but also its regulation by treatments and
ligands, associated biological processes, upstream and
downstream interactions and location relative to protein
domains and other functional regions of the protein.

Protfun results predicted that the odds of the three bacteriocins
being a part of the cellular were very similar to that of azurin.
The other selected functional characterization was to predict the
propensity of the bacteriocins to have enzymatic activity. Our
study revealed that our bacteriocins and Azurin, both possess
very low proclivity to exhibit catalytic activity. This is indicative
that the bacteriocins of our interest have little chance of
interacting with any other substrates or alter the normal cellular
kinetics. The probability of eliciting an immune response was
much lower in bacteriocins of our choice compared to that of
azurin. While azurin had a ~50.1% chance of eliciting immune
response, Lsl_003, Lsl_0554 and Lsl_0510 showed ~15%, ~21%
and ~13% respectively. This indicates that the bacteriocins that
we had chosen for study have very low chances of Druginduced
adverse reactions of type B which comprise
idiosyncratic and immune-mediated side effects 
[]. For
characterizing the localization within the cell, all bacteriocins it
subjected to the sub cellular localization tool – BaCelLo. The
detail information on the exact subcellular location of each
bacteriocin is elucidated in  (see supplementary
material). These results signify that the three chosen
bacteriocins Lsl_003, Lsl_0554 and Lsl_0510 have great chance
of possessing antineoplastic activity similar to that of azurin.
The essential information on function annotation of the
bacteriocins is depicted in ().

Ab-Initio Modeling Of the Bacteriocins &amp; Structure Assessment:
Prediction of the three-dimensional structure of a protein from
its amino acid sequence is imperative, as knowledge of the 3 d
structure of the bacteriocins is essential to study its binding
affinity towards the protein receptors, which are to be targeted
to yield an anti cancer effect. Owing to the short sequence
length of the bacteriocins, homology modeling was not
possible, as any sequence similarity might arise due to near
coincidence and might not be indicative of any evolutionary
relationship. The structure of the 3 bacteriocins was predicted
by ab-initio method using the quark server. De novo protein
structure prediction methods attempt to predict tertiary
structures from sequences based on general principles that
govern protein folding energetics and statistical tendencies of
conformational features that native structures acquire, without
the employing explicit templates []. The assessment of the
modeled structures was done by observing the Ramachandran
plot using molprobility. Over 90% of the amino acid residues in
the modeled bacteriocin structures reside in the most favorable
regions, clearly indicating that the modeled structures are good.
In Lsl_003 90.1% (64/71) of all residues were in favored regions,
in case of Lsl_0554 -96.4% (54/56) of all residues were found in
favored regions and for Lsl_0510, about 89.2% (83/93) of all
residues were in favored regions.

Docking Of the Bacteriocins against Selected Cancer Targets:
The protein-protein docking analysis is highly useful in judging
the strength of binding and also to analyze a spatial
configuration adopted by the molecules in their bounds state.
The modeled bacteriocin structures were subjected to docking
procedure using HEX4.5 against three cancer targets namely
p53 core domain mutant M133L-V203A-Y220C-N239Y-N268D
and Rb1 protein the androgen receptor (AR). P53 is inactivated
directly by mutation in _50% of human cancers. Nearly all of
the oncogenic mutations occur in its core or DNA-binding
domain, contained within the sequence of residues 94-292 
[,
]. 
Destabilized mutants of p53 can be stabilized by the
binding of other molecules, as shown by the binding of a
specific double-stranded DNA []. Theoretically destabilized
mutants of p53 can be stabilized by the binding of other
molecules. We made an attempt to check for the binding affinity
of the listed bacteriocins towards the destabilized core region of
p53 by carrying out molecular docking studies. Rb1 is
responsible in preventing excessive cell growth by
inhibiting cell cycle progression until a cell is ready to divide.
pRb belongs to the pocket protein family, whose members have
a pocket for the functional binding of other proteins. Binding of
oncogenic protein, such as those produced by cells infected by
high-risk types of human papillomaviruses, can inactivate Rb1,
and consequently lead to cancer []. Our focus was to check
whether the Lactobacilus bacteriocins are capable of binding to
Rb1 binding sites and thereby obstruct the physical interaction
of Rb1 with viral ooncoproteins. Androgen receptor is the most
common receptor targeted by most drugs which are
administered against prostate cancer. Drugs like Flutamide are
a nonsteroidal antiandrogen that blocks the action of both
endogenous and exogenous testosterone by binding to the
androgen receptor []. Docking analysis carried against
Androgen Receptor yielded very promising results, with all
three bacteriocins show very high binding affinity. Against
mutant p53 and Rb1 - Lsl_0510 shows a good binding strength
with an E-Total value of -46.93 and -57.85 respectively. This
indicates that Lsl_0510 is a promising candidate to stabilize the
destabilized core region of mutated p53. The E-total values
obtained after docking against the cancer target is illustrated in
 (see supplementary material). The docking poses of the
three bacteriocins against the chosen cancer targets - p53, Rb1,
AR is shown in ().

Conclusion
Our study identified 3 bacteriocins from Lactobacillus salavarius
namely Lsl_003, Lsl_0554, and Lsl_0510 which were found to
possess characteristics which highly similar to that of Azurin
and can serve as potential leads in the quest for new cancer
therapeutic drugs. These bacteriocins may be further tested by
in vitro experimentation for their antioncogenic activity.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Shaikh et al, Bioinformation 8(13): 589-594 (2012)

Flowchart illustrating the process of identification and
subsequent characterization of hypothetical bacteriocins from
Lactobacillus salavarius.

Graph depicting key functional characteristics of the
three chosen hypothetical bacteriocins from Lactobacillus
salavarius in comparison with Azurin. The propensity to be part
of cellular envelope, eliciting immune response and being nonenzymatic
in nature are represented in odds and the numbers of
phosphorylation sites are denoted.

The docking results of the three bacteriocins Lsl_003, Lsl_0554, and Lsl_0510 against cancer targets - p53, Rb1 and AR. The
cancer targets are depicted in the cartoon form and the bacteriocins depicted in surface model.

