Background
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) is an enzyme in
the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) that plays an important
role in protecting cells from oxidative damage by producing
NADPH and reduced glutathione. In the erythrocyte, which
lacks a nucleus, mitochondria and other organelles, PPP is the
only biochemical pathway for generating reducing capacity 
[]
.G6PD deficiency is common in malaria endemic regions and is
estimated to affect more than 400 million people worldwide. It
is a hereditary genetic defect, which is one of the most prevalent
polymorphisms and enzymopathies in humans, particularly in
males []. It is postulated that the high frequency of G6PD
deficiency has arisen because G6PD deficient variants confer
some protection or resistance against malaria caused by
Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax 
[]. Erythrocyte
exposure to oxidative stress causes haemoglobin denaturation,
ultimately resulting in haemolysis. Haemolytic anaemia in
G6PD-deficient individuals can be triggered by a range of
oxidative agents, such as infections and certain foods and
drugs, including anti-malarials []. The G6PD gene is located at
the telomeric region of the X chromosome (band Xq28),
consisting of 13 exons and 12 introns. It encodes 515 aminoacids
and a GC-rich (more than 70%) promoter region. G6PDdeficient
erythrocytes are more susceptible to destruction by
oxidative stress than normal erythrocytes due to the lower
NADPH levels []. Individuals with this genetic defect may
exhibit non-immune haemolytic anaemia in response to a
number of stimuli, most commonly infections or exposure to
certain medications or chemicals [].

G6PD is X-linked, and so deficient variants are expressed more
commonly in males than in females. Worldwide, an estimated
400 million people are G6PD deficient with the distribution
corresponding to areas in which malaria is, or has been,
prevalent. The evolutionary conservation of a housekeeping
gene such as G6PD is greater than that of tissue-specific genes,
presumably because the latter may require more specific
adaptation to the physiology of individual organisms. Total
lack of G6PD is almost certainly lethal in mammals, but partial
G6PD deficiency confers biological advantage with respect to
malaria. Most of the aa replacements causing G6PD deficiency
take place in positions that are conserved, but less than fully
conserved. Thus, the range of permissible G6PD mutations in
the microevolution of the human species bears a clear imprint
of the macro evolutionary history of this gene. With increasing
numbers of full genome sequences becoming available, the
approach we have used for the analysis of G6PD mutations is
likely to be generally applicable to genes (particularly
housekeeping genes) underlying other human diseases 
[]. The
abundance of distinct mutation sites and their clinical
manifestations make this enzyme ideal for structure-function
analysis studies. The main goal of the present study is to screen
of G6PD deficiency in the blood donors in Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia and also in this analysis, we also summarise the
occurrence or degree of mutations by residue conservation of
G6PD sequence in various species.

Methodology
Samples Collection:
1540 donor samples were obtained from Saudi male donors
which presented to Central blood bank, driver school blood
bank (DALLA), King Abdul-Aziz specialist Hospital in Taif city
in West region of Kingdom of Saudi Arabia during the period (3
July 2011 to 12 Aug 2011). The Age of these donors is between
17 to 50 years with a mean age of 33.5, and tested for the
activity of G6PD. Whole blood sample obtain from whole blood
bag after blood donation, and we used 6ml potassium EDTA
tube, and kept in refrigerators 2-8°C, and tested within 12
hours.

G6P-DH Fluorescence Screening Test:
This test used as screening test for G6PDD, by detect the
activity of G6PD enzyme in blood sample to reduction of
NADP and formation of reduced form NADPH. (This method
is that of Beutler &amp; Mithell [] modified on the recommendation
of the ICSH (70)). Add 5 µl of Anti-coagulated blood (which
was collected in EDTA tube) directly into 100 µl of the working
reagent. Mix and incubate the sample with working reagent at
temperature (25°) for 10 minutes. Then take 10 µl of the
resulting solution and place on the paper provided and leave to
dry. When the filter paper is completely dry view under along
wave UV-lamp in a darkened room. It will fluorescence activity
when the sample have a normal or slightly deficient. In case of
no fluorescence activity after 10-minute incubation, the sample
has marked G6PD deficiency of enzyme.

G6PD determination test:
This test is different from florescence test, it is used to detect the
quantity of NADP that reduced to NADPH by G6PD enzyme.
The amount of formation of NADPH is related to the activity of
G6PD enzyme. Pipette 400 µl of lysing reagent to a test tube.
Add 100 µl of Anti-coagulated blood. Mix well and wait for 5
minutes. In another test tube add 3ml of buffer and 100 µl of
NADP reagent. To this mixture add 50 µl of the lysate prepared
in step 1. Wait for 5 minutes. To the above mixture add 50 µl of
the substrate and put it in a sample covette, and interred in
spectrophotometer. Take a result from spectrophotometer as
(mU/ml); milli Units per ml and divided by the RBC value
(millions) to get the G6PD milli Units/ RBC (millions).

Genome sequence data:
Based on the similarity of the query sequence obtained from
Uniprot DB, we could find the closely related sequences. Highthroughput
NCBI blast (E-value cutoff e-5) was used to search
homologous sequences, which yielded 6 sequences. Basic Local
Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) [] is a sequence similarity
search and alignment program that which can be used by a web
interface or as a stand-alone tool to compare the query
sequences to the database sequences.

Multiple Sequence Alignment:
Clustal W was the program [] used for Multiple Sequence
Alignment Program (MSA) to determine the conserved
sequences among the templates. The obtained alignment files
were stored as text file inorder to study the degree of
conservation by tree prediction method.

Evolutionary Studies:
Phylogenetic tree were predicted by Phylodraw software 
[] in
order to determine the relatedness of G6PD to other related
among other species. PhyloDraw is a unified viewing tool for
phylogenetic trees. PhyloDraw supports various kinds of multialignment
formats (Dialign2, Clustal-W, Phylip format, NEXUS,
MEGA, and pairwise distance matrix) and visualizes various
kinds of tree diagrams, e.g. rectangular cladogram, slanted
cladogram, phylogram, unrooted tree, and radial tree. By using
several control parameters, users can easily and interactively
manipulate the shape of phylogenetic trees. The tree was
calculated from distance matrices determined from percent
identity or aggregate. In this method, pairwise distances used to
cluster the sequences are represented as the percentage of
mismatches between two sequences. The branch lengths are the
percentage mismatch between two nodes

Evolutionary Trace Server (TraceSuite II) was the software used
to trace the g6pd consensus sequences among species. The
concept behind this algorithm is to trace the evolutionary
significance among individual sequences based on the
occurrence of the amino acid residues in a protein sequence by
their relative evolutionary importance, and when a structure is
available for that protein, it also can display a structural map of
where top-ranked residues fall.

Discussion
Frequency of G6PD deficiency in KSA is very high when
compared to other study population [], and still not be
screening routinely for blood donor []. We estimate the
activity of G6PD enzyme in blood donors sample by using
fluorescence screening test to follow up the enzyme activity.
The normal range for G6PD enzyme in normal patient is (100-
200 mU/109), in own study (mean ± SD) of G6PD enzyme in 39
deficient donor is (10.8 ±13.1) and the range is (57.5 - 0.206), but
the (mean ± SD) of G6PD enzyme in Saudi deficient donor is
(8.87 ± 10.2) and the range is (46.16 - 0.206). Finally the (mean ±
SD) of G6PD enzyme in non Saudi deficient donor is (14.25 ±
17) and the range is (57.5 - 0.871),  (see supplementary
material). The phylogenetic tree () we obtained for
G6PD clearly supports a common evolutionary origin
throughout all the organisms considered for the study and is
consonant with taxonomy. The degree of homology results
shows critical regions as consensus sequences in all the species.
These conserved sites/specific pattern suggests that within the
selected species in G6PD are likely to be involved in the
development of functional specificity. These may play a crucial
role in binding to a specific substrate or can be part of active site
of protein. Besides the specific pattern sites determined are
regarded as functionally important and the properties of the
motifs may also suggest specific functional roles for the protein.
The tree shows the average gene-gene distance as 0.048 and
root-gene distance as 0.027.

More than a hundred naturally occurring mutations of human
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) have been
identified at the amino acid level. The abundance of distinct
mutation sites and their clinical manifestations make this
enzyme ideal for structure-function analysis studies 
[]. These
results of computer-assisted analyses contribute to a further
understanding of the structure-function relationships of human
G6PD deficiency. The results from Evolutionary Trace Server
(TraceSuite II) include six clusters which are more or less
conserved among species and as shown in figure s 4 and 5. This
web server provided an improved representation of results
adds useful input and output options and integrates the
graphical representation of the clusters which shows the
evolutionary distance between the selected sequences among
the species. The cluster shows human and macaca have more or
less similar kind of evolutionary significance in the case of
G6PD mutation and they lay on the same phase in evolution
[].

Recognition of sequence variations especially by mutation that
lead to functional diversification within a sequence family is not
a trivial task. Our study focused on the fact that, functional
specificity signals must be separated from strong background
signals resulting from the phylogenetic differences between the
protein subfamilies or subgroups. The mutation in the
sequences can be analyzed through pattern and evolutionary
studies which can be helpful to distinguish the specific
distribution of amino acids within and across the subfamilies.
Hence, it is very important to determine the degree of
conservation of mutation by analyzing the occurrence of the
residues that can provide significance information for
evolutionary studies [].

Conclusion
The application of sequence similarity study approach and
phylogenic studies as shown by this work may significantly
advance the understanding of protein sequence-structurefunction
relationships and guide experimental characterization
of protein function. Overall, our analysis reveals the presence of
G6PD mutated sequences among species and gene clusters
provide significant differences which helps to identify the
evolutionary path that might have included. This analysis
highlights the conserved presence as well as functional
importance of G6PD revealed by mutational studies.In the
present case, gene-gene and gene-root distances highlighted
relatively well the feature of evolutionary data for homologous
between species.

Conflict of Interest
No

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are thankful to Mentor and Staff of College of Applied
Medical Sciences (CLS Department), King Saud University,
Riyadh for helping us in compiling this study by providing
facilities from the university Grand.

Citation:Alharbi et al, Bioinformation 8(25): 1260-1264 (2012)

(A) Shows the Phylogenetic tree for the sequences; (B) MSA for G6PD from different species; (C) Phylogeny (rooted) for
G6PD from different species.

