Abbreviations

LQTS - Long QT Syndrome, TDS - Torsades de Pointes, hERG - human ether-a-go-go-related gene, MCC - Matthews' Correlation Coefficient.

Background
Our thinking and perspective on drug development is now
being revised due to serious cardiac side effects arising
from certain drugs available in the market [–]. Endorsing
or banning the process of developing a new drug is now
more than ever subject to strict scrutiny. Meanwhile, drugrelated
patents and datasets of broader and higher quality
are accumulating and becoming available in the database
and as a result, computational approaches are developed in
parallel aiming to predict cardiac toxicity of such drugs,
their by-products, and the factors that induce them [–].
The focus of the current study is to verify certain drugs
toxicity to the cardiac tissue and thereby differentiate nontoxic
(safe) from toxic drugs. Such drugs lead to QT
interval prolongation and causes fatal consequences.

Long QT syndrome (LQTS) is usually congenital although
it can be acquired after administration of certain drugs
known to affect the heart electrical system, prolong the
QT-interval and cause a dangerous form of heart
arrhythmia []. QT interval includes both the ventricular
depolarization and repolarization intervals. Prolongation of
QT interval induced by drugs is due to increased
repolarization time through blockade of the outward
potassium (K+) current []. More than 80% QTprolonging
drugs have been shown to inhibit the K+
channels encoded by the human ether-a-go-go-related gene
(hERG) [–]. The hERG K+ channel, a key target for QTprolonging
drugs, is a voltage-activated channel, expressed
by multigene family forming tetrameric structure which
consists of four identical α-subunits []. Each subunit
consists of six α-helical transmembrane domains.
Mutations occurred in the hERG localized in the cardiac tissue causing loss of channel function leads to congenital
LQTS [].

Cardiac and non-cardiac drugs prolonging QT interval vary
in their risk or cardiac toxicity [–&gt;,]. The most serious
risk of such drugs is known by the French term Torsades
de Pointes (TDP) which also called polymorphic
ventricular tachycardia, a specific type of dangerous
ventricular arrhythmia that could deteriorate to fatal
ventricular fibrillation and results in sudden death.
Although, some drugs carry a risk of TDP, others are only
associated with that risk and lack substantial evidences for
causing TDP. Other types of drugs carry the risk of TDP
only with patients having congenital LQTS. Many noncardiac
drugs prolong the QT interval enhancing the risk of
TDP as a side effect [,]. TDP is usually self-limited
arrhythmia causing heart shivering, dizziness, or even
epilepsy and loss of consciousness []. TDP can also
worsen and cause ventricular fibrillation eventfully results
in sudden death. Drug-induced TDP has been considered
for the last decade to be the single most common cause of
the withdrawal or restriction of the use of the
corresponding marketed drugs []. The large number of
non-cardiac drugs that prolong QT interval is rising,
amongst are antihistamines, anti-psychotics, anti-bacterial,
and others. Their potential side effects leading to cardiotoxicity
and resulting in sudden death constitute a major
concern in drug manufacturing and regulation. For that
reason, the focus has been put onto current and potential
drugs causing QT prolongation in the population []. As
a result, several drugs have been withdrawn from the
market or restricted in their use, whereas others due to their QT prolongation and deadly cardiac consequences were
not even granted the regulatory approval [,,].

Considering the torsadogenic effect of current drugs and
due to various measures taken by regulators as to drug
withdrawal and restriction in the market, our view has been
that while developing a drug, it is important to test its
cardio-toxicity using computational tools that employ
available information on drug structural characteristics.
These tools could predict cardio-toxicity of a potential drug
early in its development and thus based on available data
could verify the LQTS risks saving significant time, labour
and resources and more importantly avoiding loss of
patients lives. In this research we have made efforts to
define a set of counting rules to filter out compounds in
databases that are not ’cardio-safe‘. We have used
characteristics of known cardio-toxic drugs in terms of
molecular descriptors and optimized their ranges.

Methodology
Learning sets
A corresponding search in the literature identified several
drugs that exhibit QT­interval prolonging activity [–].
Rand Biotechnologies ltd has conducted this search and
provided us with categories of drugs as follows: 133
cardio­toxic drugs and 1500 potentially cardio­safe
marketed drugs. In the current study we aim to develop a
method that could provide simple rules to be used by
medicinal chemists for verifying or designing cardio­safe
molecules. For such purpose we have utilized 2Ddescriptors
which are based on simple whole­molecule
properties e.g. molecular weight, H­bond donors, H­bond
acceptors, log P, polar surface area, number of heavy
atoms, number of hydrophobic atoms, number of rings,
number of aromatic atoms and bonds, number of carbon,
nitrogen, oxygen, sulphur and phosphor atoms.

Descriptors selection and processing
The decision as to which set of descriptors to be used for
differentiating between cardio-toxic and -safe drugs is
crucially important. We sought after the most significant
set of descriptors from which guidelines for the design of
safe compounds to be suggested. The selection has been
performed as following: all descriptors were evaluated
separately and the best discriminative descriptor was
chosen to be the core. The second descriptor to be added to
the core was selected from the rest descriptors while giving
the best performance in discrimination. The process
continued until we have five descriptors in the core.

We aim to construct a filter consisting of ranges of 5
descriptors that can differentiate well between cardio-toxic
drugs and cardio-safe drugs. For this purpose, ranges of
descriptors were optimized simultaneously in exhaustive
search, by maximizing a function (Matthews' Correlation
Coefficient, MCC) that considers each of the four possible
outcomes for any drug ‐ Positive, Negative, False Positive
and False Negative (equation 1, ). Higher MCC means better distinction. The
division process of databases into training set and test set
has been repeated 5 times with 80% of the cardiotoxic/
cardio-safe drugs, while the remaining (20% of the
databases) was used as a test set. Each time the division
was performed by a random choice. The need for a
combinatorial optimization of descriptors' ranges dictates
the requirement to transform descriptor values into discrete
ones. Some descriptors already have a discrete character,
i.e., the numbers of Nitrogen atoms, H-bond acceptors etc,
while others, such as molecular weight, polar surface area,
etc., are continuous. The transformation to discrete
character was limited to give 50 values for upper and lower
limit ranges each.

Prediction modelling
A set of rules is constructed by picking lower limit and
upper limit for each descriptor. Each set has two values for
each descriptor, constituting the range which is considered
to be the “correct” one (by that set of descriptors) for
cardio-safety. The “correctness” of this set is measured by
its MCC value, described below. The constructed set of
rules is applied to the drugs in the training sets to calculate
the value of the scoring function, its Matthews Correlation
Coefficient (MCC) (equation 1). An exhaustive search is
performed for all combinations (around 250 million
options) and the resulting sets of rules are sorted based on
their MCC score. The best set of rules is presented.

Discussion
We checked the entire diversity within the set of drugs
inducing QT prolongation and we have found that they are
very highly diverse (). More than 110 compounds
have Tanimoto index of similarity ≪ 0.7. All cardio-toxic drugs were found to obey Lipinski rule of 5 [] and Oprea
lead-like rule []. Drug-like, according to the Lipinski
rule of 5, states that orally bio available molecules are
more likely to have ≤ 5 H-bond donors, ≤ 10 H-bond
acceptors, ≤ 500 molecular weight and ≤  5 log P. They
were derived by an analysis of 2245 drugs. Drug-like
molecules should have no more than 1 violation ‐
descriptor's value that is out of the range. However, leadlike,
according to Oprea, states that lead molecules are
more likely to have ≤ 450 molecular weight, between -3.5
and 4.5 log P, ≤ 4 rings, ≤ 10 non-terminal single bonds, ≤
5 hydrogen bond donors and ≤ 8 hydrogen bond acceptors.
They were derived by an analysis of 96 drugs and leads
from which they were derived. We can obviously see that
the property criteria for lead-likeness are more stringent
(inflexible) than that for the Lipinski rule of 5 for druglikeness.

The data base available for drugs inducing LQTS was
utilized for drawing histograms of five discriminative
descriptors, namely the number of nitrogen and oxygen
atoms, hydrophobic atoms, single bonds and log P (o/w)
(). These descriptors were employed in this study
to construct a useful prediction model that is easy for use
to medicinal chemists in drug design. Histograms'
construction may help in performing the subsequent
division of variable values into two sets: a lower range and
an upper range of each descriptor.

Our LQTS rules states that cardio-toxic drugs are more
likely to obey Lipinski rule of 5, Oprea lead-like rule as
well as having: Log P between -0.5 to 6.5, number of
nitrogen atoms between 1 to 5, number of oxygen atoms is
up to 4 atoms, number of hydrophobic atoms between 5 to
27, number of single bonds between 15 to 53. Such
extracted rules are useful for separating cardio-safe drugs
from non­safe ones. A Matthews Correlation Coefficient of
0.6 was attained and nearly 96% of the cardio­toxic drugs
(true positives) were successfully identified while only
36% of the cardio­safe drugs (false positives) fall into
these ranges. These proposed set of rules could be
employed to infer cardio­toxicity or ­safety for current and
potential drugs. It may have important impact on decision
making in the fields of drug development, molecule
screening in biological assays, and other applications as
well.

Conclusions
The molecular characters inherent in the investigated drug
molecules have shown relevance to cardio­toxicity and ­
safety. Hence, a set of simple rules has been unravelled
and could become a landmark in the predictive ability
discriminating between cardio­toxic and ‐ safe drugs.
Such set of rules maybe widely employed to determine the
cardio-safety potential of molecules, screening molecules
for biological assays, as well as for other applications.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We gratefully acknowledge RAND Biotechnologies ltd for providing us with the database of cardio-toxic and cardiosafe
drugs collected from literature.

Citation:Falah et al, Bioinformation 3(9): 389-393 (2009)

diversity within drugs prolonging QT interval

Plots of the distribution patterns of number of nitrogen atoms, oxygen atoms, single bonds, hydrophobic atoms
and log P in the LQTS drugs.

