Background
Many compounds that bind to the minor groove of DNA or
bind as intercalating ligands to DNA have been discovered.
Minor groove-binding drugs complement the shape of the
groove, whereas intercalation occurs when ligands of an
appropriate size and chemical nature insert themselves between
DNA base pairs. The minor groove binders cause little
distortion of the DNA backbone conformation and intercalating
binders are known to cause higher quantities of distortion;
however, both drug-binding mechanisms interfere with DNAprotein
interaction. Thus, DNA function can be artificially
modulated, inhibited, or activated by binding to these drugs
molecules instead of the protein. Such activation or inhibition of
DNA function can be used to cure or control diseases such as
cancer. Experimental and theoretical studies have shown that a
large number of these drug molecules can reversibly bind to the
minor groove of the AT-rich DNA regions [,
]. Using Sliding
Box Docking for simulating the interaction of ligands with AT
and CG-rich DNA, we can obtain a better understanding of the
specificity of these ligands.

Methodology
Molecular docking is a method that predicts the preferred
orientation of one molecule relative to a second molecule to
allow formation of a stable complex. The affinity of the two
molecules is evaluated by a scoring function. The docking
software simulates the ligands interaction at a specific target
site that is defined by a box. The results of docking simulations
are best poses for the ligand into the box, and the respective
scores of these insertions. The sliding box method allows a box
of a constant size to slide along the DNA structure from the
bottom to the top (). The size is automatically
calculated by the software, and is defined by the number of
base pairs. Docking simulations are performed for every
possible box location; thus, producing a score for each potential
docking site. Sliding Box Docking is a stand-alone application
implemented in FreePascal, and distributed for the Linux,
platform which provides a command line interface. It was
developed to work with Autodock Vina [], a free piece of
software separately distributed.

Input
Sliding Box Docking uses a ligand and a three-dimensional
DNA structure in Autodock PDBQT format as input. Some
three-dimensional DNA structures in PDBQT format are
distributed with the software, but other three-dimensional
DNA structures can also be used, provided they are in the
PDBQT format. The axis of the DNA helical structure should be
aligned with the x, y or z-axis, the software automatically
detects the axis with which the DNA is aligned. Some threedimensional
DNA structures are distributed with the software.
The tree-dimensional DNA structures distributed with the
software include crystallographics obained from the PDB Data
Bank [d(CGCGATATCGCG) and d(CGCGTTAACGCG)] and
theoretical structures built using the program Accelrys
Discovery Studio [d(CACACTCTGAGAGTGT) and
d(CCGGAATTCGCGATAT)] [].

Output
The results of docking simulations are exported in a PNG
graphic format and also saved in a text file.

Results &amp; Discussion
Sliding Box Docking has been tested by running it with a ligand
dataset that includes berenil, distamycin, hoechst 33258 and
netropsin. The literature describes these ligands as specific for
AT-rich DNA sequences []. A preliminary study showed that
selected ligands interact better with the AT-rich position.
Docking simulations using Sliding Box Docking showed the
expected results for the affinity between ligands and AT base
pairs in the target dataset (). The sliding box strategy
offers more information than normal DNA-ligand docking
simulations because typical DNA-ligand docking simulations
show the affinity of the ligand to DNA, but do not show the
difference between optimal position and other positions.

Caveat &amp; Future Development
The software has been tested by running it in Ubuntu and is
still based on a command-line interface. The software is
developed to support Autodock Vina. In the future, I would
like to integrate support for other docking tools and include
theoretical three-dimensional structures of other DNA
sequences into the target data set.

The authors thank Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento
Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq) for the financial support for
this project.

Citation:Andrelly Martins-José, Bioinformation 9(14): 750-751 (2013)

Schema of positioning box in Sliding Box Docking and compilation of standard results from the screening of four ligands.
A) The box slides from bottom to top with constant size. One docking simulation is performed in each position and the values of
theoretical free energy are plotted; B) The docking simulations for berenil, distamycin, hoechst 33258, and netropsin into the minor
groove of a d(CCGGAATTCGCGATAT) DNA sequence show the best affinity to AT-rich regions.

