Background
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are the most commonly encountered genetic variants. Many kinds of primer design software 
tools, such as Primer 3 [], provide the suitable polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) primers for the PCR-based SNP genotyping methods. A longer template sequence is more helpful for optimal primer design; however, 
the SNP flanking sequences provided in NCBI dbSNP [] are not always long enough 
for regular primer design.

Recently, FESD [] designed a “SNPflank” function to identify 
flanking sequences for SNP IDs and provided customizable length with rs# input alone for human SNPs but is inaccessible recently. 
To offer longer template sequences for desired SNP for genotyping experiments, such as TaqMan real‐time PCR 
[], PCR-RFLP [], and 
PCR‐CTTP [], we introduce the SNP-Flankplus for on-line retrieval of flanking 
sequences of target SNPs for sixteen organism genomes.

Methodology
The system design, algorithm and database of the program are described below.

Algorithm
This program adopts the sequences of accession numbers of the corresponding SNPs and the SNP contig position to obtain desired 
flanking sequence with specific length. In order to save memory space during reading the sequence of accession numbers, this system 
employs “block location way”, which splits the sequence of the accession numbers into multiple blocks. A specific block 
is loaded into the memory to search the required sequence and is hit by the algorithm 1 (under 
).

When the flanking length exceeds a block, some nearby blocks aer used, i.e. (block hit - d) or (block hit + d). d is the size of 
extending blocks and is calculated by the algorithm 2 (under ).

Database
The source databases are retrieved on-line and constantly updated from NCBI dbSNP and Nucleotide 
[].

Result
Input
The four main input interfaces in SNP-Flankplus are followed: (1) Single Reference cluster ID (rs#) input; 
(2) Single NCBI Assay ID (ss#) input; (3) Multiple SNP ID rs# and ss# input by pasting; and 
(4) Multiple rs# and ss# input through uploading a file (). 
Users are allowed to enter the SNP ID or multiple SNP IDs (rs# or ss#) for sixteen organisms when querying SNP information. When using 
the ss# input, the system will first query the corresponding rs#, and then retrieve SNP information related to this rs#. The SNP 
information contains allele information, submitted SNPs and other data for this RefSNP Cluster. Users can set the desired flanking 
length for the design of feasible primer sets. Two flanking length options are available: the system can be either set to default 
lengths of 300 ∼ 1000 bps, or alternatively, the length can be set to the maximum length of the corresponding contig accession 
().

Output
The flanking sequence output is shown in fasta format with on-line representation and file and/or text. It contains SNP ID (rs#), 
allele name, chromosome position of SNP, contig position of SNP, organism source, contig accession and sequence corresponding position, 
SNP type, sequence type, and case sensitivity. This information is separated by the “|” symbol. Its limitation of maximum flanking 
length is dependent on the corresponding contig accession number. Three types of flanking sequences are able to adjustable in real-time, 
such as: (1) SNP types contain general nucleotides, alleles, and IUPAC formats, (2) sequence types contain original, reverse, complementary, antisense sequences, and 
(3) case sensitive types contain upper case and lower case ().

Conclusion
SNP-Flankplus provides a real-time update mechanism is employed, and two SNP ID types (rs# and ss#) for sixteen organisms 
can be entered to obtain the latest SNP information and sequence. A maximum flanking length can be retrieved based on the corresponding 
contig accession number.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work was partly supported by the National Science Council in Taiwan under grant NSC97-2622-E-151-008-CC2, 
NSC96-2221-E-214-050-MY3 and KMU-EM-97-1.1b.

A web snapshot. (a) Four input interfaces. (b) SNP information and adjustable flanking length. (c) File or text 
output.

