Background:
Methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is a notorious 
pathogenic bacterium causing many infections and the disease 
control has become a serious issue worldwide  []. The high 
outbreak of MRSA was observed in closed communities such as 
schools, prisons and sports teams and the disease has mainly 
transmitted from fomite to person and from person to person 
and so on []. The pathogenecity of the bacteria includes skin 
and soft tissue infections (SSTI), bone, joint and implant 
infections, pneumonia, septicemia and various toxicoses such as 
toxic shock syndrome, bloodstream infections, osteomyelitis, 
septic arthritis, and device-related infections, necrotizing 
fasciitis and purpura fulminans and abscesses  []. Recent 
reports indicated the emergence of multidrug resistant 
Staphylococci against all classes of  β-lactam antibiotics. The 
antibiotic resistance is mainly due to the expression of PC1  β-
lactamase and the acquisition of mecA gene encoding a 
penicillin-binding protein, PBP2A []. The bacteria initially 
penetrate the host's immune system via epidermal and mucosal 
epithelia and the antimicrobial peptides play necessary role in
the host's innate immune defense against the initial colonization 
of bacteria []. It has been studied that many strains of MRSA 
contain genes that encode the toxin called Panton Valentine 
Leukocidin (PVL), bi-component leukocidal toxins 
(synergohymenotropic toxins) consists of F and S components. 
PVL is encoded by the lukPVoperon encoding the LukF-PV and 
LukS-PV components (cytotoxins) that lyse leukocyte. Hence, 
PVL positive Staphylococcal infections exist as life threatening 
infections of soft tissues and bones []. 

Recent studies revealed that strains of MRSA developed 
resistance to conventional antibiotics and emerged as multidrug 
resistant superbugs. Hence, there is a significant demand of 
finding better therapeutic agents. The active substances present 
in many medicinal plants could be used as therapeutic 
alternatives for MRSA infection []. Computer aided method is 
a preliminary approach to screening novel therapeutic agents 
and the discipline is an emerging strategy as it reduces many 
complexities of drug discovery process. The screening of lead 
molecule with good pharmacological properties and drug 
likeness is a tedious task in drug development process.  
Computer  aided  method  is  an  easy  platform  to  search  such 
kinds of biologically active compounds with favorable ADMET 
(Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism, Excretion and Toxicity) 
and drug-likeness properties  []. The study of receptor-ligand 
interaction is a fundamental concept of rational drug design 
and the prediction of such interactions by computational 
docking has increasing importance in the field of structure 
based drug discovery [].

The study mainly focused to screen potential herbal inhibitors 
against the drug targets of MRSA by computer based ADMET 
and docking studies. The data obtained from  in silico studies 
were later used for  in vitro studies. The study also provides a 
comparative account of the efficiency of herbal compounds to 
that of known antibiotics.

Methodology:
Identification of potential ligands:
Since MRSA has emerged as a multidrug resistant organism the 
design of alternative therapies are very crucial to treat MRSA 
outbreaks. There are reports that many herbal based 
compounds have high medicinal values against many 
pathogens. Hence, an initial survey of 74 compounds from 13 
different medicinal plants was carried out by extensive 
literature studies. It is possible to find out the druggish 
properties of herbal compounds by computer aided screening 
and the data will be useful to screen best lead molecules. The 
3D structures of all plant based ligands are available in drug 
data base and the structures were retrieved from PubChem 
[], 
KEGG [] and Chemspider 
[].

ADMET studies and screening of ligands:
The ligands with good pharmacological and druggish 
properties are very crucial for structure based drug discovery. 
The absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion and toxicity 
(ADMET) are the most important part of pharmacological 
studies of lead molecules and these can be predicted by 
computational biology tools. Hence, all 74 ligands identified 
were tested for their drug-likeliness, ADME profile and toxicity 
analysis by Pre-ADMET. The ADME includes the extent and 
rate of absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion. 
Absorption checks how the substance is entering to the blood 
circulation, distribution explains how substances are 
disseminating throughout the fluids and tissues of the body,
metabolism is the irreversible transformation of parent 
compounds into daughter metabolites and excretion explains 
how the substances are excreted from the body after 
metabolism. Pre-ADMET uses Caco2-cell (heterogeneous 
human epithelial colorectal adenocarcinoma cell lines) and 
MDCK (Madin-Darby Canine Kidney) cell models for oral drug 
absorption prediction and skin permeability, and human 
intestinal absorption model for oral and trans-dermal drug 
absorption prediction. Similarly, the programme uses BBB 
(blood brain barrier) penetration and plasma protein binding 
models to predict the distribution. Pre-ADMET predicts toxicity 
based on the mutagenicity of AMES parameters and rodent 
carcinogenicity assays of rat and mouse [].

Selection of target proteins and molecular docking:
The receptor and ligand interaction is the key mechanism of 
computer aided drug design. Previous studies reported that 
Penicillin Binding Protein 2A (PBP2A) and Panton-Valentine 
Leukocidin (PVL) are the major virulent factors of MRSA 
infections  [,
]. Hence, the native structures of the proteins 
are used as drug targets. The crystal structures of PBP2A 
(1VQQ) and PVL toxin (1T5R) were retrieved from Protein Data 
Bank and the coordinate files were used for the study. The 
selected herbal compounds were docked with target proteins by 
AutoDock. The program uses a Monte Carlo simulated 
annealing for configurational exploration using grid based 
molecular affinity potentials and provides bioactive 
conformation by energy minimization [].

In vitrostudies
The data generated by computer aided studies should be tested 
experimentally for further confirmation. Based on the 
pharmacological properties studied by ADMET &amp; docking 
studies, five botanicals were identified for In vitro  testing. The 
botanicals used in the study are Azadirachta indica 
[], Aloe vera
[],  Camellia sinensis 
[],  Punica granatum 
[] and  Psidium
guajava []. The herbals were collected from Horticulture 
Centre-Hulimavu, Bangalore. The leaf extracts were prepared 
by standard solvent extraction method and the antimicrobial 
activity of each extract was tested in different concentrations. 
The pure culture of MRSA was swabbed on Muller Hinton agar 
plates which have many wells. The extracts were added in 
different concentration to each well (well diffusion method) and 
the plates were incubated at 37°C for 24 hours. The 
antimicrobial activity was determined by measuring the zone of 
inhibition. The efficiency of herbal extracts was also compared 
with known antibiotics. The antibiotic susceptibility patterns 
were carried out by disc diffusion method. The sensitivity 
patterns of each antibiotic were confirmed by measuring the 
zone of inhibition around the disc and compared with standard 
antibiotic susceptibility chart.

Discussion:
The solution for MRSA associated outbreaks are critical 
problem because the organism  recently emerged as VRSA. 
Hence, the discovery of an alternative treatment has profound 
scope and significance. Drug discovery process is time 
consuming and multistep process which includes many 
preclinical and clinical trials. One of the major reasons for drug 
failures is the poor drug-likeness and pharmacokinetic 
properties of lead compounds. Computer aided method is a 
rapid and significant screening approach because it selects the 
lead molecules with good pharmacological and druggish 
properties. We have selected 74 active compounds from herbal 
origin such as leaf extracts of Azadirachta indica (Neem), Psidium
guajava (Guavas), Aloe vera, Ocimum tenuiflorum (Tulsi), Curcuma 
longa (Turmeric),  Allium sativum (Garlic),  Punica granatum 
(Pomegranate), Eucalyptus, Camellia sinensis (Tea) and the oil of 
Syzygium aromaticum (Clove). The 3D structures of the ligands 
were retrieved from drug databases and most of lead molecules 
qualified the properties of drugs. However, few ligands were 
found to be better as per Lipinski's rule of 5, CMC-like rule and 
MDDR-like rule (, see supplementary material).

Another important concern in drug discovery is the 
pharmacokinetics properties. The ADME profiles of selected 
drug candidates are shown in   (see supplementary 
material).  In silico toxicity prediction is the final step of 
pharmacokinetic screening of lead molecules and 30% of drug 
failures are due to toxicity issues. In this study, we have found 
that the predicted toxicities of many herbal compounds were 
suitable for further studies. Meliantriol from Azadirachta indica, 
β-sitosterol from Alo vera, ursolic acid and lupeol from Ocimum 
tenuiflorum, brevifolin  and  ellagic acid from  Punica granatum,
corilagin from Camellia sinensis, and many more showed better 
pharmacokinetic and drug-likeness properties (, see 
supplementary material). Hence, these lead molecules were 
identified as the best ligands for docking studies. All these 
herbal extracts were reported to have high medicinal potential 
against many pathogenic bacteria and we have tested efficiency 
of the same against MRSA by computer aided approach and in 
vitro studies. 

The key proteins involved in MRSA infections are PBP2A and 
PVL toxins. Hence, these proteins have been selected as 
probable drug targets. The crystal structure of Penicillin 
Binding Protein 2A (PDBID: 1VQQ) was retrieved from the 
PDB. The protein consists of two chains and three penicillin 
binding protein domains. Chain A is the key domain consists of 
646 amino acids and constitutes 33% helices (31 helices; 214 
residues) and 26% beta sheet (34 strands; 169 residues) which 
are important for the functional activity. The crystal structure of 
Panton-Valentine Leucocidin (PDBID: 1T5R) was also retrieved 
from PDB and it has 8 chains. All chains have 284 amino acid 
residues and constitute 3% helices (3 helices; 11 residues) and 
59% beta sheet (22 strands; 168 residues). The interactions 
between selected inhibitors and target proteins were studied by 
docking simulations. Among antibiotics, Vancomycin, best 
drug currently available against MRSA, showed the best 
binding energy value of ­8.91 kcal/mol. However, recent 
reports indicate that the organism developed resistance against 
Vancomycin and emerged as Vancomycin resistant 
Staphlococcus areus (VRSA). The binding efficiencies of herbal
active compounds also tested against the target proteins by 
molecular docking. The docking scores and binding energies of 
all selected ligands with both the targets were shown in 
 
(see supplementary material). As the best, Meliantriol, active 
inhibitor present in Neem, showed binding energies of ­6.02 
kcal/mol with PBP2A and ­8.94 kcal/mol with PVL toxin. 
Similarly,  β-sitosterol, an antimicrobial agent present in 
medicinal aloe, showed binding energies of ­7.40 kcal/mol and 
­6.34 kcal/mol for PBP2A and PVL toxin respectively 
().  
The docking studies reveled that herbal compounds are 
better inhibitors than chemical drugs; Meliantriol and similar 
compounds are the potential lead molecules than Vancomycin. 
As per computer aided studies plant derived inhibitors have 
high therapeutic value and it should be evaluated through  in 
vitro studies.

Thus, the study clearly indicates that herbal compounds have 
good therapeutic value against MRSA than antibiotics.

Since the data generated by computer aided method has just a 
hypothetical solution it should be tested in vitro  also. We have 
studied and compared the efficiency of antibiotics and selected 
herbal extracts (The active compounds of those extracts found 
to be effective by docking studies) against pure culture of 
MRSA. The method employed was disc diffusion and well 
diffusion techniques. Our study revealed that the organism 
resistant to wide range of antibiotics such as Moxifloxacin, 
Cefatoxime, Rifampicin, Oxacillin, Co-Trimoxazole, 
Chloramphenicol Ciprofloxacin, Ceftazidime, Nalidixic acid, 
Tetracycline, Streptomycin,  Erythromycin, Ampicillin, 
Norfloxacin and Methicillin. The organism is susceptible to only 
few antibiotics, Vancomycin is the best one. Moreover, recent 
studies on Vancomycin resistant  Staphylococcus areus  (VRSA) 
indicated that antibiotic treatments are challenging and 
pointing  out  ‘the  end  of  antibiotic  era’  is  very  near  in  future. 
The susceptibility pattern of various antibiotics against MRSA is 
shown in   (see supplementary material). Nonetheless, 
interestingly, as confirmed by the computer aided approach, the 
leaf extracts of Neem, Tea, Guava and Pomegranate showed 
better antimicrobial properties at a concentration of 100 µl, 100 
µl, 80 µl and 200 µl respectively, which implies the potential of 
herbal extract against MRSA  (). The computer aided 
method is useful to screen best ligands from wide range of 
compounds which will reduce the complexities of drug 
discovery process. Subsequently, the study needs more clinical 
testing using laboratory animals and further  in vivo studies 
should be conducted. The study would provide all initial inputs 
to design novel therapeutics against MRSA.

Conclusion:
Present studies revealed that the mortality rate of MRSA 
infection is very high and the organism is resistant to 
Vancomycin (VRSA), the best chemotherapeutic agent available 
against MRSA. This study concluded that computer aided 
screening is an effective alternative for identification of novel 
remedies when all antibiotics seems to have failed. Several 
natural herbal compounds are screened and their effectiveness 
against MRSA is compared with known antibiotics. Computer 
aided ADME and toxicity prediction favored to screen best 
ligands with good pharmacological activities. It was found that 
herbal compounds such as Melantriol, β- Sitosterol and similar 
compounds have good inhibitory activity against Penicillin 
Binding Protein 2A and Panton-Valentine Leukocidin toxin of 
MRSA, key virulent factors of MRSA infections. The  in silico
data have been tested  in vitro also, as suggested by computer 
aided method, herbal extracts of neem, medicinal aloe, tea, 
pomegranate and guava were identified as potential 
therapeutics against MRSA. The study concluded that, though 
the organism emerged as a multidrug resistant “superbug” 
there is high scope and application of herbal remedies towards 
MRSA infections.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors thankfully acknowledge the R &amp; D Centre of Life 
Sciences and Engineering, Dayananda Sagar Institutions for 
providing all necessary facilities and also grateful to Dr. P.S 
Rao, Vice President (R &amp; D), Life Sciences and Engineering and 
Dr. G S Jagannatha Rao, Senior Professor and Head, 
Department of Biotechnology, Dayananda Sagar College of 
Engineering for their constant support and encouragement 
throughout the study.

Citation:Skariyachan et al, Bioinformation 7(5): 222-233 (2011)

The interaction of Meliantriol and  β-Sitosterol against MRSA drug targets- Penicillin Binding Protein 2A (PBP2A) and 
Panton-Valentine Leukocidin (PVL) generated by computer aided docking. Neem active compound Melantriol interacts with PVL 
toxin by four hydrogen bonds (represented as green coloured sticks) and the interacting residues are LYS218 of chain A, THR 84, 
ASN 85 and ASN 86 of chain E. The lengths of the hydrogen bonds are 2.1 Å, 1.86 Å, 1.8 Å and 1.87 Å respectively  (). 
Melantriol interacted with PBP2A by ASP 624 of Chain A and the length of the bond formed was 2.21 Å  (). The ligand 
effectively binds with both PBP2A and PVL toxin with minimum binding energies of -6.02 kcal/mol and ­8.94 kcal/mol 
respectively.  showed the inhibitory activity of Aloe vera active compound β-sitosterol against both the targets. The 
ligand interacted to PBP2A by LYS273 (Chain A) with hydrogen bond of length 2.05 Å (). Similarly, β-sitosterol interacted 
with  PVL  toxin  by  ASN  85  of  Chain  A  with  one  hydrogen  bond  of  2.4  Å  ().  β-sitosterol is also identified as best lead 
molecule against MRSA targets with minimum binding energy of ­7.40 kcal/mol for PBP2A and ­6.34 kcal/mol for PVL toxin. The 
docking studies revealed that herbal compounds have good pharmacological activities against MRSA targets.

The therapeutic potential of selected herbal based 
compounds against MRSA confirmed by  in vitro  studies. The 
antibiotic susceptibility pattern was identified by Kirby-Bauer 
disc diffusion method. The resistance pattern of  Staphylococcus 
areus against Methicillin is encircled and which was 
characterized  by  lack  of  zone  of  inhibition  implies  resistance. 
Similarly the organism shows resistance against Cefatoxime (30 
mcg/disc), Norflaxacin (10 mcg/disc) and other antibiotics 
(, 
see supplementary material). Hence, the treatment 
with antibiotics are challenging in future. Figure B to F indicate 
the efficiency of herbal compounds against MRSA. As 
confirmed by computer aided screening neem active compound 
melantriol has significant antimicrobial activity against MRSA, 
represented by the zone of inhibition (C) around the well (well 
diffusion method). Figure B shows that the inhibitory activity of 
β-sitosterol (Aloe vera active compound) characterized by zone 
of clearance around the well, which was selected from docking 
studies. As screened by the computer aided approach, the 
active compound present in tea leaf (D), pomogranate (E), and 
guava (F) showed good inhibitory properties against MRSA.

