Background
The molecular confirmation of a clinical diagnosis in the context
of human heritable and somatic mutation events largely
involves sequencing-based technology. The principal focus of
any diagnostic sequencing approach is to interrogate the coding
region of those genes that are known to carry mutations that
cause a clinical phenotype. Critically, the process of designing
primers to achieve the amplification of exons for subsequent
sequencing has mostly been a tedious and labour intensive
process, with no universally adopted methods. For the most
part, designs are carried out manually or in a semi-automated
manner followed by experimental validation of primers to
establish specificity and efficiency.

Various primer design software are available ranging from
Primer 3 [], 
derivatives of Primer 3 [,
], bioinformatics suites
that incorporate Primer 3 such as Geneious 
[], or standalone
programs/software suites such as Vector NTI 
[]. In the case of
ExonPrimer [], 
which provides the ability to design primers
against intronic regions flanking exons with a preference for
regions excluding SNPs, either manual sequence entry or a
UCSC accession ID are required. Critically, it would be
desirable to incorporate other features in a primer design
process: in-silico PCR evaluation; the identification of single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that lie in the human target
sequence against which each primer anneals that might result in
allele bias in genomic amplification; and optional primer tailing
in order to allow for downstream sequencing applications.

None of the currently available free primer design software or
packages addresses the specific task of designing primers
against all exons of a given gene accession input with the ability
to carry out subsequent quality checks such as SNP checks,
while providing validation information in a complete package.
In order to address these issues, and to move one step closer to
a potential universally adopted procedure, we developed a
primer design program termed BatchPD using the Java
programming language. Our program automates and
streamlines the primer design process by interfacing with
various existing online primer-design related tools to integrate
primer quality checks, in-silico PCR evaluation, primer tailing
options, optional formatted outputs for SNP checking via an
online tool SNPCheck, as well as a standardised spreadsheet
summary output containing the most relevant information for
the targeted exons.

As part of our program validation we used NCBI's Homo sapiens
RefSeq gene accession list to produce an archive of predesigned
primers for all of the RefSeq genes that produce a
coding mRNA using BatchPD. Our pre-designed archive of
primers for approximately 9000 human RefSeq genes has been
made public allowing other research institutions and
laboratories free access []. By preparing a list of pre-designed
primers for the RefSeq genes we avoid the potential issues of
BatchPD being invalidated due to future updates of web
services, or even decommissioning these services. In support of
the Open-source software development movement and in the
interest of sharing our work, we have made both our program
and source code available [].

Methodology
It was decided at the outset that the input for BatchPD should
allow single, but preferably multiple, Refseq accession entries in
a list format with an optional automatically-read starting input
file ().

In order to streamline downstream processing, primers are
designed that allow annealing at 60°C. This removes the need
for costly PCR optimisations saving on both technical time and
reagent costs. The use of M13 tails allows for rapid sequencing
of PCR products or user-defined custom tails for nextgeneration
sequencing such as the Roche GSJunior or 454
platforms. We have validated the primers designed for
approximately 80 genes using one set of PCR amplification
conditions (35 cycles of 94°C for 45 seconds, 60°C for 30 seconds
and 72°C for 30 seconds) using either of two buffers: a standard
PCR buffer containing 2mM MgCl2, and another that is
identical but optimised for GC-rich sequences [,
]. In our
experience, the designed primers have a high probability of
successful amplification with minimal need for redesigns.

The primer design process involves the use of RefSeq mRNA
accession IDs, with a specific requirement for accessions
starting with “NM_”. This can be achieved by querying the
NCBI database [] to identify the relevant RefSeq accession if
present. In the case of batch queries using the full list of RefSeq
accessions, we used the NCBI FTP archive [].

The RefSeq accession is used by BatchPD to retrieve the
relevant GenBank file as well as to identify a corresponding
UCSC accession number. Primers are designed via an online
tool called ExonPrimer []. In order to simplify the design
process the UCSC specific ExonPrimer script link is parsed from
the University of California Santa Cruz (UCSC) genome
browser's description and page index. The results from the
ExonPrimer run are parsed for the relevant information and
results. Should the run complete successfully the results are
formatted for downstream work and optional SNP checking via
SNPCheck []. 
The SNPCheck step requires user intervention
to copy/paste the formatted inputs into the SNPCheck web
service; this step was not integrated into the automated work
flow ().

The UCSC in-silico PCR online tool was used in a simulated
PCR of the human genome with the primers designed from
ExonPrimer. This in-silico PCR evaluation determines whether a
single amplicon would be amplified as opposed to multiple
amplicons per primer pair. The results are then retrieved and
parsed to identify relevant primer and PCR related information
such as: number of amplicons, amplicon start position,
amplicon end position, strand orientation, amplicon size(s) and
chromosome location(s).
()

At the end of the run, all relevant information is processed and
formatted into a comma delimited file (.CSV) for importing into
spreadsheet programs such as Microsoft Excel or LibreOffice
Calc (formally OpenOffice Calc). For archival purposes,
supporting data, webpage results and program logs are
compressed into a zip-formatted file to conserve storage space.
Relevant gene and exon information are retrieved from the
UCSC Table Browser webpage to assist with the calculations in
generating the .csv file.

Three result files are saved with every run in addition to a perbatch
run log. The first file corresponds to results that are
formatted for spreadsheet input (.csv); the second is a list of
primary primer designs that are formatted for SNPCheck input;
the third is a summary log of the particular gene run. Primer
positions relative to relevant exon positions are calculated from
the resulting data while taking into consideration codingsequence
(CDS) start/stop positions. CDS start/stop positions
are parsed from the GenBank data for each gene while exon
coordinates are retrieved from the UCSC database. The
positions returned from UCSC PCR are then used to calculate
the primer start to exon start, as well as the exon finish to
primer finish positions relative to exon start/stop. If the exon
being queried contains the CDS start or stop positions then
these are used in place of the exon start or stop for the
appropriate calculations.

During the validation stage of BatchPD for both testing and
debugging we took the Homo sapiens RefSeq gene database
(retrieved March 8th, 2012) and processed them via BatchPD.
The results from the run have been made available online 
[] in
the hope that this would allow access by other molecular
diagnostic laboratories in order to save on technical hours spent
attempting primer designs. The pre-compiled primer designs
will be available until December 2014 at which time the RefSeq
gene list should have changed enough to warrant a complete rerun
to include all the new additions. With the pace at which
new sequencing technologies are progressing, traditional
Sanger-type sequencing methods and even amplicon
sequencing via a “Next-Generation Sequencing” technology
would be expected to be redundant or more costly than newer
technologies that will be developed in the coming years.

Disscussion
The automated primer design program BatchPD has saved
many technical hours for our laboratory staff, while using a
standardised set of procedures that are both robust and
stringent. In order to validate the program during development,
we submitted the Homo sapiens RefSeq gene list of mRNA
nucleotide identifiers into our program and produced a predesigned
database of primers. This database and the
corresponding BatchPD program have been made available
online including the source code.

In hindsight, the program could have been developed to use
offline copies of the databases and tools to lighten the burden
on the free online services. The disadvantage of such an
approach would be increased difficulty for the average
laboratory technician, and the requirement of regular database
updates. The primary advantage of the method adopted here in
which BatchPD queries the online tools and parses the returned
webpages is the ability to use the latest datasets without the
need for complex offline mirrors that require periodic
synchronization. The average laboratory technician can
download the program, input a list of RefSeq mRNA identifiers,
choose primer tailing options, click a button and carry on with
other tasks while the program completes the task without user
intervention. Alternatively a quick search of our pre-designed
primer archive may suffice. Should the need arise, enterprising
researchers can take the published BatchPD source code and
modify it to accept a wider range of input variables, or redirect
the program to use different web resources and tools.

Conclusion
BatchPD grew out the need to automate a primer design and
evaluation process that we had developed manually over the
past five years. Given the increasing need to sequence more
genes based on clinical referrals, we decided to apply BatchPD
to the design of primers for all exons of all archived Refseq
genes with an NM accession ID. The added advantage of our
approach is that it can equally be applied to next generation
sequencing strategies that involve the pooling of targeted
amplicons with defined tail-based sequences for amplicon
capture.

We acknowledge the generosity of the developers of the UCSC
genome browser and ExonPrimer in making their resources
publicly available.

Citation:Lai &amp; Love, Bioinformation 8(8): 365-368 (2012)

Manual primer design workflow shown with screen-captures of the relevant websites. The concept behind the design
process is simple, but involves significant time waiting for results and processing them for subsequent steps.

Flow diagram showing an overview of how BatchPD
functions. Each individual accession query is fed through a
series of steps with BatchPD automating the query, wait, results
parsing and conversion as well as results retrieval procedure.
Should any of the queries fail, the program will skip subsequent
steps as appropriate and report the actions taken in the logs.
Under some circumstances, BatchPD will attempt subsequent
processing steps should a non-critical section fail internal
checks.

The distance values returned in the final output
spread-sheet are illustrated here with distances being calculated
relative to the primers and exon involved. α) Primer start to
exon start is calculated from the 5' end of the forward primer to
the 5' end of the exon. β) Exon finish to primer finish is
calculated as the distance between the 3' end of the exon to the
5' end of the reverse primer. In the case of exons that include
the start/stop of the coding sequence, these values are used to
replace the exon 5'/3' ends, respectively.

