Background
In many cases, the purpose of the microarray experiments is to 
compare the gene expression levels between two different 
conditions. Mostly, one sample is considered as reference or 
control and the other is considered as experiment. In all such 
comparative studies, the main goal is to determine the genes 
that are differentially expressed in the two samples being 
compared. In the early days the simple method of Fold Change 
(FC) was used, this last involves selecting genes for which the 
ratio of the experiment and control values is a certain distance 
from the experiment/control ratio []. Another possible 
approach to gene selection is to use invariance statistical tests, 
like T-test. This approach essentially used the classical 
hypothesis testing methodology []. The analysis of variance 
(ANOVA) is a particular interesting approach to microarray 
data and differentially expressed genes (DEGs) selection, the 
idea behind ANOVA is to build an explicit model of all sources 
of variance that affect the measurements and the use of the 
data to estimate the variance []. The following approach is the 
model based maximum likelihood estimation methods []. This 
approach is very general and very powerful. Significant 
Analysis of Microarray (SAM) and moderated t-statistic using 
empirical Bayes are two tests used to address the problem of 
the simple T-test when the number of samples is small [,
]. 
More recently, Storey et al. [] developed a new approach 
based on the Optimal Discovery Procedure (ODP), which aims 
to maximize the expected number of true positive genes for 
each fixed level of expected false positives. Several others
methods have been used for the DEGs selection and the 
literature is abundant [,
,
]. Despite the wealth of a 
literature concerning DEGs selection methods, there is no 
clear-cut guideline regarding the choice of methods and 
softwares. In this context, a comparative study could guide the 
practitioners to a suitable tool. Here, we comparatively review, 
three DEG selection methods: Fold change, T-test and SAM 
using two software's tools R/Bioconductor and Bioinformatics 
Matlab Toolbox. To conduct our study we used two datasets 
issued from the Affymetrix technology [] since we showed in 
our last study that there is no significant difference, in term of 
differential analysis, between Affymetrix and other technology 
like Agilent []. The aim is to evaluate by means of sensitivity 
and specificity the impact of statistical tools on the DEGs 
selected. In the next section, we will justify the choice of 
statistical tools and we will give a concise description of the 
DEGs selection workflow followed for all proposed algorithms 
and tools. In the end, we discuss the results of used algorithms 
and tools on well known datasets.

Methodology
In order to assess the performance of a gene selection method 
we need a set of criteria able to qualify the outcome of the 
selection process. In our case the performance of a gene 
selection method has been calculated in terms of specificity 
and sensitivity presented in Receiver Operating Characteristics 
curves (ROC). In a binary decision situation, such as changed 
or unchanged, the results can always be divided into four 
categories: truly changed that are reported as changed (True 
Positives: TP), unchanged that are reported as changed (False 
Positive: FP), truly changed that are reported as changed (False 
Positive: FP) truly changed that are reported as such (True 
Negatives: TN). Based on these parameters, one can define the 
sensitivity and specificity that qualify the productivity of DEGs 
methods and tools used.

Sensitivity = TN/TN +FP Specificity = TP/TP +FN

Selected algorithm for comparison:
Several researches are done on the comparison and the choice 
of gene selection methods. The last study in this context aims 
to compare the gene selection methods and classify them 
according to some parameters []. This study shows that all 
DEGs selection methods may be classified in three categories: 
Class of methods based on deterministic FC, class of methods 
based on T-test, multiple T-test, P_values, and the class of 
methods using random permutations. Based on this 
classification, we selected three selection methods, each one 
provided from one class, and we will compare selected genes 
from each method under R/Bioconductor and Bioinformatics 
Matlab Toolbox. The first approach used is the FC, selected 
from the first class. This method is the most initiative approach 
to finding genes that differentially regulated []. Typically, an 
arbitrary threshold is chosen and the difference is considered 
as significant if it is larger than the threshold. The FC method 
is often used because it is simple and intuitive. T-test, which is 
chosen from the second class, is extensively used in gene 
expression analysis. It demonstrates whether the difference 
between two groups or samples is significant []. In our study 
P_values calculated by T-test have been used without any 
multiple testing corrections. The DEGs were obtained by 
setting two criteria of P_values &lt;0.05 and FC &gt;=2. The last
approach provided from the third class is the SAM method []. 
SAM uses a statistic called “relative difference” for gene. This 
is very similar to a t-statistic with equal variance, except that 
the gene “gene-specific scatter” in the denominator is offset by 
a fudge factor. This latter is an exchangeability factor chosen to 
minimize the coefficient of variation and is computed with a 
sliding window approach across the data. These DEGs 
selection methods have been already integrated in the 
R/BioConductor project []. In Bioinformatics Matlab 
Toolbox the two first DEGs selection methods have been also 
integrated. But for the SAM algorithm under this software, it 
was recently implemented by [].

Data sets:
We applied feature selection methods to two data sets issued 
from the affymetrix technology. The First one is the Spike-in 
datasets []. 
These data sets are designed to address questions 
about the correctness of microarray data and have been used 
extensively to compare among different analysis methods. 
Currently there are four major spike-in datasets available for 
the Affymetrix microarray platform: the Affymetrix spike-in 
dataset for cross platform comparisons [], the Affymetrix 
Latin square dataset [], the Gene Logic spike-in dataset 
[] 
and the Golden Spike dataset []. The new wholly defined 
Affymetrix spike-in dataset consisting of 18 microarrays. Over 
5700 RNAs are spiked in at relative concentrations ranging 
from 1- to 4-fold, and the arrays from each condition are 
balanced with respect to both total RNA amount and degree of 
positive versus negative fold change. The second data set is 
recently represented in []. These cancer data sets consist of 
18 breast cancer patients' usual-risk controls undergoing 
reduction mammoplasty (RM), and histologically normal (HN) 
patients. In this work, we analyze the total of 86 genes 
presented as differentially expressed between RM and HN 
samples. All Chips from the two datasets present variations 
due to the experiences background noise and systematic 
errors. For this, the standardization is applied to all chips to be 
sure that the distributions of intensities across chips are 
homogeneous. Several studies have focused on the 
performance of different normalization methods []. In this 
study we use the Robust Multichip Analysis algorithm (RMA). 
It provides accurate estimation of inter-array variability 
through a robust background correction and quantile 
normalization computed over the whole datasets. To simplify 
analysis, we follow in our comparative study the workflow 
presented below:

Raw Affymetrix Data (.cel)→ Normalization (RMA)→ 
Different DEGs Selection Methods and Tools→ Results of The 
Comparative Study

Results &amp; Discussions
The aim of this paper is to understand how gene selection 
algorithms differ from one another and how it is influenced by 
using different software's. In this study, we compare results 
for three gene selection methods, SAM, FC, and T-test in both 
R/BioConductor and Bioinformatics Matlab Toolbox using 
two datasets. We evaluate first the influence of statistical tools 
on the size of selected genes using the Venn diagram then we 
evaluate the sensitivity and the specificity of each methods and 
tools using the ROC curves. The first result is represented in 
the . A Venn diagram shows the overlap between the 
three gene selection methods and the genes identified as 
differentially expressed in each dataset (denoted by “identified 
genes” or “id” in ). The lists of genes generated as 
differentially expressed differ between methods, software's 
and datasets used. Viewpoint methods, SAM identified 80% to 
89% of all genes in each dataset under R/Bioconductor relative 
to t-test and FC methods. While, meeting lists of each gene 
selection method in Bioinformatics Matlab Toolbox show a 
close between the three gene selection methods used with a 
reduced number of genes. In term of software's; the number of 
DEGs selected was still large in R/BioConductor , but was 
considered reduced in Bioinformatics Matlab toolbox (for 
example in spike-in data set ,1224 gene was selected by 
R/BioConductor face to 101 genes selected by Matlab toolbox 
for the same data).

After this first study we can conclude that Bioinformatics 
Matlab Toolbox allows a selection of a reduced number of 
genes compared to R/BioConductor. But are remains unclear 
whether the selected genes are relevant. For this reason we 
used the ROC curves that compare the performance of the 
three methods and the software's in each dataset used in terms 
of sensitivity in specificity (). 
 represents the 
ROC curve using R/BioConductor for the breast cancer 
dataset. This figure shows that SAM and T-test report 
differentially expressed genes in a stricter manner than FC. 
This is not surprising given that the former two methods take 
into account the variance of an observation between different 
conditions, which is not the case of FC. As the figure shows, 
the SAM is more stringent than the T-test, the explanation 
coming from the “fudge factor” that reduces the bias of genes 
with large variances without necessarily biological 
significance. FC has a significant false positive rate, almost 
half of its results.  represents the ROC curve using 
R/BioConductor for the platinum spike-in dataset, this figure 
shows that SAM is preferential than t-test and FC. 
represents the ROC curve using Bioinformatics Matlab 
Toolbox for the breast cancer dataset, this figure shows close 
results between the three gene selection methods used, 
especially between SAM and T-test.  represents the 
ROC curve using Bioinformatics Matlab Toolbox for the 
Platinum spike-in dataset and shows also that the false positive 
rate is still comparable for the three methods.

Conclusion
A fundamental step of microarray studies is the identification 
of a small subset of DEGs from among tens of thousands of 
genes probed on the microarray. DEGs lists must be 
concordant to satisfy the scientific requirement of 
reproducibility, and must also be specific and sensitive for 
scientific relevance. A Bioinformatics Matlab Toolbox allows a 
selection of a reduce list of DEGs used different methods 
proposed relative to the R/ BioConductor. Concerning the 
gene selection methods, the R/BioConductor using SAM is 
favored for microarray selection compared to the other 
methods notably the FC which is uncertain. While, the ROC 
curve when using Bioinformatics Matlab Toolbox shows that 
there is a not significant difference between the three genes 
selection methods with reproducible results. We conclude that 
the SAM approach is over conservative in R/ BioConductor 
but the FC has an extremely low power in the two datasets 
used. On the other hand, the three genes selection methods 
display a high power in Bioinformatics Matlab toolbox. 
Therefore, this latter would be selected if we prefer to select a 
small list of DEGs. In conclusion, a DEGs list should be chosen 
in a manner that concurrently satisfies scientific objectives in 
terms of inherent tradeoffs between reproducibility, specificity, 
and sensitivity.

We acknowledge support from Volubilis (French-Moroccan 
Grant) to AI AM. This work was supported by a grant from the 
NIH for H3Africa BioNet to AM &amp; AI.

Citation:Kaissi et al, Bioinformation 9(20): 1019-1022 (2013)

Overlap between the three genes selection methods 
and the identified genes using both softwares and datasets: A) 
R/BioConductor in Breast cancer dataset; B) R/Bioconductor 
platinum spike-in dataset; C) Bioinformatics Matlab Toolbox in 
Breast cancer dataset; D) Bioinformatics Matlab Toolbox in 
platinum spike-in dataset.

A) ROC curve for the three genes selection methods 
using both softwares and datasets: B) R/BioConductor in the 
breast cancer dataset; C) Bioinformatics Matlab Toolbox in 
breast cancer dataset; D) Bioinformatics Matlab Toolbox in 
spike-in dataset.

