Background
Staphylococcus aureus is a vanguard for both nosocomial and
community-acquired infections. It is the primary cause of
surgical site infections and lower respiratory tract infections 
[]
and the second leading cause of cardiovascular infections,
pneumonia []. Because of evolved resistance to antimicrobial
drugs such as penicillin and newer narrow-spectrum β-
lactamase–resistant penicillin antimicrobial drugs (e.g.,
methicillin, oxacillin) infections with S. aureus are especially
difficult to treat and this resistance appeared soon after they
were introduced into clinical practice respectively in the 1940s
and 1960s []. Initially resistance to penicillin was restrained to
a small number of hospitalized patients, but as use of penicillin
increased, resistance spread first to other hospitals and then
into the community []. Greater than 80% of community- and
hospital- acquired S. aureus isolated were resistant to penicillin
by the late 1960s []. Current report suggests that the spread
and evolution of methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) seems to
be following an identical wavelike emergence pattern []. In
many US hospitals, MRSA is now endemic and even epidemic
along with long-term care facilities and communities [].
National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance system's data
suggest that the proportion of S. aureus isolates that are resistant
to methicillin has increased to 59.5%-64.4%, in intensive care
units []. Accurate national estimates of incidence are needed
for an understanding of the magnitude of the problem.
Nevertheless, national studies examining the effect of S. aureus
or MRSA on the healthcare system are greater than 5years old
[]. Noskin et al. estimated that there were 290,000 S. aureus –
related whereas Kuehnert et al. estimated a similar number of S. aureus-related 
hospitalizations for 1999-2000 and reported that
125,969 (43.2%) were likely resistant to methicillin []. The
infections caused by this pathogen range from mild infections
such as skin infections, food poisoning to life threatening
infections such as pneumonia, sepsis, osteomylatis and
infectious endocarditis. Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus is considered as superbug which was first reported in
1961 and now-a-days cause mortality rate of 39% while MSSA
cause 24% death [].

The currently known target of Staphyloccus sp. includes PBP
(penicillin binding protein) of peptidoglycan biosynthesis
pathway. Previously, beta-lactam antibiotics were known to be
effective against them, but due to production of altered form of
PBP protein as well as their beta-lactamase enzme synthesis
those drugs are not effective now. Hence, our current study
involves identifying targets apart from PBP []. Another
antibiotic prescribed is Fluroquinolone. Fluroquinolone target
DNA Gyrase A enzyme-essential for the replication,
supercoiling of DNA. But according to Stephen et al., a highly
significant association between Levofloxacin and Ciprofloxacin
treatment and subsequent isolation of MRSA is reported 
[].
Linozolid, a new class of antibiotic called Oxazolidinones is
used to treat MRSA, which involves the mechanism of binding
to the bacterial 23s ribosomal RNA of the 50s subunit and thus
inhibiting the formation of Functional 70s initiation complex.
But between April 13 &amp; June 26, 2008, 12 patients were
identified with LRSA (Linozolid resistant Staphylococcus aureus).
All the isolates were detected with a point mutation in 23s
rRNA. It was concluded that clinical outbreak of LRSA
mediated by the cfr gene was related with extensive usage of
Linozolid []. In this study, we have tried to search for some
potential therapeutic targets other than the targets discussed
above. We have implemented an approach considering two
important criteria. First of all, the identified target should be
essential to that pathogen in the sense that it must be associated
with replication as well as viability of the pathogen. Secondly,
the target should not be homologous to human. The nonhomolog
property of these proteins helps to establish highly
selective drug against the pathogen preventing the possibility of
the cross-reaction with the human host. This may help to
minimize the side effects of the proposed drug []. By this
approach, we have found some targets which are not only
essential &amp; non-human homolog but also bypass the resistant
mechanism of existing targets and some targets are involved in
the metabolic pathway of pathogen which is not exploited as
potential target area []. We have also identified the
membrane-bound Essential, non-human homolog proteins
emphasizing the fact that 60% of the drug target is membranebound
[].

Methodology
The systematic identification &amp; characterization of the putative
drug target of Staphylococcus aureus N315 was done sequentially
by the following methods:

Retrieval of Essential proteins of S. aureus:
At first, according to the Database of essential genes (DEG) [],
302 essential proteins of S. aureus N315 were retrieved from
NCBI [] in FASTA format.

Identification of non-human homologous essential proteins in S. aureus:
These 302 essential proteins were subjected to BlastP at NCBI
server against Homo sapiens with default parameters. To
identify human non-homologous essential proteins of S. aureus ,
proteins having threshold expectation value greater than 10(-4)
were taken and for this purpose Refseq protein database was
selected [].

Metabolic pathway analysis:
The human non-homologous essential proteins of Staphylococcus aureus 
obtained through BlastP were then subjected to
metabolic pathway analysis, which was done by KAAS server
at KEGG .Functional annotation of genes is provided by KAAS
(KEGG Automatic Annotation Server) []. This functional
annotation was done by this server through BLAST comparison
of the genes against the manually curated KEGG GENES
database.

Unique pathway identification:
After this, unique metabolic pathways of Staphylococcus aureus
N315 were identified through the comparison of metabolic
pathways of both Staphylococcus aureus &amp; Homo sapiens by using
KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes &amp; Genomes) [] Genome
Database. Among unique metabolic pathways of S. aureus, only
those proteins were identified which were human nonhomologue
essential proteins.

Surface protein identification:
Sub-cellular localization of metabolic proteins (essential nonhuman
homologues) of S. aureus was done by PSORTb [] to
identify the surface membrane proteins which can be used as
putative therapeutic targets.

Uncharacterized membrane-bound protein characterization:
Uncharacterized membrane-bound Hypothetical Proteins were
characterized by SVM-PROT [].

Result &amp; Discussion
The aim of this investigation was to determine the potential
therapeutic targets for alternative treatment of MRSA and to
categorize and analyze the targets. Subtractive genomic
approach was used in this approach. The basic principle of
subtractive genomic approach is, “a good therapeutic target is a
gene/protein essential for the bacterial survival, which cannot
be found in host” []. In the present study, at first essential
proteins of S. aureus N315 were retrieved from ‘Database of
Essential Gene (DEG)’. Essential genes can be defined as a
minimal gene set which is adequate for survival of a cellular life
form under favorable condition []. The results obtained by
this approach are shown in ().

With a purpose to forsake any cross-reactivity of established
drug with the human host, BlastP was done against the 302
essential proteins then 101 non-human homolog proteins were
resulted having a threshold expectation value greater than 104.
For further specification of the non-human homolog Essential
proteins of S. aureus, metabolic pathway analysis was done by
KAAS server at KEGG, which resulted in a set of 64 proteins
 (see supplementary material). With a view to further
reduce the number of 64 metabolic proteins as probable drug
targets, comparative analysis of metabolic pathways of human
host &amp; S. aureus at KEGG Genome database was done. This
comparison reveals 13 unique pathways that mean these
metabolic pathways are present in S. aureus (bacteria), but not
in human. Then, each selected unique pathway was tested for
the presence of pathogen specific essential proteins. At last, 7
proteins were found to be present on two different unique
pathways. Six out of the seven proteins are present in
peptidoglycan biosynthesis pathway and one protein-
Phosphoenolpyruvate-protein phosphatase is present in
Phosphotransferase system (PTS). For further characterization,
Computational characterization of hypothetical proteins and
prediction of subcellular localization of pathogenic proteins was
done which provides a quicker way to identify cell surface drug
targets  (see supplementary material) 
[].

Potential Drug targets from unique metabolic pathways of S. aureus:
In this section we analyze some potential therapeutic targets
identified from unique metabolic pathways. The Penicillin
Binding Proteins (PBPs), involved in the final step of
Peptidoglycan Biosynthsis pathway was the one of the first
conventional targets of Beta-lactam antibiotics- Penicillins &amp;
Cephalosporins. The beta-lactam ring of these drugs has the
ability to bind to transpeptidase (TPase) of PBPs and thus
prevent normal cross-lingking of peptide chains in the
peptidoglycan layer. Unfortunately, expression of betalactamase
and an altered form of PBP2 has lead to Methicillin
resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Thus one of the approaches of
establishing new anti-MRSA agents should be to target on
molecule other than PBPs to modulate the methicillin resistance
in S. aureus [].

Our study finds six essential non-human homolog proteins in
the peptidoglycan pathway-all excluding the PBP, they are:
UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 1-carboxyvinyltransferase(murA),
UDP-N-acetylmuramate- -L-alanine ligase (murC), UDP-Nacetylmuramoyl-
L-alanyl-D-glutamate synthetase (murD),
UDP-N-acetylmuramoylalanyl-D-D-glutamyl-2,6-
diaminopimelate-D-alanyl-D-alanyl ligase (murF), protein-Dalanyl-
alanine synthetase A (ddl), Undecaprenyl
pyrophosphate phosphatase (uppP). Among these six proteins
four are from Mur ligase family catalyzing the synthesis of
Peptidoglycan precursor (UDP-MurNAc-pentapeptide) - the
first step in the Peptidoglycan synthesis, thus fulfilling the
prerequisite of being targets other than PBP.

One potential drawback of murA target is that the presence of
two different genes-murA1 and murA2- encoding proteins with
similar enzymatic activity. Both the genes should be mutated in
order to cause bacterial death, but as both murA1 and murA2
has only 60% sequence similarity, the encoded enzymes has
different active sites for which a unique murA-specific
antibiotic development is difficult. Another potential drug
target can be D-alanyl-alanine synthetase A (ddl), which
catalyzes the synthesis of D-alanyl:D-alanine dipeptide-a prime
building block in peptidoglycan biosynthesis and any
disruption in this step would lead to a tender cell wall resulting
in cell-death. Another essential protein is Undecaprenyl
pyrophosphate phosphatase encoded by uppP. Bacteriocin and
drugs of similar mechanism will not be suitable for targeting
the S. aureus N315, as uppP is responsible for coding protein
conferring resistance to bacteriocin [].

Potential Drug targets from common metabolic pathways:
In this study, we have found essential metabolic non-human
homolog proteins in energy metabolism pathways. In vitro and
In vivo studies suggest that inhibitors designed for targeting
these proteins can effectively hinder bacterial growth by bypassing
the bacterial mutation site for drug resistance. The logic
behind this is almost all existing antibiotics target only four
pathways (cell wall synthesis, nucleic acid synthesis, protein
synthesis, folate synthesis), thus repeated exposure to similar
site increases the chance of mutation to the site, resulting in
mutant bacteria [,
]. Targets of these pathways have shown
their potential for anti-bacterial agents (e.g., Oligomycin,
Antimycin A) , but not used in case of human, due to harmful
effect both to human &amp; bacteria. But the proteins revealed by
our study can be considered as non-human homolog, thus
reducing the baneful effect of the drug to human host 
[].

Membrane-bound protein:
Our study revealed 15 membrane-bound proteins. Special
attention was given to membrane proteins, as among all the
drug targets- 60% is membrane proteins. Membrane proteins
are also easier to study by computational method rather than
experimental methods due to their uniform structure &amp;
interaction. The high tendency of proteins to construct
secondary structure in turn lowers the complexity of the
prediction of protein structure by computational method. If a
high resolution structure is not found, computer-based
structure prediction can be done with membrane protein easily
&amp; then structure-based drug prediction can done [].

Conclusion
Our study working in several points of Staphylococcus aureus
N315 genome reveals essential non-homolog proteins, 64
essential non-homolog metabolic proteins- among which the
proteins of energy metabolism and 7 metabolic proteins in
unique pathways, 15 essential non-homolog metabolic
membrane-bound proteins- can be potential drug target. The
drug would be specific for the pathogen and not lethal to the
host as subtractive genomic approach is applied in this case.
Molecular modeling of the targets will help to discover the best
possible active sites that can be targeted for drug design. Virtual
screening against these novel targets might be useful in the
discovery of potential therapeutic agents against Staphylococcus aureus.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Hossain et al, Bioinformation 9(4): 187-192 (2013)

Flowchart- A schematic representation of process
analysis and interpretations.

