Background
Most lectins are carbohydrate binding proteins of nonimmuneorigin
that agglutinate cells/ bind glycans of
glycoproteins, glycolipids and polysaccharides. Besides,
havinghemagglutinating activity, Nathan Sharon and
colleague's forthe first time described bacterial surface lectins as
adhesions because primarily lectins function as to facilitate
attachment or adherence to host cells (receptors), a prerequisite
for bacterial colonization []. Bacterial lectins occur commonly
in the form of elongated, submicroscopic, multi subunit protein
appendages known as fimbriae (hair) or pili (threads), which
interact with glycoprotein and glycolipid receptors on host
cells. Among the best characterized of bacterial surface lectins
are mannose specific (Type 1) lectins []. Although bacterial
colonization is not always pathogenic e.g. the normal flora of
the lower gastrointestinal tract is determined by appropriate
and desirable colonization by beneficial bacteria similarly
colonization of Rhizobium in nitrogen-fixing nodules of
leguminous root tips which involve lectins on the root tip
binding to Nod factors generated by the bacterium, is beneficial
yet most of the bacterial surface lectins appear to function
primarily in the initiation of infection by mediating bacterial
adherence to the host epithelial cells The mannose specific
lectins also act as recognition molecules in lectinophagocytosis
(i.e. phagocytosis of the bacteria in the absence of opsonins) by
mouse, rat and human peritoneal macrophages, and human
polymorphonuclear leukocytes []. Detailed studies of then
specificity of microbial lectins have led to the identification and
synthesis of powerful inhibitors of adhesion that may form the
basis for therapeutic agents for treating infection. Genome and
proteome research on pathogenic and associative bacteria also
provide important information on bacteria host interaction 
[].
Progress has been made to understand the structure function
relationship for several bacterial to lectins in order to know
vaccine against several infections and other diseases 
[]. Studies
of various diversified bacterial lectins/ lectin data may serve as
a tool with enormous promise to help biotechnologists/
geneticists in their innovative technology to explore a deeper
understanding in proteomics/ genomics research for finding
the molecular basis of infectious diseases and also to new
approaches for their prevention and in development of new
bacterial vaccines. In the present work the efforts have been
made to develop an integrated knowledge based bacterial
lectins database together with appropriate analytical tools
which we named as “BacterialLectinDb”.

Methodology
Data collection:
Data curation was initiated with different protein databases
available through National Center for Biotechnology
Information (NCBI) and other protein information repositories
as shown in (Figure 1). Initially a search was carried with the
keyword “bacterial lectin”. Continual searches were made with
the same keyword but with an additional source keyword
pertaining to each of the bacterial lectin, obtained in the first list
through the NCBI search engines Entrez, using GenBank,
Swiss-Prot [], and, Protein Data Bank (PDB) 
[]. The results of
these searches were downloaded onto local machines, along
with other available associated details. The data was arranged
with the help of Relational Database Management System
technique by assigning primary key and foreign key to ensure
there is no duplication of data. Any previously unidentified
redundancies were removed. For each Entry, basic information
pertaining to the lectin name, source, protein, amino acid
sequence length, molecular weight, carbohydrate specificity,
and PDB identifiers was parsed from the respective entries in
various databases.

Database schema:
An organized database schema for BacterialLectinDb was
designed to collate all the available information about all
bacterial lectins as a central repository. The database was
designed using HTML, XML. Some modules were implemented
using JavaScript and Java applets. The database blueprint was
designed to accommodate basic information about lectins viz.
the structural details (Fold, family classification, primary
structure of their proteins, the relevant nucleotide sequences)
and also the details of the carbohydrate specificities. Derived
data features such as domain boundaries, active site residues,
structure prediction, fold classification, and phylogenetic results
were stored in various file formats. Many of the links were
connected to different databases to acquire more recent data.
The database schema was designed in such a way that it can
also enable an easy addition of new information about bacterial
lectins in the future. Moreover, it can also support addition of
information on lectins from other sources such as plants, fungi,
and viruses that are planned to be integrated in the future as a
“Comprehensive Lectin Database”.

Database assembly:
A flowchart depicting the methodology used in constructing
BacterialLectinDb is illustrated in (Figure 2). The pipeline to
construct the database has been automated in parts and also
manually checked at specific stages, to ensure of minimizing
errors in the database.

Database search and contents:
Using keywords “bacterial lectin” search through NCBI
resulted in an initial list of 7 different types of bacterial lectins
comprising of a total no. of 65 lectins viz. 
ADO-ribosylating toxin: 27;

Bacterial neurotoxin: 12;

Cyanovirin: 5;

Fucolectin: 7;

Galactophilic lectin: 3;

Other Bacterial toxin: 2;

Pilli adhesion:9.


Further information was collected
by repeated searches for each bacterial lectin individually using
different databases. The database assembly was designed as
discussed in methodology, it is then run and contents were
analyzed.

Database content:
There are some specific databases which may provide
information on bacterial lectins, publicly accessible
computerized repositories of proteins, genes and other
biological informations (e.g. Swiss-Prot, GenBank and EMBL)
have served as integral research components for several
decades. However, the utility of these repositories seems to be
critical when the new forms of biological data are similarly
archived and made available. Therefore, the public availability
of bacterial lectins data would enable independent validation of
published findings, which are currently problematic because
the complete, untransformed and fully annotated data sets are
not yet placed into the public domain. Indeed, a consensus
opinion has emerged supporting the need to couple publication
of bacterial lectins data with web-based availability of data to
facilitate confirmation of findings. The database integrates
lectins related data from sequence (GenBank, EMBL, and
DDBJ), taxonomy, and PDB, CATH, SCOP and MSD databases.
Besides these, it provides functional information for all lectins
fetched from literature, functional annotations derived from
Swiss-Prot and GenBank function cards as well as from Protein
Information Resource (PIR). The functional information
pertaining to carbohydrate specificities, blood group
specificities, and biological processes have been mapped.
Furthermore, each lectin entry in the database has been tagged
with structural annotation in a layered fashion, depending
upon the extent of information available about them. The next
level of information in the database pertains to the known
function(s) of the lectins. The information spans a wide
hierarchical range, starting from individual monosaccharide
specificities to larger roles in various cellular events.
Carbohydrate specificities obtained from the literature have
often pertained to specific Bacterial lectin and a general
functional annotation to lectins of a given Bacterial has also
been provided. In our database some of the functions of lectins
and the broad potential applications they lead have been
provided as a different section of the database.

Utility
A number of repositories of Lectins data had been developed
by government organizations viz. Plant Lectin Database of the
Indian Institute of Sciences, Bangalore, India and The Centre de
Recherché sur les Macromolecules Végétales, a research unit of
the Centre National de la Recherché Scientifique
(http://www.cermav. cnrs.fr/cgi-bin/lectins/ list.pl?menuitem=1). 
Recently we have developed a phyto chemical
database for diabetes named “Phyto-Mellitus” 
[] and also an
animal lectin Database “AnimalLectinDb” 
[] providing
important information about the chemical nature of various
plant products and structural-functional annotations of various
animal lectins, respectively. Our studies with analysis of
databases for cystic fibrosis and mutational analysis of H5N1
and H1N1 were found significant for ascertaining test systems
and provide an insight to understand the role of glycoprotein/
lectins for vaccine development, respectively 
[,
].

Lectins bind to various sugars in a highly selective manner. This
selectivity enables lectins to display many significant biological
activities and a variety of functions. Mannose specific bacterial
lectins (Type 1) possess an extended combining site
corresponding to an oligosaccharide and preferentially bind to
the carbohydrate moiety i.e. oligomannose (hybrid type). Type
1 bacterial surface lectin/ fimbriae possess a hydrophobic
region close to the carbohydrate-binding site, since aromatic
alpha-mannosides inhibit strongly (up to 1000-times more than
methyl alphamannoside) the agglutination of yeasts by the
bacteria and the adherence of the latter to pig ilea epithelial cells
[]. 
The combining sites of Type 1 fimbriae of the Salmonella
and of other enteric bacteria are different from those of
Escherichia coli in that they are smaller and do not possess a
hydrophobic region [].

Molecular recognition is indeed a key event in many biological
processes. The mannose specific lectins also act as recognition
molecules in lectinophagocytosis (i.e. phagocytosis of the
bacteria in the absence of opsonins) by mouse, rat and human
peritoneal macrophages, and human polymorphonuclear
leukocytes []. 
Because lectins form an important class of
carbohydrates containing molecules, therefore, studies with
lectins have proved invaluable in the understanding of
molecular mechanisms of various cellular processes and
deciphering the code contained within the sugar molecules 
[].
The biological role of lectin-carbohydrate interaction and
proteomics research will lead to a deeper understanding of the
molecular basis of infectious diseases, and perhaps also to new
approaches for their prevention [].

BacterialLectinDb provides an easy-to-use web interface with
flexibility to select for an entry or a collective set of entries
matching user's criteria such as name of the bacteria, sequence
class etc. It also provides information such as Express Sequence
Tags and mRNA detail along with complete nucleotide
sequence and Protein sequence from different databases.
Microscopic details of protein such as visualization of dihedral
angles ψ against φ of amino acid residues in protein structure,
ligand information and domain etc are one of the most
important data sets available in Bacterial lectin database, which
is not available in any other lectin database. In the pursuit of all
the applications, it is our belief that this database will serve as a
useful repository of manually curetted information pertaining
to sequence, structure, and function, all integrated into a single
framework

Conflict of interest
The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.

Citation:Kumar &amp; Mittal, Bioinformation 8(6): 281-283 (2012)

(A) Different Nucleotide sequences obtained from
GenBank, EMBL and DDBJ; (B) Protein sequences obtained
from SwissProt, UniProt and PIR databases; (C) Various
formsof protein structures obtained from PDB, PDBSum,
CATH,MSD, PROCHECK and SCOP.

A schematic representation of the pipeline used in the
development of BacterialLectinDb.

