Background
Oil‐palm is the major commodity worldwide. The second largest source of
fats and oils to the world market of fats and oils is from Elaeis guineensis
Jacq Tenera, which is commonly known as African oil-palm. Malaysia is
the main producer and exporter of the palm oil. African oil‐palm is
cultivated on industrial scale due to high palm oil yield derived from its
fruit mesocarp tissue. African oil‐palm, E. guineensis Jacq have three
different forms (also called as varieties), namely, ‘Pisifera’, ‘Dura’, and
‘Tenera’. These three forms are distinguished on the basis of shell
thickness of fruits. The commercially cultivated African oil‐palm is a
hybrid from ‘Dura’ (♀) and ‘Pisifera’ (♂) 
[]. Another oil‐palm species
which is economically less important is Elaeis oleifera. This species is also
called as American oil‐palm.

Palmitic acid, (C16:0) is the predominant fatty acid in palm oil derived from
E. guineensis Jacq. Tenera fruit mesocarp tissue. Whereas oil derived from
E. oleifera fruit mesocarp tissue is predominant with oleic acid (C18:1)
(68.6%), a fatty acid good for health []. 
The C16:0 is the major (44%) saturated fatty acid in palm oil derived from 
E. guineensis. However, the C16:0 content in E. oleifera 
is only 25%. In spite of the high content of the healthy C18:1 in the 
E. oleifera oil, it is not preferred for commercial plantation due to its poor oil yield.

The single pass, partial sequencing of randomly isolated anonymous
cDNA clones also called as ESTs has become a rapid and cost-effective
means in gaining information about gene expression and their regulation
[]. In addition, 
generated ESTs data is useful in new and novel gene’s discovery 
[], 
evaluation of the genome for gene content and its structure,
and for in silico comparative expression analysis between different plant
tissues []. 
Most importantly, ESTs serves as a valuable resource for highthroughput
expression analysis using cDNA-microarray technology []. In
higher plants, numerous genes have been identified by random nucleotide
sequencing of cDNA clones [–
]. Therefore, in order to study the gene
expression and their patterns in E. oleifera fruit mesocarp tissue, ESTs
generation project was initiated. So far, 3,205 ESTs are generated from 17
weeks old E. oleifera mesocarp tissue cDNA library (our unpublished
work). Beta carotene hydroxylase (Chyb) is one of the isolated cDNA (ESTs) clones.

By understating potential applications of Chyb in genetic engineering of
oil-palm and or in other plants, clone was fully sequenced. The Chyb is
involved in zeaxanthin biosynthesis by hydroxylating beta-carotene, but
the enzyme may be involved in other pathways [–
]. The products of
this enzyme are zeaxanthin and beta-cryptoxanthin 
[]. Beta-carotene,
zeaxanthin and beta-cryptoxanthin are categorized under carotenoids
which have many industrial applications as food and feed additives, and
are used in cosmetics and as nutraceutical. Currently, vitamin A deficiency
is a global health burden which could be alleviated through provitamin A carotenoid biofortification 
in suitable plants []. If we understand in depth
the regulation of carotenoid biosynthesis, enhancement of beta-carotene
could be done by limiting beta-carotene hydroxylation. Therefore in order
to understand more about EoChyb, its cDNA clone is analyzed using
computational tools. The nucleotide and protein sequence of EoChyb
cDNA is analyzed and annotated in this study to find out their features.
The EoChyb annotation and features are reported in this paper.

Methodology
cDNA library and EoChyb clone isolation
Elaeis oleifera, seventeen week's old [weeks after anthesis (WAA)]
mesocarp tissue cDNA library constructed using the ‘CloneMiner cDNA
library construction kit’ (Invitrogen Corporation) for ESTs generation (our
unpublished work) was used to isolate EoChyb. The 
EoChyb cDNA clone was isolated by random method of cDNA isolation 
[].

The cDNA nucleotide sequence reported in this paper has been submitted
to GenBank/DDBJ/EMBL under accession number EU057623.

Nucleotide sequencing
The E. coli DH5α cells harboring EoChyb cDNA were 
cultivated in 10 ml LB medium (supplemented with Kanamycin) overnight in dark at 37 °C,
160 rpm. The cultivated E. coli DH5α cells were harvested from broth and
plasmid DNA was isolated by using a commercial kit, Wizard® Plus SV
Minipreps DNA purification system (Promega). Sequencing reactions were
carried out for both strands using M13 (Forward); 5’-GTAAAACGACGGCCAG-3’ and M13 (Reverse); 
5’-GGATAACAATTTCACACAGG-3’ primers.

cDNA and protein sequence analysis
The cDNA sequence was edited manually to eliminate vector and adaptor
sequences from 5’ and 3’ ends. Finalized cDNA sequence analysis was
performed using online free bioinformatics tools. The similarity searches
were performed using blast programs (BlastN, BlastX, and BlastP) against
the databases available at NCBI []. 
EMBOSS pairwise alignment algorithm [http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/emboss/align/] was used to
compare 2 cDNA sequences to find out homology %. To find out general
features of the cDNA sequence including amino acid composition and
isoelectric point analysis was performed online using bioinformatics tools
available at JustBio []. 
Guanine and cytosine content (GC %) calculation
was carried out by using ‘DNA/RNA base composition calculator‘, a free
online bioinformatics tool that calculates the molecular mass, elemental
composition, base composition, and percent AT and GC content for
cDNA/DNA/RNA sequences []. 
Alignment of amino acid sequences and dendrogram construction was carried out using multiple sequence
alignment by ClustalW [] 
program. Whereas, to find out fully conserved
residues; residues with conserved strong groups and residues with
conserved weak groups in EoChyb, amino acid sequences were aligned by
using clustal 2.0.11 multiple sequence alignment program.

Results
EoChyb clone isolation
By random method of cDNA clone isolation, EoChyb clone was isolated
from 17 day old mesocarp tissue cDNA library. The serial number of this
randomly isolated cDNA clone in ESTs generation project was 2962;
hence clone identity ‘EoEST-2962’ was given to EoChyb cDNA clone.

Nucleotide sequencing
The +ve and –ve strand of EoChyb cDNA clone were sequenced using
M13 forward and M13 reverse primers, respectively. The EoChyb +ve and
–ve strand cDNA sequence after removal of vector and adaptor sequence
was compared and searched for overlaps using blast (bl2seq) program 
[].
The results produced shows that EoChyb cDNA sequence is 1414 bp in
length. By analyzing the finalized cDNA sequence and its deduced amino
acid sequence, Chyb identity was given to the cDNA clone.

cDNA and protein sequence analysis
The general features of the cDNA nucleotide and protein sequence as
revealed by bioinformatics tools available at JustBio are summarized in
Table 1 (see ). 
The annotated nucleotide sequence was submitted to GenBank/DDBJ/EMBL under accession
number EU057623. Whereas the comparison of the EoChyb at nucleotide
and protein level with Chyb from other plant species and algal members is
depicted in Table 2 (see ). 
The nucleotide and deduced amino acid sequences of EoChyb cDNA, an open reading frame
(ORF), 5’ and 3’ untranslated regions (UTR), initiation and termination
codon, and the amino acid residues of beta-carotene hydroxylase and sterol
desaturase conserved domains are shown in . The EoChyb, and
Chyb from other selected plants and algal members Chyb amino acid
sequence alignment based phylogenetic analysis was carried out and the
constructed dendrogram is shown in . Clustal 2.0.11 multiple
sequence alignment program produced results of EoChyb amino acid
sequence alignment with amino acid sequences of Chyb from other
organisms and showed single fully conserved residues, residues with conserved strong groups and 
residues with conserved weak groups ().

Discussion
The availability of EoChyb cDNA clone in 17 day old mesocarp tissue
cDNA library indicates that Chyb is expressed in developing E. oleifera
fruit mesocarp tissue. However, the level of its expression, pattern of
expression and tissue specificity is not known. The analysis of developing
fruit mesocarp by Northern blot technique could shade the light on level
and pattern of its expression []. 
The GC content in EoChyb cDNA is
56%. This GC % is close to the predicted GC content in coding sequences
of Elaeis oleifera and Elaeis guineensis 
[–]. Homology analysis using
BlastP indicates that EoChyb protein shows 82-98% homology with Chyb
from other monocot plant species. Comparison of EoChyb with Chyb from
13 dicot plant species shows range of homology from 71-98%. However,
Chyb from algal member shows only 78-84% homology with EoChyb
(Table 2, see ). The relatively low level of
EoChyb homology with Chyb from algal member is in line with the
evolution in plant species. Monocots are highly evolved in comparison
with the dicots and algae. Conserved domain search in EoChyb indicates
that amino acid residue 46-324 are part of the beta-carotene hydroxylase
(fatty acid hydroxylase super family) conserved domain; and amino acid
residues 184-309 belongs to the sterol desaturase [lipid metabolism]
domain (). However, 
latter’s role in sterol desaturation is not clear
[]. 
The EoChyb amino acid composition analysis revealed that it is rich
in alanine (A) amino acid (See Figure 1 and Table 3 in 
).

The dendrogram constructed to study the phylogenetic relationship
between EoChyb and Chyb protein sequences from 13 dicots, 3 monocots
and 3 algal members shows 3 MC. The Chyb proteins from dicots,
monocots and algal members were precisely grouped in MC1, MC2, and
MC3 respectively (). All the Chyb 
proteins from dicotyledonous plants in MC1 were sub-grouped into 3 sub-clusters. The sub-cluster-1 is
of Chyb from Citrus sinensis and Glycine max. The sub-cluster-2 is of
Chyb from Coffea arabica, Solanum lycopersicum, Gentiana lutea,
Diospyros kaki and Capsicum annuum. Whereas, Vitis vinifera, Adonis
aestivalis, Chrysanthemum x morifolium, Brassica napus, Arabidopsis
thaliana and Daucus carota were grouped under sub-cluster-3 of MC1. All
the Chyb protein sequences from monocots, Crocus sativus, Elaeis
oleifera, Lilium hybrid and Zea mays used in phylogenetic analysis were
grouped under MC2; and three algal Chyb protein sequences from
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Muriella zofingiensis and Haematococcus
pluvialis were grouped under MC3 (). 
This classification of Chyb is in line with the phylogenetic lineages 
that have molecular data in the NCBI databases []. 
The dendrogram analysis also reflects that EoChyb is phylogenetically closer to 
the Chyb from Lilium hybrid and other monocots used in the study.

The multiple sequence alignment of Chyb amino acid sequences of
EoChyb and Chyb protein sequences from 13 dicots, 3 monocots and 3
algal members (Table 2 see ) clearly shows the
well conserved catalytic residues in Chyb. The analysis of the multiple
sequence alignment of Chyb amino acid sequences clearly shows that in
total 51 amino acid residues are fully conserved in Chyb of the all plant
species and algal members (). 
It was also evident that across the Chyb amino acid sequence, in total 28 
amino acid residues were conserved strongly ().

Conclusion
This study has annotated the salient features of randomly isolated EoChyb
cDNA clone using Bioinformatics tools. Bioinformatics analyses revealed
that EoChyb protein is carrying conserved domains for the beta-carotene
hydroxylase and the sterol desaturase. Furthermore, the study also shows
the 51 fully conserved amino acid residues in Chyb from the flowering
(monocot and dicot) plants and algal members, which could be of
relevance to gain insights into the evolution of Chyb.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors are grateful to the Ministry of Science, Technology and
Innovation (MOSTI) of Malaysian Government for research funding
[Grant Code: IRPA: 01-02-02-0014/PR0015/07-07], and to the United
Plantation Berhad, Perak, Malaysia for supplying fruit samples of Elaeis
oleifera for this study.

Citation:Bhoreetal; Bioinformation 5(3): 104-112 (2010)

Nucleotide and deduced amino acid sequences of E. oleifera beta-carotene hydroxylase cDNA clone. An open reading frame and noncoding
regions are shown in capital and small letters, respectively. The deduced amino acid sequence is given below the nucleotide sequence, which is numbered
at the both ends of each sequence line. The open reading frame encodes for a protein of 325 amino acid residues. Amino acid residues are numbered
beginning with the initial methionine till last glycine (G) residue. Initiation and termination codons are shown in bold. The beta-carotene hydroxylase
(fatty acid hydroxylase super family) conserved domain (PLN02601) [] residues are shown in green colour. The sterol desaturase [Lipid metabolism]
domain (ERG3) [] residues are underlined. *represent the termination codon. This cDNA was isolated by random method of gene isolation from E.
oleifera 17 week old mesocarp tissue cDNA library.

Rooted dendrogram showing clustering of beta-carotene hydroxylase (Chyb) from E. oleifera and other organisms. Amino acid sequences for
different organisms were obtained from NCBI database. Alignment of amino acid sequences and dendrogram construction was carried out using multiple
sequence alignment by ClustalW [] program using default parameters. Location of E. oleifera Chyb in phylogenetic tree is shown in pink box. The ID
of Chyb proteins used in the study is given in Table 2 (see ). MC stands for main cluster.

Similarity comparison of amino acid sequences of the E. oleifera beta-carotene hydroxylase (Chyb) protein and Chyb amino acid sequences
from other organisms. Amino acid sequences are numbered at the end of each sequence row. (*), (:) and (.) denote single fully conserved residues,
residues with conserved strong groups and residues with conserved weak groups in Chyb, respectively. Aa, Adonis aestivalis; At, Arabidopsis thaliana;
Bn, Brassica napus; Can, Capsicum annuum; Car, Coffea arabica; Cr, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii; Csi, Citrus sinensis; Csa, Crocus sativus; Cxm,
Chrysanthemum x morifolium hybrid; Dc, Daucus carota; Dk, Diospyros kaki; Eo, Elaeis oleifera; Gl, Gentiana lutea; Gm, Glycine max; Hp,
Haematococcus pluvialis; Lh, Lilium hybrid; Mz, Muriella zofingiensis; Sl, Solanum lycopersicum; Vv, Vitis vinifera; Zm, Zea mays. This alignment is
produced by clustal 2.0.11 multiple sequence alignment program.

