Background
The emergence of influenza A (H1N1) 9 decades ago led to a
devastating global pandemic. H1N1 is thought to have emerged almost
simultaneously from birds into humans and swine []. As of July 23,
2009, the H1N1 virus was reported in more than 130 countries, with
more than 800 deaths. Several countries are experiencing sustainable
community transmission. The sudden outbreak of this novel flu virus
has tested the world's public health preparedness. H1N1 provided a
real-world test that showed the strengths and vulnerabilities in the
abilities of the countries in world to respond to a major infectious
disease outbreak []. The scale of the problem is uncertain when a
disease first appears but increased rapidly. Pandemic preparations will
be severely challenged when the pandemic eventually arrives to
countries, especially if there is high morbidity and mortality.
Healthcare facilities can be quickly overwhelmed and the economy
can go into deep recession. There can be widespread public anxiety
and fear. It is thus vital to ensure that preparedness plans are regularly
reviewed and updated to incorporate the latest research findings and
technology where feasible. Equally important are exercises to test and
fine-tune procedures and plans. The consequences of H1N1 have been
less severe than originally anticipated, but there are some important
lessons to be learned. Should the worst occur, most countries would be
caught without the necessary policies and plans in place to deal with a
deadly outbreak. Early pandemic preparation is required, but decisions
about action must be made when the threat is only modest. Major
intervention may cause such as rare adverse events from large-scale
vaccination or economic and social costs from school dismissals and
the uncertain probability of much greater harm from a widespread
outbreak. This combination of urgency, uncertainty, and the costs of
interventions makes the effort to control infectious diseases especially
difficult []. This bioinformation examines underlying concerns and
lessons learned from the response about overall preparedness for
potential pandemic flu outbreak in the event that H1N1 returns in the
future, either in its current form or as a more virulent strain.

HxNy Pandemic and Social preparedness
If a severe pandemic occurs, it is likely to be a prolonged and
widespread outbreak that could require major changes in many sectors
of society, such as schools, work, transportation, business, health care,
and government. The public can greatly reduce their risk during a
pandemic by being informed and prepared before the emergency.

Social isolation
Nonmedical interventions primarily social distancing could be useful
in staving off transmission []. Limiting social contact will slow the
spread of influenza in the community and will reduce the height of the peak of the epidemic, although overall attack rates may remain the
same. This will help healthcare services to cope and minimize the
likelihood that healthcare services would be overwhelmed. Social
distancing measures will take the form of closure of all educational
institutions and most public places e.g. shopping malls, cinemas and
swimming pools. Public gatherings at mass events such as concerts
and sporting events will also be cancelled. Schools and corporate finds
more ways to be flexible with their work-from-home options [].

Delaying the spread of HxNy
At the earliest sign that an influenza pandemic has begun (),
border controls would be stepped up in an attempt to delay the spread
of the pandemic virus. It has been reported that such measures may
have limited usefulness but measures such as temperature and health
screening were used during the SARS epidemic were so effective and
it is good to be employed again during an influenza pandemic [].
Depending on the severity of the pandemic, other border control
measures that could be implemented include the imposition of
immigration visa requirements and quarantine of incoming travelers,
including residents. These would minimize non-essential travels [].

Planning and management
Improving coordination among governments and the private sector
preparedness and planning activities are critical in future preparation
as the nature of flu threats change over time. Communication between
the public health system and health providers must be well
coordinated. Building trust, technologies, and policies internationally
to encourage science-based, consistent decision making across
globally during an outbreak is very important.

Super-flexible response strategy
As the epidemic unfolded, new knowledge required government
officials to reassess guidance offered to the public and the medical
community. Providing clear, straightforward information to the public
is essential for allaying fears and building trust gives people the facts
they need to be prepared, not scared.

Maintaining indispensable services
Improving the ability for health providers to manage a massive influx
of patients is essential. Even with a mild outbreak, the health care
delivery system was overwhelmed. It revealed significant problems
and lack of preparedness. Investments in antiviral stockpiles and
enhanced vaccine manufacturing capacity also proved to be prudent.
Countries need to make sure that they have enough stockpiles of food
essentials such as rice and infant milk powder.

Trade limitations
There is no scientific evidence that eating pork causes influenza. Yet
20 countries have banned meat from Mexico, Canada, and the United
States, including 2 of the world's largest pork importers, China and
Russia. However, more scientific evidence required whether such bans
are necessary to implement during pandemic outbreak.

Pandemic drills
Government agencies have to carry out exercises to test their pandemic
preparedness plans. The exercise will be useful in enabling healthcare
providers to fine-tune their operational plans for an influenza
pandemic. As seen for the past few weeks, social media such as
twitter, blogs and social networks, can play a vital role in the
dissemination of information. A public exhibition on infectious
diseases, including flu pandemics will raise public consciousness
about the impact of major epidemics and the need for tough measures
to be taken.

Additional procedures
Other measures include public advice on good personal hygiene such
as good cough etiquette and frequent washing of hands. The public
could also be advised to stay home as much as possible and wear
surgical masks whenever they are in public places including when
travelling on public transportation. Members of households with
influenza cases will be asked to practice voluntary home quarantine to
prevent possible transmission. Useful lessons were learnt during SARS
such as transparency and the provision of regular updated information
as well as gene expression profiling data from the SARS patients
which are essential to design a novel treatment regimen for containing
the outbreak [,]. Another lesson is that just because SARS started in
Asia doesn't mean the next bug will be born there. A potential
pandemic can originate and take root anywhere [].

Pandemic flu and medical preparedness
The emergence of yet another serious global health threat from an
animal source highlights the critical need for deeper understanding of
zoonotic viruses, including in vivo studies of pathogenesis in animals, field epidemiologic studies, and surveillance in animal populations,
along with the development of computational models. The shift in
mortality toward younger age groups was the most striking
characteristic of the 20th-century pandemics [,]. Data from past
pandemics can provide useful insights for current and future planning
[]. Though the rapidity of transmission of influenza virus during
pandemics necessitates immediate action, it can be hoped that close
collaborations and lessons drawn from previous pandemics will
contribute to reducing national and global mortality. The documented
relevant signature features can help health authorities prioritize
national strategies and aid international collaborators in addressing the
initial and successive waves of illnesses and deaths.

National stockpile
Maintaining enough stockpiles to make sure enough antiviral
medications, vaccinations, and equipment are available to protect
people. During the SARS epidemic in 2003, personal protective
equipment (PPE) such as masks, gloves and waterproof gowns were in
short supply.

Prophylaxis for health care professional
It is important to make sure that there is sufficient medication
provided in advance to front-line health care professionals. For
example, doctors and their staffs might need numerous 10-day courses
of antiviral for them to continue treating patients for the duration of a
pandemic without getting sick. Workers in essential services such as
healthcare, energy supply, water supply, and law enforcement will be
provided prophylaxis with oseltamivir to minimize their likelihood of
being infected with influenza.

HxNy research initiatives
Providing enough funding for the future research on H1N1 is very
important Identification of pre-1918 human influenza RNA samples
would help us understand the timing of emergence of the 1918 virus.
Understanding influenza pandemics in general requires understanding
the 1918 pandemic in all its historical, epidemiologic, and biologic
aspects []. It is also important to enhance the biomedical research
and development abilities to rapidly develop and produce a vaccine.

Case definition and testing methods
Countries have reported that the clinical case definition was not an
accurate model for the swine flu epidemic; and drug and mask
distribution has been extremely slow, especially to general
practitioners, who are crucial to effective disease management and
containment []. Initial laboratory testing to confirm a case of swine
flu was only allowed if a sick patient has been recently returned from
affected countries. This is the opposite of what has occurred. To
understand the full extent of disease spread, widespread testing
without assumptions needs to occur so that the accuracy of the
proposed case definition can be tested.

Drug resistance and alternative therapy
It is shown that the main seasonal influenza strain in the United States
in 2008 was resistant to oseltamivir in 0.4 percent to 4 percent of
adults and children treated []. The real nightmare scenario will be if the current swine flu strain also develops resistance in the face of
widespread use of oseltamivir, leaving us with few treatment options.

Conclusion
The documented relevant signature features can help health authorities
prioritize national strategies and aid international collaborators in
addressing the initial and successive waves of illnesses and deaths.
The recent H1N1 Influenza outbreak raised concerns about our ability
to handle the current and future pandemic threats. Our systems for
surveillance, reporting, infection control, and antiviral drug
distribution showed strain and could potentially be overwhelmed. In
the brief time we have to prepare for our next wave, we must step back
and evaluate where improvements need to be made. Preparations must
continue to be improved and fine-tuned to ensure that the impact of the
future influenza pandemic is minimized as much as possible. It is
important to plan for the constant evolution of H1N1 virus. H1N1 may
transform into a deadly global threat at some point, debilitating normal
life across the world. Countries must heed the lessons of this scare and
recognize that preparedness in the present is essential. By
implementing comprehensive policies and investigating the strengths
and weaknesses before any real crisis hits, we can ensure a relatively
smooth transition into a state of emergency, should they be faced with
the worst. Though the rapidity of transmission of influenza virus
during pandemics necessitates immediate action, it can be hoped that
close collaborations and lessons drawn from the recent H1N1
pandemic will contribute to reducing national and global mortality.

The authors wish to thank ’Beacon Biosoft Pvt.Limited‘
( www.beaconbiosoft.com) for helping with the wonderful graphics on
the Mechanism of HxNy Evolution in this article.

Citation:Manikandan et al, Bioinformation 4(8): 338-340 (2010)

Mechanism of HxNy Evolution. Influenza virus A subtypes, belongs to the family of orthomyxoviridae, are classified as H1N1, 	 
H1N2, H3N2 or H1N5 etc., based on 16 Hemaglutinin (H) serotypes or subtypes (imputed for x variable) and from 9 subtypes of neuraminidase 	 
(N) (imputed for y variable) on the viral surface. However, the specific influenza strain isolates are identified by a standard nomenclature 	 
specifying virus type, geographical location where first isolated, sequential number of isolation, year of isolation, and also the HA and NA 	 
subtypes. (A) Without any genetic modification influenza A virus can be passed on to humans. (B) Birds or aquatic birds can also spread 	 
influenza A subtypes directly to pigs. (C) Pigs, which are one of the intermediate hosts as birds can pass on the virus to humans. (D)However, 	 
inside an intermediate host like pig, a bird influenza virus can be genetically mixed with a human strain of influenza virus subtype since humans 	 
can transmit the virus directly to pigs (E) causing the evolution of a new virulent strain of influenza which might infect the humans to cause an 	 
epidemic (F) and further spreading of this new strain in different human populations across the globe will eventually lead to a full fledged flu 	 
pandemic (G).

