Background
Biological H2 production linked to photosynthetic water oxidation is a
promising technology that may play a major role in the future of renewable
energy. The process of Hydrogen metabolism was first shown by Hans
Gaffron (1939, 1940) []. 
Gaffron observed that, under anaerobic
conditions, the green alga Scenedesmus obliquus can either use H2 as
electron donor in the CO2 fixation process in the, or evolve H2 in the light
[].
Hydrogenases constitute a family of enzymes found in certain
photosynthetic microorganisms, such as green algae and cyanobacteria,
which have the potential to store efficiently the energy of incident sunlight
as high-energy H2 molecules or catalyzes the reversible oxidation of
hydrogen gas, with a maximum theoretical efficiency of approximate 13%.
Current databases list more than 300 hydrogenase gene sequences obtained
from bacteria and cyanobacteria species with most from Scendesmus
obliquus (cyanobacteria), Clostridium pasteurianum (bacteria),
Desulfovibrio desulfuricans (cyanobacteria). If harnessed properly,
hydrogenase and/or hydrogenase-containing organisms could be used to
supply affordable and renewable H2 to be used as an energy fuel, and thus
solve the “supply” aspect of the future hydrogen economy. This idealistic
picture is not without problems. Notably, hydrogenase's H-cluster is
extremely sensitive to the presence of oxygen gas (O2), which will bind to
it permanently. In the presence of O2, hydrogen production is maintained
for only a few minutes before the hydrogenases become deactivated. In
order to maintain a sustained hydrogen production using hydrogenase, an
anaerobic environment is currently required, making hydrogenase a costly
and impractical source of H2. This creates an interesting scientific problem:
if the pathways through which O2 reaches the H-cluster can be identified, it
will be possible to create an engineered version of hydrogenase in which
these O2 pathways are blocked, thus decreasing hydrogenase's sensitivity
towards O2.

Classification of hydrogenases
Initially Fe-Hydrogenase was presumed to be present in a limited number
of bacteria and anaerobic living protozoa []. The enzyme hydrogenase
can be classified into five groups, based on the protein sequence homology
of thirty microbial hydrogenase sequences []. 

‐[Ni-Fe]-hydrogenase: membrane bound, mainly for uptake of hydrogen, found in
aerobic, anaerobic and facultative anaerobic bacteria 
[,
].

[Ni-Fe-Se]-hydrogenase: membrane bound, mainly for hydrogen uptake, found in
sulphate-reducing bacteria [,
].

Fe-hydrgenase: periplasmic, mainly for hydrogen evolution, found in strict 
anaerobic bacteria [,
].

‐Methyl viologen factor [F-420] or NAD-reducing and soluble
Hydrogenases: found in Methanobacteria and Alcaligenes.

labileHydrogenase isoenzyme of Escherichia coli.




Hydrogen metabolism
Photoproduction of H2 by the cyanobacteria is a nitrogenase-dependent
reaction, while hydrogen production in green algae such as
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii depends on hydrogenase. In nitrogenase H2 is
only produced under anoxic condition when nitrogen source is limited
[]. Nitrogenases use reductant and ATP to convert atmospheric N2 to
ammonium, providing fixed nitrogen for cell growth. The manner in which
green algae produces hydrogen gas from water is called direct
biophotolysis [,
]. The mechanism of photosynthetic hydrogen
production entails photolysis of water and a light dependent transfer of
electron via photo system II and photo system I to the chloroplast
ferredoxin. Ferredoxin efficiently binds to the [Fe] hydrogenase and
electrons are donated to the catalytic site known as ‘Hydrogen Cluster’
(HC) of the [Fe] hydrogenase. The H-cluster utilizes protons as the sinks
for the photo synthetically generated electrons, leading to the synthesis of
molecular hydrogen [,
]. This process of photosynthetic hydrogen
production does not entail carbon dioxide fixation or energy storage into
cellular metabolites.

The main aim of the present work is to predict the 3D structure of the
Hydrogenase and analyze possible pathways of molecular hydrogen
entering inside hydrogenase. This is performed using homology modeling
and molecular dynamics simulations in explicit solvent and molecular
hydrogen. We make no assumption on the initial position of H2, which is
placed outside the protein. The entry of H2 was analyzed with several
copies of H2 and without locally enhanced sampling. The present study
includes the detection of regions potentially involved in the control of H2
access to the active site.

Methodology
Target protein
The target hydrogenase sequence whose structure is to be predicted is the
hydA1 gene found in the Chlamydomonas reinhardtti. Till now two [Fe]-
hydrogenase had been cloned and sequenced from Chlamydomonas
reinhardtti, hydA1 and hydA2 and had been deposited in Genbank
(accession numbers AY055755 and AY055756)4,5,16. Given below is the
target hydA1 sequence:
&gt;gi|18026270|gb|AAL23572.1| iron-hydrogenase HydA1
[Chlamydomonas reinhardtii]
MSALVLKPCAAVSIRGSSCRARQVAPRAPLAASTVRVALATLEAP
ARRLGNVACAAAAPAAEAPLSHVQQALAELAKPKDDPTRKHVCV
QVAPAVRVAIAETLGLAPGATTPKQLAEGLRRLGFDEVFDTLFGA
DLTIMEEGSELLHRLTEHLEAHPHSDEPLPMFTSCCPGWIAMLEKS
YPDLIPYVSSCKSPQMMLAAMVKSYLAEKKGIAPKDMVMVSIMPC
TRKQSEADRDWFCVDADPTLRQLDHVITTVELGNIFKERGINLAEL
PEGEWDNPMGVGSGAGVLFGTTGGVMEAALRTAYELFTGTPLPR
LSLSEVRGMDGIKETNITMVPAPGSKFEELLKHRAAARAEAAAHG
TPGPLAWDGGAGFTSEDGRGGITLRVAVANGLGNAKKLITKMQA
GEAKYDFVEIMACPAGCVGGGGQPRSTDKAITQKRQAALYNLDE
KSTLRRSHENPSIRELYDTYLGEPLGHKAHELLHTHYVAGGVEEKD
EKK

NCBI cdd search
The target sequence was deposited to the ncbi cd-search tool for finding
the conserved region in the sequence.

NCBI blast search
Similarly psi-blast search was also performed for finding the sequences
having similarity with the target sequences.

Structure prediction of target protein
The structure of hyda1 hydrogenase form chlamydomonas reinhardtti was
predicted using comparative or homology modeling software modeler 8v2.

Amino acid sequence alignment
For single template model building procedure the target sequence hyda1
was aligned with the template sequences using the align2d command in
modeller 8v2.

Model building
Initially the model was build using the automodel class of modeler 8v2.

Model validation
Models constructed in the manner described above were validated by a
variety of computational methods. the simplest of these is to assess the
distribution of the φ and ψ angles on the side chains using ramachandran
plots (chang and loew 1996).

Modeling hyda1 hydrogenase from chlamydomonas reinhardtti based
on a single template 1feh
alignment between the target structure and template was done using the
modeller 8v2 2dalign function.. once a target-template alignment is
constructed, the 3d model of the target can be calculated automatically
from the template 1feh using the modeller automodel class.

Molecular dynamics
Analysis methods
When carrying out an molecular dynamics (md) simulation, coordinates
and velocities of the system are saved; these are then used for the analysis.
Time dependent properties can be displayed graphically, where one of the
axis corresponds to time and the other to the quantity of interest, such as
energy, rmsd (root men square deviation), etc.

In the first one, a 20 ps simulation was run with all protein heavy atoms
position-restrained with a 1 kJ/(mol nm2) force constant and with initial
velocities taken from a Maxwellian distribution at 300 K and a temperature
coupling constant between baths of 0.1 ps. In the second step, a 50 ps
simulation was run with all atoms free and a temperature coupling constant
of 0.1 ps. Conformations were saved every picosecond for later analysis.

Molecular dynamics simuation of h2 gas diffusion pathways in the
protein
Before performing the Molecular Dynamic Simulation Energy
Minimization of the whole system was performed for optimization of
hydrogen atoms. Total 6000 steps of Steepest Descent with initial step size
of 0.01 and Fmax less than 100 KJmol-1nm-1 were performed. A 105 kJ
(mol nm2) position-restraining force constant was used in the minimization
step.

Discussion
The result of the alignment between the template and target shows that the
two sequences are 32.6% identical while the similarity between the two is
around 42%. Certain α-helix and β-strands were also found to be conserved
in the alignment. The β-strands surrounding the active site region in 1FEH
are found to be conserved in the alignment. A large region in the target
sequence (from residue no 337 to 382) was found to unaligned with the
template. The region contains an helix as predicted by the ‘mgenthreader’
server. Thus loop refining has to be done for this region. The Cys300,
Cys355, Cys499 and Cys503 which ligate the [4Fe-4S] cluster are found to
be conserved in the target Cys170, Cys225, Cys417 and Cys421.
Molecular dynamics simulation was performed for the energy
minimization and structure validation. We successfully performed this.

Conclusion
The work presented here aims to first predict the possible structure of
hydA1 hydrogenase from Chlamydomonas reinhatdtti and to analyze
possible paths followed by molecular hydrogen (H2) and oxygen (O2)
towards the active site and also to find protein regions potentially
controlling its passage. In order to improve sampling efficiency, various
MD simulation replicates were used. The first conclusion that can be taken
from this work is that molecular hydrogen and oxygen easily enters the
protein. In every simulation done, H2 penetrates hydrogenase very early in
the simulation, but at the end it was seen that only 12% of the H2
molecules are inside the protein. In the case of O2 molecules only 22% of
the oxygen molecules are inside the protein at the end of each simulation.
This amount is very small as compared to what is required for predicting
the possible pathways if both gas inside the protein. In all cases of
simulation, none of the molecular hydrogen and oxygen approaches the
active centre.

We thank to The Coordinator, Centre for Bioinformatics, University of
Allahabad for providing us necessary infrastructure facilities.

Citation:Sundaram etal; Bioinformation 5(4): 177-183 (2010)

Hydrogenase pathway

Alignment generated using Chimera. Here yellow region indicated the actual and 
predicted α-helix in the template and the target (here query)
sequence. Similarly green region indicates the β-sheets.

Gromacs Flow Chart

A: Potential Energy Plot, B: RMSD Plot. Molecular Dynamics simulation of of the hydA1 
[Fe] hydrogenase was performed in a water box in

Showing RMSD Plot in protein structure during 50 ps simulation.

Showing Fluctuations in Radius of Gyration after every 1ps during 50ps simulation.

Showing Potential Energy Plot.

Plot Showing # no of H2/ps v/s cutoff radius.

Plot showing # no of O2/ps v/s cutoff radius

Ramachandran plot and predicted structure.

