Background
Ribonucleotide Reductase (RNR) is a ubiquitous cytosolic enzyme in
the cell, responsible for converting ribonucleotides into
deoxyribonucleotides, the eventual substrates for DNA polymerase [–], 
and also repair DNA in all living cells []. In mammalian cells, this
enzyme contains two dissimilar protein components, R1 and R2,
which are encoded by two different genes located on different
chromosomes []. Protein R1 is a homodimeric structure, with a
molecular mass of 168kDa, and has substrate and allosteric effector
sites that control enzyme activity and substrate specificity []. Protein
R2 is a homodimer, with a molecular mass of 88kDa, And forms two
equivalent dinuclear iron centers that stabilize a tyrosyl free radical,
required for the initiation of electron transformation during catalysis.
R1 and R2 proteins interact at their C-terminal ends to form an active
holoenzyme [].

Amidox (3, 4- dihydroxybenzamidoxime), a new polyhydroxysubstituted
benzoic acid derivative, is a potent inhibitor of the enzyme
ribonucleotide reductase (RR), which catalyses the de novo synthesis
of DNA. RR is considered to be an excellent target for cancer
chemotherapy. In the present study we investigated the antineoplastic
effects of Amidox alone and in combination with
Arabinofuranosylcytosine (Ara-c) in HL-60 human promyelocytic
leukemia cells []. Ribonucleotide reductase (RR) is the rate- limiting
enzyme of de novo DNA synthesis and has been shown to be up
regulated linked with proliferation and malignant transformation. It
was therefore identified as an excellent target for ant tumor therapy
[]. Daily oral or intravenous administration of the ribonucleotiode
diphosphate reductase inhibitor, (E)-2‘-(fluromethylene) cytidine
(MDL 101, 731), to nude mice caused rapid regression of colon and
prostrate xenografts. Studies were performed to optimize dosing
schedule and route of administration [].

The cell division makes it a potential target for designing drug to
inhibit cell growth, applications in cancer therapy, and the production
of anti- malaria and trypanosome drugs, antibiotics and anti-viral
agents against those viruses that have their own RNRs. An increased
interest in RNR as a target for cancer therapy is seen ever since the
human ribonucleotide reductase of a new type was identified which is
regulated by p53. The p53 actively suppresses tumor formation but on
mutation several forms of cancer are developed. As much as over 80%
of the human tumors have been found to contain mutations in p53 or in
the pathway that directly regulates it. Mammalian RNR-R2 is located
in the cytoplasm and regulated by the cell cycle. The new R2 gene
product is called p53R2 and found to be located in the nucleus. The
p53 binds to a sequence in the first intron of p53R2 gene and is
required for directly activating its transcription. It was reported
recently that p53 enzyme binds both R2 and p53R2 subunits in testing
cells but upon exposure to UV radiation, they dissociate from p53 and
bind to R1. Perhaps the regulation of RNR activity by p53 is more
complex than activation of P53R2 []

Methodology
Receptor and ligand data
Radical scavengers from R2 protein are very essential for inhibiting
the RNR activity and DNA replication. The crystal structure of human
RNR2 of a single subunit (PDB ID: 2IYH) was used for the current
studies. Based on brief Literature survey [,], the potential radical
scavengers Flavin and Phenosafranine molecules are constructed using
Insight [] and subsequently these small molecules were subjected to
energy minimization to bring the energy level of the system to global
minima, structurally stable and free from steric clashes.

Docking
The molecules were further subjected to Auto dock 3.0.5 to perform
the docking studies which use Lamarckian Genetic Algorithm (LGA)
for about 50 iterations by placing the grid arbitrarily at the active site
of the crystal structure [,]. To reduce the complexities in the binding 
studies the hetero groups were removed from the crystal structure earlier. 
The ligand bound complexes were further analyzed
for the binding affinity and HBond interaction studies using the online
server HBPLUS.

Interaction identification
The free energy co efficient for the vander waals for the docked
receptor and the ligand is 0.1560 and the electrostatic term for the
docked receptor and the ligand is 0.1465. It is said earliar that
Ribonucleotide reductase (RNR) activity is necessary for DNA
replication and inhibition of this enzyme will inhibits cell division.
The inhibitor must be ready to destroy the Tyrosyl radical. And thus
the inhibitors such as Flavin and Phenosafranine bind at the active site
Tyrosine 176 to reduce the radical activity and inhibit cell division.

Discussion
Structural features of human RNR2 subunit
The human RNR2 structure belongs to all-helical class of protein. R2
subunit contains a dinuclear ion center and a tyrosyl radical site (Tyr-
176 in human R2), which are essential for initiation of the nucleotide
reduction process-taking place at the active site in R1. The di-ion
center of R2 can exist in different oxidation states. If molecular
oxygen is allowed to react with the diferrous R2 (Fe (II) Fe (II)), it will
spontaneously oxidize the di-ion center through a series of
intermediate states, leading to a μ-oxo- bridged diferric ion cluster (Fe
(III) Fe (III)) and a stable tyrosyl radical []. The dinuclear ion center
is located within a four-helix bundle and is coordinated by Glutamine
169,266,232 and Histidine 269. The R2 subunit of RNR generates, as
mentioned above, a tyrosyl radical essential for the reduction of
ribonucleotides to deoxyribonucleotides in eukaryotes. It is the first
and second coordination sphere of the di-ion center in each protein that
determines the outcome of the reaction with oxygen. Therefore, it is of
great interest. The crystal structure of human RNR2 (PDB ID: 2IYH)
is shown in .

Docking studies
In this paper we have attempted to dock the inhibitor Flavin and
Riboflavin to curtail the action of human RNR2. Auto DOCK program
version available at the web site http://www.scripps.edu/pub/olsonweb/doc/autodock/, was used for this study. This program utilizes
Lamarckian Genetic Algorithm for configurationally search and
evaluates the energy using grid-based molecular affinity potential.
Fifty best configurations of the protein-inhibitors complexes were
retrieved on binding energy. The hydrogen bond and non-bonded
contacts for the complexes were calculated using the program
HBPLUS.

Docking of Flavin and Phenosafranine
The free energy of binding (calculated by adding the final
intermolecular energy and torsional free energy), docked energy
(calculated by adding the final intermolecular energy of ligand) and
the inhibition constant (Ki) for the complex configurations can be used
to find the best configuration. The docked inhibitor Flavin binds the
active site region of the human RNR2. The Flavin interacts with the
active site tyrosine 176, which is essential for free radical formation.
The binding of Flavin and phenosafranine with human RNR2 are
shown in secondary structure representation in  and . The
diagram represented by displaying the THR176 in stick representation
and flavin and phenosafranine in wireframe representation. The fifty
best configuration of RNR1 and Phenosafranine complex is chosen on
the basis of free energy of binding, docked energy and inhibition
constant. The Phenosafranine binds the active site of RNR2. The
Phenosafranine also interacts with the active site tyrosine 176.

Flavin action
Upon anaerobic incubation of R2 protein with reduced flavin and the
reduction of the tyrosyl radical result in the formation of metR2. This
reaction occurs in the absence of ferrous ion. In their presence, the Fe
(III) center is reduced to Fe (II), and reduced R2 becomes the final
product. Admission of oxygen then results in the reformation of active
R2. The enzyme provides the reduced flavin, which under anaerobic
conditions transforms R2 into metR2 by scavenging the tyrosyl radical
[]. In a second step, together with Fe (II) ions, the flavin reductase
catalyzes the formation of reduced R2, with its Fe2+ center. Oxygen
then closes the circle by reforming the radical Fe3+ center of protein
R2. In the presence of oxygen, the tyrosyl radical is formed; in its
absence the radical is removed [].

Mechanism of radical scavenging by Flavin molecule
In anaerobic condition, the first step, the oxido oxygen atom of ion
(III) cluster scavenge the hydrogen radical from the acidic hydrogen of
flavin and form the hydroxyl Fe (III). Another Fe (III) was reduced to
Fe (II) and that the reductive step precedes oxygen requiring radical
formation [,]. According to this model a form of R2 containing
reduced ion (“reduced R2”) should be an intermediate in the reaction.
Simultaneously the unstable flavin radical (IIa &amp; IIb) hydrogen
bonded [flavin N-H (of Uracil moiety)] with oxygen atom of oxido-Fe
(III) and serve as a driving force for the oxido-Fe (III) bond cleavage.
To attain the stable aromatic nature, the II b flavin radical eliminates
one more electron from the piperazine ring and form the yellow color
oxidized flavin (IV) in the second step. Hydroxyl Fe (III) reacts with
second hydrogen radical and form one more reduced Fe (II) and water.

Action of Phenosafranine molecule
In the anaerobic environment with the presence of Phenosafranine (I),
the reduction of both the free radical and the ion center takes place.
Phenosafranine cation first loses one of its protons and forms the
neural phenosafranine (II) and hydroxyl Fe- (III). One Fe (III) gets
reduced to Fe (II) at the first step. In the second step, dimethyl amine
nitrogen donates a pair of electrons to make aromaticity in the
molecule and the piperazine moiety expels the hydrogen anion from
N-H. This anion reacts with HO-Fe (II)-R to form water (IV) and
reduced to Fe (II). After the radical reduction of Fe center, air was
introduced into the sample and a partial regeneration of both the iron
center and the radical occurs.

Non bonded interaction
The internal non bonded interactions of the Ribonucleotide reductase
with Flavin before weeding is 861 and after weeding is 550 and that
of phenosafranine before interaction is 630 and after weeding is 385.
The internal energy of the unbound extended state of Flavin was
computed to be -0.313kcal/mol and that of Phenosafranine is -
0.213kcal/mol. It is noted that the Auto dock internal energy of the
“extended” state for both the ligands Flavin and Phenosafranine
denotes Negative.

Conclusion
The Human RNR activity is necessary for DNA replication and
inhibition of this enzyme helps to inhibit cell division. Therefore an
understanding of the molecular mechanism of RNR is essential for the
design of new cytostatic drugs. In this paper, the docked inhibitors
Flavin and Phenosafranine binds at the active cite TYR176, which are
essential for free radical formation. This mechanism helps to
understand the functional aspects of human RNR2 and leads to the
development of novel inhibitors. An increased level of RNR produces
more DNA, and thus drives the cells through DNA synthesis. In a
hypoxic environment where the activity of RNR is hampered due to
lack of oxygen, the level of RNR regulates the production of DNA and
drives the cells faster through DNA synthesis. This implies that the
replication machinery in the cells is able to detect the level of DNA,
when exogenous DNA is supplied. This helps to explore more about
the structure of Human RNR and its interaction with its inhibitors.
Based on our current results, the work can be further narrowed
towards novel leads molecule synthesis by structure based Drug
discovery approach.

Citation:Priya &amp; Shanmughavel, Bioinformation 4(3): 123-126 (2009)

The Cartoon representation of crystal structure of human RNR R2 subunit which displays the α-helix and the loop region in distinct
manner. The structure is rendered using PyMol.

The interaction of Flavin with human RNR was performed using Auto Dock 3.0.5 which displays the residue THR176 interacts with
the inhibitor Flavin. THR176 of Human RNR and the inhibitor molecule Flavin were found intact at the end of the docking.

The interaction of phenosafranine with human RNR was performed using Auto Dock 3.0.5 which displays the residue THR176
interacts with the inhibitor phenosafranine. THR176 of Human RNR and the inhibitor molecule phenosafranine were found intact at the end of
the docking.

