Background
DNA microarray technology has enabled us to monitor the expression levels of
thousands of genes simultaneously under certain conditions, and has been
yielded various applications in the field of disease diagnosis 
[], drug discovery
[], 
and toxicological research []. Among them, cancer informatics based on
gene-expression data is an important domain that has promising prospects for
both clinical treatment and biomedical research. One of the key issues in this
domain is to discover biomarker genes for cancer diagnosis from a massive
amount of gene-expression data by using a bioinformatics approach called gene
selection. A typical gene-selection approach is a statistical test such as t-test
and ANOVA []. 
This approach detects differentially expressed genes between
groups of samples obtained from different cells/tissues. Most of the statistical
tests assume that the expression values of each gene across the samples follow
a prior probability distribution; hence a sufficiently large number of samples
are required to obtain statistically reliable results. Rough set theory 
[] provides
a theoretical basis for set-theoretical approximation and rule generation from
categorical data. Computation of relative reducts is one of the hottest and most
important research topics in rough set theory as a basis for rule generation.
Relative reducts are minimal sets of attributes for correctly classifying all
samples to those classes. We then expect that computation of relative reducts
from gene-expression data is useful for discovering biologically-meaningful
information such as biomarker candidates for cancer diagnosis. Because
computing all relative reducts of the given data requires very high
computational cost, there have been many proposals of heuristic algorithms to
compute some of the candidates of relative reducts 
[–]. Kudo and Murai
proposed attribute-reduction algorithms to compute as many relative reducts as
possible from a decision table with numerous condition attributes 
[]. They
also proposed an evaluation criterion of relative reducts that evaluates the
usefulness of relative reducts from the viewpoint of decision-rule generation
[]. 
In this paper, we introduce Kudo and Murai’s heuristic attribute reduction
algorithms [] 
and a criterion of relative reducts [] for gene-expression data
analysis. We use these algorithms and criterion in two gene-expression
datasets, breast cancer [] and leukemia 
[], and discuss the extracted
decision rules from these datasets and their biological meanings. The
experimental results indicate that the method used in this paper can identify
differentially expressed genes between different classes in gene-expression
datasets and that it can be useful for gene-expression data analysis.

Methodology
The method we use in this paper to extract decision rules from gene-expression
data based on rough set theory consists of the following three components: 
Extraction of as many relative reducts as possible from gene-expression data;

Selection of relative reducts in accordance with an evaluation criterion of relative reducts;

Construction of decision rules from the selected relative
reducts.  illustrates the processing flow of our method. In the
following section, in terms of the method we use in this paper, we introduce
heuristic attribute-reduction algorithms for generating as many relative reducts
as possible [] used in the first step of the above method and a criterion for
evaluating the usefulness of relative reducts [] as in the second step. Note
that the details of these algorithms and the criterion of relative reducts are in
.



Datasets
To evaluate the usefulness of our method, we use two gene-expression datasets:
breast cancer [] and leukemia 
[]. Both of them are two-class datasets. The
leukemia dataset is composed of the gene-expression values for 12,582 genes
in 24 acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) samples and 28 acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) samples. The breast cancer dataset includes the geneexpression
values for 7,129 genes in 25 positive and 24 negative samples. For
each dataset, the expression values from each gene are linearly normalized to
have mean 0 and variance 1. Subsequently, they are discretized into six bins
(-3, -2, -1, 1, 2, 3) by uniformly dividing the difference between the maximum
and the minimum in the normalized data and into one bin that represents the
lack of gene-expression values. Discretized positive values represent that the
genes are up-regulated, while negative values represent that genes are downregulated.

Results and Discussion
Parameters
Our method was implemented in Java on a Linux workstation (CPU: Intel
Xeon X5460 (3.16GB) x2, Memory: 8GB, HDD: 160GB, OS: SUSE Linux
10.1). All experiments were conducted with the following parameters: base size
b = 10, size limitation L = 25, 
and number of iterations I = 100.

Classification Accuracy
First, we evaluate the classification accuracy of our method. The evaluation is
conducted by Leave-One-Out Cross Validation (LOOCV). In LOOCV, first,
we extract one sample as a test sample from the dataset and generate rules
using the remaining samples. Second, we check whether the test sample is
correctly classified by the rules. These processes are repeated for all samples.
Finally we calculate the rate of correctly classified samples. The classification
accuracy is compared to those of the two salient classifiers, decision tree (C4.5)
and support vector machine (SVM). (see )
shows the results of LOOCV on our method, C4.5, and SVM. For the breast
cancer dataset, our method exhibits the similar classification ability with C4.5
and SVM. For the leukemia dataset, the classification ability of our method
exceeds greatly that of C4.5.

Biological meanings of extracted rules
Next, we discuss the biological meanings of the best results by applying our
method 10 times for each dataset. In these experiments, we used the same
parameter settings with the comparison experiments. The best relative reducts
of two datasets are as follows: (1) Breast cancer dataset: {CRIP1, M34715_at},
ACov = 0.08 (= 2/26). (2) Leukemia dataset: 
{POU2AF1}, ACov = 0.29 (= 2/7), where the score ACov is the average of coverage of decision rules generated from the relative reduct defined by Eq.

in Supplementary material. For example, the relative reduct {POU2AF1} of leukemia dataset
generates 7 decision rules from 2 classes, i.e., AML and ALL; hence ACov score of the relative reduct {POU2AF1} is 2/7 (= 0.29).


We extracted rules from each dataset by performing the following three steps: 
generating all decision rules by the best relative reduct of each dataset,

removing decision rules that contain null values in the antecedents, and

combining the generated decision rules as long as possible by interpreting the meanings of 
decision rules. As a result, we obtained the rules for each dataset. 
(see )



The extracted rules are evaluated on the basis of known biological findings. To
this end, we investigate the functions of genes in the rules by reference to a
genetic disease database (OMIM) [] and a protein sequence database (Swiss-
Prot) []. 
For the breast-cancer dataset, the samples can be discriminated into
a true class with an accuracy of 88 percent according to the expression level of
the Cystein-rich intestinal protein 1 (CRIP1). CRIP1 is a transcription-factor
gene that induces apoptosis in cancer cells. Interestingly, this gene has been
identified as a novel biomarker of human breast cancer in recent studies 
[,
]. 
In the extracted rule, we can see that the CRIP1 expression is more upregulated
in the positive samples. Indeed, this is consistent with the recent
findings by Ma et al. [] 
that CRIP1 in human breast cancer was overexpressed,
compared to normal breast tissue in in situ experiments. For the
leukemia dataset, all samples can be perfectly discriminated by the expression
level of the POU class 2 associating factor 1 (POU2AF1). POU2AF1 is known
as a gene responsible for leukocyte differentiation. In Swiss-Prot, we can see
the description that “a chromosomal aberration involving POU2AF may be a
cause of a form of B-cell leukemia.” Namely, it suggests that this gene can be
inactivated/down-regulated in lymphocytic leukemia, such as ALL. In contrast,
it should be noted that POU2AF1 in the extracted rule shows a weaker
expression in AML than ALL. At present, the detailed role of POU2AF1 in
AML has not been revealed [], whereas we expect that its biological
relevance will be unveiled by experimental biologists in the near future.

Conclusion
In this paper, we introduced a combined method of heuristic attribute reduction
and evaluation of relative reducts in rough set theory for gene-expression data
analysis. Our method is based on a heuristic attribute-reduction algorithm for
generating as many relative reducts as possible and a criterion for evaluating
the usefulness of relative reducts. We applied our method to two geneexpression
datasets: breast cancer and leukemia. In the comparison of our
method with C4.5 and SVM, our method showed good classification accuracy
that is comparable to the results of SVM and considerably exceeds that of
C4.5.The experimental results also showed that our method can identify
differentially expressed genes among different classes in gene-expression
datasets. For the breast-cancer dataset, our method extracted decision rules
regarding a gene that has been identified as a novel biomarker of human breast
cancer in recent studies. For the leukemia dataset, rules about a gene
responsible for leukocyte differentiation were extracted. Thus, these results
indicate a possibility that our method can be a useful tool for gene-expression
data analysis. As a future work, we reduce the computation time via
improvement of the program and will provide the freely available tool.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Kudo &amp; Okada, Bioinformation 6(5): 200-203 (2011)

The method of discovering biomarker candidates based on rough set
theory

