Background
The vascular angiogenesis is an important process in the
development and differentiation of the entire organ in the
body. When this angiogenesis is affected e.g. in various
pathological and environmental conditions it ultimately leading
towards cancers, cardiopulmonary, cerebrovascular disorders
etc., [,
]. In the above said diseases various pathologies lead
to hypoxia condition in the cells. Vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) is known to be a potent hypoxia induced
mitogen and activator of angiogenesis, cellular proliferation,
migration etc. This VEGF molecule interacts with various
tyrosine kinase receptors (RTKs) present on the cell surface.
VEGFR-2 receptor gains importance among tyrosine receptors
as this is the main receptor which regulates various
downstream signal transduction pathways related to vascular
growth in the cells.

VEGF is also known to be associated with normal cardiac
morphogenesis and the causative agent of various
cardiovascular disorders such as valvuloseptal defects under
hypoxia, which may prove lethal, if untreated []. Biological
activation of VEGEFR2 activates cascade of downstream
reactions, which leads to enhanced cell damage and
cardiovascular pathologies []. In the light of the above
information, we select rat ventricular cardiomyocytes because
these cells are sensitive to hypoxia and mimic all the in vivo
molecular events.

VEGFR-2 receptor hence becomes the choice of the scientists
working all over the world in the field of drug discovery for
designing or screening new inhibitors [].

In this connection the present study has been focused to
develop novel inhibitors of VEGFR-2. For achieving this
purpose firstly, on the 3D structure of VEGFR-2 virtual
screening and docking approaches have been used to select
novel drug molecules. Later some selected molecules, have
been tested in vitro for their efficacy on cell viability in rat
ventricular cardiomyocytes (H9c2) under hypoxia (0.5%)
condition. commercially available VEGF receptor blocker
Sunitinib is used in the study as a reference molecule for
comparisons purpose.

Methodology
Protein Homology:
VEGFR-2 Protein 3D structure with ID 1VR2 was downloaded
from RCSB Protein Data bank (PDB) []. Protein stability was
analyzed through Ramachandran plot by using PROCHECK
program [].

Protein Prepration:
VEGFR-2 protein 3D structure (PDB ID: 1VR2) was subjected to
various tools like CASTp [] and DogSiteScorer 
[]. Prediction
of binding site in the protein structure was done by web server
CASTp and DogSite Scorer. They analyzes the drugability by
taking into account of its geometric and physiochemical
properties []. While, CASTp is used for the study of protein
and its surface shape to visualize, locates and measuring voids
and pockets on 3D structure of protein []. The selected active
site was further put in a box of dimensions 26.33Å × 22.67Å ×
16.00Å and a total box volume of 9550 Å3 with the aid of “Make
Receptor” module of the Open Eye software
(http://www.eyesopen.com/) 
[].

Ligand preparation:
Lipinski rule of five was instrumental in generating a set of
ligands from ZINC database.The Structures of 5384 lead like
molecules were downloded in mol2 format []. The molecular
weight of the lead molecules range fixed between 35 to 350 and
the value of xlogP fixed between -4 to 3.5 for downloading.

Virtual Screening:
The Virtual screening of ligands for pose prediction and scoring
were done with high dock resolution against VEGFR-2 protein
active site by utilizing the exhaustive search algorithm 
[]. The
protein target structure was then subjected to FRED 3.0, a
docking module of Open Eye software, for pose prediction and
scoring. The exhaustive search algorithm was used for scoring
based on Chemgauss4 scoring functions. It recognizes the
shape, hydrogen bond interactions and hydrogen bond
geometry and also hydrogen bond networks for scoring. The
results obtained with lowest score are considered to be the best
screened molecules [&amp;
]. Hence, the top 10 ranked
molecules were taken into account as the best molecules.

Molecular Docking:
Auto Dock 4.0 [] software tool was used for molecular
docking of the top ten molecules obtained from virtual
screening with VEGFR-2. The water molecules, co-factors and
ligands were removed from the protein structure and then
checked for polar hydrogen atom in the macromolecule. This
was then followed by Atomic Kollman charges and atomic
solvation parameters, which were assigned and the torsion
bonds of the ligands were selected. The binding energy of the
macromolecule coordinate was evaluated by a three
dimensional grid box of 60 60 60 (num.grid points in xyz) and
grid center 44.325 32.386 15.763 (xyz-coordinates) was created
with a spacing of 0.375Å. The bound ligand and actual target
docking site [] 
was represented based on the calculation of
the grid map.

Validation:
The docking energies of commercially available drug Sunitinib
(marketed as Sutent by Pfizer, and previously known as
SU11248) (Sunitinib malate, SIGMA, PZ0012) was compared
along with the top ten ligands obtained after screening for the
validation of the results. The docking energy for a given
macromolecule-ligand pair comprised of the intermolecular
interaction energies including internal steric energy, hydrogen
bond interaction energy, van der Waals forces and columbic
electrostatic energy of the ligand. The lowest binding energy of
protein-ligand complex has been considered to be the best 
[].

Maintenance of H9c2 cells:
Rodent H9c2 were procured from NCCS, Pune, India and
maintained in DMEM (Sigma), using 10% fetal bovine serum at
37°C and 5% CO2 in the CO2 incubator (Galaxy 170R, New
Burnswick).

Cells were collected by de-adherence from the culture flask by
trypsinization (0.25%), counted using Neubauer
haemocytometer and seeded in 48-well (Nunc, Denmark), with
a cell count of ~105 viable cells/cm2 by trypan blue exclusion
method. The culture plates were then incubated in the CO2
incubator (Galaxy 170R, New Burnswick), maintained at a
temperature of 37°C and 5% CO2 overnight. The adhered cells
were grown to 70-80% confluence.

Experimental Design of VRB treatment of H9c2 cells:
VRB 1, 2, 3 and Sunitinib were obtained. H9c2 cells seeded in
48-well plates were kept in the incubator (Galaxy 170R, New
Burnswick) for 24 hours with 21% O2, i.e., normal conditions,
with one set being kept in the CO2 incubator with 0.5% O2, i.e.,
hypoxic condition

Experimental groups were divided into 10 different sets of, i.e.,
Normoxia (N), Normoxia + ZINC04652104 (N+VRB1),
Normoxia + ZINC00484682 (N+VRB2), Normoxia +
ZINC00677022 (N+VRB3), Normoxia + Sunitinib (N+Sut),
Hypoxia controls (H), Hypoxia + ZINC04652104 (H+VRB1),
Hypoxia + ZINC00484682 (H+VRB2), Hypoxia +
ZINC00677022 (H+VRB3).

Assessment of cellular viability by MTT reduction assay
treated with different VRB molecules:
Cellular viability, in vitro, was assessed by MTT [3-(4,5-
dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl-2H-tetrazolium bromide]
assay as described previously []. Various concentrations of
VRB (VRB1-3) were used for experiments (12.5 nM, 25 nM, 50
nM, 100 nM, 200 nM and 400 nM). Twenty-four hours after
hypoxic treatment, 0.5 mg/mL MTT was added to each well
and cells were incubated upto 4 hours at 37°C. Absorbance was
measured at 550 nm in Spectrophotometer (FLUOstar Omega,
BMG LABTECH).

Statistical analysis:
Data was expressed as Mean±S.D. for each experimental group.
The results were analyzed for statistical significance using
Student׳s t-test, p&lt;0.05 was considered to be significant.

Results
Stability analysis of 3D protein structure:
VEGFR-2 protein 3D structure was obtained ID 1VR2 from
Protein Data bank (PDB). It was subjected for validation of
structure by Ramachandran plot through PROCHECK
program. According to the Ramachandran plot 87.3% residues
are in the most favorable region, 12.2% residues are in allowed
region and 0.0% residues were found in disallowed region.
Based on the values obtained in the favorable and allowed
regions of the plot it can be deduced that the protein structure
got the most stable structure.

Active Site Prediction:
The active site of a protein directly participates in making and
breaking of chemical bonds between the substrate and residues
present in it. CASTp and DogSiteScorer were used in the
present study for the active site prediction. The results obtained
are shown in the . Some of the Active site residues
were already experimentally determined in the earlier studies
[].

Virtual Screening:
The Open eye software module “FRED” was used for virtual
screening of the ligands. The top 10 molecules obtained after
screening is mentioned below in  (see supplementary
material). Sorting of the ligands is based on their chemgauss4
score. The ligands scored with the lowest chemgauss4 score
were placed at the top of the list and only top 10 ranked
molecules represented in .

Molecular Docking:
The molecular docking of the individual top 10 molecules was
done by using the Auto Dock docking tool (). The
validation of the results was performed based on the individual
docking on the active site of the protein. The docking results
obtained were then compared with the commercially available
drug Sunitinib. The docking results are tabulated in 
.

Effect of novel drug molecules (VRBs) on cellular viability under hypoxia:
Three candidate molecules, VRB-1 (ZINC04652104), VRB-2
(ZINC00484682) and VRB-3 (ZINC00677022) along with
Sunitinib as control, were checked for improvement in cellular
viability in H9c2 cells under hypoxia. Various concentrations
of VRBs were used (12.5, 25, 50, 100, 200nM) and it was found
that VRB2 at a concentration of 25nM showed maximum
improved cellular viability. Among three candidate molecules
and Sunitinib, both under normoxia and hypoxia compared to
normoxia and hypoxia controls VRB2 was found as best in
conferring cell survivability ().

Discussion
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is an important
vasogenic factor reported to be active in the early phase of the
development and required for proper growth and vascular
supply []. VEGF is activated through upstream regulator and
primary hypoxia responsive gene, Hypoxia Inducible Factor
(HIF1α). VEGF molecules interact with tyrosine kinase
receptors (VEGFR-1 and VEGFR-2) and regulate various
downstream pathways. The interaction of VEGF with KDR, i.e.
VEGFR-2 is of particular importance not only during neonatal
development of cardiac muscles but also to maintain
homeostasis under stress []. VEGFR-2 thus provides an ideal
target for designing novel candidate drug molecules by
inhibiting the interaction of VEGF with VEGFR-2 [&amp;
].

In the present study, in silico virtual screening approach was
used to examine potential candidate molecule by using
different bioinformatics tools, ten candidate molecules for
VEGFR inhibitory molecules (VRB1-10) were screened [&amp;
]. The top ten selected molecules were further checked for
their active site prediction and docking performed between the
active site and the protein molecules by using AutoDock 4.0.
The scoring of the molecules was recorded by using
chemgauss4 score [&amp;
].

The top three in silico selected molecules were then tested in
vitro by using the H9c2 cardiomyocytes cells for improving the
cell viability under hypoxic stress (0.5% oxygen). The
cardiomyocytes were chosen because under hypoxic conditions
these cells tend to increase the VEGF levels so as to sustain in
the hypoxic condition but later, overexpression of VEGF shifts
the progression towards pathology of heart like hypertrophy
and apoptosis [, 
&amp;
].

Hence in the present study the new molecules screened
through in silico virtual screening have been tested for checking
their efficiency in improving the cell viability under hypoxic
condition. All the results were compared with the commercially
available Sunitinib drug which clearly suggested that VRB2
(ZINC00484682, N'-(4-isopropylbenzylidene)-1H-pyrazole-5-
carbohydrazide) gave better cell survival compared to Sunitinib
[]. 
In the above case better cell viability is may be due to
suppression of VEGFR-2 mediated signaling cascade.

These results thus opened a new window for the selected best
molecules to study further in detail on the animal model for
their clinical acceptability.

Conclusion
VEGF-receptor inhibitor appears to be an impressive strategy to
restore normal cellular functions under hypoxic stress
conditions. We virtually screened novel VEGF-receptor
inhibitor molecules (VRB 1 to 10). Top three molecules were
further tested in rat ventricular cardiomyocytes H9c2 (in vitro
system) under hypoxia and VRB2 was found to be the best
molecule for improving cellular viability compared to
Sunitinib. However, this needs further validation in animal
model to be used as a potential drug molecule.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Saraswat et al, Bioinformation 10(5): 273-280 (2014)

Comparing active site residues on VEGFR-2 through CASTp and DogSiteScorer. The residues highlighted are common in
above two structures and are also earlier reported from the literature.

Docked structures of the Sunitinib and top ten molecules on the protein receptor: (a) Sunitinib (b) ZINC04652104 (c)
ZINC00484682 (d) ZINC00677022 (e) ZINC09065134 (f) ZINC08439539 (g) ZINC00626508 (h) ZINC05944355 (i) ZINC01414763 (j)
ZINC08424401 (k) ZINC00703128.

Figure showing effect of VRB1-3 on cellular viability in H9c2 cells by MTT assay at 24h hypoxia. Control cells were also
assessed at same time-points. Maximum cellular viability was observed at 24h hypoxia exposure at a concentration of 25nM
VRB2.Values are represented as mean±S.D. and significant values are represented at p≤0.05 as * when compared to normoxia
control and # when compared to hypoxia control respectively.

