Background
Metalloproteins are the most extensively studied class of biomacromolecules
in the field of biological inorganic chemistry []
and in environment protection []. In the field of protein design
and engineering, metalloproteins make particularly attractive
targets []. There are many reasons for this, including the
exciting possibility of engineering protein-based molecules with
useful catalytic, electronic or optoelectronic properties. Another
particularly important reason for their popularity as targets is
that metal binding makes available plenty of energy, which
helps to compensate for the deficiencies in our ability to design
sequences that fold into well-packed, stable structures.
Additionally, the abundant spectroscopic methods available for
probing metal sites allow relatively easy assessment of success
or failure in generating new metal-binding sites. Thus, metalbinding
sites have been built into existing protein scaffolds or
into scaffolds that have been designed de novo, usually with
computational screening of structures for appropriate ligand
positions [].

Weak attractive forces are important in determining the three
dimensional structure of proteins. Electrostatic interactions, van
der Waals force and hydrogen bonds play important roles in
folding a protein and establishing its final structure 
[].
Arg/Lys interactions with π residues are increasingly
recognized as an important non-covalent binding interaction
relevant to structural biology [–]. Arg/Lys interactions with π
residues are found to be common among structures in the
Protein Data Bank (PDB) [], and it is clearly demonstrated that,
when a cationic side chain is near a π side chain the geometry
will be biased towards one that would experience an
energetically significant Arg/Lys-π interaction 
[]. Over onefourth
of all Trp in proteins experience an energetically
favorable interaction with cationic side chains 
[]. A number of
studies have established a role for these interactions in
biological recognition [,
], enhancement of the stability of
thermophilic proteins [,
], folding of polypeptides 
[,
]
and the stability of membrane proteins [,
]. Thus
considering the above findings we thought it would be useful to
investigate the role of Arg/Lys-π interactions in metalloproteins
and we are not aware of any bioinformatics approaches to
study these interactions in metalloproteins. Ours results from
the present study will be useful for researchers in structural
biology and bio-chemistry.

Methodology
Dataset:
All available crystal structures of metalloproteins from PDB 
[]
were taken for the present study. The selection criteria for a
metalloprotein to be included in the dataset were based on the
following criteria. 
The protein molecule should be in complex with a metal only [Metalloproteins in complex with nucleic acids, sugars and fatty acids are excluded];

The sequence identity among the proteins in the dataset was less than 40%;

Three dimensional structures of these proteins have been solved with ≤2.5 A°.



Based on the above selection criteria we obtained a nonredundant
set of 35 x-ray resolved structures out of 1096
structures and the PDB ID's of the metalloproteins included in
the dataset are as follows:
1AWD_A, 1B0L_A, 1D4A_A, 1DLM_A, 1DXQ_A, 1HFX_A,
ILNH_A, 1OI8_A, 1P9R_A, 1RRH_A, 1UNF_X, 1VEW_A,
1WZD_A, 1XM5_A, 1Y67_A, 1YGE_A, 1Z6R_A, 2AFM_A,
2CF4_A, 2DD5_C, 2E46_A, 2IF6_A, 2IQ6_A, 2IVN_A, 2NXF_A,
2P18_A, 2RDV_A, 2VW7_A, 2Z68_A, 2ZOW_A, 3D19_A,
3EXM_A, 3FWI_A, 3HIP_A and 3PCG_M.

Arg/Lys-π interactions:
The number of Arg and Lys interactions with π residues in each
metalloprotein in the dataset was computed by the program
CaPTURE (cation pi trends using realistic electrostatics) 
[]. All
metalloprotein complexes that had energetically significant
interactions (interaction energy ≤2 kcal/mol) were selected for
the bioinformatics analysis.

Secondary structure preferences:
Secondary structure types were assigned by dictionary of
protein secondary structure (DSSP) [], and are denoted using
letters: H for helix, T for turn, and S for strand 
[,
].
Secondary structure preferences for the interacting Arg/Lys-π
residues were obtained from DSSP.

Solvent accessibility patterns:
The physical representation of water molecules in direct contact
with the protein or with a particular part of the protein was
termed solvent accessibility. In the geometrical representation it
was the surface described by all possible positions of a water
molecule in touching contact with protein atoms. The
mathematical calculation of solvent accessibility was done by
integrating a step function f over all points x on the surface of a
sphere of a radius r (atom) + r (water) around atom i. f = 1 if a
water sphere centered at x (by definition in contact with atom i)
does not intersect with any other protein atom; otherwise f=0
[]. We carried a systematic analysis of the solvent accessibility
patterns for Arg and Lys residues involved in interactions with
π residues in metalloproteins using DSSP [].

Stabilization centers:
Amino acid residues that might be responsible for the
prevention of the decay in the folded protein structure were
termed stabilization centers []. For predicting the stabilization
centers, we used profiles extracted from multiple alignments as
input to the network []. The alignments were taken from the
HSSP data bank []. For each residue the frequency of
occurrence was computed for the 20 amino acids at each
position in the alignments; thus, the input group contained 20
real values reflecting the statistics on amino acid occurrences at
the given sequential position []. There was one additional
input unit for the conservation weight for each residue that
reflected the conservation of the given position in the
alignment. These weights were also included in the HSSP files.
The teaching and the training procedure was similar to the one
applied in case of single sequences []. To estimate the
significance of the calculated amino acid composition of the set
of residues involved in long range interactions and in the
stabilization centers, standard deviations were calculated in the
following way: datasets were randomized 1000 times and
distributions were calculated from all cases. The standard
deviation was derived from the resulting Gaussian-like
distribution [].

Sequence conservation:
For computing conservation score the following methodology
was adopted: 
The amino acid sequence was extracted from the PDB [] file;

Homologous sequences in the SWISS-PROT database [] were searched and collected using PSI-BLAST [];

A multiple sequence alignment (MSA) of these sequences was constructed using CLUSTAL W [];

A phylogenetic tree was re-constructed based on the MSA, using the neighbor-joining algorithm [] as implemented in the Rate4Site program [];

Position-specific conservation scores were computed using the empirical Bayesian [] or maximumlikelihood [] algorithms.


The continuous conservation scores
were divided into a discrete scale of 9 grades. Grade 1
contained the most variable positions; grade 5 contained
intermediately conserved positions; and grade 9 contained the
most conserved positions [,
].

Sequence separation between residues involved in Arg/Lys-π interactions:
For a given residue, the comparison of the surrounding residue
was analyzed in terms of the location at the sequence level. The
contribution from &lt;± 4 were treated as short-range contacts, &gt;±
4 to &lt;± 20 as medium-range contacts and &gt;± 20 were treated as
long range contacts [–]. This classification enabled us to
evaluate the contribution of short, medium and long-range
contacts in the formation of cation-π interactions. This
classification also provides clues so as to understand the
importance of these non-covalent interactions in the structural
stability of secondary structural elements and their importance
in the local and global conformational stability.

Metal binding sites:
The metal binding sites within the metalloprotein complex was
visualized using the LIGPLOT program []. Using the
program we generated schematic 2-D representations of
protein-metal complexes from standard PDB file input.

Results
Arg and Lys interactions with π residues:
Arg and Lys residues involved in interactions with π residues
are computed for all the interacting pairs and there are a total of
10451 amino acid residues and 145 energetically significant
cation-π interactions in the data set studied. Hence there is an
average of one Arg/Lys interaction with π residues for every 72
residues and an average of three interactions per metalloprotein
in the data set. The occurrences of Arg/Lys and π residues in
the metalloproteins studied are presented in  (see
supplementary material). Arg/Lys residues account for 10%
among the naturally occurring amino acids. In the acceptor π-
group Trp residues are higher than Phe and Tyr in the
metalloproteins studied. The number of interactions involving
Phe and Tyr residues is almost similar. The Arg-π interacting
pairs in lactoferrin [PDB ID 1B0L_A] are shown in (). In
terms of pair wise interactions the preferences are similar to the
above discussed patterns and the highest pairing is with the
Arg-Trp pairs. The percentages of Arg/Lys π interacting pairs
in metalloproteins are 16, 24, 27, 11, 09 and 13 respectively for
Arg-Tyr, Arg-Phe, Arg-Trp, Lys-Tyr, Lys-Phe and Lys-Trp. It is
interesting to note that, even though the percentage natural
occurrence of Trp in metalloproteins is very minimal when
compared with the other two π residues as represented in 

(see supplementary material); there is a significant number of
Arg-Trp and Lys-Trp interacting pairs. The higher number of
energetically significant cation-π interactions with Trp residues
in spite of its lower occurrence in metalloproteins is an
important observation in the present study and thus Trp
residues might play an important role in the structural stability
of metalloproteins through Arg/Lys interactions with π
residues.

The average energetic contributions from each Arg/Lys
interaction with π residue pairs in metalloproteins and the
energies for each interaction in all protein structures studied is
presented in  (see supplementary material). The
energetic contribution from Arg-Trp is higher when compared
with other interacting pairs and the energetic contribution from
Lys-Tyr is minimal. Based on these observations; we suggest
that, in the context of energetic contribution, the role of Arg-Trp
pairs might be important. The highest cation-π energetic
contribution [-10.27 Kcal/mol] is with the Lys 141 and Trp 215
(PDB ID 1DXQ_A) and the lowest [-2.28 Kcal/mol] is with Lys
170 and Trp 91 (PDB ID 2IQ6_A). The average Arg/Lys
interaction energy with π residues is around -4.67 Kcal/mol
and there is an average of -18.92 Kcal/mol Arg/Lys interaction
energy with π residues per protein in metalloproteins.

Secondary structure preferences:
The secondary structure preferences are obtained from DSSP.
The cation-π interacting residues are found to stabilize both the
regular and non-regular secondary structural elements in
metalloproteins. The helices are predominantly stabilized by
Arg interactions with Tyr and Trp, while the coils and sheets
are stabilized by Lys interactions with Phe. Hence, the
preference of an amino acid to form Arg/Lys interaction with π
residues in particular secondary structure is not the same as the
preference of the amino acid for a particular secondary
structure []. From our results in metalloproteins we assume
that the stabilization patterns of these regular and non-regular
secondary structures are independent of amino acid class.

Solvent accessibility patterns:
We carried a systematic analysis of the solvent accessibility
patterns for the Arg and Lys residues along with the interacting
π residues in metalloproteins using DSSP. Solvent accessibility
has been divided into three categories, buried, partially buried
and exposed for different ranges of solvent accessibility values;
&lt;20, 20–50 and &gt;50, respectively [,
]. Our results suggest
that most of cationic residues are in the solvent exposed
regions, while the majority of π residues prefer to be in the
buried regions. These results are different when compared with
the results from nucleic acid binding proteins []. From our
results on the solvent accessibility patterns in metalloproteins
we suggest that these interactions might stabilize the interface
between the core and terminus in metalloproteins.

Stabilization centers:
The stabilization centers for Arg/Lys-π interacting residues are
studied. The percentages of cation-π interacting residues with
located stabilization centers in metalloproteins are 30, 34, 23, 26
and 31 respectively for Arg, Lys, Phe, Tyr and Trp. From the
results observed, we infer that the Arg/Lys-π interacting
residues might contribute additional stability to
metalloproteins.

Sequence conservation:
The conservation scores of Arg/Lys-π interacting residues in
each metalloproteins are studied. The percentages of cation-π
interacting residues above the cut off conservation scores of 6
are 55, 43, 44, 65 and 54 respectively for Arg, Lys, Phe, Tyr and
Trp. From our results we assume that the majority of the
residues involved in Arg/Lys-π interactions are evolutionarily
conserved and might have a significant contribution towards
the stability of metalloproteins.

Sequence separation between residues involved in Arg/Lys-π interactions:
We computed the sequential separation between Arg/Lys-π
interacting pair in metalloproteins to determine the role of these
interactions in the protein secondary and tertiary structures.
Majority of the Arg/Lys-π interacting pairs are in long-range
contacts and thus these interactions might contribute
significantly to the stabilization of the native structure of the
protein molecule and might help in maintaining the optimal
conformation during binding of this class of proteins to metals.
Hence any structural stability studies on the native protein
molecule in metalloproteins should also take Arg/Lys-π
interactions into consideration along with hydrogen bonds and
other stabilizing interactions.

Metal binding sites:
We generated schematic 2-D representations of protein-metal
complexes from standard PDB file input using LIGPLOT
program. The output is a postscript file giving a simple and
informative representation of the intermolecular interactions
and their strengths, including hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic
interactions and atom accessibilities []. From our analysis on
metal binding patterns in the dataset, we find that the residues
involved in metal binding are amino acids that are not involved
in Arg/Lys- π interactions as. But few metal binding pockets are
stabilized by Arg/Lys-π interactions. The Arg-Tyr stabilizing
residues (R 38-Y 35) in Ferredoxin [PDB ID 1AWD_A] along
with metal binding residues and the amino acid residues
located in metal binding pockets. We could not locate amino
acids in metal binding pockets in most structures. Based on our
results, we suggest that Arg/Lys interactions with π residues
may not contribute to functional specificity (binding of metals)
in metalloproteins.

Discussion
From our results presented we infer that there is an increased
preference for Trp over Tyr and Phe in energetically significant
Arg/Lys-π interactions. This might be due to the fact that, the
larger volume of Trp allows it to contact a greater number of
cations relative to Phe or Tyr []. In terms of energetically
significant Arg/Lys interactions with π residues in the study
group, the energies from Arg interactions are higher when
compared with Lys interactions with π residues. This
phenomenon may be due to the fact that the side chain of Arg is
larger and less well water-solvated than that of Lys, it likely
benefits from better van der Waals interactions with the
aromatic ring []. In addition, the side chain of Arg may still
donate several hydrogen bonds while simultaneously binding
to an aromatic ring, whereas Lys would typically have to
relinquish hydrogen bonds to bind to an aromatic []. There is
an average of one energetically significant Arg/Lys-π
interaction for every 84 amino acids in the metalloproteins
investigated. These results are comparable to the observations
in glycoproteins and tumor necrosis factors while they differ
with the observations with RNA binding proteins, lipid binding
proteins, cell adhesion molecules and interleukins 
[–]. To
understand the interactions that confer secondary structural
conformational stability in proteins it is important to know the
conformational preferences of amino acids.

The structural preferences of amino acids were introduced and
calculated a long time ago, and it was known that different
amino acids have distinct preferences for the adoption of
helical, strand and turn conformation [–]. Although much
were known about secondary and tertiary protein structure and
folding, the process of folding is not understood completely.
The molecular mechanism of protein self-assembly is still an
open question []. It is believed that the energetics of side
chain interactions dominate protein folding processes.
However, it was shown that secondary structure can determine
native protein conformation, devoid of side chains [].
Recently, a backbone-based theory of protein folding was
proposed, where the protein folding mechanism is based on
backbone hydrogen bonding [], while α-helix and β-sheet
propensities are closely connected with the energetics of
peptide H-bonds []. Hence, we thought it would be useful to
study the secondary structure preferences of amino acid
residues involved in cation-π interactions so that the importance
of these interactions in the structural stability with respect to
global and local conformations can be clearly understood. The
secondary structure preferences of Arg/Lys-π interacting
residues suggest that the occurrences of amino acids in different
secondary structural elements are not usually based on their
physico-chemical properties and it varies depending on the
protein class. The secondary structural preference results
obtained in the present study are similar to the results observed
with RNA binding proteins and they are not comparable with
results of other conjugated proteins [,
].

An interesting question concerns the location of cation-π
interactions within protein structures. Cationic residues
generally prefer to be on the surface of proteins whereas
aromatic amino acids prefer to remain in the hydrophobic core.
Because a cation-π interaction contains both a cation and an
aromatic, it is not clear whether the interacting pairs should
prefer to be located on the surfaces of proteins or in the cores
[]. Solvent accessibility determines the importance of local
versus non-local interactions along the protein sequence 
[,
]. Solvent accessibility is also an important parameter in
determining the structural stability of a protein molecule 
[].
For more than three decades, experimenters and theorists have
tried to understand the kind of interactions that govern first
stages of protein folding and lead to the formation of folding
intermediates, and the forces that maintain protein stability
[]. The main questions concern the relative importance of
hydrophobic versus more specific interactions, and of local
versus non-local interactions along the sequence. It is indeed
possible to detect stability changes caused by mutation, in the
folded and transition states, by measuring and comparing the
changes in unfolding and activation free energies. Presently
there are a lot of experimental data on folding free energy
changes upon mutation obtained by site-directed mutagenesis
experiments, but only a few theoretical methods have been
developed to predict such stability changes. Some of these
methods are based on detailed atomic models and others on
rougher descriptions of protein structure [].

Their performances are in general, evaluated by comparing the
calculated folding free energies to the measured ones and are
reasonably good. In most studies, the mutated residues are
buried in the protein core; since hydrophobic interactions
dominate in these regions, the energetic criteria obviously
involve hydrophobicity. In the few reported studies analyzing
mutations of solvent accessible residues, the stability changes
are correlated with statistical propensities of single amino acids
to be in α-helices or β-strands [], or with distance-dependent
residue-residue potentials [–]. Thus, ours results on solvent
accessibility would be meaningful to analyze the preferences of
residues that are involved in these interactions. Since, the
interacting residues are present in both the solvent exposed and
buried states these interactions might stabilize the intermediate
region between the terminus and the core regions within the
metalloprotein molecule. It is also noteworthy to discuss here
that the solvent accessibility patterns observed in the present
study are not comparable with observations from nucleic acid
binding proteins which also exist as metal-protein complexes
[]. Our observations with metalloproteins in the present study
suggest that Arg/Lys-π interacting pairs might be contributing
to the global conformational stability of these proteins as most
of the interacting pairs are in long-range contacts. These
observations are comparable to the results in conjugated
proteins [] and interleukins 
[]. The degree to which an
amino acid position is recessive to substitutions is strongly
dependent on its structural and functional importance. An
amino acid that plays an essential role, e.g. in enzymatic
catalysis, are likely to remain unaltered in spite of the random
evolutionary drift. Hence, the level of evolutionary
conservation was used often as indicator for the importance of
the position in maintaining the protein's structure and or
function. Conservation score is a useful parameter for the
identification of conserved residues in a protein sequence
[,
]. The conservation patterns in the present study indicate that
more than half of the residues involved in these interactions are
evolutionarily conserved.

This suggests that apart from amino acid residues responsible
for specificity; Arg, Lys and π residues also are not prone to
changes due to the evolutionary process. Stabilization centers
can be defined as clusters of residues that are involved in
medium or long range interactions [,
]. Any residue is
considered part of stabilization center if it is involved in
medium or long range interactions and if two supporting
residues could be selected from both of their flanking tetra
peptides, which together with the central residues form at least
seven out of the nine possible contacts []. A significant
percentage of Arg/Lys-π interacting residues also are located as
stabilization centers and thus might provide additional stability
to these proteins. On the whole, from the results presented we
infer that Arg/Lys-π interactions might play an important role
in the global structural stability of metalloproteins. To conclude,
our results on the bioinformatics analysis of Arg/Lys-π
interactions in metalloproteins will be useful for further
structural studies on these classes of proteins and also make a
strong case to consider these interactions to be considered along
with hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic interactions and other
covalent interactions in structural studies.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Dr. Anand Anbarasu gratefully acknowledges the Indian
Council of Medical Research [ICMR] Government of India
agent for the research grant IRIS ID: 2011_03260. P. Lavanya
thanks ICMR for the research fellowship from the ICMR grant
IRIS ID: 2011_030260 and we would like to thank the
management of VIT University for providing the necessary
facilities to carry out this research project.

Citation:Anitha et al, Bioinformation 8(17): 820-826 (2012)

Arg interaction with Phe, Tyr and Trp in Lactoferrin
(PDB ID 1BOL_A)

