Background
Manipur enjoys a very rich and fascinating diversity of insect
fauna being a part of Indo-Burma Biodiversity hotspot region.
Traditionally, indigenous people employed insects in diverse
aspects like edible purpose, therapeutic use, economic input
and many other activities. The state has 30 different ethnic
communities consisting of 1 major group, the Meitei and 29
tribes with distinct identity, culture and food habit. Literature
survey revealed that no detail studies have been made so far
from Manipur regarding the utilization of insect bioresources. It
is intended to develop strategies for conservation and
preservation of traditional life as well as cultural practices of
resources utilization by the people. The studies will be able to
provide a scientific basis for sustainable resource management
and basic information for further research in various fields.
However in India, proper documentation of traditional
knowledge on the utilization of insect resources is less
expertise. Advance enterprises in these fields and their values
do not get due recognition, as compare to insect resources
utilization in different corners of the world 
[–]. In view of the
above importance, the present investigation records and collects
all the available information of the age old culture and
knowledge of the several ethnic people regarding the utilization
of insect resources particularly edible [–] and medicinal
insects [–].

Database to retrieve the comprehensive information on insects
for edible and medicinal potential will be extremely useful to
modern research, and could enable new insights and
discoveries concerning evolutionary relationship of gene and
gene products anticipated in entomotherapeutic uses. No
attempt has been made so far for Systematic documentation of
medicinal and edible insects of Manipur, thus we have
designed a sophisticated web based database to provide
comprehensive information on insects used for medicinal and
edible purpose.

We have developed a unique, publicly available database called
MEIMAN-Medicinal and Edible Insects of Manipur
(www.ibsd.gov.in/meiman) that provides access to the
taxonomy, seasonality, their method of preparation, and form
of uses, ethnic user communities, market value, economic status
and links. MEIMAN is first resource that provides
comprehensive retrieval of information related to edible and
medicinal insects found in Manipur. MEIMANs' sophisticated
web based graphical user interface allows efficient retrieval of
data. The reliable data provide content and links to add an
advantage in exploring information of insect resources which
will make MEIMAN a comprehensive and sophisticated tool.

Methodology
Surveys for entomophagy and entomotherapy practices in
different ethnic groups were conducted in 25 villages 
()
during 2008 to 2011. Data were obtained by performing
personal interview from 1005 persons comprising village heads,
traditional knowledge holders, educated youths and
homemakers. The age of these informants were above 20 years.
Village heads and traditional knowledge holders (TK holders)
are aware about the age-old practices of insect resources.
Homemakers were included because they are responsible for
collection, selling and preparation. Educated youths were taken
to record their views about the habit of utilization of insects.
Data were collected through a questionnaire attached with
coloured photographs of the different insect species for easy
identification. The informants were enquired about the insect
species used as food/medicine, mode of
consumption/utilization, form of preparations, life stages of
insects consumed, association with other ingredients, culture
related to insects, or any other uses etc. During the course of
study, insect species were also collected from different habitats
and preserved following the standard methods and identified
up to family level by following the standard taxonomic keys
[–]. 
The identification and authentication of the insect
species were done at USDA, ZSI, IARI, etc.

Database Content:
MEIMAN database contains an extensive compilation on
medicinal edible insects, which can be visualized and analyzed
by graphical web-interface. The database comprised of 51 insect
species of which 48 are utilized as edible and 20 species in
medicinal purposes. Further, biochemical and molecular data
on gene and gene products will be updated after experimental
validation of result.

Design and Implementation:
The MEIMAN database was developed by extracting
seamlessly integrating data from extensive questionnaire
compiled in MS Excel. This data compiled in MySQL 5.1.41
(www.mysql.com) relational database along with cross
references to taxonomy, seasonality, method and form of uses,
snaps, references and links. () gives architecture and
outline of MEIMAN database. The MySQL database was
normalized and indexed to ensure efficient and accurate data
retrieval through the query option available in MEIMAN web
interface. At present search by common name, scientific name,
keyword and advance options are available to the users. We
will perform regular updates to the MEIMAN database to
ensure that its’ contents are up to date with periodic update in
experimental and biochemical study.

The MEIMAN web interface developed in Apache 2.0 Handler
CGI 1.1 (www.apache.org) runs on the Windows 2003 web
server and utilizes the MySQL (XAMPP-win32-1.7.7) module to
query and retrieve data from back end MySQL database
(www.mysql.com). The graphical display of seasonality was
implemented with JAVA Script 1.6 programming
(http://www.javascriptsource.com).

Future Development
With the above previews, our objective is to develop MEIMAN
database as a comprehensive warehouse for all edible and
medicinal insects of the region which will regard as a basis
platform for sustainable management of insect bioresources.
Since, biologically active compounds derived from plants,
animals and microbes have good binding affinities towards
target of lethal diseases, bioactive compounds from insect could
provide insight for novel ligands. Drugs from such untapped
resources are welcome by drug development fraternity due to
limitations of synthetic chemistry and adverse reactions. In the
future, we have a plan to enhance the capabilities in MEIMAN
by including biochemical, molecular data and evolutionary
relationship in gene and gene products amongst all the insects
utilized by ethnic communities of this region.

Authors are thankful to Department of Biotechnology (DBT),
New Delhi for providing financial support and working
facilities in the Insect Bioresources Division, Institute of
Bioresources and Sustainable Development. Thanks are also
due to the United States Department of Agriculture, USA,
Zoological Survey of India, Kolkata and Indian Agricultural
Research Institute, New Delhi for the identification of the insect
species. Authors are grateful to all the respondents for their
cooperation in preparation of this document. The second author
is also thankful to DBT for providing financial help through the
DBT-Research Associateship grant under Biotechnology and
Life Sciences program.

Citation:Shantibala et al, Bioinformation 8(10): 489-491 (2012)

Mapping of Manipur showing the survey sites

A) Architecture of Meiman database inclusive of fields
and sub-field that used for retrieval of information; B) Outline
of Meiman database representing a) Home; b) Basic
information; c) Seasonality; d) Economic statute; e)References;
f) Gallery and g) Search

