Background
The lignifications (a phenolic compound lignin), is a well 
known plant response to fungal attack. Lignin deposition is 
correlated with an increased activity enzyme from 
phenylpropanoid pathway. Phenylalanine ammonia-lyase 
(PAL; EC 4.3.1.5) catalyzes the initial step in the biosynthesis of 
phenylpropanoids []. PAL enzyme a member of the 
ammonia lyase family that catalyzes a reaction converting L 
phenylalanine to ammonia and trans-cinnamic acid. It has 
a molecular mass in the range of 270-330 kDa.

Phenylpropanoids are essential for growth, development, 
and survival of vascular plants []. The activity 
of PAL is induced dramatically in response to various stimuli such as tissue 
wounding, pathogenic attack, light, low temperatures, and hormones 
[]. PAL is the first and committed 
step in the phenyl propanoid pathway and is therefore involved in the biosynthesis 
of the polyphenol compounds (such as flavonoids, phenylpropanoids, and 
lignin in plants) through general phenylpropanoid metabolism involves a 
sequence of enzyme-regulated reactions [].

Karnal bunt (KB) caused by Tilletia indica (Syn. Neovossia indica), 
a semi-biotroph fungus. It is a seed borne disease which 
typically causes partial conversion of individual kernels into 
sori filled with fetid teliospores thus affecting yield and quality 
[]. 
The pathogen affects wheat spikes and proliferates within 
seeds, leading to the impairment of grain quality, seed vigor 
and reduction in market acceptability of the product. Since the 
pathogen disseminates through seeds, it also necessitates 
quarantine regulations to restrict the spread of the disease to 
unaffected areas. Elucidation of the Molecular basis of 
resistance and stage specific immunity against KB is needed to 
be examined for analyzing the role of enzymes of 
phenylpropanoid metabolism which provides structural 
barriers in conferring the resistance against KB in wheat. Fungi, 
which are serious plant pathogens, are known to cause serious 
yield losses in economically important agricultural crops. 
Recombinant DNA based approach could be utilized to develop 
fungal resistant crop varieties, provided that the cellular and 
molecular basis of fungal phyto-pathogenesis is delineated. In 
the present study attempts were made to elucidate possible role 
of PAL in impart stage specific and differential immunity as 
well as their role in providing structural barrier against KB 
pathogen has been demonstrated by comparing the basal levels 
of enzyme activity that are involved in tissue lignifications in 
developing wheat spikes and in silico characterization of PAL 
protein. 

Methodology
Plant Material:
In the present study two parent genotypes of bread wheat 
(Triticum aestivum), one highly resistant HD-29 (designated 
designated as PR) and another highly susceptible WH-542 
(designated as PS) based on their pathogenicity testing under 
field conditions against KB, were used in the present 
investigation. The seeds of these genotypes were collected from 
the Crop Research Centre, G.B. Pant University of Agriculture 
and Technology, Pantnagar (UK) [].

Isolation of total RNA:
Total RNAs were extracted from the different stages of the 
wheat spikes of resistant and susceptible genotypes using Plant 
Easy RNA isolation kit and RNA preparations were purified 
using the same kit according to the manufacturer's protocol 
(QIAGEN, Germany). Equal quantities of total RNA isolated 
from each of three plants randomly selected from each 
treatment were bulked and subjected for RT PCR analysis. Total 
RNA (10 µg) was separated on 1.2% agarose gel containing 
formaldehyde for assessing the quality of isolated RNA 
[].

Designing of primers:
The different sets of primers were designed (by using BI tool 
DNASTAR) for PCR amplification of PAL gene by RT-PCR 
based on available gene sequences in NCBI database i.e., 
JQ005112 and AY423548 for co-amplification of wheat Actin 
gene. The details of forward and reverse primers, their Tm and 
%GC contents are given in  (see supplementary 
material).

Molecular cloning and Expression analysis of Phenylalanine ammonia lyase gene:
For RT-PCR, QIAGEN One Step RT-PCR kit was used. The 
QIAGEN One Step RT-PCR Enzyme mix contains a specifically 
formulated enzyme blend for both reverse transcription and 
PCR amplification. PCR amplification of wheat PAL genes was 
done using the specific primers designed as above. The PCR 
amplicons were ligated in pGEMT-EASY cloning vector 
(Promega). Nucleotide sequence of independent clones were 
determined with the dye terminator kit (ABI Prism, Perkin 
Elmer, NJ) and analyzed on Applied Biosystems 370. RT-PCR 
was carried out to check the expression of wheat PAL mRNA 
transcripts. Actin gene was selected as endogenous internal 
standard []. Thermal cycler was programmed as follows 
reverse transcription at 50°C for 30 min and subsequent 35 
cycles of 94°C denaturation for 30 s 55°C annealing for 30 s and 
2 min extension at 72°C. Densitometry analyses of expressed 
genes (PAL and actin) were done with the help of Gene Profiler 
software, Alpha Innotech Corporation USA.

In silico sequence analysis:
The Genomic sequence was translated to protein sequence 
using translation tool (http://ca.expasy.org/tools/dna.html). 
The homology search of the PAL protein was done through 
BLAST search tool of NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlmnih.gov). 
Sequences from putative protein (Acc. No. Triticum aestivum 
(AEX59143), and 24 different plants () were aligned 
using Clustal W (www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalw2), and 
phylogenetic tree was constructed using UPGMA method by 
MEGA version 4.0.02 (www.megasoftware.net) 
[]. Domain and 
family analysis of amino acid sequence was done using CDD 
tool of NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/cdd) and MEME 
(meme.nbcr.net) 
[]. Protein variability cheek by Protein 
Variability Server http://imed.med.ucm.es/PVS.

Results &amp; Discussion
Molecular cloning and Expression of analysis of Phenylalanine ammonia lyase gene:
Total RNA was isolated from immature spike lets of wheat 
genotypes HD-29 and WH- 542, PAL were amplified using the 
same PCR conditions in both resistant and susceptible 
genotype. The primer sets designed from highly conserved 
domains were efficient in reproducible amplification of 
expected sizes 1.5 kb of amplicons. Amplification of PAL gene 
gave product size of 1500 bp (). The sequence was 
submitted to NCBI databank and is available online at NCBI 
website. Stage dependent co-amplification of the PAL and actin 
mRNA transcripts expression was studied in both the 
genotypes (). Semi-quantitative RT-PCR, and 
Densitometry (relative values) clearly showed PAL mRNA 
transcripts were significantly higher (P\0.001) in resistant 
genotype compared to susceptible (). In HD29, PAL 
gene expression utmost at Sv stage, its expression gradually 
drop off upto S3 stage (slight grain formation) in resistant 
genotype. The PAL gene was maximally expressed at Sv-stage 
(P/0.001) of wheat spike (i.e., vegetative leaf stages) 
accumulates high level of lignin and phytoalexin and then 
degree of expression was declined gradually. In susceptible 
genotype PAL mRNAs express in all the stages although the 
intensity of each amplicon was much lower than that of 
resistance genotype (). However, these results 
indicate that higher expression of PAL seemed to impart 
resistance against KB. However, this work provides possible 
evidences in favor of the role of PAL in defining the KB 
resistance. The expression of PAL occurring from Sv to S2 
stages a highly prone stage to KB infection, and the intensity of 
the detected bands in RT PCR, showed that PAL seemed to be 
expressed more in resistant than in susceptible genotype. 
Interestingly, expression and localization of pal mRNA was 
observed in Sv tissue, suggesting their involvement in 
flavonoid biosynthesis as well (Mahroug et al., 2005). Increased 
PAL activity has been observed in response to E. graminis attack 
in wheat, barley and oat []. In barley, induction of both PAL 
and peroxidase transcripts correlates temporally with E.
graminis attack []. Karnal bunt (KB) a seed borne disease in 
which proliferation of mycelia of T. indica in endosperm of 
wheat grains completely converted into sori filled with 
teliospores through necrotic cell death. In Poplar, one PAL gene 
product was associated with formation of condensed tannins 
while another was associated with lignin production 
[]. 
Spatio-temporal organization of secondary metabolites in aerial 
organs of Cataranthus roseus revealed that the first enzymes of 
the phenylpropanoid pathway (PAL) are preferentially 
localized in lignifying tissues, illustrating their involvement in 
the lignin biosynthesis pathway []. In the family Gramineae, 
active lignifications appears to be of special importance in 
induced resistance mechanisms and Inhibition of Lignification 
Breaks Hypersensitive Resistance of Wheat to Stem Rust [].

In silico Analysis of PAL Gene:
We performed comparative studies of PAL gene of Triticum 
aestivum (AEX59143.1) with twenty four plant species () 
that represent two major classes. The selection of sequences was 
random belongs to very diverse families of dicotyledonous like 
fruits (Vitis vinifera), vegetable (Daucus carota, Lactuca sativa, 
Solanum tuberosum), floweres (Hibiscus cannabinus, Solenostemon 
scutellarioides), trees (Eucalyptus robusta), from Monocotyledons, 
cereals (Triticum aestivum, Triticum urartu, Sorghum bicolor, Zea 
mays, Oryza sativa, Hordeum vulgar, Aegilops tauschii), trees 
(Bambusa oldhamii, Musa acuminate, Phyllostachys edulis, 
Pleioblastus maculosoides, Phyllostachy parvifolia) flower (Lilium) 
and model dicotyledon and monocotyledon species (Arabidopsis 
thaliana and Brachypodium distachyon) ().

Multiple sequence alignment and Evolutionary relationships of taxa:
in silico studies revealed that all the resistant and susceptible 
PAL gene clones translated to protein sequences by using 
ExPASy Software. The partial cDNA clone consists of 1,514 
nucleotides, and encoded protein 504 amino acid with 
molecular mass approximate 15 KB. Multiple alignment of
amino acid analysis showed, 83.34% homology with in 
monocotyledon and 70% homology between monocotyledon 
and dicotyledon PAL mRNA and proteins. Comparison of PAL 
amino acid sequence among the monocotyledon plants, highest 
homology with Poaceae plant then other monocotyledon PAL 
proteins. T. aestivum PAL (AAG02280.1), followed by 74.96 % 
identity to a Triticun urartu (EMS63197.1), 67.64%, 63.70 % , 
62.94%, 62.08%, 61.76%, 62.22%, 62.08% to Brachypodium 
distachyon , Zea mays , Hordeum vulgar, Aegilops tauschii, 
Sorghaum bicolor, Pleioblastus maculosoides, Phyllostachy parvifolia, 
respectively. 56. 74% homology with Musa acuminate. 
Phylogenetic analysis was performed to evaluate the 
evolutionary relationships among the 24 PAL sequences from 
24 taxa selected for this analysis. Trees were estimated from the 
multiple sequence alignment using clustal W 
(www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalw2) 
().

One dicotyledon specific clade was placed just above the out-group 
branches in the PAL gene tree. A clade with the remaining genes split 
into another monocotyledon species. A second clade containing only 
monocotyledon PAL genes divided into two subclade, one subclade 2a 
strictly contain Poaceae while in subclade2b along with Poaceae remaining 
gene split to another monocolyledon familes like Musaceae and Liliaceae 
(). This result suggests that 
PAL genes were transfer from dicotyledonous plants to monocotyledonous. 
The high bootstrap values and posterior probability evidence provided 
strong support for the organization of the angiosperms genes into these 
three distinct clusters. Physical position of PAL gene on chromosome 
also varied in monocot and dicotelyledon like vitis vinifere the PAL 
gene position on chromosomes No. 16 (NC_012022.3), in Sorgham bicolar 
present on chromosome no. 4 (NC_012873), in Brachypodium distachyon on 
chromosome 4. Because complete genome sequences are not yet available 
for wheat. It was not clear the position of Triticum PAL genes on chromosomes.

Conserved Domains and Protein Classification:
The CDD search [] with the deduced protein sequence of PAL identifies 
is multidomain protein. It belongs to a member of the Lyase class I_like 
superfamily of enzymes that catalyze beta-elimination reactions. Unique 
identifier for domain model PSSM ID of PAL is 176460.3 D structure of 
PAL (PSSM View cd00332) showes four active sites of the homotetrameric 
enzyme are each formed by residues from three different subunits and are 
active as homotetramers []. in silico analysis
of amino acid sequences employing Pfam tool [] 
revealed existence of one functional domains PDOC00424 (). 
Conserved Signature sequence of PAL shows [GS]- [STG]-[LIVM]- [STG]- 
[SAC]-S-G- [DH] -L-x-[PN] -L-[SA] -x(2,3) -[SAGVTL] (PROSITE PS00488). 
Multiple Expectation-Maximization for Motif Elicitation (MEME) 
[] is a suite of tools for motif discovery 
and searching. Twenty different motifs (subdomain) between 6 and 50 residues 
were detected and distributed by MEME software (). Most of the group 
and subgroup sharing same motifs. Many motifs are almost conserved and found 
in every group and subgroup. Motif possesses well conserved signature 
sequences. These conserved motifs could be the essential elements determining 
the PAL family's common molecular function among different plant species. 
Motif 14 absent all the monocotyledon plants. Motifs 3, 9, 15, 18 absent 
only in Triticum species like T. aestivum and T. ururtus. Motif 12 absent 
in Triticum aestivum. Motif 6 occurs twice in monocotyledon while only once 
found in dicotyledon plants. Duplication or absence of Motifs are either, 
substitution, accumulation of mutation or subjected to rearrangements. 
It is not necessary that changes their activity, because that do not have 
a direct impact on the active site contain altered residues. Duplication 
events have been an important theme in the evolution of the PAL gene family. 
At least five distinct duplication events can be identified in the PAL gene 
tree, with the oldest event following the divergence of Physcomitrella. 
Duplication events in the ancestral lineage, as well at the tip of the 
gymnosperm branch, suggest potential sources of functional variability 
[].

Protein variability analysis of PAL:
Prediction of putative protein variability sites was performed 
using PVR server []. The analysis protein variability sites 
location was compared between cloned Triticum aestivum PAL
with other monocotyledon and dicotyledon PAL protein 
database individually by calculating Shannon entropy (H) []. 
In monocotyledon plants shows low variability level (H&gt;2) 
when compared to clones Triticum aestivum (). In 
monocotyledons plants sequence N terminal and intermediate 
sequences shows highly conserved sequence H&lt;1, some 
intermediate sequence shows conserve sequence H&lt;2. Protein 
variability is very high towards the N terminal in dicotyledon 
plants as the Shannon entropy H &gt;2.0 compared to ‘C’ terminal. 
Sequence from amino acids 30 to 200 shows highly conserver as 
H&lt;1 while intermediate sequence shows H&lt; 2 that is conserved 
(). Conserved regions with in monocotyledons and 
dicotyledons PAL proteins regions between 220-244, 275-299, 
325 - 354, 370-397, 399-420, 422-530, and 535-556  (see 
supplementary material). Shannon entropy result shows 
variability was found to be more at dicotyledons protein 
compared to monocotyledons plants. It indicates that during 
evolution rate of mutation is very high compared to 
monocotyledon plant.

Conclusions
Phenylalanine ammonia lyase, is a primary control point for the 
phenylpropanoid pathway which belongs to the lyase class I 
super-family of enzymes. This study is the most extensive stage 
specific molecular expression and in silico phylogenomic 
studies so far for the PAL gene, particularly with respect to 
karnal bunt resistant (HD 29) and susceptible (WH 542) 
genotype of Triticum aestivum. The partial sequence of cloned 
PAL genes available in the GenBank. Differential expression 
patterns of RT PCR suggest that the PAL gene products may be 
responsible for providing biosynthetic precursors to different 
phenylpropanoid branch pathways under different 
developmental conditions or in response to various external 
stimuli. The PAL transcript was particularly abundant in 
developing spikes. The phylogenetic tree constructed using 
PAL gene sequences from 24 species including dicotyledonous 
and monocotyledon shows a 70 % homology between them, 
which may suggest different functional regulation. The lignin 
content of higher plants has long been recognized as an 
important factor in the resistance response against potential
pathogens. However, induced lignifications have been 
proposed as an important mechanism of disease resistance of 
wheat against a variety of fungal pathogens. Several lines of 
evidence point to a role for cellular lignification in the 
hypersensitive resistance response of wheat to the karnal bunt 
fungus, Tilletia indica.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Dr. Shalini Purwar is grateful to the Dr. D. S. Kothari Post Doc 
Fellowship, University Grant Commission, New Delhi (India) 
for providing the financial support to carry out the present 
work.

Citation:Purwar et al, Bioinformation 9(20): 1013-1018 (2013)

Semi quantitative &amp; differential expression analysis of 
multi-domain wheat PAL at different stages (Sv, S1, S2 and S3) 
of developing wheat spikes in Resistant and Susceptible 
genotypes. (a) RT PCR based amplification followed by (b) 
densitometry analysis of wheat PAL transcripts in Resistant and 
Susceptible genotype. 

A Dendrogram analysis for establishing the similarity 
index between different PAL protein sequences available in 
NCBI databases by UPGMA (MEGA 4. 1 version) with Triticum 
aestivum PAL (AEX59143), were as follows: Triticum aestivum
(AAG02280.1), Triticum urartu (EMS63197.1), Brachypodium 
distachyon (XP_003575400), Zea mays (AFW72411.1), Aegilops 
tauschii (EMT29849.1), Hordeum vulgar (BAJ93084.1), 
Phyllostachys edulis (ABP96954.2), Sorghaum bicolor 
(XP_002452479.1), Pleioblastus maculosoides (ACM45590.1), 
Phyllostachy parvifolia (ACM41749.1), Bambusa oldhamii 
(AAR24505.1), Oryza sativa (CAA61198.1), Lilium (BAM28964.1), 
Musa acuminate (ACG56648.1), Arabidopsis thaliana 
(AAC18870.1), Lactuca sativa (AAO13347.1), Daucus carota 
(BAG31930.1), Vitis vinifera (XP_003633985.1), Ipomoea 
(AAG49585.1), Hibiscus cannabinus (AFN85669.1), Solenostemon 
scutellarioides (AFZ94859.1), Eucalyptus robusta (BAL49995.1), 
Solanum tuberosum (AGT63063.1).

Functional domain analysis of representative member 
of PAL.

Schematic diagram of motif distribution of PAL 
genes.MEME4.6.0 was applied to show that different sub 
groups were distinguished by the motif distribution.

Shinon Protein Variability of a) with in monocotyledonous plants b) with in Dicotyledonous plants c) both monocotyledon and Dicotyledonous plant.

