Background
Cell cycle is controlled by various regulatory proteins (check
points) for proper cell division. Infact, cell division of cell is
divided into two stages: mitosis (M) and interphase (I)
including G1, S and G2 transition phases []. The transition
from one phase to another phase occurs in an orderly fashion
and is regulated by different type of cellular proteins,
particularly cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs-family of
serine/threonine protein kinases) and cyclins are
activated/deactivated at specific points. Therefore, CDKs
induce downstream processes by phosphorylating the
regulatory proteins in cell cycle []. However, different types of
cyclins D (cyclin D1, cyclin D2 and cyclin D3) are essential for
the regulation of cell cycle. Further, cyclins bind to CDKs and
form CDK-cyclin complex. This complex/s is/are very
important for phase progression in cell cycle []. The functional
activity of that CDK-cyclin complex is induced conformational
changes due to phosphorylation in conserved threonine and
tyrosine residues of CDKs part. Thus the complex (Cdk+Cyclin)
enhances or suppresses the binding efficiency of their specific
cyclin partner []. In case of cancer, mutations have been
observed in genes encoding CDKs, Cyclins (D1, D2, D3, A, H, T
&amp; C), CDK-activating enzymes (CAK), CKI and CDK-substrates
[]. Consequently, changes in functioning of CDKs activity to
formed Cdk+Cyclin complex, an important part of many
cancers, as well as other disease states, generally through
elevated and/or inappropriate activation []. One of the
probable ways of loss of cell cycle control could be disruption
of these regulatory proteins CDKs (check points) by a direct
interaction with chemical/carcinogen. In the present study, we
investigated the possible molecular interactions between CDKs,
cyclins with potent cigarette smoke carcinogen 4-
(Methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-Pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK).

NNK is a yellow crystalline compound with a molecular
formula C10H13N3O2, (Mol Weight = 207.2316) derived from
tobacco alkaloids (nitrosamine) as a potent carcinogen 
[]. The
concentrations of NNK in tobacco substances such as 1-20
µg/g, 20-310 ng/cigarette and ≤26 ng/m3 in snuff, cigarette
mainstream smoke, and in indoor air respectively 
[]. The
existences of substantial amount of NNK in tobacco products
play a very significant role as a main cause of cancer in
population []. Ultimately, NNK is considered as a major
contributor as well as risk factor to lung carcinogenesis 
[–].
NNK and its metabolite NNAL, has already been reported to
molecular interaction with DNA repair proteins primarily by
our group [].

We analyzed the molecular interaction, based on binding
efficiency of potent carcinogen NNK against CDKs (check
points) and cyclins involved in the cell cycle process. In case of
cancer, cells develop an autonomous set of instructions against
normal rules, leading to uncontrolled, undifferentiated growth
and proliferation called an abnormal condition of a cell known
as carcinogenicity. The carcinogen NNK and its metabolite
NNAL directly bind with DNA repair proteins to make DNA
adduct. Therefore, possibility exists that NNK may directly
interact with these regulatory protein (CDKs, cyclin) and affect
the functional activity of CDK-cyclin complex in cell cycle
regulation. The carcinogen NNK induced cell cycle abruption
may in turn result in hastened DNA replication, with a
compromised proofreading by DNA pol/RNA pol. This
process in a whole may give rise to daughter cell with loads of
mutations in their DNA. Therefore we designed this study to
investigate and determine whether the carcinogen NNK, apart
from directly causing damage to regulatory proteins, is also
capable of affecting their functionalities in term of binding
efficiency of CDKs to their specific cyclins partner (A, C, D, D1,
D2, D3, E, and H) for proper signal to execute cell cycle phases
normally.

Methodology
Preparation of receptor- protein structures:
The 3D structures of check point proteins (CDKs &amp; Cyclins)
involved in cell cycle regulation were obtained from PDB
(Protein Data Bank) and some other proteins retrieved from
MODBASE server  (see supplementary material).
MODBASE is a queryable database of annotated protein
structures models, theoretically calculated models, which may
contain significant errors, not experimentally determined
structures []. Published protein structures were edited, to
remove HETATM by using Discovery Studio Visualizer
(Version 2.5.5). And Chimera was used for energy
minimization, removal of steric collision (forces) with the
steepest descent steps 1000, steepest descent size 0.02 Å,
conjugated gradient steps 1000 and gradient step size 0.02 Å for
the conjugate gradient minimization [–
]. Protein structure
visualization and image generation were performed using
PyMOL software (DeLano Scientific, Palo Alto, CA).

Preparation of ligand structure:
Potent cigarette smoke carcinogen NNK (4-
(Methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1- butanone) ligand file was
retrieved in (dot).mol format  (see supplementary
material) () from latest version of Chem Spider
Chemical Database. This file format could not directly use by
Autodock (4.0) tool []. Thus that file was finally converted it
into.(dot)pdb file format using DS Visualizer (version 2.5.5), so
it easier to comprehend chemoinformatics and molecular
mechanics of ligand and different receptor proteins interacting
molecules. Further, ligand was submitted for minimization by
using Chimera (version 1.5.3) with Genetic Algorithm Steps
2000 and 0.5 grid units Optimized [].

In silico Studies:
In silico studies were performed by Autodock version 4.0 suit
with Cygwin interface tool [–
]. We selected molecular
docking methods for CDKs and NNK interaction, followed by
retrieving the best conformations of check point (CDKs) as
regulatory proteins and carcinogen (NNK), on the basis of
binding energy value (kcal/mol). First of all, we marked all
water molecules (H2O) in proteins then removed from targeted
protein structure, before apply docking performance. Then only
hydrogen atoms were added to all target proteins. After that
Kollman united charges and salvation parameters were applied
to selected regulatory proteins (CDKs and cyclins). Gasteiger
charge also was charged to ligand (NNK). Then defined Grid
box was set to cover the maximum part (including target site)
of selected protein for ligand interaction. The value was set to
standard 60×60×60 Å in X, Y and Z coordinate of grid point
with default value of grid points spacing 0.375 Å. Lamarckian
Genetic Algorithm (LGA) was applied for receptor protein and
ligand for flexible docking calculations []. The LGA
parameters like population size (ga_pop_size), energy
evaluations (ga_num_generation), mutation rate, crossover rate
and step size were set to 150, 2500000, 27000, 0.02, 0.8 and 0.2 Å,
respectively. The LGA runs were set to as standard 50 runs. We
observed all 50 conformations of selected proteins with ligand
complex were analyzed for the interaction orientations
including binding energy of the docked structure using
Discovery Studio Visualizer version 2.5.5.

Protein-Protein Interaction analysis:
The interacting regulatory proteins (CDKs) and cyclins were
found using STRING 9.0 database that predict, interacting
proteins against your query. We found interface residues in
CDKs &amp; Cyclins using PDBe PISA, an interactive tool for the
exploration of macromolecular (protein, DNA/RNA and
ligand) interfaces []. The Discovery studio 2.5 was used for
Zdock (Dock Proteins) and Zdock score obtained from Protein-
Protein interactions (Cdk+Cyclin) as well as from Protein-
Complex (NNK+CDK &amp; Cyclin) interaction.

Z dock calculations:
Zdock is one of the successful suites that have shown great
prediction abilities in Critical Assessment of Predicted
Interactions (CAPRI) []. Zdock uses a fast Fourier transform
to search all possible binding modes for the proteins,
evaluating based on shape, desolvation energy, and
electrostatics. The top 2000 predictions from Zdock where they
are minimized by CHARMM with create fixed atom constraint
in backbone of protein and again create Harmonic restraint in
selected protein for improving the energies and eliminate
clashes. ZDOCK is an initial stage rigid body molecular
docking algorithm that uses a fast Fourier transform (FFT)
algorithm to improve performance for searching in
translational []. All of the available structures from NMR
were used to calculate docking poses and the structures
obtained were subjected to energy minimization using, smart
minimize algorithm (Max steps 200, RMS gradient 0.01) in the
program D.S. 2.5. The resulting highest values of score were
used as appropriate conformational pose with Zdock score
value  (see supplementary material).

Results
The ligand structure NNK (4-(Methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-
Pyridyl)-1-butanone) as a potent cigarette smoke carcinogen
described in this study was retrieved from latest version of
Chem Spider Chemical Database in (dot).mol format 
(
&amp; ) with PDB-ID: 1B17. The structures of the cell
cycle regulatory proteins CDKs (CDK8:3RGF, CDK2:3DDP,
CDK7:1UA2, CDK6:1BLX, CDK9:3BLH &amp; CDK4:3G33)
obtained from PDB and other complementary partner protein
cyclin (cyclin A: 1JSU, cyclin H: 1KXU, cyclin D3: 3G33, cyclin
D: 2W9F, cyclin C: 1ZP2 and cyclin T: 3BLR) were retrieved
from MODBASE server.  &amp; 
 (see supplementary
material) show the docked score (binding energy) of ligand
NNK against cyclin dependents kinases (CDKs),
complementary partner proteins cyclins. While 
were indicated the docking images with best molecular
interaction orientation. In this in silico study, the docking scores
(binding energy) of CDK8 and CDK2 regulatory proteins
against the carcinogen NNK, -7.25 kcal/mol &amp; -6.19 Kcal/mol
respectively were more than that of positive control Human oxyhemoglobin
binding energy -6.06 kcal/mol. The residues ARG 150,
ASP 151, LEU 152, LYS 153, THR 196, PHE 197, TRP 198, TYR
199, ARG 200, ALA 201, LEU 204, TYR 211, ILE 215 and ALA
219 of CDK8 and ILE 10, VAL 18, ALA 31, LYS 33, VAL 64, PHE
80, GLU 81, PHE 82, LEU 83, HIS 84, GLN 85, ASP 86, LEU 134
and ALA 144 of CDK2 actively participate in molecular
interaction with NNK as shown in  (see supplementary
material). The residues ARG, ASP, LEU, LYS, TYR, VAL and
ALA from all regulatory proteins (CDKs) commonly interacted
with carcinogen NNK through hydrogen bonds. The functional
integrity with interaction efficiency of CDKs once bound to
NNK was also evaluated by using Zdock method. We obtained
Zdock-scores of CDK8 with its corresponding partner cyclin C
was 30.12, and of CDK2 with its corresponding partner cyclin A
was 21.62. Whereas, the complex CDK8+NNK when docked
with its partner cyclin C showed Zdock score 19.12, and
CDK2+NNK when docked with its partner cyclin A showed
Zdock score 21.34. Reduction in the Zdock score of CDK8 after
it forms complex with NNK may represent a loss in its capacity
to bind with partner cyclin C, once bound with NNK. Whereas,
regulatory protein CDK2 doesn׳t show significant change in
Zdock value, after binding with NNK as shown in ().

Discussion
An in silico approaches were applied to evaluate protein-ligand
and protein-protein interaction (PPI) for identifying possible
targets of carcinogen (NNK) amongst cyclin dependent-kinases
(CDKs) as well as with their respective partner cyclins. In order
to gather in-depth knowledge on, an important issue that how
the cigarette smoke carcinogen NNK interfere the mechanism
of signals through CDK complex (Cdks+Cyclins) in
proliferation, cell division and in abruption of cell cycle. In this
study, we characterized and identified the molecular
interaction of NNK with all regulatory proteins (CDK2, CDK4,
CDK6, CDK7, CDK8, and CDK9) and with their respective
partner cyclins (Cyclin A, Cyclin E, Cyclin D, D1, D2, D3,
Cyclin C, Cyclin H, and Cyclin T) by using Autodock and
Zdock (protein-protein interaction) methods. To validate our in
silico study, we considered Human oxy-hemoglobin at 1.25 Å
resolution, [PDB ID-1HHO] as a +ve control, which showed
binding energy of -6.06 kcal/mol, as the binding of Human oxyhemoglobin
with NNK has previously been quantified in
tobacco users and is considered as a biochemical marker for
uptake of tobacco specific nitrosamines []. The docking
outputs indicated that potent cigarette smoke carcinogen NNK
shows the binding efficiency (ΔG) against cell cycle regulatory
enzymes/proteins (CDKs) ranging, -3.95 to -7.25 kcal /mol
(). 
Simulations depicted that two regulatory proteins
CDK8 (3RGF) &amp; CDK2 (3DDP) showed better potential to bind
carcinogen NNK as compared to +ve control, i.e. -7.25 &amp; -6.19
Kcal/Mol () respectively. During the proteinligand
interaction, the amino acid residues of CDK8 involved in
interaction with ligand (NNK) were identified as ARG150,
ASP151, LEU152, LYS153, THR196, PHE197, TRP198, TYR199,
ARG200, ALA201, LEU204, TYR211, ILE215, and ALA219.
While, in case of protein CDK2 the amino acid residues, namely
ILE10, VAL18, ALA31, LYS33, VAL64, PHE80, GLU81, PHE82,
LEU83, HIS84, GLN85, ASP86, LEU134, and ALA144 were
found to be involved efficiently in the interaction with ligand
NNK. In fact, amino acid residues, particularly ARG, ASP,
LEU, LYS, TYR, VAL and ALA of both CDK8 and CDK2 were
found to be essential for the interaction of carcinogen NNK
(). This molecular interaction between CDKs and NNK
is validated on the basis of their binding energy (ΔG) obtained
from best docked conformations. It has been reported that
Cyclin Dependent Kinase-8 is actively involved in the regulation
of mRNA transcription and considered as a potent oncogene in
colon carcinogenesis. In addition, mutated or amplified CDK8
with increased expression is a common observation during a
variety of human cancers []. However, we further explored
the interaction impact of NNK on CDK8 (3RGF) in term of
binding efficiency towards its respective partner cyclin C. For
this purpose, we applied an in silico Zdock method for
calculating Zdock score of protein-protein interaction (PPI)
between CDK8 Vs Cyclin C complex and further compared it
with protein complex interaction (CDK8+NNK Vs Cyclin C) by
using Discovery studio 2.5. Results clearly depicted that
significant loss of binding energy of CDK8 Vs Cyclin C from
30.12 (PPI) to 19.12 for NNK bound with CDK 8 complex Vs
Cyclin C (PCI) at coordinates X -17.585, Y 11.939 &amp; Z 17.689.
These results predicted that binding of NNK at the active site of
CDK8 strongly interferes with the natural binding of cyclin C to
the active site of CDK8, rendering it unable to form functional
complex (CDK8+cyclin C). It has been reported that CDK8
positively regulates transcription, by directly phosphorylating
p53 and histone H3, or by facilitating assembly of Pol II
elongation complex []. The CDK8-cyclin C complex is the
part of RNA Polymerase II, which regulate the transcription of
general transcription initiation factor IIH (TFIIH), controlling
the basal transcription machinery. Failing the formation of
CDK8-cyclin C complex may eventually will result in failure of
the transcriptional regulation of a member of RNA-Pol-II
dependent genes []. CDK8 plays significant role in regulating
cell cycle progression [] And CDK 8-cyclin C complex
abnormality has many times reported to result in
tumorogenesis []. When we performed same Zdock study
with other protein CDK2, it was observed that NNK binding
with the CDK2 didn׳t significantly interfere natural binding of
its partner cyclin A . Previously QMS Jamal, et al., 2012
presented Zdock based analysis to determine the
loss/incapability in formation of functional complex of
regulatory proteins in DNA repair pathways after its binding
with a concerned chemical/carcinogen []. The binding of
NNK with CDK8 therefore, may be an important event in
carcinogenesis caused by cigarette smoke carcinogen and
should be studied in depth.

Conclusion
In silico study explores the interaction of CDK8 (cyclin
dependent kinase-8) with NNK, a widely inhaled potent
cigarette smoke carcinogen among the young generation of
population. CDK8, cyclin C and its complex (CDK8+cyclin C)
are the key mediator of cell cycle progression which play a vital
role in cell cycle perturbation due to potential interaction of
cigarette smoke carcinogen NNK. The hydrogen bonds and
certain amino acid residues ARG, ASP, LEU, LYS, TYR, VAL
and ALA play a key role in the correct positioning of CDKs
within the active site of NNK to permit docking interaction.
The effect of molecular interaction of NNK on the binding with
CDKs is elucidated. Study indicated the loss of functional
complex of these enzymes/regulatory proteins (Cdk+Cyclin),
which probably could be a reason for perturbation in cell cycle
process resulting in occupied active site of CDKs by NNK.
Furthermore, our study suggests that carcinogens (NNK)
positively alter the mechanisms of cell cycle progression
pathways and enzymes functioning could be affected by
carcinogens. Computer based structural analysis of bio
macromolecules and their molecular interactions (ligand and
protein) could play an important role in assessment of risk to a
number of diseases including cancer. At last but not least, a
deep analysis is needed to elucidate the perturbation of cell
cycle mechanisms with best suitable techniques and tools. In
vivo and In vitro validation is needed to authenticate in silico
results obtained from this study.

Conflict of Interest
We have no conflict of interest with anybody working in the
area and among the authors in the manuscript.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We expressed our sincere gratitude to Prof. S.W. Akhtar, the
Hon׳ble Vice-Chancellor of Integral University Lucknow, U. P.
India for his support and for providing necessary facility.
Special thanks to Dr. (Er.) Mohd Haris Siddiqui (Director &amp;
HOD Bioengineering), Dr Shazi Shakil, Dr. Salman Akhtar, Dr.
S.M.D. Rizvi, Mohd. Kalim Khan, Er. Adnan Ahmad and all
faculty members of department of Bioenigering, Integral
University, Lucknow, India for the valuable suggestions and
important critical comments.

Citation:Haneef et al, Bioinformation 10(8): 526-532 (2014)

(A) 4-(Methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-
butanonePubChem Compound ID- 47289,ChemSpider ID-
43038; (B) 3RGF:CDK8 interact with carcinogen NNK; (C)
3DDP:CDK2 interact with carcinogen NNK

