Background
Telomeric DNA consists of tandem array of repeated sequence
and a 3' overhang. The replication of telomere and its length
regulation is not solely achieved by telomerase, many
complexes of telomere binding protein (Transcription Factors)
helps in the synthesis. It is already reported that transcription
factors bind to the telomere region of DNA for telomere length
regulation and also involved in the aging of eukaryotes 
[].
These proteins bind the double stranded DNA with a very
specific sequence motif. The overall sequence alignment of
these proteins from different organism (Rap1 of S. cerevisiae,
TRF1 and TRF2 of human, TAZ1 of S. pombe) may differ but all
of them show very high structural similarity in Myb type DNA
binding domain []. Saccharomyces cerevisiae is one of the most
well-known and commercially significant species of yeast. This
is also a model of eukaryotic organism having 23% genome
similarity with Human and shows substantial homology with
telomeric transcription factors.

Rap1 (Repressor Activator Protein) is an essential site-specific
DNA-binding protein in S.cerevisiae which plays a role in gene
activation or repression. Rap1 is a modular protein and can be
categorized as general Transcription factor which plays a
multiple functional roles. It has been suggested that
functionality of Rap1 is mainly associated with telomere length
regulation and its maintenance []. Rap1 associated with other
protein like Sir3/Sir4 [] and RIF1 
[] activates transcription
regulation. In vitro study like immunofluorescence labeling
characterizes that Rap1 molecules majorly found at the
chromosomal end. It was also suggested that Rap1 binds DNA
after every 18 bp on average along the telomeric DNA strand
[].

The full sequence length of Rap1 is 827 aminoacid 
[] and it is
divided into three main domains – 
The N terminal BRCT domain []

Central Myb-type domain and

C terminal RCT domain.


Above domains are considerably flexible in
nature and helps in interaction with DNA. The central Mybtype
domain, a DNA binding domain (DBD), was defined in
between residues 358 to 596 []. The central DBD is homodimer
in structure but binding to DNA is monomeric in nature. Both
the monomeric domains contain three helix bundle and an N
terminal arm which interacts with the major groove of DNA in
the region of 360-445 (residues) and 446-578(residues),
respectively []. The orientation of helixes for both domains in
contact with DNA shows similar pattern with other Myb-type
DBD. The Myb-type DBD of Rap1 binds to a repetitive sequence
of telomeric DNA within the binding site and helps in entire
enclosement of DNA. In addition to DNA binding, Myb-type
DBD of Rap1 can alter the conformation (bending, twisting, etc.)
of DNA at its target site []. The mode of contact of Rap1
appears to be related with human TRF2 which is known to
protect the end of telomere region []. Rap1 length wise is a
long protein but it is reported that first 300 amino acid (BRCT
domain) can be deleted without hampering any binding
functionality of Rap1 [].

Molecular dynamics simulation is a very important tool to
predict the small fluctuation in any biological molecule. To
understand the motional properties over a time scale,
simulation study can give the ultimate results. As biological
molecules are not rigid in nature so for better understanding
the functionality it is important to know the structural changes
of proteins during interaction with DNA and other proteins
[]. 
The Myb-type DBD of Rap1 helps in bending of the
telomeric DNA during its interaction with nucleotide repeats.

This information suggests that the DNA binding domain can
alter its structure during the interaction. The motional behavior
of Myb-type DBD of Rap1 can be only studied through
simulation works. In this study we aim to model the 3D
structure of Myb-type DBD of Rap1 (one monomer with 61
residues) and to study the dynamics of the structure by
monitoring RMSD, RMSF and Radius of gyration []. Principle
Component Analysis (PCA) was also carried out to get
information about the structural changes and its dependencies
with the environment [].

Methodology
Homology Modeling and Model Evaluation:
The amino acid sequence of Rap1 of S. cerevisiae (UniprotId:
P11938) was retrieved in fasta format. The total length of Rap1
is 827 aminoacid but the HTH Myb-type domain constitute
from 355 to 415 aminoacid. Sequence homologies were obtained
for the required domain using BLASTp 2.2.24 [] setting
default parameters which was available at the National Centre
for Biotechnology Information web server
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). The best hit selected based
on query coverage, lowest E-value and good sequence
similarity. We found the PDB entry 1IGN (Chain A) as
template. The initial 3D model of HTH Myb-type domain of S.
cerevisiae was constructed by MODELLER 9v4 [] using the
alignment between HTH Myb-type domain and the template
protein 1IGN (Chain A). To crosscheck the model we used other
online server Geno3D [] 
(http://geno3d-pbil.ibcp.fr/cgibin/
geno3d_automat.pl?page=/GENO3D/geno3d_home.html)
and FOGUE (http://tardis.nibio.go.jp/fugue/prfsearch.html)
with the sequence of 1IGN and other template sequences.
Among all the results the best sequence similarity was shown
for the 1IGN template sequence. Using the Structural Analysis
and Verification Server (http://nihserver.mbi.ucla.edu/SAVES/)
steriochemical quality and accuracy was evaluated of new
modeled structure (model3.pdb) with PROCHECK [] by
Ramachandran plot analysis ().

Helix Turn Helix motif prediction:
The secondary structure was also predicted through the online
server JPred (v3) []
(http://www.compbio.dundee.ac.uk/www-jpred/). It uses the
Jnet algorithm in order to make more accurate 2-D structure
predictions of proteins as well as prediction on Solvent
Accessibility and Coiled – coil regions (Lupas method) basis. To
predict the type of motif within the target sequence
InterProScan (version 4.8)
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/pfa/iprscan/) 
() and
MotifScan (http://myhits.isb-sib.ch/cgi-bin/motif_scan/) was
done and both the result shows Helix Turn Helix motif (HTH).

Molecular Dynamics Simulation:
All simulations were carried out using the GROMOS 96 Force
Field within the GROMACS software package []. The verified
and evaluated homology model of Rap1 Myb type domain was
used as the starting structure for MD simulation. The 3D
structure of Rap1 DBD (model3.pdb) was taken in a cubic box
with a 4.0 Å edge length. The simulation was conducted at a
constant temperature of 300 K and a constant pressure of 1 atm
and each component was coupled separately to an external bath
using the Beredson Coupling method. An electrostatics
interaction as Van dar Waal and coloumbic, cut-off was dealt
with using a radius of 10 Å. MD simulation was performed for
2 ns. But before simulation the energy minimization was
performed by steepest descent method (converged at 550 steps)
and Conjugant Gradient method (converged at 4 steps). To
solvate the condition the “SPC” water model (spc216.gro file)
was used to fill up the box. The box contains 32108 no. of
solvent molecules (water). The position restrain step was
carried out for 1 n and finally the simulation was finished. After
completion of simulation the trajectory files which were
generated, analyzed with different tools of GROMACS.

Discussion
The modeled structure was crosschecked and evaluated with
different online servers. The chosen model was again analyzed
by VERIFY 3D [] and ERRAT
(http://nihserver.mbi.ucla.edu/ERRATv2/). It was found that
63.93% of the residues had an averaged 3D-1D score &gt; 0.2 in
VERIFY 3D. Subsequently the amino acid environment was
evaluated using ERRAT plots, ERRAT showed an overall
quality factor of 98.077. RMSD value of the Rap1 Myb-type
DBD demonstrated the fluctuation over time (). It is
evident from Figure3 that RMSD values increased upto 700ps,
then it decreased a little bit and after 1000ps the fluctuation was
in the range of 0.6-0.7 nm scale. Radius of Gyration (Rg) shows
the distance of the atoms of the structure from either its centre
of gravity or an axis. Our results show the much variation in the
values of Rg during the simulation time (). At the
beginning of the simulation, increased fluctuation in Rg values
was noticed but decreased as the time progresses. Our result of
RMSD and Rg curve values revealed that Myb-type domain is
flexible in solvent condition. Root Mean Square Fluctuation
(RMSF) was performed to observe the flexibility of different
segments (helix1, helix2 and helix3) as well as full structure of
the Myb-type DBD of Rap1. It shows the fluctuation of each
residue from its time averaged position. We noticed RMSF
values for each residue of Helix1, Helix2 and Helix3 in time
averaged position (). In full structure of the Myb-type
DBD of Rap1 RMSF analysis we noticed a high peak at the N
terminal region while comparatively lower peak in the region of
25-30 residues only ().

To analyze the major motions of protein, a small number of
important modes by Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
should be determined. PCA project the equations of motion on
the low-dimensional vector space and facilitate the long time
dynamics []. PCA on Myb-type DBD of Rap1 reveals that
initial 2 eigenvectors accounts for more than 85% of the global
motion. They also show maximum eigenvalues and selected as
the principal components 1 and 2 (PC1 and PC2) respectively
(). We also verified the RMSD values of PC1 and PC2
with the time evolution. Result shows the RMSD value of PC1
increased from negative value to positive value with time scale.

On the other hand high positive RMSD value of PC2 decreased
to negative value followed by its less positive value with time
scale (). This indicates that RMSD values of Myb-type
DBD of Rap1lies &lt;1.5 nm. To check the fluctuation of simulated
structure (rap1_md1.pdb) with starting structure (rap1.pdb) in
terms of RMSD, we superimposed these structures by Chimera
1.6.2 (http://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera/).The result indicates
RMSD of 13 atom pairs is 1.208 (). The result of
simulation at different time scale (250 ps, 500 ps, 1000 ps and
2000 ps) revealed that the helix 2 region and the N terminal
showed the maximum movement () 
[].

Conclusion
DNA binding domain (DBD) of Rap1 regulates the transcription
process as an activator or repressor molecule. We modeled the
3D structure of DBD of Rap1 which interacts with DNA major
groove through its HTH motif. Simulation study shows that
helix2 and N terminal have ample fluctuation. The RMSD and
RMSF values indicated that helix2 and N terminal of Rap1 is
basically flexible in nature and attain conformational changes to
facilitate the DNA protein interaction. RMSF curve of c-alpha
displayed that helix3 is less fluctuating in comparison with
other regions. As the helix3 region is known as recognition helix
during the binding with DNA so its structure in nearly rigid in
nature. Motional properties of different segments and full
structure of Myb-type DBD of Rap1 will predict the orientation
of protein and identify the amino acids which are directly
interacting with the nucleotide. Further, study on the
interaction of simulated structure of Myb-type DBD with DNA
through docking process need to be elucidated.

We thankfully acknowledge Mr. Uttam Kr. Mondol (Chemo
bioinformatics Lab, Department of Chemistry, Raiganj
University College,West Bengal, India) for suggesting in MD
Simulation Studies.

Citation:Mukherjee et al, Bioinformation 8(18): 881-885 (2012)

Ramachandran Plot of model3.pdb (rap1.pdb), the
constructed structure of Myb-type domain of Rap1 DBD. The
graph allows 70% residues are in core region and 23.6% allow
region.

Result of Helix Turn Helix motif identification by
InterProScan. The orange colour bar is showing the HTH-Myb
type domain.

Time evolution of RMSD during whole simulation of
time (2000ps)

Plot of Radius of gyration (Rg) of backbone of Mybtype
domain of Rap1.

Comparison studies of RMSF fluctuation of Helix1,
Helix2 and helix3 with the residue number. The maximum
value of RMSF fluctuation shown in the graph for Helix 2(red
line) is 0.3 nm.

Plot of Root mean Square Fluctuation (RMSF) of Calpha
value in the solvent condition as a function of residue no.
of Myb-type domain of Rap1.

The plot describes the Eigen values with eigenvector
index.

Plot of two principal components with simulation of
time. PC1 as Vec1 and PC2 as Vec2 shown in the plot.

Graphical view of superimposed structure of DBD of
Rap1 before and after simulation study by Chimera software.
The blue and brown colour diagram respectively indicates the
structure of after and before simulation respectively.

Snapshots of Myb-type domain of Rap1 DBD at
different time points during simulation run at (A) 250ps; (B)
500ps; (C) 1000ps and (D) 2000ps.

