Background
Development of dependable computational methods to identify
functional peptide motifs is an important quest in bioinformatics.
Experimental discovery of functional peptide sequences is often
arduous. High-throughput methods give a large number of false
positive and false negative results. Extensive computer calculations are
often needed to search for specific motifs within protein databases.
Identification of short motifs using currently available methods is
especially difficult. Multiple sequence alignments are tools used in
several motif-searching programs. One of them is a powerful program
Clustal W []. However, aligning sequences by Clustal W requires
significant computational resources. It can take hours of sequential
computing to align a few hundred sequences.

BLAST [] is widely used for matching a peptide sequence with 	 
database sequences and reporting results above a specified threshold. 	 
Stressing speed over sensitivity, BLAST looks only for significant 	 
patterns within the sequences. Another program, MEME [], is used to 	 
search for new motifs in user-supplied protein sequences. Various 	 
online databases store a few hundred currently known peptide motifs. 	 
Examples are ELM [] and SCANSITE []. To decrease the number 	 
of false-positive results, the ELM filter hides protein sections in which 	 
motifs are unlikely to be present. SCANSITE employs position‐	 
specific scoring matrices to evaluate functionality of putative motifs. 	 
However, the matrices can be created only for motifs for which many 	 
sequences have been experimentally confirmed as functional. When 	 
searching for motifs less than 10 residues long, these techniques usually 
give a large number of false-positive results.

Presented here is a procedure to identify short functional sequences
using the sequences' amino acid residues. The method is simple, yet
effective, and requires minimal computer power and programming
skills. The method can help reduce a pool of putative motif candidates
that warrant further experimental or theoretical investigations. It also
provides an additional tool to validate functionality of sequences found
by other bioinformatics methods. In this work, engrailed homology-1
(eh1)-like motif was investigated. The motif's transcriptional role, its
short length, and a relatively small number of sequences that have
been experimentally confirmed as functional, were some of the main
reasons the motif was chosen for the study.

Transcription factors help control transcription of genetic information 	 
from DNA to RNA. Gro/TLE proteins are corepressors for various 	 
transcription factors. Many of these factors interact with Gro/TLE 	 
through eh1-like motif []. During the interaction, eh1‐like motif binds 	 
to the Gro/TLE via its WD domain. The WD domain is a highly 	 
conserved C-terminal region of Gro/TLE. As demonstrated by X-ray 	 
studies [], the WD domain forms a β-propeller structure. Specific 	 
transcription factors are recognized by specific propeller's binding 	 
sites. Eh1‐like motif conforms to the consensus pattern FΣBXXBBX 	 
[]. Here, F is phenylalanine; Σ = S or T; B = branched hydrophobic 	 
residue (I, L, or V); and X = nonpolar residue (A, D, E, F, G, H, I, K, 	 
L, M, P, R, V, or W). Substitutions with ‘non-consensus residues’ are 	 
allowed up to a point and can lead to functional sequences [,]. 

Literature searches identified fifty experimentally-confirmed eh1-like 	 
sequences [–]. Copley [] 
predicted 109 eh1-like sequences using 	 
BLAST database searches. Yaklichkin et al. [] searched for novel 	 
motifs among 458 metazoan proteins using Clustal W and MEME 	 
programs. They predicted 95 new eh1-like sequences. All of the above 	 
sequences were used to train or test the prediction method described 	 
here. A task addressed in this paper may be summarized in the 	 
following way. Given a set of peptide sequences, develop a method to 	 
determine whether each sequence is a functional or nonfunctional eh1-	 
like motif. A simple, yet effective procedure will be described, which 	 
identifies functional eh1-like motif variants from their sequences with 	 
high reliability.

Methodology
Dataset
About 1000 sequences were used to train and test the scoring function.
The training set consisted of twenty experimentally known eh1-like
sequences [–] and forty random eight-amino-acid long sequences.
The random sequences were checked against protein databases to
make sure they were not functional. Four sets of sequences were used
to test the scoring function. The first set included 30 experimentally
known eh1-like variants [–], none of which was in the training set.
The second set contained about 800 random eight-amino-acid long
sequences. The third had 109 eh1-like sequences predicted by Copley
[] and the fourth, 95 eh1-like sequences predicted by Yaklichkin et
al. [].

Procedure employed
The scoring function
The objective was to devise a scoring function that would discriminate
between functional and nonfunctional sequences using sequence
features. The scoring function of the form F = Σwi•fi was used. Here,
wi were weighing coefficients and fi's quantified relevant sequence
properties. The procedure for determining wi's and fi's is described
below. A starting assumption was that residues at positions in
agreement with the consensus sequence had a positive influence on the
sequence's functionality. These will be referred to as ‘positiveinfluence’
(PI) residues. The training sequences were scored using fi =
1 when a PI residue was present and fi = 0 when it was absent from a
given position.

Determination of sequence properties
The next step was to determine sequence properties relevant to motif's
interactions with the WD domain, and thus to motif's functionality.
Experimentally determined three-dimensional (3D) models of
interactions between the WD domain and the 20 functional training
sequences were not available in protein databases. Therefore, the
models were created and optimized via Deep View program and the
Swiss Model []. Experimentally known 3D structure of an eh1-like
sequence bound to the WD domain (PDB ID: 2CE8) was used as a
template. The sequence's residues were mutated in Deep View to
obtain, in turn, models of interactions for each of the 20 sequences.
The models were optimized in Deep View and submitted to the Swiss
Model. Final models were built and returned to Deep View. The
models of functional sequences helped identify both essential and
nonessential binding sites for the WD-eh1 interactions. Residues at
each position were systematically mutated in each model to see
whether the interactions with the WD domain were eliminated.
Residues at particular positions that abolished WD-eh1 interactions
will be referred to as ‘negative-influence’ (NI) residues.

Tuning of the scoring function
The scoring function was then amended to include information on
sequence properties found to be crucial for the functionality. The
training sequences were scored using fi = -1 when an NI residue was
present. When an NI was absent, fi was 1 for that position, since the
absence of an NI residue increased the sequence's chance of being
functional. To assess the influence of each term on the scores, the
weights were systematically changed for each position. If the change
had a similar effect on both functional and nonfunctional sequences,
and the modeling indicated the position to be nonessential, that term
was removed from the scoring function.

Evaluation of the scoring function
The scoring function's performance was assessed using the four sets of
test sequences. The performance was also compared to that of an online server EasyPred [].

Discussion
Computer modeling indicated that WD residues D617, R534, and
E550 interacted, respectively, with residues 1, 2, and 3 in most
functional eh1-like sequences. Most sequence positions could be
occupied by a limited number of residues with similar hydrophobicity,
charge, etc., and still preserve functionality. Findings on positional
distributions of the residues were summarized in Table 1 (see ) below.
Residues not listed did not significantly contribute and were omitted
from the scoring function.

As shown in Table 1 (see ), the WD-binding positions 1, 2, and 3 did not
accept charged residues D, R, E, and K. Also, residue H was forbidden
in positions 1, 3, 6, and 7. Most residues, except I, L, and V, were not
allowed in the 6th position. Position 8, which did not interact with the
WD domain, could accept any amino acid, as could position 4.
Flexibility of position 4 may be related to its residue serving to ensure
proper spacing between key amino acids.

The clearest distinction between functional and nonfunctional sequences was achieved with this scoring function

F = 1•(PI or NI in position 1) + 1•(PI or NI in position 2) + 0.8•(PI in
positions 3, 4, or 6) + 0.7•(PI in position 5) + 0.5•(PI in positions 7 or
8) + 0.8•(NI in position 5) + 0.1•(NI in positions 3, 6, or 7)

where PI = {1 or 0} corresponded to ‘positive influence’ terms and NI
= {-1 or 1} to ‘negative’. All weights were normalized to position 1
coefficient. There were 14 term in the formula. Since each position
was occupied by only one residue at a time, only 8 addends
contributed to the final score.

The scoring function agreed with findings from the computer
modeling. Positions 1 and 2 were important for the scores, as can be
seen from their weights. If non-consensus residues were in these
positions, the sequence was likely nonfunctional. Also important were
PI residues in positions 3 and 6, and to a lesser extent in position 5.
Positions 4 and 8 did not have any NI terms, which is consistent with
Table 1 (see ).

The scoring function captured a general correspondence between the
likelihood that the sequence was functional and sequence's
characteristics. The scoring function gave no false negative results.
That is, 100% of the experimental eh1-like sequences [–] received
‘functional’ scores. About 91% of sequences predicted by Copley []
and about 95% of those predicted by Yaklichkin et al. [] were
identified as functional by the scoring function. Most random
sequences received nonfunctional scores. The scoring function gave
about 20% false positive results, identifying about 20% of random
sequences as functional. When checked against protein databases most
of these sequences were not found, indicating that they were not
known to be functional. Several false positive sequences that were
found in the databases were present inside proteins' DNA-binding
domains. Due to steric constraints, a functional eh1-like motif is
expected to be outside the DNA-binding domain. Indeed, previously
identified functional sequences [–] were all found outside this
domain. It was concluded that these false positives were not functional
sequences.

The model's performance was compared to that of EasyPred server
[]. EasyPred was trained with the same set of 20 functional
sequences. It predicted all sequences identified by Copley [] and
Yaklichkin et al. [] as functional. This is not surprising, since they
used similar prediction methods and online resources. Although
EasyPred correctly predicted functionality of all experimental
sequences, it gave 35% false positives among random sequences. This
is compared to 20% obtained with the method presented here. About
93% of scoring terms used in this method agreed with corresponding
terms in EasyPred scoring matrix. In addition, this model is simpler
since it uses 14 weight coefficients, compared to 160 in EasyPred
matrix.

A ROC plot was used to further evaluate the model's performance
. In the plot, a sensitivity increase corresponds to a
specificity decrease. The sensitivity is the fraction of correctly scored
known positives (true positive rate or TPR). The specificity is 1- FPR,
where FPR (false positive rate) is the fraction of incorrectly scored
known negatives.

The closer the ROC curve comes to the y-axis and to the top of the
plot, the more accurate the model is. An ideal model would give TPR
= 1 and FPR = 0. The optimal threshold, which maximizes both the
model's sensitivity and specificity, corresponds to the beginning of the
plateau of the curve. For this model, the optimal threshold was about
FPR = 0.2.

Conclusion
An important problem of determining functionality of peptide
sequences from their amino acids is addressed here. Interactions of
functional eh1-like variants with the WD domain were modeled. A
scoring function was devised and tested on known, predicted, and
randomly generated sequences. The scoring function was able to
discriminate between functional and nonfunctional sequences.
Although it gave about 20% false positive findings, the function
reliably identified nonfunctional sequences. The model was more
successful than an online server in reducing the number of false
positives. At least 91% of sequences previously predicted to be
functional by other bioinformatics methods were identified as
functional using this model.

The strength of the model is its simplicity and effectiveness. One of
the main advantages is that good results can be obtained using modest
computer power and minimal programming skills. The model was
developed using a relatively small number of functional training
sequences. Also, the 3D models of sequences were obtained
computationally, without experimental confirmation. These may have
lead to missing some NI or PI residues and to inaccuracies when
determining the weights. However, the success of the model suggests
that it can be valuable for other short motifs with small number of
experimentally available sequences and structures.

Further studies of selective protein recognition building on this method
are planned. Given the importance of transcriptional regulation, this
study on functionality of eh1-like sequences should facilitate further
research on their transcriptional roles.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Dalafave, Bioinformation 4(6): 229-232 (2009)

The ROC plot showing the performance of the model described in the paper. The curve represents the portion of correctly scored
known positives (true positive rate, TPR) vs. the portion of incorrectly scored known negatives (false positive rate, FPR).

