Background
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the most prevalent neurodegenerative
movement disorder and affects about 1% of the elderly population.
Cell death of midbrain dopaminergic neurons is the key pathological
feature, and clinical symptoms include bradykinesia, tremor and
rigidity among others []. The disease etiology remains largely
unknown although aberrant protein degradation and mitochondrial
dysfunction have been highlighted as probable causes. PD has a much
higher proportion of sporadic cases as compared to familial or
inherited cases. Yet “significant advances in our understanding of PD
have stemmed directly from the study of [those] genes associated with
a small proportion of familial cases” [] and mitochondrial
dysfunction has been implicated as a common pathogenic mechanism
in both familial and sporadic PD. Mitochondrial dysfunction in PD
can occur along three pathogenic pathways []. However for many
PD genes the precise mechanism through which mitochondrial
integrity remains still unknown.Six PD associated genes namely α­
synuclein, Parkin, PINK1 (PTEN­induced putative kinase 1), DJ-1,
LRRK2 (Leucine­rich repeat kinase 2) and HTRA2 (high temperature
requirement protein A2) have been identified to show involvement in
mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress. Intensive work on
mutational studies demonstrated their importance for normal
mitochondrial function []. Of these 6 genes we chose PINK1 for a
study of thymine levels as ample evidence exists that this gene product
is targeted to mitochondria and is located upstream of Parkin in the
pathogenic pathways leading to mitochondrial dysfunction 
[,,]. 
Recessive mutations of PINK1 have caused mitochondrial failure
and an inability of the mitochondrion to cope with oxidative stress.
Maguire Zeiss et al.,[] &amp; Pridgeon et al., 
[] have conducted an
analysis on an inherited form of early-onset PD which has been linked
to mutations in both copies of PINK1. It was also reported that PINK1
phosphorylates tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated protein 1
(TRAP1), and in turn TRAP1 prevents oxidative stress by preventing
mitochondria from releasing cytochrome c ­­­ a crucial step in cell
death. Such mutational studies seek functional insights by implicating
genes and proposing models of PD pathways. However it may also be
useful to study those genes from a wider perspective by performing a
comparison of sequence analysis across different organisms. PD gene
studies have sought to identify possible loci of implicated genes, to
understand gene function through deletions, knock­out mutations and
other studies. However to the best of our knowledge no study on
sequence analysis of PD genes comparing nucleotide differences
across different organisms has been carried out. This is important as
besides site specific or targeted gene mutations, naturally differing
levels of certain nucleotides may affect hydrophobicity of proteins
when compared across differing organisms. This provides a possible
reason as to why certain proteins are more likely to be unstable despite
the fact that no disease causing mutations or hereditary disease causes
can be identified. Here we use a macro approach to PD mechanisms
by focusing on PINK1 mRNA sequences to compare the differing
distribution of thymine content across species in an attempt to identify
protein instability due to the loss of hydrophobic residues.

Methodology
Dataset
PINK1 mRNA sequences in FASTA format for Homo sapiens (Hs),
Pan troglodytes (Pt), Bos taurus (Bt), Mus musculus (Mm), Macaca
mulatta (Mmu), Gallus gallus (Gg), Danio rerio (Dr) and
Caenorhabditis elegans (Ce) are taken from NCBI Genbank [].
The total number of bases in the mRNA sequence for each organism is
listed in Table 1 (see ).

The frames 1, 2 and 3 represent the 5'-3' mRNA sequences and frames
4, 6 and 5 are antisense strand. Each mRNA sequence is read in six
different frames and the number of XTX occurrences in each frame is
counted (i.e., Thymine nucleotide 2 in the second position of the
codons is considered the beginning of frame 1.The next two immediate
nucleotides 3 and 4 are considered the beginnings of frames 2 and 3
respectively. The antisense strand nucleotides of 2, 3 and 4 are
considered frames 4, 6 and 5, respectively). The number of XTX
occurrences for each frame is subsequently expressed as a fraction of
the total number of codons for all six frames. This procedure is
repeated for all 8 organisms and the results shown in . The
proportion of XTX content thus obtained for each of the eight
organisms for all six frames is plotted and shown in .

Discussion
It is observed that for frame 1 the thymine content is lower than 27%
in all species studied here except for Bos taurus which has reached the
expected genome wide thymine content level of 27% []. The
coding frames of mRNA sequences contain a greater amount of
thymine in frame 1 than frames 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 (except for
Caenorhabditis elegans). Frames 3 and 5 have similar fractions of
XTX for Homo sapiens, Pan trogdolytes, Bos taurus and Mus
musculus, except Macaca mulatta, Gallus gallus, Danio rerio and
Caenorhabditis elegans. However, frames 2 and 6 show inconsistent
fractions of thymine as seen in .

As highlighted above, the thymine content in Frame 1 and Frame 4 of
the PINK1 mRNA sequence in Homo sapiens is lesser than that of Bos
taurus. Therefore, the coding frames of these mRNA sequences are
more hydrophilic and may be more likely to contribute to impaired
protein activity whereas the hydrophobicity is maintained in the
corresponding coding frames of Bos taurus. From , for Homo
sapiens, Pan trogdolytes, Mus musculus, Macaca mulatta, Gallus
gallus, Danio rerio and Caenorhabditis elegans, we also noticed that
almost all frame 1 coding mRNA sequences code for more hydrophilic
residues, which increases exposure to water and thus contributes to
protein instability.

A recent study [] has reported that hydrophobic interactions
comprise the dominant force in most biochemical reactions which take
place in water. Carbon is the main element which contributes to this
interaction. This study also analyzed the carbon content at the protein
functional sites of PINK1 which prefer to have 31.44% of total carbon
along the chain. The PINK1 amino acid sequence in Homo sapiens
seems to be less stable in comparison to that of Bos taurus. They
suggested that the first 267 amino acids are hydrophilic and therefore
do not contribute to protein stability as they lack the required carbon
content. However in Bos taurus the hydrophobicity is maintained
within this range of 267 amino acids. From our results and their
findings, we suggest that the PINK1 protein loses large hydrophobic
residues due to low thymine content in Homo sapiens rendering it
more hydrophilic and thus susceptible to losing its stability and
activity. This shows that mutations to the genetic sequence might have
occurred suggesting evolutionary changes.

As a factor to balance the thymine content and distribution of LHR,
more numbers of small hydrophobic residues (SHR) such as glycine,
alanine, proline and cysteine are found in the PINK1 mRNA
sequences. With the addition of these residues, the length of protein
sequences also increases. This is the reason why the length of animal
coding mRNA sequence increases and in turn protein length increases
[]. We expect that these genes and corresponding longer mRNA
sequence of proteins contain low thymine content

The statistical distribution of hydrophobic residues along the protein
chains and its implications to protein folding and evolution were
reported by White and Jacobs in 1990[]. They tested for
randomness of hydrophobic residues in proteins but only on a limited
number of sequences. They suggested that the folding of proteins into
compact structures may be much more permissive with less sequence
specificity than previously thought and that the clusters of
hydrophobic residues along chains which are revealed by
hydrophobicity plots are a natural consequence of a random
distribution. Currently most of the protein sequences of several model
organisms are available for a more thorough understanding which we
have carried out here. White and Jacobs in 1993[] further argued
that the distribution of hydrophobic residues along a sequence cannot
be distinguished from that expected for a random distribution and
suggested that functional proteins may have originated from random
sequences.

Conclusion
Our study strongly suggests that coding frames of mRNA sequences
for Homo sapiens are closely associated with Pan troglodytes, Mus
musculus, Macaca mulatta and Gallus gallus. The Homo sapiens
coding frame 1 of the mRNA sequence in PINK1 has a thymine
distribution of only 25% which is less than the random percentage of
27%. As introduced, the XTX thymine codons are responsible for
coding LHRs in proteins. This thymine that has one extra methyl
group compared to its RNA Globular proteins is expected to follow the
27% distribution profile. A protein’s stability, function and interaction
with other proteins are primarily determined by LHRs. Thus, tracing a
protein’s hydrophobicity via the thymine content levels can serve as a
useful tool in identifying the coding frames of mRNA sequences that
might contribute to diseases.

Large numbers of hydrophilic residues are found among seven of the
eight organisms analyzed. This is especially true of Homo sapiens.
Any reduction of hydrophilic amino acid residues or addition of
hydrophobic residues can increase the functional activity of PINK1.
Therefore, adding more thymine at appropriate places in mRNA or in
the gene will improve the amount of hydrophobic residues which
could contribute to better biological activity, and defects in the
disease­causing sequence could be eradicated. Applying such a
strategy for PINK1 might prevent mitochondrial dysfunction and
oxidative stress.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Anandagopu et al, Bioinformation 4(10): 452-455 (2010)

The fraction of thymine (XTX) in the coding frames of PINK1 mRNA sequences in eight different species found in Table 2 (see
).

