Background
Neurodegenerative disorders are characterized by progressive 
loss of structure or function of neurons leading to neuronal 
death, and are frequently hereditary []. Neurodegenerative 
diseases include a variety of progressive disorders that result in 
cognitive and/or motor deterioration. It is thought that a 
combination of progressive neuronal loss and neuronal 
dysfunction underlies neurodegeneration and some of these 
common neurodegenerative disorders include Alzheimer׳s 
disease (AD), Parkinson׳s disease (PD), Huntington׳s Diseases 
(HD) and few others. It is thought that a combination of 
progressive neuronal loss and neuronal dysfunction underlies 
neurodegeneration []. Apoptosis has recently been implicated 
as a possible mechanism for neuronal death in 
neurodegenerative diseases []. Inhibition of apoptosis may be 
effective in the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases. 
However, the inhibitors of apoptosis must be selective enough 
to avoid blocking normal apoptosis. Much still remains to be 
elucidated about the specific pathways that intervene in 
neurodegeneration and neuroprotection [].

Caspases form a unique class of cysteine aspartate-specific 
proteases according to their substrate specificities and 
biological functions [,
]. Caspases are proteolytic in nature 
and key executioners of apoptosis []. Excessive neuronal 
apoptosis leads to a variety of diseases such as stroke,
Alzheimer׳s disease, Huntington׳s disease and Parkinson׳s 
disease [,
]. The caspase family consists of cysteine proteases 
that cleave the peptide bond after an aspartic acid in their 
substrates. They are classified as inflammatory and apoptotic 
caspases based on their function and prodomain structure. 
Caspases can be classified into two broad categories firstly, 
initiator caspases (caspase-2, caspase-8, caspase-9, and caspase-
10) and secondly effector caspases (caspase-3, caspase-6, and 
caspase-7). Initiator caspases generally act in early stages of a 
proteolytic cascade whereas effector caspases act downstream 
and are involved in the cleavage of specific cellular proteins 
[]. 
The search for effective caspase inhibitors as possible 
therapeutic agents is an important area for the treatment of 
neurodegenerative disorders [,
].

AD is the most common form of dementia among the elderly 
population. It represents the fourth cause of death in 
industrialized countries and it is estimated that, by 2050, more 
than 100 million people worldwide will suffer from AD 
[]. 
The caspases have been detected in brains of the patients 
suffering with AD. In fact, caspases-1, -2, -3, - 5, -6, -7, -8 and -9 
have all been detected to be transcriptional elevated in AD 
[]. 
PD and AD are known to be associated with 
neuroinflammation and the presence of activated microglia [,
]. Inflammation and activated microglia are implicated in the 
neuronal death and loss occurring in infectious, ischemic, 
traumatic, and neurodegenerative diseases []. The activation 
of caspase-8 in inflamed microglia prevents their death by 
necroptosis, and thus, caspase-8 inhibitors may protect neurons 
in the inflamed brain by selectively killing activated microglia 
[]. Huntington's disease (HD) and dentatorubral 
pallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA), have been shown to be 
caused by the expansion of CAG repeats [,
]. The CAG 
repeats are located in the coding regions of the respective 
responsible genes and are translated into polyglutamine. 
Previously it has been reported that activated caspase-8 was 
present within insoluble fractions of HD brains, further 
supporting the idea that caspase-8 is recruited to aggregates 
and is subsequently activated [].

The medicinal use of natural products―compounds that are 
derived from natural sources such as plants, animals or 
micro-organisms―precedes recorded human history probably 
by thousands of years. The past few years, however, have 
seen a renewed interest in the use of natural compounds and, 
more importantly, their role as a basis for drug development 
[].

Methodology
Protein preparation:
The crystal structure of caspase-8 was extracted from protein 
data bank (PDB ID: 1QTN). The structure was refined by 
removing the heteroatoms and water molecules. The 
minimization was performed by using a CHARMm force field 
[] 
with Dependent Dielectric implicit solvent model along 
and conjugates gradient method.

Ligand preparation:
The 3D structure of natural compounds with known anti-neuro 
degenerative properties were retrieved from pubchem 
compounds database. These compounds include Bilobalide 
(pubchem id: 12308750, Quercetin (pubchem id: 5280343), 
EGCG (pubchem id: 65064), Resveratrol (pubchem id:445154),
Curcumin (pubchem id: 969516), Huperzine A (pubchem id: 
5912039), Rosmarinic acid (pubchem id: 5281792), Luteolin 
(pubchem id: 5280445), Apigenin (pubchem id: 5280443) and 
Berberine (pubchem id: 2353). Further the compounds were 
refined for correct protonation.

Validation:
Before conducting molecular docking, validation was 
performed, in which the peptide inhibitor present within the 
active site of the crystal structure of caspase-8 was extracted. 
This inhibitor was subjected to re-dock within the active site of 
caspase-8 using Autodock 4.2 []. The orientation of the crystal 
and redocked confirmation of inhibitor was compared with that 
obtained from Protein Data Bank, PDB ID: 1QTN.

Molecular docking:
All the selected compounds were docked into each of the 
energy minimized modeled enzyme-structures using 
Autodock4.2 []. For the compounds, charges of the Gasteiger 
type were assigned. The MMFF94 force field was used for 
energy minimization of ligand molecules. Non-polar hydrogen 
atoms were merged, and rotatable bonds were defined. 
Docking calculations were carried out on the protein models. 
Essential hydrogen atoms, Kollman charges, and solvation 
parameters were added with the aid of AutoDock tools. 
Affinity (grid) maps of 60×60×60 Å grid points and 0.375 Å 
spacing were generated using the Autogrid program. 
AutoDock parameter set and distance-dependent dielectric 
functions were used in the calculation of the Van der Waals and 
the electrostatic terms, respectively. Docking simulations were 
performed using the Lamarckian genetic algorithm (LGA). The 
docking parameters set to perform each docking experiment 
was derived from 10 different runs that were set to terminate 
after a maximum of 2500000 energy evaluations, elitism of 1, 
mutation rate 0.02, cross-over rate of 0.8, local search rate of 
0.06. The population size was set to 150. The best run 
coordinates of the compounds with enzyme were visualized 
and analyzed through Pymol for analysis of their mode of 
interaction with binding site residues.

Result &amp; Discussions
Caspases (cysteine-dependent aspartate-specific proteases) 
belong to the group of cysteine proteases. Caspases are synthesized 
as inactive pro-enzymes that are converted during apoptosis into 
active proteases by autoactivation or by amplification cascade 
through a highly regulated process []. 
In such a caspase cascade, initiator caspases (such as caspase 8) 
activate so-called effector caspases (such as caspase 3 or 6), 
which are responsible for the cleavage of various cellular proteins, 
leading to apoptotic death []. 
The prime objective of the present study was to identify the binding 
potential of some natural compounds with previously reported 
anti-neurodegenerative properties against caspase-8, a common 
therapeutic target involved in multi-neurodegenerative disorders 
using molecular docking approach. Here in this study we have performed 
in silico approach to identify natural compounds having the potential 
of being a best possible drug candidate against caspase-8. No docking 
program could reproduce the experimentally determined binding modes in 
a satisfactory manner if is used in the default parameter settings. 
Validation of the size and center of the coordinates of the grid box 
is the first step in molecular docking. Validation of the protocol and 
the size and center of the coordinates of the grid was carried out in 
order to ensure that ligands bind to the binding pocket in the correct 
conformation. For this purpose the peptide inhibitor présent within the 
active site of crystallized structure of CASPASE-8 was redocked into its 
respective binding site. Re-docked inhibitor was found to interact with 
the same amino acids of the active site as was in the crystal structure. 
The RMSD of all atoms between these two conformations was found to be 
1.6610Å; indicating that the protocol set for molecular docking is accurate 
and faithfully reproduces the crystallographic complex with a high degree 
of similarity. The orientation of the crystallized and re-docked tetra 
peptide inhibitor (ACE-IETD-ALDEHYDE) is shown in .

Molecular docking simulations were used to investigate possible 
binding modes of selected natural compounds within the active site 
of caspase-8. Several plausible binding modes were detected and were 
ranked on the basis of their binding free energy. It was revealed 
that Rosmarinic acid and curcumin were capable of binding within 
the binding site of caspase-8 with higher affinity as compare to 
their other compounds. Rosmarinic acid is a polyphenol antioxidant 
carboxylic acid existing in many Lamiaceae herbs possesses several 
biological activities like antioxidant, antibacterial, anticancer, 
anti-inflammatory, antiviral, and neuroprotective effects 
[,
]. Previous studies on 
curcumin suggest that it may be useful for the treatment of a 
number of diseases, such as cancer, cystic fibrosis, inflammatory 
diseases as well as neural disorders []. 
For instance, Rosmarinic acid and curcumin were found to bind within 
the active site of caspase-8 with binding free energy of -7.10 Kcal/mol 
and -7.08 Kcal/mol respectively that was higher than other compounds which 
binds within the range of 5.67-6.18 Kcal/mol. Further the binding 
efficacy of Rosmarinic acid and curcumin were compared with know 
tetrapeptide inhibitor (ACE-IETD-ALDEHYDE) of caspase-8. It was found that 
this peptide inhibitor of caspase-8 interacts with binding free energy 
of -8.07 kcal/mol within the activesite of caspase-8. The binding efficacy 
of our finally selected natural compounds (Rosmarinic acid and curcumin) 
was comparable to their peptide counterpart. The binding mode of Rosmarinic acid and 
curcumin within the active site of caspase-8 is shown in 
( &amp; ). 
 (see supplementary material) illustrates the 
binding score of all the compounds used in this study against 
caspase-8. In the present study, all the compounds were found 
to interact mainly through ten amino acid residues R258, R260, 
N261, G262, T263, H317, A359 and C360 (). The role of 
Arg 258 is conspicuous in the structure of caspase 8 as the large 
protrusion that sticks out in the top-middle of the active site 
cleft []. This residue was also very much involved in the 
positioning of compounds within the active site of caspase-8. 
Interaction of all the compounds against caspase-8 was 
observed to be dominated by both hydrogen bonds as well as 
hydrophobic interactions. Hence, the present study reveals that 
Rosmarinic acid and curcumin are efficient inhibitor of caspase-
8 in terms of amino acid interaction and Autodock binding free energy

Conclusion
This study explores the molecular interactions of some selected 
natural compounds with caspase-8. However, these 
compounds were selected on the basis of their anti-neuro 
degenerative properties reported earlier. Both hydrogen bonds 
as well as hydrophobic interactions were found to play an 
important role during interaction of all these natural 
compounds to caspase-8. Out of all the selected compounds, 
Rosmarinic acid and curcumin were found to be the best potent 
inhibitors of Caspase-8 in terms of binding energy, which were 
calculated as -7.10 Kcal/mol and -7.08 Kcal/mol, respectively. 
Such information may open new prospects in the use of natural 
compounds and their derivatives as a potential drug candidate 
against caspase-8 for treatment of neurodegenerative disorders. 
Further experimental studies need to be performed to validate 
these data. Though, it can be safely stated that Rosmarinic acid 
and curcumin are efficient inhibitor of caspase-8.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors are thankful to Integral University, Lucknow, India for 
providing necessary facilities to conduct the study and one of 
the authors (K. Ahmad) is thankful to UGC, New Delhi for 
granting Maulana Azad National Fellowship.

Citation:Ahmad et al, Bioinformation 10(4): 191-195 (2014)

Binding mode of crystallized (red) and redocked 
(green) tetra peptide inhibitor within the active site of caspase-
8. The RMSD of all atoms between these two conformations is 
1.6610Å.

Binding mode of Rosmarinic acid within the active site of caspase-8.

Binding mode of curcumin within the active site of caspase-8.

