Background
Arthrobacter is a ubiquitous soil-dwelling eubacterium 
[]. They are also
found in extreme environments, such as deep subsurface soils, arctic sea
and radioactive waste tanks. They display exceptional nutritional
versatility, and are proficient in using a wide range of compounds as
carbon source and many of the species are potential bioremediation agents.
They are competent enough to biodegrade serious environmental pollutants
like endothal, nicotine, 2, 4-D, nitroglycerine, phenolic mixtures and
atrazine containing herbicides []. 
The genus Arthrobacter is characterized
by aerobic, high GC, gram positive bacteria categorized into the class
Actinobacteria, order Actinomycetales, and family Micrococcaceae 
[]. Of
the many species of Arthrobacter, the complete genome sequence of three
species had been published. These rich biological pools of data offer an
important opportunity for comparing Arthrobacter species, both at the
genomic as well as genic level, as an entirely new insight into organismal
biology and gene expression is presented by comparative studies. In recent
years, the depth and width of pathway molecular network interaction data
made available through pathway informatics databases like KEGG 
[],
BioCyc, MetaCyc [] and other such endeavours have paved the way for
comparing organisms, not only at the whole genome level but also across
the core biochemical and biophysical metabolic pathways. Metabolic
pathways contain important information on the function of organisms. Indepth
analysis of gene sequences involved in major metabolic pathways
provides an insight about the evolutionary process and comparative
analysis of metabolic pathways among species is an effective means of
obtaining information about the functional relation of organisms 
[]. A
striking feature of metabolism is the similarity of the basic metabolic
pathways even among vastly different species []. These striking
similarities in metabolism are most likely the result of the high efficiency
of these pathways, and of their early appearance in evolutionary history 
[]
[]. 
Two such important pathways are the hexose breakdown via EMP
pathway of glycolysis and metabolism of amino acids.

Glycolysis is thought to be the archetype of a universal metabolic pathway
that occurs, with variations, in nearly all organisms, aerobic and anaerobic
alike. The wide occurrence of glycolysis indicates that it is one of the
earliest known metabolic pathways []. The metabolism of amino acids
also follows a common outline in large number of organisms, the
differences being in their mode of regulation. Amino acid metabolism, in
fact, is an assemblage of multitude of pathways that are primarily
concerned with the biosynthesis and degradation of the twenty important
amino acids participating universally in protein biosynthesis. A
comparative account of these two important metabolic pathways, namely
glycolysis and amino acid metabolism, alongside whole genome
comparison of an organism is supposed to provide us with a better
understanding about the characteristics of closely related organisms.

The three strains of the genus Arthrobacter which are included in our study
are Arthrobacter aurescens TC1, Arthrobacter chlorophenolicus A6 and
Arthrobacter sp. FB24. Arthrobacter aurescens TC1 is an aerobic Grampositive
originally isolated from soil at a South Dakota atrazine herbicide
spill site. It has the ability to grow on a wide variety of carbon compounds
and to catabolize a variety of xenobiotics, such as glyphosate, methyl tertbutyl
ether, 2, 4- dichlorophenoxyacetate (2, 4-D), nicotine, 4-nitrophenol,
dimethyl silanediol, fluorene, phthalate, nitroglycerine and various striazine
compounds [] 
[].

Arthrobacter chlorophenolicus A6 is an aerobic gram positive isolated
from soil at Fort Collins, Colorado that can degrade phenolic mixtures
containing phenol, chlorophenol and nitrophenol []. 
Arthrobacter sp.FB24 is a non-sporulating, aerobic, mesophile isolated from chromate and
xylene enriched soils capable of degrading hydrocarbons and is radiation
resistant []. A comparative genomic study of these three species at the
level of metabolic pathways was performed to obtain a better insight about
the similarities and dissimilarities in characteristics such as codon usage,
gene expression, evolutionary divergence and nature of selection in these
closely related species of Arthrobacter.

Methodology
The complete genome sequence of the three strains of the genus
Arthrobacter, namely, Arthrobacter sp. FB24 (NCBI/RefSeq: NC_008537;
NC_008538; NC_008539; NC_008541), Arthrobacter chlorophenolicus
A6 (NCBI/RefSeq: NC_011879; NC_011881; NC_011886) and
Arthrobacter aurescens TC1 (NCBI/RefSeq: NC_008711; NC_008712;
NC_008713) were downloaded from the Integrated Microbial Genomes
website http://www.img.jgi.doe.gov 
[]. The nucleotide sequences
encoding the information for the production of proteins and enzymes
involved in amino acid metabolism pathways and hexose degradation by
EMP pathway of glycolysis were sorted out using references from pathway
metabolic information database KEGG [] and MetaCyc 
[]. The genome
sequence of all the three Arthrobacter strains was scanned to isolate the
different nucleotide sequences coding for the different tRNAs, proteins and
enzymes involved in the biosynthesis and degradation of the standard
amino acids along with the enzymes involved in the breakdown of hexose
via EMP pathway.

We started off with basic local alignment of the individual gene sequences
using the web based local alignment tool BLASTn 
[] to find out the
percentage of identity of the concerned gene sequences in the three
Arthrobacter species. We then calculated the effective number of codons
(ENc or Nc) as per Wright [], which is a measure of synonymous codon
usage bias, for each nucleotide sequence encoding enzymes of the amino
acid metabolism and EMP pathway. For calculating Nc at first (F caret)
was calculated for each synonymous group: (See ) 
where p represents the proportion of usage of a codon i within its
synonymous group of size j, and the total usage of the synonymous group.
The average for synonymous group of same size (i.e., 2, 4 and 6), and Nc
is calculated as: (See )

Further, the frequency of guanine and cytosine at the synonymous third
position of codon, known as GC3 content was calculated using CodonW.
Correspondence analysis was also carried out for nucleotide sequences to
investigate the major trend in relative synonymous codon usage (RSCU).
A commonly used and well-accepted measure for calculating the
expression levels of gene sequences known as the Codon Adaptation Index
or CAI was then calculated using the method proposed by Sharp and Li
[] 
but with an improved implementation proposed by Xia 
[]. In order
to obtain an insight about the evolutionary divergence of the gene
sequences of the three different Arthrobacter species together with the
nature of the selection forces acting on them, we calculated the
synonymous and non-synonymous substitution rates of the glycolysis and
amino acid metabolism pathway gene sequences. Multiple sequence
alignment was carried out using ClustalX [] for all the genes involved in
glycolysis, together with a number of genes involved in amino acid
metabolism and a few randomly selected genes from the genome of the
three different species of Arthrobacter. The curated alignment data files
were used as input for the program DnaSP [] to calculate the DNA
sequence variation at synonymous (Ks) and nonsynonymous sites (Ka)
[].

Results and Discussion
An important property of the genetic code is its degeneracy due to the
presence of synonymous codons; some synonymous codons are used more
abundantly or ‘preferred’. A well accepted parameter for studying codon
bias is the Nc index []. It is a simple measure of overall codon bias and
ranges from twenty to sixty one where 20 is the value obtained when only
one codon is used for each amino acid (i.e., the codon bias is maximum)
and 61 is the value obtained when all synonymous codon for each amino
acid are equally used (i.e., no codon bias). The whole genome of
Arthrobacter aurescens TC1, Arthrobacter chlorophenolicus A6 and
Arthrobacter sp. FB24 contains 4794, 4745 and 4606 gene sequences
respectively. The Nc score of all the genes in the genome of Arthrobacter
aurescens TC1, Arthrobacter chlorophenolicus A6 and Arthrobacter sp.
FB24 ranges between 21.81-61, 20-61 and 20-61 respectively (Table 1 see
). An overwhelming 71% of Arthrobacter
aurescens TC1 genes have effective codon numbers or Nc well above 40,
whereas in comparison Arthrobacter chlorophenolicus A6 and
Arthrobacter sp. FB24 have only 21% and 37% of its genes with effective
codon numbers above 40. The mean whole genome Nc of Arthrobacter
aurescens TC1 is substantially elevated at 43.54 compared to that of
Arthrobacter chlorophenolicus A6 and Arthrobacter sp. FB24, which is
37.62 and 39.16 respectively. This signifies that the codon degeneracy is
significantly high or alternatively, codon bias is minimal in Arthrobacter
aurescens TC1. When we consider the Nc of the genes involved in amino
acid metabolism of Arthrobacter aurescens TC1, the Nc scale ranges from
26.7 to 58.8 with an average of 40.43 which is quite high compared to that
of the remaining two strains ― Arthrobacter chlorophenolicus A6 and
Arthrobacter sp. FB24. In the case of Arthrobacter chlorophenolicus A6,
the Nc of the genes involved in amino acid metabolism ranges between
25.7-50.2 with an average of 34.33, which is the lowest among the three
strains. Arthrobacter sp. FB24 has a mean Nc of 35.58 for the genes
responsible for amino acid metabolism with the scale ranging from 25.2 to
54.1. Thus, Arthrobacter chlorophenolicus A6 genes exhibit higher codon
bias both in terms of the genome and the metabolic pathways of amino
acid metabolism.

The study of the codon usage pattern of the genes concerned with
glycolysis shows comparable results where Arthrobacter chlorophenolicus
A6 genes have a higher codon bias compared to the other two strains. In
Arthrobacter chlorophenolicus A6 the genes coding for the different
enzymes of the glycolytic pathway have Nc ranging between 27-39.8 with
an average of 33.11. Arthrobacter aurescens TC1, on the contrary, has the
least codon bias with Nc of the glycolysis pathway genes ranging between
29.1 to 54.7 with a mean of 40.15. Arthrobacter sp. FB24 glycolytic
pathway genes reveal moderate codon bias with Nc ranging between 28.4-
45.7 with an average of 36.51. Arthrobacter chlorophenolicus A6, thus,
consistently exhibited a higher codon bias not only in terms of the whole
genome but also in terms of the two important energy metabolic pathways
of amino acid metabolism and glycolysis.

A plot of Nc values versus GC3 known as Nc plot 
[] 
() was
constructed. This plot clearly indicates the anti-correlation between Nc and
GC3 for all the three species. Arthrobacter aurescens TC1 genes were
found to be scattered in comparison to the other two species which forms a
common cluster.

As for the synonymous codon usage bias, the Codon Adaptation Index
(CAI) was estimated for the gene sequences related to glycolysis pathways,
the amino acid metabolism pathways and a few randomly selected genes
from the genome. Codon Adaptation Index is a well-accepted parameter
for studying the expressivity of a gene and assesses the extent to which the
selection has been effective in moulding the pattern of codon usage. The
Codon Adaptation Index ranges from 0 to 1.0, with higher CAI values
signifying that the gene of concern has a higher degree of expressivity
[]. 
Codon adaptation index has also been successfully used in predicting
m-RNA expression in different microorganisms [] 
[]. Our study
reveals that Arthrobacter chlorophenolicus A6 has the highest average
CAI values both in terms of glycolysis and amino acid metabolism,
whereas Arthrobacter aurescens TC1 and Arthrobacter sp. FB24 have
quite similar codon adaptation index values with respect to each other.

A comprehensive and comparative study of the ten glycolytic pathway
genes from the three different Arthrobacter species (Table 3 see
) shows that for all the gene sequences starting
from glucokinase (EC 2.7.1.2), the enzyme which intiates glycolysis by
converting glucose to glucose-6-phosphate, till pyruvate kinase (EC
2.7.1.40), the enzyme which catalyzes the last step of glycolysis converting
phosphoenol pyruvate to pyruvate, Arthrobacter aurescens TC1
consistently displays a high Nc value in comparison with Arthrobacter sp.
FB24 and Arthrobacter chlorophenolicus A6. In the case of the enzymes
glucokinase, glucose-6-phosphate isomerase, triose phosphate isomerase,
phosphoglycerate kinase and phosphoglycerate mutase, Arthrobacter
aurescens TC1 has Nc value well above 40, whereas at the same time the
other two species have Nc values well below 40, pointing towards some
degree of codon bias. For the remaining enzymes too, the Nc values for
Arthrobacter aurescens TC1 are comparatively higher than the other two
species. The codon adaptation index (CAI) values were found to be
negatively correlated with the Nc value where enzyme gene sequences
with higher Nc has relatively low CAI values (r = -0.8514 for glycolytic
pathway genes and r = -0.9 for amino acid metabolism pathway genes;
p&gt;&gt;0.01). We did not observe any sort of deviation from this consistent
trend and for each individual cluster of enzymes, gene sequences with the
highest codon bias or low Nc has the highest expression level or CAI
value. The CAI values for all the gene sequences with Nc values below 30
was significantly high zeroing near to 0.8 to 0.9. Arthrobacter
chlorophenolicus A6 exhibited an overall elevated range of CAI values for
all the glycolytic enzyme genes. Apart from glucokinase, one or a few of
all the remaining enzyme gene sequences exhibited CAI values above 0.8.
Arthrobacter aurescens TC1 and Arthrobacter sp. FB24 on the other hand,
had moderate CAI values. The multifunctional enzyme enolase (EC
4.2.1.11) exhibited significantly high CAI values and low Nc values (27 ―
29.2) in all the three species concerned.

A comprehensive and comparative study of the gene sequences involved in
the amino acid metabolism pathways reveals the participation of more than
three hundred gene sequences (data not shown). Arthrobacter aurescens
TC1, Arthrobacter sp. FB24 and Arthrobacter chlorophenolicus A6 have
364, 324 and 308 genes respectively coding for the different enzymes and
RNA involved in the whole host of synthesis and breakdown pathways
collectively termed as amino acid metabolism. The codon usage index Nc
for amino acid metabolism pathway gene sequences range between 26.7-
58.8, 25.7-50.2 and 25.2-54.1 for Arthrobacter aurescens TC1,
Arthrobacter chlorophenolicus A6 and Arthrobacter sp. FB24
respectively. A thorough analysis reveals that in Arthrobacter aurescens
TC1, a very high percentage (51.10%) of all the genes involved in amino
acid metabolism have Nc values in excess of 40. In contrast, only 7.76%
and 13.37% of Arthrobacter chlorophenolicus A6 and Arthrobacter sp.
FB24 amino acid metabolism genes respectively have Nc values above 40.
The relation between Nc and CAI of the genes involved in amino acid
metabolism given in Table 2 shows that gene sequences with Nc score less
than 40 uniformly return a higher average CAI values compared to the
sequences with Nc score of more than 40 in all the three species in
question.

In this study, our observation confirms that the Nc value had an inverse
relationship with the CAI value. A high Nc value indicates low codon bias
and vice versa (r = -0.8514 for glycolytic pathway genes and r = -0.9 for
amino acid metabolism pathway genes; p&gt;&gt;0.01). We observed that the
gene sequences with high Nc score displayed lower expression level (CAI
values).

We have picked up 13 different gene sequences (Table 4 see
) involved in the various aspects of amino acid
metabolism, like alanine and aspartate metabolism, aromatic amino acid
biosynthesis, histidine and methionine metabolism and lysine biosynthesis,
to name a few. Based on their functional similarity and comparable lengths
of the sequences from the three concerned species we clustered them.
Table 4 displays a picture similar to what we have observed previously in
the case of glycolysis. Arthrobacter aurescens TC1 have higher Nc values
for all its gene sequences compared to the other two species. Arthrobacter
chlorophenolicus A6 on the other hand, have Nc values that are quite low.
In this respect mention must be made of the gene sequence coding for
methionyl-tRNA formyltranferase (EC 2.1.2.9) in Arthrobacter aurescens
TC1, since it has an overwhelming high Nc score of nearly 52. Relatively
higher Nc values were also observed in the case of nucleotide sequences
coding for phosphoserine phosphatase SerB, chorismate synthase and
arginosuccinate lyase in Arthrobacter aurescens TC1. In all these cases,
the other two organisms Arthrobacter sp. FB24 and Arthrobacter
chlorophenolicus lagged way behind in terms of their Nc scores. Those
gene sequences of Arthrobacter aurescens TC1 which have Nc values less
than 40 showed somewhat similarity with the Nc score of the same gene
sequences found in the other two organisms. To substantiate this point we
might mention that argininosuccinate synthase, 4-aminobutyrate
aminotransferase apoenzyme, cysteine synthase, cystathionine gamma
lyase and dihydropicolinate reductase displayed Nc values less than 40.

To further understand the implications of codon usage variation and to
detect and quantify synonymous codon usage pattern, we performed a
multivariate statistical analysis (correspondence analysis or CA) as codon
usage intrinsically is multivariate in nature. CA is a statistical technique
widely employed to detect and quantify synonymous codon usage pattern.
In this technique high dimensional data are reduced to a limited number of
variables or axes and the most prominent axes contributing to the codon
usage variation among the gene sequences is considered 
[].
Correspondence analysis on relative synonymous codon usage (RSCU) of
the genes involved in glycolysis and amino acid metabolism was
performed. We also performed correspondence analysis on RSCU of the
entire genomes of the three Arthrobacter species. Whole genome
correspondence analysis of the three Arthrobacter species involving 14142
genes revealed a major trend of codon usage variation and in comparison
to all the axes generated, the first and second axis accounted respectively
for 13.34% and 4.91% of the total variation. They turn out to be highest
among all the axes. The position of the genes along the first and second
major axes when plotted, a significant positive correlation between the
positions of the genes on the first axis with the level of expression was
observed. Whereas the highly expressed genes appeared on the right hand
side, the lowly expressed genes were found to be present on the left hand
side of the plot. It was also observed that Arthrobacter aurescens genes
formed a large cluster towards the left hand side of the plot compared to
the other two species. This would suggest that a relatively larger number of
Arthrobacter aurescens genes are lowly expressed. This result is consistent
with what we have observed previously in the case of glycolysis and amino
acid metabolism pathways. These low expression levels of individual
genes may be well compensated for by the presence of a large number of
gene duplicates or paralogs which might additively contribute to the
expression level of a gene product in Arthrobacter aurescens TC1.
Correspondence analysis on RSCU of the genes involved in glycolysis of
the three Arthrobacter species involving 56 genes detected a single major
trend of codon usage variation and in comparison to all the axes generated
the first and second axis accounted for 23.15% and 10.72% of the total
variation respectively, which are highest among all the axes. Plotting the
first and second axes data for glycolysis in Fig. 2 we find that the first axis
significantly correlates with the expression level of the gene (r = -0.85).
We observed that the sequences on the left hand side of the plot are highly
expressed compared to the sequences on the right hand side of the plot.
Consistent with our findings related to Nc, we also observed that
Arthrobacter chlorophenolicus has the maximum number of genes which
are potentially highly expressed. A majority of the gene sequences of
Arthrobacter sp. FB24 and Arthrobacter chlorophenolicus A6 have a
tendency to cluster or stay together whether they are highly expressed or
not showing similarity in terms of expression level; but in the case of
Arthrobacter aurescens TC1, it was seen that only those genes that have
low Nc or higher expression level clustered along with the genes of the
other two species. The remaining genes of Arthrobacter aurescens that are
relatively lowly expressed and have higher Nc were found in a rather
dispersed manner altogether in a separate quadrant (). This
observation further validates our previous finding that among the three
species of Arthrobacter included in our study, Arthrobacter aurescens TC1
has a codon usage pattern quite distinct from its other two relatives and
that a large number of Arthrobacter aurescens TC1 orthologs have low
codon bias.

Correspondence analysis of the 998 genes involved in amino acid
metabolism in the three Arthrobacter species shows highest variation along
the first axis (17.48%) and the variation along the second axis is 7.27%.
Major trend of codon usage variation for the three species in question is
observed in Figure 3. The first axis corresponds to the expression level of
the genes and gene sequences on the right hand side of the plot are
potentially highly expressed compared to the sequences on the left hand
side (r = -0.9). Arthrobacter aurescens TC1 have comparatively lesser
number of genes on the right hand side of the plot compared to
Arthrobacter chlorophenolicus A6 and Arthrobacter sp. FB24. Here also
we find that the CA on RSCU pattern of Arthrobacter aurescens TC1 is
rather dissimilar in comparison to its other two relatives.

So it is quite evident that rather unusual codon usage pattern of
Arthrobacter aurescens TC1 has percolated all the way to very important
and primordial metabolic pathways like glycolysis and amino acid
metabolism. It is generally agreed upon that metabolic pathways which are
universal and core to an organism's survival would normally have tight
and conserved gene sequences even in distantly related individuals. We
observe that Arthrobacter aurescens TC1 which is supposed to be very
close to the other two Arthrobacter strains reveal significant dissimilarities
at the level of glycolysis and amino acid metabolism gene sequences.

To study the evolutionary divergence of the gene sequences involved in
amino acid biosynthesis, the synonymous (Ks) and non-synonymous (Ka)
nucleotide substitution rates were taken into account. Mutation and
selection are known to have varied effects on synonymous and nonsynonymous
substitution rates, hence estimation of these rates are crucial
in deciphering the mechanisms of molecular sequence evolution 
[]. A
substitution is defined as synonymous if it does not change the amino-acid
sequence, otherwise it is called non-synonymous. A change in an amino
acid due to a non-synonymous nucleotide change is called a replacement.
Software tool DnaSP was employed to estimate Ka (the number of nonsynonymous
substitutions per non-synonymous site), and Ks (the number
of synonymous substitutions per synonymous site) for all the gene
sequences involved in glycolysis, 13 genes from amino acid metabolic
pathways and nearly 20 genes were selected randomly spanning the entire
genome of all the three species of Arthrobacter. The selected gene
sequences were involved in energy metabolism, DNA replication, cell wall
biosynthesis and xenobiotic degradation to name a few. The Ks or
synonymous substitution rates was found to be directly correlated with
codon usage pattern signifying the fact that gene sequences with low codon
bias or high Nc score show higher rate of synonymous or silent substitution
(r=0.7). The gene sequences representing the genome cluster concur to this
fact. Arthrobacter aurescens TC1 sequences were found to have
significantly elevated synonymous substitution rates pointing to its low
codon bias. When we consider the glycolytic pathway, apart from enolase,
all the other nucleotide sequences coding for the enzymes of glycolysis in
Arthrobacter aurescens TC1 have relatively higher rate of synonymous
substitution. This too is consistent with what we have observed in the
codon usage nature of the glycolytic genes in the three different
Arthrobacter species. Finally, we studied the previously selected bunch of
gene sequences involved in different synthetic and catabolic pathways
constituting the amino acid metabolism. Arthrobacter aurescens TC1
displayed high Ks values. We found that quite a few gene sequences have
synonymous substitution rates well above unity. The Ks versus Nc plots
() clearly depict the positive correlation between Nc and
synonymous nucleotide substitution rate in the three Arthrobacter species.

The synonymous substitution rate of Arthrobacter aurescens TC1 certainly
reveals the organism's low codon bias to cope with the continued selective
pressure of nature. In contrast, A. chlorophenolicus A6 genes are more
subtle with respect to their Ks rates which corroborate the higher
expression level of majority of the gene sequences.

The non-synonymous nucleotide substitution rate (Ka) was found to be low
for gene sequences with effective codon numbers or Nc below 40. But
sequences with Nc scores beyond 40 have high Ka values suggesting
amino acid altering changes (). With a large number of gene
sequences having Nc beyond 40, Arthrobacter aurescens TC1 have higher
Ks to counter significant changes at the protein level. The presence of a
large number of gene duplicates or paralogs in the genome of Arthrobacter
aurescens TC1 compared to the other strains ensure maintenance of form
and functionality in the extreme environments where Arthrobacter
aurescens TC1 is known to thrive.

Conclusion
A significantly different style of codon usage pattern was consistently
observed in the case of Arthrobacter aurescens TC1. This was confirmed
by our comprehensive study of parameters like Nc, codon adaptation index
along with the synonymous and non-synonymous nucleotide substitution
rate. The BLAST results (data not shown) of gene sequences of certain
selected enzymes/proteins spanning the entire genome of the three
Arthrobacter species in question comprehensively reveals the fact that the
similarity between Arthrobacter chlorophenolicus A6 and Arthrobacter sp.
FB24 is high. Arthrobacter aurescens TC1 on the other hand have low
similarity with the other two species and the genomic heterogeneity has
percolated to a certain degree even in conserved energy metabolism
pathways like glycolysis and amino acid metabolism. The gene sequences
of the enzymes/proteins included in the BLAST analysis were alcohol
dehydrogenase GroES domain protein, amidase, aspartate ammonia-lyase,
chorismate mutase, diacylglycerol kinase catalytic subunit, gluconate
transporter, glutaminase, glycosyl transferase group 1, histidinol-phosphate
aminotransferase, ketose-bisphosphate aldolase class-II and
phosphoribosylglycinamide formyltransferase to name a few. From this, it
may be finally concluded that Arthrobacter aurescens TC1 has evolved
separately or due to selection pressure it is quite distant from the other two
Arthrobacter species, where highly conserved pathways like glycolysis and
amino acid metabolism ensemble shows distinct codon usage differences.
Arthrobacter chlorophenolicus A6 and Arthrobacter sp. FB24 however
share a lot of similarity in terms of their codon usage style and
evolutionary divergence of nucleotide sequences.

Supplementary material
Data 1
One of the authors SM would like to acknowledge the Department of
Biotechnology, Government of India for its two grants BT/BI/004/93 and
BT/BI/019/99.

Citation:Pal et al, Bioinformation 5(10): 446-454 (2011)

Nc plot of amino acid metabolism pathway (AAM) and glycolysis pathway (Gly) genes of 
Arthrobacter aurescens TC1 (􀂋), A.
chlorophenolicus A6 (􀂄) and Arthrobacter sp. FB24 (􀁓).

Correspondence analysis on RSCU of glycolysis of three species of 
Arthrobacter. TC1= A. aurescens TC1; A6 = A. chlorophenolicus A6; FB24
= Arthrobacter sp. FB24.

Correspondence analysis on RSCU of amino acid metabolism of three species 
of Arthrobacter. TC1= A. aurescens TC1; A6 = A.
chlorophenolicus A6; FB24 = Arthrobacter sp. FB24.

The rate of synonymous nucleotide substitution (Ks) of selected 
genes from the whole genome (Genome) [4a], glycolysis (Gly) [4b] and amino
acid metabolism (AAM) [4c] of Arthrobacter sp. FB24 (=FB24),
A. chlorophenolicus A6 (=A6) and A. aurescens TC1 (=TC1) plotted against the mean
Nc of the respective pathways.

The rate of non-synonymous nucleotide substitution (Ka) of selected genes 
from the whole genome (Genome) [5a], glycolysis (Gly) [5b] and
amino acid metabolism (AAM) [5c] of Arthrobacter sp. FB24 (=FB24), 
A. chlorophenolicus A6 (=A6) and A. aurescens TC1 (=TC1) plotted against the
mean Nc of the respective pathways.

