Background
Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) represents the most abundant class of
genetic variations in the human genome. Non-synonymous SNPs (nsSNPs),
which cause the changes of amino acid residues in proteins, account for almost
half of all DNA mutations and may be functionally neutral or deleterious 
[,
].
The disease causing variations may cause deleterious effects on proteins. They
may inactivate the functional sites or interaction sites of enzymes or impact the
folding of proteins and may significantly destabilize the stability of proteins, or
change the solubility of proteins [,
]. So these variations represent critical
molecular markers for dissecting the biological mechanisms underlying
complex diseases, as well as for Pharmacogenomic studies. Such markers have
become very popular for all kinds of genetic analysis, and disease like cancer.
Cancer suppressors and Oncogenes play an important role in the control of the
cell cycle, apoptosis, angiogenesis, and development processes that are under
pressure of purifying selection []. Therefore, protein-damaging mutations in
cancer-related genes would be expected to be under the pressure of purifying
selection and thus to have a lower population frequency. The relationships
between the genotype and phenotype of nsSNPs in tumor suppressor genes
have received a plenty of research attentions because of their prevalence in the
drug responses and cancer therapy [,
]. Tumor suppressor genes are normal
genes that slow down cell division, repair DNA mistakes, and apoptosis or
programmed cell death. Non synonymous SNPs (nsSNPs) are the main cause
of these mutations and to mining nsSNPs from cancer related genes considered
as a laborious process and done only by site directed mutagenesis experiments
and gene knock out/knock in experiments. Recently, some groups have tried to
evaluate the deleterious nsSNPs based on 3-dimensional (3D) structure
information of proteins and homology based SIFT (Sorting Intolerant from
Tolerant) algorithm (http://sift.jcvi.org/, 
[]). Some other methods based on site
entropy calculations, relative stability changes were also developed for
predicting deleterious nsSNPs []. These methods based on protein sequence
have been demonstrated that the accuracy is the same as other methods using
tertiary structure information. However, the theoretical prediction methods for
deleterious nsSNPs are still in its infancy since the 3D structural information of
most proteins are still unavailable. To overcome these, our primary challenge is
that how to accurately predict those potentially deleterious nsSNPs. Deleterious
nsSNPs prediction for the tumor suppressor genes has received great focus
from experimental researchers. In this work, we suggest a computational model
used to predict deleterious nsSNPs in tumor suppressor genes. Evolutionary
conservation features and changes in the physicochemical properties of amino
acid are used as parameters for ANN. The method predicts deleterious SNPs
from a dbSNP id or a SNP sequence. Both fasta and raw formats are acceptable
as input sequence. ANN verification is done for predicted deleterious SNPs. A
database search is also included for known deleterious nsSNPs.

Methodology
Datasets
Details regarding the genes were collected from NCBI entrez genes
(
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene). The protein sequences were obtained
from Swiss-Prot database (
http://expasy.org/sprot/) and NCBI human genome
protein sequence (
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). The databases of Swiss-Prot
sequence variants provide full information of classification about nsSNPs
associated with the given gene. The variants are labeled as disease,
polymorphism or unclassified. The training dataset contains 
deleterious variations dataset: 68 nsSNPs were collected from seven tumor suppressor
genes (see ). Deleterious variations were
labeled as disease in the Swiss-Prot database and

neutral variations dataset: 124 nsSNPs were collected from seven tumor suppressor genes 
().

Neutral variations were labeled as disease in the Swiss-Prot database. A test
dataset was also prepared by the same method for analyzing the performance
measures of our prediction system.

Evolutionary conservation feature
Evolutionary conservation score check whether a substitution of any other
amino acid is tolerant or intolerant in every position especially the variant site
[]. 
The evolutionary conservation features are calculated by Position specific
score in matrix value (PSSM) for amino acid substitution, multiple sequence
alignment of the protein sequence with its homologous sequence, compute the
frequency of variant at the mutation site and pseudo-counts and Dirichlet
distribution densities are used due to inadequate sequence diversity. Position
specific value of residue type calculation is given in 
.

Multiple sequence alignment of the homologous sequence is calculated by
ClustalW (
http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalw2/). Due to the limitation
of homologous sequences, a normal score calculation is not efficient. So,
pseudo count and Dirichlet mixture methods are adapted to increase the results.
For pseudo-count calculation, the numbers of pseudo sequences are added with
similar properties of the available sequences. Dirichlet distribution is often
used as the prior distribution in Bayesian analysis of data where each
observation is one of the limited set of possibilities 
[]. Our case, 20 amino
acids constitute a set and each Dirichlet density describes a particular residue
composition that might occur at an alignment column. The Dirichlet mixture is
a linear combination of these densities with multiplying coefficient of their
occurrence []. 
Therefore, sum of the coefficient is given as 1. A set of
densities and mixture coefficients has been fitted to the BLOCKS database of
protein multiple alignments. In this work, we have used component Dirichlet
mixture derived from BLOCKS database (http://blocks.fhcrc.org/, 
[]).

Physicochemical properties
In this study many properties of amino acids are considered and filtered out
based on the relevance of our prediction. Finally, following physicochemical
properties of amino acid sequence are considered. They are, changes in
hydrophobicity, free energy of transfer from inside to outside of a globular
protein, hybridization potential based on free energy of transfer (kcal/mol),
hydrophilicity, optimized matching hydrophobicity, molecular weight of amino
acids, average flexibility index and solvent accessibility of amino acids. From
the parameters input matrix are created for the prediction system.

ANN prediction
The prediction of the deleterious SNP is carried out with an adaptive artificial
neural network (ANN). In this study, ANN was chosen as the tool for the
prediction, as they are powerful classifiers whose ability to cope with complex
data and their potential for modeling data of high non-linearity 
[,
]. We
used a feed forward Multi Layer Perceptron (MLP), with four layers. From the
selected twelve parameters (four evolutionary conservation and eight physicchemical
properties), undoubtedly the input layer of the neural network must
have twelve neurons. In the hidden layers, various combinations were tried out
and we got the best results as eight neurons in the first hidden layer and four in
the second hidden layer, by trial and error. The output layer has one neuron.
Back propagation algorithm was used to train the network. Training can be
performed with use of several optimization schemes and there is access to exact
partial derivatives of network outputs versus its inputs. The learning rate and
momentum were initially set at 0.2 and 0.8 respectively. The training dataset is
divided into two subsets. First subset (70% of the total training data) was used
to train the neural network. Second subset was used to stop the training process
once the model had reached the performance conditions like optimal error
value thus preventing over training. Once the training is stopped, the efficiency
of the model was further assessed by presenting another data subset, to
determine the performance for unseen cases which were not involved in the
training process []. 
Optimization was done by repeating the process with
different data subsets. The optimization needs nearly 500 epochs for this
network.

Discussion
A vast numbers of SNPs are seen in human chromosome and presently there
are more than a million SNPs in dbSNP that can be screened for association
with diseases. We used a good dataset for human nsSNP predictions from the
Swiss-Prot annotated ‘disease’ and ‘polymorphism’ variants of known human
proteins. Variants annotated neutral polymorphisms may have an unknown
association with disease. For prediction type problems, a prediction can be
either positive or negative. These counts falls into four categories: true positive
(TP), false positive (FP), true negative (TN) and false negative (FN). These
contents are used to calculate sensitivity (true positive rates), specificity (1-
false positive rates) and total prediction accuracy for assessment of the
prediction system. A test dataset is prepared which consists of protein
sequences, obtained from the Swiss-Prot database and NCBI human genome
protein sequence. The mean specificity (95.85%), sensitivity (97.40%) and
accuracy (96.25%) of the ANN prediction were obtained from the test results.
Using novel combination of parameters, the ANN predictor performs well in
terms of specificity, sensitivity and accuracy. When compared with the
previous theoretical studies, Ridge Partial Least Square (RPLS) and Linear
Discriminant Analysis (LDA), our method has better performance measures.
The prediction accuracy of the RPLS model and LDA model are 84.8% and
80.4% respectively []. 
This improvement in accuracy of our model is due to
combined feature framework into an ANN predictor. Our method uses amino
acid sequence properties and other theoretical prediction methods for
deleterious nsSNP prediction requires 3D structural information of proteins,
but 3D structural information of most of the proteins are still unavailable.

We investigated the role of two parameter sets (evolutionary features and
physicochemical properties) in the ANN predictor. A measure of how each
feature set contributes to the prediction performance of ANN can be calculated
in the course of training. We estimated the relative importance of two feature
sets in prediction. For that purpose, input layer of the ANN was redesigned by
removing one feature set from the input vector field. The performance of the
ANN was evaluated by giving a new feature vector after omitting a feature set
whose performance being evaluated. Same dataset is used for training and
evaluation of the ANN. The test result is compared with mean accuracy of the
ANN predictor. The accuracy decreased to 23.4% and 17.5% from the original
ANN predictor's accuracy. Physicochemical attributes gives the information
sufficient to identify the amino acid substitution involved. But results are better
when evolutionary features and physicochemical properties are combined
together. This demonstrates that each parameter in the feature set makes a
significant positive contribution to the overall performance of the model,
though predictability. Thus, any good predictor of result which relies upon a
single set characteristic will fall short of the accuracy obtainable by a
combination of characteristics.

The system architecture of the prediction system is given in 
. In this
system, a database search and a prediction model are incorporated. Two forms
of input (dbSNP id and amino acid sequence) are acceptable for the prediction
system. For dbSNP id inputs, database search is carried out. For an amino acid
sequence input (in fasta / raw format), after removing the invalid characters,
calculate the parameters. These values are given as the input of the ANN
predictor. The prediction model is deployed into a web server, which finds
utility of nsSNP identification and it may leads to tumor studies for scientific
community. The database search and a prediction models are incorporated in
the web server. The interface of the deleterious nsSNP web server is shown in
.

Conclusion
The functional analysis of deleterious nsSNPs may offer lead to understand the
genetic differences between individuals and disease states. It eventually
improves the medical treatments by allowing the prediction of genetically
related disease risk and drug response. Therefore, computational prediction of
deleterious nsSNPs gives great importance and promotes the development of
pharmacogenetics and pharmacogenomics. At protein structure level, in-vitro
experimental data have shown that the deleterious nsSNPs might contribute to
changes of the structure, stability and function of proteins. At amino acid
sequence level, the deleterious nsSNPs might be expected to produce a least
conservative replacement. In this work, parameters of position-specific features
and scale of amino acid change were calculated and is used to predict
deleterious nsSNPs in the tumor suppressor genes using ANN, combining
physicochemical properties of amino acids. Available genes and nsSNPs are
included in the database search.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Chandra et al, Bioinformation 6(1): 41-44 (2011)

Organizational chart of deleterious nsSNP prediction system. The
input to the method is in two forms: dbSNP id and amino acid sequence. If the
sequence is dbSNP id, search the database for similar entries. The output
contains general information of the gene and nsSNP, information on the variant
and sequence based information.

The interface for prediction and results. SNP_IDs are available at
NCBI site.

