Background
For a long time, the central issue of evolutionary genomics was to find
out the adaptive strategy of nucleic acid molecules towards different
optimal growth temperatures (Topt). Heat-loving microorganisms are
called thermophiles. They are the most studied extremophiles and are
generally found in hot springs and deep sea vents. Thermophiles thrive
at temperatures that would scald or kill most other types of life.
Regular thermophiles are those that thrive at temperatures greater than
55° C. Hyperthermophiles grow optimally at above 80° C. On the
other hand, microorganisms grow below 55° C are known as
mesophiles.

All macromolecules such as DNA and RNA must be stable and
functional at higher growth temperature. Thermal adaptation
hypothesis argues in favor of a positive correlation between G+C
content and growth temperature as G: C pair is thermally more stable
than A: T pair []. However, some authors have failed to make any
correlation between GC composition and temperature [,
]. Later,
Musto et al. [] claimed that positive correlation between genomic GC
content and optimal growth temperature exists in most of the bacterial
families they studied; nevertheless strong criticisms were raised
against their work [,].

Codon-anticodon interaction and its influence on codon usage strategy at high temperature
Considering the above contradicting views, we have proposed a new
hypothesis [] after considering the influence of codon-anticodon
interaction on the correlation between genomic G+C content and Topt.
Our hypothesis is based on the fact that codon-anticodon interaction
energy has a selective advantage on codon usage strategy for better
translational efficiency at high growth temperature. We showed that
the frequency of WWC and WWG groups of codons increase
significantly, whereas the frequency of SSC and SSG groups of
codons decrease significantly with growth temperature (W=A or T and
S=G or C). It was previously noted [] that occurrence of side-by-side
GC base pairs are avoided in the highly expressed genes of yeast and
such an avoidance has been interpreted just to eliminate very sticky
codon-anticodon interaction so that translation can proceed smoothly.
For thermophilic bacteria we proposed that the preference of WWC
and WWG groups of codons at high growth temperature might be due
to the maintenance of codon-anticodon interaction energy at an
intermediate strength since no side-by-side GC base pairing occurs for
these two codon groups. On the other hand, strong avoidance for GCrich
codon groups (SSC and SSG) at high growth temperature might
be due to the influence of side-by-side GC base pairing to exceed the
codon-anticodon interaction energy from intermediate strength. Thus
codon-anticodon interactions might have some influence on the
relationship between the genomic G+C content and Topt to optimize
translational efficiency. On the contrary, structural RNAs, being nonprotein-
coding genes, codon-anticodon interaction is in no way related
to these genes and hence at high growth temperature structural RNA
molecules might increase their GC composition in order to have
greater thermal stability [].

Methodology
The complete genome sequences have been downloaded from
ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/genomes and the coding sequences were
extracted. Homologous sequences between Thermus thermophilus and
Deinococcus radiodurans were identified by gapped BLASTP
program [] using cutoff of e=1.0 x 10-3. Hits less than 50% identity
were removed from the dataset. The maximum gap size allowed
between a pair of sequences is 5%. All hypothetical coding sequences,
as well as genes having less than 100 codons were ignored. Gene pairs
having size difference lower than or equal to 30 codons were retained.
Finally 382 gene pairs were extracted for data analyses. The protein
secondary structures corresponding to each of the sequences were
downloaded from Consensus Secondary Structure Prediction Program
available at http://npsa-pbil.ibcp.fr []. CodonW 1.4.2 (J. Peden, 200;
http://www.molbiol.ox.ac.uk/cu/) was used to calculate the DNA base
compositions and codon frequencies.

For each native mRNA sequence, 50 random sequences were
generated using the randomization protocol, CodonShuffle [], which
randomly permutes synonymous codon in codon degenerate family
preserving the exact count of each codon and order of encoded amino
acids as in the original transcript. The mfold program (available at
http://www.bioinfo.rpi.edu/applications/mfold/old/rna/form4.cgi) was
used to predict free-folding energies for mRNA sequences. The
difference in the free energy of folding between the native sequence
and the corresponding random sequences was measured by the Zscore,
given by Z-score = {Enative - &lt;Erandom&gt;}/STD, where Enative
denotes the folding free energy of native mRNA sequence, &lt;Erandom&gt;
denotes the average folding free energy over a large number of
randomized sequences generated from the native sequence and STD
denotes its standard deviation.

The nucleotide sequence of the protein secondary structure conserved
between the two species was considered for further analysis of mRNA
free folding energy contributed from each of the three protein
secondary structures. To measure the contribution of each protein
secondary structures on Z-score, only the fraction of the transcript
encoding for a particular protein secondary structure was randomized
and then the Z-score for the whole transcript was calculated. In this
way, we measured Zaperiodic, Zhelix and Zstrand for part randomization of
aperiodic, helix and strand structures respectively. Students t test was
used to evaluate the significance of the pair-wise differences in the
three protein secondary structures.

Results and Discussion
Implications of higher GC-level towards genomic thermal adaptation
To investigate whether a higher GC-level of thermophilic prokaryotes
increases the thermodynamic stability of mRNA secondary structure,
we analyzed the Bacillaceae family where highest correlation
coefficient in the regression analysis between genomic G+C content
and optimal growth temperature has been observed by Musto et al.[].
We observed significant positive correlation (r=0.682, p&lt;0.05), similar
to the observation made by Musto et al [], between average G+C
content of genes available for each species and optimal growth
temperature. Higher G+C content at higher growth temperature
implies that mRNA molecules of thermophilic genomes should have
higher stability than the mesophilic genomes. In order to examine the
above hypothesis, we have measured the correlation coefficient
between average G+C content against average free folding energy
(ΔG) (used to measure mRNA stability for a predicted RNA secondary
structure [] (http://dinamelt.bioinfo.rpi.edu/zipfold.php) of mRNA
molecules. A positive correlation was observed (r=0.42, p&lt;0.05)
between average G+C content and average free folding energy (ΔG) of
mRNA molecules. Here, increase of ΔG with the increase in G+C
levels indicates that higher G+C levels at higher growth temperature
does not have any role to stabilize mRNA secondary structure. Similar
trend has been observed when we performed the analysis by taking
homologous set of genes from the species belong to Bacillaceae
family (data not shown). Although, in the thermodynamic stability
hypothesis it was presumed that a higher G+C level should represent
more stable mRNA, but the present analysis suggest some other
functional relevance of higher G+C level at higher temperature. A
negative correlation between mRNA stability and GC3 content for
Drosophila melanogaster gene sequences has been observed by
Stenoien and Stephan []. These authors proposed an alternative
explanation that guanine and cytosine might be confined to the
unpaired regions of secondary structural elements and thus not a
contributor to the stability of mRNA molecule. However, for rRNA
molecule, Wang and Hickey [] observed that increased G+C content
of thermophiles is almost entirely concentrated within the doublestranded
stem regions. But the biochemical basis for the increase of
G+C content with optimal growth temperature for mRNA molecule in
the Bacillaceae family remains to be elucidated. It is well known that
stable secondary structures play a role in transcriptional regulation
[] and translation [] and the stability of mRNA secondary
structure would have the greatest inhibitory effect on translation [,
]. The decrease in stability of mRNA secondary structure at high
growth temperature might therefore be related to an increase in
translation rates.

Does variation in GC content always influence mRNA secondary
structural stability at high growth temperature? A case study between
T. thermophilus and D. radiodurans homologous genes.
Mesophile-thermophile pair may differ in other environmental
variables, apart from the optimal growth temperature. We have taken
two closely related organisms namely, Thermus thermophilus and
Deinococcus radiodurans where phylogenetic relationships are
expected to be fairly accurate[,,]. Optimal growth
temperature of Deinococcus radiodurans and Thermus thermophilus
are 30°C and 73°C respectively (www.dsmz.de). We have retrieved
382 homologous gene pairs (Table 1 in )
from these two related eubacteria. It is known that translational speed
is not uniform along the coding sequence and varies according to the
secondary structure of the encoded proteins; hence analyses of the
coding sequences corresponding to the secondary structures of the
encoded proteins are very much effective in extracting biological
information of a gene.

The genomic GC levels of thermophilic bacteria, Thermus
thermophilus is 69.4% and that of its mesophilic counterpart
Deinococcus radiodurans is 66.6%. The same trend has been observed in the average levels of GC and GC3 of all the homologous gene pairs
as well as in coding regions corresponding to different protein
secondary structures of T. thermophilus and D. radiodurans genes
(Table 1 in ).

We then calculated the cumulative frequency of all GC-rich codons,
i.e. all SSS codons (S= G or C) in the coding sequences corresponding
to the three protein secondary structures of T. thermophilus and D.
radiodurans genes. It is interesting to note that the cumulative
frequency of GC-rich codons in the coding sequences of three proteins
secondary structures are not always higher in T. thermophilus than D.
radiodurans (). In the aperiodic structures, GC-rich codons
are under-represented in T. thermophilus as compared to D.
radiodurans, whereas it does not vary significantly in the helix
structure. On the other hand, GC-rich codons are preferred in T.
thermophilus compared to D. radiodurans in the strand structure. It is
well-established that the reduction in the frequency of GC-rich codons
is the consequence to avoid the formation of side-by-side GC base
pairs in the codon‐anticodon interaction for better translational
efficiency [,]. Thus, our results suggest that the genomic segments
coding for aperiodic structure of the encoded protein are responsible
for better translational efficiency at high growth temperature.

It was suggested that potential secondary structures of single-stranded
mRNA may play important functional roles in translational regulation
and gene expression by modulating synonymous codon usage [,,,]. Here, we have determined the stability of mRNA secondary
structure by the minimization of the free energy of the molecule.
Z-score for T. thermophilus genes has been observed to be
significantly lower than D. radiodurans (. It indicates that of
mRNA secondary structure of T. thermophilus is more stable than that
of D. radiodurans. We then compared the contributions of mRNA
regions corresponding to three protein secondary structures (Zaperiodic,
Zhelix and Zstrand) between T. thermophilus and D. radiodurans
homologous gene pairs (). Zaperiodic is significantly higher in T.
thermophilus genes than that of D. radiodurans. No significant
difference in Zhelix values has been observed between T. thermophilus
and D. radiodurans homologous gene pairs. However, significantly
lower Zstrand has been observed for T. thermophilus compared to D.
radiodurans. These results further suggest that the higher folding
stability of mRNA secondary structure of T. thermophilus compared to
D. radiodurans is contributed from the coding sequences related to the
strand structure of protein. Higher Z-score of T. thermophilus
contributed from the aperiodic structure indicates that, these segments
of coding sequence are actually responsible for better translational
efficiency [].

Conclusions
Prokaryotic genomes have wide compositional range where GC levels
vary approximately from 25% to 75%. It is a long standing debate
whether the wide variation in base composition is under selection in
prokaryotes. Based on the analysis of genomic GC levels and optimal
growth temperature in prokaryotic families, Musto et al. [] claimed
that optimal growth temperature influences the variation of GC levels
in prokaryotes. However, this aspect remains very controversial [,,]. The selective advantage of higher GC level is the thermodynamic
stability required by DNA, RNA and proteins at high growth
temperature []. However it is also important to analyze if higher GC
levels are always associated with higher thermodynamic stability of
mRNA molecules at high growth temperature.

Here, we observed that GC content is significantly higher in T.
thermophilus as compared to D. radiodurans in all the protein
secondary structures. However nucleotide sequences corresponding to
all three protein secondary structures do not have the same influence
on mRNA secondary structural stability. Nucleotide sequences
corresponding only to the strand structure have the stabilizing
influence on mRNA secondary structure. On the other hand, there is a
strong tendency to avoid the formation of side-by-side GC-base pair in
the aperiodic structure which suggests its important contribution to
maintain translational efficiency. In our previous article [], we argued
that an organism's strategy to survive at high temperature is linked to
its ability to produce sufficient amounts of functional gene products
under the extreme thermal condition. This might be achieved through a
combination of adaptive changes at several molecular levels in a
proper synchronization, i.e., stability at one molecular level cannot be
achieved at the cost of other biological processes(s). Thus all these
analyses lead us to conclude that the positive outcome has always been
to maximize biological function at high growth temperature.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors are thankful to Department of Biotechnology, Government of
India for financial help.

Citation:Basak et al, Bioinformation 4(8): 352-356 (2010)

Frequency of SSS codons in three protein secondary structures of T. thermophilus and D. radiodurans

Energy log Z-score for T. thermophilus and D. radiodurans

Contribution of mRNA regions corresponding to three protein secondary structures on energy log Z-score for T. thermophilus and D.
radiodurans.

