Background:
Protein phosphorylation/dephosphorylation through protein
kinases is a key regulatory mechanism in modulating the
activation of intracellular responses to extracellular information
[]. The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascades are
known to be one of the major phosphorylation pathways which
function downstream of sensors/receptors and regulate cellular
responses to external and endogenous stimuli []. A typical
MAPK cascade consists of three steps: a MAP kinase kinase
kinase (MAPKKK) activates a particular MAP kinase kinase
(MAPKK) through phosphorylation on two serine/threonine
residues in a conserved S/T-X3-5-S/T motif, the activated
MAPKK can in turn phosphorylate a MAPK on threonine and
tyrosine residues within TEY or TDY motif located in the
activation loop (T-loop) between kinase domain VII and VIII
[]. The MAPKs are known to regulate a myriad of
physiological and developmental responses such as cell growth,
cell differentiation, hormone signaling, pathogen infection,
wounding, drought, low temperature, high salinity etc [].
More than 60 MAPKs have been isolated and characterized in
plants, and the analysis of Arabidopsis genome sequences has
revealed the existence of more than 20 MAPK genes [], which
suggests that the MAPK cascades in plant may be quite
complex. Based on the phylogenetic analysis of amino acid
sequence and phosphorylation motif, plant MAPKs have been
grouped into at least four groups (A, B, C, and D) [].
According to amino acid sequences, MAPKs share highly
conserved region over the entire lengths with highest similarity
in the eleven domains that are necessary for the catalytic
function of serine/threonine protein kinases []. Above facts
suggest that MAPKs play crucial roles in plant growth and
development. In order to obtain more information on the
specific structural and regulatory patterns of MAPKs, it is
necessary to isolate and identify more MAPK genes from
different species. Most of the studies on the plant MAPK genes
have been carried out in model plant species such as
Arabidopsis, tobacco and rice. Curcuma longa L. (turmeric) of the
family Zingiberaceae is one of the most important crops with
great medicinal and economic significance. Continuous
domestication of the preferred genotypes coupled with their
exclusive vegetative nature seems to have eroded the genetic
base of these crops and as a result, all of their cultivars available
today are equally susceptible to major biotic and abiotic
stresses. Moreover, turmeric is completely sterile and is
propagated exclusively by vegetative means using rhizome.
Characterization of MAPKs in turmeric can provide lot of
information on the possible mechanism of various stress
responses in asexually reproducing plants. The availability of
12,593 EST sequences from GenBank database of Curcuma longa
provides an opportunity to the characterization of MAPK gene
sequences in turmeric. We describe the identification and
characterization of plant MAPKs in Curcuma longa EST database
using known MAPK sequences.

Methodology:
Protein sequences of reported plant MAPKs were used to query
the Curcuma longa expressed sequence tag (EST) database with
the TBLASTN algorithm []. The complete list of sequences
used as baits includes OsMPK1, OsMPK2, OsMPK3, OsMPK5
and OsMPK7 from rice [], 
AtMPK2, AtMPK3, AtMPK4 and
AtMPK8 from Arabidopsis thaliana 
[], ZmMPK5, ZmMPK6,
ZmMPK7 and ZmSIMK from Zea mays 
[] and MAP kinase gene
TaMPK3 from Triticum aestivum 
[]. All turmeric sequences
used during this work were obtained from Curcuma longa EST
database. We have mined 12,593 EST sequences consisting of
two tissue libraries of 6870 rhizomes (DY395309-DY388440) and
5723 leaves (DY388439-DY382717). The EST sequences were
screened against the UniVec database from NCBI
(
ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/pub/ UniVec/) for detecting vector and
adapter sequences by using the program Cross_Match. CAP3
program was used to assemble the EST sequence into contigs
for creating a non-redundant dataset. The program TBLASTN
was used to perform reverse alignment on Curcuma longa
contigs. All MAPK clusters found in Curcuma database were
translated to obtain their putative protein sequences. The Open
Reading Frames (ORFs) for each searched contig was predicted
using the Expasy Translate Tool
(
bo.expasy.org/tools/dna.html). Protein sequences obtained
were used in a second round of TBLASTN search against the
non-redundant protein database at the National Center for
Biotechnology Information (NCBI) to identify their closest
homologues. Additional domains were detected using the
Prosite (
http://bo.expasy.org/prosite) and Pfam
(
http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Software/Pfam/search.shtml)
prediction programs. Multiple alignments of proteins deduced
and bait sequences were performed using the ClustalX program
[]. The phylogenetic tree was constructed by the neighborjoining
method [] using the NJ algorithm implemented in the
Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software
package version 2.1 with the Poisson correction []. For
construction of the phylogenetic tree the confidence levels for
the nodes were determined with 1000 replications using the
internal branch test [].

Results and Discussion:
Extensive bioinformatics analysis resulted in 4 MAPK
sequences retrieved through TBLASTN alignment of 4035
Curcuma longa contig sequences 
( see supplementary
material). All the four MAPK sequences showed significant hit
(score &gt;500, e-value equal to 0.0) with average length of 367
amino acids and found to have homologous sequences in the
NCBI GenBank database. Genome database search and analysis
was performed to identify members of the MAPK gene family
in many plants including Arabidopsis, rice, poplar and grapevine
[,
,
]. Alignment of the four Curcuma MAPK sequences
with MAPKs from other plants indicated that they contained all
11 conserved sub-domains. The TEY motif was also found
located in the activation loop between kinase domain VII and
VIII. The C-terminus of all the four sequences was also
characterized by the presence of a common docking (CD)
domain that functions as the binding sit of MAPKKs. Domain
scan using the PROSITE and pFAM analysis showed the
presence of MAPK signature domain, ATP binding domain and
serine/threonine protein kinase active site (). This data
confirmed that the four Curcuma contigs sequences belong to
the MAPK family. A phylogenetic tree was constructed by
alignment of the amino acid sequences using the ClustalX
method to investigate the molecular evaluation and
phylogenetic relationship between Curcuma MAPK sequences
and other MAPKs. The phylogenetic tree displayed that the
Curcuma MAPKs were placed in two subgroups (A and C) as
identified earlier for Arabidopsis based on sequence similarity
(). Earlier reports also suggest that MAPK sequences
with TEY signature in their activation loop have been clustered
with their Arabidopsis homologs in the previously defined A, B
and C clades []. CL.CON 2468 and CL.CON 1447 showed
highest similarity with OsMPK5 in group-A. It has been
documented that MAPK members in the group A are
implicated in signaling biotic and abiotic stress responses 
[].
OsMPK5 has been demonstrated to be a key element for
managing defense response against blast disease 
[]. Likewise,
CL.CON 3107 and CL.CON 3756 were placed in the group C
with OsMPK3 and ZmMPK7, which are transcriptionally
regulated by various abiotic stresses []. CL.CON.3756 also
showed highest homology with OsMPK4, as obtained from
BLASTp analysis. This is understood from the fact that both
OsMPK3 and OsMPK4 exhibit 91% amino acid identity even
though located in different chromosomes and are clustered in
the group C. The Curcuma MAPKs in each group showed 99%
amino acid identity with each other. This suggests that they are
meant for either same function or are represented as replicative
forms of the same gene. The Curcuma MAPK sequences
identified in this study belong to the intron-harboring members
with CL.CON 2468 and CL.CON 1447 consisting 4 and 7 introns
in their open reading frames respectively. However, CL.CON
3107 and CL.CON 3756 consisted of only a single intron each
suggesting the occurrence of gene loss among the members of
subgroup C. Two grapevine MAPKs, VvMPK1 and VvMPK2 are
also found to be clustered in subgroup C and possesses single
introns []. Although the physiological function of the
Curcuma MAPK sequences has not yet been investigated, the
high level of homology compared with the known MAPKs
indicate that they may have similar function with OsMPK5,
OsMPK4 and OsMPK3. However, actual function of the
Curcuma MAPKs identified in this study cannot be ascertained
due to the fact that the Curcuma cDNA library that contributed
the Curcuma EST sequences were derived out of the leaf, stem
and root tissue of the plant without being exposed to any stress
conditions. Hence, the MAPKs characterized in this study must
be of constitutive nature.

Conclusion:
Turmeric, also known as the ‘golden spice’, is one of the most
important herbs in tropical and sub-tropical countries and
valued worldwide as a spice, food preservative, and in
traditional medicine. It consisted of about 110 species which are
basically sterile and propagates exclusively by vegetative
means. This indicates that turmeric genotypes may provide
invaluable tools for studying and characterizing various genes
that are expressed in asexually reproducing plant. In the
present study, we identified four Curcuma MAPK sequences
from the EST database of the plant. The predicted amino acid
sequences of the Curcuma MAPKs showed high similarity in the
eleven kinase subdomains that are necessary for the catalytic
function of the serine/threonine protein kinase. Moreover, they
were categorized in subgroup A and C exhibiting high
similarity with MAPK sequences from rice and citing their
involvement in biotic or abiotic stress responses. Further
biochemical and functional analysis of the characterized MAPK
sequences are necessary to establish their physiological role in
Curcuma longa. The analysis will act as a framework for further
dissection of the MAPK signaling network in Curcuma as well
as other asexually reproducing plants.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are grateful to Dr. Manoj Ranjan Nayak, President,
Siksha O Anusandhan University for his encouragement and
support.

Citation:Joshi et al, Bioinformation 7(4): 180-183 (2011)

Domain scan result for Curcuma longa MAPK sequence
CL.CON. 1447. A distinct protein kinase domain was found
with MAP kinase signature sequence, ATP binding site and
serine/threonine protein kinase active site.

Phylogenetic tree of MAPKs from Curcuma longa and
other higher plants. Letters A-D on the right indicates different
groups of MAPKs. The protein sequences of the MAPKs used
for construction of the tree are listed in the GenBank database
under the following accession numbers: OsMPK5 (AF479883),
TaMAPK (ABS11090), AtMPK3 (BAA04866), OsMPK1
(AB183398), ZmMPK5 (AB016802), ZmSIMK (DQ422149),
OsMPK2 (BAC99508), AtMPK4 (AEE82016), NtMAPK4
(BAE46985), ZmMPK7 (DQ295030), OsMPK3 (AAG40581),
AtMPK2 (BAA03536), OsMPK7 (AK099472), AtMPK8
(BAA92222), ZmMPK6 (AY425817).

