Background
Mango, Mangifera indica belongs to the family Anacardiaceae
occupies a pre-eminent place among the various fruit crops
grown in India. It is native to the Indian subcontinent from
where it spread all over the world. Mango, popularly known as
“king of Fruits” is celebrated as National fruit in India and also
in Philippines and Pakistan []. In Tamil Nadu, mango
cultivation occupies nearly 1, 48000.0 ha and its production
reaches 82, 3000 metric tons per annum with its productivity
measuring 5.60 tonnes per hectare (Indian Horticulture
Database, 2010-11). Ever growing market potential for Mango
and its processed products in the market has created a great
demand for its improved and increased cultivation. Several
studies by research institutes have developed a wide
information resource on morphological, geographical and
molecular attributes of mango. Combining such information,
knowledge pool about above mentioned traits of ten popular,
commercially important mango cultivars in Tamil Nadu was
created and entitled as MAGICdb (Mango Genetic stocks
Identification and Characterisation database) by a team of
researchers at TamilNadu Agricultural University. MAGICdb is
the only currently available database that provides a
meaningful integrated data set about mango varieties. In
addition to farmers and breeders, this database can also serve as
a promising reference material for mango processing industries.

Methodology
Database outline, content and source
Data about ten major commercial mango cultivars namely
Alphonso, Bangalora, Kalepad, Himayuddin, Sendura, Mulgoa,
Neelum, Rumani, Banganapalli and, Swarnarekha were
collected from State Horticulture Farm, Kanyakumari
(Longitude 77°32'E and Latitude 8°04'N) and Tenkasi Farmers
holdings in Tirunelveli District (Longitude 77°30'E and Latitude
8°97'N). Incorporated into the database are three categories of
information source namely i) Morphological characters, ii) Fruit
Quality Parameters, and iii) Marker data. Search of the Database
is categorized as Morphological Search, Fruit Quality Search
and Marker Data Search. The morphological data and the fruit
quality data are stored in the MYSQL database and are
connected to the web server. Morphological data table contains
sub divisions such as Tree Character, Bearing Habit, Season of
fruiting, Number of inflorescence/Sq.m, Percentage of
hermaphrodite flower(%), Fruit set percentage(%), Number of
fruits/ tree, Fruit weight (g) and, Yield (Kg/ tree). The fruit
quality data table includes particulars about TSS (°Brix),
Reducing Sugar (%), Non-Reducing Sugar (%), Total Sugar (%)
and, Carotenoidsh (mg/100g) content of the give mango
varieties.

The information available in MAGICdb database are easily
accessible and user friendly to retrieve the data.

Languages and Software's Used
The Server side scripting language used was PHP 5.3.1.
(Hypertext Pre Processor []) and the Data is stored and
retrieved from the database using the MySQL 5.0.8. The user
interface is designed using HTML 5.0 (Hyper Text Markup
Language), JDK 1.5 (Java Development Kit) and CSS 3.0
(Cascading Style Sheet). WAMP Server 2.2 is a Windows web
development environment. It allows us to create web
applications with Apache2, PHP and a MySQL database.
Alongside, PhpMyAdmin allows us to manage easily our
databases.

Database Architecture
The MAGICdb Architecture is done with three layers. The
Topmost layer is the User interface layer or the Presentation
Layer (Web Page) which is done by using HTML and CSS
codings. HTML is a platform independent language that can be
used on any platforms like Windows, Linux and others. Mid
Layer is the Application layer in which PHP Language is
framed as a platform for intermediating between the Web
Browser and MySQL Database. A ‘precise query’ is formulated
in such a way that it returns what the user wants without
superfluous results. To enable precision in a query, an
appropriate set of relational operators, as well as direct access to
the underlying data, must be provided [,
]. MySQL is a data
storage area in which small sections called TABLES. Very
similar to a HTML tables, the MySQL tables consist of rows,
columns and cells. MySQL runs as a server providing multiuser
access to a number of databases. The data sources such as
the morphological characters, fruit quality traits and marker
data are integrated into the database and are arranged
ontologically. These three sub schemas are provided with
further search by means of dropdown menus. The procedure is
simple and is understandable.

Database Schema
The Database schema is as shown in the 

Utility
MAGICdb has been designed in a view to help the breeder and
industrial community for easy access to information on marker
and morphological details of each mango variety. On the other
hand it provides researchers, students and people of all
community with a complete set of data to know about the major
cultivated commercial ten mango cultivars. In addition, a data
on varieties of mango grown all over the world is given in
HTML format. The Google earth plug-in has also been
integrated to provide the users much graphical interface for
gaining information.

The information about the other varieties will also be added in
the days to come.

Citation:Asaithambi et al, Bioinformation 9(16): 838-839 (2013)

Flowchart representing schema of MAGICdb)

