Background
Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) emerged with the promise
of revolutionizing genomics. Although recently it has been
continuously evolving and spreading, it has its share of
limitations and challenges []. One of the essential elements of
the NGS workflow is visualization, allowing researchers to
check sequencing information and result of previous data
analyses. Several NGS viewers, browsers and other visualizing
tools have been designed to address this problem. Developers
of Genevieve [], while getting frequent NGS related projects,
constantly felt the need for a standard viewer for customized
data presentation and a uniform working platform. While
online solutions are in general easy to share and support, they
usually raise security and maintenance issues. Available offline
tools on the other hand fell short of our expectations regarding
easy operation and task-specificity. Therefore authors had
decided to develop a new proprietary SAM/BAM
viewer/browser tool for NGS data presentation. Genoviewer’s
source code is freely available []. GenoViewer, unlike other
genome browser tools like IGV [] or BamView 
[], can display
alignments in color space. This functionality is especially
useful for the development of ABi color space alignment
algorithms. GenoViewer works with the concept of projects -
different alignment and annotation files can be grouped
together and saved for later use. This makes it easy to switch
between different data analysis tasks and work on different
datasets simultaneously. Another interesting functionality is its
configurability, it is easy to define a new theme for the look of
the display and change the visual markers for the different
features.

Methodology
Software engineers used Java (1.6) [] as a uniform language
during the development process, enabling it to run on all
major operation systems. Another major benefit is the support
of reusable codes owing to Java API, for accelerated
development. There is no installation required to run
Genevieve, files just need to be copied to the user's computer.
OS specific starter files were created as well. A clearly
structured workspace system was developed for handling
input and output files. Users can generate a consensus
sequence and a table collecting all mutations. Whenever an
annotation file is available, an annotation table is automatically
created. A dynamic loading system contributes to a very
efficient memory usage, the whole input file is partitioned into
small pieces and when a section is displayed, only the
corresponding file part is loaded into the memory. The internet
community has been involved extensively in the development
process, several test versions were downloaded and it
generated an active forum thread at a NGS forum site 
[].
Genevieve underwent a three level testing system: 1) testing
algorithms written specifically for this project (checking the
basic functionality of the written part in itself and in context of
the whole integrated system); 2) testing by an outsider (usually
someone from different team); 3) testing by a competent
person, a potential user, life science expert of an outsider
academic partner. A flowchart depicting the relations between
the software's components and algorithms is shown in
. 
In order to further improve GenoViewer's functionalities
and features, we opened its code to the wider publicity.

Features
 
shows the general structure of the GenoViewer
window. The page contains four distinct areas: there is the
menu at the top with functions and a toolbar for quick access
to frequently used features; the left side panel with the
workspace and project folder system; the central area for the
alignment procedures; the toolbar at the bottom for additional
functions and information. The software supports the
following file formats: SAM/BAM [], FASTA files for
reference sequences and GFF [] for annotations. The output is
a mutation table in CSV format and the consensus sequence
can be saved as a FASTA file. Read info is displayed in a popup
window by clicking on a specific read. It shows details
about the selected read, including exact position, the alignment
to the reference (if a reference is available), mutations,
mapping quality and various flags in the file marking different
qualities.

The main visualization area can be divided into five rows,
showing the reference and consensus sequences, GFF
annotation raw, and coverage graph and mapped reads. The
scrollable mutation table enables users to study altered
nucleotides by type (SNP, MNP, insertion, deletion) and
coverage. The table also lists the following related information:
type, start and end position, length, reference and read
sequence. GFF files can be loaded for annotation purposes. The
groups and features in a GFF file are shown in the annotation
field as lines and bands, with names written above and
start/stop signs ([/]) discriminating overlapping annotations.
Unique display modes ensure advanced customizability: reads
are displayed as one continuous column or several evenly
distributed columns, nucleotide versus colour coded reads,
symboling turned on or off, etc.

Discussion and future directions
GenoViewer has been launched as a freely modifiable and
personalizable SAM/BAM viewer that can be used for a
variety of NGS related tasks. Developers do not have the
intention to morph it into complex software; it will remain
open for further development and improvement by the wider
scientific society. Potential future features include extended file
handling (e.g. .bed []), extended NGS platform support,
support of alternative alignment formats (ACE, NEXUS, ALN,
PHYLIP etc.), more complex annotation, improved contig
management, sequence and uncovered region search, multiple
alignment of consensus sequences and comparative statistics
tables.

Citation:Laczik et al, Bioinformation 8(2): 107-109 (2012)

The flowchart illustrates the relations between the
software's components.

The viewer has a traditional layout with menus and
toolbar on the top, feedback tray at the bottom, and
workspace/project folder tree, aligned left. Beneath the main
visualization area there is a navigation panel, which makes it
easy to jump through the mutations. Other functions are
accessible through pop-up windows (Mutations table, Go to
position, Edit profiles).

