Background
The 1918 influenza pandemic (also called as “mother of all pandemics”) 
infected more than one quarter of the world's population and claimed 
about 20 to 50 million human lives. The influenza virus slowly turns out to 
be a zoonotic threat and there are 2 main reasons for it. One reason is high 
error rate during genomic replication. The other reason is the segmented 
genome, which facilitates reassortment between different viral strains that 
infect the same cell  []. 
Influenza virus can spread through air and this 
enables the occurrence of pandemic infections.

Swine Flu is a respiratory disease caused by a new strain of the Influenza 
virus type A. The strain is known as H1N1 and is similar to the one found 
in seasonal flu outbreaks, except that it contains a reassorted genetic 
material of birds, humans and pigs. The genetic material of Influenza virus 
contains eight segments of single stranded RNA. Of its 8 segments of 
RNAs, 2 polymerase genes, PB2 and PA, were from the avian virus of 
North American lineage and were introduced into swine populations 
around 1998. The other polymerase gene, PB1, also evolved recently from 
a human seasonal influenza (H3N2) virus around the same year. 
Hemagglutinin (HA), nucleoprotein (NP) and nonstructural (NS) protein 
genes descended directly from the classic swine influenza A virus of North 
American lineage, which can be traced back to the 1918 virus. Originating 
from the Eurasian Swine virus, the remaining 2 genes, neuraminidase (NA) 
and matrix(M), were introduced from birds around 1979 
[].In California, 
2 viral isolates which were genetically similar and was found to contain a 
novel genetic combination of segments from previous swine influenza 
viruses that have circulated in the United States since 1999, genes from 
swine viruses of the Eurasian Lineage and genes from avian influenza 
viruses were isolated from children  suffering from respiratory illness. 
Neither of these children had exposure to swine or to each other, indicating 
that this virus was capable of Human to Human transmission 
[].

In  this  regard  such  a  type  of  H1N1  virus first detected in Mexico in April 
2009 has subsequently spread to other countries. This was originally 
referred to as “swine flu” because laboratory testing showed that many of 
the genes in this new virus were very similar to those viruses infecting pigs 
in North America. It became apparent in the early days of the outbreak that 
the virus can be directly transmitted between humans.

In India, swine flu started around May 2009 from international travelers. 
India's first swine flu death was on August 4th of a girl in Pune. Since then 
it has taken out lot of lives throughout the country. Travel in and out of 
India has remained unaffected at large. Within India travel to Maharashtra 
and Pune city in particular was affected. Though various measures have 
been implemented against the spread of the virus, finding out the genomic 
sequences of different viral isolates and their lineage of origin play a major 
role in total eradication of the illness. Thus in the present study, a 
phylogenetic analysis of the nucleotide sequences of the RNA segments of 
human H1N1 viruses was carried to demonstrate the route map of infection 
to India.

Methodology
Phylogenetic analysis of all eight RNA segments of H1N1 was carried out. 
Nucleotide sequences were downloaded from Influenza Virus Resource, a 
database that integrates information  gathered from the Influenza Genome 
Sequencing project of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
diseases (NIAID) and the Genbank of the NCBI. Only the sequences of the 
strains isolated from  Homo sapiens were taken into consideration. NCBI 
Blast was used to identify the sequence identity. Nearly 500 sequences of 
each segment were used to analyze  the 8 segments. These include the 
nucleotide sequences of polymerases PB1, PB2; hemagglutinin; 
neuraminidase; matrix proteins; nonstructural proteins. The selected 
sequences were aligned using alignment explorer in Mega 4.0 with default 
parameters. Phylogenetic and molecular evolutionary analyses were 
conducted using MEGA version 4. Phylogenetic tree was built by neighbor 
joining method. The total numbers of sequences analyzed were more than 
100.

Discussion
Pigs in North America are been suspected as the “mixing vessel” and these 
pigs thus play a significant role in interspecies transmission of influenza 
viruses  []. 
A novel 2009 human virus, circulating in USA, Europe and 
Asia is known to be a reassorted virus and our studies show that it is these 
viruses that have spread rapidly  across worldwide leading to pandemic 
infections.

Nucleotide sequences of all the 8 segments encoded by the new influenza 
A (H1N1) virus which was pandemic in 2009 were used. Sequences from 
India (especially Bangalore, Hyderabad and Pune) were retrieved from the 
Influenza Virus Resource. Similarity search was performed between these 
sequences and the other sequences from other countries retrieved from the 
Influenza Virus resource database using Blastn. The best matches were 
selected and phylogenetic analysis were done using MEGA version 4. 
Phylogenetic analysis showed that the sequences from Indian isolates 
clustered well with Asian and American countries. The virus is named 
based on the type of surface proteins i.e., Hemagglutinin (segment 4) and 
Neuraminidase (segment 6). Hence analyses of these two proteins are more 
important. The analysis done by Danishuddin et al. (2009) showed that the 
hemagglutinin sequences of two strains from USA and one strain from 
Asia from the 2009 outbreaks clustered with the swine influenza sequences 
from H1N2 subtype recovered from 1999 ­ 2004 outbreaks in USA and the 
segment coding for neuraminidase  gene (NA) of new human virus 
clustered with the swine influenza viruses from Asia and Europe from 
1992 ­ 2007 outbreaks. Our analysis also showed that  hemagglutinin 
sequences from Indian isolates clustered with New York and Mexico 
() and the segment coding neuraminidase clustered with Italy and 
Rome i.e., European countries  (). All these sequences were of 
Swine lineage. Based on the analysis done by Gorman  
[] NP nucleotide 
sequences showed that human and classical swine viruses share a single 
common ancestor and it is estimated to have emerged in 1912 to 1913. Our 
analysis showed that the segment 5 nucleocapsidproteins clustered with the 
Asian countries Singapore, Malaysia, Japan and Taiwan  
(). 
Segment 1 and 3 the polymerase genes clustered well with the European 
country Denmark (&amp;
) while the segment 2 and 7 polymerases 
i.e., the Matrix proteins M1 and M2 clustered with American countries 
(New York and New Mexico)  (&amp;
). The other sequences
clustered with Asian countries such as Malaysia, Singapore, and Japan. On 
analyzing the sequences from Asian countries they were highly similar to 
the sequences of Indian isolates and they were found to have the gene 
segments of the virus originated in Swine of North America. Travelers to 
India who are infected or carriers of swine flu from other countries, due to 
change in climatic conditions and other such factors could have been the 
reason for spread of infections to India.

Conclusion
More accurate rates of evolution and dates of common ancestors can be 
obtained from nucleotide phylogenies. This is because protein evolution is 
dependent on nucleotide evolution and nucleotide sequences contain much 
more information []. 
According to Larry Brilliant, an epidemiologist, we 
are entering into “age of pandemics” wherein outbreaks of infectious 
diseases will become increasingly common. Zoonotic diseases are rising 
rapidly and this is because the habitats of the animals are being destroyed 
and they begin to live more closely than ever before. As a result, we share 
our viruses.  The ability of the viruses to reassort their genes is the main 
reason for the spread of A (H1N1) influenza virus such that the organism 
was viable in changing climatic conditions. Influenza virus can also spread 
through air and this has also enabled the spread of the infection easily 
around the world.

This work was supported by the Indian Council of Medical Research 
(ICMR) Grants 5/13/88/06/NCD-III. We thank the Vice-Chancellor, 
Bharathidasan University for the facilities provided.

Citation:Flavia &amp; Natarajaseenivasan, Bioinformation 5(10): 416-421 (2011)

NJ plot was made for all the 8 segments of selected influenza viruses using boot strap analyses at 500 replicates. (1) Polymerase PB2.

NJ plot was made for all the 8 segments of selected influenza viruses using boot strap analyses at 500 replicates. (2) Polymerase PB1.

NJ plot was made for all the 8 segments of selected influenza viruses using boot strap analyses at 500 replicates. (3) Polymerase PA.

NJ plot was made for all the 8 segments of selected influenza viruses using boot strap analyses at 500 replicates. (4) Hemagglutinin.

NJ plot was made for all the 8 segments of selected influenza viruses using boot strap analyses at 500 replicates. (5) Nucleocapsid Protein.

NJ plot was made for all the 8 segments of selected influenza viruses using boot strap analyses at 500 replicates. (6) Neuraminidase.

NJ plot was made for all the 8 segments of selected influenza viruses using boot strap analyses at 500 replicates. (7) Matrix protein.

NJ plot was made for all the 8 segments of selected influenza viruses using boot strap analyses at 500 replicates. (8) nuclear export protein.

