Background
A unique feature of the eukaryotic cell compared to the
prokaryotic cell is the compartmentalization of nucleic acid
synthesis and processing within the nucleus, and their
separation from protein synthesis in the cytoplasm. This
separation is achieved by the double-membrane of the nuclear
envelope and the selective transport channels of nuclear pore
complexes (NPCs) embedded within this barrier 
[–]. NPCs
are the sole gateways that facilitate macromolecular exchange
across the nuclear envelope between the nucleoplasm and
cytoplasm. NPCs are composed of individual proteins called
nucleoporins (nups) and are characterized by a central
framework with 8-fold rotational symmetry with additional
filamentous structures extending from the nuclear and
cytoplasmic facades [–
]. Intrinsically disordered
/unstructured proteins (IDPs) exist without a stable threedimensional
(3D) structure as highly flexible conformational
ensembles [,
]. These proteins seem to be more abundant in
both prokaryotic and eukaryotic proteomes than originally
assumed [–
]. IDPs are multifunctional in nature and
involved in various biological processes such as signaling and
regulation [,
,
]. Nucleoporins, the protein components of
the central conduit play a predominant role in nuclear
transport. The permeability barrier in the yeast NPC is formed
by a number of conserved nucleoporins that are known to be
intrinsically disordered. Being one of the largest and most
complex macromolecular assemblies known in cells, the NPC
presents a formidable challenge for structural determination.
NPC structure has been studied for over five decades by
various techniques such as transmission electron microscopy
[], cryoelectron tomography of whole NPCs and X-ray
crystallography of individual nucleoporins and their
complexes [–
]. Cytoplasmic cross-sectional view of the
NPC is generally obtained by cryoelectron tomographic
reconstruction []. Other structural views are also generated
by a combination of experimental and computational data that
are invaluable in understanding the architecture, topology and
organization of a NPC []. A molecule transported through
the NPC from the cytoplasmic side into the nucleus does not
recognize a geometric representation of the NPC, but more
from physiochemical representation of the proteins that
constitute the NPC. In order to facilitate an improved
visualization of the NPC in terms of the primary characteristics
of the constituent nucleoporins, we have developed a
visualization tool. A straightforward code written in Python
using PyGame and BioPython libraries provides researchers a
new tool to visualize the NPC, which is color-coded with
respect to a specific property of choice (e.g., hydrophobicity or
charge). This tool can also be used to see how mutations in
one or more of the proteins can alter the overall organization

Methodology
The geometric organization of the nucleoporins in the NPC
from the cytoplasmic view is obtained from the structural
model developed by Hoelz et al [] and the forest model by
Yamada et al []. Amino acid sequences of the constituent
nucleoporins are obtained from (
http://www.uniprot.org/).
All the sequences are used in the standard FASTA format and
are used without any additional changes. The size/shape of
each protein is scaled proportionally to its expected
hydrodynamic volume to fit the symmetry of the NPC. The
primary sequence information of the amino acids was
converted into physiochemical/biochemcial value or the linear
combinations thereof to define a score for each of the 20
naturally occurring amino acids. To date, there are more than
500 different properties of amino acids, all of which have been
investigated through a large number of experiments and
theoretical studies (
http://www.genome.jp/aaindex/) 
[].
This collection of AA indices has redundant information, such
as the same physical/chemical variation might be represented
by more than one AA index. To address this issue using
multivariate statistics, Atchely et al 
[] defined a linear
combination of the complete set, to a set of 5 unique
parameters. Of these five factors, we have used the ones that
have shown significant differences between the nucleoporins:
Factor1 (PAH): Polarity, Accessibility, Hydrophobicity; Factor2
(PSS): Propensity for Secondary Structure; and Factor5 (EC):
Electrostatic Charge. In addition, we have also included the
amphiphilicity index from one of the AA indices (MITS020101)
[]. 
 (see supplementary material) lists these indices.
The code was written in Python (version 2.71) with PyGame
(version 1.9.1) and BioPython (version 1.61) libraries on a
Microsoft Windows 7 desktop computer. A copy of the code
and the instructions to run on a windows system are available
from the authors.

Results &amp; Discussion
 shows the mapping of the amino acid indices PAH
(Polarity, Accessibility, Hydrophobicity), PSS (Propensity for
Secondary Structure), EC (Electrostatic Charge) and AI
(amphiphilicity index) in panels (a), (b), (c) and (d),
respectively. PAH, PSS, and EC are cumulative indices
derived from multiple physiochemical properties 
().
The color scales in  were determined linearly from red
(high) to blue (low) and represented using the RGB
(Red:Green:Blue) color model (with Green set to zero). The
mapping of PAH on the NPC () emphasizes the
maximum differentiation in PAH by scaling the colors between
the proteins accordingly. The outermost nucleoporin (Nup159)
is differentiated from the folded (red) and the
charged/unstructured (blue) regions. Similarly, the innermost
part of the NPC is also highly differentiated with respect to the
PAH scale (classified as a tree in the bimodal distribution
model []). According to the current mapping of propensity
to form secondary structures, (PSS, ) most of the
proteins show low propensities except the C-terminal part of
Nup116 at the center of the NPC. Panels (c) and (d)
demonstrate the variation in the charge factor and the
amphiphilicity index across the NPC. Though panels (c) and
(d) do not show much differentiation between the
nucleoporins as in panels (a) and (b), several features are noted
including that of Nup159 at the outermost ring of the NPC.
The actual structure of the NPC is an evolutionarily conserved
set of ~30 different proteins and is organized into several subcomplexes,
each of which occur in multiple copies, resulting in
~500−1,000 protein molecules in the fully assembled NPC.
Our results only use a representative set of these proteins from
the cytoplasmic view and a first demonstration suggests that
direct mapping of the physiochemical properties of amino
acids could prove to be a useful tool in understanding the
complex structures. The combination of PyGame and other
high-level graphics programming can be utilized to build a
complex visualization tool for the NPC using the principles
demonstrated in this note.

The NPC is flexible and highly dynamic as one would expect
during cargo translocation. Any dynamic information
determined experimentally can easily be mapped onto the
NPC by defining an amino acid/protein specific scale. The
intrinsically disordered nature of the nucleoporins is an
additional advantage of this model: it is not necessary to
identify an orientation of a specific surface of a nucleoporin
with respect to the NPC due to its high flexibility. The
permeability barrier of the NPC is formed by unstructured
phenylalanine-glycine (FG)-repeat regions that also serve as
docking sites for transport factor-cargo complexes. Therefore,
mapping the average properties of the nucleoporins with
respect to any amino acid scale may be considered justifiable.
Several emerging techniques such as single molecule
spectroscopic methods are now capable of studying a single
NPC [,
]; yet determining the complete 3D-structure with
atomic resolution is difficult. While the precise nature of the
permeability barrier remains to be an area of heavy debate, we
hope that new tools such as the one presented here may prove
useful in understanding the functional architecture of NPC.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank Korey Reid for critical reading of the manuscript.
VVK was in part supported by NIH grant P20 MD 002732
(Research Infrastructure for Minority Institution).

Citation:Kunda et al, Bioinformation 10(2): 094-097 (2014)

Direct mapping of the selected set of AA indices on
the cytoplasmic view of yeast NPC. PAH: Polarity,
Accessibility, Hydrophobicity; PSS: Propensity for Secondary
Structure EC: Electrostatic Charge and AI: Amphiphilicity
index. The index values are listed in  (see
supplementary material). The average values of each
nucleoporin was calculated and transformed into a linear scale
between red (high) and blue (low).

