Background
Proteins with novel structural architectures are generated by gene fusion in one species' compared to another species. 
      [–] Proteome wide 
      comparative analyses within and across kingdoms showed a large number of fused structures. [] Proteins created by gene fusion are shown to have enhanced role in pathways by Yanai et al. 
      [], simulate protein subunit interaction by Marcotte et al. 
      [], novel function by Long [], enhanced substrate specificity by Katzen et al. [] 
      and enzyme multi-functionality by Berthonneau and Mirande. [] These reports 
      indicate the existence of several isolated cases of fused protein as a result of gene fusion in evolutionary history. However, 
      the advantage (structure, dynamics and kinetics) of producing fused proteins in one species compared to the un-fused protein 
      orthologs in another species is not fully understood.

Despite the availability of several protein structures at the PDB (protein databank), cases of structural pairs describing 
      fused and un-fused protein structures are limited. Nevertheless, we identified a pair of IGPS (imidazole glycerol phosphate 
      synthetase) structures (comprising of HisF ­ glutaminase unit and HisH ­ cyclase unit) from S. cerevisiae (SC) and T. thermophilus 
      (TT). IGPS catalyzes the fifth and sixth steps of the histidine biosynthetic pathway in microbes, fungi, and plants. It forms the 
      imidazole ring of the histidine precursor imidazole glycerol phosphate. [–
      ] IGPS is a glutamine amido-transferase that catalyzes the formation of IGP 
      (Imidazole glycerol phosphate) and AICAR (5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide) from PRFAR (N1- ((5'­phosphoribulosyl) 
      formimino) ­ 5­aminoimidazole­4­carboxamide ribonucleotide). Interestingly, IGPS functions at the junction of histidine biosynthesis 
      and de novo purine biosynthesis, since AICAR is the entry point to the latter (). Thus, IGPS is a key metabolic enzyme, which 
      links amino acid and nucleotide biosynthesis pathways. IGPS has different structural architectures in SC and TT. In TT, IGPS forms a 
      hetero-dimer interface with glutaminase (HisH) and cyclase (HisF) subunits. [] 
      In SC, the two subunits are fused into a single polypeptide an N terminal HisH domain and a C terminal HisF domain forming an interface 
      between HisH-HisF domains. [] The conserved glutamine binding site in 
      IGPS is at the interface of HisH and HisF in both TT and SC. [–] Thus, the stability of the interface plays an important role in glutaminase catalysis. 
      The subunit interaction in TT and domain interaction in SC mediate the catalytic activity of glutamine hydrolysis. [] Thus, the fused protein retains the glutaminase active site and a small linker connects 
      HisF and HisH in SC. However, the structure, dynamics and kinetics advantages of this arrangement in fused proteins are not known. 
      Therefore, it is our interest to probe into the structure and dynamics properties of the fused (SC - IGPS) and un-fused (TT - IGPS) 
      structures using molecular dynamics simulation. 

Methodology
Initial IGPS structures for simulation
We used the IGPS structures for SC (PDB code: 1OX6 ­ resolution 2.4 Å) [
      ] and TT (PDB code: 1KA9 ­ resolution 2.3 Å) [] downloaded from 
      PDB. Hydrogen atoms were added to these structures using SYBYL 6.8 (Tripos Associates Inc.).

Molecular dynamics simulation
All molecular mechanics calculations were carried out using the TRIPOS force field [] in SYBYL (Molecular Modeling Software Package, Version 6.8, Tripos Associates Inc.) running on a 
      Silicon Graphics Workstation. The energy function used in the force field was defined as the sum of six contributions (bond 
      stretching, angle bending, torsion, van der Waals, electrostatic and planarity (for aromatic conjugated systems). Minimizations 
      of the potential energy of the system were carried out using the Simplex algorithm and the Powell torsional gradient algorithm 
      as implemented in SYBYL, terminating when a 0.5 Kcal/molÅ energy gradient shift was obtained. A distance dependent dielectric 
      constant of 1.0 was used to compute electrostatic effects. The non-bonded cutoff distance used was 8 Å and the net atomic 
      charges in the residues were calculated by the Gasteiger-Hucker method. [
      –] The in vacuo system was simulated at constant temperature, 
      constant volume (NVT) ensemble which is referred to as the canonical ensemble. The system was run at a temperature of 300 K 
      using a coupling constant of 100 femtosecond. The initial atom velocities were employed from a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution 
      with scaling velocities. The non-bonded pair list was updated every 25 femtosecond and an 8 Å cut-off was applied. During the 
      simulation, the integration step was set up as 1 femtosecond and molecular snapshots were saved for every 1000 steps (1 pico-second).
      A total of 5000 structures were generated and the simulation properties were derived from the analyses of these snapshots. 

Analysis
We performed a comprehensive analysis of structures in each trajectory to detect structural differences between the two 
      simulated systems. The flexibilities of the different structures were assessed by computing gap volume, gap index, interface area 
      and radius of gyration.

Results
 illustrates the fused and un-fused IGPS structures in SC and TT, respectively. A small linker connects HisH 
      (glutaminase) and HisF (cyclase) in SC and thus IGPS is fused in SC. However, this linker is absent in TT and HisH ­ HisF are 
      un-fused in TT. The HisH domain in SC has 47% similarity to the HisH subunit in TT. Similarly, the HisF domain in SC has 48% 
      similarity to the HisF subunit in TT. The HisH and HisF units are homologous and have similar structures in SC and TT.

 shows the structural snapshots of TT IGPS and SC IGPS at 0 and 5 ns simulation. The HisH and HisF interface in TT 
      and SC is also visualized in . The linker connecting HisH and HisF in SC is labeled and this linker is absent in TT. Thus, 
      the interface is formed by HisH and HisF domains in SC and HisH and HisF subunits in TT. This demonstrates an evolutionary 
      transition from a subunit-subunit interface in TT to a domain-domain interface in SC.

 shows the interface area (change in solvent accessible surface area upon interface formation between HisH and HisF 
      calculated using NACCESS implemented using Lee and Richard algorithm []) 
      in TT IGPS and SC IGPS for structures generated over a 5 ns simulation. The interface area between HisH and HisF is significantly 
      larger (&gt; 1000 Å2) in fused SC IGPS compared to the un-fused TT IGPS throughout the simulation period.

 shows the gap volume (calculated using SURFNET []) between 
      HisH and HisF in SC IGPS and TT IGPS for structures generated over a 5 ns simulation. Similar to interface area, the gap volume 
      is consistently larger in SC IGPS compared to TT IGPS throughout the simulation period.

 shows the gap index (ratio of gap volume to interface area) between HisH and HisF in SC IGPS and TT IGPS for 
      structures generated over a 5 ns simulation. Unlike interface area and gap volume, gap index is steadily similar throughout the 
      simulation period.

 shows the radius of gyration for SC IGPS and TT IGPS for structures generated over a 5 ns simulation. Similar to 
      interface area and gap volume, the radius of gyration for SC IGPS is considerably larger compared to TT IGPS throughout the 
      simulation period.

Discussion
Gene fusion is an important evolutionary phenomenon for the formation of proteins with new structural architectures. 
      [­] Comparative 
      sequence analysis between closely and distantly related species shows evidence for gene fusion/fission. 
      [––
      ] Therefore, it is of great significance to document the selection force generating 
      such proteins with fused structural architectures. However, there is no documentation for structural evidence supporting the 
      dynamics of these fused structures in the evolution of orthologous proteins.

The interface residues between HisF and HisH in TT and SC are more conserved than surface residues (). The interface 
      residues similarities imply catalytic conservation at the interface. The structural properties for IGPS in TT and SC are given for 
      initial and final structures (). The interface area, gap volume and gap index are greater in SC than TT in both initial 
      and final structures. These values increased relatively due to simulation in both SC and TT. However, the radius of gyration in TT 
      is larger than SC for the initial structure unlike the final structure (). Interestingly, the radius of gyration increased 
      in SC and decreased in TT due to simulation.

The results given in  to  demonstrate the structure dynamics of fused IGPS in SC compared to the un-fused IGPS 
      in TT. The IGPS in SC forms a domain-domain interface between HisH and HisF compared to a subunit-subunit interface in TT. The 
      transition from a subunit-subunit interface in TT to a domain-domain interface in SC is interesting. The domain-domain interface 
      area in SC is larger than the subunit interface area in TT over a 5 ns molecular dynamics simulation. The interface area in SC is 
      1400 Å2 greater than in TT. The larger interface area in SC facilitates better domain-domain interactions compared to subunit 
      interactions in TT (). The amount of interface area determines the degree of atomic interaction at the interface. Larger 
      HisH and HisF interface in SC imply better interaction between these two domains. Better interaction between HisF and HisH 
      facilitates greater stability and kinetics in SC. This is assisted largely by the linker segment connecting HisF and HisH domains 
      in SC. 

The gap volume between HisF and HisH domains from SC IGPS is larger than that between HisF and HisH subunits in IGPS from TT 
      (). The increased gap volume in SC IGPS may aid in substrate flow into the active sites formed by HisH and HisF domains. 
      However, this flow of substrate is relatively restricted in TT IGPS in exchange for interface stability formed by subunit 
      interaction. Larger gap volume in SC IGPS is partly helped by the linker between HisH and HisF which provides enhanced flexibility 
      for these two domains. Interestingly, the increased gap volume in SC IGPS does not affect gap index (ratio of gap volume to 
      interface area) in both SC IGPS and TT IGPS (). This suggests that increased gap volume is proportional to the increased 
      interface in SC compared to that in TT.

Radius of gyration in proteins is a measure of their size and implies their compactness. The radius of gyration for IGPS from 
      SC and TT given in  describes the unfolding of the structure during simulation. The flexibility rendered by the linker 
      between HisF and HisH in the case of SC IGPS is shown by the increased radius of gyration compared to that in TT throughout the 
      simulation period over 5 ns. The difference in the average radius of gyration between SC and TT IGPS is about 1.76 Å. This 
      provides the explanation for the increased stability leading to greater kinetics of IGPS caused by the linker in the fused 
      structure of SC IGPS.

The raise and fall in interface area, gap volume and gap index in TT during simulation is unusual. This may be due to the high 
      interface movement between the weakly associated subunits. The proposed hypothesis driving the formation of fused proteins by 
      gene fusion is the structural determinant providing increased stability, dynamics and kinetics facilitated during evolutionary 
      selection. This is evident by the structure and dynamics of IGPS as described using interface area, gap volume and radius of 
      gyration in SC and TT. 

Conclusion
A number of fusion proteins have been identified by comparative genome analysis using sequence comparison. This suggests that 
      gene fusion is common in evolutionary phylogeny. However, the selection force driving gene fusion in organism evolution is not 
      fully evident due to the lack of structure, dynamics and kinetics data supporting this phenomenon. Despite the growth in 
      structures at PDB, the number of structural pairs illustrating fusion/fission in distant phylogeny is limited. Here, we show the 
      importance of fused protein by probing the fused IGPS structure in SC as against the un-fused structure in TT using molecular 
      dynamics simulation. The simulation shows larger interface area and radius of gyration in SC IGPS compared to TT IGPS. Thus, fused 
      IGPS in SC have better structural features than un-fused IPGS in TT. This finding provides meaningful insight for gene fusion in 
      establishing optimal dynamics and kinetics. This is an extremely interesting one and is likely to become more important as the 
      international structural genomics efforts increase significantly their production of structures.


					Citation:Yiting et al., Bioinformation 1(3): 99-104 (2006)

Residue conservation at the interface of IGPS in TT and SC
HisF (TT | SC)	Total	Interior	Interface	Surface	
(a) No. of conserved residue	113	14	20	61	
(b) No. of residues	317	34 | 43	42 | 43	241 | 231	
(a)/(b)	35%	41% | 33%	47%	26%	
HisH (TT | SC)	Total	Interior	Interface	Surface	
(c) No. of conserved residue	69	9	17	23	
(d) No. of residues	205	36 | 41	36 | 53	133 | 111	
(c)/(d)	34%	25% | 22%	47% | 32%	17% | 21%	
Data shows that interface residues are more conserved than surface residues for HisF and HisH between TT and SC. 
					The number of conserved residues for HisF is 113 (&gt; 95 == (14+20+61)) and the 
					remaining 18 conserved residues are 
					located at different regions (interior/interface/surface) in the two structures from TT and SC. This explanation 
					holds true for the HisH structures in TT and SC.

Structural properties of IGPS in TT and SC is given for initial and final structures
Parameters	Initial crystal structure	Final structure after simulation(5 ns)	Difference between initial crystal and final structures	
 TT	SC	TT	SC	TT	SC	
Interface area (Å2)	2691.5	3940.3	1652.7291	 2617.3474	-1039	-1323	
Gap volume (Å3)	3606	3952	3363.6	4627.1	-242	675	
Gap index (Å)	0.746	0.997	0.491357207	0.565656	-0.256	-0.432	
Radius of gyration (Å)	25.52 	21.59	 21.25	22.91	-4.27	1.32	
A schematic representation of histidine biosynthetic pathway is given. IGPS (imidazole glycerol phosphate synthase) 
          catalyzes the fifth and sixth step of the histitine biosynthetic pathway in microbes, fungi, and plants. IGPS catalyzes the 
          bifurcation step of the histidine and de novo purine biosynthesis pathways.

A schematic representation of the 555 residue long IGPS from SC and TT is shown. The HisH and HisF domains in SC are fused 
          by a 33 residue long linker (206-238). However, the HisH and HisF subunits are un-fused in TT and the linker is absent.

Snapshots of IGPS at 0 ns and 5 ns for SC and TT are shown. The molecules are rendered as a ribbon diagram with contrasting 
          colors for the glutaminase (bottom) and cyclase (top) domains. The figure shows the bacterial IGPS is a heterodimer and the 
          yeast IGPS is a monomer. The C-terminal cyclase domain of yeast IGPS has a longer loop at the top of the barrel than that of 
          the bacteria.

Interface area between HisH and HisF is given for IGPS from SC and TT over a 5 ns molecular dynamics simulation. The 
          domain-domain interface area in SC is larger than TT throughout the simulation period. 

Gap volume between HisH and HisF is given for IGPS from SC and TT over a 5 ns molecular dynamics simulation. The 
          domain-domain gap volume in SC is larger than TT throughout the simulation period. 

Gap index (ratio of volume to interface area) between HisH and HisF is given for IGPS from SC and TT over a 5 ns molecular 
          dynamics simulation. The gap index is similar for the interface between HisH and HisF from SC and TT. 

Radius of gyration (measure of unfolding and flexibility) for IGPS from SC and TT is given over a 5 ns molecular dynamics 
          simulation. The radius of gyration is larger for SC IGPS is larger than TT IGPS throughout the simulation.

