Background
Plants contain a very large number of UDP glycosyltransferases
(UGTs) that are involved in the glycosylation of natural
products []. Glycosylation may lead to reduction in the toxicity
of endogenous and exogenous toxic substances in plants by
adding a sugar moiety to acceptors which modify their
properties such as bioactivity, stability, solubility, sub cellular
localization and binding properties []. UDP-glucose, UDPgalactose,
UDP-rhamnose, UDP-xylose and UDP-glucuronic
acid are the common activated sugar donors of plant UGTs 
[].
Glycosyltransferases (GTs) are the enzymes that synthesize
oligosaccharides, polysaccharides and glycoconjugates. GTs
have been grouped into 91 families on the basis of sequence
similarities. Family-1 has the most number of GTs related to
plants [] and contains a plant secondary product
glycosyltransferase (PSPG) box, close to the C-terminal end of
the protein. This PSPG box consists of 44 amino acids and is
believed to be involved in binding of the activated sugar
donors. Within the PSPG-box highly, conserved amino acid
residue including the HCGWNS motif are considered to be
important for enzymatic function []. Despite the fact that many
GTs recognize similar donor or acceptor substrates, there is
surprisingly limited sequence identity between different
families. Until now only two folds have been observed for GTs:
fold GT-A, consisting of one α/β/α sandwich domain and
characterized by the presence of divalent cation in the binding
site while GT-B fold has two such domains []. Despite low
sequence conservation, the UGTs show highly conserved
secondary and tertiary structures. The sugar acceptor and sugar
donor substrates of UGTs are accommodated in the cleft formed
between the N- and C-terminal domains. Several regions of the
primary sequence contribute to the formation of the substrate
binding pocket including structurally conserved domains as
well as loop regions differing both with respect to their amino
acid sequence and sequence length.

Withania somnifera (L.) Dunal (Solanaceae) is used extensively in
traditional and herbal medicine, both in India and around the
world, primarily due to its antibiotic, antiviral, antiamoebic,
antiarthritic and anti-inflammatory properties 
[]. It produces
diverse low molecular weight natural products such as
flavonoids, alkaloids, terpenoids, tannins, resins and sterols
through secondary metabolism []. Flavonoids and
isoflavonoids are major determinants of growth, development
and defence in plants. These compounds also possess
antioxidant activity, which has potential health benefits for
humans and animals. Flavonoids, a large class of
phenylpropanoid-derived secondary metabolites, are mostly
glycosylated by UGTs with one or more sugar groups 
[].
Although large numbers of different UGTs have been reported
from higher plants, very few have been crystallized till now due
to the difficulties in obtaining crystals. Homology modeling can
be useful in prediction of protein structure and to detect
potentially important residues []. These models have been
useful not only for rationalizing experimental data but also for
designing directed mutagenesis experiments. In the current
study the homology modeling and docking analysis of a
flavonoid specific GT from W. somnifera (WsFGT) were
performed. The results will provide new insight into molecular
interactions of active site residues with substrates for the
enzymatic function.

Methodology
Sequence Alignment:
Protein sequence of WsFGT (NCBI Ac. No. FJ560880) was
selected. BLAST algorithm against protein data bank (PDB) was
used to carry out the sequence homology searches. The
sequence and 3D structure of template proteins were extracted
from the PDB database []. Multiple sequence alignments of
the target and template sequences were carried out using
ClustalW program [] with default parameters.

Homology modeling of WsFGT:
Secondary structure was predicted via the PSIpred v 3.0 servers
[]. Based on high-resolution crystal structures of homologous
proteins, 3D models of WsFGT were built using the homology
modeling software MODELLER 9v9 [] on windows operating
environment. Loop refinement tool of MODELLER was used to
refine the loop conformation of the model. Further, this model
was improved by Chimera []. Amber parameters were used
for standard residues, and Amber's Antechamber module was
used to assign parameters to nonstandard residues. The model
having lowest DOPE scores was selected for validation.

Model Validation:
Stereochemical quality of the polypeptide backbone and side
chains was evaluated using Ramachandran plot obtained from
PROCHECK []. Amino acid environment was evaluated
using ERRAT plot [] which assesses the distribution of
different types of atoms with respect to one another in the
protein model. ProSAII program was utilized for structure
validation. It uses knowledge based potentials of mean force to
evaluate model accuracy and it shows local model quality by
plotting energies as a function of amino acid sequence position
[]. 
Pair wise structural superimposition of modelled WsFGT
was done with templates using Chimera match maker program.

Molecular Docking:
Structure Data File (SDF) of ligand molecules were downloaded
from the pubchem (http://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) and
were converted to PDB format using Pymol software. The
WsFGT structure and substrate ligands were prepared using
AutoDock Tools v.1.5.2 software []. Molecular docking was
performed using Autodock vina 1.1.2 software []. The lowest
binding energy conformation in the first cluster was considered
as the most favorable docking pose. Hydrogen bonds, bond
lengths and close contacts between enzyme active site and
substrate atoms were analyzed.

Discussion
Model Construction:
The secondary structure prediction run at the PSIpred server
showed that the WsFGT consists of 45% α-helix (15 helices; 179
residues), 5% extended-beta (13 strands; 52 residues) and 50%
random coil (29 coils; 228 residues) configuration 
().
Homology modeling relies on establishing an evolutionary
relationship between the sequence of a protein of interest and
other members of the protein family whose structures have
been solved experimentally by X-ray crystallography or NMR.
WsFGT amino acid sequence alignment with available protein
sequences showed a significant percentage of identity with
Medicago truncatula UDP-glucuronosyl/UDPglucosyltransferase
(2PQ6: 31% identity) (),
Arabidopsis thaliana hydroquinone glucosyltransferase (2VG8:
29%), Vitis vinifera UDP-glucose flavonoid 3-O
glycosyltransferase (2C1Z: 29%), Medicago truncatula triterpene
UDP-glucosyltransferase (2ACW: 30%) and Medicago truncatula
flavonoid 3-O-glucosyltransferase (3HBJ: 27%). These proteins
were selected as templates for the modeling. In general,
sequence identities of 30% are enough to construct the 3D
model of target proteins through homology modeling. Due to
low sequence identity SALIGN was employed to construct
multiple structure alignments of templates. The 3D models of
WsFGT were generated by aligning the target sequence with
this multiple structures-based alignment.

Structure Validation:
We selected 5 out of 50 models with lower DOPE score. In order
to select the best model, the structural validity of the models
was performed by PROCHECK, ERRAT and ProSAII programs.
The best model was subjected to loop refinement at region
where ERRAT plot show more than 95% error value and
disallowed amino acid region showed by PROCHECK. To
improve and verify the stability of the loop model, an energy
minimization procedure was applied to the WsFGT model.
Ramachandran plot provided by the program PROCHECK,
assured very good confidence for the predicted protein with
91.6% residues in most allowed region, 8.4% in additional
allowed region, 0.0% in generously allowed region and 0.0% in
disallowed region (), 
 (see supplementary
material). ERRAT plot gave an overall quality factor of 74.330 to
the modeled structure which was very much satisfactory. The
ProSAII program (Protein Structure Analysis) is an established
tool, which is frequently employed in structure prediction,
refinement and validation of experimental protein structures. It
generates Z score of model, which is a measure of compatibility
between its sequence and structure. The model Z score should
be comparable to the Z scores obtained from the template 
[,
]. ProSAII analysis showed that protein folding energy of our
modeled structure was in good agreement with that of the
template. It showed a Z-Score of -10.28, implying no significant
deviation from the templates 2ACW (-12.75), 2C1Z (-10.96),
2PQ6 (-10.07), 2VG8 (-11.73) and 3HBJ (-11.44) 
(). 
Thus, validation results suggested that the predicted
model was a reliable 3D structure of WsFGT. The final model
structure of WsFGT and superimposition with template (2PQ6)
was displayed in (). Similarly, a homology
model of a F7GAT UGT88D7 from Perilla frutescents was
generated using VvGT1 structure as a template []. Further,
Root Mean Squared Deviation (RMSD) and TM-score were used
to quantitatively compare the 3D-structures of the models
 (see supplementary material) which revealed high
similarity in topology and overall fold of the model with
templates. Overall, these analyses confirmed the stability of
WsFGT structure and GT-B fold type. Till now, all structures of
plant UGTs (M. truncatula UGT71G1, UGT85H2 and UGT78G1;
V. vinifera VvGT1 and A. thaliana UGT72B1) which have been
reported exhibit GT-B fold.

Molecular Interactions:
WsFGT docking studies were carried out with diadzein,
apigenin, luteolin, naringenin, genistein and kaempferol as
acceptors and UDP-glucose as sugar donor. Substrate binding
pocket was made up from 13 residues (Tyr13, His18, Asn20,
Gln133, Lys245, Ser278, Gln334, His349, Trp352, Asn353, Ser354,
Glu357 and Trp371). Among these, 6 residues were polar
uncharged, 3 residues each were positively charged and
aromatic, with 1 negatively charged residue. These residues
interacted with substrate molecules forming hydrogen bonds.
UDP-glucose was almost completely buried in a long, narrow
channel mainly the C-terminal domain of the enzyme. The
enzyme interacted with UDP mainly through residues in the
UGT signature PSPG motif (His18, Asn20, Gln133, Lys245,
Ser278, Gln334, His349, Asn353, Ser354, Glu357 and Trp371) in
WsFGT structure. The interaction energy of UDP-glucose with
WsFGT complex was -10.9 kcal/mol and the hydrogen bond
distances were observed within the range of 2.1 Å to 3.4 Å.

Comparative analysis of WsFGT-substrate conformations:
A very narrow, deep pocket was observed adjacent to the UDP
binding site, mainly consisting of residues from the N-terminal
domain, which would appear to be the binding pocket for
acceptor molecules. Docking conformations of all the flavonoid
group of substrates (i.e. flavonols- kaempferol, flavononesnaringenin;
iso flavones- diadzein and genistein; flavonesapigenin
and luteolin) with WsFGT complex revealed the
lowest interaction energy of -9.3 kcal/mol with luteolin. The
active residues for luteolin: Tyr13, His18, Gln133, His349,
Trp352 and Asn353 with seven hydrogen bonds. All the
hydrogen bond distances between WsFGT and luteolin complex
were observed within the range of 2.1 Å to 3.1 Å. WsFGT
docking conformations with naringenin, apigenin, kaempferol,
diadzein and genistein were shown with interaction energies of
-9.2, -9.2, -9.2, -8.4 and -8.4 respectively, as shown in 

(see supplementary material) and in (). Together,
these analyses identified Trp352 and Asn353 as critical amino
acids due to their involvement in interactions with 5 different
substrates. His-18 was identified as a key residue for enzyme
activity. Similarly in all UGT structures, a highly conserved
histidine (His22 in UGT71G1 and His20 in VvGT1) was
observed in the active site. This may act as a general base and
catalytic residue for enzyme activity to abstract a proton from
the acceptor substrate []. Asp110 was another conserved
residue in WsFGT (Asp121 in UGT71G1 and Asp119 in VvGT1)
which formed a hydrogen bond with His18. This interaction
may stabilize the histidine and balances its charge after
deprotonating the acceptor []. For flavonoid group of
substrates, molecular docking showed that the 7-hydroxyl
group of flavonoids can be docked into the active site of the
enzyme with higher interaction energies than the other
hydroxyl groups. The docking study also showed that the
interaction energy for iso-flavones were slightly lower
compared with other flavonoids group. These studies provided
clear evidence of the importance of these amino acid residues in
the active site of WsFGT. Chemical synthesis of glycosides is
often difficult and plant UGTs can be exploited for enzymatic
synthesis. The data presented may also enable this enzyme to
mediate sugar transfer to chemically distinct acceptor atoms for
industrial application. Further, characterization and structural
study of these glycosyltransferases would help to understand
these difficult chemical reactions and facilitate biotechnological
development for utilizing these novel UGTs.

Conclusion
Flavonoids are natural source of antioxidants with various
medicinal properties and synthesised by glycosylation which is
catalysed by GTs. In this study, 3D structure of WsFGT was
developed using available plant UGTs as templates which
revealed GT-B fold. Docking analysis with different substrates
identified important amino acids for catalytic function.
However, this model is predictive and structure needs to be
confirmed experimentally. The proposed model may be useful
to understand glycosylation mechanism of flavonoid
glucosides. Elucidation of the 3D structure of WsFGT will lead
to inform design of novel biocatalysts for the synthesis and
modification of plant natural products.

Supplementary material
Data 1
SKRJ is thankful to Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
(CSIR) for senior research fellowship.

Citation:Jadhav et al, Bioinformation 8(19): 943-949 (2012)

(A) Sequence alignment of WsFGT from W. somnifera
with template (PDB code: 2PQ6) using ClustalW. The conserved
regions are indicated by ‘*’ and box indicates PSPG motif. (B)
Conserved PSPG box created using WebLogo
(http://weblogo.berkeley.edu/logo.cgi).

Residue profile of WsFGT in Ramachandran plot.

(A) Homology model of WsFGT represented in ribbon diagram. (B) Superimposition of 3D structure of WsFGT (yellow)
and M. truncatula UDP-glucuronosyl/UDP-glucosyltransferase (2PQ6: violet purple).

Diagram showing (A) apigenin (B) diadzein (C) genistein (D) kaempferol (E) luteolin and (F) naringenin docked into the
proposed binding pockets. UDP-glucose is shown in deep violet purple colour and acceptors are shown in yellow colour.
Hydrogen bonding interactions are indicated by dashed lines.

