Background
Molecular phylogeny is a fundamental approach studying species evolution 
and gene function. Many phylogenetic analysis programs are available, but 
each program often requires a particular type of input sequence format. 
Most tools have restrictions regarding the allowable length of sequence 
name and characters used. Automatically trimming the sequence names 
may lose important information, such as species names. Most often the 
trimmed names are redundant, which cannot be accepted by any analysis 
program. In addition, some programs do not accept sequence names with 
special characters. Furthermore, the input may contain identical or highly 
similar sequences which need to be removed to save computational 
resources and improve resolution of the resulting trees.

A variety of sequence formats are available for phylogenetic analysis, 
including FASTA [] and Phylip 
[]. The formats can be converted using 
tools such as ReadSeq  [], Bugaco  
[], Format Converter  
[] and 
EMBOSS  []. 
However, ReadSeq and Bugaco cannot convert formats 
from or to Mega (Interleaved and Sequential). These tools do not provide 
tree format conversions from Newick to Nexus. Phylip sequence format 
allows only 10 characters in the sequence name; the output file from most 
format conversion tools cannot be accepted by Phylip because of this 
constraint. Other alternatives such as, REFGEN and TREENAMER  
[], 
are available for handling the sequence name problem. However, those 
tools do not accept FASTA files other than GenBank and DOE JGI 
formats; they extract the total or a part of the accession number to rename 
the sequence. Additionally, they don't support conversion back to the 
original names once the tree is created. It is thus extremely inconvenient 
for the user to analyze the phylogenetic result.

The computer program libraries such as BioJava  
[] and BioPerl  
[]
provide functions to convert between different formats but require 
computer skills to use them. On the other hand, sequence manipulation
tools focus mainly on utility functions such as removing and sorting 
sequences. SeqMaT combines format conversion and essential functions of 
sequence manipulation under a single platform, with the expectation of 
addressing the issues with currently available tools.

Methodology
Based upon our practical experience, we designed a pipeline to deal with 
the various data formatting and conversion issues described above. 
 shows data flow 
and major functional modules of SeqMaT. SeqMaT 
accepts and converts a number of sequence formats, including FASTA, 
Clustal, Mega, Phylip, Nexus, EMBL, GenBank, PIR, Table, Hennig86, 
and plain text. The functional modules include 1) finding and removing 
redundant sequences, 2) format conversion, 3) removing special characters 
in sequence names, 4) sequence name encoding and 5) sequence name 
decoding.

Removing duplicate sequences
In large sequence files, it is often difficult to check for duplicate sequences 
and the tools may generate error messages because of this redundancy. 
SeqMaT provides two ways to identify the redundant sequences from the 
given dataset for all the major sequence formats. One way is removing 
identical sequences; the other way is to collapse sequences above a user 
provided threshold (with one representative sequence used for subsequent 
analysis). The latter requires aligned sequences as input.

Data format conversion
Data format conversion can be used for converting sequences from one 
format to another for future analysis. SeqMaT allows conversions among 
all major sequence and tree formats. We have provided both sequential and 
interleaved options for Phylip and Mega formats.

Special characters replacement
Most of the tools do not allow special characters such as ‘/’ or ‘|’ in 
sequence descriptions. SeqMaT provides an option for replacing the 
special characters and white space with an underscore character ‘_’ in the 
sequence description. Currently this option works for Nexus and FASTA 
sequence formats.

Sequence name coding and encoding
Automatically trimmed sequence names created by other format 
conversion tools may be redundant and cannot be accepted by analysis 
programs. SeqMaT efficiently addresses the problem of long sequence 
names. This includes a two-step process, sequence encoding and tree 
decoding.

The coding part takes a set of input sequences in FASTA, Clustal or Mega 
formats and for each sequence the whole description is replaced with a 
short alpha-numerical name. These temporary names and original 
descriptions are stored in a table. Two files, the match table with original 
and new names and a sequence file in which each sequence has a short 
unique name are given as output from this step. These converted sequences 
are easy to use in a tree analysis.

The decoding part takes the match table generated in the coding step and a 
tree file as input. It replaces the temporary names in the tree file with the 
original name (or description) from the match table. The resulting tree file 
has the original description for each sequence without any redundancies in 
it, which can be opened in any tree viewing program. 

Other applications
SeqMaT also provides additional functions to manipulate data for data 
analysis and mining. First, the sequence data in FASTA format can be 
converted to Attribute Relational File Format (ARFF), a native format of 
the data mining tool ­ WEKA. Secondly, it calculates individual residue 
frequencies and k-mer frequencies for a given set of sequences, with both 
protein and nucleotide sequences accepted. Thirdly, a user can select a 
particular number of representative sequences that will be randomly picked 
from a large dataset. Lastly, a user can extract sequences within certain 
dates and geographical locations. This application takes the starting and 
ending years from which the user needs to extract sequences and the 
number of sequences for each year. The program extracts the sequence 
data per the user choice. This function is particularly useful when 
collecting sequences for calculating evolutionary rates and the time of most 
recent common ancestry.

Software platform
The background programs were written in Java and the web integration 
was done using JSP/Servlets. The standalone version is provided as a jar 
file and runs on any systems with the Java Runtime Environment installed.

Applications
SeqMaT is currently used by the Bioinformatics lab at the University of 
Nebraska at Omaha and elsewhere.

We are grateful to Mohammad Shafiullah for his assistance in computer 
systems administration. This publication was made possible by the grants 
from National Institutes of Health R01 LM009985-01A1 and National 
Science Foundation DEB-0732969. The authors also acknowledge the 
UCRCA, the University of Nebraska at Omaha, for continuous funding 
support to this research.

Citation:Attaluri et al, Bioinformation 5(9): 400-401 (2011)

Flow chart of SeqMaT

