Background
Staphylococcus aureus is an important nosocomial and
community-acquired pathogen and its infections are known to
be a leading cause of bacteremia and are associated with severe
morbidity and mortality in hospitalized infections 
[]. In S.
aureus 85% of Glucose is catabolised through EMP pathway and
the very first step of the formation of G-6-P is carried out in two
pathways one through phosphotransferase (PTS) which usually
functions under low glucose concentration and the second PTS
independent system catalysed by glucose permease (glk U) and
glucokinase (glk A) which functions mostly under high glucose
concentration []. This G-6-P plays critical role in the pathogen
for energy generation in catabolic reactions for the synthesis of
all the intermediates for its very survival [].

Recent findings of cytoplasmic glucokinase is detected in both
Gram positive and Gram negative bacteria has 315-321 residues
and a monomeric mass of 33-35 kDa, Km values of glucokinase
varied from 0.3- 0.8mM for glucose and 0.4-4mM for ATP
substrates in both Gram positive and Gram negative bacteria
[]. 
This enzyme showed greater affinity for glucose than with
either mannose or galactose and showed detectable activity
with fructose in Gram positive bacteria, while this enzyme
showed no affinity for fructose in Gram negative bacteria 
[].
Glk A in Gram positive bacteria is composed of higher
percentage of alpha-helix compared to β-strand or β-turns and
the enzyme exhibited both structural and functional differences
with human glucokinase. Glucokinases of bacteria are divided
in to 2 groups (1) Glucokinases that belongs to repressor/open
reading frames of unknown function/sugar kinases (ROK)
family which is characterized by the presence of CXCGX
(2)GCXE motifs, and (2) Glucokinases without ROK motifs.
However, in Archaea two types of glucokinases are found one
ATP-dependent glucokinase and the other ATP-dependent
glucokinase having ROK motifs []. In multidrug resistant and
vancomycin resistant strains of S. aureus increased cell wall
biosynthesis and high reductive conditions are the characteristic
features where G-6-P formation in such strains may be playing
a critical role in drug resistance and pathogenesis 
[]. Therefore
glk A may be playing a pivotal role, hence the present study is
focused on the cloning, expression and characterization of
glucokinase from Staphylococcus aureus ATCC12600.

Methodology
Bacterial strains and culture conditions:
Staphylococcus aureus ATCC12600 and Escherichia coli DH5α
were obtained from Bangalore Genei Pvt Ltd. S. aureus was
grown on modified Baird Parkar media at 37°C. After overnight
incubation, a single black shiny colony with distinct zone was
picked, inoculated in Brain heart infusion (BHI) broth and
incubated at 37°C for overnight. Thus, grown S. aureus
ATCC12600 culture was used to characterize Glucokinase and
for the isolation of chromosomal DNA for glk A gene
amplification. E. coli DH5α was used in the expression of S.
aureus glucokinase cloned in pQE 30 vector [,
].

Kinetic study of Glucokinase:
The enzyme assay was performed on a Cyber lab
spectrophotometer (USA). Glucokinase is exclusively present in
cytoplasm of bacteria therefore cytoplasmic fraction was
isolated from the bacteria []. 2ml of reaction mixture contains
the following components 60Mm Tris-HCl buffer pH-7.5, 0.5
mM MgCl2, 0.2M ATP, 0.9mM NAD, 1unit of Glucose-6-
phosphate dehydrogenase, 12mM Glucose (substrate) and 10µl
of crude (isolated from S. aureus ATCC 12600) or pure enzyme
and incubated for 30 minutes at 37°C. The absorbance was
measured at 340 nm against blank. Enzyme activity was
expressed as the micro moles of NADH formed per ml. per
minute which is equivalent to the amount of G-6-P formed 
[].

Calculation of Hills coefficient:
The Hills coefficient was calculated by plotting the graph with
log [Vi / Vmax – Vi] on Y-Axis and log [S] on X- axis where Vi is
the velocity at different substrate concentrations, Vmax is the
maximum velocity of the enzyme at which the enzyme is fully
saturated with the substrate concentration [].

glk A gene Amplification and sequencing from Staphylococcus aureus ATCC12600:
glk A gene was amplified from S. aureus chromosomal DNA
using the primers glk A -F: 51-CGCT GAT GTA GGC GGG
ACG 31 and glk A -R: 51-GGT CTT GAT TAA TCC 31 which
were designed from the Glucokinase gene sequence of S. aureus
Mu 50 strain []. The reaction mixture contained in a final
volume of 50µl which consisted of 100ρmoles of each primers,
100µmol of dNTPS mix, 10mM Tris- HCl (pH 8.8), 1.5mM
MgCl2, 1U of hot start Taq DNA Polymerase (Bangalore Genei
pvt ltd) and 0.25µg of chromosomal DNA. Amplification
parameters included an initial denaturation step for 10 min at
94°C; 35 cycles of 94°C for 60 seconds of denaturation, 60
seconds of annealing at 460C and 100 seconds of amplification
at 72°C which was followed by a final extension step at 72°C
for 5 min in a Mastercycler gradient Thermocycler (Eppendorf).
Amplified products were purified with NP-PCR Purification
kit, Taurus Scientific, USA and were sequenced by dye
terminating method at MWG Biotech India Ltd. Thus, obtained
glk A gene sequence was deposited at Gen Bank
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/JN645812).

Cloning, expression and purification of Glucokinase:
glk A gene was cloned in the Sma I site of pQE 30 and
transformed into E. coli DH5α, the resultant clone was named as
glk A1. The insert in the clone was sequenced and after
ascertaining the sequence of glk A was over expressed with
1mM IPTG. The rglk A was purified from the cytosolic fraction
of glk A1 clone by passing through nickel metal chelate agarose
column (by following QIA express expression system protocol)
and protein was eluted using 300mM immidazole
hydrochloride. The product was analysed on 10% SDS-PAGE
[]. 
The enzyme kinetics of purified rglk A was performed as
described in earlier section.

Sequence Analysis of glk A:
The glk A sequences were retrieved for Staphylococcus aureus
(AEY84930.1), Bacillus subtilis (YP_004877992.1), Bacillus cereus
(AAU16254.1), Bacillus megaterium (ADF41316.1),
Corynebacterium glutamicum (AAF80161.1), Renibacterium
salmoninarum (YP_001625658.1) from Genbank. All these
structures were scanned against PROSITE data base to predict
the structures of ROK motif. The predicted ROK motifs of all
these glk A sequences were aligned using clustalX tool 
[] to
find out the ROK signature and dissimilarities among them.

Results
Cloning, expression and characterization of glucokinase gene:
In the present study glk A gene was cloned, expressed and
characterized from S. aureus ATCC 12600. glk A gene was
amplified from the chromosomal DNA of S. aureus ATCC 12600
and the PCR product of (0.987kb) () was cloned in the
Sma I site of pQE 30 vector and transformed in E. coli DH5α and
the clone was named as glk A1. The insert in the clone was
confirmed by PCR using the same primers and the PCR product
was sequenced (Accession number: JN645812) and the BLAST
results resembled with all the glk A gene sequence reported for
other strains of S. aureus. The PCR product obtained was cloned
in “-1” frame and successfully induced with 1mM IPTG for glk
A expression in clone glk A1. The 10% SDS PAGE results
clearly indicated the expression of rglk A with a molecular
weight 33 KDa corresponding to the insert cloned ().
The enzyme kinetics of pure recombinant glk A exhibited in the
cytosol was 0.1053±0.01mM of NADPH/ml/min and Km 5.22±
0.17mM with Hill coefficient of 1.71± 0.025mM which is close to
the native glk A of S. aureus ATCC12600 (0.20817±0.04mM of
NADPH/ml/min and Km 5.1±0.06mM with Hill coefficient of
1.66±0.032mM). The close Km and Hill coefficient values of
native glk A and rglk A corroborated the sequence results
indicating presence of only one kind of glk A in the S. aureus
 (see supplementary material). These results also
explain that both native glk A and rglk A showed positive
cooperativity towards glucose. The above results also reflected
on the functional properties of the glk A, with human GCK
showing very high Km compared with S. aureus Km suggesting
lower affinity of substrate for the enzyme  (see
supplementary material). From the results it can be concluded
that S. aureus glk A and human GCK are dissimilar enzymes.

Sequence analysis of S. aureus glk A:
The glk A protein sequence of S. aureus ATCC12600 showed
highly conserved regions with both Gram negative (E. coli) and
positive (Bacillus subtilis) bacteria, while very low identity (21%)
was observed with human GCK gene (). A clear
distinction between S. aureus glk A and other glucokinases of
both Gram positive and Gram negative pathogens was
observed in multiple sequence alignments and phylogenetic
analysis () which showed that phylogenetically not
very close relationship occurs among bacteria and humans.
Further, the glk A sequence of S. aureus showed typical ATP
binding site and ROK motif which is indicated by three
conserved C residues in the motif CNCGRSGCIE ()
such ATP dependent glk A having ROK motif is the property of
glk A of Arachae. Therefore, it was exciting to identify the role
of the amino acid sequences that are uniquely conserved in glk
A of S. aureus which is having very low homology with other
glk A of Gram positive and Gram negative bacteria indicating
variable rate of G-6-P formation which also reflects on
variability in the pathogenesis.

Discussion
In Staphylococcus aureus the glk A functions optimally at higher
glucose concentration which probably leads to increased
reductive conditions in the pathogen probably resulting in
upregulation of butanediol pathway, cell wall biosynthesis,
Polysaccharide Intracellular Adhesion (PIA) molecules,
exopolysaccharide synthesis and dTMP levels, these are the
characteristic features Small Colony Variants (SCV) which are
usually observed in relapsed episodes of S. aureus infections in
humans [,
].

The kinetic results of the present study were closed to native
glk A and exhibited higher affinity for glucose compared to
other pathogenic bacteria () these results correlated with
the multiple sequence alignment and phylogenetic analysis of
glk A () indicating the rate of G-6-P formation is
different in all these organisms. The pure glucokinase was
obtained from glk A1 [,
] which exhibited molecular weight of
33 kDa similar to native protein []. The sequence analysis of S.
aureus glk A showed typical ATP binding site and ROK motifs
similar to the glk A present in Archaea [] which is different in
both Gram positive and negative pathogenic bacteria indicating
the glk A in S. aureus is a regulated enzyme.

The human GCK counter part of S. aureus glk A showed
absence of ROK motif and exhibited higher Km () these
differences between glk A of S. aureus and human GCK
probably suggests that in S. aureus glucose is rapidly
phosphorylated and used more in the anabolic pathways such
as increased nucleotide biosynthesis, cell wall biosynthesis
resulting in rapid proliferation and formation of SCV which are
one of the key pathogenic factors of this pathogen 
[–].

Supplementary material
Data 1
This paper forms a part of Ph.D thesis work going to be
submitted to JNT University, Hyderabad- 500085, A.P, India.

Citation:Lakshmi et al, Bioinformation 9(4): 169-173 (2013)

A) PCR amplification of glk A gene (0.987kb) from clone glk A1; B) SDS-PAGE analysis of analysis glk A protein from
recombinant clone glk A 1; C) Sequence alignment of bacterial glk A sequences and human glk A sequence; D) Phylogenetic
analysis of S. aureus with other Gram positive &amp; Gram negative bacterial glk A; E) Multiple sequence alignment of S. aureus with
other Gram positive and Gram negative bacterial glk A which is having ROK CXCGX(2)GCXE motif.

