Background
Wood is single greatest material aid and comfort in every
century. Molecular knowledge of wood has an important role
for development of improved wood. Furthermore
improvement in quality of wood, researcher should have
information of its genomic background. Although there exists
many number of databases on wood which are the resources of
morphology and its anatomical characters, the database related
to genomic information of wood trait is unavailable till date
 (see supplementary material). Database of Japanese
wood contains the data regarding the wood specimen surface
views, optical microscopic images with the limited number of
data. Database of wood specimens contain the information
related to specimen no., family name, species name, original
name, wood specimen number, herbarium number,
geographical location. Indian Wood Insect Database contains
the information related to diversity of indigenous and exotic
wood insects/pests in India. It includes the details of various
wood yielding trees, taxonomic status, properties and
durability. WGDB comprises the gene specific data in different
species and clones with their position on chromosomes, specific
length in sequenced genomes. It provides the PMID (PubMed
Database ID) of literature where the specific genes information
has been published.

Architecture of Database
WGDB has been designed on the three layer structure i.e. Data
layer, middle layer and presentation layer. Data layer is
consisted through SQL server, whereas middle layer comprises
in visual studio. HTML and CSS have been implemented to
make online presentation layer of the database to make
database user friendly ().

Discussion &amp; Conclusion
WGDB is a user friendly database, which allows the user to
input their query text accordingly to the criteria in gene
selection namely accession number, gene name or the forest
tree species in order to retrieve the related information from the
database. Query related hits are displayed in a result page. User
can then select any type of query of interest to get the further
detailed information. WGDB database have 720 genes entries
which are responsible for Cellulose, lignin and hemicelluloses
traits in tree species such as pinus [], poplar 
[], deodar 
[],
Arabidopsis [].

Database Mining
Result page has been connected with different webpage. Home
tab explains the information about the wgdb database. Gene
Search tab has scroll down menu which has three sub tabs to
fulfil the query of user (). These three sub tabs
elaborate on different on web pages. User can search wood
genes through Accession Id (), by gene name 
(), by Species name 
(). User can search wood trait
specific genes which are responsible for cellulose [], lignin &amp;
hemicelluloses. NCBI, EMBL and Google have been
incorporated in tab of search engine () with tab of
glossary (). The database has been connected with the
bl2Seq (), COBALT () and Dendrome
project ().

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors would like to thanks the anonymous reviewers for
their valuable comments and Department of Science &amp;
Technology (DST), Government of India for financial support.
Forest Research Institute, Dehradun to provide facilities to
work.

Citation:Goyal &amp; Ginwal, Bioinformation 10(1): 039-042 (2014)

Flow chart of Database Architecture

Snapshot of WGDB database: A) Gene search tab; B) Accession id for gene search; C) Search by Gene name; D) Search by
species; E) incorporate search engine; F) Glossary tab;. G) BLAST search; H) COBALT: Multiple Sequence Alignment; I) Dendrome
project.

