Background
The metabolic syndrome is characterized by a cluster of several
metabolic and cardiovascular risk factors such as abdominal
obesity, insulin resistance, atherogenic dyslipidemia, and
hypertension []. Although there are different definitions of the
metabolic syndrome, the uniform pathophysiology of this
syndrome is insulin resistance []. The importance of the
metabolic syndrome lies largely in that the cardiovascular risk
factors increase the risk of cardiovascular disease by 2-fold and
the risk of developing type 2 diabetes mellitus by 3-fold 
[]. The
etiology, prevention and treatment of the metabolic syndrome
currently are the focus of intense research activities. The
combination of abdominal obesity, hypertension, dyslipidemia,
hyperglycemia and insulin resistance or type 2 diabetes mellitus
defines the metabolic syndrome [].

It has been reported that women develop cardiovascular
disease (CVD) at an older age compared to men. Gender
differences in this syndrome may contribute to differences in
CVD [,
]. The contributions of different components of the
metabolic syndrome differ between genders and in different
countries []. The underlying risk factors appear to be
abdominal obesity and insulin resistance, other associated
conditions are physical inactivity, ageing and polycystic ovarian
syndrome []. Elevated blood pressure (BP) is also associated
with insulin resistance or hyperinsulinemia []. Similarly,
smokers and heavy alcohol users often have Metabolic
Syndrome []. Published reports differ in the gender
distribution of the metabolic syndrome [,
]. Some researchers
report a higher incidence of the metabolic syndrome in men 
[,
] 
than women, the reverse is the case in some other reports 
[,
]. 
This study aims to determine gender specific prevalence as
well as the components of the metabolic syndrome within the
jurisdiction of Jaipur city of Rajasthan State.

Methodology
The study was undertaken with participants including 294 men
and 206 women, aged 30 years and above. Convenient
hospitalized patients with the diagnosis of acute myocardial
infarction were included, while those with the history of
steroids, chronic renal or hepatic disease were excluded.
Healthy age and sex matched controls from the general
population were also taken. Controls with previous history of
myocardial infarction, hypertension and diabetes were
excluded. The facilities of NIMS hospital and research centre
were used for different aspects of the study.

The study participants underwent a clinical assessment after
obtaining an informed written consent. A detailed medical
history with the help of questionnaire and a clinical
examination including body mass index, waist circumference
and blood pressure were recorded. Participants who were on
anti hypertensive or anti diabetic drugs were considered as
hypertensives and diabetics. Dyslipidemia was considered in
those already on lipid lowering drugs. Laboratory assessment
included obtaining fasting venous blood samples for the
determination of the lipid profile, and blood glucose. Ethical
approval was obtained from the Ethical committee of hospitals.
The presence of the metabolic syndrome was determined using
the National Cholesterol Education Program Adult Treatment
Panel (NCEP ATP III) definition Asian modified. The presence
of three or more of any of the following was pointer to the MetS
1) Waist circumference (WC) greater than 90 cm in men and 80
cm in women; 2) Serum triglycerides (TG) level of at least 150
mg/dL (1.69 mmol/L); 3) High-density lipoprotein cholesterol
(HDL-C) level of less than 40 mg/dL (1.04 mmol/L) in men and
50 mg/dL (1.29 mmol/L) in women; 4) Blood pressure of at
least 130/85 mm Hg; 5) Serum glucose level of at least 110
mg/dL (6.05 mmol/L). We compared between the gender
differences for age, obesity, waist circumference, blood
pressure, triglycerides, fasting blood sugar and HDL-C by using
Chi square test. Difference between males and females
regarding the frequency of metabolic syndrome were also
assessed. Statistical significance of P-value was taken as &lt;0.05.
The data were analyzed using statistical tools.

Result
The mean age of the study subjects was 55 - 56± (S.D of 15.22)
years. The most important metabolic syndrome parameters in
the study subjects were central obesity (increased waist
circumference 29%) elevated triglycerides 33%), hypertension
38%, low HDL (36%) and hyperglycemia in (29%). Most of the
women had elevated BMI (50%) and were postmenopausal. As
compared to men almost all were house wives with poor
physical activity and 13% of literacy which were also significant
statistically Sign.

Gender differences were seen as significant statistically
regarding HDL cholesterol, waist circumference, and fasting
glucose levels while they were similar regarding triglyceride
and BP. Using the standard cutoff values of the individual
components for metabolic syndrome the distribution was as
follow: the low HDL cholesterol was seen in 25% of females as
compared to 34% males (P-value &lt; 0.0001). 42% of males had
waist circumference&gt;/=90 cm, while 63% females had a waist
circumference &gt;/= 80 cms (P-value &lt; 0.002). Similarly
hyperglycemia also significantly differed in males as compared
to females i.e. 25%vs 42% (P value &lt;0.01) respectively. The
difference among males and females regarding BMI was only
marginal (p-value 0.08). Metabolic syndrome according to
ATPIII criteria i.e. those who had three or more risk factors, was
found in 128 (25.6%) of study participants.  (see
supplementary material) shows that in both women and men a
cluster corresponding to the metabolic syndrome represented
29% and 23% of the women's and men's samples, respectively
the statistically results were analysed to be significant which
was also statistically significant.

Discussion
Approximately 47 million Americans meet the diagnostic
criteria of metabolic syndrome, corresponding to about 40% of
the adult population according to census data of 2000 
[].
Somewhat similar results were seen in our study; 25.6 percent
i.e. 128 of study participants had metabolic syndrome. The
components of the metabolic syndrome vary in their rates of
occurrence. The Seychelles study reported high blood pressure
and adiposity as the metabolic syndrome defining criteria that
occurred most commonly irrespective of the metabolic
syndrome definitions used Ogbera. A however reported central
obesity and reduced HDL-cholesterol as the prevalent
components of the metabolic syndrome []. The common
components of metabolic syndrome included central obesity
and dyslipidemia in our study. This finding is not surprising as
it has been seen that central obesity plays a central role in the
development of the metabolic syndrome and appears to
precede the appearance of the other metabolic syndrome
components [].

The gender differences in prevalence of metabolic syndrome
have been found in several studies. It might be due to different
cut-off points set as criteria for metabolic syndrome like WC
and HDL-C []. The results of gender females dominance was
seen in our data similar to the Arkhangel study done in Russia
Korea and China [, 
–]. While it is comparable to the
prevalence data in Frinks cohort [] study, and the studies
conducted in Pakistan [,
]. It was worrisome that the
increase in prevalence of the metabolic syndrome was higher in
women than in men. This is mainly driven by the constant rise
in obesity in women, with presently 2 million more women
than men being affected in the United States4 as well as in the
under developing countries including south east asian countries
[,
] .

Different studies have been undertaken to characterize the
major components of the metabolic syndrome in women and
men in different populations. In a large community based crosssectional
survey in Mauritius, non-diabetic women had
significantly higher body mass indices and 2-h glucose levels
than non-diabetic men []. Investigations performed in the
French Monica cohorts to separate the contributions of different
factors to the metabolic syndrome showed a significantly
elevated body weight, waist girth, and low HDL cholesterol in
women than in men []. Similar findings were seen in our
study i.e. increased waist girth (central obesity), and low HDL
were present more in women as compared to men while blood
pressure and triglycerides levels were same in both the gender.
Abdominal fat tissue is a major source of free fatty acids and
cytokines for the liver, favoring the early development of
insulin resistance, dyslipidemia, and high blood pressure. Thus,
women need a higher degree of adiposity to achieve the same
metabolic disturbances. This might be explained by the more
favorable fat distribution in women []. Most of the women in
our study were postmenopausal with android distribution of
fat. In a US study, metabolic syndrome was associated with
physical inactivity in overweight men and in normal weight
and overweight women, suggesting a high protective value of
physical exercise in women. Similarly the women were having
more physical inactivity as compared to men in our study.
Other protective life styles are also effective, but are
unfortunately heavily underused – such as a high cereal fiber
intake, non-smoking and de-addiction of alcohol.

Conclusion
The pathophysiology of the metabolic syndrome and its
contribution to the relative risk of cardiovascular events and
heart failure show gender differences that has immense
potential relevance for prevention, diagnostics, and therapy of
the metabolic syndrome in all age-groups and all geographical
regions.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Beigh &amp; Jain, Bioinformation 8(13): 613-616 (2012)

