Background
Brucellosis is one of the bacterial zoonoses caused by organisms belonging to
the genus Brucella, gram-negative, non-spore-forming, facultative, intracellular
bacteria. The Brucella genome consists of two circular chromosomes without
plasmids, suggesting a remarkable difference compared to the single
chromosome of many bacteria []. 
Among different types of Brucella species,
B. melitensis 16M, B. suis, B. abortus 
S19 and B.canis ATCC23365 is the
common human pathogenic species which are mainly involved in osteoarthritis,
heart problems, and several neurological disorders 
[]. It is worth to notify that
the DNA sequences of these Brucella species share greater than 90% identity
[] 
and relatively, a small number of differences are responsible for the host
preference and virulence restriction of Brucella species 
[]. Many genome
sequence projects of Brucella species provided tremendous information to
decipher the mechanisms underlying Brucella pathogenicity 
[]; however, the
potential information at greater resolution by expressing different pathogenicity
of closely related genomes like Brucella species are little attracted.

Microsatellites or simple sequence repeats are the DNA regions with tandemly
repeated bases. They are present in both coding and non-coding regions. It is
well known that, variations in the repeat numbers of microsatellites in the
coding regions leads to premature termination and frame shift mutations, which
in turn causes drastic changes in the gene products 
[,
,
,
]. The number of
repeats at a locus can change by mutation and the rate of mutation depends on
the number of tandem units within the repeat 
[]. Some microsatellites
occurring in flanking regions of coding sequences are believed to play
significant roles in regulation of gene expression by forming various DNA
secondary structures and offering a mechanism of unwinding 
[]. The
variations in SSR numbers can alter the spacing between structurally important
domains like the -35 and -10 promoter regions and affect promoter strength.
Further, the promoter strength is also affected by unusual repeat structures
which have ability to alter normal pattern of DNA 
[]. SSRs also interfere
with replication elongation [] 
and also integrity of open reading frames [].
SSRs are present virtually in genome and also exhibits polymorphism 
[]. The
primary cause of microsatellite polymorphism is thought to be strand slippage
during DNA replication []. These microsatellites provide a framework for
crucial genetic rearrangements with their reversible frame-shift mutations that
can confer a certain degree of selective advantage of pathogenic bacteria.
Although these microsatellites act as gene regulators, the loss or gain of repeats
in the promoter region can regulate transcriptional activity 
[]. The influence
of SSRs on gene regulation, transcription and protein function typically
depends on the number of repeats, while mutations that add or subtract repeat
units are both frequent and reversible. SSRs have a major role in generating the
genetic variation underlying adaptive evolution 
[]. Despite the wealth of
scientific studies carried out over the years on the pathogenicity of Brucella,
there are still fundamental gaps in knowledge related to the distribution of
SSRs among different Brucella species with closely related genome.
Considering the facts that a) Brucella species viz., B. melitensis 16M, B. suis,
B. abortusS19 and B. canisATCC23365, are involved in many hazardous
health effects in humans [], 
b) these species share DNA sequences of about
90% similarities [] 
c) SSRs are primarily involved in virulence and pathogenic
nature of bacteria [] 
and d) studies related to distribution pattern of SSRs are
little exploited in Brucella species, the present study was an attempt to
understand the importance and influence on SSRs role in generating genomic
diversity among the closely related genomes of human pathogenic Brucella
species.

Methodology
DNA Sequences
The genome sequence of Brucella melitensis16M NC_003317, NC_003318,
Brucella suis NC_004310, NC_004311, Brucella abortus S19 NC_010742,
NC_010740 and Brucella canisATCC23365 NC_010104, NC_01010 were
downloaded from database www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov 
(see ), 
and the coding sequences of respective genomes were generated from the AMIGene tool
(
http://www.genoscope.cns.fr/agc/tools/amigene). The expected count was
obtained by 10 randomized versions of Homogeneous Bernoulli or
Markov models which are widely used in the analyses of DNA sequences.

Analysis of SSRs
MISA tool used to screen the four genomic and coding sequences of Brucella
and executes different class of SSRs from 1-4 (mono, di, tri and tetra) with
different combinations. These data was used for the analysis of microsatellites
with some modifications are made to accommodate for larger Sequences. To
determine whether the observed SSR frequencies of a given motif length and
repeat number occurred as expected by chance and comparing the mean
frequencies of observed or randomly occurred genomes. Ten randomized
sequences were generated for each genome with “RSAT” Regulatory Sequence
Analysis Tool (
http://rsat.ccb.sickkids.ca/). The four Brucella Coding
sequences were generated using the AMI Gene tool from complete genomes of
each species and statistical data shows the overrepresented or underrepresented
SSRs types among the four genomes.

Statistical Analysis
One-way analysis of variance ANOVA was done for mean O/E ratios of
different class of SSRs among the four species of Brucella genomes. By using
SPSS 16.0.1 to determine the distribution of SSRs reports motif, motif length,
and repeat number of genomic and coding regions of all SSRs of the four
species of Brucella genomes.

Results
The findings of the present study revealed that there are different types of
nucleotides distributed among the genomes of selected Brucella sp. Four
different types of nucleotides viz., mono-, di-, tri-and tetra-nucleotides were
determined by using the computational tools such as MISA, AMIGene and
RSAT. Further, comparison of the index of nonrandomness of SSRs of each
repeat type showed very similar correlations between SSR length and
nonrandomness. SSRs of trimers showed the strongest nonrandomness,
followed by SSRs of monomers. The patterns of nonrandomness exhibited by
SSRs of dimers and tetramers were in the order of dimmers&gt;tetramers. Results
pertaining to the mononucleotide repeat type indicate that little or no variations
were observed among the four genomes of Brucella species. However,
B.melitensis 16M and shows a little abundance with mean values of 1.02 when
compared to the mean values 0.78, 0.77 and 0.75 of Brucella abortusS19,
Brucella suis and Brucella canis ATCC23365, respectively in the genomic
region. Whereas, in the coding regions of Brucella species there was no much
variation observed in mono and di-nucleotide SSRs when compared to tri- and
tetra nucleotide SSRs (). Similar to mononucleotide repeats, dinucleotide
repeat SSRs also showed a little abundance with mean values of
0.63, 0.59, 0.52 and 0.51 of Brucella abortusS19, Brucella suis, Brucella canis
ATCC23365 and Brucella melitensis16M respectively in the genomic regions
() On contrary, the tri-nucleotide SSRs showed a distinct variability
with extensive level of overrepresentation in both genomic and coding regions
of four Brucella species with mean values of 1.46, 1.53, 1.20, 2.06.and 2.07 ,
2.43, 1.82, 3.39.while in tetra-nucleotide SSRs showed under representation
with mean values of 0.25, 0.28, 0.14, 0.17 in genomic and 0.19, 0.22, 0.09,
0.06 and coding region.

Expected frequencies of SSRs of given motif length and repeat number were
determined by computer generated genomes to construct random ordering of
nucleotides based on their overall frequencies in the genome, and their
departures were tested using parametric statistics. Among different types of
nucleotides, the O/E ratio performed with computational tool SPSS 16.0.1
indicates that tri-nucleotide repeat tracts were overrepresented in both coding
and non-coding regions. The O/E values also reveal that tri-nucleotide
microsatellites were related to the genomes of Brucella melitensis16M,
Brucella suis and Brucella abortusS19 but not Brucella canisATCC23365
(). On the other hand, tetra nucleotide repeat type SSRs are
underrepresented () in both coding and non-coding regions. The
magnitude of distribution of tetra nucleotide SSRs were in the order of Brucella
canisATCC23365 &gt; Brucella abortusS19&gt; 
Brucella melitensis16M &gt; Brucella
suis ().

Discussion
Computer based analysis of genome-wide screening of SSR frequencies of
given motif length and repeat number showed a significant (P &lt; 0.05) variation
of tri- and tetra nucleotide SSRs relative to expectations among the four
Brucella species selected (). The picture represents that the tri
nucleotide repeats were overrepresented and tetra nucleotide repeats were
underrepresented in both genomic and coding region of the selected species
(). 
Expected frequencies of SSRs of given motif length and repeat
number were determined by computer generated genomes to construct random
ordering of nucleotides based on their overall frequencies in the genome, and
their departures were tested using Parametric statistics. The number of SSRs
decreased rapidly with increasing size of the repeat unit. Similarly, mono
nucleotide SSRs was slightly underrepresented in all the organisms except in
B.melitensis 16M (1.02). In mono-nucleotide SSRs, the mean value of the
average of four genomes in total and coding region are 0.83 and 0.74,
respectively (), 
whereas in case of di-nucleotide SSRs the average
of four genomes and the coding region are 0.5 and 0.4, respectively, indicating
the underrepresentation pattern in these organisms (). On contrary,
the tri-nucleotide SSRs showed a distinct variability with extensive level of
overrepresentation in both genomic and coding regions of four Brucella
species. The tetra-nucleotide repeats exhibited underrepresentation as that of
mono-and di-nucleotide SSRs. The observed/expected (O/E) ratio gives the
valuable information regarding the distribution pattern of virtually existing
SSRs in the organisms and the computationally based analysis of SSRs. The
O/E ratio of all the means of SSRs Vs species indicate that, the distribution
pattern of SSRs in genomic and coding regions were either under-or overrepresented
in different species. In B.suis and B.abortus S19, slight
underrepresentation pattern in the SSRs were observed in the genomic region
whereas, in the coding region a slight overrepresentation was observed in
B.canis ATCC23365 and underrepresentation was observed in B.abortus S19.
The O/E ratio indicates that, there is a tremendous overrepresentation of tri
nucleotide repeats on an average r4 &gt;1.5, P &lt; 0.05 in genomic and r4&gt;2.4, P &lt;
0.05 in coding region of four Brucella genomes. Whereas O/E value of tetranucleotide
repeats indicate under-represented pattern in B. canisATCC23365
and B. abortus S19 ().

Further, statistical tools like Poisson distribution and normal distribution
analysis were performed to evaluate whether SSRs of a given length are overor
under-represented in genomic DNA sequences or not by comparing
observed SSR counts with random sequences []. In general, as SSR counts
were decreased, there was an increase in the SSR length indicating an
exponential trend among all the Brucella species tested 
().
However, in tri-nucleotide SSRs, a direct proportional pattern was observed in
the SSR counts and SSR length which might be responsible for the overrepresented
distribution of four genomes. Herein, we suggest that tri-nucleotide
SSRs in both genomic and coding regions might be an important approach to
generate functional variation of proteins in the Brucella species. In the present
study, even the organisms share &gt;90% genomic homology, the overrepresentation
of tri-nucleotide SSRs might be potential agents to cause wide
range of pathogenicity among the selected human Brucella species. Since,
SSRs act as stress response genes, transcription regulators and virulence
factors. We also postulate that all these properties of SSRs are accompanied by
tri-nucleotide SSRs which are embedded in repeat motifs. These repeat rich
regions act as reservoirs of genes, which are capable of bringing about certain
variability in virulence, antigenicity, and host adaptation. The results of the
study suggests that SSRs can be used as tool for studies of genetic variation,
determine the virulence and diagnostic purposes in species of Brucella.

Conclusion and Future directions
To conclude, deviations from expected values can be interpreted as over- or
under-representation of SSRs of a given type and length. There is preferential
distribution of repeat motifs, and some motifs are organism specific. Although
the four genome models can deviate from exponential relationship, the
deviations are experimental, and the differences between random models can
be used as benchmarks in assessing the significance of variations observed in
the genomic DNA sequence. The ability to identify SSRs with nonrandom
distribution profiles, as demonstrated in this article, is of interest since it may
assist the elucidation of disease associated SSRs and the development of novel
indicators of adverse health conditions with high prevalence among minority
groups. The development of indicators of these health conditions will assist the
diagnosis, treatment, and management of affected individuals and will
contribute to the alleviation of extant health disparities. Further, monitoring
SSR type, distribution and abundance has paramount importance to know the
inn near future short-term variability in the genome of a large number of
medically important microorganisms. Further investigation on the analysis of
SSR composition in clinical isolates may in the end be an important prognostic
marker of a patient's risk of developing severe infections. The present study
may be helpful in understanding the influence of SSRs and their effects on
human beings.

Supplementary material
Data 1
I specially thank Professor. K.V.S. Sharma. Dept of Statistics, S.V. University,
Tirupati from whom I receive great help to analyses the Statistical data.

Citation:Kiran et al, Bioinformation 6(5): 179-182 (2011)

Bars represent the abundance of SSRs in the genomic regions of
Brucella species.

Bars represent the abundance of SSRs in the coding regions of
Brucella species.

Distribution of observed (filled diamond)/expected (filled square)
ratio of SSRs in genomic region of Brucella species. (A) Brucella
melitensis16M; (B) Brucella suis; (C) Brucella abortusS19; (D) Brucella
canisATCC23365

Distribution of observed (filled diamond)/expected (filled square)
ratio of SSRs in coding region of Brucella species. (A) Brucella
melitensis16M; (B) Brucella suis; (C) Brucella abortusS19; (D) Brucella
canisATCC2336

