Background
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the leading neurological and 
psychiatric brain disorder characterized by learning and 
memory destruction affecting more than 24 million people 
worldwide []. Abnormally hyperphosphorylated microtubule 
associated protein tau (MAPT) is the hallmark of Alzheimer's 
disease and related taupathies []. Pathologically AD is 
characterized by the formation of two aggregates namely 
neurofibrillary tangles and senile plaques. Neurofibrillary 
tangles consisting of filamentous aggregates of 
hyperphosphorylated tau in microtubules [,
]. Certain post 
translational modifications of tau like phosphorylation allows 
forming of characteristic paired helical filaments. Tau is the 
major component of Alzheimer paired helical filaments. MAPT 
(Microtubule associated protein tau) is a kind of tau protein 
which occurs in healthy brain and functions in axonal transport, 
assembly and stabilization of microtubules, in certain 
pathological conditions it gets hyperphosphorylated in AD 
brains. The hyperphosphorylation of MAPT leads to form 
aggregates in neurofibrillary tangles, which are the main causes 
of AD []. Two proline rich kinases such as Cyclin dependent 
kinase5 (CDK5) and Glycogen synthase kinase3B (GSK3B) act as 
putative mediators in aberrant hyperphosphorylation of MAPT 
protein at proline directed sites []. Over activation of CDK5 
and GSK3B kinases enhances the formation of neurofibrillary 
tangles in AD brain by MAPT hyperphosphorylation []. CDK5 
is a serine/threonine protein kinase which involves in the 
processes of neuronal migration, synaptic function, myogenesis,
neurite outgrowth and controlling the differentiation of nerve 
cells [,
]. The activity of CDK5 depends on interaction with an 
activator. P25 and P35 are the activators of CDK5 that 
functionally involve in the hyperphosphorylation of tau protein 
[,
]. Calpain is a calcium dependent protease which is 
responsible for the progression of p35/p25 activators; moreover 
increase in calpain activity enhancing the p25 levels and 
contributes to CDK5 activity in the AD brain. Tau 
phosphorylated by CDK5, loses its ability to bind with 
microtubules, revealing that CDK5- mediated tau 
phosphorylation disrupts the normal functions of tau. Therefore 
CDK5 is coined as a potential candidate for a significant role in 
the hyperphophorylation of MAPT in AD []. GSK3B 
(Glycogen Synthase Kinase B) is a multifunctional serine/ 
threonine protein kinase which is involved in the regulation of 
glycogen synthesis and has the ability to phosphorylate and 
inactivates the glycogen synthase [,
,
]. In addition to 
glucose metabolism it intermediates in many extra cellular 
pathways, involved in energy metabolism, neuronal cell 
development and body pattern formation []. Deregulation of 
GSK3B kinase contributes to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's 
disease by decreasing the levels of nuclear β- catenin and results 
in tau phosphorylation [].

Overexpression of GSK3B decreases the levels of nuclear β- 
catenin, and results in tau hyperphosphorylation and 
neurodegeneration in AD brain []. 
Shi Jie Liu et al. suggested 
that inhibition of GSK3B activity abolishes 
hyperphosphorylation of MAPT and spatial memory 
impairment. From these results it is strongly implied that the 
role of GSK3B is important for the formation of neurofibrillary 
tangles, abnormalities of AD as well as the spatial memory 
impairment. Both GSK3B and CDK5 are involved in the 
regulation of hyperphosphorylation of MAPT by catalyzing the 
phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues of 
MAPT using ATP as phosphate donor .The association between 
GSK3B, CDK5 and tau has been confirmed by isolating them in 
a complex with neurofibrillary tangles from AD affected brain. 
The two proline directed protein kinases, GSK3B and CDK5 are 
strongly associated with hyperphosphorylation of MAPT and 
also implicates in AD pathiese [,
]. In this present study, the 
various structural and functional characteristics of MAPT, 
GSK3B and CDK5 proteins have been analyzed. The tertiary 
structure of MAPT protein has been modeled and its interaction 
with GSK3B and CDK5 kinases has been analyzed using insilico 
docking methods. The important phosphorylation sites of 
MAPT and other two kinases were predicted and the 
significance of phosphorylated sites which leads to 
hyperphosphorylation of MAPT was analyzed. Active sites 
which associated in the binding of MAPT with GSK3B and 
CDK5 were also examined. The role of two protein kinases 
GSK3B and CDK5 in hyperphosphorylation of MAPT in 
Alzheimer's disease has been investigated.

Methodology
Sequence retrieval and modeling:
The sequences of the three proteins, namely MAPT, CDK5 and 
GSK3B were retrieved from NCBI (http://www. ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) 
protein database. The x- ray crystallographic structure 
of CDK5 and GSK3B were already available and were directly 
taken from PDB []. However, the x- ray crystallographic 
structure of MAPT protein is not available in PDB and other 
protein databases. So, we first modeled three dimensional 
structure of MAPT protein to analyze its interaction studies 
with other two proteins. The complete sequence of MAPT (358 
aa) was submitted to NCBI BLAST [] tool for detecting the 
homologues sequences against PDB database. However, there 
was no homologues were identified with the identity 
percentage of 40% for homology modeling. So protein threading 
method was used to construct the tertiary structure of MAPT 
using RAPTOR version 3.0 []. RAPTOR contains about 6000 
non-redundant structural files within its template library for the 
modeling task. From the available structures, structures with 
CATH hierarchical classification alone were selected for protein 
threading. For this a list of CATH classified PDB codes were 
first cross-referenced with the RAPTOR structure library. In 
addition, templates with missing structural regions in the PDB 
files were excluded from the template set. The resulting 
template library contained 2938 structures. The protein 
sequence of MAPT with 358 amino acids was given as input for 
threading against the selected 2938 structures. The alignments 
between the target sequence and the template database were 
generated using the non pair wise core threading algorithm. 
The stereochemical quality of the modeled structure was 
validated with PROCHECK [] and the best model was 
selected after stereo correctness. Finally, energy minimization 
was performed for the three protein molecules namely model of
MAPT and crystal structure of CDK5 and GSK3B with the help 
of Swiss PDB Viewer [].

Binding site prediction:
To determine the binding affinities of MAPT with two protein 
kinases CDK5 and GSK3B, the active sites of modeled MAPT 
protein was predicted using Q-Site Finder []. The Q-Site 
Finder algorithm is based on calculating the Vander walls 
interaction energy with the protein for aliphatic carbons for the 
probes on a grid and, retaining the probes with favorable 
interactions. Structural domains are the independently stable 
element in a protein structure. In Q-site finder the clusters of 
probes with favorable interactions are ranked according to their 
total interaction energies, ligand binding site tends to be among 
the highest ranking pockets.

Protein protein docking:
GRAMMX v.1.2 [] was used for docking the two protein 
kinases GSK3B and CDK5 with the modeled MAPT protein. In 
protein docking studies, we consider MAPT protein as receptor 
and two kinases GSK3B and CDK5 as ligands. GRAMMX 
employs grid projection of a smoothed lennard jones potential, 
combined with a post docking procedure of rigid-body 
minimization and structure clustering for producing best 
docked complexes. The GRAMM-X output generates ten 
models and on the basis of hydrogen bond affinity between the 
atoms of two proteins; the best docked complex was selected for 
further analysis. The complex structures were viewed with 
Pymol viewer [].

Prediction of phosphorylation profile:
Phosphorylation is an important nature of protein post 
translational modification (PTM). Protein phosphorylation plays 
a significant role in a wide range of cellular processes. 
Identification of phosphorylation sites of a protein is important 
for understanding and analyzing its functions. In this study, we 
used three different servers for predicting the phophorylation
sites of MAPT protein namely NetPhos 2.0 [], 
DISPHOS 1.3 [], and PostMod 
[]. NetPhos 2.0 
[] uses artificial neural networks to 
predict 17 kinase family specific phosphorylation sites in input 
protein sequence. DISPHOS [] 
(DISorder enhanced PHOSphorylation site predictor) uses position specific amino 
acid composition method to predict structural disorder information for 
differentiate phosphorylation and non-phosphorylation sites of a given protein 
sequence. PostMod [] uses the 
BLOSUM62 matrix-based similarity measure and profile-profile alignment scores 
with a noise- reducing algorithm to predict post translational modifications 
of the query protein with a protein kinase.

Binding affinity analysis:
ATP binding residues of GSK3B and CDK5 protein kinases were 
predicted by using ATPint online server []. ATPint is a web 
based tool for the prediction of ATP binding residue in a protein 
sequence. In addition stabilization potential of the complex 
structure is computed by two programs namely Stabilization 
center (Scide) [] and Stabilization residue (Sride) 
[]. Scide 
program predicts the number of residues which acts as 
stabilization center in the complex as well as in the individual 
molecule. Stabilization center is an artificial network to predict 
the key residues acting as stabilization centers of the complex 
protein. Sride program calculates the number of stabilization 
residues in the complex. Both the algorithms can predict the 
stability of the structures by numbering the residues.

Results
Protein Models:
The crystal structures of CDK5 (PDB id: 1UNH_A) and GSK3B 
(PDB id: 1UV5) being available were directly retrieved from 
PDB database []. However for MAPT Protein neither crystal 
structure nor template is available for homology modeling. So, 
protein threading method was used to construct the 3D 
structure of MAPT using RAPTOR version 3.0 []. RAPTOR 
successfully generated 20 structural models (sequence-template 
alignments) for the target protein MAPT and a model with the 
highest Z-score of 0.39 was selected as the tertiary structure for 
MAPT. The modeled tertiary structure of MAPT protein is 
shown in (). The stereo chemical quality of the 
developed model was validated by PROCHECK program 
[] 
using Ramachandran plots. The Ramachandran plot analysis 
revealed that in the backbone dihedral angle distributions of 
amino acid residues 77.1% in the most favored, 17.5% in 
additional allowed, and 3.3 % in generously allowed regions. 
This ensures that the quality of the generated model was good. 
The binding sites of the developed model were predicted using 
Q-site finder []. There were in total 10 ligand binding site 
pockets in the MAPT protein. The binding pockets are shown in 
().

Docking studies of MAPT with CDK5 and GSK3B:
We have analyzed the mode of interaction of MAPT with two 
kinases CDK5 and GSK3B individually using GRAMM-X 
program [] 
to find their association in hyperphosphorylation. 
Binding conformations of MAPT-CDK5 complexes are 
displayed in  and the individual hydrogen bond 
formation between the interacting residues of CDK5 and MAPT 
are shown in (). Hydrogen 
bonds create significant contributions to the interactions 
between receptor and ligand. The docking interactions of amino 
acid residues of MAPT and CDK5 with interatomic distances 
are presented in  (see supplementary material). The 
docking results of MAPT-CDK5 revealed that, polar amino acid 
residues present in the active site region of MAPT were strongly 
involved in the protein-protein interactions. The residues GLN6, 
GLY9, ARG15, ARG56, ALA66, LYS209 and THR205 were the 
indispensable residues for accounting hydrogen bonding with 
amino acid residues of CDK5. Further, all the docked regions of 
MAPT were in coil in structure and showed that coiled regions 
of MAPT were binding effectively with CDK5 when compared 
with α-helices and b-sheet regions. Binding conformations of 
MAPT-GSK3B complex is displayed in  and the 
individual hydrogen bond formation between the interacting 
residues of MAPT and GSK3B are shown in . The
docking interactions of amino acid residues of MAPT and 
GSK3B with interatomic distances are presented in  (see 
supplementary material). The docking results revealed that 
only two residues of MAPT namely THR95 and GLY76 were 
involved in hydrogen bonding interaction with the residues of 
GSK3B.

Phosphorylation site predictions:
Recognition of phosphorylation sites are related to many 
functional features. The phosphorylation sites of Microtubule 
associated protein tau (MAPT) predicted using three different 
severs namely NetPhos2.0 [], DISPHOS1.3 
[], and PostMod 
[]. 
Netphos and DISPHOS predict the phosphorylation sites 
of MAPT protein and are shown in  &amp; 
 respectively. In 
() sequence position is plotted against phosphorylation 
potential of the MAPT protein. In  the phosphorylation 
sites are plotted as amino acid position and DISPHOS score. The 
servers predict overall 39 (27 Serine, 9 threonine and 3 tyrosine) 
phosphorylation sites for MAPT. PostMod predicts the post 
translational modification sites of MAPT protein with the 
influence of CDK5 and GSK3B kinases. The specific 
phosphorylation sites for CDK5 and GSK3B kinases with MAPT 
were analyzed using PostMod. When CDK5 was selected as 
candidate for phosphorylating MAPT, out of the total 39 
phosphorylation sites of MAPT, 14 of them were recognized as 
phosphorylation sites for CDK5. However, in case of GSK3B, 
only five sites were recognized as phosphorylation sites. These 
results imply that hyperphosphorylation of MAPT is regulated 
by both CDK5 and GSK3B, however the activity of CDK5 is 
more than that of GSK3B. The three residues of MAPT such as 
T53, T117 and S315 are commonly phosphorylated by both 
kinases. The result of post translational modification of MAPT 
with CDK5 and GSK3B are presented in  (see 
supplementary material) respectively.

ATP Binding site analysis:
Predicting Adenosine Tri Phosphate (ATP) binding sites is 
essential for analyzing the phosphorylation process and 
function of the particular protein. ATP interacting residues in 
the CDK5 and GSK3B protein kinases were predicted by using 
ATPint server. The numbers of ATP interacting residues in
CDK5 were 70 and in GSK3B were 102. ATP binding pockets 
were located around the active sites of the both protein kinases. 
The predicted ATP interacting residues of CDK5 and GSK3B are 
presented in  (see supplementary material).

Prediction of stabilization center and stabilizing residues in binding residues:
The stabilization center for the two complexes MAPT-CDK5 
and MAPT-GSK3B was computed using the Scide [] program. 
The results of stabilization center are presented in 
 (see 
supplementary material). In case of CDK5 many number of 
residues which act as stabilization center were also involved in 
binding with the MAPT molecule. Among the CDK5 and 
GSK3B kinases, CDK5 has the highest number of 21 residues 
which act as stabilization center as well as ATP binding sites. In 
case of GSK3B there were 19 residues acting as stabilization 
residues as well as ATP interacting sites. We have predicted the 
stabilizing residues in the CDK5 and GSK3B molecules and also 
in the complex using Sride [] program. The results of the 
stabilizing residues are presented in  (see 
supplementary material).

Discussion
Microtubule associated protein tau (MAPT) was coined to be 
abnormally hyperphosphorylated in Alzheimer's disease. Inge 
GI et al. reported that CDK5 and GSK3B are the two important 
kinases regulating the hyperphosphorylation of MAPT 
[]. 
However it is currently contested as to which kinase is strongly 
associated with tangle formation, which plays a key role in 
regulation of hyperphosphorylation of MAPT. So it is necessary
to evaluate the role of two protein kinases in 
hyperphosphorylation of MAPT protein that leads to tangle 
formation. In this study, we have investigated various insilico 
strategies to find the role of CDK5 and GSK3B kinases in 
hyperphosphorylation of microtubule associated protein tau 
(MAPT) in Alzheimer's disease.

The initial docking study reveals the important binding sites of 
MAPT protein and their association with CDK5 and GSK3B 
kinases. The docked regions of MAPT were located within the 
binding cleft. Higher number of inter molecular hydrogen 
bonds were observed in the MAPT-CDK5 complex but in the 
case of MAPT-GSK3B complex the hydrogen bonding 
interactions were less. Next, the numbers of sites to be 
phosphorylated on MAPT with the influence of CDK5 and 
GSK3B kinases were found to be 14 and 5 respectively. Further, 
some of the ATP binding interacting sites of CDK5 and GSK3B 
kinases also acted as stabilization centers after the complex 
formation. There were more number of binding residues of 
CDK5 that acted as stabilization residues and stabilization 
centers when compared to GSK3B. Certain residues that act as 
stabilizing residues in the GSK3B were not seen as the 
stabilizing residue when they formed the complex with the 
MAPT protein. In the case of CDK5, it shows the best results for 
three residues acting as stabilizing residues before and after 
binding. Moreover some of the residues that act as stabilizing 
centers in the GSK3B were not seen in the ATP binding sites 
when they formed the complex with the MAPT receptor. Again 
the CDK5 showed the best result for 21 residues acting as 
stabilizing residues before and after binding and also acts as 
ATP binding sites. These stabilization centers may increase 
stability of the MAPT-CDK5 complex during the docking
process. The overall results from various insilico analysis 
discussed are summarized in  (see supplementary 
material) and suggest that CDK5 is strongly involved in the 
hyperphosphorylation of MAPT than GSK3B.

Conclusion
MAPT is the key protein which is involved in the pathogenesis 
of Alzheimer's disease. This present insilico study helps to 
understand the structural and functional basis of MAPT protein 
with CDK5 and GSK3B kinases. The docking study of MAPT 
protein showed 7 binding confirmations for CDK5 and only two 
for GSK3B. The coiled nature of the MAPT protein is effectively 
phosphorylated by ATP binding sites of CDK5 and moreover 
these residues play a major role in hyperphosphorylation of 
MAPT than GSK3B. Some of the ATP binding sites of CDK5 
kinases acted as the stabilization centers before and after 
formation of the complex. The numbers of sites to be 
phosphorylated on MAPT with the influence of CDK5 and 
GSK3B kinases were found to be 14 and 5 respectively. 
Eventhough both kinases are regulating the 
hyperphosphorylation of MAPT, with a small extent CDK5 
showed more binding affinity towards the active sites of the 
target protein MAPT, when compared to GSK3B. With the 
overall results from different insilico analysis it can be suggested 
that CDK5 is strongly involved in the hyperphosphorylation of
MAPT than GSK3B. So the ATP binding sites of CDK5 can be 
focused as drug targets for Alzheimer's disease.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Jayapalan &amp; Natarajan, Bioinformation 9(20): 1023-1030 (2013)

Modelled tertiary structure of human MAPT

Predicted binding pockets of MAPT showing all its 10 
binding sits in different colors

Docking interaction of MAPT with CDK5 and its interatomic hydrogen bonds with distances. Red color dash lines 
represents the hydrogen bond interactions between the amino acid residues: a) Docked complex structure of MAPT (cartoon 
representation in pink) and CDK5 (sphere representation in green); b) Interatomic hydrogen bonds between GLN6 and ARG217 
with distance; c) Interatomic hydrogen bonds between GLY9 and GLN273; d) Interatomic hydrogen bonds between ARG15 and 
GLN282; e) Interatomic hydrogen bonds between ARG56 and ARG 156; f) Interatomic hydrogen bonds between ALA66 and 
SER276; g) Interatomic hydrogen bonds between LYS209 and GLU224; h) Interatomic hydrogen bonds between THR205 and PRO 
228.

Docking interaction of MAPT with GSK3B and its 
interatomic hydrogen bonds with distances. Red color dash 
lines represent the hydrogen bonds interactions between the 
amino acid residues: a) Docked complex structure of MAPT 
(cartoon representation in pink) and GSK3B (sphere 
representation in blue); b) Interatomic hydrogen bonds between 
THR95 and GLN 273; c) Interatomic hydrogen bonds between 
GLY 76 and GLU 279.

Phosphorylation sites present in MAPT protein. 
Serine, Threonine and Tyrosine sites are displayed in colours 
blue, green and red respectively.

The number of disorder enhanced phosphorylation sites of MAPT. Red colored triangles denotes the serine residues, blue 
colored elliptical shapes denotes threonine sites and green colored square areas denoted the tyrosine sites.

