Background
Soybean is the second most valuable agricultural commodity
and an inexpensive source of proteins for humans and animals
in the United States. Soybean seed proteins possess unique
physiochemical properties which are suitable for various
human and animal food uses. Soybean seed proteins are used in
baby formula, flour, protein supplements, concentrates, and
textured fibers. Soybean seeds contain 40-50% protein on a dry
matter basis and consist predominantly of globulin type of
proteins. Soybean storage proteins account for ~70-80% of total
seed proteins and are deposited in protein bodies, which are
specialized membrane-bound organelles. These storage proteins
are largely responsible for the nutritional and physicochemical
properties of soybeans. Soybeans are also sources of several
secondary metabolites including isoflavones, saponins, phytic
acid, flatus-producing oligosaccharides, and goitrogens.

In recent years, the application of proteomic tools such as twodimensional
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, matrixassisted
laser desorption/ionization time of flight, and liquid
chromatography mass spectrometry, has become popular as a
powerful methodology for accurately detecting and examining
changes in protein composition. These tools have been
extensively used to examine the composition of both natural
and transgenic soybean storage protein profiles and determine
seed qualities of soybeans. Information about soybean seed
proteins will be useful for scientists to understand their
functional characteristics for subsequent modification of the
protein through genetic alteration in order to obtain a valuable
trait. However limited sources are available to retrieve soybean
protein information from publicly available databases 
[,
].
Therefore, we developed a database for soybean seed proteins
which are easily accessible to the scientific community as well
as the general public.

Identified Soybean Proteins:
The majority of the proteins described in our database are in the
form of storage, allergen, and anti-nutritional. β-conglycinin,
one of the two major storage proteins, is a trimeric 7S globulin
glycoprotein consisting of three types of subunits: α, α′ and β, in
seven different combinations with the molecular weight of 180
kDa. The second storage protein, glycinin, is a hexameric 11S
globulin (360 kDa), consists of acidic (A) and basic (B)
polypeptides, and is encoded by five subunits. Based on
physical properties, these five subunits are classified into two
distinct major groups; group I consisting of G1, G2, and G3
proteins, and group II consisting G4 and G5 subunits. The
group I subunits contain more methionine residues than group
II. This is an important feature for plant breeders desiring to
increase the methionine content in soybean seeds to improve
their nutritional quality. Beillinson et al. 
[] identified and
mapped two additional genes in soybean variety Resnik. The
soybean allergen proteins exist as three major types. The first
major allergen, soybean Gly m Bd 60K, is described as seed
storage protein. Based on the many reports, some subunits of β-
conglycinin and glycinin are considered as Gly m Bd 60k
allergen protein members. Krishnan et al. 
[] reported that all
subunits of β-conglycinin are possible allergens. Gly m Bd 30K
is the second major allergen protein of soybean.

This protein was previously described in soybean seed as P34, a
34-kD vacuolar protein []. Elimination of P34 from soybean
seeds may enhance food safety and make the use of soybean
products available to sensitive individuals. Recently, Herman et
al. [] developed a transgenic soybean lacking p34 allergen. The
third allergen, Gly m Bd 28K is a less abundant protein of
soybean which was originally isolated from soybean meal as a
28 kDa glycosylated protein []. Like allergens, anti-nutritional
proteins in soybean act as limiters for soybean applications as a
food or feed. Kunitz trypsin inhibitor (KTI) is one of the
abundant anti-nutritional proteins, which can inhibit trypsin, an
important animal digestive enzyme. In addition, KTIs have
been characterized as food allergens in humans and have 32%
sequence homology with a rye grass pollen allergen 
[]. Seed
lectins are also anti-nutritional proteins present in soybeans and
account for about 10% of total protein in some legumes.

Methodology
Protein was extracted from cultivated soybean seed, G. max PI
423954. Extraction procedures used were a modified
TCA/acetone method and isopropanal method [,
]. 2DPAGE
separation was performed using IPG strips with pH 3.0-
10.0, 4.0-7.0 and 6.0 -11 ranges. Protein spots were initially
analyzed by MALDI-TOF-MS, and those not positively
identified were subjected to LC-MS/MS. Protein identification
was performed by searching against National Center for
Biotechnology Information (NCBI) non-redundant database
using the Mascot search engine
(http://www.matrixscience.com). The identified proteins were
classified in to 3 major protein groups: storage, allergen, and
anti-nutritional.

Database methodology:
The web based database is composed of two main parts. The
first one is a relational database built on Access 2007. The
second part is the web interface. Web pages were created using
Active Server Pages (ASP.Net) using C# programming
language. Both the database and the interface are housed on the
bioinformatics server at Towson University, MD, USA. The site
houses several 2D Gel images showing isolated soybean seed
proteins. Each protein is given a unique number (SpotID).
Information on each protein on the gels is stored in the
database. The website allows users to enter the SpotID for the
protein of interest, and retrieves the corresponding information
on that protein from the SoyProDB. The design is simple, yet
efficient, and meets the needs of the biologists using the
database. Figure 1 is a snapshot of the database's main page.
The database is accessible from:
http://bioinformatics.towson.edu/Soybean_Seed_Proteins_2D
_Gel_DB /Home.aspx.

Utility of the biological community
The database is of interest to biologists working with soybeans
and/or seed proteins. It provides an easy and visual means to
identify key proteins in soybean seeds. The web interface allows
scientists to access the data using any web browser.

Caveats
More gels need to be added to this database as well as a more
comprehensive biological interpretation of the data. Work on
that is underway.

The authors thank Dr. Benjamin F. Matthews for the critical
review of this manuscript. Funding for this research was
provided by ARS project 1275-21000-224-00D. Mention of trade
name, proprietary product or vendor does not constitute a
guarantee or warranty of the product by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture or imply its approval to the exclusion of other
products or vendors that also may be suitable.

Citation:Tavakolan et al, Bioinformation 9(3): 165-167 (2012)

Asnapshot of SoyProDB interface.

