Background
Leishmaniasis is an infectious disease complex caused by
several species that are members of the protozoan parasite
genus Leishmania. In humans, disease manifestation ranges
from self-healing cutaneous lesions to life threatening visceral
leishmaniasis (VL). This disease complex affects 12 million
people, and there are 1.5 million new cases annually [,
].
Visceral Leishmaniasis known as kala-azar, black fever and
dumdum fever and it is the most severe form of leishmaniasis.
VL, caused by Leishmania donovoni, Leishmania infantum and
Leishmania chagasi, remains the main agent of morbidity and
mortality in leishmaniasis. The parasite has a simple life cycle,
and abundant clinical and experimental evidence indicates that
of all the parasitic diseases, leishmaniasis in particular should
be an appropriate target for effective control through
vaccination. There are, however, no vaccines in routine use
against any form of the disease [,
]. Currently available
vaccines against a variety of infectious diseases mediate
protection by a long-lived humoral response through the
production of antibodies. For diseases such as tuberculosis,
malaria, human immunodeficiency virus infection, and
leishmaniasis, however, the cellular immune response
comprising primarily Th1 and CD8 effector T cells has been
shown to be critical for mediating protection against the
infection []. Visceral leishmaniasis is fatal if not treated and
development of a vaccine with long-term immunity remains a
challenge. The attachment of Leishmania promastigotes to
macrophages, crucial for intracellular parasitism and for the
outcome of the infection, has been demonstrated by many
investigators to be a specific receptor-mediated event 
[–]. The
factors that underlie the immunodominance of the LACK
epitope in the I-Ad Th response remain unknown, although
these are unlikely to reflect the overall abundance of the LACK
(Leishmania homologue of receptors for activated C kinase)
protein because other L. major surface proteins such as GP63 are
more highly expressed [,
]. Whether the focus of the immune
response on LACK is detrimental to the parasite remains
unknown, but immunization with LACK is highly efficacious in
protection against subsequent infection [, 
,
]. Emphasis
has been placed on the critical role of LACK 
[–] and
lipophosphoglycan [] that independently mediate parasite
attachment to macrophages. Both molecules, when
reconstituted into liposomes, mediate protection against
cutaneous leishmaniasis and are considered as good vaccine
candidates []. The current study has been undertaken with an
idea to determine the regions of identity, similarity and
antigenicity in the LACK protein which will help in the
development of a vaccine against all forms of VL.

Methodology
Dataset Creation:
In this study, we aligned the protein sequences of LACK of
Leishmania spp associated with Visceral Leishmaniasis over with
the similar prediction conditions and compared the results
obtained. The protein sequences were procured from the
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) through
their entrez search.

Multiple Sequence Alignment:
By Multiple Sequence alignment using Clustal W and TCOFFEE
we arranged the twenty five different sequences of
LACK of Leishmania species associated with Visceral
Leishmaniasis obtained from NCBI to identify regions of
homology that may be a consequence of functional, structural,
or evolutionary relationships.

Basic Local Alignment Search Tool:
Basic Local Alignment Search Tool, or BLAST, has been applied
for comparing primary biological sequence information, like
the amino-acid sequences of LACK obtained from different
species of Leishmania. A BLAST search enabled us to compare a
query sequence with a library or database of sequences, and
identify library sequences that resemble the query sequence
above a certain threshold.

Conservation:
Changes at a specific position of an amino acid sequence that
preserve the physico-chemical properties of the original
residue.

Bit score:
The value S is derived from the raw alignment score S in which
the statistical properties of the scoring system used have been
taken into account. Because bit scores have been normalized
with respect to the scoring system, they have been used to
compare alignment scores from different searches.

H:
H is the relative entropy of the target and background residue
frequencies. H can be thought of as a measure of the average
information (in bits) available per position that distinguishes an
alignment from chance. At high values of H, short alignments
can be distinguished by chance, whereas at lower H values, a
longer alignment may be necessary.

HSP:
High-scoring segment pair. HSPs are local alignments with no
gaps that achieve one of the top alignment scores in a given
search

P Value:
The probability of an alignment occurring with the score in
question or better. The P value is calculated by relating the
observed alignment score, S, to the expected distribution of
HSP scores from comparisons of random sequences of the same
length and composition as the query to the database. The most
highly significant P values are close to 0.

PAM:
Percent Accepted Mutation has been used to quantify the
amount of evolutionary change in a protein sequence. 1.0 PAM
unit is the amount of evolution which will change, on average,
1% of amino acids in a protein sequence. A PAM(x) substitution
matrix is a look-up table in which scores for each amino acid
substitution have been calculated based on the frequency of
that substitution in closely related proteins that have
experienced a certain amount (x) of evolutionary divergence.

Identity:
The extent to which two (nucleotide or amino acid) sequences
are invariant.

Similarity:
The extent to which nucleotide or protein sequences are related.
The extent of similarity between two sequences can be based on
percent sequence identity and/or conservation. In BLAST
similarity refers to a positive matrix score.

Expect value:
The Expect value (E) describes the number of hits one can
“expect” to see by chance when searching a database of a
particular size. It decreases exponentially as the Score (S) of the
match increases. Essentially, the E value describes the random
background noise. The lower the E-value, or the closer it is to
zero, the more “significant” the match is.

Gap:
A space introduced into an alignment to compensate for
insertions and deletions in one sequence relative to another.

Clustal:
It is a widely used multiple sequence alignment computer
program.

Dendrogram:
A dendrogram (from Greek dendron “tree”, -gramma
“drawing”) is a tree diagram used to illustrate the arrangement
of the clusters produced by a clustering algorithm.

Phylogeny:
A phylogenetic tree or evolutionary tree shows the
evolutionary relationships among various biological species or
other entities that are believed to have a common ancestor. In
a phylogenetic tree, each node with descendants represented
the most recent common ancestor of the descendants, and the
edge lengths in some trees correspond to time estimates. We
referred each node as a taxonomic unit. Internal nodes are
generally called hypothetical taxonomic units (HTUs) as they
cannot be directly observed.

Protein Variability:
We used the following methods to predict the variability in the
protein sequences of LACK Leishmania spp associated with
Visceral Leishmaniasis.

Shannon Entropy:
Shannon entropy analysis is possibly the most sensitive tool to
estimate the diversity of a system. For a multiple protein
sequence alignment, the Shannon entropy (H) for every
position can be determined. H ranges from 0 (only one residue
in present at that position) to 4.322 (all 20 residues are equally
represented in that position). Typically, positions with H &gt;2.0
are considered variable, whereas those with H &lt; 2 are
considered conserved. Highly conserved positions are those
with H &lt;1.0.

Simpson Diversity Index:
The Simpson index is another diversity index calculated from
genotype proportions. This index describes the chance that two
genotypes sampled at random and with replacement from a
community will be from the same species. The value of this
index ranges between 0 and 1, the greater the value, the greater
the sample diversity.

Wu-kabat Variability coefficient:
The Wu-Kabat variability coefficient is a well-established
descriptor of the susceptibility of an amino acid position to
evolutionary replacements. It highlights stretches of
accentuated amino acid variation.

Antigenicity Prediction:
The antigenicity/ immunogenicity of the peptides were
predicted using antigenicity index software. Several methods
based on various physio-chemical properties of experimental
determined epitopes (flexibility, hydrophibility, accessibility)
have been published for the prediction of antigenic
determinants, of which the antigenic index and Preditop are
good examples. Perhaps the simplest method for the prediction
of antigenic determinants is that of Kolaskar and Tongaonkar
(1990), which is based on the occurrence of amino acid residues
in experimentally determined epitopes [].

Discussion
The scores of Clustal W of sequences of LACK obtained from
different species strains of Leishmania parasite associated with
visceral leishmaniasis have been found to be between 89 to 100
which predict a high level of homology and conservation and
negligible percentage of gaps amongst the amino acid residues.
Similarly, T-COFFEE () results show significant
identity, similarity and positives towards the Good (Red) then
towards Average (Yellow) and least towards Bad (Green)
which indicate high level of conservation amongst residues.
The Phylogram ( Panel A) and Cladogram 
(
Panel B) analyses also show tight vicinity among the LACK
residues during the process of evolution since nodes are very
close to each other. The Cladogram is smaller in length, it has
fewer homoplasies and it is more parsimonious. These LACK
sequences obtained of one branch from eighteen different
species strains of Leishmania are more closely related as they
arose from gene duplication. Also the four sequences obtained
from the other branch are also a product of gene duplication.
Only gi_388850672_gb_AFK80167.1 arose from a separate
branch which indicates close relationship amongst the other
sequences during evolution.

The Shanon Variability coefficient ( Panel A) is 1 which
confirms our results that variability is less and conservation is
more among the residues. To confirm our findings we found
that Simpson Variability coefficient ( Panel B) comes
out to be 0.46 which again indicates lower variability amongst
the residues. The WuKabat variability index ( Panel C)
has a mean value less than 5 which collaborates well with
above findings indicating lower tendency for mutations and
variations in genotypic and phenotypic level of LACK in the
considered species strains of Leishmania. The antigenicity plot
and immunogenicity prediction ( Panel D) shows that
Threonine, Serine, Phenylalanine, Tryptophan, Phenylalanine,
Arginine, Glutamate, Cystine, Valine and Alanine are
associated with imparting immunogenicity to the LACK
protein.

Conclusion
A comprehensive analysis of LACK sequences available in
GenBank is presented in this report. The data reported here
show sequence conservation, lower variability and higher
antigenicity among known LACK sequences. This provides
ample insights for considering LACK as a putative candidate
for further validation and analysis in the context of visceral
leishmaniasis vaccine target.

Sukrat Sinha is thankful to the financial support provided by
the Department of Science and Technology (India) Fast Track
scheme for Young Scientists No. SB/FT/LS-345/2012 and
Abhay Kumar is thankful for the Department of Biotechnology
(India) Postgraduate Fellowship.

Citation:Sinha et al, Bioinformation 9(16): 832-837 (2013)

Panel A) The Phylogram showing distances in geological time scale of evolutionary relationship in LACK sequences in
different species strains of Leishmania parasite causing visceral leishmaniasis. As can be interpreted nodes of most of the species
strains of Leishmania strains overlap indicating homology during evolution and conservation of amino acid residues of LACK.
Panel B) The Cladogram showing distances in geological time scale of evolutionary relationship in LACK sequences in different
species strains of Leishmania parasite causing visceral leishmaniasis. The distances in geological time scale comes out to be
approximately same in almost all the species strains which indicates lower possibility of variation during evolution.

The MSA shows results of T-Coffee alignment of LACK in different species strains of Leishmania parasite causing visceral
leishmaniasis. A major chunk of amino acid sequence lies in the red portion of T-Coffee indicating conservation of residues
amongst different species and strains.

Panel A) The graph shows Shanon's variability plot of LACK in different species strains of Leishmania parasite causing
visceral leishmaniasis. Since H&lt;2 for most of the amino acid residues hence variability comes out be extremely low thereby
indicating higher level of identity and similarity amongst the amino acid residues; Panel; B) The graph shows Simpson's variability
plot in different species strains of Leishmania parasite causing visceral leishmaniasis. As can be interpreted from the results the
value of variability comes out to be lower than 1, it indicated lower diversity and higher conservation amongst amino acid
residues; Panel; C) The graph shows Wu-Kabat variability plot in different species strains of Leishmania parasite causing visceral
leishmaniasis. It reconfirms our observation of lower variability and higher conservation amongst amino acid residues of LACK;
Panel D) The graph shows (Antigenic index Vs Aminoacid) of LACK in Leishmania species in different species strains of Leishmania
parasite causing visceral leishmaniasis. The average amino acids present at the peak on the graph having antigenic index 1or
greater than 1:-25­­­T, 37­­­S, 40­­­S, 55­­­F, 
80­­­W, 91­­­F, 100­­­F, 119­­­R, 121­­­W, 
139­­­W, 140­­­V, 141­­­S, 179­­­G, 180­­­S, 181­­­
Y, 205­­­W, 265­­­C, 270­­­A.

