Background
Bacterial gene expression is primarily regulated at the level of
transcription. Sigma factor plays a pivotal role in binding with
the core RNAP and subsequently in promoter recognition 
[].
In the last few years, after the publication of the M. tuberculosis
whole genome sequence, the 13 sigma factors of M. tuberculosis
have become an important subject of investigation of which 10
are regarded as the ECF sigma factors. ECF sigma factors play
important role in bacterial pathogenecity and stress, among
them SigH is involved in oxidative stress and heat stress [,
].
Understanding the structural-functional relationship of these
atypical sigma factors will help to understand the physiology
and virulence mechanisms of M. tuberculosis and will help to
design new strategies to fight against the deadly pathogen.

These sigma factors are called as atypical due to the fact that
they consist of two structural domain instead of four that is
usually found in the housekeeping sigma factor SigA or Sig70
(in case of E. coli) [,
]. Domain 2 and domain 4 recognises the
-10 and -35 promoter-binding element, respectively [,
].
Biochemical studies on bacterial RNA polymerase typically
describe that domain 2 region of sigma factor binds with the β׳
subunit of RNAP []. The sigma binding locus on the β׳
subunit is quite conserved throughout the bacterial kingdom.
The present study delineates the structural understanding of
Mtb-SigH and β׳ subunit of Mtb-RNAP and thereby implicates
the predicted interaction between them as one of the vital
target for gene expression.

Methodology
Homology search:
The sequence of Mtb-SigH (Accession Number CCP46040.1)
and β׳ subunit of Mtb-RNAP (Accession Number CCP43411.1)
were obtained from NCBI database
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). The protein sequences
retrieved were used in BLAST (National Library of Medicine,
USA) search against PDB databases [] in order to obtain a
suitable template for homology modeling. Mtb-SigH and β׳
subunit of Mtb-RNAP were modeled using 75 and 974 amino
acid residues, respectively.

Model building:
The homology models of Mtb-SigH and β׳ subunit of Mtb-
RNAP were developed using the N-terminal fragment of SigR
from Streptomyces coelicolor (PDB ID 1H3L) and the crystal
structure of Thermus thermophilus (Tth) transcription initiation
complex containing 2 nucleotide of nascent RNA (PDB ID:
4G7O) as template respectively. The sequence similarities of
the templates with the targets were verified through multiple
sequence alignment. The model of Mtb-SigH was build with
MODELER module using Discovery Studio version 2.5 from
Accelerys (San Diego, CA, USA) and that of β׳ subunit of Mtb-
RNAP using Phyre Server []. Mtb-SigH showed 58.9%
sequence identity and 67.4% sequence similarity with its
template and β׳ subunit of Mtb-RNAP showed 51% homology
with the template.

Model evaluation and refinement:
Structural evaluation of the built model was done using
SAVES program (http://nihserver.mbi.ucla.edu/SAVES)
(which at a time runs PROCHECK, Verify3D, What_Check,
ERRAT). All these together are important to clarify the overall
fold or structure, errors over localized regions and
stereochemical parameters such as bond lengths and angles.

Analysis of the binding site of Mtb-SigH:
Active site prediction computes the cavities of a given protein.
The active site of Mtb-SigH was predicted using the server
from supercomputing facility for bioinformatics and
computational biology, IIT, Delhi (http://www.scfbioiitd.res.in/) 
[]. Top cavity is analysed to find out the amino
acid residues involved in binding with the core Mtb-RNAP.

Docking Studies:
Protein-protein interaction study between Mtb-SigH and β׳
subunit of Mtb-RNAP were carried out using the fully
automated web based program ClusPro
(cluspro.bu.edu/login.php) [,
]. It is a web-server that uses
the algorithm of Global rigid search: FFT using DOT or
ZDOCK program. The docked structures and interface
residues were analyzed using Discovery Studio version 4 from
Accelerys (San Diego, CA, USA). Accessible surface area of
both Mtb-SigH and β׳ subunit of Mtb-RNAP were calculated
using Surface racer version 5 [].

Results &amp; Discussion
The present study reports the 3D structure of two globular
proteins; Mtb-SigH and β׳ subunit of Mtb-RNAP. Mtb-SigH,
an ECF sigma factor is 216 amino acids long, expressed under
specific condition of oxidative stress, hypoxia, heat shock etc.
[–]. 
The conserved domain search from NCBI tools
predicted that the protein consists of two domains; domain 2
and domain 4 recognizing -10 and -35 promoter binding
element, respectively. The present model of Mtb-SigH is built
using the chain A of N-terminal fragment of SigR from
Streptomyces coelicolor (PDB ID: 1H3L) as template based on the
BLAST search () against PDB using Discovery Studio
version 2.5. Pairwise sequence alignment between the template
and the target molecule showed 58.9% sequence identity and
67.4% sequence similarity (). The model is
constructed using 75 amino acid residues consisting domain 2.
The best-selected model was then energy minimized keeping
their backbone fixed to ensure proper interactions. 1130 cycles
of conjugate gradient energy minimization steps were applied
with CHARMm force field until the structure reached a final
derivative of 0.01 Kcal/mole. The refined model after energy
minimization was subjected for PROCHECK analysis in order
to analyze the stereochemical property of the model.
Ramachandran plot retrieved from PROCHECK analysis
showed 92.5% of the residues in the most favored region and
none in the disallowed region () that confers Mtb-
SigH to be a good model. The overall structural quality of the
model is validated through verify 3D graph. The predicted
model is the triple helical structure () having a
probable DNA-binding role. The built model was
superimposed with the template () and the root
mean square deviation (RMSD) value between template and
predicted model is 0.264Å, indicative of a good model.

β׳ subunit of Mtb-RNAP (rpoC) is 1316 amino acid residues
long and the present model is constructed with 974 amino acid
residues () using Phyre server. The model is built
using the crystal structure of Thermus thermophilus (Tth)
transcription initiation complex containing 2 nucleotide of
nascent RNA (PDB ID: 4G7O) as template. The target
sequence showed 51% sequence identity with the template.
The phi-psi torsion angle of the protein is shown in the
Ramachandran plot that depicts that 92.8% of the amino acid
residues are in the core region and none of these are in the
disallowed region () which predicts the overall
stereochemical quality of the protein is significantly high. The
modeled structure consists of 18 beta sheet and 22 alpha
helices ().

The top cavity is used to analyze the result using the
parameters like shape complementarities, solvation energy,
and electrostatistics. Amino acid residues like Asp18, Gln19
and Arg26 found in the active site are also found in the
binding interface of Mtb-SigH and β׳ subunit of Mtb-RNAP.
Moreover the sequence alignment of sigma domain 2-binding
region in various β׳ homolog is found to be quite conserved
throughout the bacterial RNAP (). The study reflects
how the atypical sigma factor interacts with the core RNAP in
order to initiate the promoter recognition. In consideration of
the various experimental data on bacterial RNAP it is well
known that generally the domain 2 of the sigma factor binds
with the α helical coil-coiled region of β׳ subunit of Mtb-RNAP
(). From the present study it has also been predicted
that Mtb-SigH and β׳ subunit of Mtb-RNAP interaction takes
place through α helical coil-coiled region (). The
report confers that Arg26, Gln19, and Asp18 of Mtb-SigH and
Arg137, Gln140, Arg152, Asn133 and Asp144 of β׳ subunit of
Mtb-RNAP are probably found at the binding interface (
). The result elicited that the predicted amino acid residues
present in the binding sites are also present in the binding
cavities.

The binding energy of the docked complex is calculated using
the forcefield CHARMm which shows the potential energy of
the complex to be -33177.633 Kcal/mol. Most of the interface
residues form conventional intermolecular H-bonding within
3.4 Å, while a salt bridge is found between Asp18 of Mtb-SigH
and β׳ subunit of Mtb-RNAP. The interface residue shows an
electrostatic mode of interaction in between Arg26 of Mtb-
SigH (electropositive) and Asp144 of β׳ subunit of Mtb-RNAP
(electronegative). No potential van der Waal clashes are noted
within 0.7 Å of the binding interface  (see
supplementary material). The unfavorable interactions
(including bumps) are remarkably not found in the interacting
site of the two proteins. Accessible surface area (ASA) of both
Mtb-SigH and β׳ subunit of Mtb-RNAP is calculated using the
van der Waal radii from Richards 1977 taking probe radius 1.4
Å. The output of which typically showed that the interacting
residues of both the subunit have much higher ASA value than
those of the non-interacting ones  (see supplementary
matrerial). Thus the result clearly predicts the fact that Arg26,
Gln19, and Asp18 of Mtb-SigH and Arg137, Gln140, Arg152,
Asn133 and Asp144 of β׳ subunit of Mtb-RNAP have a
significant ASA making them potent as the interface residues.
The binding region of the sigma factor with the core RNAP is
quite conserved throughout the bacterial RNAP.
Bacteriological studies with Tth-RNAP and Ec-RNAP showed
similar amino acid residues in the binding interface 
[–].

The fine structural model of the undertaken molecule (Mtb-
RNAP and Mtb-SigH) could be used to understand the
function of other transcription associated protein in much
detail. This work will further assist and deliver clue to perform
precise experimental work with such macromolecules. The
developed model will help to explore the interacting inhibitors
by means of chemi-informatics. Thus in-silico understanding
could attribute to develop inhibitor molecule for sigma factors
and Mtb-RNAP. The structural understanding could further
delineate the regulation mechanism by the ECF sigma factors.
The region of interaction is quiet conserved in the prokaryotic
RNAP and hence targeting such stress responsive atypical
sigma factor is worth to explore the possible control of gene
expression. There are very limited reports on the gene loci that
are transcribed by Mtb-SigH which in turn could be an
excellent material to explore the putative promoter element
which can be recognized by Mtb-SigH. Moreover, such studies
will enlighten the future research of drug discovery where
such sigma factors could be treated as the target molecules.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors highly acknowledge the generous help of the
bioinformatics infrastructural facility of Kalyani University.
We are thankful for the assistance of Dr. Prithidipa Sahoo of
Visva Bharati University for proofreading the manuscript.
Authors are thankful to anonymous reviewer for his/her
comments for the betterment of the manuscript.

Citation:Gupta et al, Bioinformation 11(6): 296-301 (2015)

A) Phylogenetic relationship between Mtb-SigH with
its template SigR from Streptomyces coelicolor (PDB ID: 1H3L)
which was built using MEGA 5.2 []. 2MAP signifies solution
structure of the complex formed by the region 2 of E. coli sigma
E and its cognate -10 promoter element non template strand
TGTCAAA, 2MAO denotes the NMR structure of region 2 of
E. coli sigma E, 1OR7 is the crystal structure of E. coli sigma E
with the cytoplasmic domain of its anti-sigma RseA, 2H27 is
the crystal structure of E. coli sigma E region 4 bound to its -35
element DNA. B) Pair-wise alignment of Mtb-SigH with the
template showing 58.9% sequence identity and 67.4% sequence
similarity. C) Model of domain 2; built using S. coelicolor SigR
crystal structure as template. The model predominantly shows
the triple helical structure that distinctly have DNA binding
feature. D) Superimposition of SigH (Red) on template
(Indigo). RMSD value being 0.264Å.

A) Ramachandran plot of Mtb-SigH protein model.
The phi-psi torsion angle of the protein is shown in the
Ramachandran plot which depicts that 92.9% of the amino acid
residues are in the core region (red), 6% residues in allowed
(yellow) and 1.5% in generously allowed region. B)
Ramachndran plot analysis for β׳ subunit of Mtb-RNAP.
Containing total 1019 residues among which 92.9% residues in
the core region (red); 6.3 % residues in allowed (yellow) and
0.8% in generously allowed (light yellow) region. None of the
residues are present in the disallowed region.

A) Pairwise sequence alignment of Mtb-β׳ subunit with the template, crystal structure of Tth-RNAP (4G7O). The target
sequence showed 51% homology with the template. The Mtb-SigH binding region is highlighted with red bar. B) 3D Structure of
β׳ subunit of Mtb-RNAP. Mtb-SigH binding region is marked with purple colour. The modeled structure consists of 18 beta sheet
and 22 helices. C) Sequence alignment of sigma domain 2-binding region in various β׳ homolog. The binding region of the sigma
factor with the core RNAP is quite conserved throughout the bacterial RNAP.

A) Generalised view of bacterial RNAP (PDB ID:3DXJ). s70-b׳ binding interface is marked in red box. B) Magnified view
of Mtb-SigH and b׳ subunit of Mtb-RNAP binding interface. The binding site of Mtb-SigH is denoted in cyan. C) Close up view of
Mtb-SigH and β׳ subunit of RNAP complex. Mtb-SigH is marked in magenta and Mtb-β׳ in cyan. The green dotted line shows the
H-bonding between Arg26, Gln19 and Gly22 of SigH and Arg137, Gln140, Arg152, Asn133 and Asp144 of β׳ subunit of RNAP.

