Background
Blood coagulation pathway is a complex biological mechanism
where specific proteins and cellular components interact to
prevent blood loss []. Coagulation is an important part of
haemostasis. Haemostasis system allows blood to remain in
fluid form in plasma and prevents excessive bleeding during
vascular injury. The normal coagulation process begins with the
“Tissue Dependent Pathway”, initiated by the formation of
complex between Factor VIIa and Tissue Factor (TF). Blood
coagulation is well regulated patho-physiologically by an
important Kunitz type serine protease inhibitor known as TFPI
(Tissue Factor Pathway Inhibitor). TFPI is an endogenous
anticoagulant with an acidic amino-terminal and basic carboxyterminal,
synthesized by endothelial cells and most of them
(approx. 80%) interact with the wall and rest of them circulates
in plasma. TFPI are present in different concentration. 50-60% of
the circulating TFPI are bound to lipoprotein, 20% of total TFPI
are carrier free and approximately 10% of TFPI are confined to
platelets []. 
TFPI is a potent inhibitor of Factor VII::TF complex
and its action is regulated by the presence of Factor Xa 
[]. TFPI
consists of 3 Kunitz domains each having specific functions.

Domain1 binds to Factor VII::TF complex active site whereas
domain2 binds to Factor Xa active site thus inhibiting them and
regulating coagulation initiation [,
,
,
]. Function of domain3
has yet to be determined but it may be involved in lipoprotein-
TFPI association []. The basic and positively charged Cterminus
of TFPI is required to bind cell surfaces and cell bound
TFPI mediates the internalization and degradation of FX and
down regulation of surface TF/FVIIa activity [,
].

The residues of FVIIa that interacts with Kunitz domain 1 and
that of FXa that interacts with Kunitz domain 2 have been
reported earlier [–
]. Among others, D11, R20 and E46 are the
residues of Kunitz domain 1 which are important for interaction
with FVIIa. Similarly among others, Y17, R32 and E46 are the
residues of Kunitz domain 2 which are important for
interactions with FXa []. Actual interaction of how Kunitz
domain 1 interacts with TF/FVIIa complex and Kunitz domain
2 interacts with FXa is still unknown. Detailed study of TFPI
still needs to be done in order to understand the mechanism of
TFPI interaction with TF/FVIIa complex and FXa and how it
inhibits the tissue factor dependent pathway. Hence the present
paper enlists some of the physiochemical and functional
properties of TFPI and provides information into its three
dimensional structure.

Methodology
The study was conducted using Intel(R) Core (TM) i3-2310 M
CPU @2.10Ghz 4 core processor and 64 bit operating system.

Multiple Sequence Alignment and Homology Modeling:
PDB file of Factor VII::TF complex (PDB ID: 2A2Q, Resolution:
1.80), TFPI sequence (Domain1), Domain2 sequence (PDB ID:
4DTG, Resolution: 1.80), Domain3 sequence (PDB ID: 1IRH,
Resolution: Not Applicable) was downloaded which was used
as template for building model of Domain1. In order to build
model of Kunitz1 domain, Multiple Sequence Alignment was
done between full length TFPI sequence and Domain 2 and
domain 3 sequence. High resolution (1.80 A) structure of
Kunitz2 domain (PDB ID: 4DTG) was selected as template to
build the model of K1 domain because of more homology.
Model construction and regularization (including geometry
optimization) of model was done by optimization protocol in
YASARA. The energy of model was minimized using the
standard protocols of combined application of simulated
annealing, conjugate gradient and steepest descent.

Loop construction was done to join all the 3 Kunitz domain of
TFPI with each other. For loop construction, Loopy Software
was used which was downloaded from the site
“bhapp.c2b2.columbia.edu/software/cgibin/
software.pl?input=Loopy”. Model of Kunitz domain1 and
Kunitz domain 2 structures were joined in a single coordinate
file using inhouse perl script. Output file was then utilized for
the loop construction and the sequence given for loop
construction was “RDNANRIIKTTLQQ”. The loop was made
for the missing atom number from 59-72 in the jointed file.
Kunitz 3 domain pdb file was then joined further in the output
file obtained after loop construction between Kunitz 1 domain
and Kunitz 2 domain. Similarly, loop construction was done in
between Kunitz 2 domain and Kunitz 3 domain for the missing
atom number from 133-162 and the sequence given for loop
construction was 
“NGFQVDWYGTQLNAVWNSLTPQSTKVPSLF” hence finally
leading to generation of complete model of TFPI protein having
all the 3 Kunitz domains joined to each other.

Model Refinement:
The newly constructed model was solvated and subjected to
energy minimization using the steepest descent and conjugate
gradient technique to eliminate unwanted contacts between
structural water molecules and protein atoms. In this study, MD
simulation study was undertaken by using YAMBER3 
[]
package for the model refinement, which was used to reduce
the steric clashes between residues. The constructed TFPI model
had to be refined in order to stabilize the backbone. The data
obtained after simulation was analyzed for trajectory projection.

Model Validation:
Accuracy of predicted model and its stereo chemical properties
was evaluated by PROCHECK-NMR []. The model was
selected on the basis of various factors such as overall G-factor,
no. of residues in core allowed, generously allowed and
disallowed regions in Ramachandran plot () The model
was further analyzed by WHATIF [], QMEAN 
[,
] and
ProSA []. ProSA was used for the display of Z-score and
energy plots.

Results &amp; Discussion
Model Building:
Sequence alignment of TFPI Kunitz domain 1 with sequences of
Kunitz domain 2 and Kunitz domain 3, revealed more sequence
homology with Domain 2 (ID= 47%) which was selected as
template for the model building of Kunitz domain 1. To build
the model 6 times PSI-BLAST was done with the maximum Evalue
allowed for template being 0.005. Maximum number of
templates considered for model building was 6 along with
maximum of 5 ambiguous alignment, 4 oligomerization state
and number of unaligned loop residue to add to termini being
10. Using domain 2 sequence modeling of Kunitz domain 1 was
done with the help of YASARA (). After model
construction of Kunitz domain1 loop construction was done to
join domains. Two loops were constructed using Loopy
software. The first loop joins the domain 1 and 2 and similarly,
second loop join the domain 2 and 3. After joining domains
together, complete model of TFPI was generated ().

Model Refinement:
Model refinement was carried out to improve accuracy of TFPI
model. The newly constructed model was solvated in a box of
dimension 106.529 × 77.061 × 73.446 Å3 with 3424 number of
water molecules and subjected to sequential application of
energy minimization techniques. In the initial phase the energy
was minimized by Steepest Descent followed by Conjugate
Gradient. Finally the global minima of TFPI model was
obtained by Simulated Annealing. This was performed to
minimize strain energies and eliminate unfavorable contacts
between water molecules and protein atoms. YAMBER3 force
field in YASARA dynamics was used for the model refinement,
which was used to reduce the steric clashes between residues.
The constructed TFPI model had to be refined in order to
stabilize the backbone. After back bone refinement the energy
was again minimized by the application of above mentioned
protocol. The structure was then subjected to nvt ensemble
(constant number of entities, isochoric and isothermal) based
dynamic simulation for 1.5 ns. The temperature was 298K,
density was 0.997 and the pH was 7.4 while carrying out
refinement under physiological salt concentration of 150mM
NaCl.

The trajectory was obtained for overall energy simulation of the
modeled TFPI for 1500 picoseconds (ps) and it revealed that
overall energy stabilized after a peak of -2589436.038 kJ/mol at
25 ps and tended to remain in plateau phase further for rest of
the period (). This reflected that simulation was
achieved with stable energy for rest of the period (50-1475ps) for
the TFPI. Almost the similar trajectory was obtained for the
plots of different energy contributions against simulation run
time. The contribution due to steric parameters like bond strain,
dihedral angle, bond coloumb, Van der Waal was found
maximum at 25 ps with the values of 329479.911 kJ/mol,
50047.973 kJ/mol, -3610916.379 kJ/mol and 512036.939 kJ/mol
respectively, which stabilize further to a stationary phase for the
rest of the period (50-1475ps), except dihedral angle which
shows variations in the value (Available with authors). The
contribution due to angle and planarity was slight different
which shows maximum energy at the peak of 75 ps and 1475ps
with the value of 130803.859 kJ/mol and 453.925 kJ/mol
respectively, and then stabilize further for the rest of period
(100-1475ps) (Available with authors). These trajectory patterns
support and validates the simulation profile of modeled TFPI.
The trajectory pattern of energy due to RMSDs [A] :CA,
Backbone and Heavy atoms differed from the trajectories of
other parameters contributing to the overall energy of
interactions of modeled TFPI (Avauilable with authors). The
trajectory plots of energy due to RMSDs [A]: CA and Backbone
showed a continuous increase with respect to time even after
1475ps. The deviation of trajectory plot of energy due to angle,
planarity, RMSDs [A]:CA, and Backbone from other
contributing parameters may be due to slow computational
speed and performance available and lack of time to carry out
further simulations.

The trajectory was also obtained for overall energy simulation
of modeled TFPI for 1500 picoseconds (ps) with respect to
residues present in modeled TFPI. The trajectory reflected that
the highest value of different parameters such as RMSDs [A]:
CA, Backbone, Heavy atoms and RMSA[A] was achieved by the
GLY residue number 223 and the values were 15.611 kJ/mol,
15.824 kJ/mol, 15.874 kJ/mol and 7.934 kJ/mol, respectively.
The lowest was achieved by the ASN residue number 45 and
the values were 1.356 kJ/mol, 1.397 kJ/mol, 1.528 kJ/mol and
1.414 respectively (Available with authors) The result obtained
in the present study has provided a good picture of molecular
dynamics of modeled TFPI.

Model Validation
Model generated was energy minimized. Ramachandran
analysis of the model was done via PROCHECK-NMR server
[]. 
The model showed good stereochemical property in terms
of overall G-factor value of -0.68 indicating that geometry of
model corresponds to the probability conformation with 97.4%
residue in the core region of Ramachandran plot showing high
accuracy of model prediction. The number of residues in
allowed and generously allowed region was 76% and 2.6%
respectively and none of the residue was present in the
disallowed region of the plot (). Plot between phi and
psi angle for all amino acid residues of our TFPI protein was
also obtained via PROCHECK-NMR showing their possible
conformational state in Ramachandran map (Available with
authors). In order to get a good structure plot was made
between Chi-1 and Chi-2 value for all the amino acid residues
(Available with authors). Circular variance and average Gfactor
obtained for all the 220 amino acids reveals the
accessibility of the protein residues and their favorable
conformations. RMS Z-score for anomalous bond length and
bond angle as determined by WHAT-IF 1.142 and 1.264
respectively, which is very close to 1.0 suggesting very high
model quality.

ProSA was used to check the three dimensional model of TFPI
for potential errors. The program displays 2 characteristics of
the input structure: its Z-score and a plot of its residue energies.
The Z-score of -5.02 indicates the overall model quality of TFPI
(). Z-score also measures the deviation of total energy of
the structure with respect to an energy distribution derived
from random conformations. The scores indicate a highly
reliable structure and are well within the range of scores
typically found for proteins of similar size. The energy plot
shows the local model quality by plotting knowledge-based
energies as a function of amino acid sequence position.QMEAN
analysis was also used to evaluate and validate the model. The
QMEAN score of the model obtained was 0.69 and the Z-score
was -0.88 which is very close to the value 0 and shows the good
quality of the model because the estimated reliability of the
model was expected to be in between 0 and 1 and this can be
inferred from the density plot for QMEAN scores of the
reference set (). Comparision with non-redundant set of
PDB structures in the plot between normalized QMEAN score
and protein size revealed different set of Z-values for differnet
parameters such as C-beta interactions, interactions between all
atoms, solvation, torsion, SSE agreement and ACC agreement
which can be clearly observed (). Some local error were
also obtained for the model of TFPI which was higher
somewhere in between the residue from 150 and 170.
(Available with authors).

Conclusion
in silico studies in general and molecular modeling with
molecular dynamics studies based on simulations have been of
great help in understanding the structure, function and
mechanism of the action of proteins, particularly the membrane
proteins. The present investigation was carried out with major
objectives to model the TFPI protein and simulate the modeled
TFPI protein, thus obtained to understand the actual
mechanism of interaction between TFPI and FVIIa: TF complex
and between TFPI and FXa. The present study generated a welldefined
structure of TFPI protein and its simulation results
indicate the validity of the model. The acidic recognition site
was found to be present at Asp19 and Glu 48. The signal
peptide region is present from residue number 1-28, region in
Kunitz domain1 is present from amino acid number 54-104, in
domain 2 from 125-175 and in domain 3 from 217-267. Also,
heparin recognition site was also found which was present from
residue number 254-263. The energy trajectory of simulation
well supports the simulated complex. The trajectory of time
with respect to time, due to RMSDs [A]: CA and Backbone
differed from other contributing parameters and needed further
computational time for achieving ideal plot of plateau phase.
This may be attributed to the hardware with slow
computational speed available and lack of time to carry out
further simulations.

The model generated was also subjected to structural validation.
Structure validation by WHATIF, PROCHECK-NMR, ProSA
and QMEAN confirmed the reliability of model. The model
showed good stereochemical property in terms of overall Gfactor
value of -0.68 indicating that geometry of model
corresponds to the probability conformation with 97.4% residue
in the core region of Ramachandran plot showing high accuracy
of model prediction. Z score of -5.02 predicted by ProSA
represents the good quality of the model. Our results provide
insight in understanding structure of TFPI protein. The results
has given a good platform for further investigation into
deriving the putative drug binding sites of TFPI-FVIIa:TF-FXa
quaternary complex. This will further aid in deriving the
suitable pharmacophore for ligand search and designing, which
will help designing drugs for myriad of diseases attributed to
TFPI. The simulation was TFPI here is of preliminary nature
and needs further computational timing and refinement. This
will also help in understanding the basic molecular biology of
TFPI-FVIIa: TF-FXa interactions.

The presented work was carried out by PA whilst doing
Master's dissertation work under the supervision of MK in MD
University. The authors acknowledge the support of Centre for
Bioinformatics, MD University for the work.

Citation:Agrawal et al, Bioinformation 9(16): 808-812 (2013)

Ramachandran Plot analysis of TFPI. The plot statistics
are: total number of residues-220 with 76% in most favored
regions [A, B, L], 21.4% additional allowed regions [a,b,l,p],
2.6% in generously allowed regions and 0% in disallowed
regions. Number of glycine residues (labelled as G) are 19 and
proline residues (labelled as P) are 8.

Kunitz domain 1 model generated using YASARA

Complete model of TFPI molecule consisting 3 Kunitz
domains connected to each other via loops.

Trajectory Data/plot of Energy Simulation vs Time of
modeled TFPI

ProSA web service analysis of TFPI. ProSA-web Zscore
of all protein chains in PDB determined by X- ray
crystallography (light blue) or NMR-spectroscopy (dark blue)
with respect to their length. The z-score of modeled TFPI is
highlighted as large dots and the right graph is showing energy
plot of modeled TFPI.

Density plot for QMEAN showing the value of Z-score
and QMEAN score.

Plot showing the QMEAN value as well as Z-score.

