Background
Alpha amylase family is generally defined as a group of 
enzymes that can hydrolyse and transglycosylase α-(1, 4) or α-
(1, 6) glycosidic bonds along with the retention of anomeric 
configuration. They have a conserved (α/β) 8TIM barrel fold, 
catalytic residues and substrate binding residues in three 
dimensional structures of all family members [,
,
]. Three 
dimensional structures of alpha amylases consist of three 
domains namely Domain A, Domain B and Domain C. Domain 
A is composed of eight parallel β-strands that are surrounded 
by eight helices. Unique arrangement of these eight parallel 
beta strands and alpha helices form a (α /β) 8TIM barrel fold in 
three dimensional structure of alpha amylases. It originates 
from third β-strand and third α-helix of catalytic domain. It 
present between A and C domain and composed of many β-
strands and few α-helices []. Domain B is important for 
enzyme specificity and substrate binding. Domain C of alpha 
amylases also composed of β sheets and act as an independent 
domain. It stabilizes the catalytic domain by protecting the 
hydrophobic residues of catalytic domain from solvent and also
plays role in substrate binding. Alpha amylases also 
supplemented with additional domains i.e. domain D and E in 
some members of alpha amylases []. Four short conserved 
sequence regions cluster at Domain A and play significant role 
in structure conformation of particular enzyme. These regions 
have seven fully conserved residues in their amino acid 
sequence while their positions in the sequence may vary among 
different alpha amylases. Amylases find potential application 
in a number of industrial processes such as in the food, 
fermentation, textiles and paper industries. Microbial amylases 
have successfully replaced the chemical hydrolysis of starch in 
starch-processing industries. These amylases also reduce 
viscosity and haze formation in sugar syrups and ice juices 
respectively [,
]. Detergent industry is the primary consumers 
of enzymes, in terms of both volume and value. The utilization 
of amylases in 90% of liquid detergents formulations enhances 
ability of detergents to remove tough starch stains and making 
the detergent environmentally safe []. They would be 
potentially useful in the pharmaceutical and fine chemicals 
industries if enzymes with suitable properties could be 
prepared []. The spectrum of amylase application has widened
in many other fields, such as clinical, medical, and analytical 
chemistry [].

Biological systems are natural producers of alpha amylases. 
Even though alpha amylases are widely produced from 
animals and plants sources but scientists normally prefer to 
isolate them from microbial sources. Microbial derived alpha 
amylases are easy to modify and optimize []. Fungal and 
bacterial alpha amylases especially Bacillus species alpha 
amylases are of special concern because of their significant 
thermo stability. Among Bacillus specie, Bacillus licheniforms, 
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens, Bacillus subtilis and Bacillus 
stearothermophilus are well-known producers of commercial 
thermo stable alpha amylases []. Alpha amylase of Pyrocoocus 
furiosus from kingdom Archea is also hyperthermophilic alpha 
amylase []. Phylogenetic methods for comparative analysis of 
DNA and protein sequences become ever more important with 
the rapid accumulation of molecular sequence detail. 
Phylogenetic analysis is helpful to find out the nature and 
extent of selective forces that shape the evolution of genes and 
species. Since no such α-amylase was characterized and no 
evolutionary relationship between all kingdom was reported to 
date, thus in the present study alpha amylase from seven 
microbial species were selected and comparative analysis of 
molecular sequence data was performed for reconstructing the 
evolutionary histories of species.

Methodology
Primary Structure Information:
Sequence Retrieval:
Nucleotide and protein fasta sequences of alpha amylase 3.2.1.1 
were retrieved from NCBI and Uniprot databases  (see 
supplementary material). Out of these seven sequences, four 
sequences belong to Bacillus specie and one sequence was from 
Geobacillus specie. On the whole five sequences were from 
kingdom prokaryotes. Alpha amylase of Aspergillus oryzae was 
from kingdom eukaryotes and Pyrocoocus furiosus was from 
kingdom archea.

Sequence Analysis in BIOEDIT Tools:
Multiple sequence alignment was carried out for both DNA 
and protein sequences of above mentioned alpha amylases 
through ClustalW. Multiple sequence analysis was done to 
assess sequence conservation of each individual nucleotide and 
amino acids. Temperature based alignment was carried out and 
important residues and regions were defined in multiple 
sequence alignments.

Primary structure composition analysis and Conserved Sequence Analysis:
Nucleotide and Protein Sequence alignments were manipulated 
to find out the conserved regions of the sequence alignments. 
Conserved regions were found by through BioEdit. Consensus 
sequence was obtained at the end of multiple sequence 
alignment and it was comprised of the all identical residues of 
the organisms given in multiple sequence alignment. Through 
Information Scan a graphical plot was obtained which was a 
clear description of multiple sequence alignments. Multiple 
sequence alignment results were further studied in later in silico
analysis of two dimensional and three dimensional alpha 
amylases structures.

Phylogenetic Analysis of Alpha Amylase:
For this purpose phylogenetic analysis was performed in Mega 
5.1 tool. This tool was preferred because it uses heuristic 
approach and progressive alignment method, aligns the most 
similar sequences having best alignment score first then 
progressively add more distant groups of sequences to the 
alignment until an optimal global alignment is obtained. 
ClustalW algorithm computes a rough distance matrix between 
each pair of sequences based on pairwise sequence alignment
scores and Tree Construction was done through Neighbor
Joining method. Neighbour-joining method is a distance based 
method that defines the distance on the basis of mismatches. It 
generally provides a close-to-optimal result by applying greedy 
algorithms. As data set for the study was small so Neighbour 
Joining method was preferred for generation of initial 
evolutionary hypotheses with maximum accuracy. 
Phylogenetic tree reconstruction was done for verification 
through Maximum likelihood method as well. As most of our 
sequences belong to distantly related sequences and only seven 
sequences were in our data set so it was computationally 
inexpensive to perform Maximum Likelihood method 
fastDNAml tool. Same dataset was also verified through 
BioEdit software by applying Neighbor-Joining/UPGMA 
method.

Results &amp; Discussion
Primary Structure Analysis of Archea, Prokaryotes and Eukaryotes Alpha Amylases:
Archea: Prokaryote: Eukaryote.gb files with nucleotide and 
protein sequences of alpha amylases from Pyrococcus furiosus
(100-105°C), Bacillus licheniformis (90-95°C), Geobacillus 
stearothermophilus (75°C), Bacillus amyloliquefaciens (72°C), 
Bacillus subtilis (70°C), Bacillus KSM K38 (55°C) and Aspergillus 
oryzae (60°C) were analysed through multiple sequence 
alignment in BioEdit software. Least similarity was observed in 
MSA results of above mentioned alpha amylases as given in 
 &amp; 
. Only three conserved regions of base 
pairs were observed while no protein based conserved region 
was present in the multiple sequence alignment analysis of 
Prokaryote and Eukaryote alpha amylases  (see
supplementary material). While single nucleotide and amino 
acid identities were evident, this shows that some common 
base pairs and amino residues are present among them. 
Consensus protein sequence of Archea, Prokaryotes and 
Eukaryotes alpha amylases is Trp59, Glyc81, Pro90, Leu111, 
Gly125, Glu32I, Val144, Asp147, Asp157, Ile418 and Gly424.

Phylogenetic Relationship Analysis:
Distance based phylogenetic analysis was performed through 
Mega 5.1 software. Data set for phylogenetic analysis includes 
nucleotide sequences of alpha amylase gene from seven species 
i.e. Pyrococcus furiosus (U96622.1), Bacillus licheniformis
(M38570.1), Bacillus amyloliquefaciens (J01542.1), Bacillus 
stearothermophilus (X02769.1), Aspergillus oryzae
(XM_001820490.1) and Bacillus subtilis (K00563.1). In this 
analysis Neighbor-Joining (NJ) algorithm was used to predict 
phylogeny of these organisms. This algorithm employs a matrix 
of pairwise distances estimated under the Tamura and Nei 
model for nucleotide sequences [,
,
]. In this model, 
maximum composite likelihood approach is used that 
compares two sequences at a time and calculates the number of 
base substitutions i.e. single nucleotide polymorphism and 
insertion deletion events within the two aligned sequences. An 
estimate of these calculated transitions and transversions 
generated by all the possible sequence pairs comparison is 
known as pairwise distance []. With the help of the calculated 
pairwise distances a matrix is generated which is helpful in 
construction of an un-rooted tree. The optimal tree with the 
sum of branch length = 3.90657519 is shown in Figure 3. Total 
1547 positions in the final dataset were analysed for tree 
construction.

In the present study phylogenetic results shown an unrooted 
tree which takes alpha amylase gene from Pyrococcus furiosus as 
a base of analysis and as an outgroup taxa shown in . 
Out group taxa is actually most distant related specie from 
which other species are evolving. Here Pyrococcus furiosus
alpha-amylase gene is behaving as a reference group for the 
determination of evolutionary relationship among other 
species. Alpha amylase from Bacillus subtilis has 41% sequence 
similarity and closely related with Pyrococcus furiosus alpha
amylase gene as compared alpha amylases of other species. 
From the out group node (1) a bifurcating branch of length 
0.20119 originates whose one leaf shares evolutionary distance 
of 1.1996 and represents Aspergillus oryzae alpha amylase gene 
as recent descendent of Pyrococcus furiosus and Bacillus subtilis
alpha amylase genes as it shares 39.9% similarity with both the 
sequences. While the second leaf is sharing evolutionary 
distance of 0.55677 with formation of a clade (node 4) which 
shows that Geobacillus stearothermophilus alpha-amylase evolves 
from its ancestor Aspergllius oryzae alpha amylase and has 
distant relationship with the genes of Pyrococcus furiosus and
Bacillus subtilis alpha amylase. Sequence similarity results, 
phylogenetic tree speciation events and branch lengths show 
that Geobacillus stearothermophilus alpha-amylase gene is a 
common ancestor of other Bacillus species i.e. Bacillus sp. KSM 
K38, Bacillus licheniformis and Bacillus amyloliquefaciens alpha 
amylase sequences. They share more similarity among each 
other as compared to Aspergllius oryzae alpha amylase and 
Pyrococcus furiosus alpha amylase. Alpha amylases of Bacillus 
licheniformis and Bacillus amyloliquefaciens are sister clades 
having 64.5% sequence similarity between them and observed 
as most closely related operational taxonomic units (OTUs).
Bacillus licheniformis alpha amylase has 52% and 40% nucleotide 
sequence identity with Bacillus KSM K38 alpha amylase and 
Bacillus subtilis alpha amylase respectively.

Alikhajeh et al., (2010) also reported in their study that Bacillus 
licheniformis alpha amylase and Bacillus amyloliquefaciens alpha 
amylase are more closely related to each other than Bacillus 
subtilis alpha amylase and Bacillus KSM K38 alpha amylase. 
While reasonable homology of Bacillus KSM K38 alpha amylase 
(&lt;63% identity) to alpha amylases from other Bacillus species e.g. 
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens, Bacillus licheniformis was reported by 
Suvd et al., (2001) and Hagihara et al., (2001) which is also 
supported by the phylogenetic tree in  . Jorgensen et al., 
1997 also reported moderate homology between Pyrococcus 
furiosus alpha amylase and Bacillus licheniformis alpha amylases 
that means both are not closely related ones. Distant 
relationship of both is clearly depicted in the phylogenetic tree.
This phylogenetic tree is according to the sequence identities 
given above in primary structure analysis. Same dataset was 
also verified through BioEdit software by applying Neighbor
Joining/UPGMA method. Results of BioEdit verify the 
phylogenetic tree given by Mega 5.1 software.

Conclusion
From the phylogenetic analysis it is concluded that alpha 
amylases from Bacillus subtilis and Aspergillus oryzae having 
optimum activity at 70°C and 60°C respectively are closest 
descendants of hyperthermophilic Pyrococcus furiosus alpha 
amylase (Opt100-105 °C), as compared to other Prokaryotes i.e. 
Geobacillus stearothermophilus (Opt 75°C), Bacillus 
licheniformis (Opt 90-95°C) and Bacillus amyloliquefaciens
(Opt 72°C). As alpha amylases from Bacillus subtilis and 
Aspergillus oryzae having optimum activity up to 70°C are 
sharing more sequence similarity with thermo-tolerant 
Pyrococcus furiosus alpha amylase, their primary structures 
can be exploited on the basis of thermo-tolerant Pyrococcus 
furiosus alpha amylase to alter their intrinsic stability. For 
designing hyper thermo stable alpha amylases from less thermo 
stable alpha amylases further comparative sequence and 
structure based study would be required to elucidate 
mechanism of thermostability.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Huma et al, Bioinformation 10(7): 443-448 (2014)

Example of Multiple Sequence Alignment and Information Scan of Nucleotide Sequences of Archea: Prokaryote: 
Eukaryotes α-amylases.gb File generated by Bio Edit (Archea i.e. Pyrococcus furiosus (100-105°C); Prokaryotes i.e. Bacillus licheniformis 
(90-95°C), Geobacillus stearothermophilus (75°C), Bacillus amyloliquefaciens (72°C), Bacillus subtilis (70°C), Bacillus KSM K38 (55°C) and 
Eukaryotes i.e. Aspergillus oryzae (60°C).

Example of Multiple Sequence Alignment and Information Scan of Protein Sequences of Archea: Prokaryote: Eukaryotes 
α-amylases.gb File. generated by Bio Edit. (Archea i.e. Pyrococcus furiosus (100-105°C); Prokaryotes i.e. Bacillus licheniformis (90-95°C), 
Geobacillus stearothermophilus (75°C), Bacillus amyloliquefaciens (72°C), Bacillus subtilis (70°C), Bacillus KSM K38 (55°C) and Eukaryotes 
i.e. Aspergillus oryzae (60°C).

 Phylogenetic Tree generated by Mega 5.1 results with branch lengths of Kingdom Archea (Pyrococcus furiosus), Kingdom 
Prokaryotes (Bacillus licheniformis, Bacillus amyloliquefaciens, Bacillus subtilis, Bacillus KSM-K38, Geobacillus stearothermophilus) and 
Eukaryotes (Aspergillus oryzae) alpha amylase.

Phylogenetic Tree generated by BioEdit results with 
branch lengths of Kingdom Archea (Pyrococcus furiosus), 
Kingdom Prokaryotes (Bacillus licheniformis, Bacillus
amyloliquefaciens, Bacillus subtilis, Bacillus 
KSM-K38, Geobacillus stearothermophilus) and Eukaryotes 
(Aspergillus oryzae) alpha amylase.

