Background
This work attempts to integrate different tools and techniques for gene expression analysis with an aim to standardize them for 
      efficient usage. In this context, a number of tools such as Cluster/ Tree View [
      ], SNOMAD [], Cluster 3.0 software [], GEDA suite [], 
      GEPAS [], J-Express [], 
      Cleaver 1.0 
      [] and Expression Profiler [] have been extensively studied and significantly improved in recent years. Here, we describe a software called 
      GEDAS (gene expression data analysis suite) developed by integrating techniques such as OM, LVQ, k-means, hierarchical clustering, 
      SVM [] and PCA. The software supports a number of visualization techniques/gene 
      expression data preprocessing algorithms [–
      ] and it contains over 10 visualizations and 19 distance measures. 

Methodology
The GEDAS software has been developed as stand-alone software for analysis of microarray gene expression data using Visual 
      Basic and Visual C++ programming languages.  Microarray datasets can be loaded in plain text file, MS Excel or MS Access formats. 
      The software uses Crystal Reports for generating outputs. A snapshot of GEDAS is shown in .
      

Utility
The software facilitates various levels of data manipulation during pre-processing. GEDAS generates at least 6 different 
      outputs for any analysis unlike other many tools producing just one output. The whole genome visualization tool is introduced 
      in this development. [] In addition to the traditional plots/graphs 
      such as scatter plot and histograms, the temporal (or wave) graph, tree view, tree map, and whole genome view were standardized, 
      developed and integrated into the software. We evaluated the tools using breast cancer, mouse (Mus musculus), 
      Arabidopsis 
      thaliana, Homo sapiens and sugarcane datasets. Another most important inclusion was the representation of hierarchical 
      clustering 
      output in the form of temporal (or wave) graph.  In GEDAS, results are presented in a number of ways described elsewhere 
      [–––––
      –]. The techniques implemented in 
      GEDAS are given in . The software facilitates sorting of data in rows, columns or both. 
      The output can be exported in PDF, 
      BMP, GIF and JIF formats.

Future work
In future development, we plan to incorporate other visualization tools [
      –] including 2D and 3D score plots, profile plots, scatter plots 
      (3D scatter plots, PCA visualization, ISOMAP visualization, and multi-dimensional scaling), Venn  diagrams for visualizing similar 
      elements in micro-arrays and SOM visualization for clustering result. We also plan to provide the software using a web interface. 
      Our other plans include addition of robust distance measures and data mining tools (fuzzy c-means and agglomerative).

The software mentioned are either trademarks or registered trademarks of respective individuals or corporation and are      therefore acknowledged.

Figures and Tables
The application of various visualization techniques included in GEDAS is listed.
Visualization/Algorithm	Raw data	Pre-processed data	SOM	K-Means	LVQ	HC	PCA (gene)	SVM	
Histogram	✓	✓					✓		
Checks view	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	
Microarray	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	
Whole sample	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	
Proximity map	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	
Temporal(incl. zoomed cluster view)			✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	
Texual			✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	
PC view							✓		
Eigen graph							✓		
Tree view						✓			
Scatter plot &amp; M vs. A plot	✓	✓					✓		
Box-Whisker plot	✓	✓							
Gene Ontology			✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	
A snapshot of GEDAS is shown


        Citation:Prasad
        et al., Bioinformation 1(3): 83-85, (2006)

