Background
The main advantage of the “high-throughput” sequencing
technologies known as “next-generation sequencing” (NGS) is
the production of a large amount of data at a low cost, when
compared to the Sanger method. They also make it possible to
study complete genomes and develop systematic comparative
analyses []. The NGS platforms, such as Illumina (Genome
Analyzer), Sequencing by Oligonucleotide Ligation and
Detection - SOLiD (Applied Biosystems), 454 GS FLX Titanium
(Roche), Polonator G.007(Azco Biotech) and HeliScope (Helicos
Biosciences) are capable of producing millions to billions of
short reads, providing a high degree of coverage and accuracy,
with reduced run times [–]. In the assembly of NGS genomes,
the small size of the reads makes it difficult to correctly identify
repetitive regions. In addition, problems related to the quality
of the bases can provoke assembly errors [].

The principal programs used to assemble short reads are based
on graph theory, although they use quite different approaches:
SSAKE [], SHARCGS 
[] and VCAKE 
[] use “greedy
algorithms”, while Edena [] and Newbler 
[] are part of a
software group that implements “overlap-layout-consensus”
(OLC), and among the representatives of the De Bruijn graphs
we have: EULER-SR [], Allpaths 
[] and Velvet 
[].
Nevertheless, the difficulties involved in the production of a
complete genome, due to the problems inherent to the NGS
technology and the artefacts that appear during assembly 
[],
has led to the use of hybrid assembly approaches, involving
various algorithms and sequencing technologies [,
]. At the
end of the process, the collection of contiguous DNA sequences
(contigs) produced by de novo assembly are put in order and
oriented, in a process known as scaffolding [], which can be
simplifier using a reference genome to align the contigs, thus
constituting a hybrid approach to the genome assembly.

In the finishing stage it is necessary to analyze the produced
sequences in order to correct possible errors in the assembly. As
such, it is necessary to use tools that enable viewing and editing
sequences [] as the CLC Genomics Workbench (commercially
available from CLC Bio) that despite their extremely useful
resource for the curation and editing of sequences, when used
for the alignment of contigs (sequences much larger than reads)
against a reference are not as efficient in function of their
alignment settings being based on percentage of aligned bases
and not quantity, such that a contig with 2000bp that has 200bp
mapped against a reference would be considered only if the
minimum percentage of alignment is less than or equal to 10%,
which can result in problems due to the size range of the
contigs, which can initiate in a few base pairs up to kilobases.
As alternatives to commercial software, Consed and GAP are
freely available. However, none of the tools mentioned above
allow data sharing among multiple users by storing the
information locally in the curatorial files, which limits the
number of people involved in the conclusion of the same
project, requiring a longer time in the curation of the genomes
assembly.

We have developed the Graphic Contig Analyzer for All
Sequencing Platforms (G4ALL), multiuser software that allows
the visualization and curation of a group of contigs that are
aligned locally to a reference genome. This program identifies
where the contigs are superimposed, so that the sequences can
be extended. In addition, G4ALL can be used to edit and
validate contigs through homology searches of public
databases, such as the NCBI non-redundant protein bank, and,
once curated, to assemble the scaffold.

Methodology
Data:
As a model organism, we used Corynebacterium
pseudotuberculosis lineage Cp258, sequenced using SOLiD
version 3 and a genome library that produced reads of 50 bp
fragments, with a total of 70,521,987 reads which represented
1533× sequence coverage. For the reference genome, we used
strain FRC41 (NC_014329) of this same organism.

Data treatment:
The quality of the bases that compose a reads affects the
quantity of errors arising during sequence alignment 
[].
Consequently, the quality of the raw data obtained from the
sequencing was evaluated with the software Quality
Assessment [] to find the best quality filter to apply to the
data. The reads which presented mean quality value less than
20 were removed.

De novo assembly:
In order to increase the representation of the sequenced genome
in the de novo assembly allowing complementary strategies,
given that different approaches or assemblies can produce
different set of contigs [,
], we have applied the Edena
which uses the OLC depending on overlap graph which
represents the sequencing reads and their overlaps, and Velvet
software which uses the “Eulerian Path” which uses the K-mer
graph in which nodes represent all its fixed-length
subsequences obtained from larger sequences. Nevertheless,
other genome assemblers based on alternative approaches can
be used to generate the set of contigs.

After applying the quality filter, the reads were run through
both programs with varying parameters, in order to identify the
best assembly as a function of N50, the number of bases, and
the largest and smallest contigs. In Velvet, the k-mer parameter
was varied to include coverage cut-off and expected coverage in
 (see supplementary material).

Elimination of redundant contigs:
The contigs produced by Velvet and Edena can cover the same
portions of the genome, so, to reduce the work needed to
manually curate the contigs and improve the assembly
indicators, such as N50, we used Simplifier (available at
https://sourceforge.net/projects/simplifier/) to remove the
redundant contigs from a file in multi-FASTA format.

Synteny Analysis between genomes C. pseudotuberculosis:
Currently available in the NCBI, the genome of C.
pseudotuberculosis 316 (CP003077) which was sequenced using
the platform Ion Torrent [], whose assembly process was
facilitated due to the average size of the readings being 120pb.
Thus, since this is an organism of the same biovar of C.
pseudotuberculosis 258 and have a very conserved gene order,
we conducted an analysis of synteny with the software OSLay
[] between the two genomes.

Search for homology:
We used the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool – BLAST 
[]
(blastn or megablast), which employs an heuristic algorithm to
run a search for homologies with the reference genome, in order
to anchor the contigs produced by the de novo assemblies, and
provide the basis for the orientation and sorting of the genome
assembly. BLAST (blastx) was also used to search for
homologies in the available biological databases, that is, the
non-redundant (nr) protein data banks of the National Center of
Biotechnology Information (NCBI), in order to identify the gene
products contained in each contig and provide G4ALL with this
information. The standard BLAST parameters were used, the
low complexity filter was turned off, and this process was run
locally because of the large amount of data.

G4ALL:
G4ALL has a graphic edition and validation interface ()
for de novo -assembled contigs, which allows the orientation and
sorting of these contigs in relation to a reference genome based
on the results of the alignment generated by the appropriate
software in table format, with 11 columns (query, reference,
alignment length, mismatches, gaps, query start, query end,
source start, source end, evaluate, bitscore and identity). The
last three columns are used only for the BLAST result. G4ALL is
able to convert the alignment results of BLAST (table format)
and Nucmer (Mummer [] package) to the G4ALL format
through the Convert alignment results option in the utility
menu. This software allows the contigs to be extended with the
aid of the information on the gene products provided by the
homology search (see above). To install a project in G4ALL, the
name of the project is entered, followed by the reference
genome (fasta file), sequences produced by the genome
assembly (multifasta file), and the results (table format) of the
alignment of the contigs in relation to the reference genome.
This information is entered into a MySQL database, so that it
can be accessed by the sequence curating interface.

To visualize the project information registered in G4ALL, the
following filters can be used: minimum identity of the BLAST
hits, minimum alignment extension, contigs with multiple
alignments in the genome, contigs selected during curation
(marked as “used”), along with the option “all alignments”, in
which all previously-defined filters are ignored. Because of the
considerable computing power needed to load all of the project
data, render and position all of the sequences in the curation
window, threads were implemented in some processes, in order
to improve the performance of the program.

During curation, the following actions can be taken for each
contig: save in a FASTA format file, copy, edit, and visualize the
results produced by the alignment against the non-redundant
protein database, previously inserted through G4ALL, in
addition to generating a report of the list of gene products for
each of the contigs, with their respective e-values and identity
values, when available. In order to facilitate navigation through
the sequences produced by the assembly software, the screen
“Contig Details” presents navigation options. Within this
screen, the sequence ends can be trimmed, the sequences can be
moved in relation to the other sequences to allow alignment,
and the original sequence can be recovered using the resource
“Recover Original Sequence”. In order to produce the scaffold
of the genome, the button “Scaffold” is activated. The curated
sequences are evaluated as a function of the overlap (size
defined by the user) of each sequence in relation to its
neighbours, based on the alignment results inserted previously,
in order to represent possible rearrangements in the genome,
for the construction of the consensus sequence ().

Implementation:
To develop G4ALL, we used the JAVA language, with the
Swing library (visual resources), and java.util.concurrent
(http://java.sun.com/docs/books/tutorial/essential/concurrency/pools.html) 
to implement the threads. We used the Java
Persistence API (http://java. sun.com/developer/technicalArticles/J2EE/jpa/) to communicate with the
MySQL database. The system reports were developed using the
iReport software (http://jasperforge.org/projects/ireport).
G4ALL is available at: 
http://www.genoma.ufpa.br/rramos/softwares/g4all.xhtml

Results &amp; Discussion
The sequencing of strain Cp258 generated 70,521,987 reads,
which were submitted to the phred &gt;=20 quality filter,
considering the mean, using the Quality Assessment function,
with left 40,589,132 reads representing 882× sequence coverage.
In order to assemble the genome using Velvet and Edena, we
ran 378 and 336 assemblies, respectively, with variations in the
parameters. Considering the largest N50, the number of bases
included, and the largest and smallest contig, 1269 contigs were
obtained with Velvet, with an N50 of 3.2Kb and 2,343,443 bases,
using the parameters k-mer, coverage cut-off and expected
coverage, of 31, 15 and 260, respectively. In Edena, the best run
produced 6,735 contigs, an N50 of 0.5Kb and 2,590,667 bases,
with: MinOverlap set at 36, OverlapCutoff at 11 and DephLimit
at 14.

The contigs in Velvet and Edena were saved in a single multifasta
file with 8,004 sequences and submitted to Simplifier,
which returned only 5,271 contigs (65% of the sequences that
were entered). These were used for the BLAST run (blastn)
against the reference genome FRC41 (CP002097). The contigs
were divided into four groups: (a) single alignments, (b) more
than one alignment with the reference genome, (c) no
significant alignment and (d) no alignment with the reference,
with the criterion of alignment equal to or greater than 40
nucleotides in (see supplementary material). Contigs
with significant alignments (extension greater than or equal to
40 bps) in more than one region of the domain, generally
represent repetitions such as ribosomal RNAs, but they can also
involve the deletion () or insertion () of
regions in the contig when compared to the reference sequence,
or even assembly errors, where they do not represent the gene
product correctly ().

The lack of significant alignments or alignment with the
reference sequence may be the result of regions that are not
present in FRC41 or because of assembly errors. In either case,
G4ALL can use the gene product reports for each contig to
identify the cause. After curation in G4ALL, of the 5,118 contigs
that aligned significantly with the reference, 2,084 were selected
for the production of the scaffold, resulting in 655 contigs
(2,263,398 bases) oriented and ordered with respect to the
reference, representing 96.81% of the reference genome
(2,337,913 bases), when compared to the size of FRC41.

In the synteny analysis using the genome of C.
pseudotuberculosis 316 and 258 (), we observed a highly
conserved gene order between genomes, which was expected
since these are organisms of the same species and biovar.

Conclusion
G4ALL is a computational tool integrated with a database that
allows the curation and extension of contigs produced by de
novo assemblers, and the production of a scaffold, even when
there is little overlap between the sequences (which can be
validated by searching for homologies in biological databases).
In addition, the tool allows various users to work on the project
simultaneously, reducing the time needed for curation. This
software has been successfully used in a number of projects
involving organisms such as Archaea and viruses.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work was part of the Rede Paraense de Genômica e
Proteômica supported by Fundação de Amparo a Pesquisa do
Estado do Pará. A.S., M.P.S., A.R.C., P.H.C.G.S. and V.A. were
supported by Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento
Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq). R.T.J.R. acknowledges support
from the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível
Superior (CAPES).

Citation:Ramos et al, Bioinformation 9(11): 599-604 (2013)

The interface lists the contigs that were curated, showing their position in the reference genome and in relation to the
other contigs. After selecting one of these contigs, it is possible to move it to the left or to the right to correct the alignment in
relation to the others, copy, save or edit each sequence, and trim both ends. In addition, the BLAST results can be observed through
the menu “Blast Result”, in order to identify the existing gene products.

Assembly of the consensus sequence. When the
contigs are aligned with each other by similarity, they are
extended to produce the consensus sequence

Possible alignments of the contigs against the
reference sequence provoke multiple Blast alignments; A) Two
regions of the contig align with two parts of the reference due to
the deletion of a region in the contig; B) A region was inserted
into the contig that is not in the reference; C). The central region
of the contig does not align with the reference, which could
indicate an error in assembly or sequence insertion.

Analysis of synteny using the genome of C.
pseudotuberculosis 316 and 258. We observed a highly
conserved gene order between genomes.

