Background
Mastitis is one of the serious diseases causing huge loss to the
dairy industry worldwide. Bacteria involved in bovine mastitis
infections are S. aureus, Coagulase negative staphylococci
(CNS), E. coli, Serretia marcescens, Bacillus subtilis, Streptococcus
species etc []. Bovine mastitis has remained a major infectious
disease which is difficult to manage and control it. Further
emergence of multi drug resistant bacteria causing mastitis has
made its management more complex. It is more serious in the
countries like India which is the highest milk producer in the
world which requires an urgent attention and novel methods of
intervention to control the disease. In this context that all the
drugs selected for the treatment of bovine mastitis against a
particular infectious agent has to be screened through the in
silico study by using the bioinformatics tools and will have to be
notified through a database dedicated for this purpose which
help in identifying the high prevalence of bovine mastitis.
Coagulase negative staphylococcus is one of the most important
gram positive bacteria, which have a potential to infect both
animals and humans. Coagulase negative Staphylococci (CNS)
are increasing as causes of bovine intramammary infection
throughout the world in recent years the treatment of
staphylococcal mastitis still remains difficult in spite of using of
antibiotics with a high in vitro efficacy. The in silico based
approach involves a series of screening of proteins that can be
used as potential drug targets and vaccine candidates []. Using
such approach, novel targets have been identified successfully
for various pathogens [–]. Therefore in the present study we
have selected CNS for the in silico investigation of drug target
pathway in the bacterial cell and characterization of proteins
involved in the metabolic pathways and identifying location of
pathway in the bacterial cell.

Methodology
Identification of bacteria:
CNS has been isolated from the milk of the cow with bovine
mastitis and was identified by staining, colony morphology on
a specific media, catalase and coagulase tests.

Molecular identification of the bacteria:
Molecular identification of CNS was done by using 16s rRNA
primers forward 51CAG GCC TAA CAC ATG CAA GTC 31and
reverse 31 GGG CGG AGT GTA CAA GGC 51 primers used in
the study were designed by using Primer 3, isolation of DNA
was carried out by [] and confirmed by 16s rRNA.

Prediction of target for the drug discovery:
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database
was used as a source of metabolic pathway information 
[], all
the metabolic pathways of the S. saprophyticus were retrieved
from the KEGG. Pathways which do not appear in the host but
present in the pathogen have been considered as pathways
unique to pathogen according to KEGG database annotation
[]. The corresponding amino acid sequences of the proteins
involved in the pathway were retrieved from the KEGG
database. They were subjected to a Basic Local Alignment
Search Tool (BLAST) search against the non-redundant
database with the e-value inclusion threshold set to 0.005. The
search was restricted to proteins from Bos taurus through an
option available in the BLAST program. This analysis was
carried out for the detection of non homologues pathways in
the host, which do not have hits below the e-value inclusion
threshold of 0.005 and, were picked out as potential drug
targets. All the non homologous pathway genes were believed
to be essential genes of the pathogen. Essential genes are those
indispensable for the survival of an organism, and their
functions are therefore, considered a foundation of life 
[].
These crucial genes were absent in the host 
[]. All the
essential pathways amino acid sequences were subjected to the
PSORT (http://www.psort.org/psortb/index.html) analysis
for the prediction the location of the pathway in the cell. This is
required to find out the surface membrane proteins which
could be probable drug targets. Further these surface
membrane pathway protein sequences were characterized by
using Peptide Statistic (PEPSTAT) program which is available
online via European Molecular Biology Open Software Suite
(EMBOSS) web server [].

Results
Identification of bacteria:
The bacteria used in the present study could be identified as S.
saprophyticus based on the colony morphology, gram staining
and biochemical test. The identification of isolates as S.
saprophyticus were confirmed by PCR amplification of the gene
encoding the 16s rRNA. The sequence of the 16s r RNA gene is
shown (). Identification of species was further
confirmed by computational analysis through BLAST.

Identification of potential drug targets:
A total of 99 pathways of S. saprophyticus were retrieved from
KEGG database (http://www.kegg.jp/keggbin/search_pathway_text) out of which 44 pathways were non
homology to the host Bos Taurus
 (see supplementary
material). As bovine mastitis causative agents are emerging
multi drug resistant, the discovery of an alternative treatment
for this disease has profound scope and significance. Drug
discovery process is time consuming and multistep process
which includes test on many models and clinical trials. One of
the major reasons for drug failures in bovine mastitis treatment
is the indiscriminate use of drug without performing the in vitro
sensitivity test to the causal organism [,
]. It's reported that
drug resistant in Coagulase negative staphylococcus is also of
growing concerned in bovine mastitis, poor drug-affinity and
pharmacokinetic properties of lead compounds. Computer
aided method is a rapid and significant screening approach
because it selects the lead molecules with good pharmacological
and druggish properties.

Prediction of targets distribution in the cellular components:
ALL the 44 pathways amino acid sequence were Subjected to
PSORT analysis (http://www.psort.org/psortb/index.html)
for prediction of location of pathway in cell, out of 44 pathways,
2 pathways were found to be in cell wall (4%), 3 pathways were
located in cell membrane (7%) and 39 pathways in cytoplasm
(89%). Similar studies have been carried out by [] for finding
the location of sub cellular components by using Proteome
Analyst Specialized Sub Cellular Localization (PA-SUB) Server
v2.5 []. This is required to find out the cell wall proteins
which could be probable drug targets. Folate biosynthesis
pathway and Beta lactamase pathways were found to be
present in the cell wall of the bacteria, these both cell wall
Proteins were characterized by a PEPSTAT program 
[]. The
abundance of each amino acid in the pathways and their
molecular percent with respect to dayhoffstat and properties of
residues is given in  &amp; 
 (see supplementary material).

Folate biosynthesis pathway:
Folic acid is necessary for the biosynthesis of DNA. Bacteria
that are sensitive to a drug that inhibits an enzyme necessary
for the biosynthesis of folic acid in bacteria are unable to
acquire folic acid from their environment. In the presence of
folic acid inhibitor they are unable to synthesize the folic acid
essential for cell growth and multiplication. Drugs that inhibit
the folic acid biosynthesis pathway of pathogenic bacteria do
not harm their hosts, however, hosts (Bos taurus, human)
acquire folic acid from their diet which lack the enzyme
necessary for synthesizing folic acid []. Folate biosynthesis
pathway comprises a very important hydrolase enzyme
responsible for removal of phosphate group from the
environment, presence of phosphate group in the environment
prevents the passage of organic molecules through the
membrane [], and however inhibition of alkaline phosphatase
enzyme in the prokaryotic system makes the bacteria unable to
take up the organic matter. Hence cause the death of bacteria.
Therefore, folate biosynthetic pathway was believed to be the
best and safe target for designing the drug against the S.
saprophyticus causing bovine mastitis.

Beta-lactamase precursor pathway:
Nowadays methicillin resistant staphylococcus (MRS) is of
serious concern. This is due to the failure of beta – lactam ring
to bind to the Penicillin Binding Proteins (PBP). PBP helps to
cross link the polymer of repeated units of N-acetylglucosamine
(NAG) and N- acetylemuramic acid (NAM), which is the final
step in the biosynthesis of cell wall. However, beta-lactam
antibiotics are becoming ineffective against pathogenic bacteria.

The most common reason is due to the production of betalactamase
enzyme which catalyzes the hydrolysis of the
antibiotics through the formation of carboxyl group degrading
beta-lactam ring. Hydrolyzed antibiotics lose its activity or
binding affinity towards the PBP hence no effect against
bacteria. Resistant bacteria possessing beta lactamase gene
hydrolysis beta lactum antibiotic, hence this antibiotic fails to
bind PBP []. Beta-lactamse enzyme is an extra cellular enzyme
in Gram-positive bacteria and found in periplasmic membrane
in Gram-negative bacteria []. More than 200 types of betalactamse
have been found. The difference among them is only
the catalytic efficacy and turns over rate range from 0.004 to
1,200 molecules per second by 1 molecule of enzyme. Betalactamase
became wide spread via the mechanism of plasmid
exchange/insert among the pathogens []. The rapid spread
and evolution of these enzymes have seriously threatened the
present antimicrobial arsenal. Therefore In silico approach in
finding out the beta-lactamase inhibitors coupled with betalactam
antibiotics could be the solution for rapid spread of
multi drug resistant bacteria. These enzyme inhibitors would
function to inactivate the beta-lactamase in the periplasmic
space so that the partner antibiotics can reach its target,
penicillin binding protein (PBP), and interrupt the biosynthesis
of cell wall causing the death of the bacteria.

It is worth characterizing the physicochemical properties of the
protein by using its primary structure or amino acid sequence
which aid in finding out whether the protein share any basic
physicochemical properties with other proteins that have been
studied experimentally. The most important use of this analysis
is while qualitatively assessing particular regions of a protein
sequence that may have common characteristics with others in
alignments with distantly related protein sequences. A typical
physicochemical parameter values can be obtained by using
this analytical program.

Conclusion
In the present study attempts were made to find the putative
targets of S. saprophyticus for the drug discovery with all the
sources available in databases by computational methods. S.
saprophyticus was isolated and confirmed by 16s rRNA gene
amplification. A total 44 non homologues pathways amino acid
sequence were screened for their location in bacterial cell out of
which 39 pathway were found to be in cytoplasm, 2 in cell wall
and 3 in the cell membrane. As pathways of cell wall were
believed to be the most putative targets for the drug discovery
the, proteins involved in the cell wall pathway were further
characterized for the determination of physicochemical
properties of the protein. Perhaps the knowledge of the present
study made the drug discovery easier which have high affinity
to the target site. Possible drug discovery to manage bovine
mastitis with a help of bioinformatics tool is more significant,
specific, reduce the time and complications involved in the
clinical trials.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are grateful to the Department of Biotechnology
(DBT), Ministry of Science and Technology, Government of
India, New Delhi, for funding the Bioinformatics Infrastructure
Facility Project (BT/BI/25/001/2006 VOL II dt 05-03-2012),
Interdisciplinary Program for Life Science Project
(BT/PR/4555/INF/22/126/2010 dated 30-09-2010) and P. G
Departments of Microbiology and Biotechnology Karnatak
University, Dharwad for providing the facilities, to carry out
the present work.

Citation:Bhasme et al, Bioinformation 9(7): 339-344 (2013)

Sequence of 16s r RNA

