Background
Flood is a common phenomenon during monsoon season for rice
cultivation in the rainfed lowlands of Northeast India. Flash
flood occurs at various stages of crop growth. The regulation of
gene expression in response to environmental cues is an
important factor in plant's survival and adaptability. Most rice
varieties are intolerant to flash flood but some have the ability to
survive under flash flood. Transcriptome data have shown that
the expression levels of a number of genes are altered in the cells
of submerged plants. These genes are involved in a broad
spectrum of biochemical, cellular and physiological processes,
including glycolysis, energy metabolism, lipid metabolism,
signal transduction, DNA transcription, protein biosynthesis and
digestion, cell components and photosynthesis 
[–]. A few
characters were identified that play a key role in submergence
tolerance in rice, the most critical are: (a) maintenance of high
carbohydrate concentration, (b) optimum rates of alcoholic
fermentation (c) energy conservation by maintaining low
elongation growth rates during submergence. The discovery of
RNA interference (RNAi) has transformed our understanding of
gene regulation, mechanisms of heterochromatin formation, and
transposons control []. The term RNAi has come to encompass
an increasingly broad family of related pathways, in which small
RNAs from 20–30 nucleotides in length serve as guides to target
recognition and regulation. In the canonical RNAi pathway,
small RNAs are generated from double-stranded precursors by a
ribonuclease enzyme termed, Dicer. Small RNAs act in complex
with a second defining component of RNAi-related pathways,
the argonaute (AGO) proteins, together forming the RNAinduced
silencing complex (RISC) []. MicroRNAs (miRNAs)
play significant role in response to the adverse biotic and abiotic
stress conditions at the post-transcriptional level []. They are
small, non-coding, single stranded RNAs that are abundantly
found in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells and can trigger
translational repression or gene silencing by binding to
complementary sequences on target mRNA transcripts. In the
recent years, miRNAs have been reported to control a variety of
biological processes, such as plant development, differentiation,
signal transduction or stress responses [–]. Thus identification
of miRNA targets is an essential step in understanding the
miRNA functions.

A given miRNA may have multiple different mRNA targets, and
a given target might similarly be targeted by multiple miRNAs.
By coordinating the expression of multiple genes, miRNAs are
responsible for guiding the embryonic development, immune
and related inflammatory responses, as well as the cellular
growth and proliferation. So, with the help of bioinformatics
tools it is now possible to determine all the possible targets
within the whole genome for a particular miRNA and thereby
their cellular responses. The function of a miRNA closely
resembles its structure, which can be determined by the
bioinformatics program with the use of certain notions of
secondary structure because miRNA genes are more conserved
in secondary structure than their primary sequences 
[]. Of late
several miRNA target prediction tools have been developed but
they are unable to discriminate the true miRNA targets from non
targets. If gene expression profiles of transgenic lines with
increased miRNA expression are available, it is possible to do
high-throughput and more accurate screening of targets 
[].
When the under-expressed genes are extracted, putative targets
can be defined and the sets that overlapped with the
computationally predicted ones can be targeted. Unfortunately,
this kind of high-throughput expression profile dataset is
difficult to generate due to the high cost and the labor-intensive
experimental process. In this paper, we propose a novel
approach for screening miRNA targets. Our approach is based
on complementarity and statistical scores. We used a perl script
for the prediction of miRNA target gene. At first we looked for
which genes are expressed under submerged condition. Then the
properties of these genes were analyzed and used as query
sequence to find out the submergence responsive miRNAs. The
script was written in such a way that it keeps the first eight to
nine bases of the miRNA sequence constant to find out the most
probable target within the genome of Oryza sativa.

Methodology
Identification of submergence responsive genes:
Genes delivering resistance to rice during the submergence were
identified from GRAMENE database. These genes are: ABA 8'-
hydroxylase1 (ABA8ox1), Reduced ADH activity (RAD),
Submergence tolerance1 (SUB 1), Submergence tolerance2 (SUB 2),
Oryza sativa cation transport protein (osCTP). Gene RAD &amp; SUB 2
are not sequenced till now, so only three genes were used for our
study. The nucleotide sequences of these genes were
downloaded in FASTA format from NCBI database. Accession
numbers of the genes are given in the  (see
supplementary material). The comparative sequence statistics of
the genes was done with the help of CLC MAIN WORKBENCH
6.8.2. The genomic data of Oryza sativa was downloaded from
GRAMENE database.

Identification of Submergence responsive miRNA:
Submergence responsive miRNA were detected using the server psRNA
target: A plant small RNA target analysis 
(http://plantgrn.noble.org/psRNATarget/?function=2). Where target
transcript was submitted in FASTA format and searched against
the database miRBase (Release 19, August 2012). The parameters
used for the search are given in the  (see supplementary
material). Selected miRNA sequences were downloaded in
FASTA format from miRBase database. With the help of a perl
script the miRNA sequences were converted to DNA format and
then to their complementary sequences. Outputs of the program
were saved in FASTA format. Which are then used a query
sequence to find out the binding region within the genome of
Oryza sativa.

Prediction of miRNA binding region within the genome of O.sativa:
A perl script was written to find out the binding region of
miRNA (complementarity based) keeping the first eight to ten
bases of miRNA constant. The code of the program was written
in such a way that it extracts the target sequence and also gives
the position of the genome where the miRNA binds. The perl
script gives a number of outputs, but the most probable region
was selected based on the statistical scores and complementarity
values. The regions having mismatch within the range of 0-5 nt
with their respective miRNA were selected for further analysis.

Creation of Consensus sequence and identification of their rate of conservation:
Consensus sequence of all the miRNA was created by taking
their respective matching regions with the help of CLC MAIN
WORKBENCH 6.8.2. The rate of conservation of a particular base
at a particular position was also identified using CLC MAIN
WORKBENCH 6.8.2.

Prediction of secondary structure of the miRNAs:
The stem loop sequences of the miRNA are downloaded from
miRBase for prediction of the secondary structures. The program
developed by M.ZUKER (based on thermodynamic score) was
used for the construction of secondary structure.

Results &amp; Discussion
Prediction of Submergence responsive miRNA:
Our prediction method predicts the targets by combining the
statistical score and sequence information (). Before
applying our perl script against the genomic data of Oryza sativa
we first investigated whether our script gives true result with
their exact position by using a small nucleotide sequence. It has
been reported that miRNAs affect the expression of a number of
target genes involved in different developmental processes and
stresses. We expect that both the complementarity and the
statistical scores are informative enough to discriminate targets
from non-targets. To achieve a good prediction it is important to
find out which gene expressed at high rate during the
submergence. With the help of GRAMENE database it has been
found that the gene ABA 8'-hydroxylase1 (ABA8ox1), Submergence
tolerance1 (SUB 1), Oryza sativa cation transport protein (osCTP) are
highly expressed during submergence. The nucleotide sequence
of these genes were downloaded from NCBI database and used
as a user submitted transcript in psRNA target: a plant small
RNA target analysis online tool to find out the submergence
responsive miRNAs. The results of the search that had been
carried out to find the submergence responsive miRNA are given
in the  (see supplementary material). Out of eleven (11)
miRNAs it was found that the sequence of osa-miR396a-5p /
osa-miR396b-5p and osa-miR821a/osa-miR821b/osa-miR821c
were similar, but they have different stem loop sequences. Since
this project is sequence based only one of the similar miRNA
sequence are taken in to consideration. MicroRNA shows
dynamic expression pattern i.e. a given miRNA may have
multiple different mRNA targets, and a given target might
similarly be targeted by multiple miRNAs. By coordinating the
expression of multiple genes, miRNAs are responsible for
guiding the embryonic development, immune and related
inflammatory responses, as well as the cellular growth and
proliferation. So, with the help of bioinformatics applications our
aim is to identify all the possible submergence responsive
miRNA targets within the whole genome of Oryza sativa and
thereby their cellular response.

Genome-wide identification of submergence responsive miRNA targets:
Depending on the sequence information, perl script was written
for each of these miRNAs to find out their binding position
within the genome of Oryza sativa. The position based feature of
the script increases the overall specificity of the program. Our
perl script performed well on the genomic data of Oryza sativa
and produced significant results (allowing mismatch not more
than 5 bases) with their positions. The script was written in such
a way that it extracts the nucleotide sequence for the entire
possible binding region within the genome. The binding region
and the target sequence for osa-mir1867 are given in the 

(see supplementary material). So, further analysis of the target
sequence can be done along with its respective miRNA. We then
perform the analysis to compare the frequency of nucleotides,
weight and rate of base conservation for all possible targets with
their miRNAs. These predicted binding sequences are aligned
with their respective miRNA using the software CLC MAIN
WORKBENCH 6.8.2 to find out the consensus sequence. We
scored the alignment using a position dependent, mismatch
penalty system to find out the most probable binding region. We
also identified the rate of conservation of bases at a particular
position for all the predicted binding regions and it was found
that the all the predicted binding regions maintain above 70%
rate of conservation of bases. The frequency (), base
conservation rate () and 
weight analysis () was
done for all the predicted targets given by the perl program. At
the end of all the analysis we have predicted the following
targets within the genome of Oryza sativa for submergence
responsive miRNAs. We also predicted the secondary structure
of the submergence responsive miRNAs (given in the
supplementary file) using the algorithm developed by M. Zuker
(based on thermodynamics). The algorithm showed 97.99%
specificity and 2.01% false positive rate during the prediction of
secondary structure of miRNAs.

Discussion
Most rice varieties are intolerant to flood but some varieties have
the ability to survive after the occurrence of flood. Submergence
tolerance is a genetically determined trait with relatively high
stability. However, the duration of survival is also influenced by
environmental factors such as water turbidity, temperature, light,
and other factors such as seedling age. Plants become more
tolerant as they get older. It was observed that microRNA plays
crucial role in response to adverse biotic and abiotic stresses at
the post transcriptional level (Sunkar et al., 2008). MicroRNAs
(miRNAs) are small noncoding RNA gene products about 22-nt
long that are found in diverse organisms, including plant and
animals. Submergence tolerant rice varieties contain several
genes like submergence 1 (SUB1), ABA8ox1, osCTP which allow
the plant to survive under 10-14 days of complete submergence
and to renew growth when the water recedes. The present study
was carried out with the objectives: (a) To identify the genes
involved in submergence tolerance.(b)To identify the miRNA
that is involved in delivering resistance to plants during
submergence.(c)To identify the binding position of these miRNA
within the genome of Oryza sativa.(d)To predict the pre-miRNA
secondary structure of these miRNAs.

As per our mentioned objectives in this present study, we had
predicted a total of eleven (11) submergence responsive miRNAs
(osa-miR396a-5p, osa-miR396b-5p, osa-miR396c-5p, osamiR821a,
osa-mi8521b, osa-miR821c, osa-miR2919, osa-miR1867,
osa-miR5076, osa-miR6245, osa-miR6248) from the genes
expressed during submergence. The miRNAs were identified
using the online miRNA tool psRNA Target. The parameters used
for the prediction were almost same for all the genes except that
of the maximum expectation value (range 0.0-5.0). The maximum
expectation value 4, 2, 1, 3.5 was used for the genes osCTP
(hspsize 18), SUB1A (hspsize 18), SUB1C (hspsize 20) and
ABA8ox1 (hspsize 18) respectively. The mature and stem loop
sequence of these miRNAs were downloaded from miRBase
database. Out of eleven (11) miRNAs it was found that the
mature sequence of osa-miR396a-5p / osa-miR396b-5p and osamiR821a/
osa-miR821b/osa-miR821c were similar, but they have
different stem loop sequences. Since this project is sequencebased
only one of the similar miRNA sequences is taken into
consideration. MicroRNA shows dynamic expression i.e. a given
miRNA may have multiple different mRNA targets, and a given
target might similarly be targeted by multiple miRNAs. The
mature miRNA sequences were used as query sequence in this
study for the identification of their most probable binding region
within the genome of O. sativa. The genomic data of Oryza sativa
was downloaded from GRAMENE database. In this study we
used a perl script to predict the submergence responsive miRNA,
binding sites within the genome of Oryza sativa. The perl script
was written in such a way that it keeps the first eight to ten bases
of the miRNA constant (depending on the length of the miRNA)
to find out the miRNA binding site within the genome. The
position based feature of the script increases the overall
specificity of the program. Our perl script performed well on the
genomic data of Oryza sativa and produced significant results
(allowing mismatch not more than 5 bases) with their positions.
The script gives 16 probable binding sites for osa-miR396a /b, 22
binding sites for osa-miR396c, 13 binding sites for osamiR821a/
b/c, 4 binding sites for osa-miR1867, 100 binding sites
for osa-miR2919, 3 binding sites for osa-miR5076, 16 binding sites
for osa-miR6245, and 26 binding sites for osa-miR6248 within the
genome of O.sativa. These results were analyzed on the basis of
complementarity and the statistical scores are used to find out
the most probable binding regions. The predicted target location
for all the submergence responsive miRNAs are given in the
 
(see supplementary material). These predicted binding
regions are aligned with their respective miRNAs using the
software BioEdit to find out the consensus sequence. We scored
the alignment using a position dependent, mismatch penalty
system. We also identified the rate of conservation of bases at a
particular position for all the predicted binding regions and it
was found that the all the predicted binding regions maintain
above 70% rate of conservation of bases. However, the predicted
regions need to be verified in wet lab. It is important here to
mention that the function of miRNA closely resembles its
structure. Proper understanding of the structure function
relationship requires knowledge about the three dimensional
structure of the miRNA molecule, which is very difficult to
obtain and time consuming. Moreover, it has been reported that
MIRgenes are more conserved in the secondary structure than in
primary structure []. We predicted the secondary structure of
the submergence responsive miRNAs using the algorithm
developed by M. Zuker (based on thermodynamics). The
algorithm showed 97.99% specificity and 2.01% false positive rate
during the prediction of secondary structure of miRNAs.

Conclusion
Our results suggested that the perl script we used for analysis
has the potential to discriminate miRNA targets from nontargets.
The combination of complementarity and statistical
scoring based method ensures retrieval of true targets. We have
shown in O. sativa that the target region related to the miRNA
was successfully extracted with their positions by the program.
The above study could be significantly helpful in understanding
the dynamic expression pattern of the miRNAs associated with
submergence condition. Further research work might be taken
up for identifying the exact location of the target site of the
specific miRNA within the genome. If the miRNA binds to the
exonic region of a gene within the genome, it might be concluded
that the miRNA could play a significant role in the expression of
the gene. However, if the miRNA binds to the intronic or
intergenic site (junk) within the genome, it might be involved in
either up-regulation or down-regulation of gene expression in
the downstream region.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Paul &amp; Chakraborty, Bioinformation 9(17): 858-863 (2013)

The procedure for computational prediction of miRNA
targets within the genome of Oryza sativa

Differences in the frequency of nucleotides among all
the predicted binding regions of miR5076 within the genome of
O.sativa (Results of nucleotide frequency analysis for all the
miRNAs with their target sites are given in the supplementary
file)

Consensus sequence for Osa-miR1867 and rate of
conservation of bases at a particular position of that consensus
sequence among all probable binding region present within the
genome of O.sativa (Consensus sequence and base conservation
analysis results for all the miRNAs are given in the
supplementary file)

Comparison of weight of all predicted binding regions
for osa-miR6245 (Results of weight comparison for all the
miRNAs with their target regions are given in the supplementary
file)

