Background
Alterations of DNA methylation have been recognized as an important component of cancer development [].
Hypomethylation generally arises earlier and is linked to chromosomal instability and loss of imprinting 
[–],
whereas hypermethylation is associated with promoters and can arise secondary to gene silencing 
[–], but might
be a target for epigenetic therapy []. It is not currently
known why certain CpG islands are hypermethylated or hyphometylated in specific cancers but not in others [].
Some of these events have been observed in vitro and using in vivo animal models 
[–,,]
but their relative importance in human disease is not understood. Recent studies suggest that some methylation patterns are discernible in risk groups and certain diseases. Indications
are that the hypomethylation of specific DNA repeat elements or genes can be disease-specific []. These
repeat sequences may be transposable elements found interspersed throughout the genome, or large repeat sequences and simple repeat ones, such as DNA satellites,
that are found commonly in heterochromatin.

Hypomethylation of satellites and retroelements together should account for the greater part of the decrease in methyl-cytosine content in cancer cells. Decreased
methylation of single-copy genes does not contribute significantly to the decrease in quantity, but whether hypomethylation may lead to the reactivation of genes
silenced in normal cells is an important issue. The site reported to be hypomethylated in several human cancers is located within the coding region. It may become
demethylated in cancers as a consequence of global hypomethylation or may reflect increased transcriptional activity 
[,,]. The relationship 
between hypomethylation of specific genes and repeat elements within the genome may serve as useful diagnostic indicators for disease 
[]. Nowadays, more information is required with regard to what repeat elements are specific to
what diseases and whether this information can be used to predict disease onset or progression. Thus, the occurrence of G+C content, CpG islands, repeat and retrotransposable
elements in demethylated genes related to cancer has been evaluated in this work. Moreover, a comparative analysis among different cancer types has also been performed in
order to elucidate what structural trends/patterns are present in the studied cancers.

Methodology
All selected genes were compiled from the recent literature (see Table 1 in ) and were collected
from the NCBI nucleotide database []. The sequence characteristics of the coding regions of each gene were
examined in the analysis. For CpG dinucleotide analysis, we used the NEWCPGREPORT program [], and the
total number of CpG islands was counted. For the repeat element analysis, the Repeat Masker program [] was
used and for tandem repeat analysis, the ETANDEM program [] was used. All classes of repeat elements
output from Repeat-Masker were collected. We used ETANDEM to obtain numbers of tandem repeat elements ranging from 5 bp to 100 bp. All the statistical calculations
were performed using the Minitab software [].

Discussion
Firstly, a list of genes that are demethylated in cancer according to the recent existing literature was compiled (Table 1 in 
). We observed that these genes are related with 7 different cancer types: breast,
colon, lung, ovarian, pancreatic, prostate and testicular. As it can be seen in , the ranges of genes affected by
hypomethylation includes growth regulatory genes, enzymes, developmentally critical genes and tissue specific genes such as germ cell-specific tumour antigen genes, etc.
Then, we selected 6 representative structural descriptors (variables) for the structural study: GC content, CpG islands, Simple Repeats (SR), Low Complexity (LC),
Large Tandem Repeats (LTR) and SINE Alu. The [bp]% sequence characteristics of these descriptors were calculated for all gene coding regions. As it has stated
before, the site reported to be hypomethylated in several human cancers is located within the coding region 
[,]. For this reason, the structural information related with this
region could be very useful in order to develop a first stage approximation. Once the values for all the structural descriptors were calculated, we performed a distribution
analysis of the [bp]% differences across all 7 cancer types. In order to evaluate tendencies, we also calculated the median and the average numbers for each descriptor and
cancer types (see ).

From the boxplot data comparisons in , we observed how all the GC content, CpG islands, Simple Repeats (SR), Low Complexity Elements (LC) and 
Large Tandem Repeats (LTR) [bp] % average distributions follow the same trend in all the different cancers studied. In contrast, the SINE Alu [bp] % average distribution
follows the opposite one. Apart form that, analyzing the value’s magnitude it can be observed that in general, the genes involved in the ovarian cancer show the smallest
values for [bp] % and the largest value for the SINE Alu descriptor. On the other hand the major part of colon, pancreatic and prostate [bp] % values are the largest ones
in all cases except for the SINE Alu descriptor (see ).

The relationship between CpG islands density and the GC content is logical taking into account that CpG islands are genomic regions that contain a high frequency of CG
dinucleotides. Besides, the SR, LC and LTR elements follow the same CpG island trend while the SINE Alu follows the opposite one. To date, there seems to be very
few comparative analyses of CpG islands density and their correlations with other genome features. Here, it seems clear that there is some structural mark/pattern that
establishes a relationship among the different coding region features of the studied genes and so, a mark that relates different cancer types among them. After this
preliminary approximation, we think that these observations would be related with different hypomethylation patterns observed in some specific cancers but not in others 
[]. At this point, further investigation is required. Thus, we are studying the evolution of these trends in the sequences flanking 
the coding regions including the promoter sites. Our next objective will be the full identification of key structural characteristics that are unique to each cancer type.
Moreover, a future detailed and extensive theoretical analysis of the methylation profiles of these sequences and their characteristics may reveal higher specificity and
epigenetic signatures for cancer detection.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work has been financed by the project AGL2007-65678 of the Spanish Ministry of Science and Technology. We wish to thank Nuria Queralt Rosinach for her input,
careful reading and comments of the manuscript.

Boxplot graphs (median and interquartile) with the comparison of the different [bp] % seuence characteristic
distributions across the different cancer types*. Note that the different average numbers are connected by a drawing line.

