Human prion brain disease has been studied intensely since
1920. Examples of such diseases include Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease (CJD), fatal familial insomnia, Gerstmann-Straussler-
Scheinker disease, and Kuru. Central in the epidemiology and
pathogenesis of prion diseases is the prion protein itself and the
gene for this protein resides on chromosome 12, at locus 20pterp12.
The prion protein is termed PRNP, has a monomer
molecular weight of 22-36 Kd and is linked to glycosylphosphatidyl-
inositol (GPI) on cell surfaces. Various mutants of
PRNP have roles in disease pathogenesis. Interestingly, the
functions of the normal prion protein include synaptic
interactions, cell adhesion, and transmembrane signaling 
[].

Within the human genome, an RNA universe includes noncoding
RNA, microRNA (miRNA), which regulates many genes
and pathways. Processes influenced and regulated by prion
gene-associated miRNAs include cell death, neuronal
differentiation, development, synapse function, neurogenesis,
as well as neurodegeneration and neuropathogenesis. Studies in
mouse brains indicated that prion disease results in
deregulation of miRNAs as follows. MiR-342-3p, miR-146a,
miR-139-5p, miR-320, miR-128, miR-328, and let-7b miRNAs
were up regulated; miR-337-3p and miR-338-3p miRNAs were
down regulated. Gene promoters that were cognate to several
of these miRNAs included E2F-1 (cell cycle re-entry and
neurodegeneration), MAZ (inflammatory response
transcription factor), PAX6 (neurogenesis), KROX (transcription
factor), and Early Growth Response 1 (EGR1), a Nerve Growth
Factor-Induced Protein. Additional work indicated effects on Nmethyl-
D-aspartic acid (NMDA) receptor glutamate receptor
(ionotropic, N-methyl D-aspartate 2A, GRIN2A) as well 
[,
].

MiRNAs also participate in neuronal development, dendrite,
spine, and synapse, as well as neuron sub-type specificity and
they are involved in CNS ischemia, recovery from ischemia,
spinal cord injury, and traumatic brain injury 
[].

Exosomes are released from cells and are 50-130 nm size
vesicles. Exosomes from normal and prion-diseased humans
and animals contain molecular mixtures including cellular
prion protein, PrP(C), and the abnormal infectious form, PrP
(Sc). Exosomes released from prion-infected neuronal cells
contained miRNAs, other non-coding RNA, messenger RNA
fragments, retroviral RNA repeat regions, transfer RNA
fragments, small cytoplasmic RNA, small nuclear RNA, and
small nucleolar RNA. Compared to uninfected exosomes,
infected exosomes contain increased expression of miRNAs
miR-424, miR-29b, miR-342-3p, miR-128a, miR-21, let-7b, let-7i,
and miR-222 as well as miR-146 at decreased levels 
[].

In addition to prion diseases, miRNAs are also involved in
Parkinson's and Huntington's diseases []. 
In (), it illustrates the gene expression and protein
networks involving the proteins that interact with miRNAs in
prion-related disease [,
,
]. The study of miRNAs is a new
field and much has been accomplished. In this article, we
summarize just a few of the protein interactions of proteins
whose expression levels are perturbed in conjunction with
miRNAs in prion disease. The identification of the miRNAs
involved in the disease process and the subsequent interacting
protein networks provide several pivotal junctures that could
be attacked in developing treatments and possibly cures for
prion-related diseases. It is left as a puzzle for the interested
reader to identify the various genes and their functions in the
figures [,
,
].

There are no financial conflicts.

Citation:Shapshak, Bioinformation 9(13): 659-660 (2013)

A) Network of input prion - protein, PRNP with immediate input neighbors. In this figure, line-colors and various
interactions with other genes are red Down-regulation, green Up-regulation, beige Regulation, purple Co-expression, brown
Physical Interaction, turquoise dotted Predicted Protein Interaction, and mauve dotted Predicted TFactor Regulation 
[]. The genes
shown interacting with the PRNP gene are immediate interactions; B) Network of input prion - protein, PRNP with additional
output neighbors. In this figure, line-colors and various interactions with other genes are red Down-regulation, green Upregulation,
beige Regulation, purple Co-expression, brown Physical Interaction, turquoise dotted Predicted Protein Interaction, and
mauve dotted Predicted TFactor Regulation []. This figure is a continuation of the genes shown in Figure 1A and shows additional
levels of interactions among the genes; i.e. many of these are downstream from the first level shown in Figure 1A. C) Network of
input proteins PRNP, E2F-1, MAZ, PAX6, EGR1, and GRIN2A with immediate input neighbors. In this figure, line-colors and
various interactions with other genes are red Down-regulation, green Up-regulation, beige Regulation, purple Co-expression,
brown Physical Interaction, turquoise dotted Predicted Protein Interaction, and mauve dotted Predicted TFactor Regulation. 
[]
The expression of the proteins illustrated PRNP, E2F-1, MAZ, PAX6, EGR1, and GRIN2A are perturbed in conjunction with
miRNAs. The gene networks shown are immediate interactions. D) Network of input proteins PRNP, E2F-1, MAZ, PAX6, EGR1,
GRIN2A and additional output neighbors. In this figure, line-colors and various interactions with other genes are red Downregulation,
green Up-regulation, beige Regulation, purple Co-expression, brown Physical Interaction, turquoise dotted Predicted
Protein Interaction, and mauve dotted Predicted TFactor Regulation []. This figure is a continuation of the genes shown in Figure
1C and shows additional levels of interactions among the genes; i.e. many of these are downstream from the first level shown in
Figure 1C.

