Background
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is a human gamma herpes virus
carried by more than 90% of adult population. Most individuals
are infected asymptomatically during childhood, but a delayed
primary infection may manifest acutely []. It can be associated
with the development of epithelial malignancies, most notably
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) []. EBV viral structure
consists of linear double-stranded DNA genome, toroid shaped,
a layer of tegument, and sheath. The sheath is out of the bulges
(spike) composed by glycoproteins [,
].

BLLF1 gene encodes gp350/220 envelope glycoprotein, which
is considered as an important antigen of EBV 
[]. The
glycoprotein binds the cellular receptor CR2 mediated EBV to
enter the host cell []. The gp350/220 is an extensively
glycosylated polypeptide (907 residues) which is expressed in
two alternatively spliced forms of 350 and 220 kDa, identified as
the dominant protein in the extracellular of virus' envelope
[].
The N-terminal 470 residues of protein are essential to bind
human cellular receptor, CR2. Moreover, three-dimensional
structure of the CR2 receptor binding domain of gp350 has
recently been determined by x-ray crystallography.
Furthermore, we examined the conserved domain of gp350
which was responsible for binding CR2 receptor.

The conserved domain is crucial for EBV to infect host cells.
Further, blocking CR2 binding domain of gp350 using antibody
will inhibit EBV's spreading, and provoke immune system to
eliminate the virus in a patient. Therefore, we also identified
residues of the conserved domain which has high antigenicity
and epitope's properties which can be used as a reference to
develop NPC vaccine. Epitope prediction tools have facilitated
the vaccines development and have been applied to predict
epitopes in viruses [].

Methodology
Retrieval of Protein Sequences:
The glycoproteins 350/220 from all variants of Epstein-Barr
virus were retrieved from the National Center of Biotechnology
Information (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov).

Identification of conserved domain of gp350/220:
The conserved domain of gp350/220 was identified by aligning
protein sequences and structures, both in two dimensions (2D)
and three dimensions (3D). The alignments were done
separately for different types of proteins based on their
structure. Alignment protein sequences were performed by
Clustal-W using MEGA 5.05 software to identify the
polymorphism of N-terminal of protein in resides 1 to 470.
Hereafter, the polymorphic residues were aligned by Psipred
V2 software (http://dialign-sec.gobics.de/submission) to
identify their similar structure in 2D format. Then polymorphic
sequences were analyzed for their 3D structure profiles. The 3D
structures were modeled by Swiss Model software
(http://swissmodel.expasy.org), and then they were aligned
with their structure by pymol. Further, the polymorphic
structure was used as a template for docking analysis to
identify the resemblance of amino acid from polymorphic
variants of gp350/220 which is responsible for binding CR2
receptor. Protein docking is done by using ClusPro software
(http://cluspro.bu.edu/login.php). Then the evaluation of
docking result to analyze amino acids that bind CR2 receptor
was done by using KFC2 (Knowledge-based FADE Contact,
website address: http://kfc.mitchell-lab.org).

Analysis of Antigenicity:
Antigenicity analysis was performed by CLC Protein
Workbench 5.3 software
(http://www.softepic.com/windows/graphic-apps/cad/
CLC-Protein-Workbench). This step is important to identify the
antigenicity of gp350/220 residues which are responsible for
binding CR2 receptor. Peptide sequences with high antigenicity
properties or very antigenic ones are mandatory requirements
to be developed into a vaccine.

Epitope Mapping and BLAST Analysis:
The epitope mapping of gp350/220 was done by using
Discotope BepiPred tool from Immune Epitope Data Base
(http://www.immuneepitope.org). The obtained epitope from
previous step was examined to see their similarity to the human
protein sequences in Gene Bank database by using BLAST tools
(http:// blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi). This analysis was
used to assess the similarity of epitope with the human's
surface cell protein. The epitope with a high similarity to
surface cell protein has potential inducing autoimmune disease
when it is injected to human as vaccine.

Discussion
The EBV envelope gp350/220 protein has 907 amino acid
residues, and N-terminal of 470 protein residues essential for
binding CR2 receptor. Then, we identified the polymorphism of
residues among all EBV variants from gene bank data base
(NCBI). Here we found that among 259 variants of gp350/220,
there were 21 sequence variants or polymorphic. Hereafter, the
variants were aligned to their 2D structures using Psipred tools
to determine whether these variants have a similarity in 2D
structure. The results revealed that the variants developed 14
different 2D structures. It means that although the protein
sequences have 21 variants, some sequences are the same in 2D
structure. Psipred is a very accurate method to predict the 2D
structure of a protein. Hence, we performed further analysis by
using three-dimensional alignment to determine whether these
14 variants also have a similarity in 3D structure. Then we
predicted these 3D structure based on the homology modeling
by referring to the atomic model of amino acid sequence and
structure of three-dimensional (3D)-related protein homolog
using the Swiss Model tools. Based on these predictions, we
used a single protein sequence derived from sequences of
HHV4 (Human Herpes Virus 4; PDB ID:2H6O) as a template.
Modeling results demonstrated that all models, residues 4-427,
have high similarity (from 97, 4% until 100%) in 3D structure
(), and they are only different in their side chain. These
data suggested the residues formed conserved domain to
maintain its ability to bind CR2 receptors.

Furthermore, we examined the binding ability of 3D structures
of gp350/220 to CR2 receptor by docking molecule method. The
used CR2 receptors were obtained from PDB Bank (ID: 1LY2).
Docking results indicated that the binding site of gp350/220 to
CR2 receptor was located in domain 1 and domain 2 and the
energy binding is -899.9 KJ/mol (). The molecular
docking is either to achieve an optimal form of protein
conformation and that of ligand orientation or to identify the
lowest energy which is needed to bind protein and ligand 
[–].

Therefore, we evaluated the docking results by KFC2 software
(Knowledge-based FADE Contact) to observe amino acid
sequence of gp350/220 which interacts with CR2 receptor. The
analysis indicated that there were 46 amino acids of gp350/220
involved for binding CR2 receptor. Among these amino acids,
there are residues namely number 18, 148,160,161 and 210
which were conserved for all variants, so the residues can be
considered as the main domain responsible to bind CR2
receptors (). KFC2 is website-based software providing
tool to predict hot spots of residues in most proteins which bind
other surface proteins. Interactions between two proteins are
important to elucidate geometric properties of two different
protein structures which can be combined into complex
structures [].

Antigenicity is an ability of an antigen to specifically bind a
particular product of antibody or T cell receptor. The
antigenicity characterization of gp350/220 residues using CLC
Protein Workbench 6.3 software demonstrated that all variants
have a similar antigenic profile and the residues are important
for binding CR2 receptor which has high antigenicity properties
(). The antigenicity value is calculated from the
difference between the two data sets are used and these values
are useful to predict the length of antigenic amino acids 
[].

To evaluate the antigenic region of gp350/220 acting as an
epitope, then we performed an epitope mapping of residues by
using Discotope BepiPred, IEDB (Immune epitope Database).
The data revealed that the region was predicted to contain an
epitope which is suitable for a vaccine, 19-mer
QNPVYLIPETVPYIKWDNC residue (). Thereafter, we
analyzed the similarity of the epitope with human’s cell surface
protein to avoid cross reactivity of antibody when the region
was applied as vaccine. The similarity identification was done
by aligning the epitope sequence to human protein data bank in
NCBI by using BLAST tool. The result informed that the
epitope does not have a similarity with the human's cell surface
protein, so the epitope can be used as a reference to develop a
vaccine to prevent nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). This high
antigenicity epitope is warranted to be tested as an antigen for
peptide vaccine. It corresponds with the previous study
showing that high antigenicity epitope regions could be
designed as a vaccine candidate []. Moreover, this study
demonstrated that bioinformatics is a useful tool to design
vaccine for cancer, and another study also showed the
bioinformatics is also helpful to analyze gene-gene interaction
and pathway analysis of cancer cells death mediated by herbal
extract [].

Conclusion
It could be concluded from this study that the residue 147-165
of gp350/220, QNPVYLIPETVPYIKWDNC, was predicted as a
high antigenicity epitope which is responsible for binding to
CR2 receptor. The residue is promising to be developed as a
vaccine candidate to prevent NPC.

Citation:Sitompul et al, Bioinformation 8(10): 479-482 (2012)

Protein gp350/220 by Swiss Model

Interaction between gp350/220 and CR2 receptor. The
interactions were predicted by protein Docking using ClusPro.
CR2 receptor binds D2 and D1 of gp350/220. D1=domain
1(red), D2=domain 2(yellow), D3=domain 3(magenta).

The amino acid residues of gp350/220 bind CR2
receptor (visualized by Pymol).

Antigenicity of N-terminus gp 350/220

Predicted Epitope on gp350/220 (red color) was
visualized by Pymol.

