Background
The design of an effective HIV-1/AIDS vaccine is still in development and its
progress is debated []. 
The recent results of the HVTN 502/Merck V520-023
study, using three recombinant adenovirus-5 (rAD5) vectors expressing Ad5-
gag, Ad5-pol and Ad5-Nef, developed jointly by NIAID and Merck
Corporation [] 
and the use of priming injections of recombinant canary pox
vector (ALVAC-HIV) with booster injections of gp120 subunit (AIDSVAXB/
E) in a Thailand trial [] 
have stimulated further research and strategies in
the pursuit of HIV-1 vaccines. Studies of back-to-basics sequence structure
relationships coupled with immunological characterization are needed and the
HIV-1 ENV remains a key potential target for vaccine development 
[–].

The study of charged AA in the ENV protein is of importance because of
protein-protein surface interactions. These include gp120 and gp41 self- and
inter-subunit interactions, inner (core)-outer (solvent) molecular interactions,
receptor and co-receptor attachment, fusion required for viral entry, and
antibody and CTL immunity. Another key issue is that although AA sequences
may vary widely within and among HIV-1 clades, there may be
immunologically conserved three-dimensional structures that provide foci for
improved vaccine development 
[–].

AA positive selection is a consequence of the effects of immunity on HIV-1
ENV evolution. In 2007, the LANL HIV sequence database was examined and
AA positive selection sites in the ENV protein were identified. Asian isolates
had a higher positive selection level than North American isolates. The C3, C4,
and C5 conserved domains had most of the positive selection sites detected and
C1 and C2 were primarily positive selection-free []. In other studies,
ClustalX was used to align 300 sequences of gp160 and located AAs with a
high degree of conservation that were in proximity to one another in threedimensional
maps. For example, in HIV-1 clade A, conserved AA occurred at
positions including 32, 137, 441, and 915. Several AA were classified
according to their polarity or non-polarity at such conserved sites 
[].

Each component of the gp120-gp41 complex has specific functions. For
example, anchoring the complex occurs via the gp41, a transmembrane protein
[]. 
The gp120 V3 variable region has long been considered crucial for ENV
function. The V3 variable region binds to CCR5 or CXCR4 cell surface
coreceptors and contains conserved regions including a band, arch, and
hydrophobic core []. HIV-1 gp41 N- and C-domains mediate virusmembrane
fusion. AA sequence residues 512-681 from 862 isolates were
analyzed in HIV-1 clades A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, and O. A highly
conserved segment GIVQQQ on the C-terminal of the C-domain was identified
that is involved in the formation of the three interfaces between neighboring
helices in the trimer []. The HIV-1 gp41 amino-terminal region is a pretransmembrane
domain. It contains an amphipathic-at-interface sequence that
is non-polar (aromatic AA-rich), and is conserved among several viral strains.
The amphipathic-at-interface sequence also includes a beta-turn structure with
nonhelical extended region. Interaction of the amphipathic-at-interface
sequence with the fusion peptide region reduces its fusion ability 
[].
Additional studies from 357 HIV-1 clades A, B, C, and D also indicated that
the gp41 C-terminal tail loop and three beta-sheet membrane-spanning domains
are involved in membrane fusion [].

In addition to ENV AA sequence and charge studies, Shannon entropy is a
measure of diversity of AA sequences; the higher the entropy the greater is
sequence diversity []. For example, during investigations of HIV-1 vaccine
development, Shannon entropy was used to assess the intra- and inter-clade
sequence variation of proteomes of HIV-1 clades A1, B, C, and D. Mean
entropies were compared for strings of AA sequences and used to identify
protein regions with little diversity that harbored epitopes 
[,
]. Entropy
was also used to pinpoint clade sequence differences. For example, between
clades B and C for HIV-1 gp120, amphipathicity was maintained whereas there
was elevated entropy at the polar face of the C3 region alpha2-helix. In clade B
there was increased hydrophobicity and in clade C, V4 loops were shorter 
[].
Entropy analysis also helped identify protein regions with little AA variation
that harbored CTL epitopes; these regions frequently occurred in alpha helices
[,
]. 
Shannon entropy increased for V3 regions from patients treated with
CCR5 antagonists vs. baseline. This may be due to treatment resistant viruses
being able to produce a wider range of sequence variation than baseline viral
strains [].

The loss of effectiveness of immunological and drug therapy against HIV-1
and difficulties with producing an effective vaccine are due in part to viral
immune escape and protein sequence diversity. However, a study of protein
structure, selection, and sequence diversity of HIV-1 proteins demonstrated a
ceiling to the diversity reachable by HIV-1 despite its high mutation rate 
[,
]. 
Moreover, concomitant with the sequence variability ceiling, variability
tended to occur at restricted locations in HIV-1 proteins including in ENV.
Entropy studies for both clades B and C demonstrated that increased entropy
occurred at AA sites with less constraint, and low entropy at sites with greater
constraint. Entropies of AA sites in the protein core were lower than for sites
on the protein surface. This is consistent with a paradigm in which loops have
greater solvent accessibility than the more constrained core AAs. In this
context, protein-protein interaction regions are considered solvent inaccessible
(hydrophobic) [,
].

Since the early 1990's, phylogenetic analyses supported the paradigm of brain
as a reservoir for HIV-1 infection sequestered from blood. In studies of the V3
region, both polar and non-polar AA residues were prevalent for brain and
blood with predominantly negative and neutral AA for the brain. Entropy
calculations for HIV-1 derived from six patients indicated lower entropy in V3
sequences from brain vs. blood. Thus, the complex sequence and structure
relationships for HIV-1 sequences in brain need to be dealt with as well, for
vaccine design and production [–
].

Methodology
Datasets
Structures
The structural data for gp120 (Table 1 see ) and gp41
(Table 2 see ) were obtained from the PDB
[http://www.pdb.org/pdb/home]. This dataset was created using the PDB
interface by keyword search followed by manual curation. It should be noted
that gp120 structures are available in the ligand-bound state.

Sequences
Gp120 and gp41 sequences (from blood and brain) were downloaded from the
LANL database [http://www.hiv.lanl.gov/] 
[]. These sequences represent
multiple HIV-1 clades from different geographical locations including Africa,
Asia, North America, South America, Europe, and Oceania. Several sequences
were also derived from the PDB structural database
[http://www.pdb.org/pdb/home].

Sequence Alignment
We developed the multiple sequence alignment (MSA) for gp120 ()
and gp41 () sequences with known structures 
(and 
) in
Protein databank (PDB). The alignment was performed using Clustal W with a
gap-opening penalty of 10 and a gap extension penalty of 0.2 
[].

Structure analysis
Superimposition
The gp120 () 
and gp41 () structures in its monomer and trimer
states () were superimposed using SPDBV (Swiss PDB Viewer
version 3.7).

Solvent Accessibility
The solvent accessibility of residues in gp120 and gp41 structures was assessed
using ASA calculations (). ASA was calculated using the Lee and
Richards [] 
algorithm implemented in the software, Surface racer 
[]. The
probe radius used was 1.4 Å for the calculation of ASA.

Compositional polarity
We used percent compositional polarity to estimate sequence variations among
known clades. This allows calculation of percent polarity range among clades,
within which the sequences vary. The percent compositional polarity (S, T, N,
Q, H, Y, D, E, R, W, C and K) and non − polarity (G, A, P, V, I, L, F, M
residues) were calculated for gp120 and gp41, which included blood and brain
sequences (). It should be noted that W and C were included in the
polar group due to their partial polar property.

Shannon Entropy
Shannon entropy for each AA residue was calculated as −SUM {Paa.log(Paa)}.
Paa is the proportion of each AA in its respective site 
[]. This equation is
based on a calculation of informational entropy and the LANL methods have
been described in detail [,
] 
(
http://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/ENTROPY/entropy_one.html).

Polarity range and Shannon Entropy relation
Pearson correlation of Polarity range and Shannon Entropy was calculated
using Microsoft Excel (). The statistical significance analysis between
Shannon entropy and polarity of gp120 and gp41 sequences in blood and brain
were calculated using Two Way ANOVA. In addition, the post test for linear
trend has been applied to confirm the linear regression between the groups
using GraphPad Prism (version 5) software.

Results
The Graphical Abstract outlines the flow of analysis from the databases to the
tables and figures. The LANL and PDB databases were utilized to obtain
sequence and structure information for the HIV-1 gp120 and gp41. We
generated datasets from PDB of known structures produced by X-ray
crystallography for gp120 and gp41 shown in and 
, respectively.
These datasets include clades B, C, and A/E for gp120, and clades B and D for
gp41. From and 
, we produced MSAs for gp120 and gp41 shown in
 and , 
respectively. In , the corresponding structures for the
sequence alignments were then used for constructing structural superimposition
of gp120 (a), its trimer (b), gp41 (c), and its trimer (d). The superimposition of
multiple structures shows that several clades share the same structural folds for
gp120 (clades B, C, A/E) and gp41 (clades B, D). The ASA distribution, mean,
and standard deviations are shown for each residue position for gp120 and
gp41 in Figure 4 based on and 
. These values show the degree of
structural variation for the differences in sequence, which is represented by the
ASA measure and help identify residue positions that are solvent exposed
(ASA &gt; 0 Å2). The mean distribution show that most residues in gp120 and
gp41 are solvent exposed.

As of 12-31-2010, there were approximately 14,925 gp120 and 14,472 gp41
sequences in the LANL database for clades A-K.  shows the sequence
percent polarity for several clades, blood, and brain by geographical location
from this database. In addition, the sequence percent polarity range is shown
for gp120 (clades B, C, A/E) and gp41 (clades B, D) for which structures are
known from the PDB database. (The figures that utilize sequences from the full
LANL database for clades A-K and the sequences from known structures from
PDB do not specify geographical location.) The ranges in percent
compositional polarity among clades in blood and brain sequences are shown
in Table 3 (see ). The polarity range of gp120 clade
B brain vs. blood sequences is 19.47% vs. 18.0%, respectively in Europe, clade
B brain vs. blood, 20.13% vs. 21.64%, respectively, in North America, and
clade A brain vs. blood 17.78% vs. 19.44%, respectively, in Africa. The range
of polarity of gp41 clade B brain vs. blood sequences is 11.81% vs. 10.27%,
respectively in Europe, and clade B brain vs. blood, is 12.76% vs. 10.72%,
respectively, in North America. There is a correlation for gp120 Shannon
entropy vs. gp120 polarity range across clades and for gp41 Shannon entropy
vs. gp41 polarity range among clades. The Pearson correlation coefficients (r)
are 0.734 and 0.588, respectively, for gp120 and gp41 (). Two-Way
ANOVA of Shannon entropy and polarity of gp120 as well as gp41 sequences
shows significant variation in both blood (F = 509.6; P&lt;0.0001) and brain (F =
790.9; P &lt; 0.0001). Furthermore, the post-test for linear trend, between the
Shannon entropy and polarity, is positively correlated by coefficient of
determination in blood (R2 = 0.558) and in brain (R2 = 0.483).

Discussion
The gp120-gp41 complex trimer protein is a potential HIV-1 vaccine candidate
[]. 
The gp120 and gp41 protein subunits interact with each other at an
interface, forming a gp120-gp41 complex involved in trimer assembly. The
gp41 interactive region of the gp120 protein has a layered structure that has
conformational mobility − flexibility – at the interface with gp41 
[]. The
gp120 structures in the PDB database are available only in ligand-bound states,
which may be partly due to the limited stability of the protein without support
ligands. The trimer is unstable when produced in vitro and this may be caused
by its sequence composition and conformation 
[–]. The polar composition
of the gp120-gp41 complex trimer protein influences its surface,
immunological, and stability properties. The bottleneck for the in vitro
synthesis and production of this protein in stable form may be the prevalence of
solvent exposed polar residues as described in our findings. Moreover, trimer
instability is probably also due to the difficulty in exactly mimicking the in
vivo environment, in vitro, for protein folding and assembly of the complex.
The structure of the gp120-gp41 complex is similar among clades and
homologous sequences share common structural folds and shapes although
they have differences among side chain packing and residue orientation 
[,
]. 
Our analysis, using a solvent exposure measure, ASA, shows threedimensional
structural variation for each AA position and that the residues are
solvent-exposed. In addition, in major segments of gp120 and gp41, we
demonstrate a large percent polarity for solvent exposed residues across clades,
blood, and brain. Thus, our findings support more open and dynamic ENV
structures and conformations.

The variation in biochemical properties is relevant to manufacturing a stable
and effective HIV-1 ENV protein. An additional concern in using the ENV as
an HIV/AIDS vaccine candidate is its high sequence variation among clades
from different geographical locations; the LANL database (as of 12-31-2010)
contained 14,925 gp120 and 14,472 gp41 sequences. Potential gp120-gp41
global vaccine candidates should incorporate the issue of immunological
specificity and AA mutant variation across clades from different geographical
locations. Our analysis of the known sequences for gp120 and gp41 to estimate
the polarity changes caused by AA variation show that the percent polarity
range among clades, blood, and brain correlates with the mean Shannon
entropy. This reflects sequence variation that changes surface properties within
and across clades, blood, and brain and this is anticipated to affect their
respective immunological responses. Despite the structural similarities
determined so far across clades for blood, this is not yet known for blood vs.
brain. The difference in sequence polarity range for brain is comparable to
blood for gp120 and is greater for brain than blood for gp41. These sequence
variations could be due to differences in immune selection between brain and
blood as well as due to the structure of the ENV, e.g. the gp120 juts further into
the solvent than does gp41, since gp41 is partially submerged in the membrane.
These findings help quantify the percent compositional polarity range within
which the gp120 and gp41 sequences vary among clades; we infer from this
structural folding related to conformations pertinent to the immune response.
This is further relevant in the design of suitable HIV-1 ENV vaccines specific
for multiple HIV-1 clades across blood- and brain-derived sequences. Vaccines
that induce neutralizing antibody are currently insufficient to the task; thus,
new methodologies are needed to optimize this approach. A recent method is
under development that originates from a neutralizing antibody, works its way
back to reconstruct the epitopes (reverse engineering), and then uses a structure
based design technology to optimize the epitopes 
[]. The structural
information presented in this article should enhance methods that augment the
stability of the gp120-gp41 complex and trimer. This work points to the need
for the development of supporting ligands that assist in protein conformation
stabilization as well as producing AA mutants and other protein modifications
that neutralize antigen charge where needed. In addition, brain-related HIV-1
should be dealt with as strains of HIV-1 that similarly require a specific
antigenic enhancement approach. For this tactic, it is important to understand
the charge characteristics of the antigen; thus, we characterize the HIV-1 ENV
from the point of view of compositional percent charge polarity and its
variation across clades, brain, and blood.

There are several additional concerns in developing HIV-1 ENV vaccines that
indicate the complexity of the problem and the sophistication required. These
include issues of antigen integrity, delivery, and cross-reactivity across clade,
blood, and brain viral strains. Furthermore, potential vaccines may have
advantageous or deleterious effects depending on other factors as well. Such
vaccine-related factors include host immune responses that might cause
inflammation resulting from vaccines that could be more deleterious in the
presence of HIV-1 infection. Thus, application of the knowledge of antigen
structure may be different for vaccines in uninfected vs. HIV-1 infected
individuals. Virologic and immunologic factors (e.g., pre-existing viral strains
and cognate host immune responses), once one introduces a vaccine into the
CNS of an infected individual, might result in further inflammation as well.
Moreover, it is unknown how selective pressure on virus evolution might lead
to vaccine-resistant strains that vitiate vaccine effects. Would a vaccine be
possible that stimulates the immune response sufficiently rapidly to halt virus
replication prior to mutant virus spread? It is also unknown about the potential
interactions with vaccines amongst neurovirulent macrophage-tropic HIV-1
strains (that predominantly infect the CNS). In addition, which potential
vaccines will inhibit or prevent their neurovirulence as well as suppress or
prevent brain infections due to CNS strains? In host genetics for example, the
CCR5-32-delta polymorphism results in a less or non-functional HIV-1 coreceptor.
Therefore, those individuals with that allele would be anticipated to
have improved potential survival with a vaccine. However, NeuroAIDS
susceptibility allele SNPs may play a deleterious role during vaccine exposure
coupled with virus exposure, pre- or post-vaccinations. Because NeuroAIDS
appears to result largely from host immune state and viral strain, host
variability in the immune response to vaccine introduction is a crucial
concomitant concern [,
,
,
,
,
,
].

The effects of HIV-1 infection can be directly measured in the brain and the
neuropathology of HIVE has changed in the brain since the use of HAART
commenced in 1995 []. 
Concomitant use of vaccines and anti-viral therapy
may have an interactive impact on these therapies systemically and in the brain.
The production of escape mutants could occur within brain that has been
demonstrated systemically by automated deep sequencing techniques because
of anti-CCR5 strain antiviral therapy []. During the last several years, the
HIV-1 infected population has shown increased aging and increased incidence
of Alzheimer's disease and these factors may further complicate vaccine use in
at-risk and already infected individuals []. An additional complicating factor
in the use of vaccines is the possibility of autoimmunity as a component of
increased inflammation that could occur peripherally as well as within the brain
[]. 
Finally, in this article, we do not deal with the problem of protein
glycosylation; however, this is an important issue in vaccine production. On the
one hand, the virus, as an additional means of immune escape may use
glycosylation, though contributing to immunogenicity. On the other hand,
deglycosylation of HIV-1 ENV proteins, in vitro, may enhance their use in
vaccines [–].

Supplementary material
Data 1
[–]

We thank the members of Biomedical Informatics (Pondicherry, India) for
extensive discussions.

Citation:Sowmya et al, Bioinformation 6(2): 48-56 (2011)

MSA of gp120 sequence dataset (Table 1) derived from known structures from the PDB database 
#x0005b;http://www.pdb.org/pdb/home]. The position specific
mutations are in bold letters. The incomplete sequences in the alignment are indicated with dashes. The V1/V2, V3, V4 and V5 regions are marked. However, all
the variable loops are not yet solved by X-ray crystallography in gp120 structures and hence their corresponding atomic coordinates are not available. These
regions are indicated with incomplete sequences.

MSA of gp41 sequence dataset (Table 2) derived from known
structures from the PDB database. [http://www.pdb.org/pdb/home]. The
position specific mutations are in bold letters. The incomplete sequences in the
alignment are indicated with dashes. The gp41 structures shown consist of the
N and C helices representing the N heptad repeat and C heptad repeat,
respectively.

Structural superimposition of (a) gp120, (b) gp120 trimer, (c) gp41,
and (d) gp41 trimer. The gp120 and gp41 structures obtained from PDB
[http://www.pdb.org/pdb/home]
(Table 1 and Table 2) were superimposed using the software SPDBV (Swiss PDB Viewer version 3.7).
[http://www.expasy.org/spdbv/]. 
The variable loops (V1-V5) and the constant regions (C1-C4) of the GP120 structure, with inner and outer domains are
shown (a). The superimposition of the gp120 trimer (PDB ID: 3DNL), solved
through NMR at 20.0Å is shown in (b). The N heptad and the C heptad regions
of the superimposed gp41 structure, solved by X-ray crystallography with a
resolution of 2.10Å, are shown in (c). Only the N heptad region of gp41 is
available in trimeric form, as illustrated in (d).

Residue position specific ASA distribution profiles for (a) gp120 and
(b) gp41, (c) and (d) respective means, (e) and (f) respective standard
deviations. The structural datasets were obtained from PDB
[http://www.pdb.org/pdb/home] as 
shown in Tables 1 and 2. The ASA distribution was calculated using Surface racer [].

Percent sequence compositional polarity (%P) and non-polarity (%NP) of gp120 and gp41 sequences.These sequences are from HIV database
sequences, the PDB structural database (a, b) [http://www.pdb.org/pdb/home] 
and the LANL sequence database (c, d) 
[http://www.hiv.lanl.gov/]. (Geographical
information is not available from PDB in (a) and (b) and the A-K sequence geographical information in (c) and (d) from LANL are not shown). Additional
sequence compositional polarity comparisons are from blood (e to w) and brain (x to zb). Clade and source geographical locations are stated (from LANL). The
numbers in parenthesis represent the number of sequences. The ranges for %P and %NP are stated as well in each figure.

Mean Shannon entropy and polarity range of gp120 and gp41
sequences in brain and blood samples from different geographical locations.
Shannon entropy of gp120 and gp41 sequences is calculated at the LANL
website [http://www.hiv.lanl.gov/]. The mean Shannon entropy is correlated
with polarity range by regression coefficient (r) of 0.734 for gp120 (a) and
0.588 for gp41 (b) sequences. The Pearson correlation co-efficient was
calculated using Microsoft EXCEL software.

