Background
Traditional medicines are an invaluable resource for mankind.
It is used to refer both traditional medicine system and
various forms of indigenous medicine []. They followed their
own health practices, believes, spiritual therapies and
exercises. It is reported that over 6000 plants in India are in
use of traditional medicine systems such as Ayurveda,
Unanai, and Siddha []. Each tribe has explored the medicinal
property of herbs in their area by observation and trial and
error method.

India is rich in medicinal and aromatic plants and it is one of
the twelve mega-biodiversity countries in the world and
treasured with well practiced knowledge of traditional herbal
medicine. It has been reported that 20,000 plants in India are
rich in medicinal value from which 800 plant species are
explored by 500 tribal communities for curing different
diseases [,
]. India possesses a total of 427 tribal
communities, of which, 37 tribal communities belongs to
Tamil Nadu such as Irular, Kanikaran, Kattunayakan, Kota,
Kurimbas, Palliyan, Paniyan, Sholaga and Toda [,
]. As
herbal medicines have been used to treat many infectious
diseases and save lives of developing countries, about 70% of
the Indian population is dependent on herbal medicine [,
].

Recently, efforts have been made to gather information from
the tribal people. The medicinal plants with wound healing
properties are commonly used by the Malayali tribes at Vattal
hills near Dharmapuri, Tamilnadu []. A survey conducted in
remote villages of Madurai, Theni and Dindigul districts of
Tamil Nadu identified 62 species of medicinally important
plants belonging to 55 genera from 30 families with their uses
[]. 
Paliyar tribes of Madurai district, Tamil Nadu, have been
using 60 ethnomedicinal plant species in Southern Western
Ghats of India for the treatment of various ailments 
[]. In a
survey study carried out in tribals in Chitteri hills located in
Dharmapuri district, has documented 65 ethno medicinal
plant species distributed across 38 families 
[]. An
ethnobotanical survey conducted at Kottur Hills in
Dharmapuri District, Tamil Nadu recorded 48 ethno medicinal
plants used by tribal inhabitants for diseases like asthma, body
ache, diabetics, digestive disorders, dry cough, dysentery, ear
pain, edema, erysipelas, eye infection, fertility, gastrointestinal
problems, microbial infections, headache, insect/snake poison,
jaundice, joint pain, laxative, menstrual problem, mouth ulcer,
nail infection, nerve disorders, piles, pimples, skin disease,
throat infection, toothache ulcer, cuts and wounds 
[]. A
study at Malligainatham village, Kandarvakottai Taluk,
Pudukottai district, Tamil Nadu recorded a total of 60
medicinal plant species belonging to 37 families and the usage
of medicine. The plant parts are taken as raw or cooked, For
instance, Aloe vera leaf pulp is taken daily for stomach ulcer.
Certain crushed plants are applied externally in case of bone
fracture, body pain, head ache and diversion of nerves 
[].
An ethnobotanical study carried out at Kollihills, Nammakkal
district, Tamil Nadu with Malayali tribals who are Tamil
speaking, believed to be migrated from Conjeeveram
documented 108 species of medicinal plants belonging to 59
families []. The data collected from the tribal people at
Valaiyan community of Piranmalai Hills showed the usage of
herbal plants for various diseases []. Kurumba tribal people
in Pennagaram region, Dharmapuri District of Tamil Nadu are
utilizing plants for common diseases like ulcer, skin diseases,
headache, cold, cough and fits and aware of the antidotes for
scorpion sting, insect bites and snake bites 
[]. The traditional
healers in Kancheepuram District of Tamil Nadu, India are
using 85 species of plants distributed in 76 genera belonging
to 41 families to treat various diseases. The different plants are
prepared as a paste, decoction, powder, juice extracted from
either fresh or dried plant parts [].

Due to its accessibility, availability, low cost with less side
effects and reliable therapeutic efficacy, traditional Indian
medicine drew the attention of global market and many
pharmaceutical companies in discovering natural bioactive
compounds. Therefore, it is important to collect, document the
traditional knowledge of tribal people on traditional medicine
and conserving information on indigenous medicinal plants
for exploiting as a novel bioactive compounds for treating
infectious diseases. Digitalization of all this information is
possible because of the development of database system. Antidiabetic
plants used in ethno medicine is digitalized and made
available in online. It consists of 238 plants with information
like name of the plant, geographical distribution, and part of
the plant investigated, dosage, active constituents with antidiabetic
property with their structures, physical and chemical
properties and its action []. In order to bring out the
knowledge of traditional medicine to the modern world and
to make it accessible from everywhere, MEDDB, a database of
medicinal plants, was developed with the objective of
exploring the ethnomedicine used by tribal people of Madurai,
Tamil Nadu. The database has been developed based on the
published data collected from tribal people in and around
Madurai, Tamil Nadu.

Methodology
Data collection and database design:
The study is based on secondary sources, which include
books, thesis, papers in technical journals available from
PubMed, Science Direct, and Biomed Central, newspapers and
government reports. The database was developed using
PHP/MySQL. The images of the plants are given in JPEG file
format. The information on each species were collected and
arranged in plant profile files which contain the detailed
features like scientific name, vernacular name in Tamil,
Malayalam, Telugu, Kannada, and Hindi, Odissy in few cases,
family name, classification, physical characteristics, medicinal
uses, parts used and ethnomedicinal preparation, active
constituents, references and the image of the plant. The
references are hyperlinked.

Software and Hardware:
Microsoft Windows 95/98/2000/2003/XP operating system
was used in the development. PHP, HTML and java script
used as front end. The database was developed using MySQL
as back end. A High-end server- IBM 3.0 GHz Intel
Xeon/Itanium/AMD Opetron was used for databases.

Utility
There are many databases on medicinal plants. MEDDB
provides the comprehensive information on the usage of
plants against various illnesses based on the traditional
wisdom of the tribal people. Currently, MEDDB contains data
of 110 species, belonging to 50 families, reported to be
commonly used by tribal people in and around Madurai. The
data can be searched through the search page available in the
top panel. Basically, the user can search the database by three
names such as the scientific name of the plant, Tamil
vernacular name if you know and finally by the disease name.
The left panel contains title like plant name, Tamil vernacular
name and disease which are hyperlinked. The search results
appear in the new page with the details of the plants. Detailed
information about the plants is being displayed in a separate
web page containing common name, scientific name, family,
classification, physical characteristics, medicinal uses, active
constituents and references which is hyperlinked. The
photograph of each plant is also displayed in the same page.
In the disease search option, all the plants used for the
particular disease will be displayed. Each one is hyperlinked
with its plant profile file. The overall database design and the
screen shot of home page are given in 
()
respectively.

Future development
It will be further refined and updated periodically. The
database will also be modified to include the structure of
active constituents as .mol files which can be used for docking
in the near future.

The work is supported by Bioinformatics Infrastructure
Facility (No.BT/BI/25/001/2006) Bioinformatics division,
Department of Biotechnology, Ministry of Science and
Technology, Government of India, New Delhi. Authors would
like to thank Dr.Madhan Mohan for his encouragement and
support.

Citation:Mary et al, Bioinformation 8(8): 391-393 (2012)

a) The overall structure of MEDDB Database. Data
can be searched using scientific name, vernacular name
(Tamil) and by diseases; b) A snap shot of the home page of
MEDDB.

