Background
Periodontitis differs from many other types of infections since it 
is not caused by a single bacterium but by a group of bacteria. 
Although more than 500 different types of bacteria have been 
isolated from the oral cavity [] only a small fraction of these 
bacteria has the potential to cause destruction of periodontal 
tissues []. Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans and 
Porphyromonas gingivalis have considered the major pathogenic 
species in destructive periodontal disease []. However, other 
subgingival species have also been related to periodontal 
disease as described for Prevotella intermedia, Prevotella nigrescens 
(formerly P. intermedia), Bacteroides forsythus, Fusobacterium 
nucleatum, Campylobacter rectus, Eikenell acorrodens, 
Treponemadenticola, Micromonas micros (formerly 
Peptostreptococcus micros) and some other species. Detection of 
these putative pathogens in periodontal health and disease 
strongly depends on the techniques used. Microbial diversity 
can be greatly under estimated by cultivation studies because 
many microorganisms cannot be cultivated by standard techniques. 
Human saliva is an attractive body fluid for disease diagnosis 
and monitoring because saliva testing is simple, safe, low-cost, 
and noninvasive. The use of saliva for diagnosis and monitoring 
of periodontal disease is highly desirable because periodontal 
pathogens, host antibacterial products, and other host-related 
proteins are readily detectable in saliva by new and highly 
sensitive technologies, such as real-time polymerase chain reaction 
(RT-PCR) analysis [,
]. 
It has been determined that RT-PCR provides a new rapid diagnostic 
tool and opens the opportunity to detect small numbers of oral 
pathogens in clinical specimens, that are under the detection limit 
by the culture technique [,
]. 
Therefore, a novel rapid method of RT-PCR can be used for identification 
and quantification of periodontopathic bacteria in saliva samples 
[,
,
]. PCR has 
become an important tool for the rapid, sensitive, and specific detection 
of bacterial pathogens. Recent advances in molecular biology have made 
it possible to study microbial communities, including uncultivable species. 
Direct amplification by PCR of housekeeping genes from mixed culture 
biomass followed by purification and sequencing has allowed the analysis 
of complex communities []. The gene encoding the small-subunit rRNA has 
been used particularly for this purpose, and large databases of 16S rRNA 
sequences, such as that made available by the Ribosomal Database Project 
[], now exist. 
These techniques have been applied to the micro flora associated with 
dento alveolar abscesses [,
]. 
A number of novel sequences which do not correspond to known, culturable 
organisms have been identified. Novel taxa identified by phylogenetic 
analysis in this way are designated “phylotypes”. Three of these, which 
each made up a substantial proportion of the flora in the abscesses in 
which they were detected, were selected for further study in five major
periodontal pathogens present in periodontal, periodontal with diabetes, 
diabetes, non periodontal and non diabetic cases by PCR analysis, sequencing
and assess the evolutionary relationship between the other microbial pathogens 
and estimated these five major microbial pathogen levels by the instate and the 
status of the periodontal condition. On the basis of their phylogenetic 
positions, phylotype PUS3.42 represents a new genus related to the genera 
Bacteroides and Prevotella, PUS9.170 represents a new genus related to the 
oral asaccharolytic Eubacterium species, and PUS9.180 represents a new 
species in the genus Prevotella [,
].

Methodlogy
Study of clinical Indices:
These four groups were paired with age; in addition to health 
conditions, and teeth number. The study procedure was 
approved by the Ethics Committee of Sri Venkateswara Medical 
College, Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, India on 29th Dec, 2011 and 
an informed consent was signed by the study participants. To 
examine the periodontal disease status in patients by observing 
the destruction of tooth surrounding tissue and Clinical indices 
for the collection of microbial plaque sample with the two 
expert periodontologists. The initial clinical exam was 
performed by a single, previously trained examiner, who used a 
periodontal probe of the Williams type No. 23, and determined. 
Probing depth: distance from the bottom of the sulcus up to 
gingival margin in six points: mesio-vestibular, vestibular, 
disto-vestibular, disto-lingual/palatine, lingual/palatine and 
mesio-lingual/palatine of each tooth examined. Clinical
attachment level: also determined in the same six points as the 
probing depth.

Collection of subgingival plaque samples:
A total of 120 subgingival plaque samples were collected from patients 
and divided them into four groups, each group consisting 30 patients such 
as Non-Periodontal and Non-Diabetes (np&amp;nd), Periodontal and Non-diabetes 
(p&amp;nd), Non-Periodontal and Diabetes (np&amp;d) and Diabetes and Periodontal 
(d&amp;p) groups. Both normal and diseased cases (age range 30-75 years) with 
probing depth (PD) values &gt;= than 6 mm in the experimental sites. The 
sites were isolated with cotton rolls; removal of supra gingival plaque 
by a sterile curette (Asadental, Bozzano,Italy); gingival surface was 
dried and plaque samples were obtained by insertion of three standardized 
#30 sterile paper points (Inline, Turin, Italy) at the deepest part of each 
periodontal pocket and left in situ for 15 s. The paper points were 
transferred to a test tube containing 1 ml of the rout transport medium under anaerobic conditions.

DNA-extraction:
Chromosomal DNA was extracted from specimen collection by 
SDS lysis method. Concentration of DNA was caluculated by 
spectrophotometric analysis by using the formula Abs at 260x 
50x dilution factor purity by using formula Abs at260/abs at 
280. Samples having ratio close to 1.8 were taken for study. 
Integrity was checked by Electrophoretic analysis. 


PCR amplification:
Multiplex PCR was performed using specific primers 
for the 16S rRNA gene of each bacterium (CalinAlexandruCristea., 2005). 
PCR amplification reactions were carried out in a reaction mixture in a 
final volume of 50µl consisting of 5µl of DNA sample, 25µl of master mix, 
4µl of primers (both F.P and R.P) and autoclaved millique water16µl. 
The PCR protocol was as follows:98°C for 15 min followed by 40 cycles 
of 95°C for30 s, 60°C for 1 min, 72°C for 1 min, and a finalstep of 72°C 
for 10 min.PCR amplification was performed in an i Cycler System 
(Animal biotechnology laboratory, S.V. University, Tirupati, India). 
Amplicons were detected by electrophoresis of 10µl of samples from each 
PCR tube in a 1% agarose gel in TAE (Tris-Acetate-EDTA buffer) for 2 h at 
80 V. The amplification products were visualized and photographed under a 
UV light trans illuminator. A positive or negative identification was 
based on the presence of clear bands of the expected molecular size using 
a commercial DNA molecular weight marker (number VIII; Roche DiagnosticsS.p.A., 
Milan, Italy). Amplified products were sequenced and phylogenetic analysis for 
the evolutionary relationship with other pathogens.

Phylogenetic analysis:
All the periodontal pathogens are subjected to similarity search 
for their 16s rRNA to find out their homologs. Phylogenetic 
analysis has been carried out to find out the evolutionary 
relationship among the group of homologs for each pathogen. 
The homologous rRNA sequences were obtained from the 
BLAST search and a sequence alignment was carried out using 
Clustal X tool along with the construction of Phylogenetic trees. 
A phylogenetic tree (or) evolutionary tree can shows the 
inferred evolutionary relationships among the group of 
biological species based upon similarities and differences in 
their genetic characteristics. 

Results
The frequency of detection of the four periodonto pathogens as 
identified by PCR and sequencing. An important relationship 
between the presence of periodonto pathogenic bacteria and the 
serious form of periodontal disease was analyzed. In particular, 
in the 120 samples of subgingival plaque analysed, the 
prevalence of the 5 species monitored varied as regards the 
species itself and the method of detection. Among the 30 sample 
taken in each group DNA was obtained. No amplification 
product were observed in groups NP&amp;ND and NP&amp;D which 
clearly indicate that the patients were free of periodontal 
microbial pathogens belongs to the selected microbial 
pathogens. But in case of NDP group 22 amplified products 
were observed (). Which clearly 
indicate patients were positive for those microbes. Among the 
four microbial groups Trepanemadenticola was found to be 
prevalent in NDP. In case of P&amp;D 32 amplified products which 
were positive for microbes (). Among 
the five microbial groups Treponemadenticola, Prevotellaintermedia 
and Tannerella forsythia were found to be prevalent in P&amp;D. The 
Phylogenetic analysis of 16s rRNA of Treponemadenticola 
showed the relationship with other Treponema oral pathogen
Spcs to a major extent and also with the Spirochaetazuelaera 
(). Tannerella forsythia shows it evolutionary 
relationship only with four oral pathogens i.e Macellibacteroides 
fermentans, Porphyromadaceae bacterium, Parabacteroidesmeredae 
and Bacillus fosythus (). Prevotellaintermedia also 
showed its evolutionary relationship only with Prevotella Spcs
(). The Phylogenetic analysis of Fusobacterium 
() revealed that it has a close evolutionary relationship only 
with Porpiromonasgingivalis.

Discussion
The present study aimed at investigating the occurrence of some 
principal periodontal pathogens in combined periodontities and 
diabetic lesions. It is known that most periodontal pathogens 
are also endodontic pathogens []. Because of lack of dental 
history it was not possible to subgroup the lesions according to 
classification []. For practical reasons, the study focused only 
on five selected periodontal pathogens and single periodontal 
lesions were included as a reference group. The aim of the 
present study was to screening and molecular identification of 
periodontal microbial pathogens and their role in diabetic 
patients of south Indian population. In this study, to determine 
the detection of selected five periodontal microbial pathogens 
and these pathogens were analysis evolutionary relationship 
with other pathogens using the PCR and phylogenitic analysis 
and estimate the microbial population by statistic analysis. My 
results showed percentages in groups among the four microbial 
groups Fusobacterium and Trepanema denticola were found to be 
prevalent in P&amp;ND. In case of P&amp;D 32 amplified products 
which were positive for microbes. Among the four microbial 
groups Treponemadenticola, Prevotellaintermedia and Tannerella 
forsythia were found to be prevalent in P&amp;D. Real-time PCR 
using universal 16S rRNA primer and specific Fusobacterium, 
primers allowed quantification of the total number of bacteria as
well as of P.g. and A.a. My results are not accordance but some 
differ with the previous reports of real-time quantification for 
total bacteria [], 
for P.g. [,
] and for A.a. 
[]. Absolute 
quantification for P.g. and A.a. made possible the calculation of 
their proportions in the total bacteria. My results showed 
percentages in the similar range for Prevotella intermedia and 
Tannerella forsythia but fusobacterium and Treponem denticola 
showed higher percentage which is different as published
elsewhere [] and higher percentage values for A.a. than 
previously reported []. To my knowledge such data have not 
been presented before especial in south Indian population. The 
higher number could be explained by bacterial migration 
between the diabetes and the periodontal disease. In this study 
clearly indicate that people suffering periodontal disease from 
the Fusobacterium and Treponema denticola pathogens and 
Prevotella intermedia, Tannerella forsythia also causing periodontal 
disease but its low amount when compared to Fusobacterium 
and Treponema denticola. The elucidation of more specific disease 
associations are presently hampered by the lack of a reliable 
method for strain identification and a very poor understanding 
of how strains differ at the genetic level. Phylogenetic analysis 
has been carried out to find out the evolutionary relationship 
among the group of homologs for each pathogen. The 
homologous rRNA sequences were obtained form the BLAST 
search and a sequence alignment was carried out using ClustalX 
tool along with the construction of Phylogenetic trees. Our 
results revealed that there are relatively high levels of genetic 
diversity amongst Tannerella forsythia and Treponemadenticola, 
strains; with gene sequence similarities ranging between ca. 84 
− 100% between the strains. These levels are considerably 
higher than in T. pallidum; where strains of the pallidum and 
pertenue subspecies share ca. 100-99.6% genome sequence 
identity, and genetic differences are largely confined to 
recombination “hotspots” or other areas of acquired DNA
sequence []. 16S rRNA gene sequences, revealed that the A. 
actinomycetemcomitans serotype strains formed a separate 
branch. Previously [,
,
], already noticed serotype e 
strains with an unusual 16S rRNA gene sequence (Type V). The 
oral spirochete bacterium Treponema denticola has postulated to 
play an important role in the pathogenesis of periodontal 
disease; in particular chronic periodontitis, which is estimated 
to affect ca. 10-15% of the global population [,
,
,
,
,
]. 
It is also implicated in the etiology of acute necrotizing 
ulcerative gingivitis (ANUG) [], 
and orofacial noma [], two 
other tissue-destructive diseases of the orofacial region. 
However, T. denticola has commonly detected in the oral 
microbiota in dentulous adults; albeit at relatively low levels, 
and its precise etiopathogenic mechanisms remain to be 
established. The elucidation of more specific disease 
associations are presently hampered by the lack of a reliable 
method for strain identification, and a very poor understanding 
of how strains differ at the genetic level [], did a 
comprehensive study to determine the phylogenetic 
relationships within the family Bacteroidaceae, using sequence 
analysis of the 16S rRNA. They found Porphyromonas gingivalis 
in the Porphyromonas cluster, and Prevotella intermedia and 
Prevotella nigrescens closely related but clearly separated within 
the Prevotella cluster, showing a clear difference between the 
two genera as well as between the two species Prevotella 
intermedia and Prevotella nigrescens.

Conclusion
In this study no amplification product were observed in 
groups NP&amp;ND and NP&amp;D which clearly indicate that the patients 
were free of periodontal microbial pathogens. Among the five 
microbial groups Phorphyromonas gingivalis and Trepanema denticola 
were found to be prevalent in ND&amp;P but other microbes like 
Treponema denticola, Prevotella intermedia and Tannerella forsythia 
were found to be prevalent in P&amp;D. These results may be useful for 
the dental field of research to understand the disease and in which 
organism involving more in periodontal disease, which in turn can 
help for treatment. In addition this study may be helpful for the 
clinicians to get detailed knowledge and easy to select newer drug 
against bacterial pathogens.

Citation:Chiranjeevi et al, Bioinformation 10(4): 241-245 (2014)

Non diabetes and periodontal disease group (ND&amp;P) A, B, C, D Showing amplified products from different samples of ND&amp;P group.

Diabetes and Periodontal disease group (D&amp;P). A, B, C, D Showing amplified products from different samples of D&amp;P group.

Phylogenetic analysis of different oral pathogen groups. A, B, C, D Showing selected 4 Periodontal microbial pathogens.

