Background
Rhodopsin is a visual pigment belonging to G-coupled Protein
Receptor family (GPCR). It has seven transmembrane α-helix
structure containing six loops and present in rod cells of retina.
It has two building blocks; one is opsin protein called scotopsin
and second is a cofactor known as Retinal []. The role of GPCR
as extracellular ligand-binding proteins makes them attractive
targets for drug design. GPCRs account for approximately 40%
of all therapeutic intervention, and major GPCR research
projects are found throughout the pharmaceutical industry 
[,
]. 
Molecular study of the protein progresses in the field of
“Docking” which refers to the potential binding of
macromolecules with each other in a favorable manner. The
binding of agonist with GPCR proteins cause conformational
changes in its structure. If a receptor in an active state
encounters a G-protein, it may activate it. The binding of G
proteins to receptor affect the receptor's affinity for ligands. By
binding suitable agonists, protein functionality can be enhanced
[]. Signal messages start by ligand binding to a GPCR's
extracellular region which triggers changes in the protein's
transmembrane region. This causes the release of guanosine
diphosphate (GDP) and the uptake of guanosine triphosphate
(GTP) from the G-protein (transducin), stimulating the
activation of signaling pathway.

A mutational effect in human rhodopsin has been studied for
night blindness i.e. Gly-90→Asp mutation on the second
transmembrane helix, places an extra negative charge in the
opsin pocket, which could contribute to partial deprotonation
of the retinal Schiff base and increase photoreceptor noise. In
vitro experiments suggest that transducin is activated by the
Gly-90→Asp mutation in the absence of both the retinal
chromophore and light, which is termed as “constitutive
activity” []. 
There is no treatment for this abnormality yet;
therefore, it requires attention and need to explore possible
remedies by applying drug designing techniques like docking
and for this purpose, potential drug targets are to be
discovered. One of the important classes of known inhibitors
for rhosopsin is arrestin. Arrestins are a family of protein that is
important for regulating signal transduction within cells. The
phosphorylated receptor can be linked to arrestin molecules
that prevent it from binding and activating G-protein,
effectively switching it off for a short period of time. This
mechanism is used to study rhodopsin in retina cells to
compensate for exposure to light []. A model of interaction for
the human Arrestin-Rhodopsin complex has been obtained by a
protein docking approach, reinforced by experimental data and
binding energy calculation []. The beta-arrestin molecules are
found to have inhibitory action on G-protein and are involved
in signaling/desensitization process. Several other companies
including 7TM, a GPCR-focused drug company, and Perkin-
Elmer have developed GPCR screening technologies that take
advantage of the arrestin–receptor binding [].


Another important class of known agonists for rhosopdin is
cyanidin compounds. Cyanidin belongs to the group of
anthocyanins (C6-C3-C6 structure) found in most red coloured
berries such as bilberry, blackberry, and raspeberry. The Visual
acuity can be improved through administration of anthocyanin
pigments to animal and humans as well to enhance the night
vision [,
]. Three anthocyanins from black currant stimulated
regeneration of rhodopsin and formation of regeneration
intermediate was accelerated by cyanidin 3-rutinoside 
[,
].
These studies strongly reveal the fact that enhancement of
rhodopsin regeneration is a mechanism by which anthocyanins
enhance visual acuity. It has been studied and observed that the
effects of different cyanidin compounds, like cyanidin 3-
glycosides, glucoside and rutinoside, stimulate the regeneration
of rhodopsin. The formation of regeneration intermediate was
suggested to be accelerated by cyanidin 3-rutinoside 
[]. The
binding affinity of this important organic molecule with
rhodopsin is yet to be predicted and analyzed through docking
approach.

Methodology
Bioinformatics approach and tools have been used to carry out
this research as mentioned in the flow chart in ().

A theoretical model of human rhodopsin protein has been
obtained by homology modeling approach because it shows
93% similarity with bovine rhodopsin templates. This model
has been refined and used further for docking as recommended
[]. 
A missense mutation; GLY-90 transformed ASP, is induced
in the model with the help of Swiss PDB Viewer 
[]. The
structure of rhodopsin holds retinal molecule as its native
ligand. Therefore, the theoretical model of rhodopsin along
with its natural ligand was considered in order to conserve its
conformational space during docking. The PDB structure of Cisretinal
was retrieved from online virtual chemistry laboratory
[].

Macromolecule Binding Pocket Prediction:
The receptor macromolecule was first analyzed thoroughly for
the possibility of existence of cavities and spaces which are
necessary for the presence of native reactive groups and atoms
involved in interactions with external ligands and facilitate their
docking. For this purpose, the binding pockets of the mutant
rhodopsin model were predicted by Pocket-Finder 
[]. It
searches and predicts top 10 potential binding sites for ligands
and residues in close contact.

Ligand Structural Resources:
Beta arrestin was chosen for its inhibitory property against
rhodopsin signaling. The crystal structure of bovine betaarrestin
(PDB: 1G4R), comprising of 393 amino acids, at 1.9A
was taken from Protein Data Bank []. Cyanidin 3-rutinoside is
another vital chemical ligand which is used for its agonistic
property against rhodopsin. Its structure was sketched 
() in Accelrys Draw 4.0 
[] and converted to PDB format for
docking by using UCSF Chimera [].

Molecular Docking and Energy Computations:
Molecular docking of the structures of receptor macromolecule
and its potential ligands was done by Hex 4.5 [] and
AutoDockTools []. Hex 4.5 performs macromolecular docking
by using Spherical Polar Fourier (SPF) correlations in order to
calculate total energy values (Etotal) of the docked complexes. It
provides user friendly graphical environment to visualize the
docked complexes and animated form of total poses performed
during docking.

Prediction of Binding Interactions of Complexes:
The binding interactions of the complexes were predicted by
AutoDockTools []. Autodock 4.0 is considered to be one of
the best known structure based rational drug design program
which predicts protein-ligand interactions and protein-protein
interactions. It operates two major tools during the execution of
docking. One is AutoGrid that computes atomic affinity grid
maps and other is AutoDock that generates docking complexes.
Complexes were further analyzed in Python Molecular Viewer
interface PMV 1.5.2 [] in order to reveal the binding
interactions i.e., hydrogen bonds, vander waals forces,
hydrophobic interactions and energy calculations.

Results
The mutant version (GLY90→ASP) of homology model of
Human rhodopsin was thoroughly analyzed to find all possible
binding pockets and close contact residues in the receptor’s
vicinity with the help of Pocket-Finder Server 
[]. It predicted
top ten binding sites in the structure of rhodopsin, out of which,
two binding sites have been selected and highlighted with
maximum cavity and large number of residues in receptor's
vicinity (). Site 1 has 541 Cubic Angstroms volume and
contains 29 residues (104 atoms) in binding pocket. It is
surrounded by close contact resides indicated by ball and stick
representation in blue color (). Site 2 has 386 Cubic
Angstroms volume and contains 23 residues (92 atoms) in
binding pocket. It is surrounded by close contact resides
indicated by ball and stick representation in purple color
(). Rests of the sites are indicated by gray mesh and
occupy smaller volume. Therefore, the binding sites 1 and 2
were considered favorable for the docking of potential ligands.

The prediction of the binding sites facilitates molecular docking.
The mutant rhodopsin was first docked with its native ligand
“cis-retinal” so that its native binding pocket can be conserved
and other candidate ligands can be docked in suitable
orientation in the predicted binding sites. Cis-retinal was
docked in binding site 1 (29 residues in close contact) because it
resides in the vicinity of Helix-VII which is the native binding
pocket for retinal conformations. The binding interactions of the
rhodopsin with cis-retinal indicate one hydrogen bond and
presence of hydrophobic and vander waals interactions with
rhodopsin () which is a clear evidence for its native
affinity with it. This complex was further docked with betaarrestin.
The results of the interactions showed two hydrogen
bonds, hydrophobic and vander waals interactions with
receptor () which shows strong affinity between beta
arrestin and rhodopsin being similar in nature. Later, rhodopsin
was docked with cyanidin 3-rutinoside and showed
hydrophobic and vander waals interactions with rhodopsin
(). The energy computations of the complexes as
predicted by Hex and ADT have been recorded  (see
supplementary material). It has been noticed from Hex results
that beta-arrestin has least energy (Etotal) than organic
molecules because beta-arrestin is a protein molecule therefore;
it has more binding affinity with rhodopsin due to similar
protein nature. However, binding energy of cyanidin, as
computed by Hex and ADT, is more or less identical to that of
retinal. These results lead to successful hypothesis that these
complexes can work for rhodopsin activation and regeneration
to initiate the visual process normally.

Discussion
GPCRs undergo multiple conformational changes upon agonist
binding so new agonist exploration and development is in
progress possibly through docking techniques []. In this study,
a human rhodopsin mutation (Gly90→Asp) [] was induced
and modeled and docked with its potential ligands successively
in order to propose a cure for the congenital night-blindness.
The docking interactions of mutant rhodopsin model and betaarrestin
show close affinity with each other which conforms to
previous studies conducted on the inhibitory effect of beta
arrestin on rhodopsin [,
]. This is a clear evidence of this
effective complex that arrestin can work as an inhibitor to
switch off the abnormal rhodopsin (). However, the
docking interactions of cyanidin 3-rutinoside with rhodopsin
are also found effective and favorable to work as agonist for its
regeneration and activation () which conforms to the
previous experimental studies conducted on cyanidin
compounds in order to improve night vision [,
]. Therefore,
both of these ligands prove to have effective role in the
improvement of night vision.

Depending on the structural and functional evidences of beta
arrestin and cyanidin 3-rutinoside, the malfunctioning in the
rhodopsin visual cascade can be mended. The proposed and
corrected signaling pathway is described with the help of
figures. In , beta-arrestin molecule binds to the mutated
rhodopsin and deactivates G-protein by blocking rhodopsin
receptor site. Arrestin will work for a short period of time and
deattaches after deactivating G-protein. In , cyanidin
will bind to rhodopsin just near to cis-retinal in Helix-VII and
help in rhodopsin regeneration in order to enhance signaling. In
this way retinal will isomerize due to which rhodopsin can
change conformation to carry out signal transduction cascade
normally.

Conclusion
In this research work, the malfunctioning of visual transduction
cascade of rhodopsin as a result of a missense mutation has
been studied. The rhodopsin mutant model was docked with
two potential ligands. One is beta arrestin molecules which
bind to rhodopsin to offset the effect of abnormal rhodopsin
signaling without light and retinal isomerization. After that,
subsequent docking of cyanidin 3-rutinoside with mutant
rhodopsin initiates its activation and regeneration to trigger
normal visual transduction cascade. This research work will
help in the structural studies of agonist activation and protein
inhibition and future drug discovery process including
prediction of ADME/T (Administration, Distribution,
Metabolism, and Elimination/Toxicity) of these compounds
with the help of commercial ADME/T tools and its in vitro
testing in the molecular laboratories to measure their effects on
model organisms and drug development for congenital night
blindness.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Kanwal et al, Bioinformation 8(3): 128-133 (2012)

Flow chart of the methodology for molecular docking.

Structure of cyanidin 3-rutinoside sketched in
Accelrys Draw 4.0.

Structure of human rhodopsin protein with ten
binding pockets (indicated in gray mesh) as predicted by
Pocket-Finder [] and visualized in RASMOL 2.7.3.1v 
[].

Docked model of mutant Rhodopsin (Blue) bound
with Cis-retinal (green) and beta-arrestin (red). Image produced
by using UCSF Chimera 1.5.3 [].

Docked model of mutant Rhodopsin bound with Cisretinal
(Sticks) and cyanidin 3-rutinoside (Sticks). Image
produced by using UCSF Chimera 1.5.3 [].

Detailed view of binding interactions between the
docked complexes of mutant rhodopsin model with cis-retinal,
visualized in PMV 1.5.2 []. Hydrogen bond between
LYS296:HZ1 of rhodopsin with 1: O of Cis-retinal is indicated in
green and hydrophobic and Vander Waals interactions
indicated in red and gray mesh circles among the receptor
protein residues in close contact i.e., SER186, LYS296, ALA117,
THR118, GLU122, HIS211, TYR265, TRP 268, MET107, PHE218
and PHE212.

Detailed view of binding interactions between the
docked complexes of mutant rhodopsin model with beta -
arrestin, visualized in PMV 1.5.2 []. Two hydrogen bonds are
found between ASN315:HD22 of rhodopsin with
ARG393:HH22 of beta-arrestin and ASN326:OD1 of rhodopsin
with GLU389:O of beta-arrestin as indicated in green while
hydrophobic and Vander Waals interactions indicated in red
and gray mesh circles among the receptor protein residues in
close contact i.e., ASN315, ARG314, LYS311 and ASN326.

Detailed view of binding interactions between the
docked complexes of mutant rhodopsin model with cyanidin 3-
rutinoside, visualized in PMV 1.5.2 []. Hydrophobic and
Vander Waals interactions are indicated in red and gray mesh
circles among the receptor protein residues in close contact i.e.,
ILE133, MET143, PRO142, TYR 136, VAL218, PHE221and
ILE217.

