Background
Proteins (composed of amino acids) constitute a major group of biological macromolecules 
      that are key for the function of a living system. Protein evolution involves selection 
      of sequences having functional advantage over random mutants. [
        ] Closely evolved proteins resemble the 
        parent in their sequence, structure and function which are referred to as homologs.[
        ] Often multiple sequences (strings formed 
        by different combinations of the 20 amino acid alphabets) have the same structure and function. 
        This introduces functional redundancy to the sequence pool. Functional redundancy can be 
        overcome by developing metrics for sequence comparison. Comparison of protein sequences 
        should involve a metric for the 20 amino acids. Naturally occurring amino acids can be 
        grouped based on their similarity of physico-chemical properties. In order to understand 
        the conservation of residues in a protein sequence, it may be important to qualitatively 
        and quantitatively measure the differences among residues. A collection of physico-chemical 
        properties of amino acids will be helpful to study macroscopic properties of proteins (such 
        as aggregation), perform sequence comparison or understand conservation of functionally 
        important residues in a protein family (physico-chemical signatures).

Methodology
The site utilizes open-source software running on LINUX ® platform to deliver 
      the content. Flat files that contain indexed properties, author details and journal citations 
      were created after curating the AAINDEX [
        ] database in DBGet (Japan) and ProtScale 
        in Swiss Expasy [
        ]. We excluded properties that have 
        missing values for any of the twenty amino acids and those that are less relevant to 
        the study of protein sequence, structure and function. A search interface is implemented 
        in PHP driven by Zend engine. [
        ] Keyword search like hydrophobicity, 
        charge, aromaticity and several others produces all listed properties in the dataset 
        along with the journal citation. In order to facilitate future expansion, we have forms 
        that the users can fill out to add new properties that will be audited for completion, 
        accuracy and relevance by domain experts periodically. Numerical redundancy will be 
        automatically avoided before incorporating into the dataset. A screen capture of the web-site 
        is shown in
        .

Utility
Protein sequence analysis, macroscopic property prediction, property motif identification 
      and epitope prediction are of great interest to the biological community. Bioinformatics 
      tools that perform such tasks are increasingly incorporating physico-chemical property 
      based metric to increase their performance and to derive knowledge based rules.[
        ­] APDbase was previously available as 
        PDbase. [] During 1999-2004 other 
        groups have used this database for developing methods related to biological sequence analysis. 
        [] The previous database had 237 properties. 
        The current dataset includes additional 5 properties that are PCP-descriptors derived elsewhere. 
        []

Limitations
The dataset described here is a comprehensive sample of available properties for 20 
      naturally occurring amino acids. Nevertheless the dataset is not complete and requires regular 
      updates. The dataset can be updated using property values derived from statistical analysis and 
      experimental observations.

Future Development
We are planning to incorporate a graphics tool that can cluster available properties into 
      a dendrogram for visual inspection. This will help to visualize relatedness among clusters. The tool can be applied to generate physico-chemical profile for sequences of interest.

Conclusion
APDbase is a dataset of physico-chemical properties of amino acids that will be converted 
      as a tool to study protein sequence profiles.

The authors acknowledge Prof. Werner Braun (University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, 
      Texas, USA) for active discussions in selecting the properties and the Roskamp Foundation for 
      hosting the database.

Figures and Tables
A Screen capture of APDbase showing query and property value deposition interface 
          is shown. This database can be queried using either amino acid property keyword or 
          database index number. A search result for hydrophobicity is shown here as a sample
          


          Citation:Mathura &amp; Kolippakkam, Bioinformation 1(1): 2-4 (2005)

