Background
A model is a representation of some observable natural phenomenon. To
model a particular phenomenon on the basis of some observations, first a
conceptual part is developed, then (but not always) a mathematical part and
finally (also not always) an experimental part. The process of making the
model work is called simulation. Simulation can be carried out for at least
two distinct purposes: one might be interested in using it to test the theory
that the model is based upon, or, if the theory seems to be satisfactory, to
predict situations that might occur (be observed) in ‘reality’. Simulation can
be carried out in biological systems also. One can simulate any biological
molecule (protein) or any biological process such as any metabolic
pathway that may be for synthesis or degradation of particular metabolite.

Modeling Kinetics
Traditionally, kinetics has been defined in biochemistry in terms of
enzyme steady‐state kinetics. This corresponds to a detailed study of the
local properties of the individual enzymes. However, one can go further
and create kinetic models of whole pathways. Such models are composed
of coupled ordinary differential (for time courses) or algebraic (for steady
states) equations. These equations are non‐linear and most often without
analytical solution. This means that they can only be studied through
numerical algorithms, such as the Newton method for solving non-linear
equations and numerical integrators. Kinetic modeling of metabolic
pathways may be carried out by computer software that simulates the
behavior of a real pathway. Simulation then resembles a true experiment:
one sets the initial concentration of the metabolites and the software then
produces the time evolution and/or the steady state of these concentrations.
There is, however, an additional amount of information to be supplied in
the case of simulation: the differential equations describing the kinetics of
the pathway and values for all the parameters involved in these equations.
[].

Biochemical dynamics
Biochemical dynamics addresses questions such as ‘How do reactions in
closed system reach equilibrium?’, In open systems, do reactions approach
a steady state?’, 'In which conditions do metabolite concentrations
oscillate?’ or Can some simultaneous reactions display complex behavior?
The main philosophical difference between biochemical dynamics and
traditional enzyme kinetics is then reflected on the latter putting a great
emphasis on the determination of mechanisms and estimation of kinetic
parameters while the former is primarily concerned with temporal
behavior, or trajectories. For this reason, it is frequently possible to ignore
mechanistic arguments in biochemical dynamics and use
phenomenological descriptions of rates of single enzymes, simplifying the
lower level step significantly [].

Optimization
Optimization problems are concerned with locating optima (maxima or
minima) of the function. Finding a maximum of a function f(x) is
equivalent to finding the minimum of the function ‐f(x). The problem can
be stated in the general term as follows:

Given a real valued scalar function f(x) of n variables, x = (x1 …xn),
problem is to find the optimum of function f(x) such that gi (x)&gt;=0 with i
= 1 …m (inequality constraint) and hj(x) = 0 with j = 1… m (equality
constraint).

In general, the objective function f(x) and the constraints gi(x) and hj(x) are
non linear, although frequently the only constraints are linear boundaries of
the form ai≫=xi≫=bi (these actually translate into two separate constraints:
xi‐ai&gt;=0 and bi‐xi&gt;=0), where ai and bi are often positive constants 
[].

Methodology
Pathway of the Rosmarinic acid biosynthesis
Chemical synthesis of Rosmarinic acid was long sought after and was
finally achieved in 1991 by Albrecht [] 
(). Since then a number
of chemical syntheses of Rosmarinic acid and derivatives, e.g. the
methylester, different stereoisomers or the less hydroxylated isorinic acid
[] have been described.

Metabolic simulation software
Gepasi 3.3 is a Microsoft Windows program intended for the simulation of
the kinetics of systems of chemical and biochemical reactions. Gepasi
simulates the steady‐state and time‐course behaviour of reactions in several
compartments of different volumes [].

Modeling of the Rosmarinic acid biosynthesis pathway
To run the simulation of the biosynthetic pathway of Rosmarinic acid on
Gepasi, the primary task is to input the pathway into the Gepasi. This
process is known as defining the model. (Table1 see ). 
Gepasi takes the reaction in the form of ODEs as mentioned in
(Table 2 see ). 
In the Metabolites field, the initial concentration of all metabolites in the pathway is defined as in (Table 3
see ). 
In this simulation, we were interested in the study of the time course behaviour of the metabolite concentration and the
increase of the Rosmarinic acid productivity. The main objective of the
simulation was to test the relative change in the concentrations of the
metabolites during the course of the simulation. For this purpose, we
defined 50 sample points for each iteration and end time was set at 500.
Metabolites for the analysis of time course behaviour were set in the Time
Course menu. This menu provides the interactive plot facility to examine
the relative change in the concentration of the metabolites with time.
Optimization parameters such as objective function and parametersconstraints
were selected in the Optimization tab. The method of
optimization must be specified in the Methods option. The process of the
optimization involves following steps:

Set initial values for the adjustable parameters.

Evaluate the objective function by simulation.

Finish if stopping criterion satisfied.

Generate new guess for the adjustable parameters.

Go back to step 2.





First, the simulation was run without assigning optimization parameters.
The need of this step was to evaluate the objective function in the
simulation. Once the objective function is determined, the optimization is
carried out. Objective function was set into the “Objective function” tab in
the optimization page of Gepasi. After this, parameters were included in
the optimization simulation which may be responsible for the
maximization or minimization of the objective function. We used Genetic
Algorithm (Stochastic method) method for optimization at 10 population
and 200 iterations.

Discussion
Our goal was to study the dynamics (time course behaviour) of the
simulation. During the course of simulation, initial concentration of the
metabolites changes with time. Gepasi evaluates these concentrations by
integrating the ordinary differential equations 
(Table 4 see ). 
At t = 0, the initial concentration of Rosmarinic acid was zero,
but, as the reaction proceeds, the concentration of the Rosmarinic acid
increases with time. Simultaneously the concentration of the other
metabolites decreases with time as they had been consumed during the
course of the simulation. We could not get the steady state of the
simulation. Integration of ODEs states that concentration of only few
metabolites shows remarkable change which can be observed by 

and Table 5 see .

On the basis of the results, we can conclude that certain
parameters such as 4HPLA and 3’‐C‐4HPLA show remarkable change. So
to maximize the production of the Rosmarinic acid, one should adjust the
concentration of the 4HPLA and 3’‐C‐4HPLA.

In the optimization step, we tried to optimize (maximize) the transient
concentration (concentration at time t) of Rosmarinic acid [RA]t as an
objective function. We selected initial concentration of the Caffeoyl‐3’‐
4’hydroxyphenyllactic acid (3’C4HPLA) as parameter constraint and
varied its concentration between 0 and 0.025 such that: 0 ≤ [3’C4HPLA]i
≤ 0.025

We used Genetic algorithm methodology to optimize the objection
function that is [RA]t, and carried out 200 iterations of optimization. For
results (see )

In 200 iterations, 2048 simulations were carried out in 31 sec. at the rate of
66.0323 simulations /sec. The best concentration of Rosmarinic acid at
time t was found as [RA]t = 0.006323031(6.32031e‐002) when the initial
concentration of Caffeoyl‐3’‐4’hydroxyphenyllactic acid (3’C4HPLA) was
0.025.

There was a slight increase in the productivity of the Rosmarinic acid after
the optimization step ().
Before optimization: 4.047119e‐002 mM; After optimization: 4.566132e‐
002 mM; Change in concentration:0.519013e‐002 mM

Conclusion
If one desires to increase the productivity of any biochemical product in
the pathway, a long process of biochemical analysis and researches needs
to be carried out. This takes much amount of money and human effort and
there was no guarantee of positive result. But, the concept of metabolic
modeling has solved the problem up to much extent. Computer evaluates
the pathway in the mathematical language by using ordinary differential
equations and many numerical integration methods. On the basis of
simulation of the pathway, approximation can be done about the pathway
and productivity can be predicted. Optimization of the metabolic pathway
determines the significant parameters, on which one can optimize
(maximize or minimize) the yield as per requirement. Here, we used
Rosmarinic acid and tried to optimize its biosynthetic pathway to obtain
higher yield. On the basis of results obtained, it is clear that 4‐
hydroxyllactic acid and Caffeoyl‐3’‐4‐hydroxyphenyllactic acid play major
role in the high productivity of the Rosmarinic acid. On the basis of these
approximations, wet lab experiments can be carried out and high yield of
the product can be obtained. Thus, in silico analysis of metabolic pathways provides an opportunity to
find out the step, which affects the end product, consequently making it
easy to design our wet lab experiments with respect to time and economic
gains.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank to The Coordinator, Centre for Bioinformatics, University of Allahabad for providing us necessary infrastructure facilities.

Citation:Sundaram et al Bioinformation 5(4): 168-172 (2010)

Biosynthetic pathway of Rosmarinic acid (M.Petersan et al. 1993) 
[]

Change in concentration of the metabolites with time

