Background
Japanese encephalitis (JE) is a major viral disease of human
beings in developing countries. JE virus causes membrane
inflammation of the brain and leads to deleterious effects on
Central Nervous System (CNS). JE virus is a single stranded
RNA virus that belongs to the genus Flavivirus of family
flaviviridea []. Flavivirus genus comprises of several other
human pathogenic viruses such as Saint Louis virus, Dengue
virus, Yellow fever virus and West Nile virus. Positive sense
RNA genome of JE virus has 11,000 nucleotides, which encode a
single polypeptide of 3432 amino acids. The virus has three
structural proteins: Capsid, precursor membrane protein and
envelope protein and seven nonstructural proteins: NS1, NS2a,
NS2b, NS3, NS4a, NS4b and NS5 [].

JE is a mosquito born viral disease, Culex tritaeniorhynchus and
C. visnui mosquitoes are major vectors for JE virus transmission
in human beings. JE virus affects 50,000 people in Asia with an
annual fatality rate of 5-35% [,
,
]. The most severe known
epidemic of JE was reported in the Gorakhpur, northern region
of India in 2005, which affected 5,737 lives and 1344 deaths 
[].
JE disease is characterized by several primary and secondary
clinical symptoms such as brain membrane inflammation,
continuous fever cause irreversible neuron damage, psychiatric
and neurological disorder with limb paralysis etc. 
[,
,
]. JE
virus has five known genotypes, which are distributed in
various worldwide geographical areas  (see
supplementary material) [,
,
,
,
].

Nakayama JE virus strain is widely used in JE vaccine that
belongs to genotype III. Genotype III is the most widely
distributed genotype and it is the only genotype isolated from
the Indian subcontinent. Furthermore, The JE disease burden is
increasing day by day in developing countries due to the
impracticality of immunization, vector control methods and
lack of therapeutic treatment [,
,
]. As a result, vaccination
is the only way to prevent JE []. In present scenario, a number
of vaccines have been developed in several countries, but only
inactivated mouse brain derived Nakayama strain vaccine is the
most commercially used vaccine [,
]. Now-a-days,
Nakayama strain vaccine has been replaced by Vero cell derived
JE vaccine (IXIARO) which can effectively boost the immunity
[,
]. There are various drawbacks of this vaccine such as
vaccine production shortage, high cost and neurological adverse
effects especially in low-income countries, which increase the
disease burden of JE with time [,
,
,
].

Among all available JE vaccines, an epitope vaccine is more
potent than killed, attenuated and cell cultured derived
vaccines, gives better immunity and devoid of adverse effects of
entire viral proteins [,
]. The majority of available current
vaccines have involvement of only structural proteins but nonstructural
proteins cannot be ignored. As reported earlier,
nonstructural proteins are produced in live virus forms, show a
good immune response [] and can work as a major target for
human anti JEV specific T cells produced during natural
infections [,
].

The development of epitopes based vaccines generally requires
the knowledge of the adaptive immune system. TH cells and TC
cells can recognize antigen when bounded with MHC class II
and I molecule, respectively [,
]. Major Histocompatibility
Complex (MHC) which is also known as Human Leukocyte
Antigen (HLA) in humans is a membrane glycoprotein and
extremely polymorphic in nature. These HLA molecules can
bind to a spectrum of antigenic linear epitopes derived from
antigen processing, which initiate an immune response, but
HLA binding does not assure to generate T-cell immune
response alone. The peptide binding specificity varies for
different HLA alleles in a combinatorial manner among ethnic
populations. It has been reported that the majority of alleles can
be covered within few HLA supertypes, where different
members of a supertype bind similar peptides; these similar
peptides are called super antigens. Recently, nine major HLA
class I supertypes (HLA- HLA- A1, A2, A3, A24, B7, B27, B44,
B58, and B62 and seven HLA class II supertypes (main DR, DR4,
DRB3, main DQ, DQ7, main DP, and DP2) have been
determined by comparing peptide-binding data [,
].
Peptides exhibiting super antigenic property by binding to a
maximum number of HLA alleles or HLA supertypes with their
conserved nature can surmount the problem of HLA allele׳s
population coverage and chance of antigen escape related to
antigenic drift or shift. Therefore, the present study is designed
for a comprehensive analysis of predicted HLA binding
peptides of JE viral proteins specific to north Indian isolates.

Methodology
The complete genome and protein sequences of JEV of north
Indian origin strain (Accession No.ABU94628) were obtained
from sequence database NCBI (http://www .ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez). 
DDBJ database was used to calculate the number of
adenine, cytosine, guanine and thymine bases in the genome.
The physiochemical properties of all viral proteins such as
iteration of amino acids within proteins, their molecular weight
and pI value of predicted epitopes were analyzed using
proteomics analysis platform of ExPasy []. In addition, the
variation and conservation of envelope protein residues in all
five genotypes, were done by using a protein variability server
at 0.46 threshold value of Simpson diversity. The envelope
protein of SA14-14-2 strain (PDB ID- 3P54) was taken as a base
structure to map the variable and conserved regions in
genotypes 1,2,3,4 and 5 []. The flowchart of methodology has
been represented in ().

Screening of T cell epitopes:
All the structural and non-structural proteins of JEV (Accession
No.ABU94628) were analyzed for screening of possible
dominant T cell epitopes using immunoinformatics tools such
as Propred I and Propred. Propred I and Propred were used at
4% threshold for binding analysis of all possible peptides to 47
class I and 51 class II HLA alleles respectively. These tools are
highly valuable to recognize antigenic HLA binding peptides
[,
].

Predicted T cell epitopes worldwide conserved region study:
All the predicted T cell epitopes of JEV north Indian origin
strain, were undergone for worldwide conserved region study
among JEV genotypes 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5. Before conserved region
study it is necessary to retrieve all proteins sequences of all
genotypes from NCBI database. Therefore maximum 5
sequences of each JEV protein were retrieved from the NCBI
database randomly for genotypes 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5.

The predicted T cell epitopes of each protein of JEV strain along
with 1 to 5 same protein sequences of a single genotype were
taken to Immune Epitope Database and Analysis Resource
(IEDB) conservancy tool []. This cycle was repeated for all five
genotypes for all proteins of JEV strain.

The nanomer T cell epitopes having 70- 100% conserved region
with a maximum single and double mutation were selected
while discarded the epitopes having less than 70% conserved
region with more than two mutations. After conserved region
analysis, isoelectric point (pI) value of predicted peptides was
calculated for all mutated and conserved epitopes 
[].

Result &amp; Discussion
The result of the study indicated that JEV genome comprises
10976 base pairs with GC content 51.35 %. The GC content was
found to be 2.7% higher than AT contents. The genome
translates into a polyprotein that afterwards separated into
structural and non-structural proteins. The structural envelope
protein has the highest molecular weight 52975.81 kDa. All
protein physiological properties such as molecular weight,
amino acid number and frequency amino acid were listed in
 
(see supplementary material). Frequency of amino acid
in protein is directly associated with the pI value and their
binding with HLA alleles. The study of envelope protein
variability among all genotypes, the amino acid sequence
positions 129, 222, 327 and 369 were observed with high
Simpson variability () which was also shown in 3D
mapped structure ().

Total 118 HLA class II binding T cell epitopes were extracted by
propred tool  (see supplementary material). The highest
number of T cell epitopes was represented by envelope protein
comprising 28.81% of all predicted HLA class II epitopes.
Envelope protein predicted epitopes such as LVTVNPFVA,
VGRLVTVNP, FRTLFGGMS, LKGAQRLAA and FNSIGKAVH
were found to be potential binders of 20-50 HLA II alleles.

Envelope protein followed by NS1 and NS2A proteins
representing 12.71% and 11.86% of the predicted HLA II
epitopes respectively. In case of non-structural proteins (NS1,
NS2A, NS2B, NS4A, NS4B and NS5) LWGDGVEES,
FVHNDVEAW, FGITSTRVW, YVVLVAAAF, FMLAGLMAV,
VFLICVLTV, LLLMVVLIP, LVFLGCWGQL, LVTAATLTL, and
VVLTPLLKH were predicted as the most potential binders in
term of binding score, conserved nature and the HLA II alleles
coverage.

In case of HLA class I binding T cell epitopes, total 102 epitopes
were extracted using propred I (). Again, the highest
number of T cell epitopes was represented by envelope protein
comprising 23.51% of all the predicted HLA I epitopes.
Envelope protein epitopes such as QALAGAIVV, GHGTVVIEL,
KGAQRLAAL and TTLKGAQRL are the potential binders to
range of 20 - 50 HLA I alleles. In case of non-structural proteins
(NS1, NS2A, NS2B, NS4A, NS4B, NS5) KSILFAPEL,
YLPETPRSL, LMFAIVGGL, LLKENAVDL, AIVGGLAEL,
IALLLMVVL, AVLGALLVV, LMFAIVGGL, IAGTLLIAL,
LAVFLICVL, KATGSASSL, FMWLGARYL peptides were
predicted as best binders in the term of binding score,
conserved region and the HLA I alleles coverage.

The conserved region analysis of total 118 predicted HLA class
II binding epitopes, 29 epitopes were found to be 100%
conserved in all genotypes. The 118 predicted HLA II peptides
showed 72 % conserved nature with genotype I, 78.81% with
genotype II, 75% with genotype III, 54% with genotype IV and
39.83% with genotype V (). Predicted HLA II binding
epitopes were found highly conserved in genotype II (78.81%).
Similarly, the conserved region analysis of total 102 predicted
HLA class I binding epitopes, 21 epitopes were found 100%
conserved in all genotypes. The 102 predicted HLA I peptides
showed 70.58% conserved nature with genotype I, 75.49% with
genotype II, 76.47% with genotype III, 62.47% with genotype IV
and 52% with genotype V (). Predicted HLA I binding
epitopes were found highly conserved in genotype III (76.47%).
LMTINNTDI, MINIEASQL, LVTVNPFVA, IPIVSVASL, and
VLTLATFFL epitopes were found as common binders for HLA
class I and II alleles. LVTVNPFVA epitope of envelope protein
was found best binder in term of the HLA allele coverage with
100% conserve nature in all genotypes.

As discussed earlier, the concept of HLA supertype has a
profound role in the understanding of T cell epitope selection,
degeneration and discrimination during T cell mediated
immune response []. In the HLA supertype analysis, IEDB
web server was also used to check binding of best epitopes with
also those HLA alleles, which are not included in propred
server. For an example, DR4 HLA II supertype members such as
DRB1*0401, 0405 and 0802 are not available in propred server.
Findings revealed that LVTVNPFVA, IPIVSVASL,
KGAQRLAAL, LAVFLICVL epitopes binding to all members of
B7 HLA I supertype (B*0702, B*3501, B*5101, B*5102, B*5301,
B*5401) but these peptides also show selective binding to some
members but not all members of the other HLA I supertypes.
FRTLFGGMS, VFLICVLTV epitopes were binding to all
members of DR4 HLA II supertype (DRB1*0401, 0405 and 0802)
but not all members of the other HLA II supertypes. Therefore
LVTVNPFVA, IPIVSVASL, KGAQRLAAL, LAVFLICVL,
FRTLFGGMS and VFLICVLTV epitopes were also showing
their super antigenic property. These predicted potential novel
epitopes are sufficient to work as vaccine rather than using
whole proteins as vaccines candidates because it has been
confirmed few epitopes can represent complete antigenicity of
any protein []. Similar to this study, epitope based vaccines
have given promising result against several highly infectious
diseases such as H1N1, HIV and Tuberculosis [,
,
]. Thus
in the present study, propred I and propred server were used
for screening of best T cell epitopes from proteome of JEV north
Indian isolate followed by worldwide conserved region analysis
in all genotypes (1,2,3,4 and 5). The predicted epitopes were
nanomers and could be used as vaccine candidates and
diagnostic reagents for JE.

Conclusion
The need for the design and development of HLA specific short
peptide vaccine candidate is necessary. We document the
identification of class I and class II HLA specific JE viral
peptides at 4% threshold value by using Propred I and Propred,
respectively. We report the presence of 29 class II and 21 class I
specific conserved peptides in all known genotypes. The HLA
specific predicated are seen to be highly conserved in genotypes
2 and 3, while limited in 1, 4 and 5. We further found that the
peptides IPIVSVASL, KGAQRLAAL, LAVFLICVL and
FRTLFGGMS, VFLICVLTV, are top ranking with potential
super antigen property by binding to all HLA allele members of
B7 and DR4 super-types, respectively. This data finds
application in the design and development of short peptide
vaccine candidates and diagnostic agents for JE following
adequate validation and verification.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The present paper is concerned with a piece of Ph.D. program of
the author Pawan Sharma (M.Tech, Anna University, Chennai,
India). The authors are grateful to Prof. (Dr.) S.K. Maheshwari
and Dr. Brijesh Sharma for time-to-time suggestions and
inspiration enabling them to successfully accomplish the writeup
of this manuscript. The authors are also thankful to Director
and all faculty members of the Institute of Biomedical Education
and Research, Mangalayatan University Aligarh, U.P, India for
providing necessary facilities and encouragement.

Citation:Sharma et al, Bioinformation 10(6): 334-341 (2014)

Flowchart of methodology employed in
comprehensive analysis of predicted HLA binding peptides of
JE viral proteins.

Plot shows variable region, having variability score
more than 0.46 threshold value in envelope protein by Simpson
variability method. Peaks marked with stars are depicting the
variable residues (129, 222, 327 and 369).

Variability and conserved region of envelope protein
shown by red and blue gradient respectively onto three
dimensional base structure of envelope protein (3P54).

A relative analysis of JEV Indian strain predicted T cell
epitopes for HLA alleles and their worldwide conserved region
study in Genotype 1,2,3,4 and 5. Panel P and Panel Q are
depicting analysis for HLA II and HLA I alleles respectively.
(Here A- Conserve peptides, B- Single variation same pI
(Isoelectric point) peptides, C- Single variation changed pI
peptides, D- Double variation same pI peptides and E- Double
variation changed pI peptides).

