Background
International League Against Epilepsy [ILAE] defines
epilepsy as a disease condition characterized by an enduring
predisposition to generate seizures by neurobiological,
cognitive, psychological and social consequences 
[]. The
worldwide prevalence of active epilepsy ranges from 4 to 10
per thousand populations [] and in India almost 5.59 per
thousand suffers epileptic attack once in their life time 
[]. The 
electrogenic property of an individual neuron forms an
important marker for hyper excitability of neuronal circuits
which are dependent on the functional properties of ion
channels like Na+, K+, and Ca2+ in the membranes. VoltageGated
Sodium Channels [VGSCs], in particular, are the
mediators of intrinsic neuronal excitability and are central to
most important determinants of pathophysiology of epileptic
seizures and execute initiation of action potentials, synaptic
transmission and neurotransmitter release.

The major role of sodium channels in epileptic pathogenesis is
reflected from the studies wherein mutations on chromosome
21q were coupled to progressive myoclonus epilepsy of the
Unverricht–Lundborg type. The affected gene was later
identified to code for a sodium channel protein, which
evidently indicated sodium channels may play a crucial role in
this syndrome []. Additionally, involvement of sodium
channels in epilepsy came from yet another compelling
evidence wherein gain-of-function mutations on the β1
sodium channel subunit gene -SCN1b on chromosome 19q that
modified gating capability of channels was linked to
generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+) type
[]. The absolute necessity for intact sodium-channel function
in normal neurophysiology was underscored by the finding
that knockout mice with specific ablations of sodium channels
(Nav1.2, Nav1.5 or Nav1.6) develop seizures [,
,
]. Given
such accumulating evidences from past 15 to 20 years paved
way in rational designing of sodium channel blockers like
Phenytoin (PHT), Carbamazepine (CBZ) which are still
regarded as best- prescribed medication amongst currently
available antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) [,
]. Sodium channel
blockers act by preventing the repetitive firing of the axons by
stabilizing the inactive form of channel. In addition,
presynaptic and postsynaptic blockade of sodium channels of
the axons causes stabilization of the neuronal membranes,
prevents post tetanic potentiation, and finally limits seizure
activity [].

Despite the target hypothesis of AED treatment, around 30% of
the patients still continue to have uncontrolled seizures (drug
resistance) and drug toxicity which may be due to structural or
functional change at the site of drug action or alteration in the
drug pharmacodynamics [,
,
]. Hence, development of
novel sodium channel blockers with an optimal efficacy that
can enhance improved clinical outcome is undoubtedly an
important medical demand. In the view of above, the present
study was designed to identify novel compounds through
structure and ligand based strategies which we anticipate
would have superior channel blocking potential endowed with
optimal ADMET features than customary drugs - Phenytoin
and Carbamazepine.

Methodology
Selection of multiclass sodium channel blockers:
 (see supplementary material) 
shows two established sodium channel blockers selected as leads for virtual screening.

Molecular Modeling of SCN1A protein:
Protein sequence of voltage-gated sodium channel alpha
subunit SCN1A was retrieved from NCBI with accession
number: AAK00217.1. Crystallographic and solution NMR
structures of the protein were available in PDB [4JPZ, 2KBI]
[,
] however structures were interrupted with missing
residues and loops. Therefore, complete structure was
predicted with computational homology modeling. Similarity
searching was performed against PDB database for finding an
appropriate template for homology modeling using BLOSUM-
62 matrix enabled BLAST program. Top 10 templates were
used for the alignment against SCN1A. Threading alignment
with a normalized Z-score &gt;1 was considered optimal. The
entire top 10 template alignment file (.ali) was used for
building loops using MODELLER program. The FASTA was
converted to PIR using EMBL׳s Readseq algorithm. Structure
similarity was performed by using the profile.build (), an inbuilt
command in MODELLER. The build_profile.py was then
used for the local dynamic algorithm to identify homologous
sequences against SCN1A target sequence. The final model
thus obtained () from MODELLER was further used
for structure validation using by Procheck using UCLA׳s
SAVES server.

Prediction of channel in the protein:
3V web server was employed to predict the channel through
comprehensive analyses of the internal volumes considering
difference as large as possible probe radius and the solvent
radius (typically 1.5 Å for water) []. The volumetric
representations of the channel are provided in 
 (see
supplementary material).

Similarity search, preparation of protein and compounds :
Similarity search was supervised by Binary Finger Print Based
Tanimoto similarity equation to retrieve compounds similar to
PHT and CBZ with similarity threshold of 95 % against NCBI׳s
Pubchem compound database. All the structures were
optimized through OPLS 2005 force field algorithm 
[]
embedded in the LigPrep module of Schrödinger suite, 2013
(Schrodinger. LLC, New York, NY) []. The three-dimensional
structure of the modeled structure was processed by removing
all bound crystal water molecules and adding hydrogen 
bonds. Explicit hydrogen, bond orders, disulphide bonds,
hybridizations and charges were assigned wherever missing.
The resulting structure was energy minimized using OPLS-
2005 force field by protein preparation wizard of Schrödinger
suite 2013.

Toxicity screening and bioactivity prediction of compounds:
All the similar compounds retrieved were screened for its drug
ability by lipinksi filters. The toxicity screening was achieved
by using LAZAR toxicity prediction server []. Biological
activity of the ligands was predicted using Molinspiration
webserver (© Molinspiration Cheminformatics 2014). LC 50
was predicted using T.E.S.T. Version 4.1 (2012, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency) software. The complete
ADMET properties was calculated using admetSAR [].

Optimization of virtual screening parameters:
Molecular docking program- Molegro Virtual Docker (MVD)
which incorporates highly efficient PLP (Piece wise Linear
Potential) and MolDock scoring function provided a flexible
docking platform [–
]. The leads (PHT and CBZ) and
similar chemical structures were docked in predicted channel
of protein. Docking parameters were set to 0.20Å as grid
resolution, maximum iteration of 1500 and maximum
population size of 50. Energy minimization and hydrogen
bonds were optimized after the docking. Simplex evolution
was set at maximum steps of 300 with neighborhood distance
factor of 1. Binding affinity and interactions of similar
compounds with protein were evaluated on the basis of the
internal ES (Internal electrostatic Interaction), internal
hydrogen bond interactions and sp2-sp2 torsions. Post dock
energy of the ligand-receptor complex was minimized using
Nelder Mead Simplex Minimization (using non-grid force field
and H bond directionality) []. On the basis of MolDock −
rerank score best interacting compound was selected
respective to each parent compound.

Prediction of channel in the protein:
Molecular docking program- Molegro Virtual Docker (MVD)
which incorporates highly efficient PLP (Piece wise Linear
Potential) and MolDock scoring function provided a flexible
docking platform [–
]. The leads (PHT and CBZ) and
similar chemical structures were docked in predicted channel
of protein. Docking parameters were set to 0.20Å as grid
resolution, maximum iteration of 1500 and maximum
population size of 50. Energy minimization and hydrogen
bonds were optimized after the docking. Simplex evolution
was set at maximum steps of 300 with neighborhood distance
factor of 1. Binding affinity and interactions of similar
compounds with protein were evaluated on the basis of the
internal ES (Internal electrostatic Interaction), internal
hydrogen bond interactions and sp2-sp2 torsions. Post dock
energy of the ligand-receptor complex was minimized using
Nelder Mead Simplex Minimization (using non-grid force field
and H bond directionality) []. On the basis of MolDock -
rerank score best interacting compound was selected
respective to each parent compound.

Softwares, Suites and Webservers used :
For virtual screening Pubchem database was used to search
and prepare library of similar chemical compounds. All the
chemical structures were drawn in MarvinSketch 5.6.0.2, (1998-
2011, Copyright © ChemAxon Ltd). Ligands were optimized
with LigPrep module of Schrodinger suite 2013. Protein was
processed and refined with protein preparation wizard of
Schrodinger suite 2013 (Schrodinger. LLC, 2009, New York,
NY). Flexible molecular docking of the compounds with target
was completed using Molegro Virtual Docker 2010.4.0.0.
Accelrys Discovery Studio® Visualizer 3.5.0.12158
(Copyright© 2005-12, Accelrys Software Inc.) was used for
molecular visualizations. LAZAR online server was used to
predict In silico toxicity. T.E.S.T software (2012, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency) and Molinspiration web
server (© Molinspiration Cheminformatics 2014) were
respectively used for predicting LC50 and bioactivity of the
compound. ADMET profiles were calculated using admeSAR
(Laboratory of Molecular Modeling and Design. Copyright @
2012, East China University of Science and Technology,
Shanghai Key Laboratory for New Drug Design,)

Results
Number of similar compounds screened with ≥95 similarity
corresponding to each PHT and CBZ has been listed in 

(see supplementary material). The procheck results revealed 
the modified status of the modeled structure of SCN1A protein
(). In final model 97.6 percentages of overall amino
acids were in allowed region of Ramachandran plot, validating
the model in close proximate to experimental quality. Evident
from rerank score, compound NSC403438 (CID: 345700)
() showed 1.47 folds better interaction than PHT
whereas; compound AGN-PC-0BPCBP (CID: 57199333)
() was 1.29 folds better interacting compound than
CBZ (). In further investigation we observed that
compound NSC403438 was marginally (1.4 folds) better
interacting drug than AGN-PC-0BPCBP  (see
supplementary material). NSC403438 not only showed better
interaction against the channel than its parent compound PHT,
but also showed superior binding affinity than CBZ and rest of
the virtually screened molecules (). The overall
interaction profile of PHT, CBZ and their respective similar
NSC403438 and AGN-PC-0BPCBP is shown in  (see
supplementary material). The superior rerank score of
NSC403438 can be probably attributed to its optimal
electrostatic and hydrogen bond interactions 
 (see
supplementary material). The LC 50 values at 96 hour interval
were predicted to be 1.6 folds superior for NSC403438 than its 
parent compound PHT; similarly AGN-PC-0BPCBP had 2.4
folds better LC 50 values than CBZ  (see
supplementary material). In addition the similar compounds
identified against their parents showed enhanced bioactivity
providing a clue for target specificity  (see
supplementary material). Except for AGN-PC-0BPCBP, all the
compounds were safe and predicted to be non-carcinogen and
non-mutagenic  (see supplementary material). Further,
results from ADMET prediction revealed that NSC403438 to be
better drug like compound compared to AGN-PC-0BPCBP
 (see supplementary material). In the present study,
we were able to identify similar compounds to have better
pharmacological profile than their parents, however, CBZ
similar - AGN-PC-0BPCBP failed to pass carcinogenic filter in
cell lines of DBS Hamster. Taking this fact into consideration,
only PHT similar - NSC403438 was mapped for its structure
based pharmacophoric features. Comprehensively shown in
figure 3a, the molecule demonstrated van der Waals
interactions with His 614, Pro 611, Arg 500, Leu 716, Arg 501
and Asp 606 and electrostatic interactions with Gln 554, His
553 Ser 607, 550 and 603, Val 610, Asn 499 and Arg 498. Further
π- π interactions were observed with Arg 501 and 498. The
ligand binding pattern of NSC403438 in the channel site is
shown in . Electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions
of NSC403438 in the channel is shown in  &amp; 
respectively.

Discussion
Since, serendipitous discovery of potassium bromide in midnineteenth
century, AEDs have emerged as the most effective
treatment for hyperexcitable neuronal network. These
anticonvulsants were the mainstays of seizure treatment until
the 1990s, when newer AEDs with good efficacy, fewer toxic
effects, better tolerability and without the need for blood level
monitoring were developed [].

Regardless of progress achieved in understanding the
neuropharmacology in treatment of epilepsy, the mortality and
morbidity associated with this disease have not appreciably
declined [] and it becomes quite obvious to explore for 
innovative avenues to epileptic therapy. Most AEDs have a
narrow therapeutic window and many patients tolerate and
need serum concentrations above the usual therapeutic range
and some even experience adverse effects 
[]. Secondly,
narrow therapeutic range of AEDs is apparent from the fact
that serious idiosyncratic effects like skin rashes which later
advances to Stevens-Johnson syndrome have been observed
within several weeks or months of initiating the drug dose
[]. 
The third type of adverse drug effect documented was the
cumulative toxicity which usually occurs over years of
treatment [].

Published literature has shown that although the effect of PHT
is optimally voltage dependent with IC50 ranging from 600
µM to &lt;10 µM, in a holding-potential range of –90 to –50
mV [,
,
,
,
]. Binding of PHT to channels was much
slower and required longer depolarizations (up to seconds)
[,
] to produce blocking effects which otherwise hinders
emergency treatment. In contrast CBZ blocks the channels ~5
times faster, but with lower affinity, suggesting that
antiepileptic effects might be expected to be more pronounced
with short-duration discharges []. Considering the narrow
therapeutic range of PHT and CBZ, we in possible attempt
endeavored to overcome these setbacks by identifying
compounds bestowed with high affinity, better kinetics, least
toxicity and optimal bioactivity.

Two compounds viz., NSC403438 and AGN-PC-0BPCBP
similar to PHT and CBZ were identified to have higher affinity
than their respective parents. NSC403438 and AGN-PC-
0BPCBP showed 1.47 and 1.29 folds higher affinity than their
respective parent compounds– PHT and CBZ. Further,
NSC403438 proved to be still better than AGN-PC-0BPCBP
with augmented affinity order of 1.14 folds. The superior
affinity of NSC403438 can be attributed to its excellent
interaction profile especially in terms of electrostatic and Hbonding
interactions. Further, NSC403438 was the only
compound in the study to demonstrate 2 hydrogen bonds and
8 electrostatic interacting residues participating in the
interaction. 

The ADMET profiles of these compounds revealed that
NSC403438 was better compound and most likely drug gable
compared to AGN-PC-0BPCBP. The predicted bioactivity as
well as the LC 50 values of NSC403438 and AGN-PC-0BPCBP
was quite appreciable. The LC 50 value at 96 hour interval was
predicted to be 1.6 folds superior for NSC403438 than its
parent compound PHT; similarly AGN-PC-0BPCBP had 2.4
folds better LC 50 values than its parent compound CBZ. In
addition the similar compounds identified against their
parents show enhanced bioactivity providing a clue for target
specificity. The toxicity profiles of all the four compounds were
although appreciable, however, AGN-PC-0BPCBP
demonstrated to be carcinogenic in DBS Hamster cell line
therefore it was not further analyzed for pharmacophoric
mappings.

From the present study we predict compound NSC403438 can
overcome the narrow therapeutic window of PHT and CBZ
and can be to put forth for pharmacodynamic and
pharmacokinetic experiments for better clinical outcomes in
the successful treatment of epilepsy.

Conclusion
The narrow therapeutic range of PHT and CBZ necessitates an
urgent need in the treatment of epilepsy. Therefore in the
given view, through In silico strategies we identified
NSC403438 to have better therapeutic properties endowed
with least toxicity than hitherto administered AED׳s -PHT and
CBZ.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Our due thanks to Dr. Mallika Alvala, Lecturer, NIPER,
Hyderabad, for permitting us to carry out work at the
bioinformatics facility at Department of Medicinal Chemistry,
NIPER.

Citation:Shaheen et al, Bioinformation 11(3): 131-137 (2015)

A) Secondary structure view of the modeled SCN1A
protein. The top view of the protein depicts an ion pore (green)
surrounded by four domains; B) The ion-conducting aqueous
pore (solid green cylinder) calculated by V3 (Volume
Calculation and Extraction Procedures) web server by probing
measures.

 Structure of A) NSC403438 (CID: 345700) - compound
similar to PHT; B) AGN-PC-0BPCBP (CID: 57199333) -
compound similar to CBZ

 A) Interactions of NSC403438 in the channel of the
SCN1A protein. Residues circled in green participate in van
der Waals interaction with the ligand while residues in pink
forms electrostatic interactions. Hydrogen bonds are shown as
green arrows between ligand and residues Arg 498 and 501; B)
Binding pattern of NSC403438 in the channel. The pink lines
represent various interactions like electrostatic, van der Waals,
stearic, hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interactions that
enable energetically favourable binding of the ligand in the
channel.

A) NSC403438 deeply embedded in the channel
surrounded by highly electropositive residues; B) The channel
harboring NSC403438 is shown with hydrophobic intensities.
The hydrophobic intensities of the binding site ranges from -
3.00 (least hydrophobic area - blue shade) to 3.00 (highly
hydrophobic area –brown shade).

