Background
The species of Eucheuma occur throughout the Indo-Pacific
region from East Africa to Guam, in China and Japan waters
and mostly in algal reef areas of islands in Southeast Asia. In
Malaysia, E. denticulatum is commonly farmed in Kudat and
Semporna in the state of Sabah. E. denticulatum is also known as
“spinosum” which is a trade name indicating its production of
iota-carrageenan. E. denticulatum has been the focus of many
studies due to its unique polysaccharides that constitute its cell
wall that are unlike those found in plants. Currently there is no
dedicated database available for the expressed sequence tags
(ESTs) data of E. denticulatum even though the interest in
seaweed community has been increased globally due to its
economical value. ESTs are significantly important especially
for organisms where the genome sequences are not available
and they can be used as a basis for structural genomic
annotation. Until now only Ectocarpus siliculosus (brown algae)
has its genome fully sequenced []. We aim to generate as many
ESTs from E. denticulatum as possible and to use the encoded
information to reveal interesting information on the
biosynthetic pathway of iota-carrageenan. Bioinformatics
analysis has been carried out to facilitate the finding of
interesting biological information. To date, we have uploaded
9,057 high quality ESTs to the GenBank EST repository. We
present the E. denticulatum EST database (EuDBase) consists of
EST data, functional annotation and metabolic pathway
assignments. The content of EuDBase will continue to increase
in parallel with the EST sequencing effort carried out at
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM). It also provides
comparative data for analyses of organism that has no
comparable genomic resources. EuDBase also links to
ESTFrontier pipeline for comprehensive EST data analyses.

Methodology
EuDBase and ESTFrontier have been designed for simple and
efficient information search and retrieval. EuDBase is composed
of two major components i.e. a relational database created using
open access MySQL version 5.1.36 and a PHP version 5.3.0 web
application that communicates with the database. PHP scripts
dynamically execute SQL queries to retrieve data from the
database according to user criteria and display them as a
standard HTML output. EuDBase database model and its
interaction with ESTFrontier are depicted in 
.
EuDBase stores raw sequences, assembled sequences as unique
transcripts (UTs), translated peptides, BLASTX results, protein
signature analysis results from InterProScan, Gene Ontology
functional annotations based on BLASTX results and KEGG
PATHWAY mapping. Currently, EuDBase contains 9,057
refined EST from 10,031 sequenced ESTs from E. denticulatum
libraries. ESTFrontier was developed to facilitate EST data
processing and functional annotation. Several bioinformatic
tools are embedded in the pipeline including Seqclean 
[],
RepeatMasker, CAP3 [], ESTScan 
[], FrameDP 
[], BLASTX
[], InterProScan, InterPro2GO, BLAST2GO 
[], AutoFACT 
[]
and KOBAS []. A comprehensive spreadsheet report in EXCEL
format is generated as output files.

Utility
E. denticulatum EST statistics in EuDBase:
StackPack EST assembly pipeline was used to assemble raw
EST data resulting to the assembly of 2,275 unique transcripts
that consisted of 1,320 consensus sequences and 955 singletons
(, see supplementary material). Sequence similarity
search against NCBI nr-database with a cut-off value of 1e-06
showed 961 UTs have significant matched homologues, 145 UTs
were categorised as predicted proteins whilst 138 UTs were
grouped into hypothetical and unknown proteins (, see
supplementary material).  (see supplementary
material) shows the most abundant similarity search of E.
denticulatum UT data set where 62 ESTs were found to match
the RNA-binding proteins.  (see supplementary
material) shows the output for domain analysis using
InterProScan. We used Blast2GO for the functional annotation
in E. denticulatum EST and 1935 Gene Ontology terms were
assigned on 399 UTs. BLAST2GO used 5 best hits from BLASTX
results to annotate each UTs sequence and successfully
annotated 823 GO terms under biological process, 578 under
molecular function, and 488 under cellular component (,
see supplementary material). We have also performed a
pathway mapping of E. denticulatum UTs on KEGG pathway to
observe their interactions. Using BLAST2GO KEGG pathway
mapping functionality along with the complementary support
from KOBAS, 57 unique pathways have been mapped with E.
denticulatum ESTs and 100 UTs were found to map on the
pathway of plant hormones biosynthesis and 99 UTs are
mapped on the phenylpropanoids biosynthetic pathway. 
 (see supplementary material) lists 10 most abundant
pathways that were mapped with E. denticulatum UTs. EuDBase
web interface enables users to perform keyword search and
browsing against the database. Database users can query the
database using keywords together using Boolean operators
such as AND, OR and NOT to perform complex queries.
EuDBase includes local BLAST server to enable BLAST
searching against EuDBase assembled UTs and translated
peptides using appropriate BLAST subprograms such as
BLASTN, BLASTP and BLASTX ().

Future developments:
Eventually EuDBase will incorporate E. denticulatum
proteomics, transcriptomics and metabolomics data as well as
its integration with a genome browser. The server will be
periodically upgraded for faster access to accommodate the
growing number of data.

Conclusion:
EuDBase is a first online resource for red seaweed that allows
for easy data integration and retrieval with the aim of providing
a tool to expand the knowledge on E. denticulatum functional
genomics.

Authors' contributions:
ZAMH formulated the study, directed the work and wrote the
manuscript. RAZA worked on the preliminary development of
the database. LKK continuously developed, implemented and
managed the database and analysis pipeline. RO conceived and
directed the molecular biology studies. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank all RO's students for their contribution in generating
the EST raw data, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM), the
Malaysian Ministry of Higher Education for the Fundamental
Research Grant Scheme (UKM-RB-06-FRGS0101-2009) awarded
to ZAMH which supported this study and the MOSTI Grant 06-
02-02-003-BTK/ER/0016 awarded to RO which supported the
laboratory experiments. The work was carried out at the
Bioinformatics Lab, Institute of Systems Biology (INBIOSIS),
UKM and the laboratory experiments were carried out at the
Centre for Gene Analysis and Technology (CGAT), INBIOSIS,
UKM. The facilities and financial aid are duly acknowledged.

Citation:Mohamed-Hussein et al, Bioinformation 7(4): 157-162 (2011)

A database model of EuDBase

EST analysis pipeline in EuDBase known as
ESTFrontier

Data mining route in EuDBase. There are three main
branches for mining in EuDBase

Snapshots of EuDBase web interface. EuDBase Top
page with links to Browse and Search. A) Keyword search
results with links toward sequence summary report; B)
Consensus sequence summary report; C) Browse EuDBase by
raw sequences, singletons, consensus, protein domain, Gene
Ontology (GO) and KEGG pathway; D) Raw EST sequence
summary report; E) Singleton sequence summary report; F)
Consensus sequence summary report.

