Background
Root knot nematodes (RKN; Meloidogyne spp.) are obligatory
parasites that infect the roots of hundreds of plant species. The
annual global agricultural losses of RKN have been estimated to
be $157 billion []. The RKN is considered to be a major
pathogen of vegetables throughout the globe. It impacts both
the quantity and quality of crop yields []. The RKN has a wide
host range; all major field crops, fruit trees, most vegetable
crops, ornamental plants, and weeds are affected. Many of the
traditional agricultural control practices (crop rotation, adding
organic matter, removing diseased plants, and using resistant
varieties) have not managed to control the parasite. And the use
of chemicals has proven to be ineffective and hazardous.
Therefore new approaches are needed. One would be to create
transgenic plants using RNAi targeted to silence essential
nematode genes []. We therefore set out to identify genes in
RKN that would be lethal if silenced or mutated. We developed
a pipeline and database to store our results. The genes were
placed in a web based database for easy searching by the
biological community.

Methodology
We conducted a comparative genomics study of all known EST
sequences of RKN (from all 6 known species) with that of the
well characterized and free living nematode Caenorhabditis
elegans. We identified conserved genes that are candidates for
being lethal at any stage of the RKN if mutated or silenced. We
chose C. elegans because unlike RKN, it is well-characterized
and there are numerous knock out and RNAi studies that have
been done on it, making it a perfect species for comparison.

We downloaded all known EST and genomic sequences for C.
elegans from Wormbase (www.wormbase.org; 356,773 EST
sequences and 41,195 Genomic sequences in total). A unigene
set was generated from these sequences by using the sequence
assembly program Cap3 []. We also downloaded all known
preassembled (unigene sets) ESTs for each one of the six species
of the RKN from (http://www.nematode.net). Then we
imported these sequences into our local SQLServer database.
The RKN unigene sets were compared against the C. elegans
sequences using the stand-alone blast software from NCBI
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). Perl scripts were written to
parse the results of the blast searches. The parsed blast results
were also stored in the database. SQL scripts were written to
query the database to identify RKN genes with high similarity
to C. elegans (e-value ≦ 1E-5). Those genes were then mapped
against Wormbase to find out which of these genes resulted in
an embryonic, larval, or adult lethal phenotype in C.elegans if
mutated or silenced, following the procedure described in 
[].
We developed a web based user interface and provided search
capabilities for scientists in the field. The search for candidate
lethals could be performed by using the species name, stage of
lethality, and E-value level and\or by gene\protein name 
(). The user interface was developed using ASP.NET.

Utility to the biological community
We identified 7 candidate lethal genes from M.arenaria, 2260
genes from M.chitiwoodi, 5611 genes from M.hapla, 5650 genes
from M.incognita, 2932 genes from M. javanica, and 1052 from
M.paranaensis. RNAi constructs against four genes in
M.incognita have already been made and proven to be effective
in soybean roots []. Overall these results show a promising
solution for broadening resistance of plants against this plantparasitic
nematode.

Caveats
As the genome sequence of M.incognita becomes better
characterized, this study can be updated to identify further
candidate lethal genes.

Future Development
We hope to also incorporate gene expression experiments
within our database to show the level of expression of the
candidate lethal genes in different biological experiments and
species.

Citation:Ismail et al, Bioinformation 8(19): 950-952 (2012)

Snap shot of one of the search pages on the RKN lethal database site.

