Background
Nematodes are the most numerous multicellular animals on earth and nearly 80,000 species have been described
under the phylum Nematoda, of which over 15,000 are parasitic and infect humans, domestic animals and food
crops []. The free-living nematodes on the other hand
contribute the largest number of species in Nematoda and are largely present in soil and do not parasitize plants, but
are beneficial in the decomposition of organic matter. It has been estimated that there can be as many as 500,000 or
more described and undescribed species in the phylum Nematoda []. Parasitic nematodes can readily infect
plants or animals, although there are basic structural differences in cellular features of their hosts. These two
groups of parasitic nematodes may have common properties that are important for parasitizing the host.
Parasitic nematodes of animals, especially humans have a profound effect on the economy due to their direct
involvement in health and productivity. Over 1 billion people are infected worldwide by parasitic nematodes [],
and the diseases they cause collectively lead to mortality severe morbidity, blindness, anemia, intestinal disease,
respiratory disease, and disfigurement of major organs and limbs. On the other hand, plant parasitic nematodes can
cause even greater economic losses as they could infect crops that are important for both animals and humans. A
report published in 2002 indicated the annual crop loss caused by plant parasitic nematodes to be roughly $80
billion worldwide, with $8 billion in the USA [].
Although more recent estimates on global crop losses are not available, it may be very much higher with the
increase in agricultural productivity. Despite these facts, the biology of the vast majority of parasitic and free living
nematode species is poorly understood. In addition to genetic and biological information gleaned from research
on these organisms, further advances in these areas could be achieved by unraveling biological information from the
genomes of nematodes available in public databases using tools in bioinformatcis. Further, evolutionary relationships
and the selective pressures can also be ascertained using the information in genomes of these organisms. In the
current study, we have used the latter tools to systematically characterize a group of nematode specific
proteins using an ORF we characterized from a parasitic nematode Setaria digitata. This nematode is found in the
peritoneal cavity of many ungulates including cattle and buffaloes and causes nematodiasis, a neuropathological
disorder. In the affected animals mild motor weakness to severe paralysis and death could be brought about by the
infective stage larvae (L3) of S. digitata [].

Methodology
Construction of cDNA library
A cDNA library of S. digitata was constructed in the vector λ Zap according to manufacturer's instructions
(Stratagene). The library was in­vivo excised in E. coli, XL1‐ Blue MRF to give phagemid colonies, which were
randomly picked and plasmid DNA was extracted using the alkaline lysis method.

Sequencing
Bidirectional sequencing of randomly picked plasmid DNA was carried out with vector derived primers using Thermo Sequenase TM CY5 Dye Terminator kit and ALF express TM 
DNA Sequencer (Amershan-Pharmacia, Sweden). A clone designated pSDC13 containing S. digitata UP (SDUP) was completely sequenced.

Bioiformatic analysis
Amino acid sequences of W. bancrofti and B. malayi, were acquired by executing an iterative protein­protein
BLAST at NCBI [] against all non-redundant GenBank CDS translations + RefSeq Proteins + PDB + 
SwissProt + PIR + PRF protein databases using SDUP as the query sequence. Amino acid sequences of UPs of O. volvulus,
A. suum and M. hapla, and Litomosoides sigmodontis
were retrieved by executing an iterative WU-BLAST of
the Parasite Genome Database [] and nucleotide­protein
BLAST of NEMBASE3 [] respectively, using SDUP as
the query Sequence. Multiple alignments of nucleotide
sequences ware carried out using ClustalW of the BioEdit
software program. Molecular Biology programmes and
servers used to analyse different properties of proteins are
indicated in the results and discussion section. A
phylogenetic tree was constructed by Neighbor‐ Joining
with 100 bootstraps replicates using multiply‐aligned
sequence with MEGA 3.1 software program.

Discussion
Nearly 250 randomly picked clones of the cDNA
expression library of the cattle parasitic nematode S.
digitata were sequenced bi­directionally and functional
annotation of these cDNAs was attempted by performing a
BLAST search over publicly available genomic, protein
and domain databases. In the latter process, we identified a
cDNA clone to which functional annotation was not
possible by searching over databases indicated above.
Thus, as an initial step towards the characterization of this
clone, it was fully sequenced and the complete ORF (SDUP) was recovered (). The ORF consists of
204 amino acids and its predicted molecular weight and
isoelectric point were found to be 22.8Kda and 9.94,
respectively. Searching over the non redundant protein
sequences database of NCBI to identify similar ORF using
algorithm programs Protein­Protein BLAST (BLASTP),
Pattern Hit Initiated BLAST (PHI­BLAST), Position-
Specific Iterated BLAST (PHI­BLAST) [] identified
homologous sequences from the human filarial parasitic
nematode B. malayi, and a remarkably diverged sequences
covering entire length of SDUP from free living
nematodes C. elegans and C. briggsae with insertions and
deletions. A TBLASTX search at NCBI identified a
homologous sequence from the human filarial parasitic
nematode W. bancrofti. Further, searches in Parasite
Genomes Database with WU-Blast2 [], identified
sequences with significant similarities from human
parasitic nematodes O. volvulus (African riverblindness
nematode) and A. suum (in small intestine of pig), and
sequence with a very low similarity with regions of
insertions and deletions was identified from plant parasitic
nematode M. hapla (Root knot nematode) ( &amp;
). Furthermore, a TBLASTX search over the
databases in NEMBASE3 [] identified a homologous
sequence from the mouse filarial worm L. sigmodontis.
Ambiguities in these retrieved sequences were corrected
and coding properties were recovered. Taking S. digitata
ORF as template, ORF of the retrieved sequences were
analyzed and refined. Secondary structure analysis of
multiply­aligned sequences of UPs with Clustal W using
Jpred consensus method for protein secondary structure
prediction server [], indicated these proteins (UP of WB,
BM, LS, SD &amp; AS) to be rich in beta pleated structure and
with two potential regions for alpha helixes ().
Thus, due to the structural similarities in UPs it could be
assumed that this group of proteins performs similar
functions in these parasitic nematodes. A putative
conserved domain (CD) search with an expect value
threshold of 0.1 [] and a motif search [] did not result
in any hits for the UPs. However, when the expected value
was increased up to 1 or 10, CD search over the
CDD27036PSSMS database identified a region of
uncharacterized proteins to have entire length of the
conserved domain of RNAP_Rpb7_N_like, which
represents the N­terminal ribonucleoprotein (RNP) domain
of the Rpb7 subunit of eukaryotic RNA polymerase
(RNAP) []. Although, it was not possible to assign any
known conserved domain or motifs with a significant
structural similarity to this group of proteins, the motif
discovery tool of MEME [] identified three potential
novel motifs for unknown sequences of WB, BM, LS, SD
&amp; AS using position­specific probability matrices and of
these only two were revealed in the sequences of CE, CB
&amp; MH. On the basis of primary and secondary structures
analyses, and motifs present, UPS can be clearly divided
into two groups. In spite of tremendous sequence diversity
in these two groups, presence of some of putative motifs
() in these two groups suggests structural and
functional similarities. To further study the relationships of
these proteins, a phylogenetic analysis was carried out and
a tree was constructed by neighbor joining method of
MEGA using multiply­aligned sequences. After generating
several trees, the best tree was selected with bootstrap
values. Phylogenetic reconstruction analyses revealed two
clusters with WB, BM, LS, OV SD and AS grouped into
one while CE &amp; CB into another, MH is the most diverse.
Despite the fact that these members can be
phylogenetically grouped, sequence divergence amongst
the members coming under cluster 1 () is
remarkable and sequence identities of the members are in
the range of 84.3 to 25.4, although, their highest
classification level is class Chromadorea. Further, a
significant sequence divergence was also seen amongst
closely related CE and CB of the genus Caenorhabditis.
These sequence divergences amongst the counterparts
which are also reflected by the lengths of the branches of
the phylogenetic tree imply that this group of proteins is
undergoing divergent evolution perhaps to perform
species-specific function or to adapt to environmental
conditions that they live in. For instance, WB, BM, LS and
OV are classified under the family Onchocercidae, WB
and BM, and LS are human and mouse filarial parasites
living in the lymphatic system, respectively. LS causes
blindness in humans. Phylogenetic reconstruction analyses
revealed strong inclination of LS to group with WB and
BM than OV, which is further evident when the
phylogenetic tree is generated without either WB or BM.
This implies that this protein may be under selection
pressure by the microenvironment they lived in than the
organism which they parasitize. However, to come to a
definite conclusion, more information of UPs sequences
from different nematodes is required. A search of ESTs in
the PGD [] resulted in significant hits for different stages
in the life cycle of the same parasitic nematodes. For
instance, ESTs from all the stages of B. malayi (adult
male, female, molting L3 larva and infective larva) were
observed. Similarly, embryo and adult female of A. suum,
egg of M. hapla , L3 larva of O. volvulus and unknown
stages of W. bancrofti and C. elegance were found (Table
1 in ). This suggests that this
protein is apparently expressed in all stages of the life
cycle of parasitic nematodes.

In order to understand the properties of this group of
unknown proteins they were extensively analyzed using
bioinformatics tools available on the web as an initial
move to design experiments to characterize these proteins
further. Server TargetP 1.1 server [] was used analyze
the cellular localization of these proteins, which predicted
these proteins to be non-excretory, non-mitochondrial and
non-cytoplasmic. Therefore, the PSORT program []
which predicts the sub cellular localization sites of
proteins from their amino acid sequences was used.
Results from the above analysis indicated proteins in this
group to be devoid of peroxisomal targeting signal,
possible vacuolar targeting motifs, RNA­binding motifs,
N­myristoylation patterns, transport motifs from golgi to
cell surface, DNA binding motifs and ribosomal protein
motifs. However, latter analysis indicated the presence of
nuclear localization signals in all UPs. Thus it is likely that
they are localized in the nucleus and this finding is further
strengthened by the identification of RNAP_Rpb7_N_like
domain in UPs, which is generally present in
ribonucleoproteins. Eukaryotic cells widely use the
phosphorylation of proteins to transmit and integrate
signals received from their environment and to regulate
cellular functions. The nucleus disintegrates during
mitosis. This is mainly driven by the mobilization of
lamins and nuclear membranes by cyclin dependent
protein kinases and other kinases, such as protein kinase C, at mitotic sites and is reverted at the end of mitosis by
dephosphorylation of such sites [,]. Therefore, this
group of the proteins was analyzed for possible sites of
phosphorylation for different protein kinases using
ScanProsite server []. Results revealed potential sites for
cAMP­ and cGMP­dependent protein kinase, Protein
kinase C and Casein kinase II indicating a possible
regulatory effect on these proteins by different kinases.
Searching for the cellular role of this group of proteins
using ProtFun 2.2 server [] uniformly predicted the UPs
to be non enzymatic, cell envelope and growth factor like
proteins with higher probabilities of being non­enzymatic
and growth factor proteins. However, transmembrane
analysis of this group of proteins with the TMHMM
Server v. 2.0 [] indicated with higher certainty that this
group of proteins lack regions for transmembrane alpha
helical domains. With the revelation that this group of
proteins to be rich in beta strands (secondary structure
analyses with Jpred3 server), we analysed them using beta
barrel finder programme [], which too indicated the
absence of potential regions to form transmembrane beta
barrels indicating this group of proteins are likely to be
globular proteins.

Conclusion
Both the structure and function of the nematodes specific
proteins described in the current study are truly unknown.
However, the expression of this type of protein in all the
stages of the nematode life cycle indicates importance.
The divergent evolution to which this group of proteins is
subjected to indicates that they may be evolving to
perform species-specific functions. Taking these facts into
consideration and in conjunction with other high
probability of bioinformatic predictions, i.e. nuclear
localization signals, numerous potential sites for
phosphorylation, we hypothesize that this group of
proteins is nematode specific, constitutively expressed,
nuclear phosphoproteins that are undergoing divergent
evolution. In addition, if this group of proteins is in fact
growth factors specific to nematodes, as revealed by the
bioinformatic analyses, it would have great potential as
therapeutic target for the control of disease causes by
parasitic nematode, as growth factors are often targeted for
drug development. Finally, prior to drawing any conclusion from the bioinformatic predicted characters
about this unknown nematode specific unique protein, it
should be experimentally tested along the lines that
Bioinformatics tools predicted, which we are currently
carrying out in our laboratories.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work is supported by a grant (SIDA/2006/BT/04) awarded by National Science Foundation of Sri Lanka. We
thank scientists who sequenced UPs and deposited them in publicly available databases and also scientists who developed Molecular Biology Software programs/ servers
and Bioinformatics tools used in this study.

Citation:Dassanayake et al, Bioinformation 3(9): 370-374 (2009)

Coding properties of S.digitata uncharacterized nucleotide sequence (A), Phylogenetic tree based on
uncharacterized sequences of W. bancrofti (WB), B. malayi (BM), O. volvulus (OV), A. suum (AS) S. digitata (SD), L.
sigmodontis (LD), M. hapla (MP), C. elegans (CE) and C. briggsae (CB). The lengths of the horizontal lines are
proportional to the minimum number of amino acid differences required to join nodes. Vertical lines are for spacing
branches and labels (B), and Jpred3 server predicted secondary structures for multiply aligned unknown sequences (Jnet:
final secondary structure prediction for query, jhmm ‐ Jnet hmm profile prediction ­ H , α helices and E , β strands) (C). The
boxes in the alignment indicates motifs identified by MEME-Motif discovery tool for uncharacterized sequences using
position­specific probability matrices, CE, CB &amp; MH were not included for the alignment due to the vast dissimilarity in
sequences.

