Background &amp; Methodology
The Translational Evidence Mechanism explains the dynamic by which the 
best evidence, from fundamental and proteomics research to clinical trials 
and systematic reviews, contributes to clinical decision-making, utility, and 
cost data, and produces individual, not average, patient optimized clinical 
decisions or choices. This translational process is composed of 3 entities 
that involve information technology:  
Translational Evidence Organization,  
Central Database, and  
Decision-Making Algorithm, a primary component in constructing, 
vesting, and maintaining the central database.

The Translational Evidence Organization develops, verifies, maintains, and 
updates current, best evidence for end-users in their consultations with 
service providers. The primary purpose of the Translational Evidence 
Organization is to arbitrate published evidence and, in its absence, identify 
research that needs to be conducted by organizational  affiliates or the 
research community in producing needed data. A team, composed of basic, 
translational and professional researchers, vests the central database with 
evidence and set evidence priorities. Translational researchers also arbitrate 
published evidence to produce best evidence.  illustrates the need 
of additional, post arbitrators of evidence. These post arbitrators are the 
providers (clinicians) and consumers (patients).

The Clinicians are concerned with clinical significance and relevance; 
whether research findings can be applied to individual patients. For 
dentistry, dentists make judgments that may weight best evidence 
differently from researchers. Initially, clinical significance of decision data 
is coordinated with dentists in developing nationally, regionally, or locally 
relevant best evidence.

The dentists are provided a clinical practice guideline (CPG) with decision 
and utility best evidence and locally  provided cost schedules. Dentists 
provide assessments of clinical significance of the CPGs based on practice 
and local factors. These assessments are developed from applying 
knowledge logically based on concepts learned during training and 
implicitly in rendering health services based on experience and patient 
characteristics of well-being. During care delivery, dentists perform 
assessments, evaluate services needed, and develop plans for treatments 
and therapies. In providing dental care services, dentists may contribute to 
the understanding of the “when, where, and how” of knowledge. Dentists’ 
evaluations of clinical relevance is  used by translational researchers to 
reject or modify the clinical practice guidelines or to re-identify and 
conduct investigations that produce other clinically relevant data. Personal 
and professional expertise and experiences, values and preferences, and 
appropriate practices, as well as patient well-being, quality of life issues, 
and costs weigh heavily on whether best evidence is used in clinical 
decisions. Thus, dentists are able to predict clinical outcomes in weighing 
risks against benefits and costs for individual patients. Dentists may also 
make relevant standards of care in their local practice and for specific 
patient population characteristics. These clinical validations are necessary 
to translate research data into clinically useful data for efficacy of patient 
care.

In the context of effectiveness studies, patients are typically categorized as 
the consumers of products and services and not the developers or
guarantors of knowledge. Patients become the “conceptual subject” to 
which best evidence is applied and quantitative and qualitative outcomes 
are measured. However, patients may be advocates or adversaries of 
evidence. Patients may also exert demands on evidence to meet specific, 
personal needs. They may exert influence on the development and 
application of knowledge that does not necessarily meet acceptance criteria 
of researchers and dentists, but serves a personal need. They may also exert 
pressure to deny the development and application of knowledge that is 
contrary to their philosophical beliefs.

Even in the profession's best efforts of raising the patients' health literacy 
by informing them with best evidence and using clinician expertise to 
communicate individualized, effective  treatments, patients ultimately 
decide if treatment regimens are adhered to or rejected outright. Patient 
adherence, modification, or rejection of best evidence in treatment 
scenarios provides translational researchers with its meaning in practice. 
Translational researchers integrate these evaluations with the knowledge of 
fundamental biology and proteomic  signature in updating clinically 
relevant data. These updates are processed using decision, Bayesian, and 
sensitivity analyses within the central database. 

The Central Database is the second essential component of the novel and 
emerging Translational Evidence Mechanism.  It represents a repository of 
evidence, organized and stored  utilizing evidence-based research 
knowledge management software (EBRsoftware), currently in 
development. EBRsoftware [] is maintained by information technologists 
and integrated within the electronic patient chart, and thus is directly 
integrated with health information technology (HIT) advancements.

Both health information technology  and the Internet, as a vehicle for 
information technology, has become the most cost effective mode of 
information transfer  [,
]. It is this inclusive and reciprocal participation 
of all decision makers that accomplishes improvements in clinical care by 
means of the translational integration of the patient's fundamental biology, 
including the outcomes of proteomic studies, with clinical data and 
observations.

The structure of the central database consists of a primary network. This 
primary network contains all vested  evidence. The network may then be 
partitioned into subordinate databases. Information is then filtered and 
segregated per subspecialty information. Subspecialty information is that 
best evidence used in specific populations, geographic locales: national, 
regional, specialty, and local secondary networks, specialty procedural 
treatments, quality assurance, costs, and care delivery including facility or 
equipment improvements. These subspecialty databases may facilitate 
access based on frequency of usage.

When uncertainties in patient care arise, the clinician queries the central 
database through the patient’s chart. EBRsoftware administers the query 
and vests CPG with best decision for efficacy (i.e., satisfaction measures, 
or trade-offs), and effectiveness (e.g., utility, risk/benefit, and cost data). If 
preferred, cost data may be converted to practice schedules through the 
electronic chart.

Once vested, CPG is returned dated and specified as to expiration date of 
the evidence provided, the functional status (functionally independent, 
frail, or functionally dependent) of the patient to which the evidence 
applies, and, if available, the significance (statistical and clinical), utility 
ranking, and meaning in practice of  the evidence. The  returned CPG is 
interactive in that it provides stratified risk scenarios for high, equipoise, or 
low risk takers that may be accessed and “gamed” through a drop down 
menu. With the patient's involvement, returned quantitative and qualitative 
best evidence is organized into decision, utility, and cost data for each 
possible option/outcome to assist in  shared decision-making. If utility 
rankings, based on the “average patient,” are not acceptable to the patient, 
these may be changed through drop down menus, reflecting personal 
preferences, values, and beliefs regarding the presented outcomes. Thus, 
the patient may change, or “game,” rankings to compare and test different 
treatment scenarios in optimizing the clinical decision or provide 
assessments to compare personal trade-offs between options with the 
“average patient.” The objective of patient “gaming” is to optimize the 
clinical decision. Accompanying the CPG exhibit is the decision analysis 
statement. This statement provides a written interpretation or meaning of 
the treatment scenarios and their calculations.

The Decision-Making Algorithm constitutes the third dynamic component 
of the Translational Evidence Mechanism.  At this stage, the decision 
analysis of the CPG is done in three articulated steps:  
Interpreting for the patient the probability of the outcome;  
Multiplying utility data by the probability of the outcome in interpreting 
the service benefit to the patient; and  
Multiplying the probability  of the outcome by the treatment cost in 
determining the economic choice difference between outcomes.  
By means of this approach, the analyses outlined above become rollback 
calculations to determine individual options, which help guide patients in 
determining their optimal treatment decision.

Conclusion
In brief, the resultant patient analysis and optimal clinical decision is 
returned to the central database to be retrieved by translational researchers 
to develop new research questions or modify existing evidence. Having an 
efficient decision-making process has  an additional benefit of involving 
private practice as a unit in clinical research without disrupting normal 
patient flow or care. Conversely, clinicians may compare local based 
practice norms, patient characteristics, and standards to those derived on a 
regional and national basis.

The Translational Evidence Mechanism  is non-disciplinary specific. It is 
equally successfully applicable and applied to any discipline that services 
clients or patients, researchers, and policy-makers because it integrates 
fundamental molecular biology and  pathology data obtained from the 
patient with clinical observation, tests, expertise, as well as the best 
available evidence generated from  research synthesis methodology and 
meta-analysis. It is predicted that  the Translational Evidence Mechanism, 
which we outline here  () will increasingly gain hold among 
researchers, patients and clinicians alike, because it empowers all involved 
constituencies and stakeholders  in improving the efficacy and the
effectiveness of treatment interventions through a systematic scientific 
process of clinically relevant complex systematic reviews  [] and 
comparative efficacy and effectiveness research and analysis for practice 
[].

The authors the students and colleagues who contribute to the growth and 
establishment of the novel emerging  field of translational comparative 
efficacy and effectiveness research and analysis in dental practice.

Citation:Bauer &amp; Chiappelli, Bioinformation 5(7): 297-299 (2011)

Transforming scientific evidence for shared-decision making in arriving at individualized, consumer choices. 

