Background
Taeniasis and cysticercosis are infectious parasitic diseases caused by different
stages of the tapeworm Taenia solium. An infection with the larval stage in
humans frequently causes neurocysticercosis, which is an important contributor
to neurological morbidity in developing countries [], and a presumable
principal cause of acquired epilepsy in the world [,
]. Given the essential role
of the pig as the obligate intermediate host, porcine vaccines are promising
tools in a sustained control of taeniasis/cysticercosis and are crucial to achieve
possible eradication of this disease. TSOL18 is a recombinant protein which
has been shown repeatedly to be highly protective when used as a vaccine
against T. solium infection in pigs [,
]. TSOL18, along with other oncosphere
antigens, has previously been identified as comprising a fibronectin type III
domain but no specific role has been attributed yet []. It would be of great
value if the protective epitopes associated with this protein were known and, if
they could be produced synthetically, this would be likely to offer cost and
quality consistency advantages over the current vaccine that is produced in
Escherichia coli [].

Synthetic peptides are being tested as potential vaccines in a wide range of
infectious diseases []. 
It has been shown that the use of synthetic
peptides/epitopes could offer an important contribution to protection against T.
solium cysticercosis in pigs [–
]. Current immunoinformatics tools are able to
predict human B cell and T cell linear epitopes with high accuracy. These tools
are playing an important role in understanding the molecular basis of immunity
and notably in the development of peptide vaccines, immunotherapy against
cancer and autoimmune diseases [–
]. Similar immunoinformatics
approaches are being developed for other organisms, and will constitute the
basis for the design of new generation epitope vaccines. This manuscript
concerns the computational prediction of immunogenic epitopes of the
TSOL18 protein from T. solium and the design of a synthetic peptide vaccine
candidate. We hypothesize that TSOL18 comprises a linear epitope able to
protect pigs against an oral challenge with proglottids with an efficacy close to
100%. We used molecular modeling and immunoinformatics tools to predict
linear B cell and T cell immunogenic epitopes of TSOL18. The theoretically
predicted structure of TSOL18 was used to identify the epitopes exposed on the
protein surface. A synthetic peptide encompassing three predicted epitopes was
predicted and tested in a porcine vaccine trial.

Methodology
Cellular localization of TSOL18
The amino acid sequence of TSOL18 was obtained from the Genbank
(accession code AF017788). The prediction of the cellular localization was
performed with the web servers TMHMM [] and TMPred 
[]. The presence
of a signal peptide was tested with SignalP V1.1 []. Transmembrane helices
were predicted by HMMTOP [], SOSUI 
[], TMpred 
[], TopPred 
[]
and PredictProtein []. 
The hydrophobicity profile of TSOL18 was predicted
with ProtScale []
 using the Kyte-Dolittle scale [].

Structural model building
TSOL18 does not yet have any crystallized homologue protein. The TSOL18
structure was modeled by threading using servers Fugue 
[] and 3D-PSSM
[,
]. 
The amino acid sequence used to model the structure did not include
the signal peptide. To correct the integrity of the threaded structure, internal
discontinuities of the amino acid sequence were manually linked and missing
amino acids in the carboxy- and amino- terminals were introduced as random
coils. This was done using Swisspdbviewer [] and Chimera 
[]. The
structure was refined by energy minimization using the steepest descent
approach. Further refinement was performed with a 1 ns run of molecular
dynamics (MD) by means of an explicit periodic box, with water molecules
and using the GROMACS software package with the force field GROMOS96
G43a1 []

Immunogenic and protective linear epitopes
Immunoinformatics approaches to predict linear epitopes are well developed
for the human HLA-DR restriction element. The prediction of linear epitopes in
porcine proteins should be done using the SLA-DR molecule; however, the
immunoinformatics tools for pigs have not been developed yet. HLA and SLA
are homologues molecules but the range of diversity within the peptide binding
grooves is not identical. However, given the similarity between the human and
porcine immune systems and the similarity of their major histocompatibility
complex, it is likely that immunogenic epitopes might be shared 
[]. As a first
approach, potentially immunogenic porcine epitopes will be identified with
human immunoinformatics tools. The prediction of TSOL18 B cell epitopes
was performed with the web server ABCpred []. Recurrent neural network
score was calculated for each 10-amino acid length peptide. The B cell
predicted epitopes above threshold value (0.45) were chosen. Linear T cell
epitopes were identified as a first approximation, by prediction of human MHC
class II linear epitopes with the web server Propred 
[]. An immunogenicity
score was estimated as the frequency in which an epitope was classified as
immunogenic, among the total number of MHC alleles. We considered this
probability as the MHC-II immunogenicity index. The accessibility to the
solvent of each amino acid residue was calculated from the TSOL18 structure
using the Lee and Richards algorithm implemented in the program ASAView
[]. 
We selected the accessible residues as those with a solvent accessibility
beyond 30%. Accessible epitopes with the highest scores were considered as
potentially protective.

Multiepitopic peptide design
Three epitopes were selected and were associated to a random-coil in the
TSOL18 theoretical structure. A peptide comprising the three selected epitopes
was designed. The secondary structure of the peptide was monitored during a 1
ns MD run in a water periodic box at 310 K. We confirmed that the peptide
showed a random coil structure during the 1 ns MD run. The selected peptide
was chemically synthesized with 95% purity and lyophilized (Alpha Diagnostic
Intl. Inc, San Antonio, TX). The peptide was synthesized and conjugated to
Keyhole Limpet Hemocyanin (KLH).

Vaccine trial
The synthetic peptide conjugated to KLH was used to immunize pigs. The
vaccinated group consisted of four two-month old female pigs that received
three doses. Each of the three doses included 2 ml of antigen (0.15 mg/ml) with
1 mg saponin as adjuvant in PBS. The placebo group consisted of five pigs of
similar ages, two male and three female. For this group each of the three doses
consisted of 2 ml PBS, KLH (0.3 mg), and 1 mg saponin. In all cases the
second dose was given 2 weeks after the first dose and the third dose was given
1 week after the second dose. Animals were challenged by oral infection with
one gravid proglottid 15 days after the third dose. Gravid proglottids were
obtained from two different tapeworms and were evenly distributed between
the vaccinated and placebo groups. We collected pre-immune and post-immune
sera. The latter was collected the day before challenge. Ninety days after the
challenge, the pigs were humanely euthanized and the entire carcass and brain
were examined for the presence of cysticerci [,
]. Cysts were classified as
either viable, if a defined cyst structure with liquid content was still present, or
degenerated, if this had been replaced by semisolid contents or inflammatory
scar tissue []. 
The collected sera were evaluated using an ELISA assay to test
the reaction against the peptide, as described previously [,
]. The ELISA
assay used 1 µg/ml of peptide as antigen. Sera were diluted 1/100. A 1/2000
dilution of anti-pig-IgG-conjugated with peroxidase (Bio-Rad Laboratories,
Rockville Centre, NY) was used.

Data analysis
The number of healthy and degenerated cysts and the number of scars were
compared between the vaccinated and placebo groups. Means and 95%
confidence intervals were calculated based on a Poisson distribution. To
account for over dispersion and to adjust for the age and sex of the pigs, as well
as the identity of the taenia used for the infection, the number of cysts was
modeled in a multiple Negative Binomial regression. A paired t-test and nonparametrical
tests were used to compare the ELISA OD means between the
pre-immune and post-immune sera.

Results and Discussion
A signal peptide including the first 18 amino acids (MVCRFALIF
LVAVVLASG) was predicted. No trans-membrane helices were detected, and
an average hydrophobicity of 0.07 was estimated in the Kyte-Dolittle scale.
This confirms previous studies that showed TSOL18 being a secreted protein
[]. 
The amino acid sequence of TSOL18 did not have any homologue with a
known structure (E-value =2.9 for the best hit), and no other putative functional
conserved domain except fibronectin type III, was assigned. The 3D structure
was obtained using as query a fibronectin type III structural protein (PDB Id:
1QG3). The modeled structure of TSOL18 comprises a fibronectin type III
domain () as was previously proposed 
[]. HP6 from Taenia saginata
was associated with a fibronectin type III domain and was described as an
adherence protein []. 
TSOL18 and HP6 are homologs according to the high
similarity shared (61%) []. 
Our independent analysis after a rigorous structure
refinement approach confirms the association of TSOL18 with a fibronectin
type III domain. These predictions suggest that TSOL18 may participate in the
intestinal adherence of oncospheres, an event preceding the intestinal wall
degradation and penetration. It can be speculated that the protection conferred
by TSOL18 could be associated to the prevention of the adherence of the
oncosphere to the intestinal wall mediated by the action of IgA antibodies at
the intestinal epithelium. The three best B cell linear epitopes showing the
highest score and that are exposed on the surface of TSOL18 structure,
coincidently resulted to be predicted as potential linear T cell epitopes too. The
epitope NH3-EEIKVKVEK-COOH in position 56-64 (Ep1) had the highest B
cell epitope score (0.83). The epitope NH3-VIIRDL-COOH in position 83-88
(Ep2) had the second highest score (0.72) and was exposed on the protein
surface. The third surface epitope selected was NH3-IFVPYLRCFAL-COOH
in position 26-36 (Ep3), with a score of 0.46, and also was exposed on the
protein surface. The fusion peptide (NH3_EEIKVKVEKIFVPYLRC
FALVIIRDL_COOH) preserved the average random coil secondary structure
during the 1 ns MD run and was selected as the antigen for the vaccine trial. In
the vaccine trial all challenged animals harbored live parasites; therefore, a
complete protection was not observed in any given pig. Complete protection is
understood as an absolute absence of cysts in the vaccinated group. Although, a
trend towards reduced number of total cysticerci in the vaccinated group
compared to the placebo group was observed. In all vaccinated animals, the
ELISA readings confirmed an increased reactivity of the post-immune sera
compared to the pre-immune sera against the vaccine antigen. The identity of
the taenia was significantly associated with the total number of cysts (P &lt;
0.0001), suggesting that the infectivity of the two tapeworms was different.
After adjusting for the taenia identity, the age and sex of the pig, the number of
total cysts, viable cysts and scars, were significantly lower in the vaccinated
group (P = 0.018, P=0.001, and P=0.001 respectively) (Table 1 see
). No significant difference was observed in the
number of degenerated cysts between the placebo and vaccinated groups
(P=0.156). For some time, available evidence has suggested that the protective
epitopes of TSOL18 were likely to be conformational, based on similarities
with the EG95 vaccine protein [,
]. These studies examined the nature of
the antigenic epitopes of the protective oncosphere protein EG95 of
Echinococcus granulosus, which suggested that its host-protective epitopes are
conformational rather than linear [,
]. EG95 and TSOL18 are both hostprotective
oncosphere antigens of taeniid cestode parasites and both contain a
fibronectin type III domain. Supporting these results, recently, Assana et al.
(2010) suggested that the principal antibody specificities raised by TSOL18 in
pigs is against conformational epitopes []. Although no porcine-specific
MHC-epitopes prediction tools are available, the prediction of TSOL18
immunogenic epitopes using human MHC class II profiles is justified by the
high level of similarity between human and porcine class II molecules antigens
[]. 
It would be important to do further studies to develop a porcine-specific
MHC matrix to have a more accurate prediction of SLA epitopes. The epitopes
predicted in the present study, were identified using a hypothetical structure
model of the TSOL18. It is possible that the model did not perfectly reflect the
real structure of the protein. It would be important to determine a
crystallographic 3-dimensional structure of TSOL18 in order to obtain more
accurate predictions.

Conclusion
A synthetic peptide comprising the best theoretically predicted protective linear
epitopes using immunoinformatics tools based on human MHC matrixes failed
to completely protect pigs against porcine cysticercosis. Although a trend to a
decreased number of total cysts was observed in the vaccinated group. It is
likely that the total protection conferred by TSOL18 could be associated with
conformational epitopes rather than with linear epitopes.

Financial support
This work was partially funded by research grants numbers CRP/PER08-02
from the ICGEB, TDR-WHO 2009/53930-0, P01 AI51976 TMRC, and D43
TW007120 from the National Institutes of Health, USA. The sponsors had no
role in the design or writing of this manuscript.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We acknowledge Dr. Holger Mayta and Dr. Manuela Verástegui for their
advice during the conduction of the study, and especially Dr. Daniela Kirwan
and Dr. Lisa Shender for revising and editing the manuscript.

Citation:Zimic et al, Bioinformation 6(7): 271-274 (2011)

Theoretical structure predicted for TSOL18 of Taenia solium (a)
Ribbon representation, (b) surface representation. In color, the selected
epitopes: Blue (Ep1) (EEIKVKVEK), green (Ep2) (VIIRDL), and red (Ep3)
(IFVPYLRCFAL).

