Background
Immunoglobulins (Ig), or antibodies, are proteins generated by B-cells in response to antigenic substances. The site of contact 
between antigens and Ig molecules are called B-cell epitopes []. Approximately 
10¢ of these antigenic determinants are linear, consisting of a single continuous stretch of amino acids along the polypeptide chain 
[]. Most B-cell epitopes, though, are thought to be conformational, where 
distantly separated residues of the polypeptide chain are brought into spatial proximity by protein folding 
[]. Mutational analysis of B-cell epitopes showed that antibody binding could be 
reduced or eliminated by single-site amino acid substitution []. On the other 
hand, solution structures of antigen-antibody complexes showed that antibodies with dissimilar binding site structures may exhibit 
similar specificities for common epitopes [] and not all residues within an 
epitope are functionally important for binding []. As such, a detailed 
understanding of the sequence-structure-function relationship between antigens and their corresponding bound antibodies is essential 
for effective vaccine design.

Several databases currently exist to facilitate the characterization of antibodies: IMGT/HLA [], 
IMGT/3Dstructure-DB [] and the Immune Epitope Database and Analysis Resource 
(IEDB) [] store information on antibody sequences and structures annotated according 
to the IMGT-ONTOLOGY []. AntiJen [] 
provides quantitative binding data for both continuous and discontinuous B-cell epitope molecules. The Conformational Epitope Database (CED) 
[] details information of 225 conformational epitopes derived from the 
literature. Bcipep [] contains records of 3031 experimentally determined 
linear B-cell epitopes collected from literature and other public databases. Epitome []
maintains a list of antibody and antigen residues that are involved in specific interactions, while the Summary of Antibody 
Crystal Structures (SACS) [] provides fully automated web-based summaries of 
the latest antibody crystal structures in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) []. 
Despite these rigorous efforts, most existing resources do not focus on in depth characterization of the antigen-antibody interface. 

Here, we describe BEID, a manually curated database containing detailed characterization of 189 antigen-antibody interaction sites. 
The database contains both linear and conformational epitopes available in the PDB. Each entry describes a specific antigen-antibody 
interaction in terms of a set of sequence and structural parameters representative of molecular recognition. BEID will provide a 
valuable resource for investigators working in the areas of vaccine design and allergy research. The sequence and structural parameters 
also serve as important data sources for the development of B-cell epitope prediction tools.

Methodology
Construction and content
BEID is a MySQL relational database hosted on a UNIX server (SunOS 5.10, Apache 2.0.59). The database can be searched by antibody 
name and PDB code, with options for formulating complex queries and customizing the output. Currently, BEID contains only the structures 
of experimentally determined antigen-antibody complexes derived from the PDB. Each entry in BEID bears a unique identifier, name and 
category of the antigen, name and category of the bound antibody, experiment method, resolution of the structure, release year and 
bibliographic reference. The intermolecular hydrogen bonds, gap volume and gap index are computed using SURFNET 
[] and the interface area of the complex is calculated based on the program 
NACCESS []. Schematic diagrams based on the plotting program LIGPLOT 
[] are also provided under the fieldname “Interaction Map” to illustrate 
explicit antigen-antibody interactions, and are particularly useful for analysis of discontinuous intermolecular contact residues.

Data clustering
Information in the database is classified into five main categories: 
i) antibody (name, source), ii) isotype (IgA, IgG, IgE, IgM, IgD), iii) bound ligand (protein, hapten, sugar, steroid, others), 
iv) computed interaction parameters (intermolecular hydrogen bonds, gap volume, gap index, interface area, contact residues), and 
v) links to external related databases including IMGT/3Dstructure-DB, AntiJen and Bcipep. For PDB entries containing many molecular assemblies, all antigen-antibody 
complexes are characterized and stored in individual entries to facilitate analysis.

Definition of molecular descriptors
Detailed description of the interaction parameters have been described elsewhere 
[]. A brief outline of the descriptors follows: 
(1) Number of intermolecular hydrogen bonds minus the total number of hydrogen bonds between 
the antibody and its corresponding bound ligand; (2) Interface area is the change in solvent accessible surface area on complexation from
an unbound antibody to a bound antigen-antibody complex state; (3) Gap volume is the volume enclosed by the interacting antibody and its 
corresponding bound ligand. Gap index (Å) is the ratio of Gap volume between Ig-antigen (Å3) by Interface ASA 
(Å2) (per complex).

Utility
User interface
A user-friendly web query interface allows users to search for specific antigen-antibody interactions. A help page for browsing 
BEID is provided. Users can query the database by 
1) antigen-antibody data or 
2) PDB data. An antigen-antibody search is formed by selecting 
the following fields: antibody source, ligand category, antibody isotype, antibody name and ligand name. Query results can also be 
customized by selecting only the parameters of interest, which include interaction data, antibody information, ligand information, 
resolution and bibliographical references. A PDB search allows users to formulate complex queries based on the PDB ID, resolution, 
release year, and ligand name, and combining them logically using the “and” or “or” radio buttons 
(). Search results are presented in tabular forms that display detailed information of 
each antigen-antibody interaction site. Selecting the bond number in the summary table opens a new window that details the atomic 
contacts of the specific interactions. Visual analysis of antigens, antibodies and antigen-antibody complexes can be performed 
through the use of freely available graphics applications such as CHIME, RASMOL or Jmol. Antigen-antibody interaction maps can 
also be downloaded as Adobe PDF files. References to PubMed are also provided for easy access to experimental evidence 
of interaction.

Conclusion
BEID provides a platform for studying the rules of engagement between antigens and their corresponding bound antibodies, which 
is a key to understanding the mechanisms of humoral immune responses toward foreign antigens. The molecular descriptors, together 
with biochemical and functional studies can help direct future research into antibody binding studies, with direct implications 
in disease diagnosis, treatment and vaccine design. Further investigations are being pursued for incorporating additional 
molecular descriptors characterizing the antigen-antibody interaction region.

BEID search page. The user-friendly search page allows queries for Ig-antigen interaction records to be retrieved based on 
various properties of antigen, antibody, or PDB

