Background
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are RNA molecules, on average only 22 nucleotides,
which act as post-transcriptional regulators by binding to complementary
sequences on target messenger RNA transcripts. First discovered while
studying mutations that changed the timing of developmental events in
Caenorhabditis elegans [], they have now been identified in a variety of
organisms [] and can be found both in the plant and animal kingdoms.
MicroRNAs are transcribed as parts of longer molecules (˜ several kilobases)
that are processed in the nucleus and form hairpin RNAs of 70―100 nt with the
help of Drosha, the double-stranded RNA-specific ribonuclease 
[,
]. These
hairpins are then transported to the cytoplasm, via an exportin 5-dependent
mechanism, where they act as substrates for a second double-strand specific
ribonuclease called Dicer [,
]. The single-stranded miRNA binds mostly to
the 3' Untranslated Region (UTR) of the specific messenger RNA. Initial
estimates put the number of microRNA genes in the mammalian genome in the
range of 200 to 1000 (˜1%―3% of known genes are represented by
microRNAs). However, to this day, the number of microRNAs, including those
electronically cloned, is over 1000 and still growing 
[–]. The majority of
microRNAs (70%) are located in introns and/or exons, and approximately 30%
are located in intergenic regions []. Analysis of the genomic location of
human microRNA genes suggested that 50% of microRNA genes are located in
cancer-associated genomic regions or in fragile sites, on chromosomes which
are frequently deleted, amplified or rearranged in case of cancer development
[–]. 
Altered expression pattern (over- or under-expression) of specific
miRNAs has also been reported in tissues derived from various tumours 
[,
]. 
Changes in miRNA expression patterns have also been identified in
abnormal cell proliferation, which is a hallmark of human cancers. The role of
let-7 in lung cancer development, miR ― 145 in breast cancer tissues, and the
28 different miRNAs in colonic adenocarcinoma, can all be cited as instances
[]. 
Some miRNAs have an increased expression in tumors (may be
considered as oncogenes), others can also have decreased expression in
cancerous cells (tumor suppressor genes). The oncogenic miRNAs are known
as oncomirs and promote tumor development by negatively inhibiting tumor
suppressor genes and/or genes that control cell differentiation or apoptosis. The
present study was aimed at having a closer look into the sequential trademarks
that may signify a miRNA to associate with cancer. Although there have been
studies on prediction of oncogene regulation by miRNAs and other validation
studies [,
,
], 
this discussion and review focuses solely on the
identification of sequential distinction present in the human oncogenically ―
involved miRNAs.

Approach and Findings
A database of oncogenically involved miRNAs (oncomirs) was constructed
using the entries listed in the methods of Koscianski et al. (2007) 
[]. These
miRNAs were selected from Homo sapiens sequences in the “miRNA
Registry” Release 7.1 []. 
Koscianski et al. (2007) had listed these entries
after scanning and validation against possible oncogenic sequences derived
from the human 3’UTR database. We further culled these sequences using the
identity criterion and non-redundant sequences were thus collected. The
resulting sequences were sorted under two different categories, viz., hsa
miRNA and hsa let. Thus, a total of 135 miRNAs could be sorted into two
subgroups of 122 (hsa miRNA) and 13 (hsa let). While the longest sequence
thus encountered was 24 for a hsa miRNA entry, the shortest one was of 18
nucleotides for a hsa miRNA. Since microRNAs have very short sequences,
and sequence similarity is very high in miRNA families, we checked the
rejected substitution score by using GERP conservation (miReval). Only three
of the miRNA entries showed significant conservation – of which two were
from hsa miRNA and one from hsa let. Hence, the final database was narrowed
down to 132 miRNAs (120 hsa miRNA and 12 hsa let).

The key software used for this analysis was MATLAB. Multiple sequence
alignment of the sequences was done using ‘multialign’ function in MATLAB
with ‘ExistingGapAdjust’ option. It helps to control automatic adjustment
based on existing gaps by introducing hyphens in between sequences so that
there is maximum match at positions of sequences. From the resulting multiple
sequence alignment, sequence trademarks and specific attributes were searched
for. Finally the percentage match at all the positions in the sequences was
calculated. A plot of the percentage sequence similarities versus the frequency
in numbers () shows that the two classes of miRNAs more-or-less
exhibit some sequence similarity but are not exactly so. While most of the hsa
let family miRNAs have a very high percentage similarity (8 out of 12), the hsa
miR family are only moderately similar in sequence with the biggest peak in
the 30% similarity range.

What discriminates an oncogene-associated miRNA?
From the available results, some sequential features in miRNAs are evident.
The first remarkable feature is the rarity of Cytosines among the four bases. On
the contrary, Uracil seems to be the nucleotide of choice. In general, we could
conclude that purines occur more frequently than pyrimidines in both families
of oncogenic microRNAs. Considering the flexibility of RNA structure in
general, the abundance of the bulkier purines is something which needs further
investigation. Considering sequence similarities in the more similar hsa let
family, it was found that a “gaugau” motif was common to all oncomirs of that
family. In the more diverged hsa miRNA family, the common motif was
altered at the second base to be represented as “ggu-ggu”. To this effect, we
concluded that human oncomirs can be identified by the presence of a sequence
trademark of having a 'gg(/a)u-gg(/a)u motif. The available result could be
used for further identification and validation of oncomirs, and the authors are in
the process of developing an algorithm to that effect, based on the sequence
trademarks.

Citation:Sharma &amp; Biswas, Bioinformation 6(9): 364-365 (2011)

Plot depicting the sequence similarity of has miR and hsa let
miRNAs against the frequency of their occurrences.

