Background
Serine prote
ase inhibitors (Serpins) are a unique superfamily of protease 
inhibitor, which is involved in important biological processes like blood 
coagulation (antithrombin and heparin cofactor II), fibrinolysis (protein C 
inhibitor), inflammation (α1-antitrypsin and antichymotrypsin), cell 
migration (plasminogen activator inhibitor) and complement activation 
(C1-inhibitor)  [–].  Serpins have common secondary fold, which is 
defined by at least 30% sequence identity and constitutes seven α-helices 
and three  β sheets. Serpin in the native  form is in the metastable 
conformation which undergoes a transition to a more stable structure 
during the process of protease inhibition  [].  During the inhibition 
mechanism, the RCL (Reactive Center Loop) bound protease is 
translocated to more than 70A° away on the opposite site [].  Large scale 
conformation change involved in serpin inhibition mechanism also 
increases its tendency to polymerize.  Pathological molecular linkages are 
produced when variants allow deformation of the A-sheet conformation 
which aberrantly opens the A-sheet []. Based on the incorporation of part 
of RCL peptide between strand 3A  and strand 5A and its capability to 
block polymerization, it was proposed that polymerization in serpins 
occurs due to the insertion of RCL of one molecule into the beta-sheet A of 
another to form a loop-sheet linkage [–].  

Shutter region constituting F-helix,  B-helix, strands s3A and s5A of  β-
sheet A play an important role in stability and function in serpins [[], 
[–]].
Helix B interacts with the  β-sheet A amino acids which are conserved 
among various serpins. Helix B is located at the upper portion of the  
shutter region where RCL inserts as s4A.  Helix B mutations in  α1-
antichymotrypsin (Leu55Pro) and α1-antitrypsin (Phe51Leu, Ser53Phe and 
Val55Pro) can cause lung (emphysema) and liver diseases (cirrhosis). 
 Protein C-inhibitor (Ser52Phe  and Ser54Leu) and antithrombin 
(Pro80Ser/Thr, Thr85Met/Lys, Cys95Arg and Leu99Phe) have mutations 
which can result in angioedema and thrombosis, similarly in neuroserpin 
Ser53Pro, Ser49Pro, Ser56Arg and Ser52Arg are linked to hereditary 
disorder called familial encephalopathy with neuroserpin inclusion bodies 
(FENIB)  [–].  It has been shown that network of residues dynamically 
coupled with each other, especially inside cavities and local and global 
stability of these regions mediate inhibitory activity  [].  Increase 
polymerization in the helix B region might be due its presence in cavity 
that is involved in RCL translocation during the protease inhibition 
mechanism.

In this study, we for the first time hypothesize that strand 6B deformation 
linked helix B exposure at N-terminal end and cavity alteration help in 
smooth insertion of the RCL in inhibitory serpin.  Natural variants of 
serpins might distort stand 6B or increase helix B flexibility to make it 
prone to polymerization

Methodology
Structural Analysis
We selected representative inhibitory serpins with available native, cleaved 
and latent PDB structures for structural overlap analysis. We used Chimera 
for   superimposing   the structures  of   α1-antitrypsin,   antichymotripsin,  
protein C inhibitor and neuroserpin. Match Maker extension of Chimera 
which constructs pair-wise sequence alignments was used for 
superimposing the serpin structures []. The default settings identifies the 
best matching chains based on alignment scores, we have used NeedlemanWunsch 
algorithm with BLOSUM-62 and 30% weighting of the secondary structure term.

PDB structures used for structural overalaps are as follows: antithrombin 
[2.6Å native: pdb.1E05(I) and 3.2Å cleaved: pdb.1ATH(A) from human 
plasma], antitrypsin [2Å native:pdb.1QLP(A), 2.6Å cleaved:pdb.1EZX(A), 
2.2Å latent  pdb.1IZ2(A) and 2.59Å cleaved polymer:pdb.1QMB(A), from 
human plasma], neuroserpin [2.08Å native:pdb.3FGQ(A) and 1.79Å 
cleaved:pdb.3FO2(A) from human], antichymotrypsin [2.26Å native like 
delta conformation: pdb.1QMN(A) and 2.9Å cleaved:pdb.4CAA(A), from 
human], and protein C Inhibitor [2.30Å native: pdb.2HI9(A) and 2.40Å 
cleaved:pdb.1LQ8(A) from human plasma]

Computation of Accessible Surface Area
We carried out solvent accessibility analysis on native and cleaved states 
of antitrypsin, antithrombin, neurosrpin, antichymotrypsin and protein C 
inhibitor by using DSSP (Dictionary of Secondary Structure of Proteins) 
tool. Accessible surface area (ASA) is important for elucidating atomic 
surface area of a molecule (protein,  DNA, etc.) that is accessible to a 
solvent, and is usually expressed in Å2 (square Angstroms). ASA is 
calculated using the ‘rolling ball’ algorithm which uses a sphere 
(representing the solvent) of a particular radius to ‘probe’ the surface of the 
molecule. A typical value of a ‘probe radius’ is 1.4 Å, which approximates 
the radius of a water molecule  [,
]. Extended states of Ala-X-Ala for 
every residue X has been used (assuming that the absolute values include 
side chain and backbone surface area) []. The corresponding values are 
(in Å 2) 110.2 (Ala), 144.1 (Asp),140.4 (Cys), 174.7 (Glu), 200.7 (Phe), 
78.7 (Gly), 181.9 (His), 185.0 (Ile), 205.7 (Lys), 183.1 (Leu), 200.1 
(Met),146.4 (Asn), 141.9 (Pro), 178.6 (Gln), 229.0 (Arg), 117.2 (Ser), 
138.7 (Thr), 153.7 (Val), 240.5 (Trp), and 213.7 (Tyr) respectively.  

Cavity analysis using CASTp
CASTp was used to study surface features, functional regions and roles of 
important residues of different serpin conformations like native, latent, 
cleaved and polymeric state. CASTp maps surface pockets and interior 
voids or other regions of the PDB structures. It also gives an interactive 
visualization of computed pockets  []. CASTp uses the weighted 
Delaunay triangulation and the alpha complex for shape measurements. It 
provides identification and measurements of surface accessible pockets as 
well as interior inaccessible cavities, for proteins and other molecules. It 
measures analytically the area and volume of each pocket and cavity, both 
in solvent accessible surface (SA, Richards' surface) and molecular surface 
(MS, Connolly's surface)  []. All hetero atoms treated as ligands are 
automatically removed from calculation, which includes solvent water 
molecules.

Calculation of free energy change upon point mutations
I mutant2.0 analysis was carried out at temp 25°C and pH 7.0. Free energy 
changes upon single point mutations were computed on different structures 
of our study. It is a support vector machine (SVM)-based tool for the 
automatic prediction of protein stability changes upon single point 
mutations [].

Results and Discussion
Structural comparison of helix B in inhibitory serpins
Cleaved state of a serpin represents the inhibitory conformation where after 
cleavage reactive center loop inserts between strand 3A and strand 5A as 
strand 4A of β-sheet A. Structural overlap of strand 6B and helix B in the
cleaved and native state of inhibitory serpins  like antitrypsin, 
antichymotrypsin, neuroserpin and protein C inhibitor is shown in 
.  
The comparison showed strand 6B was deformed in the cleaved state 
but not in the native state.  In antitrypsin we see loss of one turn at the 
Cterminal end of the helix B in the cleaved structure 
() along with 
the deformation of the strand 6B. Antithrombin is a heparin binding 
anticoagulant inhibitor of factor Xa and thrombin that showed no 
deformation of strand 6B in the cleaved state (data not shown). Latent 
conformation of serpins is a loop  inserted conformation without RCL 
cleavage, no strand 6B deformation was found in this state (data notshown).

Accessible surface area analysis of helix B
Helix B is wrapped around the strand 2A, 3A and 5A of the β sheet A with 
many conserved residues involved in hydrogen bonding interactions. We 
hypothesize that for the smooth insertion of the RCL helix B has to be 
exposed, and strand 6B deformation may aid in helix B backbone 
flexibility during the RCL translocation. To analyze helix B exposure in 
the cleaved and latent state we did  residue burial analysis by using 
Accessible Surface Area (ASA) analysis.  Burial of residue relative to the 
same residue in Ala-X-Ala tripeptide can be estimated and a completely 
buried residue versus an exposed residue can be distinguished by values of 
5% to 25% (or more) []. 
A comparison of the residue burial in the native 
and the cleaved structures of serpins like antitrypsin, neuroserpin, 
antichymotrypsin and protein C inhibitor is shown in  . ASA 
analysis clearly indicated that conformational deformation of strand 6B has 
resulted in the exposure of residues in the N-terminal end of the helix B in 
most of the cleaved serpins but not in the native and latent conformations 
(data not shown). There was a remarkable similarity in the exposure 
pattern of the cleaved state among various serpins, Asn49 in antitrypsin 
and antichymotrypsin and their homologue (Asn45 in neuroserpin and 
protein C inhibitor) were all fully exposed in the cleaved conformation. 
Helix B exposure was until Val55 in antitrypsin and their homologues like 
Val51 in Protein C inhibitor, Leu51 in neuroserpin and Leu55 in 
antichymotrypsin  ().  In antitrypsin Asn45 near strand 6B is 
highly hydrogen bonded with the edge of C-terminal residues like Val389, 
Asn390 and Gln393. Large changes in burial pattern in a conserved Asn in 
each serpins () may lead to the deformation of the strand 6B and 
moving away of helix B from sheet A.  Antithrombin binds heparin 
cofactor for maximum inhibition of serpine proteases, no s6B deformation 
or helix B exposure was observed in  this serpin probably because of 
differences in mechanism arising due to cofactor based activation.  Latent 
state is a loop inserted conformation where stand 6B deformation and helix 
B exposure is not seen indicating that these structural changes are unique 
to RCL insertion during protease inhibition mechanism.

Helix B is part of the largest cavity in most serpins
Surface cavity contributes to metastability of antitrypsin and cavities near 
the β-sheet A have been shown to be important in regulating the inhibitory 
activity  [,
].  We did cavity analysis of various serpins to find out if 
the helix B residues are indeed part of cavity and to assess their volume 
and area. The results of cavity analysis are summarized in 
. 
Analysis of the native state of antitrypsin (pdb.1QLP) showed that there is 
a total of 66 cavities where the volume of the largest cavity was 526 Å3
and it had an area of about 459 Å2 This cavity predominantly included .
residues, which are part of helix B (Ser53, Val55, Ser56 T59 and Ala60), 
along with residues at N-terminal and C terminal end of helix D and 
Asn186 and Ile188 from s3A.  In the latent structure (pdb.1IZ2) of 
antitrypsin the biggest cavity had a volume (701 Å3) which is slightly 
greater than the native.  As shown in  Table 1 (see 
) 
helix B is part of the biggest cavity in most of the native state of 
the serpins analyzed in our study.  Remarkably, our analysis showed that in 
going from native to cleaved (pdb.7API) and polymeric (pdb.1D5S) states 
massive transition takes place in the cavity size where the size of the 
largest cavity increased from 526 Å3 in native to a volume of 4761 Å3 in 
the polymer state and 5339 Å3 in the cleaved state.  Large volume of the 
cavities in cleaved and polymeric conformations might be exaggerated
because both structures have the loop of another molecule inserted between 
strand 3A and 5A, and the analysis was performed on monomer. Large 
cavity formation in the upper portion of the shutter region in cleaved and 
polymeric conformations but not in  native could have implications in 
targeting this area for hindering polymerization.

Importance of helix B hydrogen bond interaction and serpin stability
A comparison of cleaved and native  conformation of antitrypsin showed 
that the β-sheet A in the central portion of the s3A and s5A and helix B is 
linked by a network of hydrogen bond, which blocks the loop insertion to 
the lower part of the β-sheet A (data  not shown).  In the native state of 
antitrypsin Tyr297 from strand 6A  forms a hydrogen bond with the 
backbone nitrogen of Phe51 from helix B, His334 from strand 5A 
hydrogen bonds with Ser53 backbone nitrogen and Asn186 in strand 3A is 
hydrogen bonded to Ser56 in helix B.  During RCL insertion s2A and s3A 
shifts in the opposite direction and both His334 and Tyr297 rotate in 
cleaved conformation leading to more exposure of helix B. Phe51 is lifted 
upwards in both the states along with the formation of hydrophobic contact 
between His334 and Phe52. Helix B is wrapped over strand A and for the 
RCL to move in as strand 4A the helix B is loosened due to strand 6B 
deformation. This loosening of helix B allows the reactive center loop to 
insert smoothly.

Mutations causing alteration in the hydrogen bonding network will cause 
destabilization allowing helix B to be exposed without cleavage resulting 
in insertion of RCL of another molecule into the β-sheet A. As shown in 
 helix B amino acids are deeply buried in native state in most of
the serpins which are exposed in the cleaved state.  Polymerization variant 
of serpins due to their deep burial and presence inside the cavity can shift 
the overall stability of the protein  which might explain its increased 
polymer propensity. We did an analysis of free energy change upon point 
mutation using I mutant 2.0 program  at temp 25°C and pH 7.0 and the 
results indicate that most of the variants in the helix B region were 
destabilizing with  ΔΔG values ranging from -0.4 Kcal/mol to -3.0 
Kcal/mol (data not shown). The results clearly indicate that the deeply 
burial of helix B residues and its presence inside cavities can cause the 
global destabilization in the variants of serpins which may result in 
increased conformational flexibility.

Conclusion
In conclusion, our data for the first time shows a plausible role of helix B 
in the mechanism of serpin inhibition and polymer formation across many 
inhibitory serpins. The results indicate that deformation of the strand 6B at 
the edge of helix B might confer extra flexibility to the N-terminal end of 
helix B residue to lift the helix so that strand 4A can smoothly pass further 
down during the process of protease inhibition.  Proposed sequence of events during serpin inhibition mechanism is 
hypothesized to be as follows: (1) Binding of protease results in partial insertion of RCL at the top of  β-sheet A, which leads to the 
loss of hydrogen bonding interactions between a conserved Asn near strand 6B and C-terminal residues, which results in deformation of stand 6B.
(2) This deformation helps in helix B exposure,which facilitate further insertion of the RCL as s4A and proteinase translocation 
to the opposite end of the β sheet A.


Supplementary material
Data 1
This research was supported by grants from Department of Biotechnology 
and University Grant Commission, Government of India. PS is supported 
by a grant from UGC. We acknowledge Protein Data Bank, Brookhaven 
National Lab, for protein structure coordinates.

Citation:Singh and Jairajpuri, Bioinformation 5(8): 315-319 (2010)

Structural overlap of the native and cleaved conformation of strand 6B and helix B in serpins: 
Illustrations show the overlap of cleaved and native conformations in α1-antitrypsin, neuroserpin, 
protein C inhibitor and antichymotrypsin indicating the deformation of strand 6B. The analysis was 
performed using the PDB structure coordinates as follows A) antitrypsin [2Å native:pdb.1QLP(A), 2.6Å cleaved:
1pdb.EZX(A)], B) neuroserpin [2.08Å native:pdb.3FGQ(A) and 1.79Å 
cleaved:pdb.3FO2(A) from human], C) protein C Inhibitor [2.30Å native: pdb.
2HI9(A) and 2.40Å cleaved:pdb.1LQ8(A) from human] and D) antichymotrypsin [2.26Å 
native like delta conformation: pdb.1QMN(A) and 2.9Å cleaved :pdb.4CAA(A), antichymotrypsin from 
human]. Chimera software was used for creating the comparison and visualization. 

Strand 6B and helix B burial analysis in serpins: A comparison of the burial 
in stand 6B and helix B region in various cleaved (square) and native 
(rhombus) conformations of inhibitory serpins. ASA values were determined from DSSP 
algorithm as detailed in Methodology section. The figures and their 
PDB codes used for each graph are detailed in methodology section and in Figure 1.

