Background
After the discovery of ribozymes [,
] extensive discussion of the
role of RNA in the origin of life initiated and led to the coining of
the phrase “the RNA world”[]. At the dawn of the hypothetical
RNA world, informational molecules and biocatalysts seem unlikely
to have consisted of pure RNA, without proteinaceous helpers, as
amino acids are formed much more easily than nucleotides in
prebiotic simulation experiments, and are easily condensed into
small peptides. Thus even long before the advent of informationdirected
protein synthesis, RNA would have functioned in concert
with a host of random peptides present in its environment. The RNA
world could have been a primitive RNP (ribonucleoprotein) world.
RNA would have been evolved in the context of this background of
peptides, some subset of which have eventually stabilized the RNA
and extended its catalytic versatility and potency [].
Ribonucleoproteins are defined as tight complexes of one or more
proteins with a short RNA molecule, usually 60­300 nucleotides
long, inhabit every compartment of the human cells []. The present
study has been concentrated to human snRNPs, all of those whose
function have been assigned to play role in gene expression,
underscoring the pivotal participation of RNP molecules in the
evolution of gene expression apparatus. Abiotic stress responses
often result in the generation of oxidative stress condition in cells.
Under such antagonistic conditions the cell experiences reduction in
levels of gene­expression and production of reactive oxygen species
[ROS][]. There have been several reports regarding these
alterations in gene­expression patterns as the correct regulatory
point for altering expression is still not known. However, ROS and
Reactive Oxygen Intermediates (ROI) molecules possess unique
electrophilic and nucleophilic properties which make them suitable
scavengers for lysine rich proteins []. It has also been reported that
some stress responses in economically weak populations consuming
cereal­based diets can be improved with lysine fortification [].
This work mainly focuses on the identification of such lysine rich
stretches in protein components of snRNPs. Results indicate that,lysine richness is a conserved property amongst most snRNPs and
thus we conclude that electrophilic and nucleophilic attack on this
lysine rich stretches probably regulate gene­expression at the vital
step of RNA processing thus leading to controlled production of
mature mRNAs capable of translation.

Methodology
Dataset
The materials are existing database sequences available at the public
databases such as SWISS­PROT and GenBank of NCBI. The
accession numbers of the sequences used are provided in Table 1
(see  ). Sequences were derived in FASTA
format and were aligned using an in house tool which provided the
conservation and richness of the constituent amino acids. Here all
the sequences showed richness in lysine residues followed by
arginine. Accessible surface area of the individual molecules was
derived from the ASAVIEW Database and it was found that the
lysine residues were clustered at the surface mostly. All the proteins
were then modeled using modeler 9.2 and their base pair geometry
was analyzed by constructing a Ramachandran Plot using
MolProbity analyzer. The modeled structures also exhibited the
presence of lysine at the surface. Numerous reference models were
generated and each model was screened based on the presence of
the number of residues in allowed regions. Those with statistically
significant number of residues in the allowed regions were selected
for further analysis. The Baum­Welch algorithm was then used for
the analysis of lysine clusters and only clusters which showed a
minimum Kullback ­ Leibler distance was screened for the analysis.

Results
Sequences alignments using the in­house tool showed richness in
lysine residues followed by arginine (5.04 to 11.57 % of lysine
content). The least is shown by ≫sp|P08621 while ≫sp|O43395
shows maximum lysine content. Accessible surface area of the
individual molecules revealed the lysine residues were clustered at
the surface mostly. Modelled structures showed good all atom
contacts and minimal outliers. The modeled structures also
exhibited the presence of lysine at the surface. [Table 2] (See
 ).

Discussion
The Baum­Welch algorithm was used to compute maximum
likelihood estimates and posterior mode estimates for the
parameters (transition and emission probabilities) of HMMs
representing the various state changes during the generation of
models. The training data set comprised of 68 randomly generated
models and each model was then screened for their relative
entropies in a simulated environment. The minimum Kullback
Leibler values were included with the parameters for scoring
HMMS and the final set of five models was obtained. Thus these
models were then subjected to further structural studies and
association with stress parameters was also analyzed. In response to
physical, chemical, abiotic and oxidative stresses that causes
topological and physical changes of proteins and, thus, the
disruption of normal cellular processes, cells alter gene­expression
strategies to aid cellular recovery following exposure to stress. A
number of reports say that pre­mRNA splicing emerges as a prime
basis to integrate different stresses into gene­expression profiles [].
Moreover it is also known that during stressed conditions a large
number of endogenous reactive oxidants and electrophiles are
generated in the cell. These chemical induce post­translational
modification of certain critical proteins causing a change in
structure /function representing the cellular response to chemical
exposure []. Proteins rich in lysine content and also consisting of
numerous stretches of lysine run­ons are presumed to be act as
electrophile­binding motifs []. Therefore our finding that human
snRNPs rich in lysine, sheds light on the possibility that they may
also be involved in regulation of gene­expression following cellular
exposure to stresses by possibly acting as electrophilic attack sites
which disrupts their 3D structure and impair their activities thus
regulating gene­expression by toning down production of mature
mRNAs through splicing. The electrophiles, generated during stress,are capable of damaging cellular constituents resulting in enhanced
mutation rates, altered cell signaling etc. Protein carbonyls are
generated by the oxidation of lysine amino acid side chain and by
the formation of Michael adducts between nucleophilic residue
(Lysine) and  α, β­unsaturated aldehydes. Two molecules of acrolein
react with the ε­amino group of lysine to form predominantly
acyclic 3­formyl­3,4­dehydopropiperidino adduct [].
Malondialdehyde (MDA) mainly reacts with lysine residues by
Michael addition, as well as Schiff base adducts are also formed
only following reaction with the amino group on lysine residues(the
nitrogen atom here contains a lone­pair electron, so it can act as a
nucleophile). It may disrupt the coiled body formation by snRNPs
and thereby altering the metabolism of nascent transcripts [].
Hence, the production of mature, translatable mRNAs is most
sensitive to stress due to the inhibition of messenger RNA splicing
and alterations in the mRNA export from the nucleus. mRNAs
accumulate in discrete cytoplasmic foci like processing bodies and
stress granules following exposure to stress conditions []. These
dynamic changes in RNA metabolism ensure the preferential
production and export of heat­shock mRNAs, and the sequestration
of general cellular mRNAs in the nucleus or in the cytoplasmic foci.
It allows redirection of the translation machinery to encode stressproteins
which aid in cellular recovery following stress (established
in Yeast sp.). The presence of lysine rich residues in regulatory
proteins have been reported in lower eukaryotes as well as in plants
[,]. Most seed proteins of plants display the property of lysine
richness and serve as effective supplement for human nutrition.
Absence of lysine rich diet has been identified as a focal cause in
patients suffering from anxiety and stress disorders []. These
evidences further point out that lysine richness was an integral
property of regulatory process associated protein (RPAP) which
dawned during the prebiotic RNA world. The presence of such
lysine run ­ons in human snRNPs contribute largely to their
establishment as RNA ­ RNP world intermediates and probably
provides a putative insight to primitive gene­regulation. The
occurrence of most dynamic changes in RNA metabolism under
conditions of stress was known but the molecular mechanism has
yet not been elucidated. This study on human snRNPs revealing
lysine richness possibly suggests a mechanism by which gene
expression can be regulated at the post ­ transcriptional level. This
finding is also consistent with the conservedness and primitiveness
of snRNPs from the time of origin of life in the world when the first
lives faced drastic environmental stresses.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors acknowledge the financial assistance of DBT,
Government of India.

Citation:Dey et al, Bioinformation 4(9): 409-411 (2010)

