Background
Members of the genus Streptomyces are known for production of
structurally diverse bioactive compounds, especially antibiotics
and anti-tumour compounds and are responsible for the
production of 70% of known microbial natural products 
[].
Since their discovery in the 1940s, these organisms have been of
immense interest to industry and academia. Emergence of
multi-drug resistant pathogens has caused renewed emphasis
on discovery of newer bioactive molecules. There is
considerable information available on Streptomyces including
their genotypic and phenotypic traits for classification
purposes. This type of polyphasic information provides
conclusive evidence that isolates belonging to specific clusters
such as the S. griseus clade are more prolific producers of
bioactive compounds. Pharmacological screening programmes
have to be based on logical parameters such as traits displayed
by the isolates since there may be a coupling between
taxonomic and chemical diversity at the level of strains 
[].
However, the relevant information is scattered across various
resources and not accessible from a single point source or even
freely available to researchers. Easy access to such data will
facilitate quicker initial screening studies.

A search of the 2012 Nucleic Acids Research Database 
[]
reveals that such a comprehensive database has not been
created till date. Currently available databases 
[–] focus on
specific aspects such as degradation of xenobiotics or of
environmental importance and include some information
pertaining to Streptomyces but are not exhaustive. The designed
database collates information about Streptomyces from different
platforms – publications (journals, books, theses, etc.), internet,
public information repositories (GenBank, RDP) web-servers
(StrepDB, PubMLST) and integrates them. The webpage is
facilitated with various search options and results are displayed
in tabular form. Currently, the website has been launched using
a free web portal.

Methodology
Data collection: Database was manually curated and collated
from various sources like journals, books, theses and websites.
Database feature and design: The database is comprised of four
tables viz. Literature, Molecular, Morphological, and
Physiological-biochemical and follows RDBMS architecture for
database modeling and designing. The RDBMS technology will
be compatible with other existing platforms and can facilitate
information exchange for easy retrieval, modification and
analysis. The detailed architecture of database design
component is described in (). We have employed the
apache 2.2.11, PHP 5.2.9, and MySQL client version 5.0.51a for
development of our database. In designing the database,
normalization eliminates data redundancy to
improve consistency, maximizes the flexibility for application of
search system by keeping tables corresponding to object types
in their simplified forms. MySQL is extremely fast for small to
medium size database like StreptomycesInforSys. MySQL
utilizes hash based indexing structure for search; therefore
search output is received in milliseconds. For efficient database
access, elimination of anomalies was done by decomposition and
normalization. Care has been taken to reduce redundancy and
maintain structure of database. Normalization eliminates data
redundancy to improve consistency, maximizes the flexibility
for application of search system by keeping tables
corresponding to object types in their simplified forms.
Referential integrity was sensitized to reject redundant data.
Many-to-many relationship was directed to build the whole
rational structure and provide flexibility to incorporate any
number of contacts. Screenshots of input tables and search
options are shown in ().

Utility
The database will serve as a single-point free reference
resource to facilitate search for Streptomyces-specific
information. It provides quality data set with nonredundancy
to help in data mining. It supports multi-user,
multitasking and multi-threading approaches for end-user.
The database is free for academicians and industry. It
provides detailed information in simple downloadable
format.

Future Developments
There is also future provision for linking to other available
databases containing specific information on
Streptomyces/Actinomycetes like the Multi-Locus Sequence
Typing (MLST) database and The Streptomyces Annotation
Server (StrepDB) for easy integration. It is being updated to
improve the data size and number of records.

The authors are thankful to Jaypee Institute of Information
Technology, Noida for providing infrastructure facilities for
carrying out the work.

Citation:Jain et al, Bioinformation 8(25): 1283-1285 (2012)

Representation of database architecture

Screenshots of StreptomycesInforSys homepage and search options.

