Background
Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC), is one of the major causes of
infantile diarrhoea and traveller's diarrhoea in different developing countries
[,
,
]. 
ETEC alone causes around 40-70% of the diarrhoeal incidence
globally []. 
The essential step in pathogenesis is mediated by initial adherence
followed by colonization in the intestine. Till date more than 25 proteinous
appendages have been identified, collectively called colonization factor
antigens which had been shown to be involved in adhesion in vivo and in vitro
[]. 
Among them, CS6 is one of the prevalent colonization factors worldwide
[,
]. 
Genomic studies have suggested that CS6 is mainly composed of two
equally expressed subunits, CssA and CssB in a stoichiometry of 1:1 
[,
].
They are very tightly associated and cannot be separated from each other easily
[]. 
Functionally, CssA subunit was shown to bind to fibronectin (Fn-an extra
cellular matrix protein of intestinal epithelial cells) by us (7) earlier whereas
CssB has been shown to interact with glycosphingolipid 
[]. Studies further
showed that the C-terminal of CssA subunit of CS6 (from 112 to 126 amino
acids) binds Fn in vitro [] 
but residue interaction was not known. We reported
purification of CS6 to a functionally active form while its organization (in
terms of both subunits) is not known. No template has been reported with high
sequential homology till date to explore its organizational details. Lack of any
three dimensional structures for CS6 thus makes it difficult to complement the
functional details of the CS6-Fn interactions with structural insights. In this
study, we have reported a model for CssA and its interaction with Fn by a
systematic approach using different bioinformatics softwares. The prediction
will help to explore the functional aspects of CS6 in greater detail in future.

Methodology
The amino acid sequence of the CssA subunit of CS6 was extracted from
ETEC 4266 strain (GeneBank accession number EF451566). The secondary
structure of CssA was determined by Discovery Studio (Acclereys, USA). We
choose the C-terminal domain of CssA subunit of CS6 protein because our
previous study experimentally proves that 15 amino acid
(NYTSGDKEIPPGIYN) containing C-terminal region of CssA bind to 70 kDa
N-terminal fibronectin domain []. The probable structure of the binding region
of CssA was assigned by homology modeling using the crystal structure
corresponding to protein data bank (PDB) (http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/) file
1NTY-A as template (66.67 % sequence identity), following a standard method
in Discovery Studio (Acclereys, USA). For loop refinement and energy
minimization we used the Disocovery studio module ‘smart minimizer’ with
0.001 minimizing RMS gradient and 2000 minimizing steps. After loop
refinement and energy minimization the predicted structure was validated by
examining the root mean square deviation (RMSD) value by Ramachandran
plot. The probable structure of Fn was also determined by homology modeling.
Although earlier ELISA data showed that CS6 binds to both proteolytic
domains Fn and that binding was enhanced in presence of both domains 
[].
We tried to determine the probable interacting region of CS6 with the Nterminal
region of Fn by computational modeling. Structure of N-terminal
region of Fn was determined by homology modeling using PDB
(http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/) files 1FBR and 1E88 as templates. Energy
minimization for Fn was performed in standard dynamic cascade using
Steepest Descent algorithm followed by Adopted Basis NR algorithm in
Discovery studio. For energy minimization, 5000 steps were included with an
RMS gradient of 0.01and an Adopted Basis NR algorithm minimization was
performed to an RMS gradient of 0.0001. After inclusion of heating-cooling
and equilibration steps the final most stable structure was obtained based on the
DOPE score. The predicted structure of Fn was also validated by
Ramachondran plot. The docking model between the C-terminal domain of
CssA and N-terminal domain of Fn homology models were extracted using
ClusPro software []. The energetically most stable model that fits with
experimental observations in ELISA data from our previous work was chosen
as the final model. Potential energy for interaction of the C-terminal loop with
different motifs of Fn was determined by Discovery studio.

Result and Discussion
Homology modeling of C-terminal domain of CssA
In order to determine the probable model for the interaction of CS6 with Fn,
homology modeling for both the N-terminal region of Fn and C-terminal region
of CssA were performed. For homology modelling DH/PH domain of Trio
(PDB: 1NTY­A) [] 
was used as a template for the C-terminal region of
CssA. The theoretical prediction of secondary structure suggested that the
proposed binding region of CssA (NYTSGDKEIPPGIYN) assumes a loop in
between two β sheets (). Three dimensionally it was confirmed by
homology modeling (). The RMSD of the predicted structure of the
loop was 1.27 Å from the template. More than 98% of amino acids fall in the
allowed region of Ramachandran plot (). Following denotes the
energy content of the final structure of the C­terminal loop. Initial Potential
Energy = ­701.66 kcal/mol, Potential Energy of the final structure = ­2517.75
kcal/mol, Van der Waals Energy = ­205.03 kcal/mol, 
Electrostatic Energy = ­ 2630.94 kcal/mol.

Homology modeling of Fibronectin
Since from our previous data we found that binding is mediated by both 30 kDa
and 45 kDa regions, we used the PDB files corresponding to the common
region of the domains to determine an approximate model for the interaction.
Using 1FBR and 1E88 as template we determined the three dimensional
structure of the 4F1, 5F1, 6F1, 
1F2, 2F2 motifs of Fn by homology modelling.
The RMSD value of the region was 1.66 Å with respect to the template and
more than 95% of the amino acids fall in the allowed region of the
Ramachandran plot. After all the energy minimization steps the final energy
content of Fn was as follows, Total Energy = ­12078.49 kcal/mol, Potential
Energy = ­15326.90 kcal/mol, 
Van der Waals Energy = ­1224.23kcal/mol,
Electrostatic Energy = ­19266.91 kcal/mol.

Docking of CssA and Fn in search of probable binding region
In protein–protein docking by ClusPro [] 
the probable binding region of the
peptide was determined (). The interaction energy was calculated
using Discovery studio. The interaction energy of the peptide with the 5F1
motif of 30-kDa fibrin binding domain was ­71.220 (kcal/mol). Binding also
occurs to the connecting region of 30 and 45 kDa domains (interaction energy
= ­46.106 kcal/mol) (see Table 1).

Conclusion
Model suggested C-terminal domain of CssA fits into the groove formed in 70-
kDa domain of Fn. This is the first report of Fn binding bacterial protein of
gram-negative bacteria. CssA did not show any significant sequence homology
to the C-terminal binding repeats of the Fn binding proteins MSCRAMM
(Microbial Surface Components Recognizing Adhesive Matrix Molecules), of
many gram-positive species []. Unlike MSCRAMM, CssA is predicted to
interact with the 5F1 and the loop joining 30-kDa and 45-kDa domain strongly
followed by 1F2 domain of 45 kDa domain. Based on the computational
modelling and binding studies, we propose that the predicted loop docks into
the grove that is formed in between the fibrin binding (30-kDa) and gelatin
binding (45-kDa) domains Fn. We also search CssA subunit protein sequence
in different CS6-expressing ETEC strains which indicates most of the amino
acid are conserved of CssA loop region (data not shown). However, this
predicted model helps to improve visualization of the Fn binding with CS6 and
may also provide a valuable information for developing a subunit vaccine
against CS6-expressing ETEC, causing diarrhoeal disease.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This study was supported in part by grants from the Department of Atomic
Energy, Govt. of India (Grant no: 2007/37/31/BRNS/1971).

Citation:Chatterjee et al, Bioinformation 6(8): 307-310 (2011)

Schematic diagram of the secondary structure of CssA of CS6. The
secondary structure was predicted theoretically by Discovery studio from the
amino acid sequence derived from DNA sequence. The barrel and arrow denote
the α-helix and β-sheet respectively.

A. Homology modeling of C terminal region of CssA. For homology
modeling DH/PH domain of Trio (PDB: 1NTY-A) (66.67% sequence identity)
was used. After loop refinement, energy minimization was performed using
Smart Minimizer. The root mean square deviation (RMSD) from the template
was 1.27 Å. The arrow indicates the ramachandran plot of the structure
showing that more than 98% of residues are in permissible region. B.
Homology modeling of N terminal region of Fn. 1FBR and 1E88 were used as
template. The energy minimization for Fn was performed in standard dynamic
cascade using Steepest Descent algorithm followed by Adopted Basis NR
algorithm in Discovery studio. The RMSD of the derived structure was 1.67 Å
with respect to the template. The arrow indicates the ramachandran plot of the
structure showing more than 95% of residues are in the energetically
permissible region of the Ramachandran diagram.

Representative model of interaction of the Carboxy-terminal loop of
CssA and Fn. The template used for 30- kDa N terminal domain (PDB: 1FBR),
which is made of 4F1 and 5F1. The template used for 45- kDa gelatin binding
domain was made of 6F1, 1F2 and 2F2. The groove region of Fn is between
5F1and 6F1 that interacts with the C-terminal loop of CssA.

