Background
Genetic recombination is one of the fundamental processes of 
biology, leading to genetic variation and diversity. Most of the 
mechanisms proposed for recombination proceed via a four arm 
branched DNA intermediate, termed as Holliday junction 
[–].
Survey of literature indicates that the structure of the Holliday 
junction has a central role in determining the outcome of the 
recombination event. Thus, in order to understand genetic 
recombination properly, a detailed knowledge of the structure 
of Holliday junction is required. Since Holliday junction has a 
property to undergo branch migration [], the junction point is 
translated along stretches of duplex DNA. To avoid this 
problem, Seeman and Kallenbach [] proposed the study of 
synthetic analogs of Holliday junctions in which the sequence is 
designed in such a way that the branch point is immobile. These 
synthetic immobile Holliday junctions consist of four stranded 
branched DNA structure, whose double helical arms are 
stacked in two domains: two of the strands are roughly helical 
and the other two cross over in between.

The significance of the formation and existence of DNA 
junctions has been confirmed by many researchers []. One of 
the critical stages of recombination is the resolution process, 
where unconnected duplexes are regenerated. This is brought 
about by resolvase enzymes, which recognize the structure of 
the junction and cleave it. It has been shown that the binding of 
mental ions alter the conformation of such junctions and 
increase their thermal stability [,
]. The first clue as to the 
three dimensional shape of the junction came from the work of 
Cooper and Hagermann [] who studied the relative 
electrophoretic mobilities of a small synthetic junction to which 
reporter arms had been ligated in various combinations. They
concluded that the four oligonucleotide strands comprising the 
junction were structurally non equivalent, their configuration in 
space being dictated by the sequences that flank the junctional 
branch point. Duckett et al. [] proposed a general structure for 
four-way helical junction in DNA, the so called X-structure 
[].
They employed a Gel Electrophoretic method similar to that 
used by Cooper &amp; Hagerman [] to estimate the relative angles 
subtended between different arms of a junction, and 
fluorescence energy transfer to estimate relative end-to-end 
distances for the arms. The most significant feature of the 
stacked X-structure was coaxial pair wise stacking between 
adjacent arms, generating two quasi-continuous helices. There 
were two ways in which this pairing may occur, and they 
showed that the local sequence at the midpoint of the junction 
determines which of the two possible isomers is more stable. 
The X-structure proposed by them was consistent with the 
results of hydroxyl-radical probing of small synthetic junctions
[]. The two qasi-continuous helices subtended an angle 
estimated to be 60°, the X-structure generated was right-handed 
and the sequence aligned in an anti parallel manner. The 
cleavage of the junction by the resolvase T4 endonuclease VII 
was sensitive to the isomeric structure adopted, indicating that 
the outcome of a recombination event might be influenced by 
the sequence and structure of the junction formed []. Churchill 
et al. probed the equilibrium structure of a junction by means of 
hydroxyl radicals generated by the reaction of iron (II) EDTA
with hydrogen peroxide []. The hydroxyl radical-cleavage 
pattern showed twofold symmetry throughout the molecule, by 
which they concluded that the junction was a twofold 
symmetric complex whose four arms form the two stacking 
domains. In order to understand the structural and biological 
functions of these biomolecules, molecular modeling has 
become an important tool in the design and construction of new 
nucleotide sequences.

A number of MD simulations on B-form DNA oligonucleotides 
using various force fields have been reported 
[–]. The 
results to date have provided considerable information on the 
ability of MD to simulate DNA accurately, as well as details of 
the dynamical structure of various DNA models. But very little 
work on the DNA junction model has been reported as yet. 
Advances in computer power now permits MD to be performed 
on increasingly realistic models of DNA system, explicitly 
including solvent water and counter-ions, and to be extended 
from the pico second well into the nanosecond time frame. In 
order to find out the possibility of stacking of an arm over the 
other arm of the junction, we started with a structure which 
forms same angles with the other two arms. This DNA Junction 
model study may be used to predict hitherto, unknown 
properties of genetic recombination and replication process in 
in-vivo systems as well as some futuristic applications of 
synthetic DNA junction models.

Methodology
Generation of coordinates:
The coordinates of DNA junction were generated according to 
the ideal geometry with the help of AMBER EDIT module, 
using following sequences 5׳d(GGAAGGGGCTGG), 
5׳d(CCAGCCTGAGCC), 5׳d(GGCTCAACTCGG), and 
5׳d(CCGAGTCCTTCC). The sequence topology for the DNA 
junction is given in . The residue numbers are in 5׳ to 3׳ 
direction with the first strand number 1-12, the second strand 
13-24, the third strand 25-36 and the fourth strand 36-48. The 
DNA junction model has four strands, each having 12 residues. 
The six base pairs in the first arm are, for example 5׳ d(G1-G2-
A3-A4-G5-G6) and its complement 5׳ d(C43-C44-T45-T46-C47-
C48). Similar trend is followed for the other three arms as well. 
The first and the third strands are the outer strands of the 
junction model and they are roughly helical. The second and the 
fourth strands form the crossover arms and are at the inner 
portion of the junction model. The second and fourth arm of the 
DNA-junction model are subtending same angle from their 
midpoint, and they form the junction crossover in the middle of 
the model.

Placement of counter-ions and water:
Forty four Sodium counter ions with cut off distance of 2.0Å
were placed at a distance of 4.5Å from the phosphorous atom 
along the phosphate bisectors. The DNA and the counter ions 
were “immersed” in a Monte-Carlo-equilibrated, periodic 
transferable intermolecular potential (TIP3P) water bath. The 
monopole charges used were derived using 6-31G* basis set. 
The system thus constructed had 1515 solute atoms, 44 sodium 
ions and 21705 solvent atoms. The water bath contained 23264 
atoms in a cubic box having dimensions of 66.3Å × 61.0Å × 
55.0Å.

The AMBER force field [] parameters were applied in the 
simulation together with the Particle Mesh Ewald (PME) 
method [,
], for evaluating long-range electrostatic forces. 
The Verletleap frog algorithm [] was used in the numerical 
integration with a 1.0fs time step length for minimization and 
2.0fs for dynamics. Hydrogen-atom bonds were constrained to 
“ideal” lengths. Temperature and pressure were maintained via 
the Berendsen algorithms []. All simulations were run with
the SANDER module of AMBER with SHAKE (tolerance 
=0.00001Å). 

Equilibration:
The entire system was subjected to 10000 steps of steepest-decent minimization 
followed by conjugate-gradient minimization with a satisfactory convergence 
of rms gradient of 0.1 kcal/mole-Å, keeping bonds involving hydrogen atoms 
constrained. The velocities were assigned at 100K to all atoms according to 
Boltzmann׳s distribution function. The system was heated from 100K to room 
temperature 298K over 2.0ps by scaling velocities according to Berendsen algorithm followed by 
a constant-pressure-dynamics run over 25ps. After the initial 
equilibration, all subsequent simulations were run by using the 
Particle Mesh Ewald (PME) method, with the help of AMBER5.0 
program with a cubic B-spine interpolation order. The 
restrained molecular dynamics was run over 600ps, during this 
dynamics the harmonic restraints were gradually reduced. 
Molecular dynamics production run were initiated at 298K, 
without any constraints on the system and was performed for 
1250 ps.

Results &amp; Discussion
Dynamic structure of the DNA junction model:
A series of twelve snapshots taken from the MD trajectory at 
periodic intervals of 100 ps is shown in (). 

shows the snap shots when the model is rotated by 90° along 
the x-axis. The variation in DNA junction especially at the 
central region of junction model can be seen over the entire 
course of the simulation. The 100 ps snapshot shows that the 
base-pairs at the middle portion of the junction are planar. The 
snapshot taken at 200ps indicates a change in the orientation of 
the base-pair plane with bases coming closer to each other. The 
next snapshot at 300ps seems to indicate that the junction is
regaining its initial structure. Only after the 800 ps snapshot 
onwards, a clear indication of folding of the DNA junction 
model is observed, with clear changes in the model becoming 
obvious at the subsequent snapshots taken at 900, 1000, 1100 
and 1200 ps. A comparison of the snapshots at 1200 ps with the 
100 ps snapshot clearly shows a major change in the shape of 
the junction model not only at the middle portion but also at the 
end base-pair. It appears that the third strand has got stretched
from the 5׳ towards the 3׳ end. No such stretching in the first strand 
is apparent from the snapshots in . In the third strand, the 
middle part of the junction consists of A: T base pair while in the first 
strand the middle part consists of G:C base-pairs. The presence of three 
hydrogen bonds in G: C base-pairs is probably keeping the middle portion 
of the first strand intact along the helix-axis thereby maintaining the 
planarity vis-a-vis the A:T base-pair of the third strand.

RMS deviation of MD structures:
To show whether the structures were fully converged, the root-mean-square 
(RMS) deviations of MD structure as a function of time (from 600 to 1257 ps) 
with respect to MD average structure are shown in () for all atoms, 
backbone-atoms and base-atoms. During the first 20 ps range the RMSDs are, 
larger because at 600 ps point the system was heated from 100K to 298K. The 
system seems to have stabilized at 298K in about 20 ps (600 to 620 ps). 
Between these points constrained (5 kcal/mole-Å) MD was done. Beyond 1000 
ps all the constraints were removed allowing greater flexibility to the 
atoms which obviously resulted in relatively larger RMSDs. Beyond 1000 
ps till the the end of simulation (1250 ps) complete convergence has 
been achieved.  further indicates that the rms deviation for the 
atoms, when the system is constrained, varies in a small range (~ ± 0.060) 
Once the constraints are removed the RMS deviations increase (~0.150Å) 
for the next period of 100 ps before attaining a stable configuration in 
the final simulation of ~150 ps when the RMS deviation is ~0.140 ps. 
The RMS deviation for backbone and base atoms are in close proximity of
all atoms RMS deviation. In totality, the small all-atom RMS deviation 
indicates that the DNA junction model structure is considerably converged

Torsion angles at the junction point:
The torsion angles α, β, γ, δ, ε and ζ for the initial DNA junction 
model and for averaged simulated structure are given in 

(see supplementary material). For the G6 residue the only 
significant change is in the value of β, - from the initial -ac to 
+ap. In G7, major changes are observed for α, β, and γ, while for 
δ, ε, and ζ there are very slight changes. The torsion angles α, β,
and γ assume the -ac, +ap and +sc conformation for this 
nucleotide from the initial +sp, -ac, -ac respectively. Residue 
C18 and T19 are the nucleotides belonging to the crossover 
strand. For C18 a major change in torsion angle is observed for 
b which, after, a rotation of 50° has gone into the +ap region 
from the initial -ac. All the other torsion angles α, β, γ and ζ
oscillate in a narrow range. At T19 major changes are seen for 
α, β, γ and ε while the values of δ and ζ remain almost 
unchanged. These nucleotides assume the -ac, +ap, and -ap 
conformation from the initial +sc, -ac, +ap respectively.

Residues A30 and A31 belong to the roughly helical third strand 
of the DNA junction model. For A30 major changes are seen for 
β, δ and ζ values which have acquired +ap, -sp and +sc 
conformations respectively from the initial -ac, +ap and -ac 
conformation. For A31 almost all the angles are changing with 
the exception of ζ. From the initial +sc, -ac, +sc, +ap and -sc 
these have gone to -ac, g+, -ap, +ac, and -sc respectively. The 
Residue T42 and C43 belong to the junction point of the 
crossover strand, which is part of the fourth strand. In T42 
nucleotide major change in torsion angles are observed for
β, γ, δ and ε, which assumes -sc, -ac, +sp and +ap conformation 
from the initial -ac, +sc, +ap and -ap. For residue C43, major 
changes are seen for α, β and ε which from the initial +ac, -ac 
and +ap have shifted to -sc, +ap, and -ap respectively.

The comparison indicates that for the first and second strands, 
the change in the values of β is correlated in the sense that both 
the residues G6 and C18 belong to the 5׳end of their respective strands. 
And along the 3׳ side also G7 and T19 belong to the first and second 
strand respectively. Both the strands show changes in identical angles, 
that is α, β and γ with the exception of ε for T19. In the case of third 
and fourth strands there is correlation along the 5׳ end with the 
exception of γ, and ε and along the 3׳ end (A31 and C43) there are 
relative changes in α, β and ε with the exception of γ and δ at A31. 
It is noteworthy that at the junction point with in a strand, from 5׳ 
to 3׳ direction α assumed the values (g-, -ac) except for the fourth 
strand which assumes (g-,g-) conformation. The β torsion angles assume 
extended t conformation except for A31 and T42 which assumes g+ and g- 
conformation respectively. The conformation parameter g assumes +sc 
conformation for most of the nucleotides at the junction point except 
for T19, A31 and T41 which assumed -ap, -ap and -ac conformations. The 
exocyclic torsion angle d assumes +ac conformation for most of the 
nucleotides at the junction except for A30 and T42 which show cis conformation 
in board terms and -sp and +sp respectively
when defined by Klyne-Prelog notations. The torsion angles ε
and ζ show correlation at the junction points also where ε
assumes values in + (ap) region and ζ ssumes values in +(ac) or 
its vicinity in the +(sc) region except for C18 nucleotides.

Conclusion
This computational study point out that particle mesh Ewald (PME) 
method effectively eliminates the usual cut-off and allows user to deal 
with the refinement treatment of the long range interaction potentials, 
which was considered as one of the serious limitation in MD protocol. In 
DNA junction model, the four arms of the junction show B-DNA conformation 
which is in accord with the experimental observations done so far. The 
strands containing A-T base pairs at the junction seem to be more flexible, 
and stretching appears to be from 5' to 3' direction. The strand containing 
G-C base pairs remain intact at the junction points. At the 5' end, the atoms 
of the strands show more fluctuations. Near the junction point there is 
shifting in the orientation of some of the P-O bonds from the usual π3 turn 
for A- and B- DNA to either π1 or π2 type of turn in order to achieve 
conformational stability. Finally, we can say that three-dimensional 
multiply-connected DNA structures, in the time to come, are expected to be of 
immense use in the assembly of molecular electronic devices, the formation of 
macromolecular-scale zeolites to host biological complexes for diffraction analysis, 
development of new catalysts and it seems possible to derivatize synthetic DNA molecules 
with special functional groups both on the bases and at the backbones as in the case 
of some natural processes by which drugs, particular proteins etc. recognizes and binds 
to the specific sites of DNA.

Supplementary material
Data 1
R.K. Yadav is much indebted to his research supervisor 
Professor A.K. Pant for providing valuable guidance and 
computational facilities. U. Yadava is thankful to Department of 
Science and Technology(DST), New Delhi for providing 
financial support through SERC Fast Track Young Scientist 
scheme (SR/FT/CS-78/2010).

Citation:Yadav RK &amp; Yadav U, Bioinformation 10(7): 394-400 (2014)

Sequence topology of DNA-Junction model

A series of snap shots taken after every 100 ps of DNA Junction during MD simulation

A series of snap shots taken after every 100 ps of DNA Junction (inverted) during MD simulation.

RMS deviation of the average MD simulated Structure 
as a function of time. a- rmsd for the base atoms, b-rmsd for all 
atoms and c-rmsd for backbone atoms

