Background
Influenza virus is continually changing every decade or so, a
dangerous new strain appears and poses a threat to public
health. The subtypes of influenza virus are H1N1, H1N2,
H3N1, H3N2, H2N3 and H5N1 []. The current H1N1 virus
strain is a mixture of human, pig and bird genes and has
proved to be very contagious, but no more deadly than
common seasonal flu viruses. The World Health Organization
(WHO) reported about 15,174 deaths due to the pandemic
influenza virus H1N1. According to the Hindu news paper, the
current cases of swine flu H1NI version have been reported in
India with over 31,156 positive test cases and 1,841 deaths till
March 2015. Influenza A virus mutates frequently because of
their segmented RNA genome, making it almost impossible to
produce a timely and sufficiently effective []. The H1N1
designation refers to the two molecules that cover the surface of
the virus are hemagglutinin and neuraminidase. These are the
two important glycoproteins responsible for viral influenza
infection []. Hemagglutinin is present on the surface of the
virion and is needed for infection, while neuraminidase is
responsible for cleavage of sialic acid (neuraminic acid) from
glycans of the infected cell []. These two proteins are drug
targets for viral infections, and the neuraminidase inhibitors,
Oseltamivir and Zanamivir, are broad spectrum antiviral
drugs, useful for the treatment of a variety of forms of influenza
[].

Medicinal plants are termed to be one of the easiest sources to
get antiviral drugs since they have a proven record for antiviral
activity. Tribes living worldwide, traditionally, have been using
most of the medicinal plants successfully for many decades 
[].
Ocimum sanctum L. (Tulsi) is a plant which is grown in different
parts of the world and are known to have medicinal properties.
Tulsi plant has been known to possess antibacterial, antifungal,
antianaphylactic activity, antihistamine and mast cell
stabilizing activity, radio-protective effect, wound healing
effect, antidiabetic effect, antioxidant activity, immunologic
effects, anticancer properties, contraceptive effects, larvicidal
property, Neuro-protective effects, antigenotoxic effect, cardioprotective
effect and other miscellaneous activities []. A wide
range of phytocompounds including euginal, eugenol,
carvacrol, urosolic acid, linalool, limatrol, methyl carvicol,
caryophyllene, antocyans, sistosterol, apigenin has been
reported in this plant []. Tulsi has also reported for its antiviral
effect, based on this background a screening of its
phytocompounds will be helpful for new therapeutic agent
preparation of the medicinal plant which can be helpful for the
humans to overcome influenza since the virus was reported for
its high mutation ability against drugs.

Investigation on prevention and cure of H1N1 still remains as
an unresolved challenge in the area of Bioinformatics and
Pharmacogenomics. This required a serious hunt for better
antiviral drugs. A proportional study on the effectiveness of the
known drugs can identify the drug with maximum interaction
with the receptor protein among the available drugs. Such
knowledge is essential for the researchers to discover a
potential new drug for H1N1. In our study, we compare the
effectiveness of the available 38 phytocompounds of Tulsi plant
as a drug and a positive control drug (Oseltamivir, Zanamivir)
in terms of binding energy between the hemagglutinin and
neuraminidase viral proteins in silico techniques. We adopted
the in silico techniques such as docking, drug screening to find
the most potent drug among the available drugs. If these
compounds selectively bind to specific targets than the control
drug then they could potentially be used more broadly in
H1N1 influenza prevention or treatment.

Methodology
Preparation of ligand structure:
The ligands used in this study were downloaded from
PubChem Database. A total of thirty eight test compound of
Tulsi and two standard control compound structures
(Oseltamivir, Zanamivir) was downloaded in the SDF format
were first converted to the PDB format using Open Babel. The
ligands and their SDF structures where give in Supplementary
 (see supplementary material). Then the Gasteiger
charges and rotatable bonds were then assigned to the PDB
ligands using Auto Dock Tool []. All rotatable bonds were
allowed to move freely.

Preparation of protein structure:
Eight protein X-ray crystal structures from the Protein Data
Bank were downloaded based on the literature survey. The
proteins and their PDB structure identifiers and the active site
are given in  (see supplementary material). All the
proteins had co-crystallized ligands (X-ray ligand) in the
binding site. The ligand enclosed in each protein structure was
removed from the binding site and saved to a new file. In each
protein structure the missing atoms were searched for and fixed
using Swiss PDB []. The Gasteiger charges and the solvation
term were then added to the protein structure using the
AutoDockTool.

Protein-Ligand Docking:
Grid box generation:
The grid parameter file of each protein was generated using
AutoDock Tool. A grid-box was created that was large enough
to cover the entire protein binding site and accommodate all
ligands to move freely in it. The number of grid points in x, y,
and z-axes were set to 20×20×20. The distance between two
connecting grid points was 0.375 Å. The center of the ligand in
the X-ray crystal structure was used as the center of the gridbox.
To the protein structures that do not have ligands in the
binding site, the center of the active binding site was estimated
from the structure and taken as the center of the grid-box.

Ligand docking:
The docking of ligands to the catalytic triad of protein was
performed using AutoDock Vina software []. Docking was
performed to obtain a population of possible conformations
and orientations for the ligand at the binding site. Polar
hydrogen atoms were added to all the proteins and its nonpolar
hydrogen atoms were merged by using the software. All bonds
of ligands were set to be rotatable. All calculations for ligandflexible
protein-fixed docking were performed using the
Lamarckian Genetic Algorithm (LGA) method. The best
conformation was chosen with the lowest docked energy, after
the completion of docking search. Standard docking settings
were used and the 10 energetically most favorable binding
poses are outputted.

Drug scans:
This was performed in order to determine the inhibitor has
fulfilled the conditions as the drug candidate based on
Lipinski׳s Rule of Five []. It is done using Lipinski Filters,
Molinspiration (http://www.molinspiration.com/cgi-bin/properties), 
admetSAR (http://lmmd.ecust.edu.cn:8000/), and
Toxtree v2.5.1, software platforms (http:// toxtree.sourceforge.net/). 
Molinspiration and Lipinski Filters were applied for
studying the molecular attributes, such as the quantity of
hydrogen bond acceptor, the amount of hydrogen bond donors,
Log P, and the molecular mass of the drugs. In addition, the
admetSAR and Toxtree v2.5.1, calculated various attributes of
the drugs, BBB, Human Intestinal absorption, Caco-2
permeable, Aqueous solubility, P-gp substrate and inhibitor,
CYP450 substrate and inhibitor, CYP IP, ROCT, HERG
inhibition, and toxicity parameters. In order to use Lipinski
Filters, the ligand in SMILE format was uploaded to the
analysis software website. The same applies to Molinspiration,
admetSAR and Toxtree v2.5.1, because the ligand in smiles
format must be uploaded to their website.

Result &amp; Discussion
Docking:
Molecular docking enables a scientist to virtual screen a
number of candidate compounds based on their binding
orientation and binding ability with a target particle. It also
allows one to select compounds with strong affinity for the
target site. In the current study, thirty eight phytocompounds
of Tulsi were docked in silico with the eight H1N1 viral proteins
and compared with the positive drugs Oseltamivir and
Zanamivir. The docked ligand molecules were selected based
on highest binding energy and good interaction with the active
site residues and the results are shown in  (see
supplementary material) and . We selected top five
ligands namely Oleanolic acid, Vicenin- 2, Apigenin,
Stigmasterol, and Ursolic acid out of thirty eight ligands as
compared to the positive ligands. These five molecules showed
the highest binding energy of greater than standard drugs in
the kcal/mol to all the H1N1 viral protein receptors.

Drug Scan (ADMET Analysis):
Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism, Excretion and Toxicity
(ADME/Tox) are main five parameters to test the drug likeness
of a molecule. Based on the docking study, top five potential
ligands molecular structure was submitted to Molinspiration,
admetSAR and Toxtree servers to determine their different
ADMET properties. Only Apigenin and Oseltamivir followed
the Lipinski׳s rule of five without any violations with respect to
an octanol-water partition coefficient (LogP ≤ 5), molecular
weight (≤ 500 KDa), number of H-bond donors (≤ 5), number of
H-bond acceptors (≤ 10), molecular refractivity (40–130) as
tabulated in  (see supplementary material), whereas
remaining ligands including Zanamivir didn׳t follow Lipinski׳s
rule of five. Considering this only Apigenin was considered as
drug candidate for further ADMET analysis including
Oseltamivir and Zanamivir.

In ADME assessment, different pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic parameters were considered such as
aqueous solubility, human intestinal absorption, blood–brain
barrier penetration, Caco-2 permeability, cytochrome P450
inhibition, renal organic cation transportation, HERG
inhibition. The results have been summarized in 
 (see
supplementary material). Interestingly, the analysis performed
on admetSAR revealed that only Apigenin had no substantial
ADME properties that could cause adverse effects in humans.
Whereas Oseltamivir and Zanamivir have potentially showed
adverse effects with blood-brain barrier and Caco-2
penetration. Zanamivir has also showed negative responses for
human intestinal absorption.

The BBB is a highly selective permeability barrier that separates
the circulating blood from the brain extracellular fluid in the
CNS. BBB is formed by the brain capillary endothelium and
excludes from the brain ~100% of large-molecule
neurotherapeutics and more than 98% of all small-molecule
drugs []. Mechanisms for drug targeting in the brain involve
going either “through” or “behind” the BBB. Modalities for drug
delivery/dosage form through the BBB entail its disruption by
osmotic means; biochemically by the use of vasoactive
substances such as bradykinin; or even by localized exposure to
high-intensity focused ultrasound. Dangerous leaks of BBB
breaks down, leads to brain cancers, brain infections,
neurodegenerative disorders and multiple sclerosis 
[].
Predicting human intestinal absorption (HIA%) of drugs is very
important for identifying potential drug candidate. HIA% data
are the sum of bioavailability and absorption evaluated from
the ratio of excretion or cumulative excretion in urine, bile and
feces []. For the development of bioactive molecules as
therapeutic agents, oral bioavailability is often an important
consideration. The prediction of human absorption using a
Caco-2 based penetration assay is routinely performed during
drug development. However, the highly variable, rather low
expression of P-gp in Caco-2 cells is normally a limiting factor
that does not allow the sensitive and reproducible recognition
of P-gp substrates []. However, for a good drug it has to pass
the BBB, human intestinal absorption and Caco2 penetration at
the first priority which has satisfied by Apigenin but not with
Oseltamivir and Zanamivir. Inhibitory toxicity of drugs was
predicted by Toxtree v2.5.0 and admetSAR. Ames Toxicity,
mutagenic and carcinogenic properties were predicted. Table 4
(see supplementary material) shows all the three compounds
Apigenin, Oseltamivir, and Zanamivir have non-mutagenic or
non-carcinogenic properties. Apigenin has showed promising
in human intestinal absorption, BBB ability, Caco-2 penetration,
solubility and some of the CYP450 substrate and inhibitors, as
these factors help in metabolizing and in flushing out the drugs
from the body. Apigenin is a flavone class that is aglycone of
several naturally occurring glycosides. In in vitro experiments
and animal studies, a variety of potential biological activities of
Apigenin have been identified []. It is used as chemotherapy
in autophagy in leukemia cells. It acts as potent inhibitors of
CYP2C9 enzyme which is responsible for the metabolism of
drugs in the body []. In rat model it is used as renal
preventive caused by Cyclosporine []. In in vitro and in vivo
study reveals that Apigenin may stimulate adult neurogenesis
and therapeutic potential in rat model []. It is one of the
active phytocompound derived from Tulsi plant. Tulsi plant is
well known for its medical properties. Tulsi plant has shown to
its antiviral activity, it may be that Apigenin would be
responsible. Considering this, Apigenin can be used as an
antiviral drug for swine flu.

Conclusion
Molecular docking of Apigenin with H1N1 proteins shows
stronger binding energy having good ADMET property
compared to Oseltamivir, and Zanamivir. Therefore, it is of
importance to pursue Apigenin as a molecule of interest in this
context for further in vitro and in vivo studies.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work was supported financially by Research Center,
Deanship of Scientific Research, College of Food &amp; Agriculture
Science, King Saud University.

Citation:Alhazmi, Bioinformation 11(4): 196-202 (2015)

Molecular docking interaction between Apigenin molecule with Influenza viral proteins such as (PDB ID) A) 1NCA; B)
1NN2; C) 2HU4; D) 3CL2; E) 3B7E; F) 3CKZ, are Neuraminidase proteins, G) 3AL4 and H) 3LZG are Hemagglutinin proteins
binding energy and their ligplot interaction energy were calculated based on hydrogen bonds, polar, cation-pi, hydrophobic and
other energies. Apigenin showed the highest binding energy with all the viral protein as compared to the control ligands based on
the molecular docking and ligplot interaction.

