Background
The discovery and analysis of transcriptional regulatory networks is a key
step in elucidating the complex regulatory apparatus of living beings [].
Transcriptional regulation is mediated mainly by transcription factors (TF)
that bind DNA and can either hinder (repressors) or promote (activators)
the formation of an open complex by the RNA-polymerase holoenzyme
[]. The semi-specific recognition of binding sites by their cognate
transcription factors allows implementing computational tools for the
discovery and detection of transcription binding motifs and sites []. Motif
discovery methods focus on the identification of overrepresented patterns
in groups of sequences []. Conversely, site search algorithms take in a
motif description and use pattern matching techniques to search for sites on
DNA sequences []. Scanning genomic sequences leads to a noisy but
informative reconstruction of transcriptional regulatory networks, which
can be later validated by in vitro and in vivo methods [].

Site search techniques can be roughly divided into two categories. Methods
based on based on regular expression syntaxes (regex) use IUPAC codes
for degenerate bases and allow for complex motif descriptions including
gaps, multiple repeats and variable spacers []. Their flexibility in motif
description comes at the cost of reduced base frequency information and a
combinatorial increase in complexity for elaborate patterns []. Position-
Specific Scoring Matrices (PSSM) approaches implement rigid or semirigid
feature locators based on the observed frequency of occurrence of
each base at each motif position, as derived from a collection of aligned
sites []. This matrix representation is commonly referred to as the binding
motif or profile. Most PSSM approaches are based on the application of
information theory to molecular biology [, ], which leads to the
widespread representation of binding motifs as sequence logos [].

Information theory can be applied to the information process that takes
place when a transcription factor binds a site. Protein binding leads to a
reduction in uncertainty that is formally defined as the difference in
entropy at each motif position [] 
(  for
equation). Following this approach, several methods have been devised to
assess the fit of a candidate site to a particular binding motif. Nonweighted
methods use only the frequency of observed bases at each
position in their computation, while weighted methods apply also with
information on positional conservation. Weighted methods show improved
correlation with experimental binding affinities, but are more prone to false
positives in genomic searches []. Alternative methods using relative
entropy, instead of Shannon entropy, have been devised to take into
account biases in genomic base composition [].

Most software solutions developed to implement genome-wide searches of
TF-binding sites using PSSM, like Virtual Footprint, are server-based
applications linked to server-based databases [] and, in some cases,
integrated in web-based motif discovery suites []. A common problem
with most web-based applications in bioinformatics is the limitation of
sequence sizes in order to contain server load and/or traffic. This is
normally addressed by relying on a server database of sequences, but this
often limits severely the number and repertoire of target sequences
available for analysis. Some solutions rely also on a limited set of precompiled
matrices, while others restrict entry of motif data to either site
collections or IUPAC codes. In addition, each solution relies on a single
specific method for site search. This prevents users from choosing the
method that they believe most appropriate and precludes the integration of
results from different methods. xFITOM is a standalone, easy to use and
extremely flexible GUI-based application for site search that integrates
several PSSM-based methods in a single tool.

Methodology
xFITOM requires a collection of aligned sites and a set of target files to be
searched. Using the site collection, xFITOM will compute the information
content of the motif. It will also pre-process the target sequence and
compute its a priori entropy. The program will then start a sequential
search of the genome using a sliding window and one of the 11 available
scoring methods. xFITOM uses a threshold, an arbitrary cut-off value or a
value relative to the distribution of scores in the collection, to define
putative binding sites. These are then sorted by genomic position or score.
If gene annotation data is available, sites are classified as “operator”,
“intragenic” or “intergenic” based on their location with respect to nearby
genes. xFITOM can also apply local complexity factors to detect locally
enriched motifs []. In this mode, xFITOM computes several mobile
score averages and can rescore sites based on three different ratios between
local and global score averages.

Implementation
xFITOM has been developed integrally in C++ as a standalone application
for Microsoft Windows operating systems using the Microsoft Foundation
Classes. The program operates on two main input files: a collection of
aligned sites and a collection of target sequences. Aligned sites can be
entered in FASTA and raw text format, with degenerate IUPAC characters
allowing for an arbitrary degree of flexibility in the definition of the
binding motif. Target sequences can be entered in FASTA and GenBank
formats, with gene annotation data extracted automatically from the latter.
Multiple sequences can be processed directly in FASTA format, while
GenBank files can be merged into a compound GenBank file for analysis.
This allows analysis of annotated unfinished genomes, giving immediate
access to newly released genomic data. All xFITOM parameters can be
specified by the user through the GUI (). Basic parameters, like
the search method, detection threshold and site-to-gene distances are
defined in the left panel, while local complexity options are located on the
right panel. The program generates comma-separated value output files to
allow easy post-processing of results with spreadsheet software. Due to its
standalone nature and configurability, xFITOM allows users to carry out
useful non-standard analyses, such comparisons among different methods
(), affinity ranking of collection sites or annotated searches of
unfinished genome assemblies ().

Supplementary material
Data 1
This research was supported partly by the Summer Faculty Fellowship
program at UMBC.

Citation:Erill et al, Bioinformation 5(2): 49-51 (2010)

[Left panel] GUI interface of xFITOM showing the input section and the advanced and local complexity options sections. [Top-right panel]
Condensed results from an annotated search of the Pasteurella dagmatis ATCC_43325 unfinished genome sequence using a collection of LexA-binding
sites from Escherichia coli []. For clarity, gene locus accession numbers have been abbreviated to Pdag_XXXX from the original HMPREF0621_XXXX
format. Searching merged GenBank files can provide useful information on the composition regulatory networks for partly sequenced organisms. Here it
shows the usual components of the SOS network in the _-Proteobacteria to be present in P. dagmatis []. [Bottom-right panel] ROC curve showing a
comparison of search efficiencies when looking for CRP sites in the E. coli genome with different methods. Previous results [] indicate that nonweighted
methods like Ri outperform weighted ones (like Ri•Rsequence), but this does not hold true when the length of sites in a collection extends beyond
the primary conserved region.

