Background
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) is an enzyme in
the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) that plays an important
role in protecting cells from oxidative damage by producing
NADPH and reduced glutathione. In the erythrocyte, which
lacks a nucleus, mitochondria and other organelles, PPP is the
only biochemical pathway for generating reducing capacity 
[].
Worldwide 400 G6PD deficiency individuals were
asymptomatic but acute hemolysis may occur in certain
conditions. It may cause chronic nonspherocytic hemolytic
anemia. The common clinical manifestations of G6PD
deficiency are jaundice and acute hemolytic anemia triggered
by certain drugs, infections or ingestion of fava beans 
[]. G6PD
deficiency is considered one of the most common genetic
disorders and is the most common of enzymopathic red blood
cell disorder. The disease has been reported in populations
from nearly all geographical locations; however it occurs most
frequently in areas where Plasmodium falciparum malaria has
been endemic. Prevalence estimates are highest in Africa, Asia,
the Mediterranean region and the Middle East.

The G6PD gene maps to the tip of the q arm of the X
chromosome (Xq28), and consists of 13 exons encoding a 515
amino acid protein with a molecular weight of about 59 kDa 
[].
Mutations in the G6PD gene may result in diminished
functionality and/or stability of the G6PD enzyme, resulting in
different levels of enzymatic activity and a wide range of
biochemical and clinical presentations. Since it is an X-linked
gene, affected hemizygous males are likely to have more severe
hemolytic crises than heterozygous females who have variable
proportions of G6PD normal and deficient erythrocytes.
However, heterozygous females because of the mosaicism
resulting from X-chromosome inactivation in somatic cells 
[]
may be missed by screening tests []. The World Health
Organization (WHO) has grouped the G6PD variants into five
disease classes based on enzymatic activity levels; however the
clinical impact of even some of the endemic variants is not
completely defined [].

Microsatellites or short simple tandem repeats have been the
genotype-based marker approach of choice for many
applications where the relatedness between individuals,
populations or species is sought. A microsatellite consists of a
specific sequence of DNA bases or nucleotides which contains
mono, di, tri, or tetra tandem repeats. Non-repetitive DNA
sequence variation has been assessed through various
approaches, including DNA sequencing, restriction fragment
length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis, single strand
conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis, random
amplified polymorphism detection (RAPD) and amplified
fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) analysis. More recently,
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are increasingly
finding their application in studies of natural populations 
[].
Germline variable gene codons have been deleted from the
coding region as well as reports in which extra, non-template
codons have been inserted into the coding region of the variable
heavy and/or variable light gene segments. Such insertions
and/or deletions (I/Ds) can occur by strand slippage and via
homologous recombination and have been shown to occur in
several human β- cell malignancies in germinal center β- cells,
in human hybridomas and in peripheral blood β-cells 
[].

The angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) gene (encoding
kininase II, EC 3.4.15.1) contains a polymorphism based on the
presence (insertion [I]) or absence (deletion [D]) within an
intron of a 287-base-pair (Alu Sequence) nonsense DNA
domain, resulting in three genotypes (DD and II homozygotes,
and ID heterozygotes). ACE is an important enzyme of the
renin-angiotensin-system, which is encoded by the ACE gene,
located on chromosome 17q23, comprising 26 exons and 25
introns. This enzyme catalyzes the conversion of angiotensin I
to angiotensin II, a potent vasoconstrictor, and also inactivates
the vasodilator bradykinin []. The α2BAR insertion/deletion
(I/D) polymorphism involves the deletion of three glutamic
acids from a repeat element in the third intracellular loop of the
protein. In vitro, the deletion has pronounced effects on the
phosphorylation of the receptor and results in a loss of agonistpromoted
desensitization.

In human studies, the α2B-adrenergic receptor gene (α2BAR) I/D
polymorphism were found to be associated with various
cardiovascular and metabolic phenotypes. A common variant
(12Glu9) of the human α2BAR gene encodes a receptor protein
leading to the ins/del (I/D) of three consecutive glutamate
residues at amino acid positions 301 to 303 has been associated
with EHT, acute coronary events. In-vitro studies showed, I/D
polymorphism of α2BAR gene to affect an impaired agonistinduced
desensitization of the receptor []. In this present study
we are investigating that whether I/D polymorphisms studies
does play any important role in G6PD individuals in Saudi
Arabian men.

Methodology
Selection of G6PD Individuals:
In this study 61 samples were included and among them 22
samples were healthy controls without any complications. This
preliminary study included 39 G6PD male individuals who
have visited to Central blood bank and driver school blood
bank (DALLA), King Abdul-Aziz specialist Hospital in Taif city
in West region of Kingdom of Saudi Arabia during the period
3rd July 2011 to 12th Aug 2011. The Age groups of these donors
were 17 to 50 years with a mean age of 33.5±9.96. All the G6PD
individuals were confirmed G6PD determination and
quantitative test.

6ml of EDTA Blood sample was collected from every male
donor and 4ml of the sample was used for hematological
parameters to confirm G6PD deficiency and 2ml of the blood
was used for molecular analysis. Institutional ethical committee
approval and informed consent was obtained from all the
subjects included in the study. The inclusion criteria of G6PD
were to include male donors and female donors were excluded
from the study.

DNA Isolation and Genotyping of Insertion/ Deletion Polymorphisms:
Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes
using Norgen DNA extraction kit (Norgen Biotek corp,
Canada). The procedure followed laid out norms for DNA
extraction. The genotype analysis was performed at the
Department of Genetics and clinical laboratory sciences, College
of Applied Medical Sciences, King Saud University, Riyadh and
Saudi Arabia.

Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was carried out to determine
the ACE and α2BAR D/D, I/D, and I/I genotypes and specific
Insertion/Deletion primers as shown in the  (see
supplementary material) were choosen from Munshi A et al
[] 
and Sivenius et al [] studies. Primers were synthesized by
Bioserve technologies, Hyderabad, India).

A total volume of 20µL reaction mixture contain 2µl of each
primer which is 100pmole, 6µl of sterile water and 10µl of 2X
master mix which includes MgCl2, 10x Taq buffer, 10 unit of
Taq DNA polymerase (Norgen Biotek corp, Canada) and the
2µl template DNA was used for amplification of I/D
polymorphisms of ACE gene and α2BAR gene.

For the genotyping I/D genotype variant of the ACE gene was
determined by PCR amplification. PCR products of 190bp
(without insertion) and 490bp (with 287-bp Alu insertion) were
detected by electrophoresis on agarose gel containing ethidium
bromide. Amplification of the PCR products, which is a 490-bp
fragment for the I allele and a 190-bp fragment for the D allele,
was carried out using the following: The PCR profile consisted
of 35 cycles (denaturized at 94°C in 5 minute, annealing at 59°C
in 30 seconds and extension at 72°C for 5 minute) was used.

The PCR cycling conditions were carried out on Thermal Cycler
(Applied Biosystems, Hercules, California, USA). The 1st Exon
of the polymorphic α2BAR gene the initial denaturation was set
up for 5 minutes at 95°C followed by 35 cycles of denaturation
for 30 seconds at 95°C, annealing for 30 seconds at 57°C,
extension for 45 seconds at 72°C and the final extension was at
72°C for 7 minutes. The insertion band is considered as 112bp
which represents the I allele and 103bp is identified as deletion
band which represented the D allele. Insertion/Deletion of the
amplified PCR products were clearly separated on 2.5%
agarose gel (Cambrex, East Rutherford, NJ, USA) which has
been performed in Origins electrophoresis (Elchrom Scientific
AG, Cham, Switzerland).

Statistical Analysis:
All the statistical analysis was carried out by using SPSS
(Chicago, IL, USA) software version 19.0 for Microsoft
Windows®. Clinical characteristics of all the subjects were
expressed as mean ± SD. Continuous variables were compared
between the groups by using two-tailed student's t test. Allelic
frequencies were calculated by gene-counting method and the
genotypic and allelic distribution of I/D polymorphism of
α2BAR gene were analyzed using chi-square test. The effect of
I/D genotypes of α2BAR was analyzed using general linear
model ANOVA for clinical characteristics. A level of P &lt;0.05
was considered statistically significant.

Results &amp; Discussion
I/D polymorphisms were identified based on the band sizes of
ACE and α2BAR genes. Over all 39 men were participated were
in this study and women's were excluded from this study.
G6PD individuals were in the age range of 17-50 years with a
mean age of 33.5±9.96. It was seen that G6PD individual's blood
groups were A, B and O of both positive and negative blood
groups and none of the G6PD individual were not having both
AB positive and negative blood groups.  (see
supplementary material) shows the individuals participated in
the study with their blood groups.

ACE I/D polymorphism study was carried out in G6PD
individuals in Saudi Arabian men. The frequencies of ACE DD,
ID and II genotypes among G6PD patients were 82%, 7.7% and
10.2% respectively. The percentage of D allele was 85.9% and of
the I allele was 14.1%.In the control subjects, the distribution of
ACE DD, ID and II genotypes was 9%, 9% and 81.9%
respectively. The allele frequencies was 13.6% and 86.3% for the
D and I alleles, respectively. When we have compared the ACE
DD genotypes and D allele with the cases and controls we have
found a strong association OR=39.38, p&lt;0.0001 (95% CI=8.80-
176.1) and OR=38.58, p&lt;0.0001 (95% CI=13.21-112.6). Similarly,
the difference of D allele frequencies between patients and
controls was found to be strong significant; 82% for patients
and 9% for controls.  (see supplementary material) is
showing the genotypes and allele frequencies of 2 different
genes.

Another gene of α2BAR I/D polymorphism study was carried
out with G6PD individuals in Saudi population. In the G6PD
group 4/39 (10.2%) cases showed DD genotype, 04/39 (10.2%)
showed ID and 31/39 (79.5%) showed DD genotype. Among
the cases 12 (15.4%) showed D allele and 66 (84.6%) showed I
allele. In the control group 01/22 (4.5%) showed DD genotype,
05/22 (22.7%) showed ID genotype and 16/22 (72.7%) showed
II genotype. In the control group 07 (15.4%) showed D allele
and 37 (84.1%) showed I allele. A chi square test between the
cases and control of D allele did not show a significance
difference OR-0.9614, p=0.9388 (95% CI=0.3482-2.653) D Allele.
None of the genotypes or allele did not show any association in
α2BAR I/D polymorphism in Saudi population OR-
0.6882,p=0.9388 (95% CI=0.2035-2.327) DD genotype 

(see supplementary material).

This study is a comprehensive investigation conducted in 2011
to determine the frequency of G6PD deficiency and its variants
in Saudi men. For the G6PD deficiency there are many
hematological and genetic studies were conducted in the
kingdom of Saudi Arabia []. In the G6PD gene 13 exons were
present and complete genetic sequencing analysis were
conducted in the Arab population. Till now there are no studies
were conducted on other gene polymorphisms apart from
G6PD gene. In our study we have conducted I/D gene
polymorphism studies to rule out whether I/D polymorphisms
play any role in G6PD individuals. We have selected 2 genes i.e.
ACE and α2BAR genes. The importance of ACE gene is a zinc
metalloprotease widely distributed on the surface of epithelial
and endothelial cells. ACE gene consists of 26 exons and spans
21 kb on human chromosome 17. The sequence codes a 1306
amino-acid protein including a signal peptide. The gene
product of ACE is composed of two homologous domains with
two active sites. It has a common polymorphism which consists
of the presence (I allele) or absence (D allele) of a 287 bp Alu
repeat sequence within intron 16. ACE activity in individuals
with DD genotype was found to be more than 8 times in those
with II genotype. Subjects with ID genotype exhibit
intermediate levels of ACE [].

α2BAR I/D polymorphism is leading to a detection of three
glutamic acids from a glutamic acid repeat element (Glu X 12,
amino acids 297-309), located at the third intracellular loop of
the receptor protein has been identified. The important
selection of this polymorphism was found to be more associated
with reduced basal metabolic rate in obese individuals. In this
study most of the men over weight and obese. From this gene
study we didn't find any association either with allele or with
genotypes. The reason that the α2BAR I/D polymorphism
could not show any significant effect in G6PD individuals
could be due to a much strong impact of G6PD deficiency as
per compared with that of this gene variant.

There are multiple studies were carried out in G6PD
individuals and have been reported. The African A mutation
studies and the two mutations i.e. C563T and 1311 C&gt;T G6PD
Mediterranean and G6PD Sibiri with different polymorphic
rates reinstate earlier studies. The G6PD Mediterranean, having
C→T transition at nucleotide 563 of exon 6 with most prevalent
allele has been reported from Mediterranean Middle East and
India as well []. This group has been carried out the genetic
work on the complete exon sequence of 6 and 7 in the G6PD
gene in Jeddah. G6PD gene polymorphism study was carried
out in G6PD deficient in more than 20 Arab countries and none
of them has been worked on I/D polymorphisms. Till date
there are no I/D polymorphism studies in G6PD patients and
this will be the first genetic study in G6PD individuals from the
Saudi Arabia.

In our study we have found that ACE I/D polymorphism study
was found to be strongly associated and 82% of individuals
were found to be deletion of Alu sequence, which means prone
for the disease and in the α2BAR gene I/D polymorphism didn't
show any association with the disease. We have mentioned one
of the reasons earlier and the other reason could be because of
lack of sample size. In our study we have chosen only 39
samples because all the men participated in this study is purely
Saudis from Taif city. We recommend having a large sample
size can help to rule out the disease whether it is showing any
important role or not.

From our study we conclude that G6PD deficiency is showing
strong association in DD genotype and D allele of ACE gene.
Any individual effecting DD genotype and D allele is prone for
the disease in ACE gene. We could not able to show any
association in α2BAR gene I/D polymorphism. Large sample
size has been recommended to study this disease.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Gratitude is expressed to all volunteers who have participated
in this study. We are thankful to College of Applied Medical
Sciences, King Saud University for the funding and supporting
this work.

Citation:Alharbi et al, Bioinformation 9(1): 049-053 (2013)

