Background
Dengue is a serious public health problem worldwide 
[]. There 
are currently no vaccines available for the prevention and 
treatment of DENV infection []. DENV is a positive – stranded 
encapsulated RNA virus and is composed of three structural 
protein genes, which encode the nucleocapsid or core (C) 
protein, a membrane-associated (M) protein, an enveloped (E) 
glycoprotein and seven non-structural (NS) proteins 
[]. DENV 
is a member of the genus Flavivirus and belongs to the 
Flaviviridae family []. DENV causes a wide spectrum of clinical 
illnesses ranging from relatively mild self limiting disease 
associated with fever, malaise and other non specific symptoms 
to the more severe, potential lethal disease manifestations that 
leads to dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) and dengue shock 
syndrome (DSS) []. There are four antigenically distinct, but 
closely related serotypes of the dengue virus (DENV -1, DENV -
2, DENV -3 and DENV -4), that exhibits a 65 – 70% sequence 
homology []. Dengue is transmitted mainly by Aedes aegypti 
mosquito and to some extent by Aedes albopictus []. The DENV-
2 is the most widespread of the four serotypes []. In India, the 
earliest isolation of DENV-2 is from Vellore, South India 
[]. 
The two component of viral serine protease, NS2B and NS3,
play a crucial role in viral replication as it is required for the 
synthesis of the polyprotein precursor prior to the assembly of 
the viral complex []. Thus NS2B-NS3 is considered to be a 
significant target for development of anti-dengue drugs. 


Plant derived compounds remain a significant source for the 
development of new antiviral agents. Studies reveal the 
importance of phytochemical agents against DENV [–]. 
Carica papaya, commonly known as papaya is a tree-like 
herbaceous plant. Carica papaya is a member of the plant family 
Caricaceae. Carica papaya leaf extracts are prescribed as a tonic 
for heart and also for the treatment of fever, pyrexia, diabetes, 
gonorrhea, syphilis, inflammation and for dressing foul wounds 
[–]. 
Previous phytochemical analysis [] reveals the 
presence of flavonoids, alkaloids, carbohydrates, saponins, 
glycosides, phytosterols, phenolics, terpenoids and tannins in 
the leaves of Carica papaya. Previous report [] states that the 
administration of aqueous leaf extracts of Carica papaya exhibits 
potential anti-dengue activity as indicated by the increased 
platelet count from 55×103/µL to 168×103/µL, White blood cells 
from 3.7×103/µL to 7.7×103/µL and neutrophils from 46% 
to78% in patients with dengue fever. 


GCMS analysis of previous report [] 
states that the leaves of Carica papaya mainly 
consists of seven phenolic compounds namely quercetin, protocatechuic acid, p-coumaric acid, 
caffeic acid, chlorogenic acid, kaempferol, and 5,7-dimethoxycoumarin. However, these compounds 
are not analyzed for their anti-dengue properties. Hence we attempted this research, and our 
results suggest that, the flavonoid quercetin has inhibitory activity on NS2B-NS3 protease 
which is very essential for the viral assembly. We believe our study might be a good 
starting point for the development of anti-dengue molecules from Carica papaya.

Methodology
Receptor 3D structure:
The NS2B cofactor was essential for the protease catalytic 
activity of NS3. The three dimensional structure of this protease 
associated with NS2B cofactor available in the protein data 
bank (PDB) []. The three dimensional structure of DENV-2 
NS2B-NS3 was retrieved from the protein data bank, PDB ID: 
2FOM []. All water molecules were removed and on the final 
stage hydrogen atoms were added to the target protein 
molecule.

Collection of active compounds:
A dataset of 7 compounds from Carica papaya were selected 
from the literature reported by Canini et al. (2007) 
[]. The 2D 
structure of seven ligands were retrieved from the NCBI 
PubChem database (
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pccompound/), all the ligand molecules were converted into 
3D structure using the 3D converter module of the SYBYL 
(Tripos international, USA) program and then energy 
minimized. The structures of the compounds were shown in 
().

Molecular docking:
Molecular docking simulation was performed using Surflex-dock program incorporated 
in SYBYL 2.0 (Tripos international, USA) []. At the beginning of the docking, the 
protein receptor was optimized by removing the unrelated substructure. The side 
chains of the protein structure were fixed using default settings such as addition 
of water molecules, addition of hydrogen, unknown atom types were assigned and bumps 
were relaxed. The Kollman-all atom charges were assigned to protein atoms. Finally, 
the whole structure was subjected to a staged minimization using the default parameters. 
Protomol is a computational depiction of the intended binding site, built from the hydrogen 
containing protein mol2 file where the putative ligands were aligned. This was done by the 
protein residues which constitute the active site using criteria tuned to create a docking 
target. Surflex-Dock combines empirical scoring function with a molecular similarity-based 
search which considers four terms, including the hydrophobic complementarity, polar 
complementarity, entropic terms and salvation terms. Before docking, ligands were optimized 
using SYBYL 2.0 Molecular Modeling Suite of Tripos, hydrogen atoms were added and charges 
were loaded with using the Gasteiger and Marsili charge calculation method. Finally the ligands 
were minimized using Powell method. The Molecular Computer Aided Design (MOLCAD) program was 
used as a visualization tool to examine the interaction between the ligand and protein. MOLCAD 
afford several methods to create a molecular surface, in the present study the fast Connolly 
method which is based on marching cube algorithm were utilized to generate the surfaces. 
Consensus scoring (CScore) function were used to represent binding affinities of active 
compounds, which uses the multiple scoring function to evaluate the binding affinity. CScore 
which combines the use of Gold score (Gscore), Dock score (D_score), ChemScore, Potential Mean 
Force (PMF_score) along with polar and crash score. Gscore which focuses on hydrogen bonding 
interactions [], 
D_score which utilizes the energetic contribution from hydrophobic and 
electrostatic interactions []. 
ChemScore function described by Eldridge et al. (1997) 
[] 
estimates the contributions to binding energy from interactions include lipophilic atoms, lipophilic
interactions, metal-ligand binding, hydrogen bonding. PMF_Score [] 
whose function is based upon 
ligand-receptor atom-pair interaction potentials that are statistical in nature rather than empirical. 
Consensus score which combines the use of multiple scoring function produce more accurate results than single scoring approach.

Drug Scan:
Drug scan was done using the online chemo informatics tool Molinspiration and admetSAR 
to check whether the compound has fulfilled the conditions as drug candidate.

Results
Molecular docking:
Docking of seven ligand molecules onto the catalytic site of the 
serine protease enzyme NS2B-NS3 is performed using SYBYL – 
Surflex docking []. After docking, the best pose for each 
ligand molecules are selected based on the CScore. Among the 
seven compounds screened, quercetin is found to have best 
binding affinity in terms of CScore. CScore offers multiple 
approaches for the evaluation of ligand-receptor interactions. 
CScore can be used to rank multiple configurations of the same 
ligand docked with a receptor, or to rank selected 
configurations of different ligands docked to the same receptor. 
To have a better understanding of the interaction of ligands 
with the complex, binding energies as well as the hydrogen 
bond interactions, are tabulated in  (see supplementary 
material). Evaluation of docking results depends upon the 
number of hydrogen bonds formed between the ligand and the 
protein. The molecular docking result of the best pose obtained 
is shown in (), protein structure is shown in surface 
model and the ligand is shown in stick model.  shows 
the hydrogen bond interactions between the quercetin and 
NS2B-NS3 serine protease. A total of six hydrogen bonds are 
formed and the key residues Asn 152, Ala 164, Lys 74, Asn 167, 
Leu 149 and Gly 87 are labeled.

ADME profiling:
Molecular properties and drug likeliness of the compounds are 
analysed on the basis of “Lipinski's Rule of Five” [] using the 
tool Molinspiration server (http://www.molinspiration.com/). 
The rule describes molecular properties important for a drug's 
pharmacokinetics in the human body, including their 
absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion. These 
compounds are checked for the drug-likeliness and the results 
are shown in  (see supplementary material). Our 
analysis showed that all the compounds passed through the 
filter except Chlorogenic acid which shows one violation 
against the Lipinski's rule of five. We also employed the use of 
admetSAR tool [] for in silico screening ADMET profiles of 
the active compounds. The admetSAR server predicts the 
ADMET-associated properties of the active compounds for 
different types of models all of which showed positive results. 
These results are depicted in  (see supplementary 
material).

Discussion
Dengue infection has been re-emerging as a serious life threat with increase in the 
infection rates every year. The number of cases of severe dengue disease continues to grow in 
endemic areas of Southeast Asia, Central and South America, and other subtropical regions 
[]. Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop effective 
anti-dengue compounds to combat this epidemic infection. In the present study we have analysed 
the activity of compounds in Carica papaya leaf extracts against NS2B-NS3 serine protease of 
DENV2 virus. DENV2 is a single stranded RNA with type I cap structure at the 5' end and codes 
for single polyprotein precursor arranged in order NH2-C-prM-E-NS1-NS2A-NS2B-NS3-NS4A-NS4B-NS5-COOH 
[]. It is well known that DENV NS3 is a multifunctional 
protein with an N-terminal protease domain (NS3pro) []. 
The viral protease is comprised of two viral proteins NS2B and NS3 that are associated with each other 
to form a heterocomplex. The N-terminal region of the non-structural 3 (NS3) protease forms complex with 
NS2B cofactor which is essential for viral replication []. Prohibiting the processing and release of 
the viral proteins from the polyprotein precursor would inhibit viral genome replication, thus reducing 
the number of virion progency produced. Since NS2B-NS3 protease plays a central role in the viral life 
cycle, it acts as an attractive therapeutic target for antiviral compound. Several studies provide 
considerable evidence for the importance of NS2B-NS3 protease as potential drug target 
[,
]. Receptor-ligand binding
interaction studies carried out by performing docking of the ligands that are 
found to be competitively inhibiting the activities of the DENV-2 NS2B-NS3 serine protease. 
From our analysis we found quercetin as best inhibitors as they show better ligand-enzyme 
interactions and stability. Our results correlate with the experimental work done by Zandi et al. 
(2011) [], which show significant antiviral activity against 
DENV-2 in Vero cells. Quercetin has also been reported to have inhibitory effects on several 
viruses []. Even though p-Coumaric acid shows best binding 
affinity in terms of hydrogen bond it shows poor values in case of ligand-receptor atom pair interaction. 
Considering protocatechuic acid the D score which reflects electrostatic and hydrophobic energy showed 
the best score whereas all the other parameters gave poor results. Chlorogenic acid, 5, 7-dimethoxycoumarin 
and kaempferol forms five hydrogen bonds with the active site residues of NS2B-NS3 protease but shows low 
binding affinity comparing to quercetin. Caffeic acid shows only four hydrogen bond interactions which are 
the least among the seven compounds analysed. Evaluation of Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism, 
and Excretion (ADME) properties of lead compounds is a major challenge in the process of drug 
development []. Most drug fails in the drug development 
process are due to poor pharmacokinetic properties and toxicity []. 
Development of high throughput and fast ADMET profiling assays facilitate the identification of active 
lead compounds at early drug discovery. ADME profiling into the earliest phase of the discovery process, 
leads to the development of effective lead compounds in the process of drug design 
[]. ADME profiling of active compounds proves 
that all the compounds except chlorogenic acid have no side effects on absorption. Presence of high-resistance 
tight junctions between endothelial cells of brain capillaries forms the barrier and prevents the brain uptake 
of most pharmaceuticals []. Experimentally, Blood brain barrier 
(BBB) is measured as the ratio of the compound concentration in the brain to that in the blood. 
Knowledge of the penetration of drugs through BBB is one of the key parameters to be optimized in 
drug discovery []. Oral bioavailability often 
considered as an important parameter to determine the drug likeness of active compounds as therapeutic agents 
[]. Oral drug bioavailability can also be markedly 
influenced by physiological, physiochemical and certain biopharmaceutical factors []. 
High penetration of BBB is required for central nervous system (CNS)-active drugs, 
whereas for non- CNS low penetration is desirable to minimize CNS-related side effects. Incidence 
of CNS involvement in patients with dengue infection has been reported in the many studies 
[]. Recently two case of meningitis caused 
by oligosymptomatic dengue has been reported in 
the city of Kolkata, West Bengal, India []. 
The BBB permeability of compound depends on several factors such as lipophilicity, hydrogen-bond 
desolvation potential, molecular size and pKa/charge [,
]. 
ADMET-associated properties of the active compounds for different types of models such as BBB penetration, 
P-glycoprotein substrate, renal organic cation transporter, human intestinal absorption and Caco2 permeability 
showed positive results which strongly supports the ability of compounds to act as drug. 
Cytochrome P450 (CYP) is group of isozymes involves in the metabolism of drugs, fatty acids, 
steroids, bile acids and carcinogens. Human genome encodes nearly fifty-seven CYP of which 
fifteen are involved in the metabolism of drugs and other xenobiotic chemicals 
[]. Nearly 75% of phase I drug metabolism depends on 
the involvement of CYP enzymes []. In the case of metabolism, 
various CYP substrate and inhibitor models are calculated and the result shows that these active 
compounds are Non-substrate and Non-inhibitor of CYP enzymes. In terms of toxicity, all the 
compounds are found to be non toxic. Our findings reveal that among the seven compounds screened, 
quercetin has potential inhibitory activity against NS2B-NS3 serine protease. Further ADME and 
toxicity risk assessment strongly suggest that quercetin have marked antiviral activity against 
DENV2 virus. Based on our observations, we suggest that, the flavonoid quercetin in Carica papaya 
might exert its antiviral activity by blocking the viral assembly mechanism of DENV2 virus. 
Our results strongly suggest that quercetin is a good candidate for the development of effective 
anti-dengue compounds. On the whole, we conclude that the flavonoid quercetin could be further 
investigated and can possibly be developed as an effective anti-dengue compound.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Dr. Anand Anbarasu gratefully acknowledges the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), Government of 
India Agency for the research grant [IRIS ID: 2011-03260] to carry out this research. P. Lavanya thanks ICMR for 
the research fellowship through the ICMR grant IRIS ID: 2011-03260. We would like to thank the management of 
VIT University for providing us the necessary facilities to carry out this research project.

Citation:Senthilvel et al, Bioinformation 9(18): 889-895 (2013)

Compounds from Carica papaya leaf extract.

Docked structure of Dengue virus NS2B-NS3 protease 
with Quercetin

Hydrogen bonding interactions between the 
compound quercetin and NS2B-NS3 protease 


