Background
HIV-1 is frequently detected in the brain of HIV-1 infected individuals. []
      The exposure of neural cells to some drugs, HIV-1 proteins or HIV-1 infection may cause brain damage and perturb gene expression . 
      In neural cells, the toxicity of the HIV-1 proteins gp120 and TAT was shown to involve Ca+2 and glutamate channels, and it could be 
      reversed by memantine. Furthermore, cocaine stimulates HIV-1 replication through the chemokine, cytokine, and signaling pathways. 
      [–] Drug abuse and HIV-1 
      infection most likely enhance neuropsychiatric disease, HAD (HIV associated Dementia), and HIVE (HIV encephalitis) as shown 
      elsewhere. [–] During the 
      early course of HIV-1 infection, the virus penetrates the blood-brain barrier (BBB). [] HIV-1 invasion of the brain most likely occurs via macrophage and microglial cells and this leads to HIVE.  
      [–] Recent work describes 
      the influx of CD16-positive macrophages from bone marrow into the brain. []
      Several inflammatory molecules including cytokines, chemokines (CCKs), growth factors, lipids, and excitatory compounds are 
      associated with brain inflammation and damage. [–] Here, we provide a preliminary description of the molecular mechanisms underlying these processes 
      using expression and gene annotation data.  This information has been stored in a user friendly, online database which will be 
      made available to the public domain.

Methodology
Cultured human fetal neurons were isolated, cultured, and treated with HIV-1 TAT, HIV-1 ENV and cocaine in a 2x2x2 study design. 
      [––] The Affymetrix HGU95A oligonucleotide chip was used to measure the expression of 12,565 probes. The 
      data were analyzed using a one-way ANOVA (analysis of variance) among the eight treatment groups across genes (p &lt; 0.0005). The 
      expression of 35 genes was statistically significant. [] We then used 
      Pathways Assist (Stratagene, Inc.) to portray pathways among genes through common and divergent relationships. We modeled the 
      neurological processes involved in Drug Abuse and Neuro-AIDS by computational simulation of physiological processes using 
      experimentally derived information. 

Our model uses the representation of biochemical networks named Moirai that is described 
      elsewhere. [] The clinical and physiological features are represented as 
      sub-networks that recursively expand to their known component reactions, recorded pertinent data based on functional assays, and 
      information on cell/tissue types. These features are treated as containers for cellular compartments in anatomical structures. 
      Thus, our model mixes information known at varying levels occurring at different spatial and logical scales. We then use a 
      prototype version of The Agora to populate the computational model where the information entered in forms goes 
      into the model 
      after appropriate review. [] The development of The Agora 
      is in progress 
      and the completed version when made available in the public domain will enable scientists to retrieve biochemical and physiological
      information on Neuro-AIDS. We use the language semantics in Glossa for gene to pathway mapping in this development. 
      []

Results
Thirty-five (35) genes were previously identified by ANOVA analysis of gene expression results from neuron cultures treated 
      with cocaine/TAT/ENV. [] The Ariadne Pathways Assist™ program was then 
      used to generate annotated pathway interactions among gene products. The categories of genes thus generated and with which they 
      interact include inflammation, focal contact, proliferation and growth, motility, morphogenesis, shape, mitogenesis, synaptogenesis,
      differentiation, cell survival, and neuropsychiatric disease. In , we see that SOX2, 
      a transcription factor, interacts 
      with other transcription factors (e.g. SOX1, SOX3, etc.) in the nucleus and also promotes the expression of cell surface growth 
      factor receptors (e.g. FGF4, FGF3, etc). This is interpreted as a series of reparative processes attempted by the neuron under 
      stress due to exposure to TAT, ENV and cocaine. 

Interpreting results such as those reported here in a physiological and clinical context requires building and refining 
      computational models for specific clinical conditions. There are three steps in the modeling process that continuously and 
      cyclically interact ().

 First, one must computationally represent the phenomena in a way that accurately captures the 
      biology, biochemical and physiological data, including information on cells, compartments, and tissues, and supports simulations 
      of biological phenomena. Our current model focuses on phenomena relevant to drug abuse and several dementias including NeuroAIDS. 
      Second, one must populate that representation with experimental data to form the basic model. We are using a prototype version of 
      The Agora, a planned public resource for the scientific community to curate and use their biochemical and 
      physiological databases 
      to populate our computational model. We enrich the model with new relationships and types of information as the data entry process 
      proceeds. For example, we initially did not include information on molecular biology kits, but these turned out to be important 
      ways of specifying certain experimental protocols. Third, one develops and tests hypotheses about the phenomena by modifying the 
      model and simulating the results. Until the basic model satisfactorily captures both the biological ideas (the representation) 
      and the data, one cannot embark on this stage. Once simulations commence, the representations are likely to change in response 
      to the results.

Discussion
Drug abuse is a complicating factor in the diagnosis and treatment of HAD and related diseases. [–] The preliminary gene 
			expression study in cultured 
      neurons treated with cocaine and HIV-1 proteins is described as a useful controlled model. We previously analyzed gene expression 
      related to AIDS directly in gross brain tissue (without cell fractionation or micro-dissection) and in cell culture. [
      –] In these brain gene expression 
      studies, statistical hypothesis testing was used to identify genes that are differentially expressed between two groups, HIV+ 
      cases and HIV- controls. [] However, we did not use traditional 
      hypothesis testing methods as these are insufficient given the extremely large number of tests involved. Since there are over 
      12,000 genes to be tested, the expected number of Type I errors (false positives) becomes unacceptable.

The preliminary analysis of the human neuron gene expression using the one-way ANOVA produced a list of 35 genes that were 
      significantly expressed across treatments. Application of a GLM analysis for significant interactions indicated most of these 
      genes were significant due to TAT, some due to TAT-ENV, TAT-cocaine, and ENV-cocaine interactions, and none due to TAT-ENV-cocaine 
      interactions. [] During the course of generating , 113,944 
      sequence objects were examined in the Ariadne database in order to identify the genes and their interactions and connections 
      indicated in the figure. In this figure we see examples of extensive interactions that occur among transcription factors in the 
      nucleus (SOX1, SOX2, SOX3, etc) as well as with cell surface growth factor receptors (e.g. FGF4, FGF3, etc). This is interpreted 
      as a series of reparative processes attempted by the neuron under stress due to exposure to tat, env, and cocaine.

The preliminary analyses described here are part of a wider scope needed to defeat drug abuse, Neuro-AIDS, and other 
      Dementias.  [] Computational modeling of biological phenomena serves three 
      main purposes including to express what is known, to help formulate hypotheses, and to test those hypotheses. Large amounts of 
      data are produced in diverse studies including molecular biology, drug abuse, virology, immunology, physiology, computational 
      biology, and statistics. The vast majority of data needed to explore hypotheses and to interpret the results of these efforts for 
      the most part remains locked in the print literature and posted web-sites. –
      –––––
      ––] We are currently using The AGORA to record this data related to Drug Abuse and Neuro-AIDS and other 
      neurological diseases. [] We are developing methods to structure 
      anatomical information (location where specific biochemical reactions occur; e.g. basal ganglia of the brain) so that essential 
      structural features are included along with the topological attributes.

We acknowledge NIH support (NIDA DA 14533, DA 12580, and NIGMS GM 056529)

Figures and Tables
(A) Gene interactions using Ariadne Pathways AssistTM. This figure shows relationships among genes expressed in neurons in 
          culture as an example of possible gene expression network connections. Connections from SOX-2, a central transcription 
          factor/regulator are shown to nuclear (e.g. SOX1, SOX3, etc.) and membrane associated proteins (e.g. FGF4, FGF3, etc). (B) 
          Modeling drug abuse and neurological phenomena. This figure illustrates the iterative process of adumbrating a representation 
          (top box), populating it with experimental data (middle box), and using the populated representation to develop and test 
          hypotheses (lowest box). Each of these steps interacts, but one cannot proceed to simulation until the first two have advanced 
          sufficiently to provide an adequate initial model. 


					Citation:Shapshak et al., Bioinformation 1(3): 86-88 (2006)

