Background
New sequencing technologies (high-throughput sequencing)
such as SOLiD, Ion Torrent, GS FLX and Illumina are
characterized by their greater accuracy, higher-coverage
sequencing and reduced read size, all of which present
challenges in the processing and analysis of these data. These
technologies allow scientists to unravel prokaryotic genomes in
a single round of sequencing and at reduced costs compared to
the Sanger method [].

The use of these platforms in functional genomic analyses
enables transcriptome-wide analyses via the RNAseq technique,
which is a promising alternative to microarrays []. There are
many advantages to this new method, including the reduction
or even absence of noise, high-coverage sequencing, transcript
detection, low cost and reductions in the time and labour
required for sample preparation. In addition, this method
produces results similar to those of quantitative PCR 
[–].

A commonly used analytical approach to proteomics studies is
the separation of polypeptide chains using 2D electrophoresis
[] followed by the isolation and tryptic digestion of spots to
identify peptides via mass spectrometry []. The
complementarity between 2D electrophoresis and mass
spectrometry generates two pieces of information that can be
integrated into transcriptome analyses: the relative volume of
each spot and the “Locus_tag” of each protein identified.

The data obtained from transcriptomic and proteomic analysis
allow for differential expression analyses that are used to
determine which genes are hypo or hyper-expressed under
different stress conditions compared to a control condition. Due
to the need for large-scale processing of data obtained on Next
Generation Sequencing (NGS) platforms and the difficulty of
integrating transcriptome and proteome data, we developed
FunSys, a programme that can be used to analyze differential
expression data from RNAseq and can integrate these analyses
with data from proteomic studies

Methodology
Data Collection:
We used the bacterium Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis strain
1002 as a model organism. The bacteria were grown under
osmotic stress, acid stress, heat stress and control conditions
(Unpublished data). Following sample preparation, cDNA was
amplified and sequenced. The sequencing results were filtered,
and error correction was performed. The C. pseudotuberculosis
strain 1002 genome was used to map sequences to quantify the
expression level of each gene.

Expression level analysis of cistrons was performed with the
Bioscope programme (Applied Biosystems) using the WT
Analysis pipeline (SOLiD™ WT Analysis Pipeline) specific for
the analysis of transcriptome data. These analyses were used to
map the sequence reads to the C. pseudotuberculosis strain 1002
genome to determine gene expression levels based on the
RNASeq technique. This pipeline generated a final output file
(counttag.txt) that consists of a list of genes present in the
genome and their respective expression levels in Reads Per
Kilobase of exon model per Million mapped reads (RPKM) 
[].

Proteome data were obtained from a sample file from the
ImageMaster 2D Platinum programme
(http://www.gelifesciences.com). This file was manually
changed so that the numbering of each spot was replaced with
“Locus_tags” present in C. pseudotuberculosis strain 1002. The
relative volume of each spot was maintained, and all other
information in the file was deleted. Finally, the file was
converted into a tabular format with two columns: the
“Locus_tag” and the relative volume of the spot. The generated
file was utilized to validate FunSys integration of the results
from the transcriptome and proteome studies.

FunSys:
FunSys was developed in JAVA programming language, using
the paradigm of object orientation and the graph library Swing
http://java.sun.com/docs/books/tutorial/uiswing. It receives
“.gff” input files that are generated from EMBL files converted
using the Artemis programme [] 
and “counttag.txt” input files
that are generated using the Bioscope programme.

In the differential expression analysis, FunSys calculates foldchange
values for each gene, taking into consideration the
RPKM ratio between the stress and control conditions (when
the ratio is less than one, the negative inverse ratio is listed).
These values are used to determine whether the expression of a
particular gene is induced, repressed or unchanged, as defined
by the user input criteria. By default, FunSys adopts the
following parameters: a fold-change &gt; 3.0 indicates induced
gene expression; a fold-change &lt; -3.0 indicates repressed gene
expression; and genes with fold-changes between -3.0 and 3.0
are considered to have unchanged expression levels 
[].

After loading the file containing the proteome information,
FunSys can integrate the transcriptome expression data (RPKM)
and the proteome data using the “Locus_tag”.

Discussion
The sequencing analysis yielded 18,783,810 reads for the
osmotic stress condition; 21,622,844 reads for the heat stress
condition; 17,393,077 reads for the acid stress condition and
25,235,478 reads for the control condition.

Using FunSys, we analyzed the differential expression of each
gene in C. pseudotuberculosis strain 1002 between the stress and
control conditions and calculated the fold-changes for each
gene using the FunSys default parameters. These data were
used to determine whether a particular gene was induced,
repressed or unchanged. From this analysis, we identified 160
differentially expressed genes (induced and repressed) under
the osmotic stress condition, 69 genes under the thermal stress
condition and 169 genes under the acid stress condition.

Following the differential expression analysis, FunSys generates
a pie chart quantifying the induced, repressed and unchanged
genes. A scatter plot of the genes (), based on RPKM
values between the stress and control conditions for each gene,
is also generated to provide a graphical representation of the
distribution of the RPKM values according to their level of
expression.

Following analysis with FunSys, the information generated can
be stored in both a tabular format and a graphical format (.png).
In addition, a report is also generated of the overall differential
expression levels of all genes for all conditions (stress and
control conditions), based on a filter available in FunSys.

Conclusion
FunSys simplifies the differential expression analysis of
transcriptome data and integrates these data with proteomics
data, thus facilitating the analysis and identification of
transcribed and translated genes. In addition, the reports and
graphs generated by FunSys will assist users in analyzing their
results and generating images for publication.

This work was part of the Rede Paraense de Genômica e
Proteômica supported by Fundação de Amparo a Pesquisa do
Estado do Pará &amp; CNPq Pronex Núcleo Amazônico de
Excelência em Genômica de Microorganismos. Funding:
FAPESPA, CNPq e CAPES.

Citation:de Sá et al, 8(11): 529-531 (2012)

scatter plot of the RPKM values of C.
Pseudotuberculosis strain 1002 genes for the heat stress and
control conditions. In the graph, the RPKM values were
converted into a log10 scale (X- and Y-axes). Following
conversion, log values less than 0 were excluded because they
represent very low RPKM values. The values for the control
condition are plotted on the X-axis, and the values for the stress
condition (50c) are plotted on the Y-axis.

