This Editorial is divided into two parts. 1. A summary of what
is under the Bioinformation aegis; 2. An example of a highly
networked gene, NF-kB.

The Bioinformation Aegis
Bioinformation (Online ISSN 0973-2063; Print ISSN 0973-8894)
is a peer-reviewed journal that grows in leaps and bounds as
the global scientific endeavor advances. Bioinformation publishes
original biological research that utilizes mathematical and
computational analysis. The fields in such analyses range from
biochemistry and cell biology to genetics, epigenetics, systems
biology, and brain imaging, from agriculture to tissue
engineering and transplantation, from nanotechnology to
evolution, and from basic research to clinical medicine,
infectious disease, immunology, molecular structure, molecular
therapy, and vaccines. This work is further often analyzed from
the vantage point of data cleaning, analysis, representation,
storage, retrieval, and knowledge extraction. Developing
databases, datasets, prediction models, and computer programs
fall under the purview of Bioinformation as well. Research
articles published in Bioinformation demonstrate novelty,
relevance, and coherence.

Global scientific advances are accelerating, research and clinical
studies are expanding, topics of study are increasing, as are
publications, journals, and books. E-publishing has participated
in this intellectual revolution, and has widened the already
expanding scope and reach. Moreover, novel fields increase
contemporaneously, e.g. nanotechnology and nanomedicine,
imaging and genetics, vaccines for cancer, microorganisms (e.g.
bacteria and parasites), and viruses (e.g. HIV, HCV, HBV, and
arboviruses), as well as genetic engineering. Genetic 
engineering in agriculture is ubiquitous; genetic engineering in
humans and animals is in progress. All this work requires
concomitant development of fields including bioinformatics
and modes of analysis. It is among the goals of Bioinformation to
continue to promote and be the venue of all these advances and
improvements.

NF-kB, a highly networked gene
The example selected for this Editorial is the gene, NF-kB
(Nuclear Factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells).
NF-kB is a central gene that is expressed in eukaryotic cells. It is
a transcription factor and interacts with the promoters and gene
products of many gene pathways. Thus, it is central in gene
control and expression and is highly utilized throughout
eukaryotic evolution. It is important, for example, for treatment
of cancer and due to its function in immunology. It is also
involved in the control of expression of many mammalian
viruses. More than 12 years ago, a list was published of some
114 genes with which NF-kB interacts. Please see 
 (see
supplementary material). A current view extends the
interactions of NF-kB including 99 genes as indicated in (Figure
).

 (see supplementary material) lists descriptions and
functions of genes in that table. As noted in the ()
legend, interactions of NF-kB are indicated that involve
regulation, co-expression, and actual physical interaction.
Molecular processes in this figure include apoptosis,
immunology, transcription, chromatin, and regulation of the
NF-kB gene itself. Additional interactions are not shown
because of the excessive overlapping information that would
result in the figure. These include down-regulation, upregulation,
predicted protein interaction, and predicted
transcription factor interactions. Similarly, only 100 genes are
shown since more than that would make the figure illegible.

In summary then, this journal,Bioinformation, has a wide array
of bioinformatics in its purview. This Editorial provides a
simple scenario of the complexity of molecular information
available, already in the literature, even for a single molecule.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Paul Shapshak, Bioinformation 8(9): 399-402 (2012)

NF-kB interactions. In this figure, interactions - linecolor
are Regulation- beige, Co-expression - purple and Physical
interaction-brown. (GenePro SA Biosciences,
http://www.sabiosciences.com/)
http://www.panomics.com/
NFkBhuman.htm

