Background
A large number of plant genomes are under consideration for whole 
genome sequencing but for most of them, due to their large genome size, 
the task has been little difficult and time consuming. However, for them, as 
a prehand, large scale EST sequencing projects has been started as an 
alternative. Expressed Sequence Tags (EST) are cDNA clones, sequenced 
randomly in a single pass run. Based on the direction of cloning, it can be 
5' EST or 3' EST. Since the ESTs are derived from cDNA, they provide 
direct evidence for the study of transcriptome and genome.

Microsatellites or Simple Sequence Repeats (SSR) or Short tandem repeats 
(STR) are 1-6 bp tandemly repeated motifs present in both coding and noncoding 
regions of prokaryotic and eukaryotic genome. SSR are extensively 
used as molecular markers because of its multiallelic nature, co-dominant 
inheritance and relative abundance. Since EST also represent the coding 
part of the genome, these serve as an important source for mining putative 
SSR markers and provide first hand insight into the organism's genetic 
diversity. Here, in this study, we present the mining of EST-SSR markers 
and detecting polymorphism in microsatellites in 3 bamboo species, 
namely, Phyllostachys edulis, Bambusa oldhamii, Dendrocalamus sinicus. 
Two approaches were used in this work. First, by using MISA, SSR 
markers were predicted and functional annotation of those SSR containing 
sequences was done. Another approach was to determine polymorphism 
using the novel pipeline PolySSR.

Methodology
ESTs for 3 different bamboo species namely,  Phyllostachys edulis,
Bambusa oldhamii and  Dendrocalamus  sinicus  were  downloaded from  
NCBI's dbEST. A total of 3087 EST sequences of  P. edulis, 318 EST 
sequences of  B. oldhamii and 14 EST sequences of D. sinicus was 
downloaded from dbEST as on may 29, 2009, dbEST release 052909. 
dbEST has redundancy in EST sequences. In order to remove the 
redundancy, CAP3 Assembler [] was used for clustering.

SSR were detected using MIcro SAtellite identification tool (MISA)  
[].
The search criteria were to search for a minimum of 14 bp SSR repeat. 
Primer pairs for the SSRs were designed using Primer3 (v 0.4.0) 
[]. The 
web interface allows the user defined constraints; however, here the default 
parameters were used.

EST-SSR sequences were subjected to similarity searching against nonredundant 
(nr) database with constraint of ORGN: Oryza sativa. Bamboo 
being monocotyledon, rice was used as model organism owing to more 
proximity in phylogeny. It was performed using NCBI's Basic Local 
Alignment Search Tool (BLAST), variant BLASTX []. The sequence was 
considered homologous if the e-value was ≤ 1e-5 and score ≥ 100. Based 
on the position of SSR in the homology search, they were assigned 
whether they lie in 5' UTR, 3' UTR or ORF. Only those EST sequences 
were further analyzed in which SSR were predicted to be in ORF. The 
functionality was assigned according to Gene Ontology (GO) annotation. 
Rice was used as model organism for similarity searching. GO annotation 
of  Oryza sativa was used to map functions by similarity searching in 
GRAMENE. Polymorphism exhibited by EST-SSR was mapped using the 
new pipeline PolySSR []. 

Results and Discussion
For analysis, the EST data was significantly reduced to a nonredundant set 
of sequences by atleast 30% using CAP3. Mono-SSR repeats were not 
considered since they do not serve important as molecular markers. The 
search criteria were kept low to maximize the SSR discovery  []. In D. 
sinicus, no SSRs were detected by MISA and excluded for further study.

Among cereal crops, tri-SSRs were most frequent followed by di- and 
tetra-SSR [] and in our study also, tri-SSRs were found to be most 
abundant (49.34%) among all SSRs in P. edulis which is in agreement to 
other poaceae family members like barley, maize, sorghum, rice, wheat [,
,]. 
In general, AT motif are common in plants [,
]. However in 
bamboo, AT motif was least occurring. In  P. edulis, among di-SSRs, 
AG/CT was most abundant. The result was consistent with the results from 
poaceae members [,
,].. 
AG/CT motif can represent codons GAG, AGA, UCU and CUC in mRNA population and code for R, E, A and L 
respectively. Since A and L are found in increased amount in proteins, the 
abundance of AG/CT in the genome can be substantiated. CG repeats are 
least found in cereal species [] and in our present study also, CG/GC 
motif was completely absent.

In plants, common motif is AAG. CCG is a specific feature of monocot 
genome  [] 
but in bamboo species, this trend was not observed. Among 
tri-SSRs,  P. edulis  showed abundance in AGG/CCT, AGC/CGT and 
AGT/ATC repeats. These motifs were fairly well represented in rice 
[], 
maize [], pearl millet 
[], and barley 
[]. In our study, AAT/ATT motif 
was found to be nil. This may be explained because TAA- based variants 
code for stop codons that have direct effect on protein synthesis  
[]. In 
this study, tetra- and hexa repeats were found in lowest frequency (Table 1 
see ).

In B. oldhamii, different SSR motifs very almost evenly distributed. Lack 
of considerable frequency difference in the occurrence of various SSR 
motifs in B. oldhamii and absence of SSRs in D. sinicus can be reasoned 
with the less number of EST sequences available and analyzed. Flanking 
primers pairs were designed for SSR containing sequences. For 90.57% of 
P. edulis EST-SSR sequences, primers were designed whereas for all SSR 
containing sequences of  B. oldhamii  primers were designed  in silico. 
Sharma et al. (2009) [] 
designed primers for 81.25% of SSR containing 
EST from P. edulis  and B. oldhamii  and were able to amplify 76.1% of 
those EST primers in lab. Most SSRs for which primers were designed 
were found to be ≫ 20 bp length, thus has a smaller chance of mutation or 
slipped strand mispairing over smaller sequence length. This may lead to 
more chance of sequence conservation.

The SSR containing sequences for which primers were designed were then 
analyzed for determining the relative SSR position on genome using 
sequence similarity search. Most of the SSRs were predicted in 5' UTR 
followed by 3'UTR. Very few were predicted to be in ORF. Maximum 
SSRs were found to be in 5'UTR in bamboo species, in accordance to 
another study []. 
Almost all AG motifs were found in 5' UTR where as 
CT motif was found maximally in 5' UTR and very few in 3' UTR. ORF 
contained mostly trinucleotide repeats []. High frequency of 
trinucleotide repeats can be explained as these are less affected by base 
mutations and hence more conserved. However, disease causing effect of 
change in SSR sequence in humans has been reported [].
These SSR predicted to be in ORF were mapped against related Gene 
Ontology (GO) IDs. They were mapped with variable functions which are 
summarized giving the corresponding GO annotations for sequences in 
Table 2 (see ).

The polySSR pipeline resulted in 287 contigs and 2127 singlets of  P. 
edulis. The contigs were analyzed for polymorphism. In all, only 7 contigs 
were found to contain 7 polymorphic SSRs. The 7 contigs included 21 P. 
edulis EST sequences, of which 4 EST sequences (189099774, 189100527, 
189100246, 189100551) were also included in our final MISA analysis. 
The SSR motif -GA showed high polymorphism. GA/CT motif was also 
most polymorphic in rice  []. Polymorphism was previously reported in 
Bamboo species by Sharma  et al.  []. Primers were designed for the 7 
contig sequences and position determination on genome was done. The 
presence of variation in repeat units of SSR in 5'UTR is said to affect gene 
transcription and/or translation, if in 3'UTR, they may be responsible for 
gene silencing or transcription slippage and if in ORF they inactivate or 
activate genes or truncate protein  [,
]. These SSRs can be used as 
molecular markers if the SSR containing genes are identified and their 
polymorphism validated. The summary of polySSR result is given in 
Table 3 (see ). 
In B. oldhamii and D. sinicus, no 
polymorphic SSRs were found. Thus the divergent biological role of SSRs 
is important in the study of plant genomics and functionalities.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors greatly acknowledge Elodie Salzemann, Wangeningen 
University, Netherland for using our data and providing us with the 
polySSR results for the study of polymorphism in EST-SSR in bamboo 
species. Also, the authors thank Pankaj Bhardwaj, IHBT, Himachal 
Pradesh for providing valuable suggestions and help

Citation:Oviya &amp; Shanmughavel, Bioinformation 5(6): 240-243 (2010) 

