Background
This availability of protein structures in recent years led to the
development of docking of ligands into the target binding site.
Docking [] which was pioneered during the early 1980's, models and
estimates the recognition process between the protein and a ligand
since then a significant development has been observed both in
docking algorithm and scoring functions []. In modern drug discovery
process High Throughput virtual screening (HTVS) or High
Throughput Docking (HTD) plays an important role and often serves
as a starting point to drug discovery process. Among the most widely
used HTVS programs are Gold [], Dock 
[], Glide [], 
FlexX [],
Fred [], and LigandFit []. Most of the software that are specifically
designed for virtual screening (VS) are commercial packages. Dock
and Fred are exceptions which are freely available for academic
purposes.

AutoDock is also free academic purpose, but it is under utilized for
virtual screening as compared to other software, although it is one of
the most frequently used docking tool for other purposes like blinddocking
and binding mode analysis. The lack of popularity of
AutoDock for HTVS is attributed to many reasons like: AutoDock
consumes relatively more docking time as compared to other docking
programs probably because of its relatively accurate docking algorithm
and scoring function. Some practical difficulties also arise especially
for GUI users, for example: each and every time the user has to repeat
the protocol for ligand preparation and docking parameter file
generation. Therefore the docking process cannot be left unattended by
the user for any virtual screening experiment with the existing features
of AutoDock. In the present work all these procedures are fully
automated by a Unix script. Additionally features from software like
FILTER, OMEGA, ROCS, EON and BABEL
(http://www.eyesopen.com/products/) are also incorporated. The aims
are mainly to minimize user intervention during the docking process so
that the process can run unattended, as well as find a reasonable
solution to the VS problem generally associated with AutoDock.

Features
A dialog box within the script is created for providing a user interface.
Some preinstalled softwares like (MGLTools1.5.0, AutoDock 4.0,
AutoGrid 4.0, OPENBABEL­2.2.0, FILTER, OMEGA, ROCS and
EON) are required. It is designed in such a way so that it provides a
clear advantage over the limitations by AutoDock while performing
virtual screening other associated programs were also incorporated
along with AutoDock which screens the structures according to certain
similarity criteria and other user defined filters, there by reducing the
redundancy and improving computational efficacy. However the user
is free to skip any program which performs a similarity calculation or
imposes any filter and can go directly for the docking which is again
automated. The only input the script requires is the ligand database in
sdf (or any other recognized file formats in BABEL) of the molecules
and then it automatically processes the data in an interactive fashion.
An interactive editing of the default parameters is provided. Before
launching a fresh program and before loading new parameters it
pauses for 10 seconds and asks the user for any alteration. For example
while writing the docking parameter file/s (.dpf) it loads the default
parameters and pause the program for 10 seconds enabling the user to
edit any parameter value, once these values are loaded it is set default
for every molecule.

The script provides an automated yet efficient mode for analyzing the
results obtained after a virtual screening experiment. After the docking
is over it converts all the docking conformers for every molecule into
its corresponding pdb files it also appends all the dlg files and then
summarizing and sorting them according to their scores. In order to
validate the program a “lead-like” subset of 972608 compounds
obtained from ZINC7 database was screened against Mycobacterium
tuberculosis thymidylate kinase a potential target for anti tubercular
drug development. A satisfactory performance is observed while
performing the process of virtual screening locally on a single system
with a dataset of 972608 compounds (unpublished results) however;
its validation on a Grid platform is under development.

Methodology
Software
The script runs on a linux platform in bash shell and requires some
preinstalled softwares like MGLTools1.5.0, AutoDock 4.0, AutoGrid
4.0, OPENBABEL-2.2.0, FILTER, OMEGA, ROCS and EON.

Scripting
Unix based Shell and Perl scripting is used in the current work. Dialog
command is used to create the various dialog boxes wherever required
in order to make the utility more user friendly. Based on the choices in
the MAIN DIALOG BOX some SUB DIALOG BOXES are created as
given in . The main dialog box is created as shown in
supplementary material.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are grateful to AICTE (All India Council for Technical
Education) for the financial aid.The Scripps Research Institute and
OpenEye Scientific Software are also acknowledged for providing the
necessary software absolutely free to carry out the research.

Citation: Sharma et al, Bioinformation 4(2): 84-86 (2009)

Flowchart showing the various dialog boxes depicting the workflow and corresponding programs used to build the script. Four main
protocols for VS are included which are (1) Filtering Molecular databases; (2) Conversion of file formats, (3) Ligand based similarity search, (4)
Structure based docking.

A LAYOUT of how the script looks after execution. The various dialog boxes one after the other with MGL Tools window in the
background.

