Background
The viral envelope proteins are used as conventional vaccine
targets. Apart from the primary and the other structures of
proteins, glycosylation is an essential feature of any protein that
gives its complete functionality. This occurs as a part of posttranslational
modifications. The N-Linked glycosylation of the
protein is a remarkable feature occurring by the programs in
the chaperones, which determines the trafficking of the protein
either to be secreted or localized to its target 
[].

The varied glycosylation pattern and degree can modulate the
protein function. This feature is found in most taxa as their
taxonomic character []. The alteration in the glycosylation
patterns of the immunoglobulins ultimately impairs the viral
entry and replication influencing the susceptibility to the viral
infections []. These fore-running reports on glycosylation
suggest the need for enhancing knowledge on glycosylation of
viral envelope proteins for vaccine design. High throughput
analysis of glycans is evolving for meeting the diagnostic and
therapeutic requirements. Genetics associated with this
phenomenon are also being investigated across populations as
it may have a clinical impact in handling the diseases 
[].

Glycosylation on the viral envelope glycoproteins affects their
interaction with the receptors on the host cells through which
they enter into the cells. The enveloped viruses can evade the
immune system by exploiting the glycans as shields that covers
the antibody targets. The glycosylation on the envelope
proteins of HIV-1 and Human Influenza Hemagglutinin, helps
them in escaping from the host immune recognition as they are
the sole targets of the humoral immune response. Moreover,
engineering the N-linked glycosylation sites of Hepatitis C
Virus (HCV) envelope glycoproteins alters the T cell response
[]. It has been already shown that the differences in the Nlinked
glycosylation of HIV and Ebola virus glycoproteins
modulate the DC-SIGN (Dendritic Cell Specific Intercellular
adhesion molecule Grabbing Non-integrin) and its receptor 
[].
The envelope glycoproteins of HIV-1 not only feature
antigenicity but also the structure, biology, tropism and the
course of the viral evolution []. The biology of the virus starts
with the entry into the host cell which is possible only with
these glycoproteins []. Beyond this, they also offer resistance
for the virus against the innate components of the host immune
system []. For example, the glycoproteins of the Influenza Virus
that causes flu enables its firm adherence onto the mucous
membrane, prevents it from being eliminated by the ciliated
epithelial cells. The sites of glycosylation on the envelope
glycoproteins of West Nile virus can be mutated for developing
alternative forms of vaccines that will be more efficient 
[].
The prophylactic vaccines for the viruses mentioned above
(HIV, H. Influenza, HCV, Ebola) are yet to be achieved. Hence,
a computational study that focuses on glycosylation of
envelope protein, would pave way for efficient vaccine
designing strategies.

The HIV-1 Env is a heavily glycosylated trimeric protein having
three identical surface gp120 molecules, each noncovalently
associated with a transmembrane gp41 molecule 
[]. Most of
the HIV-1 glycoproteins are N-glycosylated in the regions that
are putative targets for the vaccine design and it is proven in
the SIV – gp41 []. The deglycosylation of these targets had
shown increase in neutralization []. With the expanding and
advanced knowledge and technology, the field of medicine is
still impaired for about three decades with its struggle for a
successful vaccine that can address to the epidemiological
status of HIV-1 infection that produces at least 6500 new
infections daily []. The pathogen either as a whole or a part
had been used as a successful vaccine in the conventional
preventive strategies. But such a vaccine for HIV-1 is not yet
achieved. The viral diversity with its other immune evasion
strategies are being investigated. The glycosylation pattern on
the viral targets being a strategy for the viral evasion must be
studied extensively for designing a successful vaccine 
[]. The
Z13, 4E10 and 10E8 neutralizing antibodies of HIV-1 are
putatively targeting the regions, SLWNWFNITN NWFDIT and
NWFDISNWLWYIK [] found in the transmembranous HIVgp41.
By employing computational methods, these neutralizing
antibody targets were investigated in this paper for their
glycosylation patterns and the mutations that favor such
patterns.

Methodology
Sequence Analysis:
FASTA format of six amino acid sequences, three chains of two
trimers, HIV-1 envelope glycoproteins i.e., 2M7W and 2LP7
from PDB containing the target for 4E10, 10E8 and Z13
antibodies were downloaded. 2M7W and 2LP7 are trimers and
each chain (Chain A, B, C) constituting the trimer was taken as
a single sequence and was aligned using ClustalW feature of
Bioedit v7.0.9 and was stored as FASTA file. It was then
uploaded into the N Glycosite, an online tool available at
http://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/GLYCOSITE/gly
cosite.html 
[]. A typical glycosylation site will have N-X-S/T
and a potential site for glycosylation shown in . The
glycosylation sites found in the NWFDIT, NWFDISNWLWYIK
and SLWNWFNITN targeted by 4E10, 10E8 and Z13 antibodies
respectively were studied using this online tool. The D (Asp)
was substituted for N (Asn) at the 50th position that contains
the targets for these anitbodies. The glycosylation at position 50
with either N (Asn) or D (Asp) were investigated using the
above mentioned online tool. The glycosylation pattern for the
same dataset was also checked for the glycosylation pattern
using another such tool NetNGlycServer 1.0 available at 

http://www.cbs.dtu.dk /services/NetNGlyc/ to check the reliability
of the results.

Protein and Ligand Preparation for Docking:
The PDB of the HIV –gp41 homotrimer structure was hydrogen
adjusted at neutral pH. The mutant structure of this protein
was prepared by substituting 50th amino acid (Asn)
glycosylation site on chains A, B and C to aspartic acid. This
was achieved with the use of SPDB viewer version 4.1 software
[]. The 3D structure of glycan (mannose) was retrieved from
pubchem database. The ligands protonation state was assigned
at neutral pH and ligand structure optimization was carried out
using biopolymer module of InsightII software. The energy
optimization of protein and ligand was carried out using 1000
steps of steepest descent followed by 2000 steps of conjugate
gradient energy minimization. This energy optimized protein
and ligand structure was used for covalent docking.

Covalent Docking:
The covalent docking of mannose to HIV-gp41 (unmutated and
mutated) homotrimer structures was carried out using Gold
suite of docking software []. Gold suite is well known
docking software which uses Genetic Algorithm (GA) to dock
ligands flexibly to the binding site of protein 
[]. The docking
settings were optimized by performing several rounds of trial
and error method to obtain the most accurate docking result.
The binding site was defined upto 6 Å radius, by keeping the
center of c-alpha carbon atom of asparagine and the aspartic
acid as the 50th residue found in the unmutated and mutated
HIV-gp41, respectively. The asparagine side chain amino group
(aspartic acid carboxyl oxygen in case of mutated HIV-gp41)
present with a lone pair electron was chosen for linking with an
atom in mannose, during the covalent docking study. The GA
run was set to be very flexible to find the most accurate binding
pose. The number of binding poses to generate during docking
was set to 20 and top ranked solution was retained. The
ChemPLP scoring function was used to rank and select the
docking poses.

Result
The alignment of the sequences of 3 monomers (Chains A, B
and C) that are forming the trimer HIV-1 gp41 was obtained.
The epitopes of Z13, 4E10 and 10E8 antibodies are enclosed in
the red, green and cyan boxes in the alignment as shown in the
.

The results of the prediction of glycosylation on every chain of
the trimer are represented in  (see supplementary
material) that shows the estimated frequency of glycosylation
at the potential sites. The N-50 located in the shared targets for
Z13, 4E10 and 10E8 antibodies is the only potential site of
glycosylation found on each chain forming the trimer and the
frequency of glycosylation with both N and D at position 50
was calculated ().

The chemical interactivity of the mannose moiety with the
asparagine and the aspartic acid at the 50th position in their
respective forms are depicted in the 
respectively.

Discussion
In order to study the glycosylation frequency on HIV-1 gp41
trimer, each monomer sequence (Chains A, B, C) and their
trimer structures were used in these analyses. The template for
investigation of glycosylation frequency was chosen from PDB
Id 2M7W and 2LP7. The sequence identities of the monomers
were checked by the multiple sequence alignment as shown in
. All the 59 aminoacids in all three chains of both the
trimers 2M7W and 2LP7 are identical with the N-linked
glycosylation site predicted at the 50th residue found in the
shared epitopes of the neutralizing antibodies Z13, 4E10 and
10E8 as shown in  which are colored in red, green and
cyan respectively and these epitopic regions are overlapping.

The N-glycosite prediction site has located the glycosylable
asparagine residue at the 50th postion in the neutralizing
antibody targets. The predicted glycosylation site N-50 matches
the profile in . This interaction on one of the chains
(Chain B of 2M7W) that forms the trimer has been represented
in the figure 3b. As all the monomers are identical, the
glycosylation depicted in one chain is possible on all the three
monomers resulting in efficient masquerade from the immunesurveillance
and thus can help the virus to escape. The
recognition by both autologous and the epitope specific
monoclonal antibodies [] is possible due to the “glycan
shield”. Contrarily, the absence of such carbohydrates increases
the neutralizing ability of these antibodies against SIV and
affects the infectivity also [,
]. Experimentally,
deglycosylation at specific residues on the envelope
glycoprotein has been shown to have increased infectivity and
antibody affinity [].

To substantiate our sequence based prediction, structural
mutation of glycosylation site in HIV-gp41 was carried out.
Further, we performed covalent docking to unravel the
possibility of N-linked glycosylation and its mechanism in the
presence of both N-50 and D-50 which are unmutated and
mutated forms respectively. It is evident that the covalent
linkage is not possible in the presence of D at 50th position
(). The covalent docking for unmutated HIVgp41
resulted in covalently bound 20 different poses, among
which the top ranked pose with highest CHEMPLP score was
chosen for this study and shown in . The top ranked
pose of mannose bound to wild and mutated gp41 showed van
der Waals clashes along with hydrogen bond. The van der
Waal's clashes were removed by energy minimization (Details
shown in ).

The docking predictions shows that 1st carbon present in the
mannose sugar moiety forms a glycosyl linkage (bond) with the
amino group of the carboxylamine moiety on the side chain of
N-50 (). On the other hand, due to the presence of
carboxyl group in the side chain of D-50 of the mutated HIVgp41,
it failed to form the glycosyl linkage (). In
addition to the covalent linkage, we also observed other non
bonded interactions, i.e. hydrogen bonds and C-H…π -
interactions between the mannose and active site residues. In
the wild gp41-mannose complex (), hydroxyl group
linked to the 2nd carbon donates electron to oxygen atom of
carboxamide group of N-50. The hydroxyl group of
hydroxymethyl moiety attached to the 5th carbon of mannose
ring donates an electron to form a hydrogen bond with the
backbone carbonyl oxygen of N-53 as acceptor. The hydrogen
atom linked to the 2nd carbon of the mannose ring forms a CH…
π interaction with the aromatic side chain of W-46. In
contrast, mannose bound to mutated gp41 as shown in 
, the aromatic ring of W-46 involves in a π…C-π interaction
with hydrogen attached to the 4th carbon of mannose ring. The
hydroxyl group of hydroxymethyl moiety attached to the 5th
carbon of mannose ring donates an electron to form a hydrogen
bond with the backbone carbonyl oxygen of W-46 as acceptor.
Apart from these interactions, mannose involves in two short
contacts with the carbonyl oxygen of N-53 and N-47. The side
chain of Aspartic acid at the 50th position in mutated gp41 is
positioned away from the mannose as compared to the
Aparagine of wild gp41, which shows covalent interaction with
mannose. Moreover the CHEMPLP score for unmutated HIVgp41-
mannose covalent complex resulted in a better score,
when compared to the mutated HIV-gp41-mannose
noncovalent complex. This underscores that the glycosylation is
feasible with N-50 and not with D-50.

In an in vivo scenario, the pressure of these surveillant
antibodies can drive the viral mutations to get glycosylated
with asparagines as the 50th amino acid instead of aspartic acid
or any other. Such survivable variants are selectively preferred
by the error prone reverse transcriptase according to the copy
choice model as they can escape. The similar side chains of the
two aminoacid enables all the other functions of the residue
except for glycosylation. This feature comes in hand with the
‘No fidelity’ reverse transcriptase which can make progeny of
these variants to cause the antigenic drift in HIV-1 that helps
immune evasion. This unparalleled genetic plasticity of the
retrovirus HIV-1 sets it apart from all other classes and families
of the viruses to survive inspite of the immune pressure and
therapeutic agents []. So it is essential to study the
glycosylation mechanisms along with viral diversity and all
other factors that pose a hurdle to achieve a successful vaccine.

Conclusion
In conclusion, the variable degree and the pattern of
glycosylation plausibly affect the viral entry, tropism, immune
recognition or evasion and play a key role in modulating the
immune response or the viraemia and ultimately the disease
progression in the host. These data entail that the glycosylation
occurs only in the presence of N-50 and it is not possible with
D-50 can potentially mask the targets from being recognized by
the neutralizing antibodies. A major obstacle in achieving a
successful vaccine to prevent AIDS is due to the enormous
diversity and mutability of the virus that offers escape from the
immune surveillance by the neutralizing antibodies.
Glycosylation of the envelope glycoproteins in a way thus
favors the virus to escape the surveillance by these circulating
neutralizing antibodies. This varying glycosylation of the viral
epitopes in concert with the error prone reverse transcriptase
can make progeny of these mutant forms to escape the immune
recognition. Thus, the glycosylation together with the genetic
plasticity offers a survival advantage for the virus. These data
on glycosylation frequency concord with the experimental
reports, apparently shows that glycosylation interferes with the
recognition and affinity of the neutralizing antibodies and their
respective targets. Hence it is obvious that one should consider
the glycosylation to study the immune evasion mechanisms
strategies to design successful vaccines against the viral
diseases.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors thank KM Saravanan, Post Doctoral Fellow at the
Centre of Excellence in Bioinformatics, Madurai Kamaraj
University for his suggestions. This work was supported by the
University Grants Commission of India and was carried out
with the facilities in the Centre of Excellence in Bioinformatics,
Madurai Kamaraj University sponsored by the Department of
Biotechnology, Government of India. M.P thanks University
Grants Commision (UGC) for providing Post Doctoral
Fellowship under Dr.D.S.Kothari PDF Scheme. The authors
thank S.Krishnawamy, Centre Of Excellence in Bioinformatics,
for helping us with the facilities in the centre.

Citation:Christdas et al, Bioinformation 11(2): 057-062 (2015)

The potential glycosylation found in any protein must
have the above sequence where N is Asparagine; X is any
amino acid except Proline; S is Serine and T is Threonine.

Multiple Sequence alignment of the monomers (Chain A, B, C) of HIV-1 gp41 homotrimer (2M7W and 2LP7) is shown
here. The epitopes of the neutralizing antibodies Z13, 4E10 and 10E8 are marked in red, green and cyan colored boxes respectively.

a) The HIV gp41 (PDB id: 2M7W) trimer structure with mannose covalently linked to N-50 is shown as cartoon model, the
mannose is shown as stick model and colored according to chain information. In figure b and c the binding site residues within 6 Å
radius of mannose binding is shown as stick model. The binding site residues interacting with mannose (atom color) is colored
grey, other binding site residues are colored cyan. Hydrogen bonds and short contacts between protein and ligand are shown as
meganta and black dash. b) Mannose covalently interacts with N-50 and non covalently with other binding site residues of wild
gp41. c) Mannose non covalently interacts with the binding site residues of mutated gp41.

