Background
Background:
One of the major problems in antibacterial chemotherapy is bacterial
drug resistance. It is referred to as a condition in which there is no
susceptibility or decreased susceptibility to antibacterial agents and is
a quantitative measurement of the efficiency of an agent against a
specific bacterium, generally expressed in g or mg per ml or as zones
of inhibition (ZI) in mm. Experimental determinations of antibacterial
activity are based on testing gradually increasing concentrations of
potent chemical compound against the microorganism under study to
find out the concentration at which the growth is inhibited, reported as
the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of the drug []. MIC is
the lowest concentration of an antimicrobial agent, generally a
chemical compound or an antibiotic, that inhibits the growth of
microorganisms after a period of incubation, determined either by agar
or broth dilution methods []. MICs have been featured as an
important test in diagnostic laboratories to evaluate the activity or
resistance of microorganisms to an antimicrobial agent []. MIC has
been regarded as the most basic laboratory measurement of activity of
an antimicrobial agent against various mircroorganisms and rapid
advances in microbiology have resulted in a large increase in a number
of potent chemical compounds being synthesized as possible
antimicrobial agents. Here, we present a database of chemical
compounds tested for their antimicrobial activities.

Methodology
Construction of database
The MIC database was constructed using html and can be accessed at
http://www.trimslabs.com/mic/index.htm. Data were collected from
different journals such as Bioorganic &amp; Medicinal Chemistry Letters
[], Arkivoc [], Microbiology and Immunology, Journal of Dairy
Science, Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, Journal of
Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, Journal of Clinical Microbiology,
Journal of Bacteriology, Applied and Environmental Microbiology
and Indian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences. Currently, MIC
database includes 500 records of various chemical compounds tested
against nearly 80 microorganisms.

Database featuers
The data were categorized based on the molecular weights of all
compounds for ease of access. Each entry in the database was
provided with unique accession numbers viz. MIC.A.XX where XX
represents the data entered under category ’A‘ (Table 1 in
 ). Each entry is associated with the 2-
dimensional structure, Lipinski’s data, IUPAC (International Union of
Pure and Applied Chemistry) name, smiles representation, reported
activity and the MIC values against a particular organism, strain and
culture conditions, respectively. A screen-shot of the database is given
in .

Utility
Antibacterial agents are being used for various purposes in the
laboratories and to treat many microbe related diseases in humans.
This database finds utility in the sceintific community for a quick view
of the collection of various antibacterial agents and the organisms.
Moreover, the data was segregated based on the molecular weights,
which provides an easy way of access as well as locating the data in
the database. References are provided for each compound in the
database so as to track the published data.

Future development
Till date the data were collected from about 10 journals, however,
work is in progress to append the data from various other journals and
literature sources. The database shall be updated regularly.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Babu et al, Bioinformation 4(2): 75-77 (2009)

Screen-shot image of an entry in MIC Database.

