Background
Genomic analysis gained momentum through genome projects and
sequencing of model organisms. However, the rhythm of genome analysis
is not matching with the rhythm of genome sequencing. This leads to the
over accumulation of data in the repository. Initial interpretation of
nucleotide and protein sequences leads to the identification of hidden
genetic and genomic links. Experimental genome analysis is massive
process and thus necessitates the demand to develop computational tools
for predicting the sequences. We have numerous online software to supportnucleotide and protein analysis 
[].In this work we introduce a new tool
Sequence Calculator “SeqCalc” which is efficient in ten different ways. It
can be used to perform various nucleotide, protein sequence analysis and
also in automated experimental calculation. SeqCalc is developed using
Perl [] as scripting language and TCL/Tk widgets 
[] was used for
designing the graphical user interface.

This new tool provides the user with the basic requirements in his research
all in one single window. It intends to satisfy the user with his maximum
requirement. Its structure, application and memory makes it comfortable
and easy for its users.

Methodology
SeqCalc is independent software that provides a platform for various types
of study as outlined in . The software is subdivided into 3 major
components that are tagged as their function called nucleotide, protein and
common analyzers. The tool contains open reading frame identification,
aliphatic, hydropathy and instability index calculator, codon calculator,
protein secondary structural elements extractor, DNA melting and
annealing temperature calculator, random protein, nucleotide generator,
statistics calculator, complimentary and reverse complimentary generator,
DNA transcript and translator and iso-electric point calculator. Scientifically accepted formulae and methods of calculations are available
in detail with the supplementary material.

First, we set few samples that will be re-used throughout this investigation.
We selected nucleotide sequence of ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductasecomplex protein UQCR10 of Bos 
Taurus[],
protein sequence of humaninsulin and from NCBI 
[] and a new crystal form of LYS48-linke
diubiquitin of Bos taurus for testing the efficiency of the tool. SeqCalc
accepts fasta or raw format sequences as input. Besides, it requires PDB
file as input for PDB fragmentor. The program also needs setting numeric
input parameters for random sequence generator.

Result and Validation
SeqCalc is divided into three major regions as mentioned above. The
nucleotide and protein calculators are sequence specific. Common
calculator contains features that are shared by both protein and nucleotide
sequences and they alter their calculations based on the user selection.

Nucleotide calc
The Nucleotide calculator consists of five categories in it. They are codon
statistics calculator, sequence melting and annealing temperature
calculator, complimentary and reverse complimentary convertor, DNA to
protein convertor and ORF finder. The first option, codon statistics
calculator is designed for the purpose of analyzing the frequency of codon
used by determining each codons amino acid, number for hits and
investigates the frequency per thousand base pairs. It converts the given
sequence to its triplet code of amino acid and then calculates their
occurrence. The melting and annealing temperature calculator analyses by
taking the count of GC and AT content in the given sequence by using theformula given by Rychlik W, et al., 
[].The complementary option in this
tool helps in obtaining the compliment and the reverse compliment of large
genome sequence. Transcript and translate tool is used to retrieve
transcribed mRNA and the translated protein sequences from the given
input sequence. Open reading frame identification in a sequence is helpful
in gene coding sequence identification. “*” represents the start codon and
“/” indicates the stop codon in the output of ORF finder.

Protein calc
The Protein calculator is subdivided into 3 major subdivisions. They are
Protein secondary structure extractor, Iso‐electric point calculator and
Protein properties calculator. The protein secondary structure extractor is
used to extract the amino acids that encode the secondary structural regions
of protein from a given PDB file. It also extracts each chain, α-helix and β-
strand sequences in FASTA format. From the extracted secondary
structural sequence it identifies the type of helix, the sense of strand with
respect to the previous position and the percentage of occurrence from the
chain sequence in the header line of FASTA []. 
The iso‐electric pointcalculator's algorithm is developed based on the expasy pKa values 
[].
Protein properties option is used to calculate properties like aliphatic index,extinction coefficient, molecular weight and grand average hydropathy of
the protein from the given protein sequence. In the case of sample report
shown in Figure 2, algorithms of SeqCalc are highly accurate. The
efficiency of SeqCalc is compared against the online expasy tool. The
graph () correlates the results of SeqCalc against the expasy tools.

Common calc
The common calculator is used to perform calculations that are shared by
both protein and nucleotide sequences. They have the two different tools in
them random nucleotide, protein sequence generator and protein,
nucleotide sequence statistics calculator. Tools have been modeled to
produce random DNA and protein sequences. Each time this tool generates
different random sequences according to the parameters given in the tool
box. To generate random DNA, composition of each base pair, amino acid
or the length of sequence should be given as input. The sequence statistics
calculator accepts the nucleotide or protein sequence then calculates their
molecular weight and the number and percentage of occurrences of each
residue from the given sequence. The program will ignore numbers, spaces
or characters which do not correspond with one of the 4 nucleotide bases.
The parameters computed in the protein statistics include the molecular
weight, amino acid composition, atomic composition and extinction
coefficient. All these parameters in the scripts are calculated using
universally accepted formulas and have been executed successfully.

Conclusion
SeqCalc is independent software that can be used in all types of windows
operating system. It contains ten commonly used applications by research
personnel. The software mainly aims to satisfy the users with their
maximum requirement. Various sequence analysis and automated
experimental calculators are included in the tool. Its structure, application
and memory size it makes comfortable and easy for users. We believe this
new tool will be a one stop tool and an initiative to both computational and
experimental researchers in their routine research work. In future, we plan
to further update the tool with more applications in a single window.

This tool is developed under “Human Resource Development Center for
Economic Region Leading Industry” project, supported by the Ministry of
Education, Science &amp; Technology (MEST) and the National Research
Foundation of Korea (NRF).

Citation:Vignesh et al; Bioinformation 5(3): 85-88 (2010)

Schematic representation and application of SeqCalc.

A snapshot of SeqCalc tool and protein properties calculator output are shown. Each calculator can be accessed by clicking on the named tabs.

Efficiency of the protein property application in SeqCalc is plotted against the online expasy prot-param tool. Properties like Iso-electric point
(pI), Grand average hydropathy (GRAVY), Aliphatic index (AI) and Absorbance (Abs) were considered and similar results were obtained respectively.

