Background
Bacillus subtilis is a Gram-positive endospore forming bacteria.
It produces broad spectrum intoxicating lipopeptides known as
biosurfactants and has antifungal, antibacterial and antiviral
activities. Cyclic lipodecapeptide plipastatin is an example of
such compound. Cyclic lipopeptides (CLPs) are structurally and
functionally diverse molecules. CLPs are produced by large,
complex, and multifunctional non-ribosomal peptide
synthetases (NRPSs) using thioesterase mechanism, showing
highly conserved structural organization into specific peptidebinding
domain []. NRPSs acquire a modular structure and
each module act as building block resulting in a stepwise
incorporation and modification of one amino acid unit [].
Fengycin is a lipodecapeptide termed as plipastatin when it's
Tyr3 and Tyr9 residues are present in the L-and D-form,
respectively. It is produced by different strains of Bacillus
species and shows moderate surfactant properties. It is an antifungal
metabolite and inhibits the filamentous fungi but it has
no effect on yeast and bacteria. Plipastatin synthase subunit D
(ppsD) contains five NRPS subunits which assemble to form a
co-linear chain in the order ppsC-ppsD-ppsE-ppsA-ppsB 
[,
].
The structure is composed of a beta-hydroxy fatty acids
connected to a peptide part comprising ten amino acids, where
eight of them are structured in cyclic form []. Five
multifunctional peptide synthases act in synergy to activate all
fengycin amino acid components to form aminoacyl adenylates
or aminoacyl thioesters. Disruption of ppsD results in loss of
plipastatin production []. Selected open reading frame (ORF)
transcribes the ppsD gene out of the pps gene cluster encoding
plipastatin synthase enzyme in Bacillus subtilis 168. Plipastatin
Synthase is a large, complex, and multifunctional enzyme,
which activates and polymerizes the amino acids Pro, Gln, and
Tyr as part of synthesis of plipastatin which is an antibiotic
lipopeptide. The gain D-isomer form its tyrosine residue is
epimerized []. 3D structure of ppsD was not known. Structure
is more evolutionary conserved than sequence; therefore,
analysis of three-dimensional (3D) structures holds great
potential.

Structure elucidation is an expensive and time consuming
process, and also requires extensive expertise. Currently used
techniques to reveal 3D structures are X-ray crystallography
and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Imaging. Due to the
techniques being expensive and time consuming, there has been
an increasing gap of information between DNA/protein
sequence information and structure information.
Computational methods and molecular dynamic simulations
are good alternatives to overcome these problems in protein
structure prediction [].Comparative modeling is a
computational technique for 3D structure prediction of proteins
using known structures as templates []. Hence, the adopted
approach enables to formulate a structure from an amino acid
sequence in less time. Our current study describes the 3D
model of the B.subtilis ppsD protein obtained through
homology modeling. In addition, primary and secondary
structure analysis, subcellular localization prediction was also
performed and is explained.

Methodology:
Sequence analysis and subcellular localization prediction
The amino acid sequence of a Bacillus subtilis gene ppsD was
retrieved from the UNIPROT database using the primary
accession number P94459_BACSU. The sequence is 3603 amino
acids in length. ProtParam [] was used to predict the
physiochemical properties. ProtParam computed the molecular
weight, theoretical pI, amino acid composition, atomic
composition, extinction coefficient, estimated half-life,
instability index, aliphatic index, and grand average of
hydropathicity (GRAVY). Secondary structure predictions
(helix, sheets, and coils) were using made using PSIPRED 
[].
Prediction of subcellular localization of ppsD was done by
CELLO v.2.5 [], a multiclass support vector machine
classification system. PSORTb v3.02 [] was used to crosscheck
the results.

Domain Analysis of ppsD
Domains are the functional units of proteins. Plipastatin
synthase is a modular protein comprising of three domains.
These domain sequences were retrieved from UNIPROT under
accession id P94459_BACSU. Each domain sequence was then
analyzed using Interproscan [].

Homology modeling and loop optimization of ppsD:
Homology modeling was used to determine the 3D structure of
ppsD. As mentioned above ppsD consist of three domains we
therefore modeled each domain separately. A BLASTP []
search with default parameters were performed against the
Brookhaven Protein Data Bank (PDB) to find suitable templates
for homology modeling. PDB ID: 2VSQ_A was identified as the
best template based on sequence identity between query and
template protein sequence for all three domains. The alignment
between template and query sequence was done using
MODELLERv9.10 [], which uses global dynamic
programming with linear gap penalty function. This aligns the
query and template sequences and the output is obtained in PIR
format. The PIR format is used by MODELLER in the
subsequent model-building stage. A three-dimensional
structure was developed from sequence alignment between
template and query sequence using MODELLERv9.10. It
constructs model by satisfaction of spatial restraints, using its
‘automodel’ class. Twenty models were generated using the
command using python script. Loops of the homology model
were then optimized using MODELLERv9.10 to improve the
quality of model. Energy minimization, quality assessment and
visualization Once the 3D model was generated, structural
evaluation and stereochemical analyses were performed using
ProSA-web Z-scores [], Qmean plots 
[] and PROCHECK
Ramachandran plots []. Furthermore, Root Mean Squared
Deviation (RMSD), superimposition of query and template
structure, and visualization of generated models was performed
using UCSF Chimera 1.5.3 workbench [].

Discussion
The present study focused on sequence and structural analysis
of Bacillus subtilis protein ppsD. ProtParam was used to
analyze different physiochemical properties from the amino
acid sequence. The ppsD protein contains 3603 amino acids,
with a molecular weight of 406812.3 Daltons and an isoelectric
point of 5.46. An isoelectric point below 7 indicates a negatively
charged protein corresponds to having more negatively
charged residues, and an instability index of 45.99 suggests an
unstable protein. The negative GRAVY index of -0.327 is
indicative of a hydrophilic and soluble protein. The protein
sequence was found to be rich in the amino acid leucine,
suggesting a preference for alpha-helices in 3D structure.
Secondary structure analysis was performed using PSIPRED
and the protein was predicted to contain several helices,
consistent with the ProtParam results. The high percentage of
helices in the structure makes the protein more flexible for
folding, which might increase protein interactions. Subcellular
localization is a key functional feature of a protein. Cellular
functions are often localized in specific compartments;
therefore, subcellular localization prediction of unknown
proteins could be used to attain valuable information about
their functions, and to select proteins for further study.
Moreover, studying the subcellular localization of proteins is
also helpful in understanding disease mechanisms which can
have application in developing novel drugs. The consensus
protein subcellular localization predictions suggest that ppsD is
a cytoplasmic protein and had no transmembrane helices.

Domain analysis of ppsD and homology modeling:
Interproscan predicted the three domains in ppsD gene, which
were further divided into subdomains i.e. adenylation domain,
condensation domain and epimerization domain. The three
main domains predicted by interproscan are ATP-dependent
proline adenylase (proline activase), ATP-dependent glutamine
adenylase (glutamine activase), and ATP-dependent tyrosine
adenylase II (tyrosine activase II). These domains are then
modeled by homology modeling. Protein 3D structures can
provide us with precise information of how proteins interact
and localize in their stable conformation. Homology modeling
is one of the most common structure prediction methods in
structural genomics and proteomics. Despite minimal
modifications, one initial step that is common in all modeling
tools and servers is to find the best matching template by
performing a sequence homology search with BLASTP.
Templates are experimentally determined 3D structures of
proteins that share sequence similarity with the query sequence.
The template sequence and the query protein sequence are
aligned using pair-wise alignment algorithms [,
]. A welldefined
alignment is very crucial for the prediction of a reliable
3D structure using homology modeling. Here we used the
protocol of homology modeling to model ppsD along with its
three domains. A BLASTP search against the PDB database
identified 2VSQ_A as a best template as it shows maximum
identity to query sequence of all three domains. The identity
between query and template was found to be 99% for all three
domains. 2VSQ_A is an X-Ray diffraction model of a srfA-C
gene of Bacillus subtilis. 3D structures were constructed using
MODELLERv9.10. Ten models were obtained the best model
was selected based on discrete optimized protein energy
(DOPE). DOPE is based on an improved reference state that
corresponds to noninteracting atoms in a homogeneous sphere
with the radius dependent on a sample native structure; it thus
accounts for the finite and spherical shape of the native
structures.

Energy minimization, quality assessment and visualization:
Even though there were no steric clashes in the structure
generated, it was still subjected to energy minimization and
assessed for both geometric and energy aspects. The predicted
3D structures of respective three domains proline activase,
glutamine activase and tyrosine activase of ppsD are shown in
 and 
 respectively. Several structure assessment
methods including RMSD, Z-scores, Q-scores and
Ramachandran plots were used to check reliability of the 3D
models. The RMSD value indicates the degree to which two 3D
structures are similar. Lower the value, the more similar the
structures. The RMSD value of each domain 3D structure was
calculated by superimposing template and query structures.
The RMSD values were found to be 0.541, 0.589, 0.745 for the
proline activase, glutamine activase and tyrosine activase
domains respectively. The Z score is indicative of overall model
quality and is used to check whether the input structure is
within the range of scores typically found for native proteins of
similar size. Z-scores of the template and query models were
obtained from PROSAweb. In case of proline activase, z-score
was ­7.23, for glutamine activase, z-score was ­7.27 and for
tyrosine activase, z-score was found to be ­11.2, were
suggesting similarity to their templates. Finally, the
Ramachandran plots were obtained for the homology model for
quality assessment. In case of proline activase domain,
PROCHECK displayed 86.9% of residues in the most favored
regions, with 10.2%, 2.0%, and 0.9% residues in additionally
allowed, generously allowed and disallowed regions,
respectively. In case of glutamine activase domain, PROCHECK
displayed 87% of residues in the most favored regions, with
10.1%, 2.3%, and 0.6% residues in additionally allowed,
generously allowed and disallowed regions, respectively and in
case of tyrosine activase domain, PROCHECK displayed 89.8%
of residues in the most favored regions, with 8.2%, 1.3%, and
0.6% residues in additionally allowed, generously allowed and
disallowed regions, respectively. The Ramachandran plot for
the template structure showed the amino acid residues to be
91.3%, 7.2%, 1.1% and 0.3%, in most favored, additionally
allowed, generously allowed and disallowed regions
respectively (Data not shown). The comparable Ramachandran
plot characteristics, RMSD values, and Z-scores confirm the
quality of the homology model of ppsD.

Protein structure accession number:
The predicted 3D structures of Bacillus subtilis protein ppsD
domains were submitted to the Protein Model Database
(PMDB) [] 
and assigned the PMDB ID PM0077747 for proline
activase, PM0077748 for glutamine activase and PM0077746 for
tyrosine activase domain.

Conclusion:
We used homology modeling to solve the 3D structure of ppsD,
an important antifungal protein, from Bacillus subtilis. Further
investigation in this line of research may include interaction
studies with other metabolites involved in the pathway. The
predicted information is hoped to help in better understanding
of the mechanisms underlying plipastatin synthesis as well as
the production of novel therapeutic drugs for the treatment of
long term diseases. Docking experiments may suggest
additional lead compounds and medicinally significant
conformations. Ultimately, the identification of
pharmacologically active conformations via simulation will be
great leap towards use of NRPSs as the new generation drugs.

We would like to express special gratitude to Mr. Azeem
Mehmood Butt, PhD researcher in Molecular Biology at
National Centre of Excellence in Molecular Biology (CEMB),
University of the Punjab, Lahore for his assistance in proof
reading of manuscript.

Citation:Batool et al, Bioinformation 7(8): 384-387 (2011)

The figure shows modeled structures of respective
domains of ppsD (A) Proline activase, (B) Glutamine activase,
(C) Tyrosine activase. Secondary structure elements are
highlighted in different colors. Image was generated using
UCSF Chimera.

