Background
Photosynthetic organisms have the fascinating capacity to
harvest energy from sun light, and thereby provide for the
majority of other life forms on earth. Cyanobacteria are believed
to have been the first organisms which carried out
photosynthesis and crucially contributed to the accumulation of
oxygen in the atmosphere. Today, cyanobacteria are the main
contributors to global biomass production and are responsible
for up to 50% of the CO2 fixation in oceans. Besides their
ecological importance for the environment, cyanobacteria
promise to be key instruments in the generation of renewable
biofuels []. Among the various cyanobacteria, Synechocystis sp.
PCC 6803 has been most intensively studied. Synechocystis can
be easily genetically manipulated and can grow under both
photohetero- and photoautotrophic conditions, making it a
model organism for scientists around the world. Importantly, it
was the first photosynthetic organism to be sequenced 
[]. The
complete sequence served as a basis for the development of
several microarray platforms that can monitor expression
changes for the full set of Synechocystis genes. Examination of
generated microarray data has helped to decipher
transcriptional regulation and has provided important clues to
the functional relevance of specific genes. Unfortunately, the
small number of samples and conditions tested in a typical
microarray study limits the capacity to dissect interrelated
regulatory mechanisms. Here, the integration of additional
expression data from other studies can be helpful. Although
public repositories offer ample expression data nowadays,
utilization of these data for meta-analysis is by no means an
easy task. Data needs to be collect from various repositories,
that employ different query systems and data formats.
Furthermore, care must be taken in their integration, as the
different microarray platforms and analysis programs used in
the original studies can cause additional heterogeneity in
expression data. This is especially relevant in the case for
Synechocystis. Plenty of genome-wide expression data sets have
been generated over the last decades but they are dispersed at
different locations and derived by different microarray
technologies, hindering their direct use in meta-analyses.

Scope of CyanoEXpress
To facilitate the use of amassed Synechocystis expression data,
we have collected publicly available raw microarray data,
processed them in standardised manner and made the
integrated data set accessible on our CyanoEXpress web-server.
At present, 645 genome-wide (partially replicated) microarray
measurements carried out in 31 independent studies have been
evaluated and incorporated into CyanoEXpress  (see
supplementary material) The integrated data set includes
expression changes due to various environmental and genetic
perturbations. In total, CyanoEXpress provides over 178
expression entries for 3073 Synechocystis genes, which accounts
for 82.5% of the genes annotated in the Cyanobase 
[]. A
detailed meta-analysis of the data presented in CyanoEXpress
will be published elsewhere.

Data collection and implementation of web-server
Raw expression data were collected from the NCBI Gene
Expression Omnibus [], EBI ArrayExpress 
[] and KEGG
Expression database []. Data processing was carried out using
the R/Bioconductor platform []. Datasets were individually
processed and normalized by OIN (Optimised Intensitydependent
Normalisation) [,
]. This method performs an
optimized local regression of logged fold changes across the
intensity range to correct for potential dye bias. Log2 fold
changes were calculated with respect to the controls used in
individual experiments (which were primarily Synechocystis
wild-type cultures grown under standard conditions).
Processed expression data were filtered to eliminate genes for
which less than 80% of the measurements were available. To
support identification of co-expression and potential coregulation,
hierarchical clustering of genes was carried out on
the filtered data set using the software Cluster 3.0 
[].
Clustering was based on complete linkage, with the Spearman
correlation as similarity measure. Additionally, clustered
expression matrices were generated for sub-sets of the
microarrays and genes: 
Expression data for all genes, but only for perturbations of environmental conditions, excluding data from genetic manipulation of Synechocystis; and

expression data from all measurements, but only for a sub-set of functionally related genes (e.g., genes associated with photosynthesis and respiration).


The former sub-set can aid examination of expression changes occurring in the
Synechocystis wild-type, whereas the latter subsets allow a more
focused inspection of the regulation of particular processes.
Functional annotation of genes was obtained from Cyanobase
[]. 
The clustered expression matrices can be visualized and
queried through a Common Gateway Interface (CGI)-based
application, which is a modified version of the GeneXplorer
software []. CyanoEXpress is currently running on an Apache
web server under an Ubuntu Linux operating system.

Usage of CyanoEXpress
The CyanoEXpress web-site (http://cyanoexpress.sysbiolab.eu)
has a simple structure: from the Home page 
() the user
can easily navigate through the different sections. A Help page
provides instructions for CyanoEXpress ().
Information about the integrated microarray data sets is given
on the Sample Information page (). Links are provided
to the repositories from where the data sets were obtained, and
to the publications in which the experiments are described.

To visualize the clustered expression data, the user chooses one
of the integrated datasets available on the Gene Expression page
(). Here, the user can select whether they access the
full set of microarrays measurements (with all perturbations
included) or only measurements with environmental
perturbations. Alternatively, expression data sub-sets for genes
associated with specific functions can be selected (i.e.,
Photosynthesis and Respiration, Amino Acid Biosynthesis,
Regulatory function, Transcription and Translation). Upon
selection, a miniature heat map of the expression data is
displayed on the left side of the page. Using the miniature map,
a range of genes can be selected () red square, and
their expression pattern will be enlarged in a separated HTML
frame (Zoom). The names and identifiers of the genes are given
on the right side of the enlarged expression heat map. Gene
identifiers are linked to the Cyanobase for following up study
of the corresponding genes. The user can also query the
database for specific genes, whose expression changes will be
displayed. This can be done by entering a unique gene identifier
or name in the Search for text field (), red circle.
Expression changes are colour-coded by a green to red colour
gradient, corresponding to decreased (green) or increased (red)
expression with respect to the control sample. No differences in
expression are represented by black squares, while grey squares
indicate no available data. The overall graphical view is
provided as a matrix formed by rows representing genes, and
columns representing the environmental conditions or genetic
perturbations. Finally, a simple mouse-click on a specific row
generates a display of genes, which show a high correlation
with the gene corresponding to that particular row ().

Potential applications
CyanoEXpress enables examination and visualisation of gene
expression changes for various experimental or genetic
manipulations. The clustering of genes facilitates identification
of coherent expression patterns, which can indicate coregulation
across different conditions. For example, we found
that transcripts of several subunits of NADH dehydrogenase
complexes tend to be tightly clustered and display specific
differential regulation upon environmental perturbations,
despite originating from different operons. This observation
suggests the existence of common regulatory mechanisms.
Furthermore, CyanoEXpress can be used to assign unannotated
genes to functions based on their co-expression with
genes of known functions. This feature is advantageous given
that numerous Synechocystis genes are yet to be assigned
functions. For instance, we found that the expression of sll1735
(cupS), for which no functional annotation has been given in
Cyanobase, is correlated with genes encoding for NADH
dehydrogenase subunits 4 and 5, and is similarly strongly upregulated
under CO2 limitation. Such co-expression indicates a
potential functional association of sll1735 with NADH
dehydrogenase.

Future development
CyanoEXpress will be routinely updated and expanded as new
datasets become available. An option for the direct download of
expression data for selected gene sets will be implement in the
near future. Finally, upcoming versions of CyanoEXpress will
include a wider range of biological processes, for which specific
expression matrices will be provided.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank Ravi Kiran Reddy Kalathur and Trudi Semeniuk for
critically reading the manuscript. The work presented was
supported by the Portuguese Fundação para a Ciência e a
Tecnologia (PEst-OE/EQB/LA0023/2012; PTDC/BIAMIC/
101036/2008).

Citation:Hernandez-Prieto &amp; Futschik, Bioinformation 8(13): 634-638 (2012)

CyanoEXpress website. An introduction to CyanoEXpress is provided on its Home page (A) and instructions for its use
are given on the Help page (B). Data sets can be selected on the Gene Expression page (C) and information regarding the integrated
microarray studies can be found on the Samples information page (D). After selection of the data set, the CyanoEXpress can display
the expression changes across different perturbations for a set of clustered genes (E), the co-expression and correlation with a
selected gene (F) or the expression data for single gene upon query (G).

