Background
MADS (Minichromosome Maintenance1 Agamous Deficiens
Serum response factor) box genes are one of the best studied
transcription factor family that are key regulators of
development in almost all groups of eukaryotes and plays
important role in the growth and development of flowering
plants []. The MADS box proteins possess a highly conserved
DNA-binding MADS domain having a length of around 60
amino acids. MADS box genes are divided into two types−
type I (serum response factor (SRF)-like) and type II (myocyte
enhancer factor 2 (MEF2)-like). Type II has a conserved MIKC
domain (MADS DNA-binding domain, intervening
domain, keratin-like domain, and c-terminal domain). Only a
few MADS-box genes of type I have been functionally
characterized, whereas type II MADS box genes have been
extensively studied in plants []. A lot of progress has been
made in deciphering the molecular mechanism involved in the
floral transition []. Further complete genome sequence of
Arabidopsis provided more clear picture of the complexity and
diversity of MADS box genes []. Many MADS box genes have
been identified which are involved in various steps of
transition from vegetative to reproductive growth. Most of the
flowering genes encode transcription factors of MADS-box
domain. Compared to other plants very little is known about
the MADS box genes in Camellia sinensis. The floral buds of C.
sinensis were found to be a major sink of assimilates produced
by the maintenance foliage and are considered to be a limiting
factor in proper partitioning of assimilates. It has been found
that root starch was enriched when flower buds were
controlled and it induced more vegetative growth.
Considering the role of MADS box genes in the flowering of
plants and its possible implication in improving tea
productivity by controlling flowering with gene manipulation,
the present study aimed at identifying and analyzing the
MADS-box genes present in Camellia sinensis. Comparative
bioinformatics and phylogenetic analysis identified the
probable orthologous of Arabidopsis MADS box genes in tea.
The protein sequences of the identified genes were classified
into distinct clades and were found to be associated with the
conserved function of flower and seed development.
Biotechnological interventions on the identified MADS box
genes will elucidate their role in flowering of tea and may also
lead to increase in tea crop productivity.

Methodology
Database search of MADS box sequences:
NCBI NR, NCBI dbEST and NCBI TSA databases were used
for the search of Camellia sinensis MADS Box sequences. Search
for Camellia sinensis sequences was conducted using the tblastn
module of NCBI blast. The query sequence for blast used was
the band consensus of MADS region generated by the
COBBLER program (Consensus Biasing by Locally Embedding
Residues) [] of the published MADS-box sequences of
Arabidopsis thaliana. The Camellia sinensis blast hits having
significant similarity (E-value cutoff 1e-15) and score greater
than 100 were selected.

The reads obtained from blast hit were combined together,
clustered and assembled using CAP3 program to form the
contigs and singletons. The names of the contigs were prefixed
as CsC and the singleton names were prefixed as CsS, followed
by the number. To define putative coding frame of the
transcripts, the NCBI ORF Finder tool was used. The
transcripts open reading frame was determined and
corresponding protein sequences were retrieved. Those
sequences which were partial or had incomplete ORF were
discarded from further analysis.

Conserved domain identification:
For the verification of the MADS box conserved domain, the
protein sequences were inspected by the NCBI Batch CDSearch
program [] and sequences without MADS box domain
were discarded.

Phylogenetic analysis:
For the Phylogenetic analysis, Arabidopsis thaliana MADS box
gene sequences and corresponding protein sequences were
retrieved from TAIR database (The Arabidopsis Information
Resource) based on keyword search and published gene
sequences. Amino acid sequences were used for phylogenetic
analysis as they are more conserved compared to high
variability of nucleotide sequences. The dataset for
phylogenetic analysis contained the Camellia sinensis predicted
MADS box protein sequences and the Arabidopsis thaliana
MADS box protein sequences. MEGA 5 software [] was used
for the phylogenetic analysis. Sequence alignment was
performed in MEGA using ClustalW and the phylogenetic tree
was obtained using Neighbor-joining method 
[] with Poisson
distances and the pair-wise deletion option. For the reliability
of the tree 1000 bootstrap replication were performed.

Motif identification and analysis:
MEME program [] was used for the identification of the motif
cluster present in the MADS box sequences. The order of
sequences in the phylogenetic tree was maintained in the input
file for MEME program to facilitate the observation of common
motif between the closely related sequences

Result &amp; Discussion
The assembly of the sequences using CAP3 resulted in 13
contigs and 13 singletons. Based on the results of NCBI Batch
CD-Search program, sequences without MADS box domain
were discarded. Finally only 8 contigs and 8 singletons were
further used for the analysis. Except two contigs (namely-
CsC7, CsC8) and three singletons (namely-CsS5, CsS6, CsS7),
all the others sequences were found to be complete in both N
and C terminals  (see supplementary material).
However all the sequences represented perfect MADS box
domain including the two contigs and three singletons
mentioned above. Accession number of contigs and singleton
are provided in  (see supplementary material).
Phylogenetic tree () comprising MADS box protein
sequences of Arabidopsis and C. sinensis, showed that the
sequences were clustered into different groups. All the
transcripts from C. sinensis grouped with different subfamilies
of type II MADS-box protein (). The sequences could
be further visualized by the analysis of the motif grouping
results () of MEME program.

AGL2 subfamily:
AGL2 subfamily is sister to the AGL6 subfamily with only one
transcript from C. sinensis clustering with it (). The
CsS4 transcript appears to be homologous to AGL2 and AGL4
along with AGL3, AGL9 forming one clade (). For this
subfamily motif grouping among sequences reflected the
conserved feature (). Studies pointed out that AGL2
gene may play a fundamental role in the floral organ identity
and development along with seeds and embryo development
[]. 
By suppressing the expression of native AGL2 gene and
other regulatory element linked to this gene by
biotechnological approaches like antisense, co-suppression,
gene replacement etc. delay in flower may be achieved which
may led to increase in the length of vegetative phase and thus
increase in vegetative tissue yield particularly in case of foliage
crops.

AGL6 subfamily:
The contig CsC6 clustered with the AGL6 subfamily and is
seen to be very closely related to AGL6 and AGL13 ().
The overlying role of the AGL2 and AGL6 subfamily genes is
also evident from the phylogenetic tree grouping of the gene
subfamilies under one superclade (). Sequences
within the subfamily showed high similarity in motif grouping
(). In Arabidopsis, AGL6 and AGL13 belong to the AGL6
subfamily. Studies showed that AGL6 subfamily plays a key
role in regulating floral organ identity 
[] and floral meristem
determinacy in rice, maize and Petunia hybrid. It also control
circadian clock and is involved in the negative regulation of
the FLC/MAF subfamily genes and positive regulation of FT
genes [].

SQUA-Like subfamily:
Two contigs namely CsC3 and CsC4 grouped together with the
SQUA-Like subfamily (). CsC3 appears to be
homologous to Fruitfull (FUL) and CsC4 is homologous to
Cauliflower (CAL) and Apetala 1 (AP1). The functions of
MADS box genes of the SQUA-Like subfamily includes
controlling of transition from vegetative to reproductive
growth, determining identity of the floral organ and
regulating fruit maturation [] . Apetala 1 (AP1) is one of the
members of this subfamily. Together with the FUL and CAL
genes, AP1 act redundantly to control inflorescence
architecture and meristem identity. Constitutive over
expression of AP1 gene led to early flowering in transgenic
Chrysanthemum plant []. Studies can be undertaken to down
regulate or knockdown AP1 and related genes to see if this
would extend the vegetative phase duration of foliage crop like
tea.

FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC) subfamily:
The two transcripts from C. sinensis namely CsC8 and CsS6
formed another small group which is homologous to FLC (AGL
25). These two transcripts along with FLC (AGL 25), MAF1
(AGL27) and MAF2 (AGL31) gene of Arabidopsis formed one
clade to represent the FLC subfamily in the phylogenetic tree
(). The FLC is a flowering transition repressor and also
other members of the FLC like subfamily are directly involved
in the flowering process to seasonal environmental factors. It
also controls major life-history transition-seed germination and
its expression is associated with natural variation in
temperature-dependent germination []. Transgenic Chinese
cabbage overexpressing Brassica rapa FLC showed delay in
flowering and remained in vegetative phase for longer time
[]. Thus FLC gene appears to be one of the important target
for genetic manipulation to increase biomass and get high
yield in vegetative tissues.

AG subfamily:
The two transcripts namely CsC1 and CsS1, clustered with AG
subfamily were homologous to AGAMOUS (AT4G18960) of
Arabidopsis (). 
The motif grouping pattern () is
highly similar among the two C. sinensis transcripts and
Arabidopsis AGAMOUS (AT4G18960). The floral homeotic gene
AGAMOUS (AG), a class C gene of the MADS-box
transcription factor family is necessary for specification and
development of stamen and carpels along with floral meristem
determinacy []. 
In Arabidopsis, it interacts with other MADS
box proteins and plays an important role for the induction of
reproductive organ development []. Besides AGAMOUS,
few more genes namely AGL1, AGL5, AGL11 and AGL12
() constitute the AG subfamily. In situ hybridization
studies have shown that AGAMOUS gene is transcribed with
strong expression only in the third and fourth floral whorl,
after the floral bud formation just before the primordia of
stamens and carpels []. It doesn׳t interfere with the normal
vegetative growth of the plant and thus it may acts as a
suitable target in genetic modification for crop improvement.

Tomato MADS box transcription factor3 (TM3) like genes subfamily:
A total of four transcripts namely CsC2, CsC5, CsS2 and CsS3
were grouped with the TM3 like subfamily () with
common grouping motifs (). All these four transcripts
showed being homologue to AGL20/SOC1. The TM3 like
subfamily clade also contains AGL14, AGL42 and AGL71 genes
of Arabidopsis. Many member of this subfamily showed
expression both in vegetative and reproductive organs of
angiosperms. []. The SOC1 gene of TM3 subfamily is
regulated by several pathways and it co-ordinate the responses
to environmental signals. As SOC1 acts as a major hub in the
regulatory network of floral timing and development 
[], it
may acts as an important target for biotechnological
intervention for crop improvement by means of over
expression or under expression of the SOC1 polypeptide. Over
expression of SOC1 may result in early flowering, increase in
flower production and increase in fruit production. Whereas
under expression of the same may benefit foliage crops by
extending vegetative phase duration.

STMADS11-Like (SVP - SHORT VEGETATIVE PHASE):
SVP is another major subfamily where four transcripts from C.
sinensis grouped with it (). CsC7 and CsS7 appear to be
homologue of AGL24 gene, whereas CsS5 and CsS8 were
homologous to the AGL22 or SVP gene. SVP gene play
important role in two developmental phases of plants. During
the vegetative phase it acts as a repressor of the floral
transition and later it plays a vital role in the specification of
floral meristem []. Alteration in gene expression of the SVP
gene in C. sinensis via genetic modification may lead to late
flowering and extension of vegetative growth phase.

Conclusion
In this study, presence of Type II MADS domain protein
members and absence of member from type I MADS domain
proteins were observed in Camellia sinensis. In future, studies
can be undertaken to understand the molecular mechanisms of
the MADS-box proteins in growth, development and stress
conditions of C. sinensis and also steps can be undertaken to
develop trans or cisgenic plants without seeds. MADS box
gene family appears to be promising target to obtain such
plants considering its role in reproductive development of
plants. Seedless genetically modified tea plant with desired
characters if obtained might be highly welcomed by tea
community, provided the route to ethical issue relating to
transgenics is clear. Seedless transgenic plants with desired
trait will also eliminate the danger of uncontrolled dispersal of
transgenic plants in environment. Tea plant is mainly
propagated through vegetative cloning so absence of seed
should not be a problem for its cultivation. Issue relating to
narrowing down of genetic diversity of tea through such
seedless plantation can be overcome by taking steps to
preserve the genetic pool of the tea. As tea is a foliage crop
vegetative phase is more important than the reproductive
phase. Control of flowering may increase the vegetative
growth. There is a possibility to enhance the vegetative growth
of tea plants by manipulating the genes involved in flower
development. Thus, understanding the role of MADS box
gene family in tea plant may pave the way for improving the
crop productivity and benefit the tea industry.

Conflict of interest
None

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are grateful to Dr. N. Muraleedharan, Director,
Tea Research Association for his constant encouragement and
support. This work was supported by Department of
Electronics and Information Technology (DeitY), Govt. of
India.

Citation:Gogoi et al, Bioinformation 11(3): 115-121 (2015)

Phylogenetic Tree: Phylogenetic tree constructed
based on MADS box protein sequences of Camellia sinensis and
published Arabidopsis thailiana MADS box protein sequences.
Neighbor-joining comparison model was used with poisson
distances and Pairwise deletion option for the construction of
the phylogenetic tree. Bootstrap values smaller than 50% were
omitted and corresponding branches were merged. The
Camellia sinensis protein sequences in the phylogenetic tree
together with the Arabidopsis thaliana protein sequences were
grouped mainly into seven subfamily (square bracket covering
the subfamily members). The colours in the phylogenetic tree
are used to graphically distinguish the subfamilies.

Graphic representation showing the complete grouping motifs of Camellia sinensis and Arabidopsis thailiana MADS box
sequences obtained using MEME program (Multiple Expectation Minimization for Motif Elicitation, 
http://meme.sdsc.edu/meme/ meme.html). 
The parameters used were: Distribution of motif occurrences- Zero or one per sequence, maximum number of
motifs-20, Maximum motif width- 300 and Minimum motif width-6.

