Background:
Since the whole genome of many species has been sequenced, 
methods have been developed to analyze all the available genes 
together evolutionarily in the  genome of a species. One of the 
most popular methods is to construct a phylogenetic tree by 
using the data on all available of genes or proteins. Systematic 
evaluation of those methods is important. Perhaps, the only 
approach to this evaluation is computer simulation because it is 
impossible to conduct the evaluation using experiments or 
experimental data, particularly in the case of long-term 
evolution. Computer simulation programs such as ROSE  
[],
DAWG  [], SIMPROT  
[], EvolveAGene  
[], and iSG  
[,
], are 
useful for such evaluations. They are able to handle point 
mutations, insertions/deletions (indels), and the heterogeneity 
of evolutionary rates of genes. However, they do not include 
horizontal gene transfers (HGTs) in the evaluation.

HGT is the process in which an organism transfers a part of its 
genome to an unrelated organism. HGT genes are disturbing 
factors in the construction of a species' phylogenetic tree 
because they are produced through a biological mechanism that 
does not follow the authentic inheritance. Therefore, the 
influence of HGT on phylogenetic tree construction should be 
removed. In practice, however, such removal is currently 
impossible. A practical resort is to estimate the influence by 
conducting the computer simulation that considers HGT. We 
developed a program called HGT-Gen that converts a given 
tree constructed without the influence of HGT to one with it. 
HGT-Gen takes HGT into account and moves an operational 
taxonomic unit (OTU) or a clade from one place to another in a 
given tree. It can also generate HGT between a pair of lineages 
at any given evolutionary time.

Methodology:
Averaging of Branch lengths:
A  rooted  tree  is  needed  as  an input data that can be converted 
to a tree consisting of HGTs  (, Step 1). While the 
evolutionary times from the common ancestor to the present 
genes are the same, the corresponding branch lengths differ 
because of the stochastic nature of the mutations and other 
evolutionary factors. Therefore, we take the average length 
between every lineage pair  (, Step2). This process is 
recursively carried out from the bottom to the top of the tree.

The averaged branch length from an arbitrary node v to each 
OTU is defined as follows: 
L(v) = (d(vL) + L(vL) + d(vR) + L(vR)) / 2, 
in which vL stands for the left descendant to v  (), vR 
stands for the right one, d(v) stands for the distance between v 
and vP, and vP stands for the parent of v. If v is an OTU, L(v) is 0.

Relative Evolutionary time:
To determine the evolutionary time of an HGT donor and its 
acceptor, the relative evolutionary time, T(v), for each lineage
was computed  (, Step 3). T(v) on v is recursively 
determined using the following formula:  
T(v) = (d(v) + L(v)T(vp)) / (d(v) + L(v)), 
where if v is the root, T(v) is 0. On the other hand, if v is an 
OTU, T(v) is 1. This formula is derived on the condition in 
which {1 ­ T(vp)}/{1 ­ T(v)} = {d(v)+L(v)}/L(v).

Transfer of Branches:
A user first sets a time range and then randomly decides the 
time of an HGT event in the time range. The time range can be 
determined in the range between 0 (the root) and 1 (an OTU) in 
the normalized evolutionary time. An HGT donor lineage was 
randomly selected from the lineages located in the evolutionary 
time  (, Step 4). The HGT acceptor site of the selected 
lineage is randomly chosen from the lineages at the same 
evolutionary time. A new node is created correspondingly at 
the new location with the branch that is derived from the donor 
site (, Step 5). The remaining branches at the donor site 
and the nearest upper node are then deleted (, Step 6).
The branch lengths are restored (, Step 7).

Input:
HGT-Gen requires an input file containing the original 
phylogenetic tree in the Newick format. The time range (start 
and end) of the HGT events in relative evolutionary time and 
the number of the HGT trees in the output file are also required. 
An example of the command is as follows:  
perl hgtgen.pl input.tre 0.5 0.8 10 &gt;output.tre 
In this case, the input file name is “input.tre”, the start position 
is 0.5, the end position, which must be equal or larger than the 
start position, is 0.8, the number of output trees is 10, and the 
output file name is “output.tre”.

Output:
The output file contains the phylogenetic trees with HGT in the 
multi-Newick format.

Utility:
HGT-Gen does not directly contribute to solving the HGT 
problems on phylogenetic analysis, but it provides artificial 
HGT data for studying precisely the influences of HTG on the 
phylogenetic methods such as those of constructing an ortholog 
dataset and a phylogenetic tree.

Future Development and Caveats: 
The current version of HGT-Gen  generates a single HGT. To 
generate more than one HGT on a phylogenetic tree, one must 
accordingly run HGT-Gen more than one time on the tree. We 
have a plan to develop the program to generate multiple HGT 
events. The execution speed is very fast. For example, in case of 
10,000 trees with 64 OTUs each, the execution time is less than 
two minutes on a common PC. Therefore, HGT-Gen is almost 
limitless to the numbers of OTUs and output trees.

This work was supported by Grant-in-Aid for Young Scientists 
(B) No. 22710184.

Citation:Horiike et al, Bioinformation 7(5): 211-213 (2011)

Algorithm of the HGT-Gen

Scheme of the branch lengths from an arbitrary node v 
in a phylogenetic tree

