Background
Leishmaniasis is a major health problem that affects 
approximately 12 million people worldwide with 2 million new 
cases diagnosed every year. The precarious life conditions, the 
social disorganization and the lack of an effective political 
action and educational programs contribute to persistence of 
these diseases in the poorest regions of the world. Malaria and 
leishmaniasis are the most prevalent neglected diseases caused 
by protozoan parasites. Half of world׳s population is at risk of 
malaria. More than 500 million of people become severely ill 
with nearly a million people die due to plasmodium infection 
every year. Currently, leishmaniasis threatens 350 million of 
people around the world; more than 2 million of new cases of 
leishmaniasis occur annually (
http://www. who.int/tdr/diseases/leish/diseaseinfo.htm). Brazil, India, Bangladesh and 
Sudan present 90% of cases of visceral leishmaniasis around the 
world. According to WHO, in the last two decades the number
of cases of leishmaniasis increased due to the widening of 
endemic areas and the emergence of new focus of leishmaniasis. 
Epidemiological studies indicate that deforesting, unsettled 
growth of urban centers and changing habits of the insect vector 
are contributing to disease urbanization and new endemic foci 
[,
,
]. 
The causative agents of this disease are parasites of the genus 
Leishmania, which infect and replicate in macrophages of the 
vertebrate host. Leishmaniasis presents a broad clinical spectrum, 
ranging from asymptomatic and self healing infections to those 
causing significant mortality []. 
The parasite completes its life cycle in two hosts, namely sand fly 
and humans []. 
The organism is found in approximately 90 countries around the world, 
including Tropical Africa, South America, Central and East Asia, and 
Southern Europe. This disease is endemic in low-income population of 
Central and South American countries []. 
Which is caused by over twenty one different species of
Leishmania parasites (e.g. L. donovoni, L. infantum, L. braziliensis, 
L. major, L. mexicana, etc.). The parasite has a digenetic life cycle 
alternating between the promastigote forms in the sand fly insect, and 
the amastigotes within the mammalian host. Once inside the macrophage 
phagolysosomes, the promastigote-to-amastigote differentiation is triggered 
through activation of several regulatory mechanisms [–
] There are mainly 
three forms of the disease namely, cutaneous (self healing skin ulcer) 
(e.g. L. major) to mucocutaneous (e.g. L. braziliensis) to visceral 
(e.g. L. donovoni, L. infantum) out of which cutaneous Leishmaniasis 
is the most common while visceral Leishmaniasis is the lethal form. 
The letter is invariably fatal if left untreated. Current treatments 
are unsatisfactory, side effects; high cost and low efficacy better 
drugs are urgently required []. Most of the parasites, including 
Leishmania Spp., are more susceptible to reactive oxygen species than 
their hosts [,
].

Till date, there has been no effective vaccine against 
leishmaniasis and the treatment relies exclusively on chemotherapy. 
Pentavalent antimonials have been the mainstay of therapy for all forms 
of leishmaniasis for last seven decades, however, its efficacy has declined 
in recent years with the result that only about one third of patients 
respond to it [,
]. 
Tryparedoxin Peroxidase belongs to the protein family of peroxiredoxins 
[–
]. 
This enzyme cascade involves trypanothione reductase (Try R), tryparedoxin (TXN) 
and trypanotione (N1, N8-bis (glutathionyl)-spermidine) serving as a mediator 
for transfer of reducing equivalents [–
]. 
The first enzyme of the cascade is homologous to glutathione reductase and 
thioredoxin reductase [] which are 
involved in NADPH-dependent hydroperoxide reduction in other species 
[]. The other 
components of the trypanosomatid system also belong to protein families occasionally 
constituting peroxidase systems. Preliminary amino acid sequencing data indicated 
that tryparedoxin is phylogenetically related to thioredoxin, whereas the 
tryparedoxin peroxidase belongs to the peroxiredoxins 
[] comprising the 
thioredoxin peroxidases of yeast and mammals 
[] 
and the alkyl hydroperoxide reductases of bacteria 
[].

The present possibilities available for the treatment of trypanosomal 
diseases, such as Chagas disease, African sleeping sickness, and the various 
forms of leishmaniasis, necessitate improvement. We like many others have 
therefore embarked on the identification and characterization of potential 
molecular targets typical of the trypanosomatids. The natural product 
quercetin and taxifolin is a flavonoids found in many fruits and vegetables. 
Previous research has shown that quercetin and taxifolin has antitumor, 
anti-inflammatory, antiallergic, and antiviral activities. Taxifolin/ 
Dihydroquercetin a dihydroflavonol belongs to flavonoids group, together 
with its glycosides are commonly found in many species of medical plants. 
Dihydroquercetin is the most powerful natural antioxidant. Different 
studies show that it has hypocholesterolemic effects, and also 
demonstrates anti-inflammatory activities [] 
anti-acne activity [], 
medical applications include but not limited to: vitamin deficiency as 
a vitamin P, cure atherosclerosis, poison treatment, inhibit the cancer 
cells development, Helps in recovery after chemotherapy and radiation 
treatment, chemopreventive activity []. 
Fights the chronic fatigue syndrome and metabolic
syndrome. Dihydroquercetin offers protection against 
cardiovascular disease by inhibiting several steps in the disease 
process. Additionally, dihydroquercetin helps guard nervous 
system health, prevents the complications of diabetes, protects 
the liver against hepatitis-inducing agents, fights infection, and 
quells inflammation that can lead to dermatitis, arthritis, and 
pain. 


Quercetin has a synergistic effect with ephedrine and caffeine, increasing 
and prolonging their properties. Quercetin acts as a potent antioxidant 
and inhibits inflammatory and allergic reactions by inhibiting histamine 
release and other allergy-mediating compounds. Quercetin may also reduce 
capillary fragility, and it may offer protection against diabetic cataracts 
by inhibiting aldose reductase in the lens. Quercetin might reduce cancer 
risk by inactivating malignant precursors or by inhibiting carcinogenesis. 
Preliminary studies suggest it might have inhibitory effects on various cancer 
types, including breast, leukemia, colon, ovary, oral squamous cell, endometrial, 
gastric and non-small-cell lung carcinomas. Quercetin has antiestrogenic effects 
in cultures of breast cancer cells. Quercetin may be beneficial in benign prostatic 
hyperplasia (BPH), alopecia, hirsutism, androgen-dependent disorders, bacterial prostatitis, 
prostate cancer, atherosclerosis, hypercholesterolemia, coronary heart disease, 
vascular insufficiency, diabetes, cataracts, allergies, allergic rhinitis, peptic 
ulcer, schizophrenia, inflammation, asthma, gout, viral infections such as herpes 
simplex virus and in preventing cancer.

The detailed in silico analyses of probable inhibition as well as 
interaction of the models were performed with high binding 
affinity. However there is no conclusive report as to whether 
the antileishmanial activity of the taxifolin and quercetin. In the 
present study, the structural models of the taxifolin and 
quercetin in the trypanothione reductase binding sites has been 
carried out, which may facilitate further development of more 
potent antileishmanial agents. Taxifolin and quercetin might be 
a promising additive in combined drug inhibitor of 
trypanothione reductase.

Methodology
Target and template Sequence alignments:
The sequence of L. braziliensis TryP (gi No. 154334618) was 
retrieved from National Centre for Biotechnology Information 
(NCBI). The homology sequences were searched against the 
Protein Data Base [] using NCBI-BlastP 
[–]. The most 
homologous structure obtained was considered as the potential 
template for modeling the structure of target []. The atomic 
coordinates for modeling the structure was obtained from the 
protein databank.

Prediction of binding site :
To determine the interactions between flavonoids (Quercetin 
and Taxifolin) and TryP the amino acids in the binding site of 
the model was predicted through Q-site Finder [] and the 
same was confirmed by the conserved residues observed in the 
template binding site. 


Ligand preparation:
The flavonoids like Quercetin and Taxifolin () 
molecules were drawn in ACD-Chemsketch (
www.acdlabs.com) and their SMILES notation was obtained. They were 
converted into SDF files using ‘Online SMILES convertor and 
Structure file generator’ [].

Flexible docking:
Molecular docking analysis is carried out between the target 
protein active site with ligands of flavonoids like Quercetin and 
Taxifolin. The developed SDF structures were docked within 
the binding site of L. braziliensis Try P using FlexX 
[] with 
following parameters i) default general docking informations,
ii) base placement using triangle matching, iii) scoring of full 
score contribution and threshold of 0, 30 and No score 
contribution and threshold of 0,70. iv) Chemical parameters of 
clash handling values for protein ligand clashes with maximum 
allowed overlap volume of 2.9 A03 and intra-ligand clashes with 
clash factor of 0.6 and considering the hydrogen in internal 
clash tests. v) Default docking details values of 200 for both the 
maximum number of solutions per iteration and maximum 
number of solutions per fragmentation.

Predictions of ligand-receptor interaction:
The interaction of flavonoids with L. braziliensis Try P in the 
docked complex were analyzed by the pose-view of LeadIT 
[].

Results &amp; Discussion
Docking studies with flavonoids:
These quercetin and taxifolin-two flavonoids were docked with 
modeled L. braziliensis Try P and also with its template L. Major
Try PI using the docking program FlexX and the ligand-receptor 
interactions were analyzed using LeadIT. The docking interactions 
of the quercetin and taxifolin molecules with modeled L. braziliensis 
Try P and its template L. Major Try PI implies that the taxifolin has 
lowest binding energy of -8.0851 kJ mol-1 and -7.5118 kJ mol-1 
respectively and quercetin exhibited highest binding energy of -11.9518 kJ mol-1 
and -9.2482 kJ mol-1 respectively. This observation suggests that the 
folding of L. braziliensis Try P would be the almost same as its template 
protein L. Major Try PI and  (see supplementary material) summarizes 
these results.  &amp; 
 show the docking results of modeled 
L. braziliensis Try P and its template L. Major Try PI proteins 
 (see supplementary material) 
shows the corresponding amino acids with their specific binding 
energies favoring the interactions.

 
The binding energy scores of the taxifolin and quercetin 
molecules with L. braziliensis TryP -8.0851 kJ mol-1 and -11.8601 
kJ mol-1 respectively and in the case of template L. Major Try PI 
-7.5118 kJ mol-1 and -9.2482 kJ mol-1 of binding energy score 
with taxifolin and quercetin respectively. The amino acids that 
interacted with quercetin were found to be Pro-11, Asp-134 and 
taxifolin were found to be Ala-12, Ser-14, Gly-137 in L. Major 
Try PI ()and Pro-11,Asp-134, Lys-136 in L. 
braziliensis Try P with quercetin and Leu-31, Lys-136, Gly-137 in 
L. braziliensis Try P with taxifolin (). These 
findings suggested that the amino acids Proline (Pro), Aspartic 
acid (Asp), Glycine (Gly) and Lysine (Lys) in the active site of 
Try P of template and modeled proteins were conserved and 
favoring the interactions with the ligands.

Conclusion
In conclusion, this study clearly indicates that quercetin and 
taxifolin have excellent binding interactions with L. braziliensis 
Try P and L. Major Try PI. The docking results indicated that 
the amino acid residue Lys136 seemed to be essential in L. 
braziliensis Try P ligand recognition through a critical hydrogen 
bonding interaction with the docked ligands. Our ongoing 
studies on identification of novel and specific inhibitors of these 
generated homology model is expected to be useful for the 
structure based drug design against leishmaniasis.

Supplementary material
Data 1
RKG wants to thanks D.S. Kothari Post Doctoral Fellowship, 
University Grants Commission, Government of India (No. F. 4-
2/2006 (BSR)/13-618/2012(BSR) for the grant of Post Doctoral 
Fellowship and SS wants to thanks University Grants 
Commission, Government of India for financial support and 
the School of Biochemical Engineering, Indian Institute of 
Technology(BHU), Varanasi, India, for providing laboratory 
and technical support. AS wants to thanks DBT INSPER 
Fellowship, Government of India (No. DST/INSPIRE 
Fellowship/2012). RKP wants to thanks SERB, DST, 
Government of India for sanctioning the grant for Project 
(Project File no.SB/FT/LS-328/2012) under Fast Track Proposal 
for Young Scientist׳s Scheme. MP wants to thanks CSIR,
Government of India, financial support in the form of 
fellowship.

Citation:Gundampati et al, Bioinformation 10(6): 353-357 (2014)

Structures of quercetin and taxifolin.

A) Interaction of taxifolin with Tryparedoxin Peroxidase (3TUE); B) Interaction of Quercetin with Tryparedoxin 
Peroxidase (3TUE).

A) Interaction of Quercetin with Tryparedoxin Peroxidase from L. braziliensis; B) Interaction of taxifolin with 
Tryparedoxin Peroxidase from L. braziliensis. 


