Background
Several pathogens have developed resistance against many of
the currently available drugs and become a global health threat.
Since infections caused by resistant pathogens are associated
with higher morbidity and mortality than those caused by
susceptible pathogens, increasing resistance is a major concern
[]. 
Also, while drug resistance is on the rise, discovery and
development of newer drugs have been on the decline 
[]. Thus,
there is a pressing need for novel drugs to handle the problem
of drug resistance. Genomic sequences of pathogens could
serve as valuable tools in the search for newer drug targets. We
employed an in silico approach to identify potential drug targets
that could be exploited for drug discovery against some
pathogens with reported drug resistance, viz. Mycobacterium tuberculosis, M.
leprae, Plasmodium falciparum, P. vivax, Staphylococcus aureus,
Sterptococcus pneumoniae and Nesseirria gonorrhea, and made the
data available in the form of a database called DDTRP
(Database of Drug Targets for Resistant Pathogens). The
database can be accessed at 
http://bmi.icmr.org.in/DDTRP.

Methodology
From the list of currently available drugs for each of the
selected pathogens, drugs reported to be associated with
resistance due to mutation(s) in their respective target genes
were selected and all enzymes involved in each of the targeted
metabolic pathways were obtained from KEGG 
[]. The protein
sequences of these enzymes were compared with that of the
human proteome using BLAST []. Proteins that had no
orthologs in human at an e-value of 0.005 were identified as
potential drug targets and made available in the DDTRP. Each
target is cross-linked to other useful online resources. The
database was built using XAMPP. The flowchart describing the
development of the DDTRP is given in .

Results and Discussion
Eighty six potential targets were identified for M. tuberculosis, 
16 for M. leprae, 47 from Staphylococcus aureus, 43 for
Streptococcus pneumoniae, 16 for Plasmodium falciparum, 11 for
Plasmodium vivax and 46 for Neisseria gonorrhoeae. Raman et al.,
(2008) [] used the method of predicting potential drug targets
in M. tuberculosis by comparing its whole genome with that of
human proteome. Other investigators like Anishetty et al.,
(2007) [] and Agüero et al., (2008) 
[] have undertaken various
efforts to identify and prioritize targets for tropical diseases
including tuberculosis. Our strategy differs from that of others
in that we have chosen as our initial dataset proteins from
resistance associated metabolic pathways for the prediction of
alternate drug targets. A total of 265 proteins were identified by
us as potential drug targets for the seven pathogens. Since these
targets are involved in metabolic pathways that are known to
be critical for the growth or survival of the pathogen and their
interruption could bring about a static or cidal effect on the
pathogen, the shortlisted targets could be prioritized for further
studies. The contents of the database have been summarized in
Table 1 (see ).

Features of the database
The database has four browse options for each pathogen: 
currently available drugs with resistance,

targets of current drugs,

metabolic pathways involving each of the current targets, and

potential alternate drug targets.


Details for each drug include a brief description of its composition and
structure, mechanism of action, target protein, route of
administration, dosage, absorption, adverse effects/toxicity and
contra-indications. Links have also been provided to other
online resources like DrugBank, PharmGKB, Medline Plus,
DailyMed and RxList. Current and potential drug targets have
been linked to GenBank, Swissprot (UniProt), KEGG, PDB,
Pfam, InterPro, COG and other pathogen-specific databases
wherever applicable. A provision has been made to browse the
database via metabolic pathways.  is a screen shot of
the data provided for one of the potential targets in the
database.

Future Developments
The database will be periodically updated with drug resistance
related information and extended to include pathogens
responsible for other emerging and re-emerging infectious
diseases.

Conclusion
The Database of Drug Targets for Resistant Pathogens (DDTRP)
is a comprehensive database that provides a list of current and
alternative drug targets for a group of pathogens of public
health significance. This database would be an useful online
resource for researchers involved in target identification and
drug discovery for various infectious diseases.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We acknowledge the financial support provided by ICMR. We
also thank the staff of ICMR-Biomedical Informatics Centre,
New Delhi, for administering the database, and Dr. P.R.
Narayanan, Former director of TRC, for his kind
encouragement and support.

Citation:Sundaramurthi et al, Bioinformation 7(2): 98-101 (2011)

Flow of data in DDTRP

Information page for a drug target of M. tuberculosis in
DDTRP

