Background
The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) - an atypical
serine/threonine (S/T) protein kinase, is a central controller of
cell growth, proliferation and metabolism [,
]. mTOR is
regarded as the “master switch” of cellular metabolic
processes owing to its unique ability to sense nutrient 
availability, cellular energy levels, oxygen levels, and
mitogenic signals [,
] that regulates cell signaling process.
Dysregulation of mTOR and its associated proteins in the
signaling pathway often hallmarks tumor development
angiogenesis and metastasis []. For example, abnormal
activation of the mTOR pathway was detected in squamous
cancers [], adenocarcinomas 
[], bronchioloalveolar
carcinomas [], colorectal cancers 
[], astrocytomas 
[] and
glioblastomas [].

Given the ubiquitous role in carcinomas, mTOR surfaced as an
interesting anti-metastatic target in the clinical treatment of
broad range of carcinomas. A recent immune-histochemical
study performed in tissue arrays containing 124 tumors from 8
common human tumor types revealed that approximately 26%
of tumors (32/124) are predicted to be sensitive to mTOR
inhibition []. These findings indicates potential role of
dysregulated mTOR signaling in tumorigenesis and support
the currently ongoing clinical development of mTOR inhibitors
as a potential tumor-selective therapeutic strategy. The first
ever drug targeting mTOR pathway was Rapamycin isolated
from the bacterium Streptomyces hygroscopicus discovered to
have potent immunosuppressive and anti-tumour properties
[–
]. As an immunosuppressive drug, rapamycin
(rapamune or sirolimus) was approved by FDA (USA Food
and Drug Administration) in 1999 for prevention of renal
allograft rejection []. Subsequent studies described that
rapamycin can also act as a cytostatic agent, slowing or
arresting growth of cell lines derived from different tumour
types. Rapamycin forms complex with the intracellular
receptor FKBP12, this complex binds to mTOR and inhibits
mTORC1 downstream signaling [,
] thereby preventing
translations of the proteins involved in cancer progression 
().

However, being potent - rapamycin suffers solvent solubility
concerns. In order to overcome issues with the “conventional”
rapamycin, several derivatives of rapamycin called “rapalogs”
with more favourable pharmacokinetic and solubility
properties have been synthesized, such as RAD001
(Everolimus, Novartis, Novartis, Basel, Switzerland), CCI-779
(Temsirolimus, Wyeth, Madison, NJ, USA) and AP23573
(Deforolimus, ARIAD, Cambridge, MA, USA), which have
overcome the drawbacks of rapamycin.

Although, the rapalogs have been efficient for tumor reversal,
at clinical grounds, however, these drugs produce numerous
side effects including decrease in lymphocytes and hemoglobin
that could be serious and/or debilitating and often
unpredictable. In addition, the oral bioavailability of these
drugs is still a concern owing to its low aqueous solubility 
[,
]. In the view of above given concerns, the present study
endeavors to identify mTOR inhibitor with optimal aqueous
solubility bestowed with superior inhibitory potential against
mTOR anticipated to have safety profile over the established
rapalogs

Methodology
Selection of inhibitors:
Potent compounds mTOR inhibitors like Rapamycin,
(Sirolimus), and its rapalogs − Everolimus, Temsirolimus,
Deforolimus and Echinomycin served as parent molecules for
similarity search ().

Similarity search, preparation of protein and compounds:
The selected inhibitors served as query molecules for shape
similarity search. Similarity search was supervised by binary
finger print based tanimoto similarity equation to retrieve
compounds with similarity threshold of 95 % against NCBI׳s
PubChem compound database. All the structures were
optimized through OPLS 2005 force field algorithm 
[]
embedded in the LigPrep module of Schrödinger suite, 2013
(Schrodinger. LLC, New York, NY) []. Structural complex of
Human FKBP12 and FRB domain of mTOR was retrieved from
Protein Data Bank (PDB ID: 3FAP) [] which was processed
by removing all bound crystal water molecules and adding
hydrogen bonds. Explicit hydrogen, bond orders, disulphide
bonds, hybridizations and charges were assigned wherever 
missing. The resulting structure was energy minimized at
protonation state of 7.4 using OPLS-2005 force field by protein
preparation wizard of Schrödinger suite 2013.

Solubility prediction and ADMET prediction of compounds:
Solubility parameters like QP log S for aqueous solubility , QP
log P for hexadecane/gas, QP log P for octanol/gas, QP log P
for water/gas, QP log P for octanol/water were calculated by
QikProp module of Schrödinger suite 2013 []. All the similar
compounds retrieved were screened for its ADMET by
admetSAR web server [].

Ligand receptor docking:
Molecular docking program- Molegro Virtual Docker (MVD)
[] which incorporates highly efficient PLP (Piece wise Linear
Potential) and MolDock scoring function provided a flexible
docking platform. The leads (Rapamycin (Sirolimus),
Temsirolimus, Everolimus, Deforolimus) and similar chemical
structures were docked in predicted cavity of FKBP12.
Docking parameters were set to 0.20Å as grid resolution,
maximum iteration of 1500 and maximum population size of
50. Simplex evolution was set at maximum steps of 300 with
neighborhood distance factor of 1. Binding affinity and
interactions of compounds with protein were evaluated on the
basis of the internal ES (Internal electrostatic Interaction),
internal hydrogen bond interactions and sp2-sp2 torsions. Post
docking energy of the ligand-receptor complex was minimized
using Nelder Mead Simplex Minimization (using non-grid
force field and H bond directionality) []. On the basis of
MolDock - rerank score best interacting high affinity
compound was selected respective to each parent compound.

Protein-protein docking studies:
Structural complex of Human FKBP12 and FRB domain of
mTOR was retrieved from Protein Data Bank (PDB ID: 3FAP).
The FKBP12 and FRB domain of mTOR domain were
separated and saved in two different pdb files. The free and
ligand bound FKBP12 was further docked with FRB domain of
mTOR. Protein - Protein docking was executed through object
recognition and image segmentation algorithm embedded in
Patchdock server []. Default parameter was set as clustering
RMSD at 4.0.

Solvent Accessible Surface Area (SASA) and Interface Property Calculation:
Solvent accessible surface area of the protein complexes
(FKBP12 drug bound/free and FRB domain of mTOR ) was
calculated by GETAREA server [], protein interfaces was
calculated by Aquaprot [] and interface properties were
calculated by 2P2I inspector [] online server.

Results &amp; Discussion
Evident from docking (rerank) scores, it was interesting to note
that all the similar compounds identified against parent
compound had higher binding affinity against FKBP12 protein
in comparison to their respective parent compounds. Further,
compound (PubCid: 57254959) akin to Everolimus showed
highest affinity against the FKBP 12 amongst all the
compounds (parent and similars) undertaken in this study.
Everolimus similar (PubCid: 57254959) showed 1.50 folds
higher affinity than its parent compound and 1.73 folds better
affinity than conventional ‘rapamycin’. The docking scores of
parent and their respective similars are provided in 

(see supplementary material).

In the further analysis we investigated the rationale behind the
high affinity of Evorilumus similar against FKBP12. Molecular
insights revealed that the internal ligand interactions of
Evorilumus similar with FKBP12 was 2.6 folds higher than
rapamycin- FKBP12 interactions and approximately 1.2 folds
higher than Evorilumus- FKBP12 interactions. As shown in
, the higher binding affinity of Evorilumus similar can
further be attributed to higher hydrogen bonding potential
along with long and short range electrostatic interaction. We
later investigate that, in the cavity of FKBP12 34 amino acid
residues interacted with Evorilumus similar while only 26 and
28 residues of FKBP12 interacted with rapamycin and
Evorilumus which further testifies the better binding affinity of
Evorilumus similar than its parent compound Evorilumus and
rapamycin. The similar compounds retrieved against each
parent were further tested for their in silico ADMET profile and
solubility properties  (see supplementary material).
Except for Temsirolimus similar (PubChem ID: 10167669) the
entire similar compounds retrieved, demonstrated appreciable
pharmacological profile. In particular, Everolimus similar
(PubChem ID: 57284959) exhibited better pharmacological
profile than any of the similar compounds retrieved.

The key issue that rapamycin fails to form an ideal mTOR
inhibitors can be attributed to its poor oral absorption and
lower solubility. As shown in  (see supplementary
material), rapamycin falls short in demonstrating acceptable
aqueous solubility and oral absorption in the gastro-intestinal
tract. In addition, rapamycin also shows poor solubility
coefficients for hexadecane/gas partition and octanol/gas
partition. Owing to these serious drawbacks, rapalogs were
discovered bestowed with better absorption and solubility
properties. Rapalogs- Everolimus, Temsirolimus and
Deforolimus which are derivatives of rapamycin were
anticipated to overcome the solubility issues. However, in our
in silico analysis, although rapalogs although had good
pharmacological profile, nevertheless suffered solubility
concerns like sub optimal hexadecane/gas and octanol/gas
partition coefficients. The structures screened, similar to parent
compounds were successful in overcoming the given solubility
concerns. Interestingly, Everolimus similar compound
(PubChem ID: 57284959) even showed better solubility
properties than the compounds similar to Temsirolimus and
Deforolimus. Evident from protein-protein docking studies,
the FKBP12-mTOR interactions are efficiently increased in
presence of inhibitors as compared to ligand free FKBP12, thus
implying there occurs a strong FKBP12-mTOR interactions in
presence of inhibitors. It is interesting to note that, all the
similar compounds had superior inhibitory potential than their
parent compounds. In particular, the FKBP12-mTOR
interactions enhanced in presence of Evorilumus similar
compared to remaining the compounds (parent and their
respective similar) undertaken in the study. Everolimus similar
was efficient to enhance FKBP12-mTOR interactions by 1.92
folds than conventional “rapamycin” and by 1.72 folds than its
parent - Everolimus. The patch dock scores (protein-protein
docking scores) of FKBP12-mTOR interaction in presence of
inhibitors and their respective akin is shown in  (see
supplementary material).

 (see supplementary material) shows the various
molecular interactions of compounds against both FKBP12 and
FRB domain of mTOR. In terms of van der Waals contacts,
electrostatic interactions and hydrogen bond interactions in a
both FKBP12 and FRB domain, Evorilumus similar stands as a
high affinity compound against these two proteins implying
Evorilumus similar brings about best interactions between
FKBP12 and mTOR

In order to figure out the molecular rationales of enhanced
affinity of FKBP12 to mTOR in presence of Everolimus similar
as revealed from protein-protein docking results we further
performed interface property calculations. Interface properties
of FKBP12-mTOR complex in presence and absence of
inhibitors is shown in  (see supplementary material).
From extensive interface properties calculations it is quite
apparent that all the similar compounds brought about
enhanced FKBP12-mTOR interactions than their respective
parent compound. It is interesting to note that the concurrence
between patch dock results and FKBP12-mTOR interface
property calculations is supported by the fact that the total
interface area in FKBP12-mTOR complex was 2.1 folds
elevated in presence of compound Everolimus similar
compared to the complex harboring its parent compound
Everolimus. Likewise, it is also imperative to note that gap
index and SASA was declined between FKBP12-mTOR in
presence of Everolimus, indicating it to be the powerful and
potential inhibitor undertaken in the existing study. The ratio
of interface atoms to buried atoms was highest which in
addition indicates that Evorilumus similar brings about far
better interaction of FKBP12-mTOR than any other
compound undertaken in the study.

Owing to superior inhibitory potential of Everolimus similar it
was further mapped for its pharmacophoric properties. At the
mTOR-FKBP12 interface and specifically in FKBP12,
compound shows van der waals interaction with Val 55, Phe
46, Tyr 26, His 87, Ile 56, Ile 90, Ile 91, Leu 97 and Phe 36 and
electrostatic interactions with Asp 37,Glu 54,Tyr 82, Ile 56, and
Val55, hydrogen bonding interactions with Glu 121, Arg 125
and in the FRB domain of mTOR the compound interacts
through van der waals with Thr 187, Arg 125, Gly 129, Tyr
194,Trp 190, Asp 191, Ser 124, Phe 128, Phe 197 and Glu 121
and electrostatic interactions with Ser 124, Trp 190 and Lys 184
. In addition, in the FKBP12 cavity, the compound forms H
bonds with Ile 56 and Tyr 26 (). The solvent accessible
surface area of Everolimus similar at the FKBP 12 and FRB is
shown in . Electrostatic interactions of FKBP12 and
mTOR in presence of Everolimus similar is shown in .
In conclusion, together with molecular docking analysis,
protein-protein patch docking, solubility analysis, ADMET
predictions and interface property calculations has put forth
Everolimus akin compound (PubChem ID: 57284959) to
demonstrate and brings about strongest interaction between
FKBP12 and FRB domain of mTOR.

Conclusion
The current drugs that facilitate FKBP12 and mTOR
interactions have been successful, nevertheless have known to
demonstrate serious concerns like declined oral absorption
property and suboptimal solubility. To overcome the narrow
therapeutic window of the current drugs, we identified
Everolimus similar compound PubChem ID: 57284959 to show
appreciable drug like properties bestowed with better
solubility higher oral bioavailability. In addition, this
compound brought about enhanced interaction between
FKBP12 and FRB domain of mTOR. Extensive investigations
using molecular docking, ADMET predictions, solubility
analysis, protein-protein docking and interface property
calculations testifies Evorolimus similar to be superior
inhibitor of mTOR pathway; however in vitro and in vivo
experimental correlates are required to complement our
observations.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Nasr et al, Bioinformation 11(6): 307-315 (2015)

A) Ligand stimulation of growth receptors (like VEGFR, HER etc) and insulin receptors activates the mTOR complex
through a series of upstream signaling proteins like PI3K and AKT. Over-activation of mTOR signaling significantly contributes to
abnormal cellular proliferation and development of tumors through deregulation of upstream PI3K/AKT signaling through a
variety of mechanisms, including overexpression or activation of growth factor receptors, and IGFR (insulin-like growth factor
receptor) or mutations in PI3K and mutations/amplifications of AKT. Rapamycin and rapalogs crosslink the immunophilin FKBP-
12 protein then rapamycin-FKBP12 complex interferes with FRB domain of mTOR and inhibits the mTOR activity. The inhibition of
mTOR blocks the binding of the accessory protein raptor (regulatory-associated protein of mTOR) to mTOR, As a consequence, the
synergistic binding reduces protein synthesis which leads to late blockage of G1/S cell cycle and induces cancer cell death by
stimulating autophagy or apoptosis. Inset: Domain structure of mTOR. The N-terminus of mTOR contains tandem repeated HEAT
motifs (protein interaction domains found in Huntington, Elongation factor 3, PR65/A and TOR), a FAT (domain shared by FRAP,
Ataxia telangiectasia mutated, and TRRAP, all of which are PIKK family members) domain, a FRB (FKBP12-rapamycin-binding
site, found in all eukaryotic TOR orthologs) domain. TheFRB domain forms a deep hydrophobic cleft that serves as the highaffinity
binding site for the inhibitory complex FKBP12-rapamycin; B) Protein complex (PDB ID: 3FAP) of FKBP12 (green helices)
and FRB domain of mTOR (blue helices). Ligand-receptor complex is first established between Rapamycin (bound at the interface)
and FKBP12. The complex thereafter binds to FRB domain of mTOR. The synergistic binding of rapamycin bound FKBP to mTOR
results in inhibition of mTORC1 downstream signaling pathways leading to translational suppression of oncogenes.

Structures of established mTOR inhibitors a) Rapamycin; b) Everolimus; c) Temsirolimus; d) Deforolimus; e)
Echinomycin.

a) Interactions of PubChem ID: 57284959 –Everolimus similar with FKBP12 and FRB domain of mTOR. Residues (residues
prefixed with ‘A’ belong to FKBP12 and ‘B’ belong to FRB domain of mTOR). Residues circled in green participate in van der Waals
interaction while residues in pink forms electrostatic interactions. Hydrogen bond donors and acceptors are shown in blue and
green color respectively; b) Evorilumus similar bound at the interface of FKBP12 (red helices) and FRB domain of mTOR (golden
helices).

Electrostatic surfaces of FKBP 2(Solid) and FRB
domain of mTOR (mesh) in FKBP12-mTOR complex.
Everolimus similar (PubChem ID: 57284959) (solid yellow) is
bound between the interfaces

