Background
SSRs or microsatellites are tandem repeats of mono-, di-, tri-, tetra-, etc.
nucleotide motifs. They infest the genomes of most eukaryotes and often
exhibit length polymorphism. The reversible length altering mutations are
resultant of unequal crossing over and replication slippage. Relative
conservation of the flanking regions, allow the variable length
microsatellites to be used as locus specific, co‐dominant, genetic markers
across taxa. SSRs present in non-coding DNA were earlier thought to be
non-functional entities, but now we know that they play distinct roles in
genome organization, regulation of transcription, DNA recombination and
repair, etc. [] When present in protein coding DNA segments, their
expansion or contraction can have huge impact on protein’s function.
Several human diseases have been linked to expansion of trinucleotide
microsatellites within protein coding genes and have been dubbed
trinucleotide repeat disorders. [] Through “guilt by association”, several
microsatellite loci in plants have been linked to stress tolerance, disease
resistance, domestication events and various agronomic traits. [] Cp DNA
has lesser percentage of non-coding component as compared to nuclear
DNA, still SSRs are abundant in chloroplast genomes. In contrast to
nuclear DNA markers that are inherited both from seed and pollen the
cpDNA is inherited only through maternal route in angiosperms. It is
considered a highly polymorphic marker that can be used to trace
divergence through geographical isolation. []The present work finds the
relative percentages of different SSR motifs and their distribution in
coding and non-coding compartments of cpDNA in members of
Brassicaceae family. Brassicaceae includes almost 338 genus comprising
of about 3700 species exhibiting cosmopolitan distribution. [] The family
is also known as mustard family and members are mostly annual or
perennial herbs. Arabidopsis thaliana, a commonly used 
‘ model plant’ also belongs to this family. Chloroplast genome sequences of 12 species of
Brassicaceae are present in GenBank [] and we have included all of them
in our analysis of microsatellite loci. The study also tests the
appropriateness of using data from cpDNA SSR length polymorphism as a
genetic marker to plot phylogenetic relationships.

Methodology
Mining of chloroplast genome sequences
cpDNA sequences of 12 species of Brassicaceae family, namely,
Aethionema cordifolium (NC_009265), Aethionema grandiflorum
(NC_009266), Arabidopsis thaliana (NC_000932), 
Arabis hirsuta (NC_009268), Barbarea verna (NC_009269), 
Capsella bursa-pastoris (NC_009270), Crucihimalaya wallichii (NC_009271), 
Draba nemorosa
(NC_009272), Lepidium virginicum (NC_009273), Lobularia maritima
(NC_009274), Nasturtium officinale (NC_009275) and
Olimarabidopsispumila (NC_009267) were downloaded from GenBank 
[]
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). DNA sequences for coding and noncoding
DNA segments of cpDNA were downloaded from the Chloroplast
Genome Database []
(http://chloroplast.cbio.psu.edu).

Mining SSRs from cpDNA and Primer design
A standalone perl script was used to find SSR motifs. For monomers, the
minimum repeat size was 10 nt, for dimers, minimum repeat size was 5 nt,
for trimer to decamer, minimum repeat size was 3 nt. Both perfect SSRs
and compound SSRs were detected. The maximum interruption size
between compound SSRs was kept 5 nucleotides. SSRs were searched in
full chloroplast genome as well as separate coding and non-coding regions
for each species. About 200‐400 nt sequences flanking the SSR was used
in online tool primer3 [] for designing primers. Parameters used for
primer3 were: optimum primer size ‐ 20nt, optimum annealing temperature
‐ 59°C, optimum GC content ‐ 50%.

SSR dynamics in coding, non‐coding and complete cpDNA
The data generated from SSR mining was analyzed using Microsoft
Excel-Ŗ. Percentages of different types of SSR motifs were calculated and
their occurrence in coding vs. non‐coding DNA was determined. The
number of SSRs in coding and non‐coding DNA across species was
represented graphically to appreciate the dynamics.

Designing Universal primers &amp;Virtual PCR on cpDNA
200‐400 nt flanking the SSRs were aligned and regions showing 100 %identity were 
used to design universal primers. These primers were tested
using FastPCR [] for amplification of SSR loci across cpDNA of all 12
species. Two sets of universal primers showing length polymorphism
across all species were selected for further analysis.

Electrophoresis prediction and phylogenetic tree construction
The amplicons generated by FastPCR from cpDNA of all species, using
the selected universal primers, were loaded into CLC DNA workbench
[]An in-silico gel electrophoretogram was plotted using the CLC DNA
workbench. Length polymorphism data was used to generate a distance
matrix, using the ‘ simint’ module of NTSYSpc ver 2.2 []and further
clustered using UPGMA (Unweighted Pair Group Method with Arithmetic
mean) algorithm for plotting a dendrogram. Amplicon sequence data was
used to plot dendrogram on structural polymorphism basis. The amplicon
sequences were aligned using ClustalW [] Neighbor-Joining clustering
algorithm was used to plot a dendrogram. The robustness of the tree was
tested using bootstrap analysis (1000 iterations).

Discussion
Chloroplast genomes of 12 species of Brassicaceae family were analyzed
for their total microsatellite content, distribution across coding and noncoding
domains and relative percentages in different species. The data
reveals interesting patterns of SSR distributions. Finally, using the
designed universal primers, an attempt was made to use SSR length
polymorphism for exploring phylogenetic relationships.

Types of SSR motifs in cpDNA of Brassicaceae
Total numbers of different types of SSR motifs present in all cpDNA
samples were estimated. Mononucleotide and trinucleotide motifs are most
common and present in almost the same proportion (42% and 40%
respectively). Motifs larger then penta nucleotide represent only 1% of
total SSRs (). Twelve percent of the total NRMs are dinucleotide
repeats, where AT/TA type repeats were predominant, in contrast to
CG/GC type repeat. One of the reasons for this disparity may be that CG
repeats are known to increase the stacking energy of DNA and can form ZDNA
in negatively super coiled regions, during transcription .
[]

Further, between the two most prominent repeat motifs, mononucleotide
motif was overrepresented in non-coding DNA in contrast to the
trinucleotide motif that was more common in coding DNA. Other NRMs
were also present in larger numbers in non-coding DNA 
().
Expressed sequence tags (ESTs) represent the coding portion of the
genome.[] Mining of publicly available EST sequences for SSRs have
been performed by several groups and almost invariably, trinucleotide
motif has been reported as most common [,
]  which corroborates with
our results. This is expected as repeats other then trinucleotide motifs,
would result in fram shift or null mutations, resulting in non-functional
proteins, and hence would generally not be selected through evolution.

Distribution of SSRs in cpDNA of different species
Distribution of total numbers of SSRs present across the 12 species was
tested. Total numbers of SSRs in complete cpDNA molecules show
considerable variation across different species. Further analysis showed
that this huge variation is mainly due to the differences in SSR content in
non-coding regions. Coding regions of different cpDNA, in contrast,
showed lesser variation in SSR numbers, across the species 
( &amp;
Table 1 in ). 
As a corollary from this analysis, it also
appears that despite 51% of cpDNA (of selected species) encodes proteins,
total number of SSRs in coding regions range only from 47 to 58, in
different species, while total number of SSRs in non-coding region (about
49% of chloroplast genome) range from 84 to 120. Thus, on an average,
non-coding compartment of cpDNA in Brassicaceae contains twice the
number of SSRs present in coding DNA. Simillar results have been
reported for mitochondrial and chloroplast genomes of rice 
[]. SSRs are
known to undergo cyclical expansion and contraction. These mutations are
caused by recombination or by replication slippage. [] Such changes
would be more easily tolerated in non-coding DNA and this could be one
of the reasons why more numbers of SSRs are observed in non-coding
regions.

Microsatellite polymorphism across Brassicaceae
Length polymorphism of SSRs can be easily assessed using simple
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays, with primers designed on
conserved flanking regions. []
Two sets of universal primers, which
yield variable length amplicons across the 12 Brassicaceae species, have
been designed (). An electrophoretogram was simulated to
demonstrate the extent of length polymorphism (). On basis of
amplicon size distribution, two major classes emerged. These have been
marked in the electrophoretogram, and are also represented in the
dendrogram plotted on length variation basis (). In order to test
whether sequence based phylogeny (structural polymorphism) correlates
with the dendrogram plotted using length variation of SSR, we aligned the
amplicon sequences in clustalW  ( . Subsequently, clustering was
performed and sequence based phylogenetic tree was constructed (). Our analysis suggests that SSR length polymorphism and structural
polymorphism may not correlate for cpDNA of Brassicaceae. Similar
results were reported for SSR data from mitochondrial genome of domestic
animals[] as well as 
for chloroplast genome in Cucumis species.[]

Conclusion
This work reveals the distribution of different types of SSR in coding and
non-coding compartments of 12 different species of Brassicaceae family.
Out results indicate that, in general, SSRs have more preponderance in
non-coding segments of cpDNA in contrast to the coding regions.
However, triplet repeats are more prevalent in coding regions, as expected.
Considerable variation in numbers of SSR is observed in non-coding
regions of cpDNA across different species. Attempt to use amplicon length
polymorphism to construct phylogenetic relationships did not yield results
that were in complete congruity with amplicon sequence based phylogeny.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Financial assistance provided by institutional CSIR grant is deeply
acknowledged. The authors are thankful to the Director, IIIM for providing
facilities for this work.

Citation:Gandhi etal Bioinformation 5(1): 16-20 (2010)

Distribution of nucleotide repeat motifs (NRM) in choloroplast genomes of 12 species belonging to Brassicaceas family,(a) pie chart revealing
the percentage of different types of NRMs (SSRS) in Brassicaceae (b) Bar graph indicating percentage of various NRMS in coding or non-coding regions
of chloroplast DNA (c) species wise distribution of total SSRS in coding or non-coding regions of chloroplast DNA note :-percentages have been rounded
to nearest integer

Microsatellite polymorphism in chloroplast genomes of 12 Brassicac eae species.(a) Universal primer sets exhibition amplicon length
polymorphism (b) simulated DNA electrophoretogram of predicated amplicons using universal primer set 1 (b) simulated DNA electrophoretogram of
predicted amplicons using universal primer set 1(c) phylogenetic tree based on amplicon length polymorphism using universal primer set1 (d)
phylogenetic tree based on amplicon sequence polymorphism using universal primer set 1

Multiple sequence alignment of amplicon sequences using CLUSTAL W

