Background
In the post-genomic era, genome-sequencing projects are
progressing at a fast pace. Hence the availability of the genome
sequences has generated vast sequence data that is available via
public domain databases. Complete genome sequences pose
challenges and opportunities to a computational biologist to
understand the genome function and its complexity 
[–]. To
explore the hidden genomic information, building the
relationship between the genomes of various species is an
important step to begin. Ortholog identification is used
efficiently to compare and to understand the functional aspect
of un-annotated genes present in the genome.

Reciprocal Best BLAST Hits (RBBHs) is known to be an efficient
approach to identify the orthologs [–]. Our web tool, OrFin
also makes use of this approach to identify pair of orthologous
proteins for a given set of two proteomes. It allows user to alter
the criteria to retrieve the RBBHs. It is user friendly with a web
interface that will have potential implications to assist features
associated with orthologous proteins.

Algorithm
The web server takes the input sequences for two organisms
and returns the orthologous pair of proteins. Firstly, it filters the
identical proteins, if any, followed by Reciprocal Best Blast Hits
methods to retrieve the orthologs. Ortholog search for these
multiple identical proteins is carried out with one of the protein
sequence as a representative. Later in the results, representative
protein is replaced with actual protein/ORFs along with their
identified orthologous proteins. User defined parameters are
incorporated in this web-tool. Flow chart of the methodology
followed is depicted in .

Web interface
The web interface is provided through PHP. In client tier, we
have allowed the user to go through different options, e.g.
selection of listed organisms or to provide organism details. In
later case files (.faa) are to be uploaded. After successful
submission of the data our application will retrieve the
orthologous pairs of proteins. It also allows the user to choose
E-Value for BLAST and alignment length criteria to retrieve the
RBBHs. Additionally, user can also upload genome coordinate
files (.ptt) for each of the genomes submitted in order to retrieve
a well formatted output which can be Protein IDs, ORF IDs and
their combination with gene names. Apache HTTP Web Server
is used for the management of communication between
different tiers or layers of the application. Programs running at
the backend of OrFin have been written using Perl-CGI scripts.
At the backend, mysql database server is used for storing all the
relevant data and user outputs. An example of executing a job
using OrFin server has been shown in .

Applications
OrFin is built to identify the putative orthologous proteins
between two proteomes. It will have potential implications to
employ comparative genomics to assist not only in functional
annotation but also in phylogenetic footprinting.

Research in VV's laboratory is supported by RGYI grant from
Department of Biotechnology, Government of India and UPE-2
grant of University of Hyderabad. VV acknowledges the
Bioinformatics Infrastructure Facility, University of Hyderabad,
to host the webserver. Authors acknowledge technical support
from Mr. Jogadhenu Rajesh.

Citation:Midha et al, Bioinformation 8(15): 738-739 (2012)

Flowchart illustrating the methodology

Screenshot of OrFin with input parameters and results
as an example

