Background
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding nucleotide
sequences between 17 and 25 nucleotides in length that
primarily function in the regulation of gene expression [,
].
Studies have demonstrated that a single miRNA may regulate
several mRNAs of multiple functions, and that a single mRNA
may be target of several microRNAs []. Thus, miRNAs form a
complex, regulatory cell-signaling network [,
] that results in
differentiated gene expression. It is estimated that two-thirds
of the human genome is regulated by these small nucleotide
sequences. The mechanisms underlying the negative
regulation of gene expression by miRNAs are similar in
animals and plants, which implies that they are involved in
fundamental cellular processes including cell proliferation,
development, differentiation and apoptosis []. Several studies
have described the expression profile of miRNAs in both
healthy tissues as for diseases [–
].

Altered miRNA expression levels may contribute to disease
development in humans. Several reports have linked miRNAs
to cancer; the first miRNAs to be characterized were involved
in cellular proliferation and death. Human tumors and tumor
cell lines exhibit large differences in miRNA expression levels
compared with normal tissues [,
,
]. The evidence suggests
that differentiated miRNA expression may regulate tumor
suppressor genes and oncogenes []. To predict putative
target gene of a single miRNA in silico, tools like
microRNA.org [] and targetScan 
[] are used. The difficulty in
this analysis is the amount of predicted targets for a single
miRNA, considering that, as mentioned, a single miRNA may
have thousands of possible targets. Using online databases
available, the TargetCompare web tool proposes a way to
analyze all possible common targets of any number of preselected
miRNAs, indicating thereby targets with greater
chances of being silenced by at least two of the miRNAs pre
selected. The tool also associates known diseases linked to
these potential target genes.

Implementation:
The Java (http://www.oracle.com/us/technologies/java/)
programming language was used for TargetCompare
development and it was implemented as shown in 
.
The data used to compare putative targets was downloaded
from three majors miRNA target prediction datasets:
microrna.org [], targetscan.org 
[] and PiTa 
[]. To associate
the target genes with diseases, the public Genetic Association
Database [] was used. To manage the data, MySQL Database
Server (http://www. mysql. com/) was used. The web tool
targetCompare is freely available at http://www.lghm.ufpa.br/targetcompare.

Results &amp; Discussion
Using the developed tool in a single miRNA, it is possible to
compare target genes in all three datasets simultaneously
(). Another way to use the web tool is to query a set of
genes to find out which miRNAs target this set of genes
(). To evaluate the tool, it eas used in a set of the eight
miRNAs most highly expressed in antrum region of the
stomach [], we were able to identify 4,748 different genes may
be regulated by up to two of the eight miRNAs selected. Using
the simultaneous presence of at least six miRNAs as a selection
criterion, 43 potential target genes were grouped together
 (see supplementary material). The results obtained
with the developed tool suggest that these putative target
genes of the eight most highly expressed miRNA in antrum are
strong candidates for silencing in the gastric region.

Conclusions
This tool simultaneously evaluates different microRNAs
associating them with different classes of diseases. However,
the putative target genes need validation. Thus, the described
tool is useful to reduce the arbitrariness in the analysis. This
increases the chances of selecting target genes having an
important role in the studied tissue.

Funding sources
This work was part of the REDE DE PESQUISA EM
GENÔMICA POPULACIONAL HUMANA (Bio
Computacional/CAPES). Financial support: PROPESP/UFPAFADESP,
CNPq, CAPES. FABIANO CORDEIRO MOREIRA
supported by CESUPA; IGOR G. HAMOY is supported by
Pós-Doc Junior (PDJ) fellowship from CNPq/Brazil
(162605/2011- 0); ÂNDREA RIBEIRO-DOS-SANTOS
supported by CNPq/Produtividade.

Competing Interests
The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.

Author Contributions
Conceived and designed the experiments: FCM, BD. Analysed
the data: FCM, BD. Wrote the first draft of the manuscript:
FCM. Contributed to the writing of the manuscript: ARS, IGH.
Agree with manuscript results and conclusions: FCM, ARS,
IGH. Jointly developed the structure and arguments for the
paper: FCM, AMRS. Made critical revisions and approved final
version: FCM, ARS, IGH. All authors reviewed and approved
of the final manuscript.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors would like to thank the staff of the Núcleo de
Pesquisas em Oncologias - UFPA who contributed to the
realization of this work.

Citation:Moreira et al, Bioinformation 10(9): 602-605 (2014)

TargetCompare flowchart.

TargetCompare results for a single miRNA. The columns show the disease class associated with the potential target gene,
broad phenotype, PubMed ID and the association score of each dataset used

Results for a target gene consult. The column shows all miRNAs that has as target the selected gene in all three target
databases

