Background
Uncontrolled hypertension has become a major health problem 
worldwide. Previous study reveals that the prevalence of 
uncontrolled hypertension in both developed and developing 
countries remains high []. Many studies suggest that 
uncontrolled hypertension leads to a half of coronary heart 
disease and cerebrovascular disease incidents []. Moreover, it 
contributes to 7.5 million deaths per year (13% of all death 
causes) []. Therefore, achieving blood pressure target is 
essential to reduce the mortality and morbidity of hypertension 
related diseases [,
,
]. Many factors may contribute to 
uncontrolled hypertension, such as antihypertensive drug 
combination, patients' compliance, and genetic variants in renin 
angiotensin aldosterone system. 

Renin is an aspartyl protease produced and secreted by 
juxtaglomerular cell in kidney []. This enzyme induces 
enzymatic cascade that generates angiotensin II peptide as the 
main effector in the system of renin angiotensin aldosterone as 
blood pressure regulator []. Plasma renin level has been used 
for many years to determine the responses to antihypertensive 
therapy. The transcription level of renin is determined by many 
factors such as the presence of distal enhancer in renin gene and 
polymorphism in this area.

Studies on human chorionic cultured cell suggest that renin 
distal enhancer plays a pivotal role in renin gene expression. 
Deletion of this area resulted in 10 fold loss of enhancer activity 
[]. Fuchs, et al. suggest that SNP in C-5312T of renin enhancer
increases transcription level of renin gene by 45% in -5312T 
compared to -5312C9 []. On the other hand, Pan L., et al. 
(2003) report that renin gene expression is regulated by 
Sp1/Sp3 proteins, mutations in these proteins decrease renin 
levels up to 40% in mice []. This phenomenon suggests that 
Sp1 acts as a positive regulatory protein that binds renin 
enhancer. Thus, this study has been designed to investigate 
whether renin enhancer has a Sp1-binding site, and to examine 
the influence of genetic variant of C-5312T on Sp1 binding 
pattern to renin enhancer.

Methodology
Detection of polymorphism:
SNP within renin distal enhancer of human renin gene was identified by 
direct sequencing of genomic DNA obtained from 34 hypertensive patients. 
Each sample was amplified by these primers 5'-CGTAGTGCCATTTTTAGGAAC-3' and 
5'-AACACCA AAGCAGGCTTAA-3'. All samples were sequenced by automatic sequencing 
method (Macrogen) and the genetic variants were analyzed using Genescane 
software (Applied Biosystem). The existence of Sp1-binding site of these sequences 
was determined based on Sp1-binding site consensus from CORE Jaspar database 
(http://jaspar.genereg.net/cgi-bin/jaspar_db.pl).

DNA Modeling:
We generated 3D structural models of DNA from sequences of 
renin enhancer (5'gtgcccccagattaagcctg3') normal and 
(5'gtgccctcagattaagcctg3') mutant using 3D-DART provided by 
haddock (http://haddock.science.uu.nl/services/3DDART/) 
[].

Molecular Docking:
Models of SP1 protein (1R8U) and ER-Estradiol (1A52) were 
retrieved from protein structure databases, PDB 
(http://www.rcsb.org). 
Binding interaction among molecule
complex of ER-Estradiol, Sp1, and DNA was done by using 
Escher NG in VEGAZZ. Further for detailed analysis, we used 
Hex Protein Docking to predict interactions between Zinc 
Finger Domain 2 (Zf-2) of SP1 and DNA of renin enhancer. Hex 
is FFT-based approach that was ﬁrst used as a rapid way to 
calculate shape complementarity within a 3D Cartesian grid 
[]. Thereafter, the complex of docking result was analyzed 
using ligand Scout to know the amino acids and nucleotides 
responsible for the interaction [].

Visualization:
All the visualization of the structure files was done using 
PyMol (www.pymol.org) and YASARA molecular graphics 
system. 

Results
Proportions of genetic variant of the patients were CC (47.1%), 
CT (44.1%), and TT (8.8%). Sp1 protein is a trans-acting 
transcription factor-1, has 3 zinc finger domains which serves to 
bind DNA. Since the Sp1 bound to DNA in the GC rich motif, 
then we searched the motif in renin enhancer of 34 hypertensive 
patients that we analyzed. The data showed that renin enhancer 
of the hypertensive patients contained Sp1-DNA binding motif. 
Further, we found two genetic variations in Sp1-binding site 
from this study, SNPs in C-5312T ().

Sp1 is activated by a complex of ER alpha receptor (ER) and 17β-Estradiol, 
and then binds DNA to stimulate transcription of the gene being regulated. 
Therefore, we used the ER-Estradiol-Sp1 complex to elucidate pattern of the 
regulator bind to renin enhancer by using docking methode. The docking results 
showed that Sp1 most preferably bind to DNA in GC rich sequence. Sp1 was bound in 
the center of the GC rich sequence and form bond with C base in -5312C variant. 
However, Sp1 was bound in downstream of the GC rich sequence in -5312T variant. 
Taken together the phenomenon, indicated that genetic variations C-5312T of renin 
enhancer causes differences of Sp1 binding to renin enhancer 
().

Furthermore, we analyzed more detail the differences of Sp1 
binding pattern to SNPs in C-5312T of renin enhancer by 
docking Zinc Finger domain-2 of SP1 with 21 BP DNA 
containing the C-5312T SNP. The result indicated that change 
from T to C causing displacement of Sp1 binding site from
center to dowstream of GC rich sequence, and Sp1 loss of 
contact with bases -5312 (). The shift in the Sp1 binding 
suggested that Sp1 loos contact with the center of rich GC 
sequence, which was very likely not be able to stimulate 
transcription of renin gene. This result explained why the 
transcription level of renin gene in -5312T was higher by 45% 
compared to -5312C.

Discussion
Renin angiotensin aldosterone system (RAAS) plays a pivotal 
role in blood pressure regulation []. Renin, that catalyzes 
angiotensinogen to angiotensin I, plays an essential role on 
blood pressure regulation and electrolyte homeostasis 
[]. 
Plasma renin level has been used for many years to determine 
the responses to antihypertensive therapy. The transcription 
level of renin is determined by many factors such as the 
presence of distal enhancer in renin gene and polymorphism in 
this area. Several studies have been conducted to identify the 
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in renin gene and its 
association with hypertension [,
,
]. These studies 
suggested that polymorphism in intron 1 of renin gene is 
strongly correlated with hypertension in Caucasian 
[]. 
Furthermore, SNP in renin distal enhancer at -5312 is associated
with hypertension in whites [,
]. This SNP also becomes a 
major determinant of patients' response to angiotensin-receptor 
blocker therapy in Ireland and Japan. This study shows two 
polymorphisms in renin distal enhancer, in -5190 site and -5312 
site. Previous study has reported the functionality of 
polymorphism in -5312 in Japan and French [,
]. Sp1 binds 
to GC rich promoter especially in CACCC box and -5312 area 
might be identified by Sp1. This transcription factor will be 
activated by ER alpha and 17β-Estradiol (E2) []. Thus, 
polymorphism within C-5312T might contribute to the 
reduction of renin transcription. Fuchs, et al. stated that 
polymorphism in this site increases transcription level by 45% 
in -5312T compared to that of -5312C []. However, these 
studies do not explain the mechanism of transcriptional level 
increase. Therefore, according to all of the results of the 
analyses, we concluded that Genetic variant of C-5312T has 
changed binding pattern of Sp1 to renin enhancer, which is very 
likely to influence Sp1 activity to stimulate expression of renin 
gene. Morever, this study helped to explain why SNP -5312C 
reduces expression levels of renin gene.

Conclusion
This study shows that Sp1 most preferably binds to DNA at the 
GC rich region. The genetic variants C-5312T has changed 
binding pattern of Sp1 to renin enhancer. This is likely to 
influence Sp1 activity to stimulate the expression of renin gene. 

Citation:Lukitasari et al, Bioinformation 9(20): 1010-1012 (2013)

Genetic variation of Sp1-binding site at hypertensive 
patients. Consensus of Sp1-binding site was retrieved from 
Jaspar CORE database (A), Varian renin enhancer at -5312C (B), 
and variants of the renin enhancer at -5312T (C).

Complex molecules of 17β-Estradiol (cyan), ER (ed), 
Sp1 (blue) and the Renin Enhancer (gray) was resulted from 
docking analysis by using Escher NG in VEGAZZ. The presence 
of SNP in C-5312T has led to change the bonding pattern of Sp1 
to renin enhancer. Sp1 bound to the major groove side of renin 
enhancer on-5312T (A), shifts to the minor grove on-5312C (B). 

Binding pattern of Zinc Finger Domain of Sp1 (Pink) 
to renin enhancher (Grey) was identified by docking analysis 
using Hex 8, position of SNPs in C-5312T is shown in green 
(Left Panel). Interaction of Sp1 amino acids and DNA is 
indicated by arrows (Right Panel). Binding pattern of Zinc 
Finger Domain shifted from the middle of Sp1-binding site on -
5312T (A), to downstream of Sp1-binding site on -5312C (B).

