Background
Gerontologists and biologists reached a consensus
“evolutionary theory of aging,” [,
] embedding aging
research into the mainstream of biological research. T. nutricula
is the one of the known hydrozoan in the animal kingdom that
can revert back into the immature polyp stage after reaching
sexual maturity, designating itself as the only immortal animal
[]. T. nutricula interplay with the polyp and sexual maturity
stages by virtue of trans-differentiation process 
[].
Theoretically, this process can go on indefinitely therefore, the
organism can be considered as biologically immortal and does
not experience aging. Hence, in the basic biology of aging
research, the organism has found itself great importance 
[]. If a
cell or organism undergoes aging, there are two vital biological
processes viz. negative regulation of cell division or
proliferation and /or positive regulation of apoptosis may
occur []. Furthermore, aging and neurodegeneration diseases
are directly associated with these two biological processes 
[].
While in cancer, aging does not happen and these two
biological processes are inversely associated 
[]. Thus, the
organism can be a great tool in cancer, aging, and
neurodegenerative related disorders. Although the transdifferentiation
mechanism has been documented at
physiological and cellular level [,
]; the molecular mechanism
behind the T. Nutricula's trans-differentiation is not yet
elucidated.

Although 16S rRNA based phylogenetic analysis is well
established, COX 1 based analysis is not much reported. COX1
is one of the most conserved genes in almost all eukaryotes. It
belong to the cytochrome oxidase subunit I protein family,
which also includes mitochondrial encoded COX2 and COX3
those combine to form respiratory complex IV, a final enzyme
of electron transport chain in mitochondrial oxidative
phosphorylation []. COX1 exhibits the characteristics of a
“housekeeping” gene and is constitutively expressed in almost
all tissues. COX1 appears to be responsible for the production
of prostaglandins []. Studies suggest that COX1 has its own
importance in phylogenetic analysis. Its sequence is conserved
among conspecifics and addition to this its mutation rate is also
rapid enough to distinguish closely related species [].
Additionally, in phylogenetic study, invasion patterns can be
inferred from COX1 sequences []. Phylogenetic study on T.
nutricula is not so far reported. Since the genome sequences or
gene or protein expression profile or any kind of molecular
data of T. nutricula is not available, we focused to identify its
close relatives that may have similar physiology of immortality
and may have molecular data so that, the organisms can be
used to carry out aging and disease research. With these aims,
at the very first step, here we tried to identify close relatives of
T. nutricula using its only available Cytochrome Oxidase
Subunit I (COI or COX1) and 16S rRNA sequences and
bioinformatics based robust phylogenetic analysis.

Methodology
Gene and protein sequences:
All-over, only six nucleotide (nt) sequences (COI/COX1 from
four different isolates and 16S rRNA form two different
isolates) of T. nutricula are available in NCBI database. All the 4
isolates of COI/COX1 and 2 16s rRNA partial sequences have
shown similar sequence comparatively. We used all the
sequences for our phylogenetic analysis. However, COI/COX1
nt sequence of 621 bp from the isolate-1 (GenBank: JQ716082.1)
and partial 16s rRNA sequence of the isolate WHO_1
(GenBank: EU624348.1) based analysis are represented here. In
UniProt, only two COX1 protein sequences are available and
both have similar homology. The COI/COX1 protein (UniProt:
K4P7S9) of 207 amino acid (aa) based phylogenetic analysis is
represented here.

Phylogenetic analysis:
We have started our analysis to identify the sequence homologs
using NCBI BLASTn to identify nt sequence homologs and
BLASTp to identify protein or aa based homologs with cut off
values 97% identity (for aa) and 84% (for nt). Based on these cut
off values, the species specific homologs were selected for
multiple sequence alignment. Clustal Omega and ClustalW
(http://www.clustal.org) were used for multiple sequence
alignment. Molecular Evolutionary Genetic Analysis tool
(MEGA) version 5.1 [] was used for the construction of
phylogeny. In MEGA 5.1, Neighbourhood joining method 
[]
was used for construction of nucleotide based phylogenetic
trees whereas Poisson model [] was used to build protein
based phylogeny to estimate the number of amino acid
replacements when species are closely related. Pairwise
distances are calculated with scope as pairs of taxa using
Maximum Composite likelihood method []. Rates among the
sites were considered uniform, pattern of lineages were
regarded as homogeneous, and gaps or missing data were
treated as deletions.

Results
Homologous sequence similarity search provided number of
related species from which best homologous sequences were
selected according to the cut-off values  (see
supplementary material). Nemopsis bachei is found to be closest
relative of T. nutricula in COI/COX1 gene based study that
exhibits the shortest root distance of 0.174 ( &amp; 
) 
()with a bootstrapping percentage of 88. The 16S rRNA based
analysis  (see supplementary material) revealed that
the immortal jellyfish is genetically close to T. dohrnii [,
]
(Root distance: 0.034) followed by T. rubra [,
] (Root
distance: 0.099) ( &amp; ) 
()with the bootstrapping
percentages of 100 and 99.In contrast to the nucleotide or gene
based analysis, the COI/COX1 protein based analysis 
(see supplementary material) showed some different findings.
The result demonstrates that T. lata, Amphinema dinema,
Eucheilota menoni, and Eutima levuka have similar root distance
of 0.029 ( &amp; 
) 
(). These species have shown a
low bootstrapping percentage of 70 when compared to the gene
and 16s rRNA bootstrapping results.

Discussion
Phylogenetic analysis is a powerful tool for precise taxonomic
classification as well as predicting origin or relatives of a
species []. Attempts have been made in systematic
classification of the genus Turritopsis [,
]. However, the
closest taxa based on these studies are not reported to have
features of immortality similar to the T. nutricula. Since our aim
is to identify closest organism of T. nutricula having possible
immortality; we discussed the results focusing on this specific
aspect. In T. nutricula trans-differentiation directly allows
functionally differentiated cells to switch to entirely new
functions. Theoretically, this process can go on indefinitely
therefore, the organism can be considered as biologically
immortal and does not experience aging []. Based on the wellestablished
16S rRNA phylogeny, our predicted close relatives
of T. nutricula are T. dohrniiand T. rubra where T. dohrnii is
reported to undergo reverse development [,
]. COX1 is
recently used for phylogenetic analysis [,
]. While
considering the association of COX with aging and immortality,
recent study on C. elegans illustrates that two COX assembly
factors are involved in energy metabolism, reproduction, and
aging []. Genomic level studies on Podospora anserina support
the idea that, immortality can be acquired by the lack of active
cytochrome c oxidase []. In Drosophila, COX is down
regulated during aging [] and in male wistar rats an inter-link
between muscle-fiber trans-differentiation and mitochondrial
respiratory chain was observed []. Therefore, based on these
aging and trans-differentiation association of Cytochrome C
Oxidase, we used T. nutricula available COI/COX1 gene and
protein sequences for this phylogenetic study. Based on the
COI/COX1 gene sequence, our predicted closest taxa of T.
nutricula is Nemopsis bachei. However, we have observed some
deviation in COX1 amino acid based analysis. Most of the
predicted relatives are from different genus except T. lata;
although few of these genus are jellyfish and as per our analysis
they are close relatives. As per out limited knowledge, the life
cycle of these identified possible close relatives of T. nutricula
are not studied in depth. Therefore, we are not sure if these
animals are having the features of immortality like the T.
nutricula. Since our prediction demonstrates close relativeness
of these animals with T. nutricula, they might have immortal
features and hence the biology of these animals may be
explored to find possible identification of new members of
immortal animal.

Conclusion
Predicted seven species to be closely related to immortal
jellyfish T. nutricula based on COX1 and 16S rRNA sequences.
Among these seven, three (T. dohrnii, T. rubraand T. lata)
belongs to same genus Turritopsis, two (Nemopsis bachei and
Amphinema dinema) belongs to same suborder Folifera, while the
rest two (Eucheilota menoni and Eutima levuka) belongs to same
order Leptothecata. Precisely, these all species including T.
nutricula are grouped under a common order Leptothecata 
[].
Limited studies have been done on those animals and none of
these organisms is so far reported to be immortal similar to T.
nutricula. There is high probability that these animals may have
features of immortality. Detail physiology and molecular
studies of these animals along with T. nutricula will shed light
on aging biology and therefore the knowledge may be
translated and would be applied to biomedical sciences
especially in proliferative, degenerative, and aging related
disorders.

Conflict of Interest
The authors are no conflict of interest of this article

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors thank DST-SERB for financial support in young
scientist award scheme and Vasco Azevedo is sponsored by
CNPq and UFMG

Citation:Devarapalli et al, Bioinformation 10(9): 586-591 (2014)

Phylogram representing Turritopsis nutricula and its
COX1 nt sequence based relatives according to specific root
distance. Turritopsis nutricula and Nemopsis bachei are emerging
from the same node.

Web Graphical view of root distances of relative's
species verses Turritopsis nutricula. Root distance of Nemopsis
bacheis showing low root distance to Turritopsis nutricula than
other relatives.

Phylogram representing Turritopsis nutricula and its
16s rRNA based relatives according to root distance. In this
Phylogram Turritopsis dohrnii and Turritopsis nutricula are
shown to be emerging together.

Web Graphical view of root distances showing
relative species verses Turritopsis nutricula. Centre point of the
web refers to Turritopsis nutricula. The distance of
Turritopsisdohrnii followed by Turritopsis rubra are nearer to
Turritopsis nutricula according to their root distances based on
16s rRNA relative study.

Phylogram representing Turritopsis nutricula and its
COX1 amino acid based relatives according to specific root
distance.

Web Graphical view of root distances of relative's
species verses Turritopsis nutricula. Except Bougainvillia muscus
almost all species are have shown similar root distance of
~0.030 towards Turritopsis nutricula.

