Background
Flaviviruses are small, enveloped RNA viruses which are
generally transmitted by arthropods to animals and man. Birds
and mammals are the principal vertebrate hosts for flaviviruses
[]. These flaviviruses all share a similar genomic organization
and replication strategy, and yet cause a range of distinct
clinical diseases in humans []. Dengue virus causes an
estimated 50 million cases of febrile illness each year, including
an increasing number of cases of hemorrhagic fever. West Nile
virus, which recently spread from the Mediterranean basin to
the Western hemisphere, causes thousands of sporadic cases of
encephalitis annually. Despite the existence of licensed
vaccines, yellow fever, Japanese encephalitis and tick-borne
encephalitis also claim many thousands of victims each year
across their vast endemic areas. Antiviral therapy could
potentially reduce morbidity and mortality from flavivirus
infections, but no effective drugs are currently available []. The
viruses within the Flaviviridae family are associated with
significant public health and economic impacts worldwide. Of
the 3 genera in this family, the Flavivirus genus is the largest,
composed of 53 species divided into 12 groups. The 4 most
common species causing human disease include the Japanese
encephalitis virus (JEV), Murray Valley encephalitis virus
(MVEV), St. Louis encephalitis virus (SLEV), and the West Nile
virus (WNV). [] A number of studies have already revealed
that the non-structural NS3 serine protease is required for the
maturation of the viral polyprotein and thus is a promising
target for the development of antiviral inhibitors []. The ~11 kb
flavivirus RNA genome is a positive-sense, single stranded,5'-
capped RNA ((+)saran) that is released into the cytoplasm
immediately following cell entry. It encodes a single, large
polyprotein, which is proteolytically processed to yield three
structural proteins (envelope, E; membrane precursor, Pram;
and cased C) and seven non-structural (NS) proteins (NS1,
NS2a, NS2b, NS3, NS4a, NS4b, and NS5). [] The 7
nonstructural proteins are vital for replication of the
Flaviviridae. [] NS3 is a multidomain protein, with an Nterminal
NS3Pro []. In this in-silico study, we have developed
molecule inhibitor of NS3pro for 22 species of genus flavivirus
using structure based drug designing. The interaction between
NS3 protein and inhibitor were studied by docking methods
using Auto Dockvina. The interactions of complex NS3proteinligand
conformations, including hydrogen bonds and the bond
lengths were analyzed using Accelrys DS Visualizer software
.We hope, this Drug will get success to clear out all the phases
of clinical trial and it will be effective drug in the cure of
flavivirus diseases.

Methodology
Sequence alignment:
The protein sequence of NS3 of 22 species was obtained by
NCBI database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) showing in
given  (see supplementary material). Using the Protein
–protein blast (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) through
NCBI, the homologous structure ofMVEV NS3 was identified,
which was used as template for the homology modeling.
Multiple sequence alignment of the aminoacid sequences of 22
species were performed with the online version of CLUSTALW
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalw2/) program to
identify the set of conserved residues in the alignment
().

Protein homology modeling:
The homology modeling was carried out using the Modeller
(http://www.salilab.org/modeller/) 9v7 program. The target
and the template sequences were aligned using Modeller 9v7, a
comparative protein modeling program, was used for
homology modeling to generate the 3-D structures of NS3
protein for 22 species. Final homology model was selected on
the basis of MOLPDF, DOPE score GA341 score.

Loop Refinement:
The alignment between target and template sequence contains
gaps. These gaps results for the loops in the 3d structure. So
forfurther refinement of 3d models, loop refinement step was
performed by using Modeller
(http://www.salilab.org/modeller/) 9v7program and the best
model was selected on the basis of molpdf value.

Model optimization and evaluation:
The protein models of 22 species generated by homology
modeling often produce unfavorable bond lengths, bond
angles,torsion angles and bad contacts. Therefore, it was
essential to minimize the energy to regularize local bond and
angle geometry as well as to remove bad contacts. Energy
mininmisation were done with the GROMOS96 (Scott et al.,
1999) force field by implementation of Swiss-PdbViewer
(http://www.expasy.org/spdbv). After the optimization
procedure, the 3D models of NS3 were verified by using
PROCHECK (Laskowski et al., 1993) Program of Structural
Analysis and Verification Server (SAVES).The quality of models
was also validated by ProSA (Wiederstein et al., 2007) (Sippl,
1993) server(https://prosa.services.came.sbg.ac.at/prosa.php),
a web server for Protein Structure Analysis.

Active site identification:
The active sites were revealed on the basis of previous studies.
The aminoterminal domain contains the serine protease
catalytic triad consisting of amino acid residues H51, D75, and
S135 and the substrate-binding pocket is contained within NS3
protein [].

Virtual Screening of the Lead:
Ligand library was downloaded from Accelrys DS Visualizer
software (“http://accelrys.com”). Then lead molecule was
screened out from 2930 molecules on the basis of molecular
properties. The fragment “1 H-1, 2, 4-triazole” was identified
onthe basis of “Lipinski's Rule of Five” and may therefore
represent suitable starting point for evolution of good quality
lead compounds. MolSoft, OSIRIS and Molinspiration were
used to design drug molecule on computer to define its
molecular structure  (see supplementary material).

Rigid Docking:
Hex 4.5 was used for the purpose of docking of the lead with
the target molecule. The lead compound “1 H-1, 2, 4-triazole”
and MVEV NS3 protein were opened in the Hex
(http://hex.loria.fr/) and ligand was attached to the residue on
the minimum distance position to the active site position .The
docking controls were activated with default parameters .The
ligand was hence docked to the receptor protein ().

Generation and optimization of Ligand:
Ligbuilder was used for the generation of the ligands. The
conformation of the pre-placed “seed” ensuring the binding
affinity decides the manner that ligands would be grown with
Ligbuilder software. Novel ligands had been developed with
Ligbuilder(http://mdl.ipc.pku.edu.cn/drug_design/work/ligbuilder.html) v1.2 software. We developed 200 novel ligands for
the inhibitorysite in NS3 protein. Virtual screening, an insilico
tool for drug discovery, has been widely used for lead
identification in drug discovery programs. Out of 200 novel
ligands generated, 10 ligands were selected on the basis of
maximum binding affinity measured in kcal/mol. The selected
10 ligands were then analyzed for drug- relevant properties
based on “Lipinski's rule of five” and other drug like properties
of valid structures using OSIRIS Property Explorer
(http://www.organicchemistry.org/prog/peo/), Mol soft:
Drug- Likeness and molecular property explorer
(http://www.molsoft.com/mprop/). On the basis of binding
affinity and drug like properties, one ligand that passed all of
the screening tests was taken for further molecular docking
study.

Protein-ligand docking:
The docking of ligands to the catalytic triad of NS3protein for
22 species was performed using AutoDock Vina software.
Docking was performed to obtain a population of possible
conformations and orientations for the ligand at the binding
site. Using the software, polar hydrogen atoms were added to
the NS3protein and its nonpolar hydrogen atoms were merged.
Allbonds of ligands were set to be rotatable. All calculations for
protein-fixed ligand-flexible docking were done using
theLamarckian Genetic Algorithm (LGA) method. The grid box
with a dimension of 20 × 20 × 20 points was used around
thecatalytic triad to cover the entire enzyme binding site and
accommodate ligands to move freely. The best conformation
was chosen with the lowest docked energy, after the docking
search was completed. The interactions of complex NS3proteinligandconformations,
including hydrogen bonds and the bond
lengths were analyzed using Accelrys DS Visualizer software
(“http://accelrys.com”).

Discussion
The sequence of the 22 species protein encoding for NS3 was
retrieved from NCBI Database .The similarity searches was
performed by protein- protein blast. The 100% similarity was
found in MVEV among 22 species. So MVEV(PDB entry2WV9) ,
was used as template for protein homology modeling .The
predicted 3D structure of NS3 protein was generated by
Modeller and the structure with the lowest DOPE scores were
selected . The alignment between target and template sequence
contains gaps .So loop refinement step was also performed by
using Modeller. The best models were selected on the basis of
molpdf value. The modeller generated models statistically
analyzed by structure analysis and validation server
(SAVS).The structure submitted were validated and zero bad
contacts was used for the further process at lead target
prediction .The final protein structures selected after analysis in
SAVS. The Rigid docking was performed by HEX in which
protein and ligand were opened in docking software and was
attached to the residue on the minimum distance positon to the
active site position .The ligand was hence docked to the
receptor protein. The Ligbuilder tool was used for the inhibitor
generation. After generation of the lead molecule it was then
screened for its activity and its drug likeness. Web based tools
like Molinspiration, and OSIRIS property explorer were used
for this purpose. Molinspiration uses sophiscated Bayesian
statistics to compare structures of the representative ligands
active on the particular target site. In OSIRIS we draw chemical
structures to calculate various drug revelant properties. The
binding pattern analyzed by AUTODOCK, is used to predict
small molecule to the receptors of known 3D structure. The
ligand and target protein were given as input and the flexible
docking was performed. The negative and low value of ΔGbind
indicates strong favorable bonds between NS3 protein and the
novel ligand indicating that the ligand was in its most
favourable conformations. The interactions of complex
NS3protein-ligand conformations, including hydrogen bonds,
sigma and pi bonds were analyzed using Accelrys DS
Visualizer software (“http://accelrys.com”) 
 (see
supplementary material)

Conclusion
Although there are still no specific vaccines or
chemotherapeutic regimes for prevention and treatment for
flavivirus based diseases like dengue, hemorrhagic fever,
encephalitis etc. In recent years there has been substantial
progress in our understanding the life cycle of flavivirus, the
various stages of which represent potential targets for the
development of novel antiviral drugs. NS3 protein is a
particularly interesting molecular target for antiviral
compounds because of it central role in all the viral life cycle of
flaviviruses. A challenging aspect in the search for potent,
selective antiviral drugs that interfere with multifunctional NS3
is the design of appropriate assays for druggable sites that are
relevant for viral replication in vivo. Inhibitors of NS3pro should
also be of great benefit in combating infections by other
Flaviviruses, as well as Japanese encephalitis virus and West
Nile virus. The development of such drugs requires a more
informed structure-based drug discovery program. A further
consideration includes the cost of drug synthesis which should
not make the price of the final product prohibitive to poor
patients in developing countries. The best highly active lead
compound was docked into the active site of 22 species of
flaviviruses. Thus, we hope that the lead molecules generated
from this structure based drug designing of NS3 protein would
be helpful in identifying structurally diverse compounds with
desired biological activity for the successful treatment of
various types of diseases in flaviviruses.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Agnihotri et al, Bioinformation 8(3): 123-127 (2012)

The sequence alignment between NS3 proteins of 22
species. All three major amino acids forming the catalytic Triad
(H51, D75, and S135) have been highlighted.

View of the surface of the catalytic traid HIS 51
(green), ASP 75 (yellow) and SER 135 (pink) shows docking
with inhibitor 1 H-1, 2, 4-triazole (red).

