Background
Peroxidases (PODs, EC 1.11.1.7) are well known haem
containing proteins that use hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) as the
electron acceptor to catalyse a number of oxidative reactions 
[–]. 
PODs from bacteria, fungi, plants and animals constitute a
superfamily consisting of three major classes []. Class I PODs
include intracellular enzymes in plant, bacteria and yeast. Class
II PODs consist of secretary fungal enzymes and Class III are
typical secretary plant PODs, which have multiple tissue
specific functions: e.g., removal of H2O2 from chloroplasts and
cytosol, oxidation of toxic compounds, biosynthesis of cell wall,
defence responses towards wounding, indole 3 acetic acid
catabolism, ethylene biosynthesis etc. []. Class III PODs are
glycoprotein's which belong to a large multigene family
containing four conserved disulphide bridges and two calcium
ions []. Besides being vital for plants, the enzyme also has
serious commercial applications in medicine as a component of
diagnostic tools and in the bioremediation and bio bleaching
industries [,
]. Horseradish POD and soybean POD are two
important commercially exploited sources of the enzyme
because of their higher stability []. A couple of preliminary
experiments have already established the usefulness of alfalfa
POD for biotechnological applications. The enzyme
immobilized in self assembled monolayers has been
successfully used for determination of thiodicarb 
[] and the
plant has also been studied for analysis of POD activity under
abiotic stress []. 
Detailed study of alfalfa POD still needs to be
done in order to raise the potential of its use for various

academic and industrial applications. Hence, the present paper
enlists some of the physiochemical and functional properties of
alfalfa POD and provides insight into its three dimensional
structure. Docking studies were performed to predict the ligand
binding site within the protein.

Methodology
The study was conducted using Intel(R) Core(TM) i5-2400 CPU
@ 3.10 GHz, 3101 MHz, 4 Core(s) processor and 64-bit
Operating System.

Retrieval of target sequence:
The 353 amino acid long sequence of POD from alfalfa
(Medicago sativa) was obtained from the Protein sequence
database of NCBI (GenBank Id: AAB41811) and blasted 
[]
against Protein Data Bank (PDB) entries to find similar
sequences. Parameter values for BLAST 2.2.26 search were set
as default.

Characterization of target sequence:
Transmembrane helices in the query sequence were predicted
by TMHMM 2.0, ABTMpro and TargetP 1.1 server. Subcellular
localization of protein using amino acid composition was
achieved by MultiLoc []. NetNGlyc 1.0 Server predicted NGlycosylation
sites using artificial neural networks.
Physiochemical properties such as molecular weight,
theoretical pI, total number of negatively (Asp+Glu) and
positively (Arg+Lys) charged residues, extinction coefficients
[], instability index 
[], aliphatic index 
[] and grand
average of hydropathicity (GRAVY) [] of the mature protein
were computed using Expasy's ProtParam Proteomics server.

Protein Topology prediction:
Secondary structures within alfalfa POD were calculated with
SOPMA (Self Optimized Prediction Method with Alignment)
[] and disulfide bonds were predicted by the Cys_REC tool
from softberry.

Multiple Sequence Alignment:
In order to know the key residues responsible for catalytic
activity of the enzyme, amino acid sequence of alfalfa POD was
compared with amino acid sequences from other PODs of
known crystallographic structures. Pairwise sequence
alignment server Clustal-W [] was employed to compare
POD form alfalfa, soybean (PDB Id: 1FHF), peanut (PDB Id:
1SCH) and horseradish (PDB Id: 1ATJ).

Homology modeling:
High resolution (2.80Å) crystal structure of soybean POD (PDB
Id: 1FHF) was selected as template to create the three
dimensional model for POD from alfalfa. The homology
modeling program, Modeller 9v9 [] was used to generate a
total of 10 models of target protein.

Model refinement and evaluation:
The models constructed were solvated and subjected to energy
minimization using the steepest descent and conjugate gradient
technique to eliminate bad contacts between protein atoms and
structural water molecules. Computations were carried out in
vacuo with the GROMOS 96 43B1 parameters set,
implementation of Swiss-PDB Viewer. The stereo chemical
quality and accuracy of the predicted models was evaluated
with PROCHECK [] by Ramachandran plot analysis 
[]. The
best model was selected on the basis of overall G-factor,
number of residues in core, allowed, generously allowed and
disallowed regions. The selected model was further put to
analysis by VERIFY 3D [], WHAT IF 
[], ERRAT 
[] and 3D
Match program from softberry. ProSA [] was used for the
display of Z-scores and energy plots. Finally the protein was
visualized with Swiss-PDB viewer [].

Docking Studies:
The structure of substrate H2O2 was obtained from NCBI
PubChem in psf format and converted to pdb format using
OpenBabel []. To understand the molecular interactions
between H2O2 and the protein receptor, flexible small moleculerigid
protein docking experiments were performed using
Autodock 4.0 []. In the protein non-polar hydrogen atoms
were merged and total gasteiger charge of -3.9953 was added to
the protein. It was made sure that there are no non-bonded
atoms in the protein. Gasteiger partial charges were also
assigned to the ligand and all torsions were allowed to rotate
during docking. The grid box was centred at the modeled
structure and affinity maps were calculated by AutoGrid. Fifty
Lamarckian Genetic Algorithm runs with default parameter
settings were performed and the docked confirmations were
played ranked by energy. The lowest energy complex of ligand
and protein was further viewed using Swiss PDB viewer.

Results and Discussion
The 353 amino acid long sequence of alfalfa POD retrieved from
Protein: sequence database of NCBI (GenBank ID: AAB41811)
had a putative signal peptide of 28 amino acids at N-terminus
and a mature peptide of 325 amino acid residues. The sequence
of mature protein was blasted against the PDB database for
proteins with similar sequence and known three dimensional
structure using compositionally adjusted substitution matrices.
A 304 amino acid long sequence of POD from soybean (PDB Id:
1FHF) had 69% residues identical with the target protein with
0% gaps. Structure of soybean POD has been solved at a
resolution of 2.80 Å, hence it was chosen as template to build
the 3D structure for target protein.

Characterization of POD:
TargetP 1.1 designated alfalfa POD to be a protein of secretary
pathway and TMHMM server 2.0 predicted the presence of one
transmembrane domain within the signal peptide which may
be required to direct the protein to secretary pathway.
ABTMpro server also indicated that alfalfa POD is an alpha
helical transmembrane protein. Multiloc predicted the protein
to be extracellular in nature. Eight asparagines residues were
found to be N-glycosylated by NetNGlyc server. Glycosylation
of asparagines residues is required for correct folding of protein
before being exported.

A comparison of physiochemical properties of POD from three
different sources viz. horseradish, soybean and alfalfa
computed using ProtParam tools is presented in  (see
supplementary material). Horseradish and soybean are two of
the most popular sources for isolation of POD and hence were
included in the study for comparison purpose. Data shown in
 suggested that alfalfa POD is superior over POD from
both the sources. The computed isoelectric point (pI value)
revealed alfalfa POD to be more acidic than horseradish POD
but less acidic than soybean POD. The computed isoelectric
point will be useful for separating the protein on a
polyacrylamide gel by isoelectric focusing. The extinction
coefficient of a protein as calculated by the program depends on
the molar extinction coefficient of Tyr, Trp and Cys residues.
The extinction coefficient can be used to calculate the
concentration of a protein in solution. Stability of the three
PODs was studied by analyzing the values for instability index,
aliphatic index and Grand average of hydropathicity (GRAVY)
index. Instability index relies upon the occurrence of certain
dipeptides along the length of the protein to distinguish
between the unstable and stable protein 
[]. The value of
instability index was least for alfalfa POD (42.94, 30.18 and
23.17 for horseradish, soybean and alfalfa POD respectively);
hence it could be safely predicted as most stable of the three
proteins. The aliphatic index refers to the relative volume of a
protein that is occupied by aliphatic side chains and contributes
to the increased thermo stability of protein. Aliphatic index of
POD from all the three sources was comparable. GRAVY index
indicates the solubility of proteins: a negative GRAVY value for
POD from all the compared sources designates it to be
hydrophilic in nature.

Topology of alfalfa POD:
A comparison of secondary structure elements as calculated by
SOPMA showed that random coil occupied the largest part of
the protein followed by alpha helix, extended strand and beta
turns for all three PODs  (see supplementary material).
Disulfide bridges play an important role in the folding and
stability of proteins. CYS_REC version 2 revealed the presence
of 10 disulphide linkages (at positions: 13, 14, 39, 72, 77, 119,
125, 204, 236 and 237) in alfalfa POD while the horseradish and
soybean POD had eight disulphide linkages each (at positions:
12, 45, 50, 92, 98, 178, 210, 302 and 11, 44, 49, 91, 97, 176, 208, 299
respectively). The presence of extra disulphide bonds might
contribute towards higher stability of POD from alfalfa.

ClustalW analysis:
The identification of catalytic residues is key to understanding
the function of enzymes. The information from other
functionally similar sequences with known crystallographic
structures was exploited to identify the key catalytic residues.
ClustalW alignment of alfalfa POD with soybean (PDB Id:
1FHF), peanut (PDB Id: 1SCH) and horseradish (PDB Id: 1ATJ)
PODs as shown in  (see supplementary material)
depicted a high degree of conservation among the sequences
[,
]. Moreover POD in higher plants is a part of large
multigene family where a number of isozymes are formed as a
result of posttranscriptional and posttranslational changes.
Hence, the compared sequences varied in length but essentially
conserved the key catalytic residues which have been
highlighted with an asterisk (*) symbol.

Model building, refinement and evaluation:
Crystal structure of soybean POD was used as template to
generate three dimensional coordinates for alfalfa POD. Ten
models generated by Modeller 9v8 were viewed with Swiss
PDB viewer and energy minimized. Ramachandran plot
analysis of the ten models was obtained by PROCHECK server.
The best model in terms of stereo chemical quality showed a
overall G-factor value of -0.04 which indicates that geometry of
the model corresponds to high probability confirmation with
92.1% residues in the core region of Ramachandran plot 
(). The number of residues in allowed and generously
allowed regions were 6.6% and 1.4% respectively. It is generally
accepted that if 90% residues are in the allowed region, the
quality of the model is evaluated as good and reliable. None of
the residues was present in the disallowed region of the plot.
Superimposition of the model with the template (used as
reference layer) with Swiss PDB viewer as shown in ()
showed a very low RMSD of 0.26 Ao, suggesting high similarity
between them. 3D Match program was also used for alignment
of protein 3D structures. The RMSD score of 0.256Ao with a Z
score of 7.930 indicated that both template and target proteins
have similar folds.

Verify 3D analysis revealed that 84.97 % of the residues had an
average 3D-1D score of &lt;0.2, predicting that the model is
compatible with its sequence. The amino acid environment was
evaluated using ERRAT plots, which assess the distribution of
different types of atoms with respect to one another in the
protein model and is used for making decision about its
reliability. ERRAT showed an overall quality factor of 85.050, a
result expected for crystallographic models with resolution
&gt;2.5Å. B-factor analysis is done with WHAT IF server reflected
the mobility or flexibility of various parts of the molecule.
Averaged B-factor deviation for protein backbone was 30.594
and averaged standard deviation was 38.491. Since average
deviation value was less than standard deviation, so it reflected
a good quality model.

Z score Analysis:
RMS Z-scores for anomalous bond lengths and bond angles as
determined by WHAT IF 0.895 and 1.209 respectively, which is
very close to 1.0 suggesting high model quality. ProSA was
used to check three dimensional model of alfalfa POD for
potential errors. The program displays two characteristics of the
input structure: its Z-score and a plot of its residue energies.
The Z-score indicates overall model quality and measures the
deviation of the total energy of the structure with respect to an
energy distribution derived from random conformations. As
shown in () the Z-score for alfalfa POD is -8.26 and for
soybean POD is -7.04. The scores are well within the range of
scores typically found for proteins of similar size indicating a
highly reliable structure. The energy plot shows the local model
quality by plotting energies as a function of amino acid
sequence position. In general, positive values correspond to
problematic or erroneous part of a model.  displays a
comparable energy plot for both the target and template
structures.

Docking Studies:
Autodock was used to generate fifty different conformations of
the ligand H2O2. The confirmations were played ranked by their
energy and the confirmation having lowest binding energy (-
1.88 kcal/mol) was chosen for further analysis of protein-ligand
complex. Docking site interaction was stabilized by hydrogen
bonds between ASP43 OD2 and two hydrogen atoms of the
ligand (). Residues His40 and Cys49 were found
within a distance of 3 Å from the ligand. When the distance
was increased to 4Å, residues Leu101, Ala98, Asp50 and Cys44
were found to interact with the ligand. In the template protein
both ASP43 and ASP50 are involved in binding of calcium ions,
which in turn may help in binding the H2O2 molecule. The key
ligand binding residues (Arg38, Phe41 and His42) as found in
other functionally similar proteins (PDB Id: 1SCH &amp; 1ATJ) were
found within a distance of 5Å from H2O2, which might be due
to rigid biomolecule docking. Complex of alfalfa POD with
H2O2 as viewed by Deep view Swiss PDB viewer is shown in
(). Further analysis revealed the presence of fourteen
alpha helices in the modelled protein. Surface view of the
modeled structure () showed that ligand binding site
was buried inside a channel.

Conclusion
The present study analyses the sequence of alfalfa POD in silico
with respect to presence of transmembrane helices,
glycosylation sites, subcellular localization, physiochemical
properties, conserved regions and topology. Instability index
value and presence of ten disulphide linkages suggest the
superiority of alfalfa POD over other popular PODs from
horseradish and soybean. Three dimensional structure of alfalfa
POD was predicted using soybean POD as template (PDB Id:
1FHFA) with a RMSD value of 0.26 Ao. Structure validation by
PROCHECK, Verify 3D, WHAT IF, ERRAT, 3D Match and
ProSA confirmed the reliability of the model. Docking of H2O2
in the vicinity of predicted key catalytic residues further
suggested that model is of high quality. The predicted
properties of alfalfa POD may help in better utilization of
enzyme for various biotechnological applications.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are thankful to UGC-Networking Resource Centre
in Biological Sciences, Madurai Kamraj University, Madurai,
Tamil Nadu for providing necessary support and
encouragement for learning the bioinformatics tools during the
Summer School on “Genomics and Proteomics in drug
discovery”.

Citation:Hooda et al, Bioinformation 8(20): 974-979 (2012)

(A) Ramachndran plot analysis for alfalfa POD. The
plot statistics are: Total number of residues-325 with 92.1%
residues in the core region (red); 6.6 % residues in allowed
(yellow) and 1.4% in generously allowed (light yellow) region.
Number of glycine residues (labelled as G) is 21 and Number of
Pro residues is 16 (B) Superimposition of CA atoms of alfalfa
POD (red) with soybean POD (green) as done with Deep View
Swiss PDB viewer gave a RMS value of 0.26 Å, arrows within
helices and sheets points towards the C-terminus. Gln1 is the
first amino acid at N-terminus whereas Oxt 325 represents the
terminal oxygen atom at C-terminus.

ProSA-web service analysis of alfalfa and soybean peroxidase. ProSA-web z-scores of all protein chains in PDB
determined by X-ray crystallography (light blue) or NMR spectroscopy (dark blue) with respect to their length. The z-scores of
alfalfa (A) and soybean (B) peroxidase are highlighted as large dots (C) Energy plot of alfalfa peroxidase (D) Energy plot of
soybean peroxidase.

(A) Residues found within a distance of 4Å from the
ligand. The bonding between H2O2 and protein was stabilized
by hydrogen bond between the ligand and ASP43 (B) Predicted
three dimensional structure of alfalfa POD. Secondary structure
elements of proteins are presented as ribbon. Sitting inside is a
ball and stick model of ligand H2O2 labeled as Lig1. Gln1 is the
first amino acid at N-terminus whereas Oxt 325 represents the
terminal oxygen atom at C-terminus. (C) Molecular surfaces
showing channel for substrate binding.

