Background
There is a vast gap between the between the amount of sequence information and
                functional characterization of the protein. Hence, fast computational methods are
                required for the correct characterization of its function [&gt;,]. The present classification system of proteins is based
                either on Sequence­Sequence similarity or Sequence­Structure
                similarity [&gt;,]. These two methods play a
                critical role in predicting a possible function for a new sequence. But these
                methods do not function properly when clear sequence or structural similarities do
                not exist as in case of distantly related proteins. As we know that not all
                homologous proteins have analogous functions []. Proteins have many shared domains, need not
                necessarily perform the same function e.g. SH2, WD40 etc., are known to have
                different functions []. Proteins of specific functional class share common
                structural and chemical features essential for performing similar functions
                    []. It is of
                interest to consider protein functional family classification as a method for
                facilitating protein function prediction, which is expected to be particularly
                useful in the cases, described above and may thus be used as a protein function
                prediction tool to complement sequence alignment methods.

It has been reported that physical and chemical properties of the
                protein's primary sequence play an important role in determining the
                protein's function []. We have tried to explore new physiochemical properties along
                with the secondary structure information of the proteins for the correct
                characterization of its family. Instead of direct comparison of the sequences,
                Nearest Neighbor classifier [] was used to cluster the physiochemical properties that were
                generated from the protein primary sequence. Samples of the protein known to be in a
                functional class are used to train the Nearest Neighbor system to recognize specific
                features and to classify the protein sequences. Such an approach may be applied to
                closely related proteins as well as distantly related proteins.

Methodology
The physical parameters of the protein are very important in defining an unknown
                protein into a specific class. The most important physical parameters are the
                hydrophobic and the polar residues. It has been found in research of transmembrane
                proteins that the discriminatory features are observed in the intermediate steps
                when the patch of the hydrophobic residues followed by neutral amino acids and the
                same is observed when the polar residue string is followed by neutral amino acids
                    []. Thus on the
                basis of physiochemical properties and structural properties, protein family can be
                classified using derived parameters from primary sequence.

Our dataset comprised of sequences of protein that were randomly chosen from the
                Swissprot database []. Every protein sequence was represented by a specific
                feature vector assembled from encoded representations of tabulated residue
                properties including the composition of twenty naturally occurring amino acids,
                hydrophobic content of the protein, molecular weight of protein, isoelectric point
                of protein, secondary structure composition of amino acid residues as helices, coils
                and sheets and the composition of helices, coils and sheets in the secondary
                structure topology. Each of above mentioned features are defined as follow.

(1)Amino acid composition (aa)
aai = ai /N, where ai is
                    frequency of amino acid ’i‘ in the protein and i
                    = twenty different amino acid aai represents the
                    proportion of amino acid ’i‘ in the protein N
                    = total number of residue in protein sequence;

(2)Hydrophobic content (H)
H = h/N, where h = no. of hydrophobic residue
                    in the protein sequence, N = total number of residue in protein
                    sequence.

Isoelectric point of protein (Ip)
The Isoelectric point is the pH at which the protein has no net charge. The net
                    charge of a protein was calculated as the sum of the number of positively
                    charged residues (protonated lysine, arginine,
                    histidine),minus the number of negatively charged residues
                    (deprotonated tyrosine, cysteine, glutamate, aspartate),
                    plus the number of protonated amino termini, minus the number of deprotonated
                    carboxyl termini. The net charge calculation does not take into account any
                    electrostatic interactions within the protein that may perturb ionization. For
                    each amino acid of interest, the number of protonated residues is determined by
                    the following equation: N(p) =
                        N(t)
                        [H(+)]
                    /
                    )[H(+ʉ]
                    + K(N)), where
                        N(p) = number of protonated
                    residues, N(t) = total number of
                    residues of a specific amino acid,
                        [H(+)]
                    = hydrogen ion concentration,
                    K(N) = dissociation constant for
                    the amino acid of interest that is equal to the following:
                        (10)
                    (−pK)N

Secondary structure feature (S and SS)
We predicted the secondary structure of protein sequence using SSPro4.0
                        []. We then
                    calculated the following features; Proportion of Amino acid falling within
                    particular secondary structure, Sj =
                    aj/N,where aj is no. of amino acid that fall
                    in the ’j‘ and j = (helix,
                    sheet, loop) N= total number of residue in protein
                    sequence. Secondary structure proportion composition ssj
                    = nj/M, where nj is the no. of secondary
                    structure ’j‘ in topology and j =
                    (helix, sheet, loop) M = total number of
                    secondary structure (helix, sheet, loop) in sequence
                    topology.

Molecular weight of protein (mw)
mw = N ∑ i=1
                    wi; wi = molecular weight of amino acid, N
                    = total number of residue in protein sequence combining all above
                    mentioned features,Finally feature vector is F = [ aa
                        H Ip s ss mw] that becomes the input for
                    Nearest Neighbor classifier.

Classification of proteins
For the classification of various classes of protein based on mentioned
                    physiochemical properties (F) using nearest neighbor
                    classifier (NN). NN is quite popular amongst pattern recognition community
                    mainly due to its simplicity and good performance. Consider the problem
                    classifying unknown object into P classes with the training data set which is
                    formulated as X= {(xi,
                    c1) … (xN,
                    cN)} where x is the feature vector,
                        {ci|i = 1 to P, P
                    = no. of classes} and N = no. of objects.
                    According to NN rule, a new unclassified object x is assigned a class
                    ci of xi nearest to x. In our case, there is four class c
                    = {globin, homeobox, heat shock protein,
                    kinase} and N is 2000. We used Euclidean distance as a measure of
                    similarity.

Results and Discussion
The study was conducted on four major classes of proteins namely Globins,
                Homeoboxes,, Heat Shock Proteins and Kinase. Sequences of all four protein class
                were downloaded from Swissprot database. Then proposed physiochemical features were
                evaluated using Nearest Neighbor Classification technique. The results obtained from
                Nearest Neighbor Classifier fed with training set of five hundred sequences of each
                protein family against test set of three hundred sequences of each protein
                family,chosen randomly,are as follows:

The results show that the properties used namely the frequency of twenty naturally
                occurring amino acids, hydrophobic content of protein, molecular weight of
                protein,isoelectric point of protein,secondary structure composition of amino acid
                residues as helices, coils and sheets and the composition of helices,coils and
                sheets in the secondary structure topology plays a significant role in correctly
                classifying the protein into its corresponding class or family as indicated by the
                overall efficiency of Nearest Neighbor 84.92% (Table 1 in
                    ). On excluding the class Kinase the overall efficiency
                is 97.67% (Table 2 ) suggesting that the protein
                family “ Kinase” is more widely distributed than the Globin
                and the Homeobox protein families. Our further analysis on the individual protein
                family showed that Kinase and Heat Shock protein are closely related with respect to
                the above defined parameters.

Conclusion
The study suggests that the above taken feature set of proteins has the potential for
                classifying the proteins into protein families. Further addition of property
                / properties will help in discrimination of protein families that are
                widely distributed.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Chaurasiya
                    et al, Bioinformation 4(9): 396-398 (2010)

