Background
The goal of the International HapMap Project [] is to develop a haplotype map of the human genome, the HapMap, to describe the common patterns of human DNA 
sequence variation. Four populations were selected for inclusion in the HapMap: 30 trios from Ibadan, Nigeria (YRI), 30 trios of U.S. residents of northern and 
western European ancestry (CEU), 45 unrelated individuals from Tokyo, Japan (JPT) and 45 unrelated Han Chinese individuals from Beijing, China (CHB). 
Epstein Barr virus (EBV)-transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) were derived from these individuals. The HapMap resource is comprised of genotypic data 
on ~4 million single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), gene expression data using various microarray platforms, other phenotypic data such as drug response as 
well as structural variation data (copy number changes) []. In addition, there is data available regarding cellular sensitivity to various chemotherapeutic 
agents at PharmGKB []. Thus, investigators can utilize extensive genotype, gene expression and other phenotypic data on the 270 HapMap samples to perform 
various genome-wide scans for studies that do not require a priori knowledge or experimentation to generate new hypothesis. Because the HapMap samples provide 
samples from major world populations, investigations into inter-ethnic variation in genotype, gene expression and phenotype are possible. Recently, using the 
HapMap resource, some exciting progress has been made in the areas of gene expression variation studies and pharmacogenomics []. Albeit the successes, there are 
some limitations of the HapMap resource []. For example, LCLs represent just one human tissue type and gene expression levels vary considerably among tissues. 
For pharmacologic studies, LCLs may not reflect tumor response or sensitivity of target tissue of known toxicity. Also, studies have suggested that EBV 
transformation may affect the expression of some genes and certain biological processes in LCLs [,]. Therefore, interpretation of results using these cell 
lines may be biased by this effect. In this paper, we will not delve into these “intrinsic” limitations of the HapMap resource. Instead, we will discuss some 
of the technical challenges when utilizing the HapMap resource.

Description
Problem of untyped SNPs
The HapMap resource has allowed whole-genome associations to detect genetic determinants, particularly SNPs that affect gene expression variations 
(expression quantitative trait loci, eQTLs) and other phenotypes such as drug response []. However, a statistically significant association between a SNP 
and a phenotype does not necessarily indicate that the relationship is with a causal variant. The detected SNP could be in linkage disequilibrium (LD) with 
the casual variant. Therefore, involving the causal SNP or the marker SNP in LD with it will be critical to detect a causal association. With the availability 
of ~4 million genotypic data on SNPs, the HapMap resource provides a reference catalog of human genetic variations. The problem with the whole-genome associations 
is, however, whether the HapMap SNPs are sufficient to capture most of the human variation and untyped SNPs. Using the National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences (NIEHS) Environmental Genome Project SNPs, Tantoso et al., showed that the HapMap SNPs are transferable to the NIEHS SNPs. However, the HapMap SNPs do not 
capture some SNPs (~45% for CEU and JPT/CHB, ~70% for YRI) []. Therefore, deep resequencing or a denser genotyping microarray would uncover more SNPs in the HapMap 
samples so that researchers can be certain that tag-SNPs chosen for association studies are able to comprehensively cover all the variants in the genes. Some efforts 
to resequence the HapMap samples include 1) the coordination of the HapMap Project and the ENCODE (ENCyclopedia Of DNA Elements) Project [], 2) the SeattleSNPs 
Project [] and 3) the NIEHS Environmental Genome Project []. For example, the SeattleSNPs Project has implemented a large-scale genotyping effort, using 
Illumina BeadArray technology, to map highly informative tag-SNPs from previously studied SeattleSNPs candidate genes in all unrelated HapMap samples. In contrast, 
the ENCODE-HapMap Coordination aims to resequence ten 500Kb genomic regions in 48 unrelated individuals (16 YRI, 16 CEU, 8 CHB and 8 JPT) using a PCR-based method. 
No doubt, the HapMap resource will become an even more powerful tool once integrated with these efforts.

Confounding factors when using the resource
Although exciting results have been generated using the HapMap resource [], to date few researchers have taken proper care of some potential confounding factors 
when using these data. We classified these confounding factors into three major groups: 1) non-genetic factors such as batch effect, cell collection time etc. 
Akey et al. pointed out that the batch effect of a HapMap dataset could significantly impact the interpretation of the results of a gene expression variation 
study []; 2) technical confounding factors such as SNPs in probes. The confounding effect of SNPs in probes has been appreciated by researchers [], however, 
most available HapMap gene expression datasets using various microarray platforms (eg. Affymetrix Human Focus array, Illumina BeadChip []) did not consider this 
effect. A recent version of expression dataset using the Affymetrix Human Exon array took an extra step to filter out probesets affected by SNPs maintained in dbSNP 
(a database of SNP data curated by the National Center for Biotechnology Information) when summarizing gene expression [], though a more comprehensive comparison 
study may be necessary to investigate in detail this effect on gene expression; and 3) other potential confounding factors such as gender and cell proliferation rate 
need to be considered when interpreting results from particular association studies with expression and or pharmacological response. For example, some drugs are more 
effective on rapidly growing cells, therefore the proliferation rate may be an intermediary confounding effect. Genes important in cellular susceptibility to a particular 
drug could include genes that solely affect cellular proliferation.

Conclusion
The HapMap resource has provided researchers a powerful tool to explore quantitative variation in complex traits such as gene expression and drug response in human 
populations. Overcoming the challenges associated with this resource or considering the confounding variables in the interpretation of results would facilitate the next wave 
of research using this tremendous resource and provide more insights into the current views of the human genome as well as complex traits such as drug response variation and 
susceptibility to common disease.

This Pharmacogenetics of Anticancer Agents Research (PAAR) Group (http://pharmacogenetics.org) study 
was supported by NIH/NIGMS grant U01 GM61393.

