Background
Snake envenomation is a serious medical problem, especially in
the farms where snakes are abundant []. The common species
such as Crotalus rhodostoma (38%), Trimeresurus albolabris (27%),
Daboia russeli siamensis (14%), Naja atra (10%), and others (11%)
are responsible for snakebites in Southeast Asia []. Snake
venoms constitute a rich source of phospholipase A2 (PLA2)
enzymes, which show remarkable functional diversity. Snake
venom phospholipase A2 (svPLA2) can induce several
additional effects such as cardiotoxicity, myotoxicity, pre or
postsynaptic neurotoxicity, edema, hemolysis, hypotension,
convulsion, platelet aggregation inhibition and anticoagulation
[–]. svPLA2 catalyze the hydrolysis of 2-acyl ester bonds of 3-
sn-phospholipids producing fatty acids and lysophospholipids
[]. The Ca2+ ion, an essential cofactor, and an Asp residue at
position 49 are required for catalysis on artificial substrates [].
Their catalytic activity upon cell membranes of specific tissues
suggests an important role of these enzymes in venoms toxicity.

PLA2s were recently divided into 15 groups based on
biochemical and structural criteria, considering their molecular
weight, disulfide bonds profile, phospholipid substrates, amino
acid sequence, and sensibility to Ca2+ ions, catalytic activity
and genic structure [–]. Snake venoms are especially rich in
group I and II PLA2s, found in the Elapidae or Viperidae
families, respectively. Group II PLA2s can be further subdivided
into two main types commonly referred to as Asp-49 and Lys-
49 isoforms []. Since then, the isoforms of basic myotoxic
PLA2s were isolated from Bothrops snakes and classified into
group II, where the Asp-49 residue was replaced by Lys-49,
resulting thus two classes of this enzyme: (a) Asp-49 myotoxins
showing moderate catalytic activity and (b) Lys-49 myotoxins
with low or no enzymatic activity upon artificial substrates 
[–]. Previously, myonecrotic venom components were
extensively studied. Several myotoxic Bothrops PLA2s were
characterized, such as B. asper PLA2s, B. moojeni myotoxins I and
II, and B. jararacussu bothropstoxins I (Lys-49) and II (Asp-49),
responsible for several biological effects including myonecrosis,
edema, irreversible neuromuscular blockage and in vitro cell
lysis [–] etc. Many acidic PLA2s have been isolated from
Agkistrodon halys, Pseudechis papuanus, Bothrops neuwiedi,
Bothrops lanceolatus, Trimeresurus jerdonii, Heloderma horridum,
Ophiophagus hannah, Lachesis muta, B. jararaca, B. moojeni and B.
jararacussu [–]. Toxicity and pharmacological effects differ
in acidic isoforms. For example, the acidic PLA2 isolated from
Lachesis muta venom is myonecrotic, proteolytic, anticoagulant
and platelet aggregation inhibitor. Another myotoxic PLA2 from
the same venom did not show anticoagulant or lethal activity.

It has been suggested that PLA2s represent a class of versatile
enzymes and, as multifunctional proteins; they are extremely
relevant as mediators of several inflammatory diseases and
promising agents for use in biotechnological areas 
[–]. An
increasing search for use of these enzymes is therefore not
surprising, including their general anesthetic action, treatment
of rheumatoid arthritis, bactericidal action, novel class of
antiparasitary agents, HIV inhibitors and others 
[–]. In this
review, we broadly discuss the implications of the PLA2
inhibitor groups of plants, marine organisms serve as sources of
compounds on current understanding of snake biology, as well
as in the development of new therapeutic drugs for treatment of
snake envenomations.

Venom neutralization by bio-active compounds from plant
a) Neutralization potential of crude mixture of plants:
Many plants are used in traditional medicine as active agents
against various effects induced by snakebite 
[]. Viperidae
snakes (Daboia russelli russelli) are well known for sever local
effects and these effects commonly treated with plant extracts
without any scientific validation in triabl areas, India 
[]. There
are few survey reports that reveal the practice of herbal
medicine by either folk or indigenous communities [–].
However, in most cases the efficacy of this traditional treatment
regimen is unproven. Thus, the study of herbal antidotes
against snake venom is of great importance in the management
of snakebite. Recently, various research groups actively
enganged for antivenom research by using diversed crude
extracts and elucidated active compounds from various plants
sources [,–]. In addition, their natural PLA2 inhibitors
also play an important role in some traditional medicines used
for immune support, such as the ashwaganda plant (Withania
somnifera) used in Ayurvedic medicine. Aqueous extracts of this
plant have been reported to neutralize venom of the Indian
speckled cobra -Naja naja [] another report, ethanolic seed
extract of Strychnas nux-vomica also showed antisnake venom
activity []. Ethanol leaf extract of Acalypha indica potentially
neutralized Viper russelli russelli (Russell's viper) venom 
[].
Morus alba leaf extract abolished the in vitro proteolytic and
hyaluronolytic activities of Indian vipera ‘D. russelli russelli’
venom. Edema, hemorrhage and myonecrotic activities were
also neutralized effectively []. Aqueous root extract of Mimosa
pudica inhibited the hyaluronidase and protease activities of
Indian snake (Naja naja, Vipera russelli and Echis carinatus)
venoms by dose dependant manner [].

The ethanol leaf extract and essential oil of Nectandra angustifolia
was the most active and inhibited both venom activities
(hemolytic and coagulant), while the oil was only active on the
coagulant activity []. Methanol extract of fresh leaves
(Camellina sinensis L.) showed potential to inhibit PLA2 enzymes
with hydrolytic activity in Naja naja kaouthia Lesson and
Calloselasma rhodostoma Kuhl venoms []. Another, methanolic
extract from Cordia verbenacea ‘baleeira’, ‘whaler’ (Cv)
significantly inhibited paw edema induced by Bothrops
jararacussu snake venom and by its main basic phospholipase A2
homologs, namely bothropstoxins I and II (BthTXs). Alam et al,
[] also reported that the isolation, purification and partial
characterization of viper venom inhibiting factor from the root
extract of the Indian medicinal plant sarsaparilla (Hemidesmus
indicus R.Br). Viper venom-induced inflammation and
inhibition of free radical formation by pure compound (2-
hydroxy-4-methoxy benzoic acid) isolated and purified from
anantamul (Hemidesmus indicus R.BR) root extract [].

In our previous study, the herbal practitioners in the study area
were interviewed, and information on medicinal plants was
collected from the traditional healers called “Vaidyars”. This
survey covers 72 medicinal plants belonging to 53 families that
are used for the treatment of snakebite in a traditional way.
Traditional approach was evaluated scientifically with some
selected plant extracts (7.2 mg/kg, bodoy weight) and partially
purified fractions (2.4 mg/kg, b.w) were orally administered to
mice experimentally envenomed with rattlesnake venom s.c.
injection (2.5 - 15 mg/kg, b.w). Tested fractions (Aristolochia
indica, Hemidesmus indicus, Gloriosa superba, Strychnos nuxvomica,
Eclipta prostrata, and Andrographis paniculata) showed
potent neutralizing effect against the venom. Compared to the
extracts, administration of purified fractions was more effective
in increasing the body weight. Control mice injected with the
venom alone showed weight loss and severe toxicity at 15
mg/kg, b.w. The purified fractions (2.4 mg/kg, b.w) produced
significant protection against venom induced changes in serum
SOD and LPx levels. The isolated fractions effectively inhibited
the toxic effect of snake venoms in vitro than in vivo. The above
observations confirmed the protective activity of plants -
Aristolochia indica, Hemidesmus indicus, Gloriosa superba, Strychnos
nux-vomica, Eclipta prostrata, and Andrographis paniculata against
the lethal action of snake venom [].

Several plants are used in traditional medicine as active agents
against various effects induced by snakebite [,
]. Folk
medicine and its isolated constituents recommended as snake
venom antidotes for the protection against Jararaca venom []
for i.e. haemorrhagic effect of Bothrops atrox venom and their
strong lethal enzymatic effect was neutralized by plants [–].
Furthermore, previoulsy we reported [] hydrocarbones such
as 2, 4 dimethyl hexane, 2 methylnonane, 2, 6 dimethyl heptane
obtained from traditional medicinal plants Tragia involucrata
(Euphorbiaceae) member showed effective venom and PLA2
neutralisation in mice (). PLA2 inhibitors have also
been isolated from plants such as Horsfieldia amygdaline 
[].

The active component was isolated and identified as rosmarinic
acid (RA). RA is an ester of caffeic acid and 3, 4-
dihydroxyphenyllactic acid 2-O-cafeoil-3-(3, 4-di-hydroxyphenyl)-
R-lactic []. RA in the species C. verbenacea and of its
anti-inflammatory and antimyotoxic properties against snake
venoms and isolated toxins reported for the first-time. RA
inhibited the edema and myotoxic activity induced by the basic
PLA2s BthTX-I and BthTX-II. The pure compound potentiated
the ability of the commercial equine polyvalent antivenom in
neutralizing lethal and myotoxic effects of the crude venom as
well as isolated PLA2s in experimental models. Circular
dichorism data also suggested that after binding, no significant
conformation changes were occurred either in the Cv-RA or in
the target PLA2. A possible model for the interaction of RA with
Lys49-PLA2 BthTX-I is proposed []. A compound AIPLAI
purified from the methanolic leaf extract of Azadirachta indica
(Neem) inhibits the Cobra and Russell's viper venoms (RVVs)
PLA2 enzymes in a dose-dependent manner and the AIPLAI
holds good promise for the development of novel anti-snake
venom drug in future [].

The secondary metabolites (chemical constituents) are
responsible for the neutralizing effect of plants that are in
popular use against the action of snake venoms 
[–]. An
animal study has also been well documented in the case of
immunity of the opossum (Didelphis marsupials) towards the
venom of the Jararaca (Bothrops jararaca) snake 
[]. Plants are
reputed to be capable of neutralizing the action of snake venom,
and their antivenom activity has been related to certain
chemical compounds identified in those plants []. Several
chemical constituents like alkaloids, flavonoids, sitosterol or
glucoside, lupeol, gymnemagenin, phenolics, pentacyclic
triterpenes like oleanoic acid, ursolic, tannins, taraxasterol, α
and β amyrin are found to be present in varying proportions in
plants. They have also been previously reported for antisnake
venom activity. All these classes of chemical compounds are
capable of interacting with macromolecular targets with
enzymes or receptors and it can effectively inhibit the toxic
effect of snake venoms in vitro than in vivo 
[]. Besides, several
other phytochemicals of plant origin showed the most potent
inhibition of human synovial fluid phospholipase (HSF- PLA2)
was observed with compounds such as scalaradial and ellagic
acid, which both have IC50 values of 0.02 µM (using autoclaved
[3H]-arachidonic-acid (AA)-labelled Escherichia coli membranes
as substrate).

b) Alkaloids:
Recently, alkaoid has been reported that aristolochic acid
inhibits PLA2
in vitro and also decrease both oedema induced
by snake venom as well as human synovial fluid PLA2 
(). 
Several authors studied the anti-inflammatory activity of
aristolochic acid and to investigate the effect of the alkaloid on
the enzymes involved in the release of eicosanoids. Results
demonstrated that aristolochic acid was inhibited the
inflammation induced by immunological, immune complexes,
and non-immunological agents such as carrageenan or croton
oil [].

c) Flavonoids:
The inhibitory effect of the plant flavonoid and rutin were
investigated against group I PLA2 from porcine pancreas and
Naja naja as well as group II PLA2s from Vipera russelli and
Crotalus atrox etc (). Rutin efficiently inhibited group
II PLA2s obtained both V. russelli and C. atrox but it was shown
only a weak inhibitor of PLA2-I from porcine pancreas and N.
naja. The lack of strong inhibition of pancreatic PLA2-I was not
due to contaminating proteins in the enzyme preparation, since
the same weak inhibition was obtained against pancreatic PLA2
purified to homogeneity as well []. The phytotherapeutic
agent like flavonoids selectively inhibited the group II PLA2 of
venom origins. Previously, Alcaraz and Hoult [] reported that
the hypolaetin-8-glucoside and related flavonoids inhibited the
snake venom phospholipase A2 effectively. Porcine pancreatic
PLA2 hydrolyses phosphatidylcholine when in the lamellar
state as well as in the micellar state. We have found that alphatocopherol,
the most active form of vitamin E, is able to inhibit
PLA2 activity only toward lamellar fluid membranes, thus
protecting phospholipids toward this lytic enzyme. This
compound decreases both the initial rate and the extent of
hydrolysis. The inhibition is of the non-competitive type and
the evidence strongly suggests that it is mainly due to an effect
of alpha-tocopherol on the substrate, i.e. the membrane and not,
on the enzyme [].

d) Lipids:
Membrane lipid-derived second messengers are generated by
PLA2 during synaptic activity. Overstimulation of this enzyme
during neurotrauma results in the accumulation of bioactive
metabolites such as arachidonic acid, oxygenated derivatives of
arachidonic acid, and platelet-activating factor (PAF). Several of
these bioactive lipids participate in cell damage, cell death, or
repair-regenerative neural plasticity. Neurotransmitters may
activate PLA2 directly when linked to receptors coupled to G
proteins and/or indirectly as calcium influx or mobilization
from intracellular []. Chronic inflammatory diseases are often
accompanied by intense angiogenesis. A model of
inflammatory angiogenesis is the murine air pouch granuloma
which has a hyperangiogenic component. Proinflammatory
lipid mediator generation is also a hallmark of chronic
inflammation and the role of endogenous production of these
mediators in angiogenesis is not known. The 14 kDa PLA2
deacylates phospholipid, liberating arachidonic acids are used
for leukotriene and lysophospholipid, production of plateletactivating
factor (PAF) []. Another report, 1-alkyl ether lipids
were studied for their ability to inhibit PLA2 and antagonize
PAF responses. Studies with synthetic micellar substrate (1-
stearyl-2-arachidonyl phosphocholine), at concentrations
ranging from 0.02 to 1000 µM, demonstrate that CL 118326
inhibits porcine pancreatic PLA2
in vitro. As the substrate
concentration increases, there is a dose-dependent increase in
the IC50 value (IC50 ranges: 2.6-137 µM). CL 118326 inhibits
mammalian pancreatic PLA2, but not snake or bee venom PLA2.
CL 118326 inhibits thrombin effectively at IC50 = 7.9 µM dose
[].

Phospholipase A2 (PLA2) inhibitors from marine organisms
Phospholipase A2 (PLA2) inhibitor from marine organisms that
are provides a rationale for seeking inhibitors of PLA2 as antiinflammatory
agents []. Marine natural products that inhibit
PLA2 are manoalide [–] and its derivatives such as
scalaradial [] and related compounds like pseudopterosins
[], vidalols, and a group of terpenoids that contain masked
1,4-dicarbonyl moieties respectively.

a) Manoalide:
Several marine terpenoids that contain at least one reactive
aldehyde group, such as manoalide (MLD) and its congeners,
possess interesting anti-inflammatory activities that are
mediated by the covalent inactivation of secretory
phospholipase A2 []. 
Manoalide is a potent analgesic and antiinflammatory
sesterterpene isolated in 1980 from a marine
sponge. The anti-inflammatory activity of manoalide is due to
inhibition of PLA2, through irreversible binding to several
lysine residues (). This binding is realized by means
of the two masked aldehyde functions present in the polar part
of manoalide. Of the two aldehyde groups, only that present in
the g-hydroxybutenolide ring seems to be essential, since
cacospongionolides, naturally occurring analogues lacking the
second masked aldehyde group, were also shown to be
irreversible PLA2 inhibitors. It appears that the minimum
structural requirement for exhibiting manoalide-like PLA2
inhibition would be the presence in the inhibitor of functional
groups able to seize the amino groups of PLA2 lysine residues
with formation of stable covalent bonds. Many manoalide
analogues have been isolated from marine sponges, most of
them sharing PLA2 inhibitory properties 
[].

MLD inactivated bee venom phospholipase A2s, localization of
the manoalide binding site on bee venom PLA2 
[–]. MLD
drug inhibited purified human synovial fluid phospholipase A2
(HSF-PLA2). Inhibition of HSF-PLA2 by MLD was concentration
and time dependent with IC50 values of 0.2 and 0.02 µM for
dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine (DPPC) as the substrate (38.0
µM and 18.8 µmol) [3H]arachidonic acid released/min/mg
protein with Escherichia coli as a natural substrate respectively
[].

b) Scalaradial:
Scalaradial (SLD), a 1, 4-dialdehyde marine terpenoid that was
isolated from the sponge (Cacospongia mollior) possesses antiinflammatory
properties in vivo and in vitro. SLD is a potent
inactivator of bee venom PLA2 with an IC50 value of 0.07 µM.
Inactivation of bee venom PLA2 occurred in a time-dependent
manner. The rate of inactivation was reduced markedly in the
presence of excess phosphatidylcholine, suggesting that
modification of the enzyme occurs at or near the substrate
binding site []. Due to its peculiar dialdehyde structural
feature, it has been proposed that scalaradial exerts its
enzymatic inactivation by means of an irreversible covalent
modification of its target [].

c) Petrosaspongiolide:
Petrosaspongiolide M (PM) is an anti-inflammatory marine
metabolite that displays a potent inhibitory activity toward
group II and III secretory phospholipase A2 (PLA2) enzymes.
The details of the mechanism, which leads to a covalent adduct
between PLA2 and gamma-hydroxybutenolide-containing
molecules such as PM. The model provides an interesting
insight into the PM-PLA2 inhibition process and may prove
useful in the design of new anti-inflammatory agents that target
PLA2 secretory enzymes [].

d) Vidalols:
Chemical studies of the Caribbean red alga Vidalia obtusaloba
have resulted in the isolation of two new bromophenolic
metabolites, vidalols A and B (1, 2). The new compounds were
discovered as part of an organized effort to isolate new
naturally-occurring anti-inflammatory agents with a focus upon
those which may function through the inhibition of PLA2 
[].
A chemically synthesized novel phenolic metabolite,
vidalenolone, as well as two previously described and
structurally simple phenols were isolated as SH2-inactive
substances. Their structures were determined by spectroscopic
methods such as 2D NMR []. The cytotoxic activities of all the
synthetic compounds were determined against DLD-1 cells
using the MTT assay. Compounds with IC50 &lt; 20 µmol were
also tested against HCT-116 cells. Compound 3c (2, 5-dibromo-
3, 4-dihydroxybenzyl n-propyl ether) was the most active
compound against both cell lines (IC50 = 1.72 and 0.80 µmol,
respectively), and its effect on the cell cycle was studied using
flow cytometry [].

Other lead molecules as PLA2 inhibitors
Analogues of lead molecules were generated by substituting
different types of functional groups in order to obtain a
molecule with optimal PLA2 inhibition. The lead molecules
characterized as PLA2 inhibitors are acenaphthenes,
azetidinones, indoles, piperazines, isoxazolidines, isoxazolines,
diazepinones, and several substrate analogues 
[]. Among
these analogue piperazine derivatives on optimization with
respect to hydrophobicity and electronegativity showed
inhibition at nanomolar levels. Structural analysis of many lead
molecules indicated that a PLA2 inhibitor should have both
hydrophobic moiety and polar functional groups. However, the
docking studies clearly showed that the binding mechanisms of
plant (acalyphin, chlorogenic acid, stigmasterol, curcumin and
tectoridin) and marine compounds (gracilin A and
aplysulphurin A), performed with Russell's viper and bovine
pancreatic PLA2 as target molecules. These compounds
interacted with the amino acid (AA) residues at the active site of
both PLA2s, and proved the efficacy as anti-inlfammaotry and
as well antidotes properties [].

Antibiotic as a PLA2 inhibitor
a) Tetracyclines as PLA2 inhibitor:
Tetracyclines are primarily bacteriostatic broad-spectrum
antimicrobial agents; they are thought to exert their effect by the
inhibiting protein synthesis. Tetracyclines at low doses were
found to interfere with the production of prostaglandins and
leukotrienes [–], scavenge oxygen radicals [], interfere
with the expression of nitrous oxide synthase [], and enhance
natural inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases 
[–] after this
novel discovery non-antimicrobial chemically modified
tetracyclines (CMT) were prepared and widely investigated in different type of diseases 
().

Tetracyclines have been recognized as useful agents for therapy
of inflammatory arthritis [], non-infected corneal ulcers,
serious (sometimes life-threatening) skin-blistering diseases,
rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis, systemically as well as
locally induced bone loss, suppress connective tissue
breakdown during periodontal disease and perhaps even
tumor-induced angiogenesis [–]. However, prolonged use
of tetracyclines is limited by their detrimental antimicrobial
properties. Recently, a group of chemically modified
tetracyclines CMT, CMT-3 and CMT-5 [] devoid of
antimicrobial properties has been synthesized. However, the
CMT-3 (COL-3) is produced by deletion of the dimethylamino
group from carbon 4 in the A ring of tetracycline, which
abolishes the antibiotic activity but not the anti-MMP activity of
the molecule. Further modification by replacement of the
carbon 11 carbonyl oxygen and the carbon 12 hydroxyl groups
with nitrogen, abolishes the anti-MMP activity, giving rise to
CMT-5 (COL-5), which is neither antibiotic nor anti-MMP [].
Some CMT were found to inhibit various matrixmetalloprotinase
(MMPs) [,
,
]. Nearly 10 synthetic CMT
were tested for inhibition of sPLA2 human porcine PLA2, and
Naja naja PLA2. PLA2 activity was assessed by radio labeled
Escherichia coli assay using standard and high calcium
concentrations. Of which 6 CMT inhibited sPLA2 activity at 50
µg/ml or lower concentrations []. However, the other
antibiotics such as tetracyclines, macrolides, chloramphenicol
and carbenicillin inhibited the activity of Crotalus adamanteus
PLA2 towards phospholipids of egg-yolk emulsions []. For
example, an assessment of metalloproteinase inhibitors
clodronate and doxycyline showed effective neutralization of
hemorrhage and coagulopathy induced by Bothrops asper snake
venom [].

Tetracyclines also inhibit cell proliferation, cell migration, and
synthesis of the extracellular matrix in a variety of cell types
studied in culture []. However, the earlier studies have shown
that CMT-3 and CMT-8 inhibit tumor metastasis and arthritisaffected
synoviocyte invasion in animal models []. In
addition, doxycycline, CMT-1, and CMT-8 exerted a direct
dose-dependent inhibition of porcine periodontal ligament
epithelial cell medium MMP activity as assayed by gelatin
enzymography. Both the 92-kDa (MMP-9) and 72-kDa (MMP-2)
gelatinases were inhibited by the tetracyclines added to the
conditioned medium. Culturing the cells in the presence of the
tetracyclines required considerably smaller concentrations to
reduce the secreted MMP activity. The drugs were not toxic to
the epithelial cells at 4 to 250 µg/ml concentrations up to 24 h of
culture. Doxycycline and the chemically modified tetracyclines,
in addition to inhibiting the MMP activity may also reduce the
enzyme expression at the transcriptional level []. Doxycycline
and 4-de-dimethylaminotetracycline (CMT-1) have been tested
in vitro for their ability to inhibit human neutrophil and
fibroblast interstitial collagenases and collagenase in human
gingival crevicular fluid (GCF). Human fibroblast collagenase
and GCF collagenase from LJP patients were both relatively
resistant to tetracycline inhibition; the IC50 for doxycycline and
CMT-1 for these 2 sources of collagenase were 280 and 500 µM,
respectively [–]. The presence of 25 µM CMT-3, the 48/80-
induced histamine release from rat serosal mast cells was
inhibited significantly, to 43.0 ± 7.3% of control. Similarly, the
activation-induced secretion of TNF-α and IL-8 by HMC-1 cells
were decreased in the presence of 25 µM CMT-3 to 13.5 ± 4.1%
and 9.7 ± 1.1% of control, respectively []. Adding CMT-3 at
final concentrations of 5 - 20 µM inhibited MT1-MMP
gelatinolytic and caseinolytic activity, blocked MT1-MMP
activation of pro-MMP-2, and decreased invasiveness (using the
Matrigel system) of HT-1080 fibrosarcoma cells []. Six
different CMT to inhibit human and chicken MMP were studied
in vitro. The ability of tetracycline and its analogs to inhibit
MMP appears to depend on the Ca++/Zn++ binding site at C11
(carbonyl oxygen) and C12 (OH group) of the molecule, which
is lacking in CMT-5, the pyrazole derivative of tetracycline [].

b) Lipophilic tetracyclines such as minocycline and doxycycline:
Previous study reported that the doxycycline, minocycline 
[],
and chemically modified tetracyclines (CMTs) [] inhibit
inducible NO synthase (iNOS) expression in murine
macrophages. Tilley and colleagues [], reported that the
tetracyclines, particularly minocycline and doxycycline, are
potent inhibitors of collagenases and gelatinases, two matrix
metalloproteinases [,
] showed a significant reduction of
the collagenolytic activity of synovial tissue obtained from six
patients with rheumatoid arthritis who received minocycline
before total joint arthroplasties compared with the
collagenolytic activity of synovium obtained from the same
patients during a previous arthroplasty when they had not
received minocycline. Minocycline and doxycycline also inhibit
PLA2
in vitro [,
], 
another mediator of inflammation [].
Tetracycline has also been reported to decrease leukotaxis and
to inhibit phagocytosis by neutrophils, lymphocyte proliferative
responses, and anti-CD3-induced synovial T-cell proliferation
in a dose-dependent manner [,
]. Some of these antiinflammatory
properties have been shown in a chemically
modified tetracycline analog that has no antibacterial effects
[,
,
]. 
Recently, several in vitro and fewer in vivo studies
have shown that tetracyclines, non-antibacterial, non-chelating
hydroxypyrazoline derivative of minocycline, 12 S-hydroxy-1,
12-pyrazolinominocycline (PMIN), also induced antinociceptive
and anti-inflammatory effects in rats [].

Cazalis et al, [] 
investigated that the effects of tetracycline
(TC), doxycycline (doxy), and chemically modified tetracycline-
3 (CMT-3) on the production of pro-inflammatory mediators
and MMPs in an ex vivo human whole blood (WB) model
stimulated with Porphyromonas gingivalis lipopolysaccharide
(LPS). Results show that TC, doxy, and CMT-3 can reduce the
production of pro-inflammatory mediators (interleukin-1beta
(IL-1beta), interleukin-6 (IL-6), interleukin-8 (IL-8), MMP-8, and
MMP-9. However, the secretion of IL-1beta and -8 and TNFalpha
by macrophages decreased significantly (P &lt;0.05) when
they were pretreated with 2 µM doxycycline, whereas a
concentration of 10 µM was required to significantly reduce IL-6
secretion []. Pretreatment of macrophages with 10 µM
doxycycline prior to A. actinomycetemcomitans LPS
stimulation resulted in a marked decrease in the
phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (-
76%).

A previous study describes the interaction of α-Lipoic acid
(ALA) and dihydrolipoic acid (DHALA) with pro-inflammatory
secretory PLA2 enzymes from inflammatory fluids and snake
venoms. In vitro enzymatic inhibition of sPLA2 from V. russellii,
N. naja and partially purified sPLA2 enzymes from human
ascitic fluid (HAF), human pleural fluid (HPF) and normal
human serum (HS) by ALA and DHLA was studied []. Since
in experimental models lipophilic tetracyclines such as
minocycline and doxycycline are anti-inflammatory, they
examined their effects on PLA2 activity using two assay systems
in vitro. They found that minocycline and to a lesser degree
doxycycline were markedly inhibitory to both pancreatic and
non-pancreatic PLA2. Using [14C] oleic acid labeled Escherichia
coli membrane phospholipids as substrate, the IC50 values for
minocycline and doxycycline were 3.6 × 10-5 M (18 µg/ml) and
0.98 × 10-4 M (47 µg/ml), respectively 
[]. In addition,
minocycline has its greatest effect on lipid types, which result
from degradation (lipase) reactions, suggesting a lipase
inhibition effect and/or direct effect on ocular flora 
[].
Currently, patients were randomized to receive 20 mg of
subantimicrobial-dose (SD) doxycycline or placebo twice daily
for 6 months. Doxycycline treatment significantly reduced the
number of inflammatory and non-inflammatory lesions in
patients with moderate facial acne, was well tolerated, had no
detectable antimicrobial effect on the skin flora, and did not
result in any increase in the number or severity of resistant
organisms [].

Snake venom PLA2 inhibitors and therapeutic potential
Certain molecules like endogenous antitoxic serum proteins
with neutralizing capacity against snake venoms have been
previously reported [,
]. Snake blood-derived inhibitors
have been grouped into three major classes (α, β and γ), based
on common structural motifs found in other proteins with
diverse physiological properties [–]. PLA2 inhibitors
(PLIs) from snake blood Agkistrodon, Trimeresurus, Bothrops,
Crotalus, Naja, Laticaudata and Elaphe. Several reviews dealing
with inhibitors of snake venom hemorrhagins [–]
myotoxins and neurotoxins [] have been published along the
past two decades. Lizano et al. [] reviewed the current
knowledge regarding PLA2s inhibitor proteins derived from
both snake and mammalian blood, with particular emphasis on
the classification, molecular and functional characterization of
myotoxic PLA2 inhibitors.

The search for new strategies for treatment of snake
envenomations has prompted the discovery of proteins which
neutralize the major toxic components of these venoms. These
proteins have been isolated from both venomous and nonvenomous
snakes, mammals, and most recently from medicinal
plant extract []. 
Phospholipases A2s (PLA2s) are commonly
found in snake venoms from Viperidae, Hydrophidae and
Elaphidae families have been extensively studied due to their
pharmacological and physiopathological effects in living
organisms []. Several substances have been evaluated
regarding their effects against snake venoms and isolated
toxins, including plant extracts and compounds from marine
animals, mammals and snakes serum plasma, in addition to
poly or monoclonal antibodies and several synthetic molecules.
The enzyme first attracted the interest of investigators seeking
cures for snake-bite, since it is a component of toxic venoms
from a number snakes. These venoms produce neurotoxicity,
myotoxicity, and inflammation. Interestingly, some nonvenomous
snakes secrete PLA2 inhibitors. Venomous snakes
produce a natural PLA2 inhibitor that has also been isolated.
Neuroprotective polypeptide (diffusible survival evasion
peptide or DSEP) was used to treat rats with traumatic brain
injuries. The peptide, which inhibits the enzymatic activity of
sPLA2, blocked the inflammatory response to injury and
prevented neural degeneration []. Furthermore, the
biotechnological potential of PLA2 inhibitors may provide
therapeutic molecular models with antiophidian activity to
supplement the conventional serum therapy against these
multifunctional enzymes.

a) PLA2 inhibitors peptides:
A basic nonapeptide P2 (antiflammin-2, HDMNKVLDL) which
is identical to a portion of the amino acid sequence (residues
246-254) of lipocortin I, has been described to have
antiinflammatory activity in a rat paw edema model []. P2
(0.05 µM) was also reported to inhibit porcine pancreatic PLA2.
The effect of synthetic P2 (98% pure) on PLA2 was evaluated in
two assay systems. Using porcine pancreatic PLA2 and
phosphatidylcholine/deoxycholate mixed micellar substrate, P2
(0.005-50 µM) had no effect on PLA2 activity, even in the
presence of 2 []. Two anti-inflammatory peptides, named
antiflammins (AFs), corresponding to a region with high amino
acid similarity between lipocortin-1 and uteroglobin were
tested for their ability to inhibit transglutaminase (TG) and lowmolecular-
mass PLA2. Porcine pancreatic PLA2 activity and
guinea pig hepatic TG activity were determined by arachidonyl
release from arachidonyl-phosphatidylcholine and by the
incorporation of putrescine into succinylated casein,
respectively. AFs inhibited TG activity but did not affect PLA2
activity. Moreover, porcine pancreatic PLA2 was activated by
TG []. This antiflammins showed significant effects on PLA2
activation by the enzyme called transglutaminase. However, the
peptides (antiflammins) failed to show their inhibit effect
against purified human synovial fluid PLA2 (HSF-PLA2), even
at such high concentrations of peptides as 50 µM. In vivo antiinflammatory
activity of these peptides was evaluated in
several experimental models of inflammation induced by
carrageenan, croton-oil [].

b) Co-crystallization studies PLIs:
In 1984, the first venom PLA2 with a lysine substituting for the
highly conserved aspartate 49 was discovered, in the North
American crotalid snake Agkistrodon piscivorus piscivorus 
[].
Ten years later, the first mapping of a ‘toxic region’ on a Lys-49
PLA2 was reported, in B. asper myotoxin II 
[]. After a further
decade of research on the Lys-49 PLA2s, a better understanding
of their structural determinants of toxicity and mode of action is
rapidly emerging, with myotoxic effector sites identified at the
C-terminal region in at least four proteins: B. asper myotoxin II,
A. p. piscivorus (K49 PLA2), A. contortrix laticinctus (ACL
myotoxin), and B. jararacussu (bothropstoxin I) 
[].

A new myotoxic Lys49-PLA2 isolated from B. moojeni snake
venom has been crystallized. Suggest a new quaternary
structure for this Lys49-PLA2 in contrast to the dimeric and
monomeric structures solved so far for this class of proteins
[,
]. BnSP-7 and BnSP-6, Lys49-PLA2 isolated from B.
neuwiedi pauloensis snake venom, were co-crystallized with
alpha-tocopherol and X-ray diffraction data were collected for
both complexes (2.2 and 2.6 A). A new “alternative” quaternary
conformation for these two complexes compared with all other
dimeric Lys49-PLA2 has been observed []. Large single
crystals of piratoxin I a Lys49-PLA2 homologue with low
enzymatic activity have been obtained. The crystals belong to
the orthorhombic system space group P2 (1)2(1)2(1), and
diffract X-rays to a resolution of 2.8 A. Preliminary analysis
reveals the presence of two molecules in the crystallographic
asymmetric unit []. A myotoxic PLA2, bothropstoxin II,
which exhibits low hydrolytic activity, was crystallized and Xray
diffraction data were collected to a resolution of 2.2 A.
Preliminary analyses reveals the presence of three molecules in
the asymmetric unit.

c) Structure based functional studies of PLIs:
Several crystal structures of the tetrahedral mimic inhibitors
with an sn-2-phosphate, substituent, L-1-(O-octyl-2-(heptyl
phosphonyl)-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine, complexed
with secreted PLA2 from Chinese cobra venom [,
], PLA2
and peptide inhibitor from Russells viper venom [], bee
venom [,
], and inflammatory exudates 
[,
] have
been reported. Also the crystal structure of a sn-2-acyl-amino
analogue of phospholipids complexed with the engineered
(without the residues of the surface 62-66) porcine PLA2 
[,
] has been determined. The crystal structures of the
complexes of bovine pancreatic PLA2 with an inhibitor ndodecyl-
phosphorylcholine [–] and human synovial PLA2
with an acyl amino analogue of phospholipids [] are also of
some interest. Recently, a series of indole inhibitors of human
secretory PLA2 were developed [–].

Despite differences in their primary sequences (~30% homology
only), crystal structures of PLA2 from bovine pancreas (type I)
and human synovial fluid (type II) are almost superimposable
and, not surprisingly, the active sites from both types of
enzymes are virtually identical []. Asp-99 and His-48 form
an essential catalytic dyad in the fashion of serine proteases
[]. Tyr-52 and Tyr-73 appear to be associated with these two
residues via a hydrogen bonding network, but there is evidence
[] that Tyr-52 is not essential for the catalytic reaction. From
structure-function studies of type I and II enzymes, the first
eight residues at the NH2 terminus together with Tyr-69, based
on the numbering system of Renetseder et al, [], are thought
to play a functional role in interfacial binding of the enzyme to
aggregated substrate []. Both chemical modification 
[]
and site-directed mutagenesis [–] studies have shown
that the NH2-terminal residue is crucial for activity on micellar
substrates. Further studies with type I PLA2 [,
] have
shown that significant alterations of the invariant hydrophobic
face of the NH2-terminal amphipathic helix (residues 2, 5, or 9)
are detrimental to enzyme activity. Residue 10 is necessary for
interfacial binding, and changes in other residues have a
modest or no effect on catalytic activity. Production of the fully
active enzyme depends on conformational changes of the NH2-
terminal helical region that occur firstly on interfacial binding to
the phospholipid micelle and secondly on substrate binding at
the active site [].

Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopic studies of
porcine pancreatic PLA2 indicated that the first few residues of
the NH2 terminus are not alpha-helical in solution but become
helical and rigid on formation of a ternary complex with
micelles or a substrate analogue [–]. X-ray
crystallographic studies showed that the NH2-terminal and β-
loop regions (residues 62-73) are held by hydrogen bonding in
the active enzyme conformation and form the catalytic network
involving His-48, Tyr-52, Tyr-73, and Asp-99 [–]. Recent
studies have shown that there is a strong but non-covalent
association between residues of the NH2-terminal amphipathic
helix and the β-loop region, suggesting that a novel approach to
enzyme inhibition may be to provide one or another of these
domains as free peptide. Peptides from the β-loop region,
corresponding to residues 70-74 in three different type II PLA2
molecules, were made and added to mixed micelle assays for
the PLA2. Significant enzyme inhibition occurred for each of the
three peptides, and inhibition was specific to the PLA2 from
which the peptide was derived.

Mechanism action of PLA2 inhibitors
Natural inhibitor inhibits p38 MAPK phosphorylation and
slows down the activation of transcription factor which control
the transcription of sPLA2, MMPs and inflammatory cytokines.
MAPKK –kinase, sPLA2-IIA-secretory phospholipase A2 Group
IIA, PGE2-prostaglandin E2.

Secretory phospholipase A2 (sPLA2-IIA) is an inflammatory
protein known to play a role in the pathogenesis of
envenomation. Over the last 30 years, interest in PLA2 has
grown beyond its enzymatic capacity to cleave phospholipids.
PLA2 cleave membrane phospholipids to release arachidonic
acid, the precursor to a large family of pro-inflammatory
eicosanoids including prostaglandins and leukotrienes. Current
therapies include non-steriodal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs') that inhibit cyclooxygenases (COX-1, COX-2) but
have no effect on the production of leukotrienes or platelet
activating factor (PAF) [,
]. In addition, existing treatment
with non-steroidal drugs is the only choice for the treatment of
anti-inflammatory. However, the available treatments (such as
targeting tumour necrosis factor and TNF signaling) do not cure
the disease in the clinical settings, and ultimately leads to
adverse side effects []. A simple mechanism of action of
inhibitors on interleukin (IL) induced expression of sPLA2 and
matrix metalloproteinase proposed. Cytokines induced the
expression of sPLA2-IIA and MMP via activation of mitogenactivated
protein kinase (MAPK) etc. Natural inhibitor inhibits
p38 MAPK phosphorylation and slows down the activation of
transcription factor which control the transcription of sPLA2,
matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) such as MMP-1, MMP-2,
MMP-3 and MMP-9 and inflammatory cytokine like IL-1, IL-6
and TNF -alpha etc. The effects of inhibitors inhibit the sPLA2
action and decrease the formation of arachidonic acid for
prostaglandin production ().

Conclusions and future impacts
Snakebite envenomations and their severity remain is not clear
yet. However, this poorly neutralized by conventional
antivenom serotherapy. In severe cases, these local effects may
lead to permanent tissue loss, disability or amputation. A
renewed interest in the phenomenon of inter- and intra-species
resistance towards the toxicity of snake venoms, coupled with
the search for new strategies for treatment of snake
envenomations, has prompted the discovery of proteins which
neutralize the major toxic components of these venoms.
Naturally available inhibitors occupy an important place in the
potential to neutralize the toxic effects caused by snake venom
proteins. It has been well recognized for several years that
animal sera, some plant and marine extracts, antibiotics from
synthetic chemicals are the most potent in neutralizing snake
venoms. The implications of these new groups of PLA2 toxin
inhibitors in the context of our current understanding of snake
biology as well as in the development of novel therapeutic
reagents in the treatment of snake envenomations world-wide
are discussed. Furthermore, the biotechnological potential of
PLA2 inhibitors may provide therapeutic molecular models
with antiophidian activity to supplement the conventional
serum therapy against these multifunctional enzymes. In
addition to that the clinically importance of these natural
inhibitors may lead to the development of new novel
antivenoms therapeutics for the efficient treatment of the
envenomation.

The authors are grateful to the National University of Singapore
for the financial support (Grant No: R-181-000 078 122)
provided under the ARF.

Citation:Samy et al, Bioinformation 8(1): 048-057 (2012)

Structure of various bioactive molucules involved for
the inhibitory potential of phospholipase A2 (PLA2) enzymes in
vitro and also decrease both oedema induced by snake venom
as well as human synovial fluid PLA2.(A) Hydrocarbons like 2,
4 dimethyl hexane, 2 methylonane, 2,6 dimethyl heptane
obtained from traditional medicine plants Tragia involucrata
(Euphorbiaceae) member (Samy et al, J Ethnopharmacol.
2006,107(1):99-106), (B) Aristolochic alkaloid, (C) Flavonoids
and neoflavonoids from plants (D) Manolide and scalaradial
from marine sources (E) tetracylne (antibiotics)

Flow chart represents the simple mechanism of action
of inhibitors on interleukin (IL) induced expression of secretory
phospholipase A2 (sPLA2) and matrix metalloproteinase.
Cytokines induced the expression of sPLA2-IIA and MMP via
activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) etc.

