Background
Japanese encephalitis (JE) is one of the major causes of Acute
Encephalitis Syndrome in South and East Asian countries. The
disease is caused by the Japanese Encephalitis Virus (JEV) which
is a plus strand RNA virus belonging to Flaviviridae super
family []. The Flavivirus genus includes over 70 pathogenic
viruses such as Dengue virus (DENV), West Nile virus (WNV),
and Yellow fever virus (YFV) etc. JEV strains can be
distinguished into 5 distinct genotypes based on analysis of its
envelope (E) gene sequences. Of these 5 genotypes Genotype III
is most widely distributed in the Indian Subcontinent and
among South-East Asian countries [,
].

The JE strain selected in this study is the North Indian isolate
GP78 which belongs of Genotype III. The ~11kb viral genome of
JEV is translated into a single polyprotein which is cleaved into
3 structural and 7 non structural proteins by both host and viral
proteases [–]. 
The viral genome is organized into gene
sequence as NH2-C-prM-E-NS1-NS2A-NS2B-NS3-NS4A-NS4BNS5-
COOH. Capsid (C), Membrane (M) and Envelope (E) are
structural proteins whereas the non structural proteins are
designated as NS1, NS2A, NS2B, NS3, NS4A, NS4B and NS5 
[–]. 
The NS3 protease in complex with its cofactor NS2B cleaves
the polyprotein at intergenic junctions containing dibasic amino
acid motifs (Arg-Arg, Lys-Arg or Arg-Lys followed by Ser, Gly,
or Ala) []. Sequence alignment and similarity studies reveal
that the mechanism of polyprotein processing by NS2B/NS3
protease is conserved among Flaviviruses. A 40 residue central
hydrophilic domain in Dengue NS2B is essential for the
optimum activity of NS2B-NS3 complex. Furthermore, the
hydrophobicity profiles of other Flaviviruses including JEV
have significant sequence similarity with a central hydrophilic
domain surrounded by hydrophobic regions [].

Natural plant, animal and mineral products with therapeutic
properties have been used since time immemorial as drugs for
human treatment against various infectious diseases. About 252
drugs prescribed by WHO as basic and essential for humans;
11% are exclusively of plant origin and many synthetic drugs
have natural plant precursors []. The derivatives of 4-
hydroxypanduratin A used are natural plant secondary
metabolites of Boesenbergia pandurata (Roxb.) Schltr. (Syn.
Kaempferia pandurata Roxb.) (Fingerroot) which is a member of
the Zingiberaceae family (ginger). It has been widely used as a
medicinal plant, has been reported to possess pharmacological
activities such as anti-inflammatory [], anti-oxidative
properties [], neuroprotective, chemoprotective 
[],
antioxidant [] and antimicrobial activity. The 4-
hydroxypanduratin A () has shown promising
inhibitory activity against Dengue virus NS2B/NS3 protease
[–]. Flaviviral NS2B/NS3 protease activity is essential for
polyprotein processing and viral replication for Japanese
Encephalitis Virus (JEV), a major cause of Acute Encephaltis in
Asia. Inhibition of formation of this complex by arresting the
binding of NS2B with NS3 would reduce the enzyme's activity
to meager proportions and hence would prevent further viral
proliferation. In this paper 4-hydroxypanduratin A and its 220
derivatives were docked on the central domain of NS2B
consisting of about 40 hydrophilic residues was selected which
also forms Site 2 to identify potential lead inhibitor that would
prevent the binding of NS2B with NS3. Docking has been used
to predict the interactions between ligand and receptor. Since
the ligand can bind with the binding site on the receptor
molecule in several possible orientations the goal of docking is
to screen in favorable interactions against prohibitive ones 
[].

Methodology
Protein selection and structure prediction:
The 3D structure of NS2B protein/cofactor is not reported in
the RCSB protein databank. Therefore, the amino acid sequence
(128 residues) of NS2B GP78 (AAC27708) was retrieved from
GenBank. The sequence was subjected to similarity search using
BLASTp against PDB data base but no significant hit with
complete query coverage for template to build 3D model of
NS2B. However, the best alignment have been identified by
using LALIGN in EMBOSS (). Homology modeling was
used to generate a reliable 3D model of NS2B protein
(AAC27708) by MODELLER 9.10 []. A good quality model
was not obtained even by using multiple templates so the
model predicted by MODELLER was poor quality with
inappropriate folded conformation. Hence, NS2B structure was
predicted using I-TASSER integrated web platform which uses
a composite approach for protein modeling combining ab initio,
threading and comparative modeling []. In the first step, the
query sequence was threaded through a non redundant
sequence database to identify evolutionary relatives. A profile
of homologous sequences was created to predict the secondary
structure using PSIPRED []. The predicted secondary
structure templates were ranked through LOMETS a meta
threading server []. Templates were judged as per their Z
score and top hits were considered for further evaluation.

In the second step, protein structure was built by assembling
fragments from different templates while unaligned regions
predicted by ab initio modeling 
[–]. To assemble fragments
Replica exchange Monte Carlo simulations were performed at
different temperatures and low temperature structural
trajectories were selected and clustered by SPICKER 
[].

In the third step, the 3D model was refined again by performing
second round of simulations and the closest PDB structures
retrieved by TM-align []. The cluster centroids from the first
run provided external restraints to remove steric clashes to
further refine the model. Finally, the lowest energy structures
from each cluster were selected and all atom structural models
from Cα traces were built. Accuracy of predicted structure was
assessed by C-score [] and TM-score 
[]. NS2B 3D structure
predicted by I-TASSER was further verified using PROCHECK.

Ligand selection and preparation:
4-hydroxypanduratin A and its 220 derivatives were retrieved
from NCBI PubChem compound database
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pccompound/) and virtually
screened on the basis of Lipinski's rule of 5 
[–]. The ligands
were converted into PDB coordinate files using OpenBabel
software (www.openbabel.org/). Ligands were prepared by
adding hydrogen bonds and neutralization of charged groups.
The optimized lignads were subsequently docked against NS2B
using Autodock4.2 (http://autodock.scripps.edu/wiki/AutoDock4.2) 
[].

Molecular Docking:
Molecular Docking plays a critical role in computational drug
design. Docking predicts the preferred orientation of a ligand
with the binding site on a receptor. The strength of the
interaction between ligand and receptor is measured in terms of
experimentally defined inhibition constant Kd. The binding
energy of the receptor-ligand interaction can be measured by

Equation 1:
ΔGbind = ΔGcomplex- (ΔGligand-ΔGreceptor)

This relationship between ΔG and Kd is shown by Equation 2:
ΔGbind = −RT ln Keq = −RT ln Kd

The energy minimized NS2B pdb file was generated by use of
Swiss PDB viewer (www.SPDBV.vital-it.ch/). After energy
minimization Kollman charges, polar hydrogen atoms and
solvation parameters were added to NS2B structure. 3D grid
maps for calculating atomic energy potentials for each atom
type in the ligand molecule which surround the binding site on
the receptor molecule was generated [–]. AutoGrid program
available with AutoDock 4.2 was used to generate grid maps
for the ligands. The grid map was created in such a way that the
entire hydrophilic region of NS2B was covered. The box was set
to 90Å×78Å×42Å with grid points separated by 0.375Å.
Docking was performed in rigid state and Lamarckian genetic
algorithm was used to find the most preferred pose where the
ligand can bind to the receptor with lowest binding energy. The
results of docking studies were visualized using LIGPLOT
software (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/thornton-srv/software/LIGPLOT/)
and analyzed as per our previous study []. A complete drug
target identification using molecular modeling and docking
studies workflow is followed in this work and given in 
().

Analysis and confirmation of Docking Results:
The search for the best ways is to fit ligand (4-
hydroxypanduratin A), into NS2B structure, using Autodock4.2
resulted in docking files that contain details including records
of docking. The obtained log files were read in ADT (Auto Dock
Tool) and Python scripts in MGL tools package were used to
analyze the docking results []. The similarity of docked
structures was measured by computing the RMSD between the
coordinates of the atoms and creating clustering of the
conformations based on the RMSD values. The lowest binding
energy conformations in all clusters were considered as the
most favorable docking pose.

Results and Discussion
Structure prediction and validation:
All the information about a protein's biological function cannot
be ascertained by mere knowledge of its primary sequence or
the secondary structure. It is therefore, essential to know its
tertiary structure. Additionally, the 3D structure of NS2B
cofactor was not reported in RCSB PDB Data bank. BLASTp
similarity search was performed against PDB data base but no
significant results with complete query coverage were obtained.
Even use of multiple templates could not cover the target
protein completely to be modeled. However, the best
alignments have been identified by using LALIGN inEMBOSS
(). 3D model of NS2B protein (AAC27708) was
predicted by homology modeling using MODELLER 9.10 
[]
with multiple templates. The obtained 3D structure was poor
quality with inappropriate folded conformations. Therefore, the
automated 3D structure of NS2B cofactor from JEV GP78 was
predicted based on the sequence-to-structure-to-function
paradigm using I-TASSER () and the function of
NS2B protein was inferred by structurally matching the 3D
models with other known proteins []. The stereochemical
quality of NS2B cofactor structure was checked by PROCHECK
[]. Backbone conformation by evaluation of Psi/Phi angles in
Ramachandran plot predicts only two amino acids (Glu24 and
Ser68) in disallowed geometry. Ramachandran plot gives 86.5%
residues in most favored regions, 9% in additionally allowed
regions, 2.7% in generously allowed regions and only 1.8%
residues in disallowed regions. Thus, the predicted 3D structure
by I-TASSER was of good quality with proper folded
conformation.

Docking of 4-hydroxypanduratin A to NS2B:
The active conformation and the molecular alignment of each
derivative of 4-hydroxypanduratin A were done using docking
program Autodock4.2 into binding pockets of NS2B Site 2 (75-
87). Mutagenesis studies in West Nile Virus NS2B/NS3
protease revealed two regions in NS2B as essential for protease
activity. Both of them were found conserved in other
Flaviviruses including JEV. Site 1 (59-62) is a 4 residue long
region and contain conserved residues Ile60/Val60 and Trp62
while Site 2 (75-87) is about 13 residue long and binds very
close to the active site of NS3. This region is believed to be quite
flexible and could be targeted by potential inhibitors 
[]. The
molecular alignment is done according to the electrostatic and
structural properties of the active Site 2 of NS2B. The calculated
binding energies, based on the docked structures, agree well
with the experimentally observed inhibitory activities. Further,
the steric, electrostatic and hydrophobic fields were mapped
onto the active binding pocket of NS2B to better understand
these interactions. Prediction of interactions between small
molecules and proteins is a crucial step to decipher many
biological processes and plays a critical role in drug discovery.
The search algorithm tries to combine the ligand with the rigid
protein molecule in several possible orientations. Each such
orientation of the ligand within the active site region of the
protein molecule is called a pose. The most favorable pose will
have the lowest binding energy and therefore maximum
stability.

In NS2B protein/cofactor, Site 1 (59–62) contains conserved
residues Ile/Val60 and Trp62 which bind to adjacent pockets of
NS3. This could be targeted by small aromatic, drug like
compounds []. Additionally, the displacement of NS2B
cofactor from this region is likely to prevent correct folding of
the protease and hence lead to inactivation. However, Site 1
region of NS2B cofactor remains tightly associated in both
inhibitor-bound and substrate/inhibitor-free crystal structures
[–]. Therefore, it will be very difficult to develop
compounds with high affinity to displace the bound cofactor.
Hence, Site 2 in NS2B was targeted to find inhibitory effect of 4-
hydroxypanduratin A. In NS2B, Site 2 (75–87) forms a β-loop
that binds to a deep pocket in close proximity to active site
residues. The Site 2 of NS2B cofactor is more flexible and not
associated with the substrate-free protease [] and hence was
found highly accessible. Hence, 4-hydroxypanduratin A and
220 derivatives of 4-hydroxypanduratin A with highest fit value
were subsequently analyzed for binding pattern to Site 2 in
NS2B using Autodock methods. Among all ligand molecules 4-
hydroxypanduratin A was found to be having highest fit value
and was subsequently analyzed further. 4-hydroxypanduratin
A was found tightly associated with targeted hydrophilic
domain (44-84) and interacting with Site 2 in NS2B in the
vicinity of Gly80, Ala111, Ile112, Ala105, Asp79, Ala115, Cys101,
Tyr119, Leu104, Thr108 and Asp81. Ligplot and PyMol analysis
revealed that 4-hydroxypanduratin A formed two hydrogen
bonds with Gly80 and Asp81 ( &amp; ) and 10
hydrophobic contacts with Asp79, Asp81, Cys101, Leu104,
Ala105, Thr108, Ala111, Ile112, Ala115 and Tyr119 into NS2B
Site 2 ().

The free binding energy of NS2B/4-hydroxypanduratin A
complex was found highest (ΔG = −9.95Kcal/Mol) with LogP
value of 5.6 and inhibition constant (Ki) of 51.07nM 
 (see
supplementary material). Due to the close proximity of Site 2 to
the active site, where it forms part of the substrate-binding cleft,
it is likely that displacement of Site 2 region will interfere with
substrate binding []. The inhibitor 4-hydroxypanduratin A
bind to NS2B cofactor in Site 2 region with Gly80 and Asp81
and in the vicinity of many hydrophobic contacts 
( &amp; ). 
Hence, 4-hydroxypanduratin A targeted to Site 2 will have
sufficient profound effect to inhibit protease activity to abrogate
viral replication. It could be a promising potential drug
candidate for JEV infections using NS2B Site 2 as a Drug target.

Conclusion
The present study shows that the molecule 4-
hydroxypanduratin A was found to bind with the NS2B
cofactor of NS3 with least binding energy among the tested
compounds. The free binding energy of NS2B/4-
hydroxypanduratin A complex was found highest (ΔG =
−9.95Kcal/Mol) with inhibition constant (Ki) of 51.07nM 
(). 
Due to the close proximity of Site 2 to the active site, where it
forms part of the substrate binding cleft, it is likely that
displacement of Site 2 region will interfere with substrate
binding []. The inhibitor 4-hydroxypanduratin A bind to
NS2B cofactor in Site 2 region with Gly80 and Asp81 and in the
vicinity of many hydrophobic contacts 
( &amp; ).
Hence, 4-hydroxypanduratin A targeted to Site 2 will have
sufficient profound effect to inhibit protease activity to abrogate
viral replication. It could be a promising potential drug
candidate for JEV infections using NS2B Site 2 as a Drug target.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors are grateful to the department of Biotechnology MITS
Gwalior for providing computational facility and all the
bioinformatics software developers who have developed such
wonderful analysis tools.

Citation:Seniya et al, Bioinformation 9(1): 054-060 (2013)

A) Schematic representation of α helices, β sheets and loops in predicted 3D model of NS2B by ab initio, threading and
comparative modeling generated by UCSF Chimaera 1.6, B) Chemical structure of 4-hydroxypanduratin A [CID: 636530].

Pair-Wise Sequence Alignment using LALIGN in
EMBOSS

A workflow for complete drug target identification

A) A schematic Ligplot of NS2B/4-hydroxypanduratin a complex, B) Binding pocket of NS2B with ligand (light green)
bound with Asp81 (cyan) Image generated by Pymol and C) Hydrogen bond between ligand (white) and Aspartate 81 residue
(yellow) Image generated by Pymol.

