Background
Identification of orthologous genes and gene families is a key
task in molecular biology and comparative genomics. Accurate
ortholog identification enables the transfer of functional gene
information from one species to another and is an important
step in the annotation of newly sequenced genomes. There are a
multitude of tools to perform this genome-wide annotation
such as InParanoid [] and OrthoMCL 
[], however from the
perspective of the biologist, there is a distinct lack of tools for
the fast, targeted identification of specific gene families of
interest from newly sequenced transcriptome databases or
expressed sequence tag collections.

Methodology
The reciprocal blast method is widely used as a tool for the
identification of orthologous sequences []. The OrthoRBH
method, schematically illustrated in () begins with a set
of protein sequences from a gene family of interest used as
tblastn queries to search a transcript database. Tblastn forward
blast is used because protein homology is likely to be greater
than the DNA homology, and tblastn also allows for the mining
of expressed sequence tags instead of curated protein
sequences. Forward blast hits with an e-value better than the
threshold are classified as “candidate” orthologs and are return
blasted (either blastn or tblastx). If the candidate's return-blast
best match is any of the original forward blast queries with an
e-value satisfying the threshold, then the sequence is confirmed.
The nucleotide transcript sequences corresponding to the
original queries and the newly confirmed orthologs are
deposited to a fasta file for ClustalW alignment [] which can be
used in downstream phylogenetic and molecular evolutionary
analysis. If the database to be queried consists of expressed
sequence tags and/or next generation sequencing reads,
OrthoRBH can identify homologous sequence reads and
assemble them into contigs using CAP3 []. The assembled
contigs are then deposited into a fasta file alongside the
transcript sequences corresponding to the original queries.

Software Requirements
OrthoRBH functions on the Linux command line and has been
developed and tested on the Ubuntu operating system version
12.04. OrthoRBH is dependant on Perl and NCBI BLAST
2.2.25+. Clustal W and CAP3 are optional tools required for
multiple sequence alignment and contig assembly steps
respectively.

Input options
OrthoRBH requires a configuration file which specifies the path
to the query peptide sequences (species A), the target
transcriptome sequence or expressed sequence tag library
(species B) and the background transcriptome sequence (species
A). The config file further enables selection of either tblastx
(sensitive and slow) or blastn (insensitive and fast) algorithm
for the return blast search, as well as fine-tuning of the e-value
threshold for forward and reverse searches. Options to
OrthoRBH allow the user to skip the construction of blast index
if this has previously been generated; and enable/disable the
contig assembly function depending on the type of target
transcript sequence database used. There is further detail on the
configuration file and other options in the accompanying
documentation.

Output options
OrthoRBH creates a results directory named as specified in the
the config file. The forward blast and return blast results are
stored in tabular form. The candidate hits are stored in fasta
format. The confirmed ortholog sequences (if any) are
organised/clustered and renamed based upon their top return
blast match. The confirmed ortholog sequences, either full
length cDNA or assembled contigs are collated together with
the nucleotide sequences corresponding to the original query
sequences in a fasta file to facilitate downstream phylogenetic
applications.

Case study with a plant gene family
To demonstrate the efficacy of OrthoRBH, we undertook a
search for PYR/PYL/RCAR genes (simply termed PYR in this
work) in the newly-released Hordeum vulgare transcriptome
database [] 
using the 10 member PYR family of Oryza sativa 
[]
as queries (). When using the more sensitive tblastx
return search, 13 H. vulgare PYR genes were detected, while 5 of
these were not identified when using the less sensitive blastn
return search. This demonstrates that tblastx remains the most
suitable return search algorithm unless the two species
involved are recently diverged. In this instance, OrthoRBH
using tblastx took 66 s, while the blastn run took 17 s on a fourcore
personal computer.

Caveats and future development
OrthoRBH is not recommended in situations where sequence
homology is very low, for instance, identifying homologous
sequences between plants and animals. OrthoRBH is not suited
for the discovery of non-protein-coding genes. The accuracy of
return blast classification is limited by the length of sequences
in the target sequence database. Thus, contig assembly of
transcript reads less than 50 bp is not recommended, especially
for species pairs with are rich in in-paralogs. Future
development of OrthoRBH will be focused upon improving the
speed of mining homolog transcripts from large next generation
sequencing data sets.

Conclusion
As the number of fully sequenced genomes grows rapidly,
OrthoRBH software will satisfy a need for an automated
pipeline to rapidly mine gene families of interest. The software
is designed for use by biologists and non-expert
bioinformaticians.

Citation:Ziemann et al, Bioinformation 9(5): 267-269 (2013)

OrthoRBH pipeline schematic diagram. Candidate
forward tblastn hits belonging to “species B” are return blasted
on the “species A” transcriptome reference sequence. If the
return blast best hit is one of the original query sequence, then it
is a confirmed homolog and undergoes annotation based upon
the name of the best return blast match. If the species B
sequence database is comprised of individual expressed
sequence tags, these can be assembled into contigs. Newly
confirmed orthologs undergo multiple sequence alignment
alongside query sequences.

Phylogenetic Neighbour joining tree of PYR genes
from O. sativa (labeled “LOC_Os”) and newly identified
homologs in H. vulgare (labeled “Hv”). Gene tree was
generated using inferred peptide sequences submitted to
ClustalW. Entries marked with an asterisk are those identified
by tblastx return search but not with the less sensitive blastn
return search.

