Background
Bovine mastitis is frequently occurring disease affecting dairy
cattle with large economic losses in dairy industries. Though
bacteria are the main causative agents of bovine mastitis, still
there are 20 – 35% cases of bovine mastitis which are
bacteriologically negative for the milk samples [,
] perhaps
there may be pathogens other than bacteria causing disease,
reports suggests that bovine herpes virus 4 is isolated from the
milk of cows with mastitis []. Bovine herpes virus 4 is also
isolated from the milk of staphylococcus mastitis. Reports
suggests that there is a positive association between the bovine
herpes virus 4 seropositivity of cows and the incidence of
bovine mastitis caused by S. aureus [] and S.aureus is found to
be the main causative agent of bovine mastitis [].

Bovine herpes virus 4 is a member of the family herpesviridae,
subfamily gamma herpesvirinae belonging to the order
herpesvirales and genes rhadinovirus. BHV 4 has an enveloped
icosahedral nucleocapsid, with a diameter of 100 nm, while the
overall diameter of the virus particle is approximately 150 nm.
The present study was also extended for the analysis of the
genome of BHV1 and BHV5 which belongs to order
herpesvirales family herpesviridae, subfamily
alphaherpesvirinae, genus varicellovirus. BHV1 and BHV5 are
held responsible for causing the most important emerging
diseases of dairy cattle in many countries of the world. The
disease caused by BHV in dairy cattle is characterized by the
signs of respiratory disorder, general illness, abortion and
reduced quality and quantity of milk yield. Virus has a wide
host range which is known to infect different ruminant species
like cattle, sheep and goats [,
]. BHV needs dividing cells for
effective virus replication as there is increase in viral DNA
replication and protein expression at the S phase of the cell
cycle.

The regulation of gene expression can be controlled at
transcription level by a promoter region that contains a specific
DNA sequence from which transcription begins and proceeds
through the coding sequences and ends at the terminator site.
The sequence of the promoters affects the transcription
initiation event and also influences the rate at which RNA
polymerase clears the promoter region to begin elongation in a
typical transcription process. Therefore, identification of
promoter sequences in a whole genome is crucial for regulation
of gene expression in BHV. However, a limited number of data
is available on the BHV. Hence, the present study was carried
out through a computational method for the identification and
analysis of putative promoter motifs in BHV.

Methodology
Retrieval of genome sequence:
The complete genome sequences of BHV were retrived from
biological database such as National centre for Biotechnology
Information (NCBI) cited at
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/viruses.html.

Analysis of BHV genomes:
The size of the genome of bovine herpes virus (BHV) was
analysed in the FASTA format the G+C % was compared and
total number of genes were also noted.

Transcription promoter site:
The putative promoter in the genome of BHV was identified by
using the promoter scan programme at 
http://wwwbimas.cit.nih.gov/molbio/proscan/. The complete genome
BHV1, BHV4 and BHV5 was used for the analysis of promoters
in all three genomes. The program comprises three databases
such as TF databases, promoter databases and non promoter set
constructed from protein and RNA gene sequences. In this
study we have provided a brief description of putative
promoters of Bovine herpes virus. However, there are
numerous methodologies available in the public domain for the
analysis of promoters but still further validation is needed for a
researcher before picking up the problem for investigation in
the molecular biology laboratory.

Results and Discussion
In the present study complete genome sequence of BHV 4,
BHV1 and BHV5 was retrieved from the accession on
NC_002665.1, NC_001847.1 and NC_005261.2 and the size of
genome was found to be 108.87 kb, 135.3kb and 137.87 kb
respectively the highest GC % was found in 74.8% in BHV 5
followed by BHV1 72.4% and BHV4 41.4% the highest number
of genes were found in BHV 4 79 followed by BHV1 and BHV5
70 genes each. Similarly reports suggest that the genome size of
Kamati River and Tick borne encephalitis virus was 11 kb,
Tamana bat virus was 10,053 bases and GC% of Tamana bat
virus and Louping ill virus was 38.43 and 54.85 respectively 
[].
DNA with high GC-content is more stable than DNA with low
GC-content. GC base pairs are more stable than AU base pairs,
due to the fact that GC bonds have 3 hydrogen bonds and AU
only has 2 hydrogen bonds, which makes high-GC-content
RNA structures more tolerant to high temperatures. More
recently, the first large-scale systematic gene-centric association
analysis demonstrated the correlation between GC content and
temperature for certain genomic regions while not for others
[]. Further, the identification of putative promoter in the
genome of BHV1, BHV4 and BHV5 was also carried out. A total
of 147 types of promoters and their sequences were identified in
the genomes (,  and 
) most of the promoters found in all
3 genomes are similar and it is confirmed with the existing data.

A very limited data is available on the identification and
charecterization of promoter in the virus genome. Transcription
factor IID (TFIID) is one of the general transcription factors that
make up the RNA polymerase II preinitiation complex 
[]
TFIID binds to TATA box in the core promoter of the gene. It
regulates the activities of more than 70 polypeptides required
for the initiation of transcription by RNA polymerase II and
also acts as channel for regulatory signals. SRF is a serum
response element – binding transcription factor 
[] that
regulates the activity of many immediate early genes viz C-fos
and thereby participates in cell cycle regulation, apoptosis, cell
growth and cell differentiation. SV40 is a double stranded DNA
virus which causes tumors at multiple sites to wide range of
vertebrates. T- Ag is a protein of proto- oncogene present in the
SV 40 and is involved in viral genome replication and
regulation of host cell cycle [].

AP1 (activating protein1) is a collective term referring to
determine transcription factor composed of Jun, Fos or ATF
subunit that bind to a common DNA site. Different AP1 factors
may regulate different target genes and thus execute distinct
biological functions []. NF1 gene promoter harbours a
hypomethylated CpG island. Hence, methylation changes may
be involved in the development of different types of
neurofibromas and malignant transformation [].

The human neurotropic papovirus JCV contains sequences
within the two 98 –bp tandum repeat which play a key role in
glial – specific transcription of the early and late stage of viral
promoter sites []. TCR V beta promoter contains a highly
conserved decamer homologous to cAMP response element
(CRE). It has been shown that TCR beta – chain expression
immediately activated cAMP. Such induction is likely to be
mediated through V beta-CRE sequence because the inclusion
of V- beta – CRE in a vector with minimum promoter (PB1
CAT2) conferred the cAMP inducibility of CAT activity 
[].

The promoter of the early growth response gene (Egr-1) has
been described to be activated by ionizing radiation it has been
reported that a novel regulatory element in the human Egr-1
promoter is similar to a NF kappa-B binding site 
[]. HNF-1
beta forms a homodimer or a hetrodimer with HNF1 alpha and
regulates various target genes. HNF1 beta mutations are rare
and no functional analysis has been performed in conjuction
with HNF1 alpha. HNF1 beta controls liver specific and bile
acid related genes as it is expressed in the liver and biliary
system [].

Conclusion
In the present study attempts were made to find the promoter
sites and regulation of genes and their function in the genomes
with the available data by computational methods. A total of
147 promoters were identified from three bovine herpes virus
genome out of which 39 promoters were from bovine herpes
virus 4 (BHV 4), 95 from BHV1 and 13 from BHV5. The results
of the present study may help in designing of the live
attenuated vaccine by site directed mutagenesis in the promoter
region which could be a permanent solution for the problem
bovine mastitis due to Bovine herpes virus. This present study
of promoters might also help in designing of expression vectors
which helps in better understanding of regulation of gene
expression. In the era of large genomics and proteomics
prediction of promoters in the whole genome is crucial for drug
discovery and gene therapy.

The authors are grateful to Department of biotechnology,
Ministry of Science and Technology, Government of India, New
Delhi, for funding the Bioinformatics Infrastructure Facility
Project, Interdisciplinary Program for Life Science Project and P.
G Departments of Microbiology and Biotechnology Karnatak
University, Dharwad for providing the facilities.

Citation:Kurjogi et al, Bioinformation 8(23): 1167-1170 (2012)

The promoters of Bovine Herpes virus 4.

The promoters of Bovine Herpes virus 1.

The promoters of Bovine Herpes virus 5. The red
line indicates the positive strand; The green line indicates
the negative strand; The yellow box indicates the
promoter sequence and the number below the box indicates the
specific location of the promoter. The letters above the box
indicates the promoter designation.

