Background
Merkel Cell Carcinoma (MCC) is a rare, aggressive cancer in
which malignant cancer cells develop in hair follicles, or on or
beneath the skin. Merkel cells are found in the top layer of the
skin. These cells are very close to the nerve endings that receive
the sensation of touch. Merkel cell carcinoma, also called
neuroendocrine carcinoma of the skin or trabecular cancer, is a
very rare type of skin cancer that forms when Merkel cells grow
out of control. Merkel cell carcinoma starts most often in areas
of skin exposed to the sun, especially the head and neck, as well
as the arms, legs, and trunk. A newly discovered virus
called Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCV) likely contributes to the
development of the majority of MCC []. Approximately 80% of
MCC have this virus integrated in a monoclonal pattern [,
],
indicating that the infection was present in a precursor cell
before it became cancerous. MCV is the first polyomavirus
strongly suspected to cause tumors in humans. Like other
tumor viruses, most people who are infected with MCV
probably do not develop MCC. It is currently unknown what
other steps or co-factors are required for MCC-type cancers to
develop []. MCC also occurs more frequently than would
otherwise be expected among immuno suppressed patients,
such astrans plant patients, AIDS patients, and the elderly
persons, suggesting that the initiation and progression of the
disease is modulated by the immune system []. Although rare,
the incidence of MCC has tripled over the past 15 years to
approximately 1500 new MCC cases in the U.S. each year. MCC
is primarily seen in the elderly Caucasian population 65 years
of age and above, and shows a slight predominance in males.
Merkel cell carcinoma tends to grow quickly and to metastasize
(spread) at an early stage. It usually spreads first to nearby
lymph nodes and then may spread to lymph nodes or skin in
distant parts of the body, lungs, brain, bones, or other organs.
At present time there is no clinical treatment of Merkel cell
carcinoma. Hence, there is an urgent need for novel
therapeutics for the disease.

MCV is the fifth polyomavirus that infects humans to be
discovered. It belongs to the murine polyomavirus group, one
of the three mainclades of polyomaviruses []. MCV is
genetically most closely related to the African green monkey
lymphotropic polyomavirus []. The prototype sequence of
MCV has a 5387 base pair genome, and encodes
characteristic polyomavirus genes including a large T antigen,
small T antigen, VP1 and VP2/3 genes []. MCV T antigen has
similar features to the T antigens of other polyomaviruses,
which are known oncoproteins, and is expressed in human
tumors []. The MCV T antigen locus encodes for four
differentially spliced mRNA transcripts corresponding to
polyomavirus large T antigen (LT), and small T antigen (ST,
encoded by two transcripts) as well as an additional isoform
57kT, which may represent an analogue to the SV40 17kT
transcript []. Both large T and small T oncoproteins are needed
to transform healthy cells into cancer cells, and they act by
targeting tumor suppressor proteins, such asretinoblastoma
protein []. The large T antigen possesses a helicase motif
needed for virus replication that is deleted in MCC tumors.
Unlike for other polyomaviruses, MCV small T antigen
transforms cells in vitro [] by activatingcap-dependent
translation.

RNA interference (RNAi), an evolutionary conserved gene
silencing mechanism, uses short double-stranded RNA
(dsRNA) “trigger” is processed into siRNA and assembled with
other components to degradation or translation repression of
homologous RNA targets in a sequence-specific manner. This
has been used as alternative antiviral therapy []. H Roland et al
subsequently showed that the T antigen mRNA can be
successfully targeted by siRNAs in cell culture []. Thus, T
antigen protein coding mRNA of MCV is obligatory target to
inhibit the RNA processing and may be suitable for antiviral
therapy. Therefore, in the current study an attempt has been
made to identify potential siRNA molecules for silencing of T
antigen coding mRNA or gene in MCV using computational
approach.

Methodology
Data collection and analysis:
Thirty seven complete cds of large T antigen and small T
antigen gene sequences of MCV were retrieved from viral
GenBank database, available at
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/. The viral database contains all
experimentally identified widespread genome isolates of MCV
which were further used for siRNA designing.

Target identification and rational siRNA molecule designing:
siDirect 2.0 [] (http://siDirect2.RNAi.jp/) tool, was used for
target identification and designing of potential siRNA
molecules. It utilized mixed rule approach of Ui-Tei,
Amarzguioui and Reynolds rules [] and melting temperature
(Tm) below 21.5°C for siRNA duplex, as parameter. For further
verification of predicted molecules GeneScript siRNA Target
Finder (http://www.genescript.com/index.html), dharma siRNA
technology (http://www.dharmacon.com/designcenter/) and
siRNA at whitehead (http://sirna.wi.mit.edu/home.php) tool
was also applied. Besides these other parameters were taken on
the concept of algorithms given in  (see supplementary
material).

Similarity search:
Blast tool (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast) 
[] was used
to identify any off target sequence similarity in other non
targeted organism's genome against whole Genebank datasets
by applying expected threshold value 10 and BLOSUM 62
matrix as parameter. The target sites having similarity of more
than 16 adjoining base pair with any other organism were
excluded from the consideration.

GC calculation and siRNA secondary structure prediction:
GC calculator tool www.genomicsplace.com/gc_calc.html was
used to calculate the GC content for selected siRNA molecule
while secondary structure and free energy of folding was
computed through Mfold server
http://mfold.rna.albany.edu/?q=mfold/download-mfold.

Thermodynamics calculation of RNA-RNA interaction:
RNAup program (www.tbi.univie.ac.at/~ulim/RNAup) at
Vienna web suit [] was used to study the thermodynamics of
interactions between target gene and predicted siRNA
molecules. It works on extension of the standard partition
function approach to RNA secondary structures that compute
energetic of RNA-RNA interactions [].

Result and Discussion
Thirty five complete cds of large T antigen and small T antigen
gene sequences of MCV are available in NCBI Genebank
database which used in current study. siDirect 2.0 tool was used
in current study to provide functional, target-specific siRNA
molecules, which significantly reduces off-target silencing. To
avoid offtarget effect, Tm for the seed-target duplex was
calculated using the nearest neighbor model and the
thermodynamic parameters for the formation of RNA duplex
were also studied []. The formula for calculating Tm is:

Tm = {(1000 × ΔH) / (A + ΔS + R ln (CT/4))} - 273.15 + 16.6 log
[Na+] (Equation 1)

Where ΔH (kcal/ mol) is the sum of the nearest neighbor
enthalpy change, A is the helix initiation constant (-10.8), ΔS are
the sum of the nearest neighbor entropy change []. R is the
gas constant (1.987 cal/deg/mol), and CT is the total molecular
concentration of the strand (100 µM). [Na+] was fixed at 100
mM. Apart from it, to check the accuracy of result Gene script
target Finder was also applied and usage statistical modeling
method.

In present study six hundred seventy one siRNA targets were
identified for T antigen of MCV and potential siRNA molecules
against these targets were obtained using mixed rule approach
i.e. Ui-Tei, Amarzguioui and Reynolds rule. Out of six hundred
seventy one predicted siRNA targets, three hundred thirty one
were following all three rules. Hence, these three hundred
thirty one siRNA targets were filtered out for further study and
considered possible candidates. Consequently these three
hundred thirty one targets were subjected to NCBI Blast tool.
Out of these three hundred thirty one targets only 135 were
selected on the basis of low off target similarity 
 (see
supplementary material). MSA of these selected 135 siRNA
targets were depicted that these sequences divided in to four
different groups which is shown in ().

However, there are the incompatible results regarding the effect
of GC content and secondary structure on siRNA efficiency.
Therefore, these parameters cannot be preferred as a primary
determinant of siRNA efficiency. Still, it is recommended to
choose sequences with low GC content (31- 58%) 
[–], in the
present study all predicted siRNA molecules having
recommended range of GC content. Furthermore, the possible
folding of predicted siRNA molecules for MCV was done with
the online MFold package. Mfold follows most widely used
algorithms for RNA secondary structure prediction, which are
based on a search for the minimal free energy state 
[]. Here,
one siRNA molecule is having more than zero free energy of
folding at 37°C  (see supplementary material). Earlier
studies have recommended that an RNA molecule should have
minimum free energy of folding for their stability. Therefore,
the molecule with positive energy may be more accessible for
target site and have high potential to bind with target and lead
to in effective gene silencing. While other molecule is also
having less than -1 kcal frees energy of folding.

Apart from this, a variety of biologically important RNAs were
used for prediction of their function by interacting with other
RNA molecules. Thus, thermodynamics study of RNA-RNA
interactions may be an important aspect for siRNA molecule
efficiency. The predicted siRNA molecules were subjected to
RNA-RNA interaction study with their respective targets. The
Vienna web site is a comprehensive collection of tool that offers
state of the art algorithms for RNA folding, comparison and
prediction of RNA–RNA interactions. RNAup one of the
important tools of Vienna web site was used to predict free
energy of RNA-RNA interactions. It models the binding energy
for the interaction at a particular site as

(BE) ΔGbinding = ΔGuA + ΔGuB + ΔGh (Equation 2)

Where ΔGuAB (ΔGuA + ΔGuB) is the free energy required to
make the binding region in molecule A (target) or B (siRNA)
accessible by removing intra-molecular structure. While ΔGh
denotes the free energy gained from forming the intermolecular
duplex by the partition function over all structures where the
short RNA binds to target region. Calculation of the free energy
of interaction (binding) between a siRNA molecule and its
target was performed by using (equation 2)  (see
supplementary material).

RNAi approach is successfully exploited in various cases such
as hepatitis B infection [] silencing of endonuclease
Argonaute 2 in Drosophila melanogaster []. RNAi utilized in
HIV-1 infection in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells
via best env-specific siRNAs, E7145 targeted to the central
region of the V3 loop and E7490 targeted to the CD4 binding
site of conserved regions on gp120, significantly inhibited the
HIV-1 gene expression. Furthermore, E7145 and E7490 were
effective against HIV-1NL4-3 replication in PBMCs for a
relatively long time (14 days) []. In experimental brain cancer
pegylated immunoliposomes (PIL) carrying short hairpin RNA
expression plasmids driven by the U6 RNA polymerase
promoter and directed to target EGFR expression by RNAi. The
PIL is comprised of a mixture of known lipids containing
polyethyleneglycol (PEG), which stabilizes the PIL structure
invivo in circulation. The tissue target specificity of PILs is given
by conjugation of ~1% of the PEG residues to monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs) that bind to specific endogenous receptors
(i.e., insulin and transferrin receptors) located in the brain
vascular endothelium []. This approach was found to be
successful in targeting bovine priongene PRNP in livestock 
[],
carcinoma of the breast [] and crown gall tumorigenesis in
plants []. This technique was also used for silencing of capsid
genes of Flavivirus using computational methods [].
However, siRNA is the most influential means to control over
gene expression in various organisms and showing antiviral
activity too. Therefore, rational siRNA has provided the
advancement in the development of experiment based
approaches to prevent the MCV infections via gene silencing
mechanism.

Conclusion
Using RNAi technology a number of siRNA molecules may be
designed for silencing of significant genes in various biological
systems. Further their interactions with target can also be
calculated, computationally. Therefore, in this study four
siRNA molecules were predicted against T antigen protein as
effective candidate using computational approaches. These
molecules may lead to a novel antiviral therapy against MCV.
Study outcome would also provide a basis to the researchers
and pharma industry persons to develop the antiviral
therapeutics at genomic level, experimentally.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Hoque et al, Bioinformation 8(19): 924-930 (2012)

Multiple sequence alignment of predicted siRNA target sequences. A) Consensus Target-1; B) Consensus Target-2; C)
Consensus Target-3; D) Consensus Target-4

