Background
HIV Integrase (IN) is an enzyme that enables its genetic
material to be integrated into the DNA of the infected cell. HIV
integrase (IN) is an essential enzyme in HIV replication and an
important target for drug design [,
,
]. HIV-1 IN is
comprised of three domains: the catalytic core, the C-terminal
domain, and the N-terminal domain. These designations are
based on the susceptibility of the linker regions to proteolysis,
functional studies, and the structures of the domains, which
have been individually determined by x-ray crystallography
and NMR []. The N-terminal domain of HIV-1 IN contains a
conserved pair of His and Cys residues, a motif similar to the
zinc-coordinating residues of zinc fingers [,
]. The C-terminal
domain binds DNA non-specifically. Because the sites of
integration into target DNA are relatively nonspecific, it has
been suggested that this domain may interact with target DNA.
[,
]. The catalytic core domain contains the invariant triad of
acidic residues, the D, D-35-E motif, residues Asp64, Asp116,
and Glu152 [].

The Elvitegravir (EVG) is an ARV (antiretroviral) drug, which
inhibit the viral replication by preventing integration of viral
DNA into the host cell []. The drug was approved by U.S.
Food and Drug Administration on August 27, 2012 for people
starting HIV treatment for the first time as part of the fixed
dose combination known as Stribild []. In this current work,
an endeavour was made for identification of EVG-like
compound in chemical libraries using virtual screening
approach. The docking results suggested good binding 
interaction of five candidate compounds against IN receptor.

Methodology
The methodologies applied in this investigation are as follows
and shown in ().

Target selection:
The three dimensional Crystal structure of target HIV-1 IN
(PDB ID: 3L3U) was retrieved from Protein Data Bank
(http://www.pdb.org/) 
[].

Analogue Design for Elvitegravir:
An analogue is a drug whose structure is related to that of
another drug, but whose chemical and biological properties
may differ. In drug development, large series of structural
analogs of an initial lead compound are created and tested as
part of a structure-activity relationship study. Using EVG as a
reference, analogues were designed. The structures were design
by changing the functional groups keeping the backbone of the
EVG fixed. The functional groups used to design analogues are
F, Cl, NH2, OH etc. The ChemBio Office was used to drawn the
different analogue of EVG.

Compound Retrieval and Similarity Search:
The screening was performed against different chemical
databases. These databases are ZINC (zinc.docking.org/),
ChemSpider (www.chemspider.com/), PubChem
(www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pccompound) and ChemBank
(chembank.broadinstitute.org/). The EVG -like compounds
were retrieved from these chemical databases based on
fingerprint, substructure, Physical properties, etc. Most of the
compounds were found in the ZINC database. ZINC is a free
database of chemical compounds that contains 13 million
compounds [,
]. MolSoft ICM-Browser was used to
perform Chemical Similarity Search.

Physiochemical Property Calculations:
Chemical behaviour of molecules through chemical structures
is an integral part of drug discovery process. In vivo
pharmacokinetics parameters, such as absorption, distribution,
metabolism and excretion are strongly influenced by the
physiochemical properties of drug. Based on Lipinski׳s rules
[], physiochemical properties were calculated for each of the
screened molecule and Analogues. We selected only those
molecules whose properties do not violate the Lipinski rule of
five for subsequent steps. The remainer of the molecules that
violated the Lipinski׳s rules was discarded from screening.

Bioactivity and Toxicity Prediction:
Bioactivity of molecules describes compounds that have a
specific effect on system- inhibiting, activating, or otherwise
modulating a cellular process. In drug discovery processes, one
cannot designate a molecule as a drug only by predicting its
activity. It is important to predict or examine the toxicity of the
molecules as well. If a molecule is biochemically active, but
contains some toxic effects, then one cannot accept the molecule
as a drug. One can designate a molecule as a drug if it is
biochemically active and as well as non-toxic. Therefore, during
the drug discovery process, prediction of activity and toxicity of
molecules is very important. Using the PASS software, we
predicted all those molecules that passed Lipinski Filtration.
PASS (Prediction of Activity Spectra of Substances) predicts
drug-likeness as well as toxicity of molecules []. This study
selected only those molecules that have the drug-likeness
property of 50% or above. During our search process, out of 211
molecules, 48 molecules showed toxicity. The molecules that
showed toxicity (teratogen, carcinogenic and embryo-toxic)
were rejected from the screening process.

Energy minimization:
The Energy minimization of molecules was carried out using
software ChemBio 3D Ultra. The potential energy calculated by
summing the energies of various interactions is a numerical
value for a single conformation. This number can be used to
evaluate a particular conformation, but it may not be a useful
measure of a conformation because it can be dominated by a
few lower grade interactions. For instance, a large molecule
with an optimum conformation for nearly all atoms can have a
large overall energy because of a single bad interaction. For
example, two atoms too near each other in space that has a
huge Van der Waals repulsion energy. It is often preferable to
carry out energy minimization on a conformation to find the
best nearby conformation. Energy minimization is usually
performed by gradient optimization: atoms are moved to
reduce the net forces among them. The energies of selected
ligands were predicted in ChemBio Office Ultra using MM2
module before performing docking.

Active Site Prediction and Cavity Detection:
The region of a protein that interacts with a ligand is generally
referred to as the “active site.” The active site generally lies on
the surface of the protein. In some cases, the active site is buried
within the protein. Residues with reactive groups (Asp, Glu,
Ser, Cys, His, Lys, Arg) tend to be abundant in protein active
sites. The Ser-His-Asp (sometimes Ser-His-Glu) “catalytic triad”
is a motif commonly found in enzyme active sites. We used
Molegro Virtual Docker for protein active site prediction and
cavity detection. Cavity detection is often the first step for
functional analysis, since binding sites in proteins usually lie in
cavities. The predicted cavities are shown in (see
supplementary material).

Docking Studies and Interpretation:
During docking, at first, the molecules were prepared and
bonds, bond orders, explicit hydrogen, flexible torsion were
assigned if they were missing by the Molegro Virtual Docker
program to both the protein and ligands. The analysis of side
chain flexibility affords insights valuable to improve docking
algorithms and can provide an index of amino-acid side-chain
flexibility, potentially useful in molecular docking 
[]. The
search algorithm is taken as Moldock SE and numbers of runs
are taken and maximum interactions were 1000. The population
size was set at 50 with energy threshold of 100. The potential
binding site were predicted and docking performed with
cavity-1 having the having a volume of 79.36 A3 cube and a
surface area of 259.84 A2 square. The screen compounds shown
in () along with EVG were imported to Molegro Virtual
Docker workspace. The bonds flexibility of the ligands was set
and the side chain flexibility of the amino acids in the binding
cavity was set with a tolerance of 1.10 and strength of 0.90 for
docking simulations. RMSD threshold for multiple cluster
poses was set at &lt;2.00 Å. The docking algorithm was set at a
maximum iteration of 1500 with a simplex evolution size of 50
and a minimum of 20 runs [–
].

ADME Prediction:
The ADME properties were predicted using PreADMET
(preadmet.bmdrc.org) server to know whether the compounds
have the potential of adverse effect in human.

Results &amp; Discussion
The virtual screening of chemical libraries for HIV integrase
inhibitor resulted in four compounds: ZINC26507991,
ZINC01585513, ZINC01459700, and ZINC20731658 
 (see
supplementary material). These compounds were reported
from ZINC compounds and showed significant resemblance
with the reference drug EVG with better ranking scores. The
Docking of these compounds including one analogue of EVG
have shown good rerank and Moldock scores. The
ZINC26507991 shows highest rerank score of -84.22 whereas
EVG has shown -22.93. The other compounds as in 

shows moderately good ranking with respect to EVG. In second
and third cavity, the EVG not showing any significant
interaction, on the other hand ZINC26507991, ZINC01585513
predicted better score and suitable interaction with receptor.
The ADME prediction results of these five candidate
compounds possess all the minimum characteristics of a drug.
The predicted scores were shown in Table 3. The results of
Docking and ADME reflected the novelty of these candidate
compounds as IN inhibitors. The in vitro and in vivo
experiments may be recommended with these molecules as
future candidate drug of AIDS.

Conclusion
The virtual screening and analogue design of EVG revealed five
compounds with more potent activity than EVG:
ZINC26507991, ZINC01585513, ZINC01459700, ZINC20731658
and Analogue-9. The ADME prediction also showed very
encouraging results. Hence, these compounds may be tested in
vitro as future IN inhibitors.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors thankfully acknowledge the Department of
Biotechnology, Govt. of India for providing the Bioinformatics
Infrastructure Facility to CSIR-NEIST, Jorhat under the project
“Creation of BIF for the promotion of biology teaching through
bioinformatics, 2008” and Director, CSIR-NEIST for constant
support and encouragement throughout the study.

Citation:Regon et al, Bioinformation 10(2): 076-080 (2014)

The flow chart showing different step of the methodology in Investigation

