Background:
Cytochrome P450s (CYPs) are important heme-containing
proteins, well-known for their monooxgenase reaction. They are
involved in the metabolism of xenobiotics and endogenous
compounds, such as steroids and fatty acids. Human CYPs are
primarily membrane-associated proteins located either in the
inner membrane of mitochondria or in the endoplasmic
reticulum of cells. Some CYPs metabolize only one (or a very
few) substrate, while others may metabolize multiple
substrates. Cytochrome P450 enzymes are present in most
tissues of the human body, and play an important role in
hormone synthesis and breakdown, cholesterol synthesis, and
vitamin D metabolism. Cytochrome P450 enzymes also function
to metabolize potentially toxic compounds, including drugs
and products of endogenous metabolism []. In human there
are fifty-seven functional cytochrome P450 isoenzymes with
well-established role in the metabolism of endogenous sterols,
bile acids, vitamins and fatty acids. However, thirteen human
P450s still remain “orphans” because their functional roles have
yet to be elucidated []. Human CYP4 family consists of 6
subfamilies, 12 genes and 10 pseudo genes. Human CYP4V2, a
relatively new member of human cytochrome P450 enzymes is
termed as an orphan P450 because its substrate specificity and
physiological roles are unknown. The CYP450 protein family is
a group of enzymes that use iron to oxidise various substrates,
including potentially harmful substances, thereby making them
more water soluble and promoting their biological processing.

CYP4V2 gene encoded as a member of the cytochrome P450
hemethiolate protein super family is involved in oxidizing
various substrates in the metabolic pathway. The gene contains
11 exons spanning 21.7 kb and is expressed in various tissues,
most abundantly in the retina. Mutations in CYP4V2 gene result
in Bietti crystalline corneoretinal dystrophy (BCD) 
[] which is
an autosomal recessive retinal dystrophy. The symptoms of
BCD include crystals in the cornea, yellow shiny deposits on the
retina, progressive atrophy of the retina, choriocapillaries and
choroid (the back layers of the eye). BCD is a rare disease
leading to progressive night blindness and visual field
constriction. BCD appears to be more common in people with
Asian ancestry [,
]. The issue of CYP4V2 substrate specificity
is important because an intriguing genetic association has
emerged between CYP4V2 and BCD. It is proposed that the
protein encoded by CYP4V2 plays a role in processing lipids
such as fatty acids or steroid metabolism in the eye. Wilson and
associates [] found crystals resembling cholesterol or
cholesterol esters in the retina, and complex lipid inclusions in
the cornea, conjunctiva, fibroblasts and circulating
lymphocytes, suggesting that BCD may be a systemic
abnormality of lipid metabolism. CYP4V2 is widely distributed
in the eye and can selectively omega-hydroxylase saturated
medium-chain fatty acids. The defective omega-oxidation of
ocular fatty acids/lipids secondary to mutations in the CYP4V2
gene appears to be a plausible mechanism underlying BCD. The
amino acidic sequence of orphan human protein CYP4V2 is
available but to date its crystal structure has not been resolved.
Experimental functional studies of CYP4V2 suggest that
saturated fatty acids like caprylic, lauric, myrisitc and palmitic
acids can act as possible substrates [].

Structural information might help us to understand the ligand
interaction and channeling of CYP4V2. Structural studies
relying on computational comparative modeling and molecular
docking have been used to gain insight into finding active site
topology, identifying key ligand-interacting residues and
interaction energy of substrates. In this study, 3D structure of
CYP4V2 was constructed by using comparative modeling and
the model was refined by energy minimization. After structural
evaluation, the reliable model of CYP4V2 was docked into
possible fatty acid substrates to explore substrate specificity.

Methodology:
Homology modeling of human CYP4V2:
The sequence of human CYP4V2 was obtained from the
UniprotKB database (accession no: Q6ZWL3). For template
selection, the sequence was submitted to PSI-BLAST against
Protein Data Bank (PDB). The templates 1TQN, 3CZH, 3E4E,
1NR6, 1PO5 and 3EBS having high similarity were selected and
further submitted to ClustalW [] for template target alignment.
The coordinates for heme were obtained from 1TQN and
positioned as in the template. The Modeller 9v2 program 
[]
was employed to generate the 3D model of CYP4V2. The model
which ranked first based on the internal scoring function of
Modeller was selected and subjected to energy minimization
using YASARA software []. The optimized model was
subjected to quality assessment with respect to its geometry and
energy aspects. Graphical presentations of the 3D model were
prepared using Pymol.

Prediction of binding site in homology model of CYP4V2:
The homology model of CYP4V2 was submitted to ConSurf
Server [] 
for identification of functional regions by detecting
the structurally conserved binding regions among their close
sequence homologues.

Ligand optimization and evaluation of drug likeness:
The possible substrates like caprylic, lauric, myristic and
palmitic acids were downloaded from the Pubchem in Structure
Data Format (SDF). Conversion of SDF to Protein Data Bank
(PDB) format was carried out using Open Babel program 
[].
The MMFF94 force field was used for energy minimization of
ligand molecules. Gasteiger partial charges were added to the
ligand atoms, non-polar hydrogen atoms were merged and
rotatable bonds were defined. Ligand geometries and electric
properties were calculated using MOPAC2009. Further, ligands
were evaluated for drug likeness using Lipinski's rule of five
[]. 
According to this rule, an ideal drug molecule should have
a molecular weight of less than 500, total number of hydrogen
bonds should not exceed 5, logP value should be less than 5 and
the sum of N and O should not be more than 10. Further poor
absorption or permeation is more likely when a ligand molecule
violates this rule.

Molecular docking:
Docking calculations were carried out using Docking Server
[] 
to compute the free energy of binding on protein model.
Essential hydrogen atoms, Kollman united atom type charges
and solvation parameters were added with the aid of AutoDock
tools []. 
Affinity (grid) maps of 60×60×60Å grid points and
0.375 Å spacing were generated using the Autogrid program.
AutoDock parameter set and distance dependent dielectric
functions were used in the calculation of the Van der Waals and
the electrostatic terms respectively. Docking simulations were
performed using the Lamarckian genetic algorithm (LGA) and
the Solis and Wets local search method. Initial position,
orientation and torsions of the ligand molecules were set
randomly and all rotatable torsions were released during
docking. Each docking experiment was derived from 10
different runs that were set to terminate after a maximum of
250000 energy evaluations. The population size was set to 150.
During the search, a translational step of 0.2 Å and quaternion
and torsion steps of 5 were applied.

Results and Discussion:
The protein sequence of human CYP4V2 was queried against
the Protein Data Bank (PDB) using PSI-BLAST and the result
showed less than 30% identity between target and the
templates. The top six templates (1TQN, 3CZH, 3E4E, 1NR6,
1PO5 and 3EBS) were selected and their sequences were
multiple aligned with CYP4V2 sequence. The majority of the
structures were found to be conserved except for few gap
inserts. The sequence conservation and the signature motifs of
CYP4V2 were examined using multiple sequence alignment
with templates (). The structural motifs were in the I
helix (xGxxT), a tetra peptide in the K helix (ExxR), a dodeca
peptide prior to the L helix (ZxxPxxZxPxxZ) and a deca peptide
between L helix and the dodeca peptide (FxxGxxxCxG), where,
Z could be any aromatic amino acid and x could be any residue.
Among these signature motifs, FxxGxxxCxG is the
characteristic motif for the CYP super family, which includes a
conserved cystine residue that ligates to the Fe of the heme.
Several signature motifs were conserved for CYP4V2 as per
pervious findings [,
]. The conservation of sequence
indicates that CYP4V2 model construction based on this
alignment is reliable. The templates structures did not contain
residues in N-terminal membrane-binding domain and thus the
first 36 residues at the N-terminal were not included in model
construction. The resulting alignment was used as input for
Modeller to generate the initial 3D model of CYP4V2. The
model of CYP4V2 was subjected to energy minimization using
YAMBER force field implemented in YASARA. The total
energy was 25283762.4 and ­264806.2 kJ/mol for homology
model of CYP4V2 before and after minimization. The energy
minimized model was subjected to several structural quality
assessment methods. The Procheck [] evaluation showed that
98.5% of residues were in the allowed region and 1.5% in the
disallowed region (). 
Prosa [] evaluation showed Z
score of ­6.81 () indicating that the predicted CYP4V2
model was a reliable one. The model contained several
structurally conserved regions quite similar as those of other
P450s such as helices D, E, I, J, K and L and the heme group
sandwiched between helices (). Comparison of the
model with the templates by superposition clearly showed that
the overall CYP fold was preserved in CYP4V2 ().

Based on Gothoh's proposal, predicted substrate binding sites
(SRS) of the CYP4V2 such as SRS-1, SRS-2, SRS-3, SRS-4, SRS-5
and SRS-6 were observed respectively in B helix, F helix, G
helix, I helix, K helix and between β4 and β5 ().The
final model was deposited in Protein Model Database (PMDB)
[] and it is available under ID: PM0077758. The CYP4V2
model was further tested to predict functional regions using
ConSurf server () by identifying high conservational
score (, see supplementary material). The optimized
and energy minimized substrates namely caprylic (),
lauric (), myrisitc 
() and palmitic acids
() were subjected to ligand geometry and calculation
of electric properties (, see supplementary material).
Further, the ligand was also evaluated for drug ability
assessment using Lipinski's rule of five. It was observed from
the calculated ligand properties that all the substrates did not
violate this rule.

To determine the key residues responsible for substrates
interaction, the homology model of CYP4V2 was docked with
selected fatty acid substrates. The calculated binding energies of
CYP4V2 with lauric acid, myristic acid and palmitic acid were
respectively ­5.99, ­5.72 and ­6.14 kcal/mol. The lowest energy
was found with caprylic acid as -4.30 kcal/mol (, see
supplementary material). The negative and low value of free
energy of binding indicates a strong favorable bond between
CYP4V2 and the caprylic acid in most favorable conformations.
Docking of CYP4V2 with caprylic acid revealed that major
residues involved were Phe398, Leu136 and Phe329 which
formed hydrophobic interaction, while Ser394 formed polar
interaction (). With lauric acid, major residue Leu136
formed hydrophobic interaction while Phe398 formed both
hydrophobic and cation interaction (). With myristic
acid, the binding residues Ile 506 and Phe328 formed
hydrophobic interaction, and Asp332 formed polar interaction
(). With palmitic acid, Phe398 formed hydrophobic
interaction (). Major residues involved in interaction
with all selected fatty acid substrates were Phe328, Phe398,
Leu136 and Ile506 (, see supplementary material).

Conclusion:
The orphan human protein CYP4V2 was suggested to be
associated with Bietti crystalline corneoretinal dystrophy (BCD)
and a role in fatty acid and steroid metabolism in the eye. It was
suggested to be potential drug target for BCD, but lack of
structural information hinders the detailed characterization of
its biological roles and it application in the structure based
design. For this reason, the homology model of CYP4V2 was
constructed using comparative modeling and assessed for
geometric and energy aspects. To provide useful information
and characterize the CYP4V2 function, four possible saturated
fatty acid substrates such as caprylic, lauric, myrisitc and
palmitic acids were docked into active site of CYP4V2 to
explore favourable binding modes and their substrate
specificity. The interaction energy calculated between CYP4V2
and substrates revealed that caprylic acid had a lowest energy
followed by myristic, lauric and palmitic acids. Several key
residues Phe328, Phe398, Leu136 and Ile506 had predominant
contribution to the substrate binding with CYP4V2. The key
residues identified through ConSurf analysis (functional region
identification) and docking studies were in concurrence with
each other reflecting the importance of crucial residues
involved in substrate binding. The key residues identified from
the present study could be potential candidates for site directed
mutagenesis studies. Furthermore, these residues might play a
role in ligand-channeling and for identifying the reaction center
of the protein. The structural information obtained from this
study will also be useful for the structure-based drug design of
CYP4V2.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Kumar, Bioinformation 7(7): 360 365 (2011)

Multiple sequence alignment of target (CYP4V2:
Q6ZWL3) and six templates (3EBS, 1PO5, 1NR6, 3E4E, 3CZH
and 1TQN) using ClustalW program. The red colour indicates
conserved residue and yellow colour indicates a semiconserved
substitution.

(a) Ramachandran plot of CYP4V2 (b) Prosa z score of
CYP4V2.

(a) Homology model of CYP4V2 (b) Superimposed
structure of CYP4V2 with 1TQN (c) Substrate recognition sites
of CYP4V2: SRS-1: red, SRS-2: green, SRS-3: blue, SRS-4: yellow,
SRS-5: magenta and SRS-6: orange (d) Predicted active site of
CYP4V2.

2D structure of ligands; (a) Caprylic acid (b) lauric
acid (c) Myristic acid (d) Palmitic acid.

Close up View of CYP4V2 with (a) Caprylic acid (b)
lauric acid (c) Myristic acid (d) Palmitic acid. Key residues are
labeled. Substrates are shown in green stick.

