Background
Microorganisms are the source of toxins having mutation
capabilities. These toxins enter the human and animal body
through food, water, air and by other physical contacts. The
immune system is involved in neutralizing these toxins by its
defense mechanism during infection or disease progression.
Infectious organisms produce different types of toxins like
exotoxins, endotoxins, interotoxins, neurotoxins and sometimes
enzymes with toxicity []. These toxins are often proteins
secreted by the bacterial cell (for example, the anthrax toxin is
an exotoxin produced by Bacillus anthracis) which are regularly
destroyed by heat. It is of interest to understand carbon
distribution to its toxic function in these proteins. The toxic
shock syndrome toxin (TSST) is a super antigen expressed by
Staphylococcus aureus (UniProtKB number P06886 and PDB ID
1QIL). The disease linked to this protein is characterized by
fever, hypotension, multiple-organ disorder, and desquamation
(skin peeling). TSST is 25% hydrophobic and stable in aqueous
and basic solutions. Investigations produce data on the
terminus responsible for toxic activity. Super antigens bind
non-specifically and activate populations of T cells by forming
H-bonds. Studies on this super antigen indicate that the binding
domain lies at the top of the back side of this toxin, though the
complete interaction remains to be determined. There have also
been indications that the binding site is mapped to the major
groove of the central alpha helix or the short amino terminal
alpha helix. Residues in the beta motif of TSST are known to
interact with the invariant region of the alpha chain of other
proteins. The role of carbon in TSST for protein disorder and
activity is of interest []. Here, we describe the carbon
distribution in TSST. These studies will provide insights to the
optimal design and synthesis proteins with proper distribution
of amino acids. It should be noted that TSST is taken as an
example for carbon content analysis in this study. It should be
also noted that thymine distribution in mRNAs is available in
related studies [].

Methodology
We downloaded the protein sequence for TSST from PDB
(www.rcsb.org/pdb/) with the PDB ID 1QIL. This entry
describes three monomer chains. The carbon distribution in this
protein sequence is analyzed using the CARd program as
described elsewhere []. The carbon content along the sequence
is calculated with outer and inner length of 700 and 35 atoms,
respectively. The mean and statistical mean along the sequence
is subsequently computed. The number of carbon atoms
divided by total atoms (700 in this case) is the mean carbon
content for a stretch of 700 atoms in a row. The statistical mean
of carbon content is computed using CARd as described
elsewhere []. The mutational site (135) of the protein is also
analyzed for carbon distribution using CARd with an outer
length of 270 atoms (~17 aa) and an inner length of 35 atoms.

Discussion
The TSST protein (UniProtKB number P06886) is 234 amino
acid residues in length. The first 40 residues form the signal
peptide. The remaining 194 amino acids residues in the
sequence are subjected to carbon distribution profile analysis
using an improved version of the CARd program. The carbon
distribution in TSST is shown in . The hydrophobic
regions are 1-45, 58-73, 93-139 and 145-194 in the sequence. Each
pocket is about 45 residues long. The TSST contains excess of
carbon content as most of the regions are above the line value of
0.3145. The excess carbon indicates protein disorder. The
mutational site H135 is also in the carbon rich region. It should
also be observed that both the terminals are hydrophobic in
nature. The secondary structure analysis reveals that most of
them are beta-barrel. The mutational site (135) is present in the
hydrophobic stretch. The mutation H135A results in the loss of
T-cell mitogenicity and toxicity in experimental animals 
[]. The
carbon distribution profile reveals the loss in biological function
of the protein. This shows the relationship of carbon role in
toxicity of toxic proteins. The average carbon content (0.322),
mean carbon (0.338), median (0.343) and mode (0.314) of the
distribution curve at site 135 in native types are reported.
However, in the mutant protein, a carbon content of 0.326 and
mean carbon of 0.336 is observed. The median and mode
remains same. The comparison () of carbon content and
mean carbon reveals that the mean carbon is always higher than
the average carbon in the native protein. This is reverse at site
135. The mean carbon is lower than the average carbon at
position 134. This is not true in the mutant protein. This is also
true at residue position 35 as a potential site for protein
stabilization.

Conclusion
The carbon distribution in a toxic protein is described in
relation to its function. We show that carbon distributions in the
local structure have relation to protein activity. The carbon
content is higher at the active site which is destabilized by
mutation causing protein disorder.

Citation:Akila et al, Bioinformation 8(15): 720-721 (2012)

Hydrophobic index along TSST. The fraction of carbon
is plotted against amino acid residue numbers in sequence. The
region above the line corresponding to 0.3145 is considered as
the carbon rich regions. It should be noted that the mutational
site 135 is in the carbon rich region.

Carbon content (mean and statistical mean) in the
toxin protein. The statistical mean is greater than the mean
carbon in the distribution. It should be noted that at the
mutational site (135) the trend is seen reverse while it is normal
thereafter.

