Background
Fusarium head blight or head scab of wheat is a global problem in the 
humid and subhumid wheat growing areas of world  [].  
Fusarium head blight has been associated with upto 17 organisms, of which  Fusarium 
graminearum is the principle pathogen responsible for head blight in many 
countries including India []. 
In addition to causing yield losses, strains of 
F. graminearum are known to produce trichothecene mycotoxins which 
pose a serious threat to human and animal health and food safety 
[].

Simple sequence repeats (SSRs) or microsatellites have been proven to be 
the markers of choice during the last decade in plant research because of 
their hypervariability and ease of detection. SSR markers have been 
developed for many species of plants, animals and fungi from genomic 
DNA through the construction of SSR enriched libraries. This approach is 
labor intensive and time consuming.  However in recent years, with the 
establishment of several sequencing projects in crop plants, animals and 
microorganisms resulted in a wealth  of DNA sequence information. This 
sequence data for expressed sequence tags (ESTs), genes and cDNA clones 
can be downloaded from various databases in public domain and by using 
computer programs these can be scanned for identification of SSRs, 
referred as EST-SSRs or genic microsatellites. Microsatellite sequences 
obtained through in silico mining have more or less the same utility and 
potential comparative with those derived from a genomic library. 
However, the negligible cost of  in silico mining and high abundance of 
microsatellites in different sequence resources make this approach 
extremely attractive for the generation of microsatellite markers. SSR 
provides a powerful tool for taxonomic, phylogenetic and population 
genetic studies because of its highly polymorphic nature. The 
polymorphism in SSRs is generally believed to be the result of DNA 
polymerase slippage and unequal recombination  []. The information on 
abundance and distribution of SSRs may also help in understanding their 
relevance in gene function or genome evolution. The main objective of this 
study was to analyze the abundance and distribution of different classes of 
SSRs in the EST database  Fusarium graminearum, which may help in 
understanding the evolution and diversity analysis.

Methodology
Dataset
The genomic sequences (433 contigs of 36.22 Mb) of  Fusarium 
graminearum available in Fusarium comparative database of Broad 
Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge (http://www.broadinstitute.org/ 
annotation/genome/fusarium_graminearum/) were used for the study.

SSR analysis
Perfect mono-, di-, tri-, tetra-, penta-, and hexanucleotide motifs with a 
repeat of ≥6 times were identified using the software WebSat (SSR finder 
program)[]. 
The sequences from each contigs were downloaded from 
Fusarium comparative database and entered in the WebSat software. As 
the program can process 150,000 characters, the longer sequences were 
divided into two or more parts and then processed for SSR analysis. The 
output generated by the program highlight the SSR sequences in yellow 
color.

Discussion
Genomic sequence data of 36.22 Mb size of  F. graminearum assembled 
into 433 contigs and further assembled into 31 scaffolds or supercontigs 
from Broad Institute (http://www.broadinstitute.org/) was used to search 
for mono-, di-, tri-, tetra-, penta- and hexanucleotide motifs with a repeat 
of  ≥6 times. A total number of 1705 SSRs were identified from the EST 
database &gt;Fusarium graminearum (Table 1 see 
). 
Chromosome 1 possessed highest number of SSRs (611) and chromosome 
3 had the least number of SSRs (318). Ten SSRs were identified in the 
contigs not mapped to any chromosome. Mononucleotides repeats were the 
most abundant (1063) repeats in all the chromosomes accounting 62% of 
SSRs. Next to mononucleotides, dinucleotides (20%) were predominant 
followed by trinucleotides (14%).  Tetra-, penta- and hexanucleotide 
repeats were the least frequent repeats accounting 4% of SSRs. The density 
of SSRs was found to be one SSR per 21.2 kb.

Among the mononucleotides, polyA  and polyT were more abundant 
repeats with a frequency of 492 and 439  (Table 2 see  
), 
respectively. PolyG and polyC  repeats were rare representing 
5.9% and 6.5% of mononucleotide repeats. The number of repeat units 
ranged from 10 to 41 among mononucleotides, but majority of repeats had 
10-12 repeat units. Twelve types of dinucleotide repeat motifs (Table 3 see 
)  were found in the genome. The AT/TA 
dinucleotide repeat motif was the  most predominant while the CG/GC 
repeat motif was rare. Among trinucleotide repeats, 53 different types of 
repeat motifs were identified and the CTT repeat motif was predominant in 
Fusarium graminearum genome. Tetra-, penta - and hexanucleotide 
repeats were least frequent repeats in the genome, tetranucleotide repeats 
occur more in number (34) followed by penta- (21) and hexanucleotide 
repeats (14). The genome possessed 29 different types of tetra-, 20 types of 
penta- and 14 types of hexanucleotide repeats. The number of repeat units 
in di-, tri-, tetra-, penta- and hexanucleotides ranged from 6 to 46, but the 
majority of SSRs (70%) had six to seven repeat units. Some of the highly 
repeated sequences identified were (AG)28, (AAG)31, (GAA)46, 
(GTATG)18, (GAAGAG)21, (TGAAGA)22 and (CCCTAA)23.

SSRs were categorized into two groups based on length of SSR tracts and 
their potential as informative genetic markers: Class I SSRs contain perfect 
repeats ≥20 nucleotides in length and Class II contain perfect repeats &gt;10 
nucleotides and &lt;20 nucleotides in length. Out of 1705 SSRs, 291 repeats 
were categorized as Class I SSRs. 54% of trinucleotide repeats were Class 
I SSRs, followed by dinucleotide (14%) and mononucleotide repeats 
(4.5%)  (). All tetra- , penta - and hexanucleotide repeats were 
Class I SSRs. The estimated frequency of Class I SSRs was one SSR per 
124.5 kb, whereas the frequency of Class II was one SSR per 25.6 kb.

The in silico mining of EST database of F. graminearum provided a rich 
source of SSRs which can be used for taxonomic, evolutionary and 
population genetic studies. Role of microsatellites in regulation of gene 
expression and in the evolution of gene regulation  [,
] are well 
documented. The implications of excess numbers of short iterated repeats 
could be extremely important not only for genomic stability, but also for 
the evolution of additional genomic features such as codon usage 
[].

In general, microsatellites show a  decrease in abundance with increasing 
repeat length  []. However, more than the expected number of long 
microsatellite repeats were also reported []. The rationale for Class I and 
Class II categories of SSRs is that longer perfect repeats (Class I) are 
highly polymorphic as evidenced by the experimental data originally 
reported from human  [] and then confirmed by studies in many other 
organisms, including rice []. Microsatellites in Class II tended to be less 
variable, representing sites where SSR expansion may occasionally occur 
but its probability is limited due to a smaller chance of slipped-strand 
impairing over the shorter SSR template  [,
]. The microsatellites 
identified in this study could be used for the development of genome 
specific markers for evolutionary studies in F. graminearum.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The financial support for Agri Bioinformatics Promotion Program 
provided by Bioinformatics Initiative Division, Department of Information 
Technology, Ministry of Communications &amp; Information Technology, 
Government of India, New Delhi is gratefully acknowledged. The authors 
are thankful to Project Director, DWR, Karnal for providing facilities for 
this work.

Citation:Singh et al, Bioinformation 5(10): 402-404 (2011)

Frequency of Class I and Class II SSRs of mono-, di-and 
trinucleotide repeats.

