Background
Alzheimer׳s disease (AD) is the most common form of
dementia. It is a harmful neurological disorder that affects the
aged people that is increasing substantially with the symptoms
of memory loss, decaylanguage and problems with visual
spatial search [,
]. About 1%-4% of the population are affected
by AD every year among the age group of 65 to 70 years, while
this may exceed 6% over 85 years of age [,
]. Pathologically
AD may be characterized by progressive intra-cerebral
accumulation of beta amyloid (Aβ) peptides []. It is also found
that the tau protein [] contributes to neuronal, synaptic, and
cognitive malfunction []. Recent studies showed that Aβ
progressively accumulates in synaptic mitochondria and
impairs mitochondrial structure and function including
membrane potential, membrane permeability transition pore,
respiration, energy metabolism, oxidative stress, mitochondrial
dynamics, and calcium homeostasis [–
]. Amyloid binding
alcohol dehydrogenase (ABAD), a mitochondrial enzyme
responsible for mitochondrial dysfunction and in the
pathogenesis of AD is known []. This enzyme has attracted
considerable interest because of its ability to interact with Aβ
which mediates mitochondrial and synaptic dysfunction [,
]
. Hence, antagonizing Aβ-ABAD interaction is a strategy to
improve the learning memory in AD [,
]. Moreover, the β-
secretase, widely known as β-site amyloid precursor protein
cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1), initiates the production of the
toxic amyloid β (Aβ) that plays a crucial early part in AD
pathogenesis. Due to its apparent rate limiting function, BACE1
appears to be a prime target to prevent and lowering the Aβ
generation in AD [–].

According to the ‘cholinergic hypothesis’ cholinergic function is
required for short-term memory, the cholinergic deficit in AD
was also believed to be responsible for much of the short-term
memory deficit [,
]. Cholinergic neurons, such as choline
acetyltransferase (ChAT) and acetylcholinesterase (AChE),
which are enzymes responsible for synthesis and degradation
of Ach, are respectively decreased in the cortex and
hippocampus, areas of the brain involved in cognition and
memory [,
]. So blocking the acetylcholinesterase enzyme is
now a comprehensive target for the treatment of AD 
[].

The use of medicinal plant derived secondary metabolites or
plant based compounds as lead a molecule is clearly
established in recent years []. The biological effect of these
compounds in slowing down the progress of AD or dementia is
known []. The application and use of molecular docking
analysis in predicting ligand-protein target is well established
in recent years []. Therefore, it is of interest to evaluatethe
importance of fisetin (a flavonolthat belongs to the flavonoid
group of polyphenols) binding with AD associated AChE,
ABAD and BACE1 proteins using molecular docking and
analysis.

Methodology
Data and databases:
The data from databases used in this study include PDB
(Protein Data Bank) [] 
and ZINC []. ZINC is a free database
of commercially available compounds for virtual screening. It
contains over 35 million purchasable compounds in ready-todock;
3D formats which is provided by the Shoichet Laboratory
in the Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry at the
University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) [].

Docking Tools:
The docking tools used in this study include Flexx (LeadIT
2.1.6) and iGEMDOCK. FlexX a fully automated docking
program available on LeadIT 2.1.6 package was used to dock
compound into the active site of the enzymes. FlexX considers
ligand flexibility by changing the conformations of the ligand in
the active site while making the protein rigid 
[].
iGEMDOCK is a graphical environment for recognizing
pharmacological interactions and virtual screening. For postscreening
analysis, iGEMDOCK can enrich the hit rate and
provide biological insights by deriving the pharmacological
interactions from screening compounds [].

Ligand and protein preparation:
The plant derived flavonoid compound fisetin (ZINC00039111)
was downloaded from the ZINC databases. The compound is
obtained from the ZINC databases in .MOL2 format. This is
prepared by adding hydrogen and applying suitable geometry
by using Accelrys Discovery Studio Visualizer 3.5. 3D as shown
in . The three target enzymes i.e., ABAD (PDB id:
1SO8), BACE1 (PDB id: 2QP8) and AChE (PDB id: 1EVE) were
downloaded in pdb format from protein data bank
(http://www.rcsb.org/pdb). The enzymes are prepared by
using receptor preparing wizard available in LeadIT 2.1.6
package for Flexx Docking and all crystallographic water
molecules were removed.

ADMET tools:
The adverse properties such as absorption, distribution,
metabolism, excretion and the toxicity of fisetin were calculated
using the ADMET SAR database. They provide the latest and
most comprehensive manually curated data for diverse
chemicals associated with known ADMET profiles.

Molecular docking with Flexx:
FlexX uses an incremental build up algorithm where ligands
are docked starting with a base fragment. Base fragments are
generated by severing all noncyclic bonds in a given ligand. All
base fragments identified for a given ligand serve as starting
points for the docking  (see supplementary material).
After placement of a base fragment (in different positions) the
complete ligand is constructed by adding the remaining
components back on. Each component is added in accordance
with a set of predefined, allowed torsion angles, thus allowing
for ligand flexibility. At each step the interactions are evaluated
and the best solution is selected according to the docking score
[]. In this study, the docking and subsequent scoring were
performed using the default parameters of the FlexX program
implanted in LeadIT 2.1.6. The active sites of the enzymes were
defined to include residues within 6.5 Å radius around bound
inhibitor. Final scores for all FlexX solutions were calculated by
a consensus scoring function (CScore) and used for database
ranking. Finally the best pose with the highest score was
selected for investigating the interactions, HYDE assessment
and calculating the free energy of binding (DG)[,
].

Molecular docking with iGEMDOCK:
Graphical automatic drug design system for docking, screening
and post-analysis program iGEMDOCK was used to gain the
docking results of the listed compounds with the target 
(). 
The binding sites of the targets were prepared and the
energy minimized compound was imported. During docking,
at first the molecules were prepared and bonds, bond orders,
explicit hydrogen׳s, charges, flexible torsions were assigned to
both the protein and ligands. From the docking, wizard ligands
were selected and the scoring function used was iGEMDOCK
score. If hydrogen bonding is possible, the hydrogen bond
energy contribution to the docking score is assigned a penalty
based on the deviations from the ideal bonding angle. This
option cansignificantly reduce the number of unlikely
hydrogen bonds and also internal electrostatic interaction;
internal hydrogen bond sp2-sp2 torsions are calculated from the
pose by enabling the ligand evaluation terms. The search
algorithm is taken as iGEMDOCK and numbers of runs taken
are 70 and max interactions were 2000 with population size 200
and with an energy threshold of 100 also at each step least ‘min’
torsions/translations/rotations are tested and the one giving
lowest energy is chosen. If the energy is positive (i.e., because of
a clash or an unfavourable electrostatic interaction), then
additional ‘max’ positions will be tested. If the pose being
docked is closer to one of the ligands in the list than specified
by the Root Mean Square Deviation (RMSD) threshold, an extra
penalty term (the energy penalty) is added to the scoring
function. This ensures a greater diversity of the returned
solutions since the docking engine will focus its search on poses
different from earlier poses found. The energy penalty was set
to 100, RMSD threshold was 2.00 and RMSD calculation by
atom ID (fast) were set. Docking was conducted between
protein and inhibitor which results in binding affinities in
kcal/mol and docking run time. The compound which gives
lowest binding energy is chosen as the best inhibitor 
[].
iGEMDOCK showed better overall performance in docking
simulations when compared with other software. The
hydrophobic preference and electrostatic preference were set to
1.00. The binding site of the target was identified at a distance
8Å. The empirical scoring function of iGEMDOCK was
estimated as:

Fitness = vdW + Hbond + Elec.

Here, the vdW term is vander Waal energy. H-bond and Elect
terms are hydrogen bonding energy and electro-static energy,
respectively.

Results &amp; Discussions
Flavonoids are the natural plants compounds with variable
phenolic structures, found in fruit, vegetables, stems, flowers,
tea, and wine []. These natural products were known for their
beneficial effects on health long before flavonoids were isolated
as the effective compounds. They are usually attached with
sugar moiety to increase their water solubility. Most of the
flavonoids are known to possess various pharmacological
activities, such as antioxidant, antiviral, antibacterial and
antimutagenic effects [,
]. The stereochemistry of binding
fisetin on AD has not been yet characterized. In our present
studies, we have used two docking engines to analyse the
binding affinity of fisetin on the three target enzymes
responsible for the AD i.e., (i) ABAD (1SO8) (ii) AChE (1EVE)
(iii) BACE1 (2QP8), which may facilitate further development
of more potent Alzheimer agents.  described result of
fisetin against three targets of AD using FlexX and
iGEMDOCK.

Amyloid binding alcohol dehydrogenase (ABAD):
In FlexX docking method, the compound fisetin interact with
the amyloid binding alcohol dehydrogenase(ABAD) enzyme by
least binding energy -15.0147kcal/mol.The binding
confirmation of fisetin with the enzyme is demonstrated on the
, shows that theoxygen of the carbonyl groupbinds
with the hydrogen atoms of amino acid residue Gly93. Another
hydrogen bond is formed between the oxygen of carboxyl
group and the amino group of amino acid residue Ile94. Leu22
and Cys91 are also involved in the hydrogen bond with oxygen
and hydrogen of the fisetin. In iGEMDOCK, the binding energy
of fisetin with amyloid binding alcohol dehydrogenase (ABAD)
enzyme is -103.006kcal/mol. The overall binding information of
fisetin and ABAD is described in (). From this calculated
score, the relative conformation and arrangement of fisetin
shows a significant affinity towards the enzyme amyloid
binding alcohol dehydrogenase.

Acetylcholinesterase enzyme (AChE):
Molecular docking analysis of fisetin with AChE, by using
FlexX, the docking score is -28.2652kcal/mol. In ,
the interaction between of fisetin and acetylcholinesterase
enzyme is showing hydrogen bonds which is formed between
the hydrogen and oxygen of hydroxyl group of fisetin with the
oxygen of Tyr70 residue and hydrogen of Asp72. The oxygen of
carbonyl group of Trp84 residue formed two hydrogen bonds
with the hydrogen of two hydroxyl group׳s. Tyr130 and Glu199
residues are also involved in the interaction with fisetin
molecule. The binding energy of fisetin calculated by
iGEMDOCKis-112.042 kcal/mol (shown in ), described
a high affinity towards Acetylcholinesterase enzyme.

BACE1enzyme:
 shows the binding of fisetin which is -31.4957
kcal/mol in FlexX by making contact with amino acid residue
Ile 187 by forming two hydrogen bonds between the
hydrogen׳s of hydroxyl groups and oxygen of the carbonyl
group of amino acids. Some other hydrogen bonds are also seen
which contributed by Thr133, Ser97, Asp289 and pro131. In
iGEMDOCK, the calculated result of the interaction is -70.9739
kcal/mol between fisetin-BACE1enzyme. The binding energy
also shows a significant ligand-receptor complex with this
enzyme.

ADMET results for Fisetin:
ADMET profile was evaluated using the admetSAR database
for fisetin shows the highest binding energy  &amp; 

(see supplementary material). admetSAR predicted
classification and regression values for fisetin and the results
seems to have been calculated for different types of models
such as blood brain barrier, human intestina labsorption,
CaCO2 permeability all of which showed positive results
ensuring that the compound passes all the models and have no
side effects on absorption. Similarly in case of metabolism,
various cytochrome P450 (CYP) substrate and inhibitor models
were calculated and the results show that they are nonsubstrate
and non-inhibitor except CYP450 1A2 Inhibitor. In
terms of toxicity, it is found to be non-carcinogenic. Although
some toxicity models show some negative results the regression
profiles indicates that they have very low probability values.

Conclusion
The predicted binding of fisetin with AD associated amyloid
binding alcohol dehydrogenase, acetylcholinestease, and
BACE1 enzymes d is documented in this study. The ADMET
properties have been calculated for fisetin and it has been
shown that it is non-carcinogenic and non-toxic in nature.

Competing interests
All authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thankthe Bangladesh Council of Scientific and Industrial
Research (BCSIR).

Citation:Dash et al, Bioinformation 10(9): 562-568 (2014)

a) 3D structure of fisetin, Interaction of fisetin with b) Acetylcholinesterase c) BACE1 and d) ABAD enzyme.

