Background
Medical image segmentation plays an important role in clinical
diagnosis .An ideal scheme should posses some properties such
as minimum user interaction, fast computing, accurate and
robust segmentation result []. Segmentation achieves its best
results with semi automated algorithms with human operator.
Image segmentation often allows doctors and surgeons to
analyze the patient data prior to determining the location of
disease []. Computer vision the area is characterized by the
extraction of information from image data for the purpose of a
medical diagnosis to a patient. Image data is in the form of
ophthalmology images. An example of information which can
be extracted from such image data is detection of tumors,
hardexudats, soft exudates, hemorrhages or other malign
changes. Diagnosis needs segmentation of the image into pixels
the goal of segmentation is to simplify and/or change the
representation of an image into something that is more
meaningful and easier and simple to analyze the result of
image segmentation is a set of pixels that collectively cover the
entire image. Diabetic retinopathy is damage to the retina
caused by long time diabetes, which leads to blindness it is an
ocular manifestation of diabetes, a disease, which affects up to
80 percent of all patients who have had disease for 10 years or
more [] application of pillar algorithm is observed over 150
images from different databases for checking with the better
results.

Methodology
Basics of K-Means and Fuzzy C-Means:
This section briefly explains about the algorithms related to kmeans
and fuzzy c-means clustering techniques [,
].

Algorithmic for K-Means Clustering:
K-means clustering aims to partition n observations into k
clusters in which each observation belongs to the cluster with
the nearest mean

Let X = {x1,x2,x3,……..,xn} be the set of data points and V =
{v1,v2,…….,vc} be the set of centers ().

Algorithm for Fuzzy C Means:
The fuzzy c-means algorithm is as same as the k-means
algorithm. The algorithm minimizes intra-cluster variance, but
has the same problems as k-means, the minimum is a local
minimum, and the results are based on the initial choice of
weights []. The expectation-maximization algorithm is a more
statistically formalized method which includes some of these
ideas: partial membership in classes. It has better convergence
properties and is in general preferred to fuzzy-c-means.

Medical imaging is the special method and process used to
create images of the human body for clinical purposes (medical
procedures seeking to reveal, diagnose, or examine disease) or
medical science (including the study of normal anatomy and
physiology).

Measurement and recording techniques which are not
primarily designed to produce images, such as
electroencephalography (EEG), etc., but which produce data
susceptible to be represented as maps (i.e., containing
positional information), can be seen as forms of medical
imaging [].

Image Segmentation Approach:
Image segmentation approach follows steps as
Reading the image, removing the noise from the image, color
space transformation, data normalization, comparative analysis
of algorithms (KM, FCM, IPKM) ().

Discussion
Noise Removal:
An adaptive noise removal filtering using the median filter is
applied for noise removal of images. This filter is widely used
for solution of image restoration problems this is often used in
processing to reduce salt pepper noise from image 
[].

Color Space Transformation:
Our image segmentation system pre-proceeds the image by
transforming the color space from RGB to grayscale. Rgb2gray
converts RGB images to grayscale by eliminating the hue and
saturation Information while retaining the luminance 
(). RGB (red, green, blue); CMY (cyan, magenta, yellow); HSI
(hue, saturation, intensity)

Our image segmentation system pre proceeds image by
transforming the color space from RGB to HSL, RGB to
grayscale and CIELAB color systems. HSL is the improved
color space of HSV because it represents brightness much better
than saturation since the hue component in the HSL color space
integrates all chromatic information, it is more powerful and
successful for segmentation of color images than the primary
colors []. The CIELAB color system has the advantage of being
approximately perceptually uniform, and it is better than the
RGB color system based on the assumption of three statistically
independent colors attributes. The CIELAB color space is also
widely-used for image restoration and segmentation.
Considering the advantages of each color system of HSL and
CIELAB, in our approach we use both of them as hybrid color
systems for image segmentation.

Data Normalization:
Our image is processed and put in the form of rows and
columns to avoid redundancy and duplication of data. Here
Normalization is a process which changes the range of pixel
intensity value. In our system, Soft max algorithm is used for
the data normalization the output range is between 0 and 1.

Improved Pillar K Means:
The system uses the real size of the image in order to perform
high quality of the image segmentation. It causes highresolution
image data points to be clustered. Therefore we use
the K-means algorithm for clustering image data considering
that its ability to cluster huge data, quickly, effectively and
efficiently. However, Because of initial starting points
generated randomly, K-means algorithm is difficult to reach
global optimum, but only to one of local minima which it will
lead to incorrect clustering results [,
]. To avoid this
phenomenon, we use our previous work regarding initial
clusters optimization for K-means using Pillar algorithm. The
Pillar algorithm is very robust and superior for initial centroids
optimization for K-means by positioning all centroids far
separately among them in the data distribution [].

This algorithm is inspired by the thought of determining a set
of pillars, locations in order to make a stable building.
Illustrates the locating of two, three, and four pillars, in order to
withstand the pressure of several different roof structures
composed of discrete points. It is inspiring that by distributing
the pillars as far as possible from each other within the pressure
distribution of a roof, the pillars can withstand the roof's
pressure and stabilize a building, as number of centroids
among the gravity weight of data distribution in the vector
space. Therefore, this algorithm designates positions of initial
centroids in the farthest accumulated distance between them in
the data distribution () below is the illustration of
locating a set of pillars (white points) withstanding against
different pressure distribution of roofs ().

The Improved Pillar k-means algorithm is as follows:
Let X={xi | i=1,…,n} be data, k be number of clusters,

C={ci | i=1,…,k} be initial centroids, SX ⊆ X be identification for
X which are already selected in the sequence of process,

DM={xi |i=1,…,n}

Be accumulated distance metric,

D={xi | i=1,…,n} be

distance metric for each iteration, and m be the grand mean of
X.

The following execution steps of the proposed algorithm are
described in (). However, the computation may take
long time if we apply the Pillar algorithm directly for all
elements of high resolution image data points. In order to solve
this problem, we reduce the image size to 5%, and then we
apply the Pillar algorithm we apply clustering using the Kmeans
algorithm and then obtain the position of final centroids.
We use these final centroids as the initial centroids for the real
size of the image as and then apply the image data point
clustering using K-means. This mechanism is able to improve
segmentation results and make faster computation for the
image segmentation.

Benefits of the Proposed System
Computation time is less; Efficiency is more; Accuracy in
detecting dark spots in the retinal images of initial stages.

Conclusion
We presented a technique for segmentation of retinal images
using improved pillar k means algorithm to find particular
dark spots in the diabetic retina. Here in results (),
 (see supplementary material) we find the dark spots in
the retina with less computation time and more clearly
compared with k-means and fuzzy c-means. Separation of
macular is difficult. In further work detection and separation of
macular can be done.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Dr. Allam Appa Rao would like to thank the Dept. of Science
and Technology for their financial support (DST-CMS GoI
Project No.SR/S4/MS:516/07 Dated 21.04.2008)

Citation:Gogula et al, Bioinformation 10(1): 028-032 (2014)

K-Means algorithm applied before improved pillar kmeans
algorithm.

Flow chart to represent the data flow

Different color models to represent color space
transformation.

With standing against different pressure distribution
of roofs white spots represent the pillars

Improved pillar k-means algorithm

Results of different algorithms applied on diabetic
retinopathy

