Background
Gynura procumbens (Lour.) Merr. is one of the important medicinal 
plants in Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia, Korea and Philippines. It is known as 
‘ Sambung Nyawa ’ in Malay and as ‘ bai bing ca ’ in Chinese language. It belongs 
to the Asteraceae (Compositae) plant family. It is distributed in Western and central 
Africa, and from southern China throughout continental South-East Asia and Papua New Guinea. 
It is cultivated (at marginal scale) in Malaysia and has limited distribution to the western 
part of peninsular Malaysia. This plant is used in the traditional treatment of various health 
aliments [] such as fever, constipation, 
kidney diseases, rheumatism, viral diseases of skin, rashes, migraine, and cancer 
[]. The leaves of this plant have anti-herpes simplex 
virus [], anti-hyperglycemic 
[], anti-inflammatory 
[], anti hyperlipidemic 
[], anti-allergy agent and antihypertensive 
[] properties. The leaves of this plant 
are often consumed in diet; and research shows that leaves contents are not having any toxic 
effects []. The leaves contain flavonoids, 
unsaturated sterols, terpenoids, polyphenols and essential oil.


The endophytic microbes (bacteria and fungi) live in the tissues of various plant species without 
causing any disease or damage to their host plants []. 
Endophytes could be used for their various applications in boosting plant growth and development 
[] and can make vital contribution in agricultural 
biotechnology. The endophytic bacteria are known to contribute to the host plants growth and 
development by producing plant growth regulators []. 
The bacterial endophytes are also known to increase host plants resistance to plant pathogens and parasites 
[,], 
to promote biological nitrogen fixation [], 
and to produce antibiotics []. 
Endophytes are also promising source of pharmaceutically important bioactive compounds; 
and they are known to produce taxol, the most important and effective antitumor agent developed 
in the past three decades []. In order to be 
able to exploit their (endophytes) bioactive products in various sectors of biotechnology, 
the understanding of their diversity in plants, plant-endophyte association and their role 
in plant growth and development is necessary [–
].

The presence of the bacterial endophytes and their interaction and association with 
agronomic, medicinal [] and 
forest plant species is reported for a variety of plant species such as 
Glycine max, Oryza sativa 
[], and Ocimum sanctum 
[]. However, relatively very little number of 
endophytes and plant species for endophytes are being studied so far though endophytes
do have several potential applications in agriculture sector and health care sector. 
Cytokinin is a plant growth regulator which retards the senescence; and cytokinin-like 
compound producing endophytes can be utilized to prolong the shelf-life of cut-flowers, 
leafy vegetables and fruits. In addition, endophytes do have potential to produce pharmaceutically 
important bioactive compounds.

Gynura procumbens , an important tropical medicinal plant is studied mainly 
of its medicinal properties and toxicology of leaves or leaves extracts; and there is no study 
so far about the endophytes associated with this important plant. The main aim of this study was 
to isolate and identify the bacterial endophytes from G. procumbens leaves and to 
screen theputative endophytic bacterial isolates for cytokinin-like compounds using classical CCGB. 
The isolated and identified bacterial putative endophytes of G. procumbens are 
being reported in this paper along with the results of their screening for cytokinin-like compounds.

Methodology
Plant material
Gynura procumbens plant twigs along with leaves were collected from the 
G. procumbens collection available at Forest Research Institute of Malaysia 
(FRIM), Malaysia. Healthy plant twigs were selected and collected to avoid contamination by 
plant pathogens. Collected samples were brought to the laboratory within 24 hours after sample collection 
following guidelines described by Nalini et al . [] . 
Plant flowers, fruits, stems, roots and twigs can be used to isolate endophytic bacteria, 
but leaves were used in this study.

Surface decontamination of collected leaves samples
Leaves were separated from the twigs and washed thoroughly under plenty of running tap 
water to remove adhering soil particles and the microbes. The surface decontamination method 
described by Fisher et al . [] 
was used with some minor modification. Leaf samples cleaned with detergent (5% Teepol), 
running tap water and then distilled water were taken into laminar hood and immerged into 70 
% ethanol for 30 sec and then into sodium hypochlorite (5%) solution for 3 min. 
Finally, leaf samples were exposed to absolute alcohol for ˜10 sec and then washed thrice 
with autoclaved distilled water (ADW). Surface decontaminated leaves were cut into pieces of 
about 1 cm² using sterile surgical blade. The leaf pieces were aseptically inoculated 
in Petri dishes containing Luria Bertani (LB) agar medium and then incubated at 37°C 
for 18 to 20 hours in the dark.

Isolation of bacterial endophytes
Well grown colonies of cultivable bacterial putative-endophytes that are visible on the 
LB medium (on leaf margins) were randomly chosen for their further analysis. Pure culture 
of each putative endophyte was cultivated separately in universal bottles containing 10 ml 
LB medium. The culture-cultivation was carried out at 37°C, 160 rpm for 18 hours 
[] . Glycerol stocks were prepared and kept
 at –80°C to preserve the putative endophytic isolates for the future research work.

Preparation of cell-free broth extracts
The bacterial cells were harvested from overnight grown 10 ml culture of respective isolate. 
The bacterial cells were used to prepare the lysate and ethyl acetate extract was prepared from 
7 ml cell-free broth by mixing it with equal volume of ethyl acetate. The ethyl acetate extract 
was collected from the vigorously mixed cell-free broth and ethyl acetate. Ethyl acetate was 
evaporated (70°C) using rotary evaporation and the dried extracts were dissolved in 1 
ml analytical grade ethanol. Finally the ethanol was evaporated at 50°C and the dry 
extracts were dissolved in bioassay solution as described by Fletcher et al . 
[] and used in CCGB.

Amplification of the 16S rDNA
The bacterial cells harvested from 10 ml broth were re-suspended in 50 μl sterile 
distilled water and boiled at 100 ° C for 10 min and centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 5 min. 
Five μl lysate was used in polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to amplify 16S rDNA. The 16S 
rDNA PCR amplification was carried out in a total volume of 50 μl containing 10x PCR buffer, 
2.5 mM MgCl 2 , 0.16 mM of dNTPs, 0.75 U of Taq DNA polymerase and 0.2 pmol forward [Bak11W-F; 
5 ’ -AGT TTG ATC MTG GCT CAG-3 ’ ], and reverse [Bak-R; 5 ’ -GGA CTA CHA GGG TAT CTA AT-3 ’ ] 
primer. The PCR conditions consisted of an initial hot start at 95°C for 3 min, 30 amplification 
cycles of 95°C for 30 sec (denaturation), 52°C for 30 sec (annealing), and 
72°C for 30 sec (extension), and finally one cycle of 72°C for 5 min.

16S rDNA sequencing and identification of isolates
The amplified PCR products were purified using the ‘ Wizard ® SV Gel 
and PCR Clean up system ’ by following guidelines provided by manufacturer 
(Promega Corporation). Both strands of amplified 16S rDNA weresequenced using Bak11W-F 
and Bak-R primers. Forward and reverse DNA strand sequence was aligned using BLAST (bl2seq) 
program available at NCBI [] . 
The finalized sequence of amplified 16S rDNA fragment from each isolate was blasted against 
the collection of non- redundant nucleotide sequence database of NCBI. The isolates were identified 
based on hits analysis from megablast (highly similar sequences) output. The hits of 16S rDNA 
sequences were used in phylogenetic analysis of 16S rDNA sequences of isolates to determine 16S 
rDNA sequence based evolutionary relationship among the isolates and hits.

MSA and tree construction
The MSA of 16S rDNA sequences was carried out using ClustalW (version 1.6) program 
[] . The MSA output from ClustalW was used
the construction of a rooted dendrogram using NJ (Neighbour Joining) method of Saitou and Nei provided 
at the http://align.genome.jp/.

Cucumber cotyledon greening bioassay (CCGB)
The cucumber ( Cucumis sativus L.) seeds (F1 Cucumber 303) were purchased 
from Tai Lung Farm Seed Co Ltd, Taiwan to conduct CCGB. Cucumber seeds were germinated in the 
plastic tray containing tissue paper towel saturated with autoclaved distilled water. Seeds 
were incubated at room temperature (RT) in the dark for 6 days following the guidelines reported 
by Fletcher et al . [] 
for cucumber seed germination. Cotyledons were separated from hypocotyls of 6 day old cucumber 
seedlings. By weighing, cotyledons were added in Petri dishes containing the 10 ml bioassay solution 
supplemented with broth extracts of respective endophytic bacterial isolate. A negative control and a 
positive control (BAP) were used in the assay for comparison purpose by following guidelines of 
Fletcher et al . [] . 
The BAP concentration in positive control was 1 ppm.

Extraction and quantitative estimation of chlorophyll content
Cucumber cotyledon samples along with negative and positive control 
were incubated under fluorescent tube light for 3.5 hours at 27°C 
±2. The cotyledons were ground with 80% acetone with mortar 
and pestle after the incubation. The chlorophyll extracts were collected 
and centrifuged at 4,000 rpm for ten min. The derived supernatant was 
analyzed for total amount of chlorophyll using spectrometer (λ 663nm and 645nm) 
[] .

Results
The inoculated 18 leaves discs on LB medium produced 24 bacterial colonies in total. 
Visibly, three different types of bacterial colonies were observed on the leaf discs margins 
on LB-agar cultures. Three colonies representing three types of colony morphology were 
selected randomly and inoculated in LB medium for their cultivation. Gp e1, 
Gp e2, and Gp e3 code names were given to the randomly 
selected three bacterial putative endophytes. The 16S rDNA fragments were PCR-amplified 
using the lysate of pure cultures of three (Gp e1, Gp e2, 
and Gp e3) bacterial putative endophytes. The size of the amplified 16S rDNA 
fragments was about 794 bp ().

The purified amplified 16S rDNA PCR products were sequenced using the same forward and 
reverse (Bak11W-F and Bak-R) primers used in the PCR. The blastn analysis results showed that 
Gp e1, Gp e2, and Gp e3 isolates are of 
Psuedomonas resinovorans, Paenibacillus polymaxa , 
and Acenitobacter calcoaceticus , respectively. The 16S rDNA sequence of 
Gp e1, Gp e2, and Gp e3 was deposited 
in the international GenBank/DDBJ/EMBL gene sequence database. The GenBank accession numbers 
and the length of deposited 16S rDNA sequences are depicted in the 
(Table 1, see  )

The Gp e1, Gp e2, and Gp e3 16S rDNA sequences and 
their hits from GenBank were used in phylogenetic analysis to find out phylogenetic relationship between 
three isolates and the reported other strains of respective species from different countries. The 16S 
rDNA sequences based dendrogram is shown in  . The source 
and geographical location of different strains of Pseudomonas resinovorans , 
Paenibacillus polymyxa, and Acinetobacter calcoaceticus used in 16S 
rDNA sequencesbased dendrogram construction are depicted in 
(Table 1, see .)

The CCGB results are showed in . In positive control, the cucumber cotyledons 
were treated with 1 ppm authentic cytokinin (BAP; and the total 
amount of chlorophyll content was 177.37 mg per gram of fresh cucumber cotyledons. 
The total amount of chlorophyll content in cucumber cotyledons from negative control and cotyledons treated with
Gp e1, Gp e2, and Gp e3 isolate broth-extracts 
is shown in the .



Discussion
In the natural habitat, plants live in a complex ecosystem where microbial (bacteria and fungi) 
communities interact continuously with plants. The endophytic microbes compete for nutrients and 
water in the host tissues regardless of plant category. The knowledge of the diversity of 
endophytic bacteria in plants in general and medicinal plants in particular is important to 
explore their capabilities in various sectors of biotechnology.

Different plant organs can be used to isolate the cultivable endophytic bacteria. However, 
in this study we have used leaves of G. procumbens plant to isolate the cultivable 
bacterial endophytes. This plant bears lots leaves and leaves are easily available in plenty 
and hence used in the isolation of bacterial endophytes. But, other parts of the plant such as roots 
[–] , 
stems, seeds [–] , 
petioles, tubers tissue, and flowers [] 
can also be used in isolation of endophytes.

The 16S rDNA coded 16S rRNA is a component of the 30S subunit of bacterial (prokaryotic) ribosome. 
The 16S rDNA is 1,542 bp in length [] . 
The prokaryotic 16S rDNA sequence provides bacterial species-specific signature sequences and can be 
used in bacterial identification. Hence, we amplified 16S rRNA encoding gene sequence for the rapid 
and accurate bacterial identification [] 
instead of using traditional phenotypic and biochemical tests based bacterial identification methods. 
We have used the forward and reverse primers that are commonly used for the 16S rDNA amplification in 
sequence based identification of bacteria [–
] . The amplified 16S rDNA fragments are of ˜ 
794 bp as expected based on location of primers. However, only clean sequence was used in 16S rDNA based 
identification of the isolates.

The Gp e1, Gp e2, and Gp e3 cultivable bacterial 
putative endophytic isolates () were 
identified as Psuedomonas resinovorans, Paenibacillus polymaxa , 
and Acenitobacter calcoaceticus , respectively. There are only 61, 338 and 534 
nucleotide entries for various strains of Psuedomonas resinovorans, 
Paenibacillus polymaxa , and Acenitobacter calcoaceticus , 
respectively (September 10, 2010, GenBank Search). However, there are very few or no reports on 
endophytic roles of Psuedomonas resinovorans, Paenibacillus polymaxa , 
and Acenitobacter calcoaceticus . The P. resinovorans strain P-1, 
and P. resinovorans strain LAM 9 reported from Taiwan and Italy 
() are known to have phenol degrading 
and heavy metal resistance properties [–
] . The P. polymyxa strain YRL13 
(accession No: EU373421) and P. polymyxa strain GBR-602 (accession No: 
AY359631) both reported from Korea are known to have antimicrobial and plant growth promoting properties 
that are not verified. The A. calcoaceticus strain LCR102, A. calcoaceticus 
strain HIRFA36 and A. calcoaceticus strain HIRFA33 
() are believed to have Phosphate 
solublizing and plant growth promoting properties but claims are not verified.

The phylogenetic analysis indicates that G. procumbens endophyte 1 
(Gp e1) is closely related to the Psuedomonas resinovorans 
strain mol11 reported from Korea; the G. procumbens endophyte 2 
(Gp e2) is closely related to the Paenibacillus polymyxa 
strain 12170504 reported from China; and the G. procumbens endophyte 3 
(Gp e3) is closely related to the Acenitobacter calcoaceticus 
strain LCR102 reported from India (). 
It is of interest to note that we have used 16S rDNA sequences of Pseudomonas resinovorans 
reported from China, Japan, Italy, Korea, Taiwan, and USA; but interestingly P. resinovorans 
reported from Korea shows close evolutionary relationship with Gp e1 
(see  and ). 
The A. calcoaceticus strain BA60 (accession No: FJ263920) similar to 
Gp e3 is isolated from human blood culture. However, there is no more information 
about role of this bacterium in human body or in the plant host like G. procumbens .

The isolates screening for cytokinin-like compounds using CCGB suggest that Gp e1 
and Gp e2 isolate extracts do contain compounds that acts like cytokinin. The cucumber 
cotyledons treated with Gp e1 and Gp e2 extracts showed 49.5% 
and 9.3% extra amount of chlorophyll in cucumber cotyledons in comparison to negative control 
used in CCGB. Our previous study showed that the cell-free crude broth of endophytes is not suitable in 
CCGB [] . Therefore, extracts were prepared 
from the cell-free broth using ethyl acetate and used in the CCGB. Though, Gp e1 and 
Gp e2 broth extracts are showing positive results in CCGB; these results need to be 
verified using other methods such as liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-TMS) 
[–] 
and or by using other methods described by Ge et al . 
[].

The G. procumbens is an important medicinal plant and in this study only three 
types of bacterial endophytes were found in their leaves. Any individual plant species could contain 
several types of endophytes [] The leaves 
samples used in the isolation of cultivable bacterial putative endophytes in this study are only from 
one place; and leaves samples are from plants that were grown in restricted conditions 
( ). It could be a possible reason for limited number 
of putative endophytes in the leaf samples used. The endophytic population in the other organs 
of the plant such as stem could contain high number of endophytes than that of the leaves. The 
results reported by Magnani et al . (2010) also shows that the plant stem could 
harbors a larger number of different endophytes [] 
compared to leaves, through it could be seasonal.

Gao et al . (2005) has reported that in medicinal plants a seasonal fluctuation 
of the endophytes occurs [] . Therefore, 
we hypothesize that various types of endophytes might be colonizing the G. procumbens 
in addition to the three bacterial putative endophytes reported in this study. Furthermore, we have 
isolated only bacterial endophytes. However, more comprehensive study needs to be done in order to get 
a complete understanding of the association of various (bacterial and fungal)endophytes with the 
G. procumbens and their benefits to the G. procumbens . This type 
of comprehensive study might shade the light on the possible roles of endophytes in the synthesis of 
the medicinally important compounds found in G. procumbens .

Conclusion
The results data show that G. procumbens leaves contains cultivable bacterial 
endophytes (putative) namely, Psuedomonas resinovorans, 
Paenibacillus polymaxa, and Acenitobacter calcoaceticus . 
Furthermore, this study also show that two (Gp e1 and Gp e2) 
out of three isolated bacterial putative endophytes of G. procumbens do produce 
cytokinin-like compounds. However, these cultivable bacterial putative endophytes need to be studied 
further to determine their beneficial roles to the host plant, G. procumbens .

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors are grateful to the Malaysia ' s Ministry of Agriculture and 
Agro Based Industry (MoA) for financial support (Grant Code Number: 05-02- 16-SF1001), 
and to the Forest Research Institute of Malaysia (FRIM) for providing plant material for 
this study.

Citation:Bhore et al; Bioinformation 5(5): 191- 197 (2010)

Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplified 16S rDNA fragments from three isolates of 
bacterial putative endophytes isolated from Sambung Nyawa (Gynura procumbens (Lour.) 
Merr.) leaves. M, 1 kb DNA ladder (DNA marker); Gp e1, Gynura procumbens 
putative endophyte 1; Gp e2, Gynura procumbens putative endophyte 2; 
and Gp e3, Gynura procumbens putative endophyte 3.


Rooted dendrogram showing clustering of Psuedomonas resinovorans, 
Paenibacillus polymaxa, and Acenitobacter calcoaceticus isolated 
from medicinally important Gynura procumbens leaves tissue. Dendrogram was constructed using 16S rDNA sequences of 
three isolates and other strains of respective species reported from different parts of the world. The 16S rDNA sequences for 
different strains of respective bacterial species were obtained from NCBI database. The multiple sequence alignment (MSA) of 16S rDNA sequences 
was carried out using ClustalW (ver. 1.6) by applying default parameters. The MSA output from ClustalW was used for the construction of a 
rooted dendrogram using NJ (Neighbour Joining) method of Saitou and Nei provided 
at the http://align.genome.jp/. 
In the phylogenetic tree, locations of three isolates from G. procumbens are shown in 
green boxes and source of other strains is given in Table 2 (see supplementary material). 
The accession number of the respective 16S rDNA sequence is given in front of the respective species 
(strain) name.


Screening of three endophytic bacterial putative endophytes of G. procumbens 
for cytokinin-like compounds using cucumber cotyledon greening bioassay (CCGB). The Gp e1, 
Gp e2, and Gp e3 represent cotyledons treated with broth-extracts of 
G. procumbens putative endophytes 1, 2 and 3 respectively. Pcon, positive control; Ncon, 
negative control; positive control is with 1 ppm (BAP), and negative control is without BAP and extract. 
Bars indicate the standard error.

The plantlets collection of Sambung Nyawa [ Gynura procumbens 
(Lour.) Merr.] at Forest Research Institute of Malaysia (FRIM), Malaysia. The plant material 
used in isolation of endophytic bacteria was collected from FRIM (Photography credit: Preveena J., 
AIMST University).

