Background
Dengue viral infection poses a growing public health
problem in various tropical and subtropical countries.
Dengue was circulated as a quasi-species, which is
categorized into four serotypes []. Dengue virus belongs to
the genus Flavivirus of the family Flaviviridae []. There are
four serotypes of dengue virus (DEVI-IV) which causes
dengue hemorrhagic fever and dengue shock syndrome [,]. The infection caused by dengue viruses are widely
recognized as a major public health concern, with more than
one million cases of dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) per
year with fatality rates 1 to 10%. The most susceptible to the
disease are children and young adults.

Dengue is a positive stranded RNA virus and the genome
encodes a single polyprotein []. A comprehensive
assessment of phylogenetic relationship of genus Flavivirus
was determined. Three RNA domains (Peptidase_S7,
DEXHc and Flavi_NS5) were found conserved in the genus
Flavivirus. The conserved RNA domains help in processing
of the polyprotein into mature protein subunits. DEXHc
contributes in unwinding of nucleic acids for various aspects
of RNA metabolism, nuclear transcription, pre mRNA
splicing, ribosome biogenesis, nucleo-cytoplasmic transport,
translation, RNA decay and organellar gene expression and
flavi_NS5 that possess a number of short regions and motifs
homologous to other RNA directed RNA polymerases [].

The development of an anti-viral drug or vaccine target is
still a non-trivial task for dengue virus. Therefore, it is
important to understand RNA structures. RNA structures are
characterized with secondary structures and are less complex
than protein structures. It is also known that the single
stranded RNA structures are often stabilized hydrogen bonds
[]. MFold is a well known tool used for prediction of RNA
secondary structure. RNA secondary structure plays an
important role viral multiplication. It is known that the
evolution of virus RNA genome is subjected to various
structural constrains including RNA structures []. Therefore,
it is important to predict and discuss RNA secondary
structures for conserved domains of peptidase_S7 and DexHc
in dengue virus.

Methodology
Dengue genome sequence and conserved domain
The complete genome sequence of dengue viruses was
downloaded from GenBank at National Center for
Biotechnological Information (NCBI) [] and the Universal
Virus Database of the International Committee on Taxonomy
of Viruses genome database (ICTVdB) []. The complete
DNA sequences of dengue virus were used to identify the
conserved domain using the conserved domain database
(CDD) at NCBI.

RNA secondary structure prediction package
Prediction of RNA folding of the conserved domains of
dengue virus was completed using the online MFold package
[]. MFold is the most widely used algorithms (uses genetic
algorithm) for RNA secondary structure prediction, which
are based on a search for the minimal free energy state. The
algorithm allows structures to be removed at later stages of
the simulation if other pairings are found to be more
favorable. This is in addition to the possibility of growing of
new stems. The algorithm also allows the prediction of
certain tertiary interactions (example, RNA pseudo-knots).

Discussion
The RNA genome of dengue virus contains conserved
domains of peptidase_S7 and dexHc among different strains
(Table 1 in ). Therefore, it is
important to predict their secondary structures ( and
). We used MFold (software package) to predict
their secondary structures with energy calculations ().
The dengue I stain showed the highest free energy for
peptidase_S7 with δG -38.50 and DexH with δG -30.50.
However, the dengue IV virus showed the lowest free energy
for peptidase_S7 (with δG -42.30) and DexHc (with δG -
42.80). We find structural similarity with other predicted
RNA structures described henceforth below.

Several reports are available on the RNA secondary structure
prediction. The genomic diversity of argentine tospo viruses
from different geographical areas with several distinct crops
has been reported. A 450 nt fragment of the N gene were
substantially described. A partial sequence of the N gene was
able to classify local isolates within three tospo virus species
previously described (Tomato spotted wilt virus, TSWV;
tomato chlorotic spot virus, TCSV and groundnut ring spot
virus, GRSV) []. Six evolutionarily conserved stem-loop
structures in the NS5B encoding region and two in core gene
have been reported. This observation relates to that found in
HCV, GB virus-B (GBV-B) with similar internal base pairing
in its coding region [].

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) possesses extensive RNA secondary
structure in the core and NS5B-encoding regions of the
genome. A program (STRUCTUR_DIST) was developed to
the analyses of multiple RNA folding patterns predicted
using MFOLD to determine the evolutionary conservation of
predicted stem loop structures. This method helps to analyse
frequencies of covariant sites in predicted RNA folding
between HCV genotypes []. A comparison of the structure
of the 3`-untranslated region (3`‐UTR) of HGV/GBV-C with
the upstream NS5B coding sequence has been shown. The
secondary structure predictive algorithms and analysis of
covariance between HGV/GBVC genotypes 1 ‐ 4 and the
more distantly related HGV/GBV-C chimpanzee variant,
show RNA secondary structure formation in both regions. In
particular, the NS5B region contained long stem-loop
structures of up to 38 internally paired nucleotides which
were evolutionarily conserved between human, chimpanzee
and HGV/GBV-C variants []. The NS1 gene of Influenza
virus is stable during evolution. The computational tool has
been used to model its RNA secondary structure (free energy
ranged between -222.90 to-251.10 Kcal/mol) for nine
different strains of Influenza A virus [].

RNA secondary structure prediction was combined with
comparative sequence analysis to construct models of folding
for the distal 380 nucleotides of the 3’-untranslated region
(3`‐UTR) of Yellow fever virus (YFV). A number of
structural elements that are thermodynamically stable,
conserved in shape, and confirmed by compensatory
mutations have been shown []. At the same time structural
polymorphisms were observed among strains of YFV. The
observation of a strong association between secondary
structure of the 3`-UTR and virulence of YFV may help
elucidate the molecular mechanisms of virus attenuation.
This may lead to the development of new strategies directed towards rational modification of secondary structure of the
3`‐UTR.

Prediction of evolutionarily conserved secondary structure
motifs in the genomic RNAs of the family Flaviviridae has
been reported []. This virus family consists of the three
genera Flavivirus, Pestivirus, Hepacivirus and a group of GB
virus C / hepatitis G virus (with an uncertain taxonomic
classification). RNA secondary structures for 5S rDNA of 37
bacteria have been investigated []. Data show that the
lowest free energy of the 5S rDNA is related to the most
primitive bacteria and high free energy always indicates less
stability during the evolution.

Conclusions
The prediction of RNA secondary structure was performed
for peptidase_S7 and DexHc of dengue virus serotypes. The
predicted structures of conserved RNA domains provide
structural insights for potential function in RNA mediated
viral replication.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank Indian Council of Medical Research, New Delhi
(64/2/07/BIF-BMS) and Department of Biotechnology, New
Delhi.

Citation:Somvanshi &amp; Seth, Bioinformation 3(10): 435-439 (2009)

RNA secondary structures of peptidase_S7 conserved domain for dengue serotypes.

RNA secondary structures of DeXHc conserved domains of dengue serotypes.

