Background
India possesses the largest population of cattle in the world and Vechur (Bos 
indicus) is one of the indigenous cattle breeds of Kerala, India. It is the smallest 
cow (nearly 90 cm high) in the world that produces relatively high amount of 
milk as compared to other breeds. Moreover, it has got a low level of feed 
requirements and high disease resistance []. Milk of Vechur cow has got a 
high proportion of small fat globules and saturated fatty acids, hence suitable 
for infants and sick [].  
This milk is considered of medicinal value and is used 
in Ayurveda system of medicine. Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) 
has listed Vechur cow breed under the category of critical breeds. Lactoferrin 
(LTf) belongs to the serum transferrin gene family and the bovine LTf gene is 
localized to chromosome 22 and syntenic group U12 
[]. It is a potential gene 
for milk composition and body measurement traits in dairy cows. Though, 
genotype, sex, age, breed, herd, location, and other random environmental 
factors affect milk composition in the organism, single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) reportedly have some very important role. Though 
most of the SNPs are silent, without an observable phenotype, some SNPs 
make an individual unique, genetically. Apart from LTf's antibacterial and 
tumor growth-inhibiting functions, its physiological roles in bone growth and 
the efficient expression of the milk protein are also very important  
[]. Few 
SNPs of the bovine LTf gene have been reported. Associations between bovine 
LTf gene polymorphism and somatic cell count in milk produce are well 
reported  [] 
by many scientists but are not much studied in this species. The 
information required for determining and characterizing a protein's function 
are hidden in its amino acid sequence. The physicochemical properties of the 
amino acids present in the proteins are well understood with the use of 
computational tools used in proteomics and molecular biology  
[]. If the 
bioinformatics methods are standardized and optimized, it may lead to the 
characterization of sequences and identification of functional targets. 
Moreover, many attempts have been well documented for characterization and 
prediction of functional pockets of a query protein by its amino acid sequence 
[]. 
It is widely recognized that mutations in evolutionarily conserved sites tend 
to impair protein function. There is also weak evidence that protein impairment 
are somewhat correlated with the physicochemical difference between the 
original amino acid and the missense variant 
[]. Much attention has been 
focused on the possible phenotypic effect of SNPs that cause amino acid 
changes. The volume of available information together with the development 
of more sophisticated methods of protein structure prediction has led to 
different attempts of relating the effect of amino acid changes to structural 
distortions and, consequently possible phenotypic effects 
[]. Recently we 
cloned and sequenced the full coding region of LTf gene of Vechur breed of B. 
indicus. The objectives of the present study are to detect SNPs in the LTf gene, 
its physicochemical characterization and binding site analysis in some animals 
of B. indicus Vechur breed and its comparison with 
‘wild type’ B. taurus using 
bioinformatics tools.

Materials and Methodology
Analysis and comparison of amino acid sequences
MUSCLE (Multiple Sequence Comparison by Log- Expectation) software 
employed for comparative analysis, exercises a progressive algorithm based 
method that not only provides better average accuracy but better speed and 
hence was employed for multiple sequence alignment  
[]. The translated 
sequences were then again compared to check if these variations cause 
substitution of one amino acid for another in the protein (missense mutation). 
Physicochemical analysis of the sequences namely molecular weight, 
theoretical pI, amino acid composition, instability index, aliphatic index and 
grand average of hydropathicity (GRAVY) were performed using 
PROTPARAM tool [http://www.expasy.ch/tools/protparam.html]. 
Antimicrobial peptide prediction was computed using APD2: Antimicrobial 
Peptide Predictor [www.aps.unmc.edu/AP/about.php] and AntiBP Server 
[www.imtech.res.in/raghava/antibp/index.html]. 

Structure prediction and analysis
LTf protein homologs from Vechur breed and the  B. taurus sequences were 
modelled using ‘Modeller9v8’ software which implements comparative protein 
structure modelling by spatial restraints to construct protein models 
[,
]. 
LTf protein variants were modelled using structure of ‘diferric buffalo 
lactoferrin’ (PDB ID: 1BIY) obtained from protein data bank. To gain more 
insight into locations of these amino acids, the domains were predicted and 
analyzed using PDBsum from Procheck. Procheck verifies the stereo chemical 
quality of a protein structure and provides an at-a-glance overview of every 
macromolecular structure deposited in the Protein Data Bank. PyMOL program 
was employed for interactive visualization and analysis of molecular structures 
[]. 
Structural superposition was performed between the B. indicus protein 
variants and the  B. taurus protein sequence using a combination of 
MatchMaker and Match- Align subroutine of Chimera 
[]. A novel score 
incorporating both secondary structure and residue type is used to align the 
sequences in Match Maker while Match- Align constructs sequence alignments 
from pre-existing superpositions of structures. These tools when used together 
enhance the understanding of sequence information in the context of structure 
and vice versa [].

Binding pocket exploration
Surface topography of proteins was computed using CASTp server  
[]. The 
weighted Delaunay triangulation and the alpha complex for shape 
measurements method is utilized by CASTp server that compute identification 
and measurements of surface accessible pockets as well as interior inaccessible 
cavities, for proteins and other molecules. This tool measures analytically the 
area and volume of each pocket and cavity, both in solvent accessible surface 
and molecular surface. 

Result and Discussion
Comparative sequence analysis
In the present study, the full coding region of the LTf gene of Vechur breed of 
B.indicus was cloned and sequenced. The LTf sequences of five animals of 
B.indicus  Vechur breed namely LTfV1 (NCBI ID: ACY01187), LTfV2, 
LTfV3, LTfV4 and LTfV5 (Accession Nos. JF926526, JF926527 and 
JF926528) were analyzed using various bioinformatics tools to find variation in 
LTf of Vechur breed and  B.taurus LTf represented as LTfBt (NCBI ID: 
AAA30609). These variations in the sequences could be the probable cause for 
better milk yield in Vechur breed. Comparative sequence analysis for Vechur 
breeds LTf gene samples with ‘wild type’  B.taurus revealed fifteen single 
nucleotide variations at the very onset using MUSCLE  [] software, resulting 
in eleven amino acid differences. The assembled results present evidence that, 
the difference in LTf gene might have potential effect on milk composition in 
these species. Arginine residue at position 176 in all five LTfV samples, at 264 
in LTfV3 and LTfV4 while at 632 position in LTfV3, LTfV4 and LTfV5 are of 
prime importance. This study explains primarily the effect of SNPs detected in 
the LTf gene. The nonsynonymous mutation that results in more arginine 
residue in LTfV samples further illustrate powerful bioactivity of LTf in the 
Vechur breed that is expected to have an increase of a part of phenotypic 
variation, especially on milk protein.

Physicochemical characterization
(see ) provides details of the 
physicochemical analysis which shows more of the positively charged residues 
in the sequences and shows instability index ranging from 40.47 to 41.34. A 
protein whose instability index is smaller than 40 (+5%) is predicted as stable 
hence these proteins might be stable in a test tube. GRAVY indicates the 
solubility of the proteins and was computed negative in all the samples 
(hydrophilic). Calculation of protein isoelectric point (theoretical pI) and 
molecular weight (Mw) of a specified amino acid sequence are useful to know 
the approximate region of a 2-D gel where a protein may be found. Theoretical 
pI ranges from 8.69 to 8.76 in the given samples, showing protein pI as basic. 
The PROTPARAM tool calculates an accurate (+/­ 5% in most cases) molar 
extinction coefficient for proteins at 280 nm, simply from knowledge of the
amino acid composition. The extinction coefficient indicates how much light a 
protein absorbs at a certain wavelength and is useful while purifying a protein. 
Our results establish that difference in sequence at discovered positions leads to 
physicochemical variation and is highly predictive of the impact of amino acid 
substitutions on protein function. Antimicrobial peptides are an evolutionarily 
conserved component of the innate immune response which demonstrates it as 
novel therapeutic agents. In our desire to better understand the functions of 
antimicrobial properties of LTf in innate immunity in Vechur breed with that of 
the wild type, APD2: Antimicrobial Peptide Predictor and AntiBP Server was 
employed for the prediction of the antibacterial peptides using antimicrobial 
peptide database (APD). The distribution of sequences in antimicrobial motif 
was predominantly studied that result in many potential antibacterial peptides 
that need to be investigated further for confirmation. These softwares 
confidently predict antimicrobial peptides at 61 and 428 positions and show 
some chance of being an antimicrobial peptide at 538 and 546 positions in the 
LTfV samples which was not found in LTfBt. This could be the cause for 
enhanced innate immunity in Vechur breed  (see 
). 
Functional difference in Vechur breeds and the B. taurus LTf may 
be due to the differences in standard physicochemical properties.  

Structure prediction and analysis
In order to determine difference in tertiary structure LTfV protein variants and 
the reference LTfBt samples were modeled using coordinates of diferric 
buffalo LTf (PDB: 1BIY) [] and the modeled structures were validated with 
the Ramachandran plot as well as its RMSD value. Based on an analysis of 118 
structures of resolution of at least 2.0 Angstroms and R-factor no greater than 
20%, a good quality model would be expected to have over 90% residues in the 
most favored regions []. LTfV1 and LTfV2 resulted 90.5%, LTfV3 and 
LTfV4 resulted 90.6% while LTfV5 resulted 91.5% residues in the most 
favored regions in the Ramachandran plot, hence was designated as a stable 
structure. The RMSD value also scored less then one, an acceptable range for 
all the samples modeled. To gain more insight into locations of these amino 
acids, the modeled structures were superimposed using Match- Align 
subroutine of Chimera software. The result demonstrates moderate difference 
in structure at 5' end for 48 residues. This could be quite significant as residue 
property plot confirmed residues ranging from 30 to 48 forming helical region
(). Moreover, the structure analysis from residue property plot 
confirmed the secondary structure elements of some of the SNP positions in 
beta sheet region (176 and 428 positions) and helix region (546, 627 and 632 
positions)  () indicating an important structural and functional role of 
these residues. It is very interesting to note that LTfV samples have more alpha 
helical strands than beta sheets which are also found more than LTfBt sample 
when compared. This can be of functional significance especially with the 
disparity in some of the alpha helices. This finding is substantial and falls in 
line with the previously documented studies of computational protein design 
efforts on the surface of GCN4, a homodimeric coiled coil that suggest helix 
propensity is the key factor in sequence design for surface helical positions 
[]. 
The difference in size of the side chains of residues suggests that it may
have significant local influence on the structure. Result from SMART genomes 
[] 
server suggests three transferrin domains in LTfV samples, one low 
complexity motif from residue 7 to 20, and two confidently predicted domains 
from 25 to 363 positions and from 364 to 697 positions.

Binding pocket exploration
While many surface sites in proteins can tolerate a wide variety of side chains, 
surface residues can still have a significant effect on protein structure and 
stability. Binding sites and active sites of proteins and DNAs are often 
associated with structural pockets and cavities. The binding pocket search 
resulted in 136 binding pockets that did not show reasonable difference in all 
the structures except that of LTfV5, and need to be investigated further. This 
result suggests that despite of some variation leading to physicochemical 
variations, the binding sites in four LTfV samples are exactly similar as in 
LTfBt, while it is found rather different in LTfV5 sample. Based on area and 
volume of the binding pockets, four pockets were selected as major binding 
pockets for further study  (see ). This study 
has its importance in drug development based on LTf protein structure, as one 
drug developed for wild type can also be employed for other variants with 
similar structure. The procured consensus region may be utilized for effective 
drug designing []. Subsequently, analysis was preformed to discover binding 
pocket position and the residues located in it  (). Binding pocket 
exploration produced a total of 136 binding pockets. Four binding pockets were 
considered ‘major’ based on area and volume of the site. The largest binding 
pocket  (Green color in ) discloses eight aspartic acid residues, one 
tyrosine residue and no histidine residue. The second (Blue color in )
and fourth (Yellow color in ) binding pockets show all the three amino 
acid residues but one aspartic acid. Third pocket though (Cyan color in 
) 
provides all the three amino acid residues in the required number for iron 
binding that is two aspartic acids and one each of histidine and tyrosine. The 
708 amino acids of LTf, forms two homologous globular domains named Nand C-lobes. 
N-lobe corresponds to amino acid residues 1-333 and C-lobe to 
345-692. Literature suggests that N lobe is important for binding and the ends 
of the domains are connected by a short α-helix 
[]. The metal binding sites of 
transferrin domains are localized in each of the two protein globules. There, 
each ion is bonded with six ligands: four from the polypeptide chain (two 
tyrosine residues, one histidine residue and one aspartic acid residue) and two 
from carbonate or bicarbonate ions. Therefore, we can establish as per the 
literature discussed above that the second binding pocket is considered more 
prominent for binding, as it does not only contain all the three required residues 
for iron binding but also falls in N-lobe region. 

Conclusions
In conclusion, SNPs identified in the LTfV samples result in missense 
mutations as well. The sequence and structural difference due to these 
variations was investigated in the present research. Our results provide 
evidence that the SNPs detected in the LTf gene might have potential effects on 
milk composition. Binding site analysis demonstrates one major domain that 
could be a common binding pocket to all the samples that could be utilized for 
effective drug designing. Furthermore, antimicrobial peptide regions at SNP 
positions might be a reason for improved antimicrobial property of the milk of 
Vechur breed. Therefore, further study will be essential using the SNP for 
marker-assisted selection in larger populations to substantiate the result. 

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are thankful to Chairman, SCMS Group of Educational Institutions for 
providing infrastructure facilities for carrying out the work.

Citation:Shashidharan et al, Bioinformation 6(7): 275-278 (2011)

A curtailed output of secondary structure elements in LTfV5: Alpha 
helix, beta sheet and random coil location in the curtailed output from residue 
property plot. The eleven amino acid residue variations have revealed a beta 
sheet region at 176 and 428 positions, helix region at 546, 627 and 632 
positions while others are found to be in random coil region.

Binding pocket location LTfV1: The figure from CASTp software 
shows a wire frame structure of LTfV1, showing four major domains in 
different-colored space fill model.

