Background
Viral hepatitis is one of the important public health problems. There are 350
million patients, who are carrier of hepatitis B at present, worldwide 
[]. The
Majority of the Asian population is affected. Particularly the situation in
Pakistan is alarming []. 
Pakistani population has a carrier rate of 3-4%. Some
of the community based studies showed the presence of 31% hepatitis B core
antibodies and 4.3% of hepatitis B surface antigen on tested samples 
[]. There
are two types of antiviral treatments, Interferon and nucleoside/nucleotide
analogues. The expenses for antiviral treatment are considerable in developing
and developed countries []. 
Hence the appropriate treatment selection has a
major role in the cost and cure of the disease. The dose of the drug and
selection of the drug can be determined by the knowledge of drug's
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. The lack of sufficient information
for pharmacokinetics of a drug may not produce the desired results. Artificial
Neural Network (ANN) provides a novel model-independent approach to
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics data []. This is why ANN can
predict the drug treatment accurately based on the factors or symptoms of the
patients. ANN has been used as a prediction tool for classification and decision
support in many fields like medicine []. ANN is based on artificial
intelligence (AI) established in the area of computer sciences, which is capable
of producing software which can do sophisticated, intelligent, and can perform
computations similar to those of human brain []. Neural Networks collect the
information by detecting relationship patterns in data as the brain does [].

Computational artificial intelligence is mainly concerned with the construction
of AI programs that perform diagnosis and make therapy recommendations
based on purely statistical and probabilistic methods. [] ANN provides a more
advanced model of univariate and multivariate analysis, which imitates the
nervous system in its function. It consists of a group of input and output
neurons, simulating receptors and effectors, and a group of hidden neurons
layer which simulates inter-neurons. [] Neural Network is basically an
interconnected assembly of simple processing elements, units or nodes, whose
functionality is loosely based on the animal neuron. The processing ability of
network is stored in the inter-unit connection strengths, or weights, obtained by
process of adaptation to, or learning from, a set of training patterns []. The
therapy recommendation is too important for the curing of hepatitis B
especially with time duration. Hence the concept was developed to create an
ANN system through supervised learning of Hepatitis B patients samples to
predict the treatment strategy i.e. lamivudine only or lamivudine + Interferon
on the basis of viral load, visit number, treatment duration, ethnic area, sex, and
age. Following were the aims of this study. (a) To set up an artificial neural
network system. (b) To develop a computational model to recommend the
treatment plan of the newly registering patients based on ANN prediction. (c)
To develop a database of hepatitis B patients. (d) To develop a Management
Information System for handling present and upcoming HBV patients.

Methodology
Sera samples were collected from HBV infected patients, DNA was extracted
and then PCR was performed before the start of the treatment, at 3 months, at 6
months and in follow up periods. Two types of treatment were given to the
patients i.e. Lamivodine only and Lamivodine + Interferon. The complete
demographic, diagnostic and treatment history of patients were being recorded.
The front end of system was developed in Dot net technologies i.e. Visual
Studio 2005, at backend a normalized database has been developed in MYSQL.

Statistical Analysis and testing
Neural Network modeling was applied to get the required results by sigmoid
activation function. ANN has been developed by creating single-layered
Perceptron by Feed-forward Networks and back propagation methods through
supervised learning of a sample of 90 patients to predict the treatment strategy.
The sigmoid function was calculated through logistic regression. The system
was built in two phases, in phase one the system was given training to learn and
in second phase it was test against training.

Results and Discussion
Hepatitis B virus infections are well known to be the major cause of mortality
and morbidity worldwide, especially among developing countries 
[]. Hepatitis
B is endemic in Africa, Eastern Europe, Asia and America 
[]. Our study is
primarily focused on Pakistani population. The Pakistan HBV infection rate is
known to be increasing day by day owing to the lack of proper health facilities,
poor economic status, etc. []. The drug selection for HBV infection is an
important factor not only for the treatment of the disease, but also has an
impact on the economic status of the country. The cost of anti-viral therapy is
always considerably high, globally. In addition, the drug may have many side
effects like fatigue, flu like syndrome etc. Most importantly, only a few
patients may achieve a response after therapy 
[]. Hence, prediction or
suggestion of a treatment is crucial. Therefore, a system was developed which
predicts accurate treatment and treatment procedure. In addition, a database
information system was developed, to save the patient data. The latest
technique used for accurate prediction is artificial neural networks, which is
actually a novel independent approach to analyze the data for prediction 
[].
For a linear relationship, certain assumptions must be met within the data. In
case of data deviation from assumptions is met, assumptions-free modeling
approach such as Artificial Neural Network is utilized.

An ANN was developed by creating single layer Perceptron, Feed-forward
Networks and back propagation method. The system was created through
supervised learning of a sample of 90 patients, to predict the antiviral treatment
strategy, i.e. Lamivodine only and Lamivodine+Interferon on the basis of viral
load, visit number, treatment duration, ethnic area, sex, and age. In previous
study it has been proved that the factors like age, genotype, viral load, Alt
levels, and liver function tests are the strong predictors for antiviral therapy 
[].
The same concept was carried out in another study where ANN was developed
using SNP's []. 
The age was categorized into two groups above 40 and below
40 yrs. The viral load has two categories, below 10,000 and above 10,000.
Ethnic area was categorized into NWFP, Punjab, Sindh and Baluchistan. There
were 73 (81.1%) males and 17(18.9 %) females. Hence, the prevalence is high
among males. 72 (80%) patients were below age 40 and 18 (20%) were above
40, hence it is more common among young men. 38 (42.2%) patients belong to
NWFP, 25 (27.8%) belong to Punjab, 16 (17.8%) from Sindh and 11(12.2%)
from Baluchistan. The set of all known samples were broken into two
orthogonal (independent) sets, training set and testing set to test the
performance of the neural network. The system was provided with 68 (77.3%)
samples to train the network, and 20 (22.7%) were tested against training. A
total of six variables were used as input against which a hidden layer of two
neurons were developed. The weights were assigned between the input and the
hidden neurons. The weights of hidden neuron and output were calculated by
using the Sigmoid Activation function (see ).
In input layer, H (1:1) is the weight between the input and one hidden neuron in
the hidden layer. H (1:2) is with neuron 2. While in hidden layer 1 the weights
are H (1:1) and H (1:2) for the hidden neurons and the output. The diagram of
the neural networks is shown in . A significant reduction in the error
was found with training and testing the system showing high precision level.
The overall standard error (SE) of the system was 1.214. To validate the
prediction model, we calculated sensitivity (SEN), specificity (SPE), positive
prediction value (PPV) and negative prediction value (NPV). The overall
accuracy by the ANN was 92% which is found to be almost same in another
study of FFNN using SNP's []. 
The value of SEN, Sep, PPV, and NPV were
0.928, 0.8333, 0.93 and 0.83 respectively.

Conclusion
We have developed a prediction model to predict the appropriate drug through
an advanced methodology based on phenotypic characteristics. The results
have shown that a trained ANN model is a promising method for providing the
inference from measure of phenotypic traits. Our model achieves a higher
successful rate of prediction and allows patients and doctors to make more
informed decision. Based on the experience of appropriate therapy for HBV
infection with this system we can predict 92% satisfactory therapy for the
infection with low error rate. The error can be further reduced by increasing the
sample size. The choice of the drug is not only helping to cure the disease but
also it reduces the side effects of the drug and the cost of the therapy especially
in the developing world.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Iqbal et al Bioinformation 6(6): 237-239 (2011)

Model Diagram. Where H(1:1) and H(1:2) are the hidden neurons

