Background
With over 30,000 isoprenoids being structurally identified, most of them
are of plant origin and represent the largest family of natural compounds
[]. 
They function in respiration, signal transduction, cell division,
membrane architecture, photosynthesis, and growth regulation 
[].
Furthermore, they also play an important role in the exchange of signals
between plants and their environment [] 
or in defense against pathogens.These structurally diverse compounds all originate 
from a branched fivecarbon unit, the so‐called active isoprene, isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP),
and its isomer dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAPP). The key enzyme of the
classical mevalonate pathway in plants is 3‐hydroxy‐3‐methylglutarylcoenzyme
A (HMG‐CoA) reductase (HMGR, EC 1.1.1.34). It catalyzes the
formation of mevalonate by two successive reductions of HMG003200052010CoA,
using two molecules of NADPH as cofactor. Genome sequencing has
identified hmgr genes in organisms from all three domains of life, and over
150 HMGR sequences are recorded in public databases. Higher animals,
archaea, and eubacteria have only a single hmgr gene, where as in plants,
which use both HMGR003200052010dependent and HMGR‐independent pathways to
synthesize isoprenoids, have multiple HMGR isozymes that appear to have
arisen by gene duplication and subsequent sequence divergence 
[].
Sequence comparison among HMGRs reveals two distinct classes:
eukaryotic HMGRs (class I) and prokaryotic HMGRs (class II)
[].
Artemisinin, a sesquiterpene-lactone, has been isolated from the aerial
parts of Artemisia annua L. plants. Besides being currently the best
therapeutic agent against both drug003200052010resistant and cerebral malaria causing
strains of Plasmodium sp. [], 
it is also effective against other infectious diseases such as schistosomiasis, hepatitis B 
and leishmmaniasis [,
,]. 
The potent antimalarial sesquiterpene lactone, artemisinin, is produced
in low quantities by the plant A. annua L. and hence a serious limitation to
the commercialization of the drug [,
]. Research on artemisinin
metabolic engineering showed that overexpressing a key enzyme in
isopeprenoid biosynthesis could elevate the level of the sesquiterpene final
product []. Also, mevalonate 
is utilized as precursor in the synthesis of various terpenes including artemisinin hence, 
we hypothesized that artemisinin biosynthesis and its accumulation in A. annua 
L. plants can be increased through modulation of HMGR activity and MVA level 
[].The
present study therefore, has been conducted to understand and elucidate the
3‐D structure of HMG CoA reductase of A. annua by homology modeling.
Knowledge gained from its 3‐D structure with functionally important
domains and structural features is essential for establishing importance and
regulatory mechanism at molecular level as well to target the protein
metabolic engineering to enhance biosynthesis of artemisinin.

Methodology
Datasets
The HMG Co A reductase protein sequences of A. annua; AHM1, AHM4
and HMGR1 (NCBI accession numbers and AAA68965, AAA68966,
AAD47596; UniProt acc. Nos. Q43318, Q43319 and Q9SWQ3) and other
sequences examined in this study were retrieved from the public databases
[,
].

Physicochemical analysis and Homology Modeling
Theoretical pI and molecular weight were determined using the ProtParam
at Expasy server []. 
The amino acid sequence of AHM1 protein wassubmitted 
to TMHMM server for the presence of hydropathic transmembranous
regions [,
]. BLAST‐p against PDB database at
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST
 was done to find experimentally determined 3D structural homologue of AHM1 protein. 
Further, Clustral W analysis showed maximum identity of AHM1 protein with Human HMG‐COA reductase 
(PDB ID: 1DQ8), (sequence identity 56 %)[,
,]. 
Therefore, 3‐D structure of AHM1 (566 amino acids) was generatedby using 1DQ8 as template by Swiss 
Model Server at expasy.org [,
,]
 and visualized by RASMOL [,
]. The functional domains of
AHM1 of A. annua were obtained by submitting 3‐D structure to Profunc
server at http://www.ebi.ac.uk 
[,
]. Prediction of secondary structurewas done at Pdbsum 
http://www.ebi.ac.uk 
[,
,].The stereo chemical
quality of the structure was analyzed using PROCHECK &amp; WHAT IF
serve [,
]. The Ramchandran map 
[] was generated to check peptide
bond planarity, bond lengths, bond angles, hydrogen bond geometry, and
side chain conformations of protein structures as a function of atomic
resolution.

Results and Discussion
Analysis of protein sequence
The HMG Co A reductase protein sequences of A. annua (Q43318,
Q43319 and Q9SWQ3) were retrieved from NCBI. Clustral W results
showed the close similarity between all three. The physicochemical
analysis of HMGRs of A. annua through Protparm, suggests pI range form
6.52‐8.2 (Table 1, see ). 
Sequence comparison among HMGRs reveals two distinct classes: eukaryotic HMGRs (class I)
and prokaryotic HMGRs (class II) []. 
The BLAST003200052010p analysis of AHM1 protein against PDB database and Clustral W analysis showed that it has
highest sequence identity to HMGR from the human (class I) (56 %; PDB:
1DQ8A) and minimal to HMGR from Pseudomonas mevalonii (class II)
suggesting that it belongs to class I HMGRs. The TMHMM plot suggests
the presence of two major hydropathic trans‐membranous regions at N
terminus (37‐59 and 80‐102) which again supports that it belongs to class I
HMGRs as class II HMGRs are soluble proteins and they lack the
transmembrane domain. The structure prediction program and intrinsic
disorder prediction suggest that HMGR proteins have predominant helical
structure (˜18 distinct helical blocks) with coil and extended coil structure
().

Homology modeling of AHM1 from A. annua L. plant
Most functional restraints on evolutionary divergence operate at the level
of tertiary structure hence 3‐D structures are more conserved in evolution
than sequence []. 
The 3-D structure of protein is an important source of
information to better understand the function of a protein, its interactions
with other compounds (ligands, proteins or DNA) and to understand
phenotypical effects of mutations []. 
We have used in present studyhomology modeling method to generate the 3‐D structure. The 3‐D
structure generated by SM server and visualized by Rasmol showed the
predominance of ‐ helix (18) and β strands (11) arranged in two sheets
(). The primary sequence of the initial 146 amino acid residues
present at the N-terminus of the AHM1 do not showed any significant
sequence homology to the template protein, Human HMGR (1DQ8)
sequence deposited at the PDB data bank therefore, this fragment was
excluded during the modeling. This initial fragment however, showed the
presence of two trans-membranous domains suggesting that they probably
anchor protein molecule to the membrane, positioning both N‐ and Ctermini
in the cytosol. The Profunc results suggest the presence of two
major domains substrate (HMG‐CoA) binding domain and co‐factor
(NADPH) binding domain (). The fold of substrate domain is
unique to HMGRs. The 3‐D structure of the catalytic portion of AHM1
shows three domains: an N‐terminal ‘N-domain‘, a large ‘L‐domain‘ and a
small ‘S-domain‘. The N‐domain is the smallest of the three domains and
is α-helical and connects the catalytic portion of HMGR to the membrane
domain in full length protein. The fold of the L‐domain (residues 212‐274
and 378‐555) is unique to HMGRs. Its architecture resembles a prism,
with 28‐residue helix forming the central core (). The S-domain
(residues 276‐351) is inserted into the L‐domain and probably forms the
binding site for NADP(H). Detailed analysis show three catalytically
active residues E234GC, DK375K, GQD451 (). The solvent
accessibility calculation by WESA server showed that E234 and D451 are
present in buried form and may be exposed once ligand binds to K375 
[,]. 
The HMG‐CoA reductase is phosphorylated and inactivated in vitro by the AMP-activated protein kinase 
[]. The presence of S in the
conserved sequence NRS555 suggests that AHM1 may also be regulated in
the similar manner ().

Homology models validated by PROCHECK essentially satisfy the stereochemical
parameters with well‐refined structures at similar resolutions.
The distribution of residues in the most favored regions of the
Ramachandran plot for AHM1 is 88.3 %. Various studies on structure of
catalytic domain have revealed that substrate recognition and catalysis
require dimerization of two HMGR molecules through this domain to form
the substrate-binding and active site []. 
Thus, it is assumed that in A.annua also, the enzymatically active form 
of HMGR may be a tetramer. The presence of the HMGR isoforms in A. annua 
suggests that the isoprenoid biosynthetic pathway is very complex and its metabolic
engineering requires the understanding of coordinated activity and specific
role of each individual HMGR isoform. Thus, integrating data from
metabolomics, proteomics, and transcriptomics will greatly enhance our
ability to determine the interactions between components of plant systems
and lead to a better understanding of the regulation of plant metabolism
networks for enhancing the concentration of desired product.

Conclusions
Although artemisinin is an effective medicine for treating malaria, the
application of this medicine is limited by the availability of the source. The
artemisinin content in the leaves or florets of A. annua is very low, and the
chemical method for the synthesis of this compound is difficult. These
factors make the medicine expensive and hardly available on a global scale
for patients. Research on artemisinin metabolic engineering showed that
overexpressing a key enzyme in isopeprenoid biosynthesis could elevate
the level of the sesquiterpene final product.The analysis of structure build
through homology modeling shows that AHM1 from A. annua L. plant
consists of two major domains: N‐terminal a transmembrane domain that
probably anchors the protein molecule to the endoplasmic reticulum
membrane and a C‐terminal catalytic domain, which contain the active
sites and probably resides in the cytosol where the precursors of sterol
biosynthesis are present. Further, the 3‐D structure generated shows the
presence of a substrate (HMG‐CoA) binding domain and co‐factor
(NADPH) binding domain. The fold of substrate domain is unique and
resembles a prism, with 28‐residue helix forming the central core. The
homology model, thus generated in this study, could aid in determining the
mechanistic function of this important class of proteins.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are thankful to the Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi, India, for
providing the infrastructure and financial assistance.

Citation:Abdin et al; Bioinformation 5(4): 146-149 (2010)

The HMGR1 of Artemisia annua showing major domains. (a)The 
Substrate binding domain ‐ green (149‐268 and 385‐544) and NADP‐binding
domain ‐ red (271‐387). (b) Substrate binding domain resembles prism, with 
27‐residue alpha helix forming the central element. Results were obtained
from Profunc server and visualized with RASMOL (cartoon).

Comparison of (a) the catalytically active residues and (b) the 
phosphorylation site residue in Human HMGR and Artemisia annua HMGR

