Background
Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) is a rapidly
developing procedure for embryo genetic analysis []. It allows
couples carrying genetic diseases to have an unaffected child,
without undergoing an invasive prenatal diagnosis and
possible termination of pregnancy []. The number of cases
employing PGDincreases annually [,
], and indications for
PGD have expanded to include identification of a broad
variety of genetic diseases []. Since 1997, the European Society
of Human Reproduction and Embryology (ESHRE) PGD
Consortium has been collecting data internationallyfrom the
corresponding facilities where PGD was performed []. Since
1999, 11 data sets of PGD-related information have been
analyzed and published. The data of only a few Japanese
facilities has been included [].

PGD and prenatal diagnosis (PND) in Japan are not regulated
by law but are governed by professional guidelines. In 1998,
the Japanese Society of Obstetrics and Gynecology (JSOG)
approved the clinical research of PGD and issued “The
Guidelines on Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis” 
[]. In 2003,
10 genetic-related medical societies published comprehensive
guidelines to incorporate and expand on previously
established guidelines. The “Guidelines for Genetic Testing”
(2003) cover particular conditions for PND but do not mention
PGD in particular []. According to these guidelines, PGD is
conducted as a “clinical research,” and approval is required on
a case-by-case basis, not only by the ethics committee of the
facility but also by the ethics committee of JSOG. The report
“Guidelines on Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis” (1998) was
amended in 2006 and revised in 2010. These guidelines
indicate that this diagnostic procedure should be applied only
to serious hereditary disorders and balanced structural
chromosomal abnormalities in couples with recurrent
miscarriages. Because of long-term discussions involved and
these severe preconditions, no case of PGD had been
performed in Japan up to the end of 2004 despite the rapidly
increasing number of PGD cycles worldwide []. It has been 11
years since the initiation of clinical practices for PGD in Japan,
and the number of live births has been increasing every year.

Although PGD data collection has been conducted by the
ESHRE consortium, detailed data such as the technical
background of facilities has not been evaluated. In addition,
there is a need for continuous accumulation of information
regarding the precision of genetic diagnosis, pregnancy
outcome, and follow-up of deliveries. Furthermore, since PGD
application in Japan is limited by JSOG, it is necessary to
survey our present situation to expand PGD application. The
aim of the present study was to monitor PGD treatment cycles
and their outcome including the follow up of children born in
order to clarify the current status of PGD in Japan.

Methodology
Our data were collected retrospectively from 12 IVF
laboratories. These facilities also have own PGD laboratories,
and had the approval of the ethics committee of JSOG between
September 2004 and September 2012, and entered into a
FileMaker Pro 12 database (FilemakerInc, Santa Clara,
California, USA). This included files for PGD referrals (patient
history, PGD indications, and decisions taken by facilities and
patients), ethical review and genetic counseling, PGD cycles
(ART data and PGD analyses and results), and pregnancy and
infant records. Indications for PGD are divided into two
categories: (a) PGD for chromosomal abnormalities and (b)
PGD for monogenic diseases. Data submitted were thoroughly
assessed to identify omissions and any inconsistent data.
Records with insufficient data (e.g., with no cycle, no patient
identification, no clear indication, or from an incorrect time
period) were excluded from subsequent data calculations.
Following editing and correction of all data, the entire
collection was separated into the two above-mentioned
categories. We defined genetically transferable embryos as
carrier and non-carrier embryos for monogenic diseases, and
balanced and normal embryos for chromosomal abnormalities.
Clinical pregnancies were defined as the presence of one or
more fetal heartbeats by ultrasound at 6−7 weeks of gestation.
Implantation rate was defined as the number of active fetal
heartbeats per 100 transferred embryos. Delivery rate was
defined as the percentage of pregnancies resulting in delivery
per OR and per embryo transfer procedure. This clinical
research was approved by the ethics committee of the Keio
University School of Medicine (approval No. 20120089).

Results
Data from 12 PGD facilities were included in this report. Any
PGD data collected from facilities that did not have the
approval of the ethics committee of JSOG were not included. In
cases of PGD, ICSI was the most frequent method of
fertilization, and cleavage-stage aspiration was the most
common method of biopsy. Overall, laser drilling of the zona
pellucida was most commonly performed.

Genetic counseling and the system of administrating genetic information:
At three of 12 facilities, licensed medical geneticists were not in
charge of genetic counseling. Four facilities had no separate
room dedicated for genetic counseling. At seven of 12 facilities,
genetic information was recorded on regular medical charts. In
addition, at five facilities, genetic records were stored in usual
medical records, and at three facilities, all staff were allowed
access to genetic information. Further, at nine facilities, genetic
testing results were concurrently disclosed to couples.

PGD for monogenic diseases:
 (see supplementary material) summarizes data from
99 OR cycles, for which PGD was performed to identify
monogenic diseases. Most common indications for this
treatment were Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD, 59
cycles) and myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1, 31 cycles). Other
indications were Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency
(OTCD, 6 cycles) and Fukuyama congenital muscular
dystrophy (FCMD), adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD), and Leigh
syndrome of mitochondrial disease, all with one case each.
ICSI was used in all cycles, and the use of a noncontact diode
infrared laser was the preferred method for biopsy (94.3% PGD
cycles). Day 3 cleavage-stage embryo biopsy was used in all
PGD cycles. A total number of 1050 cumulus–oocyte
complexes (COCs) were collected, and 63.0% (661/1050)
mature oocytes were fertilized. A total of 83.8% (554/661)
embryos were biopsied, of which, 97.7% (541/554) were
successful. Further, of successfully biopsied embryos, 70.8%
(383/541) presented a diagnostic result, of which, 62.7%
(240/383) were genetically transferable On an average, 10.6
COCs were collected per cycle that yielded 6.7 embryos, of
which, 5.6 were suitable for biopsy. In addition, diagnosis was
achieved for 3.9 embryos per cycle, of which, 2.4 embryos were
deemed genetically transferable. On an average, 1.7 embryos
were transferrable per cycle. A positive hCG was obtained in
19 cycles, with a positive heartbeat in 14 cycles [14.1% per OR
(14/99), 12.0% per embryo transfer (14/117), with 15 active
fetal heartbeats, giving an overall implantation rate of 9.0%
(15/167)]. The delivery rate was 10.1% per OR (10/99) and
8.5% per embryo transfer (10/117). Eight miscarriages (42.1%
per positive hCG, 21.4% per clinical pregnancy) and one
ectopic pregnancy were reported.

PGD for chromosomal abnormalities:
 (see supplementary material) summarizes 572 OR, for
which PGD was performed for chromosomal abnormalities.
PGD for reciprocal translocations was performed more often
compared with that for Robertsonian translocations. The
percentage of female carriers was higher for both reciprocal
translocations and Robertsonian translocations (65% and 79%,
respectively). In 72% cycles, ICSI was used for fertilization.
Zona breaching was achieved by either laser drilling or
mechanical techniques, in equal numbers. The aspiration of
blastomeres from cleavage-stage embryos was the preferred
biopsy method (86%). A total of 4140 oocytes were collected
(mean, 7.2 per cycle). Of these, 66.3% (2744/4140) were
fertilized. A total of 66.4% (1822/2744) embryos were biopsied,
and of these, 99.8% (1819/1822) were successful. Of
successfully biopsied embryos, 94.0% (1710/1819) presented a
diagnostic result, of which, 25.5% (436/1710) were genetically
transferable. On an average, 7.2 COCs were collected per cycle.
This yielded 4.8 embryos, of which, 3.2 embryos were suitable
for biopsy. Diagnosis was achieved for 3.0 embryos, of which,
0.8 embryos were deemed genetically transferable. On an
average, 0.5 embryos were transferred per cycle. A positive
hCG was obtained in 101ET cycles, with a positive heartbeat in
77 cycles [13.5% per OR (77/572), 35.6% per embryo transfer
(77/216), with 80 active fetal heartbeats, giving an overall
implantation rate of 27.4% (80/292)]. The delivery rate was
10.5% per OR (60/572) and 27.8% per embryo transfer
(60/216). Moreover, 36 miscarriages (35.6% per positive hCG,
15.6% per clinical pregnancy) were reported, with
approximately more than half of them (61%) occurring in the
female reciprocal translocation group. In addition, two ectopic
pregnancies were reported.

Prenatal and postnatal diagnosis:
 (see supplementary material) summarizes prenatal
and postnatal diagnoses of pregnancies. Excluding unknown
cases, confirmation of the diagnosis was performed prenatally
(47%, 27/57) and/or postnatally (7%, 4/57). Amniocentesis
was performed for 45% cases (26/57), and 100% them (26/26)
were normal. No misdiagnoses were reported.

Method of delivery, gestational age, and infants born:
 (see supplementary material) summarizes the
pregnancy outcome data. There were 70 deliveries of 75 babies.
Caesarean section was performed for about 50% deliveries
(31/63). In seven cases, the delivery method was not recorded.
The mean birth weight of all singletons was 2964 g. The
percentage of females (56%) born was higher than that of
males.

Discussion
We have built a basis for gathering continuous PGD data from
which the status of PGD implementation can be tracked in
Japan. Our study is the first PGD report from all facilitieswhich
had the approval of the ethics committee of JSOG. Our results
help to clarify the current status of PGD in Japan. A majority of
PGD in Japan (98%) was performed for balanced structural
chromosomal abnormalities in couples with recurrent
miscarriage. PGD for monogenic diseases was performed only
in two facilities because PGD for monogenic diseases
warranted genetic counseling and tailor-made diagnoses for
each case, which may not be feasible for outpatientclinics.

At three of 12 facilities, licensed medical geneticists were not in
charge of genetic counseling. Although the genetic counseling
system in Japan has been on the way to establish, it is still
insufficient. Nishiyama et al. examined the current state of
providing genetic counseling in Japan to pregnant women
before they elected amniocentesis for prenatal diagnosis. The
data revealed that pre-amniocentesis genetic counseling was
usually provided by the obstetrician alone (73.8 %), by
geneticists (18.4 %), including obstetricians certified as
geneticists (12.6 %) and geneticists with other specialties (5.8
%), and by an obstetrician and nurse/midwife (7.8 %). These
data reveal that most of the certified genetic counselors in
Japan are not involved with prenatal genetic testing. Thus, we
should consider the appropriate involvement of certified
genetic counselors to assess and improve mental stress of
pregnant women []. In addition, the handling and
management of genetic information should be regulated more
strictly and sufficiently in the clinical field in Japan 
[].
Although limited access should be established in the
management of genetic records, at three facilities, all staff were
allowed to access genetic information.

Advanced maternal age was identified in this study (38 years
for monogenic diseases and 40 years for chromosomal
abnormalities). These maternal ages are higher compared with
those documented in a recent ESHRE report (34 years for
monogenic diseases and 35 years for chromosomal
abnormalities) []. Prolongation of the period before PGD
initiation is regarded as one of the causes of advanced
maternal age in Japan, which may be attributed to the two-step
ethics examination; it is required to shorten this period by
timeous ethics examinations.

For monogenic diseases, our diagnosis rates data were lower
than those documented in the ESHRE report []. On the other
hand, our data on chromosomal abnormalities were similar to
those reported in the ESHRE report. The primary reason for
low diagnosis rates for DM1 was difficulties in diagnosis. The
expanded myotonic dystrophy protein kinase (DMPK) allele is
refractory to PCR amplification; therefore, the diagnosis is
based on detection of the affected individual׳s unexpanded
allele in the embryo. However, for couples who are either
uninformative (sharing all alleles) or semi-informative (sharing
one of their alleles) for the DMPK region, two parental alleles
transmitted to an embryo may be of equal size; therefore, it
may not be possible to confirm that the affected partner's
unexpanded allele has been inherited. In these cases, diagnoses
have been facilitated by the incorporation of linked markers to
allow detection of contamination and/or the presence of phase
alleles []. Rates of embryo transferof PGD were 62.7% for
monogenic diseasesand 25.5% for chromosomal abnormalities
in Japan. These data are similar to those previously reported in
ESHRE reports.Furthermore, clinical pregnancy rates per
embryo transfer in the current study were 12.0% for
monogenic diseases and 35.6% for chromosomal abnormalities.
For monogenic diseases, our data were lower than previous
reports ranging between 13% and 29% [,
,
]. In contrast,
for chromosomal abnormalities, our data were similar to other
previous reportsranging between 23% and 39% [,
,
].
Pregnancy rate is highly influencedby women׳s age. It is
thought that advanced maternal age and two cell biopsies from
day3 embryosare the primary reason for lower pregnancy rates
following PGD for monogenic diseases in Japan.The
miscarriage rate after PGD for monogenic diseases (44%, 8/18)
and chromosomal abnormalities (36%,36/101) was higher than
other reports [,
,
]. We speculated that this high
miscarriage rate was due to advanced maternal age.

Several problems about PGD in Japan were clarified in this
study. First, it is imperative to reduce the prolonged period
before implementation of PGD because of the two-step ethics
examination. In addition, the genetic counseling system in
Japan is still insufficientdue to the lack of medical geneticists
and certified genetic counselors. Thus, we need to establish the
system as quickly as we can.Finally, the introduction of the
microarray-based PGD for chromosomal abnormalitiesshould
be considered in the technical aspect [,
]. To date, studies
investigating neonatal outcomes following PGD have reported
reassuring findings [,
]. However, long-term effects of
embryo biopsy have not been clarified. It is necessary to
investigate the health of infants born following PGD to assess
long-term effects of embryo biopsy. We wish to clarify the
long-term negative effects of PGD in future by continuing
investigation. Though the JSOG has so far approved only PGD,
clinical studies on preimplantation genetic screening (PGS) are
likely to be launched by the JSOG. Behind its decision is the
fact that the technical level of PGS has been improved
remarkably, and that an increasing number of people have
been calling for application of the latest genetic profiling.

Conclusion
We have established a basis for gathering continuous PGD
data from which the future status of PGD implementation can
be tracked in Japan. Moreover, this system can be used to track
the health of infants born following PGD. These data represent
a valuable information resource with regard to the clinical
application of PGDnot only from the social and ethical aspects
but also from the technological and medical aspects.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We would like tothank the following membersfor their
contributions: ShiotaniM (Hanabusa Women's Clinic, Hyogo),
Morimoto Y and Nakaoka Y (IVF Namba Clinic,
Osaka),Fukuda A (IVF Osaka Clinic, Osaka), Kato K and
Aoyama N (Kato Ladies Clinic, Tokyo), Sugiura M (Nagoya
City University Hospital, Aichi),Asakura H (Ohgimachi Ladies
Clinic, Osaka), UtsunomiyaT (St.Luke Clinic, Oita),Tanaka A
(St. Mother Hospital, Fukuoka),Netsu Y (Suwa Maternity
Clinic, Nagano),Takeuchi K (Takeuchi Ladies Clinic,
Kagoshima),Yano K (Yano Maternity Clinic, Ehime).This work
was supported by Grants from the Ministry of
Health,Labourand Welfare, Japan [Health Labour Sciences
Research Grant (H22-jisedai-ippan-004)].

Citation:Sato et al, Bioinformation 11(5): 254-260 (2015)

