Background
Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) belongs to family flaviviridae of
genous flavivirus, is the major health problem over the globe. It
is a positive sense RNA virus affecting about 200 million people
worldwide (3.3') []. The single stranded virus genome
encodes three structural and six nonstructural proteins 
[]. The
inability of the virus to proofread induces a very high mutation
rate (8-18 mutations) in the virus genome/year and produces
1012 viruses/day which is advantageous for virus to increase
the evolution rate []. Such a high mutation rate is the main
hindrance not only for vaccine design but also for the treatment
of the infected individuals. HCV infection rate in Pakistan is
about 10 million covering 6' overall population []. The
infection of virus may be acute but mostly chronic seropositive
(about 70') individuals are found []. Chronically infected
HCV patients often remain asymptomatic and undiagnosed for
long times even before chronic hepatitis leads to severe fibrosis,
cirrhosis, hepatic failure or hepatocellular carcinoma. Such long
term complications associated with HCV made it a leading
emerging infectious disease worldwide [].

Globally this virus is found in six genotypes having numerous
subtypes []. Variations among different genotypes of HCV are
about 1/3. HCV genotypes 1, 2 and 3 have global distributed. In
Pakistan HCV sero-frequency figures are considerably higher
(4.7') as compared to other Asian countries. The most
frequently distributed HCV genotype in Pakistan is 3 for which
epitopes have been predicted as a part of ongoing research [].
The HCV 1 is the 2nd highest genotype in the country (Punjab-
12.14'; Sindh-8.33'; Balochistan-32.12'). Pakistan shares a
longer border with Iran where genotype 1a is most prevalent.
The neighboring Asian countries especially China has also been
reported for high HCV-1 prevalence (HCV-1b). Most common
HCV-1 subtypes in Thailand are 1a and 1b. HCV-1d was
exclusively found in Indonesian population. The vast majority
of HCV isolates found in Philippines was HCV-1a and HCV-1b.
These figures raise the alarming signals to take the major steps
for reduction of viral infection because various HCV-1 subtypes
are associated with severe cirrhosis [–].

It is also reported that individuals having chronic infection with
HCV showed reduced antibody titers against other viral
vaccines like Hepatitis A, B and HIV etc. This impaired immune
response is explained due to the defect in antigen presenting
cell function []. Moreover, the HLA region in human genome
is highly dense containing approximately 200 genes. A large
number of these genes play an important role for immune
response and some exhibit high genetic polymorphisms 
[].
The study was designed to predict the conserve promiscuous
MHC I and MHC II binding epitopes of HCV 1 genotype of
Asian origin against HLA alleles that are frequently found in
Asian countries in order to pick up the best epitopes that can
provide good results as vaccine candidates for all Asian
population. Since Asian countries share similar climatic and
hygienic conditions and the mode of viral infection. Hence it
was hypothesized that promiscuous prediction of epitope from
conserved regions of the viral sequences infecting the human
population covering a wide geographical region (especially
Asia) can provide a more clear picture of viral mutation and to
locate the conserve regions by analysis of mutations in past and
reduced mutation rate in future. Such an analysis can provide
potential vaccine candidates from conserve viral sequence
having less mutation rates in future with better results of
vaccination.

Methodology
Data collection and preparation:
Elimination of viral mutations in the past as well as their
prediction for the future are important for epitope based
vaccine design. Hence, it's important to collect all the available
sequences over extended periods of time and geographical
distribution representing the possible genetic variants of the
viral of interest. For that purpose the available complete
genome sequences of HCV genotype 1 and its subtypes of
Asian origin were collected from HCV database
(http://hcv.lanl.gov/content/index). Collected sequences were
edited manually to remove duplications, discrepancies and
precursor polyprotein. Finally selected sequences were then
aligned and compared by using multiple sequence alignment
software ClustalW2.

Identification of conserved sequences:
Conserved regions in all the collected protein sequences of
HCV-1 genotypes were examined by a consensus-sequence
based approach for each country separately. Finally all the
consensuses of each origin were aligned via multiple sequence
alignment. Segments of minimum length of nine amino acids
were selected that were 100' conserve in all HCV 1 subtpes of
Asian origin demonstrating at least 80' representation of each
subtype. Selection of minimum length of nine-mers is important
for many immunological applications because it represents
typical length of peptide that bind to HLA molecules 
[].

Entropy-based analysis of HCV sequence variability:
Degree of variability of peptides having any length can be
measured by vigorous method which is based on information
entropy. It also helps the assumption of evolutionary stability.
Low value of sequence variability at entropy scale characterizes
the site stability. An increase in value from 0 to upward is
parallel to respective decrease of conservancy from 100' to
lower []. Hence, entropy of HCV genotype 1 was calculated
using Shannon Entropy-One tool available at HIV sequence
database. The results show that HCV 1 sequences of different
Asian origin has distinct patterns of highly conserved and
variable regions. Thus the low entropy regions were restricted
to distinct short regions which corresponded to the conserved
sequences selected by consensus-sequence method.

HLA Selection &amp; Epitope Prediction:
Epitopes of HCV genotype 1 were predicted against MHC I and
II alleles that were more frequently found in Asian countries.
These are mostly 10 MHC I supertypes and 1 MHC II supertype
along with their respective alleles that covers about 99' Asian
population [,
]. Using the HLA alleles that are frequently
dominated in Asian countries, epitopes of HCV genotype 1
were predicted by using NetMHCpan
(http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetMHCpan) and
NetMHCpanII
(http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetMHCIIpan-2.0/) based
on artificial neural networks (ANNs). HCV epitopes were
predicted as nanomers using the protein sequence in FASTA
format. Any epitope that fall in the hotspot or warm spot were
rejected. Promiscuous epitopes from conserve region are
tabulated along with their sequence, start position in the
protein, average score and HLA binding.

Validation of predicted Epitopes:
All the predicted epitopes were submitted to IEDB database
(http://www.immuneepitope.org/) that contains
experimentally confirmed data about antibody, T call epitopes,
MHC binding, host organism, MHC restriction, MHC class, etc.
All the predicted epitopes were analyzed and those found to be
true positive are highlighted by using (*) in the predicted
epitope tables.

Results
85 complete genome sequences of HCV genotype 1 retrieved
from HCV sequence database were used for the present
analysis. The average molecular weight of all the subtypes of
HCV genotype 1 was found to be 327171.61KDa with 3010
amino acid residues analyzed by Composition/Molecular
weight in PIR search and analysis tool
(http://pir.georgetown.edu/pirwww/search/comp_mw.shtml
). The mostly repeated amino acid residue in the whole viral
proteome was found to be Leucine (9.97') while Methionine
was found to be the least repeater (1.96').

Among all the Asian countries, China and Japan were found to
be the major contributing countries of HCV 1 full genome
sequences in HCV sequence database. The other significant
contributing Asian countries were India, Taiwan, Korea and
Philippines. Using all the available full genome sequences of
HCV 1 of Asian origin from the public database, the
promiscuous epitopes were predicted against subjected HLA
alleles. Out of 10 MHC I supertypes, 51 epitopes were predicted
as promiscuous binders. Epitope LSAFSLHSY is predicted to be
the highest promiscuous binder, covering 9 MHC I alleles of
Asian origin at binding score 149.22. YLVAYQATV is also a
good promiscuous epitope of binding score 69.41 and covering
8 MHC I alleles. About 9.8' predicted epitopes (FSIFLLALL,
SVIDCNTCV, YLNTPGLPV, ILSPGALVV and LMTHFFSIL)
have binding specificity to 7 MHC I alleles of Asian origin at
average binding score 113.14, 34.25, 66.32, 133.89 and 185.63
respectively  (see supplementary material). MHC class I
supertypes A2 and B7 were found to be good binders for a large
number of promiscuous predicted epitopes. MHC class I alleles
A*0206 and A*0203 were the highest binder by 11.71' for the
predicted epitopes of HCV genotype 1. It was followed by
MHC I alleles A*0202, A*0201 and A*0205 of A2 supertype as
promiscuous binder to predicted epitopes by 10.36' and 9.46'
respectively. The MHC I alleles B*3801 (A24 supertype), B*4402,
B*4403 (B44 supertype), B*5702 (B57 supertype) and B*5109 (BX
supertype) never responded for binding to any promiscuous
epitope and thus restricted the binding efficiency. Other MHC I
alleles (A*0207, A*3301, A*6601, B*0702, B*5101, B*5401, A*0101,
A*2402, B*4002, B*2705 and B*2706) were found to be least
binders for predicted promiscuous epitopes of HCV genotype 1
of Asian origin ().

Against 8 predominantly found Asian alleles of DRB1
supertype 42 epitopes were predicted as promiscuous binders.
Epitope VNLLPAILS was predicted to be the highest
promiscuous binder covering 62.5' Asian alleles at average
score 274.65. 11.9' predicted promiscuous MHC II binding
epitopes (YKVLVLNPS, LVLNPSVAA, IQYLAGLST,
INALSNSLL and LITSCSSNV) covers 50' MHC II alleles of
Asian origin at binding score 96.19, 84.26, 236.19, 74.25 and
171.45 respectively. About 14.28' predicted epitopes covers
37.5' MHC II alleles of Asian origin. The rest of the predicted
epitopes are also provided  (see supplementary
material). MHC class II alleles DRB1-0101 was found to be
highest binder by 40.77' followed by DRB1-0701 and DRB1-
1501 at binding specificity 22.33' and 16.50' respectively.
While MHC II allele DRB1-0301 was the least binder (0.97') to
predicted promiscuous epitopes of HCV genotype 1 of Asian
origin (). The IEDB analysis of predicted epitopes
highlights that server predicts true positive results at default
thresholds. That's why we found a considerable no. of
predicted epitopes confirmed experimentally and are
highlighted by (*) in the tables against respective epitope
sequence. The remaining short number of epitopes will be
confirmed in future. All the true positive binders will be the
effective vaccine candidates singly or fused as polyepitopes.

Discussion
In this study 85 publically available full length sequences of
HCV 1 of Asian origin were subjected for the physicochemical
and immunoinformatics analysis. HCV specific immune
responses are closely correlated to CD+4 and CD+8 T cells 
[–]. 
In patients recovered from HCV infection, CD4+
proliferative T-cell response remain vigorous and multi-specific
while CD4+T cell response is quite week and focused in
persistent HCV infected patients []. CD8+ memory T cells
maturation and maintenance is determined by their vigorous
proliferation and elimination of virus upon viral re-challenge
[]. Memory T cells confer immediate protection in peripheral
tissues and mediate recall responses to antigen in secondary
lymphoid organs. T cells consist of distinct populations
characterized by homing capacity and effectors function.
Effectors memory cells (TEM) migrate to inflammatory
peripheral sites and perform immediate effectors function 
[].
However, the major problem is that MHC proteins are not only
polygenic (i.e. multiple genes for MHC I and MHC II) but also
the polymorphic (i.e. various alleles of each gene). Variation in
MHC alleles is usually by 30 amino acid residues that are often
found within binding site. These variations in peptide binding
sites results in high specificity of peptides and thus the
recognition of T cell. Different polymorphic MHC alleles exhibit
different peptide binding specificities and each allele binds to a
particular sequence pattern of peptide []. Hence the
promiscuous epitopes were predicted from HCV glycoprotein
isolated from Asian countries against MHC alleles that were
frequently found in Asian countries to catch the best epitopes as
good vaccine candidates for Asian population. Moreover, CD4+
and CD8+ binding T cell epitopes were predicted as nanomers
because maximum number of MHCs responds more strongly to
nanomers. All the predicted epitopes of HCV genotype 1 varies
in their positions to viral proteins as well as binding specificity.
Hence, the peptide binding core of viral protein, position of
peptide in full length viral sequence, binding MHCs and their
average scores have been tabulated. All the predicted nanomers
are antigenic and can be used as singly as potent vaccine
candidates or fused together as polytopes. These epitopes thus
considerably reduces the viral mutation and represents the
whole viral genome to be used as vaccine candidates having a
potential control over the immune response and eliminating the
side effects [].

Conclusion
The presented in silico approach to HCV of Asian origin will
proved generic as it applied to other viruses mainly dengue,
HIV and influenza and proved to be successful []. Hence this
approach can serve as a template for the study of other
emerging viruses and their subtypes over a wide range of
geographical distribution. It is therefore, possible to
significantly reduce the costs and efforts of experimentation for
screening of effective vaccine candidates.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors contributions
The current study was designed by AS. AS collected the data,
performed the immunoinformatics analysis and drafted the
whole manuscript. SUR and TH critically reviewed the
manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final
manuscript.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Shehzadi et al, Bioinformation 8(20): 957- 962 (2012)

Binding specificity of different MHC I alleles of Asian
origin to originally predicted epitopes of HCV genotype 1 viral
proteins.

Binding specificity of different MHC II alleles of Asian
origin to originally predicted epitopes of HCV genotype 1 viral
proteins.

