Background
Peanut (Arachis hypogaea L.) is an important source of protein
and vegetable oil. Most of the species among the genus Arachis
are wild and are not domesticated. Cultivated peanut (A.
hypogea L.) is an allotetraploid (2n = 4x = 40) species which is
widely cultivated around the world in tropical, sub-tropical and
warm temperate climates []. Thus, peanut is an internationally
important crop for human consumption and oil production.
Abiotic stresses such as drought, cold, salinity and sodacity are
major factors affecting the crop yield. There are many genes or
gene networks are involved in response to abiotic stresses.
Some of the major challenges for the breeding programs are
developing abiotic stress tolerant, improved oil quality and
flavoured varieties of peanut. As peanut can be cultivated in
arid and semi-arid regions and drought or dehydration is most
frequent stress reduced the yield. Therefore, study on drought
stress responsive genes and its regulation is very much
important. Use of molecular markers and marker- assisted
selection for crop improvement and evolution showed little
variation which resulted in limited application. Therefore, the
development of transgenic peanut has enormous potential for
enhanced productivity, trait improvement and identification of
agronomically useful genes.

Expressed sequence tags (ESTs) are considered as most
appropriate tool for discovering a gene, mapping a gene and
analyzing various traits necessary for crop improvement. They
are generated from large scale sequencing of clones from cDNA
libraries prepared from mRNA isolated at a specific stage of
cell/tissue development. Many EST libraries have been
constructed and are available in sequence databases. As the
functions and regulation of most of the newly identified genes
are not known, but can be determined by multiple sequence
alignment with known genes/ ESTs available in the databases.
EST approach developed during the establishment of genomics
era and in HGP (Human Genome Project) has proved to be the
most high throughput technologies ever invented []. Use of
EST maps in major crop genome projects such as Zea mays 
[],
Glycine max [] and Triticum aestivum 
[] have been successfully
applied. Study on identification and functional validation of
some drought induced genes differentially expressed during
gradual water stress in peanut has been conducted [].

In the present study, we aim to identify the drought stress
responsive candidate genes in peanut ESTs available in
databases. Experimental data of expression analysis of drought
stress responsive genes and its corresponding EST sequences as
heat maps and supplementary tables reported previously 
[]
were screened. Furthermore, a phylogenetic analysis was
performed to find a cluster of utmost similar ESTs for each
selected gene. Individual EST of the mentioned cluster were
further searched in peanut ESTs (1, 78,490) using stand alone
BLAST. To predict as well as annotate abiotic stress responsive
selected genes various tools like Vecscreen (a system that is
developed by NCBI for quickly identifying and removing
segments of a nucleic acid sequence that may be of vector origin
and act as contaminant, before sequence analysis),
RepeatMasker (a program that screens DNA sequences for
interspersed repeats and low complexity DNA sequences), EST
trimmer (a tool used for trimming EST sequences concerning
ambiguous sequences, removing of distal oligoN series from
either the 5' or 3' end and size cut off), DNA Baser (that allows
to assemble a set of contiguous sequences, contigs) and WISE2
(that compares a protein sequence to a genomic DNA sequence,
allowing for introns and frameshifting errors) were used. Here
we report six best putative candidate genes belonging to three
different gene families for drought stress response in peanut.
Further, Predicted result of contigs, domain as well as 3D
structure for HSP 17.3KDa protein, DnaJ protein and Type 2
Metallothionein protein were also discussed.

Methodology
Screening of Peanut ESTs:
Experimental data for expression analysis of drought stress
responsive genes shown in the heat map and supplementary
table [] were downloaded. Depending upon the higher
expression during drought five gene families was selected.
Total twenty two ESTs were screened from the above selected
five different gene families. With the efforts of Peanut Genome
Initiative (PGI), out of 2, 52,832 ESTs reported from the genus
Arachis at NCBI, 1, 78,490 ESTs were belongs to cultivated
peanut A. hypogaea. Total ESTs sequences of A. hypogaea and
above twenty two screened ESTs sequences were retrieved from
the NCBI database.

Phylogenetic Analysis:
To find relationship between ESTs of individual gene family
with representative genes, phylogenetic analysis was
performed using MEGA 5.1 Beta (a unified tool for showing
automatic and manual sequence alignment, concluding
phylogenetic trees, estimating rates of molecular evolution,
mining web-based databases, inferring inherited sequences, and
testing evolutionary hypotheses) software available at
http://www.megasoftware.net. It is used for phylogenetic
analysis in various research fields [].

Standalone BLAST:
The standalone BLAST wasperformed against whole peanut
ESTs and using screened ESTs as query sequences. BLAST
analysis was done on the basis of their highest bit score and
lowest e-value.

Data Normalization:
After BLAST analysis, the shortlisted ESTs were further
checked for the presence of vector sequences, polyA tail,
interspersed repeats and low complexity regions in the DNA
followed by their removal by using different online available
software's like VecScreen [available at
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/VecScreen/VecScreen.html and was
used for the identification of a nucleic acid sequence that may
contain a vector origin. A hash search algorithm was used to
remove contaminating sequences []. The algorithm initially
uses a hash lookup, followed by a gapless hit extension. Finally,
ESTs that passed the filters but possessed an unmasked
sequence were discarded], EST trimmer (available at
http://imed.med.ucm.es/EMBOSS/runs/tmp.0.xuYbpD/inde
x.html) and can recognize one or more nucleotide sequences
with any 3' poly-A tail (or, optionally, 5' poly-T tail) in the input
sequences that are at least the specified minimum length 
[] and
Repeat Masker available at www.repeatmasker.org/and is a
program that curtains DNA sequences for interspersed repeats
and low complexity DNA sequences. The output of the
database is a detailed explanation of the repeats that are
contemporary in the query sequence as well as a modified
version of the query sequence in which all the annotated
repeats have been masked. In various contig assemblies, repeat
masker has been used [].

EST Assembly:
EST assembly was performed using DNABaser
(www.dnabaser.com/) software. Data filtering and assembly of
EST sequences were accomplished with the help of DNABaser
(v3.5.3), which incorporates quality filtering, clustering, and
assembly into one distinct pipeline. The filtering step includes
masking of vector sequence and low-quality regions and
annotation of low-complexity regions, repeats, and poly (A)
regions. The final assembled ESTs were named as contigs.

Identification of putative candidate genes:
The contigs of individual gene families were subjected to
BLAST analysis with the whole genome of Arabidopsis available
in TAIR10 (www.arabidopsis.org/) database. The putative
candidate gene was identified by WISE2
(www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/Wise2/) analysis on the basis of lowest
e-value and highest WISE2 score (in bits). Wise2 help to
perform the comparison of a protein sequence to a genomic
DNA sequence which allows understanding of the errors in
intron and frame shifting using Gene Wise algorithm 
[]. It
helped to select the putative candidate genes with known
functions.

Three dimensional structure prediction of identified domains:
3D structure of the identified domains of the protein sequences
were predicted using I-TASSER
(http://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/I-TASSER/). I-TASSER
(The iterative threading assembly refinement) server
determines 3D structures of protein based on the sequence-tostructure-
to-function paradigm algorithm. It predicts secondary
structure, tertiary structure and functional annotations on
ligand-binding sites, enzyme commission numbers and gene
ontology terms. The accuracy of prediction is based on the
confidence score of the modelling [,
].

Discussion
Peanut (A. hypogaea) is an important oilseed crop having major
nutritional as well as economic value. It is the third major
oilseed crop in the world next to soybean and cotton.
Production of peanut at global level plays a significant role as
far as nutrition, fuel and energy, sustainable agriculture and
enhanced productivity is concerned. To enhance crop
production, genetic improvement through genomic research is
more beneficial []. Numerous applications and recent
developments from the EST concept have been made after it
was proposed by Adams et al []. EST sequencing was aimed
to clone the full length sequences of genes with agronomic
value. Large-scale EST sequencing offers an access into the
genome of an organism. The ESTs gave significant evidence
about its coding content and expression patterns in different
tissues of plants in different environmental conditions. The EST
resource of A. hypogaea will play major role for genome
sequencing and gene expression analysis in different abiotic
stresses. Therefore, to get necessary information about genes
involved in abiotic stresses, ESTs were selected which currently
encompass more entries in the public databases than any other
form of sequence data. Thus, EST datasets provide a vast
resource for gene identification and expression profiling. By
doing EST assembly, researchers will be able to learn about
tissue specificity and expression profiling of peanut genes 
[].
From introduction of Peanut Genome Initiative, till March 2012,
the peanut research community has deposited 2, 52,832 ESTs in
the public NCBI database []. Out of total ESTs of peanut, 1, 78,
490 ESTs belongs to cultivated peanut (A. hypogaea) only.

For identifying drought stress responsive putative genes in
peanut (A. hypogaea) ESTs, five drought stress responsive gene
families and its corresponding EST sequences were shortlisted
from the experimental data of the heat map []. For each
shortlisted gene family, their corresponding ESTs were selected.
Total 22 ESTs belonging to five drought stress responsive gene
families were selected from the supplementary data described
by Govind et al [] and shown in 
 (see supplementary
material). The whole ESTs of A. hypogaea (1, 78,490 ESTs)
including 22 ESTs screened during this study were downloaded
from the public NCBI database. For the identification of similar
ESTs of each screened 22 ESTs in whole peanut ESTs,
Standalone BLAST (2.2.26) analysis was performed. The
screened ESTs were taken as a query sequence and the whole
peanut ESTs as a database. Similar EST sequences were
shortlisted on the basis of lowest e-value and highest bit score.
We found that total of 3073 ESTs in which 826, 286, 17, 66 and
1878 ESTs belongs to Hsp17.3 KDa, Desiccation protective
protein LEA5, DnaJ heat shock protein, Hsp70-60 KDa
chaperonin and Type 2 metallothionein, respectively ().

Phylogenetic analysis was performed to find the appropriate
evolutionary relationship between ESTs of individual gene
family with representative genes. Our phylogenetic result
showed that individual gene family has close relation with
respect to their representative genes. We noticed that HSP 17.6
KDa family, out of 8 ESTs, one EST (gi|108954762) is closely
related with gi|350534973 of Solanum lycopersicon. In desiccation
protective protein family, out of 4 ESTs, two ESTs
(gi|108954830 and gi|108954989) are closely related with
gi|388503839 of Lotus japonicus. In Type 2 metallothionein
family, out of 6 ESTs, three ESTs (gi|108954648, gi|108954669
and gi|108955131) are closely related with gi|71040682 of A.
hypogaea itself. Similarly in Hsp70-60 KDa chaperonin family,
out of 3 ESTs, one EST (gi|108955006) is closely related with
gi|297722722 of Oryza sativa 
().

The shortlisted ESTs were further normalized by removing
vector sequences, Poly-A tail and masking of low complexity
region using different online available software's. We found
that out of 3073 ESTs, 2931 EST sequences did not contain
vector sequences were used for further analysis. As reported by
Joshua et al [], a number of quality features are evaluated for
EST assembly such as: (a) the occurrence of chimeric contigs; (b)
the constancy of mate-pairs in the same contig; (c) phylogenetic
analysis using known genes and their relationships; and (d) the
extent of redundancy among the assembly's contigs and
singletons. In an ideal assembly, for the generation of a single
contig, ESTs transcribed from a single gene are conjoined
together. A phylogenic approach was also used to assess EST
assembly quality []. After normalization, EST sequences were
assembled for finding the contigs using DNABaser (v3.5.3)
(). These contigs were further BLAST (v2.2.8) with
Arabidopsis Whole Genome (TAIR v10)  (see
supplementary material). On the basis of lowest e-value, out of
five, three gene families (i.e. 17KDa Class II Heat Shock Protein,
DnaJ protein and Type 2 Metallothionein) were selected. WISE2
(v 2.1.20) was performed to select putative candidate genes with
known functions as well as intron and exon identifications 
[,
]. Based on highest WISE2 score (in bits) six putative
candidate genes were found and their respective families with
their roles are mentioned ().

The functional characterization of protein depends upon their
3D structure, therefore from the resulting assembled contig
sequences, conserved protein domains were assessed from
InterProScan (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/pfa/iprscan) 
[]
which allows to scan protein sequence for matches against the
InterPro collection of protein signature databases. The different
combinations of domains give rise to the diverse range of
proteins found in nature. The identification of domains that
occur within proteins can thus provide insights into their
function. We also predicted the possible domains in three
protein sequences of HSP17.3KDa protein (), DnaJ
protein () and Type 2 Metallothionein protein 
() by using InterProScan. InterProScan of HSP17.3KDa protein
has Alpha crystallin/HSP20 domain (IPR002068) as well as
HSP20-like Chaperone and other unassigned HSP20 domains
(). Likewise, DnaJ protein showed N-terminal HSP
domain (IPRO01623), C-terminal HSP domain (IPRO02939) and
others (). Again, metallothionein type 2 has entirely a
single domain of metallothionein family-15 type 2 domains
(IPRO00347) ().Earlier it was reported that Small heat
shock proteins (sHSPs) varies from 15–42 kDa [] that play a
significant role in providing resistance to variety of abiotic
stresses such as drought, salt, cold and oxidants besides high
temperature [,
]. Tzi et al [] reported that DnaJ protein
plays an important role in various stress response mechanism.
Clement et al [] reported that DnaJ protein interacts with
Hsp70 that might also be involved with ABA signalling.
Metallothioneins are associated in metal detoxification,
homeostasis, and protection during oxidative damage []. It
was reported that metallothionein transcripts were present in
both cultivated peanut and wild species [,
].

Simultaneously, we predicted the 3D structure of
corresponding protein sequences of contigs HSP17.3KD protein
(), DnaJ protein () and Type 2
Metallothionein protein () by using I-TASSER.
Biological role of above three proteins were also noted from ITASSER
result. The quality of the generated models are
estimated based on a confidence score (C-score), ranges from -5
to 2 where a high value signifies a model with a high
confidence and vice-versa. C-score is highly correlated with
TM-score and RMSD thus, TM-score and RMSD are known
standards to measure the accuracy of structure modelling
thereby measuring structural similarity between two protein
structures. RMSD is an average distance of all residue pairs in
two structures and is sensitive to local errors (i.e., a misorientation
of the tail) which occurs inspite of the correct global
topology hence, TM-score must be used for solving these errors.
A TM-score &gt;0.5 indicates a model of correct topology.
Therefore, the best predicted model is selected on the basis of
confidence score; TM-Score as well as RMSD value  (see
supplementary material). I-TASSER server predicts and
displays various features in different sections for best model
studies. We are considering the prediction and generation of the
best model based on C-Score, their structural analogs and
binding sites. The C-Score value for the best predicted model
HSP17.3KD, DnaJ protein and Type 2 Metallothionein protein
(0.3), (-3.18) and (-2.98) respectively and furthermore, highly
similar structures in PDB (as identified by TM-align) of
HSP17.3KD, DnaJ and Type 2 metallothionein were identified
and listed in  (see supplementary material). Template
proteins with similar binding sites for HSP, DnaJ and Type 2
metallothionein were listed in  (see supplementary
material). The best binding site is predicted on the basis of
CscoreLB (Range = 0-1) and BS-Score (&gt;1) values. A higher score
CscoreLB indicates a more reliable ligand-binding site prediction
and BS-score reflects a significant local match between the
predicted and template binding site () 
[,
].

We found that HSP 17.1 KDa has important role in some
molecular function (GO: 0005212) that contributes in the
structural integrity of the cell and less role in creating protein
oligomers (GO: 0051260). Similarly DnaJ interact selectively and
non-covalently with unfolded proteins (GO: 0051082) and is
involved in assisting the covalent and non-covalent assembly of
single chain polypeptides or multi-subunit complexes into the
correct tertiary structure (GO: 0006457). On the other hand, type
2 Metallothionein interact selectively and non-covalently with
an adenyl-ribonucleotide, any compound consisting of
adenosine esterified with (ortho) phosphate or an
oligophosphate at any hydroxyl group on the ribose moiety
(GO:0032559) and is thus involved in the chemical reactions and
pathways involving the phosphate group, the anion or salt of
any phosphoric acid (GO:0006796). Govind et al 
[] described
that for cellular mechanisms, groups of gene products are
involved that act in coordination in response to stimuli of water withhold.

Conclusion
The present in silico study allowed identification of six best
putative candidate genes belonging to three different gene
families for drought stress response in peanut. Contigs,
domains as well as 3D structure of HSP 17.3KDa protein, DnaJ
protein and Type 2 Metallothionein protein were also predicted.
Thus, EST approach play key role in providing an excellent
resource for novel gene discovery and its annotation for
drought stresses.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Birla Institute of Technology, Mesra, Ranchi, Jharkhand, India is
greatly acknowledged for providing Institute Fellowships to
Mr. Ashutosh Kumar and Ms. Archana Kumari. UGC, New
Delhi, India is also acknowledged for providing Fellowship to
Mr. Gopal Kr. Prajapati. DBT, New Delhi, India is greatly
acknowledged for providing Bioinformatics Facility at our
Institute.

Citation:Kumari et al, Bioinformation 8(24): 1211-1219 (2012)

(a) Dendrogram depicting phylogenetic relationship between screened ESTs of 17.3 KDa class I HSP and representative
gene of Solanum lycopersicon (gi|350534973|ref|NM 001246984.1). The evolutionary relationship is analysed by using MEGA 5.1.
The phylogenetic tree represented the nearest gene with respect to reference gene is gi|108954762; (b) Dendrogram depicting
phylogenetic relationship between screened ESTs of desiccation protective protein and representative gene of Lotus japonicu
(gi|388503839|gb|BT140191.1). The phylogenetic relationship is analysed by using MEGA 5.1. The phylogenetic tree represented
the nearest gene with respect to reference gene is gi|108954989; (c) Dendrogram depicting phylogenetic relationship between
screened ESTs of type 2 metallothionein and representative gene of A. hypogaea (gi|71040682|gb|DQ097730.1). The evolutionary
relationship is analysed by using MEGA 5.1. The phylogenetic tree represented the nearest gene with respect to reference gene is
gi|108955131; (d) Dendrogram depicting phylogenetic relationship between screened ESTs Hsp70-60 KDa chaperonin and
representative gene of Oryza sativa (gi|297722722|ref|NM 0011867). The phylogenetic relationship is analysed by using MEGA 5.1.
The phylogenetic tree represented the nearest gene with respect to reference gene is gi|108955006.

Result showing snapshot of assembled contig map of a gene family analyzed by DNA Baser (v3.5.3). The green arrows
represent the aligned EST sequences which were used for EST assembly. The pink color indicated the mismatch in final contig
sequence. The side bar indicating the list of input sequences with file extension .fasta (“GI number”.fasta).

(a): Result of HSP 17.3KDa protein for domain prediction/identification by InterProScan. The blue colour bar is showing
the Alpha crystalline/HSP20 domain having interpro ID PF00011 (IPR002068). The sequences of HSP 17.3KDa protein contain the
highly similar domain with Alpha crystalline/HSP20 domain. The black bar is representing the HSP20 like chaperone (i.e.
IPR008978 from SUPERFAMILY). These sequences also contain the unintegrated domain (i.e. noIPR). In unintegrated domain the
blue bar is from GENE3D with no description, the next brown bar (PTHR11527) is for SMALL HEAT SHOCK PROTEIN FAMILY
and the last brown bar is for HEAT SHOCK PROTEIN 1.7 (these brown bars from PANTHER); (b) Result of DnaJ protein for
domain prediction/identification by InterProScan. In IPR001623 it represents the Heat shock protein Dnaj, N-terminal. The violet,
blue, red, orange and black bar is representing the domain of Dnaj_N, Dnaj (PF00226 i.e. from PFAM), Dnaj (SM00271 i.e. from
SMART), DNAJ_2 (i.e. from PROFILE) and Dnaj_N (SSF46565 i.e. from SUPERFAMILY) respectively. The next blue bar is for
Dnaj_C i.e. Chaperone Dnaj, C-terminal (IPR002939) from PFAM. The green bar is for Heat shock protein Dnaj from PRINTS. The
Dnaj peptide binding domain is represented from black bar (i.e. IPR008971 from SUPERFAMILY). The Heat shock protein Dnaj
conserved site represented by yellow bar (i.e. IPR018253 from PROSITE). The unintegrated domain is containing two bars of
different colour, the violet one is from GENE3D and the brown one is from PANTHER; (c) Result of Type 2 Metallothionein protein
for domain prediction/identification by InterProScan. The blue colour bar is showing Type 2 Metallothionein domain of PFAM. It
has no unintegrated region in its domain part. It only contains the unique PFAM domain.

(a) Result showing 3D structure of HSP17.3KDa
protein predicted by I-TASSER. The coloring method is based
on secondary structure. The cartoon shaped structure
representing α helix and the yellow colored arrow representing
β-sheets. The black color part of ribbon representing coil and
the purple color representing turn in this 3D structure; (b)
Result showing 3D structure of DnaJ protein predicted by ITASSER.
The colouring method is based on secondary
structure. The cartoon shaped structure representing α helix
and the yellow colored arrow representing β-sheets. The black
colour part of ribbon representing coil and the purple colour
representing turn in this 3D structure; (c) Result showing 3D
structure of Type 2 Metallothionein protein predicted by ITASSER.
This structure is not containing any α helix and β-
sheets. But it is completely made up of only coil (black colour
part of ribbon) and turns (in purple colour).

