Background
We certainly do not know how many people are malnourished;
but, FAO report indicates that there are about 925 million
undernourished people in the world []. The animal products
(eggs, meat, milk, etc.) are a source of dietary proteins; but,
proteins are usually derived from legumes (plants from the
bean and pea family) especially by poor people []. There are
thousands of legume species, but common beans (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) 
are cultivated on the large scale. By understanding
the importance of P. vulgaris, the Phaseomics international
consortium was developed to establish the necessary
framework of knowledge and materials for the advancement of
bean genomics, transcriptomics, and proteomics; and the main
goal of it is to help in generating new common bean varieties
suitable and desired by farmers and consumers []. As a part of
the international consortium for Phaseolus genomics 
[],
research work on generation of P. vulgaris expressed sequence
tags (ESTs) was initiated at Melaka Institute of Biotechnology,
Malaysia.

The randomly isolated anonymous cDNA clones (on a large
scale) are treated as ESTs and used extensively in the gene's
expression and regulation studies []. The generated ESTs data
is also used in the evaluation of the genomes for genes content
and its structure, in comparative gene expression analysis
between different plant tissues using computational tools 
[],
and in discovery of new and novel genes []. In monocot and
dicot plants, various new and novel genes have been identified
by using random method of cDNA clones isolation and their
nucleotide sequencing [–]. Hence, ESTs were generated to
study the gene's expression and regulations in bean– pod-tissue
in-line-with the agenda of the international consortium for
Phaseolus genomics [].

To this point, we have generated 5972 ESTs; and annotated
ESTs were deposited into ESTs database hosted by National
Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) GenBank / DDBJ
/ EMBL (our unpublished work). While processing and
analysing generated ESTs, we found lycopene β-cyclase and β-
carotene hydroxylase gene's cDNA [,
]. The source of
lycopene β-cyclase and β-carotene hydroxylase cDNA is P. vulgaris; 
hence, lycopene β-cyclase and β-carotene hydroxylase
cDNAs were designated as PvLCY-β and PvCHY-β, respectively.
In carotenoids biosynthesis pathway, PvLCY-β catalyzes the
production of carotene (α-carotene and β-carotene) [,
]; and
PvCHY-β is known to function as a catalyst in the production of
lutein and zeaxanthin [].

Due to antioxidant properties of carotenes (β-carotene), several
health benefits associated with its consumption are reported
elsewhere []. Similarly, the benefits of lutein and zeaxanthin
consumption are reported by many researchers; and their
reports are reflecting the importance of these (carotenes, lutein
and zeaxanthin) natural products in human health 
[–].

Both, PvLCY-β and PvCHY-β cDNA clones do have potential
applications in genetic engineering of P. vulgaris and other
plants. That is why, both clones were fully sequenced. These
two cDNA clones could be used in manipulating P. vulgaris and
level of carotene, lutein and zeaxanthin could be elevated.
Hence, in order to understand more about PvLCY-β and
PvCHY-β, their cDNA clones were analysed and annotated. The
nucleotide and deduced protein sequence of PvLCY-β and
PvCHY-β gene's cDNA are analyzed and annotated in this
study using computational tools. The nucleotide sequence of
PvLCY-β and PvCHY-β gene's cDNA and its annotation is
reported in this paper.

Methodology
Plant Materials:
The seeds of P. vulgaris genotype BAT93 were kindly provided
by Patricia Lariguet, Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire des
Plantes Supérieures, Department of Plant Biology, University of
Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. Seeds were germinated in soil
obtained from a nursery (Melaka, Malaysia), and seedlings
were maintained to grow in the open area at Melaka Institute of
Biotechnology, Malaysia.

PvLCY-β and PvCHY-β cDNA clones isolation:
The PvLCY-β and PvCHY-β cDNA clones were identified from
the ESTs generated using random method of gene isolation 
[,
,
]. 
The cDNA clone encoding PvLCY-β was isolated from 20-
day-old [days after anthesis (DAA)] bean-pod-tissue cDNA
Entry Library; and the cDNA clone encoding PvCHY-β was
isolated from 5-day-old bean-pod-tissue cDNA Entry Library.
The cDNA libraries were constructed (our unpublished data)
using ‘CloneMiner cDNA library construction kit’ procured
from Invitrogen Corporation.

Plasmid DNA isolation:
The individual cultures of Escherichia coli strain DH5α cells
harbouring recombinant plasmids with PvLCY-β and PvCHY-β
cDNA clones were cultivated in 10 ml LB medium
supplemented with 40µg/ml Kanamycin. Cultures were
incubated in dark at 37°C, 160 rpm for 18 h. From harvested E.
coli cells, plasmid DNA was isolated using Wizard® Plus SV
Minipreps DNA purification system, a commercial kit
(Promega).

Nucleotide sequencing:
Purified plasmid DNA was used in sequencing reactions. Both
strands of both PvLCY-β and PvCHY-β cDNA clones were
sequenced using M13 (Forward) [5'-GTAAAACGACGGCCAG-
3'] and M13 (Reverse) [5'-GGATAACAATTTCACACAGG-3']
primers.

cDNA and deduced protein sequence analysis:
For both PvLCY-β and PvCHY-β cDNA clones, the nucleotide
sequence of plus (+) and minus (−) strands were aligned using
Blast (bl2seq) program available at NCBI
[http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/]. The 5' and 3' ends of the
cDNA sequences were edited to eliminate adaptor and vector
sequences. The finalized cDNA sequences were analyzed using
online bioinformatics tools.

The similarity searches were performed using blast programs
(BlastN and BlastP) available at NCBI. Online bioinformatics
tools available at JustBio [http://www.justbio.com/] were used
to deduce the protein sequence, to find out the general features
of PvLCY-β and PvCHY-β cDNA and deduced protein
sequences. The EMBOSS Water - Pairwise Sequence Alignment
[http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/emboss/align/] was used to
compare cDNA and deduced protein sequences to find out
similarity% with their counterparts from other species. Guanine
and cytosine (GC %) content calculation was carried out by
using ‘DNA/RNA base composition calculator'. Alignment of
multiple protein (amino acids) sequences was carried out using
multiple sequence alignment by ClustalW program, and the
phylograms were constructed using BioEdit and TreeView
programs [,
]. Proteins sequences were aligned by using
CLUSTAL 2.1 multiple sequence alignment program to find out
conserved residues in both PvLCY-β and PvCHY-β deduced
proteins.

Discussion
PvLCY-β and PvCHY-β cDNA clones isolation:
The full-length PvLCY-β and PvCHY-β cDNA clones were
isolated from 20-day-old and 5-day-old bean-pod-tissues cDNA
libraries, respectively. The isolated PvLCY-β and PvCHY-β
cDNA clones were designated as PvLCY-β and PvCHY-β to
indicate their precise identity and the source of the plant to
which they belong.

Nucleotide sequencing:
Both, sense (+) and antisense (−) strands of both cDNA clones
were sequenced where M13 forward and M13 reverse primers
were used. After elimination of the vector and adaptor
sequence, the sequence of sense and antisense strand of
individual cDNA was compared using blast (bl2seq) program.
Analysis of the results showed that PvLCY-β and PvCHY-β
cDNAs are 1639 and 1107 bp in length, respectively.

cDNA and Deduced Protein Sequence Analysis:
The identity of both cDNA clones was confirmed by analyzing
finalized respective cDNA sequence and its deduced amino
acid sequence. Annotated nucleotide sequences of both PvLCY-β 
and PvCHY-β cDNA were deposited in
GenBank/DDBJ/EMBL under the accession numbers
HQ199604 and JN255133, respectively. Annotated general
features of cDNA nucleotide and protein sequences are
summarized in  (see supplementary material); and
nucleotide sequence of PvLCY-β and PvCHY-β cDNA along
with its deduced amino acid sequence is shown in  &amp;
, respectively.

The similarity% of both PvLCY-β and PvCHY-β cDNA
nucleotide and deduced protein sequence with their
counterparts from other species are shown in  &amp; 

(see supplementary material), respectively. The amino acid
Sequence analysis results showed that both PvLCY-β and
PvCHY-β proteins are Leucine (L) rich (Supplementary 
&amp; ). The comparison of the PvLCY-β protein with its
counterparts from other species showed that 217 (out of 502)
residues (43.23%) are fully conserved. But, in case of the
PvCHY-β protein, results showed that only 67 (out of 305)
residues (21.97%) are fully conserved. The consecutive search
for conserved domains in PvLCY-β and PvCHY-β protein
sequences resulted in the detection of their conserved domains,
and the results are summarised in  (see supplementary
material). The phylograms were constructed in order to
understand phylogenetic relationship of PvLCY-β and PvCHY-β
proteins with their counterparts from other species. The
phylograms for PvLCY-β and PvCHY-β proteins are shown in
 &amp; , respectively.

The understanding of the identified genes, their expression
patterns and regulation is crucial in order to strategize the
approach to manipulate any biosynthesis pathway of interest in
the plants. For the suppression of a gene expression, partial
sequence of that gene can be utilized to induce posttranscriptional
gene silencing (PTGS) [–]. However, the full
length gene or its cDNA is required for its over-expression in
order to increase either the production of desired vital proteins
or natural products []. Therefore, understanding of gene of
interest and it's cDNA is prerequisite before it can be used in
recombinant DNA (rDNA) technology to manipulate
genetically, any plant of interest or organism [].

The main goal of this study was to annotate PvLCY-β and
PvCHY-β gene's cDNA and deduced respective protein (amino
acid sequence). The PvLCY-β cDNA clone was identified in 20-
day-old-pod tissue cDNA library, and it indicates that PvLCY-β
is expressed in bean's 20-day-old developing pod tissue.
However, the PvCHY-β cDNA clone was identified in 5-dayold-
pod tissue cDNA library; and it reflects that PvCHY-β is
expressed in bean's 5-day-old developing pod tissue. However,
the level of both gene's expression, pattern of expression, and
tissue-specificity is not clear at this moment as we have not
characterised these two gene's expression. It can be done by
using either Northern hybridization technique or microarray
technique [].

The LCY-β protein of G. max showed the maximum similarity
(95.2%) with inferred PvLCY-β protein. Whereas, LCY-β protein
from Cryptomeria japonica and Taxodium distichum showed less
similarity (83.8%) with inferred PvLCY-β protein. Both,
Cryptomeria japonica and Taxodium distichum are species that
belong to gymnosperms; the relatively low level of PvLCY-β
similarity with LCY-β from Gymnosperm members is in line
with evolution in plant species []. Interestingly, LCY-β protein
of Salicornia europaea and Crocus sativus showed lowest
similarity with PvLCY-β. While analysing PvCHY-β, we noticed
that Glycine max CHY-β protein shows the maximum (78%)
similarity with inferred PvCHY-β protein. On the contrary,
Muriella zofingiensis CHY-β protein showed less (58%) similarity
with PvCHY-β protein. Muriella zofingiensis is an algal member,
and the relatively low level of similarity between PvCHY-β and
CHY-β from M. zofingiensis is along the lines of the evolution in
plants. These results are similar to the results reported by Bhore
et al. []. Both, PvLCY-β and PvCHY-β proteins showed highest
similarity with LCY-β and CHY-β of G. max, respectively. This
makes logical sense because both P. vulgaris and G. max belongs
to the same family, Fabaceae [].

The PvCHY-β protein contains conserved domain for betacarotene
hydroxylase which is a member of the Fatty acid
hydroxylase superfamily (Accession No: cl01132) 
[]. In
PvLCY-β, two main conserved domains namely,
NADB_Rossmann super family and lycopene beta cyclase were
detected. The NADB domain does exist in numerous
dehydrogenases of metabolic pathways; for example glycolysis.
The lycopene cyclase family protein conserved domain was
detected in PvLCY-β, and lycopene beta and epsilion cyclases
are part of this protein family [–].

Phaseolus vulgaris is a valuable source of proteins in the human
diet; and it is important to increase the yield of this essential
crop [,
]. Several research teams are using GM technology
approach to improve yield of the beans [,
]. For instance
developing P. vulgaris resistant to the herbicide [] and viral
infection []. In addition to this, there is a vast scope to modify
beans genetically for improving the nutritional quality of its
pods and seeds. This type of genetic manipulation is possible;
because, rice (Oryza sativa) has been genetically engineered and
β-carotene content in it has been increased for use as a source of
vitamin A []. Similarly, β-carotene content can be increased in
beans by over-expression of PvLCY-β in its carotenoid
biosynthesis pathway (Supplementary ). Furthermore,
therapeutically beneficial lutein and zeaxanthin content
increment in beans is also possible by over-expression of
PvCHY-β [].

Genetic modification of agricultural crop plants to improve
yield and nutritional quality is a viable option, and it is
absolutely important as far as human wellbeing is concerned
[,
]. Both, isolated PvLCY-β and PvCHY-β gene's cDNA are
reasonably well annotated in this study, and we believe that the
available annotated cDNA sequences could be useful in
designing the strategy for the construction of transformation
vectors. Further research is needed in this line to achieve the
ultimate goal of generating new common bean varieties suitable
and desired by farmers and consumers.

Conclusion
This study has annotated the salient features of PvLCY-β and
PvCHY-β gene's cDNA clones. The computational analysis of
deduced PvLCY-β and PvCHY-β proteins revealed the presence
of conserved domains. Furthermore, the comparative analysis
of deduced PvLCY-β and PvCHY-β protein sequences with their
counterparts from other species revealed the fully conserved
amino acid residues. However, further study is required to
understand PvLCY-β and PvCHY-β gene's expression and its
regulation in bean-pods. Both genes' over-expression in beanpods
can be considered for futher research to explore the
possibility of nutritional quality improvement of the bean-pods
and bean-seeds.

Conflict of Interests
Authors attest that there are no conflicts of interest to declare.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors are grateful to the Ministry of Science, Technology and
Innovation (MOSTI), Malaysia for research funding [Research
Grant Code Number: BSP (M) / BTK / 004 (3)]; and to Patricia
Lariguet, Department of Plant Biology, University of Geneva,
Geneva, Switzerland for supplying seeds of bean, genotype
BAT93.

Citation:Bhore et al, Bioinformation 9(4): 197-206 (2013)

Nucleotide and deduced amino acid sequences of Phaseolus vulgaris lycopene β-cyclase (PvLCY-β) cDNA clone. Open
reading frame (ORF) and 3' non-coding region of cDNA are shown in capital and small letters, respectively. The deduced aminoacid
sequence is given below the nucleotide sequence, and numbered at both ends of each sequence line. The ORF encodes for a
protein of 502 amino acid residues (blue). Amino acid residues are numbered beginning with the initial Methionine (M) till last
Glutamic acid (E) residue. Initiation and termination codons are shown in green and red colour, respectively. *represent the
termination codon. This cDNA clone was isolated from P. vulgaris 20-day-old-pods tissue cDNA library.

Nucleotide and deduced amino acid sequences of Phaseolus vulgaris beta-carotene hydroxylase (PvCHY-β) cDNA clone.
Open reading frame (ORF) and non-coding regions of cDNA are shown in capital and small letters, respectively. The deduced
amino-acid sequence is given below the nucleotide sequence, and numbered at both ends of each sequence line. The ORF encodes
for a protein of 305 amino acid residues (blue). Amino acid residues are numbered beginning with the initial Methionine (M) till
the last Serine (S) residue. Initiation and termination codons are shown in green and red colour, respectively. *represent the
termination codon. This cDNA clone was isolated from P. vulgaris 5-day-old-pods tissue cDNA library.

The phylogram showing phylogenetic relationship of
common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) lycopene β-cyclase (PvLCY-β) protein with its counterparts from other species. Available 35
full-length LCY-β protein sequences were retrieved from NCBI
database (see supplementry ). The location of PvLCY-β
protein in phylogram is shown in a pink box.

The phylogram showing phylogenetic relationship of
common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) β-carotene hydroxylase
(PvCHY-β) protein with its counterparts from other species.
Available 16 full-length PvCHY-β protein sequences were
retrieved from NCBI database (see supplementary 
).
Location of PvCHY-β protein in phylogram is shown in a pink box.

