Background
Diabetes mellitus has become a universal metabolic prevalent 
that has effect the many biochemical events nearly in all age 
group population []. Good physical activity, a hygienic diet, 
avoiding from smoke and obsessive control from alcohol has an 
82% esser rate of diabetes []. Diabetes is mainly characterized 
by the inadequate function of pancreas when enough insulin is 
not producing by the pancreas or the insulin which is produced 
by the pancreas is not well utilized in body. Diabetes is one of 
the leading causes of premature disorder and demise in 
worldwide []. Diabetes is reason for 60% of all deaths 
worldwide without including transmissible diseases []. At 
present diabetes mellitus has been affecting above 170 million 
individuals worldwide and hypothetically in the year 2030 it 
will be above 365 million []. Moreover the failure of beta cells, 
the other pathophysiological factor causative to the prevalence 
of type 2 diabetes mellitus is typically related to the inadequate 
secretion of insulin and target tissues show resistance to insulin 
[]. From the past four decades the incidence of type 2 diabetes 
mellitus (T2DM) has been raised intensely. Type 2 diabetes 
mellitus has been described as: the resistance of insulin, 
hyperinsulinaemia and hyperglycaemia. Eminent hepatic 
gluconeogenesis producing surplus of glucose through 
aberrantly way is the vital indicator of hyperglycaemia in type 2 
diabetes mellitus [,
]. There is clinical correlation to the insulin 
resistance causing the increase of glucose level this results due 
to the lack of inhibition of two enzymes involving in 
gluconeogenic process, PEPCK 
(phosphoenolpyruvatecarboxykinase) and G6Pase (glucose-6-
phosphatase) subunit [,
]. Several enzymes catalyzed the 
gluconeogenesis pathway i.e. 
phosphoenolpyruvatecarboxykinase (PEPCK) and glucose-6-
phosphatase (G6Pase) [], PEPCK is present in two isoforms, a 
mitochondrial (PEPCK-M) and a cytosolic (PEPCK-C). Now 
PEPCK is deliberated a key enzyme in gluconeogenesis and 
glyceroneogenesis []. PEPCK-C is present on chromosome 3 
in rat, on chromosomes 2 in mouse, and in humans on 
chromosome 20 [–]. PEPCK-C and PEPCK-M both are
coded by separate genes []. PEPCK-C and G6Pase has vital 
role in gluconeogenesis in liver and kidney and also has some 
other metabolic roles such as glyceroneogenesis in liver and 
adipose tissues [,
]. Insulin is considered the most 
significant hormone that play role in the inhibition of 
gluconeogenesis. Primarily it acts by suppressing the expression 
PEPCK and G6Pase genes for the gluconeogenic enzymes. In 
the first rate limiting steps of gluconeogenesis, PEPCK catalyzes 
the reaction of oxaloacetic acid to phosphoenolpyruvate, and 
then in the final step of gluconeogenesis, G6Pase catalyzes the 
glucose 6-phosphate into glucose. Glucagon and glucocorticoids 
induced the expression of genes for PEPCK and G6Pase during 
fasting and periods of stress respectively [–]. A co-activator 
protein PGC-1 has been discovered that is also the important 
mediator for this process []. These signaling pathways that 
regulate the glucogenic enzymes are the potential targets for 
drug designing to restore the insulin sensitivity. An antidiabetic 
commercial drug, metformin has been used in clinical patients 
for more than 40 years to reduce the hepatic glucose production 
[]. Medicinal plants have an important role in the treatment of 
diabetes particularly in the countries where resources are 
insufficient. Traditional medicines are mostly used in the 
majority of the world population. Rather than relying on the 
expensive imported drugs, the use of indigenous forms of 
medicines are encouraged []. As compared to the synthetic
drugs these herbal drugs have minor side effects. Hence, it 
has become more important to isolate and identify the 
anti-hyperglycemic compounds from plants [].

More than 150 plants are used for the management of diabetes mellitus by the WHO report 
[]. 
Azadirachtaindica (neem) has engrossed universal importance in recent years due 
to its extensive medicinal properties. Neem has been widely used in Unani, Ayurveda 
and Homeopathic medicines. Neem has enormous range of biologically active chemical 
constituents that are different chemically and structurally. Over than 140 chemically 
active compounds have been identified from different parts of neem i.e. leaves, flowers, 
seeds, fruits, roots and bark are used traditionally for the cure of many diseases. 
Neem leaf and its active compounds have been identified to reveal the anti-inflammatory, 
immunomodulatory, antiulcer, anti-hyperglycaemic, antimutagenic, antioxidant, anticarcinogenic 
and antiviral properties []. Neem constituents 
are consisting of two groups: Isoprenoids and non-isoprenoids. The Isoprenoids comprise of 
diterpenoids and triterpenoids including protomeliacins, azadirone, limonoids and derivatives 
such as vilasinin, nimbin, salanin and azadirachtin. The non-isoprenoids consist of carbohydrates, 
proteins, sulphurous compounds, and polyphenolics including flavonoids, dihydrochalcone, coumarin 
and aliphatic compounds ete, []. 
A substantial and dose dependent decrease in blood pressure has been reported by an alcoholic 
extract of neem leaves []. Considering 
the above discussed medications by neem this study was designed to screen the active compounds 
of Azadirachtaindica (Neem) against the PEPCK protein by using molecular docking studies.

Methodology
This study was design for the in-silico investigation of 
Azadirachta indica (neem) leaves active chemicals against PEPCK
protein. For the current study chemical structures of neem 
compounds were retrieved from PubChem. Few of them were 
drawn by using the Chemdraw software. 3D structure of 
PEPCK protein was retrieved from Protein Data Bank (PDB). 
This study was conducted using MOE (Molecular Operating 
Environment) software []. 

Preparation of Protein Structure:
The target protein was downloaded from Protein Data Bank 
(PDB) (PDB: http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/home). 1KHB is the 
PDB id of target protein. By using MOE (Molecular Operating 
Environment) software all water molecules were removed. 
Hydrogen atoms were added to the receptor molecule. Receptor 
molecule was optimized by doing 3D protonation and energy 
minimization. Energy minimization was performed using the 
AMBER99 force field and gradient was 0.05. Receptor was 
minimized till the root mean square gradient reaches below 
0.05. Then minimized receptor molecule was used for docking 
study.

Preparation of Ligand Structure:
Neem leaves chemicals were retrieved from PubChem in 2D 
format. Few chemical compounds structures were not available 
on PubChem. Their 2D structures were found from literature 
study and their structures were drawn using ChemDraw 
software and saved in 3D format. Hydrogen atoms were added 
to the ligand structures and energy minimization was 
performed using the MMFF94X force field at the gradient 
0.05.Then the ligands were saved in .mol2 format. 


Construction of Database:
In MOE, a database of all the ligands was constructed. Database 
was saved in .mdb format. This database was docked against 
the target receptor protein. 


Molecular Docking:
Molecular docking was performed with the database of ligands 
against PEPCK protein by setting the docking parameters. 
Ligands were docked by selecting the pocket from receptor 
protein in MOE. Output database file was saved in .mdb format. 
The minimum S scored complexes was taken to check the 
binding interactions with the active sites. The best hydrogen 
bonding and π-π interactions were analyzed by the ligX option 
in MOE.

Results &amp; Discussion
Docking Analysis:
All ligands of Azadirachta indica (neem) were docked with the 
active sites of PEPCK enzyme and top ranked conformations of 
each ligand were selected from output database. These ligands 
were saved in a separate database. Compound 01 was ranked as 
top docked molecule on the basis of S-Score obtained from MOE 
docking algorithm. Thus, it can be inferred that this compound 
can serve as potential inhibitor against PEPCK enzyme. All 
other compounds were having S-Score close to each other. All 
compounds were studied in detail to obtain their interaction 
information that can be important for the inhibition of PEPCK 
enzyme. Interaction diagrams were obtained using MOE ligand 
interaction analysis feature.

Binding Interactions of Ligands and Protein:
The most active compound 01 was ranked as first on the basis of 
docking score. It is clear from the () that this compound 
was bound deep into the binding cavity of PEPCK making 
interactions with the residues Asn292, Met 295, Leu293, Asn297, 
Gly289, Thr343, Pro528, Phe530, and Gly531.On the basis of 
docking score compound 02, compound 03, compound 03, 
compound 04, compound 05, compound 06, compound 07, 
compound 08, compound 09 and compound 10 were ranked 
close to each other as shown in  (see supplementary 
material). Among all these compounds, Compound 03, 
compound 05, compound 06 and compound 10 showed the
interactions with the Cys288 residue of active site of enzyme 
PEPCK. In all the listed compounds, compound 01, compound 
02, compound 03, compound 05, compound 06, compound 09 
and compound 10 were having interactions with the Asn292, 
Gly289 residues (compound 09 was not having interaction with 
Gly289). Compound 03, compound 04, compound 05, 
compound 07, compound 09 and compound 10 were having 
interactions with Arg405, Lys290.Compound 04 was not bound 
to the Lys290 residue. Compound 03, compound 05, compound 
07, compound 09 and compound10 were have fine interactions 
with Asp310, Asp311 and Thr291 sites of enzyme. Compound 
04 and compound 07 were also having interactions with Tyr235 
residue. Compound 03, compound 07 and compound 10 
showed interactions with Ser286 residue. Compound 03 and 
compound 09 were having interactions with Lys244 in binding 
site of protein molecule. Compound 03 is the only compound 
which was having interaction with Glu329 residue. Compound 
03 and compound 10 were also bound to the Ala287 residue. 
Compound 04 was also having interaction with Asn403. 
Compound 05 was having interaction with Phe530 and 
compound 06, compound 09 and compound 10 were having 
interactions with Val335 in binding site of protein. Compound 
07 was also bound to the Arg87 residue and compound 06, 
compound 09 and compound 10 were having interactions with 
Arg436 residues. Compound 08 was having binding site
interactions with Pro337 and Pro402 residues. Compound 09 
was also having interactions with the Gly338, His264 and 
Phe333 residues in binding site of PEPCK molecule.

Conclusion
There is an increasing need for the identification, screening and 
design of anti-diabetes compounds from natural sources like the 
leaf extracts of neem. Hence, PEPCK was screened using the 
structure data for compounds found in the leaf extract of neem 
using molecular docking simulation and screening techniques. 
The compound 3-Deacetyl-3-cinnamoyl-azadirachtin is found to 
have the best binding properties with PEPCK. This observation 
finds application for further consideration in in vitro and in vivo
validation.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Jalil et al, Bioinformation 9(20): 1031-1035 (2013)

A) The interaction between the compound 01 and active sites of PEPCK; B) The interaction between the compound 02 and 
active sites of PEPCK; C) The interaction between the compound 03 and active sites of PEPCK; D) The interaction between the 
compound 04 and active sites of PEPCK; E) The interaction between the compound 05 and active sites of PEPCK; F) The interaction 
between the compound 06 and active sites of PEPCK; G) The interaction between the compound 07 and active sites of PEPCK; H) 
The interaction between the compound 08 and active sites of PEPCK; I) The interaction between the compound 09 and active sites 
of PEPCK; J) The interaction between the compound 10 and active sites of PEPCK.

