Background
DNA methylation is an important component of the epigenetic
regulation of gene expression in eukaryotic cells. Methylation of
CpG dinucleotides within transcriptional regulatory elements
often results in reduced expression or silencing of genes 
[].
CpG islands defined as genomic regions of more than 200 bases
with a GC content of at least 50%, typically occurs at or near the
transcription start site (TSS) []. CpG islands methylation is
positively associated with the interference of gene transcription
by blocking transciption factor binding or by bringing about
chromatin alterations [].

Erythropoietin (EPO) is a 34-kDa glycoprotein hormone that is
mainly produced in the fetal liver and adult kidney.
Expressions of EPO and its receptor (EPOR) have been
described in various cancers under hypoxic condition 
[].
Recent data suggest that EPO and EPOR are involved in several
growth-stimulating pathways including proliferation, antiapoptotic,
angiogenesis and invasion of cancer cells [].

EPO gene expression is under the control of hypoxia-inducible
factors-1 (HIF-1) and hepatocyte nuclear factor transcription
factors []. Induction of EPO occurs under hypoxic conditions,
and activated through binding of the hypoxia-induced factor 1
α (HIF1α) and aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(ARNT; also termed HIF1β) to the enhancer region of EPO gene
[]. 
The binding site of HIF1 has been reported to be in the
enhancer region (sequence TACGTGCT) located at the 3′ UTR
region of the EPO gene [].

A CpG near the regulatory region of EPO gene is
hemimethylated in normoxic, but not in hypoxic []. In normal
mammary cells and breast cancer cell lines (not under hypoxic
condition), methylation of regulatory elements of EPO gene is
8% and 46% respectively []. The aim of our study was to
investigate the effect of different methylation percentage of EPO
gene regulatory elements to HIF1 activity as a transcriptional
factor of EPO gene.

Methodology
Nucleotide sequence and protein structure retrieval:
The DNA sequence of Epo gene is GI:298358534, and the
protein sequences of HIF-1α and HIF-1β are GI:2498017 and
GI:114163, respectively; retrieved from the sequence database of
the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI),
United States National Library of Medicine (NLM), National
Institutes of Health (NIH) [].

This study has gained ethical clearance from research ethics
committee, Faculty of Medicine, Brawijaya University, as a
member of ethics committee in Indonesia.

CpG island prediction:
The EPO gene sequence was scanned for the distribution of
CpG islands using CpG Island Searcher with the parameters set
as lower limits: percentage of G and C bases (%GC) = 55%, ratio
of observed to statistically expected CpG frequencies
(ObsCpG/ExpCpG) = 0.65, frequency of bases in the island =
200 bp and gap between adjacent islands = 100 bp.

Protein and DNA structure modeling:
Modeling structure of HIF1α and HIF-1β predicted using
SWISS-MODEL web server [] by homology modelling
method. DNA structure was constructed using 3DNA-Driven
DNA Analysis and Rebuilding Tool (3D-DART) web server
[]. The enhancer region of EPO gene (5'-3' sequence) was
given as input. The ‘fiber’ module initially developed a DNA
structure and a corresponding base pair parameter file was
generated using ‘find_pair’ and ‘analyze’ modules. The
parameter file was then subsequently utilized to introduce
‘local’ and ‘global’ bends in the DNA structure with default
settings of roll, tilt and twist. Finally, the DNA structure file in
PDB format was returned with the help of ‘rebuild' module of
3DNA.

Structure manipulation and energy minimization:
Methylation involves the addition of CH3 group in cytosines of
the EPO gene regulatory elements. Percent of methylation is 0%
(cells under hypoxic condition), 8% (normal cells), and 46%
(cancer cells under non-hypoxic condition). Yet Another
Scientific Artificial Reality Aplication (YASARA) View was
extensively used to perform this operation. ‘Build’ utility was
employed to introduce methyl group and subsequently the
bond orders were corrected using ‘Adjust bond order’ utility.
The resultant structure files were then energy minimized using
YASARA Energy Minimization server.

Computational docking:
The docking simulation of EPO gene promoter with
transcriptional factor HIF1 performed using High Ambiguity
Driven biomolecular DOCKing (HADDOCK) [] engine and
HEX software []. Docking protocol consists of three stages
visualization. A rigid-body energy minimization, a semi-flexible
refinement in torsional angle space and a finishing refinement
in explicit solvent. After execution of each of these stages, the
docked conformations are scored and ranked by the scoring
function to facilitate the selection of the best conformations and
subsequently employed in the next stage. The best docked
conformers can be recovered by inspection of HADDOCK score
which takes into account the weighted sum of van der Waals,
electrostatic, desolvation and restraint violation energies
together with buried surface area.

Interaction of HIF1 and EPO gene analysis:
The result of computational docking then visualized using
CHIMERA software [] and analyzed using NUCPLOT 
[].
The input to NUCPLOT is a file in PDB format. The program
identifies which atoms belong to the protein and other ligands
and which to the nucleic acid. Protein residues and water
molecules interacting with DNA atoms are then identified from
a list of hydrogen bonds, van der Waals contacts and covalent
bonds that generated automatically by the HBPLUS program
which calculates hydrogen bonds and van der Waals contacts
for a given PDB file.

Results &amp; Discussion
Protein structure analysis:
Modelling protein and DNA structure have an important role to
study interaction between HIF1 and EPO gene enhancer.
Protein 3-dimensional structure () were generated
using SWISS-MODEL server. From several predicted structure
for HIF1α and HIF1β, the best model was selected after
Ramachandran plot analysis. The best model was picked based
on highest percentages of residues in most favoured regions
and lowest percentages scores in outlier region. The
stereochemical quality of predicted HIF1α and HIF1β structure
were analyzed through residue-by-residue geometry and
overall geometry of protein structures using the RAMPAGE
server []. Ramachandran plots were drawn for these protein
structure. In ramachandran plots (), the most favoured
regions are indicated by dark blue patches, while bright blue
areas show allowed regions.

It was observed that HIF1α has 94.2% number of residues in
favoured region, 3.4% residues in allowed region, and 2.5%
residues in outlier region. In the case of HIF1β, plot analysis
revealed 93.9% residues in favoured region, 4.5% residues in
allowed region, and 1.6% residues in outlier region. Protein 3-
dimensional structures are fundamental as the biological
activity of a protein is accomplished by it's 3-dimensional
structure.

Docking analysis:
The result of docking analysis including HADDOCK score,
RMSD, binding energy, van der Waals energy, electrostatic
energy, desolvation energy and restraints violation energy
showed in  (see supplementary material). Our result
showed that binding energy in 46% methylated DNA was
higher (-161,45 kcal/mol) than in unmethylated DNA (-194,16
kcal/mol) and 8% methylated DNA (-175,94 kcal/mol).
Suggested that higher binding energy required for interaction
caused HIF1 more difficult to bind to EPO gene enhancer, even
if HIF1 can bind to EPO enhancer, the interaction might be not
stable. In contrast, the lower energy required for the interaction
between HIF1 and unmethylated EPO gene enhancer made the
interaction become strong and stable, suggested it's lead HIF1
binds strongly to EPO gene enhancer and stimulated
transcription of EPO gene This study conducted opinion that
methylation has an important role in the regulation of EPO
gene trascription. Irvine et al [] confirmed that the
methylation of DNA had a local effect on transcription. They
also showed that acetylated histones were found to be
associated with unmethylated DNA and were nearly absent
from methylated DNA regions. These methylation effects were
local and there is no preferential interaction if both the partners
(histone tails and DNA) were methylated. Kumar et al 
[] also
found that DNA normally being a negatively charged
biomolecule, if methylated, it additives the negativity of the
DNA thereby eliminating the role of methylated histones tails
to interact physically. So we presume that methylation isn't
only interfere binding process between HIF1 to EPO gene
enhancer, but also correlated with the interaction of histone tails
to DNA.

The result of docking interaction analysis also showed that
amino acid and nucleotide that directly involved in the
interaction is different in each percentage of methylation
(). In the interaction between unmethylated EPO gene
enhancer and HIF1, formed 3 hydrogen bonds between
nucleotide and amino acids, that are THY6 → Ser184; ADE7 →
Lys187; and CYT → Ser13, Ser16. Hydrogen bonds that formed
between 8% methylated EPO gene and HIF1 is between CYT5
→ Ser184; CYT11 → Lys41, Lys187, Thr195; GUA12 → Lys41;
and GUA14 → Asp9. In the interaction between 46%
methylated EPO gene and HIF1, it's formed 5 hydrogen bonds,
that is GUA9 → Ser37, His38; GUA12 → His38; CYT14 → Lys41;
ADE15 → Lys41; CYT16 → Ser196. The more hydrogen bonds
that formed between amino acids and nucleotide, the binding
energy required for the inetarction is higher ().

Epigenetic alterations of tumor suppressor genes contribute
essentially to tumor development and tumor progression in
cancers. Epigenetic gene silencing is mediated by aberrant
methylation of CpG island promoters. Methylation provides 2
levels of control, both dependent on DNA/protein interactions.
Methylation of 3' CpGs in the proximal promoter blocks the
binding of essential trans-acting proteins, thereby indirectly
repressing transcription. High-density CpG methylation in the
5'-UTR permits the binding of a methyl-CpG binding protein
that either directly represses transcription or recruits
corepressors, histone deacetylases, or both [].

Conclusion
In summary, we presume that a silencing mechanism of the Epo
gene by methylation is correlated with the binding energy,
which is required for interaction. A higher methylation
percentage correlates with a higher binding energy which can
cause an unstable interaction between DNA and transcription
factor. In conclution, methylation of promoter and enhancer
region of Epo gene leads to silencing.

Conflict of interest statement
The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Dewi &amp; Fatchiyah, Bioinformation 9(15): 782-787 (2013)

3-dimensional (3D) model of HIF1α and HIF1β (A) by using SWISS MODEL homology modelling, and the result of 3D
structure validation using Ramachandran plot analysis (B).

Interaction between EPO gene enhancer and hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1). The number of hydrogen bonds that
formed between EPO gene enhacer and HIF-1 are different in each percentage of methylation (0%, 8%, 46%; 3 hydrogen bonds, 4
hydrogen bonds, 5 hydrogen bonds, respectively).

