Background
Classification and clustering analyses are having their own
significance in biological data mining. These mathematical techniques
impart a long term relation with biological data analysis. With time,
sophistication has increased in data generation and analytical
methodologies. Basic biological taxonomical methods initiated with
morphological identification and classification, now extended to the
molecular level in the recent past []. Methodologically, the available
techniques improved a lot with the help of modern statistical pure and
hybrid strategies. Data mining techniques extracts complex pattern
[,] and relationship from a given set of data. As stated by Leslie
Cauley, “This is referred to as data mining. They slice and dice these
numbers a thousand different ways. They analyze patterns.”
Application of this classification and clustering techniques are well
documented in the available literature [,,, ], where it
has been extensively used with higher level of accuracy and efficiency
for different kind of complex data sets. In the preceding years, this
kind of methodology gained momentum due to the emergence of more
interdisciplinary research. Artificial Neural Network (ANN) [,]
based methodologies and higher level multi variate regression
techniques [,] got special appreciation for handling more
complex and non linear dataset. Biological datasets are complex due to
its heterogeneous nature and are hard to classify. Recent applications
deal with this complexity easily and do efficient classification for any
kind of data [,]. The advancement of the computational biology
research have generated enormous amount of data in the recent
decades. Mining of this chunk of data may unveil some unique
evidence or clues on the pattern or the interrelationship. In the present
study we have adopted an intelligent method dependent approach for
classification and clustering the bacterial Pyruvate Dehydrogenase
protein sequences according to their genera based on their
physicochemical properties [,]. Similar kind of studies we have
reported in the recent past [,,].

Methodology
The aim of this study is to classify and cluster the protein sequences
based on their 48 (28 different parameters and 20 amino acid
compositions) physicochemical properties of Pyruvate dehydrogenase,
extracted from National Centre for Biotechnological Information
(NCBI) [] public domain protein database, employing modern data
mining approach and compare the efficiency of different methods
while classifying the complex dataset. Pyruvate Dehydrogenase (PDH)
superfamily [,,] was selected out of several super families due
to its enormous importance in the regular metabolism. A large number
of sequences were collected initially and after complete preprocessing
a final dataset of 95 sequences was prepared. The complete workflow
is represented below in the .

Data preprocessing
All the collected sequences were verified manually and redundant
sequences were removed from the collected dataset. Ample amount of
sequences in the NCBI public domain database are present
repetitively, all those repetitive sequences were sorted out and only the
longest complete sequence was kept as a representative. Redundant
sequences with unspecific amino acid one letter codons were not
considered for the study

Extraction of features
Features were calculated by employing Protparam
(http://www.expasy.ch/tools/protparam.html) and Protscale
(http://www.expasy.ch/tools/protscale.html) servers available from
EXPASY. A total of 48 parameters were computed by the above
mentioned servers, they are as follows: bulkiness, recognition factors, hydrophobicity­Kyte &amp; Dolittile, percent buried residues, ratio hetero,
average flexibility, beta sheet­Chou Fasman, alpha helix­Chou
Fasman, anti parallel beta strand, relative mutability, number of
codons, polarity­Zimmerman, refractivity, transmembrane tendency,
percent accessible residues, average area buried, beta turn­Chou
Fasman, coil­Deleage &amp; Roux , parallel beta strand, molecular weight,
theoretical pI, different amino acid composition, extinction
coefficient(All cys), extinction coefficient( No cys), total number of
positive charges (Arg+Lys), total number of negative charges
(Asp+Glu), aliphatic index, instability index and GRAVY. The
extracted features obtained according to the used servers are listed in
Table 1 (see  ).

Input data set preparation
Preprocessed dataset prepared for this study contained 256 sequences
of PDH family belonging to different prokaryotic and eukaryotic
species. As this study was solely confined to the bacterial genera,
sequences belonging to bacteria only were isolated. Moreover, only
those genera were considered who have at least 5 sequences. The final
input dataset contained a total of 95 sequences belonging to 5 different
bacterial genera and an unannotated group. A total of 5 sub-datasets
were prepared from the main dataset to remove any kind of bias from
the analysis and each set was further divided into 2 subsets for training
and test set respectively, maintaining a ratio of 70:30.The same dataset
was used for clustering the sequences using Self Organizing Maps 
[,] without any training and test set division as the algorithm itself
takes care of data division during the calculation.

Classification with KNIME
The input dataset was used for the classification using KNIME []
software. It is a well known effective data mining tool which enables
us to construct a proper mathematical model by using different
classification and regression methods available in the tool. It is a
modular data exploration platform that allows the user to visually
create data flows. The functions, such as logistic method [,],
Multi Layer Perceptron (MLP) [,], Radial Basis Functional
Network (RBFN) [], Sequential Minimal Optimization (SMO) []
and simple logistic (SL) were applied to classify the prepared data.

Clustering with Self­Organizing Maps (SOM)
A self­organizing map (SOM) is a modern clustering method which
mimics the human brain in architecture. This algorithm possesses
several input neurons containing the input data space. Topological
properties of all the input neurons are preserved in the input space by
using neighborhood function. The final winning neuron represents the
low dimensional visualization of high dimensional data points. The
output representation is done with different color codes which lie in
various ranges of the data points. A two dimensional SOM was
adopted to cluster the generated input data space of pyruvate
dehydrogenase protein sequences. The following algorithm was used
in this SOM:

Steps involved in the algorithm

Initialization: Randomly initialize a weight vector (Wi) for each
neuron i Wi = [ wi1; wi2;...; wi n ]; n denotes the dimension of input
data. 

Sampling: Select an input vector X=[x1, x2,..., xn]

Similarity matching: Find the winning neuron whose weight
vector best matches with the input vector j(t)= arg min {||X­Wi||} 

Updating: Update weight vector of winning neuron, such that it
becomes still closer to the input vector. Also, update weight vectors of
neighbouring neurons­the further the neighbour, the lesser the degree

of change. Wi(t+1)=Wi(t) +α(t) X hij(t)X [X(t)­­Wi(t)] α (t): learning
rate that decreases with time t, 0&lt;α(t) ≤ 1 hij(t)= exp(­|| rj­ ri || 2/2 X
σ(t)2) ||rj­r i||2=distance between winning neuron and other neurons σ
(t)=neighbourhood radius that decreases with time t.

Continuation: Repeat steps 2­4 until there is no change in weight
vectors or up to certain number of iterations. For each input vector,
find the best matching weight vector and allot the input vector to the
corresponding neuron/cluster. 



Data Normalization
To obtain unbiased results while ensuring equal
importance to all parameters while clustering, data was normalized
linearly such that value in each category ranged between 0 and 1.
Normal Formula = (Original data value­Minimum data value)/
(Maximum data value­Minimum data value)

Results and discussion
Proper classification has been the basic criteria in taxonomy from the
dawn of scientific studies in biological sciences. It started with
morphological and phenotypic differentiation and slowly with the
advancement of molecular techniques inclined towards the specific
molecular markers. Novel in silico and statistical methods aided
accuracy and efficiency to these existing techniques and added a new
dimension in biological data analysis [,]. In this study we
classified five genera and an unknown group of data with greater
amount of accuracy level and later on clustered those considered
sequences for better magnification and understanding of their exact
comparative position.

The over all final curated data contains 95 sequences belonging to five
different bacterial genus, they are, Bacillus, Burkholderia,
Geobacillus, Mycobacterium and Synechococcus along with an
unannotated sequence group.

Classification analysis with KNIME
In KNIME, several methods
with different functions like logistic, Multi Layer Perceptron (MLP),
Radial Basis Function Network (RBFN), Sequential Minimal
Optimization (SMO) and simple logistic are available. The program
requires an input of training and test dataset. Rigorous training and
testing exercise was performed with all the 5 data sets and
classification efficiency was calculated for them applying the above
mentioned methods.

The obtained results indicated that Multiple Layer Perceptron (MLP)
method had yielded maximum average accuracy level of 88.2024
(). Though the other methods were also good and the
optimum result remained over 80% of accuracy. Apart from the MLP
method rest of the methods have shown more or less similar results
which is lying within the range of 83.0196% and 83.7094% accuracy
in average ().

Obtained highest accuracy for individual dataset achieved 93.103% of
accuracy (). Except Radial Basis Function Network all
method showed the exact same level of accuracy with different
dataset. But in all the cases dataset 3 remain common while providing
the maximum level of accuracy. Overall performance analysis
exhibited consistency.

The detail of obtained proper classification, misclassification and error
percentage are depicted in . The classification analysis
efficiently categorized the sequence data based on the parameter
considered for this study. The methodology adopted was able to group
the data successfully. To obtain further insight and recognize the
orphan sequences (not annotated), help of clustering technique was
taken. Initially, statistically mean distribution was calculated for each
genus along with the unannotated group. Later on sophisticated
Kohonen Map was used to get more insight.

The mean value for all the parameters were calculated for each genus
considered for this study along with the unknown group. Higher level
similarities were found in the calculated mean values (data available
from the authors upon request) for the parameters of
Mycobacterium and Synechococcus with the unknown sequences.
Mycobacterium data and unknown data group showed similarity for
the following parameters; Molecular weight, Hydrophobicity, %
buried residues, Beta sheet, Polarity, Transmembrane tendency, Coil,
Theoretical pI, Glutamine, Glycine, Leucine, Phenylalanine, Proline,
Valine ,Total positive charge (Arg +Lys), Instability index and
GRAVY.

Similar trend was observed in between Synechococcus and unknown
data group. The following parameters showed similarity in the context
of mean value; Bulkiness, Relative mutability, Number of codons ,
Transmembrane tendency, Average area buried, Glutamine,
Glutamate, Leucine, Methionine, Serine, Threonine, Total negative
charge (Asp+Glu). No resemblance was observed with the unknown
data group and Burkholderia or Geobacillus genus. This obtained
calculated statistical result suggests that some candidate sequences of
the unknown group were in vicinity either with Mycobacterium or
Synechococcus while maintaining a major distance with the other two
genuses. To confirm this basic statistical insight, support of latest
clustering approach was taken.

Cluster Analysis with SOM
A two dimensional SOM has been employed to cluster the sequence
data based on their respective genus. A 2*2 grid SOM was employed
to cluster all the sequences based on their calculated physico­chemical
parameters. The range of learning rate was tuned between .01 and .10.
Iterative convergence of the output was restricted to 1, 00,000
iterations during the calculations. Four clusters were formed
successfully. The distribution of all the 95 sequences are shown in the
below pie chart () where the cluster (1, 1) is possessing 30
sequences, cluster (1, 2) 24, cluster (2, 1) 9 and cluster (2, 2) 32
sequences respectively.

Cluster (2, 1)
The third cluster is the smallest one containing only 9
sequences (). The distribution of the sequences observed is
sharing 3, 5 and 1 sequences from Mycobacterium, Synechococcus and
unknown respectively. The uniqueness in this cluster is its maximum
parametric similarity with each other which is easily visible from the
above cluster compare to others. Parameters like molecular weight,
bulkiness, beta sheet, number of codons are with complete agreement
to each other. Higher level of similarity has been observed in
hydrophobicity, polarity, total positive charges (Asp + Glu) and
extinction coefficient.

Cluster (1, 1)
The first cluster, i.e., cluster (1, 1) represented in
, was found to be unique according to the parameters it has
clubbed together. This cluster was having only one Mycobacterium
sequence, rest of all is from the unannotated or unknown group. Few
parameters in these sequences are having exact similarity, such as beta
sheets and number of codons. All the values for these two parameters
are near about 1. Some other parameters have also known high degree
of equality like GRAVY, aliphatic index, molecular weight and
bulkiness. Values of these attributes are again very similar and ranged
near 1 with few minor deviations. On the contrary, parametric value of
refractivity is quite low for all the sequences and it’s in the vicinity to
0.

Cluster (1, 2)
The second cluster contains 24 sequences overall.
Among those 11 are from Burkholderia, 5 Mycobacterium, 6 unknown
types and each Geobacillus and Synechococcus having a single
representative sequence in this very cluster (). All the
unknown sequences in this cluster have been placed near
Synechococcus sequence, suggesting their similarity with this very
group. In this case also maximum similarity has been observed in case
of number of codons followed by beta sheet with exception for one
sequence, molecular weight, glycine content and bulkiness.

Cluster (2, 2)
The final cluster is the largest one with 32 sequences
(). Though this is the largest cluster formed still
Synechococcus and Burkholderia sequences are absent in this cluster.
A total of 7 unknown sequences are clustered in vicinity to
Mycobacterium, suggesting their similarity with Mycobacterium. In a
similar fashion like the prior clusters molecular weight, beta sheet and
number of codons have shown the identity in majority. Higher degree
of similarity is observed in total (Asp + Glu) content.

In this study we were able to classify and cluster successfully a
complex dataset containing 95 records and 29 attributes belonging to 5
different genuses and a complete set of orphan sequences. The overall
accuracy achieved was more than 93% employing different
classification methods and we were able to predict the position of the
unknown sequences based on their distribution in different clusters.
Most of them were in vicinity with Mycobacterium and
Synechococcus.

Conclusion
There are several bacterial species present in this universe but so many
are to be discovered. Classification of those genus or species is of
immense importance from taxonomical and molecular biology point of
view. We have several molecular markers now to detect a particular
species still it is cost effective and there are some deficiencies in our
usual methodology which restricts us to confidently confirm in so
many cases. Intelligent techniques may prove as an effective tool in
this regard and considering of all statistical facts and complexity it can
help us to reach a meaningful conclusion. In this study we have
classified and clustered different microbial groups based upon their
highly complex physicochemical properties with more than 80%
accuracy successfully. Unannotated sequences were also classified and
clustered which will help to determine their taxonomic position
properly. As the heap of generated dataset is increasing day by day, in
future this kind of unannotated data will increase. The approach
adopted here to classify and cluster may become an effective tool in
future for proper classification and clustering and determining the
exact taxonomic position for such orphan data.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are grateful to Dr. J.S.Yadav,
Director, Indian Institute of Chemical Technology for his constant
support and encouragement during the study. AKB thanks Council of
Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), Govt. of India, for the
Senior Research Fellowship (SRF).

Citation:Banerjee et al, Bioinformation 4(10): 456-462(2010)

Workflow representation of the whole study

Average accuracy achieved versus methodology adopted

Representation of highest accuracy obtained with respective methodology adopted and dataset used

Classification efficiency of different methods with respect to dataset

Distribution of sequences considered in this study according to their cluster formation

Visual representation of cluster 1, 1

Visual representation of cluster 1, 2

Visual representation of cluster 2, 1

Visual representation of cluster 2, 2

