Background
Gliomas are among the most aggressive malignant tumors and the most
refractory to therapy, in part due to the propensity for malignant cells to
disseminate diffusely through out the brain. Glioma is a type of cancer that
starts in brain and spine. It arises from glial cells. The most common site of
gliomas is brain []. Various workers have used the microarray technology
to analyze the differential expression of the genes involved in the various
cancers and related pathways, especially in the case of human []. Gene
expression profiling is proven useful in sub-classification and outcome
prognostication for human glial brain tumors. The analysis of
biosignificance of the 100s and 1000s of alteration in gene expression
found in genomic profiling remains a major challenge. Moreover, it is
increasingly evident that genes do not act as an individual unit, but
collaboration in overlapping network, the deregulation which is a hallmark
of cancer [].

Over the last few years, the routine use of microarrays has made possible
the creation of large datasets of molecular information characterizing
complex biological systems. A single sample for microarray contains
measurements for around 10,000 genes and hence the amount of data in
each microarray is too overwhelming for manual analysis []. The true
power of microarray analysis does not come from the analysis of single
experiment but rather from the analysis of many hybridization to identify
common pattern of gene expression and hence based on the available
understanding of the cellular processes, the genes that are contained in a
particular pathway or that responds to a common environmental challenge
should be co-regulated and consequently should show similar patterns of
expression [].

Modern experimental techniques such as microarray analysis of gene
expression, are improving our understanding of both the classification and
biological basis of complex diseases. While there has been an explosion in
the volume of raw data available for analysis, there is a widening gap
between statistically compelling results and their biological interpretation.
Research oftentimes becomes bogged down in an analytical maze of
spreadsheets and arbitrary statistical significance thresholds. Tools are
needed that can efficiently summarize huge amounts of information within
a biological context. Novel combination of microarray clustering features
supports such a comprehensive analysis. Combining flexibility, speed, and
visualization of both statistical and annotative information into a single
package, hierarchical clustering and k-means clustering fulfills a crucial
role in comprehensive microarray analysis [].

The biological interpretation of gene expression microarray results is a
daunting challenge. For complex diseases such as cancer, wherein the body
of published research is extensive, the incorporation of expert knowledge
provides a useful analytical framework. However, unexpected differences
in survival time of various tumors have generated attempts to search for
more precise parameters []. It has been clear that tumor behavior depends
mostly on gene expression alterations of various genes at genomic level
[] thus the knowledge of single gene alterations failed to accurately
define pattern and survival time of various malignant tumors; however, the
gene expression profiling, based on microarray technology has raised
hopes []. Our main objective is to perform a comparative analysis of
expression pattern of various genes involved in the glioma pathway of
Homo sapiens to understand their relative functionality in this pathway and
also in various other cancers. Such analysis could be used in regulation of
the disease by altering the expression pattern of responsible genes. This
would further provide guidance for drug target.

Methodology
We first of all retrieved the genes that are involved in pathway of glioma in
Homo sapiens from the KEGG database and found that 65 genes are
involved in the glioma pathway []. For the analysis of gene expression
profile of these all genes we downloaded the microarray data from SMD
database related to glioma and for their comparative expression analysis
we also downloaded the data for other cancers i.e. breast, lung, Prostate,
Liver, Pancreas, and Miscellaneous (various Acute Myeloid Leukemia,
Cell line cancers, Ovarian Cancers and Skin Cancers) []. Before the
analysis, we processed the whole data by taking gene expression ratio (log2
values) from the downloaded files. Then the data was normalized for
missing values, by following the neutral method, which was proposed by
Alizadeh et al (2000) for the analysis of diffused large B-cell lymphoma
[] and for that we replaced the missing (empty) values with zero. After
preparation of the working data, we carried the whole analysis in two
different parts. For comparative analysis of various cancer patterns along
with the glioma with reference to the known glioma suppressor gene i.e.
PTEN, p53 and Rb1 and oncogenes i.e. EGFR, MDM2, PDGF family,PDGFR family and CDK4 and analyzed their relative role in all the
cancers and for that we created gene and sample expression profile and
converted them in tabular form where each column represents a single
gene and each row represents a single cancer type Percentage expression of glioma genes in various cancer type 
(Table 1 in ). Further, for the analysis of comparative
expression of glioma genes within glioma, we analyzed their gene
expression profile using all available data for glioma, and then for the
analysis of comparative expression of these genes in other cancer, we
analyzed the expression profile of these all genes using the data of all
cancers except glioma and clumped them. For better and simplified
understanding, we converted overall expression level (over/under/mix) in
percentage ().

Discussion
In this study we concentrated on the differentially expressed genes that are
involved in the pathway of glioma and might be involved in the other
cancers. From the results of this study, expression of glioma pathway
genes is characterized as given in Table 1 (see ).
It depicts that the genes CDKN2A, PTEN, RB1 and TP53 are expressing at
a lower level than the normal and are also an important cause in causing
the cancers. This means that these genes are functioning as the tumor
suppressor genes and whenever they are present in the tissues that we have
taken into consideration; they are likely to cause the cancer. In contrast, the
genes CDK4, EGFR, MDM2, PDGFA, PDGFB, PDGFRA and PDGFRB
are showing an enhanced expression in the cancers and hence show that
the genes are functioning as the oncogenes in the various types of cancers.
It means, whenever these genes are over expressing in the tissues type we
studied, they are expected to cause the cancer in these tissues. Even these
features were compared in the various other cancers whose data has been
downloaded from SMD itself []. The percentage expression of the
oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes is almost same in the other cancers
also, like breast cancer, liver cancer, prostate cancer, lung cancer,
pancreatic cancer and miscellaneous cancers. Miscellaneous cancers
involve various Acute Myeloid Leukemia, Cell line cancers, Ovarian
Cancers and Skin Cancers. By the analysis of relative expression patterns
of the glioma suppressor and oncogenes in all cancers, we observed that
CDK4, MDM2, EGFR, PDGFA, PDGFB and PDGFRA have almost
shown a similar pattern and their percentage for over expression was
observed to be very high and it was found that they have barely shown
under expression. Here it was also observed that except the PFGFA for
which we did not found sufficient data, on an average all these genes
showed the same expression percentage in all the cancers that they have
shown in glioma. Genes CDKN2A, PTEN, RB1, and TP53 were found to
be very close to each other and shared a comparatively very high
percentage for under expression pattern and very low percentage for over
expression in glioma and all other cancers. The percentage expression of
PDGFRB is quite high for over expression in breast and glioma but for
other cancers (on an average) it has shown the mixed expression.

These observations are almost similar as observed by wet lab experiments,
thus they supported the earlier suggested views that their over expression
made positive effects on various tumors growth [,
,], in spite of all
this, intensive research and clinical trials are already going on PDGF
receptors to test it as the therapeutic targets []. Here we suggest that
CDK4, MDM2, EGFR, PDGFA, PDGFB and PDGFRA genes can be used
as the marker because they are robust and can be predicted by any method
(computational and wet lab).

Detection of comparative expression level of all 65 genes involved in
glioma pathway () suggests that, in glioma cancer most
of these genes show mixed type of expression levels. Some of them show
100% over expression and some shows 100% under expression.
Expression level of mTOR, CALML6 and PDGFA was not mentioned in
the figure because of the non availability of the sufficient amount of the
data. It has been shown that to maintain a particular process or biological
pathway it is essential that genes which are related to that process remains
active, suppression of such genes results in lost of such activity. On the
basis of this concept, essential genes can be used as the target to control
pathway. AKT1, CAMK2B and NRAS genes shows 100% over expression
in all tumors, it suggests that these three genes work as essential genes and
might be playing some important role to maintain the glioma pathway.
Here, essentiality of all these three genes suggests that they could act as
very good drug targets []. Further analysis suggests that ARAF, CCND1,
CDK4, CDKN1A, MDM2, PIK3CD and SHC1 genes show more than
60% over expression and rest of the time a mixed expression , thus they
also can be checked for being probable drug targets. The expression levels
of these 65 genes were also observed in different cancers (Breast, Lung,
Prostate, Liver and Pancreas) () and suggests that, the genes of
glioma pathway are also active in most of the cancers but their expression
levels remain very low, thus their contributions in these all cancers seems
little but positive.

Conclusion
Analysis of comparative expression patterns of the genes of glioma
pathway suggests that the genes CDKN2A, PETN, RB1 and TP53 are
acting as the tumor suppressor genes, the under expression of which are a
cause of cancer that we have analyzed and the genes CDK4, PDGFA and
PDGFB, PDGFRA and PDGFRB, MDM2 and EGFR are over expressing
at a rate higher than the normal and are acting as oncogenes in these
cancers. The analyses of gene expression further provide us with the
knowledge of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes that can be further	
used in disease profiling. It suggests that the use of gene expression data
can improve the functional gene annotation of the genes that were
previously unknown. Further the detailed knowledge of oncogenes and
tumor suppressor genes can be extended to get some potential drug targets
against which drugs can be designed.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors acknowledge the DBT center for bioinformatics facility at
Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Banasthali University,
Banasthali, India for providing essential facilities for completion of this
research work.

Citation:Katara etal Bioinformation 5(1): 31-34 (2010)

(A) Gene expression level of all 65 glioma genes in glioma tumors; (B) gene expression level of all 65 glioma genes in overall cancers

