Background
The cytokines family is composed by many proteins that need to bind to
specific receptors on the cell surface to perform their biological function 
[].
This binding can stimulate both the expression of receptors for cytokines and
the production of other cytokines that in turn act on other target cells 
[–]. On
the whole, the totality of the cytokines and of their interactions in and around
biological cells is defined with the “cytokinome” term 
[–]. Often these
molecules are involved in cancer-related chronic inflammation and play a
pivotal role in promoting tumorigenesis and metastatic processes. Therefore,
the knowledge of the structures of cytokine-receptor complexes and the
biophysical basis of their binding is important to identify putative antagonists
able to block the cytokine-receptor interactions that represent the reason of
onset disease [–]. 
We have developed a Cytokine Receptor Database
(CytReD) that collects biological information regarding the human cytokine
receptor families and their related ligands and can be used by researchers as
well as physicians and clinicians to identify what cytokines are reported in the
literature as significant in a given disease.

Materials and Methodology
Data Collection
Different databases were used to collect gene and protein data regarding the
human cytokine receptors []. 
Moreover, ProtParam tool was used to calculate
isoelectric point, hydropathicity and number of charged residues whereas
FoldIndex for the prediction of disorder propensity of the cytokine receptors
[].

System features
To build a dynamic website we used Drupal platform being content
management system. Drupal modules provide specific functionality by using
MySQL acting as a back-end database server. JMOL was implemented to view
the three-dimensional structures of the proteins. For the front end web user
interface we have used ZERO POINT theme from Drupal Themes and
customized in according to our needs and web user interface is developed in
PHP (version 5.3.1). In particular, the creation of the database in MySQL
version 5.0.75 by using phpMyAdmin version 3.1.21 includes 34 data fields.

Results
Database content
The user can search in Cytokine Receptor Database by selecting “Cytokine
Receptor Name”, “Ligands”, “Cytokine Family” or “Disease”. If the user
chooses “Cytokine Receptor Name” and writes the receptor name, the output
page will report all the information related to the selected receptor, subdivided
in three different parts: description, sequences and accession codes and other
biological information (). 
In the “description” there are information
regarding the biological description, the related ligands, the commonly used
synonyms, the cell type where the protein is expressed, its role and the diseases
in which it is involved. Indeed, the user can click on disease names to visualize
information on involved genes, drugs and pathways reported in PharmGKB
database (http://www.pharmgkb.org) or on ligand name to obtain specific
information collected in CytokineDB database [].

In the “sequences and accession codes” part there are the nucleotide and
protein sequences with the link to EMBL, UniProt and PDB databases and the
possibility to view 3D-structures by JMOL visualization tool. In “other
biological information” section the user can find Chromosome localization,
Ensemble protein coding gene, References, CATH and SCOP classifications,
and different quantitative analysis. In particular, the number of charged
residues and unfoldability index were inserted because our previous study has
demonstrated that N- and C-terminal regions present in chemokine membrane
receptors are characterized from a high disorder propensity 
[]. When the user
chooses “Ligands” and writes a ligand name, the output page will retrieve the
list of the receptors which bind that protein. Then, clicking on “View” link, it
will be possible to visualize the page with all the related information on chosen
receptor. If the user chooses “Cytokine Family” and writes one of the 7 subfamilies
(Interleukins, Interferons, Colony-Stimulating Factors, TNF family,
Transforming Growth Factors, Adipokines, and Chemokines), CytReD will
show the list of all the receptors belonging to this receptor cytokine family. As
in the previous case the user can choose a receptor, click on “View” link and
visualize a page that report all the information related to the chosen receptor.
Finally, if the user chooses “Disease” and writes a disease name, CytReD will
report the list of all the receptors and of the related cytokines involved in the
selected disease on the basis of papers recently published. Also, the user can
obtain information on a chosen receptor by clicking always on “View” link.

Utility
CytReD can find utility in the scientific community for a quick review of the
cytokine receptors, of their ligands, of their involvement in diseases and of
their use in clinical treatments.

Future developments
CytReD is part of a broader project aimed to develop tools and portals able to
be useful supports for a reliable predictive medicine and will be correlated with
CDMS (Clinical Data Mining Software) that collects cytokine profiles
evaluated on patients affected by different diseases 
[].

Citation:Miele et al, Bioinformation 6(5): 207-208 (2011)

Output example of CytReD

