Background
Glutamate is the major excitatory neurotransmitter in the
central nervous system. Both physiological and pathological
effects of glutamate are mediated by a large family of glutamate
receptors consisting of ionotropic (NMDA, AMPA, and KA
receptors) and G-protein-coupled metabotropic glutamate
receptors []. There is considerable evidence that AMPA
receptors are involved in many neurological processes in the
healthy as well as in the diseased CNS. It has been well
established that over stimulation of AMPA receptors is one of
the major causes of Ca2+ overload in cells, potentially leading to
cell damage and death. These processes are strictly related to a
large number of acute and chronic neurodegenerative
pathologies such as cerebral ischaemia, epilepsy, amiotrophic
lateral sclerosis, and Parkinson's disease. Thus, AMPA receptor
subtypes represent potential targets for therapeutic intervention
in many neurological diseases. In particular, extensive work
was addressed toward the development of selective antagonists,
which proved to be particularly useful in the prevention and
treatment of different neurological pathologies [].

Ligands showing competitive antagonistic action at the AMPA
type of glutamate receptors were first reported in 1988, and 2, 3-
dihydroxy-6-nitro-7-sulfamoylbenzo[f]quinoxaline was first
shown to have useful therapeutic effects in animal models of
neurological disease in 1990. Over the ensuing years there have
been many interesting developments in the study of these
antagonists, including the identification of diverse new
chemical entities, increased understanding of receptor
pharmacology, and reports of in vivo studies both in preclinical
animal models of disease and in early clinical trials. However,
early pharmacological studies have been hampered by the lack
of potent and selective compounds. Additionally, many
quinoxalinedione derivatives with competitive AMPA receptor
antagonistic activity have been synthesized and tested against
the glutamate receptors. These quinoxalinedione compounds
can be divided into first-generation compounds, such as NBQX
and YM-90K and second-generation compounds, such as YM-
872, and have been shown to exhibit good AMPA receptor
antagonistic activity []. However, among these compounds the
first-generation agents have been shown to cause kidney
toxicity as a result of their physicochemical properties
(particularly, low water solubility), and have been limited to use
in clinical trials. On the other hand, in second-generation agents
such as YM-872 these undesirable properties have been
ameliorated by introducing a hydrophilic functional group, for
example acetic acid, into the quinoxalinedione skeleton by
medicinal chemists, and this compound has been shown to have
neuroprotective effects in animal models of focal cerebral
ischemia. Unfortunately, such antagonists have not yet proved
useful in humans because of their side effects such as
hypotension, ataxia and cognitive disturbances that have
sidelined their clinical development []. In recent times, we have
been devoting our efforts in scrutinizing various therapeutic
options for the treatment of neurological disorders 
[–]. To
continue our stride, we have investigated mode of interactions
of AMPA receptor antagonists by molecular docking study to
understand the structural requirements for better
affinity/selectivity at the receptor site which will be fruitful in
future drug design.

Methodology
For the present study, the most recent protein structure with
good resolution of the AMPA receptor [] was downloaded
from the protein data bank (www.rcsb.org/pdb, PDB code:
3KGC). The downloaded protein is a dimer which is manually
converted to monomer in Discovery Studio Visualizer 2.5
program. Prior to docking, water molecules were removed
manually from the PDB file and polar hydrogens were added.
Molecular docking was performed using the Lamarckian
genetic algorithm implemented in AutoDock 4.2 []. 41
structurally diverse AMPA receptor antagonists having
quinoxaline core were taken from literature 
[–]. The
structures of the ligands were drawn in ChemBioDraw Ultra
12.0 and converted to their three dimensional structures in
ChemBio3D Ultra 12.0, energy miminized by PM3 method
using MOPAC Ultra 2009 program (http://OpenMOPAC.net)
and saved as in pdb format. The prepared ligands were used as
input files for AutoDock 4.2 in the next step. The standard
docking procedure was used for a rigid protein and a flexible
ligand whose torsion angles were identified (for 10 independent
runs per ligand). A grid of 60, 60, and 60 points in x, y, and z
directions was built with a grid spacing of 0.375 Å and a
distance-dependent function of the dielectric constant were
used for the calculation of the energetic map. The default
settings were used for all other parameters. At the end of
docking, the best poses were analyzed for hydrogen bonding/
π-π interactions and root mean square deviation (RMSD)
calculations using Discovery Studio Visualizer 2.5 (Accelrys
Software Inc.) and Pymol (The PyMOL Molecular Graphics
System) programs. From the estimated free energy of ligand
binding (ΔGbinding, kcal/mol), the inhibition constant (Ki) for
each ligand was calculated  (see supplementary
material).

Results &amp; Discussion
There has been resurgence in modern medicine with the
introduction of computational studies in drug design.
Conventional drug designing was time consuming, expensive
and did not always yield good results. In addition, there was
also a lack of rationalism in the approach toward drug
discovery. In contrast, this new elegant technique promises high
specificity and efficacy. Also of importance is the positive
impact of these techniques on the economies of the
pharmaceutical industry. Structure-based drug design has
emerged as a very effective and low-cost strategy to improve
the rate of success at any stage of the drug discovery pipeline
[]. 
There are two broad categories of structure-based drug
design computational techniques: (1) protein-ligand docking
and (2) ligand similarity methods. Protein-ligand docking
attempts to use the 3D protein structure of the protein target to
predict binding modes and affinities of ligands to biologically
relevant targets, while ligand-similarity methods capitalize on
the fact that ligands similar to an active ligand are more likely to
be active than random ligands. The latter method considers
two- or three-dimensional chemistry, shape, electrostatic, and
interaction points (e.g., pharmacophore points) to assess
similarity. With the increasing availability of crystal structures
for many drug receptors, scientists working in the field of
computer aided drug design have changed their focus from
developing simple descriptor–property relationships to the
detailed investigation of the more complex ligand–receptor
interactions. The docking procedure responsible for fitting
ligand and receptor together in 3D-space is attracting much
attention, and there are a growing number of software packages
available to enable this important process in drug design 
[].

Validation of the docking protocol:
A prerequisite to any successful experiment is the validation
step. To evaluate the accuracy of AutoDock 4.2 as an
appropriate docking tool for the present purpose, the co
crystallized ligand (ZK200775) were redocked within the
inhibitor binding cavity (IBC) of AMPA receptor, and the
docked position was compared to the crystal structure position
by calculating RMSD value. According to the method of
validation, if the RMSD of the best docked conformation is ≤2.0
Å from the experimental one, the used scoring function can be
considered as successful [–
]. The RMSD values of the native
co-crystallized ligand after docking was 0.428 Å, which
confirms the reliability of AutoDock for docking compounds
under study ().

Correlation between docking scores and experimental AMPA antagonistic activity:
Molecular docking is a computational method to find out
binding modes of ligands to their receptors rapidly. After the
validation of the docking method, a dataset of 41 molecules
belonging to quinoxaline derivatives with varied activity range
(Ki ranging from 39 nM‒28.5 µM) were docked into the same
coordinates of the crystal structure (PDB code: 3KGC). To
describe the binding affinity of AMPA receptor, all
experimental values for the inhibition constant (Ki) given in
literature was converted to pKi (negative logarithm of the Ki) in
order to obtain uniform data. Similarly, docking predicted Ki
values were also converted to pKi values 
(). Docking
predicted binding affinity was well correlated with the
experimentally reported AMPA receptor binding affinity
exhibiting a correlation coefficient R2 of 0.6. It means that
molecular docking is justifiable methodology to be used to
predict the structure of the intermolecular complex formed
between quinoxaline derivatives and AMPA receptor ().

Binding interactions of quinoxaline derivatives with AMPA receptor:
Molecular docking studies provided important clues on the
structural requirements which are vital for designing potent
antagonists. These features are summarized in (: 1)
hydrogen bond donor group that binds to an acceptor of the
receptor; 2) in triazoloquinoxaline framework, nitrogen atom at
position-3 and the oxygen atom of the position-4 impart
negative charge and are able to form a coulombic interaction
with a positive site of the receptor; 3) among
triazoloquinoxaline derivatives, a carboxylate function at
position-2 is able to engage a strong hydrogen-bond interaction
with a cationic proton donor site of the receptor; 4) an electronwithdrawing
substituent at position-7; and 5) a N-containing
heterocycle (1,2,4-triazol-4-yl moiety is most favorable) at
position-8 of the triazoloquinoxaline core, which is an essential
feature for selective AMPA receptor antagonists. These
structural requirements are in agreement with those reported
earlier for AMPA receptor antagonists [].

The basic backbone of the quinoxaline derivatives has a
common pattern of interaction as the native co-crystallized
ligand ZK200775. The docked quinoxaline derivatives were
outlined by the residues such as Glu-13, Tyr-16, Tyr-61, Pro-89,
Leu-90, Thr-91, Arg-96, Gly-141, Ser-142, Thr-174, Glu-193, Met-
196 and Tyr-220. These residues constitute the binding pocket
for the interaction of native co-crystallized ligand ZK200775.
However, docked quinoxaline derivatives also interacted with
Gly-59, Gly-62, Asn-72, Ser-140, Thr-143 and Thr-195.

stick while compound 1f is presented as ball and stick style in
(violet color). Dashed lines in green indicate H-bonds while π-π
interactions are shown as orange lines. Nitrogen is presented in
blue, oxygens in red, sulfur in yellow and polar hydrogens are
colorless. Bond distances for H-bonds and π-π interactions are
given in Å.

The aromatic part contributed by quinoxaline ring system in
these ligands facilitates hydrophobic interactions (π-π
interactions) in the predominantly hydrophobic binding pocket
of the AMPA receptor consisting of Tyr-61, Lys-60, Arg-96, Leu-
138, Met-196 and Tyr-220. Furthermore, compounds 1a, 1b, 1f
(Gra-293), 2c (YM-90), 3a, 3b, 3c (NBQX) having additional
aromatic system conjugated with quinoxaline ring also
contributes to hydrophobic interactions. Although strong polar
contributions in the form of H-bonding occur in the binding
pocket, hydrophobic interactions provide major contribution to
the binding of ligands (). Residues which were involved
in forming H-bond with the quinoxaline derivatives were Glu-
13, Tyr-16, Gly-59, Tyr-61, Gly-62, Asn-72, Pro-89, Thr-91, Arg-
96, Ser-140, Ser-142, Thr-143, Thr-174, Glu-193, Thr-195, Met-196
and Tyr-220 (). Based on these results, an overview of
the structural requirements for antagonizing AMPA receptor is
presented in ().

Conclusion
Present study was aimed at exploring the computational basis
for antagonism of AMPA receptors, an important target of
glutamate binding, which plays a major role in learning,
memory and various neurological disorders. By knowing the
drug-receptor interactions of the drug candidates at the
beginning, the ligand can be modified to design a better drug
with improved pharmacological profile. Present studies
underscore the structural requirements for the modification and
design of new quinoxaline based AMPA receptor antagonists
for the treatment of neurological disorders.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Azam et al, Bioinformation 9(17): 864-869 (2013)

The native co-crystallized ligand ZK200775 (shown in
green color) docked (shown in blue color)) within the active site
of AMPA receptor (PDB code: 3KGC) exhibiting RMSD of 0.428
Å (Centroid of the molecules is shown in red).

Experimental pKi for AMPA receptor antagonistic
activity is plotted against docking predicted pKi.

Overview of the structure-activity relationship (SAR)
of quinoxaline derivatives.

The lowest energy configuration of docking result of
quinoxaline derivatives (Compound 1f with binding pocket of
human AMPA receptor. The amino acids (cyan) are shown as
stick while compound 1f is presented as ball and stick style in
(violet color). Dashed lines in green indicate H-bonds while π-π
interactions are shown as orange lines. Nitrogen is presented in
blue, oxygens in red, sulfur in yellow and polar hydrogens are
colorless. Bond distances for H-bonds and π-π interactions are
given in Å.

