Background
Cancer is the major leading cause of deaths in all over the globe
and the etiology of cancer is linked to several lifestyle choices in
the modern society. These lifestyle choices include cigarette
smoking, excessive alcohol consumption, poor diet, lack of
exercise and hormones []. Depending on the lifestyle choices,
cancer can originate at any site in the body including breast and
prostate. Breast and prostate cancers have shown to be the
major leading cause of cancer related deaths in women and
men, respectively []. Several methods are being used to treat
breast and prostate cancers, such as surgery, chemotherapy,
radiation therapy and immunotherapy. Among all,
chemotherapy is most commonly used method to treat
metastatic cancer using cytotoxic drugs []. However, those
agents often have shown to generate side effects by affecting the
cell viability of both tumor and normal cells, thereby bring
down the quality of human life []. Several anticancer
compounds have been derived from natural resources including
plants [] microorganisms and marines 
[]. Plants have a long
history of use in the treatment of cancer providing some of the
currently used effective anticancer agents such as vinblastine,
vincristine, mechlorethamine, prednisone, procarbazine,
etoposide, teniposide, paclitaxel, bleomycin, cisplatin and
taxanes []. However, cancer cells were found to be resistant to
several drugs against chemotherapy []. Therefore, recent focus
has been shifted towards the identification of novel natural
compounds to suppress the cancer cell growth or to enhance the
cancer cell death against chemo-resistance caused by
chemotherapy []. In search of novel source of the traditional
medicine, we had come across, Sophora interrupta as a source of
folklore medicinal plant by tribal"s in various parts of Andhra
Pradesh for the treatment of cancer. Sophora interrupta belongs
to family Fabaceae, popularly known as Adavi rela or Adavi
billa and is very important shrub in the Ayurveda. The generic
name Sophora is derived from an Arabic word “Sophera” means
a pea-flowered tree []. Species in this genus are spread
throughout the tropical and temperate regions of the world. It is
especially prevalent in the Eastern Ghats of AndhraPradesh
especially Tirumala []. Various parts of S. interrupta are
traditionally used to treat different diseases such as antibacterial,
anti-inflammatory, anti-allergic, hepatitis, cardiac
arrhythmia and anti-tumor properties of human health as folk
medicine [–]. These activities are mainly attributed due to
the presence of flavones, flavanones, isoflavanoids etc., in the
members of this family []. Hence the present work is
undertaken to evaluate the Antioxidant, Anti-inflammatory and
Anticancer activity of S interrupta using In-vitro and In-silico
experimental models.

Methodology
Human breast adenocarcinoma cancer cell line (MCF-7),
Prostate adenocarcinoma cell line (PC-3) were obtained from the
National Center for Cell Science (NCCS), Pune, India. Cell
culture reagents were purchased from GIBCO (Invitrogen USA).
Streptomycin, Penicillin, MTT (3-(4, 5-dimethyl-2-thiazolyl)-2, 5-
diphenyl-2H-tetrazolium bromide), DMSO cell culture grade,
agarose and analytical grade chemicals are obtained from
HiMedia (Mumbai, India). The woody perennial shrub S.
interrupta was collected from Tirumala hilltop. Latitude
13.667790 &amp; Longitude 79.345880 readings of the plant
collection sites were taken by using a Geographical positioning
system (GPS) area of Tirumala Tirupati, Eastern Ghats,
AndhraPradesh, India. A Voucher specimen has deposited, at K
L University, Guntur, India (Voucher number KLU 1211).

Identification of phytoconstituents present in the S. interrupta:
The root part of the plant was thoroughly washed with double
distilled water to remove all dust and debris on the surface
areas and shade dried properly. Dried plant roots were crushed
and milled to powder for extraction of compounds into different
solvents with increasing polarity in a ratio 1:3 by the maceration
process. Extracts are dried under reduced pressure with rotary
vacuum evaporator at 40°C to identify the presence of
phytoconstituents present in the extracts. The presence of the
phytoconstituents such as Phytosterols, Tannins, Flavonoids,
Alkaloids, Saponins, Glycosides and Combined anthraquinones
were carried out based on standard protocols 
[–].

Evaluation of total antioxidant potential by Phosphomolybdate method:
The total antioxidant capacity of the SEA was evaluated by
Phosphomolybdate method []. In brief, 3ml of
Phosphomolybdate reagent is mixed with a series of 300 µl of
SEA of the plant in a test tube. The test tubes were capped with
silver foil and incubated in water bath at 95°C for 90 min. Later,
the tubes were cooled down to room temperature, and the
absorbance measured at 695 nm against the blank. Ascorbic acid
was used as a standard for this experiment. The antioxidant
activity of SEA was expressed as µg/ml of ascorbic acid
equivalents.

Cell viability assay:
To study the action SEA on cancer cell viability, we seeded
MCF-7 and PC-3 cells 5 × 103 in 96 well plate and were
maintained in Dulbecco's modified eagle"s medium (DMEM),
F12K medium respectively. Both the cell lines were
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (heat inactivated)
and 1% antibiotic (100U/ml of penicillin and 100µg/ml
streptomycin) gently mixed and placed in a 5% CO2-humidified
incubator at 37°C. The cells were treated with increasing
concentrations (1, 10, 50, 100, 250, 300, 500 and 1000 µg/ml) of
SEA in DMSO for 24 hrs. Following treatment, 15µl of MTT
(5mg/ml) reagent was added to the culture media and further
incubated for 4 hrs at 37°C in CO2 incubator. After an incubation
period MTT containing medium was aspirated, 200 µl of DMSO
and 25 µl of Sorenson glycine buffer (0.1 M glycine and 0.1 M
NaCl, pH 10.5) were added to lyse the cells and solubilize the
water insoluble formazan crystals. Absorbance values of the
lysates were determined on a Fluostar optima microplate reader
(BMG Labtech, Germany) at 570 nm. The percentage inhibition
was calculated as: (Mean OD of vehicle treated cells − Mean OD
of drug treated cells) / Mean OD of vehicle treated cells × 100.
The IC50 values were calculated using a graph pad prism,
version 5.02 software (Graph Pad Software Inc., CA, USA).
Negative controls were maintained with DMSO. In as separate
experiment, the effect of S.interrupta root extracts on
morphological changes such as cell shape, size was captured
using a phase contrast microscope (Zeiss, Axiovert 25,
Germany).

Acridine orange (AO) /Ethidium bromide (EB) staining:
To determine the changes in cell shape and morphology, we
stained the live and dead cells using Acridine orange (AO)
/Ethidium bromide (EB) dyes. For that, we seeded 0.5 x 106
MCF-7 and PC-3 cells were seeded in 6 well plates and cultured
as mentioned above. Following 24 hrs of incubation, the media
was replaced with fresh media consisting of S.interrupta ethyl
acetate root extracts and further allowed for incubation of 24 hrs
at 37°C in 5% CO2 incubator. The cells were washed with
Phosphate buffer saline (PBS), added 100µl of AO and EB
(100µg/ml, Sigma) respectively to each well, and incubated for
15min in CO2 incubator. Following incubation the medium was
aspirated, and washed thrice with PBS. The intensity of
fluorescent staining was observed and the images were
captured with the help of fluorescent microscope (Zeiss,
Axiovert 25, Germany) using appropriate color filters.

Anti-proliferative activity assay:
The antiproliferative activity of SEA extract was evaluated
using the Saccharocymes cerevisiae as a cancer cell mimicking the
model according to the previously reported method of 
[]. In
brief, S. cerevisiae BY4741 strain was obtained from IMTECH,
Chandigarh, India. The single healthy colony was inoculated
with sterilized yeast peptone and dextrose broth and incubated
at 37°C for 24 hrs, referred as seed broth. The seeded broth was
diluted with the blank culture media until the absorbance
reaches 0.1 at 600nm. To validate the action of SEA, we
distributed the overnight yeast culture into three tubes. The first
tube kept control without any extract. Whereas second and
third tubes were mixed with root extract and standard cisplatin
respectively. All tubes were incubated at 37°C for 24 hrs; the
anti-proliferative activity of plant extract is calculated by
measuring the absorbance at 600 nm using UV-Vis
spectrophotometer (DYNAMICA Halo DB20). The culture was
spread on plates to count the number of colonies.

Anti-inflammatory assay:
The In-vitro anti-inflammatory activity of SEA was measured by
calculating the Percentage of haemolysis and membrane
stabilization of red blood cells (RBC) evaluated by 
[]. In brief,
five millilitres of blood sample was obtained from two healthy
men (20-30 years old) and added an equal volume of Alsever"s
solution. The contents were mixed properly and centrifuged at
1500 × g for 10 minutes. Following centrifugation, RBC were
washed thrice with isosaline solution for 7 min at 1000 × g and
were resuspended in 10% v/v suspension with isosaline. The
red blood cells were treated with various concentrations of SEA
extract and were incubated at 37°C in continuous shaking water
bath for 1 hr. Water containing RBC cells were used as a control.
After the incubation period, the cells were centrifuged and the,
supernatant was used to measure the absorbance at 560 nm
using a UV-Vis spectrophotometer (DYNAMICA Halo DB20).
Diclofenac is used as a referral drug. The percentage of
haemolysis was calculated using the formula Haemolysis % =
(Optical density of Test sample / Optical density of Control) ×
100.

Molecular Docking:
The three dimensional protein structures along with the
crystallized ligand, AMP (Adenosine monophosphate) were
obtained from Protein Data Bank (PDB) PDB ID: 2I4I. Hydrogen
atoms were added, water molecules were removed from the
cavity to prepare biologically active and stable receptor. The
active site within the receptor was identified. Ligands were
retrieved from Chemspider and also sketched using tools like
Chemdraw. The conformational space of the compounds was
employed using an omega (optimized ensemble generation
application) program from Open Eye Scientific Software
(
http://www.eyesopen.com/omega). Ligands were docked
onto the receptor and the interactions were checked. The
scoring function generates scores depending on which the
ligand with the best fit was selected.

Result
Phytochemical analysis:
Phytochemical analysis showed the presence of phytochemical
excipients in different solvent extractions. Several secondary
metabolites were identified and their presence / absence of the
phytochemical excipients in different solvent extracts were
scored as + + / + / - based on color change/precipitation.
Petroleum ether and Ethyl acetate extracts confirm the presence
of Alkaloids, diterpenes, glycosides, proteins, phenols, and in
undetermined state or absence of rest all phytoconstituents.
Chloroform extract confirms the presence of alkaloids,
diterpenes, glycosides, proteins, phenols, tannins and rest all in
undetermined state or absence. The n-Butanol extract gave
positive results for alkaloids, diterpenes, flavonoids, proteins,
phenols and rest all constituents are absent. The ethylacetate
extract showed the presence of all phytoconstituents and
aqueous extract confirmed the presence of diterpenes,
flavonoids, proteins, phenols, saponins, tannins and rest all
absent. In all extracts Anthraquinones and sterols are
completely absent or may be in undetectable range ().

Antioxidant, Anti-inflammatory and Anti-proliferative activity of SEA extract:
The total antioxidant capacity of the SEA was calculated based
on the reduction of Mo (VI) to Mo (V) by the extract and
subsequent formation of a green phosphate/Mo (V) complex at
acid pH, which was measured spectrophotometrically at 695
nm. Our results showed that the antioxidant activity of SEA
increases in a dose dependent manner at a concentration of 100
µg/ml to 1mg /ml. The antioxidant activity of SEA at 100
µg/ml is similar to ascorbic acid at 50 µg/ml concentration.
(). To study the anti-inflammatory activity, we
have evaluated haemolysis and membrane stabilization of
human red blood cells (RBC). For that blood cells were treated
with varying concentrations (100, 250, 500, 700 and 1000 µg/ml)
of plant extract using Diclofenac is used as a positive control.
Our results suggest that the percentage (%) of haemolysis is
decreased in a dose dependent manner throughout the
concentration range of 50-1000 µg/ml. It is evident from the
increasing membrane stabilization of red blood cells. Diclofenac
(50-1000 µg/ml) was used as a reference drug which also
demonstrates concentration dependent inhibition of haemolysis.
It suggests that the % of haemolysis/membrane stabilization of
RBC in the presence of the SEA extract at 1000 µg/ml is similar
to that of Diclofenac concentration of 50 µg/ml 
(). 
Next, we studied the anti-proliferative activity of SEA
extract using actively proliferating yeast (BY4741 strain) as a
model system for studying the anti-proliferative activities in
eukaryotes []. Our results showed that, the cells exposed to
concentrations of SEA at 250 µg/ml showed growth arrest
during a 24 hrs period, with respect to control cultures 
(). However, the concentrations above 250 µg/ml
concentration had little or no effect on proliferation of cells,
even at 48 hrs (data not shown). Same cultures were spread on
Yeast peptone dextrose (YPD) agar plates and further incubated
for 24 hrs to measure the number of colonies (). As
shown in , the number of colonies is greatly reduced
as compared to control cultures and is equal to the levels of
anticancer drug, cisplatin. It suggests that the SEA extract
contains anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory and anti-proliferative
activity and it might be attributed due to presence of medicinal
compounds.

Anticancer activity of SEA extract on MCF-7 and PC-3 cells:
To evaluate the anticancer activity of S. interrupta, we treated
the breast (MCF-7) and prostate cancer (PC-3) cell lines with
increasing concentrations of SEA extract (1, 50, 100, 250, 500 and
1000 µg/ml) for 24 hr. The cell viability was determined using a
standard MTT assay and the results were depicted in ().
As shown in  top panel, petroleum ether (PE) and nbutanol
(BU) root extracts showed higher percentage of cell
viability as compared to ethyl acetate (EA) extract. Whereas,
ethyl acetate (EA) extract inhibited 75% of the cell viability in
both the cell lines, MCF-7 and PC-3 at variable concentrations. It
is evident from the calculated dose of 50% inhibition of cell
viability (IC50). The ethyl acetate extract showed lower IC50
value for both MCF-7 (250µg/ml) () and PC-3
(700µg/ml) () cell lines as compared to other solvent
extracts. It suggests that growth inhibitory principles are
present in all organic fractions and we rank them as
EA&gt;BU&gt;PE. In a separate experiment we have captured the
phase contrast photomicrographs for both MCF-7 and PC-3
cells. The cell morphology studies showed a smooth, flattened
morphology with normal nuclei in normal culture conditions.
Whereas, in treated cells showed a typical morphological
changes with membrane blebbing and detached from the
surface were noticed in both MCF-7 and PC-3 cell lines 
().

Live/Dead Cell Viability Assay:
Based on the IC50 values the cell lines were treated with 250
µg/ml and 700 µg/ml of root ethyl acetate extract and the
percentage of live/dead cells were counted based color change
using acridine orange (AO) and Ethidium bromide (EtBr)
staining. As shown in , bright red fluorescent cells were
observed in MCF-7 cell line as compared to vehicle treated cells.
On the other hand, orange fluorescent cells were observed in PC
3 cells, it indicates that those cells are at the early stage of
apoptosis. Moreover, the number of PC 3 cells in the field of
view is lesser than vehicle treated cells. It is suggested that, the
large number of cells completely ablated from the cell
attachment, a few cells are adherent and they also about to die,
which is evident from condensed chromatin granules, the
change of cell shape (). This was further confirmed by
DNA fragmentation assay. As results shown in , ethyl
acetate extracts caused an intensified fragmentation of DNA in
both MCF-7 and PC-3 cancer cell lines at higher concentration.
This further supports our hypothesis regarding the toxic effects
of the SEA extract on cancer cell growth.

Molecular docking against TRAIL induced anti-apoptotic complex gene, DDX3:
In search of anticancer compounds present in the S. interrupta
we have identified four isolated compounds from the recently
published paper []. They are 1) O-Prenylated flavonol, 2) 2'-
hydroxy-3, 4-dimethoxychalcone 3) biochanin A and 4)
kaempferol-3-O-b-D-glucopyranoside (kaempferol). Among all
kaempferol and biochanin A has shown to sensitize or enhance
tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)
mediated cancer cell death []. Biochanin A is belonging to a
member of the class of 7-hydroxyisoflavones and is isolated
from red clover Triflolium pretense []. The molecular weight of
this compound is 284.2 Da. Whereas, Kaempferol-3-O-β-Dglucopyranoside
is a molecular weight of 448.37 Da and is
isolated from “Phytolacca americana” (the American pokeweed).
[]. TRAIL is a type II membrane protein and has shown to
enhance apoptosis by multi-component regulation via DEAD
box RNA helicase, DDX3 []. Therefore, we evaluated the
interaction of Sophora interrupta flavones against cancer
resistance marker, DDX3 by rational molecular docking
approach. Five flexible amino-acid constraints (Tyr 200, Gln 207,
Gly 229, Gly 227, and Thr 231) were detected with Crystallized
ligand. The pyrimidine portion of adenine and sugar portion of
nucleoside interacted with arginine 202, Glutamine 207 and
with the side chain of Tyr 200 respectively. The phosphate
group interacted with Thr 231, Gly 229 and Gly 227. On the
other hand, S.interrupta flavones bound deep within a narrow
pocket formed by the inner lobe cleft as similar to AMP 
(). 
Among all four compounds tested kaempferol formed six
(6) hydrogen bond interactions. Some important interactions
between kaempferol and DDX3 include H-bonding between (1)
Gly 227-NH---OH at 4th position of kaempferol (2) Gly 229 NHOH
at 4th position of kaempferol (3) Thr 231- NH-OH, CH-OH
at 4th position of kaempferol (4) Gln 207-NH=OC at 8th position
of kaempferol (5) Arg 202-C=O-HO at 9th position of kaempferol
and (6) Ala 232-NH-OH at 5th position of kaempferol 
().

Discussion
Herbal medicine is one of the oldest forms of health care known
to mankind. In Ayurveda it is also known as phytomedicine,
which uses various phytoprinciples such as alkaloids, steroids,
tannins and flavonoids from medicinal plants to treat various
human ailments. Flavonoids, alkaloids and glycosides has
shown to be responsible for cure diabetes, obesity, inflammation
associated diseases, cardiovascular diseases, cancer 
[]. These
phytoprinciples differ from plant to plant due to vast
biodiversity. An enormous number of plants, even though
identified, their medicinal values are still with local people and
tribal populations. Our interaction with local tribal people at
forest area, we could come across one of the medicinal plant
Sophora interrupta as an anticancer plant. Sophora interrupta
commonly called as Adavibilla belonging to Fabaceae family
and is distributed in temperate regions. This plant is abundant
of alkaloids, tannins, flavonoids and phenol derivatives 
[]. In
search of anti-oxidant potential of S. interrupta we have
extracted the total phytochemical constituents from the root
using ethyl acetate as an organic solvent. This extract is
nominiclated as S. interrupta root ethyl acetate (SEA) extract.
The anti-oxidative potential of SEA is comparable to that of
Ascorbic Acid, a well-known anti-oxidant molecule. Oxidative
cellular damage have shown to be primary cause of cancer 
[]
and anti-oxidative mechanisms have shown to reverse the
oxidative damage by regulating tumor supressor genes and
their products []. Cancer is not a single disease, it is a
multifactorial disease, it can be also caused by inflammation.
Inflammation has shown to diseemeniate the cancer cells from
the site of origin, it is called as a metastasis. In order to
understand the anti-inflammatory potential of SEA extract we
have used red blood cells as an experimental model to
determine the % of haemolysis and membrane stabilization.
Because inflammation has shown to destabilize the membrane
of red blood cells, thereby release inflamatory cytokines such as
CXCR4 and others in the process of cancer dessimination 
[].

Our results have shown that SEA can inhibit the percentage of
haemolysis by preserving the stability of RBC membrane.
Similar observations also found using a well known antiinflammatory
compound Diclofenac. Moreover, our results
have shown that SEA can effectively inhibit the active
proliferation of yeast cells, as a model system for studying the
anti-proliferative activities in eukaryotes. Uncontrolled cell
growth (Proliferation) is one of the major hallmark of cancer
[]. Since SEA extract effectively inhibited the growth of
proliferating cells, we evaluated its potential on two cancer cell
lines of breast (MCF-7) and prostate (PC-3) origin. The cell
viability assay detects the reduction of MTT by mitochondrial
dehydrogenase to a blue formazan product, which infers the
normal function of mitochondria and cell viability 
[]. SEA
extract showed more suppression of MCF-7 than PC-3 growth
as compared to other n-butanol and petroleum ether (PE)
extracts, and is dose dependent (). However, the
concentration below 100 µg/ml does not show any cytotoxicity
against either cell line. To visualize the cancer cell viability
under experimental conditions, we used in-vitro live/dead
assay using Acridine orange (AO) and Ethidium Bromide (EB)
dye method. Acridine orange is a cationic dye that enters only
live cells and stains DNA green while Ethidium bromide stains
dead cell"s DNA orange and is excluded by live cells 
[].
Adopting this method, we found that, MCF-7 displayed more
number of red fluorescent cells and PC-3 displayed few
adherent cells. It suggests that the SEA extract has potent
anticancer compounds, thereby regulating a primary
homeostatic mechanism of cell division and cell death 
[]. This
process is called as apoptosis and it can be determined by DNA
fragmentation assay. The DNA fragmentation in presence of
SEA extract is marked by the formation of tailing (200–300 kbp)
on electrophoretogram resulting from DNA breaks. Overall, It
suggests that, phytoconstituents of SEA extract possesses the
anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory and anti-proliferative activity,
which is also evident from formation of apoptotic bodies and
membrane distortions in MCF-7 and PC-3 cell lines. Similar
observations were observed in phytoconstituents of Pterocarpus
marsupium []. Apoptosis is a cell death mechanism, by which
cell number and cell cycle events are coordinated in many
physiological settings under normal conditions. However,
cancer cells are exceptional to normal cell cycle events, and they
can easily escape from the cytolytic pathway, proliferate,
metastasize and can bring down the quality of human life.
Several cytotoxic drugs have shown to induce apoptosis in
tumor cells.

However, those agents often have shown to generate side
effects by affecting the viability of both tumor and normal cells.

In search of compounds to trigger apoptosis in tumor cells
without much affecting the normal cell functions. Towards that
goal, researchers have identified member of the Tumor Necrosis
Factor (TNF) family of “death receptors” and its ligand TRAIL
(Tumor necrosis factor-Related Apoptosis-Inducing Ligand).
TRAIL is a type II membrane protein and has shown to induce
apoptosis by multi-component regulation via death receptor 4
(DR4, TRAIL-R1) and 5 (DR5, TRAIL-R2). The compounds
present in the Sophora interrupta has shown to sensitize or
enhance TRAIL mediated apoptosis in cancer cells, and it may
dissolve the cancer resistance caused against TRAIL therapy
[]. One of the markers associated in TRAIL induced cancer
death is a DEAD box RNA helicase, DDX3 []. DDX3 is a
DEAD box RNA helicase family member and has shown to play
a role in RNA metabolism and protein translation. To
understand the nature of S. interrupta compounds towards
TRAIL induced cancer cell death, we have performed molecular
docking analysis. Among all the selected compounds,
kaempferol form four hydrogen bond interactions with Gly 227,
Gly 229, Thr 231 and Ala 232 as similar to the AMP catalytic
binding site. Moreover, non-bonding interactions around the
cavity are similar to the experimental data obtained from crystal
structure as reported in earlier studies []. The docking scores
against selected natural compounds showed higher binding
affinity towards DDX3, which is evident from the hybrid
chemgauss4 score for Kaempferol (-8.786 K.cal/mol), and
Biochanin A (-5.906 K.cal/mol) are significantly equal to the
crystallized ligand, AMP (-6.233 K.cal/mol). Collectively, our
results suggest that selected natural compounds from the S.
interrupta may inhibit the function of DDX3 and kaempferol-3-
O-b-D-glucopyranoside can be considered as potential bioactive
molecules to treat various DDX3 associated diseases.

Conclusion
Studies revealed that S.interrupta has significant antineoplastic
effects on MCF-7 and PC-3 cell lines. The compounds present in
S.interrupta root extract may enhance TRAIL mediated cancer
cell death via interacting with anti-apoptotic protein, DDX3.
More extensive studies need to be done with the active
compounds to elucidate the mechanism of action of the
compounds against cancer cells and apoptosis.

Authors are thankful to Dr. Partha Roy and his laboratory for
their continuous support for providing necessary laboratory
facilities to carry out cell culture studies. This work was partly
supported by a grant from the Department of Biotechnology
(DBT), Government of India to Botlagunta Mahendran.

Citation:Mathi et al, Bioinformation 10(3): 144-151 (2014)

Plant information A) A pictorial representation of S.interrupta plant region grown abundantly on tirumala hills; B)
S.interrupta (Fabaceae) plant odd-pinnate, leaflets sub opposite, with strong root in underground in thick hill forest region; C)
Phytochemical screening of S. interrupta root extracts using various solvents. PE = Petroleum ether extract, CH = Chloroform
extract, EA = Ethyl acetate extract, BU = n-Butanol extract, ME = Methanol extract, AQ = Aqueous extract. + + = copiously present,
+ = moderately present, - = absent.

Antioxidant, Anti-inflammatory and
Antiproliferative assay. The total antioxidant activity of A)
Ascorbic acid; B) SEA extract. The membrane stabilization of
HRBC; C) standard Diclofenac; D) SEA extract. The
antiproliferative activity of SEA extract using yeast cells as
eukaryotic models; E) and their growth on YPD plates; F).
Results are presented as mean ± SEM of three independent
experiments. % = Percentage, SEA = Sophora interrupta
ethylacetate extract.

Cell viability with MTT assay. A) Cytotoxicity curves
S.interrupta root subsequent extracts on MCF-7 cell line; B)
Cytotoxicity curves S.interrupta root subsequent extracts on PC-
3 cell line. Data are expressed as means ± SDs; C) Cell
morphological study of S.interrupta root EA extract induced
membrane blebbing and detachment were observed in both
MCF-7 and PC-3 cells. The cells were incubated for 24 hrs with
IC50 value.

Apoptotic study with Acridine orange/Ethidium
bromide and DNA fragmentation assay. A) Induction of
apoptotic effect upon incubation of cells with S.interrupta root
EA extract on both MCF-7 and PC-3 cells stating the early and
late apoptosis depicted by orange and red colour respectively
which was visualized by fluorescence microscope; B) Induction
of DNA fragmentation by S.interrupta root extracts in MCF-7
and PC-3 cell lines. Lane1.1kb DNA Marker, Lane2. Control
cells, Lane3. Root petroleum ether, Lane4. Root n-Butanol and
Lane 5. Root ethyl acetate.

Insilico molecular docking. A) Protein-drug interaction against DDX3 (PDB ID: 2I4I) with AMP; B) Protein-plant
compound interaction against TRAIL induced anti-apoptotic complex gene, DDX3 using molecular docking analysis. Kaempferol
with 2I4I. Green dotted lines indicate direct hydrogen bond interaction with flexible aminoacid residues. Numbers indicates the
hydrogen bond distance in Angstroms with their respective aminoacid constrains.

