Background
The order, Coleoptera, is the most diverse on earth. The scarab beetle, Euoniticellus intermedius, is highly effective in new 
habitats and often more successful than native beetles. E. intermedius makes tunnels beneath dung pats where they feed and reproduce. 
Adults obtain nutrients from the microbe - rich liquid portion of manure feed and do not actually consume the dung. The dung beetle 
larvae consume most of the dung in brood balls where they are laid.

Dung beetles have important agricultural benefits and are often introduced in the environment to alleviate ecological damage. A 
recent meeting of some 1500 conservation biologists at Columbia University found that loss of dung beetles could hurt the ecosystem 
[]. Some of the benefits include nutrient recycling, improvements to soil tilth 
and pest control. E. intermedius beetles are the most beneficial to pasture health and in agriculture as they enhance soil conditions by 
increasing percolation. Dung beetles also reduce the number of parasites acquired by cattle and greatly reduce the population of 
pestiferous flies (that are dangerous to livestock) such as African buffalo fly (Haematobia thirouxi potans), the Australian buffalo fly 
(Haematobia irritans exigua), the bush fly (Musca vetustissima Walker), the face fly (Musca autumnalis) and the horn fly 
(Haematobia irritans irritan). These dung beetles also help control nematodes that are potential cattle parasites 
[].

The value of insect ecological services in the United States of America was estimated at $60 billion in 2006 with the dung 
beetles being the most significant contributors. Scarab beetles contributed services such as dung burial, reducing forage fouling, 
nitrogen volatilization and control of cattle parasites and pest flies [].

Mostly behavioural, ecological and taxonomic studies of E. intermedius have been conducted so far. This is the first 
significant molecular biology study of E. intermedius. We are interested in these beetles because of their microbe-rich 
habitat as they may have a potent immune system. Their immune system could provide useful strategies for treatment of infections 
diseases affecting humans and animals. The study of beetles could also help in managing ecosystems and in enhancing agricultural 
practices.

Methodology
Data collection and sequencing
cDNA was synthesized from mRNA isolated from adult beetles sequenced by the GS(FLX) technology by a commercial facility 
(Inqaba Biotec. Pty (Ltd)).

Sequence processing and analysis
Sequence processing and analysis were performed by the use of the EST2Uni (EST analysis software to create an annotated UNIgene 
database) pipeline []. The EST2uni pipeline automates the pre-processing, 
clustering, annotation, databases creation, data mining and retrieval of the EST collection. To reach a fully functional EST2uni 
pipeline on a Unix-base server, the following open-source tools were installed; HMMER module an implementation of profile hidden Markov 
models [] GO-Perl, BLAST [], 
modified Sputnik that is distributed with EST2uni source code [], ESTScan, 
TGICL [], RepeatMasker, LUCY [], 
SeqClean, Exonerate, Phred and Cross-match [], Apache, MySQL, PHP, Perl and 
Bioperl. In addition NCBI UniVec and RepBase [] databases were used locally for 
the pre-processing stage. Sequences and results of the analyses are stored in a MySQL relational database that is created automatically 
by the EST2uni pipeline.

Database content
The database contains 6064 ESTs further processed into 744 CONTIGS and 1918 singletones. Sequence comparisons between the 
E. intermedius transcriptome and other species were performed by TBLASTX and BLASTX at a cutoff E-value &lt;1x10-10. The compared species 
fall in the two main insect branches; holometabolous (Apis melifera, Bombyx mori, Tribolium castaneum, Drosophila melanogaster) and 
hemimetabolous (Acyrthosphon pisum). The comparative results show that E. intermedius has closer sequence homology to Tribolium than 
to the other species. Functional comparison was based on Drosophila melanogaster gene ontology. Motifs and domains were identified by 
using the Pfam and HMMER at a cut-off E-value&lt;1x10-10. Information collected from these sources shows that there are 472 (17%) 
unigenes in the E. intermedius transcriptome database that have identifiable motifs and domains. The database can be searched by 
using BLAST and by unigene ID ().

Future development
The database will be expanded to include genome sequences of E. intermedus. In addition differentially expressed genes 
in response to a variety of stresses on D. melanogaster and E. intermedius will be included. To this end the website is called the 
Flylab Genomebase to reflect is broader purpose.

A snapshot of the database. In addition to the BLAST page for comparing user sequences with the database. This page allows 
the user to view the full sequences in the dataset and search entries using the sequence ID.

