Background
The continuous depletion of ozone layer results in an increased
level of UVB radiation (280–315 nm) that reaches the Earth's
surface and thereby increases the exposure of organisms in
surface waters to UVB radiation []. The response of
cyanobacteria to UVB radiation involves a series of damaging
effects on DNA, protein and photosynthetic apparatus. It is well
known that UVB radiation causes widespread damage in cells
and also modulates the expression of many genes. Unlike
transcriptomic approaches, only a few quantitative proteomic
studies have explored the impact of damaging solar radiation
on microorganisms. For example, a quantitative proteomic
approach with 2D gels was used to compare the proteomes of
irradiated and unirradiated Deinococcus radiodurans bacteria to
identify the mechanisms of their extreme radio-resistance and
DNA repair [,
] Protein breakdown and recycling, which
depend on the levels of proteolytic enzymes, are an essential
part of the plant response to environmental stress 
[]. In
response to environmental abiotic and biotic factors, cellular
proteins are normally rebuilt. Degradation of damaged,
misfolded and potentially harmful proteins provides free amino
acids required for the synthesis of new proteins.

There are number of proteins related to UV-B stress which have
not been reported. Identification, physiological and
computational study of such differentially expressed proteins
provides new ideas for future studies that will allow assessment
of their physiological roles and significance in the acclimization
of cyanobacteria under UV-B stress condition. Some of them
belong to the hypothetical and unknown group 
[]. These
hypothetical proteins are characterized by low identity to
known, annotated proteins. Hypothetical proteins (HPs) lacking
any significant sequence similarity to other ORFs in the
databases are termed orphan ORFs (syn: ORFans) or “poorly
conserved ORFs”. About half the proteins in most genomes are
candidates for HPs []. Among cyanobacteria, a lot of research
shows that UV-B has a number of negative effects on cell
physiology, damaging nucleic acids, protein and photosynthetic
apparatus []. So, it is essential to utilize proteomic and
metabolic strategies to find a system level understanding of
cyanobacterial response to UV-B stress. A number of new
proteins are synthesized after prolonged UV-B radiation in
cyanobacteia []. Some are known proteins while some of them
are hypothetical proteins whose cellular function is not clear in
relation to UV-B stress. An important example of this type of
hypothetical protein is protease. A protease also termed as
peptidase or proteinase, is an enzyme that conducts proteolysis.
This proteolytic enzyme is found in all living organisms, and
takes an important role in cell growth and differentiation.
Protease is a valuable commercial enzyme and serves as a vital
tool in determination of protein and polypeptides structure 
[].
Detailed computational studies of protein sequence homology
are essential for a variety of purposes and have, therefore,
become routine in computational molecular biology and
bioinformatics field. It is also seen that protein structure
prediction is possible through bioinformatics. The functional
analysis has been necessary to confirm such predictions.

The present study is an attempt to predict the structural aspects
and putative binding sites of target hypothetical protein,
protease from UV-B treated cyanobacteria, Synechocystis PCC
6803. This protein is identified by two- dimensional
electrophoresis (2-DE) [].

Methodology
Qing-yu Wu [] had proposed a list of putative UV-B (shortand
long- term) irradiation proteins from cyanobacterium,
Synechocystis PCC 6803, identified by MALDI TOF/TOF. For
our study, a UV-B stressed induced hypothetical protein,
protease, was recruited from Gen Bank database []. The target
accessions no GI: 16331465 hypothetical proteins (protease)
were selected from hypothetical category []. The selection was
made on the basis of finding suitable protein structure template
from protein databank database [].

Three Dimensional Protein Modeling:
To study the functional details of UV-B stress protein, it is
required to have the three dimensional structure modeling of
target protein of Synechocystis PCC 6803. BLASTp was applied
to obtain a suitable template protein crystal structure. BLASTp
[] 
was run against protein databank [] and the modeling was
performed on SWISSMODEL []. After three dimensional
modeling of target protein structure, it was necessary to
validate the structure by the Ramachandran approach. Here,
RAMPAGE [] was used to validate the target protein
structure.

The recognition of errors in experimental and theoretical
models of protein structures is a major problem in structural
biology. SWISSMODEL workspace provides the QMEAN4
score that is used to evaluate the generated target model
protein. The global QMEAN4 scoring function [] is a linear
combination of four structural descriptors using statistical
potentials. QMEAN4 is a reliability score for the whole model
which can be used in order to compare and rank alternative
models of the same target. The quality estimate ranges between
0 and 1 with higher values for better models. In addition, the
QMEAN Z-score represents the measurement of the absolute
quality of a model by providing an estimate of the ‘degree of
nativeness’ of the structural features observed in a model and
by describing the likelihood that a given model is of
comparable quality to experimental structures. It was necessary
to check the most similar protein structure from all entries of
PDB; Dali server [] was extensively used for this purpose. The
Dali server is a network service for comparing proteins in 3D
structure against the PDB.

Prediction of Binding Sites:
Q-Site Finder was used to highlight the regions for ligand
binding sites. It employs the interaction energy between the
protein and a simple Van-der Waal probe to locate energetically
favorable binding sites. Energetically favorable probe sites are
clustered according to their spatial proximity and clusters are
then ranked according to the sum of interaction energies for the
sites within each cluster []. This method was widely applied
for probable binding sites. Ligand binding sites were predicted
for both target and template protein which depicted the
common residues including common position between both
proteins. This study indicates the residues playing a major role
in cadmium binding sites.

Results &amp; Discussion
The target UV-B stress induced protein was obtained from
NCBI protein database and the accession was noted as
NP_442193. BLASTp was applied against protein databank for
cyanobacteria. The maximum identity (49%) for Nostoc sp. was
observed among all obtained hits.

Three Dimensional Protein Modeling:
The target protein sequence of interest for Synechocystis PCC
6803 strain was obtained from NCBI protein database,
accession, NP_442193. BLASTp produced significant alignments
and 3F2I_A PDB, UV-B stress protein, from Nostoc sp, was
chosen as a suitable template protein for computer modeling.
All the inputs were studied using the SWISSMODEL for
homology modeling. Three dimensional modeled protein
structures are shown in (). It consists of five alpha-beta
domains and loop regions were embedded in between each of
the alpha-beta domains.

Three dimensional structure of target protein of Synechocystis
PCC 6803 strain was validated through RAMPAGE ().
156 residues (96.3%) were expected in favored region and only
6 (3.7%) numbers of residues were recruited in allowed region
in Ramachandran contour plot. No residue was obtained in
disallowed region. In context of QMEAN4 global scores, the Zscore
indicates overall model quality and measures the
deviation of the total energy of the modeled structure with
respect to an energy distribution derived from random
conformation. The overall QMEAN4 score was calculated as
0.63 and the Z-score was observed as -1.86. The QMEAN4 score
is a composite score consisting of a linear combination of 4
statistical potential terms (estimated model reliability between
0-1) (see supplementary material). After complete
refinement and assessment of predicted model, it has been
found that the predicted model quality was good and reliable.
After quantitative and qualitative analysis of predicted 3D
structure model was successfully deposited to PMDB database
[] (PMDB id: PM0078697).

Similar Secondary Structure Analysis:
Dali tool is extensively used to check the most similar protein
structures from PDB. Three dimensional structures comparison
is shown in (). Here, the result describes the 3D
structures that were obtained related to target UV-B protein
structure. 10 PDB structures have been picked for comparing
target protein. The Dali server results indicate that the
structures having similarity above 70% were recruited for 3Dalignment.
This study was needed to evaluate the secondary
structure information of target protein structure. Dali result
shows high quality secondary structure similarity from all 10
PDB crystal structures. Helix regions show better resemblance
with target structure rather than sheets and coil regions.
However, these regions also show better match with target
protein ().

Prediction of Binding sites:
Computational methods for the detection of active binding
region and characterization of functional sites in protein
structure have increasingly become an area of interest. There is
at least one successful prediction in the top three predicted sites
in 90% of proteins tested using Q-Site Finder. Generally, ligand
binding site prediction method analyzes the protein surface for
pockets. The ligand binding sites are usually in the largest
interacting cavity having major active binding region. The
cavities are defined by energetic criteria. The method calculates
the Van-der Waal interaction energies of probe with protein. QSite
finder depicts 10 major active binding cavities. Results are
summarized in (). Most favorable binding sites contain
amino acids with high conservation residue score.

Predicted binding site selection is highlighted according to the
likelihood of being an actual binding site. The residues involved
in each binding site for modeled protein were also tabulated in
first three letters of name. In addition, the site volume of every
predicted binding site was also taken into account. This site
volume box gives information about the selected predicted
binding site. It gives an estimate of cavity volume and total
protein volume. All the predicted sites were selected which had
the volume above 90 cubic angstroms.

We have chosen to analyze UVB protein from Synechocystis PCC
6803 by using tools and databases. The results indicate that all
the amino acids are specific and there is an UVB stress protein
domain in Synechocystis PCC 6803 that shows similarity with
the Nostoc sp. In addition, comparative UVB stress protein
modeling is done to construct a three dimensional model on
one or more related proteins of known structure, which can be
taken from the protein data bank []. Further, for deducing the
biological functions involved in the mechanism via structure
function relationship, structure knowledge is essential for all
areas of protein research such as enzyme kinetics, ligand–
protein binding studies, gene characterization and construction,
structure based molecule design, and rational designing of
proteins [,
]. In addition, these models can speed up the
process of experimental structure determination by molecular
replacement phasing using X-ray crystallography. Active sites
binding prediction was performed by Qsitefinder, which is
widely used and is a reliable tool. The results indicate that the
prediction can be applied in docking processes to understand
the mechanism of protection against UV stress. Moreover, it
could be helpful to enhance the tolerance to UV radiation stress.

Conclusion
The present study will help to understand the mechanism of
putative UV-B stress induced protein in cyanobacterium,
Synechocystis PCC 6803 and the protective role of cyanobacteria
in UV stress mechanisms. Identification of such proteases
expressed under UV B stress will give clues related to the
physiological activity and the importance of cyanobacteria,
Synechocystis PCC 6803 acclimatization under UV stress. This
piece of work has given an insight into the three dimensional
protein structure, its putative binding site/s and their
comparison with other putative UV stress induced proteins in
other cyanobacteria.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Rahman et al, Bioinformation 9(12): 639-644 (2013)

Three dimensional structural representation (Chimera
view) ribbon display. Residues labeled by one-letter code.

Alignment of sequences of target putative UV-B stress from Synechocystis PCC 6803, template from Nostoc sp. and other
related protein sequences by DALI, showing consensus regions and secondary structure. Depiction of secondary structure
assignments by DSSP (H/h: helix, E/e: strand, L/l: coil) in which he most frequent amino acid type is colored in each column.
Mol1A is treated as target protein which is written at top row (0001 number).

Q-Site Finder analysis of target protein structure from Synechocystis PCC6803. The energetically most favored site with
residues involved in interactions and estimated site volume; Total site volume: 15474.

