Background
MMPs (Matrix metalloporteinases) are responsible for digestion of various 
structural components of extracellular matrix (ECM), such as membrane 
collagens, elastin, aggrecan, fibronectin and laminin  
[].  In addition to 
their ECM substrates, MMPs also cleave other extracellular proteins. Their 
targets include a number of cell surface receptors, peptide growth factors, 
cytokines and chemokines as well as other proteases 
[]. MMP proteolysis 
plays a central role in biological processes like embryonic development, 
morphogenesis, bone remodelling, homeostasis, wound repair etc. 
[]. For 
this reason, MMPs are closely regulated in their expression and tightly 
controlled in their function by endogenous mechanisms such as tissue 
inhibitors of metalloproteinase (TIMPs). Recent study demonstrated that 
imbalance in this regulation results in variety of disease states such as 
tumor metastasis, and multiple sclerosis [,
].  

MMPs are zinc containing endopeptidases , which belong to metzincin 
group of proteases. They include the M10A subfamily, the M10 family and 
the MA clan of metallopeptidases  []. In humans, more than 27 different 
MMPs have been described which are sub-grouped into collagenases, 
gelatinases, stromelysins, matrilysins and membrane type MMPs  [].  
Except for MMP7, MMP26 and MMP23, all MMPs have a hemopexin 
domain connected to the catalytic domain by a hinge or linker region. 
Hemopexin domain mainly affects TIMP and substrate binding while 
catalytic domain is where the proteolytic cleavage occurs.  MMP2 
(gelatinaseA) and MMP9 (gelatinaseB) are two such MMPs which are 
characterized by their ability to digest denatured collagens (gelatin). These 
MMPs have been described for their role in various pathological 
physiological processes in humans like inflammatory, neurodegenerative, 
cardiovascular and autoimmune diseases  [,
]. MMP9 in particular has 
been associated with cancer cell  invasion, metastasis and tumor 
progression [].

MMP9 and MMP2 are distinguished among other MMPs by the presence 
of three head to tail cysteine rich repeats which resemble fibronectin type 
II repeats. This insert is required for interaction with substrates gelatin,
laminin and collagen  []. 
Structurally, MMP9 also contains a heavily Oglycosylated, 
elongated linker region between its catalytic and hemopexin 
domains. This O-glycosylation increases affinity for galectin-3, thus 
impeding metastasis formation []. Additionally, Role of MMP9 has been 
established in early tumor progression, it acts as a functional component of 
angiogenesis switch during multistage carcinogenesis, where MMP9 
functions by triggering the release of vascular epidermal growth factor 
accelerating tumor growth  []. Furthermore, increased expression of 
MMP9 is also observed during various neoplasias, such as tumors of colon 
and breasts. Therefore, from a medical perspective MMP9 is a pre-eminent 
target for inhibitor development, blocking MMP9 activity by more specific 
inhibitors can be of therapeutic benefit for patients carrying early stages of 
cancer.

In Nature, MMPs proteolysis is inhibited by a plasma inhibitor alpha2-
macroglobulin or by family of endogenous glycoproteins known as tissue 
inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs). Four TIMPs have been identified 
so far, all of which possess a conserved gene structure with 12 identically 
placed cysteine residues. These cysteine residues give a two domain amino 
terminal structure that co-ordinates bidentately to the catalytic zinc (Zn2+)
through its amino terminal moiety and carbonyl oxygen, which leads to 
inhibition of activity of MMPs  []. Although TIMPs are selective 
inhibitors of  MMPs, technical  restraints  prevent  their development into 
useful drugs. However, MMPs make an attractive target for synthetic 
inhibitors. Most synthetic inhibitor development is based on mimicking the 
binding of TIMPs to the catalytic  site of the enzyme. Based on this 
knowledge, there are two basic requirements for a molecule to be effective 
MMP inhibitors (MMPIs). Firstly, a functional group able to chelate the  
active site zinc (known as the zinc binding group). Secondly, at least one 
functional group capable of hydrogen bonding with the enzyme backbone. 
Several classes of synthetic MMP inhibitors were developed in the past. 
These synthetic inhibitors showed promising results during pre clinical 
studies on mouse models, still clinical development of MMPIs led to their 
subsequent failure due to various unforeseen problems. On examination of
these failures, it was found that broad enzyme specificity of MMPIs led to 
musculoskeletal side effects and cell cytotoxicity  
[]. These failures 
highlighted the need to further understand role of specific MMPs in disease 
pathways, their structure, and their binding to synthetic MMPIs. In recent 
years, crystal structures of MMP9 with its specific inhibitors have been 
resolved []. 
In light of this structural data, it has now become possible to 
evaluate the binding of potential inhibitors to MMP9. So, in current study 
we have applied molecular docking and molecular dynamics approach to 
determine structural specificity of three different ZBGs towards MMP9, 
the results obtained will help us understand binding of inhibitors in the 
active site pocket of the enzyme as well as provide clues for structure 
based design of potential MMP inhibitors in the future.

Methodology
Enzyme preparation
Crystal structure of MMP9 in complex hydroxamate inhibitor 
(triflouromethyl hydroxamic acid) obtained from protein data bank was 
used for docking studies [PDB id code: 2ow1] []. Water molecules and 
ligand were removed from the enzyme. The complex was then energy 
minimized in steepest descent followed by conjugate gradient method 
using Gromacs (version 4.0)  [].   All these minimization steps were 
performed using Gromos87 force field, which is default for gromacs.

Inhibitor Selection
The set of 54 inhibitors were selected for this study from ref 17, 18. 
Selected ligands belonged to three classes of known synthetic 
metalloproteinase inhibitors. These three classes have hydroxamate, 
sulfodiimine, and carboxylate as their zinc binding groups. Chemical 
structures of ligands were retrieved from Pubchem compound database. In 
order to obtain stable ligand confirmations, they were optimized by 
steepest descent in Amber Force field using UCSF chimera 
[].

Docking Setup
Docking was performed using Autodock 4 and Flexidock available in 
SYBYL-X  [,
]. 
Autodock combines energy evaluation through precalculated 
grids of affinity potential employing various search algorithms 
to find the suitable binding position for a ligand on a given protein  
[]. 
Kollman united atom charges and polar hydrogens were added to the 
receptor PDB using Autodock tools []. All rotatable bonds in the ligands 
were kept free to allow for flexible docking. Binding site for ligand was 
chosen around Leu-187 side chain which includes all amino acid residues 
in the active site. Grid size was set to 60 x 60 x 60 grid points (x, y and z), 
with spacing between grid points kept at 0.375 Å.  The Lamarckian genetic 
algorithm was chosen to search for the best conformers. Standard docking 
protocol was applied which is based on population size of 150 randomly 
placed individuals, a maximum number of 250000 energy evaluations, a 
mutation rate of 0.02, a crossover rate of 0.80 and an elitism value of 1. 
Twenty five independent docking runs were carried out for each inhibitor 
and cluster tolerance was kept at 1.0 Å. Best docking conformers from 
each class of ligand were further verified using Flexidock available from 
SYBYL-X, each flexidock simulation was performed with 25,000 
generations. Binding site was defined around 3 Å region of previously 
docked ligand, the resulting conformations from flexidock runs were 
compared with autodock to establish veracity of autodock runs. 

Molecular Dynamics setup
Based on Docking results, Molecular Dynamics simulations of Active site 
MMP9- inhibitor complexes were carried out using Gromacs 4.0 suite of  
programs using gromos force field []. Each of the complexes was placed 
in centre of 90*90*90 Å cubic box and solvated by SPC/E water molecules 
[]. The  gromacs  topology  file  for  ligands  was  generated  using  the  
PRODRG2 server. The time constant for berendsen temperature coupling 
and berendsen pressure coupling were  both set at 0.1.  The environment 
was set to 300K and 1 bar. All of the complexes were energy minimized 
using steepest descent method. Further, a 30 ps position restraining 
simulation was carried out to restrict  the movement of the protein in the 
simulation. For the long range electrostatic interactions, Particle Mesh 
Ewald (PME) electrostatic was used. The cut-off for coulomb interaction
and Vander Waal interaction were set  to 1.0 nm and 1.4 nm respectively. 
The LINCS algorithm was used for all bond constraints. 

Results and Discussion
Even though, several crystal structures of MMP9 in complex with other 
inhibitors are present, structure of truncated MMP9 in complex with 
hydroxamic acid inhibitor [PDB id  code 2OW1] was used for docking 
studies. In this structure, the hydroxamic acid group demonstrates high 
affinity for catalytic zinc atom by co-ordinating in a bidentate manner 
through its hydroxyl and carbonyl groups. Overall, structure of the 
complex displays tight binding  conformation with almost exact 
resemblance to structure of Pro-MMP9  isoform with slight disordering in 
Leu 187 side chain  []. Moreover, the subsite  conformations in this 
structure allow for favorable hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions 
with residues in main substrate binding cavity. Therefore, the structure 
provides optimal conformation for docking small molecules in the active 
site.  

Docking was performed using Autodock4.0. To verify the accuracy of 
docking results, hydroxamate (triflouromethyl hydroxamic acid) was 
extracted from crystal structure in its experimental conformation. It was 
docked back to the corresponding binding pocket. The top ranking 
conformational clusters from this dock were evaluated in terms of root 
mean square deviation between docked position and experimentally 
determined position for the ligand. The low RMS (≫ 2 Å) between the 
experimental and docked co-ordinates of ligand indicated energetically 
favorable and statistically validated docking result. Further verification of 
docking results was performed using flexidock module available in 
SYBYL-X, this was done to account for interaction of Zn atom present in 
protein with the ligand

For docking studies, a set of 54 inhibitors were chosen from three broad 
classes of MMP inhibitors: (1) carboxylic acid based inhibitors (2) 
Sulfonamide hydroxamate based inhibitors (3) Thio ester based inhibitors 
[,
]. 
This classification is based upon the nature of zinc binding group 
(ZBG) present. All the inhibitors were then docked into the active site of 
MMP9. Active site of MMP9 comprises of catalytic zinc ion and is 
separated into small “lower” and large “upper” subdomain. These 
subdomains form Sn (n=1, 2, 3…) and Sn' (n'=1, 2, 3…) substrate binding 
pockets, small inhibitors bind to the S1' substrate binding pocket, formed 
by these two subdomains []. 
S1' pocket is framed in the center of active 
site cleft closest in proximity to active site zinc. This pocket comprises of 
Asp 185 ‐ Leu 188 and Pro 421-Tyr 423 which provide donors and 
acceptors for inter main chain hydrogen bonds to substrates or inhibitors. 
The wall of S1' cavity is formed by side chains of Leu 188, Leu 397, Val 
398, His 401, and Leu 418, and the Met 422-Tyr 423 main chain. Leu 397 
and Val 398 are specific to MMP9 []. The 25 docking conformations for 
each ligand were divided into separate conformational clusters according 
to 2 Å RMSD criteria. Autodock ranks each conformational cluster by 
binding free energy evaluation to find the best binding mode  
[]. Best 
ranking conformational clusters from each class of ligand were further 
docked using Flexidock module in SYBYL-X. Results from both autodock 
and flexidock show agreement with less than 1 Å RMSD deviation in the 
conformation of docked ligands. In our results best ranking conformations 
demonstrated a clear propensity to bind into the S1' subsite within the 
active site cleft. The orientation of ZBG in all of 54 best ranking clusters 
was similar to the orientation of  ZBG of ligand in the experimental 
structure. Our docking results clearly show that co-ordinate bond formation 
between   ZBG   and   active   site   zinc  is  facilitated   by  anchoring  of  
functional groups of ligand with residues  in  S1' cavity.  Highest   ranking  
conformations in 43 of the 54 docks hydrogen bond either with upper 
domain Leu 188-Ala 189 or lower domain Gln 402-His 411. Anchoring in 
the upper part of S1' subsite is supported mainly by main chain amine 
moeity of Leu 188, which acts as a hydrogen bond donor to functional 
group of ligands. This interaction determines positioning of ligand within 
the ‘S1’ subsite. It was observed that bulkier functional group moieties 
bind deep into the upper domain Leu 188 pocket of the subsite while 
smaller functional group moieties  show preference for Gln 402-His 411
pocket. Apart from above mentioned  residues, S1' wall residues Pro 421-
Tyr 423 also act as hydrogen bond acceptor in few ligand conformations. 
Docking results reaffirm the fact that S1' subsite is likely the most 
important substrate recognition point in the active site cleft. 
The binding free energy evaluation by Autodock includes intermolecular 
energy (van der Waals energy, hydrogen bonding energy, desolvation 
energy, and electrostatic energy), internal energy and torsional energy. The 
first two items build up docking energy; the first and third items compose 
the binding energy. The difference in binding free energy of three different 
classes of inhibitors provides further insights into their binding mode with 
MMP9. Our docking results indicate that Thiol based ZBG Zinc Binding 
Group is energetically favored over carboxylic and hydroxamate Zinc 
Binding Groups. Analysis of docking poses of Thio ester based ZBG group 
suggests that while bivalent sulfur  helps in co-ordinating monodentately 
with  the  catalytic  zinc, with  the  two  bulkier  moieties  attached to thio 
ester  strongly  interacting  with  S1'  subsite (13 of  the  18  top  ranking 
conformations interact with both lower and upper domain S1' residues). In 
case of hydroxamate and carboxylic groups, only one functional group can 
co-ordinate with the catalytic zinc thus restricting the ability to interact 
with S1' subsite.  Analysis of  binding energies within each group 
demonstrates that ligands with bulkier side chains in functional groups 
have better binding energies than smaller side chains. It can be argued that 
the bulkier moieties attached to thio ester can also possibly extend into S1 
and S2' subsites resulting in increased interactions between ligand and 
enzyme. Based on docking results, one enzyme-inhibitor conformation 
from each of the three groups was chosen for molecular dynamics studies 
(Table 1 see ). This choice was based on the 
optimal binding conformation obtained by inhibitor in the group. The 
optimal conformation was ascertained on following criteria: docking 
energy, binding conformation, and  hydrogen bonding with active site 
residues. We examined the mobility of inhibitors in active site through 1 ns 
MD simulation. This was done by calculating RMSD of inhibitors atom 
position to MMP9 backbone for all three systems  (). A 
comparison of RMSD deviation and  subsequent conformational changes 
indicate binding mobility in all three groups of inhibitor.

For the carboxylic group, in the first 250 ps of simulation, the inhibitor 
aligns itself to a more vertical position subsequently loses contact with S1' 
subsite resulting in opening up of active site cleft. However, about halfway 
through the simulation inhibitor anchors itself to S1' subsite again. This 
occurs by anchoring with the side chains of Ala-189 and Leu-188 and 
finally closing the active site again. This conformation gradually stabilizes 
at about 700 ps with slight changes in backbone structure. For the 
hydroxamate group, the inhibitor changes its original binding conformation 
and aligns itself in S1 subsite. The active site pocket achieves an open 
conformation while inhibitor further buries itself in S1 pocket. This results 
in increased interaction of hydroxamate moiety with His 113 and brings 
about slight closing of active site cleft. This conformation attains stability 
at around 700 ps and remains stable for rest of the simulation. For the 
Thiol based ZBG group, the binding conformation of the inhibitor forces 
the active site to remain in a closed conformation for most of the 
simulation period. Still, around 300 ps the inhibitor realigns itself in the 
S1' subsite further closing the active  site to attain very tight binding 
conformation, and this conformation remains stable for rest of the 
simulation.  

All three inhibitors display varying mobility in the active site pocket as 
evidenced by MD simulations. A further calculation of 500 ps reveals that 
the structures attain conformational stability around 1000 to 1100 ps for all 
three groups. The reasons for realignment are explained by the nature S1 
and S1' subsites.  S1' is a deep hydrophobic pocket which acts as substrate 
recognition point while S1 forms a hydrophobic surface which 
accommodates amino acids from the substrates. S1 subsite acts as a 
channel for amide bond hydrolysis by exposing amide bonds to 
nucleophilic zinc at the center of active site. Carboxylic and hydroxamate 
group inhibitors demonstrate this by first binding to energetically favorable 
S1' pocket with their bulky side chains preferring deep hydrophobic 
pockets, however simulation reveals that polar residues (Tyr 423) push 
aromatic side chains of inhibitors to  realign into S1 pocket. It is revealed 
that bulky Thiol based ZBG inhibitor  buries deep inside active site cleft 
closing face of the active site, and it  shows steadier anchoring within the 
active site pocket compared to other two groups.  Thio ester based ZBG 
group inhibitor also interacts with Val 398, which is specific to MMP9.

Conclusion
In our study, molecular docking and dynamics approach was applied to 
study the binding conformations and structural specificity of three new 
groups of MMP inhibitors. In  three groups, carboxylic acid ZBG and 
sulfonamide hydroxamate ZBG demonstrate similar binding orientations 
with general specificity towards  S1' pocket of the enzyme with 
sulfonamide based hydroxamate group that anchoring more steadily into 
the S1' pocket by having more hydrogen bonding pairs between enzyme 
and inhibitor. Moreover, thio-ester based ZBG displays better binding and 
greater specificity than the other two inhibitor groups, which have the 
ability to anchor to both S1 and S1' subsite and maintain a tightly closed 
conformation throughout the simulation period that indicate of greater 
specificity towards the structure of the enzyme.  
Our study explores structural specificity of three groups of inhibitors 
towards recently available MMP9 structure and provides valuable insights 
into designing highly specific inhibitors towards MMP9 enzyme. In this 
study, thio ester ZBG compounds demonstrate promising results, and 
further studies could provide leads for highly selective inhibitors for 
MMP9 enzyme in the future.

Supplementary material
Data 1

We would like to thank Ms Sakshi Rana and for her valuable assistance 
during this study; we would also like to thank Mr. Sunil Kumar Gupta of 
bioinformatics center, biotech park Lucknow for his technical assistance on 
using SYBYL. We would also like to thank Mrs Prachi Srivastava for her 
assistance and we would specially like to mention Dr. Daya Shankar lal 
Srivastava for his guidance in initiating the studies. 


Citation:Tandon and Sinha, Bioinformation 5(8) 310-314 (2011)

Docked conformations of Inhibitors in Red (Autodock) and Green (Flexidock) with respect 
to crystal structure ligand in blue. (a) Carboxylic 
acid ZBG (b) Sulfonamide Hydroxamate ZBG (c) Thio ester based ZBG

Root mean square deviation between drug molecules and Backbone atoms of MMP9 structure 
for chosen inhibitors from the three groups. 

