Background:
The c-kit proto-oncogene encodes a transmembrane tyrosine 
kinase receptor which is activated by the stem cell factor (SCF), 
its natural ligand. C-kit protein plays a critical role in 
modulating histamine release from mast cells [–], following its 
binding with SCF which leads to dimerization and autophosphorylation at specific tyrosine residues. Moreover 
signaling by c-kit, plays an important role in cellular 
transformation and differentiation, including proliferation, 
survival, adhesion, and chemotaxis []. The over-expression of 
c-kit proto-oncogene has been reported in hematopoietic cells, 
small cell lung cancer, and gastrointestinal stromal tumors 
[–].
Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that mutations of c-kit 
protect human colon adenocarcinoma cells against apoptosis 
and enhance their invasive potential []. The clinical importance 
of c-kit expression in tumors focused the research towards 
inhibitors of this tyrosine kinase. Imatinib (Gleevec®) was the 
first compound used in therapy, but mutations on TK1 domain, 
known also ATP-binding pocket, (V654A, T670I gatekeeper 
mutations of c-kit) led to reduced effectiveness or 
ineffectiveness of this treatment []. Other compounds are likely 
to be effective against mutants, such as Sunitinib (Sutent®), but 
the need for new and most effective inhibitors is still critical. In 
order to understand which features of the inhibitors could be 
determinant in the interaction with wild type and/or mutant 
enzyme, in this paper is reported mixed Molecular 
Dynamics/Docking study with the aim to unveil the molecular 
mechanisms involved in the resistance of Imatinib, Sunitinib, 
and other known compounds against the “gatekeeper” mutants 
V654A e T670I. We tried to evidence strong and weak features 
of actual inhibitors () (Nilotinib, Sorafenib, Motesanib, 
PKC-412, a thienopyrimidine derivative TPD, an
aminobenzoisoxazole derivative ABIOZ) in order to identify the 
guidelines to design new and most potent inhibitors against ckit mutants.

Methodology:
The three dimensional crystal structures of intracellular domain 
of tyrosine kinase c-kit complexed with Imatinib (Pdb: 1T46) 
and complexed with Sunitinib (Pdb: 3G0E) were used as 
receptor throughout the work. The two crystal structures, 
analyzed by means TM-align software [], revealed RMSD = 
1.39 Å and TM-score = 0.95 (TM-score &gt;0.5 means good 
structural alignment). Crystallized inhibitors were re-docked 
with the aim to evaluate the ability of Glide docking software 
[] to reproduce the experimental conformation (Imatinib 
crystallized/docked RMSD = 0.43 Å; Sunitinib 
crystallized/docked RMSD = 0.51 Å). All the structures of 
compounds (Nilotinib, Sorafenib, Motesanib, PKC-412, TPD, 
ABIOZ) object of the study were prepared by means Ligprep 
[]. The mixed Molecular Docking/Dynamics protocol, called 
Induced Fit Docking (IFD) [,
] was used. This approach 
combines, in an iterative fashion, the ligand docking techniques 
with those for modeling receptor conformational changes. The 
Glide docking software is used for ligand flexibility, while the 
refinement module in Prime program [] is used to account for 
receptor flexibility: the side chain degrees of freedom are 
mainly sampled, while minor backbone movements are allowed 
through minimization. The strategy is to dock first ligands into 
a rigid receptor using a softened energy function such that 
steric clashes do not prevent at least one pose from assuming a 
conformation close to the correct one (ligand sampling step). 
Further, the receptor degrees of freedom are sampled, and a 
global ligand/receptor energy minimization is performed for
many ligand poses which attempts to identify low free-energy 
conformations of the whole complex (protein sampling step). A 
second step of ligand docking is performed on the refined 
protein structures, using a hard potential function to sample 
ligand conformational space within the refined protein 
environment (ligand resampling step). Finally a composite 
score function is applied to rank the complexes, accounting for 
the receptor/ligand interaction energy as well as strain and 
solvation energies (scoring step). The composite score, used for 
final ranking of compounds, is reported in the equation: IFScore 
= GlideScore + 0.05 PrimeEnergy. c-kit crystallized structures 
were modified inserting “gatekeeper mutations” and optimized 
by means Prime to erase bumping and altered dihedral angles.

Discussion:
Imatinib occupies hydrophobic pockets generated by Trp577 
and Phe811 in the inactive conformation. Beyond these, it 
establishes three H-bonds with three different residues of ATP 
binding pocket: the first between NH of Asp810 and the oxygen 
atom of amide moiety; the second between the NH separating 
the aromatic rings and the oxygen of the gatekeeper residue 
Thr670; the third between the nitrogen atom of pyridine moiety 
and the NH of Cys673. Thus, not only hydrophobic and 
aromatic features are involved in the modulation of 
ligandreceptor interaction, but these are doubtless predominant. Also 
Sunitinib, bound to wild-type protein, forms one H-bond with 
Cys673 and π-stacking interaction between Phe811 and the 
fluoroindole moiety. Further, distances from gatekeeper 
residues Val654 and Thr670 are quite stable. The mutation T670I 
determines the loss of one of the H-bond between Imatinib and
c-kit, consequently a weaker binding could be the reason of 
minor effectiveness and therefore could lead to resistance. 
Introduction of mutations does not substantially influence 
binding mode of Sunitinib, as expected being this inhibitor 
effective against mutants. The principal difference regards 
Phe811 which is not oriented towards the binding pocket, but is 
rotated in the opposite side. Two H-bonds were formed: the 
first between the NH of indole moiety of Sunitinib and Glu640; 
the second between the peptide carbonyl of Ile789 and the 
amide NH of the inhibitor. Hydrophobic interaction with 654A 
remains unaltered due to the similar distance of mutant residue 
respect to wild-type residue (5.0 Å vs 4.78 Å), in the same 
manner the distance of 670I respect to the indole nitrogen is 
quite similar. The binding mode of four inhibitor (TPD, ABIOZ, 
Sorafenib, Motesanib) is really different. In fact for all 
compounds the same condition was verified: in wild type 
protein, the formation of one or more H-bond (with Asp723 and 
Gly676 for TPD; Lys593, Thr594, Asp723 for Sorafenib; Arg796, 
Gly676 for ABIOZ; Asp677 for Motesanib) together with the 
rotation and π-stacking interaction between each inhibitor and 
the phenyl ring of Phe811, turn out to be essential. In the 
mutant protein, docking scores are lower than wild-type ones: 
this could be justified by the loss of π-stacking interaction with 
Phe811. In fact, in all the cases the phenyl ring of Phe811 is 
oriented toward the opposite site of binding pocket, therefore 
opposite to inhibitors as verified for Sunitinib, but with the 
consistent difference that distances from mutant residues are 
longer than wild type, leading to the loss of interaction that 
could justify lower scores. Number and distribution of H-bonds 
keep constant, but some residues are different from those 
involved in wild-type and Ile789 is always involved in 
Hbonding with all these four inhibitors. For Nilotinib and 
PKC412, both in wild type and in mutant protein, the
orientation of the phenyl ring of Phe811 turns out to be not 
influent even if rotated of 180° with respect to the inhibitors, 
because the hydrophobic pocket created by 654A and 670I is 
occupied by the pyridine ring of Nilotinib and by the phenyl 
ring of PKC412, which keeps this orientation also by means a 
H-bond with Asp572. Therefore, docking results stressed the 
fact that the presence of gatekeeper mutations lead to the 
change of key residue Phe811 orientation, which rotate almost 
180° out of the binding pocket, so that selectivity or resistance to 
an inhibitor against mutant protein is related to the loss of 
Phe811 interaction in quantitative terms. This loss should be 
balanced with new hydrophobic interactions. In fact, Nilotinib 
and PKC412, able to establish new hydrophobic interactions 
with sub-pockets created by mutant residues seem to prove the 
key role of this type of interactions. Hydrogen bonds are 
important for binding, but not for selectivity or resistance. The 
presence of NH groups, both amidic or aromatic, favour the
binding with c-kit, but residues involved in H-bonds are several 
and they do not turn out crucial to foresee the arise of 
resistance. By means information collected from docking 
analysis, it is possible to obtain useful and concrete guidelines 
to design new compounds able to keep the inhibitory activity 
also against the mutant protein. Design of new compounds 
should head towards inhibitors with strong hydrophobic 
ability, determined by aromatic moieties, also fused, 
and Hbond donor groups. Inhibitors which turn out most selective 
against mutant are about 17-18 Å long, while resistant 
compounds do not exceed 15 Å, therefore scaffold lengthening 
seems to lead to increase the interaction with gatekeeper 
residues which are located at 5 Å from the binding pocket.

Conclusion:
In this work we focused on the study of c-kit kinase inhibitors, 
overexpression of which was demonstrated the cue event of 
gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs). We studied the role of 
gatekeeper mutations V654A and T670I, which are located into 
the activation loop (A-loop of catalytic domain), in relation to 
the binding of therapeutic drugs (Imatinib, Sunitinib and other 
important inhibitors). By means a mixed Molecular 
Dynamics/Docking approach we tried to understand the 
molecular mechanisms involved in the resistance or selectivity 
of Nilotinib, PKC412, Sorafenib, Motesanib, TPD, ABIOZ. The 
goal was to point out strong and weak features of known 
inhibitors suggesting valuable guidelines to the design of more 
potent inhibitors, and able to overcome resistance. This 
theoretical approach can reveal useful to develop an effective 
anti cancer drug.

Citation:Tutone et al, Bioinformation 7(6): 296-298(2011)

Known c-kit inhibitors

Docking poses of inhibitors within wild-type and 
mutant protein. In green Phe811 is represented.

