Background
Cancer is an abnormal growth of cells which tend to proliferate
in an uncontrolled way and, in some cases, leads to metastasize
[]. 
Improvements in cancer-directed therapies and
management strategies have led to significant gains in survival
over the past several decades. While additional progress is
unquestionably necessary, a substantial proportion of adult
cancer patients (an estimated 64%) currently reach 5-year
survival, and the number of cancer survivors has grown
steadily, increasing from 3 million in 1971 to more than 10
million in 2002 []. Angiogenesis, the process of new blood
vessel formation, is involved in many physiological and
pathological settings such as ischemia, diabetes, atherosclerosis,
and cancer []. Recent advances in the development of
angiogenesis-based therapies for treatment of angiogenesisassociated
diseases have provided new hope in a wide variety
of human diseases ranging from eye diseases to cancer. One
group of growth factor receptors critically implicated in
angiogenesis is vascular endothelial growth factor receptors
VEGFR-1/FLT-1 (fms-like tyrosine kinase) and VEGFR-
2/KDR/FLK-1 (fetal liver kinase) are the prototypes of a gene
family encoding structurally related receptors, FLT-3/FLK-2
and FLT-4/VEGFR-3 and, a subfamily of receptor tyrosine
kinases (RTKs) []. VEGF primarily utilizes its receptor VEGFR2
(also known as Flk-1 or KDR) to induce angiogenic responses
by activating a variety of signaling cascades, including
activation of PI3K-Akt, PLC-γ–PKC, and MAPK 
[].
Proangiogenic factors can positively regulate VEGF-VEGFR2
signaling. Sphingosine-1 phosphate via its receptor S1P1,
placental growth factor via its receptor VEGFR1, and laminar
flow via Src can transactivate VEGFR2 [–]. VEGFR2 activity is
also regulated by direct interactions with other proteins,
including co-receptor neuropilins [], adhesion molecule
vascular endothelial–cadherin (VE-cadherin) 
[], and integrins
VE-cadherin is in complex with VEGFR2 and is critical for
VEGF-induced survival (PI3K-Akt) signaling [] VE-cadherin–
VEGFR2 also regulates EC permeability [,
]. Interestingly, a
complex of VEGFR2, VE-cadherin, and PECAM-1 (CD31) has
been shown to be a mechanosensor that functions upstream of
integrin signaling and transduces shear stress-mediated
angiogenesis and vascular remodeling []. It is also seen
proinflammatory cytokine TNF via its receptor TNFR2
transactivates VEGFR2 [,
]. However, negative regulations
of VEGFR2 by protein-protein interactions are less understood,
and an endogenous inhibitor that directly binds to and
modulates VEGFR2 activity has not been identified 
[]. Nature
is an infinite sphere of which the center is everywhere and the
circumference nowhere and henceforth we have chosen around
two hundred natural molecules derived from natural source
that can be used to treat cancer.

Pazopanib served as a reference drug in our study. Pazopanib
(GW786034B; GlaxoSmithKline) is a novel orally available,
small-molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor of VEGF receptor -1, -2,
and -3 with IC50 values of 10, 30, and 47 nM, respectively 
[].
An initial nonrandomized, dose-escalation phase I study with
pazopanib (GSK-VEG10003) showed stable disease or partial
responses in relapsed/refractory patients with renal cell (RCC),
Hurthle cell, neuroendocrine, GIST, adeno lung carcinoma,
chondrosarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, and melanoma.
Remarkably, of 12 patients with RCC, 7 patients had stable
disease or tumor reduction and 1 patient had a partial response.
Adverse side effects included manageable hypertension,
tiredness and hair de-pigmentation. Pazopanib inhibits VEGFtriggered
signaling pathways in both tumor and endothelial
cells, thereby blocking in vitro MM cell growth, survival, and
migration, and inhibits VEGF-induced up-regulation of
adhesion molecules on both endothelial and tumor cells,
thereby abrogating endothelial cell-MM cell binding and
associated cell proliferation [].

Here we have explored natural compounds inhibiting the
process of angiogenesis by targeting VEGFR. Also, quantitative
structure-activity relationships (i.e. partition coefficient log p
value) was studied to identify the low toxic natural compounds
that has good drug likeness properties compared to the
reference drug pazopanib, which are detailed in further
sections.

Methodology
Pubchem:
Pubchem chemical database was used to retrieve natural
molecules which are targeting important biological process in
cancer. Around two hundred molecules were studied in this
category. The chemical structure of the molecules was retrieved
in SD (Structure Data) format. Physical and chemical properties
of all two hundred molecules were screened from the structure
page of pubchem.

Lipinski's rule of five:
Lipinski's rule-of-five analysis helped to raise awareness about
properties and structural features that make molecules more or
less drug-like. The guidelines were quickly adopted by the
pharmaceutical industry as it helped apply ADME (Absorption,
Distribution, Metabolism, and Excretion) considerations early in
preclinical development and could help avoid costly late-stage
preclinical and clinical failures. The guidelines predict that poor
absorption or permeation of an orally administered compound
is more likely if the compound meets the following criteria:

Molecular mass greater than 500 Da
High lipophilicity (expressed as cLogP greater than 5)
More than 5 hydrogen bond donors
More than 10 hydrogen bond acceptors

The molecules which are not meeting the above criteria were
taken for docking studies ().

Protein Data Bank:
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a homodimeric
hormone that induces proliferation of endothelial cells through
binding to the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor. Thus
VEGFR acts as a target for molecular medicine. Crystal
structure of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (PDB
id: 1FLT () was retrieved from protein data bank.

HEX:
Molecules which are screened based on lipinski's rule features
were subjected to receptor-ligand interaction study using HEX
(Version 5.1) docking tool. Marvin sketch, chemical structure
drawing tool, was used for file conversion and PDB (Protein
Data Bank) format of small molecules were prepared for
docking in HEX. The protein-ligand complex of the molecules
was saved for active site analysis.  is showing the
docking score of top nine molecules out of two hundred agents
targeting biological processes important in cancer.

SwissPDBViewer:
The receptor-ligand complex of the molecules was subjected to
active site analysis using SwissPDBviewer (Version 4.0.1) to
find the amino acids contributing for binding pocket 
(). The pazopanib, an investigational drug for VEGFR is
interacting with Leucine-32 and Glutamine -30 in terms of
hydrogen bond. The hydrogen bond of all complexes was
found by using this tool.  (see supplementary material)
represents the binding site results along with the Hydrogen
bond distance.

Q site finder:
Crystal structure of VEGFR is not co-crystallized, so Q-site
finder was used to find out the possible binding pockets in the
VEGFR (PDB id: 1FLT). Around ten sites were generated by this
tool and the site 7 () may be an active site for this
receptor as the binding site results from SwissPDBviewer and
Q-site finder are correlating well in amino acid contribution for
making binding pockets.

Quantum:
The small molecules which were making hydrogen bond with
the VEGFR were taken for docking study using commercial
docking tool Quantum. Further screening of the molecules was
based on the docking score comparison between HEX and
Quantum.  is showing the docking score of
barrigtogenol, epigallocatechin, finasteride and curcumin along
with investigational drug pazopanib.

ADME analysis:
ADME Boxes (Version 4.0) predictors are desktop software
modules based on exacting data analyses and carefully built
expert models for calculating vital properties. Most of the
ADME Boxes modules combine several such independent
models, based on sometimes even independent data sets along
with experimental data for the most similar compounds that
seek to provide maximum information for the decision, a
consensus of all the results being a perfect suggestion that
would be the right one. Twelve major pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics features were predicted for molecules
which are showing good interaction with VEGFR, then the
important features like bioavailability (), solubility,
drug plasma binding protein and volume of distribution
() was considered for comparison studies.

Toxicity analysis:
Tox Boxes (Version 2.0) is new high quality toxicity prediction
software. The software provides predictions for three basic
toxicity endpoints: acute toxicity, genotoxicity and organ
specific health effects. Toxic effects of molecules are predicted
solely from the chemical structure. Tox Boxes employ large and
validated databases, robust Structure- Activity Relationship
(QSAR) models in combination with expert knowledge in
organic chemistry and toxicology. Ames test parameter was
used for finding mutagenicity of the molecules. Health effects in
blood, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal system, kidney, liver,
and lungs were predicted and LD50mouse analysis used for
finding acute toxicity of the molecules.  is showing the
ADME and toxicity properties of the top nine molecules out of
two hundred agents targeting biological processes important in
cancer.

Results
Agents targeting biological processes important in cancer were
taken for our study. Initial screening of the molecules was
based on Lipinski's rule of five. Around 101 molecules were
screened by applying this rule. All these molecules were
subjected to receptor-ligand interaction study using HEX
docking tool. The investigational drug pazopanib docking score
was used as a reference in this study. Molecules which are
showing better interaction with the vascular endothelial growth
factor receptor (1FLT) than the pazopanib were subjected to
binding site analysis using swissPDBviewer and Q-site finder.
The investigational drug pazopanib is interacting with leucine
32 and glutamine 30 in terms of hydrogen bond with the
distance of 1.86 A0 and 2.49 A0 respectively. Around ten possible
binding pockets of VEGFR were predicted using Q-site finder.
Analyzing the binding site results from SwissPDBviewer and
Q-site finder it was clear that the molecules were showing
interaction only in binding site 7. The following amino acids
were observed towards contributing for the binding pocket in
crystal structure of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor
Cys-57, Gly-59, Leu-32, Glu-30, Thr-31, Arg-56, Ile-29. The
molecules which are interacting with any one of these residues
from the binding site analysis were selected for docking in
Quantum, a commercial tool for finding receptor-ligand
interaction. Absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion and
toxicity features of the top ten molecules which were showing
interaction with VEGFR in both HEX and Quantum analysis
were predicted using ADME Box and TOX Box tool.

For toxicity prediction, Ames test was considered for initial
screening of the molecules based on their ability to induce
mutation. Ames test is for determining if a chemical is a
mutagen. The use of the Ames test is based on the assumption
that any substance that is mutagenic may also turn out to be a
carcinogen; that is, to cause cancer. The molecules which were
showing the ability to induce mutation were rejected in the
toxicity based screening. Ames test prediction value for
pazopanib used as a reference and the molecules showing value
less than the pazopanib were selected as lead molecules.
Further health effects of these lead molecules in blood,
cardiovascular system, gastrointestinal system, kidney, liver
and lung were predicted. The LD50 values also were predicted
for selecting reliable molecule for ADME analysis. The reference
investigational drug is good in solubility, stability and
absorption but no significant first pass metabolism in liver and
intestine and no active transport. Plasma binding protein and
volume of distribution prediction of pazopanib was unreliable
in distribution analysis. The natural molecules curcumin,
EGCG, finasteride and barrigtogenol were considered as final
reliable molecules based on their ADME and Toxicity features.
These molecules considered as better ligands for VEGFR based
on their interaction, pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
features.

Conclusion
Tumors cannot grow or spread without the formation of new
blood vessels, scientists are trying to find ways to stop
angiogenesis. Studies are going on to find out natural and
synthetic angiogenesis inhibitors, also called antiangiogenic
agents, in the hope that these chemicals will prevent or slow
down the growth of cancer by blocking the formation of new
blood vessels. In our study we predicted the angiogenic
inhibition activity of natural agents targeting biological
processes in cancer on vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor. The natural molecules curcumin, epigallocatechin
gallate (EGCG), barrigtozenol and finasteride were showing
reliable pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics features than
the investigational drug pazopanib were taken as outcome of
our work. The dietary product curcumin and epigallocatechin
gallate (EGCG) can be cancer chemopreventive agents and the
natural molecules barringtozenol and finasteride can be
effective inhibitors for vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor.

Conflict of interest
Authors don't have any conflict of interest.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This research has been carried out in Institute of Computational
Biology. We would like to thank Institute of Computational
Biology, Bangalore for allowing us to work with the commercial
software Quantum (version 3.0). We thank Anantharamanan R,
Santosh Anand and Akshaya L for the discussion on drug
designing.

Citation:Chatterjee &amp; Bhattacharjee, Bioinformation 8(25): 1249-1254 (2012)

(a) Bar graph representing Lipinski rule of five for top 9 anti-angiogenic natural compounds screened through HEX; (b)
Cartoon representation of VEGF receptor (PDB Id: 1FLT), binding site highlighted in black balls and inset representation of binding
site in red; (c) Bar graph representing HEX docking score for top 9 anti-angiogenic natural compounds; (d) Graphical
representation of amino acid and hydrogen bond analysis for the anti-angiogenic natural compound (Npf- 86i) using
SwissPDBViewer; (e) Binding site analysis for the VEGF receptor using Q-site server prediction; (f) Bar graph representing
QUANTUM docking score for top 9 anti-angiogenic natural compounds screened through HEX, (g) ADME property of top 9 antiangiogenic
natural compounds screened through HEX; (h) Pie-chart representation for percentage distribution of drug binding to
plasma protein – humans, (The Compound Id represented in the bar graphs along with the color code used is same as represented
in ).

