Background
Mitochondrion is a semi-autonomous organelle involved in several
vital cellular processes including energy production, fatty acid
metabolism, calcium homeostasis and regulation of cell death. This
is the only organelle that contains extranuclear DNA in animal cells.
The mitochondrial genome (mtDNA) encodes 13 polypeptides
involved in oxidative phosphorylation as well as 22 tRNA and two
rRNA species. The mitochondrial structure is highly susceptible to
oxidative stress as shown by reports on lipid peroxidation [],
protein oxidation [] and genomic alterations in mitochondria.
Higher damage susceptibility of mtDNA than nuclear DNA can be
explained on the basis of (a) absence of introns, (b) lack of histones
and other shielding proteins, (c) presence in the close vicinity of
electron transport chain, a major source of cellular ROS, and (d)
lack of proactive DNA repair system in mitochondria []. Ionizing
radiation can increase ROS level through hydrolysis of water as
well as through damage to ETC proteins and/or mtDNA. Ionizing
radiation induced mtDNA damage and mitochondrial dysfunction
have also been implicated in chromosomal instability through
perpetuation of oxidative stress in irradiated cells []. In an
experiment with targeted cytoplasmic irradiation, induction of
mutation in nuclear DNA has been observed, which further suggests
the importance of mitochondrial dysfunction in radiation-induced
cytotoxicity []. Mitochondrial DNA damage is also known to
initiate apoptosis as it leads to further increase in leakage of
electrons from ETC and generation of superoxide radicals followed
by activation of mitochondrial membrane permeabilization and
cytochrome-c release []. Several antioxidant enzymes (SOD
(Superoxide dismutase), Catalase, Peroxidases, GST (Glutathione
S-transferase)) and a network of low molecular weight antioxidants
(ascorbate, glutathione, tocopherol and phenolic compounds) are
known to protect the cells from radiation-induced ROS. SOD
catalyzes the dismutation of superoxide radical to hydrogen
peroxide and is present in all aerobic organisms. There are two
types of SOD enzymes present in mammalian cells, viz., Cu-Zn
SOD (cytoplasmic/ nuclear) and Mn-SOD (mitochondrial).
Hydrogen peroxide generated after SOD activity is further
converted into water by catalase and peroxidases. Peroxidases
constitute a coenzyme based enzymatic system that utilizes low
molecular weight antioxidants such as Glutathione (GSH), ascorbate
(AA) and thioredoxin (TRx) to convert hydrogen peroxide into
water, e.g., glutathione-, thioredoxin- and ascorbate-peroxidase,
respectively. Each of these three redox systems includes one
peroxidase for removal of hydrogen peroxide as well as a reductase
to maintain the redox status. Reduced forms of these are
glutathione, ascorbic acid and reduced thioredoxin, which are well
known antioxidants and can scavenge radicals such as hydroxyl
radicals. The glutathione system includes glutathione (GSH),
glutathione reductase (GR), glutathione peroxidase (GPx) and
glutathione S transferase (GST). This system is found in animals,
plants and micro-organisms and is required for removal of hydrogen
peroxide and organic hydroperoxides such as lipid hydroperoxides
[]. The thioredoxin system contains the 12kDa protein thioredoxin
and its regulatory enzymes thioredoxin peroxidase (TRPx) and
thioredoxin reductase (TR). Proteins related to thioredoxin system
are present in most of the sequenced organisms. The active site of
thioredoxin consists of two cysteines, as a CXXC conserved motif
and can cycle between an active reduced di-thiol and oxidized
disulfide form. In its active state, thioredoxin acts as a good
reducing agent and ROS scavenger and maintains other proteins in
the reduced form []. In addition to these two systems, ascorbate
system has been reported in various plants and few insect species,
which consist of its peroxidase and reductase enzymes. Ascorbate
system has been considered as the stronger antioxidant defence in
plant species. Among the naturally existing radioresistant
organisms, insects are evolutionarily closest to mammalian system
and yet display very high radioresistance. Lepidopteran insects and
cells have comparable radioresistance as nematodes, which is
roughly ≫10 times and 50-100 times more than Dipteran insects and
mammals, respectively []. Studies so far have shown that reduced
DNA damage, enhanced DNA repair, lack of chromosome breakage
and resistance against radiation-induced apoptosis contribute to
Lepidopteran radioresistance, besides other mechanisms [–].
Since oxidative stress involving mitochondria plays important role
in radiation response and antioxidant enzymes are known to
modulate cellular responses to radiation and other stress agents, the
current study aims to analyze the presence of antioxidant enzymes
in mitochondria of different species including mammals and stressresistant
insects and nematodes. Our analysis clearly indicates
higher Mitoprot scores indicating preferred availability/ targeting of
antioxidant enzymes in the mitochondria of insects and nematodes
than in relatively radiosensitive mammalian mitochondria. This may
favour enhanced antioxidant capacity of Lepidopteran insect cells as
well as nematodes, and may contribute to reduced radiation-induced
mitochondrial dysfunction and resistance against radiation-induced
apoptosis observed in Lepidopteran Sf9 cells [].

Methodology
Sequence retrieval and data set
Full length protein sequences for all the antioxidant enzymes
including manganese-superoxide dismutase, catalase, glutathione
peroxidase, gluthathione reductase, glutathione S-transferase,
thioredoxin peroxidase and thioredoxin reductase were retrieved
from Genebank using protein and species name or accession
number as keywords. Representative protein sequences for all
antioxidant enzymes derived from nematode, insects and mammals
were considered for analysis. Accession numbers for all the
sequences used for analysis are listed in . Import of many
nuclear encoded mitochondrial proteins is mediated by
mitochondrial targeting signal (MTS). This N-terminal presequence
is usually enriched in positive, hydrophobic and
hydroxylated amino acids and devoid of acidic amino acids. Since
mitochondrial localization is influenced by N-terminal sequence of
the protein, all retrieved protein sequences were manually checked
for intact N-terminus and sequences starting from methionine as
first amino acid were picked for further analysis.

Data analysis
Extent of mitochondrial localization for all retrieved sequences was
predicted using Mitoprot server
(ftp://ftp.biologic.ens.fr/pub/molbio, institute of human genetics,
Helmholtz center munich). Mitoprot scores and the other
information given by mitoprot server such as the presence of target
sequence, cleavage site in the target sequence, net charge on protein
sequence, number of basic and acidic residues, hydrophobic
moment (μHδ) and Hydrophobicity maxima (Hmax) in target
peptide were also considered for the analysis.

Discussion
Mitochondrial localization of antioxidant enzymes
Majority of mitochondrial proteins are encoded in the nucleus,
synthesized in the cytosol and are imported back into mitochondria
with the help of mitochondrial targeting signal (MTS). This Nterminal
MTS is usually enriched in positive hydrophobic amino
acids and is devoid of acidic amino acids. The MTS has a tendency
to form an amphiphylic α-helix, which presents a positively charged
hydrophobic surface. The hydrophobic moment (mHd; used as a
measure of the helical amphiphilicity), asymmetric distribution of
hydrophobic side chains and the maximal hydrophobicity (Hmax)
of hydrophobic face of helical structure are also very important for
mitochondrial targeting of a protein [–]. All these properties
important for mitochondrial localization of antioxidant enzymes are
described in . Non-mitochondrial proteins are known to have
generally lower hydrophobic moment and lower number of
positively charged amino acids. Listed observations in 
clearly suggest that all representative species from nematodes,
insects and mammals have different set of antioxidant enzymes with
predicted mitochondrial localization. Mn-SOD was the only enzyme
found to have higher mHd, Hmax, mitoprot score, number of basic
residues and higher net charge in all the species studied and seems
to be exclusively mitochondrial in insect, nematode and mammals.
Although no signal peptide and signal cleavage site was predicted in
nematode Mn-SOD, other features were found similar to other Mn-
SOD orthologues while showing higher hydrophobicity, thereby
enhancing its mitoprot score. Mitochondrial localization of catalase,
which is usually abundant in cytosol, has been known to provide
resistance against ionizing radiation and oxidative stress []. This
unusual intracellular distribution of catalase has been seen in
another lepidopteran species Trichoplusia ni, with 47% catalase
activity from mitochondrial fraction []. In line with the
observation in Trichoplusia ni, catalase mitochondrial import
prediction of Lepidopteran insects (Bombyx mori) was significantly
higher than the relatively radiosensitive Dipteran insects
(Drosophila) and mammalian species. In addition to catalase,
thioredoxin system enzymes predict higher localization potential in
insects and nematodes () as compared to mammals, which
may contribute to their stress resistance.

Mitochondrial thioredoxin and glutathione system
The thioredoxin and glutathione enzyme systems regulate cellular
redox potential and the maintenance of reduced (thiol-rich)
intracellular state, which helps in damage minimization. Parallel
functioning of thioredoxin and glutathione system provides
considerable protection against oxidative stress []. Our analysis of
mitochondrial localization of these antioxidant enzymes clearly
suggests that all the components of thioredoxin and glutathione
system are present in the mitochondria of Lepidopteran system and
can scavenge reactive oxygen species (ROS). Coexistence of the
ascorbate and glutathione system has been reported in some plant
species [] and our prediction also suggests the analogous
antioxidant enzyme coupling in lepidopteran insects. Other species
analyzed have strong presence of only either thioredoxin system
(Diptera, Nematoda) or glutathione system (Mammalia). Factors
responsible for mitochondrial localization of thioredoxin and
glutathione system enzymes listed in  suggest that the protein
sequences of these enzymes are responsible for their differential
distribution in mammalian and invertebrate system along with the
presence of mitochondrial localization signal. In addition to these
factors, active ascorbate system has been reported in Lepidopteran
insects [,]. Enzymes associated with the ascorbate system such
as ascorbate peroxidase and dihydroascorbate reductase have been
found active in many different species of insect larvae, suggesting
its wide presence among insects [–]. Altogether, the strong
presence of thioredoxin-glutathione coupled system and catalase in
the mitochondria of lepidopteran insect along with strong ascorbate
peroxidase activity may help reduce mitochondrial damage and
contribute in the oxidative stress resistance.

Conclusion
The present computational analysis of antioxidant enzymes from
different organisms demonstrates that strong insect mitochondrial
antioxidant system might be a function of the preferred localization
of certain antioxidant enzymes in mitochondria. Specifically, a
strong glutathione and thioredoxin system (as indicated by the
mitoprot score) in lepidopteran insects as well as active ascorbate
system [,] can effectively modulate stress sensitivity. We
hypothesize that these features can significantly reduce the risk of
damage to insect mtDNA, proteins and cell membranes by radiation
and other stressors, and could significantly contribute towards the
radio-resistance of lepidopteran cells.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Suman et al,Bioinformation 4(1): 19-23 (2009)

Interaction between free radicals and the antioxidant defence system present in living organisms. Superoxide radical (O2) is
converted into hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) by superoxide dismutase (SOD) enzyme. H2O2 may further react with membrane lipids, undergo
Fenton chain reaction and can be converted into nontoxic H2O by various antioxidant system including glutathione (GSH: reduced
glutathione, GSSG: oxidized glutathione, Gpx: glutathione peroxidase, GR: glutathione reductase), ascorbate (AA: reduced ascorbate, DHA:
dehydroascorbate, Apox: ascorbate peroxidase, DHAR: dehydro-ascorbate reducatse), thioredoxin (TR: thioredoxin reductase, Trpx:
thioredoxin peroxidase, Trx: reduced thioredoxin, OTrx: oxidized thioredoxin) and catalase. Lipid hydroperoxides and hydroxyl radicals
generated by H2O2 are further scavenged by Glutahione S-transterase and soluble antioxidants.

Mitoprot score of various antioxidant enzymes from Mammalia (Homo sapiens), Insecta (Drosophila melanogaster and Bombyx
mori) and Nematoda (C. elegans).

