Background
Soybean (Glycine max) seeds provide an inexpensive source of
protein for both humans and animals and are also a dominant
oilseed compared to other legumes. Soybean seeds contain
numerous proteins that provide nutrients to the embryo and
protect the seed from diseases and pests. Soybean seeds
contain two major storage proteins, β -conglycinin and
glycinin. These two compounds account for 80 % of total
proteins and are responsible for much of the nutritional,
physicochemical and physiological properties of soybean
seeds. Soybean seeds also contain lower abundance proteins
that either provide nutrition or function in metabolism, i.e., β-
amylase, cytochrome c, and urease. Other lower abundance
proteins may provide defense against diseases and pest. These
protective proteins include lectin, lipoxygenases and the
Bowman-Birk Inhibitors (BBI) of chymotrypsin and trypsin 
[,
].
Proteomic analysis using 2D-PAGE for protein separation
and MS for protein identification are efficient tools to study
alterations in protein profiles that are caused by mutations, the
introduction of silencing genes, or to responses to various
environmental stimuli [,
]. However, protein extraction for
IEF is difficult because seed samples have lipids and other
compounds that disrupt or interfere with focusing during
protein separation steps. Additionally, it is difficult to detect,
identify, and analyze low abundant proteins since they are
obscured by high abundant storage proteins in most legume
seeds. Characterization of low abundant soybean seed proteins
and the availability of databases for those proteins are limited.
Wang et al. [] reported that a combination of TCA and phenol
was efficient for extracting leaf proteins from bamboo, lemon,
olive, redwood. In addition, these authors reported that the
TCA method was also suitable for extracting proteins from
apple, pear, banana, grape, tomato and orange fruits. In our
laboratory, we used direct precipitation of protein from
powdered tissues using TCA/acetone to successfully extract
proteins from soybean seeds, and leaves [,
]. Using this
extraction method, we observed an increased yield of highly
abundant proteins with decreased yields of low abundant
proteins. Therefore, we developed an efficient isopropanol
extraction method that removed approximately 80% of the
major seed storage proteins and this allowed us to identify low
abundant soybean seed proteins []. We used protein
expression profiling to categorize various low abundance
proteins. This involved the combined applications of
separation techniques such as 2D-PAGE, with identification
techniques such as Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption
Ionization (MALDI-TOF-MS), Liquid Mass Spectrometry (LCMS)
analysis, and bioinformatics tools.

Identified proteins used for database development
In our published studies, the results showed that isopropanol
depleted most of the β-conglycinin subunits, however, some
glycinin isomers were observed (, spots 1-14). Glycinin
consists of acidic (A) and basic (B) polypeptides with five
subunits G1, G2, G3, G4 and G5 []. Beilinson et al. 
[]
identified two additional glycinin subunits in soybean variety
Resnik. The five major subunits are classified into two groups
based on their physical properties. Group I consists of G1
(A1aBx), G2 (A2B1a), and G3 (A1aB1b) and group II contains
G4 (A5A4B3) and G5 (A3B4). In this study, isopropanol
solubilized a higher proportion of group I glycinin subunits
than group II subunits. In addition, we observed ten spots
(spots 15-24) of soybean lectins in isopropanol extracts. It has
been reported that soybean lectins (agglutinins), which are
anti-nutritional and also carbohydrate-binding proteins, are
present in moderate levels in soybean, peas and clover 
[].
Nine protein spots were identified as dehydrin (spots 25-33)
and 14 spots (spots 34-47) were identified as maturation
associated proteins. Dehydrins are a family of late
embryogenesis-abundant proteins (LEA) that normally
accumulate during the later stages of seed maturation and play
an important role in membrane and protein stability [,
].
Various seed maturation proteins (SMPs) are also synthesized
during the later stages of seed development.

Six spots (spots 48-53) were identified as the stress induced
protein, SAM22 (starvation-associated message 22), which is
also known as a pathogenesis related protein, PR-10. Other
anti-nutritional proteins are protease inhibitors that help
protect the seed from being eaten. Two of these, Kunitz trypsin
inhibitor (KTI) and Bowman-Birk inhibitor (BBI), are well
studied []. We found eight spots of the trypsin inhibitor,
subtype A (spots 54-61), nine spots of KTI (spots 62-70) and
one spot of BBI (spot 71). KTI is an abundant protein that can
inhibit trypsin, an important animal digestive enzyme.
Bowman-Birk proteinase inhibitors (BBIs) are cys-rich protease
inhibitors that have been identified in the Fabaceae, including
soybean (G. max) and Lima beans (Phaseolus lunatus) 
[]. We
observed two spots (spot 72-73) of alcohol dehydrogenase
(ADH) which are necessary for successful germination under
low oxygen conditions [], and five spots (spots 74-78) of
malate dehydrogenase. We further observed four polypeptides
(spots 79-83) of superoxide dismutase. Superoxide dismutases
(SODs) are ubiquitous metallo-enzymes, which convert the
superoxide radical to hydrogen peroxide and molecular
oxygen, and thereby mitigate oxidative damage in all
organisms []. Additional identified protein spots included:
three spots of napin type 2S albumin 1 precursor (spot 84-86);
two spots of 2S albumin (spots 87-88); two spots of
proteasome, subunit alpha type 5 and 6 (spots 89-90); three
spots of type IIIa membrane protein (spots 91-93); four spots of
class III acidic endochitinase (spots 94-97), one spot of
nucleoside diphosphate kinase 1 (spot 98); one spot of triose
phosphate isomerase (spot 99); one spot of dihydroorotate
dehydrogenase (100); one spot of chain A soybean peroxidase
(101); one spot of glyoxalase (102); one spot of dienelactone
hydrolase (spot 103); and one spot of a disease resistance gene
like protein (104). An additional three spots were categorized
as unnamed/hypothetical proteins (105-107).

Construction of database
In this investigation, previously published results on low
abundant proteins were used to develop an online database.
The Low Abundance Soybean Proteins (SoyProLow) database
was created to organize protein data and to enable queries by
users. SoyProLow stores relevant data relating to all 107 low
abundance proteins described above and retrieves the
corresponding information on that protein based on the spot
number or “SpotID”. SoyProLow retrieves theoretical_PI/Mr,
protein identity, constituent peptides, sequence coverage,
MOWSE_score, expected value, NCBI accession number and
MS method.

The SoyProLow database was designed implemented and
hosted using Microsoft SQL Server 2008 Enterprise Edition.
Microsoft Visual Studio 2008 was used to design and launch
web pages, which were programmed using ASP.NET with C#
programming language. The server is running Microsoft
Windows Server 2003 and Internet Information Services
version 6.0 (IIS V6.0). SoyProLow stores unique “SpotID” for
each protein and this enables users to query the database based
on their specific requirements. Both the database and the
website are on the same server at Towson University in
Towson, MD, USA.

We developed a user friendly website to provide browse
capabilities for all the data stored in the database. Users can
search protein data through the “SpotID”. All website pages
were built based on a master page to create a consistent layout
for all the pages in the website.

Users enter the “SpotID” and if the number is valid, their
query will be successful. However, if the user inputs an
incorrect “SpotID”, i.e. one does not exist in the database; an
error message is obtained. This is where web form validation
comes into play. The purpose of web form validation is to
ensure that the user has provided proper input needed to
successfully complete a query. The website also validates user
input by type and if the user enters a character instead of an
integer number as “SpotID”, an error message will occur. It is a
very rich validation and the query never gets submitted if
validation fails. SQL scripts were used to build a database
driven search page. Integration between ASP.NET and SQL
made it possible to construct powerful search capabilities.
Figure1 shows a snapshot of the actual webpage. The webbased
database is publically available at the following address:
http://bioinformatics.towson.edu/Soybean_low_abundance_
proteins_2D_Gel_DB/Gel1.aspx.

We thank Dr. Richard Sicher for critical review of this
manuscript. Funding for this research was provided by ARS
project 1245-21220-232-00D. Mention of trade name,
proprietary product or vendor does not constitute a guarantee
or warranty of the product by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture or imply its approval to the exclusion of other
products or vendors that also may be suitable.

Citation:Tavakolan et al, Bioinformation 10(9): 599-601 (2014)

A snapshot from the SoyProLow online database displaying the search field. The numbers on the image represents
proteins that have been separated by 2D-PAGE. When the user types the number ID of the protein of interest, the database returns
the detailed annotation (if available) for that protein along with other relevant information such as the PI (isoelectric point).

