Background
The epidemic disease tuberculosis (TB) affects world population
drastically and is responsible for 1.5 million deaths and 8
million new cases per year []. The bacterium, Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, causing tuberculosis in Homo sapiens can persist in
the host and escape from an intact immune response. Available
drugs for tuberculosis often cause side effects in
immunodeficient patients in long-term use. The bacterium
survives these drugs and gives rise to multidrug-resistant
(MDR) and extensively drug-resistant (XDR) bacterial mutants
causing serious health issues and hurdle in tuberculosis
treatment [].

The cell envelope of Mycobacterium tuberculosis contains unusual
lipids with low cell permeability and is a major reason for
bacterial intrinsic drug resistance []. The pathogenicity of
bacteria is due to mycolic acids, long chain fatty acids and lipids
containing methyl branched fatty acids. The lipids synthesis
involves multifunctional enzymes namely polyketide synthases
(PKS) and two fatty acid synthase (FAS) systems. The
attachment of 49-phosphopantetheine group from Coenzyme A
(CoA) is catalyzed by phosphopantetheinyl transferase
(PPTase) enzymes which convert from its inactive apo form to
functional holo form []. Two PPTases in mycobacteria namely
AcpS and PptT are highly conserved and activates specific
protein substrate in bacterium []. The enzyme PptT is found to
be a novel drug target and is mainly involved in the assembly
of mycobactin which is required for virulence, by activating two
non-ribosomal synthethases (NRPS) namely MbtB and MbtE.
PptT plays a critical role in development of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis by providing synthesis of components that is
needed for the growth and also others factors involved in
virulence [].

Methodology
Protein structural modeling:
The target protein sequence of a drug target Mycobacterium
tuberculosis PptT of length 227 amino acids was downloaded
from UniprotKB database (Accession no: O33336). PptT belongs
to the transferase family and its molecular function was holo-
[acyl-carrier-protein] synthase activity and magnesium ion
binding. In the absence of experimental three dimensional
structure of M.tuberculosis PptT and due to the low sequence
homology of PptT in P-BLAST against PDB database, structural
modeling of drug target PptT was performed in I-TASSER
server based on ab-initio/threading method 
[]. I-TASSER
(Iterative Threading ASSembly Refinement) is an automated
protein prediction server and also the most accurate prediction
server. The server predicted five models of target protein and
the best model was selected based on C-score. The best model
was validated with estimated TM score and RMSD.

Validation of PptT model:
M.tuberculosis PptT model was validated by PROCHECK and
ProSA server. Stereochemical property of PptT model was
analyzed by Ramachandran plot in PROCHECK using SAVES
server []. ProSA server determines the quality index of native
structure compared with experimental structures by Z-score 
[].
Z-score for the given query model is calculated by referring the
Z-scores of all experimentally determined protein chains in
current PDB. The result was displayed in a plot with two colors
representing the groups of structures from X-ray and NMR.

Molecular dynamics simulation:
The refinement of PptT model was carried out by molecular
dynamics simulation using GROMACS 4.5.4 []. Topology of
the model was performed using GROMOS96 43a1 force field.
Solvation of system was in cubic box size of 1.0nm and 2.0 nm
between any two periodic images of a protein to provide
aqueous environment. Eight chlorine ions were added. Energy
minimization was done with short range interactions and
constrains using LINCS algorithm and SETTLE algorithm. Two
equilibration phases was performed with ensemble NVT with
300 K and coupling constant of 0.1 ps and ensemble NPT with 1
bar and coupling constant of 5 ps. Final MD was run for
duration of 10 ns. The plotting of trajectory files was done in
Xmgrace tool.

Substrate docking:
The substrate binding pocket was identified with molecular
docking carried out with M. tuberculosis PptT model and CoA in
PatchDock server. Algorithm of PatchDock molecular docking
is based on shape complementarity principles. The docking
results were evaluated with parameters like score, area and
atomic contact energy. The ligand was applied with
transformation which includes rotational angles and transitions.
3D structure of CoA was downloaded from PDB of Bacillus
subtilis PptT (PDB code: 1QR0). The docking result of top PptTCoA
complex was visualized in PyMOL to view the hydrogen
bond interactions.

Results &amp; Discussion
The structural modeling of M.tuberculosis PptT in I-TASSER
server predicted five models based on threading templates. The
model with less C-score -2.98 was selected as the best structure.
The model accuracy was estimated by TM score of 0.68. The
three dimensional structure of PptT was visualized in PyMOL
as shown in (). The predicted model is proper in its
folding with functional domain ACPS which confirmed with
Pfam and the experimental structure of Bacillus subtilis PptT
(1QR0). The secondary elements of M.tuberculosis PptT
composed of six α helices and six β strands and attain a new
fold comprising of a pseudo 2-fold symmetry with two halves
of roughly identical size. The comparison of M.tuberculosis and
B.subtilis PptT shows that two strands were absent and the
strands changed to loop region was observed. The protein
contains two domains with a ‘N’ terminal domain range from
Met1 to Gly103 and a ‘C’ terminal domain range from Arg104 to
Leu227. The substrate CoA tends to bind the active pocket in
the region of interface between the two halves of PptT. Each
halves contains anti-parallel beta sheets connected with loops
forming a barrel like structure.

Validation of the model was carried out with PROCHECK with
construction of Ramachandran plot. The results showed the
predicted model with 82% core region and four residues in
disallowed regions seen in loops. Equal number of glycine and
proline residues occupied all regions of plot. Stereochemical
property of PptT model was properly validated with phi-psi
angles. Quality index of the model was obtained from ProSA
server and Z-score of -5 confirmed the mode near to the NMR
experimental structures.

The refinement of the model was done with 10 ns molecular
dynamics simulations in GROMACS and trajectories were
analyzed with RMSD (g_rms), Rg (g_gyrate) and total energy
(g_energy). RMSD plot was constructed in order to define the
final structure conformation in dynamic system. RMSD with 0.4
nm showed that the structure was less deviated from the
starting structure and was well equilibrated during 10 ns as
shown in (). The radius of gyration (Rg) explained the
overall dimension of protein in system and Rg plot showed the
slight change in dimension with maximum value of 1.85 nm
which occurred during 4 ns to 6 ns. After 6 ns, the protein
equilibrated well and attained proper dimension at the end of
the simulation as shown in (). The total energy of the
simulations was -6.48E+05 which showed the structural
stability of PptT model. MD simulations results showed that the
PptT model was refined well and explained the structural
behavior.

Substrate docking of M.tuberculosis PptT with CoA was
performed in PatchDock. The docking results showed top
twenty complexes and the first PptT-CoA complex was selected
as best with a high score of 5388, area of 595.20 and atomic
contact energy of -37.14. The transformation on the ligand was
rotational angles of -0.07 0.66 -0.99 and transitions of 6.38 -31.19
-83.63. The complex was visualized in PyMOL for the hydrogen
bond interactions between the CoA atoms and PptT residues
atoms shown in (). The results showed that the
binding pocket occur in the interface of two domains in PptT
with bend conformation near to beta 2 and beta 3 strands and
involvement of binding residues His 93, Asp114 and Arg 169.
The interacted atoms and bond length was measured and listed
in  (see supplementary material). His 93 residue was
critical in the substrate binding with two hydrogen bonds with
CoA and located in beta 2 strands. The conserved residue His
was also observed in B.subtilis PptT-CoA binding which
confirmed the importance of the sequence conservation among
the phosphopantetheinyl transferase superfamily. Thus, the
substrate binding study of M.tuberculosis PptT was significantly
important in the function and can be a target for inhibitor design.

Conclusion
The importance of enzyme PptT in M.tuberculosis leads to a
suitable drug target for tuberculosis treatment. Computational
modeling of PptT determined the validated three dimensional
structural models and is observed with native conformation of
the phosphopantetheinyl transferase superfamily. Comparison
of M.tuberculosis PptT structure model with template B.subtilis
PptT shows that the active structural elements of the enzyme
are present to perform the transferase function. MD simulations
shows that the PptT model is properly refined and structure is
stable with less RMSD value and overall dimension of the
protein is maintained during simulations with standard Rg
value. The total energy of the model confirmed the stable
conformation of the PptT model in the course of 10 ns
simulations.

Substrate binding was critical in the function of
phosphopantetheinyl transferase superfamily with CoA. The
results shows that the binding pocket is the same like B.subtilis
PptT binding and is involved with bend conformation. M.
tuberculosis PptT binding site residues His 93, Asp114 and Arg
169 are involved and His 93 is conserved with B.subtilis PptT
substrate binding. Even though there is less sequence homology
with B.subtilis PptT, critical residues are conserved in structural
level to perform the function. This proves the nature of PptT in
structure-function mechanism related to different members
with varying sequences. In summary, the structural model of
M. tuberculosis PptT is more reliable and well studied with
transferase function. The substrate binding pocket reported can
be useful in inhibitor design against M. tuberculosis PptT and
may be useful in overcoming multidrug-resistant (MDR) and
extensively drug-resistant (XDR) strains.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Rohini &amp; Srikumar, Bioinformation 9(13): 685-689 (2013)

Structural analysis results of M.tuberculosis PptT a) three dimensional model of PptT using ab-initio/threading method
from I-TASSER server. Color scheme: Helices in red, strands in yellow and loops in green; b) Root means square deviation (RMSD)
plot of PptT model from MD simulations of duration 10 ns in GROMACS. c) Radius of gyration (Rg) of PptT model from MD
trajectory; d) PptT-CoA binding interaction from PatchDock based on molecular docking. CoA molecule represent in stick model
and protein in cartoon model. Hydrogen bonds represented in pink dashed lines.

