Background
Endo- β -N-acetylgucosaminidases (ENGases) are enzymes
which come under the class of EC 3.2.1.96 that hydrolyze the
glycosidic bond of GlcNAc β -1,4 GlcNAc, N-linked sugar
chains of glycoproteins and releases the N-glycan moiety
leaving the end GlcNAc attached to the protein. These
enzymes play a critical role in de-N-glycosylation event
followed by degradation of misfolded glycoproteins in the
eukaryotic cytosol []. ENGases are found in wide variety of
bacteria [–], 
fungi [], plants 
[–], animals 
[] and in humans
[]. These are key enzymes in the processing event of free
oligosaccharides in the cytosol []. The deglycosylation
property of ENGases has been used for structural and
functional studies of deglycosylation. Basing on the similarity
in amino acid sequence, ENGases are categorized into
glycoside hydrolase families GH18 and GH85. Besides
hydrolysis, some of the GH85 family ENGases possesses
transglycosylation activity, i.e., they transfer the released
oligosaccharide moiety to a suitable acceptor other than water.
The transglycosylation activity of ENGases has attracted much
attention in recent years for the chemoenzymatic synthesis of
oligosaccharides, glycopeptides and glycoproteins [,
].

In order to understand the structural and functional
relationships of ENGases, we studied the different orthologous
species like Humans, Arabidopsis thaliana and Sorghum in
comparison with [] 
the bacterial ‘Arthrobacter protophormiae’
protein structure. Due to lack of crystal structures of plant and
human ENGases, Arthrobacter protophormiae ENGase crystal
structure 3FHQ is considered for homology modeling. These
structural comparisons lead to comprehend the dual-catalytic
mechanisms like hydrolysis and transglycosylation of
ENGases by docking with GlcNAc-Asn and Man3GlcNAc
thiazoline ligands.

Methodology
The protein sequence of Human (Uniprot ID: Q8NFI3,
www.uniprot.org), Arabidopsis (NCBI ID: 79507164, 
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) and Sorghum (Uniprot ID: C5YW98,
www.uniprot.org) sequences were retrieved. Protein–protein
Blast was used to identify the homologous sequence with three
dimensional structures done against protein data bank
(www.rcsb.org). The obtained PDB sequence was then aligned
with Clustal x for multiple sequence alignment.

Homology Modeling and Energy Minimization:
Homology models of Human, Arabidopsis and sorghum ENGase
were built with Prime (3.1) module of Schrödinger Suite
(Schrödinger, LLC, New York, NY). The secondary structure of
these three target sequences were predicted using the SSpro
program bundled with Prime. The target Human, Arabidopsis
and Sorghum ENGase and template (Arthrobacter protophormiae
ENGase) sequences were aligned using the Clustal X method
of Prime, followed by manual adjustment to avoid big gaps in
the secondary structure domain. The original ligand in the
template structure was removed before performing homology
modeling.

Using protein preparation wizard (Schrödinger suite version
9.6) the protein was minimized. Firstly, water molecules were
removed from the crystallographic structure followed by
addition of hydrogen atoms. All atom charges and atom types
were assigned. Finally, energy minimization and refinement of
the structure was done up to 0.3 Å RMSD by applying OPLS-
2005 force field. The optimized target protein was employed
for docking studies. Further, the structure quality of the
predicted homology models for ENGases of Human,
Arabidopsis thaliana and Sorghum were evaluated by using the
online tools like Rampage, PDBSum and PSVS (Protein
Structural Validation Suite).

Binding Site Prediction:
The binding site for bacterial ENGase was determined by
using the ligand interaction diagram generated by LIGPLOT.
All modeled structures were superimposed on bacterial
ENGase (3FHQ) using the superimposition tool of the
Schrodinger Suite. Sitemap (Schrödinger, LLC) was used to
recognize the plausible active sites for the modeled proteins.
Based on the scores and the larger cavity, the top ranked
potential active ligand binding sites for each of the modeled
protein was identified and receptor grid was generated to
proceed further for molecular docking.

Preparation of Ligand Molecules:
GlcNAc-Asn and Man3GlcNAc-thiazoline were used as ligands
in this present study. LigPrep module was used to prepare the
ligand. Preparation involves the generation of tautomers, 32
stereoisomers corresponding to a pH of 7±2 and protonation
states. Finally, energy minimization was done using the force
field OPLS2005.

Molecular Docking Studies:
Identified active site as predicted by sitemap in the three
modeled proteins was used as a target for docking. Receptor
grid generation was performed, being an essential step as the
docking protocol is a grid based docking. The grid box was
generated at centroid of the residues in the active site of the
modeled structures continuing with the default parameters.
The glide extra precision (XP) protocol (Glide Tool,
Schrodinger suite) was employed for docking the prepared
ligands with the modeled proteins. Ligand interaction diagram
was used to understand the interactions between the ligands
and modeled ENGase proteins.

Results &amp; discussion
Protein 3D structure prediction from amino acid sequence
turns accessible if relatively similar homologous protein
structure is crystallized. PSI –Blast search, an online search
engine was used to identify the similar type of proteins.
Arthrobacter protophormiae Endo-Beta-N-acetylglucosaminidase
is chosen as template for modeling studies. Blast results
showed 25 % similarity with Human, Arabidopsis thaliana and
24% with Sorghum protein sequences. The crystal structure
3FHQ with a resolution of 2.45 oA was retrieved from protein
data bank (www.rcsb.org). The multiple sequence alignment
(MSA) of the four ENGases was done using Clustal X as shown
in the . The modeled 3D structures were generated
using the prime module and further refined by using the
protein preparation wizard. The models were evaluated by
using the Procheck. Ramchandran plot for Arabidopsis thaliana
showed 73.7% of amino acids in most favorable region, 23% in
allowed regions and 3.3% in disallowed region. Human
ENGase model showed 77.8% in most favorable region, 20.4%
in allowed regions and only 1.8% of amino acids in disallowed
regions. Sorghum ENGase protein model showed 76.7% of
amino acids in most favorable regions, 20.5% in allowed
regions and only 2.8% in disallowed regions. Majority of
amino acids are in allowed regions of the Ramchandran plot
for the three models generated and reinstate that these
homology models are of good quality and dependable. Super
imposition of the modeled proteins along with bacterial
counterpart showed helix broken to helix-loop-helix
confirmation at 680 to 689 amino acids and extended loops
with 446-456 amino acids in Human protein. Four extended
loops were also seen in Arabidopsis thaliana structure ranging
22-28, 553-557, 570-576, 584-603 amino acids. 570-581 amino
acids extended loop was also seen in Sorghum as depicted in
. The Glide XP based molecular docking was done
with all the three modeled proteins with GlcNAc-Asn and
Man3GlcNAc-thiazoline as ligands. All the four ENGases were
docked with GlcNAc-Asn and Man3GlcNAc-thiazoline inside
their binding pockets generated by the sitemap. The binding
cavity site position is common for all the four ENGases but
they differ in amino acids residues number as depicted in
. Based on the nature of amino acids, all the four
cavities of the proteins contain majority of aromatic and acidic
type of amino acids in their cavity. This suggests that cavities
of all the three modeled modeled structures are in line with
crystallized protein and could be attributed with similar
functionality.

When compared with the bacterial (3FHQ) catalytic triad,
N171, E173 and Y205 are found to be conserved in Human and
plant ENGase proteins as shown in . Critical catalytic
residues N171 (Bacteria), N238 (Human), N177 (A.thaliana) and
N192 (Sorghum) were showing back bone hydrogen bonding
with GlcNAc-Asn as represented in . E179 (A.thaliana)
showed a salt bridge while E173 (Bacteria), E240 (Human) and
E194 (Sorghum) were hydrogen bonded with GlcNAc-Asn.
Y213 (A.thaliana) and Y228 (Sorghum) were also found
connected with back bone hydrogen bonds to GlcNAc-Asn.
Tryptophan (W) at 216 and 244 positions of bacterial enzyme
were reported to be crucial for transglycosylation activity and
are speculated as gate keepers for the active site during
transglycosylation []. W (Trp) 216 of Bacteria is found to be
conserved in Humans and Plant ENGases where as W (Trp) at
244 is replaced with N (Asn) at 305 positions in humans and T
(Thr) in plants at 244 and 259 positions as tabulated in 
(see supplementary material).

Considering the previous mutagenic studies of Endo M 
[]
and the structures of binary complexes of Endo A and
mutational studies, Y299 F showed 3 times higher
transglycosylation activity than wild type Endo A. The
hydrolytic activity also remained unchanged 
[].
Interestingly, Y299 of bacteria is not found to be conserved and
is replaced with F(PHE) at 361 in humans and at 300 in
A.thaliana. The same tyrosine is found to be completely deleted
in Sorghum protein sequence. As predicted, the loss of
hydroxyl group in the Y to F mutation might help in the
release of the product faster and there by resulting in increased
transglycosylation rate in human and plant ENGases. This
could also be considered as a natural selection criteria of
evolution for elevated rates of enzyme activity in higher phyla.
Further, the docking results of Man3GlcNAc-thiazoline with
Arabidopsis thaliana model showed hydrogen bonding with Tyr
213, Glu 179, Asp 139, Ser 105 amino acids present in the
binding pocket. Bacterial ENGase (3FHQ) with Man3GlcNActhiazoline
complex was maintained through Tyr 299 and Gly
95. Binding between Human ENGase model and
Man3GlcNAc-thiazoline was maintained through Asp 233, Glu
240, Asn 308, Lys 284 Trp 285 and Asp 287 amino acids.
Man3GlcNAc-thiazoline bound to Lys 242, Glu 265, Trp 263,
Lys 264, Trp 239 and Thr 262 amino acids of Sorghum model.

Conclusion
ENGases are inherently a class of hydrolases; the hydrolytic
activity in general is relatively higher in comparison to their
transglycosylation activities with natural N-glycan׳s as
substrates. The major concern for the chemo-enzymatic
approach is the product of hydrolysis, where the product thus
formed tends to be the substrate for the enzyme. Lack of
crystallized structures was a challenge for ENGase engineering
and in the understanding of the structural basis for hydrolysis
and transglycosylation activities. This study provides
homology models of human and plant ENGases and depicts
the mutations for enhancing the transglycosylation activities.
The human and plant enzymes are excellent source for
engineering it by selectively modifying the hydrolytic catalytic
triad.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors thank the management of K L University for
providing the infrastructure of Schrödinger suite. The authors
also acknowledge the financial support of DST SR/FT/LS-
033/2009 for the execution of the project.

Citation:Choragudi et al, Bioinformation 10(8): 507-511 (2014)

Depicting the Multiple Sequence Alignment (MSA) of Arthrobacter protophormiae [3FHQ], Arabidopsis thaliana,
Human, Sorghum protein sequences. The MSA is developed using CLUSTAL X

Shows the superimposition of the three modeled
proteins Human [Green], Sorghum [Red] and Arabidopsis
thaliana [Blue]. Major changes in the Human protein are
depicted with green arrows: A [446-456], B [680-689], Sorghum
with red arrow: A [570-581] and Arabidopsis thaliana with
blue colored arrows: A [22-28], B [553-557], C [570-576] and D
[584-603].

a Showing the superimposition of Human [Green],
Sorghum [Red] and Arabidopsis thaliana [Blue] along with
Arthrobacter protophormiae [Grey] and the active site of the
GlcNAc-Asn is highlighted in pink color; b Zoomed version of
the active site domain confirms the same homology in all the
four proteins.

Lig plots highlighting the interaction of GlcNAc-Asn
with active site amino acids including the catalytic triad.

