Background
The International HapMap Project [] provides a resource of genotypic data of more than 3.1 million single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) [] for 
human lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) derived from the individuals of European (CEU: Caucasians from Utah, USA), African (YRI: Yoruba people from 
Ibadan, Nigeria) and Asian ancestry (CHB: Han Chinese from Beijing, China and JPT: Japanese from Tokyo, Japan). Association studies using the HapMap 
genotypic data have generated new insights into the genetic determinants responsible for the risks of common diseases as well as quantitative phenotypes 
such as gene expression and individual drug response to therapeutic treatments [-]. 


Because of the severity of multiple comparisons due to the large number of SNPs and the running time might be needed for a whole genome association 
study, the raw genotypic data downloaded from the HapMap website [] requires some degree of preprocessing that includes, but is not limited to, removing 
uninformative and biased SNPs. The HapMap website [] provides a web-based interface for users to extract genotypic data on each population by setting up 
parameters including population, minor allele frequency (MAF), SNP location and genomic regions. One limitation of the current website, is the inability 
to dump filtered genotypic data (eg. data with 80% genotyping rate or data with partial samples in a population). Software packages such as PLINK [] do not 
provide functions that allow for the selection of certain cell lines, removal of the SNPs with biased genotypic data or do not allow flexibility in 
defining cutoffs (eg. MAF) []. Therefore, we wrote a C++ program, HapMap Filter, using Microsoft Visual C++ 6.0 for Windows to generate a high-quality 
HapMap SNP dataset that are ready to be used in association studies. HapMap Filter v1.0 features two user-specified criteria for filtering the raw HapMap 
data: MAF and genotyping rate. This tool gives users a flexible way to focus on the common genetic variants and those that have been well-genotyped, thus 
improving the multiple comparison issue and the running time of the association analyses. The output data can be conveniently used in the following association 
studies, for example, conducted by a customized script written in R [].

Methodology
There are two major steps for each run of the software. In step 1, HapMap Filter scans the raw HapMap genotypic data to generate an intermediate output file, 
which contains data of user-specified cell lines. Users can choose either a subset of cell lines or all cell lines in the HapMap panel using a cell-line file. 
The format of the cell-line is shown in the on-line supporting materials. For convenience, we have provided cell-line files for the groups of all HapMap cell 
lines. For example, “CHB-all.txt” contains information for the 45 Han Chinese samples. In step 2, HapMap filters the genotypic data in the intermediate output 
file from step1 using two criteria: MAF and genotyping rate. If f(AA), f(Aa), and f(aa) are the frequencies of the three genotypes at a locus with two alleles, 
then the frequency p of the A-allele and the frequency q of the a-allele are obtained by counting alleles. The total frequency p of A-alleles in the population 
is calculated as in equation 1 (in ). Similarly, the frequency q of the a-allele is given by equation 2 (under ). 
MAF is simply the smaller of these two frequencies. Missing data are not included in the calculation of MAF. The genotyping rate of a particular SNP is defined as , 
where NA(%) is the proportion of missing data.

Input
HapMap Filter requires the raw genotypic data files downloaded from the HapMap website []. Besides genotypic data from whole chromosomes, data within a 
user-specified genomic region (or a particular gene location) saved from the search engine at the HapMap website can also be used as input. The program will prompt 
for information which includes 1) the name of the HapMap data file (eg. chr1-dat.txt); 2) the name of the cell-line file (eg. CHB-all.txt); 3) population (eg. CHB); 4) 
the MAF cutoff (eg. 0.01) and; 5) the genotyping rate (eg. 0.90).  illustrates the screenshot of an example run. For easier input, we suggest the user change 
the original downloaded file names before running the program.

Output
HapMap Filter has two output files. The first one is “output-temp.txt”, which contains all genotypic data of the user-specified cell lines. This file is then used to 
generate the final output file, “output.txt”, which contains the filtered genotypic data by MAF and genotyping rate.  shows an example of the final output file.

Caveat and future development
The current v1.0 has been tested for the downloaded data files of the HapMap r22 (March, 2007) and r23 (February, 2008). The file format of the HapMap genotypic data has 
been consistent for these two most recent releases, though future changes of the HapMap data format will require adjustment of the source code accordingly. Also the source 
code can be revised easily to accommodate any new populations that are to be included in the International HapMap Project. Future development could include adding options 
such as filtering data by gender, linkage disequilibrium or SNP location, to name a few.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This Pharmacogenetics of Anticancer Agents Research (PAAR) Group (http://pharmacogenetics.org) study was supported by the NIH/NIGMS grant U01GM61393. Data generated from 
PAAR is deposited into PharmGKB (http://www.PharmGKB.org).

The screenshot of an example run of HapMap Filter 1.0 and its output. (a) The input data include 1) raw genotypic file: chr5.txt; 2) cell line file: CHB-JPT-all.txt; 
3) population: CHB-JPT; 4) MAF cutoff: 0.01 (1%) and 5) genotyping rate: 0.9 (90%). (b) The output is a plain text file that has columns for rs numbers and genotypic data for each 
cell line.

