Background
The traditional Indian medicine and use of phytocompounds against various
diseases receive considerable attention in recent years. Plant-derived drugs
remain an important resource, especially in developing countries to combat
serious diseases. Approximately 60-80% of the world's population still relies
on traditional medicines for the treatment of common illness 
[–].
Pharmacophore screening is one of the useful ways to uncover a set of features
that is common to a series of active molecules responsible for the activity 
[].
Perceiving a pharmacophore is the most important first step towards
understanding the interaction between a receptor and a ligand. Paul Ehrlich
(1900) defined a pharmacophore as “a molecular framework that carries
(phoros) the essential features responsible for a drug's (pharmacon) biological
activity” []. 
That definition of pharmacophore remained unperturbed for over
90 years. The current widely used definition was presented by Peter Gund
(1977) refined a pharmacophore as “a set of structural features in a molecule
that is recognized at a receptor site and is responsible for that molecule's
biological activity” [].
This definition is remarkably loyal to the earlier
definition. A pharmacophore is an exact description of molecular features
which are necessary for molecular recognition of a ligand required biological
macromolecule. The IUPAC defines a pharmacophore to be an ensemble of
steric and electronic features that is necessary to ensure the optimal
supramolecular interactions with a specific biological target and to trigger (or
block) its biological response []. 
Typical pharmacophore of a molecule consist
of features like, hydrophobic, aromatic, a hydrogen bond acceptor, a hydrogen
bond donor, negative and positive functional groups. Here, an effort has been
taken to find the Pharmacophoric sites of certain medicinal compounds by
using PHASE module. The application of database is to help researchers;
particularly working with medicinal compounds. Through this database, they
may get idea about ligand chemical features. Molecular level studies of
pharmacophore explain about active site of drug molecule, which is important
for interaction with binding target. Theoretical prediction of Pharmacophoric
features of these compounds includes hydrogen bond donor, hydrogen bond
acceptor, hydrophobic, aromatic, positive and negative features. These
characteristics of ligand molecules are considered as pharmacophoric sites
based on the differentiation (). 
These pharmacophore are considered to
be an essential part of a compound to become a drug, thereby these.
pharmacophoric features can be an advantage for researchers to know about the
chemical features and functional properties of ligand molecule.

Methodology
Data collection &amp; Preparation
The dataset consists of 150 medicinal compounds collected from
http://www.hccbif.info/ 
of which 89 are anti cancerous &amp; anticarcinogenic, 43
are antidiabetic, 47 are antimicrobial and 5 are anti oxidants 
[]. Data set are
prepared by ligprep cleaned structures for molecular modeling environment.
Prepared ligands are processed for pharmacophoric features through
Pharmacophore Alignment and Scoring Engine (PHASE) module of
Schrodinger suite, which is a recently developed pharmacophore modeling
package, for all the above mentioned series of compounds.

Creating Pharmacophoric Sites
Phase locates features using SMARTS pattern matching, making it easy to
modify existing feature definitions and to create entirely new custom features.
Intuitive visualization tools and the rapid location of sites help researchers finetune
feature definitions. Each compound structure is represented by a set of
points in 3D space, which coincide with various chemical features that may
facilitate non-covalent binding between the compound and its target receptor.
PHASE provides a built-in set of six pharmacophore features, hydrogen bond
acceptor(A), hydrogen bond donor(D), hydrophobic group(H), negatively
ionizable (N), positively ionizable (P), and aromatic ring(R). By this
methodology the pharmacophoric features are predicted and deposited in
database [–].

Utility for biological community
A Pharmacophore is defined as an ensemble of universal chemical features that
characterize a specific mode of action of a ligand in active site of the
macromolecule in 3D space. Due to its importance, this method is
computationally very efficient and is subsequently well suited for virtual
screening of large compound libraries. This Database is open source and freely
available. Applications of the work consists of user interface with dynamic web
pages, more than 150 medicinal compounds having anti-carcinogenic, anticancerous,
anti-diabetic, anti-microbial and anti-oxidant activity, Theoretical
prediction of chemical features using commercial software's are applicable for
the researchers working on medical plants. Pharmacophore predicted in this
work would consider to be very useful for further development of ligand based
new analog for finding a new active compound with similar Pharmacophoric
features and the knowledge of the pharamacophore will result in the generation
of several leads. Pharmacophore of these compounds can explain very well
about the physiochemical properties required for the designing of new
compounds of these series.

Future development
We plan to refine and keep updating this database and to provide more
medicinal compounds with bio-physiochemical properties.

Author Contributions
Dr. Pitchai Daisy and Periyasamy Vijayalakshmi developed and maintaining
the database. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singh and Chandrabose Selvaraj predicted the
pharmacophoric features of medicinal compounds. Other authors helped in
dataset and manuscript preparation. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.

This project is funded by BTIS (Biotechnology information system), DBT
(Department of Biotechnology) and Ministry of Science &amp; Technology,
Government of India, India.

Citation:Daisy et al, Bioinformation 6(4): 167-168 (2011)

Database workflow for pharmacophoric prediction of medicinal
compounds

