Background
Psoriasis is an autoimmune and non-infectious dermatological 
disease well characterized by defined red, slightly raised 
plaques and papules with silvery scales on skin. In psoriasis, 
hyperproliferative keratinocytes lack terminal differentiation 
[] as seen by the formation of hyperparakeratotic stratum 
corneum [,
]. The universal occurrence varies from 0.1% to 3 
% in different parts of the world [] and about 5% population 
suffers in the Indian subcontinent [,
]. According to the 
National Psoriasis Foundation, 20,000 children under 10 years 
of age are diagnosed with psoriasis annually []. Till date, the 
precise cause of psoriasis is unknown; however the genetic 
component is now believed to play an important role in 
pathogenesis.

In the recent years, a range of signaling pathways were found 
to be modulated in psoriatic plaques. In particular, the Wnt 
pathways [,
] have an essential role in stem cell self-renewal 
and keratinocyte differentiation in the skin [,
]. The 
involvement of Wnt pathways in psoriasis has been evidenced 
from the pioneering studies by Joachim Reischl et al., 2007 
[]
wherein differentially expressed genes in canonical Wnt/ -
catenin or the non-canonical Wnt/Ca2+ pathways were 
involved in the pathophysiology of psoriasis. Functionally, 
Wnt5a lowers the concentration of IFN required to induce 
target genes, and increases the magnitude of IFN target gene 
induction, suggesting a molecular mechanism underlying IFN 
hypersensitivity in psoriasis []. The marked over expression
of Wnt5a and Fzd5 in psoriasis suggests that this ligand 
receptor pair may actively derive the chronic inflammatory 
and hyper- proliferative nature of this phenotype. The broad 
implications of Wnt/β-catenin signaling in psoriasis skin 
render the pathway a prime target for pharmacological 
research and therapeutic interventions. Therefore, in the view
of above, we have developed and characterized a Wnt5a
specific antagonist peptide with the capacity to inhibit 
Wnt/Ca2+ signaling in psoriasis. Peptides inhibiting Wnt 
pathway has been well established in melanoma cells, however 
the condition of psoriasis has been still untouched. Since the 
Wnt pathway operates the similar way in malanoma as well as 
in psoriasis we anticipate the compounds proposed in the 
present study can come with novel therapeutic strategy in 
controlling the pathological condition.

Interestingly, it has previously been shown that modification 
of a formylated bacterially derived chemotactic peptide 
(formyl-Met-Leu-Phe), converted the molecule from an agonist 
to an antagonist analogue. Specifically, the modification 
involved substitution of the N-terminal formyl group for a t-
butoxycarbonyl (t-boc) group. As hypothesized by Jenei et al. 
[] 
such a modification could also change its Wnt5a agonist 
functions to that of an antagonist. Therefore in the pioneering 
study, Jenei et al. synthesized and purified such a t-boc-Met-
Asp-Gly-Cys-Glu-Leu peptide which acts as a potential 
antagonist for Wnt5a protein. However, in the further 
endeavors, we have proposed series of compounds by 
attaching tertiary alkyloxy carbonyl groups at the N-terminal 
end of the hexapeptide. Given the distinct lack of therapeutics 
available for psoriasis progression and the potency of Wnt5a to
increase the pathological condition we believe that inhibition 
of Wnt5a expression and signaling would be a promising 
therapeutic approach for this disease.

Methodology
Ligand Design and Core Optimization:
The sequence of hexapeptide (Met-Asp-Gly-Cys-Glu-Leu) was 
designed and optimized using Accelrys Discovery Studio 3.5 
DS Visualizer. The alkyloxy carbonyl groups  (see 
supplementary material) were attached to the N׳ terminal of 
the hexapeptide at methionine residue by Marvin Sketch 
5.6.0.2 []. The series of structures were further optimized and 
energy minimized using through Ligprep module of 
Schrodinger Suite 2013.

Protein Modeling and Validation:
Protein sequence of Wnt 5a retrieved from NCBI using 
accession num: AAH74783.2. 3D structure of Wnt 5a is not 
available in Protein Data Bank; hence 3D structure prediction 
of Vif has been performed using Swiss model server. The 
model was further validated using Procheck [,
,
,
].

Prediction of Binding Site:
The inhibitory site of the modeled structure was identified 
using Q site finder []. Q site finder is a method of ligand 
binding site prediction which works by hydrophobic (CH3) 
probes to the protein and finding clusters of probes with most 
favourable binding energy. These clusters are placed in rank 
order of the likelihood of binding site according to the sum 
total binding energies of each cluster.

Molecular Docking of Compounds:
Molecular docking program - Molegro Virtual Docker 2010.4.0.
provide a flexible platform for docking compounds. The 
structure based virtual screening of compounds was based on 
rerank score which is the mathematical representation for 
ligand-protein affinity. Rerank score is based on MolDock 
scoring function (MolDock Score) derived from the Piecewise 
Linear Potential (PLP) scoring functions [,
]. Docking 
parameters were set to 0.20 Å as grid resolution, maximum 
iteration of 1500 and maximum population size of 50. Energy 
minimization and hydrogen bonds were optimized after the 
docking. Simplex evolution was set at maximum steps of 300 
with neighborhood distance factor of 1. After the ligand was 
docked the total energy was minimized using Nelder Mead 
Simplex Minimization [] (using non-grid force field and H 
bond directionality). Binding affinity and interactions of the 
compound with receptor was evaluated on the basis of the 
internal electrostatic, hydrogen bond interactions and sp2-sp2 
torsions. On the basis of rerank score, best compound with 
optimal binding affinity was selected against Wnt 5a protein.

Pharmacophoric Mapping:
Pharmacophric mapping which involves ligand interaction 
patterns, hydrogen bond interaction, hydrophobic interactions 
and solvent accessible surface area upon ligand binding was 
evaluated using Accelrys Discovery Studio 3.5 DS Visualizer 
[].

Results &amp; Discussion
The procheck results revealed the modeled Wnt5a protein to 
be bonafide (). Three cavities with different volume 
were detected by Qsite finder in Wnt5a protein. As a 
convention, the volume with highest volume was considered 
to be an active (inhibitory) site. The inhibitory site had a 
volume of 841 Cubic Angstroms with minimum coordinates of 
(-21, -15, -10) and maximum coordinates of (-1, 14, 14). The 
inhibitory site is shown in . Evident from rerank score, 
out of 13 compounds, compound 10 showed highest and 
optimal binding affinity. The overall ligand binding affinity of 
all the compounds against Wnt 5a is shown in  (see 
supplementary material).

Since compound 11 () showed highest binding affinity 
against Wnt5a protein it was further subjected to 
pharmacophoric identification. In the , in the binding 
site of Wnt 5 A compound 11 demonstrates van der waals 
interaction with Tyr 231, Val 197, Arg 228 Glu 195, Leu 220 Lys 
194 and electrostatic interactions with Asp 198, Asn 223, His 
221, Gly 209, Arg 227. Residues like Lys 283 Tyr 211, acts as 
hydrogen bond donors while, Glu 224, His 221, lys 283, Arg 
227, Gln 286 acts as an acceptor. The hydrogen bonding profile 
is shown is shown in  (see supplementary material). 
The ligand binding pattern is shown in . Further the 
electrostatic, hydrophobic interactions and solvent accessible 
area upon ligand binding of compound 11 with Wnt receptor 
is shown in , 
 &amp; 
 respectively.

Conclusion
In spite of major advances in medical science, the treatment of 
psoriasis is still in infancy and there is a need for better Wnt 5a 
antagonists. Hence, we have proposed alkyloxy modified 
hexapeptides and evaluated its binding affinity against Wnt5a 
receptor. In the present study, out of 13 proposed compounds, 
in particular compound 11 with 1,1-diphenylethoxy group 
attached to N-terminal of the hexapeptide (Met-Asp-Gly-Cys-
Glu-Leu) found to high affinity compound against Wnt 5a 
protein, however further consideration are required using in 
vitro analysis.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:kelotra et al, Bioinformation 10(12): 743-749 (2014)

 Modeled structure of the Wnt5a protein. Binding site 
(blue mesh) in the protein was detected using Gaussian Filter 
enabled DoGSite server

 Compound 11. 1,1-diphenylethoxy group attached to 
N-terminal of hexapeptide (Met-Asp-Gly-Cys-Glu-Leu)

Interactions of compound 11 with Wnt5 a protein. 
Residues circled in green participate in van der waals 
interaction with the ligand while residues in pink forms 
electrostatic interactions. Hydrogen bonds with bond lengths 
are shown as blue arrows between ligand and residues

Binding pattern of compound 11 with Wnt5A. The 
pink lines represent various interactions like electrostatic, van 
der Waals, stearic, hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic 
interactions that enable energetically favourable binding of the 
ligand in the cavity.

Electrostatic surface of Wnt5a receptor bound with 
compound 11

The active site of receptor is shown with hydrophobic intensities. The hydrophobic intensities of the binding site ranges 
from −3.00 (least hydrophobic area - blue shade) to 3.00 (highly hydrophobic area −brown shade).

The active site of receptor is shown with solvent accessible surface areas. The accessibility to solvent of the binding site 
ranges from 10.00 (least solvent accessibility - green shade) to 25.00 (highly solvent accessible −blue shade).

