Background
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and aggressive type of
primary brain tumor in humans []. 
GBM is a fast-growing type of central
nervous system (CNS) tumor arises mainly from glial tissue of the brain and
spinal cord. GBM usually occurs in adults and affects the brain more often than
the spinal cord []. 
It has been proved that 17,000 primary brain tumors
diagnosed in the United States each year, out of which approximately 60% are
gliomas []. 
Gliomas are a group of central nervous system (CNS) neoplasms
with various histological characteristics. They are classified into two major
groups as astrocytomas and oligodendrogliomas based on their morphological
and histological resemblances between malignant and normal cells 
[]. The
most common form of gliomas in human is the astrocytoma, and the most
aggressive type is GBM [].

Molecular markers that are found on tumour cells and are also over-expressed
on malignant cells were nearly absent on normal cells which facilitates as
attractive drug targets. Along these lines we found ephrin-A2 (EphA2),
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and EGFRvIII are considered to be
novel molecular targets for this pathological condition, because it is expressed
in high quantities in GBM []. 
EphA2 is a type of tyrosine kinase family []
and this receptor is over expressed in various cancers of brain, breast, cervix,
colon, oesophagus, head, neck, liver, lungs, ovary and skin 
[–]. The EphA2
is believed to be an ultimate target in many cancers 
[]. It plays a critical role
in embryonic patterning, neuronal targeting, and vascular development during
normal embryogenesis, cell proliferation and migration 
[]. Eph receptor
tyrosine kinases (Eph RTKs) and their ligands, ephrins are frequently over
expressed in a various types of cancer and tumor 
[]. About fourteen Eph
receptor and eight ephrin ligands are involved in the various type of cancer 
[–]. 
In vitro study has shown that modifications or a mutation in the EphA2 is
responsible for GBM [].

EGFR is also a member of tyrosine kinase family containing proteins and it
plays a major role in signal transduction pathway responsible for cell
differentiation and proliferation []. Over expression of EGFR in GBM has
been proven in many in vitro and in vivo studies 
[]. It is also been over
expressed in 50-60% of gliomas []. EGFRvIII is over expressed in most 24-
67% of glioblastoma patients []. This is a mutated type of the tyrosine kinase
receptor. This is caused by genetic loss of 270 amino acids from the EGFR.
This mutated type protein is responsible for GBM disease in humans 
[].
Multimodality therapy for this disease still remains unsatisfied 
[]. In this
study we adopted cheminformatics-based drug design approach to identify
potential inhibitors against GBM. We conducted comparative docking studies
using molecular modelling approach against a total of 44 drug-like molecules
which includes 
35 drug-like molecules from the marine actinomycetes were
selected through the available literature [],

5 drug-like molecules which are currently under in vitro and in vivo investigations 
[–] and

4 known commercially available inhibitors [–] were docked against the 3 molecular
targets including EphA2, EGFR and EGFRvIII. From the docking experiments data obtained, 
we identified two potential bioactive drug-like molecules out of
35 ligands based on their better binding energies and pharmacokinetic
properties than the other compounds utilized in this study.




Methodology
Protein preparation of the 3 molecular targets of GBM
Docking studies were conducted on the three dimensional (3D) structures of
the 3 molecular targets including EphA2, EGFR and EGFRvIII (PDB ID:
1MQB, 1M17 and 1I8I) which were obtained from protein data bank 
[].
Before performing docking, hydrogen atoms and charges were added to these
crystal structures of 1MQB, 1M17 and 1I8I and then the complex was
submitted to a series of restrained, partial minimizations using the optimized
potential for liquid simulations-all atom (OPLS-2005) force field 
[]. The 3D
structures were then processed by use of the ‘Protein Preparation module’ with
the ‘preparation and refinement’ option before docking. The missing loops in
the structures were then filled in the respective protein molecules with the help
of Prime, version 2.1 (Schrödinger, LLC, New York, 2009) 
[]. Hydrogen
atoms were added and all unwanted water molecules were removed from the
structure. Partial charges were assigned according to OPLS-2005 force field.
Charges and atom types were assigned.

Binding site prediction for EGFRvIII
The binding sites for 1MQB and 1M17 were determined using PDBsum
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pdbsum/). Since the active for EGFRvIII was not well
defined; its binding site was predicted using SiteMap, version 2.3 (Schrödinger,
LLC, NewYork, 2009) []. 
The SiteMap predicts the binding site in three stages, 
a grid was assigned, and the points were grouped into sets according
to various criteria to define the sites,

the sites were mapped on another grid
to produce files for visualization of the maps and

finally, the properties
were evaluated and sites has been written in a maestro-readable form. Each
stage is accomplished by running an impact job and finally the best site was
considered for the further docking study.



Ligand structure Preparation
The 35 marine actinomycetes compounds which were retrieved from the
literature [], 
the chemical structures of these molecules were downloaded
from PubChem (http://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/), few of these structures are
not available in PubChem, hence we used ChemSketch version
11.01 (http://www.acdlabs.com) to draw those structures. The chemical
structures of the 5 compounds which are under in vitro and in vivo
investigation along with the 4 commercially available compounds were also
downloaded from PubChem and all these ligands were prepared for docking by
using LigPrep, version 2.3 []. 
The tautomers for each of these ligands were
generated and optimized. Partial atomic charges were computed using the
OPLS-2005 force field.

Docking using Glide extra precision
All the ligands which were prepared using LigPrep were then subjected for
docking against the 3 molecular targets including EphA2, EGFR and EGFRvIII
(PDB ID: 1MQB, 1M17 and 1I8I) using Glide extra-precision (XP), version
5.5 [] 
mode. The grid-enclosing box was centered to the active sites of the
corresponding 3D-structures of these 3 molecular targets to GBM; so as to
enclose them within 3 Å from the centroid of these residues. A scaling factor of
1.0 was set to van der Waals (VDW) radii for these residue atoms, with the
partial atomic charge less than 0.25. Glide XP mode determines all reasonable
conformations for each low-energy conformer in the designated binding site. In
the process, torsional degrees of each ligand are relaxed, though the protein
conformation is fixed. During the docking process, the glide scoring function
(G-score) was used to select the best conformation for each ligand. Final Gscores
were analysed based on the conformation at which the ligands formed
hydrogen bonds to at least one of the active site amino acid residues of the
corresponding 3D-structures of these 3 molecular targets with optimal binding
affinity. Herein, the data obtained from these dockings were used to analyse the
molecular interactions and also to identify the residues involved in hydrogen
bond formation with 1MQB, 1M17, and 1I8I. The glide scores and energies
including van der Waals (VDW) and electrostatic were calculated for all the
ligands against EphA2, EGFR and EGFRvIII. Finally the molecular
interactions and functional role of the two selected marine actinomycetes
compounds named and the commercially available drugs were proposed in
detail. All these docking procedures were performed on a Dell RHEL 5.0
workstation.

Molecular Dynamics Simulation
Molecular Dynamics simulations were done with all the 3 molecular targets of
GBM against the two selected bioactive compounds. The MD simulation was
performed by using Gromacs 3.3.2 [,
]. It works based on the leap-frog
algorithm to integrate Newton equations. The NPT ensemble and Gromos96
force field were applied to the system. Each docking complex was placed in the
center of a 72 Å × 72 Å × 72 Å cubic box and solvated by simple point charge
water molecules (SPC/E). Na+ counter ions were added to keep the system
electrically neutral and the periodic boundary condition was also applied to the
system. Energy minimization was carried out by using steepest-descent method
[]. 
Berendsen temperature and pressure coupling methods were applied to
keep the system in stable environment (300 K, 1 Bar), and the coupling
constants were set at 0.1 and 1.0 for temperature and pressure respectively.
Cut-off method was employed for electrostatic and van der walls interactions;
cut-off distance for the short-range neighbor list (rlist) and was set at 0.8,
whereas coulomb cut-off (rcoulomb) and VDW cut-off (rvdw) was fixed at 1.4.
The LINCS algorithm was used to constraint the bonds 
[]. The simulation
was performed with a time step of 2fs and the coordinates were saved every
1000 steps. 20 ps position restraining dynamics simulation was carried to
relieve close contacts and to equilibrate the protein in the medium; finally 1ns
molecular dynamics simulation and further analysis were performed. The
dynamics results were visualized using VMD [].

Assessment of drug-like properties of selected optimized ligands
The selected optimized molecules were studied for their drug-like properties
based on Lipinski parameters using QikProp version 3.2 
[], and also the
percentage of their human oral absorption was also predicted to determine the
toxicity levels, by use of QikProp [].

Results and Discussion
In this study, we conducted a comparative docking and molecular dynamics
simulation between the two selected bioactive molecules that include
Tetracenomycin D and Chartreusin which was obtained from 35 marine
actinomycetes compounds along with the 5 compounds derived from the
experimental studies and 4 commercially available drugs against GBM. The in
silico results revealed that the two bioactive molecules exhibited better binding
affinity than the commercially available drugs against the 3 molecular targets
of GBM including EphA2, EGFR and EGFRvIII.

Binding site analysis for the molecular targets against GBM
The binding site for the two molecular targets including EphA2 and EGFR
(PDB ID: 1MQB, 1M17) are known and were determined using PDBsum. But
EGFRvIII (PDB ID: 1I8I) does not have any defined active site and hence it
was predicted using SiteMap program in Schrödinger. The predicted amino
acids were identified to be Asp408, Gln412, Trp410, Phe46, Gln301, Val302,
and Gln412. Docking studies were performed with the two bioactive molecules
against the 3 molecular targets based on their corresponding co-crystallized
ligands available in their 3D-structures. All binding pockets of protein- ligand
complexes were shown in the .

Analysis of Glide XP and Molecular Dynamics simulation results
The comparative docking analysis on the 35 marine actinomycetes 
[], 5 
invitro and in vivo 
[–] compounds including 
Nimodipine- 3-(2-methoxyethyl) 5-propan-2-yl 2,6-dimethyl-4-(3-nitrophenyl)-1,4-
dihydropyridine-3,5-dicarboxylate,

Gallic acid - 3,4,5-trihydroxybenzoic acid,

Verapamil- (RS)-2-(3,4-dimethoxyphenyl)-5-{2-(3,4-
dimethoxyphenyl)ethyl-(methyl)amino}-2-prop-2ylpentanenitrile,

Perrilyl alcohol-( (4-prop-1-en-2-yl-1-cyclohexenyl) methanol),

Gambogic acid and 4 known commercial inhibitors 
[–] 
including Temazolomide, Sunitinib, Carmustine and Thalidomide () 
against the 3 molecular target proteins of GBM was performed using Glide XP application.


The glide scores for 
35 selected marine actinomycetes [] drug-like 
molecules possessed ranged between ˜ -8.5 kcal/mol to ˜ -2.8 kcal/mol,

5 in vitro and in vivo compounds 
[–] 
ranged from ˜ -7.5 kcal/mol to ˜ -3.7 kcal/mol and

4 commercial compounds [–] ranged from ˜ -7.1
kcal/mol to ˜ -5.3 kcal/mol.


By comparing their respective glide scores and
hydrogen bond interactions, it was found that only two compounds including
Tetracenomycin D and Chartreusin () out of 35 marine actinomycetes
compounds exhibited better binding energies than the other drug-like
molecules (see ). The docking scores of the
two bioactive molecules including Tetracenomycin D and Chartreusin against
the EphA2, EGFR and EGFRvIII are shown in Table 2 (see 
). 
All hydrogen bond interactions formed in the exterior/hydrophilic
portion of the protein, since both the bioactive molecules are polar in nature.
This may be due to the electric charge of the compound leading to the electric
dipole. formed hydrogen bonds after simulation are Asp408, Phe46, Val302, Gln301,
Lys303, Gln412 and Trp410 out of which none of them are found to interact
with the co-crystallized peptide of 1I8I. However these amino acids are found
to be in close contact with EGFRvIII. Finally the simulation results revealed
that the two bioactive molecules can efficiently block EphA2 than when
compared to EGFR and EGFRvIII without much conformational change in the
active site after 1ns simulation (Table 3 see ). The
temperature and pressure does not imply any changes in the conformation of
the structure. The hydrogen bonds that have been formed between the protein
and ligand after simulation are mostly present in the β-sheets and loop regions
of the protein which contains the active site region for the catalysis of the
substrate binding. Since they form the hydrogen bonds with by blocking the
active site region of the protein, the docking results suggests that the two
bioactive molecules could efficiently inhibit the functional activity of the target
proteins of GBM.

ADME or pharmacokinetics prediction of the ligands
Predict pharmacokinetic properties using the QikProp module of the
Schrödinger 2009 software. QikProp settings determine which molecules are
flagged as being dissimilar to other 95% of the known drugs. Predicted
significant ADMET properties such as permeability through MDCK cells
(QPlogMDCK), QikProp predicted log IC50 value for blockage of K+ channels
(QPlogHERG), QikProp predicted gut-blood barrier (QPPCaco) and violations
of the Lipinski’s rule of five (LROF) were reported in Table 4 (see
). 
The number of stars indicates the deviations from
the 95% of the known drugs. Percent of Human Oral absorption is based on
number of metabolites, number of rotatable bonds, logP, solubility and cell
permeability.

In accordance with Lipinski's rule of five, QikProp was used to evaluate the
drug-likeness of the lead molecules by assessing their physicochemical
properties. Their molecular weights were &lt; 500 Daltons with &lt; 5 hydrogen
bond donors, &lt; 10 hydrogen bond acceptors and a log p of &lt; 5 (Table 4 see
); these properties are well within the acceptable
range of the Lipinski rule for drug-like molecules. These compounds were
further evaluated for their drug-like behavior through analysis of
pharmacokinetic parameters required for absorption, distribution, metabolism,
excretion and toxicity (ADMET) by use of QikProp. For the two bioactive
compounds, the partition coefficient (QPlogPo/w) and water solubility
(QPlogS), critical for estimation of absorption and distribution of drugs within
the body, ranged between ˜ 0.7 and ˜ 2043, cell permeability (QPPCaco), a key
factor governing drug metabolism and its access to biological membranes,
ranged from 0.004 to 2050, while the bioavailability and toxicity were from ˜
3.4 to ˜ 0.4. Overall, the percentage human oral absorption for the compounds
ranged from ˜ 36 to ˜ 79%. All these pharmacokinetic parameters are within
the acceptable range defined for human use (Table 4 see 
), 
thereby indicating the selected two drug-like compounds their
potential as drug- like molecules could be a potential inhibitor of therapeutic
targets of GBM disease and further analysis can be performed through various
experimental studies. Among various commercially available drugs against
GBM, the best two bio active compounds from marine actinomycetes have
good interactions with the GBM targets. Tetracenomycin D and Chartreusin
have also been confirmed in both in vitro and in vivo studies for the different
cancer treatments []. 
ADMET properties of these two compounds are under
acceptable range. So, these drugs can be a potential inhibitor of therapeutic
targets of GBM disease and further analysis can be performed through various
experimental studies.

Conclusion
In the present study we have performed comparative docking analysis of
various compounds using Glide and the results are interpreted. EphA2 was
identified as good target for GBM. For the first time we proposed in silico
study to identify the potential small molecule inhibitor for EphA2, EGFR,
EGFRvIII proteins against GBM.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are grateful to the Department of Bioinformatics, Alagappa
University and Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yong Loo Lin
School of Medicine, National University of Singapore for providing laboratory
assistance.

Citation:Kirubakaran et al, Bioinformation 6(3): 100-106 (2011)

Illustration of binding pocket of bioactive compounds and drug
targets a) EphA2 –Tetracenomycin D, b) EphA2- Chartreusin, c) EGFRTetracenomycin
D, d) EGFR- Chartreusin, e) EGFRvIII –Tetracenomycin D
and f) EGFRvIII- Chartreusin. Binding poses of the six lead molecules. The
proposed binding modes of the two bioactive compounds with 3 molecular
targets of the GBM are shown. The two bioactive compounds are shown in ball
and stick display. Critical residues for binding are shown as sticks colored by
atom types. Hydrogen bonds are shown as dotted pink lines with the distance
between donor and acceptor atoms indicated. Atom type colour code: red for
oxygen, blue for nitrogen, grey for carbon and yellow for sulphur atoms
respectively. (a) The EphA2 docked with the Tetracenomycin D. (b) The
EphA2 docked with the Chartreusin. (c) The EGFR docked with the
Tetracenomycin D. (d) The EGFR docked with the Chartreusin. (e) The
EGFRvIII docked with the Tetracenomycin D. (f) The EGFRvIII docked with
the Chartreusin.

The 2D structure for the best two compounds. (a) 2D structure of the
Tetracenomycin D (b) Chartreusin respectively.

