Background
Methotrexate (MTX) is a chemical [MF: C20H22N8O5; MW:
454.44; chemical name N-(4-(((2,4-diamino-6-pteridinyl)methyl)
methylamino)) benzoyl] [] sensitive to hydrolysis, oxidation
and light and clinically used for the treatment of cancer, severe
psoriasis and rheumatoid arthritis []. MTX acts as a
competitive inhibitor of dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR, EC
1.5.1.3) blocks DNA replication and RNA synthesis and a target
of chemotherapeutic agents in malignant disease [,
]. In
plants and protozoa, DHFR and Thymidylate synthase (TS)
functionally correlate to each other and the activities of the both
enzymes are restricted in a single polypeptide [,
]. TS is a
ubiquitous enzyme present in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic
cell and plays a significant role in nucleotide biosynthesis 
[]. X
ray crystallography reveals similarity in tertiary structure of
DHFR in bacteria and vertebrate []; while, in human there
exists 7 parallel and 1 antiparallel strand of β sheet leading to
carboxy terminus end. Inhibitor like MTX is reported to bind
with folate binding domain of DHFR the an extended cavity
located on one side of central β-sheet [].

DHFR-TS enzyme is identified for the first time in Arabidopsis
thaliana by cDNA sequence analysis and DHFR specific
sequence is found to be located upstream of TS coding region.
DHFR-TS cDNA sequence are also identified in other higher
plants namely, Daucus carota [], Glycine max 
[] and Zea mays
[] among others. Present study describes the core DHFR and
its folate binding domain from the available data sources of
plant and human beings. Phylogenyetic analysis based on
protein sequences conservness, secondary structure and
hydrophobicity, is conducted to ascertain relatedness among
plant species as well as between plant domains and human.
The objective of the work is to foresee whether MTX can target
plant DHFR as it is a potent inhibitor of human DHFR.

Methodology
Data retrieval:
Using key words namely ‘Plant DHFR’, ‘HumanDHFR’, ‘Plant
DHFR-TS’, a search is performed from database NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) 
and TIGR (http://www.tigr.org)
for retrieving data on plant DHFR. A careful alignment is then
carried out with the derived sequences from database.
Sequences that shared 95% or higher identity are considered as
likely alleles [,
].

BLAST searches for folate binding domain:
Similarly using key words namely, ‘Human DHFR’ and ‘Homo
sapiens DHFR’ human folate binding domain is retrieved from
NCBI data base. Moreover all DHFR domain sequences are
used to retrieve other available DHFR sequences with high
percentage of identity using BLAST against NCBI. A sequence
alignment is created using CLUSTAL Xv.1.8 [] and a
phylogenetic tree is constructed from different plant and
human folate binding domain using the neighbor joining (NJ)
method in MEGA 5.05 []. Conservation scoring is performed
by PRALINE (http://www.ibi.vu.nl/programs/pralinewww/)
[].

Results &amp; Discussion
Identification and characterization of predicted DHFR genes:
A total of 12 predicted plant DHFR-TS homologues with
protein sequences are identified. The plant DHFR regions are
with 173 amino acids long stretch as compared to 187 for
human []. In case of folate binding domain it is 131 amino
acids long for selected plants species whereas it is 130 for
human. The relationship of plant and human DHFR domains is
presented in . As all DHFR domains are highly
conserved, a phylogenetic tree is constructed after multiple
sequence alignment using predicted protein sequences to
possess better precision on the evolutionary relationship.

Phylogenetic analysis of predicted folate binding domains:
Dendogram and unrooted phylogenetic tree ( &amp; 
)
reveals close relationship among plant species of related
taxonomic members. Both analyses showed the identical
results. Cluster comprising 8of Zea mays, Oryza sativa Indica
Group, Brachypodium distachyon and Oryza sativa Japonica
Group of family Poaceae; Glycine max, Pisum sativum and
Medicago truncatula of Fabaceae; Arabidopsis thaliana and
Arabidopsis lyrata of Brassicaceae; Vitis vinifera, Daucus carota and
Ricinus communis are dicotyledons and belongings to the family
Vitaceae, Apiaceae and Euphorbiaceae respectively. Human
beings are mammalian belonging to the family Hominidae
form separate cluster and distantly apart from the plant species.

Conservation score performed using PARALINE software
reveals that the alignment score of DHFR is 8.06 which indicate
that the domain is well conserved. Few dissimilarities exist
between human and plant DHFR domains. In 20th position of
human DHFR domain, there is an additional proline residue
moderately polar uncharged in association with an imino
group providing structural rigidity to the β sheet 
[]. The
human DHFR domain possesses proline-Glutamic acid-Lysine-
Aspartic acid (PEKN) sequence near active site ();
although in other selected organisms the sequence does not
exist apart from the presence of proline []. In plant DHFR
domain 2 extra amino acids are noted to be present at 82nd and
83rd positions. The present investigation reveals that the basic
structure of folate binding domain is more or less similar in
both plant species as well as in human beings, though MTX
binds with human as well as plant folate binding domains with
different affinity. As MTX is a potent inhibitor to human folate
binding domain therefore it is expected that MTX as well as
other antifolate agents may be effectively used for plant system
as well, which will be simple and cost effective.

Authors are thankful to Dr. Keya Sau, HIT-Haldia and Dr. M.
Das, Presidency University for their valuable suggestions. The
work is grand aided by SERB (SR/FT/LS-102/2010), Govt. of
India.

Citation:Samanta et al, Bioinformation 10(2): 101-104 (2014)

Dendogram of DHFR protein domains of plants and human beings.

Unrooted phylogenetic tree of folate binding domain
of 12 different plant species along with human after multiple
sequence alignment using predicted protein sequence.

Comparison of folate binding sites of amino acid sequence from plants and human; hydrophobicity of amino acids are
represented in color.

