Background
Filariasis is a serious public health problem. [] It is one of the 
      leading causes of disability in 48 million people from the Indian sub-continent. The annual economic loss due to filariasis 
      burden is huge. [–] 
      The disease is caused by nematode worms Wuchereria bancrofti, Brugia malayi and Brugia timori transmitted by female mosquitoes 
      Culex, Anopheles, Mansoniods and others. [] The NFCP (National Filaria 
      Control Programme) was launched in India during 1955. However, the NFGP showed limited progress due to lack of skilled manpower, 
      inadequate funding, improper estimation of vector/disease transmission rates, improper implementation of control programmes 
      and ineffective communication between the field workers and health administrators. [
      –] Hence, a database is necessary to identify parameters 
      representing the spread of the disease. This will help in the design of effective control strategies. Here, we describe a database 
      containing information on filariasis.

Methodology
Dataset
The epidemiology, entomology and socio-economic data associated with filariasis were collected from 45 rural areas in the 
      Indian state of Andhra Pradesh during 1998 to 2001.

Database Interface
The database can be accessed using login and password obtained from the authors.  The interface helps to search the database 
      based on epidemiological, entomological and socio-economical parameters ().

Database design
The database consists of two suites, namely, (1) data entry suite, and (2) report generation suite. The data entry suite 
      contains ADD, MODIFY, DELETE and SEARCH options for effective and easy update.

Data entry suite
Data entry is feasible for socio-economic data (serial number, date, village, taluk, district, unit name, sex, age, affected 
      organ, occupation, family background, filariasis awareness, mosquito avoidance, water supply, structure of house, presence of 
      animals, habitat, number of earning members of the family, average income and education status of parents), mosquito collection 
      data (adult mosquito count, species name, type of catching stations (random/fixed), total collection, time spent, male mosquitoes 
      number, females mosquitoes number, and density per 10 man hour (10MHD)), mosquito dissection data (infection rate and infectivity 
      rate), filariasis survey (disease rate) and mass blood survey (micro-filarial rate in night blood). 

10MHD is calculated as (total female mosquitoes collected/time spent)*10. The infection rate and infectivity rate is defined 
      as (female mosquitoes (Culex quinquefasciatus) with all stages of larvae/total mosquitoes dissected)*100 and (female mosquitoes 
      (Culex quinquefasciatus) with III stage of larvae/total mosquitoes dissected)*100, respectively. Disease rate is estimated as 
      (total diseased/total sampled)*100. Micro-filarial rate is defined as (positive blood samples/total blood samples collected)*100.

Report generation suite
The database facilitates the generation of a report consisting of several information in the database according to the input 
      parameters selected by the user ().

Utility
The RDBMS system for filariasis is critical for the understanding of vector dynamics towards disease management. This will 
      help to develop effective control programs. We propose to develop similar RDBMS system for diseases like Malaria, Japanese 
      encephalitis, Dengue and others.

The database was developed and managed by Indian Institute of Chemical Technology (CSIR), Hyderabad, India. This is 
      funded by the Ministry of Communication and Information Technology, Government of India, New Delhi.

Figures and Tables
A web database for filariasis management. (A) web interface, (B) report generated in the database


      Citation:Murty
      et al.,Bioinformation 1(1): 19-20 (2005)

