Background
Influenza is a major cause for concern worldwide due to the
human suffering and economic burden afflicted by the periodic
epidemics. The occurrence of repeated epidemics is attributed
to effective evasion of herd immunity in host populations by
the Influenza A viruses through antigenic variation in the
surface proteins. Influenza A viruses have two surface
glycoproteins– hemaglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA).
The antigenic variations in HA and NA proteins necessitate
new vaccine strains to be updated frequently and hence
constitutes a major challenge to effective vaccine design 
[].
Though the antigenic variability of the HA protein has been
studied [–], reports related to antigenic variability of NA
protein are rare. This may be due the fact that the NA protein,
by the virtue of its positioning on the virus membrane, has
somewhat limited interactions with the host immune system
[]. The Neuraminidase is a mushroom-shaped tetrameric
protein, anchored to the viral membrane by a single sequence of
29 amino acid length at the N-terminus []. The four identical
subunits are arranged with circular four fold symmetry and the
enzyme active site is located centrally on each subunit. It is
evident from reports that the anti-NA antibodies do provide
protection and arguments have been made that NA should be
included in the vaccines [,
]. However, direct demonstration
of a significant contribution of NA to antigenic drift in human
influenza viruses has not been made so far. There are instances
of outbreaks due to failure of HA based vaccine. The 2003-2004
epidemic of H3N2 was caused by the proliferation of a new
H3N2 subtype strain A/Fujian/411/2002 (an antigenic drift
mutant of the A/Panama/2007/99 strain), with the existing
vaccine failing to offer any protection [,
]. Hence, studies on
antigenic variability in the NA protein are necessitated.

Though antigenic evolution of H3N2 has been studied in terms
of HA protein, to the best of our knowledge reports involving
NA protein of H3N2 viruses are sparse. In our earlier
publication [], we have reported about the antigenic
variability in H3N2 virus strains (1968-2007) in the light of
antigen-antibody interactions involving HA proteins. In the
present paper, we studied the antigenic variability of NA
proteins of influenza A/H3N2 (vaccine strains 1968-2009) using
bioinformatics tools for sequence and structural analysis. Using
modelling and docking protocols we also investigated the
molecular basis of the reported (experimental evidence) failure
of antibody Mem5 (raised against A/Memphis/31/98 NA
protein and specific to epitope B) to bind to H3N2 strains
evolving in 1999 and thereafter [].

Methodology
The dataset
The NA amino acid sequences for the following WHO
recommended vaccine strains of influenza A/H3N2 virus were
downloaded from the SwissProt database: A/Aichi/2/1968
(X31), A/Albany/1/1970 (ALB70), A/Port Chalmers/1/1973
(PC73), A/Memphis/31/98 (MP98), A/Moscow/10/1999
(MOS99), A/Wisconsin/67/2005 (WIS05),
A/Brisbane/10/2007 (BR07) and A/Perth/16/2009 (PT09). The
names in parenthesis will be used henceforth in the present
paper. The structural information for Neuraminidase protein
was retrieved from the Protein Databank (PDB ID: 2AEP). This
known structure of MP98 NA protein complexed with antibody
Mem5 has been considered as a reference for the study.

Phylogenetic analyses
Sequence-based phylogenetic analyses were carried out using
the Molecular Evolutionary Genetic Analyses (MEGA 4.0)
package []. Multiple sequence alignment was carried out
using the ClustalW implementation in MEGA 4.0 with default
parameters. The phylogenetic tree was constructed using the
neighbor-joining algorithm and bootstrap with 10,000
replications was used as test of phylogeny. To obtain the
pairwise comparison of sequences (all possible combinations)
within the dataset, the ALIGN algorithm as implemented in
ISHAN package [] has been used.

Antigenic variability
In silico prediction of antigenic determinants was performed for
each sequence of the dataset using the Kolaskar method 
[] as
implemented in the B-cell epitope prediction server at Immune
Epitope Database (IEDB; www.immuneepitope.org/). The
known antigenic regions [] were also compared with the
predictions. The antigenic distance between any two strains
(newer vs older) can be measured in terms of the fraction of
amino acids differing between the strains in the epitope regions.
Such a measure is defined by ρepitope []. It is calculated as
follows: ρepitope = Number of amino acid differences in the
epitope/Total number of amino acids in the epitope

3D structure prediction and analyses
The 3D structures of the NA proteins from strains MOS99 and
WIS05 have been predicted using the SwissModel online
workstation. The template chosen (based on the automatic
template selection mode) was the NA protein of MP98 (PDB ID:
2AEP.pdb). Energy minimization of the modeled structures and
structural comparisons were performed using the GROMOS96
force field application in Swiss PDB-Viewer (SPDBV) 
[].
Predicted 3D structures were evaluated using PROCHECK
analyses []. Visualization of molecular structures and
rendering of images was carried out in Discovery Studio v.2.0
(Accelyrs Inc., USA). The NOC software was used for studying
the surface electrostatics of the proteins structures 
[].

Molecular docking
Computational rigid-body docking protocol, a method which
predicts the preferred stable orientation of one molecule when
bound to a second one, was used to determine the binding site
and the residues interacting between the antigens and antibody
through hydrogen bonds (H-bonds) and salt bridges. In silico
docking of antibody Mem5 against the NA proteins of MOS99
and WIS05 has been carried out using the ZDOCK server with
default parameters []. No preconditions such as, specific
amino acids desired to be at the interface, were specified at the
time of running the docking protocol. From ten solutions
returned by ZDOCK in each case, the best solution was selected
based on the following conditions: 
the complimentarity determining regions (CDRs) of the antibody interacting with the antigen at the antigen-antibody interface and

the value of minimized energy of the complex being the least.


The details of contacts between amino acids of antigen and antibody for each
complex were obtained by Contacts of Structural Units (CSU)
analyses [].

Discussion
Neuraminidase amino acid sequences from various strains were
subjected to pairwise comparison using the ISHAN package
[]. 
Identity (%) values calculated from these alignments were
tabulated by the program (Figure S1, see ). 
Maximum identity (99.4%) in amino acid
composition was observed between the strains BR07 and PT09.
The minimum identity (85.5%) was observed between X31 and
PT09. The net divergence within NA sequences considered in
the study (time span: 1968-2009) was found to be 8.1%. Also,
analyses based on earlier reports [], revealed that divergence
between the HA sequences was 8.6% over the similar time span.
Phylogenetic analyses further indicated clustering of the
sequences and placed both BR07 and PT09 in one clade (Figure
S2, see ). The multiple sequence
alignment indicated the occurrence of mutations in the various
strains with respect to X31. Compared to the X31 there were 16,
27, 53, 56, 63, 66 and 67 mutations in the sequences ALB70,
PC73, MP98, MOS99, WIS05, BR07 and PT09 respectively
(Figure S3, see ). The number of
mutations between BR07 and PT09 were found to be only 3.
These mutations were not in the epitopes or their vicinity. The
amino acid stretches which recorded maximum variations in
composition are: i) 140-155 and ii) epitope C covering 329-347 &amp;
357-370 (as per numbering of complete amino acid sequences in
Figure S3, see ).

The antigenic evolution has been evaluated in terms of
mutations in the epitope regions.  describes the
antigenic distances of various strains with respect to X31, for
the known epitopes A, B, and C. The antigenic distance was
determined in terms of ρepitope. It can be seen from the graph that
antigenic distance is least between the strains X31 and ALB70
with no mutations in the epitopes A and C. Comparatively, the
antigenic distance is higher between X31 and PC73 with many
mutations in the epitope regions. The antigenic distances of
MP98, MOS99, WIS05, BR07 and PT09 with respect to X31 are
high for all the epitopes. Maximum antigenic variability is
observed in the epitope C within the data set considered
(). The total number of mutations between the
successive strains has been enlisted in Table 1 (see
). 
 describes the antigenic
distances between pairs of NA proteins from successive strains.
While only the epitope B changed between the strains X31 and
ALB70, all the epitopes differed between ALB70 and PC73. It
should be noted that between the strains of MP98 and MOS99,
variability was observed in epitopes B and C (ρepitope values: 0.19
and 0.48 respectively). No changes were observed in any of the
epitopes of NA protein between the strains BR07 and PT09. In
order to investigate the molecular basis of the reported failure
of Mem5 antibody (which is specific to epitope B of MP98) to
bind to NA of strains evolved in 1999 and thereafter 
[], we
undertook molecular docking studies involving the known
structure of Mem5 against predicted 3D structures of NA
proteins. Three dimensional structures of the NA proteins from
strains MOS99 and WIS05 were predicted using the homology
modelling protocol as implemented by SwissModel online
workstation (automated mode). The NA protein of influenza
(H3N2) strain MP98 was used as a template (PDB ID: 2AEP).
Analyses of energy values and Ramachandran plot revealed
that the models were reliable (Table 2, see ). 
Docking of Mem5 antibody onto the 3D structures of
NA proteins was carried out to determine the binding site and
the residues interacting within the antigen-antibody complex
through hydrogen bonds (H-bonds) or salt bridges.

The results of docking studies indicated that the antibody
Mem5 failed to recognize and bind to the epitope B on the NA
protein of MOS99 and strains evolved thereafter. Docking
outputs revealed physically unrealistic orientations of antigen
with antibody (Figure S4, see ). The
docking output revealed that Mem5 docked onto NA of MOS99
with the CDR regions interfacing with the amino acid stretch
170-176 on MOS99 but without H-bonds. However, this region
on the NA would remain embedded in the tetramer complex on
the virion surface and therefore remain inaccessible to
antibodies, as observed in the tetrameric structure of NA
protein (PDB ID: 2AEP) (Figure S4B, see ). 
The failure of the antibody to recognize epitope B on
the NA of MOS99 can be attributed to the variations in amino
acid composition (greater antigenic distance). The mutation
H197D at the antigenic site B in MOS99 compared to MP98
resulted in alteration of molecular surface contour as well as
electrostatics (). This mutation was retained in the
subsequent strains WIS05, BR07 and PT09. The amino acid
H197 of NA MP98 was crucial for interactions with the
Antibody Mem5. In the co-crystal structure of Mem5 with NA
of MP98 (2AEP.pdb), the residue H197 on epitope B formed Hbonds
with residues R52 and T56 of the heavy chain of Mem5
(data obtained from CSU [] analyses). Hence, the mutation
H197D has not only altered the surface electrostatics, but also
altered the ability to form H-bonds with the antibody. Another
two mutations E199K and K221E at the epitope B were
observed in WIS05 and retained thereafter. These mutations
along-with another one G216V in the vicinity of epitope B,
further altered the side-chain conformation (protein surface)
and the surface electrostatics (). From predominantly
negatively charged in MOS99, the epitope B has become
predominantly positive in WIS05. However, in the absence of
suitable antibody structures (1999 onwards) it was impossible
to ascertain the impacts of these mutations in terms of antigenantibody
interactions.

Overall, antigenic variability in NA proteins between the
various strains of H3N2 viruses have been studied. Though the
epitopes of ALB70 were very similar to that on X31,
considerable differences existed between those on X31 and
other strains evolving from 1973 onwards. Maximum
variability was observed in epitope B between the successive
evolving strains during 1998-2005. The docking of Mem5, an
antibody specific to epitope B of MP98, onto the MOS99 and
WIS05 NAs revealed that the antibody fails to recognize the
epitope. The loss of recognition by the antibody can be
attributed to the mutations on the B epitope of MOS99 and
WIS05 which altered the protein surface and the surface
electrostatics. A comparison with earlier reports from the
authors' laboratory [] 
revealed that the antigenic variability in
NA followed trends similar to that in case of the HA proteins
and also indicated the equivalent net divergence within NA
proteins. The findings at the molecular level supports the earlier
experimental reports related to NA and host immune response
[,
].

Conclusion
The antigenic evolution of Neuraminidase proteins from
vaccine strains of influenza A/H3N2 has been studied over the
period 1968-2009 and variability in terms of antigenic distances
have been observed for all the epitopes. The structural basis for
the antibody Mem5 not recognizing the NAs of 1999 and
subsequently evolved strains could be explained through
molecular docking studies. A single amino acid change was
found to alter the surface properties, antigenicity of the epitope
B in NA proteins and the specificity to antibody binding. The
present study may contribute in gaining insight into the
mechanisms of virus-host interactions at the molecular level.
Our study supports the earlier experimental observations
regarding NA versus host-immune response and reinforces the
suggestions that the NA protein may be considered along with
HA as an active component for effective influenza vaccine
design.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Shil et al, Bioinformation 7(2): 76-81 (2011)

(A) Antigenic distances of all the epitopes (A, B and C) on NA proteins from selected vaccine strains of Influenza
A/H3N2 computed with X31 as a standard. (B) Antigenic distances of all the epitopes (A, B and C) on NA proteins between
successive strains of Influenza A/H3N2. (C) The comparison of surface electrostatics (outputs from NOC program) reveals
dissimilarities between the MP98, MOS99 and WIS05 arising due to mutations in the epitope B. Numbering of amino acids are in
accordance with sequence numbering of X31 (sequence ID: Q75VQ4).

