Background
Milk is a white liquid produced by the mammary glands of
mammals and is an important food with many nutrients. The
cow (Bos taurus), domestic goat (Capra hircus), Domestic sheep
(ovis aries) and Water buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) plays
important role as milk producers []. The best nutritional option
for newborn infants is mother's milk; however some infants
may not be exclusively breast fed during the first month of life.
In that case, another substitute must be provided for cow milk.
This substitution results in an allergic disease known as cow
milk protein allergy (CMPA) in 2-6% of children []. Nowadays,
most common alternatives are soy and extensively hydrolyzed
formulae. However, there is evidence that 10-20% of children
allergic to cow milk do not tolerate soy derivatives 
[–], and
some cases of high immunological reaction to extensively
hydrolyzed formulae have been reported [–]. Allergies to cow
milk are often broadly classified into immunoglobulin E (IgE)-
mediated allergy and non-IgE-mediated allergy 
[]. Cow's milk
contain more than 25 different proteins, but only the whey
proteins alpha-lactalbumin, beta-lactoglobulin, BSA and
lactoferrin as well as 4 caseins, have been identified as allergens
[]. The casein fraction is composed of alpha s1, alpha s2, beta
and kappa-casein, of which alpha-s1 casein seems to be a major
allergen according to IgE and T-cell recognition data 
[–].

In developed countries there is increasing interest in goat milk
and its derivatives, the quality of which is considered of special
importance in the light of current tendencies favoring healthy
eating. In particular, the composition of goat milk is said to
have certain advantages over that of cow milk, and thus former
is preferable for some consumers []. In one case Scientific and
clinical studies also suggest that infants and children who are
sensitive to cow milk based product often thrieve better when
goat milk based product is substituted []. In order french
extensive clinical studies with children allergic to cow milk, the
treatment with goat milk produced positive results in 93% of
the children and was recommended as a valuable aid in child
nutrition because of less allergenicity and better digestibility
than cow milk []. But in some cases goat milk also proved to
be allergenic and intolerant for infants []. In some childrens
and adult humans,water buffalo milk show more tolerance than
cow milk. Repeat skin testing was performed at age 2 years of
children and continued to be positive for cow milk but children
found to be negative for skin prick tested to water buffalo milk
based yogurt []. On these bases, selection of suitable milk for
consumption is an important target for nutritionist and
paediatricians. Therefore, the present study leads to evaluate
the suitability of buffalo and sheep milk for nutrition to the
people and children allergic to cow milk by study of amino acid
composition, secondary structure, CLUSTALW2 analysis and
phylogenetic relationship of Cow, Goat, Sheep and Buffalo milk
whey proteins.

Methodology
Dataset:
Search for some milk whey protein was made in GenBank and
EMBL databases. Obtained protein sequences filtration was
done to remove any redundant sequences from the population
and cross-checked by UniProtKB data base. The sequences are
available at NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein) with
accession no. as given in  (see supplementary material).
The dataset consists of casein protein (α-s1, α-s2, β and κ) and
β-lactoglobulin.

Sequence analysis:
The ProtParam tool of ExPASy (http://www.expasy.ch/) was
used to analyze amino acid and atomic composition 
[].
Further isoelectric point, Extinction coefficient and
hydropathicitywas observed and compared between four
species.Secondary structure prediction was done using SABLE
(http://www.sable.cchmc.org) of obtained sequence in dataset.

Multiple Sequence Alignment:
CLUSTALW2 at European Bioinformatics Institute
(www.ebi.ac.uk/tools/msa/clustalw2/) was used for protein
multiple sequence alignment (MSA) using standard parameters.

Phylogeny tree construction:
The Phylip tool (http://bioweb.pasteurfr/phylogeny/intro.en.html) was used to construct
phylogenetic trees from aligned sequences. Computation of
distance was done by program Protdist, which constructs
distance matrices by a process called “Bootstrapping”. A rooted
tree was plotted using NJ plot software package 
[] and
distance matrix was calculated between each selected species
[].

Discussion
Sequence analysis:
Number of amino acid residue in selected milk whey protein in
each species given in  (see supplementary material).
These proteins also share considerable similarity in their
percentage content of amino acids as given in  (see
supplementary material). There was considerable similarity in
predicted protein secondary structure of Capra hircus and Ovis
aries as shown in . At the same time there were
some similarities as well as some differences in predicted
protein secondary structure of Bos Taurus and Bubalus bubalis as
shown in .

Multiple sequence Alignment:
The MSA of protein sequences obtained from CLUSTALW2 including the family of 
candidate protein sequences, show the maximum pairwise similarity in beta-casein 
group (95%) between goat and sheep. On the other hand minimum pair wise similarity 
shown in kappa casein (85%) between cow - goat and cow- sheep. The most common 
and generally more accessible approach to protein function prediction is 
‘inheritance through homology’- that is, the knowledge that proteins with 
similar sequences frequently carry out same function []. For a majority of 
proteins it is already posible to predict their approximate function with resonable 
accuracy based on their evolutionary relationship or sequence similarity to proteins 
with known functions [–]. Since the whey protein from goat and sheep share a great 
similarity this supports functional similarity between goat and sheep milk. At the same 
time buffalo shows great similarity with cow at sequence level but
some dissimilarities at secondary structure level makes it less allergenic. 
The reason behind this may be absence of allergenic epitopes but it 
should be analyzed further in vitro.

Phylogenetic tree construction:
The result of phylogenetic tree analysis shown that for casein 
and beta-lactoglobulin each subgroup is divided in to two sub 
groups containing two species (Bos Taurus, Bubalus bubalis) in 
one group and two species (Capra hircus, Ovis aries) in another 
group is shown in . Distance matrix for each 
protein groups in between four different species was calculated 
as given in  (see Supplementary material). Calculated 
distance matrix evaluates close relationship between goat-sheep 
and cow-buffalo.

Conclusion
In case of cow milk allergic infants, since milk whey proteins of 
sheep and goat are almost identical , hence sheep milk is suitable and 
acceptable substitute of goat milk. In cow milk allergic childrens and 
adult humans buffalo milk is a good substitute of cow milk without any 
change in nutritional quality.

Supplementary material
Data 1
I acknoledge Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, MANIT, Bhopal for support and encouragement.

Citation:Dixit et al, Bioinformation 8(21): 1035-1041 (2012)

Predicted secondary structure in different species.

A) casein alpha sl; B) casein alpha s2; C) casein beta; D) casein kappa; E) beta-lactoglobulin

