Background
Celiac disease (CD) is a chronic illness which is characterized
by mucosal lesion of the small intestine and impaired
nutrient absorption by the bowel that improves on gluten
free diet. Its diagnosis is based on demonstration of villous
atrophy in jejunal mucosa. The jejunal tissue is generally
obtained by endoscopoic biopsy, which is an invasive
procedure. To select the subjects for invasive jejunal tissue
biopsy there exist a handful of serologic screening test that are
commonly used in routine clinical practice []. In CD the role
of tissue transglutaminase (TTG) and gliadin is proved beyond
any doubt. The disease involves antibody formation against
both of these proteins. Diet containing gluten supplies gliadin,
a glutamine rich protein to the intestine. The elevated level of
activated TTG in CD deamidate gliadin and Immunoglobulin
A (IgA) antibody is generated against both TTG and gliadin,
which are used for serologic screening of the disease [].
Gliadin is recognized as one of the key immune activator in
CD []. Although gliadin is a key pathogenic molecule of CD,
serum IgA antigliadin antibody (IgA AGA) is not observed to
be always an efficient tool for screening of CD. Some studies
advocate its good sensitivity and specificity for such screening
purpose [], while other studies express an opposite view 
[].
Currently no authority is advocating the use of serum IgA
AGA as a screening tool for CD []. Similar is the case with the
status of salivary IgA AGA estimation for CD. Some studies
demonstrate positive result for the purpose and others exhibit
the opposite []. Contrary to IgA AGA estimation, in both
serum and saliva IgA TTG seems to be promising for the
purpose of screening for CD []. The reason for such disparity
of immuno-elevation of IgA-AGA and IgA-TTG in CD is
currently not understood.

Some aspects are often ignored in the immunodetection of IgAAGA
in the context of CD. For immunodetection of IgA-AGA,
generally gliadin antigen is immobilized in a well over which
the sample is applied and that follows addition of secondary
labeled antibody. It is supposed that gliadin antigen will react
with sample IgA antigliadin antibody []. In this modality of
immunodetection, a CD specific fundamental change of gliadin
molecule is ignored. In CD tissue trans-glutaminase acts on
glutamine residues of gliadin and convert it to glutamate.
Tissue trans-glutaminase is significantly elevated in CD and it
is known to cause deamidation of gliadin molecule and this
altered gliadin molecule evokes immune response in CD [].
Therefore it is quite possible that the generated IgA antigliadin
antibody will better react with the altered gliadin with
glutamine residues changed to glutamate. Recently it is proved
beyond any doubt that IgA raised against deamidated gliadin
is superior for the diagnosis/screening of celiac disease [].
Supporting this view there is evidence that two stretches of
nonapeptides derived from gliadins with glutamine changed
to glutamate interact well with sera of CD patients,however
the number of amino acids that binds with antibody can be
even less than nine []. For practical reason, involvement of
peptides in a diagnostic test with more number of amino acids
will increase the cost of the analysis. Keeping this fundamental
inappropriateness we have designed a shorter peptide using
tools of computational biology that may be experimentally
verified for the purpose. The designed peptide is supposed to
overcome the current limitations of IgA antigliadin antibody
estimation in bio -fluids of CD patients and if found
satisfactory after experimental validation is expected to reduce
the current cost of the deamidated peptide based diagnosis of
CD.

Methodology
Modeling of the 3-Dimesional structure of IgA:
Carbon alpha co-ordinates of dimeric immunoglobin A1 is
retrieved (PDB code 2QTJ) from protein data bank 
[]. The
three dimensional structure is modeled using SABBAC tool
[] and is used for analyzing peptide-IgA interaction.

Peptide designing:
It has been found from the literature that N-terminal region of
gladin protein has the epitope binding site and have high
content of PQ []. The sequence of gliadin has been taken
from NCBI [] and performed the BLAST 
[] search against
the non-redundant database. Four motifs rich in proline and
glutamine which are found are given below and in parenthesis
the number of hits of the consensus sequence is mentioned.
1) QLQPFPQP (71 hits); 2) QFPQ (70 hits); 3) QLQPFPQPFPP
(no hits); 4) QPFPQPFPP (no hits). Similar procedure has been
applied for hordein and secalin present in barley and rye
respectively, which are homologous to gliadin and also
responsible for CD []. 1) QPYPQ (30 hits); 2)
QPQPYPQQPFPP (6 hits); 3) QPYPQQPFPP (9 hits). After
combining these outputs, we have designed 16 peptide
sequences (that may bind to IgA in both monomeric and
dimeric forms) as follows:
1) QLQPFPQP; 2) QLQPYPQP; 3) QPFPQ; 4) QPYPQ; 5)
QLQPFP; 6) QPQPFP; 7) QQQPFP 8) QPQPFPQ; 9)QPQPYPQ;
10) QPFPQQPFPP; 11) QPYPQQPFPP; 12) QPFPQP; 13)
QPYPQP; 14) QQQPYP; 15) QGSFQP; 16) QGFFQP

These peptides have been designed in extended conformation
using pymol [] and then energy is minimized using swiss
pdb viewer [] generating two different sets of minimized
and non-minimized conformations.

Docking:
The peptides are docked using AutoDock4.0 
[]. Each peptide
is docked against monomeric IgA at epitope binding region of
Fab for first monomer, taking the grid center as the center of
Fab region consisting of L and A chain and extends point upto
62 in each direction of X, Y and Z axis. Ten best conformations
of peptide-IgA complexes are taken into consideration. The
number of cases have been manually checked and counted
where the peptide is present at variable and junction of
variable-constant region of IgA and given in 
. Out of
them, those are found at variable and junction of variableconstant
region in higher number of cases are taken for further
docking and thus seven peptides have been selected which are
given in bold letters in . Then, the grid centre is taken
on residue Tyr33 of chain A (because this residue is the
approximate centre of the Fab variable region having L and A
chains) and selected peptides have been docked against IgA
monomer consisting of L and A chains.

The best fit peptide is docked at the second epitope binding
region of the first monomer having M and B chains with grid
centre Arg45 of B chain (because this residue is the mirror
image of the Tyr33 and hence the approximate center of Fab
variable region having M and B chains). Afterwards, to see its
interaction in the dimeric form it is also docked at the other
monomer at their respective epitope binding sites.

Result and Discussion
Docking and Analysis of gluten peptides with IgA:
First of all, 16 peptides as mentioned in methods have been
designed to check the binding with IgA. Two sets of these
peptides have been made: one having the non-minimized
conformation and the second one having the minimized
conformation using swiss pdb viewer energy minimization
tool. However two peptides, QGSFQP and QGFFQP have been
rejected because no poly-proline are present in the sequences
which is the main characteristic and requirement of gluten
peptide to bind with IgA []. So, 14 peptides have been
selected for docking with Autodock with grid centre at the
centre of the Fab region. The number of cases where these
peptides (both minimized and non-minimized conformations)
are observed at variable and junction regions of IgA are
summarized in  (see supplementary material). Peptide
QPFPQP is interacting with better orientation than QPYPQP
with IgA as QPYPQP is shifted more towards the junction
region while QPFPQP is interacting at the variable region.
Thus 7 peptides which are found in higher numbers at these
regions have been selected for further docking with grid centre
at Tyr33 position (because Tyr33 is the approximate center of
the Fab variable region) and are given in bold letter in .
Though the peptide QPFPQQPFPP is tightly fitted in the IgA
molecule, only 1 or 2 residues are actually interacting with IgA
and rest are away from it because of the orientation of the
peptide is outwards. Peptide QPFPQ is weakly interacting
with IgA because it is in the vicinity of the IgA molecule and
the distance is also more. However, by addition of a Proline
residue at the C terminus of peptide QPFPQ, there is a drastic
improvement in the binding of the peptide with IgA. The
peptide QPFPQP is properly fitted at the variable region of
IgA, all residues are interacting with Fab region, side chains of
the IgA molecule are also visible to be interacting with the
peptide and the orientation is also accurate. Remaining 4
peptides in bold letter of  are also interacting with IgA
molecule at variable region. But the peptide QPFPQP is
interacting better than all of the other peptides.

So, the peptide QPFPQP is selected as the best peptide and is
docked with the two monomeric and dimeric forms of the IgA
molecule. The peptide QPFPQP is interacting at both the lobes
of Fab region in the first monomer having L, M, A and B
chains. Similarly the peptide is also docked with the other
monomer having N O, C and D chains and is found to interact
with variable region of IgA. Finally, the peptide is docked with
the dimeric IgA molecule and is properly interacting at all the
four lobes of Fab variable region.

Interaction between best fit peptide and IgA molecule:
The interactions between peptides and IgA molecule are
represented in . Two Gln residues of the peptide may
form hydrogen bonds with polar residue Y33A and acidic
residue E55A of IgA molecule as the interacting bond distances
between hydroxyl and amino groups are 2.6 and 2.7v
respectively (). If Q5 is substituted by E the chance of
more number of hydrogen bond formation increases; thereby
increasing the stability (). However substitution of
either Q1 or both Q1 and Q5 decreases the chance of hydrogen
bond formation (). It is expected that QPFPEP will
intreact with the homo-dimeric IgA molecule in a similar
fashion as it interacts with monomeric IgA molecule and more
strongly than QPFPQP. At the variable region of IgG molecule
(PDB code 7FAB) QPFPQP can bind weakly but QPFPEP
cannot bind (data not shown).

The results presented clearly demonstrate that the designed
peptide QPFPEP interacts in a stable manner with dimeric
immunoglobin A1 molecule and its parent peptide QPFPQP is
sequentially present in maximum number of gliadin epitopes.
The interaction is specific for IgA AGA detection as the
peptide does not even interact with IgG. In the designed
hexapeptide chance of nonspecific hydrophobic interaction is
less as it contains only one hydrophobic residue (F). The
peptide is derived from deamidation of QPFPQP, a gliadin
derived peptide and therefore in derivation of the designed
peptide, the CD specific change of gliadin is kept into
consideration. Earlier phage display study have emphasized
role of PEQ for epitope binding []. Here, if the last amino
acid of the designed peptide is changed from P to Q our
designed peptide will have PEQ tripeptide sequence. But in
this mode of peptide engineering it will loose poly-proline,
presence of which is proved to be biologically important for
gliadin in the context of pathogenesis of CD []. Therefore we
advocate QPFPEP sequence to be tried for the purpose.

Conclusion
The hexapeptide (QPFPEP) predicted to bind specifically with
IgA antigliadin antibody. If it is proved to be a fact by
experimental analysis the hexapeptide has the potential to
provide a cost effective method for screening of celiac disease.

Supplementary material
Data 1
RB and NS have done the computational analysis and DB
developed the basic hypothesis. RB and DB acknowledge DST,
New Delhi for financial assistance.

Citation:Bhattacharyya et al, Bioinformation 8(2): 087-091 (2012)

Interactions between the residues of peptide QPFPQP
(in 1a), QPFPEP (in 1b), EPFPQP (in 1c) and EPFPEP (in 1D)
with IgA molecule are shown in ball and stick mode. Green
and magenta color shows the residues of IgA molecule which
are interacting while white color shows the peptides with
oxygen and nitrogen atoms in red and blue color, respectively.
The black dashed lines indicate atoms which are in contact
with distance (in Å). The interacting residues are labeled with
one letter amino acid code followed by residue number and
chain id.

