Background
RNA pseudoknot is a structural motif of RNA formed when a
stretch of nucleotides within a loop region in a secondary
structure basepair with residues outside that loop [,
]. Many
distinct folding topologies exist for pseudoknotted structures.
The most frequently occurring pseudoknots are the so-called Htype
(or hairpin type) pseudoknots. In a typical H-type
pseudoknot, sequence within the loop of a hairpin (stem-loop)
structure of RNA form intramolecular basepairing interaction
with a complementary sequence outside the hairpin ().
All H-type pseudoknots contain two helical stems, S1 and S2,
and two non-equivalent loops, L1 and L2. Some H-type
pseudoknots also contain a third loop, L3. If L3 is absent, S1 and
S2 can form a quasi-continuous double helix, with loops L1 and
L2 crossing the major groove and minor groove of stem S2 and
stem S1 respectively (). H-type pseudoknots assume
diverse biological functions. The best-known function is to
stimulate -1 ribosomal frameshifting in the translation of viral
proteins []. In a -1 ribosomal frameshifting event, a certain
percentage of the translating ribosomes shift back by one
nucleotide on the mRNA therefore change to the -1 reading
frame. Although frameshifting occurs at a so-called slippery
sequence with a typical composition of X XXY YYZ (XXX and
YYY: a stretch of three identical nucleotides; the triplets XXY
and YYZ indicate two codons in the 0 reading frame), an RNA
structure several nucleotides downstream is required for
efficient framshifting. Most often, the downstream RNA
structure is an H-type pseudoknot. To facilitate the
identification of H-type pseudoknots in RNAs, e.g. in the fulllength
genomic mRNAs of retroviruses, we have developed a
computer program (written in C++) that is capable of
identifying all potential H-type pseudoknots in any RNA
sequence with unlimited length.

Methodology
 shows a linear presentation of the sequence elements
of a typical H-type pseudoknot, which requires that both helical
stems (S1 and S2) form simultaneously. If a given RNA
sequence contains two pairs of complementary stretches (S1-5'
complementary to S1-3', and S2-5' complementary to S2-3'. G-U
is considered a legitimate base pair) separated by two or three
connecting unpaired regions (L1, L2 and optionally L3) with a
sequential arrangement as shown in (), then this
sequence has the potential to form an H-type pseudoknot. The
computer program tests all possible combinations of stem and
loop lengths within certain ranges (which can be set by the
user) to check whether the pseudoknot-forming criteria can be
met.

In order to compare the relative thermodynamic stability of the
identified pseudoknots within a given mRNA sequence, we
have also implemented free energy (ΔGo37) calculation for the
two helical stems S1 and S2. In calculating the free energy, the
Turner's nearest-neighbor parameters are used 
[]. If L3=0, the
two stems are taken as a continuous helical stem for the
calculation, but only half of the value is given to the S1-S2 stack
to account for the quasi-continuous nature of the stacked stems.
Although this simplified free energy calculation should only be
viewed as semi-quantitative, it provides a reasonable estimation
of the relative stability of the detected pseudoknots, which are
ranked according to the calculated free energies. Input and
output. The input is an mRNA (or cDNA) sequence. The
program recognizes G, C, A, U, and T (for cDNA sequences) in
both upper and lower cases, this is to ensure that input
sequence file can be generated easily and reliably from
sequences downloaded from nucleotide sequence databases.
Before the search, the user is prompted to set the ranges for S1,
S2, L1, L2 and L3, or accept the default values (default ranges
are 5 to 20 base pairs, 5 to 20 base pairs, 1 to 10 nucleotides, 3 to
50 nucleotides, and 0 to 10 nucleotides respectively for S1, S2,
L1, L2 and L3). The threshold for calculated free energy (default
value -18 kcal/mol) can also be set. Pseudoknots with a
calculated free energy higher than the threshold will not be
reported in the output. The output file of the program contains
information about whether pseudoknots are found and how
many are found; the detected pseudoknots are then listed in the
order of calculated free energy of the stems. For each of the
detected pseudoknots, the following information is given:
lengths of S1, S2, L1, L2, and L3; free energy value of the stems;
size and location of the pseudoknot. A schematic diagram is
then drawn, showing the actual pseudoknot forming sequence
and base-pairing schemes of the two stems; a sequence of 20
nucleotides immediately 5'- to the pseudoknot is also shown to
facilitate the identification of potential slippery sequence in case
of -1 frameshift stimulating pseudoknots.

Validation:
To show the usefulness of PKscan, we have performed a search
on the full-length genomic RNA of simain retroviruses type-1
(SRV-1, accession number M11841) that has 8173 nucleotides.
Using the default values for stems and loops, it took ~78
minutes to finish the search on a Linux workstation (Red-hat
Enterprise Linux 5.6 on Dell precision T5500). As shown in
(), a total of 50 potential pseudoknots were identified
within the SIV-1 genomic RNA. Significantly, the established -1
frameshift stimulating pseudoknot at the gag-pro junction 
[,
]
is identified as the most stable pseudoknot (lowest calculated
free energy, -34.71 kcal/mol). The calculated free energy of this
frameshift stimulating pseudoknot is lower than the second
ranked pseudoknot by ~10 kcal/mol. Scanning the SRV-1
genomic RNA for pseudoknot detection showcases a unique
utility of the PKscan program which allows assessment on the
strategic importance of the frameshift-stimulating pseudoknot
within the viral genome. The results also show that there is no
ultra-stable pseudoknot in the mRNA sequence which would
become a roadblock to terminate translation []. Of course,
PKscan can also be useful in many other scenarios.

Conclusion
PKscan can be used to efficiently and reliably identify all
potential H-type pseudoknots in any given RNA sequence.
There is no limit on the length of the RNA sequence therefore
very long RNA sequences such as the full-length viral RNAs
(several thousands to tens of thousands of nucleotides) can be
scanned. As long as the sequence elements of a potential
pseudoknot fall within the ranges defined by the program, the
pseudoknot will not elude being detected.

The work was supported by the start-up fund and a seed grant
from Southern Illinois University Carbondale to Z.D., and a
grant from University of Hawaii to J.C. This work is also
supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No.
1218712. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Science Foundation.

Citation:Huang et al, Bioinformation 9(9): 440-442 (2013)

Schematic diagrams of the sequence elements for
forming an H-type RNA pseudoknot. Abbreviations used are:
S1, stem1; S2, stem2; S1-5' and S1-3', the 5' and 3' strands of
stem1; S2-5' and S2-3', the 5' and 3' strands of stem2; L1, loop1;
L2, loop2; L3, loop3. A: linear sequential arrangement of the
pseudoknot-forming sequence elements. Complementary
strands forming S1 and S2 are painted black and gray
respectively. Small arrows indicated the complementarities of
the strands. A pseudoknot requires that both S1 and S2 can
form simultaneously. B: Schematic representation of folded
pseudoknots with a non-zero L3. C: with the absence of L3, S1
and S2 can stack coaxially to form a quasi-continuous double
helix. L1 and L2 are located on the same side of the molecule,
with L1 crossing the major groove of S2 and L2 crossing the
minor groove of S1.

A typical output of running the PKscan program, using the full-length genomic mRNA of the simain retroviruses type-1
(SRV-1, accession number M11841) as the input sequence. A total of 50 pseudoknots with a calculated stem free energy lower than-
18 kcal/mol were identified (only the 1st &amp; 2nd ranked pseudoknots are shown for clarity). The texts and boxes in red are not parts
of the original output. They are added to indicate the sequence elements of the identified pseudoknots. The software can be
downloaded from: http://www2.cs.siu.edu /~xhuang.

