Background
Light scattering opacities of the crystalline lens, or cataracts, are
a common ocular symptom of aging (&gt;50 years), and despite
advances in their surgical treatment age-related cataracts
remain a leading cause of visual impairment, accounting for
~48% of world blindness [], with approximately 37 million
people affected []. Approximately 80% of all cataracts are agerelated
and idiopathic []. Age-related cataract has been defined
as the appearance of the clinical sign of cataracts in one or both
eyes in a person older than 50 years []. Among Caucasian
Americans aged 65 years or older, the reported prevalence of
cataract is 24% []. Incidence of cataract surgery in the United
States is highest amongst those over 70 years, with an annual
increase of about 14% []. Age-related cataract has consistently
been attributed to risk factors such as old age, female gender,
diabetes, hypertension, smoking, UV light exposure, and heavy
alcohol intake []. EPHA2 belongs to the tyrosine kinase family
of proteins and is an epithelial cell kinase that has been
associated with autosomal dominant cataracts and recently it
was implicated in age-related cortical cataracts in humans and
mice [–]. EPHA2 interacts with membrane-bound ephrin
ligands, which play an important role in morphogenesis and in
numerous developmental processes []. Recently, several
EPHA2 single nucleotide polymorphisms were found to be
associated with age-related cortical cataracts in different
worldwide Caucasian populations [,
,
]. It is estimated that
around 90% of human genetic variations are differences in
single bases of DNA, known as single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) [,
]. Among them, non-synonymous
single nucleotide polymorphisms (nsSNPs), that cause amino
acid changes in proteins have the potential to affect both protein
structure and protein function [,
]. These nsSNPs can result
in inherited diseases and drug sensitivity [,
]. These nsSNPs
affect gene expression by modifying DNA and transcription
factor binding [,
] and inactivate active sites of enzymes or
change splice sites, thereby produce defective gene products
[,
]. Some of the mutations in nsSNP sites are not associated
with any changes in phenotype and are considered functional
neutral, but others bringing deleterious effects to protein
function and are responsible for many human genetic diseases
[,
]. There are several databases with these variations of
SNPs, such as the human genome variation database, HGVBase
[], National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)
database, dbSNP [], and SWISSPROT 
[]. The large size of
these databases presents a challenging hurdle for annotating the
effects of all nsSNPs by experimental approaches. Therefore,
computational methods that can quickly distinguish diseasingcausing
nsSNPs from neutral nsSNPs are in urgent need.

Epidemiologic association studies focus a great amount of effort
into identifying SNPs in genes that may have an association
with disease risk. Often, the SNPs that have an association with
disease are those that are known as nonsynonymous SNPs,
which result in an amino acid substitution. Many molecular
epidemiologic studies focus on studying SNPs found in coding
regions in hopes of finding significant association between
SNPs and disease susceptibility, but often find little or no
association []. With the availability of high-throughput SNP
detection techniques, the population of nsSNPs is increasing
rapidly, providing a platform for studying the relationship
between genotypes and phenotypes of human diseases. Our
ability to better select a nsSNP for an association study can be
enhanced by first examining the potential impact an amino acid
variant may have on the function of the encoded protein with
the use of different SNP detection programs like, I-Mutant, Sort
Intolerant from Tolerant (SIFT) and Polymorphism Phenotype
(PolyPhen) []. Discovering the deleterious nsSNPs out of a
pool of all the SNPs will be very useful for epidemiological
population based studies. So the main aim of this study is to
identify deleterious nsSNPs associated with EPHA2 gene. We
undertook this work mainly to perform computational analysis
of the nsSNPs in EPHA2 gene and to identify the possible
mutations and proposed modeled structures for the mutant
proteins and compared them with the native protein. We report
that, the mutation namely, E825K in the native protein of
EPHA2 gene could be a candidate of major concern for cataract
formation.

Methodology
Methodology used was the same as described earlier 
[–].

Screening of SNPs:
We used dbSNP (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/SNP/) to
identify SNPs and their related protein sequence for the EPHA2
gene [].

Protein stability prediction:
I-Mutant 2.0 software was used to predict nsSNP causing
protein stability change []. I-Mutant 2.0 is a support vector
machine (SVM)-based tool for the automatic prediction of
protein stability change upon single amino acid substitution.
The protein stability change was predicted from the EPHA2
protein sequence (NP_004422). The software computed the
predicted free energy change value or sign (DDG) which is
calculated from the unfolding Gibbs free energy value of the
mutated protein minus unfolding Gibbs free energy value of the
native protein (kcal/mol). A positive DDG value indicates that
the mutated protein possess high stability and vice versa.

Analysis of functional effect on protein:
There are many web-based resources available that allow one to
predict whether nonsynonymous coding SNPs may have
functional effects on proteins. We chose SIFT 
[] to perform
protein conservation analysis and predict the phenotypic effect
of amino acid substitutions. SIFT is based on the premise that
protein evolution is correlated with protein function. Variants
that occur at conserved alignment positions are expected to be
tolerated less than those that occur at diverse positions. The
algorithm uses a modified version of PSIBLAST 
[] and
Dirichlet mixture regularization 
[] to construct a multiple
sequence alignment of proteins that can be globally aligned to
the query sequence and belong to the same clade. The
underlying principle of this program is that it generates
alignments with a large number of homologous sequences and
assigns scores to each residue, ranging from zero to one. SIFT
scores [] were classified as intolerant (0.00-0.05), potentially
intolerant (0.051-0.10), borderline (0.101-0.20), or tolerant (0.201-
1.00). Higher the tolerance index of a particular amino acid
substitution, lesser is its likely impact.

Simulation for functional change in coding nsSNPs:
PolyPhen [] is a computational tool for identification of
potentially functional nsSNPs. Predictions are based on a
combination of phylogenetic, structural and sequence
annotation information characterizing a substitution and its
position in the protein. For a given amino acid variation,
PolyPhen performs several steps: (a) extraction of sequencebased
features of the substitution site from the UniProt
database, (b) calculation of profile scores for two amino acid
variants, (c) calculation of structural parameters and contacts of
a substituted residue. PolyPhen scores were classified as
‘benign’ or ‘probably damaging’ 
[]. Input options for the
PolyPhen server are protein sequence or accession number
together with sequence position with two amino acid variants.
We submitted the query in the form of protein sequence with
mutational position and two amino acid variants. PolyPhen
searches for three-dimensional protein structures, multiple
alignments of homologous sequences and amino acid contact
information in several protein structure databases. Then, it
calculates position-specific independent counts (PSIC) scores
for each of two variants, and computes the difference of the
PSIC scores of the two variants. The higher a PSIC score
difference, the higher functional impact a particular amino acid
substitution is likely to have. PolyPhen scores of &gt;2.0 are
expected to be “Probably damaging” to protein structure and
function and PolyPhen scores of 1.99-1.50 are expected to be
“Possibly damaging” to protein function 
[].

Analysis of functional nsSNPs by FASTSNP:
The Functional Analysis and Selection Tool for Single
Nucleotide Polymorphism (FASTSNP) is a web server which
connects many softwares and databases for processing analysis
[]. We used FASTSNP for the prediction of the functional
effect of nsSNPs and an estimation of their risk score. The
FASTSNP uses a decision tree for prioritizing the functional
effect and estimating risk score. The nsSNPs were submitted for
FASTSNP analysis and output files were displayed as a decision
tree.

Total energy and RMSD calculations:
Structure analysis was performed for evaluating the structural
stability of native and mutant protein. We used the web
resource SAAPdb [] to identify the protein coded by EPHA2
gene (PDB id 1MQB). The mutation position and residue were
in complete agreement with the results obtained with SIFT and
PolyPhen programs. The mutation was performed by using
SWISSPDB viewer and energy minimization for 3D structures
was performed by NOMAD-Ref server []. This server use
Gromacs as default forcefield for energy minimization based on
the methods of steepest descent, conjugate gradient and L-BFGS
methods []. We used conjugate gradient method for
optimizing the 3D structures. Deviation between the two
structures is evaluated by their RMSD values. Divergence in
mutant structure with native structure is due to mutation,
deletions, and insertions [] and the deviation between the two
structures is evaluated by their RMSD values which could affect
stability and functional activity [].

Results
SNP dataset:
The EPHA2 gene investigated in this work contained a total of
181 SNPs, of which 16 were nsSNPs, 9 were synonymous SNPs,
and none were in noncoding regions. The rest were in the
intron region. We selected nonsynonymous coding SNPs for
our investigation  (see supplementary material).

Stability of nsSNPs:
More negative is the DDG value, less stable the given point
mutation is likely to be, as predicted by I-Mutant 2.0 server. We
obtained 8 nsSNPs that were found to be less stable by this
server as shown in Table 1. Out of 8 nsSNPs, 6 nsSNPs, namely
rs11543934, rs2291806, rs1058371, rs1058370, rs79100278 and
rs113882203 showed a DDG value of &gt; −1.0. The remaining
nsSNPs showed a DDG value of &lt; −1.0, as depicted in 
.
Since these six nsSNPs showed higher DDG value, we
considered these nsSNPs to be least stable and deleterious.

Prediction of deleterious nsSNPs by SIFT:
Sixteen nsSNPs retrieved from EPHA2 gene, submitted
independently to the SIFT showed 8 nsSNPs to be deleterious,
having the tolerance index score of ≤ 0.05. The results are shown
in  (see supplementary material). We observed that, out
of 8 deleterious nsSNPs, 6 nsSNPs showed a highly deleterious
tolerance index score of 0.00  (see supplementary
material). We found that among these 6 nsSNPs that are seen to
be deleterious according to SIFT, 4 nsSNPs namely rs2291806,
rs1058370, rs79100278 and rs113882203 were also found less
stable by I-Mutant 2.0 server.

Damaged nsSNPs by PoluPhen:
To identify the EPHA2 nsSNPs that affected protein structure,
the EPHA2 nsSNPs were analyzed for predicting a possible
impact of amino acids on the structure and function of the
protein using PolyPhen server. The EPHA2 protein sequence
(NP_004422) with each nsSNP position and their 2 amino acid
variants was submitted as input for analyzing the protein
structural change due to amino acids. Our result showed, 4
nsSNPs namely rs11543934, rs2291806, rs1058370 and
rs113882203 to be probably damaging with PSIC score of ≥ 2. 0.
The nsSNPs namely, rs2291806, rs1058370 and rs113882203
which were observed to be the cause of protein less stability by
I-Mutant 2.0 server and SIFT were also predicted to be probably
damaging by PolyPhen server. In addition two nsSNPs were
highly predicted as possibly damaging and the remaining as
benign  (see supplementary material).

Functional effect and estimated risk of nsSNPs:
In order to identify nsSNP with a high possibility of having a
functional effect, FASTSNP was applied for the detection of
nsSNP influence on cellular and molecular biological function
e.g. transcriptional and splicing regulation. In addition the
estimation of risk score was also calculated by FASTSNP. The
functional effect and estimated risk of EPHA2 nsSNPs are
shown in  (see supplementary material). Three nsSNPs
exhibited medium-high risk score (risk score = 3-4). The
functional nsSNPs were rs11543934, rs2291806 and rs1058370.
The eight nsSNPs showed low-medium risk (risk score=2-3).
The risk score of the remaining four nsSNPs was not predicted.
The most important finding detected by FASTSNP were the two
nsSNPs namely rs2291806 and rs1058370 to have high possible
functional effect. These were also found polymorphic by IMutant
2.0; SIFT as well as by PolyPhen server.

Structural modeling of mutant protein:
Mapping the deleterious nsSNPs into protein structure
information was obtained from Single Amino Acid
Polymorphism database (SAAPdb) []. The available structure
for EPHA2 gene is reported to be having a PDB id 1MQB.
According to this resource, the mutations mainly occurred for
1MQB at one SNP id, namely rs2291806. The mutation was at
the residue position E825K. The mutation for 1MQB at the
position 825 was performed by SWISS-PDB viewer to get
modeled structures. Then, energy minimizations was
performed by NOMAD-Ref server [] for the native type
protein (PDB 1MQB) and the mutant type protein (1MQB)
E825K. It can be seen from Table 3 that total energy for the
native type structure (PDB 1MQB) and the mutant type
structure 1MQB E825K are found to be −7476.263 and
−13238.058 kcal/mol, respectively.  (see supplementary
material), also shows that the RMSD values between the native
type (1MQB) and the mutant type (1MQB) E825K is 2.36 Å.
Since the RMSD values and total energy after energy
minimization are very high for the mutant type structure as
compared to the native type structure (1MQB), we may
presume that, this mutation causes a significant change in the
mutant structure of the protein with respect to the native
protein structure. This mutation was also predicted to be
functionally significant based on I-Mutant, SIFT, PolyPhen and
FASTSNP results.

Discussion
Our analysis revealed 16 SNPs as nonsynonymous out of which
6 nsSNPs, namely rs11543934, rs2291806, rs1058371, rs1058370,
rs79100278 and rs113882203 were found to be least stable by IMutant
2.0 with DDG value of &gt; −1.0. nsSNPs, namely
rs35903225, rs2291806, rs1058372, rs1058370, rs79100278 and
rs113882203 showed a highly deleterious tolerance index score
of 0.00 by SIFT server. Four nsSNPs namely rs11543934,
rs2291806, rs1058370 and rs113882203 were found to be
probably damaging with PSIC score of ≥ 2. 0 by PolyPhen
server. Three nsSNPs namely, rs11543934, rs2291806 and
rs1058370 were found to be highly polymorphic with a risk
score of 3-4 with a possible effect of Non-conservative change
and splicing regulation by FASTSNP. The total energy and
RMSD value was higher for the mutant-type structure
compared to the native type structure. A major interest in
human genetics is to distinguish mutations that are functionally
neutral from those that contribute to disease. Amino acid
substitutions currently account for approximately half of the
known gene lesions responsible for human inherited disease.
Therefore, the identification of nsSNPs that affect protein
functions and relate to disease is an important task. The effect of
many nsSNPs will probably be neutral as natural selection will
have removed mutations on essential positions. Assessment of
non-neutral SNPs is mainly based on phylogenetic information
(i.e. correlation with residue conservation) extended to a certain
degree with structural approaches. However, there is increasing
evidence that many human disease genes are the result of
exonic or noncoding mutations affecting regulatory regions 
[,
]. Much attention has been focused on modeling by different
methods the possible phenotypic effect of SNPs that cause
amino acid changes, and only recently has interest focused on
functional SNPs affecting regulatory regions or the splicing
process. Moreover, because of their widespread distribution on
the species genome, SNPs become particularly important and
valuable as genetic makers in the research for the diseases and
corresponding drug []. Currently, millions of human SNPs
have reported by high-throughput methods. The vast number
of SNPs causes a challenge for biologists and bioinformaticians
although they provide lot information about the relationships
between individuals []. Besides numerous ongoing efforts to
identify millions of these SNPs, there is now also a focus on
studying associations between disease risk and these genetic
variations using a molecular epidemiological approach. This
plethora of SNPs points out a major difficulty faced by scientists
in planning costly population-based genotyping, which is to
choose target SNPs that are most likely to affect phenotypic
functions and ultimately contribute to disease development 
[,
,
].

Currently, most molecular studies are focusing on SNPs located
in coding and regulatory regions, yet many of these studies
have been unable to detect significant associations between
SNPs and disease susceptibility. To develop a coherent
approach for prioritizing SNP selection for genotyping in
molecular studies, an evolutionary perspective to SNP
screening is applied. The hypothesis is that, amino acids
conserved across species are more likely to be functionally
significant. Therefore, SNPs that change these amino acids
might be more likely to be associated with disease
susceptibility. It is becoming clear that application of the
molecular evolutionary approach may be a powerful tool for
prioritizing SNPs to be genotyped in future molecular
epidemiological studies [,
]. Therefore, our analysis will
provide useful information in selecting SNPs of EPHA2 gene
that is likely to have potential functional impact.

Conclusion
In our analysis, we found out that nsSNP (rs2291806) as less
stable, deleterious, probably damaging and have high risk
score. The mutant protein structures of this nsSNP also showed
very high energy and RMSD values compared to the native
type structure. We therefore concluded that this nsSNP as
potentially functional polymorphic. To those conducting largescale
population-based epidemiologic studies, the idea of
prioritizing nsSNPs in the investigation of association of SNPs
with disease risk is of great interest. The use of these servers to
select potentially polymorphic nsSNPs for epidemiology
studies can be an efficient way to explore the role of genetic
variation in disease risk and to curtail cost. Furthermore,
predicted impact of these nsSNPs can be tested with the use of
animal models or cell lines to determine if functionality of the
protein has indeed been altered.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Masoodi et al, Bioinformation 8(12): 562-567 (2012)

