Background
Sigma 1 receptor is a subtype of opioid receptor that
participates in membrane remodeling and cellular
differentiation in the nervous system. Sigma receptors are
subdivided in to 2 subtypes, sigma – 1 and sigma -2. The sigma
-1 receptor is a 25K Da protein possessing one putative
transmembrane domain and an endoplasmic reticulum
retention signal. The cloned sigma-1 receptor reveals no
homology to any known mammalian protein []. The amino
acid sequence of sigma I receptors exhibits more than 90%
identity in different mammalian species including guinea pig,
human, rat, and mouse []. The cloned cDNA, when
functionally expressed in mammalian cells, enhances the
binding of sigma – 1 receptor ligands. Sigma-1 receptors contain
3 hydrophobic domains namely at the N- and the C termini,
and at the center of the protein.

Evolutionary Trace (ET-method) is a method in which protein
sequences of a particular protein family is partitioned in to
different groups, which originate from the common node in the
phylogenic tree and it also involves evolutionary time cut-off.
Detailed analysis on the evolutionary conservation information
extracted from multiple sequence alignment is an important
tool used for prediction of functional properties as well as
prediction of ligands binding sites; protein interface surfaces
etc, and the detection of conserved residues would be useful in
identifying the functionally important residue, even in the
absence of structural information. According to the ET method
each residue is reported as either conserved or class specific or
variable based on the conservation properties []. Parthiban et al
has reported the use of evolutionary trace in identifying
conserved and class specific residues close to the putative
binding site in nocitinic acetylcholine receptors []. LIU Yang
Don et al [] has reported the use of evolutionary trace analysis
in identifying 11 trace residues in superoxide dismutase of
extremophile Thermoplasma acidophilum, of which three
residues (Asn39, Gly105 and Glu162) were scattered over the
structure and the rest of the residues were identified near the Fe
binding site.

In this work, we made an attempt to explore the information
about functionally important residues of sigma -1 receptor
through evolutionary conservation method and to predict the
three dimensional structure of Sigma 1 protein and its
interaction with antipsychotic drugs.

Methodology
Sequence analysis and ab initio structure prediction of Sigma 1 protein:
The Sigma 1 protein sequence of Homo sapiens was retrieved
from NCBI (NC_). Domain and pattern were analysed using
PFAM [] and PROSITE 
[] database respectively. The
secondary structure of the protein was predicted using different
JPRED [], SOPM 
[], SOPMA 
[] and GOR4 
[] servers. The
three dimensional structure of sigma 1 protein was predicted
using I-TASSER server (
http: //zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/I-TASSER/) 
[]. 3D models are built based on multiplethreading
alignments by LOMETS and iterative TASSER
assembly simulations; function insights are then derived by
matching the predicted models with protein function databases.

Evolutionary trace analysis:
A total of 74 non-redundant protein sequences of sigma-1
receptor from various organisms were retrieved from Swiss
prot database. Of the 74 sequences, only 36 sequences have
been selected for multiple sequence alignment and showed in
 (see supplementary material). The selection criteria
were based on the (a) sequences having functionally similar
domains, (b) sequences with &gt;25% sequence identity, (c)
sequences with full length sigma 1 proteins were selected. We
performed multiple sequence alignment for 36 Sigma 1 receptor
sequences using CLUSTALW. ET analysis for Sigma 1 Receptor
sequences were carried out using ET server [].

Results &amp; Discussion
The 223 amino acids long sigma receptor protein of Homo sapiens
has an ERG2_Sigma1R. No pattern/signature could be
identified from prosite database. No homologous protein with
solved structure could be identified from PDB database using
BLAST tool. Similarly, threading servers such as PHYRE 
[]
and 3DPSSM [] also didn't identify any significant templates
that could be used for developing three dimensional models for
sigma 1 receptor protein.

Hence, ab initio method was opted for predicting the structure
of sigma 1 receptor protein. The protein sequence was
submitted to I-TASSER server and five models were predicted.
Of the five models, the best model was selected based on TMscore.
The C-score and TM-score are -4.12 and 0.28±0.09
respectively. The predicted model was identified to have seven
helices and four strands (). Based on statistics, if a
template/model has a TM-score around or below 0.17, it means
the prediction is nothing more than a random selection from
PDB library. Hence the predicted model is taken as a significant
model.

Based on the evolutionary trace analysis, the phylogenetic tree
() was split into 10 evenly distributed partitions,
namely P01-P10 in order of evolutionary time cut-off (ETC).
Analysis of the mapped traces for partitions P01-P10 revealed
clusters of conserved residues occurring on the surface of the
protein. Eleven residues were identified to be well conserved in
the selected 37 sequences and predicted to be functionally
important residues ().

Active site prediction of Sigma protein and docking analysis:
The predicted sigma protein model was submitted to Q-Site
server for prediction of the active site. The first predicted active
site of the ten different predictions was selected based on the
volume of the site. We then docked the antipsychotic
compound (tBOC) into the active site of our target to
understand the binding affinity of the compound. Based on the
docking results, tBOC binds into the cavity of sigma 1 protein
with GOLD score 40.04. The binding of tBOC to sigma 1 protein
will be validated using experimental methods. We further
docked our compound (tBOC) along with 23 available drug
molecules available in PDB database in complex to protein
tyrosine phosphatase 1B of Homo sapiens which is an important
target for cancer, diabetic and obesity to understand the affinity
level of our compound to that of the available molecules. Based
on our results  (see supplementary material), tBOC was
ranked sixth among the 23 drug molecules docked to protein
tyrosine phosphatase 1B. This result predicts that tBOC has
binding affinity with the protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B and
can be probably an alternative drug for obesity, diabetics and
cancer which has to be further confirmed through wet lab
experiments. Further, docking studies were carried out for all
these above mentioned 24 drug molecules to sigma 1 protein of
human using GOLD software. Based on our results, 2FJ was
identified to have a better affinity to sigma 1 protein (GOLD
score: 76.0) when compared to tBOC (40.04) ().

Conclusion
Sigma 1 Receptor protein is a potential target for studying basic
mechanisms of behavioral studies were shown to be involved in
higher ordered brain functions including memory and drug
dependence. Since no experimental structures are available for
sigma1 receptor protein, our study was first to predict the three
dimensional structure of sigma 1 protein. Further we compared
the binding of our compound TbOC to sigma 1 protein which
proves a potential antipsychotic drug. The predicted
functionally important residues and the 3D structure will be
helpful for understanding the function of sigma1 receptor
protein and for structure based drug designing studies.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Latha et al, Bioinformation 9(19): 944-951 (2013)

Predicted three dimensional structure of sigma 1
protein.

Vertical lines in Dendrogram A to J show different
partition identity cutoffs (PICs) each PIC represents an
individual group. A represents the most conserved 10th trace.
As PIC increase A to J partition comprises decrease group from
10 to 1.

Evolutionary Trace shows conserved consensus
pattern.

Docked conformation of tBOC and 2FG in the active
sites of sigma 1 protein of Homo sapiens.

