A recent publication analyzed MicroRNAs (miRNAs)
globallyinhumans []. Here, we summarize several key
concepts from this article. Apparently during evolution, there
were several origins of miRNAs and the authors embarked on a
detailed and specific analysis of these events. In fact, the
authors analyzed 1,433 extant human miRNAs that originated
15 times during evolution. These steps correspond to the
evolutionary progression of the following species: avians,
Prototheria platypus, Metatheria opossum/wallaby,
Atlantogenata, Laurasiatheria, rodents/rabbits, tupai,
lemur/galago, tarsier, marmoset, rhesus monkey, gibbon ape,
orangutan, gorilla, chimpanzee, and humans. The rates of origin
of miRNAs was greatest (most accelerated) in two periods,
during the Atlantogenata-Laurasiatheria transition/origin period
and during the monkey-gibbon ape transition/origin period.
Across all 15 originations, the extents of expression are lower
for the younger miRNAs []. It should be noted that the process
of miRNA integration, stabilization, and expression in an
organism’s transcriptome takes 60 million years. In addition,
there is an ongoing process of miRNA expression increase
during that time []. It is noteworthy that the HIV-1 antecedent
viruses may have evolved among the primates during this most
recent resurgence of miRNAs.

Considering the complexity of miRNAs that we are just
beginning to appreciate, it is remarkable that HIV-1 has evolved
the capacity to interact with and damage human cells and cause
severe disease. HIV-1 is a nine-kilobase single stranded RNA
virus with nine genes.There is thus a great difference in number
of HIV-1 genes compared to the approximately 20-30,000
genesthat humans have [].

The origin of HIV-1 is a difficult and complex issue. HIV-1
entered human beings and became the virulent virus it is
known to be, at least by 1959. Thus, it has caused continued
havoc for more than 50 years. Since HIV-1infected humans and
was derived from other primates, it was probably by this time
primed and ready to invade the human ecosphere/genosphere.
HIV-1 has a tremendous capacity to evolve rapidly. This has
been studied extensively [,
].

Previously, we analyzed the involvement of HIV-1 Tat protein
in cellular gene networks and aspects of its interaction with
miRNAs []. In addition, we discussed HIV-1 viral protein R
(Vpr) that interacts with miRNAs and its involvement in gene
expression networks []. In the current paper, we briefly relate a
few themes related to the TAR RNA sequence of HIV-1 from a
recent publication [].

The HIV-1 Tat protein as well as host cell proteins interacts with
the TAR sequence on HIV-1 RNA for the control of HIV-1
translation. The TAR sequence is 59 nucleotides in length and is
present on all HIV-1 transcripts. Three host cell proteins that are
in interactive networks are included among those that are
involved in the regulation of HIV-1 translation. These proteins
are TAR RNA binding protein (TRBP), dsRNA-dependent
kinase (PKR), and Ribonuclease III, double-stranded RNAspecific
endoribonuclease (Dicer) [].

On the one hand, the secondary structure in the TAR sequence
due to ponderal forces can hamper translation by impeding
translation initiation factors, prevent 5’-CAP access, and by PKR
activation. On the other hand, HIV-1 translation is enabled by
TRBP binding and relaxing of the TAR secondary structure as
well as overpowering the triggering of PKR. Moreover, Sanghvi
et al indicate that since TRBP is a cofactor of DICER miRNA
processing, the arrogation by TAR of TRBP is a forceful
opposing measure evolved by HIV-1 to obstruct antiviral
cellular processes. The authors indicate that once PKR actuation
is blocked, inhibiting TRBP has no further effect on virus
production. However, the authors state that these processes do
not affect miRNA-muzzling pathways [].

When TRBP, PKR, and DICER were entered into the GenePro
program [] then TRBP mapped to multiple symbols TARBP2,
TARBP2P, and NCOA6, PKR mapped to multiple symbols
PKLR and EIF2AK2, and DICER mapped to DICER1. The
protein interactive networks were analyzed as seen in 
(
&amp; ), and the protein input list became TARBP2, TARBP2P,
NCOA6, PKLR, EIF2AK2, and DICER1.

We note that semantics is not always consistent across all
databases. This is a relevant issue to analyze and will be done
[]. 
Suffice it to say as a general caveat, individual researchers
should ascertain the semantics of their terms.

The figures illustrate various gene interactions among the
proteins mentioned above. It is left as a puzzle for the interested
reader to identify the various genes and their functions in the
figures [,
].

There are no financial conflicts.

Citation:Shapshak, Bioinformation 9(2): 065-066 (2013)

Network of input proteins (TARBP2, TARBP2P,
NCOA6, PKLR, EIF2AK2, and DICER1) and the input
neighbors of these proteins.Consequent to HIV-1 infection,
expression of these proteins may be modulated by miRNAs. In
this figure, line-colors and various interactions with other genes
are red Down-regulation, green Up-regu*lation, beige
Regulation, purple Co-expression, brown Physical Interaction,
turquoise dotted Predicted Protein Interaction, and mauve
dotted Predicted TFactor Regulation [].

Network of neighbor interactions of the input proteins
(TARBP2, TARBP2P, NCOA6, PKLR, EIF2AK2, and DICER1)
with the various networks through which they interact.
Consequent to HIV-1 infection, expression of these proteins
may be modulated by miRNAs. In this figure, line-colors and
various interactions with other genes are red Down-regulation,
green Up-regulation, beige Regulation, purple Co-expression,
brown Physical Interaction, turquoise dotted Predicted Protein
Interaction, and mauve dotted Predicted TFactor Regulation 
[].

