Background
Ginger (Zingiber officinale) is a perennial plant in the family
Zingiberaceae ‐ its rhizome is commonly used as a cooking spice
throughout the world. The ginger plant has a long history of
cultivation known to originate in China and then spread to India,
Southeast Asia, West Africa, and the Caribbean. India is a leading
producer of ginger in the world. Ginger is cultivated in most of the
states in India. Kerala and Meghalaya are major ginger growing states
in the country. The rhizomes and stems of ginger have assumed
significant roles in Chinese, Japanese, and Indian medicine since the
1500s [].The oleoresin of ginger is often contained in digestive,
antitussive, antiflatulent, laxative, and antacid compounds []. Ginger
has a large genome of 23618 Mbp distributed in 2n=22 chromosomes.
The phytochemistry and pharmacology of this is well studied but the
molecular biological process involved in this is not yet studied. Singlepass
sequencing of the 5' and/or 3' ends of randomly selected cDNA
clones, is an effective approach to provide genetic information of an
organism. These sequences can serve as markers or tags for
transcripts, and have been used in the development of SNP markers for
reference genetic map and recovery of full-length cDNA and genomic
sequences. Expressed sequence tags (ESTs) are also useful for the
discovery of novel genes, investigation of genes of unknown function,
comparative genomic study, and recognition of exon/intron
boundaries. Currently, there are 38139 available ginger sequences in
the GenBank, and majority of these sequences are ESTs which had
been deposited at NCBI (dbEST) http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/dbEST/. The lack of sequence information has limited the progress of
gene discovery and characterization, global transcript profiling, probe
design for development of gene arrays, and generation of molecular
markers for Ginger. In this study, we have categorized 38139 ESTs in
to three tissue libraries leaves 13274, rhizomes 12763 and roots 12092
ESTs. The availability of these EST sequences will allow comparative
genomic studies between ginger and other monocotyledonous and
dicotyledonous plants, development of molecular markers for the
establishment of reference genetic map, design and construction of
cDNA microarray for global gene expression profiling. Single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are a second class of genetic
markers that can be mined from sequence data and are useful for
characterizing allelic variation, genome-wide mapping, and as a tool
for marker-assisted selection. In the field of human genetics, SNPs are
a major focus of efforts to increase the efficiency of mapping [–]
and are already being used for detection and mapping of a variety of
diseases [–]. In many crop plants, SNPs are present with sufficient
frequency to offer an alternative for genetic mapping and markerassisted
selection. Although SNPs can be identified by sequencing
selected DNA fragments, a practical limitation to this approach for
ginger follows from the fact that the sequencing error rate is often
higher than the polymorphism rate. The cost of SNP discovery through
sequencing amplified fragments is therefore high even with reductions
in the cost of sequencing. The objectives of the research described in
this paper were to assess the potential of existing public databases for
the discovery of single nucleotide polymorphisms. We have mined
updated EST tissue libraries of zingiber officinale for this analysis to
find the SNP / Indel polymorphisms. SNP detecting perl scripts
AutoSNP version 1.0 is used indentify the SNP / Indel
polymorphisms, DNA substitution like Transversion vs Transition and
Indel []. There are some other SNP detecting software such as
SEAN [] PolyPhred [] 
PolyBayes [] TRACE_DIFF [] and
HarvEST (http://harvest.ucr.edu) but AutoSNP provides user friendly
approach and interpretable results as html file. Thus there are ten kinds
of SNP/indel (two types of transition and four types of transversion
and four groups of indels) are possible in the SNP/indel sites in EST
libraries. We have used three tissue libraries [,] 
of Zingiber officinale.

Methodology
EST database of NCBI (dbEST release 092509) contains 38139
Zingiber officinale Express sequence tag data. We have mined 38139
EST sequences consist of three tissue libraries of leaves 13274
(DV544275-ES560515), rhizomes 12763 (DY350707-DY363469) and
roots 12092 (DY363470-DY375561). CAP3 program is used to
assemble the EST sequence in to contigs. The SNP detection tool
AutoSNP version.1.0 was used to find the candidate SNPs from these
libraries. AutoSNP required input as ace or fasta format. But the perl
script edited manually to analyse fasta or ace format. Sequence
assembly program CAP3 is integrated in AUTOSNP to make fasta
files in to contigs 
(http://bioweb.pasteur.fr/seqanal/interfaces/cap3.html) 
[]. The DNA substitution like transition (Ts) versus
transversion (Tv) ratio of all the libraries in Ginger genome was also
calculated.

Discussion
In this study it is discovered that total of 64026 SNP sites and 7034 indel polymorphisms in 38139 ESTs analyzed with an average
frequency of 0.84 SNPs / 100 bp. Results of the tissue wise SNP and
indel discovery are listed in Table 1 (see )
and . In Ginger leaves tissue libraries showing high indels
1983 while comparing other tissues. Rhizome tissues showing the high
SNP frequency 1SNP in 100bp. In Ginger a total of 27083 transitions,
29909 transversions and 7034 indels were found while analysis. But
we found in tissue wise manner, rhizome transitions are high in
number 13433. Rhizome tissues having more SNPs than others.
Rhizome part is more expressed than other tissues. While discovering
all SNP with DNA substitution overall transitions and transversions
ratio is 0.90. When compared to ginger with others, the studies on the
occurrence and nature of SNPs are beginning to receive considerable
attention, particularly Arabidopsis where over 37,000 SNPs have been
identified through the comparison of two accessions []. It has been
reported in maize that there occurs a frequency of one non-coding SNP
per 31 bp and 1 coding SNP per 124bp in 18 maize genes assayed in
36 inbred lines []. Moreover the recent evidence has indicated that
SNPs appear to be even more abundant in plant systems than in the
human genome. Germano and Klein [] identified five SNPs in 1 kb
of cDNA of Picea rubens and Picea mariana, and also discovered
SNPs in the chloroplasts of these species. Recently, in soyabean
(Glycine max), two SNPs found approximately 400 bp []. In maize
(Zea mays), SNP has been detected even more frequently, with one
SNP approximately every 48 bp and every 130 bp in 3' untranslated
regions and coding regions, respectively [,]. The SNP analysis on
Apple (Malus domestica) ESTs the Bi-allelic SNPs were on an
average of every 706 bp [] and the study in Maize ESTs [] also
showed the relative increase of over transversion and transition sites.
This in silico analysis will help ginger researchers about the single
nucleotide polymorphism related study and nucleotide substitution in
this important crop.

Large-scale sequencing of Expressed Sequence Tags and complete
genomes offers information of use to plant breeding programs. With
the completion of the first crop genome sequencing projects [,]
the potential for plant breeding to be impacted by new technology has
never been greater. In ginger, sequencing projects offer a potential
solution to the scarcity of markers that can be used in elite breeding
populations. Of special interest is the ability to discover DNA
polymorphisms by mining sequence data [,]
. The frequency of single nucleotide polymorphisms that we detected is considerably
lower than reported for maize, wheat, barley, and soybean. Not
surprisingly it is also lower than the one SNP per approximately 100
bases that was detected in some of tissue libraries []. There was a
relative increase in the proportion of transition (6805) over
transversion (7258) in Ginger ESTs except in leaves libraries (). C / T transition was found to be high in ginger (Table 1 in
). High frequency of the C to T mutation is
usually seen due to methylation. We also used the Shannon
information index to analyze the proportion of ten possible types of
SNP/indels. ESTs from tissues of root showed highest values of
indices (0.164) whereas leaves had the least value (0.150) and rhizome
showed relatively increased value (0.152). Our study on higher
number and Shannon index of SNP/indel sites in root tissue than other
tissues also gives the additional information about in genomic
variation in genes expressed specifically in root tissue. Ratio of
transition to transversion (Ts/Tv) was very useful to compare the
genotypes of hepatitis virus C and also differences among the
mitochondrial genomes of animals. Our study gives a method, which
compares the ten possible types of SNP/ indels in a single index. The
results of detected SNPs were accessed through online at www.spices.res.in/spicesnip/

Conclusion
In total, we have identified over 64026 candidate SNP polymorphisms
with frequency of 0.84 SNPs/100bp in Ginger EST sequence data,
along with two measures of confidence for each predicted
polymorphism. Segregation of these SNPs with haplotype along with
validation demonstrates that candidate SNPs with high redundancy
and co-segregation confidence scores are likely to represent true SNPs.
The transition to transversion ratio and indel size frequencies
correspond to those observed by the analysis methods of SNP
discovery and suggest that the majority of predicted SNPs and indel
identified using this approach represent true genetic variation in
ginger. Overall transversion is high because ginger is vegetative
propagated through rhizome. This in silico analysis on ginger shows
the potential SNP markers for use in ginger breeding and the online
information we created would help to designing new primers and
develop more markers and to saturate the linkage maps.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are grateful to Department of Biotechnology Government of India
for the financial support.

Citation:Chandrasekar et al, Bioinformation 4(3): 119-122 (2009)

DNA substitution and indel polymorphism of SNPs in Ginger EST libraries.

