Background:
Senecio vulgaris also known as Groundsel, is an herb belonging
to the family Asteraceae. Groundsel has a long history of herbal
use and although not an official plant. It is still often used by
herbalists. The whole herb is anthelmintic, diaphoretic and
diuretic. It has been also reported to act as a remedy for scurvy.
It is often used as a poultice and is said to be useful in treating
sickness of the stomach, whilst a weak infusion is used as a
simple and easy purgative. The plant can be harvested in May
and dried for later use, or the fresh juice can be extracted and
used as required. A homeopathic remedy is made from the
plant. It is used in the treatment of menstrual disorders and
nose bleeds [].

To date RNA interference (RNAi) has mainly been used as a
readily available, rapid, reverse genetic tool to create medicinal
plants with novel chemical phenotypes and to determine the
phenotypes of genes responsible for the synthesis of many
pharmaceutically important secondary metabolites [].
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a type of interfering RNAs. miRNAs
are produced from non-coding DNA region []. They represent
a newly identified class of non-protein-coding small (˜20 nt)
RNAs, which negatively regulate the gene expression at the
post-transcriptional level by repressing gene translation or
degrading targeted mRNAs. They can regulate gene expression
by controlling the protein translation mechanism during variety
of cell phenomena. miRNAs originate from endogenous
transcripts that can form local hairpin structures and are
processed such that a single miRNA molecule accumulates
from one arm of a hairpin precursor molecule []. In silico
identification of miRNAs has gained momentum because
miRNAs are evolutionary conserved. There are four approaches
for identifying miRNAs: (1) genetic screening [,
]. (2) Direct
cloning after isolation of small RNAs [], (3) computational
strategy [], 
and (4) expressed sequence tags (ESTs) analysis [].
The basics of computational miRNA prediction are based on
few parameters like calculation of optimum free energies (dG),
Structural continuity, and number of G: C base pairing etc. 
[].
Identification of miRNAs by homology search analysis with
ESTs is also an emerging approach. Several miRNAs are
evolutionarily conserved from species to species [,
] and
suggests a powerful base to predict homologues or orthologues
of previously known miRNAs. More importantly this approach
is very useful for predicting miRNAs in multiple species.
Recently a set of miRNA and their targets were reported using
the largest data set of Triticeae ESTs []. In rice, six new
miRNAs were identified which are conserved in other
monocots [].

Methodology:
The present work used EST analysis method for the
identification of miRNAs. miRNAs from known plants
Arabidopsis, Brassica, Glycine, Saccharum, Sorghum, Vitis, Solanum,
Oryza, Triticum, Chlamydomonas, and other plant species were
downloaded from the miRNA database miRBase Release 17.
16772 miRNAs are available on the site
(http://www.mirbase.org/). 
1956 ESTs and 115 GSS sequences of S vulgaris are available on 
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov).
Local databases of EST and GSS sequences were created by
Bioedit sequence alignment editor tool (version 7.0.9.0).
BLASTN tool was used to reveal homology between ESTs and
miRNA sequences and GSS and miRNA sequences. An E-value
cut off 0.01 and word-match length 7 between query miRNA
and ESTs sequences was used as criteria to assign identity to
any sequence. On the basis of the parameters like expectation
value (E-value) and word match size between queries and
databases, precursor-miRNAs (pre-miRNAs) were identified.
The pre-miRNAs are aproximately 70-nucleotides in length and
are folded into imperfect stem-loop structures []. So, we
fetched 100 sequences upstream and downstream from the
matching region. Resultant sequences were predicted as premiRNAs.
For the functional annotation of EST and GSS hits,
they were searched against Swissprot database by using
BLASTX tool. The RNA structure and free energy of the hits
that did not show significant homology with proteins in
Swissprot database were calculated by RNA structure software
version 5.2. The flow chart of miRNA prediction is given in
. 
The following criteria were considered necessary for
miRNA homologs:

(1) The RNA sequence folding into an appropriate stem-loop
hairpin secondary structure, (2) a mature miRNA sequence
located in one arm of the hairpin structure, (3) predicted mature
miRNAs with no more than 3 nt substitutions as compared with
the known miRNAs, (4) miRNAs having less than 6 mismatches
with the opposite miRNA sequence in the other arm, (miRNA*)
(5) no loop or break in miRNA* sequences, and (6) predicted
secondary structures with higher minimal folding free energy
(MFE) and minimal folding free energy index (MFEI), the MEFI
usually being over 0.85 []. Also the AU contents of premiRNA
within 30% to 70% were considered significant [].

Nomenclature of miRNAs:
Names were assigned to the predicted miRNAs in similar
pattern to miRBase []. The mature sequences are designated
‘miR’, and the precursor hairpins are labeled as ‘mir’ with the
prefix ‘svu’ for S. vulgaris. In the cases where distinct precursor
sequences have identical miRNAs with different resources and
mismatch pattern, they were named as svu-mir-1-a and svumir-
1-b. In this research work both suv-mir-3a and suv-mir-3b
have identical miRNA sequences, however resources were
different.

Discussion:
The main principle behind the computational miRNA
prediction is sequence and structure homologies. As mentioned
above in materials and methods, after BLASTX searches, all
ESTs and GSS hits with noncoding sequences were maintained
for secondary structure analysis, only those in line with the
screening criteria of RNA structure prediction were selected as
candidates. In this analysis we identified 10 potential miRNAs
of S. vulgaris. Nomenclatures of these miRNA were based on
the scheme proposed by Ambros []. The basic information of
predicted miRNA as gene Id, source of the data,percentage of
AU in pre-miRNA and free energy of the structure are given in
, (see supplementary material) Structures with energy
of -90kcal/mol or higher were rejected (higher means less
negative).

As biological database grow exponentially in size of
complexity, on web (WWW), the identification of miRNAs
using computational approaches is more feasible and faster
than experimental approaches. The value of computational
methods increases due to advantages includes low cost and
high efficiency associated with it. According to Zhang 
[],
10,000 ESTs contain 1 miRNA, so about 1 miRNA should have
been predicted theoretically from the total of 1956 ESTs and 115
GSSs in this work. However, we obtained 10 potential miRNA
candidates from the present work. Generally, plant miRNA
clusters have not been frequently observed, so only one plant
miRNA can come from the same transcript. In this work,
different length of mature miRNAs from the same precursor
were regarded as different ones, considering they corresponded
to different target genes.

Conclusions:
In this paper, with a computational approach 10 miRNAs were
identified from the EST and GSS databases of S vulgaris. Six out
of ten most stable secondary structure of miRNA are shown in
. The free energies of different miRNAs are displayed
in . There lies great potential in mining the huge
information from databases and transfer that to divergent plant
species. Comparative genomics is useful for understanding the
regulation and function of genes in the plant genomes for which
genome sequence and related genomic resources are not
available. S vulgaris is a less studied plant member of
Asteraceae family, having medicinal value. This effort will
accelerate research in S vulgaris structural and functional
genomics. Data mining was done from biological database
resource, dbEST and dbGSS of NCBI. This led the identification
of miRNA in S vulgaris, the effort will accelerate the
development of genomic resources for this lesser studied plant
member of Asteraceae family, with great economic value.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Sahu et al, Bioinformation 7(8): 375-378 (2011)

Flowchart of miRNA prediction in Senecio vulgaris

Energy plot among the predicted miRNA of Senecio
vulgaris (Groundsel).

Secondary structure of predicted miRNA of Senecio vulgaris(Groundsel), red color shown miRNA sequence.

