Background
Blueberry (Vaccinium corymbosum) is one of the major berry 
crops grown in the United States []. North America, in fact, is 
the world's leading blueberry producer, accounting for nearly 
90% of world production at the present time. Total area devoted 
to growing commercial blueberries in North America is 
approximately 74,000 hectares. Blueberry is a high value crop, 
often times grown in acidic and imperfectly drained soils that 
would otherwise be considered unfit for agricultural 
production []. Blueberry is also an important fruit crop because 
of its nutritional value. Of all fresh fruits and vegetables, 
blueberries are one of the richest sources of antioxidants 
[,
,
]. 
Blueberry is a model organism for the heath family Ericaceae, 
which also includes the economically important, closely related 
cranberry as well as the economically important, more distantly 
related ornamentals, rhododendron, azalea, and mountain 
laurel. For all these related species, genomic studies, including 
EST generation and microarray analyses, are lacking or 
completely absent. Functional genomic studies on berry crops 
are lacking, especially studies dealing with the molecular 
impacts of low temperature on berry crop yield and chilling 
accumulation. Low temperature extremes reduce blueberry 
yields and impact the profitability and competitiveness of U.S. 
producers. Enhanced cold tolerance during the winter and early 
spring of elite varieties would be of great value to the blueberry 
industry. New low-chilling varieties are also desirable for the 
southern U.S. BBGD454 is a public database that houses 454 
transcriptome sequences from numerous blueberry cDNA 
library samples. The ultimate goal of these experiments is to 
better understand the genetic control of cold hardiness, chilling 
requirement, and various fruit quality traits and apply the 
information to develop new cultivars for the blueberry 
industry. 


Methodology
BBGD454 database was designed, implemented and hosted 
using Microsoft SQL Server 2008 Enterprise Edition. Microsoft 
Visual Studio 2008 was used to design and implement the web 
pages, which were programmed using ASP.NET framework 
2.35 with C# programming language. Real time charts were 
built using a charting library called Highcharts written in pure 
JavaScript. Both the database and the website are on the same 
server at Towson University in Baltimore, MD, USA. This 
server is running Microsoft Windows Server 2003 and Internet 
Information Services (IIS V6.0). BBGD454 stores unique 
putative transcripts (contigs and singletons) that resulted from 
assembling the normalized, corrected and filtered 454 
sequences using the GS DeNovo Assembler (454 Life Sciences, 
Roche). In addition to the sequences, BBGD454 also houses 
information on taxonomy, gene function, tissue specificity, gene 
ontology, and blast results of those contigs with high number of 
reads in one library against all the other libraries. All blast 
results were obtained using Blast2Go []. 


Utility to the biological community
The database contains 454 sequences from nine cDNA libraries that were 
constructed from mRNA from various organs collected from plants of the highbush blueberry 
(V. corymbosum) variety Bluecrop. Organs included young, fully expanded leaves, 
flower buds collected at various stages of cold acclimation (0, 397, 789, and 1333 chill units), 
and fruit collected at various stages of ripening (green, white, pink, and blue) 
[]. The nine libraries (leaves, buds at four 
different stages of cold acclimation, and fruit at four different stages of ripening) 
were multiplexed and sequenced on two plate runs of the 454-GS FLX Titanium platform. 
A summary of the sequencing and assembly results is shown in 
 (see supplementary material). 
Overall, 1,348,819 reads were generated, with an average read length of 287 nucleotides 
(nt). This yielded a total of ~390 megabases of cDNA sequence. The BBGD454 web-accessible 
interface () provides an easy way to search, 
browse and download the sequences and expression data
stored in the database. The following are the main functions the 
website provides: 


(i) Search:
Users can search by contig number, or by sequence description 
(). Partial numbers and/or characters can be used if one 
is not sure of the contig number or full gene name. Both the 
search by contig and search by description return their results 
in a nice tabular format that allows the user to select any record 
of the returned search results to see details about that specific 
sequence. The information includes sequence name, sequence 
description, sequence length, number of hits, gene ontolgy, 
RPKM [], number of reads, and more. 


(ii) Browse:
The webpage displays a table of all the blueberry cDNA 
samples. The user can click on any of the samples to see all 
sequences of that specific sample in a table that can be sorted 
based on many sequence attributes (id, length, description, etc). 
Sequence details can also be seen from this page by clicking on 
details next to any sequence id (contig number).

(iii) Compare samples:
Users can compare the expression of genes between two 
different libraries from the web site. This should help identify 
genes that are potentially differentially expressed during cold 
acclimation and chilling accumulation and during fruit 
development. 


(iv) Blast:
We have a Blast application on the site that provides the 
functionality of blasting a sequence of interest against the 
sequences stored in BBGD454, the Sanger ESTs stored in BBGD 
(http://bioinformatics.towson.edu/bbgd/) and/or a collection 
of sequence data comprising EST and genomic sequences from 
all plant species, kingdom Viridiplantae. 

Caveats
The sequences were de-novo assembled, which may have 
resulted in a number of false positives. Once the genome of 
blueberry is completely sequenced, one can redo the analysis, 
using these sequences, and aligning them to the genome. This 
would yield more accurate results.

Future Development
A web browser aligning the reads to the genome of blueberry 
would be extremely beneficial. This is something we might 
consider implementing once the genome is published and made 
available.

Authors' contributions
Omar Darwish, a doctoral student in IT, designed and 
developed the database and user interface, under the guidance 
of Nadim Alkharouf at Towson University. L. Jeannine 
Rowland was the PI of the Blueberry transcriptomic project at 
the USDA and was in charge of library preparation as well as 
the overall design of the experiments. All authors contributed to 
the writing of the manuscript.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Darwish et al, Bioinformation 9(17): 883-886 (2013)

A snapshot of BBGD454 main web page, shows a quick summary about the project and the functions this website 
provides. 


A snapshot of the Search by Contig ID page. Users can use the Search pages 
(By Contig Id, By Sequence Description) to search for the sequences using any part of their IDs or description.

