Background
The bimolecular structure prediction problem has been
examined for years, based on the fact that a function of a
bimolecule is largely dictated by its structure. The ultimate goal
of structure prediction is to obtain the three dimensional
structure of bimolecules through computation. The key concept
for solving the above mentioned problem is the appropriate
representation of the biological structures. The problems that
concern representations of bimolecular structures are either
characterized as NP-complete or with high complexity. A
characteristic common to these problems of molecular biology
consists in the satisfaction of a set of constraints coming from
different sources of biological knowledge. Hence, we focus on
the representation and visualization of closed RNA secondary
structure without pseudoknots, which can reasonably be
viewed as a first step towards three dimensional prediction
modeling. Generally, there are six kinds of representations for
closed RNA secondary structures: Full representation, Tree
representation, Circle representation, Arc annotated, Mountain
representation and Bracket representation. The major areas of
computational study in RNA secondary structure prediction
include dynamic programming algorithms [], stochastic
algorithms such as Bioambients calculus [], comparative
methods [], simulated annealing 
[], and most recently
evolutionary algorithms which attempt to mimic a natural
folding pathway by using a populations based approach 
[].
Nowadays, an increasing number of researchers have released
novel RNA structure analysis and prediction algorithms for
comparative approaches to structure prediction. Their
approaches are based on the fact that closed RNA structures can
be viewed as mathematical objects obtained by abstracting
topologically non-relevant properties of planar folding of
single-stranded nucleic acids. These algorithms require
significant computational resources and thus are impractical for
sequences of even modest length.

From the biological view, the RNA's structure is dominated by
base-pairing interactions, most of which are Watson-Crick pairs
between complementary bases. The base-paired structure of
RNA is called, its secondary structure. Due to the fact that
Watson-Crick pairs are such a stereotyped and relatively simple
interaction, accurate RNA secondary structure prediction
appears to be an achievable goal. RNA secondary structures
() folding cooperatively allow the creations of
pseudoknot free secondary structures, where no base pairs
overlap, that is there are no pair of bases (i, j) and (i', j') with i &lt;
i' &lt; j' &lt; j. In literature 
[] except hairpin and interior loops we
can also find definitions for bans, multiloops, external loops,
pseudo knot loops, interior-pseudo knotted loops and multipseudo
knotted loops.

Methodology
In this case consideration will be given to the surveys of Trotter
[] &amp; Johnson 
[] for the generation of specific permutations by
transposing pairs of elements, using a recursive procedure.

K-noncrossing closed RNA structures
Closed RNA secondary structure is represented as knoncrossing
set of partitions, which corresponds to the basepairs
and no base-pairs respectively. A (set) partition of [2n] is a
collection of disjoint subsets on [2n], representing a 2n union
(). Each element of a partition is called a block. A
(complete) matching on [2n] = {1, 2, 2n} can be represented by
listing its 2n blocks, as {(i1, j1), 
(i2, j2),…, (i2n, j2n)}, where ir &lt; jr for
1 ≤ r ≤ n. Two blocks (also called arcs) (i, j) and (i', j') form a
crossing if i &lt; i' &lt; j &lt; j', and a nesting if 
i &lt; i' &lt; j' &lt; j. It is wellknown
that the number of matching's on [2n] with no crossings
(or with no nestings) is given by the n-th Catalan number. Let
π2n denote the set of partitions of [2n] 
and a diagram π ε π2n. A
k-distant (k is a nonnegative integer) crossing of π is a pair of
edges (i, j) and (i', j') of π satisfying i &lt; 
i' &lt; j &lt; j' and j &lt; i' ≥ k. A
k-distant nesting of π is a set of two edges (i, j) and (i', 
j') of π satisfying i &lt; i' ≤ j' &lt; j and j 
&lt; i' ≥ k. A partition or matching π is
k-distant noncrossing if π has no 
k-distant crossing and k-distant
non-nesting if π has no k-distant nesting.

Generating Permutations
Our case study includes all the numbers that begin with 1 and
have unique alternate even-odd digits. The problem mainly
concerns the quick development of a special set of permutations
G2n, rather than the common n! permutations of the first n
components. These alternative permutations can be defined in
the form as shown in .

Discussion
RNA pseudoknot structures can be categorized in terms of the
maximal size of sets of mutually crossing bonds. A knoncrossing
RNA structure has at most k­1 mutually crossing
bonds and a minimum bond-length of 2, i.e., for any i, the
nucleotides i and i+1 cannot form a bond. According to this
formulation, a k-noncrossing RNA structure can be represented
as a digraph in which all vertices have degree, that does not
contain a k-set of mutually intersecting arcs and 1-arcs, i.e. arcs
of the form (i, i+1), respectively 
[]. Furthermore, RNA
secondary structure is often assumed to be sufficient for being
able to predict the RNA function. This assumption can be
justified by observations of well conserved secondary structures
and the fact that secondary structures fold fast, while tertiary
interactions need much more time to form 
[]. The fact that it
is possible to predict secondary structures using nearestneighbour
parameters [] also suggests that secondary
structure contributes much more to the stability of the RNA
structure, than the tertiary interactions.

Moreover, an imperative algorithm for generating
combinatorial objects is called loopless, if for every set of n
elements the number of steps needed to generate the first object
is less than O(n), the decision whether an object is the last is
obtained within O(1) steps and every transition between
successive objects requires at most O(1) steps. Generally, an
algorithm is loopless if the objects are represented in a simple
form and can be read directly without requiring any additional
steps.

The proposed model-algorithm () includes the
following procedure: Given an integer array of certain length
(L), the algorithm generates the permutation of digits {1, 2,…,
2n} in the integer array M[i, j], i, j = 1, 2,…, 2n. The number of
the iterations T is calculated proportionally with the total
number of elements required for the permutations of number n.
(e.g. for 3 one element, for 4→2, for 5→4 etc). A permutation is
created by swapping the newly added digit n with an existing
digit in the array. If n is odd, the permutation should occur only
if the corresponding swapped number is odd and vice versa.
Thus, only digits at positions n­3, n­5… should be considered.
Note that the first digit (1) of the array is not swappable. For the
n+1 element that is added after the last position on each of the
previous permutations every permutation of previous mark is
recalled. Since the recursive detection of the transposing,
through the minimal change of permutations, can be performed
at the same time, the running time of the algorithm will be
proportional to the size of the computation tree (the number of
recursive calls). Furthermore, in this tree, each node has exactly
T­1 children and each leaf corresponds to a unique permutation.

Conclusion
From the set of canonical pairs, it is clear that a given RNA
sequence has many potential structures. In fact, the number of
possible structures grows exponentially with the length of the
RNA sequence. The challenge is to identify whether structure
plays a functional role for a given RNA sequence and, if yes, to
predict this functional RNA structure. In medical applications,
accurate structural knowledge will be the starting point to
create new lead compounds which would eventually be applied
into more effective drugs. Therefore, the accurate prediction of
RNA structure could simultaneously provide clues for curing
an assortment of diseases, especially those that are based on
RNA viruses. Since the conception of permutation to the
individual representation of RNA secondary structure in
genetic algorithms has been introduced, the problem can be
essentially represented as a neural network in future work,
which can be optimized through genetic algorithms techniques.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Alexiou et al, Bioinformation 7(2): 91-95 (2011)

Representations of RNA secondary structures (An
RNA molecule can be viewed as an ordered sequence of n bases
and secondary structures can be generally defined as a set of
pairs i - j, 1 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ n, indexed starting at 1 from the so-called 5'-
end and with each index in, at most, one pair.) (a) A secondary
structure can be represented as an arc diagram, in which base
indices are shown as vertices on a straight line, ordered form
the 5'-end and arcs (always above the straight line) indicate
base pairs, and all chemical bonds of its backbone are ignored.
(b) Matching Nested Sets as an example of permutation [1-4-3-
2-5-8-7-6] in M4.

Diagrammatical representation of the proposed
algorithm

