Background
A DNA sequence is a long sequence 
consisting of four types of nucleotides: Adenine (A), Guanine (G), Thymine (T) 
and Cytosine (C). An important problem for sequence analysis is to distinguish 
coding (exons) and non-coding (introns and intergenic spaces) regions in a 
sequence. Sequence features exploiting properties such as codon usage bias, 
base compositional bias between codon positions, periodicity in base occurrence 
in coding regions [,
] have been proposed for 
characterizing coding/non-coding regions. The 3-periodicity property of coding 
regions is particularly interesting and has been studied intensely. A natural 
choice for detecting such periodicity is the Fourier Transform (FT). 

The Z-curve features [
] and the FT approach [
– ] are both concerned 
with detecting the 3-periodicity property of coding sequences and are 
implicitly related. However, there is no theoretical study of the relationship 
between the two approaches. In this paper, we give a theoretical analysis that 
reveals the relationships between the two and show that there are significant 
differences among them. In particular: (1) we provide a theoretical study of 
the relationship between the two approaches; (2) we provide a justification for 
the empirical observation that Z-curve approach generally have better 
performance than FT approach, especially for shorter sequences; and finally, (3)
 we propose a modification of the basic FT approach based on a new numerical 
sequence representation derived from Z-curve that preserves biological 
significance.

Methodology


Results and Discussion


Conclusion
Z-curve 
features are one of the popular features used for DNA sequence classification 
and they are closely related to a FT spectral analysis of the sequence for 
3-periodicity. In this paper we gave a theoretical study of the relationship 
between the Z-curve and the FT approach. Our analysis showed that there are 
significant differences in the spectral interpretation between the two. We 
discussed the implications of these differences for shorter sequences. Moreover,
 we showed that the three modified sequences obtained from the spectral 
reformulation of the Z-curve approach characterize different biological 
properties and are useful for coding region prediction. In particular, the 
3-periodicity is much more prominent in the modified sequences. As a result of 
our analysis, we proposed to apply spectral analysis to the three modified 
sequences to better capture the 3-periodicity property embedded in the coding 
region of a DNA sequence and verified this experimentally. 

Supplementary Material

Data 1

Data 2
This work is supported by RGC Grant PolyU 5210/04E, the project A-PA2P and the Centre for Multimedia Signal Processing (A452), the Hong Kong Polytechnic 
			University. The authors have no conflict of interest in this work.

Figures and Tables
 Classification results of coding and non-coding sequences
	Yeast	Human	
FFT approach			
Sensitivity	0.8580	0.8627	
Specificity	0.8922	0.2873	
Average	0.8751	0.5750	
	
Proposed approach			
Sensitivity	0.8607	0.7607	
Specificity	0.9558	0.8413	
Average	0.9083	0.8010	
Magnitude Spectrum in both coding (exons) and non-coding (introns) regions

Magnitude Spectrum for ‘AX136319’

 Magnitude spectrum for ‘AB061839’. No discernible peaks can be observed for blue dotted line at 2Π/3 (k=41)

 Magnitude spectrum for ‘AB050050’. No discernible peaks can be observed for blue dotted line at 2Π/3 (k=43).


      Citation:Law et al., Bioinformation 1(7): 242-246 (2006)

