Background
In the world's foot wear production India occupies 10th position
and is one of the highest producers of raw hides. As a result of
increasing demand for leather and leather products to
indigenous use and export, more than 2500 tanneries have been
mushroomed in India. The quality leather was obtained from
the raw hides through a complex and tedious process called
tanning. Tanning process consumes a large quantity of lime,
sodium sulphide, ammonium sulphate, sodium chloride,
bactericides, vegetable tannins and chrome salts. This leads to
the heavy discharge of high organic load, phenolic, tannins and
heavy metals into the environment. When the industrial tannin
discharged into water and soil it causes serious threat to biotic
and abiotic factors, notably in developing countries 
[].
Moreover tannin is resistant to microbial attack; thereby, it
retards the growth of soil microbial communities and stops the
biodegradation process []. Perhaps condensed tannin binds
with proteins and it develops into complex, which is not
feasible for decomposition. Even though tannin has the
antimicrobial property, many bacterial species developed
various mechanisms and pathways for their degradation in
natural habitats []. The degradation of gallotannin by an
anaerobic bacterium Achromobacter sp was reported by Lewis
and Starkey []. Deschamps et al., 
[] portrayed the ability of
bacteria using tannic acid as the sole source of carbon and his
group isolated 15 bacterial strains belong to Bacillus sp,
Staphylococcus sp and Klebsiella sp.

Activated sludge is the cost effective method for the treatment
of industrial waste waters. Sudden changes in the rate of
organic load and chemicals to meet out the market demand
makes the activated sludge process more complicated. To
overcome this problem, the promising approach CETP was
emerged. It was designed with the combination of the physical,
chemical and biological process. The present study has been
undergone in CETP functioning at Pallavaram, Chennai,
Pallavaram Tanners Industrial Effluent Treatment Company
Ltd (PTIET). In this, seven collection wells are located in various
places to receive effluent from 152 tanneries, which is pumped
to a collection tank, from there the treatment process was
started []. This study unmask the biomass survive in each
stage of tannery effluent treatment plant, also our prime focus is
to evidence the predominant group of microbes in the treatment
plant and to exploit it for tannin degradation by adopting
molecular strategies.

Methodology
Sample Collection, Isolation and Identification of bacterial isolates:
The effluent samples were collected in sterilized containers
from the raw effluent tank, primary treated, secondary treated,
tertiary treated and soil from CETP, Pallavaram, Chennai, India.
The supernatant was removed without disturb the biomass and
1 g of the biomass was suspended in 1ml of distilled water.
From this crude, serial dilutions were made up to 10-7 for each
stage of treatment including soil. Each dilution were spread on
LB agar plates and incubated at 32°C for overnight. The
observed colonies were picked on the basis of the
morphological features like size, shape, elevation, opacity,
surface, texture and margin. Pure cultures were obtained
through the quadrant streak and stored in the refrigerator for
molecular analysis. It was subcultured 2 to 3 times to check the
purity before DNA extraction.

Molecular investigation:
The genomic DNA was extracted from bacterial isolates using
bacterial genomic DNA isolation kit (Real Biotech Corporation).
The amplification of 16S rRNA gene was performed with
universal primers 27F (agagtttgatcmtggctcag) and 1492R
(tacggytaccttgttacgactt) (Lane, 1991). The reaction mixture
contained 50ng of template DNA, 10X PCR buffer, 1.5mM
MgCl2, 2.5mM each dNTPs, 10 pmol of forward and reverse
primer and 1.5 U of Taq DNA polymerase. The total mixture
volume was 50µl and the program starts with initial
denaturation at 94°C for 3 mins, followed by denaturation at
94°C for 30s, annealing at 55°C for 1.5 minutes, extension at
72°C for 2.5 minutes then the final extension at 72°C for 5
minutes. From denaturation to extension step 35 cycles were
repeated. The 16S product was resolved in 1.5% (w/v) agarose
gel electrophoresis in 1X TAE buffer using 1 kb ladder as
molecular weight marker and visualized by staining with
ethidium bromide.

Sequencing and In silico analysis:
The amplicons were sequenced and the partial sequences
obtained were compared with available data in GenBank using
the BLAST. The sequences were deposited in GenBank public
database under the accession numbers JN411558 - JN411575 and
JN559869 - JN559926. In the total population, the dominant
isolates were subjected to the promoter identification and the
prediction of its differential promoter location in the isolates.
The functional promoters were identified using the online
software Bprom. The transcription binding factor present in the
16S rRNA gene was also identified using another online tool
named TF scan site.

Result and Discussion
The present study was performed to estimate the microbial
population in the different stages of treatment in CETP.
Samples were collected from the discharges of Raw Effluent
tank, Primary Treated effluent, Secondary Treated effluent,
Tertiary Treated effluent and Soil in Pallavaram CETP, Chennai.
Those 5 different samples were worn to harvest the microbes in
culture dependent way; LB media was used as a substrate to
harvest the microbes. The microbes developed in the plate were
picked for screening with respect to its morphological
characteristics. The colonies were subcultured atleast thrice to
check the mixed profile and also to obtain the pure culture of
the isolate. The pure cultures were subjected to genomic DNA
isolation. The isolated DNA was checked for its quality and
quantity to perform the PCR. 16S rRNA genes of the isolated
bacterial colonies were amplified with the above said
conditions; they were sequenced to identify the phylotype of
the bacterial colonies in different stages. Microbial communities
have been explored comprehensively in all states of soil 
[].
However, in the recent decades the scientist has turned towards
the analysis of microbial consortia of contaminated source. The
classical reason behind this is to exploit the untapped microbial
resource in contaminated sites, and the consortia tends to frame
microbiome which codes for the superior activity to clean up
the contaminating pollutants from the same site. Moreover, the
microbiomes exist in the contaminated sites develops the
resistivity which have the ability to convert complex pollutants
into simpler harmless derivatives. On this basis, the microbiome
based removal of pollutants from the industrial premises was
practised in current situation [,
]. The number of colonies
formed in the plate showed arbitrary growth in different stages
of treatment.The number of colonies increased gradually from
the initial stage (Raw effluent) to the final stage (Treated
effluent and soil). The survey of the bacterial community in
CETP revealed that, the dominant group belonging to
firmicutes in all stages of the treated effluent. Around 90% of
the Bacillus genera were occupied, which constitute different
species in the different treatment plant. The Raw effluent
consists of putative Bacillus sp, whose population was around
50% in total bacterial population (). Similarly, the
treated effluent and soil also have the same percentage of
population, but the percentage of putative Bacillus sp was
variable around 30-40% in all stages of the sample. Bacillus
subtilis as the second highly populated bacteria present in the
primary treated effluent (). In the secondary treated
effluent Staphylococcus sp was the second dominantly existing
bacteria ().The tertiary treated effluent has notable
population variability. Other than Putative Bacillus sp, totally
diversified bacterial colonies were also found (). In
soil the Bacillus firmus ranks the second highly populated and
Bacillus safensis leads the third of the same.

However, in this study, the CETP samples from treatment site
was collected, which receives wastewater from various
tanneries; this results in the complex diversity of bacteria in the
CETP. One of the major tasks is to analyse the microbial flora
and this is the first step in understanding the operational
efficiency of these systems []. Even though, it was well
recognized that cultivable microbes comprise a very low level
of total diversity than the culture-independent. One of the ever
best options was the culture-based method, whereby specific
substrate enrichment of the community can be carried out 
[].
The conventional fact is, the culture dependent method
enhances the growth of dominant microbes in selected sample.
So the majority of population diversity studies were carried out
with both the aspects []. Here diversity calculation is based on
16S rDNA gene sequence analysis. Many 16S rRNA based
molecular techniques have been developed for communitylevel
analysis of differences in microbial composition associated
with environmental, spatial or temporal changes 
[].
Moreover, in the current scenario microarrays have been
implied for community analysis in treatment plants. These are
designed using either the 16S-23S rDNA intergenic spacer
region [] or the 16S rDNA gene 
[]. However, results from
this study demonstrate the importance of using both culturebased
and culture-independent tools for the characterization of
microbial diversity of a niche []. A coherent dominance of
putative Bacillus sp, B. firmus and B. licheniformis were observed
in all the stages of effluent, while uncultured Bacillus sp was
observed in all the treated samples except raw effluent and
secondary treated. The Firmicutes, B. megaterium and B.
methylotrophicus showed their presence from secondary
treatment because they were not seen in raw and primary
treated samples. Bacillus altitudins was observed in the primary
and secondary stage of the treatment plant, while B. subtilis
present in the raw effluent and primary treated. Fascinatingly,
B.pumilus and B. marisflavi were the members existing in the
population without any continuity, B. pumilus were present in
the raw effluent and in the tertiary treatment, B. marisflavi was
found in the secondary treated and soil sample. Likewise,
B.cereus was existing in the primary treated effluent and soil
sample.

This is the first attempt to isolate and elucidate the fact of
dominant microbes present in all stages of the CETP through
culture dependent method, so samples were collected from the
different stages of same CETP site. Correspondingly, in earlier
studies it was insisted that Bacillus pumilis and Bacillus polymyxa
are reported as the good producers of microbial tannase 
[].
Similarly, the data of microbial diversity in aeration tanks
revealed that there was an interesting notification regarding the
presence of firmicutes in one aeration tank. Notably, in the
same analysis on another aeration tank they observed
firmicutes were not found, this clearly states that the microbial
population varies with respect to several factors 
[]. The
current study is also highlighting the prevalence of the tannin
tolerant microbes vary with respect to the CETP and its organic
load, but the firmicutes was found in most of the CETP which
has been confined in earlier studies on tannery effluents. The
dominant occurrence of Bacillus sp was predicted in the study
site, consistently in all stages starting from the raw effluent to
the each step of treated effluent and finally in soil also, a similar
dominance was reported earlier in chromium contaminated site
[,
]. A unique set of bacteria were also found in each
sampling stage of the CETP, for instance B. amyloliquefaciens
and Lysinibacillus fusiformis in raw effluent, Leucobacter tardus in
primary treated, Staphylococcus sp and Bacillus aquimaris in
Secondary treated. A variety of diversified strains were present
in the secondary treated sample such as B.flexus,
B.stratosphericus, B. anthracis, Staphylococcus caprae, and
Bacterium sp. Similarly soil also comprised of distinctly variable
colonies such as B.safensis, B.oceanisedminis, B.aryabhattai and
uncultured bacterium (). The lineage of the branches
extended well enough with inter variable species in firmicutes
and also a wide distribution of diversified firmicutes were
visualized in the soil when compared to the others ()
there is a percentage of cumulative bacterial diversity in the
CETP, which elucidates the total diversity constitutes above 90
% of the population was firmicutes. In that a Bacillus sp occupies
the dominance of 33%, Bacillus firmus was second dominant
species resides about 11% in total population. Rather than these,
the census of all other bacteria survives in the CETP was below
the margin of 10%. This evidence propably sounds the validity
of dominance of Bacillus sp and Bacillus firmus, those can be
studied in detail to know how they are resistant towards the
tannin and oraganic load. The dominant bacteria can be implied
in treatment process through enrichment of media, which
enables them to have a prolonged stationary phase. A Novel
tannase gene can be traced from those microbes, thus obtained
gene can be over expressed and can be exploit the same to treat
the organic pollutant from CETP.

As a final point, we look forward the in silico analysis of the
isolates obtained, most probably all the isolates varied evidently
in their promoters counts, site and in their location. But we
scrutinize and accomplish the in silico data of the abundant
microbes interspersed in the treatment setup. Accordingly the
Bacillus sp, Bacillus firmus and Bacillus licheniformis were the
isolates taken for the interpretation of insilico characterization,
the results exposed the variable number of promoters in its site
and location. The Bacillus sp procures 2 promoters, one was
unpredictable and the other was ihf (integration host factor), in
Bacillus firmus 3 different promoters namely rpoD19 and
rpoD17 (Transcription factors) and pur R is a Purine regulation
promoter. Then the Bacilllus licheniformis persist the following
promoters Crp (C-reactive protein) and rpoD16 (Transcription
factors) Usually the integration host factor – ihf is a nucleoidassociated
which persuades the confirmation of the neighboring
promoter sequences, and defined the specific DNA base
sequence that rendered the promoter susceptible to this
activation. Here, ihf binding sets the confirmation of
neighboring sequences, thereby triggering promoter activation
[]. The promoter rpo family was closely associated with the
RNA polymerase transcription initiation factor which closely
related to sigma complex factor []. Crp superfamily of
transcription factors that bind as homodimers to palindromic
sequences of DNA, each subunit binding to one half-site.

Supplementary material
Data 1
All the Authors gratefully acknowledge the Department of
Biotechnology (DBT), New Delhi for providing financial
support [No. BT/PR-11581/BCE/08/712/2008 Dt 17.08.2010].
Authors are thankful to PTIET-CETP for sample collection for
this study. First author T.S gratefully acknowledge UGC for
awarding her Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship. J.P gratefully
acknowledges the UGC for the award of UGC Non SAP
meritorious fellowship.

Citation:Suganya et al, Bioinformation 9(2): 101-105 (2013)

Statistical pie diagram represents the percentile of
bacterial community in the A) Raw Effluent; B) Primary treated
Effluent; C) Secondary treated Effluent; D) Tertiary treated
Effluent; E) Soil.

