Background
The matrix metalloproteinases (hMMPs) of human are zinc
containing endopeptidases and they play some important roles
in ovulation, embryogenic growth, tumor growth, metastasis,
multiple sclerosis, rheumetoid arthritis etc []. The human
neutrophil collagenase (HNC) or hMMP-8 is mainly produced
by neutrophils and involves in colorectal cancer []. The
biological role of hMMP–8 and its actual function / mechanism
is incompletely understood. So, hMMP–8 is one of the attractive
target for design the inhibitors of extracellular matrix
degradation in colorectal cancer and antiproteolytic drug for
inflammatory diseases [,
]. The hMMP-8 is structurally
homologous to all other MMPs, consisting of defined functional
domains. The crystallographic structures (1BZS, 1JAP, 1ZP5,
1ZVX, 1ZSO) [–] of hMMP-8 Table 1 (see supplementary
material) have explored the presence of two (catalytic and
structural) zinc ions in catalytic domains of enzyme. Catalytic
zinc ion (ZnC) is bound to three histidine reidues (H197, H 201,
H207) and different inhibitors (BSI250, HOA4, 2NI128, FIN994,
EIN994 respectively), whereas the structural zinc (ZnS) is
coordinated by three histidine residues (H147, H162, H175) and
one aspartic acid (D149) which are given in Table 2 (see
supplementary material). The catalytic domain also has two
calcium ions which are thought to involve in the structural
function of enzyme. Furthermore, regarding the mechanism of
activity of different hMMPs, the catalytic role of ZnC is well
known []; 
however, the participation of other zinc ion (ZnS) in
the catalytic process has also been indicated in MMP-13 
[].

In this work we perform long time MD simulations in order to
study the dynamics of water molecules and their interaction
with catalytic and structural zinc (ZnC and ZnS) centers. Beside
these, the role of ZnS (structural zinc ion) in the catalytic
mechanism / process of hMMP-8 can also be investigated
through computational dynamic of solvated enzyme. In
addition the simulation could also shade some light on the
water mediated recognition between the two zinc centers and
their conjugal involvement in the catalytic process. All the
results may provide further complementary information on the
inhibitor binding chemistry and also enrich the biochemical
insight of hMMP-8 enzyme which may be useful for the
development of inhibitor topology of hMMP–8.

Methodology
X-ray structures of hMMP–8 (1BZS, 1JAP, 1ZP5, 1ZVX, 1ZSO)
were taken from Protein Data Bank [–]. All the five
structures are monomer and are bonded by several inhibitors
(BSI250, HOA4, 2NI128, FIN994, EIN994) given in Table 2. From
all the structures, protein, Zn ions and water molecules were
isolated using Swiss PDB viewer program [,
]. The
inhibitors were removed from all the structures.

Solvation:
All the hMMP-8 structures were solvated using the program
CHASA (Conditional Hydrophobic Accessible Surface Area)
[] 
without implying Periodic Boundary Condition (PBC). The
explicit hydration have been employed on each structure where
approx ~ 800-1000 water molecules have been used to immerse
molecules by TIP3 water model.

Energy minimization of the structures:
All the five modified PDB and solvated structures were energy
minimized by GROMOS 96 force field [] (500 steps of steepest
decent followed by 1000 cycles of conjugate gradient) in the
Swiss PDB Viewer program with 10Å cut–off distance [] for
nonbonded interaction, using a distance dependent dielectric
constant. At the initial stage of energy minimization, the protein
was kept fixed and the water molecules were only allowed to
move freely. Optimization released the local constraints from
the structures, the energy minimization was again followed
(1000 cycles) by allowing the protein and water molecules to
move freely.

Molecular dynamics structures:
For investigating the role of water molecules, solvation of
native PDB structures was done by creating a water box of
dimension 10 × 10 × 10 Å3, using solvate 1.2 plugin within the
Visual Molecular Dynamics v. 1.8.6. program [] and MD
simulations were followed. Total ~ 2196 water molecules (TIP3P
water model) were used to immerse each molecule. The
molecular dynamics of each structure was performed by
converting the solvated and PDB structures to Protein Structure
File (PSF) using the tool Automatic PSF Generation Plugin–1.0 v
by applying CHARMM force field [,
] within the Visual
Molecular Dynamics v. 1.8.6. All the ten (five PDB and their
solvated) structures were simulated. All the structures were
initially energy minimized (100 cycles to eliminate initial
contacts which would destabilize the system) using CHARMM
force field. After energy minimization all the structures were
simulated using Auto Interactive Molecular Dynamics (IMD)
v.1.8.6 and Nanoscale Molecular Dynamics v.2.6. 
[]. During
simulation, the whole system was allowed to move freely 
[].
The molecular simulations were followed upto 5 ns for each
structure (where time step was 2fs) at 300K temperature by
means of Langevin dynamics []. The whole system was
converged within 500ps and the simulation was adequately
converged within 2ns (). During the dynamics, several
snapshots were recorded (every 2ps) to investigate the detail
coordination or interaction of water molecules with the Zinc
(ZnC / ZnS) ions.

Identification of conserved water molecules:
To identify the conserved water molecules in hMMP-8, the five
different X-ray crystal structures of the protein (1BZS, 1JAP,
1ZP5, 1ZVX, 1ZSO) were compared using 1BZS as template. All
the other structures were superimposed one by one on the
template structure by a standard least-square fitting algorithm
using Swiss PDB Viewer program. The fit was initially
optimized on the backbone atoms and the RMSD values were
~0.5-0.6Å. After superimposing the concerned structure on the
template, the conserved water molecular sites were compared
and located between the two respective structures. Water
molecules that were found to be within 1.5Å [,
] in between
the two structures (template and concerned reference
structures) were taken as conserved.

Binding free energy and electrostatic free energy of Zn ions:
Binding free energy and electrostatic free energy of both the Zn
ions in the PDB and MD simulated hMMP-8 structures were
calculated by FOLDX program []. The temperature, ionic
strength, pH and VDW (parameters of FOLDX) were assigned
as 300K, 0.05 (M), 7.0 and 2.0 Å.

Results
X-ray Structural information:
In this work the catalytic and structural zinc ions are designated
by ZnC and ZnS. Throughout the work the water molecules
which are directly coordinated to ZnC are abbreviated as WH
and WI. The WH (Trans to ZnC bound H207) is thought to involve
in the hydrolysis of substrate []. The WI (Trans to ZnC bound
H197) is in close proximity to inhibitor binding site. In the five
PDB structures coordination of residues (H197, H 201, H207) to
ZnC is same. In these structures ZnC is also bonded to a
competitive inhibitor….(BSI250, HOA4, 2NII8, FIN995, EIN994
respectively). In the structures 1JAP, 1ZVX, 1ZSO the inhibitor
molecule has two donor centers, whereas in 1BZS and 1ZP5 the
inhibitors have only one donor center. However, the structural
zinc ion (ZnS) is coordinated by three histidines (H147, H162, H175)
and one aspartic acid (D149).

Analysis of energy minimized structures:
During energy minimization of all the PDB structures, the
coordination number of ZnC changes due to the bonding of
incoming water molecules to this metal ion. In the energy
minimized native 1BZS, 1JAP, 1ZVX crystal structures, two
incoming water molecules (WH and WI) form bond with ZnC,
and WH also forms H–bond to E198 (2.5 to 3.5 Å). Whereas in the
PDB structures of 1ZP5 and 1ZSO only one incoming water
molecule (WI) is bonded to ZnC. However, no such water
molecular interaction is observed at ZnS. All the distances are
included in  (see supplementary material). Again, after
energy minimization of the two (1BZS, 1JAP) solvated PDB
structures two incoming water molecules are observed at the
same hydrophilic WH and WI sites which are included in 
. 
In the rest three (1ZP5, 1ZVX, 1ZSO) solvated structures, only
one water molecule appears at WI site and coordinated to ZnC.
However no water molecular coordination is observed at the
structural zinc ion (ZnS).

Analysis of MD simulated structures:
MD simulation of the different X-ray and solvated structures
has also revealed the presence of water molecules at the WI and
WH hydrophilic centres. Within 500ps, both the water molecules
(present at the two hydrophilic centres) and one glutamic acid
residue (E198) are appeared to coordinate with ZnC. In every
structure the WH water molecule forms H–bond to E198 (OE1) (~
2.1 to 2.6 Å). During 5ns simulation, the trigonal geometry
around ZnC has changed to distorted octahedral and the
coordination number changed from 3 to 6  (see
supplementary material) (). In the simulated PDB
structures, the average ZnC …..W1, W1…..W2 and W2…..H162
distances are 2.07 – 2.17, 2.14 – 2.80 and 2.23 – 2.87Å
respectively. In all the simulated X- ray and solvated structures
of hMMP–8 (1BZS, 1JAP, 1ZP5, 1ZVX, 1ZSO) the ZnS atom is
coordinated by two positionally conserved water molecule (W
and WS) and three histidine and one aspartic acid residue.
Among the two water molecule one (WS) also bonded to S151.
Within 500ps, these two water molecules appear to coordinate
with ZnS and S151 also bonded to WS. In the simulated X-rays
structures the average ZnS …..W and ZnS….. WS distances are
2.08 – 2.15 and 2.02 – 2.21 Å, however in the solvated structures
the values are 2.01 – 2.27 and 2.06 – 2.62 Å Moreover, after 2ns,
the ZnC bound WH / W1 water molecule bridges to ZnS bound
H162 through another W2 water molecule (ZnC – WH (W1)…..W2
….H162 - ZnS). The H–bonding distances are given in ()
 (see supplementary material).

The average binding free energy of ZnC and ZnS ions in the five
PDB structures (1BZS, 1JAP, 1ZP5, 1ZVX, 1ZSO) are 23.88 and
137.1 Kcal/mole, whereas after simulation the values are
reduced to -75.7 and -34.5 Kcal/mole. After solvation, the
average binding free energy of ZnC and ZnS are 87.6 and 94.2
Kcal/mole whereas after simulation (of the solvated structures)
the average binding free energy reduced to -51.1 and -48.3
Kcal/mole () 
 (see supplementary material).
The average electrostatic binding free energy of ZnC and ZnS
ions of the five PDB structures (1BZS, 1JAP, 1ZP5, 1ZVX, 1ZSO)
are -0.848 and -0.682 Kcal/mole respectively, whereas after
simulation the values are -6.0 and -10.2 Kcal/mole. After
solvation, the average electrostatic binding free energy of ZnC
and ZnS -8.26 and 13.6 Kcal/mole, whereas after simulation (of
solvated structures) the values are reduced to -14.43 and -26.45
Kcal/mole Table 6.

Discussion
The hydrophilic center around both the zinc ions (ZnC and
ZnS) in hMMP–8 structures seems to be interesting. The
coordination of water molecules present at WH hydrophilic site
which forms H-bond to E198 around ZnC ion in three Emin X-ray
structures (1BZS, 1JAP, 1ZVX) and all MD simulated structures
are observed to be conserved. Furthermore, the coordination of
WI water molecule in two Emin X-ray structures (1ZP5, 1ZSO)
and all MD simulated structures is also conserved. The presence
of WH and WI hydrophilic centers has been revealed during the
simulation of hMMP-8 PDB and solvated structures. These two
conserved water molecules may provide some stability to ZnC
ion. Nevertheless, in all the MD simulated X–ray and solvated
structures, the ZnS bound two water molecules occupying the
same hydrophilic centers (trans to H162, H175), indicate the
possibilities of variable hydration susceptibility of catalytic and
structural zinc ions (ZnC and ZnS) in the hMMP–8 dynamical
structures . The shift or fluctuation of binding and
electrostatic free energy of both the zinc ions in the X-ray and
simulated structures may imply some possibility of ZnS centre
to act as a catalytic partner.

The variation of coordination geometry from tetrahedral to
distorted octahedral through the interaction of two water
molecule (W and WS) directly to ZnS in all the PDB and solvated
MD–simulated structures and the H–bonding of WS with
S151(OG)  (see supplementary material) indicated the
possible involvement of metal ion and S151 to the catalytic
process. Furthermore, the recognition of the ZnC and ZnS
(which are ~ 13Å apart) through two conserved water
molecules (WH / W1 and W2) and the observation of similar
type of water mediated conjugation of metal ions in different
synthetic Zn–complexes [,
] may also support the role of
two Zn centres in the function and mechanism of enzyme
( … 
). Based on the dynamical results of this work the
participation of ZnS in the collagenolysis mechanism of hMMP-
8 may be proposed (). The ZnS directly binds to
substrate and polarize it and subsequently activate the water
molecule which may then act as a nucleophile. The ZnS bound
WS (water molecule) and S151(OG) may also thought to activate
the metal ion in the intermediate transition steeps of the
photolytic mechanism.

Conclusion
The MD-simulation of the PDB and solvated structures of
hMMP-8 have revealed the presence of few conserved water
molecules (W and WS) around the catalytic and structural zinc
(ZnC and ZnS) ions, which are mostly inaccessible in X-rays
structures. The coordination of these two conserved water
molecules to ZnS and the H-bonding interaction of WS to S151
have indicated the plausible involvement of that metal ion in
the catalytic process. The differential coordination dynamics of
the ligands (water molecules) around both the zinc ions seem to
be an interesting feature of hMMP-8. Beside this the coupling of
ZnC and ZnS metal ions through two conserved hydrophilic
centers (occupied by water molecules) may also provide some
rational clues on the recognition of two zinc ions which were
separated by ~13 Å in their X-ray structures. Possibly, the
biochemical signal between the two Zn+2 ions may be
transmitted through W1 and W2 water centers in enzyme.

The unique recognition and stereospecific interaction of both
the Zn+2 ions through conserved water molecules of both the
Zn+2 ions in the enzyme (ZnC – WH (W1)…..W2 ….H162 - ZnS)
seem to be important for activity and ligand recognition.
Possibly, the geometrical and electronic consequences of
conserved water molecular interaction W and WS are very
implicative for design the topology of hMMP-8 inhibitor which
may be implemented / exploited for the design of
antiproteolytic agent using water mimic drug design protocol.
Possibly, heterocyclic ligand with flexible structure containing
two aliphatic short chains with suitable spacer length may be
suggested to design selective inhibitor for hMMP-8.

Supplementary material
Data 1
B.P.M. and B.C. thank and acknowledge National Institute of
Technology-Durgapur for providing the research facility in the
Department of Chemistry.

Citation:Chakrabarti et al, Bioinformation 9(3): 126-133 (2013)

The binding free energy of Znc and Zns in 1 BZS
structure during 5ns MD Simulation.

Water mediated recognition of the catalytic and
structural zinc ions (Znc and Zns) after MD simulation.

Proposed mechanism on water mediate hydrolysis of substrate in hMMP-8.

