Background
In post genomic era, bioinformatics taking the lion share of
research in the field of computational biology. Physicochemical
properties of amino acids (building block of protein)
can be used to study protein sequence profiles, structures and
functions []. Various types of chromatographic procedures
need apriori information about physicochemical properties
such as molecular weight, net charge and binding affinity for
the isolation of proteins. In general, Isoelectric point, Molecular
weight, Aliphatic index and GRAVY are most popular among
all physicochemical properties. However, these values do not
reveal anything about the code of proteins i.e. the sequence
property. Sequence properties such as Polarity, hydrophobicity,
hydrophilicity, relative mutability, bulkiness, refractivity and
others, which are computed using experimentally determined
amino acids index values, are most important. Determination of
physicochemical properties of unknown proteins and finding
its correlation with known ones is very important as it can
provide insight into their structure and hence function. Three
dimensional structures of proteins, which are more conserve,
are determined by more diverse amino acids sequences 
[].
Several online GPL softwares are present which analyze
physicochemical properties of proteins. Most authentic among
them is from ExPASy []. However, major bottle neck in this is
that one has to input one sequence at a time for computation of
above properties, which is time consuming and limited by the
speed of internet. Further, managing outputs may create
confusion. Propas [] a standalone software, which can perform
calculation on a number of sequences but only of three kinds of
physicochemical properties. Thus, available software tools
suffer from one or the other limitations. We, therefore, have
developed PHYSICO which not only computes 25 kinds of
sequence properties and physicochemical properties of large set
of protein sequences but also computes mean properties as well
as standard deviation of all input sequences for comparison.
Our program thus would be helpful for researchers in the field
of bioinformatics and computational biology.

Program input
PHYSICO takes protein FASTA file (raw or block) as input.
User needs to be on the same directory where the FASTA file is
located. In the command prompt, the program is to be run with
the name of FASTA file as argument. Upon thorough check of
the input file, PHYSICO starts computation and output
redirection.

Preparation of RAW-FASTA file:
In this, full length sequence is to be kept in one line, following
the title line (FASTA FORMAT). Any number of sequences of
any length can be kept in the file. Sequences are to be retrieved
from an authentic database and fed in a local text file along
with header line.

Preparation of BLOCK-FASTA file:
In block FASTA file all sequences are of same length. Analysis
of this file is useful for comparison among different
orthologous sets adapted in different environment (such as
mesophilic, thermophilic etc). Firstly a raw FASTA file is made
using all available orthologous sequences as above and then it
is subjected for multiple sequence alignment. Indels are to be
removed and FASTA format is to be made. The block FASTA
file thus obtained can be subdivided based on environment
specific proteins (thermophilic or mesophilic etc) or can be
separated in the same FASTA file by putting a specific marker
(such as ##1, ##2 etc) just after &gt; in the header line. Program
can automatically identify the marker if it exists and process
accordingly.

Program output
PHYSICO writes itemized excel outputs for block or raw
FASTA files as input. In block FASTA file homologous position
based computations are relevant and thus the program
redirects extra relevant outputs for block FASTA files apart
from common outputs. Figure 1 show details of the program.

Caveats and future development
PHYSICO is written in GAWK (interactive) language which can
preferably run in any C shell UNIX prompt and also be made
run on B shell Linux and window command prompts. We are
developing a web based interface for PHYSICO and other tools
developed in our lab.

We thankfully acknowledge the computational facility
Laboratory of the Department of Biotechnology, Govt. of India,
The University of Burdwan.

Citation:Gupta et al, Bioinformation 10(2): 105-107 (2014)

Details and execution of the program in UNIX environment.

