Background
Phosphodiesterases (PDE) are enzymes that control
concentrations of intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP) and cyclic guanidine monophosphate (cGMP)
respectively. PDE-catalyzed cleavage of the phosphodiester
bond at the 3׳-position cyclic adenosine 3,5-phosphate, cAMP,
results in its hydrolysis into their respective 5׳-nucleotide
monophosphates []. cAMP and cGMP mediate the activation
of protein kinase A and protein kinase G that phosphorylate
various substrates responsible for regulation of many
physiological processes particularly the smooth muscle
contraction []. The relative intracellular concentration of cAMP
and cGMP is regulated through the synthesis process mediated
by adenyl and guanyl cyclases and the hydrolysis process
catalyzed by PDEs. PDEs inhibitors block the hydrolysis of
cAMP and cGMP resulting in higher levels of these cyclic
nucleotides and therefore attractive therapeutic utilities are
outcome []. PDEs include 11 identified families, which have
been distinguished by their substrate specificities, mechanisms
of regulation, and their sensitivities to different
pharmacological agents [,
]. cGMP specific
phosphodiesterase-5 (PDE5) isoform is expressed in smooth
muscle tissue, specifically in the corpus cavernosum 
[]. Being
caused by low concentration of cGMP, successful treatment of
male erectile dysfunction (MED) was achieved by PDE5
inhibitors that block the hydrolysis of cGMP and elevate its
cellular level []. Many PDE5 inhibitors were clinically
approved to be marketed as drugs for treatment of human
MED. Several PDE5 inhibitors are in wide clinical use for MED
treatment, including sildenafil (Viagra®), vardenafil (Levitra®),
tadalafil (Cialis®) and udenafil (zydena®). Synthetic and
crystal structure study has been reported based on the
sildenafil derivatives. Regrettably, the clinical use of PDE5
inhibitors experienced several disadvantages including the
cross-reactivity with PDE6 and PDE11 resulting in unwanted
side effects such as skin rash, blurred vision, headache, back,
and muscle pain [].

There are several aryl, biaryl, hetroaryl or heterobiaryl classes
of PDE5 inhibitors with different scaffold structures. The aryl
class includes substituted nitroanilines and the biaryl class
includes substituted naphthalenes. At the same time, the
heterobiaryl and heterotriaryl are further sub classified based
on its fused system into pyrazolopyrimidinones,
triazolopyrimidinones, imidazotriazines, purines,
pyrrolopyrimidinones, triazolotrizinones,
isoxazolopyrimidinones, β-carbolines, pyrroloquinolones,
isoquinolines, quinazolines, imidazoquinazolinones,
pyrazolopyridines, pyrazolopyridopyrimidinones 
[–]. These
widely different chemical structures are suggested to have
different orientation in the binding site of PDE5 enzyme. In
view of these findings and in continuation of our previously
published work in the field of design of PDE5 inhibitors 
[]
and in the modelling area of research [,
], we have been
prompted to using the molecular modelling studies in order to
investigate the preferential mode of binding of PDE5 inhibitors
having different chemical scaffold and to elucidate their
common pharmacophore hypothesis as the key pharmacophore
of PDE5 inhibitors. These studies aim to be guidance to find
new drug candidates having good potency and high selectivity
towards the PDE5 inhibitors.

Methodology
General:
The pharmacophore and docking studies were performed on
PC windows Vista Home Premium Intel(R) Core(TM)2 Duo,
1.83 GHz using LigandScout program v3.1 (G. Wolber and
Inte:Ligand GmbH 1999-2013) [] and Dock6.4 program 
[].
The chemical structures of different classes of PDE5 inhibitors
used in this study are shown in Table 1 (Available with authors). The biological data are
cited from the literature [–].

Common Feature-Based Pharmacophore Models:
The study was carried out using the software LigandScout
(version 3.0). Using the default settings, LigandScout program
[] was used to derive the 3D chemical feature-based
pharmacophores from the structural data of the compounds 1-
52 [–] 
are included in the modelling method. Prior to the
generation of pharmacophore hypotheses, the training set
compounds 1-38 Table 1 (Available with authors) were converted to 3D structure and
were used to generate diverse conformations using the best
conformation model generation method using the default
parameters including maximum number of 500 conformers,
and a conformer energy threshold value of 20 kcal/mol.

Hypothesis validation using test set:
Compounds 39-52 Table 1 (Available with authors) were
selected as a test set in order to clarify whether the generated
pharmacophore hypothesis is capable to make real prediction
of the activities of compounds other than the training set. The
conformation generation for the test set compounds was carried
out in a similar way, like the training set compounds using
BEST conformation analysis algorithm, implemented within the
LigandScout program with setting values, as same as those
used with the training set. The compounds associated with
their conformations were subsequently carried out for
pharmacophore mapping [].

Docking procedure:
All compounds were generated in the protonation state under
physiological condition. The xray structure of 3`,5`-cyclic
phosphodiesterase enzyme (PDE5) complexed with its cocrystallised
ligand vardenafil inhibitor is published in the
Protein Data Bank (1XP0) []. The coordinates were taken from
the Protein Data Bank and co-crystallised ligand was docked in
its original protein structure using default settings. A 10-Å
sphere around the centre of the binding pocket was defined as
binding pocket for the docking runs. All torsion angles in each
compound were allowed to rotate freely. In order to get a
population of possible conformations and orientations for
compounds 7, 23, 28, and 36 at the binding site, docking
procedure was performed with default settings.

Results &amp; Discussion
Common Feature-Based Pharmacophore Models:
Table 1 (Available with authors) shows the structures of training 1–38 and test set 39-52
compounds that are reported as PDE5 inhibitors 
[–].
Assuming that the most active compounds bind in a similar
fashion at the enzyme׳s active site, we employed the
LigandScout approach to evaluate the common features
required for binding and the hypothetical geometries adopted
by these ligands in their most active forms []. Ten
pharmacophore models were obtained having score in the
range of 0.87–0.70. The top-ranked chemical feature-based
pharmacophore model identified in this study is shown in
.

The successful pharmacophore run resulted in generation of ten
pharmacophore hypotheses, based on its highest rank score
and mapping into all training set molecules, model-1 was
considered statistically as the best hypothesis and was selected
for further investigation and analysis is shown in . This
pharmacophore model contains four chemical features: an
aromatic ring (A), a hydrophobe (BH), a hydrogen acceptors
(HA) and a hydrogen donor (HD). As a quick and primary
validation of model-1, the compounds of the training set were
mapped onto the model, and the orientation of the mapped
compounds relative to the proposed pharmacophore was
scored ("fit value") at a range of 34.3-47.78 Table 1 (Available with authors). Initial
investigation of the obtained results revealed a moderate
correlation between the fit value and the biological activity of
each of the compounds understudy. This initial correlation
encouraged us to generate a linear model based on “fit value”
to predict the biological activity of the compounds under
investigation. The generated model (Equation 1) showed good
statistics.
pIC50 = 0.1343 Fit value - 2.7117 (1)
n = 38, SE = 0.0919, and R2 = 0.966.
Where n: number of compounds; R2: square of the coefficient of
multiple correlation; SE: standard error.

 showed the alignment of the hypothesis model
with compounds 7, 23, 28, and 36 as representative examples
different classes of PDE5 inhibitors. A closer look at the
mapped structures revealed the importance of certain structural
features for activity. The obtained model suggests that the
scaffold essential for the activity should contains at least one
central aromatic or heteroaromatic ring linked with one
hydrophobic group while, the hydrogen donor and acceptor
groups are included as substituent groups on an aromatic ring
or as heteroatoms of a heterocylic ring. 

Hypothesis validation using test:
The obtained pharmacophore model-1 was validated using
fourteen structurally diverse compounds as test set. It is a
measure how well it could make real prediction of the activity
of external compounds. Table 1 (Available with authors) shows the experimental and
predicted activity. The regression of the predicted activity
against the experimental one of the test set showed a
correlation coefficient value R2 of 0.89 (Equation 2).
pIC50 = 0.209 Fit value - 6.2127….(2)
n = 14, SE = 0.30856, and R2 = 0.89. Where n: number of
compounds; R2: square of the coefficient of multiple correlation;
SE: standard error.

Docking procedure:
Docking study was undertaken using Dock6.4 [] to make
comparable study of possible interactions of different classes of
PDE5 inhibitors and the active site of PDE5. The RMSD value
difference of 0.485274 Å of the pose of the non-restricted
redocking of the X-ray structure of the PDE5 inhibitor (vardenafil)
from itself also confirmed the approach. The docking poses of
compounds 7, 23, 28, and 36 as representatives of different
classes of PDE5 inhibitors, compared with that of the
vardenafil, X-rary structure, are shown in 
respectively. Compound 7 () showed same orientation
of vardenafil inside the binding site. Its pyrazolopyrimidinone
scaffold adopts the same position as the triazolopyrimidinone
moiety of the vardenafil. Also, they showed similar hydrogen
bonding to the amino group of the side chain of GLN817. Their
propyl and piprazinyl substituents are oriented similarly inside
the hydrophobic pockets of the active site. Occupying same
binding site, compound 23 showed different orientation than
that of vardenafil (). Its imidazoquinazolinone moiety
showed similar hydrophobic interaction as the propyl side
chain of the vardenafil, while the phenyl ring occupied the
same orientation of the imidazotriazinone moiety of the
vardenafil and its carboxamide substituent explored similar
hydrogen bonding to the amino group of the side chain of
GLN817 while its propoxyl substituent showed same
orientation as the piperazine moiety of vardenafil. Compound
28 () was oriented in the active site similar to
vardenafil. Its pyridopyrimidinone scaffold adopted the same
position as the imidazotriazinone moiety of the vardenafil, Xray
structure. Also, they showed similar hydrogen bonding to
the amino group of the side chain of GLN817. Their propyl and
piprazinyl substituents are oriented similarly inside the
hydrophobic pockets of the active site. Compound 36 
() oriented its pyrazoloquinoline scaffold so that the pyridine
ring and pyrazole ring adopt the same position of the imidazole
ring and propyl substituent of vardenafil respectively.
However, compound 36 and vardenafil showed similar
hydrogen bonding to the amino group of the side chain of
GLN817, an additional hydrogen bond was shown between the
quinoline nitrogen atom and TYR612. The pentyl substituent on
compound 36 is oriented in the same hydrophobic pocket of the
piprazine moiety of vardenafil ().

Conclusion
In conclusion, a computational approach using pharmacophore
modeling and docking analysis was applied to PD5 inhibitors
with widely different scaffolds in order to identify the common
structural features required for an effective inhibition of PDE5,
in an aim to be a future guide to discover drugs for treatment of
male erectile dysfunction. A reliable pharmacophore model
was generated based on 38 training set compounds, which
consists of na aromatic ring (A), a hydrophobe (HB), a
hydrogen acceptor (HA) and a hydrogen donor (HD). This
model revealed internal (R2 = 0.966) prediction of training set as
well as external (pred R2 = 0.89) prediction of fourteen
compounds of test set. The PDE5 inhibitors with different
structural scaffolds, 7, 23, 28, and 36 were docked in the active
site of PDE5. Compound 7 and 28 oriented in the binding site
similarly to the vardenafil. The pyrazolopyrimidinone and
pyridopyrimindinone of compounds 7 and 28 respectively
occupied the same orientation of imidazotriazinone scaffold of
vardenafil. While compounds 23 and 36 having fused tricyclic
scaffold showed different orientation of their fused aromatic
rings from that of the imidazotriazine moiety of vardenafil. All
of the compounds explored hydrogen bonding to the amino
group of the side chain of GLN817 as well as the vardenafil. In
addition, the scaffold essential for the activity should contains
at least one central aromatic or heteroaromatic ring linked with
one hydrophobic group while, the hydrogen donor and
acceptor groups are included as substituent groups on an
aromatic ring or as heteroatoms of a heterocylic ring.These
findings could be exploited for future ligand design in order to
obtain novel derivatives as inhibitors of PDE5.

The authors would like to extend their sincere appreciation to
the deanship of Scientific Research at King Saud University for
its funding of this research through the research Group Project
no. RG-1435-080.

Citation:Radwan, Bioinformation 11(2): 063-066 (2015)

Best aligned pose of compounds 7 (IC50 = 0.0001µM)
(a), 23 (I C50 = 0.00048 µM), 28 (IC50 = 0.0012 µM) and 36 (IC50
= 0.0022 µM), superposed with the query (model-1).

Phosphodiesterase 5 (1XP0) binding site: the docked compound 7 (colored blue): a), the docked compound 23 (colored
green); b), the docked compound 28 (colored cyan); c), the docked compound 36 (colored blue) (d), vardenafil, xray ligand,
(colored rose) Hydrogen bond is displayed in green.

