Background
Autism is a neurological disorder that affects the functioning of the brain 
causing lifelong developmental disability, including problems with 
communication, social interaction and physical activities. Dendrites are short 
fibers that conduct toward the cell body of the neuron where nerve cells 
receive and pass information to other nerve cells. The precise patterning of 
dendrites is important for determining how information is processed by a 
neuron. Abnormal decrease in the dendrite branches led to a state of difficulty 
where more hardly sites are available for receiving information and patients 
with autism disorder exhibit fewer dendrite branches and different dendrite 
patterns. Hence knowledge of the number of dendrites produced by a neuron and 
its patterning is very important. Intracellular protein cypin's role in 
increasing dendrite number by binding to tubulin heterodimers and by promoting 
microtubule assembly was made known recently. [] Snapin, a protein first isolated as a SNAP-25 
interacting protein [], 
was reported as a cypin-binding partner which may act to regulate dendrite 
number as part of a cypin protein complex. The binding of snapin to cypin 
crowded out the tubulin protein resulting in assembly of fewer dendrites and 
more branching. Previously snapin protein's role in the neuron was 
reported only as presynaptic [
–] but latest findings 
reveals its role in regulating dendrite patterning in hippocampal neurons. 
[] It was also reported 
that overexpressing snapin in hippocampal neurons decreases the primary 
dendrites growing out of the cell body and many secondary dendrites were also 
branched out from them. Snapin was pinpointed as a drug target protein for 
autism therapies because the aim is not to disturb cypin but to stop the 
binding between the cypin and snapin, so that cypin can still function with the 
other proteins it binds to. Since the protein sequence was not available 
directly for snapin the translated mRNA sequence was obtained from Genbank 
database. The secondary structure of snapin was determined and it was also 
checked for the presence of coiled-coil domains. A stretch containing heptad 
repeats typical for coiled coils was located in the C-terminal region of the 
molecule. [] Knowledge 
on the three-dimensional structure of snapin protein will provide clue on its 
function and lead to structure based drug designing. Since there is no protein 
homologue of known 3D structure based on sequence similarity were found, a 
suitable fold for the snapin protein was found among known 3D structures by 
fold recognition methods. Comparative modeling method in which the 
three-dimensional structure of a protein sequence was modeled primarily based 
on its alignment to one or more proteins of known structure was applied to 
predict the structure of snapin protein. Molecular docking programs were used 
to model the interaction of snapin with SNAP-25 protein present in the SNARE 
complex.

Methodology
The protein sequence for Snapin was obtained from Genbank. [] The GenBank accession number for 
human Snapin protein is AF086837. Snapin was subjected to initial sequence 
characterization to infer the secondary and topological state of its amino 
acids.

Secondary structure prediction
The secondary structure of the snapin sequence was predicted by submitting 
the sequence to the leading GOR secondary structure prediction server. [
,] The GOR (Garnier–Osguthorpe–Robson)
 method uses both information theory and Bayesian statistics for predicting the 
secondary structure of proteins. GOR uses the evolutionary information of the 
PSI_BLAST to generate the multiple alignments after five iterations based on 
the non-redundant database. The sequence information of these multiple 
alignments was used to increase the information content for improved 
discrimination among secondary structures.

Coiled-coil prediction
Coiled-coil domains are characterized by a heptad repeat pattern in which 
residues in the first and fourth position are hydrophobic, and residues in the 
fifth and seventh position are predominantly charged or polar. The coiled-coil 
is formed by component helices coming together to bury their hydrophobic seams. 
As the hydrophobic seams twist around each helix, so the helices also twist to 
coil around each other, burying the hydrophobic seams and forming a supercoil. 
We have used the following three servers for coiled coil prediction: COILS, 
PAIRCOIL2, and MULTICOIL. COILS [,] is a 
program that compares a sequence to a database of known parallel two-stranded 
coiled-coils and derives a similarity score which is compared to the 
distribution of scores in globular and coiled-coil proteins. A probability 
value for the sequence adopting a coiled-coil conformation was reported. 
Paircoil2 [] predicts 
the parallel coiled-coil fold from sequence using pair wise residue 
probabilities with the Paircoil algorithm and an updated coiled coil database. 
The Paircoil program takes three arguments: a name for the sequence, a 
probability cutoff, and the amino acid sequence. The probability cutoff 
determines how stringently the program will screen the input sequence in 
detecting the existence of a coiled coil domain. The default value of 0.5 has 
been empirically determined to work well. MultiCoil program predicts the 
location of coiled-coil regions in amino acid sequences and classifies the 
predictions as dimeric or trimeric. The method is based on the PairCoil 
algorithm.

Fold Recognition
To predict the fold present in the snapin protein, we subjected the amino 
acid sequence to the 3D-PSSM server. [,] This 
web-based protein fold recognition server uses the 1D and 3D sequence profiles 
coupled with secondary structure and salvation potential information. It 
exploits a list of Master Proteins of known structure within super families to 
create libraries of 1D- and 3D-profiles. It does this, first by iteratively 
PSI-Blasting each Master Protein against NRPROT and aligning relevant hits to 
create a 1D-PSSM. Next, 3D alignments between each Master Protein and all 
others in the same superfamily are created using the SAP algorithm. For each 
input sequence, the 3D-PSSM library is scanned using the global dynamicn 
programming algorithm. The score for a match between a residue in the input 
sequence and a residue in the library sequence is calculated as the sum of the 
secondary structure, solvation potential and PSSM scores. 3DPSSM resulted in 20 
proteins with folds similar to that of the snapin protein.

Protein modeling
Comparative modeling is a class of techniques in protein structure 
prediction that seek to construct a model of a protein's tertiary 
structure based on its amino acid sequence. Comparative modeling relies on a 
sequence alignment between the target sequence and the template sequence whose 
structure has been experimentally determined. We used the Crystal Structure of 
the coiled coil region 129-250 of the tumor suppressor gene product adenomatous 
polyposis coli (APC) (PDB: 1M5I) [] as template for building a comparative model for snapin 
using MODELLER [] that 
satisfied the spatial restraints. The alignment between snapin and the template 
obtained from 3DPSSM was implemented to build the global alignment in this 
modelling process.

Structure validation
The snapin models generated were evaluated using PROCHECK suite of programs 
[] that provides a 
detailed check on the stereochemistry of a protein structure. Its output 
comprises a number of plots in PostScript format and a comprehensive 
residue-by-residue listing. The best snapin model was chosen based on the 
PROCHECK analysis, which includes checks on covalent geometry, planarity, 
dihedral angles, chirality, non-bonded interactions, main-chain hydrogen bonds, 
disulphide bonds, stereo chemical parameters, parameter comparisons, and 
residue-by-residue analysis. The Ramachandran plot for the models obtained from 
comparative prediction was studied in PROCHEK analysis. The Ramachandran plot 
is a way to visualize dihedral angles φ against ψ of amino acid 
residues in protein structure. It shows the possible conformations of φ 
and ψ angles for a polypeptide. In Ramachandran plot, the white areas 
correspond to conformations where atoms in the polypeptide come closer than the 
sum of their VanderWaals radii. These regions are sterically disallowed for all 
amino acids except glycine, which is unique in that it lacks a side chain. The 
red regions correspond to the allowed regions namely the alpha-helical and 
beta-sheet conformations where there are no steric clashes. The yellow areas 
show the partially allowed regions of lefthanded helix wherein the atoms are 
allowed to come a little closer together. The snapin model was analyzed for the 
presence of coiled-coil structure by submitting it to the SOCKET server 
[] with a packing 
cutoff of 8 A for center of mass distances and helix extension of 2 residues. 
SOCKET program finds the Knobs-into-Holes mode of packing between alpha helices,
 which is characteristic of coiled coils. It unambiguously defines the 
beginning and end of coiled-coil motifs in protein structures and assigns a 
heptad register to the sequence. The packing-cutoff parameter specifies how 
close the knob side chain must be to all of the four hole side chains. The four 
distances between knob and each hole residue must all be within this cutoff for 
the interaction to be considered as a knob in a hole. The result shows the 
presence of 102 alpha helical residues in the structure.

Modeling the interaction of snapin with SNARE complex
The modeled snapin 3D structure was docked with the SNAP-25 protein present 
in the SNARE complex obtained from the Protein Data Bank [PDB ID: 1KIL] to 
study about its interaction using PATCHDOCK. [,] 
PatchDock is a geometry-based molecular docking algorithm, which aims in 
finding docking transformations that yield good molecular shape 
complementarity. The PatchDock algorithm divides the Connolly dot surface 
representation of the molecules into concave, convex and flat patches. These 
complementary patches were matched in order to generate candidate 
transformations. Each candidate transformation was further evaluated by a 
scoring function that considered both geometric fit and atomic desolvation 
energy. Finally, an RMSD clustering was applied to the candidate solutions to 
discard redundant solutions. The surface area, atomic contact energy, various 
angle transformations and the score obtained from PatchDock program were 
reported.

Discussion
We have predicted the secondary structure of snapin using GORV and the 
results as shown in  contains 
more of helices. The snapin sequence was observed for the presence of coiled 
coil regions using the following three popular servers COILS, PAIRCOIL, and 
MULTICOIL. The sequence when submitted to the coils server predicted the 
probability of the residues to be in the coiled coil structure and it was found 
clearly from the plot obtained in  
that there are regions with higher probability to be in the coiled coil domains 
in all the three window sizes with 14, 21, and 28 residues. It can also be 
inferred from the output of paircoil in  that the residues 83 -119 have the probability of about 0.620 and 
hence show greater possibility of a coiled coil structure in snapin. The plot 
in  between the residues and the 
probability of it being in the coiled coil structure revealed the fact that the 
probability of the protein to trimerize is high. Crystal Structure of the 
coiled coil region 129-250 of the tumor suppressor gene product adenomatous 
polyposis coli (APC) was predicted to have a coiled coil fold using 3DPSSM 
server. The alignment, consisting of snapin, APC protein and the predicted 
secondary structure of snapin along with PSSM scores is shown in . Five models were generated using MODELLER 
and were validated and subjected to PROCHECK analysis by taking into 
consideration the percentage of residues in the core region in Ramachandran 
plot. [] The validated 
best model for the snapin protein is shown in the . The analysis showed that the best model has 89.7% of 
residues in the most favored region as shown in the  of Ramachandran plot. As reported in the output of the 
socket program three major helical regions were found in positions 21-73, 76-95,
 99-127 contributing to a total of 102 alpha helical residues in the structure. 
The snapin model was docked with SNAP-25 of SNARE complex as shown in  to study the interaction between them 
using PatchDock server. The input comprised of SNAP-25 protein and snapin. The 
best interaction model of snapin and SNAP-25 as shown in , had an approximate 
interaction surface area 2440 and atomic contact energy 454.06.The 
transformation of the three rotational and the three translational angle 
parameters obtained were 2.42 - 1.41 0.28 16.16 51.39 77.88.The geometric shape 
complementarity score was 16798.

Conclusion
Snapin a 15-kDa protein of high therapeutic potential and biological 
interest was analyzed and its 3D structure was modeled. The analysis of the 
snapin sequence revealed that it had a predominantly alpha helical secondary 
structure. The protein has been reported to be highly enriched on purified 
synaptic vesicles. The coiled-coil structure of snapin was determined to have 
the ability to trimerize. Snapin has drawn in a wide interest because it 
increases binding to SNAREs and for the possibility of snapin to have a direct 
molecular link between the fusion apparatus and second messenger-dependent 
signaling cascades. Snapin has been found to bind to SNAP-25 of the SNARE 
complex indicating its regulatory role of SNAREs whose function is not confined 
to neuronal exocytosis. The interaction of snapin with SNARE complex is also of 
great importance in studying the neurotransmitter release process. We also 
reported a model of snapin-SNARE complex, which could be helpful to study the 
role of snapin as SNARE regulator in neuro transmitter release.

The authors are grateful to Dr. K.N. Somasekharan, Dean - School of Chemical 
&amp; Biotechnology and Dr. S. Swaminathan, Dean - Sponsored Research 
&amp; Director CeNTAB, Shanmugha Arts Science Technology &amp; Research 
Academy (SASTRA), for their support.

Figures and Tables
Snapin sequence &amp; secondary structure
Snapin sequence
          MAGAGSAAVSGAGTPVAGPTGRDLFAEGLLEFLRPAVQQL
          DSHVHAVRESQVELREQIDNLATELCRINEDQKVALDLDP
          YVKKLLNARRRVVLVNNILQNAQERLRRLNHSVAKETARR
          RAMLDSGIYPPGSPGK	
Secondary structure
          CCCCCCCHHHHHCCCCCCCCCCCHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH
          HHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHCCCCCCCHHH
          HHHHHHCCHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH
          HHCCCCCCCCCCCCCC	
Graphical plot of coiled coil structure [coils]

Graphical plot of coiled coil structure [PAIRCOIL]

Graphical plot of coiled coil structure [MULTICOIL]

3DPSSM alignment

 Structure of snapin

Ramachandran plot

Model of snapin- SNARE complex interaction (ribbon representation)

Model of snapin- SNARE complex interaction (surface representation)


      Citation:Gowthaman
       et al., Bioinformation 1(7): 269-275 (2006)

