Background
Antibiotic resistance in bacteria is an increasing problem worldwide
                    []. Extended
                spectrum β­lactamases (ESBLs) are the bacterial enzymes that
                make them resistant to advanced generation cephalosporins and might lead to
                therapeutic dead­end. ESBLs are of due scientific concern because they
                are often plasmid­associated and there can be cross­species
                dissemination of these plasmids. Moreover, these plasmids often carry genes for
                co­resistance to other antibiotics such as aminoglycosides,
                fluoroquinolones, tetracyclines, chloramphenicol and
                sulfamethoxazole­trimethoprim. ESBLs hydrolyze the
                β­lactam ring present in the target antibiotics.
                CTX­M enzymes have become the most prevalent ESBLs [] which mainly target cefotaxime.
                The change in activities of CTX­Ms leading to the evolution of more
                variants may be due to point mutations present either inside or outside of the
                active site omega loop (amino acid positions 161 to 179) []. Identification of the amino
                acid residues crucial to the interaction between CTX­M (the enzyme
                produced by resistant bacteria) and cefotaxime (the drug hydrolyzed by this
                bacterial enzyme) is a problem of deep scientific interest. This information might
                be useful for the scientists involved in drug­designing in their search
                for more potent and versatile CTXM inhibitors. A number of authors have explored the
                binding of different variants of CTX­M (other than
                CTX­M­15, which is being covered by the present study) with
                reference to structure and dynamics. Kimura et al [] have described binding of cefotaxime to
                CTX­M­18 and CTX­M­19. Notably, the
                authors observed that although the oxime side chain of cefotaxime does not have a
                carboxylate group to form hydrogen bond with Ser237, Ser237 kept an original
                conformation without a steric interaction with the methoxime in
                CTX­M­18. The C­4 carboxylate formed hydrogen
                bonds with Ser130 and Arg276. On the other hand, the steric interaction between the
                AT moiety and Ser167 in CTX­M­19 invoked a conformational
                change of Ser237 to form a hydrogen bond with the C­4 carboxylate. Thus,
                the C­4 carboxylate formed the hydrogen bond with Ser130 in both
                CTX­M­18 and CTX­M­19. The authors
                highlighted that their results were compatible with the fact that both enzymes have
                a similar affinity for cefotaxime []. Regarding the inhibitors, sulbactam, clavulanate and
                tazobactam are traditional CTX­M inhibitors, while LN1­255
                and NXL­104 [] are novel inhibitors. Most of these share the same binding
                site as cefotaxime. For instance, sulbactam forms a
                dead­end­complex with CTX­M and renders it
                ineffective and occupies the same site as cefotaxime. To the best of our knowledge,
                there are no studies reporting modelling of CTX­M­15 variant
                of the CTX­M family and their docking with cefotaxime. Also, there was
                no X­ray crystallographic structure available with the Protein Data Bank
                for this variant of CTX­M family at the time of communicating this
                paper.In view of the stated background, we found it pertinent to study the mode of
                interaction of CTX­M enzyme with cefotaxime. This study is based on
                interaction energies. The objectives of the study were: Modelling of CTX­M enzyme from blaCTX­M sequences
                            of clinical Escherichia coli isolates

Docking of cefotaxime with modelled CTX­M enzymes in order to
                            identify amino acid residues crucial to their interaction

To hypothesize a possible relationship between ’interaction
                            energy of the docked enzyme­antibiotic complex‘
                            and ’minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of the
                            antibiotic against the bacteria producing that enzyme‘



Methodology
Seven E. coli strains of clinical origin which were confirmed as
                PCR­positive for blaCTX­M were
                selected for the present study. Originally, 111 clinical E. coli
                isolates that gave a positive doubledisk synergy test for
                ESBL­production were screened for the presence of
                    blaCTX­M gene by PCR. As these 7 strains
                were PCRpositive for blaCTX­M, we narrowed
                down to the same from amongst these strains for further investigations. Strains D8,
                D183, D282, D295 and D296 were isolated from neonates admitted to neonatal intensive
                care unit of Aligarh Hospital, India. Strains D253 and D281 were isolated from
                infected foot ulcers of diabetic patients admitted to the endocrinology ward of the
                same hospital. The blaCTX-M genes which were amplified
                from clinical E. coli strains were cloned into E.
                coli C600 cells using ’Qiagen cloningplus kit‘ as
                per manufacturer’s instructions (Qiagen, USA). C600
                    blaCTX­M cells were tested for
                ESBL­production by the double­disk synergy test performed as
                described by Jarlier et al []. Briefly the synergy test with ceftazidime, cefotaxime,
                ceftriaxone and cefixime was performed by disk diffusion method on
                Mueller­Hinton agar plates with and without 10 μg of amoxyclav. A
                ≥ 5­mm increase in the zone of diameter of third generation
                cephalosporins, tested in combination with amoxyclav versus its zone when tested
                alone was considered indicative of ESBL production. E. coli ATCC
                25922 was used as ESBL negative and Klebsiella pneumoniae 700603
                was used as ESBL positive reference strain. Also C600
                    blaCTX­M cells were again tested for the
                presence of the said gene by PCR. Cefotaxime and ceftazidime MICs for the study
                strains were determined by the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute
                (CLSI)­microbroth dilution method. Antibiotic susceptibilities were
                tested by disk­diffusion method as per the CLSI guidelines for the same.
                Transmissibility of cefotaxime and ceftazidime resistance markers was checked by
                transconjugation which was performed as described previously []. Enterobacterial repetitive
                intergenic consensus (ERIC)­PCR was used for the analysis of genetic
                relatedness of the seven selected strains as described by Versalovic et al
                    [].
                BLAST­P was performed to retrieve suitable templates for homology
                modelling using the study blaCTX­M
                sequences. Protein Data Bank (PDB) IDs of the templates retrieved for modelling are
                shown in .
                Modelling was performed using Swiss Model Server []. The modelled structures (prior to docking) were
                verified using the “Structure Assessment” function of the
                Swiss Model Workspace which incorporates Procheck [] and verify3D programmes []. PDB structure of cefotaxime
                was retrieved from Drug bank (Drug Bank accession no. DB00493). The ligand
                (cefotaxime) was docked into each of the modelled structures employing the Hex 5.1
                software. This program uses spherical polar Fourier correlation to accelerate
                docking calculations. However, since Hex 5.1 is generally considered a more reliable
                platform for “protein­protein docking” compared
                to “protein­ligand” docking, we reconfirmed our
                results using the targeted docking mode of ’Molecular Docking
                Server‘ which is based on the well known Autodock program. The MMFF94
                force field was used for energy minimization of ligand molecules. Gasteiger partial
                charges were added to the ligand atoms. Non­polar hydrogen atoms were
                merged, and rotatable bonds were defined. Docking calculations were carried out on
                the protein models. Essential hydrogen atoms, Kollman united atom type charges, and
                solvation parameters were added with the aid of AutoDock tools. Affinity (grid) maps
                of 60×60×60 Å grid points (centred on Ser237, a
                well identified residue of the active site) and 0.375 Å spacing were
                generated using the Autogrid program. AutoDock parameter set and distancedependent
                dielectric functions were used in the calculation of the van der Waals and the
                electrostatic terms, respectively. Docking simulations were performed using the
                ’Lamarckian genetic algorithm (LGA)‘ and the
                ’Solis &amp; Wets local search method‘. Each docking
                experiment was derived from 10 different runs that were set to terminate after a
                maximum of 250000 energy evaluations. The population size was set to 150. During the
                search, a translational step of 0.2 Å, and quaternion and torsion steps
                of 5 were applied. The lowest­energy structures were selected as
                energy­refined complex models. The models were duly verified by Procheck
                    [] and verify3D
                programmes [].
                Discovery Studio 2.0 (Accelrys) was used to prepare Ramachandran plots for the
                modelled structures. Ramachandran Z­scores for the evaluation of these
                models were calculated using ’WHAT IF‘ package. Alignments
                were performed by ClustalW program using default parameters.

Discussion
BLAST analysis of the sequences confirmed all the
                    blaCTX­M genes as
                    blaCTX­M­15. The gene
                sequences used in the study appear in GenBank with the following accession numbers:
                    FJ997864, FJ997865,
                    FJ997866, GQ145220,
                    GQ145221, GQ174503 and
                    GQ174504. The cefotaxime resistance markers were found to
                be located on the plasmid DNA of the study strains and were transmissible by
                conjugation. Conjugation frequencies were of the order 10­5. Four out of
                the 7 study strains were found to be clonally related as revealed by their
                ERIC­profiles. The
                    blaCTX­M­15 from strain D8
                possessed point mutations 262C→A and 265A→G resulting in
                amino acid substitutions Pro88Thr and Asn89Asp respectively ( ). In the strain D295,
                    blaCTX­M­15 possessed point
                mutation 689G→C leading to the amino acid substitution Val230Leu.
                Additional information regarding sequence­alignments and secondary
                structures is presented in supplementary files 1 and 2. Over 90% of the
                amino acid residues in the protein structures modelled from
                    blaCTX­M­15 genes were found
                to be present in the most favored regions as revealed by their respective
                Ramachandran plots. For instance, percent amino acid residues in most favored,
                additional allowed, generously allowed and disallowed regions of the Ramachandran
                plot for the modelled CTX­M enzyme corresponding to strain D8 (GenBank
                accession no.­ FJ997864) were 91.0%,
                8.2%, 0.8% and 0.0%, respectively (). All the enzyme structures were
                modelled using the PDB structure 1iysA as template. The target sequences possessed
                more than 80% sequence­identity with the said template. For
                instance, D8 CTX­M enzyme model was constructed using 1iysA
                (1.65Å) template with a sequence­identity of
                85.326% (E value: 5.27e­83). Ramachandran
                Z­score expresses how well the backbone conformations of all the
                residues correspond to the known allowed areas in the Ramachandran plot.
                Accordingly, the Ramachandran Z­scores for modelled CTX­M
                enzymes from E. coli strains D8, D183, D253, D281, D282, D295 and
                D296 were found to be ­0.449, 0.096, 0.027, 0.043, 0.032,
                ­1.249 and ­1.107, respectively. This further confirms the
                accuracy of the modelled structures. Cefotaxime was docked into each of these
                modelled enzyme­structures.

The flexibility of the β3 strand, omega loop, and residues
                Ser­237, Asp­240, and Arg­276 are known to be
                involved in the cefotaximase activity of CTX­M enzymes
                    []. It is
                reported that the β3 strand of CTX­M enzymes has numerous
                Gly residues and is therefore probably more flexible than that of TEM enzymes.
                Residue Gly­240 in CTX­M­15 may further increase
                the flexibility of the β3 strand and alter its positioning during the
                catalytic process. It is supposed that CTX­M­15 might have
                evolved from CTX­M­3 due to a single amino acid change
                (D240G). As a result of this substitution (D240G), interaction between the residues
                Gly 240 and Asn 270 was found to be absent in the CTX­M­15
                enzyme. The absence of this interaction in CTX­M­15 might
                increase the flexibility of the C­terminal of the β3 strand.
                During the catalytic process, this flexibility could favour the accommodation of
                more varied substrates with respect to their size and 3D­structures.
                This explanation is compatible with the fact that the
                CTX­M­15 enzyme is known to hydrolyze cefotaxime,
                ceftazidime as well as cefepime antibiotics quite efficiently. Moreover, these
                results are in coherence with the observation of several authors with reference to
                other CTXM­ variants such as CTX­M­27
                    []. The SDN
                (positions 130­132), and KTG (positions 234­236) sequences,
                were found to be conserved in all the CTX­M­15 sequences
                obtained in this study. These are typical structure of class A enzymes
                    []. All the
                sequences harbored the D240G mutation with respect to
                CTX­M­3, the distinguishing feature of
                CTX­M­15 enzymes. None of the mutations obtained in our
                CTX­M­15 sequences lied within the omega loop or other
                positions that are known to affect the substrate profile of these enzymes. Hence the
                trend in the MIC values for cefotaxime and ceftazidime antibiotics in these isolates
                was typical of CTX­M­15 producers ( ). The study isolates
                displayed cefotaxime MICs up to 8 fold higher than ceftazidime MICs, as observed
                previously [].
                     and  show close-up view of interaction between cefotaxime and
                CTX­M­15 enzyme modelled from
                blaCTX­M­15 gene sequence of strain D8, as
                per the results of Hex5.1 and Autodock4.0, respectively. It is important to mention
                here that the docking results obtained by Hex 5.1 were in harmony with the results
                obtained using Autodock 4.0 but were not identical. All, the results with reference
                to energies and interacting residues were same, except that Autodock identified
                Asn104 also as one of the interacting residues. Analysis of the docked structures by
                Discovery Studio2.0 was performed by using the “show ligand
                interactions“ function of the “scripts” menu
                provided within the said software. It was revealed that the amino acid residues Asn
                104, Asn132, Gly 227, Thr 235, Gly 236, and Ser237 were responsible for the proper
                positioning of cefotaxime into the active site of the
                CTX­M­15 enzyme, as per the Autodock results (which is
                generally considered to be more reliable than Hex5.1). This finding is supported by
                the views of other authors as well [,].
                Ramachandran Z­scores obtained by ’WHATIF‘ for
                all the docked structures were well inside tolerable limits. For instance, Z-score
                of the docked complex involving CTX­M enzyme model (corresponding to the
                strain D183) and cefotaxime, was found to be 0.390. Furthermore, the residues
                involved in the interaction constituted the same secondary structures as those
                involved in interaction of cefotaxime to closely related enzymes whose
                X­ray crystallographic structures are available with the
                ’RCSB Protein Data Bank‘. Asn 132, one of the interacting
                residues forms part of a ’loop‘ in our study. Similarly,
                several crystallographic structures of Class A beta lactamases complexed with
                ligands, show Asn 132 as an interacting residue which constitutes a
                ’loop‘. Our results (secondary structures constituted by the
                interacting residues as well as the docking pose) are in perfect harmony with the
                PDB entry 1IYO, which shows Toho­1 (a Class A
                beta­lactamase) in complex with cefotaxime. The first and last residues
                of the omega loop are clearly marked in Fig 1c, which are Arg161 and Asp179,
                respectively. Asn132, one of the residues important for positioning the drug into
                the active site of the enzyme is also shown in the figure as part of the
                ’SDN‘ loop ().
                Ser237 forms a hydrogen bond with the carboxylate oxygen of cefotaxime (). This interaction might induce the
                rotation of the carboxylate group in the acyl­intermediate structure of
                CTX­M­15 compared with those of non­ESBL
                enzymes. Interaction between Ser 237 and cefotaxime probably helps to bring the beta
                lactam carbonyl group to the suitable position in the oxyanion hole, thereby
                promoting drug-hydrolysis. The acylamide side chain of cefotaxime interacts with the
                    Nδ of Asn132 and the backbone oxygen of Ser 237. The
                    Oδ of Asn104 interacts with the Nδ
                of Asn132 in the docked complex. Furthermore, Nδ of Asn104
                was found to make a hydrogen bond with the carbonyl oxygen of the acylamide side
                chain of cefotaxime (). In this way, we
                found that a total of 7 hydrogen bonds are crucial for the correct positioning of
                cefotaxime within the active site of CTX­M­15 enzyme.A
                noteworthy relationship between total interaction energy (Etotal) and
                cefotaxime (MICs) of the
                blaCTX­M­15 positive study
                strains was observed. Cefotaxime MICs increased with the increasing negative value
                of interaction energy, when the former was docked into the modelled
                CTX­M­15 structures of the respective strains (). It can be explained by the fact that
                higher negative interaction energy for the enzymeantibiotic complex is an indicator
                of more stable and effective interaction between the two during binding. A more
                stable and better fitting of the β­lactam antibiotic
                (cefotaxime) into the active site of the CTX­M­15 enzyme
                would ensure an easy hydrolysis of the drug. This is in coherence with one of our
                earlier observations in which we performed docking of the enzyme Sme1 with different
                carbapenems to compare their effectiveness against Sme1 producing bacteria
                    []. It was
                observed that the imipenem­Sme1 complex was far more stable than the
                complex involving doripenem. This suggested an easier hydrolysis of imipenem by
                Sme­1 and a poor hydrolysis of doripenem. This was strongly supported by
                the experimental studies that suggested a better activity of doripenem over other
                carbapenems against carbapenemase producing bacteria []. Moreover, in a similar 2009
                study authors have used interaction energies of docking to compare the efficacy of
                different neuraminidase inhibitors against newly evolved strains of H1N1 viruses
                    []. It is
                important to mention here that more experimental studies are needed to establish a
                precise relationship between MIC and interaction energy. We admit the limitation of
                the present study that we could not narrow down to a possible
                “energy­concentration pair” that produced
                effective interaction between the discussed enzyme and substrate.

Conclusion
To the best of our knowledge we are the first to report results of docking between
                CTX­M­15 (receptor) and cefotaxime (ligand). Moreover, this
                is the first study to hypothesize a possible relationship between
                ’interaction energy of the docked enzymeantibiotic complex‘
                and ’minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of the antibiotic against
                the bacteria producing that enzyme‘. In conclusion, the present study
                reveals that the amino acid residues Asn 104, Asn132, Gly 227, Thr 235, Gly 236, and
                Ser237 are responsible for positioning cefotaxime into the active site of the
                CTX­M­15 enzyme. A total of 7 hydrogen bonds are crucial for
                the correct positioning of cefotaxime within the active site of
                CTX­M­ 15 enzyme. Cefotaxime MICs for the
                CTX­M­15­producers increased with the increasing
                negative interaction energy for the enzyme­antibiotic complex.
                Researchers are expected to duly utilize this information for designing more potent
                and versatile CTX­Minhibitors as well as new drugs resistant to
                hydrolysis by CTX­M enzymes. Scope is still left to determine the 3D
                structures of the rapidly emerging variants of CTX­M by
                X­ray crystallography.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors acknowledge the facilities of Distributed Information Subcentre,
                Interdisciplinary Biotechnology Unit, AMU, Aligarh, India. SS is recipient of Senior
                Research Fellowship from Department of Biotechnology, Govt. of India.

Citation:Shakil &amp; Khan, Bioinformation 4(10): 468-472
                    (2010)

(a) Ramachandran plot for the modelled CTX­M­15
                        enzyme corresponding to strain D8 (GenBank accession no. ­
                            FJ997864) (b) Interaction between cefotaxime and
                        the modelled CTX­M­15 enzyme obtained by Hex5.1 (c)
                        Modelled CTX­M­15 enzyme corresponding to strain D8
                        (d) Total interaction energy (Etotal) versus cefotaxime MIC graph
                        for the study E. coli strains (Docking: Ligand
                        = cefotaxime; Receptor = modelled
                        CTX­M­15 enzymes).

Interaction between cefotaxime and the modelled
                        CTX­M­15 enzyme obtained using Autodock4.0. The drug
                        is shown in stick form. The broken lines represent hydrogen bonds.
                        ’Interacting amino acid residues‘ are labeled.
                        Figure has been produced by Discovery Studio2.0

