Background
In the universal genetic code, multiple codons differ only at the
third position or occasionally in the second position in some of
the aminoacids []. Though a number of synonymous codons
needed to regulate the translation process, but only particular
codons are preferred, leaving the others as less preferred
codons. This phenomenon, otherwise known as codon usage
bias has been observed in all organism, including prokaryotes,
animals and plants [–]. A number of investigations
demonstrated that the synonymous codons usage (SCU) is not
at same frequencies either within or between organisms 
[–].
The patterns of synonymous codon usage vary significantly
among species and also among genes of the same species 
[].

Though synonymous codon usage biases do not have direct
impact on protein sequence, it may influence protein product
and cellular processes since codon usage bias has been proved
as an important evolutionary force []. Functional integrity of
the genetic code is maintained by synonymous codons by
providing a linkage between gene expression and evolution of
proteins [–]. The frequency of usage of preferred codons
(common codons) may deviates due to mutational biases,
caused by chemical decay of nucleotide bases [], non uniform
DNA repair and non random replication errors [] or due to
natural selection for optimal translation at the stage of synthesis
of proteins. Codon bias has significant correlation with mRNA
levels as there is a global optimization to reduce the time for the
ribosomes to participate in translation of mRNA []. The other
biological factors that affect patterns of synonymous codon
usage bias are genome size [], length of the gene 
[], codon
context [], rate of recombination 
[] and amino acid
composition [].

In plant molecular evolution, chloroplast genomes generate
interest among biologist owing to its smaller size, larger copy
number and known functions of many genes at molecular level
[]. Translational process in the chloroplast genome has been
reported to be similar to that of unicellular organisms,
indicating that synonymous codon usage may be identical to
that of Escherichia coli []. The significance of mutational
pressure in shaping the SCU variations in chloroplast genome
was already established []. However, natural selection is also
a driving force that frames SCU variations in plants and algal
lineages []. The neutral theory of molecular evolution
demonstrated the inverse relation between the rate of molecular
evolution and the amount selective forces. Synonymous
substitution in protein coding genes is in a slower rate than
pseudo genes [,
], indicating the influence of selective
forces on the rate of synonymous codon evolution. Coffee is a
most attractive beverage crop in the world. More than 100
species of Coffea are diploids in nature (2n=2x=22) except Coffee
arabica (2n=4x=44) which is autogamous (self –fertile) and
considered as allotetraploid. C. arabica is a species for centre of
attraction owing to its inherent quality. Unfortunately, this
species is highly susceptible to major pests and diseases. The
complete nucleotide sequence of C. arabica chloroplast genome
has been determined []. However, studies on synonymous
codon usage bias in chloroplast genome of C. arabica (155,189
bp) have not been reported. Chloroplast genome of C. arabica
comprises a total of 130 genes (79 protein coding genes, 29
tRNA genes, four ribosomal genes and 18 intron sequences). In
this study, synonymous codon usage was analyzed using 53
protein coding genes (PCGs), having more than 100 codons by
measuring codon usage indices such as relative synonymous
codon usage, effective number of codons (ENC) and codon
adaptation index (CAI) and the findings on synonymous codon
usage are discussed.

Methodology
Sequence data of C. arabica chloroplast genes:
A total of 53 protein coding genes in the chloroplast genome of
Coffea arabica (EF044213) were retrieved from the National
Centre for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) and identity of
those genes were presented  (see supplementary
material). To avoid sampling errors, PCGs contain more than
100 codons were chosen for analysis.

Relative Synonymous Codon Usage (RSCU):
To analyze the characteristics of variations in synonymous
codon usage by neglecting the influence of amino acid
composition, the relative synonymous codon usage values of all
sequences were determined according to equation (described in
) 
[].

Effective number of codons (ENC):
This index is used to measure the extent of synonymous codon
usage bias. The ENC values would be 20 when only one codon
is used for each amino acid, In contrast, when codons are used
randomly, the ENC values is 61. If the calculated ENC is greater
than 61 due to more even distribution of codon usage than
expected, it is adjusted to 61. Thus, the expected ENCs are
calculated by following equation [],

ENC = 2 + s + {29/ [s2 + (1- s2)]}
Where s = GC3 (GC content at the third codon position)

Identification of optimal codons:
Optimal codons occur most frequently only in highly expressed
genes. Difference in RSCU of a given codon between putative
high and low expression data set was calculated and tested the
significance (p ≤ 0.05) using one-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA). Codons that occur significantly at high frequency in
highly expressed genes were regarded as putative optimal
codons.

Codon adaptation index:
Codon adaptation index (CAI) is used to measure the extent of
bias towards preferred codons in a gene by defining the
translationally optimal codons that are mostly represented in a
reference set of highly expressed genes []. It takes value from
zero to one and a higher value reveals a stronger codon bias
with high expression level. In this study, the ribosomal protein
coding genes have been used as reference for estimating CAI
values on the basis of equation (described in
).

Sequence analysis:
Nucleotide contents were calculated using a software viz.,
Dambe version 5.2.65 [] and CAI values were estimated by
CAI calculator 2 [].

Statistical methods
Correspondence analysis:
Correspondence analysis (COA) is extensively used for
analyzing multidimensional data []. COA was performed to
analyze RSCU values to explore the different features of
synonymous codon usage (SCU) patterns across the 53 protein
coding genes in the chloroplast genome of C. arabica.

Correlation analysis:
Correlation analysis was used to demonstrate the relationship
between base compositions and synonymous codon usage
patterns. This analysis was implemented based on the Pearson
correlation analysis way. All statistical processes were carried
out with software Past version 2.12 [].

Discussion
Base compositional analysis of ORFs of 53 protein coding genes:
Total and silent base compositions were identified  (see
supplementary material). Intricate correlations were found
between A, T, G, C, GC and A3, T3, G3, C3, GC3 contents in the 53
ORFs of chloroplast genome of C. arabica
 (see
supplementary material). Interestingly GC3 has significant
correlations with A, G, C, and GC contents, prognosticating that
GC contents may have high influence, balancing between
mutational pressure and natural selection. We observed that A
was significantly correlated with A3, T3, C3 and GC3 contents
and T had higher correlations only with A3 and T3. Base
composition analysis of ORFs revealed that G, C content has
significant correlations with T3, G3, GC3, and G3, C3, GC3
respectively. This implies that compositional constraints may
have direct influence in the evolution of synonymous codon
usage in the chloroplast genome of C. arabica.

Characteristics of relative synonymous codon usage:
Overall and strand specific codon usage patterns of 53 PCGs
were analyzed  (see supplementary material). Strand
asymmetry was reported in the chloroplast genome of Euglina
gracillis with regard to base composition 
[]. Strand specific
analysis was carried out to examine the differences in
preference for codons in leading and lagging strand and found
that there was no difference in the selection of preferred codons
for coding all the 18 degenerate amino acid in both the strand.
Arg, Leu and Ser have six fold degeneracy. A ending codons
TTA and AGA were preferred to code Leu and Arg respectively
whereas TCT was most frequently used to code Ser. The amino
acids Ala, Gly, Pro, Thr and Val possess four-fold degeneracy.
We found that T ending codons were often used for coding Ala
(TCT), Pro (CCT), and Thr (ACT) but A ending codons were
preferred for coding Gly (GGA) and Val (GTA). In two fold
degenerate family, A ending codons were used most frequently
to code Glu (GAA), Gln (CAA) and Lys (AAA) whereas T
ending codons were preferred to code His (CAT), Phe (TTT),
Tyr (TAT), Asn (AAT), Asp (GAT) and Cys (TGT). Three fold
degenerate Ile was preferably coded by ATT. All the rare of non
preferred codons were observed to be ending in C or G.
Putative optimal codons were identified for amino acids Asp
(GAT), His (CAT), Ile (ATA), and Arg (AGA). No optimal
codons were identified for any of the four fold degenerate
amino acid family. The values of ENCs among 53 PCGs were
found to be varying from 36.79 to 53.86 with mean of 46.87 and
S.D of 4.02 in the chloroplast genome of C. arabica and the
overall GC3 values varied from 19.60% to 35.30% with a mean
and S.D of 27.82% and 3.52 respectively, ensuring the
heterogeneity of codon usage ().

ENC Vs GC3 plot:
The ENC plot is developed for determining the variations in
SCU across a number of genes by exhibiting intraspecific and
interspecific variations. It has been considered as an alternative
to complex multivariate statistical methods to analyze SCU
patterns in a genome. This plot effectively demonstrates SCU
variation when the genome under study has significantly
different GC content from 0.50 []. ENCs and GC3 were
estimated and plotted for 53 PCGs, following the null
hypothesis that GC3 compositional constraints alone influences
expected SCU patterns. If a gene is influenced by GC
compositional constraints, it would lie on or below the expected
curve. If translational selection acts on a gene, it lies distantly
below the expected curve. Accumulation of majority of genes
on or below the left hand side of the expected GC3 based on null
hypothesis suggested that SCU variations across majority of
PCGs in C. arabica chloroplast genome were influenced by GC3
compositional constraints (). To confirm this further,
Parity rule 2 (PR2) plot [] was analyzed (). If GC3
mutational pressure acts on the genes, G and C (A and T)
nucleotides should be used proportionally. To analyze whether
codon preferences were restricted in strongly biased ORFs,
relationship between synonymous G, C and A, T contents were
analyzed. It was observed that G, C, and A, T contents were
used proportionally () and this confirmed the influence
of GC3 biased mutational pressure in framing codon usage
biases. Neutrality plot [] () revealed that some
amount of selection may act on PCGs in the chloroplast genome
of Coffea arabica as there was no correlation between GC12 and
GC3 []. However, some of the genes, viz., rps12, ndhF, ndhE,
ndhB, atpF, petB, petD, psaB, psbA, psbC, psbD, rpl16, rps8 and
rps14 were grouped distantly below the expected GC3 curve
indicates the interaction of some other factors that are
independent of base compositional constraints.

Correspondence analysis (COA):
Frequently used multivariate statistical analysis, viz.,
correspondence analysis was used for determining the SCU
variation across 53 PCGs in the C. arabica chloroplast genome.
To avoid effect of aminoacid composition, RSCU values were
used instead of codon counts. In this study, ORF of each gene
was represented as 59 dimensional vectors (excluding three
stop codons, Met and Trp) and each dimension denotes RSCU
value of one codon. The first, second, third and fourth axes
account for 10.94%, 8.09%, 7.35% and 6.89% respectively 
(). To unveil the factors that are responsible for the distribution
of genes in the COA plot, ordination of 53 PCGs of axis 1 to 4
were analyzed for possible correlation with silent base
composition and various indices of codon usage  (see
supplementary material). Axis 1 was significantly correlated
with A3 (r = -0.481, p &lt; 0.01) and with C3 (r = 0.542, p &lt; 0.01).
Axis 3 was in correlation with G3 (r = -0.276, p &lt; 0.01) and C3 (r
= 0.395, p &lt; 0.01). These correlations indicated the possible
influence of nucleotide compositional constraints in framing
codon usage. ENC, an index measuring the level of gene
expression was found to be in correlation with axis 1 (r = 0.364,
p &lt; 0.01) and with axis 2 (r = -0.377, p &lt; 0.01). Another index for
measuring gene expression, viz., CAI was significantly
correlated with axis 1 (r = 0.498, p &lt; 0.01) and with axis 2 (r =
0.381, p &lt; 0.01). Hence, it could be predicted that gene
expression levels also slightly influences (weak selection) codon
usage pattern in the chloroplast genome of C. arabica.

An equilibrium between positive and negative directional
mutational pressure on GC base pairs results in the base
composition of a genome []. The non random usage of
synonymous codons (codon bias) was detected in all coding
sequences of prokaryotes and eukaryotes as a result of the
interaction between two significant evolutionary forces such as
directional mutational pressure and selection in nature for
translational optimization [,
,
,
]. Codon bias of genes in
the chloroplast genomes has been reported to be towards A and
T ending codons due to the compositional bias towards AT rich
content [,
,
]. Codon bias is reported to be relatively
weaker in angiosperms []. A similar finding was also noticed
from the ENC values of PCGs in the C. arabica chloroplast
genome as ENCs of all the genes are greater than 35, indicating
a weaker bias. Correlation analysis between total nucleotide
contents and silent base contents revealed that base
compositional constraints greatly influence in framing the SCU
pattern in the PCGs of C. arabica chloroplast genome.
Nucleotide composition is considered to be the most important
factor that influences the SCU variations in chloroplast genomes
[]. Since all chloroplast genomes have high AT content, AT
biased mutational pressure is believed to be the factor
responsible for codon usage bias. But in the psbA gene of higher
angiosperms, the codon usage is directly linked to tRNA
population for translational optimization, indicating selection
acts on this gene []. Since selection influences codon usage of
psbA, lower rate of synonymous substitutions was reported in
psbA gene [].

Identified putative optimal codons were found to be ending in
A/T and found consistent with previous findings []. In our
study, ENC plot of selected chloroplast genes in C. arabica
unravels the possibility that some amount of selection may act
on petB, petD, psaB, psbA, psbC, psbD, rpl16, rps8 and rps14 as
these genes lie considerably below the expected GC curve.
However almost all the other genes lie on or just below the
continuous curve, revealing the influence of compositional
constraints in regulating SCU variation in C. arabica chloroplast
genome, further confirmed using PR2 bias plot. COA analysis
to find out the factors responsible for codon usage discrepancies
shown that compositional constraints rather than selection
plays crucial role in shaping the SCU variation across genes in
C. arabica chloroplast genome as there was a grouping of A/T
ending and C/G ending codons along the axis 1. Nevertheless,
influence of selection on codon usage of some of the genes
cannot be nullified because factors responsible for selective
constraints are regarded as dynamic processes []. It was
reported that selection against mutational pressure may narrow
the GC3 distribution []. Similar to previous finding 
[], we
observed a narrow distribution of GC3 contents (19.36%-
35.30%) in the Coffea arabica chloroplast genome and no
correlation was observed between GC12 and GC3. This result
demonstrates that some amount of selection may act in the
chloroplast genome of Coffea arabica. Correlations of axis 1 &amp; 2
with CAI, and axis 1 &amp; 4 with ENC point out the influence of
gene expression levels in framing the codon usage patterns.
However, no exact separation is observed in the COA plot
between highly and lowly expressed genes based on either ENC
or CAI. In contrast to the previous findings that revealed
significant correlation between length of CDS, hydropathy,
aromaticity and codon bias [,
,
], but our study could not
find any significant correlation between these parameters and
codon bias. Thus it can be concluded that the factor responsible
for SCU variation across genes in the C. arabica chloroplast
genome may possibly due to mutational pressure combined
with weak selection. Moreover, information about the rare and
preferred codons can be effectively used for enhancing
expression of genes by optimizing synonymous codons. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the very first report describing the
codon usage bias in the genus Coffea.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors acknowledge Central Coffee Research Institute,
Chikmagalur, Karnataka, India for providing technical support
in writing the manuscript. This study has been financially
supported by the University Grants Commission, New Delhi,
India under the major research project ‘Establishment of genetic
identity for Indian coffee germplasm using chloroplast genome
sequences’ F. No. 41-583/2012 (SR) during the year 2012 – 2015.
Part of this work is supported by Department of Science and
Technology under Promotion of University Research and
Scientific Excellence (DST-PURSE).

Citation:Nair et al, Bioinformation 8(22): 1096-1104 (2012)

ENC Vs GC3 plot showing the grouping of majority of
genes on or just below the expected GC3 curve. Red spots
indicate genes that are independent of GC compositional
constraints as they lie considerably below the continuous curve.

PR2 bias plot (A3/ (A3+T3) Vs G3/ (G3+C3)).
Average position is y = 0.171x+0.368.

Neutrality plot (GC12 Vs GC3). Average position is y=
0.400+0.756. r = 0.142 (p = 0.305).

Correspondence analysis plots of RSCU values of 53 ORF's in the C. arabica chloroplast genome. Distribution of these
ORFs was found to be mainly due to base compositions.

