Background
Introns (intra-genic, non-coding DNA) split a eukaryotic gene
into coding exons and their role largely remains unknown.
Variation of intron length with respect to intron positions and
its dynamic study is focused by current researchers 
[]. A
correlation between intron positions and protein structure is the
main theme of research after the discovery of intron in
eukaryotes in 1977 []. 
It is found that there was a strong
positive correlation between intron length and divergence, also
a strong negative correlation between intron length and GC
content (first introns are more GC rich, longer, more divergent)
[]. 
A major type of alternative splicing mechanism in human
transcriptome is intron retention. In 21,106 human genes intron
retention is located within the untranslated regions (UTRs) of
human transcript and 22% of retained introns in human are also
found in mouse transcriptome []. In upstream and
downstream introns, flanking intronic sequences are 88% and
80% respectively which is higher in comparison to promoter
region conservation level as 77% []. According to the
mechanism of excision introns are classified as GroupI, GroupII,
GroupIII, t-RNA, spliceosomal, chloroplast, mitochondrial, premRNA
and HAC1 introns []. We have developed IntDb, a
comprehensive database which contains information regarding
accession ID, definition, location, length, nucleotide sequences
of classified introns (like start, middle, stop) of Saccharomyces
and human. IntDb constitutes percentage of GC content, GTAG,
AT-AC consensus, etc. along with other deviations and
information related to diseases like application of homing
endonucleases in human. IntDb has better constitution than
other intron databases like YIDB, FUGOID, ExInt, GISSD, IDB
in exploring classified introns and their analysis 
 (see
supplementary material).

Methodology
IntDb is developed by using HTML (), Java script as
frontend, MySQL as backend and CGI-PERL for connectivity to
retrieve data. Apache server which has most intuitive
configuration is used as the web-server. The complete genome
of human &amp; Saccharomycetaceae family is screened in NCBI
database to find accession IDs (Genbank sequences) those
posses introns and after screening 18 species of
Saccharomycetaceae family, only 3 species like Saccharomyces
cerevisiae (350 IDs), S.pastorias (7 IDs), S.bayanus (8 IDs) were
found to be containing introns. Along with this 500 Homo
sapiens accession IDs those posses' introns are collected.
Classified introns are collected by using IMAGA tool which
classifies the intron as start, middle and stop by taking introns
positions from Genbank file. The database constitution is
presented in the schema (). Patterns of introns were
found by using IMAGA tool
(http://imaga.bicpu.edu.in:8080/Isaga/) in which 4 sets of
introns taken in one slots with variation of GA arameters
(population size, maximum number of GA runs, crossover
type).

Utility
IntDb constitutes classified introns of Saccharomyces and human
along with accession IDs those posses’ introns with relevant
information regarding introns like definition, no. of introns,
location, length, nucleotide sequence, GC percentage and
consensus pattern of classified introns 
(). We
have analyzed several statistical and functional aspects of
introns. Statistical analysis is done by considering 850 accession
IDs of Sachharomyces (350) and human (500). Statistical
analysis is done to identify consensus pattern, GC content and
length variation in classified introns (). In these
introns containing accession IDs first, last introns are said as
start, stop intron and rest all in between are middle introns. The
collected accession IDs always posses at least one start intron,
hence start introns are more. This analysis is done by taking 850
start, 38 middle and 143 stop introns. Apart from this we have
found some patterns of start introns by using IMAGA tool. All
the previous research works show that first introns (start intron)
are longer but our analysis reflects middle introns are longer in
average though their occurence is less in gene. Functional
analysis of introns covers the detailed prior studies on introns,
their role in homing endonuclease and transcription. Here
homing endonuclease application is projected in diseases like
Xeroderma pigmentosa and cancer. Transcription regulatory
role is found in Murine IL4, Hsp90 beta gene, Beta 1 tubulin
gene in which intron enhances expression of gene by Intron
Mediated enhancement (IME). IntDb can be accessed for
detection of mutation position, identification of splicing sites
which are helpful in gene prediction programs, development of
tools &amp; databases.

Future Developments
IndDb is a generalized name and intron data of other model
organisms will be included in future. We also want to predict
and store typical patterns which are conserved during
evolution along with their functional or malfunctional role in
gene.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors would like to thank the Department of
Biotechnology (DBT), Government of India for providing
fellowship and financial support.

Citation:Mohanty et al, Bioinformation 8(5): 233-236 (2012)

Flow chart of IntDb Development

Schema of IntDb shows 4 tables

A snapshot of IntDb and its important options. (a)
Table contains accessionid of Saccharomyces cerevisiae possess
introns, (b) Search for accession ID AJ011856 in IntDb
homepage, (c) Result for query AJ011856, (d) Statistical analysis
of start, middle, stop introns for its GC content and length, and
(e) Statistical analysis for consensus pattern of start, middle,
stop introns.

