Background
The Quantitative Trait Loci (QTL) is essentially a statistical
creation that identifies a particular region of the genome as
containing one or more genes. The QTL analysis is the phrase
used currently to study this genetic variation, to locate the
genes responsible and to explore their effects and interactions.
QTL databases have become a routine tool for complex traits
analysis in functional genomic research and QTL mapping is
widely used due to its simplicity and concept []. To increase
the importance of QTL analysis, various databases have been
constructed for comparative detection and prediction of
genome structure. The NIAB genetic marker database
(http://nabic.niab.go.kr) provided QTL markers which have
been systematically aligned to the sequence on the 12
chromosomes in rice []. The GRAMENE QTL database
(http://www.gramene.org/qtl/) provides QTL identified for
numerous agronomic traits in plants, and genetic maps have
been systematically aligned to the rice sequence where they
can be searched as standard genomic features 
[–]. The
QTLNetwork is a mapping tool to identify main effect QTLs,
epistatic QTLs and QTL- Environment effects in several crop
species []. 
The Q-TARO Database (http://qtaro.abr.affrc.go.jp/) 
focused on QTL information which views the
genomic location of a target QTL or to compare target QTLs.

Methodology
Dataset:
The QTL markers were collected from the Korea rice (Oryza
sativa) genome project of National Academy of Agricultural
Science (NAAS, http://http://www.naas.go.kr/) and the
New Bio-Green 21 project (http://atis.rda.go.kr/). In addition,
QTL information was collected through international public
institutes and collaborative university.

Development and marker design:
The platform was developed using MYSQL and Oracle
relational database management system. To construct a loci
database with genetic map, we analyze the collected QTL
markers using the Haldane mapping function method. Using
the MapMaker/Exp 3.0 program with integrated rice genome
explorer (INE, 
http://ine.dna.affrc.go.jp/giot/) method, QTL
map was developed in two stages as polymorphic markers and
QTL markers. The Logarithm of the Odds (LOD) score was
analyzed with MapMaker/QTL 1.1 program using a range of
recombination frequency value which was computed using
maximum likelihood algorithm between markers. In 2014, we
have released a major update for QTL mapping using
Haldane׳s mapping function method [] with LOD score and
recombination frequency value.

Implementation and features:
The NABIC has developed an integrated web database which
is comprised of QTL markers for genetic variation and markers
position search tools. The RiceQTLPro database provides
information through a genetic map of about 112 QTL markers
with 817 polymorphic markers on each of the 12 chromosomes
in rice. The database has three major parts and functions such
as QTL markers list, searching of markers, and map of QTL
markers position. Users can detect a mapped locus of specific
QTL markers with associated trait. In addition, users can view
a table of detailed information by clicking the linked QTL
marker ().

The QTL marker locus is displayed on the left while the genetic
markers as polymorphic marker are displayed on the right and
QTL names are shown next to each vertical green bar. The QTL
marker list table shows the peak LOD value and their genetic
parameters. The user can directly specify the viewer to view
the genomic location of a target QTL. The specific marker
information is displayed by selecting chromosome map with
both information on associated traits and a mapped locus on a
genetic map. The position of QTL markers are displayed by
trait categories, allowing the locations of QTLs of each trait to
be easily compared. Using the RiceQTLPro database, a user
can access the individual information table for genome
structure analysis by clicking a linked their respective
hypertext.

Utility and future developments:
The RiceQTLPro database provides information through
genetic map of about 112 QTL markers with 817 polymorphic
markers on each of the 12 chromosomes in rice. Users can trace
the new structures of the chromosomes and gene positional
functions through comparisons using our QTL marker
database. In the future, NAAS plans to develop an integrated
genetic linkage map that combines an SNP marker database
and a QTL marker database for rice.

This study was conducted with support from the Research
Program for Agricultural Science &amp; Technology Development
(Project No.PJ010112) of the National Academy of Agricultural
Science, Rural Development Administration, Republic of
Korea.

Citation:Kim et al, Bioinformation 10(10): 664-666 (2014)

A snap shot of QTL position linkage map. The view page shows the genetic map on the 10 chromosome in rice plant.

