Background
The soybean cyst nematode (SCN) is the major pest of soybean
in the U.S. and caused ~457 to 819 million dollars in yield losses
annually between 2003 and 2005 []. Some soybean cultivars are
resistant to one race or isolate of SCN yet susceptible to another.
The life cycle for SCN has different stages including egg, four
juvenile (from J1 to J4), and adult []. The second-stage juvenile
(J2) is important, because it is the only stage in which SCN is
motile. After hatching from the egg, the J2 moves through the
soil and infects by penetrating a host plant root, migrating
toward the vascular tissue, and selecting a cell for feeding. The
life cycle and pathogenic characteristics of SCN make it an
excellent model for studying parasitism and virulence in plantparasitic
nematodes. Literature about gene expression during
nematode infection in both susceptible and resistant soybean
genotypes using microarrays are available [,
,
,
]. However,
not all expressed mRNAs are immediately translated into
proteins. Furthermore, gene expression studies do not reveal
protein turnover patterns and protein modifications that may be
involved in signaling and communication, protein transport and
targeting and other important phenomenon. Therefore, we need
protein information which is important for developing SCN
resistant varieties. Recent advancements in protein separation
methods have led to greater use of proteomics to explore and
understand mechanisms of resistance and susceptibility of
plants to pathogens. We have published the characterization of
SCN proteins previously []. Since limited information on SCN
proteins is available, in this investigation, we developed a
publicly available database for SCN proteins for use by the
scientific community to identify genes encoding the proteins for
resistance and so the genes can be cloned and transformed into
susceptible soybean to develop SCN resistant varieties.

Methodology
The nematodes were grown at the United States Department of
Agriculture, Beltsville MD, USA according to Klink et al. 
[].
Proteins were extracted from J2 nematodes using a modified
phenol extraction procedure []. The nematode protein samples
(400µg) were separated in the first dimension using 13cm
(Immobiline IPG Dry strips (GE Healthcare). The first
dimensional separation was achieved through isoelectric
focusing (IEF) using commercially available strips (pH 3-10, 4-7
and 6-11). The strips were loaded onto 12.5% SDS-PAGE gels
and subjected to electrophoresis using the Hoefer SE 600 Ruby
unit for the second dimensional protein separation. The 2DPAGE
gels were stained with Colloidal Coomassie Blue G-250
and scanned using Image Scanner TM II (GE Healthcare). From
the 2D-PAGE, 803 distinct spots were manually excised from
gels and digested with trypsin. A LTQ Orbitrap XL hybrid
linear ion trap, Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher
Scientific, San Jose, CA) was used for protein analysis. The
resulting peptides were separated by reverse phase
chromatography and searched against NCBI non-redundant
databases and the invertebrates EST database using MASCOT
search engine (http://www.matrixscience.com), which uses a
probability-based scoring system [].

Construction of database:
The web based database is composed of two main parts. The
first one is a relational database built on Access 2007. The
database contains several tables that are joined to each other
based on a single primary key. This primary key is a unique
number for each protein referred to as “SpotID”. The SpotID
matches the number written next to the spots in the images. The
second part is the web interface. Web pages were created by
Active Server Pages (ASP.Net) using C# programming
language. Both the database and the interface are housed on the
Bioinformatics server at Towson University, MD, USA. The
website consists of several sections each of which contain
information about a 2D Gel image that represents isolated SCN
proteins. Each page displays the 2D image and allows the user
to obtain information about the proteins shown in the image. By
entering the Spot ID of a protein, its corresponding information
from the SCNProDB is retrieved. The website validates the user
input to ensure that the entered number exists in the database.
Valid inputs can only be integer numbers from 1 to 754. If the
user inputs a character or an invalid number, an error message
is displayed. For a valid number, a query is executed and
returns the following protein information: assigned protein spot
number, protein description, theoretical isoelectric point (pI),
molecular weight (Mr), NCBI accession number (gi),
Uniprot_accession number, peptides_matched, EST_coverage,
molecular weight search (MOWSE) score, species, EST_species,
EST_Acc, and blast_e_value.

The design is efficient and meets the needs of the biologists
using the database.  is a snapshot of 2D gel׳s main page.
The database is accessible from: http://bioinformatics.towson.
edu/Soybean_SCN_proteins_2D_Gel_DB/Gel1.aspx

Utility to the biological community
The database is of interest to biologists working with soybeans
and/or seed proteins. It provides an easy and visual means to
identify key proteins in soybean seeds. The web interface allows
scientists to access the data using any web browser.

The authors gratefully acknowledge support from the United
Soybean Board project number Y9254. Mention of trade name,
proprietary product or vendor does not constitute a guarantee
or warranty of the product by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture or imply its approval to the exclusion of other
products or vendors that also may be suitable.

Citation:Natarajan et al, Bioinformation 10(6): 387-389 (2014)

a snapshot of SCNProDB

