Background
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (CFS) is a relatively rare, poorly understood,
complex disorder that is characterized by severe and chronic physical and
mental fatigue not attributable to other causes (diseases) which is sometimes
accompanied by other symptoms such as weak immune response, digestive
problems and depression. A great deal of effort has been put forth in recent
years in collecting clinical, gene expression, gynotypic and proteomic data by
the Chronic Fatigue Syndrome Group at CDC in an attempt to find a genetic
basis of CFS. Even though these data have been analyzed by numerous
researchers (and research teams) in the last two years resulting in a special
issue of the journal Pharmacogenomics [] and were also as part the Critical
Assessment of Microarray Data Analysis (CAMDA) conference in 2006, the
type of success has been mixed and limited. Since genes do not act alone,
especially, for a complex disorder such as CFS, our attempt in analyzing these
data takes a systems biology approach where we study groups of genes (called
modules) obtained from gene-gene association networks. Thus, our approach is
similar to that of [], although our network construction methods and the
statistical analyses are different from theirs. At the end, we identify eleven
“interesting” genes which may play important roles in certain aspects of CFS or
related symptoms. In particular, the gene WASF3 (aka WAVE3) possibly
regulates brain cytokines involved in the mechanism of fatigue through the p38
MAPK regulatory pathway. A preliminary version of this work was presented
in the CAMDA 2007 conference [].

Methodology
The CDC Chronic Fatigue Syndrome Research Group provided challenge
datasets consisting of clinical, microarray, proteomics, and SNP data that were
used for both CAMDA 2006 and CAMDA 2007 competitions. 227 subjects
filled self-administered questionnaires and had their blood drawn for lab
analysis. For many of them, microarray (163) and proteomics (63) data were
also collected for the purpose of discovering biological (genetic) basis of CFS.
In this work, we integrate clinical, microarray, SNP and proteomics data for
our analysis.

Microarray data
CAMDA 2006 microarray data consists of 177 arrays, 9 of which were
repeated twice at different times during the study. We discarded these 9
microarrays for multiplicity reasons and additional 5 arrays were excluded
from this analysis due to the absence of clinical information on the subjects.
Thus, we started our analysis with 163 arrays. Subtracted ARM (Artifactremoved)
density column which is already adjusted for the background density
was log-transformed to stabilize the variance.

Clinical data
Clinical data contains extensive information on 227 subjects and can be linked
to microarray and SNP data via the ABTID subject ID. The two pieces of
clinical data that we made use of were the Intake Classific variable classifies
patients into 5 categories and the Cluster variable provides information on the
severity of the symptoms (“Worst‟, “Middle”, “Least”) for some patients.

SNP data
Forty two Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP's) for 10 different genes
were genotyped. For the purposes of this analysis, we selected two SNP's,
hCV245410 (on gene TPH2) and hCV7911132 (on gene SLC6A4), which were
previously identified [] to be associated with CFS severity.

Proteomic data
Protein spectra are available for 63 subjects in the study. Serum was originally
separated into 6 fractions of which we use the last four and then applied to
three different SELDI surfaces, giving us a total combination of 12 different
settings. Experiments were repeated twice and we averaged the two spectra for
each subject. We removed the first 4000 m/z values from our analysis which
roughly corresponds to m/z values smaller than 1700 Da. After that we divided
the spectrum into the bins of size 10 and took the maximum intensity value in
each bin. The data was reduced by a factor of 10, leaving 2650 m/z values in
the data for further analysis. To de-noised data, we estimated the standard
deviation for each m/z bin and took the median of these as a measure of noise'
standard deviation σ. Intensity values smaller than 3σ were considered to be
pure noise. If this happened in all samples, the m/z value was removed from the
analysis. Then the data was then log transformed.

Statistical analysis
The first step of the statistical analysis we performed was to identify a set of
differentially expressed genes between different groups of subjects. Disease
status of subjects came from the clinical portion of the CFS data (Intake
Classific variable). All subjects included in the microarray study were
classified into 5 different groups: Ever CFS - 45 subjects ever experiencing
CFS, Non-fatigues - 34 controls who never experienced CFS, Ever ISF - 45
subjects who are fatigued but cannot be classified as CFS because of
insufficient symptoms, Ever ISF-MDDm - 20 subjects experiencing ISF with
melancholic depression, Ever CFS-MDDm - 19 subjects experiencing CFS
along with melancholic depression. ANOVA F-test for each probe was carried
out to determine differentially expressed genes across the five groups. 286
probes were identified as differentially expressed (p-values &lt; 0.01). Since we
are not interested in determining the differentially expressed genes per se,
multiplicity correction was not used. The reduced microarray data consisting of
286 probes and 163 samples (subjects) was used later for further statistical
analysis as discussed below.

Network construction and identification of associated gene sets
To better understand the relationships between the selected 286 probes in terms
of interactions/ associations, we employ two computational network inference
techniques. The first method is based on the Partial Least Squares regression
(PLS) [], 
while the second method is based on the Partial Correlations (PC)
[]. 
A number of similar characteristics are shared by the two approaches, such
as computing association scores whose magnitude reflects the strength of the
interaction between genes and local false discovery rate (local fdr) Empirical
Bayes procedure for multiplicity adjustment in testing multiple hypotheses. The
results from applying the PLS and PC network reconstruction techniques to the
reduced microarray data are summarized in the first three columns of Tables 1
(for PLS) and 2 (for PC). The actual visual representation of the networks
themselves can be found from  &amp; 
, respectively. Both Tables 1 and
2 have the same structure. The first column shows the number of genes in
distinct gene association modules (connected components) within each network.
Gene association modules were defined to be clusters of 4 or more
connected genes such that genes in two distinct components are not connected
by an edge. Thus, it differs from the definition used in 
[]. The tables are sorted
by the second column which displays the percentages of each module's average
association score when compared to the module with the largest average
association score (the first module in each table). The exact definition of
association scores are dependent on the method used. As for example, for the
PC method, the association score of an edge is the partial correlation between
the connected gene pair. Finally, in the third column we list all the genes
belonging to each individual module. Genes shown in red are the genes that
appear in both tables.

Prediction of symptom severity
After identifying clusters of associated/interacting genes, we investigate the
ability of each module to predict the CFS severity level. For that purpose, we
fit a log-linear model for each gene module to regress the clinical variable
Cluster on the set of expression profiles of genes included in the module. The
overall predictive ability of the CFS severity by a given module can be judged
on the basis of the likelihood ratio test which compares the full model (all
genes in a module included as covariates in the model) and the null model
which includes no covariates. The p-values obtained from the tests are shown
in the fourth column of (see ). Small
p-values indicate that gene association modules are effective in predicting the
symptom severity categories.

SNP association
Carrying out a similar analysis as in the previous section, we study how
effectively each gene cluster (module) can predict the genotypes of the two
SNP's, hCV245410 and hCV7911132, which have been identified by 
[] to be
associated with symptom severity. Again, we fit multiple log-linear models and
compute the p-values for the likelihood ratio tests. The p-values for both SNP's
are shown in columns 5 and 6.

Integration of proteomic data
We have run a number of well regarded classifiers (Random Forest, LDA, and
others) based on the class information with the hope of identifying the features
possessing the greatest classification ability; however this approach was
abandoned since none of the classifiers produced desirable classification error
rates when cross validation was used. An alternative analysis consisted of
performing a t-test for each m/z value to compare case and control samples
which identified the discriminating features by the magnitude of the p-values.
Then we fitted regression models to predict the intensity values of the ten most
discriminating features from the collection of expressions of the genes in the
two modules (from PLS and PC, respectively) identified by our analysis of
associated gene sets. The genes have a good predictive ability as can be seen
from Table 3 (see )

Discussion
Two gene association modules (indicated by asterisks) are of interest based on
their predictive ability of symptom severity, at least, one of the SNP genotypes
and intensity of identified proteomic features. The first cluster comes from the
PLS reconstructed network and the other one from the PC reconstructed
network. Table 4 (see ) lists the eleven genes that are
in common between these two gene modules. The GO annotations listed in the
table were mined from the BioGrid online repository 
[] and the pathway
analysis was conducted using the DAVID webtools 
[] in addition to mining
existing literature. It is plausible that these genes are responsible for certain
aspects of CFS or its symptoms. As for example, the first gene on the list
WASF3 (aka WAVE3) is thought to take part in the p38 MAPK regulatory
pathway []. 
On the other hand, in recent animal model studies 
[], it has been
demonstrated that regulation of brain cytokines through p38 MAPK pathway is
involved in the in the central mechanisms of fatigue and therefore may play a
role in the pathogenesis of the CFS. The list also includes autoimmune
response gene NUP98 and genes related to tumor activities (PRUNE, TNK2,
HOXA1). Gene expression of HDAC7A has been shown to be correlated with
unexplained fatigue in a past study []. 
The gene GPR41's role in autoimmune disorders including CFS has been hypothesized in 
[].

Conclusion
It is possible and perhaps desirable to integrate information from various
experimental platforms in order to understand complex disorders. The findings
in this study are based on data mining approaches using clinical, gene
expression, SNP and proteomic data. The predictive models obtained here may
explain certain aspects of CFS and may pave the way for further experimental
validation.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Pihur et al, Bioinformation 6(3): 120-124 (2011)

Gene-Gene Association Network constructed using the PLS method

Gene-Gene Association Network constructed using the PC method

