Background
Syphilis is a STD (sexually transmitted disease) caused by Treponema pallidum. The understanding of host-pathogen interactions 
      remains unclear due to difficulty in culturing the organism in vitro. Syphilis is an exclusive human pathogen and its pathogenesis 
      from animal study provides limited inference []. The availability of the 
      complete genome sequence of Treponema pallidum provides ample opportunities for the computational analysis towards the 
      identification of potential drug targets. 

Lysyl tRNAs are essential for protein biosynthesis by ribosomal mRNA translation. They are synthesized by lysyl tRNA 
      synthetases (a group of enzymes of two unrelated protein families, namely, class I and II). Known lysyl tRNA synthetases are 
      class II in bacteria/eukaryotes and class I in archaea. A recent genomic analysis showed the presence of the archaeal type class-I 
      lysyl tRNA synthetase in Treponema pallidum and Borellia species. [] The 
      difference between the lysyl tRNA synthetases of spirochetes and their hosts is for potential exploitation towards the development 
      of anti-spirochete therapeutics. The X-ray crystal structure of class-I lysyl tRNA synthetase from the archaea Pyrococcus 
      horikoshii is known. [] Here, we use this structure as a template for 
      the modeling of class-I lysyl tRNA synthetase from Treponema pallidum. We discuss the modeled structure as a potential drug target 
      for syphilis caused by Treponema pallidum. 

Methodology
Lysyl tRNA synthetase sequence
The protein sequence for class I lysyl tRNA synthetase of Treponema pallidum (O83650) was obtained from the SWISS PROT 
      database.

Template selection
The sequence was then searched against PDB (protein databank) protein sequences [] using BLASTP [] and a potential template 
      structure (PDB-ID: 1IRX) was identified at an E-value (expect value) cut-off of 3e-110. 

Molecular modeling
An ensemble of 20 models for the class I lysyl tRNA synthetase from Treponema pallidum was generated using MODELLER by 
      satisfaction of spatial restraints. []

Model evaluation
The backbone of 20 models were overlapped well with the template structure and the most reliable structure was chosen based on 
      least objective function value and stereo chemical quality of the models using the PROCHECK analysis. [] In addition, the superimposition was also performed using the SUPERPOSE command in MODELLER and the 
      RMSD (root mean square deviation) between predicted model and template is 0.7 angstrom. The predicted model quality assessment was 
      checked using Ramachandran plot analysis for phi and psi torsion angles. The analysis shows that 92.5 % of residues are found to be 
      in the allowed region of the plot which is more than the average cut-off of 90% in most reliable models. [] The bond lengths and bond angles analyses of the modeled structure satisfies the small molecule 
      experimental data described by Kabsch et al. []
      

Utility of the study
Here, we illustrate the potential use of molecular models towards the likely design of inhibitors for the class I tRNA 
      synthetase enzyme from Treponema pallidum. The study is highly pertinent where the difficulty of solving the structure of the 
      protein is high (culturing of Treponema pallidum is difficult in this case).

Conclusion
A molecular model of the class I lysyl tRNA synthetase from Treponema pallidum is documented in this study. The model is 
      believed to provide valuable insights towards the design of an inhibitor for class I lysyl tRNA synthetase for the treatment of 
      syphilis. However, further computational docking and high throughput screening experiments are required in detail for extracting 
      more useful information. 


        Citation:Rao
        et al., Bioinformation 1(3): 81-82, (2006)

