Background
Chitin is a ubiquitous biopolymer in ecosystem but is not being
accumulated despite of its recalcitrant nature that refers to
existence of an efficient chitin degradation system. So, it is not
astonishing that a variety of proteins have evolved with
indistinct variations in structure and organization, to degrade
the plenteous biopolymer on Earth. Microorganisms such as,
Serratia marcescens, Serratia proteamaculans, Streptomyces tendae
Tü109, Streptomyces olivaceoviridis, Streptomyces reticuli, Bacillus
amyloliquefaciens and Bacillus thuringiensis produce chitin
binding protein(s) [–] 
with the several chitinases [,
,
].
The family 33 chitin binding proteins (CBM33) are believed to
interact with chitin in crystalline form, making it easily
available for degradation by chitinases [], where some of
them can specifically bind to α-chitin [] while others prefer β-
chitin. The ChbB from B. amyloliquefaciens 
[] and CBP21 from
S. marcescens [] preferably bind β-chitin. On the other hand,
some chitin binding proteins have shown synergistic action
with chitinases either specifically or non-specifically 
[]. Three
chitin binding proteins (CBPs) from Artemia parthenogenetica (a
shrimp) have been found involved in oviparous development.
Moreover, it was found that these proteins are involved in the
embryonic cuticular layer and all three CBPs have shown
carbohydrate-binding activities []. Nonetheless, chitin
binding proteins have been found involved in adhesion
strategy of some pathogenic bacteria, including E. coli, Listeria
monocytogenes and Vibrio cholerae during the intestinal
inflammation in humans []. So, it seems that chitin binding
proteins are important not only for biomass turnover, but they
have crucial roles to play in different metabolic pathways.

The computational packages are frequently being used these
days for the sequence analyses and characterization of proteins.
Various structural and physicochemical properties of proteins
can be better exploited by using computational tools. Although
precise and accurate structure of proteins can be guaranteed by
experimental methods only yet they have the disadvantage of
being expensive, time consuming and large amount of purified
protein is required for this purpose. Computational methods
are an excellent and cost effective alternative, in this context.
Despite of the fact that they are not as much reliable as
experimental ones, still they can provide us nearly exact
structure of proteins besides the deep understanding of
structure-function relationship and substrate-protein
interaction of protein at almost no cost. By far the most
authentic and precise solution to the problem of protein
structure prediction is template-based modeling 
[]. Extensive
expertise in the structural biology and the use of extremely
particularized computer programs are the prerequisite of
modeling of protein structures for each of the individual steps
of the modeling process [].

In the present study, the chitin binding protein CBP24 Bacillus
thuringiensis serovar konkukian was characterized in an in-silico
study. The protein was subjected to several online and desktop
based bioinformatics tools to study physico-chemical
properties. The structure reflects function, so the 3D structure
of the protein was established using homology modeling
approach. The predicted structure was subjected to structure
evaluation and validation to authenticate the results. Later, the
protein was docked using chitin hexamer as a ligand to study
the substrate-protein interaction sites. The study will lead us to
better understanding of the substrate-protein interaction
principles and mechanism.

Methodology
The in-silico analyses of CBP24 were carried out using HP630 i-5
workstation having CentOS as operating system. The whole
study involves various desktop based applications for
comparative modeling and docking including MODELLER
(v9.9) [], Chimera 
[]; an extensible molecular modeling
system, Autodock (v4.2) [] and PyMol. Amino acid sequence
of the target protein was retrieved from Uniprot [] (accession
number Q6HHR5) in FASTA format. SignalP4.0 server was
used to identify the cleavage site of extra cellular transport
signal site. The physico-chemical parameters of the protein
sequence that includes amino-acid and atomic compositions,
molecular weight and isoelectric point (ρI) were computed by
Protparam program available at ExPaSY (www.expasy.org).
Secondary structure analyses of the query protein were
performed by PSIPRED Server []. The sequence is then
submitted to Pfam database and also to Conserved Domains
Database at NCBI for domain prediction and analyses. The
presence of particular motifs that reflects the specific functions
of the proteins was searched by Motif Search Library.

Molecular modeling and validation:
The sequence of predicted domains was searched for their
structural similarity with the query protein by running PSIBLAST 
against Protein Data Bank (PDB) []. The resulting hits
were short listed on four criteria by eliminating hits with evalues
greater than 0.01, alignment length shorter than 85% of
target sequence or lower functional similarity and origin of
protein. The template with maximum score and least e-value
(smaller the e-value, greater is the confidence) were selected as
templates for homology modeling.

After the selection of template, the alignment between template
and target sequence was generated by “align2d“ function of
MODELLER. The align2d implements global dynamic
programming with an affine gap penalty function and is
preferred for aligning a sequence with structures because it
tends to place gaps in a better structural context 
[]. Domain
wise multiple sequence alignment of the chitin binding protein
CBP24 was performed to see the conserved residues in
predicted domain using multiple templates retrieved from
family (CBM33) members. Once a target-template alignment
was constructed, MODELLER calculated 3-D models of the
target completely automatically, by using its automodel class.
The Lowest Objective Function is used to select the best model
by the smallest value of normalized Discrete Optimized
Molecule Energy (DOPE) score. Loop optimization function of
MODELLER9.9 was used for the loop modeling of the CBP24
based on satisfaction of spatial restraints. The high-resolution
X-ray rotamers library of CHIMERA was used to model side
chains that would have least steriochemical clashes.

Structures were analyzed for their steriochemical properties
through MolProbity and NIH server. Molprobity server
computed Ramachandarn values for dihedral angles, poor
rotameric conformations, Cβ deviation, bad angles and bond
lengths of all the residues. NIH server embeds various
evaluation tools like PROCHECK [], ERRAT 
[] and VERIFY
3D []. Structure-structure alignment of models with their
respective templates was assessed by FATCAT server. The
outputs of a structural alignment are superimpositions of the
atomic coordinate sets and a minimal root mean square
deviation (RMSD) between tertiary structures. CHIMERA's
structure comparison function also gives the RMSD value
validates the model. Energy minimization was done by
Chimera's built in function AMBER.

Ligand selection, active site prediction and molecular Docking:
The CBP24 is known to have a carbohydrate binding domain
which primarily hydrolyzes oligomeres of chitin. Acetylated
hexamer of chitin, N-acetyl-chitohexose was selected as ligand
for docking. The 3D structure of the ligand molecule was
obtained from a small molecule database ChemIDplus 
(http://chem.sis.nlm.nih.gov/chemidplus/). To predict the
substrate binding pocket, 3D model of CBP24 was submitted to
POCKET-FINDER server (http: //www.modelling.leeds.ac.uk/pocketfinder/help.html). Auto Dock Tools (ADT) is a
graphical front end for AutoDock (v4.2) and was used for
flexible protein-ligand docking. Polar hydrogen was added to
protein molecule and all atoms had assigned Gasteiger charges.
Ligand bonds were set non-rotatable. A grid box of size (x= 98
A, y= 82 A and z= 106 A) was generated having centroid
(x=10.919 Å, y= 31.108 Å, z= 9.782 Å). A blind docking was
then launched using Lamarkian genetic algorithm with
population size 150, maximum numbers of generations as 27000
for 100 docked conformations.

Results &amp; Discussion
The present study comprises sequence, structural and docking
analysis of the chitin binding protein CBP24 from B.
thuringiensis serovar konkukian. Previously, we have
characterized the modular chitin binding protein CBP50 and
two chitinases (Chi74, Chi39) [,
,
]. It was shown that the
C-terminal carbohydrate binding domain of the CBP50 has a
critical role in substrate binding activity of the CBP50 
[].
ProtParam was used for primary sequences analyses of the
target protein, the CBP24 contains 221 amino acid, with a
molecular weight of 24082.3 Dalton and an isoelectric point (ρI)
of 9.11, while the total number of negatively and positively
charged residues were 17 and 22, respectively. Secondary
structure analysis was performed using PSIPRED and the
protein was shown to contain several β-strands and α-helices,
where the predicted percentage of β-strands was higher than
the α-helices. Domain analyses of the protein have shown a
single CBM33 domain, whereas no functional motif was found
in the query protein. Inconsistent to our findings, CBP21 has
three chitin binding domains. The multiple sequence alignment
of CBP24 has shown its association with other members of
CBM33 as well, particularly with template CBP21, where both
the proteins have shown conserved residues on pair wise
alignment (). The SignalP4.0 HMM showed the
maximum cleavage site probability (0.289) of the CBP24
between amino acid residues at position 34 and 35.
Subsequently, 35 residues were thus removed from the Nterminus
of the protein sequence. The signal is recognizable by
gram-positive bacteria only, which is in accordance with
previous findings [].

Homology modeling; template selection, model generation and validation:
Advance search feature of the PDB PSI-BLAST produced
thirteen homologues for CBP24. The template selection was
made based on sequence identity greater than 30% and e-value.
For the chitin binding domain of CBP24, the crystal structure of
the S. marcescens chitin binding protein CBP21, (2BEM; PDB
entry name) was selected as template with 62% homology.
Although the pair wise alignment of the CBP24 and CBP21 has
shown the presence of conserve residues yet the CBP24
appeared on a separate branch as compared to the other
CBM33 domains, when a protein sequence based phylogenetic
tree was constructed (). Out of thirty generated models,
the one with lowest objective function was selected for further
refinement. Loop optimization side chain modeling produced
considerable improvements in model (). Several
structure assessment methods including Ramachandran plots,
verify 3D, RMSD and Errat quality factor were used to check
the reliability of 3D model. Structure superimposition with
2BEM finally evaluated the model showing a low RMSD value
of 0.161 Å (Å= 10-8 cm) which is acceptable based on sequence
homology between CBP21 and selected template 2BEM. The
verify 3D showed that amino acid residues of the template and
model were 97.66% and 76.58% in favored regions, respectively.
Similarly Errat quality factor was computed to assess the
quality of the model, for 2BEM (template) its value was 98.765
and for 3D model it was 77.838. The Ramachandran plot was
obtained for template and model and shows 99.01% and 95.89%
residues in the most favored region respectively. The
comparable RMSD values, verify 3D values, Errat quality factor
and Ramachandran characteristics confirm the quality of the
homology model of CBP24 ().

Flexible protein-ligand docking was carried out to assess the
binding mode of the CBP24. Blind docking for whole protein
showed the similar pattern of substrate binding at exposed
binding surface as that of CBP21. Out of 100 docked
conformations, model 37 having cluster size as 16, showed the
lowest binding free energy i.e -0.5 kcal/mol. Final
intermolecular forces, van der Waal's force , H-bond energies ,
desolvation energies and electrostatic energies of this complex
were computed as -8.34 kcal/mol, -8.20 kcal/mol, -4.55
kcal/mol respectively. This depicts a stable intermolecular
conformation of the docked complex. These results are in
accordance with the previous work on homology modeling and
docking [].

Detailed molecular analysis of binding site prediction has
shown that several residues (Glu-39, Tyr-46, Thr-103, Leu-104,
Lys-112, Ser-162) are involved in substrate-protein interaction.
Among them surface-exposed hydrophilic residues Thr-103,
Lys-112 and Ser-162 were found to have strong H-bonding with
substrate. Whereas, amino acids residues Glu-39, Tyr-46, Leu-
104 and Asn-109, shown to involve polar interactions with the
substrate (). Whereas, the surface-exposed polar
residues Tyr-54, Glu-55, Glu-60, His-114, Asp-182, and Asn-185
were predicted to be involved in the substrate-binding activity
of the CBP21 in a homology modeling based study [,
]. It is
interesting to note that Tyr-54, which is Tyr-46 at
corresponding position in our CBP24, had previously been
found critical in a mutational study of a homologous CBP from
Streptomyces olivaceoviridis []. In this way, the CBP24 is
presenting novel substrate binding sites. Moreover, it remains
unconfirmed that the CBP24 may have role(s) other than chitin
binding. This finding is in accordance with the smCBP28 
[].
In CBMs surface exposed aromatic residues are known to
interact with substrates but the template CBP21 lacks an
aromatic surface region, and the mode of CBP21 substrate
binding is not clear []. The analysis had showed that CBP21
exerts this effect through specific polar interactions, which are
not only important for binding, but also for alteration of the
substrate structure. Using mutation analysis, Asn-185 has
proved to be one of such residue [].

Instead of being top of functional homolog of the CBP21, the
CBP24 is presenting a different mechanism of interaction with
the substrate. This may be confirmed through site-directed
mutagenesis of the predicted amino-acids residues. So, the
functional characterization of the CBP24 will elucidate the
substrate-interaction pathway of the protein in specific and the
carbohydrate binding proteins in general leading towards
better understanding of substrate utilization pathways by
prokaryotes.

Citation:Sehar et al, Bioinformation 9(14): 725-729 (2013)

Phylogenetic dendrogram based upon alignments
with other domain family (CBM33) members. The phylogenetic
dendogram was built using the CBM33 family members having
same domains as in CBP24. The bacterial sequences used are
Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis, (Q9CE94), B. amyloliquefaciens
(Q9F9Q5), B. thuringiensis serovar konkukian (Q6HHU4), L.
monocytogenes (Q8Y4H4), Photorhabdus luminescens subsp.
laumondii (Q7N4I5), S. marcescens (O83009), Oceanobacillus
iheyensis (Q8ES33), Yersinia enterocolitica (Q8GBD4), Shewanella
oneidensis (Q8EHY2), Vibrio parahaemolyticus (Q87FTO), S.
olivaceoviridis (Q54501). The numbers at nodes indicate
bootstrap confidence values. The position of the sequence
originating from the B. thuringiensis serovar konkukian (Present
study) is represented by Q6HHR5.

A) Template (2BEM) model; B) Homology model of
CBP21; C) Structure-Structure alignment between target protein
CBP24 (white) and template 2BEM (magenta)

Ramachandarn Plot of the best selected model
showing ~ 95% residues in favored region.

Substrate binding mode of CBP24. (A) Chitin oligomer bound at surface of protein is shown. Molecular surface
representation is used for protein while ligand in sticks model is shown; (B) Residues involved in substrate interaction are shown
with their exposed side chains, H bonded Thr-103, Lys-112 and Ser-162 are highlighted in green while green dotted lines represent
H-bonds. Glu-39, Ser-41, Tyr-46, Leu-104 and Asn-109 are marked as residues involved in polar interactions; (C) Close atomic view
of interaction shows all the interactions involved including polar contacts as well as H-bonds, wireframe circles are shown around
the atoms involved in interaction.

