Background
Poliomyelitis is a disease of major public health importance 
[]
and is one of the important emergent viral diseases of the
twentieth century []. Pakistan is one of the four countries
worldwide where polio is still endemic despite general success
in eradicating polio from most of the globe []. Poliovirus is a
member of the genus Enterovirus in the family Picornaviridae,
having a single-stranded 7500 nucleotide RNA genome of
positive-sense strand []. There are three serotypes of
poliovirus, PV1, PV2, and PV3, each with a slightly different
capsid defining its receptor specificity and antigenicity 
[]. The
Poliovirus cause flaccid paralysis through selective destruction
of motor neurons in the central nervous system [].
Susceptibility to poliovirus infection is determined mainly by
the interaction between the surface capsid proteins (VP1, VP2,
and VP3) of poliovirus and the poliovirus receptor protein
(CD155) on the host cell surface [].

CD155 is a transmembrane protein with 3 Ig-like extracellular
domains, D1-D3, where D1 is recognized by the polio virus 
[].
The Ig-like folds have predominant function related to cellular
adhesion and activation [,
]. They activate natural killer cells
[,
] and also play a role in cell motility and tumor cell
invasion []. 
Membrane bound PVRs are considered to play
important roles in the early steps of infection, such as binding of
the virus to the cell surface, penetration of the cell and
uncoating of the virus []. The virus–receptor interactions for
PVs have a greater dependence on hydrophobic interactions 
[].

Binding to a specific receptor is the most crucial step in viral
infectious cycle. Blocking these receptors can prevent infection.
Entry inhibitors are gaining interest as promising antiviral
therapeutics which acts by preventing binding and entry of the
virion. Viral infections can be inhibited by blocking the host cell
receptors used by viruses to gain entry into the cells. Various
strategies have been proposed for blocking the receptors. The
purpose of this study was to predict induced mutations which
can alter the binding domain of CD155 receptor in a significant
way to make it unattachable and unrecognizable for the polio
virus and thus blocking the viral entry into the cell which will
prevent infection.

Methodology
Virus receptors are important for viral binding, penetration and
other necessary events during early infection. Exploring their
functional regions and pattern of interactions in each step is
essential for better understanding of the molecular mechanisms
of host-virus interaction. Sequences of PVR, VP1 and VP2
proteins were retrieved from the UniProt database
(www.uniprot.org) and were searched for binding domains
through pfam (pfam.sanger.ac.uk). Among the identified
domains, the one important for viral attachment were identified
and confirmed from the literature. The next step was to predict
significant substitutions in the binding domains which can
cause significant structural and interacting variations without
enforcing functional impacts. Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant
(SIFT) was used (http://blocks.fhcrc.org/sift/SIFT.html) for
predicting the impact of the proposed substitution and protein
conservation analysis. Protein evolution and function are inter
related, variations at conserved regions are expected to be less
tolerated than those at the diverse positions. Its algorithm is
using a modified version of the PSIBLAST [] and Dirichlet
mixture regularization [] for the proteins global multiple
sequence alignment against the query sequence. This program
generates alignments with a large number of homologous
sequences and assigns scores to each residue, ranging from 0 to
1. Scores ≤ 0.05 are predicted to be intolerant or deleterious,
whereas scores &gt;0.05 are considered tolerant. Higher the
tolerance index of a particular substitution, lesser is its likely
impact.

Better understanding of the functional impacts of residue
substitution, potential causes and molecular basis depends on
the relevant information related to sequences, structures and
solvent accessibility. Secondary structures for the seed and the
mutants of the PVR and VP proteins were predicted by using
the Hierarchal Neural Network (HNN) 
(
http://npsapbil.ibcp.fr/cgi\bin/npsa_automat.pl?page=/NPSA/npsa_hnn.html)
and PRALINE (http://www.ibi.vu.nl/programs/pralinewww) was
used to observe the variations in secondary structure elements.
A detail insight of the protein three-dimensional structure is
essential for understanding its functionality and thus was
predicted for all the seeds and mutants by using LOOPP server
(http://clsb.ices.utexas.edu/loopp/web). It performs multiple
sequence alignment, sequence profiling, threading and then
combines the results to generate a 3D model. All the predicted
models were refined with Chiron: Rapid Protein Energy
Minimization Server through discrete molecular dynamics for
each residue. The structural parameters were further validated
for Z-Score through ProSA-web
(https://prosa.services.came.sbg.ac.at/prosa.php); VERIFY 3D 
[] and
WHAT IF []. The refined and validated 3D structures were
compared for similarity by PDBeFOLD
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/msd-srv/ssm), an interactive service for
protein 3D structures comparison.

Amino acid substitution can cause physiochemical differences,
which in turn can affect the protein interactions,
physiochemical properties were predicted through ProtParam
(http://au.expasy.org/tools/protparam.html). Functional impacts
of the induced mutations were investigated through mutation
assessor (http://mutationassessor.org). The functional impact was
assessed based on evolutionary conservation of the affected
residues in protein homologs. Protein-protein interactions were
analyzed through HEX (http://hexserver.loria.fr) for the PVR
with both the VP1 and VP2 to further understand their complex
structure and also to analyze the impact of proposed
substitutions on the virus-receptor interaction. HEX is an
interactive molecular graphics program for calculating and
displaying feasible docking modes of pairs of protein and DNA
molecules.

Discission
Retrieval of Protein Sequence and domain identification:
Polio Virus Receptor is the product of PVR gene and belongs to
the family of immunoglobins. It is composed of three
immunoglobin domains (D1 immunoglobin V-Set domain from
residues 28-142, D2 CD80 like C2-set immunoglobin domain
from residues 143-242 and D3 immunoglobin domain from
residues 243-330), a transmembrane domain from 331-355 and a
cytoplasmic tail from residues 356-417. D1 immunoglobin V-Set
domain is actually involved in viral attachment.

Mutation identification and substitution:
Receptor modification is a new approach to block viruses by
inducing substitutions in the residues at the binding domain to
make it difficult for the virus to recognize it. The intolerant
mutations were substituted in the seed sequence, out of 2166
mutations only 7 were predicted intolerable which are of
primary importance for the proceeding study. At the residue
position 90, W, C and F were predicted to be intolerable
substitutions in place of the original K. Similarly at the position
124, W in place of L and at 130, W, Y and F in place of Q were
predicted to be intolerable.

Structure prediction, comparison and characterization:
Secondary structures can give a useful insight into the folding
pattern and function. The residues in the seed and mutants
were analyzed for secondary structure to check the protein
stability. It was observed that there were 84 helices, 114α-
sheets and 219 coils in the seed PVR. This number either
decreased or increased whenever a mutation was incorporated
which means these substitutions may affect the key residues
and thus the folding pattern (). Substitutions may also
affect the protein high order structure which determines protein
functions. It is therefore better to use the three-dimensional
protein knowledge for better and in-depth understandings. All
the predicted models were analyzed for structurally variable
regions (SVR) by superimposing in 3D. The highest RMSD
values were observed in between the seed and the mutant K90F
(3.265 Å) and Q130W (3.270Å), while the least was recorded in
between the seed and Q130Y (1.374Å). A higher RMSD value
means more deviation between the structures and thus may
have more functional impacts. The highest Q-score was
recorded for the K90F and Q130W i.e. 0.63 while for K90W and
Q130F, the scores recorded were 0.112. The lowest Q-score was
for L124W i.e. 0.110. The sequence identity was observed as
0.924 for L124W, Q130F and Q130Y, 0.101 for K90F and Q130W
and 0.911 for K90W. According to the predicted physiochemical
properties, pI was observed changed for mutants K90F and
K90W from the normal 6.07 to 5.94 while change in GRAVY
was recorded as the most affected parameter, deviated the most
from the seed (-0.048) to Q130Y (0.033) to K90F (-0.032).

Functional analysis:
The biochemical differences, nature and location of amino acid
substitution can affect the protein in various ways and is
therefore important to determine whether it can alter the
protein function. It was observed from the results that
functional impact score lied in between 0.83 and 0.95 for all the
proposed substitutions i.e. 0.83 for mutations at position 90, 0.91
and 0.95 for the mutations at position 130. The functional
impact score lies below 1 it means, mutations have low
functional impact and thus can be further tested and validated
by the experimental researchers for further research and future
therapeutics against the polio virus.

Protein-protein Interaction analysis:
Docking aims to determine the three dimensional structures of
the protein-ligand complexes []. Protein-protein interactions
are important for all biological processes [] but are always
difficult to predict due to the different complexities like
thermodynamics and topography etc. Protein-protein docking
results of the PVR seed along with its mutated versions with
VP1 and VP2 proteins are shown in 
 (see
supplementary material ). Most of the PVR mutants in complex
with VP1 were observed with decreased number of bonding
interactions. Mutant K90W-VP1 was the only complex having
more than the normal hydrogen bond (7) interaction with a salt
bridge while mutant Q130Y-VP1 having no interaction at all
and thus is the most suitable substitution against polio virus. In
case of Seed-VP2 complex, 8 hydrogen bond interactions were
observed. When mutants were compared to the Seed-VP2
complex, it was noticed that with the exception of Q130Y-VP2
(having 8 interactions), all the mutants were having decreased
number of interactions. From cluster analysis of the docked
complexes, it is clear that, substitution Q130Y is the most
significant against VP1 while Q130F against VP2. It was further
observed that substitutions L124W and Q130W are significant
against both the VP1 and VP2 

(; ).

Conclusion
Our current analysis focuses on receptor modifications against
polio virus, and our findings could significantly explain the
types of substitution which can structurally modify the polio
virus receptors, making them unrecognizable for them. Six
mutations (K90F, K90W, L124W, Q130F, Q130W and Q130Y)
were predicted and substituted in the CD155 protein key
residues which are promising against polio virus. This
approach might also be applied against certain other viruses
which are otherwise difficult to block. This study bridges
computational biology to molecular, structural biology and
experimental biology, which may deepen our understanding
towards novel antiviral therapeutics. Structure and sequence
based computations were systematically evaluated and were
applied for the induced substitutions in PVR1 and PVR2
proteins and have provided a comprehensive structural
explanations for impacts of proposed substitutions. It is obvious
from the results that this novel bioinformatics approach can be
significantly used against HCV, HIV etc which are the major
and difficult to handle agents threatening humanity in general.
Substitution Q130Y and Q130F were found the most effective
against VP1 and VP2 respectively while substitutions L124W
and Q130W are effective against both the VP1 and VP2. Such
techniques should be developed through which these mutations
can be induced in vitro to investigate their effectiveness at the
first stage and later on in vivo.

Supplementary material
Data 1
No funding or grants have been received, and no conflict of
interest is present in this study. The authors thank the
Evidence-Based Decisions Active Groups of Stakeholders (EBDAGS)
of the EBD-Practice-Based Research Network and the
EBD Study Group for the invaluable critical contributions to
this work.

Citation:Farid et al, Bioinformation 8(7): 331-335 (2012)

Secondary structure elements alignment of seed and
mutated PVR proteins.

Cluster analysis of Protein-protein interactions analysis of
seed and mutated PVRs with VP1 and VP2

