Background
Nature has provided an innumerable number of culturally 
important medicinal plants that have been indispensable for the 
treatment of various diseases and maintaining health. Plants 
produce a wide variety and high diversity of secondary 
metabolites, which are not required for the immediate survival 
of the plant but which are synthesized in response to stress as a 
means to protect themselves from organisms, diseases or the 
environment []. Plant kingdom is a promising source of 
chemical constituents that are of high value to human beings 
because of their profound physiological effect on the 
mammalian system and can be used as a source for new 
pharmacologically active compounds.

Cancer is the second leading cause of mortality at present and it 
strikes more than one-third of the world's population. Influence 
of natural products in the area of anticancer drug discovery is 
quite marked, both for use as such and as platforms for 
developing more effective molecules []. Phytochemicals 
obtained from medicinal plants seems to be one of the most 
feasible and promising approaches for chemoprevention [].

Diabetes has emerged as the leading cause of premature illness 
and mortality in both developed and developing countries and 
it is estimated that 25% of the world population is affected by 
this disease []. Although numerous synthetic drugs were 
developed, medicinal plants and their derivatives were widely 
considered in the treatment of diabetes because they are 
effective, non-toxic, with less or no side effects and are 
considered to be excellent candidates for oral therapy [].

Despite recent improvements made in the treatment of cancer 
and diabetes, there is a growing interest in herbal drugs due to 
the undesired side effects associated with chemotherapy and 
oral hypoglycemic agent [,
]. Currently, a few plant based 
products are being used to treat cancer and diabetes. However, 
a myriad of unexplored potentially useful plant products exist 
that have shown very promising anti-cancer and antidiabetic
properties []. Antidiabetic and Anticancer Medicinal Plants 
Database (DIACAN) is unique in providing a comprehensive 
platform for antidiabetic/anticancer medicinal plants, 
taxonomical hierarchy, phytoconstituents isolated from the 
plants, and medicinal properties obtained through literature 
mining

Methodology
Database Architecture and Implementation:
MySQL 5.0 (http://www.mysql.com/), an object-relational 
database management system was used (RDBMS) at the 
backend which stores information as tables and performs SQL 
(Structured Query Language) queries that provides speed and 
flexibility in data retrieval. Hypertext Preprocessor (PHP) 
programming language along with HTML and JavaScript was 
used as the front end in order to provide dynamism to the Web 
interface. DIACAN was deployed on Apache HTTP server and 
runs on a server managed by the Windows operating system.

DataBase Access:
The lists of antidiabetic plants, anticancer plants, antidiabetic 
phytochemicals and anticancer phytochemicals have been
alphabetically indexed based on plant name in the database. 
The user can click on the medicinal plant detailed view link and 
a new page will appear that display the details of the plant and 
its activity towards diabetes or cancer (). The 
corresponding page for each plant is comprised of (i) general 
information including scientific name of the plant, taxonomic 
classification, image of the plant, image courtesy, ii) detailed 
description regarding the bioactivity of the plant and related 
references with literature citation, iii) phytoconstituents isolated 
from the plant having antidiabetic or anticancer activity, plant 
part from which the compound was isolated, description 
regarding the activity of compound with related reference, iv) 
PubChem ID, and compound detail view hyperlink. By clicking 
on detailed view hyperlink user can view the compound 
chemical properties of like IUPAC name, molecular formula,
molecular weight, hydrogen bond donor, canonical smiles and 
2D structure of the phytochemical. Drop down search box with 
scientific names in alphabetical order is also provided for easy 
retrieval of data. A photo gallery of medicinal plants is also 
provided in the database. DIACAN is also having cross 
references to databases like PubChem and PubMed.

Utility
DIACAN will be a specialized, first of its kind value-added 
database that will enable effortless pursuit of relevant 
knowledge on anticancer and antidiabetic medicinal herbs and 
phytoconstituents, thus making it a unique resource in the area 
of cancer and diabetes. DIACAN will help in the process of 
Drug Discovery by providing a promising starting point for in 
silico screening of phytochemicals. 

Future development
We are working to elaborate the database by incorporating data 
on disease targets of phytoconstituents and geographic location 
of the medicinal plants. Additional search and retrieval features 
will also be added to enhance the usability of the web interface.

This project was supported by the Department of 
Biotechnology, Government of India.

Citation:James et al, Bioinformation 9(18): 941-943 (2013)

Screenshots of the web-interface of the DIACAN. A) Medicinal plants and their bioactivity listed alphabetically; B) 
Detailed description page for individual Medicinal Plant; C) Plant derived phytoconstituents and their uses arranged in the order 
of alphabetical list of Medicinal plants; D) Property of Phytoconstituent and 2D structure; E) Drop down search box for 
alphabetical listing.

