Background
An epidemic of influenza is a yearly seasonal threat. On the other hand, the
2009 H1N1 swine flu unexpectedly ran riot around the world. It is a major
cause of mortality, particularly in children and the elderly. Although several
anti-influenza drugs, neuraminidase inhibitors, and M2 protein blockers are
used for medication against this virus, drug resistance has gradually emerged
[–]. 
In addition, the supply of viral vaccine is inadequate. Thus, the
development of effective anti-influenza drugs targeting different constituent
proteins of the virus is urgently desired []. The influenza virus is a segmented
negative-stranded RNA virus. The synthesis of influenza virus mRNA occurs
in the nuclei of infected cells and is catalyzed by a viral RNA polymerase
consisting of the three subunits, PA, PB1, and PB2 
[]. This RNA-dependent
enzyme possesses endonuclease and RNA transcriptase activities, and is hence
essential for viral replication. Although the RNA polymerase is highly
conserved among influenza A, B, and C viruses, no homologue has been found
in mammalian cells []. 
Thus, a viral RNA polymerase is a safe target in terms
of selective toxicity.

Tomassini et al. reported that a series of diketo acid derivatives, 1-8, are
effective inhibitors of influenza viral replication in both in vitro cell culture
replication assays and in vivo mouse challenge model, without exhibiting any
cytotoxicity () 
[,
]. Given that the action is due to the inhibition of
the endonuclease activity of the viral RNA polymerase, the enzyme is currently
regarded as a promising target for anti-influenza virus agents 
[]. Recently,
studies on the crystallography of the PA subunit have revealed that PAN, the Nterminal
domain of PA, contains one Mg ion or two Mn ions in the
endonuclease active site [–]. 
The endonuclease activity of the PAN subunit
with two Mn ions is inhibited by the diketo acid derivative 5 
[]. This
suggests that 1-8 should bind tightly to the active site of the PAN subunit and
inhibit endonuclease activity. Given that compounds 9-12, which lack a β-
diketone or carboxylic acid group, do not show inhibition of endonuclease
activity, the diketo acid moiety is a pharmacophore for the anti-influenza virus
activity []. 
In addition to the significance of the pharmacophore, it is
suggested that the inhibitory activity should depend on the hydrophobicity of
the aliphatic substituents. Hence, the interaction between the hydrophobic
substituents and non-polar residues in the active site should be associated with
enzyme inhibition.

Our objective in this study was to rationalize the inhibitory action of the diketo
acid derivatives to the PAN subunit of the metalloenzyme RNA polymerase and
to design potential diketo acid inhibitors by structure-based and computeraided
modeling approach. Hence, we carried out molecular docking to predict
how the anti-influenza virus diketo acid derivatives would bind to the active
site of the PAN subunit. To our knowledge, this is the first modeling study to
elucidate the interaction of the PAN subunit with anti-influenza virus diketo
acid derivatives.

Methodology
The geometry optimization and electrostatic potential calculation of the
dianionic forms of diketo acid derivatives were performed using Gaussian 03
with the B3LYP hybrid functional and the 6-31+G(d) basis set 
[]. The
restrained electrostatic potential charge fitting of the electrostatic potentials of
the optimized structures was carried out with the antechamber module in
AMBER9 []. 
The crystal structure (ID: 2w69, chain D) of the PAN subunit
with two Mn ions was obtained from PDB []. All water molecules and
sulfate ions were stripped from the coordinates of the crystal structure, and then
hydrogen atoms were added through WHATIF web server
(http://swift.cmbi.ru.nl/servers/html/prepdock.html). The Gasteiger charges and
+2.0 charges were assigned for the amino acids and two Mn ions, respectively.
A grid of 30.0 Ǻ × 30.0 Ǻ × 30.0 Ǻ with 0.375 Ǻ spacing was calculated using
AutoGrid. Automated ligand-flexible and receptor-flexible molecular docking
calculations were performed and analyzed using AutoDock 4.2 and
AutoDockTools []. 
One hundred docking runs for every compound were
performed. Each docking calculation consisted of 25 million energy
evaluations (long mode) using the Lamarckian genetic algorithm method.
Maximum number of generations was set to 270,000. All the other parameters
were set by default. The docking results were clustered on the basis of rootmean-
square deviation between the Cartesian coordinates of the atoms using
2.0 Ǻ cutoff, and were ranked on the basis of the binding free energy (BFE,
kcal/mol) calculated by AutoDock 4.2.

Results and Discussion
Prior to the molecular docking, we evaluated the stability of four tautomers of
the simplest diketo acid 8 according to density functional theory (DFT). The
geometry optimization of the tautomers was carried out with the B3LYP hybrid
functional and 6-31G(d) basis set []. As shown in 
, the optimized
structures and energies indicated that the enol forms 8a (E = −495.04062 a.u.)
and 8b (E = −495.03833 a.u.) were more stable than the keto forms 8c (E = −
495.03573 a.u.) and 8d (E = −495.02792 a.u.). Furthermore, the enol form with
an intramolecular hydrogen bond between the enol and carboxylic acid groups
(8a) was more stable than the one without the intramolecular hydrogen bond
(8b). As a result, 8a was the most stable tautomer, suggesting that its
population is the highest. Given the pKa of the terminal carboxylic acid of
diketo acids (pKa ˜ 4) [], 
potential chelating ability of the β-diketone group,
structure-activity relationship, and DFT results, it is the dianionic forms of
diketo acid derivatives that should readily coordinate with the two Mn ions in
the active site of the PAN subunit, as shown in . The driving forces of
the interaction are likely to be the chelate effect, enthalpically favorable
electrostatic interaction between the Mn2+ and oxo ions, and the entropically
favorable release of water molecules generated by the acid-base reaction of the
diketo acids with the coordinated hydroxo bases. Sequestering the metal ions
should disturb the access of the substrate, and thus inhibit enzyme function
[]. 
In addition, the hydrophobic interaction between the substituents of the
diketo acid derivatives and the residues in the active site should be
systematically related to the affinities and inhibitory activities of the diketo
acid derivatives. Hence, we predicted the binding modes of the dianionic forms
of the diketo acid derivatives in the active site of the PAN subunit having two
Mn ions.

The top-ranked docking poses for compound 1-3 and 5-8 in terms of flexibleligand
and rigid-receptor docking are shown in , respectively,
and their BFEs are listed in (see ). As
expected, the dianionic moieties were predicted to chelate the dinuclear Mn
center as dinucleating ligands. For 1-3, the chlorobenzyl groups were exposed
on the outside of the active site, and they had contact with Phe105 and Arg84 at
the edge. On the other hand, the aryl/cyclohexyl piperidine substituents were in
a deeper position, and they had van der Waals contacts with Tyr24 and Ala20.
The burial of the hydrophobic groups upon binding should result in desolvation
entropy gain because of the release of water molecules into the bulk solution.
No hydrogen bond was seen for the piperidine nitrogens. Thus, the right side of
the active site was blocked by chelation and hydrophobic interaction, both of
which should contribute to higher inhibitory effect. The poorer inhibitory effect
for 5-8 is most likely due to the lack of aliphatic substituents that interact
hydrophobically with any amino acid residue in the deeper position. The topranked
docking pose for 4 was different from that for the others mentioned
above. The only carboxylate group coordinated to and bridged two Mn ions,
and the biphenyl substituent interacted with a hydrophobic pocket on the left
side (). 
However, diketo acid 4 need not be of diketonate form in this
docking pose, and thus its BFE is overestimated. This unexpected improper
docking result could arise from steric hindrance between Arg84 and the
biphenyl substituent. Thus, a molecular docking taking into account the
flexibility of Arg84 was carried out. There was space to pack the Arg84
residue, and steric hindrance was avoided by the inversion of the Arg84
residue. This resulted in the chelation by the dianionic form of 4 as the
dinucleating ligand, as shown in .

In the light of the flexibility of Arg84, molecular docking calculations were
also performed for the other diketo acid derivatives. The logIC50 values for
transcription inhibition activity and the BFEs of 1-8 when using a flexible-
Arg84 receptor model are listed in . 
The plots of the logIC50s and BFEs shown in  
reveal that the logIC50s of 1-8 are well correlated with the
corresponding BFEs. In particular, it is noted that the correlation in the case of
flexible-Arg84 dockings (R = 0.91) was superior to that in the case of rigidreceptor
dockings (R = 0.89). In addition, molecular docking calculations
including the flexibilities of Arg84 and the residues adjacent to Arg84 were
also performed to test if the correlation could be improved by using a receptor
model with two or three flexible residues. The correlations resulting from
flexible-Arg84-Tyr24 (R = 0.79) and flexible-Arg84-Tyr24-Trp88 dockings (R
= 0.64) were lower than those resulting from the rigid-receptor and flexible-
Arg84 dockings (see ). This suggests that
Arg84 is a key residue in predicting the binding mode.

On the basis of our predicted binding models, we propose potential diketo acid
inhibitors 13-15, as shown in Figure 6, by lead optimization of 1. Chemical
functionalities were introduced from the viewpoint of enthalpy and entropy of
binding, which determine the Gibbs energy of binding (i.e., binding affinity).
The introduction of a hydrogen bond donor/acceptor to establish favorable
enthalpic interaction with the target was considered.  shows the
flexible-Arg84 docking pose of 1. It was found that the proton donor residue
Arg84 was conveniently close to the chlorobenzyl piperidine moiety. This
suggested that the replacement of the methylene group with a carbonyl group
as a proton acceptor might result in a favorable hydrogen bond. The top-ranked
docking pose of 13 with the flexible-Arg84 receptor showed a hydrogen bond
between its carbonyl group and Arg84 (). The introduction of the
carbonyl group lowers the BFE of flexible-Arg84 docking in 13 (−13.31
kcal/mol) relative to that in 1 (−12.92 kcal/mol). Furthermore, it was inferred
that replacement of the carbonyl group with a sulfonyl group could result in a
more favorable hydrogen bond. The top-ranked rigid-receptor and flexible-
Arg84 docking poses of 14 are shown in , respectively. The
docking pose of 14 with the flexible-Arg84 receptor also showed a hydrogen
bond between its sulfonyl group and Arg84. The BFE of flexible-Arg84
docking in 14 was lower (−14.21 kcal/mol) than that in 13, suggesting that in
the docking models, the sulfonyl group might be better than the carbonyl group
as the hydrogen acceptor with higher affinity. Entropic optimization by
increasing hydrophobicity was derived by the careful visual inspection of the
docking results. From a comparison of the top-ranked docking pose (BFE = −
13.23 kcal/mol, ) of 14 with the second top-ranked pose (BFE = −
13.22 kcal/mol, ) when using the rigid-receptor model, we found that
there was room for packing an additional phenyl ring in the deep cavity. Thus,
compound 15 was designed by introducing a diphenylmethyl group, commonly
found in marketed drugs, in place of the benzyl group. The top-ranked rigidreceptor
(BFE = −14.39 kcal/mol) and flexible-Arg84 docking poses (BFE = −
14.90 kcal/mol) of 15 are shown in , respectively. The
docking pose of 15 when using the flexible-Arg84 receptor model exhibited a
hydrogen bond between its sulfonyl group and Arg84, as well as a hydrophobic
contact of the diphenylmethyl group in the deep cavity. Few conformational
differences were observed between the top-ranked rigid-receptor and flexible-
Arg84 docking poses of 15 and between the poses of their corresponding
Arg84 residues. This suggests the adequacy of the positions for the introduction
of the hydrogen bond acceptor and the hydrophobic substituent. As a result, the
BFEs of 15 demonstrated the highest affinities among all the diketo acid
derivatives when using both the rigid-receptor and flexible-Arg84 receptor
models. The inhibitory activity of 15 might increase by a few orders of
magnitude relative to that of 1, as estimated by the linear regression model in
.

Conclusion
In this work, we proposed the binding mode of anti-influenza diketo acid
derivatives in the active site of the PAN subunit of the RNA polymerase, of the
influenza virus, by molecular docking. The calculations suggested that the
dianionic forms, of the diketo acids, should chelate the dinuclear Mn center as
dinucleating ligands and sequester it. In addition, they indicated that the
aliphatic substituents of the diketo acid derivatives should properly block the
hydrophobic cavity in the active site, and thus inhibit endonuclease activity.
The accuracy of the predicted binding modes was validated by the excellent
correlation between the logIC50s of the diketo acid derivatives and the
corresponding BFEs. Potential diketo acid inhibitors were designed from the
thermodynamic point of view by structure-guided and computer-assisted
modeling approach. The critical residue for the lead optimization of diketo acid
derivatives is likely to be the proton donor Arg84. The molecular docking
results showed that the newly designed diketo acid derivatives with the proton
acceptor of a carbonyl or sulfonyl group might inhibit the metalloenzyme RNA
polymerase more strongly than the lead compound. We hope that our study can
contribute to the development of potent influenza virus inhibitors targeting the
RNA polymerase, which is essential for viral replication.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Ishikawa &amp; Fujii. Bioinformation 6(6): 221-225 (2011)

Series of diketo acid derivatives and their IC50 values (µM) for
transcription inhibition activity.

Optimized structures and energies of four tautomers of 8. Gray, red,
and white spheres depict carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen atoms, respectively.

Plausible coordination mechanism of diketo acid derivatives to
dinuclear Mn center in active site of PAN subunit of influenza RNA
polymerase.

(A) Top-ranked flexible-ligand and rigid-receptor docking poses of 1
(cyan), 2 (green), and 3 (orange); (B) Top-ranked flexible-ligand and rigidreceptor
docking poses of 5 (cyan), 6 (green), 7 (orange), and 8 (purple); (C)
Top-ranked flexible-ligand and rigid-receptor docking pose of 4; (D) Flexibleligand
and flexible-Arg84 docking pose of 4.

Plots and regression lines of logIC50s of 1-8 versus their binding free
energies with rigid-receptor (open circles and dashed line) and flexible-Arg84
receptor (filled circles and solid line) models.

Newly designed diketo acid derivatives.

(A) Top-ranked flexible-ligand and flexible-Arg84 docking pose of
1; (B) Top-ranked flexible-ligand and flexible-Arg84 docking pose of 13; (C)
Top-ranked flexible-ligand and rigid-receptor docking pose of 14; (D) Topranked
flexible-ligand and flexible-Arg84 docking pose of 14.

(A) Second top-ranked flexible-ligand and rigid-receptor docking
pose of 14; (B) Top-ranked flexible-ligand and rigid-receptor docking pose of
15; (C) Top-ranked flexible-ligand and flexible-Arg84 docking pose of 15.

