Background
Circadian rhythm is an internally driven, approximately 24-
hour cycle of physiological, biochemical or behavioral processes
of an organism. It is visceral and adjusted by environmental
factors such as daylight. Disturbance in circadian rhythm can
cause serious health problems in humans like sleeping sickness,
mood disorders etc. Regular circadian rhythm is depends upon
balanced formation of melatonin and conversion of melatonin
from serotonin is governed by an enzyme AANAT []. It is
already reported that the enzyme AANAT would be a good
target for the treatment of irregular circadian rhythmicity and
related diseases like sleeping sickness, mood disorders etc 
[].
Human AANAT gene spans 2.5 kb, contains four exons, and is
located at chromosome 17q25. The open reading frame encodes
a 23.2- kDa protein that is 80% identical to sheep and rat
AANAT. The AANAT is highly abundant in the pineal gland
and is expressed at lower levels in the retina and in the
retinoblastoma cell line []. The important regulatory role of
AANAT has made it of central interest in research of melatonin
biochemistry and neurochemical signal transduction and
because it may lead to a better understanding of the role of
melatonin in human physiology [,
]. Studies in the rat
indicates that expression of the AANAT gene is regulated by
circadian clock in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), which
drives rhythmic activity of the pineal gland via neural circuit
that not passes through central and peripheral structures 
[,
].
The neurotransmitter that regulates the abundance of AANAT
mRNA is noradrenalin, which acts through a cyclic AMP
mechanism []. As a hormone noradrenaline affects several
parts of the brain, which controls attention and responses 
[].

More specific analysis of the AANAT may reveal mutations that
could explain the large individual-to-individual variations in
serum melatonin levels among human [–]. In this study we
have done in silico analysis of AANAT enzyme's inhibitors by
molecular modeling, molecular dynamics simulation, virtual
screening and docking.

Methodology
Preparation of Receptor Protein:
Protein sequences for AANAT enzyme were retrieved from
Uniprot (Q16613) (http://www.uniprot.org). PBLAST was
conducted against the Protein data bank (PDB,
http://www.rscb.org/pdb/) using query sequences to search
for structural templates. The closest structural template of
AANAT enzyme was found in Ovis Aries (Sheep) with a 78%
sequence identity was chosen for structural modeling. Out of
those 16 structures hits, the best protein (PDB ID: 1KUV) has
been taken for modeling. After the modeling, loop modeling
has been performed for minimizing the loop structure of
modeled protein by SWISS-PDB Viewer. The quality of protein
was checked by SAVES server and stereo chemical quality of
protein was analyzed by Ramachandran Plot ().

Model Protein Refinement by MDS:
The molecular dynamic simulation (MDS) analysis was
performed for the stability study of modeled AANAT enzyme.
The protein was minimized and simulated by GROMACS 4.5.4.
Optimized Potential for Liquid Simulations (OPLS) force field
was used for the minimization. The minimization was carried
out by Periodic Boundary Condition (PBC) in all directions and
it involves 1000000 steps of steepest descent optimization. All
the solvent atom and protein molecules were allowed to relax in
MDS.

Virtual Screening for Ligand Prepration:
Ligand N-Acetyl Serotonin was used as a reference molecule to
generate ligand library from ZINC database. Virtual screening
has been performed, with the receptor protein by using the
Molegro. 269 molecules have shown 80% similarities with
reference ligand, out of these top 10 molecules were selected on
the basis of their MolDock scores ().

Molecular docking:
The minimized structure of receptor protein obtained from MD
simulation and top five ligand molecules were obtained from
virtual screening have been taken for molecular docking by
using AutoDock 4. The reference molecule N-Acetyl Serotonin
was also docked with receptor protein. The other parameters
were selected as default and number of poses for every ligand
was set to 10. After both docking each protein ligand complex
were observed and their interaction with amino acids were
analyzed. The most energetically suitable conformation of
ligand receptor complex was selected.

Results
Modeling and simulation analysis:
Closest structure AANAT enzyme of Sheep (Ovis Aries) with a
78% sequence identity has been taken for modeling. The
stability of receptor protein has been verified by Ramachandran
plot and it showed 90.9% residues lie in the allowed region
(). Molecular dynamic simulation was performed by
GROMACS to analyze the stability of the homology models of
the proteins and lowest energy conformation for each protein
was chosen for further docking study. The RMSD value was
raised from 0.2nm to 0.6nm and then remained quite stable in
the subsequent simulation time from 1.25 ns onwards. Gradual
decrease in potential energy of the model from -1.2e+06
kJ/mol to -1.9e+06 kJ/mol at around 1900ps which indicates
that the model is energetically stable during MDS. RMSF graph
also decreasing gradually from 0.800 to 0.235 ().

Molecular Docking analysis:
In docking studies strength of the drug and receptor
interactions have been analyzed by scoring each possible
interaction (). On the basis of earlier reported work
motif A (LHALAVHRSFRQQGKGSVLL) and motif B
(VPFYQRFGFHPAG) of AANAT protein have considered,
hence we have included whole domain as an active site to dock
with ligand. N-Acetyl Serotonin is selected as a reference ligand
[,
] and ligand ZINC01587152 has shown lowest binding
energy (-9.38 Kcal/Mol) with five hydrogen bonds ()
(). Above said active site has been predicted by CastP
server also.

Discussion
Melatonin has been proven to play an important role in
regulation of sleep wake cycle, seasonal breeding patterns, and
it depends upon environmental changes in dark-light patterns
[,
]. An AANAT enzyme activates acetyl transfer from acetyl-
CoA from serotonin, gives N-acetyl serotonin, which acts as the
messenger of melatonin. Thus it is proved to be a key enzyme
involved in daily oscillation of melatonin []. In this study,
homology modeling has been used to model the AANAT
protein by loop modeling. The molecular dynamic simulation
showed that model protein was stable throughout the total time
scale of the 2000ps and the potential energy was also decreased.
Ligand N-Acetyl Serotonin was used to form a combinatorial
library from ZINC database. On the selected database virtual
screening was performed by using Molegro []. Top five
molecules obtained after performing virtual screening and these
molecules were docked individually with AANAT protein by
AutoDock. Reference ligand molecule was also docked with
AANAT protein and results were compared and found that out
of top five molecules, ZINC01587152 N-[2-(5-Hydroxy-1Hindol-
3-yl)ethy1[-3-(4-hydroxyphenyl)-2-propenamide has
showed least binding energy (-9.38 Kcal/Mol). On the basis of
this result, we can suggest that ZINC01587152 molecule may be
a putative drug to cure sleep and mood disorders 
[–].

Conclusion
The AANAT is responsible for conversion of serotonin to
melatonin and it is observed that it regulates wide variety of
sleep disorders. 3D structure AANAT has been modeled and
their energy minimization has been performed to bring
optimized state later evaluated with Ramachandran Plot.
Virtual screening of AANAT protein active site was performed
against ZINC data based and ranked on the basis of their
MolDock score. After screening top five ligands were selected
and docked on above said protein by using AUTODOCK
software. Finally docking studies showed better interaction
between ZINC01587152 molecule and AANAT with least
binding energy when compared to all the molecules including
reference molecule. We can conclude that ZINC01587152
molecule has been proven insilico as a potential drug and may
be further tested experimentally in the treatment of sleep and
related disorders.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors are thankful to Dr.M.D.Tiwari, Director, Indian
Institute of Information Technology, Allahabad for providing
all facility to complete this work and also thankful to Mr. Kamal
Kumar Chaudhary for their significant suggestions.

Citation:Prashant et al, Bioinformation 9(15): 771-776 (2013)

Ramachandran plot shows 90.9% residues found in
allowed region

A) RMSD of backbone atoms shows stable nature of
model; B) RMSF graph showing fluctuations in protein with
respect to time; C) Graph of potential energy shows the
energetically stable conformation.

Showing interaction of ligands (A, B, C, D, E, and F)
with receptor protein.

