miRNAs (microRNAs) are small RNAs that are transcribed
from intron and other non-coding RNAs. miRNAs are utilized
by the cell's molecular biological machinery to help control
transcription []. There are more than 500 known miRNAs
involved in neuronal function including development,
transport, and neuronal plasticity. [] However, what of the
neuronal proteins that interacts with these miRNAs? In this
month's Editorial, we examine a few protein-protein
interactions of proteins that interact with the miRNAs and
demonstrate additional network pathways in which these
proteins function in neurons.

The protein product Atx2 (Ataxin-2 protein) is implicated in the
human neurodegenerative disease, spinocerebellar ataxia. In
studies in the brains of the fruit fly, Drosophila, Atx2 was
identified as a miRNA pathway component. Both miRNA and
Atx2 components were involved in long-term plasticity of
synapses in these studies. Interestingly, the control of
translation occurs locally in proximity to the involved synapses.
In addition, Atx2 interacts with the Me31B family DEAD box
helicases - DHH1 – (also termed DDX helicases) that interact
with Argonaute (Ago) and affect function of miRNAs 
[,
]
().

The contributions of miRNAs to synaptic plasticity are
extensive study. For example, CREB (cAMP responsive element
binding protein), MECP2 (methyl CpG binding protein 2), and
FMRP (fragile X mental retardation protein) interact with
miRNAs in their role as mediators of synaptic plasticity within
dendrites. The RISC machinery is utilized post-DICER action,
producing the miRNAs in situ as above. Post-translation
inhibition occurs for these proteins following bursts of synaptic
activity mediated by the rapid increase of calcium levels. These
activities occur in mouse forebrain and are involved in longterm
memory in Drosophila [] 
().

The two figures illustrate various gene interactions, up to 100
[]. 
It is left as a puzzle for the interested reader to identify the
various genes and their functions in the figures 
[].

There are no financial conflicts.

Citation:Shapshak, Bioinformation 8(21): 1003-1004 (2012)

Protein interactions with Atx2, Ago, and DDX. In this
figure, line-colors and various interactions with other genes are
red Down-regulation, green Up-regulation, beige Regulation,
purple Co-expression, brown Physical Interaction, turquoise
dotted Predicted Protein Interaction, and mauve dotted
Predicted TFactor Regulation [].

Protein interactions with CREB, MECP2, and FMRP.
In this figure, line-colors and various interactions with other
genes are red Down-regulation, green Up-regulation, beige
Regulation, purple Co-expression, brown Physical Interaction,
turquoise dotted Predicted Protein Interaction, and mauve
dotted Predicted TFactor Regulation 
[].

