Background
Oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) is the main function of
mitochondria and takes place in its inner membrane. There are
five complexes that are involved in the respiratory chain.
Cytochrome c oxidase (COX) is the Complex IV of this
pathway. It catalyzes the transfer of reducing equivalents from
cytochromec to molecular oxygen and utilizes the energy
generated by this reaction to pump protons across the
mitochondrial inner membrane. COX comprises of 13 subunits,
two heme groups (a and a3), three copper ions (two in the CuA
site and one in CuB site), a zinc ion, and a magnesium ion. The
biogenesis of COX requires the interplay of two genomes
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) andNuclear DNA
(nDNA).MtDNAencodes the three larger subunits (COX I, COX
II, and COX III) whereasnDNAencodes the remaining 10
smaller COX subunits and several accessory proteins (eg.
SURF1, SCO1, SCO2), which are known to help in the proper
assembly of all the 13 subunits of COX []. COX plays a vital
role in the oxidative phosphorylation pathway. If Complex I is
affected in the respiratory chain, then there is complex II for
entry of electrons. But if COX is affected then the catalysis of
the transfer of reducing equivalents from cytochrome c to
molecular oxygen, is disturbed. There is no other complex
which can contribute to this activity in the respiratory pathway.
The energy generated by COX is necessary to perform a
transmembrane proton-pumping activity. This proton pumping
helps in maintaining the proton motive force which drives the
synthesis of ATP with the help of ATP synthase. Thus,
decreased production of ATP can lead to a wide spectrum of
diseases in which organs with high energy requirements, such
as brain and heart, are majorly affected. Hence, COX deficiency
is a highly heterogeneous condition and leads to a wide clinical
spectrum of diseases []. SCO2 gene (OMIM 604272.0008) is
located on chromosome 22 (cytogenetic location: 22q13). Total
length of this gene is2872 bp and it consists of four exons. This
gene has four transcript variants. The fourth exon (size: 856 bp)
is conserved in all the transcripts.SCO2 gene produces SCO2
protein, which is an assembly factor for COX and mainly takes
part in copper (Cu) delivery. SCO2 protein is 266 amino acids
long and its molecular weight is 25 KDa. SCO2 is a
ubiquitously expressed protein and similar expression pattern
is observed in different human tissues [].

SCO2 with COX17 and SCO1 protein helps in forming the
active COX and these proteins are responsible for the insertion
of Cu into the COX holoenzyme (). Cu generates
cytotoxic free radicals when free within the cell. Thus, specific
chaperons or assembly factors are needed for storage or
incorporation of Cu into the target molecules. As SCO2 plays a
critical role in COX formation; it has been associated with a
number of COX deficiency diseases. For an instance, defects in
SCO2 are the cause of fatal infantile cardioencephalomyopathy
with COX deficiency []. A number of studies have been carried
out to find out the mutations present in the SCO2 gene in
patients with COX deficiency (). However, there is a
lack of studies which explore the functional relevance of these
variations and propose their effects on COX activity. It is
imperative to do systematic studies which could highlight the
importance of SCO2 variations, before initiating in vitro and in
vivo functional studies. The preliminary investigation of a
polymorphism can be performed with the help of a precursory
computational analysis using different in silico tools. This
approach can help in increasing the efficiency of molecular
studies by narrowing down the potential pathogenic mutations.
It will also pave path for functional characterization of nonvalidated
variations. In the current study, we have predicted
the possible effects of all the non-validated reported SCO2 gene
mutations, on COX activity. Both validated and non-validated
variations have been analyzed and compared to relatively
predict their possible role in COX deficiency.

Methodology
Data Collection:
The present study incorporates a number of databases and
software tools to collect information. The Human Gene
Mutation Database (HGMD) constitutes a comprehensive core
collection of data on germ-line mutations in nuclear genes
underlying or associated with human inherited disease
(http://www.hgmd.org). It was used to obtain the specific
mutations in SCO2 which have been reported in cases of COX
deficiency. It provided eleven missense mutations that have
been reported till now in SCO2 gene  (see
supplementary material). Protein sequence for SCO2 was
obtained from NCBI.

Data Analysis:
As per literature, out of these eleven mutations, E140K and
R171W have already been functionally validated [,
]. These
variations were used as controls for our study. Amongst the
remaining nine non-validated mutations, three mutations
(W36X, Q53X and R90X) are predicted to result in truncated
SCO2 protein and were not included in our study. Six nonvalidated
mutations (C133Y, L151P, V160G, M177T, G193S and
S225F) and two validated mutations (E140K and R171W) were
analyzed and compared using various bio-informatics tools.

Mutation analysis:
To analyze the importance of all the mutations in SCO2 protein
sequence, multiple sequence alignment was done using
ClustalW. It is a general purpose multiple sequence alignment
program for DNA or proteins available at the EMBL-EBI server
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalw2/). It aligns
multiple sequences and highlights areas of similarity.

Secondary structure prediction:
To analyze the effect of mutations on the secondary structure of
SCO2 proteins, Gor IV was used. Gor IV is the fourth version
of GOR secondary structure prediction method (
http://npsapbil.ibcp.fr/cgi-bin/npsa_automat.pl?page=npsa_gor4.html). It
uses all possible pair frequencies within the window of 17
amino acid residues to predict alpha helix, beta sheet, turn, or
random coil secondary structure at each position.

Predication of functional relevance of mutations:
Several tools were used to determine a possible change in the
protein function. SIFT (Sorting Intolerant from Tolerant)
predicts whether an amino acid substitution affects the protein
function (http://sift.jcvi.org/). Positions with normalized
probabilities less than 0.05 are predicted to be deleterious; those
greater than or equal to 0.05 are predicted to be
tolerated.PolyPhen-2 (Polymorphism Phenotyping 2) is an
automatic tool used for prediction of possible impact of an
amino acid substitution on the structure and function of a
human protein (http://genetics.bwh.harvard.edu/pph2/index.shtml). 
If the score is less than 0.5, prediction is benign
else, the prediction is probably damaging. MuPro is used to
predict how single site amino acid mutations affect protein
stability (http://www.ics.uci.edu/Åbaldig/ mutation.htm). If
the score is greater than 0, the prediction indicatesan increased
stability otherwise there is decreased stability. Panther
(Protein ANalysis THrough Evolutionary Relationships)
classifies genes by their functions, using published scientific
experimental evidence and evolutionary relationships to
predict functions even in the absence of direct experimental
evidence (http://www.pantherdb.org/). It calculates the
subPSEC (substitution position-specific evolutionary
conservation) score based on the alignment of evolutionarily
related proteins. subPSEC scores are continuous values from 0
(neutral) to about −10 (most likely to be deleterious). Pdeleterious
is also calculated which provides the probability of a mutation
being deleterious, where 1 indicates deleterious and 0 indicates
not deleterious.

Results &amp; Discussion
Different bioinformatics tools have been used for the in silico
analysis in this study. This has been done to ensure that the
prediction for a particular mutation is correct and efficient.
Probability of false positives is very common in computational
work. Thus, it will help in better analysis of the results
obtained. Also, along with the various non-validated reported
mutations, functionally validated mutations (E140K and
R171W) have also been used for comparison of the results with
other mutations. E140K is a common change reported and very
well validated in COX deficiencies [,
,
]. When we compared
the scores and predictions of E140K and R171W with the other
non-validated mutations, we observed that the scores of E140K
is less than that of the non-validated ones, according to almost
all the tools. This helped us in elucidating that the nonvalidated
mutations with almost similar or higher scores in
comparison with validated mutations will also be deleterious
and should show disease phenotype. The compiled results,
using all the tools are summarized in  (see
supplementary material).

Protein sequence alignment and analyses:
ClustalW results indicated that all the mutations are present at
conserved amino acid positions, except M177T ().

Predication of structural and functional relevance:
E140K is a change from Glutamic acid to Lysine. It is a
functionally proven mutation in COX deficiency reported
firstly by Papadopoulou et al. in 1999 
[]. As per this study, 3
patients with E140K mutation were suffering from a fatal
infantile cardioencephalomyopathy and had decreased COX
activity in their heart and skeletal muscles. In our analyses,
SIFT and Polyphen-2 suggested that E140K is a damaging
mutation, though the PANTHER score was less than the second
functionally proven mutation, R171W, which is a change from
arginine to tryptophan. R171W mutation was first reported in
SCO2 gene, along with E140K and R90X, in 3 out of 10 patients
clinically characterized with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,
muscle hypotonia, seizures and respiratory insufficiency
[].They concluded that these mutations result in a fatal
infantile mitochondrial disorder characterized by hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy and COX deficiency. After in silico analysis,
this change has been predicted to be highly damaging by SIFT,
Polyphen-2, MuPro and PANTHER. Hence, for both the
validated mutations (used as controls), it is evident that they
can be pathogenic in COX deficiency diseases. In a similar way,
the rest of the mutations were analyzed. S225F was first
reported along with E140K mutation and causes a change of
serine to phenylalanine at 225 position []. From the in silico
data, it is predicted to be damaging by SIFT and Polyphen-
2.Panther also indicated it to be deleterious with a score of 0.89,
however, MuPro predicts increased instability.

Pronicki et al. (2010) investigated 18 patients with COX
deficiency and one novel mutation M177T was found in SCO2
of one of the patient []. M177T is a change from a non-polar
methionine to a polar threonine. The in silico data we have for
this novel mutation supports the decreased COX activity, as
Polyphen-2, Panther and MuPro predict it to be damaging. All
the mutations analyzed for secondary structure prediction by
GORIV were predicted to be unable to change the structure,
except for L151P which causes a change from helix to random
coil. This variation was reported by Sacconi et al. (2003). They
screened 30 patients with COX deficiency for mutations and
found pathogenic changes L151P and E140K in a patient in
SCO2 gene []. The patients presented the classic phenotype of
SCO2 defects with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,
encephalomyopathy and severely reduced COX activity. Thus,
L151 is also predicted to be damaging by PolyPhen-2, MuPro
and Panther. Moreover, Panther provides the highest
deleterious score for this change: 0.98, comparable to the
control R171W. Thus, clinical symptoms along with the in silico
data suggest that it should be further investigated through
functional validation. C133Y, a change of cysteine at the
position 133 to tyrosine, is a novel mutation reported in a male
neonate case of spinal muscular atrophy with COX deficiency
[]. Post-mortem muscle, heart, and liver biopsies showed
severe, moderate, and mild reductions in COX activity,
respectively. This reduced activity is very well supported by
the in silico analysis. SIFT and PolyPhen-2 predicted this
mutation to be damaging and MuPro predicts decreased
stability. It should be noted that Panther predicts this change to
be deleterious with a score of 0.93, which is greater than
Panther prediction score of the validated control mutation,
E140K.

Knuf et al. (2007) reported a novel change V160G, in a girl with
fatal infantile Cardioencephalomyopathy and the skeletal
muscle biopsy of the patient revealed a significantly reduced
COX activity []. V160G causes the change of valine to glycine
at position 160, which is a damaging change as predicted by
PolyPhen-2 and Panther. MuPro indicates a decreased stability
of the protein due to this mutation. Thus, V160G seems to be
one of the mutations that can cause severe damage in COX
deficiency disease conditions. More recently, a novel mutation
G193S has been reported in a patient with fatal infantile
Cardioencephalomyopathy []. It is a change from glycine to
serine. PolyPhen-2 predicted this mutation to be damaging and
MuPro predicts decreased stability. It should be noted that
Panther predicts this change to be deleterious with a score of
0.95, which is greater than Panther prediction score of the
validated control mutation, E140K and almost similar to that of
R171W. It can be elucidated from the aforementioned studies
that all the reported mutations analyzed in this study in SCO2
gene can probably be critical in causing COX deficiency.

Conclusion
The functional analysis of the various reported mutations in
SCO2 gene can be a potential approach for elucidating their
pathogenic role in the disease phenotype. Thus, all the
mutations predicted to be severely damaging in our study
should be investigated further. The integrated analysis of
mutations using different tools provides a clear picture of the
possible impacts of genetic changes in SCO2. It provides a valid
judgment and can serve as evidence to support an in-depth
functional analysis. Moreover, before initiating the tedious
laboratory experiments, selection of potential variants turns out
to be highly cost-effective when working on complex disorders
like COX deficiency diseases. These analyses can also be
utilized in their clinical genetics, mainly for medical tests.
Therefore, computational analyses like ours can serve as
foundation blocks for breakthrough research in heterogeneous
diseases and eventually help in their better management.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Chadha et al, Bioinformation 10(6): 329-333 (2014)

Flow of electrons with the aid of SCO1 and SCO2
(Leary et al., 2004)

ClustalW results showing alignment of mutated human SCO2 gene sequence with other species. The missense mutations
are highlighted and are found to be at completely conserved amino acid positions (except for M177T).

