Background
The P450 (cytochrome P450 mono-oxygenases) belongs to super
family of haem-containing mono-oxygenase enzymes 
[]. This
enzyme participates in the oxygen transfer reaction, where it
catalyzes the reduction of di-oxygen atoms that bound to the
haem iron of the P450 []. This step leads to removable of single
oxygen atom from di-oxygen and transfer it to an organic
substrate along with the formation of a water molecule.

RH+O2+2e- +2H+ = ROH + H2O The cytochrome P450 monooxygenases
may catalyze diverse sets of oxidation reactions.
However the important step is to introduce the oxygen atoms in
the substrate [,
]. This step is important in the survival of the
pathogenic microorganisms like Mycobacterium tuberculosis. In
addition, the reaction catalyzed by the cytochrome P450 monooxygenases
helps in regulation of important pathways that are
essential for the infectivity or pathogenicity of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis []. Therefore, this enzyme is always a potential
drug target against the Mycobacterium tuberculosis []. Many
drugs are available in the market for the treatment of
tuberculosis disease and have been classified in to different
categories based on their activity as well as effectiveness against
inhibiting the growth of the Mycobacterium such as first line,
second line and third line drugs [].

Some of the first line drugs like Ethambutol are known to be a
bacteriostatic agent and function effectively by inhibiting the
growth of actively growing TB bacilli []. It mainly targets the
cell wall of the tuberculosis bacteria and inhibits its formation
during the cell division. Another drug, Isoniazid
is bactericidal in nature and acts on the mycobacterium cell
when it rapidly divides in the human body. On the other hand,
it becomes bacteriostatic when the mycobacterium grows
slowly and manifests the human body for pathogenicity 
[,
].
Isoniazid performs its action by inhibiting the P450 system. One
of the major first line anti-tuberculosis drug, Rifampicin is
typically used to treat Mycobacterium tuberculosis infections,
including tuberculosis and leprosy. The chemical composition
of Rifampicin provides lipophilic nature which makes it more
active drug to treat the meningitis form of tuberculosis 
[,
].
In addition, the lipophilic nature of the Rifampicin helps in
smooth distribution of the drug into the central nervous
system and crossing the blood-brain barrier. However, it caused
several side effects and toxicity in the human body, thereby
creating the limitations for using as an effective antituberculosis
drug therapy. For example, the Rifampicin may
cause hepatotoxicity of the liver after prolonged use 
[]. The
most common (approximately 1%) side effect of Pyrazinamide
is joint pains (arthralgia), Ethambutol may cause stomach upset,
dizziness, fatigue, or headache. Isoniazid can cause allergy also
and the symptoms of an allergic reaction include: rash, itching,
swelling, dizziness, trouble breathing []. Due to above sever
complications of the existing anti-tuberculosis drugs; there is a
need to develop new drug therapy against tuberculosis disease.
Here, we proposed the use of computational drug designing
methods to find the alternative potential inhibitor against P450
enzyme of mycobacterium which can act as an anti-tuberculosis
drug compound. We also compared the efficacy of our
compounds with the existing first line anti-tuberculosis drugs.
The new drug was also tested for drug likeness properties
derived by Lipinski rule of five

Methodology
Input receptor file:
The CYP130 protein (pdb id 2UUQ) from Mycobacterium
tuberculosis has been chosen as potential drug target for our
docking study. From its original research paper we enumerated
the active site pattern and prepared as input file for docking
simulations.

Setting anti-tuberculosis compound libraries:
Ligand databases such as ZINC [], DRUG BANK
(www.drugbank.ca) and PUBCHEM [] were searched for
obtaining putative anti-tuberculosis compounds for our
docking study. The compounds searching strategies were
divided in to three steps: (1) obtained the first line antituberculosis
drugs which are known to target Mycobacterium
tuberculosis. Compound obtained from DRUG BANK databases.
(2) Obtained natural (plant origin) anti-tuberculosis compounds
from PUBCHEM databases. The information for natural antituberculosis
compounds was obtained from published
literature’s that describing the effectiveness of natural antituberculosis
compounds against Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The
SMILES strings [] of DRUG BANK and natural compounds
were downloaded and converted in to 3D structure via
CORINA server (http://www.molecularnetworks.com/online_demos/corina_demo). (3) The SMILES
strings of first line anti-tuberculosis drugs were virtually
screened against ZINC database. We constructed different
compound libraries based on the similarity with SMILES strings
and set as input files for docking simulations.

Docking Simulation:
The compound libraries (First line, Natural and ZINC
compounds) were virtually screened individually against the
active site pattern of 2UUQ via GEMDOCKv2.0 software 
[].
This docking tool works effectively based on the genetic
algorithm (GA) with default parameters of virtual screening.
Furthermore, the top ten compounds that produced lower
fitness values were selected for next cycle of docking simulation
via GEMDOCK. In the second phase of docking cycle, 29
compounds were submitted into docking simulation via
GEMDOCK v2.0. Note that the several successive simulations
were performed in order to find all possible poses of the
compounds. After completion of docking, the top ten
compounds were selected and subjected for further final
validation via AUTODOCK 4.0 []. The automated molecular
docking simulations were performed by Genetic Algorithm-
Local Search (GA-LS) with standard parameters. The
compounds were ranked based on the docking energy. The
compound with the highest affinity for the 2UUQ active site
pattern with lowest docking energy was selected. Here, we
examined the performance of these docking software to select
best compound without and biased.

Statistical analysis:
The histogram was generated for analyzing the number of
compounds showing fitness values in the specific range.
Furthermore, standard score known as Z score was calculated
to evaluate the fitness value of the compounds and to find
unique compound showing affinity for 2UUQ which was
unlikely to produce by other compounds in the random
population. Here, the Z score value will determine the best
compound fitness value that may be far from the mean of the
fitness values generated by total number of compounds. The
affinity of selected compound was further tested by normal
distribution analysis. The compounds P values were calculated
for each Z score and normal distribution analysis was
performed. The standard P value was set to 0.05 at 95%
confidence interval and it was assumed that compounds with
more negative Z score and lesser P value than &lt; 0.05 are better
than the other random population.

Drug likeness calculation:
The compound that produced lowest docking energy was
subjected to MOLINSPIRATION 
(www.molinspiration.com)
drug likeness analyzing server. Their molecular and drug
likeness properties were measured and compared with
properties of first line anti tuberculosis drugs against
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Please refer () for the
overall methodology.

Discussion
The CYP130 protein (2UUQ) from Mycobacterium tuberculosis
was selected for our docking study. A total of nine first-line antituberculosis
drugs were selected from DRUG BANK databases
 (see supplementary material) and were screened
against the functional site of 2UUQ (Chain A) through
GEMDOCKv2.0 software. Drug Rifampicin was produced
lowest interaction energy (fitness value) of -89.819 with 2UUQ
(A)  (see supplementary material). Furthermore, 45
plants origin natural anti tuberculosis compounds were
submitted for the docking analysis against the protein 2UUQ
(A). Compounds Artonin E and Artonin B have obtained
highest rank with the lowest fitness value of -90.67 and -84.92
respectively. We have selected top ten compounds for further
study. Additionally, the screening of 637 commercial available
chemical compounds from ZINC databases against functional
site of 2UUQ (A) obtained ranking of best hit compounds 
(Supplementary material). The top ten ZINC compounds
were filtered. The selected 29 compounds (nine from first line +
ten compounds from natural inhibitors + ten from ZINC) were
included into a single set of compound library. Subsequently,
these compounds were set as input for further docking
simulation.

The chemical compound from ZINC database ZINC00004165
(5-[3-(2-nitroimidazol-1-yl) propyl] phenanthridine) ()
was obtained highest rank with lowest interaction energy of -
113.255 as compared to first line anti-tuberculosis compounds
(). Furthermore, results were verified via
AUTODOCK4.0. Further, ZINC00004165 produced lowest
docking energy of -9.80 kcal/mol  (see supplementary
material), (). Statistical analysis also revealed that
ZINC00004165 has lowest Z score of -2.681 as compared to
other compounds (). It indicates that the affinity of the
compound ZINC00004165 is far from the mean of the
population of other drug compounds fitness values and not
able to produce by other compounds. Simultaneously, normal
distribution and P value analysis () follow a bell shaped
curve. The compound ZINC00004165 exhibits a Z score of -2.681
with P value of 0.003, which is lesser than P value of 0.05
(represents 95% confidence interval). It signifies that there is
less chance of getting similar affinity by any other compound
for 2UUQ as compare to ZINC00004165. Drug likeness analysis
for selected ZINC and first line anti-tuberculosis compounds
through MOLINSPIRATION server revealed that
ZINC00004165 has no violation for the Lipinski rule of five. On
the other hand, the first line compounds, namely Streptomycin
and Rifampicin have three violations  (see
supplementary material). Additionally, Structure-Structure
superposition between 2UUQ (with docked compound
ZINC00004165) and 2UVN (with bound ligand) is produced the
r.m.s.d of 0.96 Å (). Interestingly, the catalytic residues
that surrounds the compound ZINC00004165 (5-[3-(2-
nitroimidazol-1-yl) propyl] phenanthridine) have matched with
the literature reported for 2UUQ as well as with the catalytic
residues that bound to the first line anti-tuberculosis
compounds ().

Conclusion
The Molecular docking analysis concludes that the novel
compound ZINC00004165 (5-[3-(2-nitroimidazol-1-yl) propyl]
phenanthridine) produces lowest docking energy and fitness
value than the first line anti-tuberculosis drug compounds. This
unequivocally shows that the compound ZINC00004165 has
more affinity towards the Protein 2UUQ in comparison to the
commercially available anti-tuberculosis compounds. Further,
the Z score statistical test has verified the uniqueness of the
above compound by exhibiting top Z score than the rest antituberculosis
compounds. The normal distribution analysis for
the calculated Z scores has further concluded that the
percentage of affinity for the ZINC00004165 compound is
comparatively higher than any other compounds from the drug
database. Significantly, the drug likeness test also confirmed
that the compound ZINC00004165 follows no violation of
“Lipinski rule of five” and possess the criteria of standard drug
like properties. Therefore, it is likely that ZINC00004165 can act
as a potential inhibitor for the CYP130 protein (2UUQ). In
addition, they can serve as an effective model compound for
designing novel drugs against the harmful pathogenic
bacterium Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Supplementary material
Data 1
AS and A jointly conceived the idea for the current research
work. AS, IC, NS, KKS and OR are great full to New Era
Proteomics, India as well as France for all financial support.
AN kindly acknowledges DBT, India for all financial resources.
PPC kindly acknowledges Bioroutes life sciences for all funds.

Citation:Sharma et al, Bioinformation 8(19): 931-937 (2012)

Overall methodology: (1) downloaded pdb file of cytochrome P450 mono-oxygenase enzyme (2UUQ) from RCSB protein
data bank (2) Extracted the functional site residues from 2UUQ, reported in the literature of 2UUQ (3) downloaded the first line
anti-tuberculosis compounds from DRUG BANK, plant metabolites from PUBCHEM and ZINC compounds similar to first line
compounds from ZINC database (4) Docked the compounds against the functional sites of 2UUQ via GEMDOCKv2.0 (5) Ranked
the compounds based on the fitness values and selected the top ten compounds from each category (6) made new compound
library (7) Docked against the functional site of 2UUQ via GEMDOCKv2.0 (8) Performed the statistical analysis (9) Selected the best
compounds (10) Docked the best compounds against the site via AUTODOCK4.0 for final validation (11) Selected the best hit
compound with lowest docking energy.

Compound ZINC00004165 from ZINC database.

Docking simulation analysis for ZINC compound and
first line anti tuberculosis compounds. (A) Compound
ZINC00004165 docked with functional site of 2UUQ (A)
docking energy of -9.80 kcal/mol. (B): docking of first line anti
tuberculosis compounds (a) Pyrazinamide (DE -4.18 kcal/mol)
(b) Rifampicin (DE -8.00 kcal/mol) (c) Isoniazid (DE -4.53
kcal/mol) (d) Streptomycin (DE -8.19 kcal/mol) (e)
Ethambutol (DE -5.84 kcal/mol) with functional site of 2UUQ
(A).

Structure-structure superimposition between 2UUQ
(A) (green) with docked ZINC00004165 compound (magenta)
and of 2UVN (A) (red) with bound ligand ECN, 1-[ (2S)-2-[ (4-
Chlorobenzyl) Oxy]-2-(2,4-Dichloropheyl) Ethyl]- 1H-Imidazole
(blue) produced r.m.s.d. of 0.96 Å (No. of atoms 1456).

