Background
Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) is an endemic worldwide problem
which affects 170 million people globally and 10 million people
in Pakistan []. It causes acute and chronic hepatitis and is a
main cause of liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma 
[].
HCV belongs to Flaviviridae family with a positive-sense singlestranded
RNA genome which encodes three structural proteins
(Core, E1, E2) and six non-structural pmroteins (NS2, NS3,
NS4A, NS4B, NS5A &amp; NS5B) []. Among all HCV proteins,
NS3/4A serine protease and helicase are effective drug targets
to develop anti-HCV agents []. The basic role of NS3/4A is the
proteolytic processing at NS4A/4B, NS4B/5A, and NS5A/5B
sites, and it shows a vital role in HCV replication. As it is
involved in viral replication, it has worked as a reliable drug
target for HCV. Til today, no vaccination is available for
treatment of HCV and present standard of care is a combination
therapy of Pegylated interferon alpha (PegIFN-α) injections
with oral antiviral nucleoside analogue ribavirin (RBV) which
leads to treatment of HCV in 50% genotype 1 cases and 80% of
genotype 2 cases but this treatment no rapid response and side
effects in genotype 1a and 1b patients [–
]. Present treatment is
expensive. Less effective and has numerous side effects thus,
there is a need of developing antiviral agents that are less
harmful and hasability to target all genotypes of HCV with the
same competence. Recently, two NS3 protease inhibitors have
been approved as triple therapy (PEG-IFN- α, ribavirin and
Boceprevir or Telaprevir) against HCV []. But still there is a
strong need to develop specific compounds that can target
important factors of the HCV life cycle []. Several Medicinal
plants are tested and many of them are proved to have antiviral
effect in their phytochemicals. Medicinal plants are costeffective,
multiple target activities, minor side-effects and thus,
preferred over conventional treatment [–]. Phytochemicals
such as alkaloids, organosulfur compounds, limonoids, lignans,
furyl compounds, polyines, thiophenes, proteins, peptides,
flavonoids, terpenoids, sulphides, polyphenolics, coumarins,
saponins, chlorophyllins have functions like scavenging,
antioxidant activities, hindering viral entry, DNA and RNA
replication against numerous viruses []. Recently, our group
reported that phytochemicals Amelanchier alnifolia showed novel
inhibition of HCV titer in infected liver cells []. Therefore, this
study was planned to screen phytochemical of Amelanchier
alnifolia against HCV NS3/4A protease and helicase using in silico
approaches.

Methodology
This study was designed to dock Amelanchier alnifolia
phytochemicals against HCV NS3/4A protein with the
following communications. Intel (R) xenon (R) CPU
E5620@2.40GHz system having 3.8GB RAM with the open 11.4
(X 86_64) operating platform. Protein-ligand docking was
carried out using the MOE (Molecular Operating Environment)
software package. Interactions between HCV NS3/4A protease
and ligands were imagined using ligPlot feature of MOE
software [].

Ligand preparation:
A literature was searched to find Amelanchier alnifolia
phytochemical Structures. Chemical structures of
phytochemicals were drew using ChemDraw software 
() 
and were transformed into their respective 3D structures. 3D
structures were optimized by addion of hydrogens through
MOE software package. Energies of selected molecules were
minimized with parameters (gradient: 0.05, Force Field:
MMFF94X, Chiral Constraint and Current Geometry).
Molecules were then saved in .mdb format and were used as
input file for MOE-Docking.

Preparation of Receptor Protein:
HCV NS3/4A protease and helicase structures were
downloaded from Protein Data Bank using PDB ID: 3P8N and
2fm2 and was optimized by removal of water molecules, 3D
protonation and Energy minimization. Energy minimization
was carried out using parameters (gradient: 0.05, Force Field:
MMFF94X+Solvation and Chiral Constraint: Current
Geometry). Energy minimization was stopped when the root
mean square gradient falls below the 0.05. The minimized
structures were used as the receptor protein for Docking.

Molecular Docking:
MOE docking program with default parameters was used to
bind the selected ligands with receptor protein and to find the
correct conformation (with the rotation of bonds, structure of
molecule is not rigid) of the ligand so as to obtain minimum
energy structure. After docking, best conformations were
analyzed for hydrogen bonding/π-π interactions.

Results &amp; Discussion
Docking Analysis:
All ligands were docked with the pocket of NS3/4A protease
and helicase enzyme and top ranked conformations of each
ligand were saved. Compound 01 was ranked as top docked
molecule on the basis of S-Score obtained from MOE docking
algorithm. Thus, it can be concluded that this compound can
serve as competative inhibitor against NS3/4A protease and
helicase. All other compounds were having S-Score close to each
other. All compounds were studied in detail to obtain their
interaction information that can be important for the inhibition
of NS3/4A protease and helicase enzyme. Interaction diagrams
were obtained by using MOE ligand interaction analysis
feature.

Binding interactions of Ligands and Protein:
The most active Compound 01 was ranked as first on the
docking score. It is clear from () that this compound
was bound deep into the binding cavity of NS3 protease making
interactions with the residues His 57, Asp 81 and Asp 168.
Similarly, Compound 01 ranked first on the docking score
wgich showed deep binding with NS3 helicase cavity making
interactions with the residues Ala 157, His 528. On the basis of
docking score Compound 02, Compound 03, Compound 04,
Compound 05, Compound 06, Compound 07, Compound 08,
Compound 09, Compound 10, and Compound 11 were ranked
close to each other as shown in  (see supplementary
material). There were some visible interactions observed
between the Compounds and the binding site residues Asp 81,
His 57 and His 528. The solvent contact was found almost all
over the ligand.

Conclusion
The design and development of prevention tools for Hepatitis C
viralinfection has been a challenge. Therefore, improved
strategies for the treatment of Hepatitis C are relevant to the
context. The use of extracts from Amelanchier alnifolia containing
flavonoids shows promising results intraditional treatment
pipelines. Hence, it is interest to document thepotential binding
of Amelanchier alnifolia derived flavonoids with HCVNS3/4A
protease and helicase. Molecular docking and binding
simulations ofsuch flavanoids with HCV target proteins show
the good binding ability ofquercitin 3-galactoside and 3-
glucoside with protease and helicase,respectively. These
observation provide insights to consider Amelanchieralnifolia
derived flavonoids as potential inhibitors of HCV target
proteins.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Khan et al, Bioinformation 9(19): 978-982 (2013)

Chemical structures of Amelanchier alnifolia phytochemicals constructed using ChemDraw Software.

A) Interactions between Compound 01 and active site of NS3/4A protease and helicase; B) Interactions between
Compound 02 and active site of NS3/4 protease and helicase, C) Interactions between Compound 03 and active site of NS3/4
protease and helicase; D) Interactions between Compound 04 and active site of NS3/4A protease and helicase; E) Interactions
between Compound 05 and active site of NS3/4A protease and helicase; F) Interactions between Compound 06 and active site of
NS3/4A protease and helicase.

