Background
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is an opportunistic pathogen, meaning that it
exploits some break in the host defenses to initiate an infection. In fact,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is the epitome of an opportunistic pathogen of
humans. The bacterium almost never infects uncompromised tissues,
yet there is hardly any tissue that it cannot infect if the tissue defenses
are compromised in some manner. It causes urinary tract infections,
respiratory system infections, dermatitis, soft tissue infections,
bacteremia, bone and joint infections, gastrointestinal infections and a
variety of systemic infections, particularly in patients with severe burns
and in cancer and AIDS patients who are immunosuppressed.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection is a serious problem in patients
hospitalized with cancer, cystic fibrosis, and burns. The case fatality
rate in these patients is near 50 percent. [,,]. 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is intrinsically resistant to many antibiotics, or can develop
resistance during treatment with consequent high mortality, and is,
increasingly, a cause of infection in immunocompromised patients. The
most relevant mechanism for the development of resistance to the
antipseudomonal penicillins (such as ticarcillin or piperacillin) and
cephalosporins (such as ceftazidime) is the selection of mutations
leading to the hyperproduction of the chromosomal cephalosporinase
AmpC [,,]. AmpC is a group I, class C ‐lactamase present in most
Enterobacteriaceae and in P. aeruginosa and other nonfermenting gramnegative
bacilli [,]. The β‐lactam class of antibiotics is one of the
most important structural classes of antibacterial compounds and act by
inhibiting the bacterial D ,D ‐transpeptidases that are responsible for the
final step of peptidoglycan cross-linking. The resistance mechanism in
bacteria to β ‐ lactams is the production of β‐lactamases that catalyze
the hydrolysis of the β ‐lactam ring, preventing their interaction with the
D,D-transpeptidases. During treatment with lactams, resistant mutants
showing constitutive high levels of AmpC production are frequently
selected, leading to therapeutic failure []. Thus due to emergence of
multidrug resistant and extremely drug resistant strains of Pseudomonas
aeruginosa makes searching for drugs that are effective against these
strains imperative.

Our main aim in the study is to screen possible inhibitors against AmpC
/ β ‐ lactamase (an enzyme responsible for antimicrobial activity in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa), through virtual screening of 1364 NCI
(National Cancer Institute) diversity set II compounds. NCI Diversity
Set II is a collection of 1,364 compounds chosen (from 140,000 open
compounds in the NCI chemical repository with more than or equal to
250 mg inventory) to cover a large, diverse range of molecular scaffolds
and pharmacophore features, while also being relatively rigid. All
compounds in the Diversity Set II have five or fewer rotatable bonds,
facilitating pharmacophore development and conformational sampling
[].

Methodology
Comparative modeling of AmpC / β ‐ lactamase
As the tertiary structure of AmpC/ β‐lactamase is not available in the
structure databases the structure was predicted by comparative
modelling approach. The comparative modelling of P. aeruginosa β ‐
lactamase was done using MODELLER 9v6 [] and five models were
generated. The peptide sequence of P. aeruginosa β‐lactamase was
retrieved from UniProt Knowledge Base, http://www.uniprot.org,
(UniProt acc. No. P24735), ranging from 27 to 397 residues. ClustalW
was used to produce alignment between the P. aeruginosa β ‐
lactamase sequence and the sequence of the templates (PDB: 2QZ6 and
1ZKJ) chosen from PDB BLAST hit. The predicted 3-D structures were
evaluated using the PROCHECK [] and Verify 3D programs [].

Pattern detection in the sequence
The amino acid sequence of the β ‐ lactamase was subjected to
ScanProsite web server [] to find any pattern present in the sequence.

Active Site Determination
After the prediction of 3-dimensional model of AmpC/ β‐lactamase, the
possible Active sites of β ‐ lactamase were determined using
LIGSITEcsc.[] and CastP [] web servers simultaneously.
LIGSITEcsc is based on the notion of surface-solvent-surface events and
the degree of conservation of the involved surface residues where as
CastP server uses the weighted Delaunay triangulation and the alpha complex for shape measurements. It provides identification and
measurements of surface accessible pockets as well as interior
inaccessible cavities, for proteins and other molecules.

Virtual Screening of NCI Diversity Set II against β ‐ lactamase using molecular docking
The ligand molecules of NCI Diversity Set II were obtained from
ZINC database, a free database of commercially-available compounds
for virtual screening in mol2 format, provided by the Shoichet
Laboratory in the Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry at the
University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) []. Autodock4
program was used for molecular docking along with the help of the
python scripts provided in the AutodockTools package for the
preparation of the ligand, receptor, grid and dock parameter files.
AutoDock4 uses Monte Carlo (MC) simulated annealing and
Lamarckian genetic algorithm (LGA) to create a set of possible
conformations, i.e. each string (coding for an individual in the
population) passes on some of the characteristics it has acquired during
its lifetime. LGA is used as a global optimizer and energy minimization
as a local search method. Possible orientations are evaluated with
AMBER force field model in conjunction with free energy scoring
functions and a large set of protein-ligand complexes with known
protein-ligand constants []. The active site center obtained by active
site determination programs was used as the grid center in the grid
parameter file, rest all the parameters were set to default values. The
entire process of file preparation and docking was automated using an
in house Perl script.

Molecular interactions
The LIGPLOT tool was used to generate molecular level interactions in
the docked complexes [].

Visualization
All the visualization of the structure files were done using PyMol
molecular graphics system [].

Discussion
The hypothetical protein models generated in the modeling procedure
were analyzed online by submitting to NIH MBI Laboratory for
Structural Genomics and Proteomics' SAVES server. Validity reports
generated by PROCHECK and Verfiy_3D judged accuracy of the
protein models. A comparison of the results obtained from the abovementioned
validation tools, showed that one of the models generated by
Modeller is more acceptable in comparison to the others and was
selected for further studies. For the final selected model Ramachandran
plot generated by PROCHECK showed 95.1% residues in the most
favored region (). The compatibility of the atomic model (3D)
with its own amino acid sequence (1D) computed by Verfy_3D
reported 100.00% of the residues having an average 3D-1D score &gt; 0.2 .

After the validation, the sequence of the β ‐ lactamase was scanned for
any pattern present in the sequence using ScanProsite. The regular
expression generated by the scan ([FY] ‐ E ‐ [LIVM] ‐ G ‐ S ‐ [LIVMG]
‐ [SA] ‐ K ) suggested β ‐ lactamase class-C active site region with first
Serine residue as the catalytic residue. Active sites in the modeled
protein structure were detected using LIGSITEcsc and CastP webserver.
The LIGSITEcsc and CastP programs detected all the possible pockets in
the structure which were compared with active site location from the
homologous structures complexed with the substrates available in the
PDB. Residues within the 5 A radius of the coordinates of the center of
the active site detected by the LIGSITEcsc was also studied for the
catalytic Serine residue as well as other residues found conserved in the
ScanProsite. The various pockets obtained by the CastP program were
also looked for the conserved residues and the spatial location of the
pockets found by the program, the 2nd pocket detected was found better
in all respects hence it was chosen as the most biologically favorable
site for Docking study and other Identified Active sites were neglected
().

A set of 1364 compounds available in NCI Diversity Set II were
obtained from ZINC database in mol2 format, the individual mol2 files
converted into pdbqt file supported by Autodock4 using the python
script prepare_ligand4.py available in Autodock Tools package. The
receptor molecule was also converted into pdbqt format using
prepare_receptor4.py script of Autodock Tools. The coordinates
generated by the Ligsite in the grid parameter file, the grid was
generated using Autogrid4 available in the Autodock4 suite. Docking of
1364 compounds was performed using Autodock4, the entire process of
format conversion of files, preparation of grid and dock parameter files
were automated using an in house Perl script. The algorithm
exhaustively searches the entire rotational and translational space of the
Ligand with respect to the receptor. The various solutions evaluated by
a score giving Estimated Free Energy of Binding which is a sum total of
Final Intermolecular Energy (vdW + Hbond + desolv Energy,
Electrostatic Energy), Final Total Internal Energy, Torsional Free
Energy and Unbound System's Energy of the Ligand in the protein
environment. The best four docking solutions based on the energy
scores were selected ( ).

To understand the interaction between β ‐ lactamase and the four
compounds from the NCI Diversity Set II, complexes were generated
using AutodockTools for outputs of Autodock solutions. LIGPLOT
were run for all the four complexes (). It is evident from the
analysis of the Docked complex that the Ligands are located in the
center of the Active site, and is stabilized by hydrogen bonding
interactions. The interaction analysis shows that Ser 64, Tyr 151 and
Thr 317 are important anchoring residues for β ‐ lactamase and the
main contributors towards compound interaction. Though the
interaction energy does not include the contribution from the water of
the extended compound structure, this preliminary data along with the
list of hydrogen bond interactions between the compounds and the
Active site residues clearly supports that Ser 64, Tyr 151 and Thr 317
are more preferred residues in binding.

Conclusion
AmpC/β ‐ lactamase is shown to be most potent cause for antimicrobial
resistance in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. In this work, predicted 3‐
dimensional Model of AmpC / β ‐ lactamase was used for Virtual
Screening of NIC Diversity Set II compounds. Docking results indicate
that out of 1364 compounds, there were four inhibitory compounds for
AmpC/β‐lactamase as target for antimicrobial resistance in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Hydrogen bonding proved to play an
important role for the structure and function of biological molecules,
especially for inhibition in a complex. Thus our study confirms that
ligand molecules having the following ZINC Ids ZINC12670903,
ZINC17465965, ZINC11681166 and ZINC13099024 are potential
inhibitor for AmpC / β ‐ lactamase as target for antimicrobial
resistance in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Yet to confirm it to be
promising, Pharmacological studies need to be performed.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors would like to acknowledge the support and facilities
provided by the Department of Computational Biology and
Bioinformatics, Sam Higginbottom Institute of Agricultural,
Technology and Sciences, Allahabad, U.P., India.

Citation:Farmer et al, Bioinformation 4(7): 290-294 (2010)

(A) The final model of AmpC / β ‐ lactamase; (B) Validation of the model using Ramachandran plot computed with the PROCHECK
program with 95.1 % of the residues in the most favored regions.

Active sites are shown. (A) The red sphere shows the coordinates of the center of the active site predicted by Ligsite program. (B) Blue
spheres show the location and the area covered by the most appropriate active site as predicted by CastP program.

Receptor-ligand interaction is shown. (A) ZINC12670903 hydrogen bonded with Ser 64 OH, Lys 316 NH and Thr 317 OH at a distance
of 2.79 Å, 2.75 Å and 2.53 Å, respectively whereas Gln 120, Tyr 151, Tyr 223, Ser 319, Thr 320 and Asn 321 are non-ligand residues involved in
hydrophobic contact(s). (B) ZINC17465965 hydrogen bonded with Ser 64 OH, Arg 149 NH, Tyr 151 OH, Asn 153 NH, Thr 317 OH and Asn 347
NH at a distance of 2.87 Å, 2.68 Å, 2.90 Å, 2.97 Å, 2.57 Å and 3.29 Å respectively whereas Ala 293, Ser 319 and Thr 320 are non-ligand residues
involved in hydrophobic contact(s). (C) ZINC11681166 hydrogen bonded with Ser 64 OH, Tyr 151 OH and Asn 344 NH at a distance of 2.35 Å,
2.44 Å and 2.79 Å respectively whereas Thr 290, Ala 293, Ser 319, Thr 320 and Asn 321 are non-ligand residues involved in hydrophobic
contact(s). (D) ZINC13099024 hydrogen bonded with Ser 64 OH, Tyr 151 OH, Gly 214 NH and Thr 317 OH at distance of 2.76 Å, 3.09 Å, 3.25 Å
and 2.79 Å respectively whereas Val 213, Tyr 223, Thr 320 and Asn 321 are non-ligand residues involved in hydrophobic contact(s).

