Background
Amyloid fibril forming regions in protein sequences appear to
be associated with several illnesses including
neurodegenerative diseases and Type II diabetes [].
Experimental proof is compelling in approval of the postulate
that continuous and short segments of peptide sequences are
responsible for amyloidogenity [,
]. Hence mining such motifs
is important in understanding the underlying cause of amyloid
illnesses. The reliable discovery of amyloid promoting
fragments in proteins has a great impact on the development of
anti-amyloid agents as well. Moreover, methods that identify
aggregation-prone motifs have a broad range of
biotechnological applications, such as the improvement of the
solubility of recombinant proteins for pharmaceutical and
industrial purposes, and peptide-based biomaterial engineering
[]. 
Therefore, during the past five years, many groups have
actively worked on developing tools that integrate several
factors driving protein aggregation in order to identify potential
amyloidogenic stretches in proteins. Most of the methods show
a good agreement with wet lab experimental results.

Recent efforts in understanding the physicochemical grounds
[] and structural denominators 
[] of amyloid fibril formation
has led to the development of several algorithms, capable of
predicting a number of aggregation related parameters of a
protein directly from its amino acid sequence. Review articles
on computational studies of investigating fibril forming
segments do exist such as [], but are focused on the design of
model systems for amyloid formation [], approaches based on
computer simulations of the aggregation process of proteins 
[]
and those emphasizing on phenomenological models that use
the physicochemical properties of the side chains and
computational techniques based on atomistic descriptions of β–
aggregation []. In fact, these articles have not touched upon the
effectiveness of prediction tools in terms of true positive rates or
false positive rates. Therefore, the main focus of our present
study involves the evaluation of recent computational
prediction tools to predict amyloidogenic stretches of
polypeptide sequences based on statistical parameters.
However, we believe that such a comparative analysis of fibril
forming prediction tools might be useful to carry out further
research in this area.

Methodology
The challenge of computationally mining amyloidogenic
regions has resulted in a diversity of multi-parametric methods
that attempt to predict fibril motifs []. The problem remains
that many methods are not available to be downloaded for
inclusion in independent testing on a common dataset. Hence,
at the moment, we have taken into account of only those most
recent methodologies which provide an online tool solely based
on sequences as input to verify the amyloidogenity of a peptide.
Few other methods such as 3D profile method [] based on the
crystal structure of the cross-β spine formed by the peptide
NNQQNY, PreAmyl [] based on structure and residue-based
statistical potential, Pafig [] based on supervised learning
model trained with 41 physicochemical properties, are not
included in this review due to their incompatibility with the
present study.

Data retrieval and preparation:
The overall success of diverse computational approaches in
predicting aggregation-prone regions allows to propose that
aggregation propensity in polypeptide chains is ultimately
dictated by the primary protein sequences []. The quality of
each prediction tool has been evaluated on two datasets namely
Amylpreddataset and AmylFibrilset. Amylpreddataset
corresponds to the data available in []. Frousios et al.
compiled 18 proteins (Accession Nos.: P01236, P01258, P02647,
P02663, P02735, P02766, P02788, P04156, P04279, P05067,
P06396, P10636, P10997, P22398, P37840, P61626, P61769 and
Q08431) having experimentally proved fibril regions and 5
proteins (Accession Nos.: P00441, P01034, P01308, P01857,
P01625) which showed no signal of fibrillogenesis. Besides, we
compiled experimentally proved proteins related to
amyloidosis and proteins with no experimentally concluded
amyloidogenic regions published in literature [, 
–], in order
to construct a dataset. We term this dataset, AmylFibrilset.
AmylFibrilset includes natively globular proteins, natively
intrinsically unstructured proteins, amyloidogenic proteins and
proteins related to depositional diseases to analyze deeper the
general predictive ability of each method. The accession
numbers of proteins included in this dataset can be retrieved
from our earlier publication [].

Recent findings in the study of protein aggregation reveal the
fact that there exist rather specific continuous small stretches
that can nucleate the aggregation process 
[]. Thompson et al.
[] claim that a hexmer is sufficient to form amyloid-like fibril
motifs. Therefore, the predicted peptides with less than 6
residues were excluded while quantifying each method. The
total data in AmylFibrilset collectively amounts to 10,603 six
amino acid residues obtained by a six-residue sliding window.
The total amount of positive residues is 1176, experimentally
found to aggregate and 917 peptides known not to aggregate by
experiment. Amylpreddataset contains 512 positive hexmers
and 829 negative hexmers selected from 6,761 hexpeptides. The
use of positive dataset helps to identify the number of true
positives and false negatives that defines the sensitivity of a
particular tool. The false positives and true negatives defining
the specificity of a tool are obtained using negative dataset.

Analysis:
Here in the present study, we summarize, in alphabetical order,
three prediction programs capable of discriminating between
amyloidogenic peptides and non-amyloidogenic peptides 
 
(see supplementary material). The positive and negative data
that have been experimentally supported and obtained from
literature mining as detailed above were given as input to each
of these tools and the predicted output was analyzed to
calculate the count of true positives, true negatives, false
positives and false negatives  (see supplementary
material). Further, to evaluate the performance of prediction
tools, we calculated the statistical parameters namely
Sensitivity, Specificity, Matthews Correlation Coefficient and
Balanced accuracy. The comparative analysis tells how well
each tool can predict the fibril motifs in a given sequence.

Aggrescan:
Aggrescan [] is web based software that can predict
aggregation-prone segments in protein sequences. Using an in
vivo reporter method to study a “hot spot” in the central
hydrophobic core of Aβ, the effect of single point mutations on
the aggregation propensities of the peptide within the cell is
calculated. The results are used to approximate the in vivo
intrinsic aggregation propensities of natural amino acids when
located in an aggregation-prone sequence stretch. This
information was subsequently used to generate an aggregation
profile for any protein sequence under study to detect those
regions with high aggregation propensities. Identification of
such regions is accessed through the link
http://bioinf.uab.es/aggrescan/ 
[]. The analysis was
performed using the default parameters of the software.

Amylpred:
A publicly available online tool that utilizes five different and
independently published methods, to form a consensus
prediction of amyloidogenic regions in proteins, using only
protein primary structure data is developed []. The first
method relies on average packing density profiles. The second
method used is the consensus secondary structure prediction
algorithm SecStr [] that has been shown to be able to predict
amyloidogenic regions as conformational switches, which are
identified as regions predicted both as α-helices and β-strands.
Locating the amyloidogenic pattern {P}-{PKRHW}-[VLSCWFNQE]-
[ILTYWFNE]-[FIY]-{PKRH} [] is another method used for the
consensus prediction. The TANGO algorithm [] based on the
physicochemical principles underlying β-sheet formation,
extended by the assumption that the core regions of an
aggregate fully buried, is the next method used (version 2.1)
that calculates the tendency of peptides to form beta aggregates
and aside from the primary sequence. Finally, an algorithm
that maps all hexpeptides of a sequence onto the
microcrystalline structure of NNQQNY and calculates the
resulting conformational energy [] is used. The tool is available
http://biophysics.biol.uoa.gr/AMYLPRED/input.html
[].The
analysis was performed using the default parameters for each
employed algorithm.

FoldAmyloid:
FoldAmyloid [] algorithm is based on using expected
characteristics – scales: either expected packing density or the
probability of formation of hydrogen bonds. The scales
themselves are obtained from the statistics of spatial structures
of proteins, and then the scales are used for predictions on
amino acid sequences. Initially, the values of the expected
packing density and probability of formation of hydrogen
bonds for each residue in spatial structures of proteins are
obtained. The average values for each of 20 types of amino acid
residues are calculated. The obtained average values are then
used as the values expected for each residue of a given type in a
sequence for which the prediction is made. The FoldAmyloid
web server is available at http://antares.protres.ru/foldamyloid/
[]. We chose the value of sliding window size and
reliable frame size to be 6 to carry out the analysis.

Results &amp; Discussion
Multiple statistical measures were used to assess the
performance of the tools under study including Sensitivity (Sn),
Specificity (Sp), Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC) 
[]
and Balanced accuracy (BACC) [] related to the standard
Balanced Error Rate (BER), where BER = 1-BACC . In a binary
classification, given a classifier and an instance, there are four
possible outcomes. When a positive instance is classified
correctly as positive, it is counted as a true positive (TP);
however if it is classified wrongly as negative, it is counted as a
false negative (FN). If the instance is negative and has been
classified correctly, it is counted as a true negative (TN),
otherwise it is counted as a false positive (FP). The MCC used in
machine learning is a measure of the quality of binary
classifications. It takes into account true and false positives and
negatives and is generally regarded as a balanced measure. It
returns a value between ­1 and +1. A coefficient of +1
represents a perfect prediction, 0 an average random prediction
and ­1 the worst possible prediction [].

The methods included in our analysis were not assigned any
prediction cutoff or threshold. As a result, Receiver operating
Characteristic (ROC) curves cannot be completely constructed
for these algorithms. Instead, the overall prediction
performance of these tools could only be represented by
selected points on the ROC plot. Figure 1 shows the scatter plot
for true positive rate (sensitivity) versus false positive rate (1-
specificity) of each of the prediction tools and the balance
between Sn and Sp of these methods are compared. The plot
area is divided into four quadrants marked I-IV as referred [].
In fact, the four quadrants denote algorithm that achieves 
higher Sn but lower Sp

higher Sn and higher Sp

lower Sn but higher Sp

lower Sn and lower Sp.


The diagonal line (0, 0) – (1, 1) denotes an algorithm that results in equal rates of true
positives and false positives, i.e. a totally random method
without any predictive power. Therefore, algorithms in
quadrant II, far away from the diagonal line are better
performers [].

All algorithms belonging to quadrant III tend to predict all the
examples as negative thereby achieving high specificity but
very low sensitivity. Aggrescan, Amylpred and FoldAmyloid
appear in quadrant III indicating that although they have good
Sp (scores of 86.15%, 91.06% and 90.84% respectively for
AmylFibrilset and 85.4%, 90.5% and 91% respectively for
Amylpreddataset), the Sn (scores of 22.45%, 12.67% and 16.33%
respectively for AmylFibrilset and 26.2%, 20.7% and 16.6%
respectively for Amylpreddataset), is poor. Out of these
algorithms, FoldAmyloid achieves maximum FP rate with least
TP rate for Amylpreddataset. Amylpred shows the highest FP
rate but achieves lowest TP rate for AmylFibrilset. However,
Amylpred scores the maximum MCC of .2 for
Amylpreddataset.

It is also evident from () that there is not much
significant difference in the statistical measures as far as the
dataset is concerned. On further investigation, we observed that
there were almost 20 positive hexmer examples which were
predicted as fibril forming stretches by Aggrescan but not by
other tools, resulting in the best TP rate. As a result, Aggrescan
achieves significantly better BACC (score of .558).

The best quadrant of the plot in figure 1 is II with both Sn and Sp
being &gt; 0.5. As can be seen from the plot, none of the algorithms
is found in this quadrant. However, the accuracy of these
methods decreased significantly for
Amylpreddataset/AmylFibrilset data and/or they suffered
from highly biased prediction (very low Sn but very high Sp).

() depicts measures illustrating the rate of false
positives and true positives, and the equilibrium maintained
between the rates in terms of BACC.  shows a
comparison of various methods under study in terms of the
performance evaluation indicators namely TP, FN, FP, and TN
along with Sn and Sp on Amylpreddataset and AmylFibrilset.

It remains difficult to assess accurately the performance of
many of the tools listed above. In fact, experimentally mined
amyloidogenic regions reported in different works do vary [].
One possibility could be due to the fact that the protein
sequences are examined under diverse states. Fibril formation
depends on the experimental conditions and is expedited by
denaturants: to aggregate, proteins should be unfolded, at least
partly []. Hence reliable identification of amyloid fibril
stretches is challenging and difficult.

Keeping in mind the various methodologies developed so far,
one possible area of further research is to incorporate existing as
well as new relevant features to develop efficient and effective
algorithms for the same purpose. It was expected that
Amylpred would result in better overall prediction accuracy
than the other two tools for the reason that the performance of
various unions and intersections of individual programs
incorporated in this tool, lead to better predictions.
Unfortunately, although it gives high Sp, the overall accuracy is
poor due to very low Sn.

Conclusion
In the absence of high-throughput experimental techniques to
determine the fibril forming regions, it is vital that
computational techniques are developed to unravel their effects
in protein aggregation and implications for disease diagnosis
and drug discovery. We have attempted to investigate the
performance of few prediction tools in this study. To our
knowledge, this is the first attempt to perform an evaluation on
prediction tools in terms of prediction accuracy which remains
as one of the key means to decipher the role of fibril forming
regions in disease and therapeutics. However, the rapid
development of computational methods for fibril forming
prediction is promising for future research.

Recently published three methods of amyloid fibril forming
segments identification tool have been compared to understand
their relative performances. Statistical measures of these
techniques on two datasets were measured. As evident, a
significant reduction of Sn associated with a gain in Sp is noted.
In other words, the tools got biased to predict most of the input
instances as negative examples. However, of all the tools
examined, Amylpred and FoldAmyloid showed the best Sp for
AmylFibrilset and Amylpreddataset respectively, whereas
Aggrescan displayed the maximum Sn irrespective of datasets.

As far as the overall accuracy is concerned, certain
improvements need to be incorporated in the prediction tools
for a better performance.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Nair et al, Bioinformation 8(2): 070-074 (2012)

Scatter plot of True Positive rate (Sensitivity) versus
false positive rate (1-Specificity) of three prediction tools for
Amylpreddataset (red) and AmylFragset (blue).

Comparative analysis of FoldAmyloid (1, 4 on X-axis),
Aggrescan (2, 5 on X-axis) and Amylpred (3, 6 on X-axis)
prediction tools on Amylpreddataset and AmylFibrilset
respectively in terms of Sensitivity, Specificity and Balanced
Accuracy.

