Background
The extracellular matrix (ECM) is an intricate network of
macromolecules surrounding a substantial volume of cells. It
comprises of collagens, proteoglycans, glycoproteins and
proteases []. These components are arranged in a highly
organized manner and play a significant role not only as a
scaffold to the cell but also in multiple processes such as cell
migration, cell-cell interaction and cell proliferation 
[].
Collagens are the most abundant component of ECM. They
form a triple helical structure with three distinct polypeptide
chains, commonly known as the alpha chains. Also, this triple
helix is found to possess a peculiar sequence ‘Gly-Xaa-Yaa’ 
[].
The presence of glycine as every third residue accounts for the
stability of the helical structure owing to its property of being
the smallest amino acid. Xaa and Yaa can be any amino acid but
are mostly occupied by the proline residue. Thus, collagen is
known to be a glycine and proline rich entity. Collagen proteins
are synthesized as inactive precursor forms known as procollagens.
The cleavage of pro-peptides present at the N and C
terminal by peptidases forms the mature active collagen
molecules.

The collagen family is a large and a complex family comprising
of 28 genetically distinct members found in humans []. This
diverse family includes fiber forming collagens, amorphous
collagens, transmembrane collagens and a specialized type of
collagen that forms unique structures []. The imperative role of
collagen can be ascertained through the wide spectrum of
pathological disorders that are associated with it. Mutations in
the genes encoding for collagen proteins can lead to a variety of
diseases such as Osteogenesis Imperfecta, Ehlers-Danlos
syndrome, Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, Multiple epiphyseal
dysplasia []. Furthermore, variations in the collagen content or
a significant remodeling of the collagen network can lead to
several dysfunctions like parenchymal disease, hypertensive
heart disease, renal fibrosis, tumor and fibrotic diseases [].
Computational biology is an emerging field that essentially
helps to unveil the hidden information of a protein structure,
both at the genomics and proteomics level. It integrates biology
with computational algorithms for better understanding of
complex molecules. Such analysis can be enhanced through a
combinatorial dry to wet lab approach wherein the propositions
made through the biocomputational findings can help in
providing a direction for further research during wet lab
studies. Thus, it facilitates to appreciate and understand the
structural and functional roles of protein molecules, which are
the heart of human disorders. A similar approach has been
adopted to characterize the family of matrix metalloproteinases
(MMP), where in silico characterization was followed by
experimental confirmation and MMP-7 was subsequently
proved to be a potential target in cardiac hypertrophy [,
].
Collagen and its derivatives, such as gelatin, act as substrates of
MMPs and are involved in development of many pathological
conditions. An extensive analysis of collagen family is hence
essential to comprehend the process of matrix remodeling in
diseases.

Our study reports a comparative characterization of alpha-1
sequences of human collagen using biocomputational tools. Of
the three alpha chains present in collagen, alpha-1 was
observed in all 28 human collagens; thus alpha-1 was used for
further analysis of the collagen proteins. The physico-chemical,
secondary structural, functional and phylogenetic analysis of
alpha-1 sequences of human collagen was executed. This
research aims to provide an insight to various protein attributes
of collagen proteins and characterize this large family. It also
intends to propose potential members implicated in disease
conditions based on relative examination of the collagen family
or the presence of any atypical characteristics in the collagen
molecules. This would aid biologists in carrying out further
investigations on these complex molecules, for which, the basic
structure analysis is of prime importance.

Methodology
Retrieval of human collagen alpha-1 protein sequences:
The complete alpha-1 protein sequences of all 28 members of
human collagen family reported till date were derived from
UniProtKB/ SWISS-PROT, a curated protein database
(http://expasy.org/sprot/) 
in FASTA format with the help of the accession number provided for each collagen sequence
(http://www.uniprot.org/) 
[]. Complete information about
the origin, attributes, annotation, ontologies, binary interactions
and sequence of proteins was found in this knowledgebase.

Physico-chemical characterization of collagen family:
Various features including number of amino acids, molecular
weight, theoretical isoelectric point (pI), amino acid
composition (%), number of positively (Arg + Lys) and
negatively charged (Asp + Glu) residues, extinction co-efficient,
instability index, aliphatic index and Grand Average of
Hydropathicity (GRAVY) were computed using ExPASy's
ProtParam tool using the protein sequence in FASTA format as
the input data type (http://expasy.org/tools/protparam.html).
Other physico-chemical features including number of codons,
bulkiness, polarity, refractivity, recognition factors,
hydrophobicity, transmembrane tendency, percent buried
residues, percent accessible residues, average area buried,
average flexibility and relative mutability were calculated for
primary structure characterization by ExPASy's ProtScale tool
using the retrieved protein sequence as the input data type
(http://expasy.org/tools/protscale.html). A suitable amino
acid scale was chosen for computation of each parameter in this
sliding windows based tool that gives each amino acid a
numerical value known as the amino acid scale.

Secondary structural characterization of collagen family:
The secondary structural features of proteins comprising of
alpha helix, 310 helix, Pi helix, beta bridge, extended strand, beta
turn, bend region, random coil, ambiguous states and other
states were predicted using Self-Optimized Prediction Method
with Alignment (SOPMA) tool that takes into account the
information derived from alignment of protein sequences
belonging to the same family (
http://npsa-pbil.ibcp.fr/cgibin/npsa_automat.pl?page=npsa_sopma.html) []. The
protein sequence in FASTA format was used as the input data
type and the number of conformational states was adjusted to
four in order to predict Helix, Sheet, Coil and Turn. The other
parameters were set as default.

Functional characterization of collagen family:
The Motif scan tool was used to scan and identify all the known
motifs, their nature and location in the selected alpha-1 protein
sequences of the collagen family based on a profile and pattern
search (http://myhits.isb-sib.ch/cgi-bin/motif_scan) 
[,
].
The protein sequence in FASTA format was used as the input
data type and scanned against ‘PROSITE Patterns’, a selected
protein profile database out of the eight available.

Phylogenetic classification of collagen family:
The human alpha-1 collagen protein sequences were aligned
using multiple sequence alignment tool ClustalW2 using the
protein sequences in FASTA format as the input data type
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalw2/) 
[]. The best
alignment for a set of input sequences was computed and all
the identities, similarities and differences were highlighted. The
evolutionary relationships were established by constructing
phylograms through retrieval of the alignments using Neighbor
Joining (NJ) method.

Discussion
Functional role of alpha-1 chain of each human collagen was
analyzed (, see Supplementary material). MultAlin tool
was used to carry out protein sequence alignment wherein a
decreased sequence similarity was witnessed with increasing
number of input sequences []. It was inferred that the alpha-1
chain showed identities, similarities and differences at various
positions along the protein sequence in all 28 members. The
computation of amino acid composition of each human alpha-1
collagen sequence using ExPASY's ProtParam tool indicated
very high percentages of glycine and proline as compared to
other amino acids (, see Supplementary material).
Glycine content in all collagens was more than 12%, except
Collagen 12, 14 and 20 with a value of 9.2, 10.9 and 11.5%
respectively. High percentage of glycine accounts for the
stability of collagen triple helical structure, since incorporation
of large amino acids can cause steric hindrance [].
Furthermore, proline content was more than 10% in most
collagens except Collagen 6, 12, 14 and 20 with values 8.7, 8.6,
8.7 and 10%, respectively. Proline residues are equally essential
to point outward and stabilize the helix and also to act as
structural disruptor of the secondary structural elements [].
Thus, this not only helps collagen to act as a structural molecule
but also aids in processes like cell-cell adhesion, migration.
Other essential physico-chemical parameters were also
calculated using ExPASy's ProtParam and ProtScale tools
( see Supplementary material). The pI values
for 15 collagens were found to lie in the acidic range, while for
the remaining half, alkaline range was observed. Also, analysis
of instability index classified most collagens as stable
(instability index &lt;40) while Collagen 15, 17, 18, 20 and 26 were
declared as unstable collagens. Additionally, Collagen 20 was
regarded most thermostable, with highest aliphatic index
(79.61), describing the relative volume of protein occupied by
aliphatic side chains, closely followed by Collagen 14 (77.67)
and 12 (75.45). Furthermore, the GRAVY values, signifying
interaction of collagens with water, were observed within a
broad range of ­0.261 to ­0.919, while the hydrophobicity was
found to range between ­0.3335 of Collagen20 (most
hydrophilic) to 0.3335 of Collagen18 (most hydrophobic).

SOPMA analysis of secondary structural features of human
collagen protein sequences showed a pre-dominance of random
coils while least percentage of β-turns were found. α-helices
were found to exceed extended strands in 13 collagens
(Collagen 6, 9, 13, 15, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26 and 28) (
 see Supplementary material). A high percentage of random
coils facilitating self-assembly of the monomer units into welldefined
structures can also be linked to high glycine and proline
content that are vital to provide the desired flexibility and
ability to bond with adjacent units in collagen monomers. This
information on packaging of secondary structural elements may
assist to derive potential tertiary protein structures and also
promote advancements in protein engineering. Motifs of
protein can provide significant knowledge about the protein's
mechanism of action and nature. Signature motifs were
obtained within protein sequences using Motif Scan tool 
(, 
see supplementary material). Collagens 1, 2 and 3 were
found to possess the VWFC domain signature, known to
participate in oligomerization, hence forming an imperative
part of the complex forming proteins [,
]. The presence of
this domain can be correlated to the known characteristic of
collagen molecules passing through a complex assembly
process to form a triple helical structure. Additionally,
Collagens 7 and 28 were observed to have pancreatic trypsin
inhibitor (Kunitz) family signature. The 28 human alpha-1
collagen protein sequences were aligned based on sequence
homology and phylogram was constructed with distance-based
NJ method to establish evolutionary relations in the complex
collagen family (). Various clusters with close
relationships were identified including Collagen 1 and 2, 12 and
14, 23 and 25 relating closely to Collagen 3, 20 and 17
respectively. These molecules may be analyzed together for
possible similar properties owing to their close evolutionary
history. Also, Collagen 4, reported majorly in diseases shows
similarity to Collagen 13, which may also potentially play a role
in pathological conditions. Collagen 9, 12, 14 and 20 are
included in the FACIT (Fibril Associated Collagens with
Interrupted Triple helices) group of collagen family, where
alpha-1 chain of Collagen 9 is recognized for its role in skeletal
and rheumatoid disorders, especially in multiple epiphyseal
dysplasias []. Owing to their structural similarities, atypical
features and proximity in evolutionary history, the other
members of this family also present a prime candidature for
investigation of their role in skeletal disorders.

Conclusion
With the availability of a wide variety of computational tools,
an in-depth study of the information hidden behind a protein
structure is possible. Comparative studies of the members
belonging to a protein family and their physico-chemical,
secondary structural, functional and phylogenetic classification
can help give extensive information of protein's structure,
function and its relationship with other members of the family.
Characterization of the alpha-1 chain of the vast collagen
protein family in humans yielded new insights. Based on this
comparative characterization, we hypothesize, Collagen 12, 14
and 20 as a potential protein cluster showing similarity in many
properties along with an atypical behavior. These three proteins
possess, low glycine and proline, very high aliphatic index and
a close evolutionary relation. Since these collagens form a part
of the FACIT collagen family, of which collagen 9 is established
for its role in skeletal disorders, these collagen molecules might
be possible disease candidates. These findings can help
biologists working with ECM proteins concentrate their
research on collagen proteins proposed as putative players in
diseased conditions. Moreover, this study is a model for
researchers to fine-tune their specific systems and comprehend
their outcomes better.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work was supported by the research grant awarded to Dr.
Vibha Rani by the Department of Science and Technology,
Government of India (SR/FT/LS-006/2009: Sept 4, 2009). We
acknowledges Jaypee Institute of Information Technology,
Deemed to be University, for providing the required support.

Citation:Nassa et al, Bioinformation 8(1): 026-033 (2012)

Phylogram of human alpha-1 collagens constructed
using Neighbor Joining (NJ) method. Subject sequences were
aligned using ClustalW2 multiple alignment tool and
phylogenetic trees were constructed thereafter. Clusters with
similar relations were identified such as Collagen 12 and 14,
with Collagen 20 as their nearest neighbor.

