Background
Science long ago christened the standard twenty proteinmaking
- or biogenic - amino acids; their full, informal names
arising through historical happenstance. The amino acids were
discovered during a hundred and thirty year period between
1806 and 1935. Asparagine was the first to be discovered;
threonine the last. Two further biogenic amino acids were
identified more recently: selenocysteine, the 21st amino acid, in
1986, and the 22nd, Pyrrolysine, in 2002. The three-letter and
one-letter codes used universally in bioinformatics derive, in
part at least, from these long names: thus “Glycine” becomes
“Gly” (3-letter code) becomes “G” (1-letter code), and so on for
other residues.

As one-letter codes, exclusively written using ASCII characters
derived primarily - though not exclusively – from letters used
in classical Latin, the twenty biogenic amino acids form an
alphabet, from which the protein sequences comprising the
proteome are constructed. IUPAC introduced the one-letter
code for the 20 amino acids in 1968, complementing the earlier
three-letter code. The IUPAC nomenclature evolved from an
original proposal formulated during the 1950s by Frantisek
Sorm (1913-1980). When selecting letters to represent different
amino acids, Sorm omitted B, O, U, J, X, and Z. At this time,
Sorm's coding was not widely used, and many thought it might
spell out obscene words and offensive phrases.

The present amino acid nomenclature, either the three-letter or
one-letter codes, is no more than an arbitrary historical accident.
Science might easily have chosen a very different set of letters.
We could map Latin letters to an arbitrary choice of Amino
Acids. The IUPAC one-letter code offers one alternative but
there are more. Another might choose to compare the frequency
of letters in English, or other languages, to the frequency of the
different amino acids. There are 26!/6! different ways to map
the 26 letters in the English alphabet to the twenty different
amino acids. 26!/6! works out to be 560127029342507827200000.
Listing all such possibilities, writing one such permutation
every second, would take 200000 times longer than the
estimated age of the universe. Allowing such free substitution,
or rather permutation, of letters representing each amino acid,
we can quickly identify much longer words within naturallyoccurring
proteins sequences than those unearthed by previous
efforts [,
]. These studies assumed the conventional one-letter
coding, finding HIDALGISM or ANNIDAVATE. Allowing free
permutation, words such as
DICHLORODIPHENYLTRICHLOROETHANE or
CYCLOTRIMETHYLENETRINITRAMINE appear. They
obviously map to utterly different looking sequences using the
conventional coding, but the underlying pattern of permutation
is the same.

Apart from the storage of sequence data, the one-letter amino
acid code is key to the manual construction of pair-wise and
multiple protein sequence alignments [3]. Likewise, the oneletter
code plays a pivotal role in the human visualisation of
alignments and thus their interpretation in terms of function,
evolution, and structure, as well as the identification of
characteristic conserved motifs. As the parsing of the complex
patterns inherent within large multiple alignments is often
extremely difficult, colours were long ago introduced to ease
the analytical process. There are several standard conventions
for colouring residues [], and attempts have been made to
optimise these [,
]. Generally, these colours are used to
encode the grouping of amino scids according to their physical
properties. As such different properties vary differently
between different amino acid residues, there are thus many,
many ways to group them. Using Stirling numbers of the
second kind allows us to quickly identify the total number of
different ways to group the 20 amino acids: over 51724 billion.
However, using colour alone to show groupings, limits us to
but a single choice of clustering. If we could find another way to
represent the many different choices of grouping, colour could
usefully take on other roles when we seek to interpret and
understanding sequence conservation as revealed by multiple
alignments.

Use of the one-letter IUPAC code is now so prevalent as to be
near universal; as bioinformaticians, we cannot easily imagine
using any other nomenclature. Yet there are arguments for
doing precisely that; and in this paper, we begin to investigate
this idea. Rather than suggest a definitive alternative, we
introduce several strategies for renaming the amino acids, and
explore how these alternative orthographies can combine
synergistically with colour potentially to enhance visual
analysis of multiple protein sequence alignments.

Methodology
Rationale:
To aid the construction and interpretation of multiple sequence
alignments, we explore alternative orthographic symbols for the
twenty standard biogenic amino acids ().

Primary orthographic encoding:
We introduce first the direct one-to-one substitution of an
alternative alphabet for the twenty conventional Latin letters.
The choice of an alternative orthography is wholly arbitrary:
there are potentially an infinite number of different alternatives
to the traditional IUPAC code. We could use non-alphanumeric
characters – such as @#$% – already available in extant fonts.
Or choose all twenty letters from a single other language; for
example, the many beautiful letter symbols of the Tibetan
alphabet. Or we might choose one letter from each of twenty
different languages; or several letters from each of several
languages; or design a wholly-new set of previously unknown
letter symbols.

Secondary orthographic encoding:
In contrast to the one-to-one substitution described above, we
could encode similarity of different amino acids one-to-another
via the visual similarity of the letter symbols themselves. There
are several ways to achieve this. For example, the four aliphatic
hydrophobic amino acids LIVM could be represented by the
same letter rotated successively by 90 degrees. Or we could
more subtly alter the shape of letters to capture their
continuous, quantitative - rather than categoric - similarity, as is
more often represented by projection of high dimensional data
into the plane [], 
designing a novel amino acid orthography for
that purpose.

Tertiary orthographic encoding:
The previous encodings presume a single character to encode
each amino acid. However, we could instead create symbols
which combine several distinct, independent elements to form
each character. Each element would encode a different and
distinct grouping of the amino acids. Thus, each symbol would
simultaneously capture several different aspects of the complex,
multi-dimensional similarity between the amino acids
comprising the protein-making alphabet.

Colour:
Combining these three encodings with residue colouring opens
up several interesting and potentially useful enhancements to
multiple alignment construction and interpretation. While
combining colour with primary orthographic encoding allows
us to reproduce conventional alignment processes, combination
of colour with secondary encoding allows us simultaneously to
capture two kinds of grouping: one in the form of the symbols
used, the other in the colours adopted. We can extend this idea
with tertiary orthographic encoding, where we can combine the
many groupings implicit in the multi-component symbols with
an extra group represented by colours. Colouring different
elements differently within each symbol can effectively double
the number of groupings represented. When combined with
secondary or tertiary orthographic encoding, colour can be used
to represent dynamic information deriving from the alignment,
rather than static, pre-imposed information about different
physical property-based amino acid groupings implicit within
the symbols used.

Discussion
We have described three encodings of increasing sophistication
able to represent amino acid sequences within single and
multiple alignments, using new symbols free from precedent
and associations. While this idea is, to the best of our
knowledge, novel, it is not without thematic precedent.
Multiple alignments often use non-alphanumeric symbols, such
as hashes, to represent, say, conservation within columns. The
program Joy [], 
represented the different structural state of
residues within multiple structural alignments by using italics,
bold, or underlining to indicate the presence of hydrogen bonds
or highly accessible residues.

Our suggested encodings offer three options: the direct
substitution of essentially random symbols for the conventional
one-letter code, building the similarity apparent in amino acid
properties into the graphical similarity of a new set of amino
acid symbols, and combining several orthographic elements to
create new symbols that better capture the multidimensional
nature of amino acid similarity. Any of these alternate scripts
would, or at least should, be free of precedent in extant written
languages. Pre-existing linguistic associations with so-called
written natural language, as is the case with the current IUPAC
code based on familiar Latin letters, precludes the ready
identification of important functional patterns in sequence
alignments: real biological patterns are hidden beneath
linguistic ones. When constructing or interpreting multiple
protein sequence alignments, we often see words or pseudowords
in the amino acid texts; much as Scrabble players are
reputed to easily differentiate real from contrived words, even
if such words are unknown to them. Thus freeing the human
analysis of multiple alignments from psychological
preconceptions should facilitate deeper and more perspicacious
understanding of structure-function relations currently lying
unseen in single sequences and multiple sequence alignments.

As we have said, both secondary and tertiary orthographic
encoding allows for the direct representation of amino grouping
and similarity between amino acid residues. The secondary
encoding envisaged above attempts to impose a particular static
amino acid grouping directly onto the orthography of the
amino acid alphabet. It can do this by using, say, letter rotation
to indicate a group of similar amino acids – ILVM for example -
and thus captures the explicit categorisation of amino acids into
defined group. Alternatively, we can do so by encoding the
implicit similarity of residue physical properties as the
similarity in shape between different symbols. This captures the
implicit groupings more usually represented using a principal
component plot or other data reduction technique. Tertiary
encoding allows us to capture several different ways of
grouping amino acids simultaneously by combining several
elements in the one symbol.

In the current work, we have purposely not attempted to
prescribe the precise choice of orthography, but merely to
initiate a discussion, however brief, around the subject. The
choice is open. We could use letters from widely written
languages, such as Arabic or Hebrew, but this would represent
only a minor improvement over the conventional Latin letters.
Alternatively, we could utilise little-used but aestheticallypleasing
scripts such as those of the Tibetan alphabet. Better still
perhaps would be to use newly designed characters entirely
free of extant connotation or psychological preconceptions. A
new symbolic representation would allow us to design sets of
characters whose internal graphical similarity might adroitly
echo the similarity in physical properties across the twenty
biogenic amino acids. Optimising such representations to
achieve this is best left as a collaborative exercise for
bioinformaticians, font designers, and psychologists.

We have also purposely not attempted to implement this idea,
yet instantiation of such scripts would, in the modern age, be
relatively straightforward. There are now many so-called open
source fonts (http://openfontlibrary.org/), and innumerable
word processing programs able to use them; thus the mechanics
of designing one or more wholly new fonts would be facile.
There are also many programs which create and/or display
multiple sequence alignments, and again adding the option of
using such new amino acid-specific fonts should prove equally
straightforward.

When combined with different orthographic encoding, colour
can add additional information. This may be static information,
such as a physical property-based residue grouping, or
dynamic information, derived from the alignment. Dynamic
information changes as the amino acid alignment changes, and
could include position-wise sequence conservation; windowaveraged
- rather than positional - physical properties, of which
hydrophobicity is the most obvious; or an alignment reliability
score []. Alternatively, we could use colour to encode entirely
different data: for example, functional data, such as post
translational modification sites, or structural data, such the
location of secondary structure elements – helices or sheets - or
the relative surface accessibility of residues.

Conclusion
The sequences comprising strings of amino acids that form
proteins constitute perhaps the most natural language we
know; a language common to all humanity: a language shared
irrespective of individual creed, ethnicity, culture, or political
affiliation. Thus it seems appropriate to promulgate the idea
that this language should have its own unique symbolic
representation without precedent in any pre-existing written
language. Currently, history, and the dominance of English, has
dictated that the amino acids are written using the Latin letters
used by the languages of Western Europe. The replacement
with an alternate and hitherto unknown script will it is to be
hoped free the representation of protein sequences from all
literary connotation, racist euro-centricity, and psychological
preconceptions of any kind.

We have deliberately avoided prescribing a new alphabet,
leaving that to others, but have indicated the broad routes we
might take, the many potential advantages to be gained, and the
significant benefit of the whole undertaking. The wide
implementation of this concept has much to recommend it, and
may lead to the development of much more sophisticated
software for protein sequence alignment and display, and thus
to much more complete, meaningful, and far-sighted
interpretations of the complex and befuddling patterns that
such protein alignments contain.

Citation:Flower, Bioinformation 8(12): 539-542 (2012)

The schematic representation embodied in this figure
attempts to capture the quintessence of the proposed alternative
scripts. Primary orthographic encoding is a literal alternative
with a straight substitution of one alphabet for the standard,
Latin-based amino acid code. As examples of what might be
possible, we show here non-alphanumeric characters and letters
culled from an aesthetically pleasing but little used language.
Secondary encoding attempts to impose static amino acid
groupings onto the orthography of the alphabet, either by using
letter rotation or by encoding similarity in residue physical
properties as the similarity of shape between letters. This
captures either the explicit categorisation of amino acids into
defined groups or the implicit groupings more usually
represented using a principal component plot. Tertiary
encoding renders each amino acid as a composite symbol; each
such symbol thus representing several groupings
simultaneously. As indicated, orthographically-encoded
groupings can be effectively augmented by colouring each
element differently.

