Background
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) are a
group of proteins that belong to nuclear receptor super family
[]. There are three main isotypes of PPARs found in humans
PPAR-α, PPAR-β/δ and PPAR-γ. PPAR-α, also known as
NR1C1 has been shown to express in organs like eyes, kidney
and nerves and currently it is a candidate target for antidiabetic
drugs [,
]. Lipid lowering drugs like fenofibrate,
ciprofibrate, GW9578 act through PPAR-α []. Endogenous
compounds like leukotriene B4 (LTB4) [], eicosanoids 
[] and a
number of long chain fatty acids [] have been shown to
activate PPAR-α but physiological relevance is still ambiguous
due to their low physiological concentrations.
Glyceroneogenesis is a pathway in which pyruvate is converted
to glycerol-3-phosphate via gluconeogenesis pathway 
[]. It is
also the dominant source of glycerol to which fatty acids are
attached to form triglycerides in adipocytes []. It has been
shown that organic extracts of media after adipogenic induction
and before triglyceride production of various pre-adipose cell
lines were capable of inducing adipogenesis of other preadipose
cells []. Also inhibition of glyceroneogenesis resulted
in lipodystrophy and overexpression leading to obesity 
[].
This strongly provoked us to question the involvement of
glyceroneogenesis in activating PPARs that plays an important
role in adipogenesis. Glide extra precision (XP) docking
introduced new binding energy and scoring function which is
considered to be more advantageous than most other docking
and scoring tools including for PPAR-α []. A number of leads
were proved to be PPAR-α agonists using glide []. In this
study we report the docking studies done on PPAR-α with
glyceroneogenesis pathway intermediates.

Methodology
Target protein structure:
The ligand binding domain (LBD) of human PPAR-α PDB: 1I7G
receptor co-crystallized with agonist (2s)-2-ethoxy-3-[4-(2-{4-
[(methylsulfonyl)oxy]phenyl}ethoxy)phenyl]propanoicacid
(AZ-2), taken from the Protein Data Bank (www.rcsb.org).

Ligand compounds and structures:
Ligands were downloaded in .mol format from pubchem
(http://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) website and prepared by
LigPrep 2.5 (Schrödinger, Inc., NY, 2012).

Molecular energy minimization and preparation: Downloaded
ligands were first converted from 2D to 3D structures; ionized
using Epik 2.3 and energy minimized using Optimized
Potentials for Liquid Simulations 2005 (OPLS_2005) force field.
The protein was prepared automatically by prepwizard
available in Maestro 9.3. Briefly, the preparation process
included adding hydrogen, defining bond order of hydrogen,
histidine protonation (Epik 2.3), minimizing the new structure
in OPLS_2005 force field and adding missed side chains (Prime
2.3). Waters that are forming more than three hydrogen bonds
and 5Å away from ligand binding pocket were deleted for
clarity.

Molecular docking:
The grid box was generated by clicking an atom of the cocrystallized
ligand AZ-2. Extra precision (XP) Glide was used
for docking the prepared ligands into the grid (Glide 5.8,
Schrödinger, Inc., 2012). All these processes were carried out in
a PC ran on Windows7.

Binding energy calculation and scoring:
The XP visualization tool (XPVT) provides a unique
opportunity to visualize Glide results. Almost all the weak
interactions were considered and more score will be awarded to
the ligand that forms more hydrophobic contact with the active
site of the protein. XPVT also provides XP scores which is more
accurate than conventional glide and dock scores. High
resolution images were obtained using Chimera 1.6.2 
[].

Results &amp; Discussion
The intermolecular hydrogen bonding interaction of the best-fit
ligands were found to be associated with Tyr314, Ser280,
His440, and Tyr464 amino acid residues at the receptor active
site of PPAR-α. As shown in the  (see supplementary
material), strong binding was observed for glycerate and found
similar interactions () to that of co-crystallized AZ-2
() with a best glide score of -7.1. Previous studies have
established that PPAR-α activators form hydrogen bonds to
Tyr314, Ser280, His440, and Tyr464 of the receptor and these are
necessary for receptor activation [,
]. The docking
structures of all the compounds showed that they bind in a very
similar pattern with the active site of PPAR-α (data not shown).
The best results obtained with docking scores are -7.1, -6.5, -6.4
and -6.0 of ligands glycerate, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
(GAP), dihydroxy acetone phosphate (DHAP) and
phosphoglycerate respectively. Guerre-Millo et al. 
[] proved
that lipid lowering drugs act through PPAR-α and improve
insulin sensitivity besides reducing adiposity. Thus by finding a
novel endogenous PPAR-α ligand with high physiological
abundance is the need of the hour for diabetes researchers.

Docking study is particularly useful as a preparatory step for
identifying ligands. It provides a faster, cheaper but highly
efficient means of detecting the agonists. Previously Das et al.
[] 
have proved that Benzoxazinones as PPAR-γ ligand using
Glide. In a recent study LTB4 has been reported as a PPAR-α
ligand through docking and established its activity in vitro 
[].
A number of synthetic and semi-synthetic compounds were
identified as PPAR agonists using molecular docking, especially
through the recent advancement in tools like core hopping and
high throughput virtual screening. But right from the beginning
only certain class of drugs like fibrates were considered as
potential ligands for PPAR-α. Here we show for the first time
that some of the gluconeogenesis intermediates are
physiologically relevant PPAR-α ligands by employing in silico
docking.

Conclusion
Availability of glycerol is the most critical for triacylglycerol
synthesis. As mentioned earlier, adipogenesis is activated by
triacylglycerol biosynthesis pathway intermediates. But most of
the researchers till date ponder either the last few steps of the
pathway i.e. after the formation of diacylglycerol or dietary
triacylglycerols. This is based on the notion that PPAR-α, with a
big ligand binding pocket and very large earlier reported
ligands, can bind only huge molecules like fatty acids and
triglycerides. Here for the first time we consider the first phase
of triacylglycerol synthesis, the synthesis of glycerol itself, as a
potent pathway for ligand identification. Studies conducted by
Pastorius et al. [] show that PPAR-α regulates the conversion
of glycerol to glucose in the liver and PPAR-α ligands reduce
free glycerol in serum. Moreover glycerate is the connection
link between gluconeogenesis and glyceroneogenesis 
[]. This
strongly coincides with our hypothesis and docking studies
show that glyceroneogenesis pathway intermediate, glycerate
can act as plausible PPAR-α ligand. We suggest that further
investigation is necessary to confirm the biological activity of
these compounds in vitro and in vivo. We conclude that small
molecule precursors of the glyceroneogenesis pathway may
activate PPAR-α and leads to adipogenesis.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work was supported by CSIR grant #37(1488) EMR-II,
New Delhi, India. We thank Dr. Dinakar Ampasala for
providing training and facilities.

Citation:Subramani et al, Bioinformation 9(12): 629-632 (2013)

PPAR-α interaction with glycerate.

PPAR-α interaction with the co-crystallized compound AZ-2.

