Background
Thymidylate synthase has been a primary target for chemotherapy
aimed at cancers of the gastrointestinal tract and head and neck []
despite moderate response in 30-40% of patients. Thymidylate
synthase has been favorite target for designing and developing
inhibitors which could be used as anticancer drugs []. A major
problem affecting TS-directed treatments is that tumor cells often react
to an exposure to Thymidylate synthase inhibitors by raising levels of
intracellular TS activity about 2- to 4-fold, which may lead to
resistance. Thymidylate synthase (TS) catalyzes the reductive
methylation of 2‘-deoxyuridine 5‘-monophosphate (dUMP) to
thymidine 5‘-monophosphate (dTMP), using the co-substrate, 5,10-
methylenetetrahydrofolate (CH2H4folate) as a one-carbon donor and
reductant. The physical structures of bacterial TSs have been relatively
well defined, and crystallographic data, in concert with data derived
from kinetic, spectroscopic, and site-directed mutagenesis studies,
have led to a detailed understanding of the catalytic mechanism of
these enzymes []. In contrast, relatively few investigations of
mammalian TS structure and catalysis have been conducted. The threedimensional
structure of the native human thymidylate synthase (hTS)
has been reported previously []. The data showed a surprising feature
not observed in TSs from other sources: loop 181-197 containing the
catalytic cysteine, Cys-195, was in an inactive conformation, and
rotated ˜ 180° with respect to its orientation in bacterial TSs, with the
sulfhydryl of Cys-195 over 10 Å from the location of sulfhydryls of
corresponding cysteine residues in bacterial enzymes. Subsequent
determination of the structure of a ternary inhibitory complex between
closely related ratTS (rTS) and dUMP and tomudex [] has shown that
the ligands bind to the enzyme in the active conformation. Recently, it
was found that also in the hTS·dUMP·tomudex complex hTS is in the
active conformation. The inactive conformation has not been observed
in TSs other than human [].

Although T S does not represent a new target, there is still enthusiasm
for the development of quinazoline derivatives. A unique feature of TS
is the selectivity that is possible in the design of inhibitors. This makes
it an ideal “old” target for rational and effective drug design for
anticancer agents. Nowadays, molecular docking approaches are
routinely used in modern drug design to help understand drug‐receptor
interaction. It has been shown in the literature that these computational
techniques can strongly support and help the design of novel, more
potent inhibitors by revealing the mechanism of drug‐receptor
interaction []. However, so far, there has been no report concerning
the application of molecular docking methodology for understanding
the binding of quinazoline antifolate derivatives. The antifolate
compounds evaluated in this investigation are derivatives of
quinazoline antifolate, having structures similar to the
tomudex/ZD1694 class of antifolates, where quinazoline is a
compound made up of two fused six-membered simple aromatic ring,
a benzene ring and a pyrimidine ring. Its chemical formula is C8H6N2.
Due to an interest in new anticancer drugs, several quinazoline
antifolate inhibitors were chosen from the ICI Pharmaceutical &amp;
Institute of Cancer Research, England for screening against human
thymidylate synthase [–].

Molecular docking is a key tool in structural molecular biology and
computer-assisted drug design. The goal of ligand‐protein docking is
to predict the predominant binding model(s) of a ligand with a protein
of known three-dimensional structure. In this study, we have used fast
flexible docking to study the binding orientations and predict binding
affinities of quinazoline antifolate derivatives. Such studies have been
carried out to understand the forms of interaction of one hundred six
compounds, sysnthesized by Marsham et al [–] for the human
thymidylate synthase. The results obtained from this study would be
useful in both understanding the inhibitory mode of quinazoline
antifolate derivatives as well as in rapidly and accurately predicting the
activities of newly designed inhibitors on the basis of docking scores.
These models also provide some beneficial clues in structural
modification for designing new inhibitors for the treatment of cancer
with much higher inhibitory activities against thymidylate synthase.

Methodology
Molecular structures &amp; optimization
The biological activity data of quinazoline antifolate derivatives (one
hundred six compounds), reported by Marsham et al [–] was used
in the present study shown in  . The structures of all the
compounds were constructed using the InsightII 2000.1 Builder
module (http://www.accelrys.com). The geometries of these
compounds were subsequently optimized using Discover module of
InsightII 2000.1 using CVFF force field. The structure of humanTS
protein (PDBid code 1I00) was obtained from Protein Data Bank
(http://www.rcsb.org).

Molecular docking
Molecular docking of quinazoline antifolate derivatives to the active
site of human thymidylate synthase was carried out using modern
docking engine LigandFit available with Cerius2_4.9.
(http://www.accelrys.com). This algorithm makes use of a cavity
detection algorithm for detecting invaginations in the protein as
potential active site regions. A shape comparison filter is combined
with a Monte Carlo conformational search for generating ligand poses
consistent with the active site shape. Candidate poses are minimized in
the context of the active site using a grid-based method for evaluating
protein-ligand interaction energies. The docking was carried out with
the following non default settings in LigandFit: site partitioning in
order to fully access the potential docking orientation of the active site,
maximum trials variable table values to help the pseudorandom
conformational analysis, and the CFF force field [] option used for
the grid energy calculations. The flexible fitting option was selected
for generation of alternative conformations on the fly, as was the
diverse conformer's option to ensure the solutions generated cover a
broad range of conformations with similar low-energy docking scores,
and a maximum of 30 top scoring diverse ligand poses were returned
for each of the compounds.

Scoring function
The docked conformations were further scored using different scoring
functions available with Cerius2 []. The LigandFit algorithm []
uses an internal scoring function, DockScore, to select and return
dissimilar poses for each compound. DockScore is a simple force field
based scoring function which estimates the energy of interaction by
summing the ligand/protein interaction energy and the internal energy
of the ligand. CFF force field [] was used to resolve the van der
Waals parameters for DockScore. The top DockScore pose was used
for postdocking scoring. Scoring was performed using a set of scoring
functions as implemented in Cerius2 []. These included LigScore1,
LigScore2,‐PLP1,‐PLP2, ‐ JAIN, PMF, LUDI and DockScore
available from the docking process. The putative 3D poses and score
results were then stored as an SD file. Each docking was minimized,
using DockScore, the only purely molecular mechanics based scoring
function employed in this study, and this minimized pose was then
presented to each of the other scoring functions, which were either
knowledge based or regression based.

Protein preparation
The high-resolution (2.50 Å) X-ray structure of human thymidylate
synthase complex with tomudex (PDBid code 1I00) was imported into
Cerius2 [], and the ligand was extracted to leave a cavity. Docking
simulations were carried out with substrate dUMP and without water
molecules, to elucidate the role of dUMP for the binding of
quinazoline antifolate derivatives.

Hardware and software
Insight II 2000.1 [http://www.accelrys.com] and Cerius2 [] were
used for molecular modeling on a SGI Origin 300 workstation
equipped with 4 * 600 Mhz R12000 processor.

Results and Discussion
To date, several crystal structure of human thymidylate synthase in
complex with different inhibitors have been reported viz 1I00 with
ternary complex with dUMP and tomudex, [], 1JUJ with dUMP
LY231514, a pyrrolo(2,3-d)pyrimidine-based antifolate [], 1JTQ
with dUMP and the pyrrolo(2,3-d)pyrimidine-based antifolate
LY341770 [], 1JU6 with dUMP and LY231514, a pyrrolo(2,3-
d)pyrimidine-based antifolate [], 1HVY with dUMP and raltitrexed,
an antifolate drug [] etc. which provide information about the exact
location and composition of inhibitor binding pocket and opportunity
to use the enzyme in a functional conformation. We used X-ray
structure of human thymidylate synthase in ternary complex with
dUMP and tomudex (PDBid code 1I00) for the docking study.

Validation of the docking method
To ensure that the ligand orientation and the position obtained from
the docking studies were likely to represent valid and reasonable
binding modes of the inhibitors, the LigandFit program docking
parameters had to be first validated for the crystal structure used
(PDBid 1I00). The ligand tomudex, in the conformation found in the
crystal structure, was extracted and docked back to the corresponding
binding pocket, to determine the ability of LigandFit to reproduce the
orientation and position of the inhibitor observed in the crystal
structure. Results of control docking showed that LigandFit
determined the optimal orientation of the docked inhibitor, tomudex to
be close to that of the original orientation found in the crystal shown in
. The low RMS deviation of 0.290 Å between the docked
and crystal ligand coordinates indicate very good alignment of the
experimental and calculated positions especially considering the
resolution of the crystal structure (2.50Å).

Interaction modes between the quinazoline antifolate derivatives and human thymidylate synthase
To study the binding modes of quinazoline antifolate derivatives in the
binding site of human thymidylate synthase, intermolecular flexible
docking simulations were performed by means of LigandFit program
and Dockscores were calculated from the docked conformations of the
human thymidylate synthase-inhibitor complexes. All the compounds
in the dataset were docked into the active site of human thymidylate
synthase, using the same protocol. Thymidylate synthase monomer
consists of an α/β–fold containing 7 α-helices and 10 β-strands,
arranged in three layers : a six stranded mixed β-sheet, a long α-helix
across the sheet flanked by two shorter helices, and a mixed layer
containing the remaining four helices and two antiparallel twostranded
β-sheets. The large β-sheets from the monomers stack against
each other to form dimer interface. The dimer contains two active
sites, one within each monomer. The active site of human Thymidylate
Synthase comprises of amino acids residues such as Arg50, Phe80,
Leu 108, Asn112, Leu192, Asp218, Gly220, Leu221, Gly222, Phe225
and Tyr258. As most of the amino acid residues in the active site are
hydrophobic so they are involved in strong hydrophobic interactions
with the quinozoline antifolate derivatives. It was depicts the aligned
binding conformations of the quinazoline antifolate derivatives in the
binding pocket of the human thymidylate synthase, which were
derived from the docking simulations by LigandFit software.
Molecular docking studies of quinozoline antifolate derivatives into
human thymidylate synthase binding site revealed very clear
preference for the binding pocket. All of the inhibitors occupy the
binding site well as seen from the .

The majority of the contacts between the quinazoline antifolate
derivatives and the protein are non polar, making use of the
hydrophobic side chains in the binding site. Most of the quinazoline
antifolate derivatives bind in more or less similar fashion with its
quinazoline ring occupying the interior of the deep cleft and their tail
is extended towards the entrance of the hydrophobic binding cavity.
The quinazoline ring of quinazoline antifolate derivatives therefore
bind to the human thymidylate synthase active site in an identical
fashion, as reported in case of other inhibitors like tomudex [] and
raltitrexed []. The quinazoline ring of the inhibitors forms
hydrophobic contacts with Leu192, Leu221 and Tyr258. As seen from
our docking studies the quinozoline core occupies the same core in the
binding site as does the quinazoline ring of tomudex and makes
stacking interaction with pyrimidine ring of UMP. This stacking
interaction is very important and has been conserved in all the
thymidylate synthases for with crystal structures has been solved in
complex with the inhibitor and cofactor.  represents the
binding conformations of the highly active compounds, all of which
share the common binding mode with quinazoline core occupy space
deep in the cavity and ester tail extends towards the solvent.

The binding mode of the most active comp32 has been shown in
. As expected, comp32 bind to the thymidylate synthase
active site in the similar conformation as other known TS inhibitors
(tomudex, ralitrexed etc.) which mainly bind using the quinazoline
moiety and this moeity is presented to pyrimidine ring of cofactor
UMP. This pterin ring is involved in π-π stacking interactions with the
pyrimidine ring of UMP. This stacking interaction is very important
and has been conserved in most the thymidylate synthases for which
crystal structures have been solved with UMP and inhibitors in ternary
complex with the enzyme. The amino group substituted at quinazoline
ring of comp32 makes significant hydrogen bonding interaction with
side chain oxygen of Tyr258 and sugar oxygen atom of cofactor UMP.
So it can be concluded that the presence of a hydrogen bond donor
group at 2-position of the quinazoline moiety is important for
thymidylate synthase activity of the inhibitors. In addition to this
important hydrogen bonding interaction quinazoline ring nitrogen N3
and quinazoline carbonyl group make hydrogen bond with backbone
oxygen of Asp218 and backbone nitrogen of Gly222 respectively. In
addition to these hydrogen bonding interaction Comp32 is involved in
van der Waals interactions through its phenyl ring with Ile108 and
Phe225. Quinazoline ring is also involved in van der Waals
interactions with the Trp109 (Residue not shown in figure for clarity)
and Leu221 of the protein. Phe80 also show stacking interactions with
the glutamyl chain of Comp32 and these particular interactions play
very important role in thymidylate inhibition and need to be present
for good inhibition by the inhibitors. Comp32 shows all the
interactions shown by the well known potent inhibitor tomudex of
thymidylate and binds in almost the same fashion as tomudex do,
however comp32 show additional hydrogen bonding interaction via –
NH2 substituted at quinazoline moiety ( instead of tomudex
which has methyl group substituted at this position.

Comp13 bind to thymidylate synthase active site in slightly tilted
(about 45%) way when compared to the binding of highly active
comp32 and crystal structure ligand tomudex. This particular tilt in the
binding may be contributed by the absence of the hydrogen bonding
amino group substituted at 2-position of the quinazoline ring.
Additionally, this hydrogen bond positions the inhibitors for stacking
interactions with the pyrimidine ring of the cofactor UMP. Loss or
decrease in the stacking interaction may lead to decreased affinity for
the protein binding site. The phenyl ring in comp13 is unsubstituted
whereas flourine atom is substituted at 3-position of highly active
comp32 which may lead to decreased van der Waals interactions with
Ile108 and Phe225 and hence lead to decreased activity in case of
comp13 and other inactive compounds.

Correlation between docking scores and inhibitory activity
An important application of LigandFit docking program in structurebased
drug design is to predict the inhibitory activities while
determining the binding conformation of an inhibitor with the target
by making use of their dock scores. Linear regression analysis
analyses were performed to explore whether the docking scores could
be correlated with the experimental activities. The predicted inhibitory
activity of quinazoline antifolate derivatives as inhibitors on the basis
of dock score is listed in  . Linear regression analysis analyses
were performed to explore whether the docking scores could be
correlated with the experimental activities. The equation was obtained
for the inhibitory activities represented as pIC50 values, using the Dock
score, Ligscore1, Ligscore2, -PLP1, -PLP2, JAIN, -PMF and
Consensus score as the variable descriptors. A model with the
correlation coefficient (r2) of 0.148 was obtained for one hundred six
compounds.Removal of 10 compounds (comp2, comp22, comp25,
comp27, comp35, comp48, comp65, comp104, comp105, comp106)
identified as outliers from the docking dataset yield a better model
with correlation of coefficient (r2) of 0.494 was obtained for ninety six
compounds. This rather good correlation demonstrates that the binding
conformations and binding models of the quinazoline antifolate
derivatives with human thymidylate synthase are reasonable shown in
.

Conclusion
The orientation of the quinazoline antifolate derivatives in the model
complex is similar to that observed in the crystal structure. Despite
some relaxation, due to the nature of the forcefield potentials, all
important ligand-protein interactions are preserved during the energy
minimization. Using the CVFF forcefield, the stacking interaction and
hydrophobic contacts is very important in human thymidylate synthase
complex with the quinazoline antifolate inhibitor and cofactor.

In this study, the molecular docking was applied to explore the
binding mechanism and to correlate its docking score with the activity
of a quinazoline antifolate derivatives. To our knowledge, this is the
first study aimed at deriving docking studies for quinazoline antifolate
derivatives. The docking studies provided good insights into the
binding of quinazoline antifolate derivatives at the molecular level.
Significant study between active sites and quinazoline antifolate
derivatives will be analyzed to propose structural changes in these
compounds, with the aim of rendering them more selective and
thereby better human thymidylate synthase inhibitors.

Supplementary material
Data 1
One of the authors, Mr. Vivek Srivastava is thankful to Council of
Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), New Delhi for providing
the Senior Research Fellowship (SRF) for carrying out the research
work, Mr.Ashutosh Kumar for providing help in many ways for
completion of this research work.

Citation:Srivastava et al, Bioinformation 4(8): 357-365 (2010)

(a) Conformation of tomudex crystal structure (red) as compared to the docked conformation of tomudex (yellow) with cofactor
substrate dUMP (atom color). Amino acid residues are presented by atom color, (b) Docked conformation highly active compounds (i) comp32
(brown) (ii) comp47 (red) (iii) comp31 (orange) (iv) comp35 (yellow) (v) comp1 (green blue) (vi) comp52 (cyan) (vii) comp50 (light blue) (viii)
comp34 (blue) (ix) comp37 (violet) (x) comp76 (magenta), (c) Docked confirmation of comp32 compared with binding mode of tomudex, (d)
Docked confirmation of comp13 compared with binding mode of tomudex and it shows the binding mode of least active comp13 and its
comparison with the binding of tomudex.

A correlation for binding conformations and binding models of the quinazoline antifolate derivatives with human thymidylate synthase.

