Background
Low linear energy transfer (LET) ionizing radiation exposure
causes multiple pathologies, dose dependent carcinogenicity
and lethality. The threat of unwanted exposure to radiation is
increasing with increase in the use of ionizing radiation in
industry, warfare, medicine, diagnosis and therapy.
Identification of radiation targets, their role in pathogenesis
and development of agents which could counter the radiation
hazards (generally termed as radioprotective drugs/ radiation
countermeasures) is an important field of research. The
challenge is so enormous that despite decades of research so far
no drug, meant for whole body radiation protection, has been
approved for human use. The only drug, WR2721, approved
for use with radiotherapy displays multiple toxicities including
neurotoxicity. Earlier, we had identified the novel radiation
target protein, the fibroblast growth factor-inducible 14 (Fn14)
or tumor necrosis factor receptor super family member 12A
(TNFRSF12A), which showed radiation dose dependent
increased transcription in the liver of whole body 60Co-gammairradiated
mice []. The fn14 or TNFRSF12A is a growth-factorinducible
immediate-early-response gene and codes for a type I
trans-membrane protein Fn14, which is 102-amino-acid long.
The Fn14 belongs to tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor super
family. TWEAK (TNF-homologue with apoptosis inducing
activity), is a member of the TNF super family and is the
specific binding ligand of Fn14. The extracellular ligand
binding region of Fn14 is a single cysteine-rich domain (CRD)
and comprises 53 amino acid residues []. The receptor-ligand
recognition between Fn14 and TWEAK induces a variety of
cellular processes such as inflammation, immune responses,
tissue repair, carcinogenesis etc. [,
]. The constitutive low
expression of Fn14 in livers was associated with normal slow
hepatocytes turnover without activating the oval cells. On the
other hand increased expressions of TWEAK and Fn14 were
reported in case of massive liver injury and were associated
with uncontrolled proliferation of oval cells or situations
associated with hepatocellular carcinoma []. We also reported
that adverse effects of radiation were prevented by treating the
mice with tannins and flavonoids rich extract of Hippophae
rhamnoides before irradiation [,
], which presumably acted via
inhibiting the Fn14-TWEAK interaction [].

The objective of this study was to investigate the in silico
affinity of the flavonoids (quercitin, genistein and rutin) as well
as tannins (gallic acid and ellagic acid) towards the human
Fn14 region which was binding to the natural ligand TWEAK.
The approach was made in two essential steps, first a
homology model of human Fn14 protein was developed
because no crystallographic structure for human Fn14 is
available so far, and second the binding of various antioxidants
(tannins and flavonoids) was examined to the TWEAK specific
sites on the CRD domain of Fn14.

Methodology
Model generation of TNFRSF12A:
Sequences of human tumor necrosis factor receptor super
family member 12A (TNFRSF12A) with Uniport ID: Q9NP84
consists 129 amino acids were obtained from Uniport database
(www.uniprot.org). To get tertiary structure of TNFRSF12A,
sequence alignment was performed by using online Basic Local
Alignment Search Tool for Protein (BLASTp) against Protein
Data Bank (PDB) (http://www.pdb.orgN/ pdb/
home/home.do).In the output result no proper homologous
entries were found and therefore, TNFRSF12A protein was
modeled using Iterative Threading Assembly refinement (ITasser
sever) (http: //zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/ITASSER/).
Multiple templates were used in the iterative
structural assembly simulation method [,
]. To get the best
model, minimum confidence score protein was selected for
further study.

Energy minimization and structure validation:
The best selected model of TNFRSF12A was subjected to
GROMACS 4.5.3 Package for energy minimization [,
] and
the structure energy minimization was done by using OPLSAA/
L force field []. In subsequent step, the structure was
embedded in SPC216 water molecules cubic box []. The
charged states of ionizable groups, which usually occur in the
normal state at pH 7.0, were neutralized by adding respective
ions in the system. The ion treatment was followed up by
energy minimization. The equilibrium of the system was
maintained according to the protocol in two phases. The first
phase included NVT ensemble in which a short 100
picoseconds (ps) position restrained molecular dynamics
simulation (MDS) at 300k was done by using a Berendsen
thermostat for ensuring proper stabilization of the temperature.
In the second phase of NPT ensemble, loops position-restrained
MDS at 300K and 1 bar was done by using a Parrinello-Rahman
barostat pressure coupling to stabilize the system in relation to
pressure and density [].

At the end, unrestrained 10 nanoseconds (ns) MDS was done
on the NPT ensemble for both structures. The output obtained
was further subjected to quality checks, numerical graphs and
interpretation of data by using Xmgrace software. The stereo
chemical quality and parameter of modeled structures as well
as minimized generated structures were scrutinized by
PROCHECK and WHATIF [,
], ERRAT was used to
determine non-bonded interaction between different atom
types in structures []. VERIFY3D 
[,
] was used to check
the compatibility of amino acids in models. Finally the
secondary structural changes and conformational analysis were
performed in Profane in PDBsum [].

Selection of inhibitors:
Based on our previous report [,
] the active constituents of
leaf extract from Hippophae rhamnoides i.e., flavonoids
(Quercitin, Rutin and Genistein) and tannins (Gallic acid and
Ellagic acids), were selected. 3D structures of Ellagic Acid (CID:
5281855), Genistein(CID:5280961), Rutin (CID:5280805) &amp; Gallic
acid ethyl ester (CID:13250) and Quercetin (CID:5280343) were
downloaded from Pubchem (http:// pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov /).

Docking of inhibitors:
All inhibitors of TNFRSF12A were tested to find out the best
inhibitor, which could bind to the site of its natural ligand
protein TWEAK. Docking was performed by using Autodock
4.2.0 in the platform of MGLTool 1.5.4. [,
]. AutoGrid was
used to generate grid maps. The grid box dimension was
60×60×60 and spacing between the grid points was 0.375 Å.
Each job consisted 50 independent runs and the generated log
files were analyzed using MGLTool [].

Result &amp; Discussion
Molecular dynamics simulation analysis and structure validation of TNFRSF12A:
Sequences of human tumor necrosis factor receptor super
family member 12A (TNFRSF12A) with Uniport ID: Q9NP84
consists 129 amino acids were obtained from Uniport database
(www.uniprot.org). Best model structure, which had -3.01
confidence score amongst the top five predicted models, by ITassar
Sever, was subjected for MD simulations to get a stable
structure. The structures were compared and the main-chain
root mean square deviations (RMSD) were calculated as a
function of time. The resulting RMSD profiles are shown in
(). Major structural change occurred during the initial
few picoseconds at RMSD of ~0.55 nm, subsequently, the
system got equilibrated and structural deviations were
minimized. The main-chain root mean square fluctuations
(RMSF), indicated that the initial 250 C-terminal atoms
fluctuated more () out of the 1975 atoms of structure.
All catalytic site residue atoms had similar fluctuation pattern.
However, the amino acids falling in the interacting site showed
minimum fluctuations, indicating that it was a promising site
for docking ().

Fifty successive structures were generated with 200ps time
difference. Between each structure trajectory was 10ns. The
stereo chemical quality of each amino acid of modeled Fn14
(TNFRSF12A) was minimized and the structure was renamed
as TNFRSF12Am. For both the structures, Ramachandran plot
was used to measure RMSD (). PROCHECK based
evaluation results showed better stereo chemical quality in
comparison to initially modeled TNFRSF12A. ERRAT
calculated the overall quality factor for non-bonded atomic
interactions. The higher ERRAT score meant better quality of
structure. The ERRAT score for TNFRSF12Am and
TNFRSF12A structure were 41.538 and 23.967 respectively. The
ERRAT score for TNFRSF12Am structure shows an
enhancement in atomic interaction after molecular dynamics.
Simulated structures were evaluated by VERIFY3D. The
simulated structures showed better sequence-to-structure
agreement in comparison to initial proteins as shown in 
 
(see supplementary material). The overall quality G-factor
scores for TNFRSF12Am and TNFRSF12A were -0.71 and -0.64
respectively, indicating that minimized one had good quality
in comparison to initial model.

Docking analysis:
All the compounds except Ellagic acid (, 

(see supplementary material)) docked into the TWEAK
interacting site of TNFRSF12Am. The docking site contains Asp
45, Lys48, Met50 and Asp62 amino acids which are reportedly
crucial for TWEAK interaction. The binding energy and the
number of their interacting hydrogen bonds are presented in
. 
After comparative docking analysis it was learnt that
Rutin and Genistein showed better inhibition in comparison to
other compounds. It was observed that the order of docking,
from best to least, was Genistein, Rutin, Gallic acid ethyl ester
and Quercetin.

Flavonoids and tannins are widespread in plant kingdom and
in vitro studies as well as clinical trials to show that dietary
intake of flavonoids, prevented tumor progression 
[]. Our
model predicted that radiation induced liver pathologies,
which are induced by over expression of Fn14-TWEAK
interaction, can be prevented by treatment with Genistein,
Rutin, Gallic acid and Quercitin. Further our model showed
that ellagic acid was not acting through binding with Fn14 and
TWEAK. This study predicted that radiation induced
harmful/lethal/carcinogenic effects could be prevented by
blocking the binding of TWEAK on Fn14 by using
phytochemicals/ nutraceuticals containing Genistein, Rutin,
Gallic acid ethyl ester and Quercetin. The flavonoids and
tannins are dietary constituents and are non-toxic. These can be
developed into drugs meant for whole body radiation
protection. The immediate applications of this study could be
that supplementation of radiotherapy treatment protocols with
these flavonoids and tannins, and/or nutraceuticals rich in
Gallic acid, Rutin, quercitin, genistein, may counter the
harmful effects of radiation.

Conclusions
This study has been the first to develop a homology model of
human Fn14 protein, because no crystallographic structure for
human Fn14 is available so far. Further, based on the binding
properties of tannins and flavonoids, this study predicted that
Genestein, Rutin and Gallic acid are effective in preventing
harmful effects of radiation by preventing Fn14-TWEAK
interaction and therefore their uncontrolled expression. This
study has application in development of targeted radiation
countermeasures as well as improving radiotherapy treatment
by utilizing non-toxic flavonoids and tannins as may be present
in plants like Hippophae rhamnoides.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Prasad &amp; Bala, Bioinformation 9(12): 633-638 (2013)

The calculated of Root Mean Square Deviations (RMSD) plot (A) Root Mean Square Fluctuations (RMSF) plot; (B) of
TFNR12Am; (C) Ribbon structure of TFNR12Am showing (D45, Lys48, M50 and D62) crucial interacting amino acids in stick form;
(D) The secondary structural investigation for the model structure TFNR12Am on Ramachandran plot.

Best docked conformer of (A) Gallaic acid ethay ester (CID: 13250); B) Rutin (CID: 5280805); C) Quercetin (CID: 5280343) and (D)
Genistein (CID: 5280961) with TNFRSF12Am -TWEAK interacting sites.

