Background
High levels of epigenetic systems such as DNA methylation,
histone modification and chromatin remodelling tightly
regulate gene specificity in mammals []. DNA methylation, is
the widely studied epigenetic modification and has a critical
role in tissue-specific gene expression in mammals.
Computational approaches for detection of methylation events
would be a complimentary aid for expensive and laborious
experimental analysis. Genome-wide DNA methylation studies
show that methylation status is tissue specific and possess
sequence correlations [,
]. Recently some studies revealed
evolutionary conservation of tissue-specific methylation in
human tissues by using BAC microarrays []. Both
experimental and computational comprehensive genome-wide
profiles of methylated regions would significantly improve our
ability to address these questions. Currently there are no tissue
specific methylation tools available, thus a need for a classifier
that can detect patterns across tissues and to calculate DNA
methylation levels by available statistical models. To this end,
we developed MethFinder an efficient machine learning model
to unravel the pattern of DNA methylation in CpG
dinucleotides using support vector machines (SVM).

Tissue-specific Sequence data sets:
The tissue-specific non-redundant cytosine methylation data
were extracted from MethDB [] a curated database of
experimentally determined methylated DNA fragments. The
database contains a total of 5382 methylation patterns from
various sources ranging from plants to humans []. In-house
Python script was used to download tissue specific methylation
patterns of Homo sapiens from MethDB. We incorporated CpG
islands predicted by the CpG cluster algorithm. For studying
the effect of flanking sequence features, we split the sequences
into overlapping fragments of fixed window size. Fragments
with a methylated cytosine in the center were considered as
Methylation prone, where as fragments with non-methylated
cytosine in the center were considered as Methylation resistant.

Pattern Detection and classification:
To detect overrepresented sequence motifs in the flanking
regions, we used the Multiple Em for Motif Elicitation (MEME
Suite version 4.3.0) []. Twenty best-fit motifs were obtained for
each sequence set (Methylation prone and Methylation
resistant) for individual tissues, for all window size using the
ZOOPs model (zero or one occurrence per sequence) with
default parameters. When submitted to MEME, datasets with
increasing window size from 59 to 79 show the presence of
motifs for nine tissues (Blood, Brain, Kidney, Liver, Lung,
Muscle, Pancreas, Prostate and Skin). For each sequence, MAST
a motif alignment program [] determines the best match in the
sequence to each motif. The frequency and position of all motif
hits with a goodness-of-fit (P &lt; 0.000001) were extracted using
custom Perl scripts. The percentages of occurrence of each motif
between the methylation prone and methylation resistant data
sets were calculated for the datasets with window size from 59
to 79 for all tissues. A Student's t-test was used to compare the
frequency of occurrence of each motif between two datasets and
P-value below P&gt;0.001 as considered as not significant between
the methylation prone and methylation resistant data sets.

Support vector machine (SVM) parameter optimization and calculation:
For optimization, we developed training data sets of n samples,
(x1,x2,........xi,.......xn), where xi are vectors of d features and
known labels for each vector {y1,y2,y3, .. .,yi, .. .,yn}, indicating
whether the fragment is methylation prone or methylation
resistant (yi{+1, -1}) (see  for equation
and explanation). We used the software LIBSVM
(http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/libsvm/) for the
implementation of the SVM algorithm, and adopted the linear
kernel function by a grid search script available in the LibSVM
package, with 10 fold cross validation.

Sensitivity (SE), specificity (SP), accuracy (ACC) and Matthew
correlation coefficient (MCC) of the SVMs to assess
classification performance were estimated using the following
equations. We calculated the expressions for SP, SE, ACC and
MCC using Eqs. (2– 5) (see ).

Software Performance:
We trained the SVM classifier with training sets from nine
different tissues (supplementary table 1) and tested its
performance on a corresponding test set from individual
tissues. The training set was randomly selected from individual
tissues with specific window length (59, 69, and 79 bp). For each
window length, this experiment was repeated with random
selections of training and test sets. The best classification
accuracy was observed for a window size of 69, where the best
balance between specificity (0.97) and sensitivity (0.89) were
also observed with the highest value for MCC (0.86) 

(see supplementary material). Performance of the classifiers
was also evaluated by forming receiver operating characteristic
(ROC) curves (). Here we used motif-based sequence
analysis tools coupled with classification techniques to identify
DNA sequence patterns that define CpG island methylation
status. This study serves as proof-of-principle that the
epigenetic state of a genomic region can be predicted based on
DNA sequences.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work was sponsored by Advaita Informatics, Dubai.

Citation:James et al, Bioinformation 9(1): 061-064 (2013)

The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) plots for performance measure using datasets from nine different tissues

