Background
Intracellular communication or environmental signals in
eukaryotic cells responds with growth adaptation or cell death
requires reconstruction of specific patterns of gene expression
[]. The external signals are transduced to intracellular
effectors by pathways that link cell surface and nuclear events
and processed transient input to permanent responses 
[].

Genes such as Ras are activated by point mutation through
transduction. Others such as Src were identified as the
homologous of transforming viral genes. The development of
computer algorithms to predict optimal intervention is a
future development in Ras/Raf/MAPK Kinase cascade [].
The impact of genomic and proteomic technologies on the
development of new cancer drugs evaluated by using
metabolic pathways is known. Li et al., (2011) proposed
biological methods to analyze the roles of ERK1/2 signaling
pathways in regenerating hepatosites using Bioinformatics
tools []. Various metabolic pathways such as KEGG are being
organized to computerized functional aspects of genes and
genomics in terms of molecular interactions and gene
relationships. Various metabolic databases is being composed
based on three interconnected sessions; genes, molecules and
pathways [].

Angiogenesis is the growth of new blood vessels which occurs
during both physiological and pathological disease processes
[]. Cancer cells can spread to other parts of the body through
blood and lymphatic systems []. Protein-protein interaction
forms the basis for majority of cellular events such as signal
transduction, transcriptional regulation and gene regulation in
various living organisms. Here, we describe the importance of
protein-protein interactions in protein networks.

Methodology
System requirement:
System requirements are Intel® Core ™ i3 CPU M 370 @ 2.40
GHz 2.40 GHz. Processor, 4.00 GB (3.80 usable) RAM,
LENOVO Base Mother Board, 500 GB Hard disk, Windows 7
Professional (x64) (build 7600) OS.

Pathway data and source:
KEGG stands for Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes
and it is one of the most important, manually constructed,
constantly updated metabolic pathway database available
online for free. The database describes pathways for signal
transductions, primary and secondary metabolic cycles, and
immune systems. We used data from KEGG for this study.

Protein interaction data and tool:
We used STRING (version 9.0) for extracting protein-protein
interaction data. STRING is a database of experimentally
known and predicted protein-protein interactions. The
interactions include direct (physical) and indirect (functional)
associations. They are derived from four sources: (1) genomic
context; (2) high-throughput experiments; (3) co-expression
(conserved) and (4) known knowledge. STRING quantitatively
integrates interaction data from these sources for a large
number of organisms, and transfers information between
these organisms where applicable. The procedure used in this
study for combining, excluding and comparing data in KEGG
and STRING is illustrated using a flowchart in ().

Discussion
The RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK signaling pathway regulates cell
cycle progression and anti-apoptotic molecules. Mutations are
often observed among molecules in the pathway in
transformed cell lines and human cancer cells. This pathway is
also involved in maintaining cell survival by modulating the
activity of apoptosis including RAS, P13K, AKT and BAD.
This is illustrated using (). The mechanisms in the
complex network of factors contributing to human diseases is
often been analyzed using data extracted from KEGG. The
active process of cell suicide termed “programmed cell death”
is initiated either by injury to the cell due to exogenous
damaging agents or by changes in endogenous signals by
RAS/P13K/AKT/BAD. Androgens are capable of stimulating
proliferation and imbalance in program cell death due to
RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK occurs during several cancer
progressions. Coordination of cell proliferation with antiapoptotic
signals results in activation of receptor thyrosine
and serine/threonine protein kinases leading to RAS action
().

A protein interaction network summarizes a large amount of
protein-protein interaction data to reveal aspects of network
topology and modularity. Due to increasingly large amount of
heterogeneous raw data becoming available, proper data
integration is essential for protein network reconstruction.

This is true especially in the development of human protein
interaction networks. Several algorithms aim at clustering
proteins into complex networks with biological functions
using functional genomics and Bioinformatics analysis
derived data.

The interaction data in STRING (version 9.0) include physical
interactions as well as functional associations predicted in
common pathway or process derived using knowledge from
DB such as BIND, KEGG, HPRD and REACTOM. STRING
aims to improve usability of the interactome by scoring and
ranking interaction data. () illustrates interaction of
PKCMT1MMP2/EGFR/GRB2/SOS/RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK/
RSK/CREB and PKC/MT1-
MMP2/EGFR/GRB2/SOS/RAS/P13K/AKT/ BAD networks
using STRING data.

The MAPK pathway is the heart of molecular signaling
networks for human (with about 22,400 genes). This governs
growth, proliferation, differentiation and survival. This is also
associated with mutations linked to cancer, Alzheimer's and
Parkinson's diseases []. The current survey illustrates the
complex, less understood interactive pathway with genes
responsible for apoptotic and anti-apoptotic actions. Munshi et
al. (2004) provided that transforming growth factor β1 (TGF-
β1) regulates a wide array of cellular process including cell
differentiation, proliferation and apoptosis [].

An efficient genetic system to predict protein-protein
interaction between two proteins with known or unknown
protein shapes and structures is critical 
[]. The contribution
by residues from both proteins to energy (thermodynamics
and kinetics) is now possible to be measured by double
mutant cycle analysis. This may help in the better
understanding of protein networks and protein-protein
interactions associated with activated EGFR involving
metallo-proteins leading to apoptosis and anti-apoptosis.

Christian et al. (1999) [] proposed macro molecular
associations with representations using metabolic networks
(KEGG) of Human Genetic Disease (OMIM) data. The HPRD
DB provides protein names and their synonym to help in such
complex networks. Hence, the available clinical, biochemical
and bioinformatics approaches help delineate the possible
function of enzymes/proteins by generating clues in bacteria,
virus, plants and animals [,
]. Thus, the problem of
protein-protein interactions in a biological system is of
fundamental importance in understanding implicit and
explicit information related to proteins in networks 
[].

Conclusion
The importance of protein-protein interactions and their
predictions in the development of complex protein networks
such as the signal transduction is highlighted.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

The authors acknowledge the support from GITAM
University for providing the necessary research facilities.

Citation:Kaladhar et al, Bioinformation 8(9): 437-439 (2012)

Flow chart for the workflow analysis used in this
study; KEGG = Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes

A pathway describing cell proliferation with anti-apoptotic signals with the activation of receptor thyrosine and
serine/threonine protein kinases is illustrated

Example of a protein interaction network from
STRING (version 9.0) is shown for signal transduction
associated proteins.

