Background
Malaria infects 500 million people and kills an estimated 2.7 million annually, representing one of the most significant diseases in the world 
. It is caused by four species of the genus Plasmodium, in humans, of which Plasmodium falciparum is the most virulent 
that infect and destroy red blood cells . Plasmodium falciparum strains have evolved resistance against known anti-malarial drugs 
 and yet, no effective vaccine is available against malaria for mass production. Malarial vaccine development is probably hampered by the 
several factors such as multiple stages of the life-cycle, multiple antigens per stage, multiple epitopes per antigen, multiple arms of the immune system, multiple immune responses 
in different hosts and multiple strains of the parasite .

Malarial immunity is a stage specific and the previous strategies are being used to develop a vaccine against each stage‐sporozoite, asexual blood stage and sexual stages. 
A vaccine against a single stage in the life-cycle need to be 100% effective, because parasite that progress to the next stage may express a new set of antigens, which may be unaffected by the 
vaccine induced immune responses . Although, a good number of candidates for such vaccines exist , however, it is 
an accepted view that an effective malaria vaccine need to target all the life-cycle stages of the parasite as well as allelic diversity of the human host.

The recent approaches such as genome sequence analysis, microarray, proteomics and computational vaccinology can be effectively applied for vaccine development of several 
diseases including malaria . In a large-scale, high-accuracy mass spectrometric proteome analysis, 152 proteins were found common to the four stages of 
Plasmodium falciparum life-cycles . One of these common proteins, merozoite surface protien 1 (MSP1), normally found in a number of 
Plasmodium species is synthesized as a high-molecular-weight precursor (190 kDa) and then processed into several fragments. At the time of red blood cell invasion by the merozoite, only the 19-kDa C-terminal 
fragment remains on the cell surface. The full-length MSP1 as well as processing fragments expressed in Escherichia coli have been evaluated as vaccines . 
Antibodies against MSP1 also inhibit merozoite entry into red blood cells and immunization with MSP1 protects monkeys from infections . Therefore, MSP1 
may have importance as a protective immunogen in novel vaccine formulation .

Although several CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) epitopes have been identified from Plasmodium falciparum sporozoite-derived antigens, recently 
a single epitope has also been described for the merozoite form . However, the full range of CTL epitopes present in MSP1 still remains unknown. The precise characterization of the immunogenic sequences from MSP1, involved in the cytotoxic
immune response, i.e. the MHC class-I epitopes, is critical for in vitro monitoring of the therapeutically induced anti­ Plasmodium falciparum CTL responses in patients for peptide-based vaccine
development. In this article, we report the characterization of MSP1, precursor antigen as a suitable vaccine candidate followed by identification of the HLA class-I binding epitope using bioinformatics
tools. The predicted CTL epitopes may be evaluated as potential components of malaria vaccine formulation that circumvent the problems associated with the host genetic restriction and antigenic
variability.

Methodology
Target protein sequence retrival
A comprehensive set of the protein complements has been isolated
from sporozoites, merozoites, trophozoites and gametocytes of the
Plasmodium falciparum 3D7. About 46% of all the gene products
(2,415 parasite proteins) were detected in all the four stages of
Plasmodium falciparum life-cycle and only 6% (152 proteins) were
common to four stages . One of these common proteins, MSP1
was targated for the characterarization as a vaccine candidate and their
immunogenic regions analysis. The amino acid sequence of the MSP1
(Orfid: PFI1475w; chromosome: 9) was retrieved from the PlasmoDB
database .

Vaccine candidate characterization tool
The vaccine candidate characterization of MSP1 was done using
various computational tools such as Vaxijen, MAPP, SPAAN,TargetP, SignalP and TMHMM. The conserved domain and similarity
to the human and mouse reference proteins of MSP1 were searched
using NCBI's conserved domain database . The orthologs of the
MSP1 related to the other Plasmodium species were also searched
using OrthoMCL database .

Immunogenic region analysis tool
Here, we used Immune Epitope Database (IEDB) analysis resources
such as ARB, SMM and ANN available at 
http://tools-int-01.liai.org/analyze/html/mhc_processing.html to predict 
CTL epitopes
for thirty four HLA alleles. The software tool combines predictions of
proteasomal cleavage processing, TAP transport and MHC binding to
produce an overall score for each peptide as well as intrinsic potential
value for CTL epitope. The default setting parameters were used for
the immunoproteasome cleavage and TAP transporter predictions. The
results of computational analysis included peptide sequences, their
start positions and corresponding IC50 values. In order to, predict
supertype CTL epitopes in MSP1, a web based software tool
(NetCTL-2.1) available at http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetCTL was used. The NetCTL-1.2 server demonstrated a better predictive
performance than other available web servers like EpiJen, MAPPP,
MHC-pathway and WAPP on all performance measures . In order
to, classify 1712 overlapping peptides into binders and non-binders to
twelve HLA class I supertypes (5 HLA-A and 7 HLA-B), the
transformed binding affinity value of ≥ 0.426 (equivalent to affinity ≤
500 nM) was used. To get, an average optimal predictive performance,
the default weight on C terminal cleavage and TAP transport
efficiency was used as 0.1 and 0.05 respectively. The peptides with a
combined processing score value ≥ default threshold value (0.75) were
predicted as potential supertype CTL epitopes.

Discussion
The characterization of Plasmodium falciparum proteome by
multidimensional protein identification technology showed that 46%
of all gene products (2,415 parasite proteins) were detected in all the
four stages of the life-cycle. Almost half (49%) of the sporozoite
proteins were unique to this stage and shared on an average 25% of its
protein to other stages. On the other hand, trophozoites, merozoites
and gametocytes have 20-33% unique proteins and shared their 39-56% proteins. Consequently, only 152 proteins (6%) were common to
all four stages of the parasite life-cycle (). These common
proteins were mostly housekeeping proteins such as ribosomal
proteins, transcription factors, histones and cytoskeletal proteins .
One of these common proteins, MSP1 has the potential to become a
suitable vaccine candidate which also contained domains that indicate
a role in cell-cell interactions .

The characterization of the targeted MSP1 antigen as a vaccine
candidate was performed using a number of computational tools
available in the public domain. The MSP1 was predicted as a subunit
vaccine candidate using Vaxijen server with a score of 0.57. The
prediction of MSP1 as adhesin and adhesin-like was done using
MAAP and SPANN servers based on their prediction probabilities of
1.00 and 0.65, respectively (Table 1 in ).
The prediction of localization of MSP1 in a secretory pathway with
signal peptide probability of 0.94 and 1.0 was done using TargetP1.1
and SignalP 3.0 servers. MSP1 having single transmembrane spanning
region were predicted using TMHMM server. The exhaustive search
for orthologs and conserved domains based on homology prediction
was performed using OrthoMCL and NCBI's CDD databases. The
MSP1 has two orthologs namely Plasmodium vivax-Pv099980 and
Plasmodium yoelii-PY05748. The similarity to the human and mouse
reference proteins were also searched using the BlastP server (Table 1 in ). MSP1 did not find any sequence
similarity to human and mouse reference database. A vaccine
candidate with similar sequences to the host i.e. human or mouse is
likely to cause autoimmunity in the host. Non allergenicity of the
MSP1 protein was also predicted using Algpred and Allermatch tools.
Here, MSP1 demonstrated all the desirable properties of a suitable
vaccine candidate (Table 1 in ).

A total seventeen CD8+ epitopes have been identified from P. falciparum sporozoite-derived antigens and available at IEDB as on
15th March, 2009. The latest one, a single CTL epitope binding to the
HLA-A*0201 for merozoite form is additional . However, the full
range of CTL epitopes binding to other HLA class-I molecules present
in MSP1 still remains unknown. Therefore, the binding information
regarding thirty four HLA class-I epitopes was predicted using IEDB
analysis algorithms like ARB, SMM and ANN, whereas, supertype
CTL epitopes were predicted using NetCTL2.1 algorithm. The best
performing method for the individual HLA class-I molecules was used
for epitope mapping of MSP1 (). According to the analysis,
peptides with the best predicted binding affinities for each HLA class-I
molecules are presented in (Table 2 in ). The
predicted output is given in units of IC50 nM. A lower value of peptide IC50 indicates higher affinity towards MHC molecule. As a rough
guideline, peptides with IC50 values ≪ 50 nM, ≪ 500 nM and ≪ 5000 nM
are considered having high affinity, intermediate affinity and low
affinity towards MHC molecule respectively. Among all HLA alleles
and peptides, the promiscuous peptide FLSSGLHHL (position: 1195-
1204) binds with the two HLA alleles A*0202 and A*0203, peptide
KIFSARYTY (position: 532-541) binds with four alleles A*0301,
A*1101, A*3002 and A*3101 and peptide VPYPNGIVY (position:
419-427) binds with two allele B*3501 and B*5101 . In order to,
reach for a consensus prediction by other alternative software tools,
the predicted highest scoring CTL epitopes by most accurate method
were also ranked by two other alternative methods  (Table 1 in ). 
Most of the highest scoring CTL epitopes,
predicted by one method were also ranked within five by other
alternative tools. In addition to, HLA class-I allelic CTL epitope
prediction, MSP1 was also searched for putative HLA-A and B
supertype CTL epitopes. The highest scoring predicted supertype CTL
epitopes are shown in the . In this study, none of the highest
scoring predicted CTL epitopes shared sequence identity to human
proteins, therefore, they could be included in malaria vaccine design
except the peptide sequence IFFLCSFLFFI (position:4-15), which
corresponds to the signal peptide.

Conclusion
Identification of epitopes capable of binding to multiple HLA alleles
and supertypes shall significantly rationalize the development of
epitope-based vaccines. The present study can be considered as a good
example of application of advanced bioinformatics techniques in CTL
epitope prediction. The promiscuous and supertype peptide binders
allow reducing the time and minimizing the total number of predicted
epitopes required for wet lab tests without compromising the
population coverage. As per our knowledge, the highest scoring
predicted epitopes using IEDB analysis resource and NetCTL are
reported first time and could eventually be proposed as a component of
a peptide-based anti-malaria vaccine. However, this study has some
limitations, as it reports only predicted results and further validation is
required through in vitro synthesis of the determined peptides.
Besides, in vivo experimental study has to be done, in order to, finally
test the efficacy of malaria vaccine.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We are thankful to U.P Technical University, Lucknow and Amity
University Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow for their laboratory support to
research work.

Citation:Singh &amp; Mishra, Bioinformation 4(1): 1-5 (2009)

Clusters of proteins expressed in different stages of the P.falciparum 3D7 life-cycle (Spz- Sporozoites, Mrz-Merozoites, Tpz-
Trophozoites and Gmt-Gametocytes).

A comparative evaluation of CTL epitope processing prediction algorithms available at IEDB (ANN-Artificial Neural Network,
ARB-Average Relative Binding and SMM-Stabilized Matrix Method) for thirty four HLA class-I alleles.

The predicted highest scoring CTL epitopes in MSP1, precursor binding to twelve HLA-A and B supertypes using NetCTL2.1
algorithm. Peptides are shown with their start position in the native protein.

