Background
High-mobility group protein B1 (HMGB1) is an abundant
component of chromatin and belongs to a subfamily of the
HMG proteins that contain the HMG1 box domains. It is widely
distributed in eukaryotic cells from yeast to human, and was
originally discovered as a nuclear transcription factor that binds
to DNA in the minor groove without sequence specificity. It has
been reported that HMGB1 plays important roles in the
modulation of transcription, DNA integration and
recombination []. The structural feature responsible for the
DNA-binding properties is the two HMG box domains.
Although the binding of an HMG box to DNA is now
reasonably well understood, its structural disposition of the two
boxes and the intervening linkers remains to be clarified.
Further, the role and location of the acidic tail are unclear 
[].
HMGB1 has also been identified as an inflammatory cytokine
that functions as a late mediator of lethality in sepsis, and
consequently its inhibition can be utilized as a promising
therapeutic target []. Further study revealed that HMGB1 was
associated with organ damage in hepatic ischemia-reperfusion
injury and an anti-HMGB1 antibody treatment reduced liver
damage in the hepatic injury []. HMGB1 is phosphorylated by
protein kinases and its phosphorylation appears to be
important for the proper functioning and turnover rates of
HMGB1 []. However, the mechanism underlying the ischemiareperfusion-
induced liver injury and the functions of HMGB1
remains to be solved. Furthermore, to the best of our
knowledge, the physiological significance of the HMGB1
phosphorylation by protein kinases in inflammation has not
been elucidated.

Glycyrrhizin (GL) is the principal licorice component and used
worldwide in foods and medicines. It is considered to be at least
50 times sweeter than refined sugar and extensively used as a
natural sweetener and flavoring additive. Its use in foods has
been approved by most national regulatory agencies, and the
World Health Organization suggested that consumption of GL
at 100 mg/day would be unlikely to cause adverse effects 
[].
GL is a saponin compound comprising a triterpenoid aglycone,
glycyrrhetinic acid (GA), conjugated to a disaccharide of
glucuronic acid. GL is hydrolyzed to GA in the body and in fact
GA is the pharmacologically active compound []. Owing to the
high expectation of the development of more effective and safer
medicines in recent years, natural products from plants and
their synthetic derivatives have been anticipated to play
important roles in creating new and better chemopreventive
and therapeutic agents []. Several single natural compounds
from plants, such as the green tea polyphenol epigallocatechin
gallate [] and apple ursolic acid 
[], are being studied as
anticancer agents. GA is also used as an antitoxic and
immunological regulatory agent for the prevention or treatment
of viral infection, inflammation and anaphylaxis 
[].

GA has also been investigated for its interactions with HMGB1,
and it was demonstrated that GA played an important role in
the inhibition of HMGB1 []. We have been focusing our
attention on GA as a multifunctional agent for the prevention
and treatment of cancer, including downregulation of
inflammatory responses associated with cancer. Recently, we
found that GA demonstrated a significant selective toxicity
towards a central nervous system (CNS) tumor cell line 
[].
These reports suggest that targeting HMGB1 with GA treatment
could be utilized for controlling the development and
progression of cancer. However, no structural analysis of the
GA-HMGB1-DNA complex has been explored, although a
crystal structure of the HMGB1-DNA complex has been
reported []. Molecular modeling has found widespread utility
in the field of drug development [], and in the present study
we will report the structural analysis of the ligand-receptor
interaction between GA and the HMGB1-DNA complex by a
highly sophisticated software package, the Molecular Operating
Environment (MOE) 2010.10 (Chemical Computing Group Inc.,
Montreal, Canada).

Methodology
Modeling of the HMGB1-DNA complex:
Modeling of the 3D structure of the HMGB1-DNA complex was
executed as previously reported []. In brief, the HMGB1
(NCBI reference sequence: NP_002119.1) and the duplex
sequences and their crystal structure coordinates were loaded
into the MOE. The primary structure of the HMGB1-DNA
complex was aligned, carefully checked to avoid deletions or
insertions in conserved regions and corrected wherever
necessary. Full energy minimization was applied to the
restructured HMGB1-DNA model and the refined model was
utilized for further inspection. The qualities of the protein folds
of the HMGB1-DNA model were evaluated with the MOE by
calculating the effective atomic contact energies, comprising the
desolvation free energies required to transfer atoms from water
to the interior of the protein. The overall geometric and
stereochemical qualities of the final modeled structure of
HMGB1 were also examined using Ramachandran plots
generated within the MOE.

Binding Site Selection and Exploration:
The binding site selection and exploration for the HMGB1-DNA
complex was executed as previously reported 
[]. In brief, the
Site Finder module of the MOE was used to identify possible
ligand-binding pockets within the newly generated 3D
structures of HMGB1-DNA. Hydrophobic or hydrophilic alpha
spheres served as probes denoting zones of tight atom packing.
These alpha spheres were utilized to define potential ligandbinding
sites (LBSs) and as centroids for the creation of dummy
ligand atoms. The dummy atoms were matched to the
corresponding alpha spheres during the characterization of the
LBSs in HMGB1-DNA. This method generates bound
conformations that approach crystallographic resolutions 
[].

Alpha Sphere and Excluded Volume-Based Ligand-Receptor Docking (ASE-Dock):
The docking and analysis of the ligand-receptor interaction
between GA and HMGB1-DNA were also performed with ASEDock
in the MOE []. In the ASE-Dock module, ligand atoms
have alpha spheres within 1 Å. Based on this property, concave
models are created and ligand atoms from a large number of
conformations generated by superimposition with these points
can be evaluated and scored by maximum overlap with alpha
spheres and minimum overlap with the receptor atoms. The
scoring function used by ASE-Dock is based on ligand-receptor
interaction energies and the score is expressed as a Utotal value.
The Utotal value was utilized for the overall evaluation of the
ligand-receptor interaction. The ligand conformations were
subjected to energy minimization using the MMF94S force field
[]. From the resulting 500,000 poses, the 200 poses with the
lowest Utotal values were selected for further optimization with
the MMF94S force field. During the refinement step, the ligand
was free to move within the binding pocket. Udock values were
also adopted to determine the most reasonably docked GAHMGB1-
DNA complex.

Results and Discussion
Modeling of the HMGB1-DNA Structure:
The sequence alignment of HMGB1 (PDB code: 2GZK) and the
duplex containing the consensus sequence of the sexdetermining
region on the Y chromosome (SRY) [] is shown
in (). The alignment revealed that it contained the
residues of the basic linker Lys76 – Lys84 and HMG box B Asp85 –
Lys159. The PDB code of 2GZK was selected for the present 3D
structure modeling of HMGB1-DNA because the detailed
analysis of the HMGB1-DNA complex had been provided 
[].
The HMGB1-DNA model with the best packing quality
function and full energy minimization was utilized in the
present study ().

Binding Site Selection and Exploration of the HMGB1-DNA Model:
The Site Finder module of the MOE identified 16 possible LBSs
in the modeled HMGB1-DNA complex (). The
previous report by Stott et al. identified 43 residues that interact
with the DNA, including the intercalating residues such as Ile13,
Phe97 and Ile116 []. 
Our present results in () also
identified these residues, and the possible ligand-binding
pockets within the newly generated 3D structures of the
HMGB1-DNA complex are shown in (). The
hydrophobic (white) or hydrophilic (red) alpha spheres, which
served as probes denoting zones of tight atom packing,
revealed that the potential LBS could be found almost
anywhere in the HMGB1-DNA complex.

Docking Simulation of GA to the HMGB1-DNA Complex:
It has been reported that GA interacts with HMGB1 and that it
has inhibitory effects on HMGB1 [,
]. We recently found
that GA demonstrated significant growth inhibitory activity
toward a CNS tumor cell line [], suggesting that GA can be
utilized for the antitumor drug development. However,
whether or not GA can bind to the HMGB1-DNA complex is
not known. Further, if GA binds to the HMGB1-DNA complex,
the precise mode of the binding of GA needs to be elucidated.
To this end, the ASE-Dock [] was performed and showed that
GA bound at the No. 9 site () in the HMGB1-DNA
complex (). The ligand docking score (Udock value) for
GA was -59.5 kcal/mol. The enlarged figure of the LBS in the
GA-HMGB1-DNA complex revealed that the hydroxyl group of
GA at C3 and the oxygen at C11 formed hydrogen bonds with
Lys90, and the distance between Lys90 and the OH was 2.58 Å
while that for the C=O oxygen was 2.85 Å (). There
has been a report exhibiting that Lys90 was identified as an
important residue for high-binding of the B domain and that it
contacted the T229 phosphate group []. This report and our
present results suggest that GA can inhibit binding of HMGB1
to DNA interfering with the contact between Lys90 and T229.

Contacts of GA with the HMGB1-DNA Complex in Detail:
To create ligand-receptor interaction plots for the GA-HMGB1-
DNA complex, the Ligand Interactions module of the MOE was
used, which provided a clearer arrangement of the putative key
intermolecular interactions that aid in the interpretation of the
3D juxtaposition of the ligand GA and the LBS in the HMGB1-
DNA complex (). Our present results ascertained the
presence of the hydrogen bond between the hydroxyl group of
GA at C3 and Lys90. The C=O oxygen at C11 was also identified
as the element that formed the hydrogen bond with Lys90.
Further, the hydroxyl group at C29 was also identified as
forming a hydrogen bond with C231. It has been reported that
C231 had contacts with Ser101 and Lys104 and that Ile116 was the
intercalating residue that interacted with C231 []. This report
and our results suggest that GA can interfere with the
formation of the HMGB1-DNA complex at C231. Arg91 was also
identified as the critical residue for proper binding of HMGB1
to DNA, and it made contacts with C206, C207, G227 and A228 
[].
The present results revealed that GA had interaction with Arg91,
which suggests that GA possibly inhibit HMGB1 interfering
with Arg91 to make contact with DNA. Tyr149 in HMGB1
contacted with T207 [] and our current results showed that GA
interacted with Tyr149, indicating that GA interferes with Tyr149.
C230 has also been reported to make contacts with Pro93 and
Phe97 in HMGB1 []. The present study also identified GA as
having interaction with C230, which suggests that GA interferes
with C230.

Conclusion
Examination of the HMGB1-DNA complex provides
considerable insight into the binding mechanism of HMGB1 to
DNA and suggests approaches by which HMGB1 inhibitors
with greater selectivity may be attainable. Further, detailed
analysis of the ligand-receptor interaction is of great
significance in designing in silico HMGB1-inhibiotor models for
successful development of antitumor drugs. The main objective
in the present study was to determine whether or not GA can
act as an inhibitor of HMGB1 and to elucidate the precise mode
of GA binding to the HMGB1-DNA complex. Analyses of the
structural properties of the HMGB1-DNA complex and the
docking simulations of the GA-HMGB1-DNA pose suggest that
GA possibly inhibits HMGB1 interfering with Lys90, Arg91,
Ser101, Tyr149, C230 and C231 in the HMGB1-DNA complex. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first report of an HMGB1-
DNA model with GA as a potential inhibitor.

This study was partially supported by a grant-in-aid from the
Promotion and Mutual Aid Corporation for Private Schools of
Japan.

Citation:Yamaguchi et al, Bioinformation 8(23): 1147-1153 (2012)

(A) The sequence alignment of HMGB1 (PDB code: 2GZK) and the duplex containing the consensus sequence of SRY; (B)
The 2D structure of the HMGB1-DNA complex. For HMGB1; Red: α-helix. Blue: turn. For DNA; Green: carbon for G201 – C216.
Orange: carbon for G217 – C232. Blue: nitrogen. Purple: phosphorus. Red: oxygen.

(A) The 16 possible LBSs identified by the Site Finder module of the MOE; (B) The identified possible LBSs depicted with
the hydrophobic (white) or hydrophilic (red) alpha spheres, which serves as probes denoting zones of tight atom packing. For
HMGB1; Red: α-helix. Blue: turn. For DNA; Green: carbon for G201 – C216. Orange: carbon for G217 – C232. Blue: nitrogen. Purple:
phosphorus. Red: oxygen.

Docking simulation of GA to the HMGB1-DNA complex. (A) ASE-Dock showing that GA binds at the No. 9 site 
() in the HMGB1-DNA complex; (B) The enlarged figure of the LBS in the GA-HMGB1-DNA complex. For GA; Gray: carbon. For
HMGB1; Red: α-helix. Blue: turn. For DNA; Green: carbon for G201 – C216. Orange: carbon for G217 – C232. Blue: nitrogen. Purple:
phosphorus. Red: oxygen.

The ligand-receptor interaction plots for the GA-HMGB1-DNA complex created by the Ligand Interactions module of the
MOE.

