Background
Protein prenylation is an important posttranslational
modification through which naïve protein molecules are
targeted to membranes. It also helps in protein-protein
interactions and reversible binding of some transport proteins
to membranes []. Protein prenylation is the addition of either
Farnesyl or geranylgeranyl moieties to proteins. Many proteins
including Ras superfamily of proteins require prenylation for
their proper function []. Three independent prenylating
enzymes namely protein farnesyl transferase (FTase) and two
protein geranylgeranyl transferases (GGTase1 and 2) are
responsible for addition of respective isoprenoids. The subtle
change in amino acid recognition sequence by these three
enzymes confirms that any given protein is prenylated with
only one of them. Both FTase and GGTase1 recognize CAAX
motif present in C-terminal of the proteins to be prenylated,
where C is cysteine, A can be any aliphatic amino acid. FTase
binds to the protein if X is serine, methionine or glutamine. If X
is leucine, GGTase1 binds to it resulting in geranylgeranylation
of the protein. In a stark contrast GGTase2 recognizes proteins
with C-C or CXC domain and prenylate them. To date, Rab
family of proteins are the only known candidates to possess CC
or CXC domain [,
].

Ras farnesylation was targeted soon after its discovery to
combat tumor malignancy [,
]. Farnesylation was effectively
stopped by inhibiting FTase through peptidomimetic
compounds. Though proven to be very good drugs with
amazingly nil side effects, FTase inhibitors (FTI) failed to
prevent tumor proliferation completely as some Ras isoforms
like K-Ras-4B bind the enzyme more avidly than FTIs like L-
744,832, and FTI-277 or undergo alternative prenylation i.e.
geranylgeranylation []. Rho family of GTPases (about eight
members) belongs to Ras superfamily of proteins that are
geranylgeranylated by GGTase1. Members of Rho family
especially RhoA and Rac1 play a vital role in Ras mediated
transformation of NIH 3T3 cells []. A combination of FTI and
GGTI was required for deterring K-Ras processing in A549 and
Calu-1 cells []. The importance of GGTase1 and FTase
inhibitors in anti-cancer therapy was described elsewhere 
[,
,
]. Hence, it becomes clear that an FTase-GGTase1 dual
inhibitor may be of certain interest.

FTase and GGTase1 are structurally very similar with a
common α-subunit []. The β-subunit, with precisely two
amino acids, W102 and Y365 (FTase) T49 and F324 (GGTase-I)
recognizes their respective CAAX peptide []. Previously, we
have identified curcumin as an inhibitor of GGTase1 by
docking simulations using AutoDock Vina []. Curcumin
(C21H20O6) is an active ingredient of Turmeric () is
known to inhibit FTase but the molecular mechanism and
structural basis of this activity is unknown [,
]. In the
present study, we have evaluated the molecular dynamics of
the enzyme inhibitor complex using Desmond software 
[].
Additionally, molecular dynamics of curcumin binding to
FTase and enzyme–inhibitor interactions were studied using
Desmond software.

Methodology
GGTase1 target structure and molecular docking:
A homology based high-resolution structure of GGTase1 was
prepared and docking was done as described elsewhere 
[].

FTase target structure and molecular docking:
2Å resolution crystal structure of human FTase (PDB ID
1MZC). 2-[3-(3-ethyl-1-methyl-2-oxo-azepan-3-yl)-phenoxy]-4-
[1-amino-1-(1-methyl-1h-imidizol-5-yl)-ethyl]-benzonitrile
(BNE) were downloaded from protein data bank (PDB) 
[].
This structure was chosen due to its human origin, better
resolution and co-crystallization with an inhibitor. The
structures were minimized and prepared as mentioned
elsewhere using chimera []. Autogrid was constructed
around the active site defined in the crystal structure. All
docking simulations were done on a PyRx GUI v0.8 
[]
containing AutoDock Vina tool.

Molecular dynamics simulations:
MDS were run on Desmond [] software of Maestro 9.9 GUI
(academic versions) study with OPLS 2005 force field 
[].
Docked complexes were solvated using the SPC explicit water
model that is most suitable for a cytosol proteins. The
complexes were neutralized by addition of Na+ ions. System
builder tool of Desmond software imposed topology and force
field parameters. A Nose-Hoover chain thermostat method 
[]
and Martyna-Tobias-Klein barostat method [] were used to
maintain the water bath at 300K and a constant isotropic
pressure of 1atm with 2ps relaxation time respectively. Smooth
particle mesh Ewald method [] with a cut off radius of 9Å
was used to study the Coulombic and a tolerance of 1e-09 was
used for long range interactions. The setup was then simulated
for 10ns using above said conditions.

Results
Virtual screening and molecular docking:
Enzyme inhibitory site-compound library screening using
AutoDock Vina yielded 10 highest score enzyme-inhibitor
conformations. Based on zero RMSD value, the best enzymesubstrate
conformation was selected. The best score for the
compounds were Curcumin -7.3 as compared to GGTI-297 -7.5
and GGTI-298 -7.5. All these compounds formed hydrogen
bond with T49 which is a key amino acid for GGTase1
specificity (). All the hydrogen bonds were observed
within a range of 2.1-2.5 Å. Curcumin and 2-[3-(3-ethyl-1-
methyl-2-oxo-azepan-3-yl)-phenoxy]-4-[1-amino-1-(1-methyl-
1h-imidizol-5-yl)-ethyl]-benzonitrile (BNE) with score of -7.9
and -9.5 respectively, bind FTase in the inhibitory site.
Curcumin formed hydrogen bonds with R202 and S357 but
BNE did not form any hydrogen bond with the enzyme (). 
The critical residues S99B and D359 were also shown to
interact with the inhibitors but through non-covalent
interactions other than hydrogen bonds.  &amp; 
 (see
supplementary material) shows the docking scores of various
compounds with GGTase1 and FTase respectively.

Molecular dynamics simulations:
RMSD of enzyme C-α and inhibitor fit to enzyme of both
complexes (GGTase1 and FTase) were found to be in
equilibrium after 3 ns and fluctuations were not observed till
the end of simulation time (10 ns) (). While GGTase1
interacted with curcumin mainly through hydrophobic
interactions, FTase did so with hydrogen bonding. W275 of
GGTase1 showed strong hydrophobic interaction with
curcumin almost 120% of the time (due to multiple interactions
other than that of hydrophobic). Hydrogen bonds with T49 and
F324, the key amino acids which give substrate specificity for
GGTase1, perished during the course of simulation time and
showed only a little interaction. In the case of FTase E198 and
R202 of the B chain from was found to hydrogen bond with
curcumin for more than 80% of the time. Of this hydrogen bond
with R202 was realized during docking studies. Interestingly,
hydrogen bond with S357 was lost throughout the simulation
time. W102 which gives FTase its substrate specificity, interacts
with the inhibitor for about 40% of the time. Enzyme-inhibitor
interactions throughout the simulation time is shown in 
.

Discussion
Ras mediated transformation is manifested in many cancers. As
mentioned earlier, a combined administration of FTase and
GGTase1 inhibitors has been shown to be effective in treatment
of cancers facilitated by Ras. Peptidomimic compounds, the
only proven drugs that act against GGTase1 which is
structurally similar to CAAX tetrapeptide. Molecular docking is
a fast track method for screening drugs with low cost but high
efficiency and rapidity. Many compounds are already available
in market that were initially screened by molecular docking.
But there are no inhibitors for GGTase1 other than
peptidomimic compounds reported. Taylor et al., 
[]
concluded that amino acid at 49th position which ascertains
GGTase1 specificity can be exploited for structure based drug
design. Our findings indicate that curcumin can act as dual
inhibitor of GGTase1 and FTase. It specifically binds T49 which
may confer inhibitory effect of GGTase1. Curcumin, a
pleiotropic molecule is shown to ameliorate cancer progression
by a number of ways []. In a previous study with piperidine
based FTase inhibitors, the synthesized compounds were
shown to interact with S99B and D359B through molecular
modelling approach []. In this study, despite curcumin was
not shown to interact with either of these amino acids after
docking, MDS studies show that D359 and S99 significantly
interacted with curcumin for about 40% of the total simulation
time (10 ns). Hence, we hypothesize that anti-cancer activity of
these compounds are in part may be due to FTase and GGTase1
inhibition. Extensive studies need to decipher the complete
mechanism of curcumin׳s action on FTase and GGTase1
inhibition.

Conclusion
Curcumin is a highly pleiotropic molecule with excellent
anticancer activity. Molecular docking and dynamics
simulation studies indicate that, part of curcumin׳s anticancer
activity is attributable to its binding of two of the most
important prenylating enzymes. In conclusion, curcumin
exhibits its anticancer activity at least in part due to the
inhibition of FTase and GGTase1 and in future, more rigorous
studies are required to prove this fact.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The financial support provided by the University Grants
Commission, New Delhi [UGC F. No: 42-176/2013(SR)], India
is gratefully acknowledged.

Citation:Subramani et al, Bioinformation 11(5): 248-253 (2015)

2-Dimensional structure of curcumin shown in one of
its tautomeric (keto) forms.

Interaction diagrams of GGTase1 with A) Curcumin B) GGTI-297 and C) GGTI-298. Hydrogen bonds between the
enzyme-inhibitor complex is shown as green dashed lines. Other amino acids shown here form the binding pocket which may
interact with the inhibitors through non-covalent interactions other than hydrogen bonding.

Interaction diagrams of FTase1 with A) Curcumin and B) BNE. Hydrogen bonds between the enzyme-inhibitor complex
is shown as green dashed lines. Other amino acids shown here form the binding pocket which may interact with the inhibitors
through non-covalent interactions other than hydrogen bonding.

RMSD evolution of the A) enzymes, B) curcumin fit
into GGTase1 and C) curcumin fit into FTase. All protein
frames are first aligned on the reference frame backbone, and
then the C-α RMSD is calculated. Changes in C-α RMSD lie
within acceptable limit of 1-1.4 Å. Ligand (inhibitor) RMSD
shows the RMSD of the inhibitor when the enzyme-inhibitor
complex is first aligned on the protein backbone of the
reference and then the RMSD of the inhibitor heavy atoms is
measured. The values observed were not significantly larger
than the RMSD of the enzyme.

Amino acid residues that interacted non-covalently
with the inhibitor during the simulation period. Values on yaxes
represent the percentage of time the inhibitor interacted
with that amino acids. This percentage can be more than 100%
due to the multiple interactions. A. Interaction of curcumin
with GGTase1. W275 is shown to have hydrophobic
interactions with curcumin almost throughout the simulation
period. B. Interaction of curcumin with FTase. Both the A chain
and B chain interact with curcumin. E198 and R202 of the B
chain form hydrogen bond with curcumin for more than 80% of
the simulation time.

