Huntington's disease (HD) has been intensely studied for many
years. As we enter the miRNA age in molecular biology novel
approaches are taking place in the study of HD. HD is a
neurodegenerative disease and often involves depression prior
to symptom onset. Symptoms include mental disorders as well
as psychopathological, motor, and cognitive dysfunction. In
HD, there is gliosis and loss of neurons in the brain's caudate
nucleus, striatum, and frontal lobes. Dysfunction and loss of
neurons involves CAG nucleotide repeats in the Huntingtin
gene amino-end [].

miRNAs can attack or interact with multiple pathways. As an
example of the study of miRNAs in HD, it has been shown that
the miRNA, miR-22, is associated with protective mechanisms
against Huntington's disease (HD). Moreover, miR-22 is antiapoptotic.
This miRNA may be anti-neurodegenerative since it
shows decreased levels of expression in HD and Alzheimer's
disease brain (AD). miR-22 possibly interacts with histone
deacetylase 4 (HDAC4), REST corepresor 1 (Rcor1) and
regulator of G-protein signaling 2 (Rgs2), three genes
implicated in the pathogenesis of HD. Increased expression of
miR-22 reduced degeneration of cortical and striatal cultured
cells that had been exposed to Htt171-82Q, a fragment of
mutated huntingtin. The use of miR-22 also reduced apoptosis
of neurons exposed to tumor protein p53-inducible nuclear
protein 1 (Tp53inp1) and mitogen-activated protein kinase
14/p38 (MAPK14/p38). In addition, miR-22 targeted Rgs2,
HDAC4, and Rcor1 mRNAs [].

, , 
, and  
illustrate the gene expression and protein
networks involving the Huntingtin, Rgs2, HDAC4, and Rcor1
proteins.) It is anticipated that in time, point and counterpoint
network models for gene expression and protein interactions
will become available as miRNA-miRNA interactions, proteinprotein
interactions, and miRNA-mRNA interactions become
merged in highly sophisticated accessible databases. That
would indeed be a new day in the progress of Molecular
Biology and Medicine and perhaps help in the cure for the as
yet incurable disease, HD [,
]. It is left as a puzzle for the
interested reader to identify the various genes and their
functions in the figures [,
,
].

There are no financial conflicts.

Citation:Shapshak, Bioinformation 9(11): 549-550 (2013)

Network of input protein, Huntingtin - HTT - with
immediate input neighbors. In this figure, line-colors and
various interactions with other genes are red Down-regulation,
green Up-regulation, beige Regulation, purple Co-expression,
brown Physical Interaction, turquoise dotted Predicted Protein
Interaction, and mauve dotted Predicted TFactor Regulation 
[].
This figure shows gene interactions of the HTT (Huntingtin
gene), the central gene at issue in Huntington's disease. Because
of its central importance in the onslaught of this disease, it is
important to portray these interactions. The genes shown
interacting with the HTT gene are immediate interactions.

Network of input protein, Huntington – HTT with
additional output neighbors. The study of miRNAs is a new
field and much needs to be learned. In this figure, line-colors
and various interactions with other genes are red Downregulation,
green Up-regulation, beige Regulation, purple Coexpression,
brown Physical Interaction, turquoise dotted
Predicted Protein Interaction, and mauve dotted Predicted
TFactor Regulation []. 
This figure is a continuation of the genes
shown in Figure 1 and shows additional levels of interactions
among the genes; i.e. many of these are downstream from the
first level shown in Figure 1.

Network of input proteins Huntington – HTT,
histone deacetylase 4 - HDAC4, REST corepressor 1 - Rcor1,
regulator of G-protein signaling 2 - Rgs2 with immediate
input neighbors. The study of miRNAs is a new field and much
needs to be learned. In this figure, line-colors and various
interactions with other genes are red Down-regulation, green
Up-regulation, beige Regulation, purple Co-expression, brown
Physical Interaction, turquoise dotted Predicted Protein
Interaction, and mauve dotted Predicted TFactor Regulation 
[]
As mentioned in the text, miR-22 targets HDAC4, RGS2,
RCOR1. These genes as well as HTT are shown in this figure.
The gene networks shown are immediate interactions.

Network of input proteins Huntington – HTT,
histone deacetylase 4 - HDAC4, REST corepressor 1 - Rcor1,
regulator of G-protein signaling 2 - Rgs2 and additional
output neighbors. The study of miRNAs is a new field and
much needs to be learned. In this figure, line-colors and various
interactions with other genes are red Down-regulation, green
Up-regulation, beige Regulation, purple Co-expression, brown
Physical Interaction, turquoise dotted Predicted Protein
Interaction, and mauve dotted Predicted TFactor Regulation 
[].
This figure is a continuation of the genes shown in Figure 3 and
shows additional levels of interactions among the genes; i.e.
many of these are downstream from the first level shown in
Figure 3.

