Background
The presence of pesticides in the environment is a matter of
particular concern for the conservation of ecosystems and for
human health. The natural process of transformation of such
substances in the environment, as well as their elimination is
called bioremediation. Therefore, the understanding of the
biochemical reactions involved in their metabolism is the basis
for identifying the time of persistence of such compounds in
nature. Diuron (IUPAC name: 3-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)-1,1-
dimethylurea; CAS number: 330-54-1) is a systemic herbicide,
largely used in agriculture, belonging to the phenylamide
family and the subclass of phenylurea. This substituted urea
herbicide inhibits photosynthesis by preventing oxygen
production [] and blocks the electron transfer at the level of
photosystem II of photosynthetic microorganisms and plants
[].

Diuron is classified as moderately toxic to the environment
and contaminant of groundwater []. The time for its
degradation in the soil depends on biological and nonbiological
factors that may interact with it. In the absence of
biological processes, the degradation rates vary between 55 to
70% in a period of three weeks. With the participation of
microorganisms, this rate increases between 80 to 85%. Under
anaerobic conditions, the rate reaches 85% after 18 days [].
Diuron hydrolyses very slowly in neutral solution at 25°C. The
abiotic degradation in water solution is an irreversible reaction
giving 3,4-DCA (3,4-dichloroaniline) as the only product. 3,4-
DCA is considerably more toxic than diuron itself and has a
higher water solubility, so it can leach out from treated
agricultural land. It cans eventually condensate into
chloroazobenzene, which is highly toxic [].

Biodegradation is a major way of diuron decomposition in the
environment. Many studies were conducted and they showed
that degradation happens under both aerobic and anaerobic
conditions and it is promoted by both Gram positive and Gram
negative bacteria as well as by some fungi []. The capability of
ligninolytic or white-rot fungi to degrade diuron has also been
considered. White rot fungi (WRF) produce several
extracellular lignin modifying enzymes that include lignin
peroxidase, manganese peroxidase and laccase []. The
degradation of diuron by WRF is partially attributed to the
action of these enzymes [].

Ceriporiopsis subvermispora is a well-known WRF used in the
bio-pulping industry [], but its role in biodegradation and
potential application in bioremediation remains untapped.
Therefore, this work aimed to investigate the potential
application of the fungus C. subvermispora in degrading the
compound diuron by means of molecular docking simulations,
using the modeled structure of enzyme laccase-1 produced by
this fungus as a target. In the field of molecular modeling,
docking is a prediction method to find the preferred
orientation of one molecule to a target when bound to each
other to form a stable complex. The knowledge of the preferred
orientation may in turn be used to predict the strength of
association, or binding affinity, between two molecules by
means of scoring functions []. These studies are important for
characterizing the structure of this enzyme, which has not yet
been solved by experimental methods of X-ray diffraction, as
well as for a better understanding of the reaction mechanism,
which is still not fully understood.

Methodology
Sequence analysis:
The sequence from laccase-1 of Ceriporiopsis subvermispora
(CersuLac1) was obtained from UniProt database (UNIPROT:
O59944) and then subjected to InterProScan-5 and TargetP-1.1
servers in order to characterize the structural domains and
predict their subcellular localization. After, the amino acid
sequence on the functional protein domain was used to search
for structural templates by BLASTp against Protein Data Bank.
The presence of disulfide bonds was evaluated by Ensemblebased
Connectivity Disulfide Bonding Pattern prediction
server (EDBCP) and the prediction of secondary structure was
performed by PsiPred server.

Model building and validation:
The tertiary structure of CersuLac1 bonded to the ρ methylbenzoate
(ZINC: 330134) and four copper ions was
obtained by program Modeller-9.11. First, the amino acid
sequence of the target was aligned with the sequence of the
template PDB: 2HRG to generate 1,000 models of the enzyme
by using restrictions to make two disulfide bonds between
residues 87 to 487 and 119 to 207. The top five models ranked
by Modeller Dope Score were evaluated by their
stereochemical quality through software Procheck. The best
model was used to generate other 1,000 new models for
corrections of residues positioned at unfavorable regions of 
Ramachandram plot, and the final model was chosen by
applying again the evaluation method described above. For the
docking studies, the final model was fully minimized with
20,000 steps of conjugate gradient through NAMD2-2.9
software. For this purpose, the protein was immersed in a
periodic water box with limits at least 10 Å away from the
outer surface of the protein, and also with sufficient sodium
counter ions for the neutralization of the system charges. The
force field Charmm-c35b2 was used to define the residues of the
protein and the force field of the ligand was generated, in the
same format, through Swissparam server.

Molecular docking:
To establish the optimal docking simulation protocol, the
redocking of the ligand ρ-methylbenzoate on the proteinligand
complex of the template 2HRG was performed, because
it is assumed that the crystallized final structure of the
complex represents the lowest energy conformation and 
therefore the most stable []. In this procedure, the ligand was
taken from its original structure and redocked by means of the
software AutoDock-4.2.3 in order to find the conditions that
could reproduce the pose of the modeled/crystallographic
ligand with a root mean square deviation (rmsd) lower than
2.0 Å, as well as 100% reproducibility. The docking protocol
was established by keeping the single bonds of the ligands free
rotatable, the enzyme treated as a rigid body, and applying the
Lamarckian genetic algorithm for search, based at the already
known active site location in the template structure. This
protocol was then applied for the redocking of ρ methylbenzoate
into the minimized structure of CersuLac1 and
in the docking of the compound diuron (ZINC57287) obtained
from Zinc database in the template and minimized CersuLac1
structures.

Discussion
Analysis of the structure:
The analysis of the sequence of CersuLac1 suggested the
presence of a signal peptide between residues 1 and 21, which
signals to the secretory pathway, suggesting an extracellular
enzymatic activity and showed 70 and 67% of identity with
laccases from the fungi Trametes sp, (PDBid: 3KW7), and from
Coriolopsis trogii, (PDBid: 2HRG) respectively. The template
3KW7 was not used in the modeling, only in the comparative
analysis of results due its low resolution. The template 2HRG
was chosen for the modeling because it has high sequence
identity and high resolution (1.58 Å, Rvalue=0.175), and it was
co-crystallized in the presence of the ligand p-methylbenzoate,
a compound found in industrial wastes [] with shares certain
structural similarity to diuron (Tamimoto index: 0.11).

The modeling of a protein in the presence of a ligand has some
advantages. It facilitates the location of the binding site, and
the binder itself, gives the proper guidance in the selection of
the best pose of an unknown ligand. There were three regions
in the target sequence without match the templates (yellow
boxes at ). Without this structural information, the
modeling program tends to include them in the model as
bulges. According to PsiPred server, these three unmatched
regions in the templates would not be part of any element of
secondary structure in CersuLac1. As a result, no restriction for
modeling secondary structure was applied during the
construction of the models. Nevertheless, these three
unmatched regions in model sequence are placed in loops,
away from the ligand binding site, without compromising the
stability of the structure. However, it was observed that in the
final model there were two regions with deletions in CersuLac1
(162 to 163) and (392 to 393), which should be in direct contact
with the ligand ρ-methylbenzoate. This fact led to a significant
change in the area of catalytic site that was reflected in a
different affinity of the CersuLac1 by the ligands compared to
the template.

Based on the analysis of the Procheck software, the final
CersuLac1 model presented better stereochemical quality than
their templates, having all residues placed in the allowed
regions of Ramachandram plot. The residue Asp205 from
2HRG template structure is located at the ρ-methylbenzoate
binding site. According to the Procheck evaluation, this residue
is located in a generously allowed region of the
Ramachandram plot, which could compromise the redocking
simulations of the ρ-methylbenzoate in this structure.

The final modeled structure of CersuLac1 bonded to the pmethylbenzoate
and four copper ions is shown in 
and, its analysis by PDBsum server showed that its tertiary
structure is not very different from the templates used in its
construction. As a result, we can infer a high confidence level
that the same CATH structural classification identified in the
template must also be present in the CersuLac1 model.
According to CATH server domain, the regions between
residues 1 to 134, 135 to 310 and 311 to 498 would form three 
cupredoxins domains: blue copper proteins (cath id:
2.60.40.420).

Molecular docking:
When a protein is crystallized in the presence of ligand, both
the macromolecule and ligand assume a position that
maximizes their intermolecular interactions. However, in a
structure that was modeled in the presence of a ligand, this
mutual interaction is not taken into account, since modeling
programs are based on semi-empirical force fields to establish
such interactions and parameters for small ligands are
unavailable. As a result, the structure of the ligand is copied as
it appears in the template structure. Energy minimization of
the whole complex provides a way to strengthen the
interactions between protein and the ligand in modeled
complexes. Since accurate force fields for the ligands are
parameterized, their use in minimization softwares can cause
the complex interactions to be comparable to those found in a
crystal structure.

Taking this fact into consideration, the docking protocol was
validated by redocking the compound ρ-methylbenzoate in the
structure of template 2HRG and in the minimized structures of
CersuLac1. In both targets, the simulations were repeated ten
times in order to verify the reproducibility of the data, thus
avoiding false-positive results. The protocol applied uses the
software AutoDock-4.2.3, Lamarckian GA, box size 15, 15, 35
and 0.375 grid spacing around the center of the ligand. The
results obtained with redocking of ρ-methylbenzoate in 2HRG
showed a good overlap of the ligand in the first three poses of
lower energy (). All ten attempts provide an average
ΔGbinding of −2.46 kcal.mol-1 (± 0.009), which corresponds to a
theoretical Ki of 15.78 mM (± 0.218) and an rmsd of 1.57 Å (±
0.013). In the redocking of p-methylbenzoate in the CersuLac1,
the first four poses of all ten attempts appeared to be well
overlapped (). The best pose had an average ΔGbinding
of −2.08 kcal.mol-1 (± 0.013), which corresponds to a theoretical
Ki of 30.0 mM (± 0.73) and an rmsd of 1.71 Å (± 0.034).

These results suggest that the 2HRG must have twice as much
the affinity by the ρ-methylbenzoate as the CersuLac1.
Anyway, both Ki values are relatively high, which indicates
that this product should not be a good ligand for the laccase.
This may justify why there were no references in the literature
regarding experimental data for the reaction of laccase with ρ methylbenzoate.
Those rmsd values, although smaller than 2.0
Å, are relatively high, which would be expected in the docking
of a small ligand within a wide cavity, providing a greater
freedom of movement. This observation is compatible with the
highest value of thermal vibration factor (Bfactor) of the binder
in the crystallographic template 2HRG, which is 33.53 Å2,
being relatively high compared to the mean from the whole
structure, 19.70 Å2.

Regarding the docking of the compound diuron in the 2HRG
template structure, an average ΔGbinding of −4.53 kcal.mol−1 (±
0.027) corresponding to a theoretical Ki of 479.2 µM (± 21.11)
was obtained. The docking of this compound in CersuLac1
structure provides an average ΔGbinding of −3.46 kcal.mol−1 (±
0.008), which corresponds to a theoretical Ki of 2.91 mM (±
0.043). The images of the best poses of diuron in the template
and model structures are shown in . The best pose in
the docking of diuron on CersuLac1 is comparable to the
position of the ligand ρ-methylbenzoate. This pose is also
catalytic favorable for the oxidation of diuron [], where
His457 plays an important catalytic role, since the presence of
copper ions causes the protonation of this residue to be moved
from Nδ1 to the Nδ2 in order to make a hydrogen bond with
the dimethylurea oxygen of diuron (). According to
Claus [], the various copper centers of laccase oxidize the
substrate by transferring their electrons to molecular oxygen
without the release of toxic peroxide intermediates. This is
achieved through four monoeletronic oxidations of the
substrate catalyzed by the type 1 copper (Cu1 which interacts
with the residue His457 of modeled structure). The electrons
would be transferred to a trinuclear copper cluster (Cu2, Cu3
and Cu4), where the reduction of molecular oxygen and the
release of water occur.

The enzymatic oxidation of xenobiotic phenolic compounds by
laccases produces free radicals which react among themselves
to form dimers, oligomers or polymers covalently linked by
type C−C, C−O and C−N bonds []. In other cases, the reaction
may be accompanied by partial demethylation and/or
dehalogenation. The ability of laccase to carry out such
reactions is the basis for its potential application in
bioremediation, because it allows these compounds to interact
with the organic matrix of the soil []. It is well established
that the aerobic biodegradation pathways for diuron proceed
by successive demethylation steps to form DCPMU [1-(3,4-
dichlorophenyl)-3-methylurea], DCPU [1-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)
urea], and finally, 3,4-DCA (3,4-dichloroaniline) []. We
believe that the first two reactions are the most likely to be
catalyzed by laccase. It is probable that 3,4-DCA is not
produced by the laccase reactions, an interesting point if one
takes into account that this compound is more toxic than
diuron itself. It is important to note that diuron is a
chlorophenol compound and laccases have a well-known
dechlorination activity of chlorophenol compounds. The C.
subvermispora enzyme could thus promote direct
dechlorination similar to that described for the Picnoporus
cinnabarinus laccase (chlorinated hydroxybiphenyls) []; and
for the Trametes (Coriolus) versicolor laccase (several
chlorophenol compounds) [].

The calculated binding constant for the docking of diuron in
CersuLac1 is 2.91 mM, which is comparable to the MichaelisMenten
constant of laccases from other organisms binding
similar compounds. As examples, the laccase from
Toxicodendron vernicifluum has a KM between 2.3 and 3.9 mM
for the compound N,N-dimethyl-4-phenylenediamine [,
],
and the laccase of Fomes fomentarius has a KM of 2.92 mM for
the compound vanillic acid []. After careful analysis of these
observations, we believe that the results of the simulations
presented in this work suggest that the template structure
2HRG should have greater affinity to the compound diuron
than the CersuLac1. However, the affinity of CersuLac1 for
diuron determined in silico is also considerable, and suggests
that the enzymatic extract of this fungus containing this
enzyme could be a very promising alternative in the field of
bioremediation.

Conclusion
The structural model of the laccase-1 from Ceriporiopsis
subvermispora (CersuLac1) solved in this study has a similar
fold with lacases from Trametes trogii and Trametes sp (cath id:
2.60.40.420). This work gives evidences suggesting that
Ceriporiopsis subvermispora, a fungus commonly used in
bioremediation and degradation of lignocellulosic biomass
may also be used for the biotransformation of the herbicide
diuron, since there are no reports in literature regarding this
purpose. Our results also show structural insights into the
catalytic mechanism of fungal laccases, as the need of Histidin
Nδ2 protonation is coordinated by a copper ion, in order to
interact with ligand.

We thank Fundação Araucária and Coordenação de
Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES) for
their financial support and Centro Nacional de Processamento
de Alto Desempenho (Cenapad /SP, proj520) for
computational resources.

Citation:Vieira et al, Bioinformation 11(5): 224-228 (2015)

ClustalO sequence alignment of CersuLac1 with
templates 2HRG from Trametes trogii and 3KW7 from Trametes
sp. The first line on the alignment corresponds to the
prediction of secondary structure by PsiPred server, having the
alpha-helix in blue boxes and beta-strands in green boxes.
Yellow boxes indicate the regions of CersuLac1 with no match
in templates. Residues in red correspond to the glycosylation
sites, and residues in blue correspond to copper-binding site as
Uniprot notation for template 3KW7. Asterisks represent
identical residues while points, and two points represent
similar residues.

a) ribbon model of CersuLac1 showing ρ methylbenzoate
in gray and copper ions in blue; b) close view
of ρ-methylbenzoate binding site showing a salt bridge with
His457.

Redocking of the p-methylbenzoate (coral) over model (gray): a) structure 2HRG; b) CersuLac1.

Pose of the diuron after docking (coral) relative to the
reference ligand p-methylbenzoate (gray). In a) the structure of
the template 2HRG and b) the structure CersuLac1

Molecular structures of the two ligands used in this paper.

