Background &amp; Description
Inflammation is a physiological process in response to acute tissue damage
resulting from physical injury, ischemic injury, infection, exposure to
toxins, chemical irritation, and/or other types of trauma. Moreover, it is a
protective attempt by the organism to remove the injurious stimuli as well
as initiate the healing process for the tissue. Inflammation may become
chronic when an inflammatory stimulus persists. Some authors have
suggested the correlation between chronic inflammation and cancer. In
fact, while the inflammatory diseases increase the risk of developing many
types of cancer, some non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs reduce this
risk for certain cancers (for example, breast cancer) as well as their
mortality. Interestingly, inflammation is involved in all three stages of
tumor development: initiation, progression and metastasis.

Cytokines are among molecules that play an important role in the evolution
of these processes. They are proteins that are expressed before and during
the inflammatory process and play a key role at the various disease levels
so that they can be considered as specific markers of cancer and of its
specific evolutive steps (). It is now clear that these proteins
profoundly alter the metabolic pathways and, therefore, the homeostasis of
the organism.

In order to understand the whole universe of human cytokines, the socalled
cytokinome, according the “omics” system of definition, it needs to
evaluate these proteins and analyse their complex network of interactions
by which they regulate their own synthesis or that of their receptors, and
antagonize or synergize with each other in many and often redundant ways.
A major effort is the achievement of an efficient database that can collect
together correct ontologies, algorithms and tools of analyses, structural and
“omics” data of cytokines and their receptors, metabolic pathways, and the
whole interactome. Another intriguing problem related to the cytokine
family and their receptors is the pleiotropy existing in the cytokine system,
where one cytokine is able to activate various receptors and many different
cytokines activate the same receptor. When the frame of the whole
cytokine network will be known, we will have the possibility to create best
and more efficient drugs against the cancer, most probably able to interact
with the receptors rather than directly with the cytokine molecules because
of their pleiotropic effect. Another element of complexity in the cytokine
network is introduced also by the fact that some genes encoding cytokines
can give rise to variant forms of cytokines (isoforms) by means of 
alternative splicing, yielding molecules with slight structural differences
but biologically significant changes of activities. This explains why it is
always useful to analyze the gene expression profile correlated to the
cytokines. In fact, previous studies have identified important mutations in
lung cancers, but they were primarily focused on a limited set of genes
and, thus, provided a constrained view of the mutational spectrum. Recent
cancer sequencing efforts have used next-generation sequencing
technologies to provide a genome-wide view of mutations in leukaemia,
breast cancer and cancer cell lines.

However, a correct and comprehensive understanding of cytokine
functions can be obtained from simultaneous and coherent measurements
of the serum concentrations of cytokines. This point raises the inherent
difficulty of a simultaneous measurement of the cytokine concentrations to
obtain correct internal ratios among the various molecules present in the
same biological fluid due to the often large difference in concentrations
spanning several magnitude orders. At present, it is possible to effectively
characterize the serum levels of cytokines using a broad-spectrum beadbased
multiplex immunoassay.

In this complex interactions network, Systems Biology and/or Biologically
Integrated Approaches are powerful tools to analyze as a whole, the
enormous amount of data coming from the so-called “omics” disciplines
(genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics) by computational methods and
algorithms, in order to create an information body that allows us to have a
comprehensive and integrated vision of the biological phenomenon under
investigation. These datasets can be analyzed and modelled
computationally by using graphs or networks connecting the various data
groups (related to gene and protein expression obtained by microarrays and
by multiplex biometric ELISA-based immunoassay) in terms of dynamicprobabilistic
maps of metabolic and/or physiological activities and/or
pathogenetic pathways. Therefore, the definition and evaluation of a
human cytokinome is an important future tool to analyze the interaction
network of cytokines both in healthy individuals and in patients affected
from a cancer. Using these computational models it will be easier and
immediate to understand and investigate how the regression of a chronic
inflammation process, by acting on the cellular populations of cytokines,
can block the progression of the cancer and how this knowledge can be an
useful prognostic and diagnostic tool for clinicians.

Citation:Costantini et al; Bioinformation 5(4): 166-167 (2010)

Relationship between inflammation, cytokines and cancer

