Background
Butachlor, belongs to the chloroacetanilide class of herbicides,
are being used as a pre-emergence pesticide in modern
agriculture to control weeds, crop losses and production losses
in rice field []. Extensive use of herbicides in the agricultural
land has been reported to adversely affect the diversity, biology
or even sustainability of cyanobacteria []. They persist in
agricultural soils, ground and surface waters, as organic
pollutants [,
]. Its bioaccumulation in the ecosystem׳s primary
producers and subsequent propagation through the trophic
chain is a major concern [].

Cyanobacteria are an important component of microbial
population in wetland soils, especially in rice paddy fields,
where they significantly contribute to building-up soil fertility
as a natural biofertilizer []. They have been shown to degrade
organic pollutants including herbicides and transform their
original forms into other more or less toxic forms. Ateeq et al.,
[] demonstrated that the toxicity of butachlor is not only due to
parent compound, but also its degradation product such as
dialkylquinoneimine. Herbicides persist in fertile layer of soil
and harms non-target organisms of soil including cyanobacteria
by inducing oxidative stress leading to considerable losses in
crop yield [,
]. The effect of butachlor on growth and various
metabolic activities have been well documented. However, the
use of rice field cyanobacterial strain for the remediation of
butachlor and toxicity assessment is less explored. Therefore,
the objectives of the present study are to investigate the tolerant
mechanism of cyanobacterium Nostoc muscorum to butachlor
treatment and degradation of the butachlor.

Methodology
Organism and culture conditions:
Cyanobacterium Nostoc muscorum was originally obtained from
Ranjan Plant Physiology and Biochemistry Laboratory,
Department of Botany, University of Allahabad, Allahabad. The
culture was maintained in the culture room at 27 ± 2°C under 75
µmol m-2 s-1 photon flux density (PFD) with a photoperiod of
14:10 h. in the Department of Biosciences, Integral University,
Lucknow. CHU-10 medium was used without extra
supplementation of combined nitrogen for the growth. The
exponentially grown cyanobacterial cells were used throughout
the experiment.

Butachlor treatment:
The stock solution of butachlor was prepared by dissolving it
into the sterilized nutrient medium (Chu -10).Various required
concentrations of butachlor (5, 10, 20, 40 and 80 ppm) were
prepared from stock solution. For each experiment, the solution
of butachlor was freshly prepared and sterilization was done by
passing through a Millipore membrane filter (0.22 mm).

Survival and growth determination:
The survival of Nostoc muscorum against butachlor was
determined by viable cells count. Cyanobacterial cells (0.05 mL)
obtained from exponential phase, were inoculated onto agar
plates containing 5, 10, 20, 40 and 80 ppm of butachlor. After 15
days of incubation under growth conditions, the survival was
recorded by counting the colonies of cyanobacterium with
respect to untreated control. Growth of cyanobacterium was
measured by estimating dry mass at regular intervals up to 10
days of butachlor treatment as per the method of Sheeba et al.,
[].

Scanning Electron Microscopy:
Morphological alteration in the cells of cyanobacteria was
determined by Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) by
following the modified method of Goldstein et al. 
[] and
Hayat []. 
The cells of Nostoc muscorum (treated and control)
after centrifugation were chemically fixed with an equal amount
2 % glutaraldehyde (1, 5-glutaraldehyde) in a 0.1 M cacodylate
buffer (pH 7.2) for 20 min on ice bath. The samples were then
washed with same buffer and then by distilled water.
Cyanobacterial samples were then dehydrated in ethanol
followed by critical point drying. Afterwards, samples were
placed on stubs and coated with a layer of Gold –Palladium
alloy at 18 mA for 160 sec by Polaron Sputter Coater SC7640.
Finally the images were magnified to 25.00 KX and viewed with
LEO 430 Cambridge Scanning electron microscope.

SDS-PAGE analysis of proteins:
Sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS-PAGE) was done on 12 % polyacrylamide resolving gel
according to the method of Laemmli []. Approximately 25 µL
containing 25 µg protein from treated and untreated extracts
were loaded in each well.

GC-MS analysis:
2 µL of cyanobacterial extract in dichloromethane was subjected
to GC-MS/MS analysis. GC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on
a Trace GC Ultra coupled to TSQ Quantum XLS mass
spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). The separation was
achieved on a TG-5MS capillary column (30 m length × 0.25 mm
I.D. × 0.25 µm film thickness). Oven temperature was
programmed as follows: initial 70 °C (1.00 min); increased to 210
°C at the rate of 15 °C/min; further increased to 230 °C at a rate
of 2 °C/min; and finally increased up to 280 °C at the rate of 15
°C/min (5.00 min). Injection was performed in split less mode at
an injector temperature of 280 °C. Helium was used as carrier
gas at a flow rate of 1 mL/min. Quantification was performed in
selected reaction monitoring (SRM) mode. Two transitions were
used; the quantifier (237 → 160) and qualifier (176 → 146) for
butachlor.

Result
In response to butachlor treatment, a significant decrease in the
survival and growth of Nostoc muscorum was observed. Cell
survival of N. muscorum treated with different concentration of
butachlor was 86 %, 72 %, 52 %, 26 % and 8 % at 5, 10, 20, 40 and
80 ppm, respectively (). The viability of the cell could
also be reflected by changes in cell morphology, membrane
integrity, metabolic activities and the levels of biomolecules
such as protein and DNA. Scanning electron microscopy
observations showed that butachlor caused swelling in the cells
of the filament followed by separation. At high concentration
(80 ppm) of butachlor, cells collapsed and completely separated
from each other indicating the potential adverse effect of
butachlor on the cellular integrity and metabolic activities of N.
muscorum ().

 shows the effect of various concentrations (0, 5, 10, 20,
40 and 80 ppm) of butachlor on the growth pattern of N.
muscorum. It can be seen from the figure that butachlor
consistently inhibited the growth of N. muscorum in
concentration dependent manner. Upon increasing the
concentration of butachlor from 5 to 20 ppm, the growth of N.
muscorum declined from 20 to 76 % to that of control after 10
days of treatment. Further, increase in the butachlor
concentration (from 40 to 80 ppm) did not show any growth
even after 10 days of treatment, indicating the failure of the cell
system to come back in the active forms.

SDS – PAGE analysis of crude extract of protein isolated from
the control and butachlor treated Nostoc muscorum after 48 h of
treatment is shown in (). The bands resolved were
classified according to their molecular weight markers (lane-1).
Scanning of the gel indicated butachlor concentration at 10 ppm
resulted in the induction of one new polypeptide of 31 KDa
(lane-4) which can be seen more prominent at 20 ppm (lane-5)
concentration. In addition to this on increasing the
concentration, most of the polypeptides bands disappeared or
inhibited as compare to control. Further, the band of 42.7 KDa
was found over expressed at 10 and 20 ppm concentration of
butachlor.

The GC-MS study of butachlor suspension exposed to N.
muscorum are shown in  (see supplementary material)
and (). The major residues obtained after 72 h of
exposure were Phenol (RT: 8.72), 1, 2-Benzenedicarboxylic acid
(RT: 12.98) and Butachlor (RT: 15.68). Butachlor amount was
found left 0.408 µg/mL which is 8 % of the initial amount
(5ppm/5µg mL-1) indicating the uptake or breakdown of
butachlor by N. muscorum (). 

shows mass spectrum and structure of butachlor, respectively.

Discussion
The awareness related to the herbicide toxicity in
microorganisms, and their degradation is growing as a result of
increased investigation and improved modern techniques. In
the present study attempt has been made to evaluate butachlor
induced toxicity in Nostoc muscorum exposed to butachlor
treatment and its degradation.

Our findings show that Nostoc muscorum is sensitive to herbicide
butachlor at all the concentration used. A decrease in cell
survival was noticed with an increasing concentration of
butachlor indicating the dose dependent effect on cell survival
(). It might be due to damage caused at the level of bio
molecules or to the metabolic and physiological activities 
[,
].
Decline in the cell survival could be correlated with changes in
cell morphology () which reflects the status of
membrane integrity, metabolic and physiological activities and
on the levels of biomolecules such as ATP, proteins and nucleic
acids [,
].

Like cell survival, growth of N. muscorum was also inhibited by
increasing concentration of butachlor () which is in
agreement with the results of earlier workers [,
]. It has been
suggested that reduced growth of cyanobacterium N. muscorum
was due to inhibitory effect of herbicide on pigment synthesis,
photosynthetic activity and nitrogen metabolism [,
].

During various biotic and abiotic stress factors the equilibrium
between the production and the scavenging of ROS may
disturbed and lead to sudden increase in intracellular levels of
ROS which can cause significant damage to proteins, lipids,
carbohydrates, DNA and thereafter cell structures [,
].

Gel-electrophoretic investigation of protein profile
demonstrated that butachlor at the concentration of 10 and 20
ppm induced a polypeptide of ~31.0 K Da and over expression
of ~42.7 K Da (). This may be ascribed to the utilization
of the chemical itself or its degradation products providing
carbon skeleton for amino acid forming protein []. In another
study, new polypeptides of ~280, 152, and 25 K Da (in 250 ppm
Bavistin), ~58 and 28 K Da (in 0.3 and 0.2–0.4 ppm
monocrotophos, respectively) and ~31, 28, and 26 K Da (in 0.5
and 1.0 ppm Nimbicidin) were detected in the treated cells of
cyanobacterium []. Loss of polypeptides above 42.7 K Da 10
and 20 ppm of butachlor may be correlated with the enhanced
production of ROS. The reduction in the amount of butachlor
from the cell suspension as observed by GC-MS analysis after 72
h (), indicated the presence of 1, 2-
Benzenedicarboxylic acid and phenol. The reason behind the
degradation of butachlor at 5ppm could be due to active
metabolic activities at low dose of butachlor. Gushit et. al., 
[]
also found residues of 1, 2-Benzenedicarboxylic and phenol
from pesticide treated plants. In conclusion, it appears that
herbicide butachlor can cause damage to the biomolecules and
cell components of N. muscorum. However, the
breakdown/utilization of butachlor was observed at the low
concentration (5 ppm). Further, increased concentration has
adverse impact on the cell survival, morphology and protein
profile indicating the ROS mediated toxicity in the cells of N
muscorum. The toxic effects of butachlor may be due to its
original form or intermediate compounds which might have
induced the formation of ROS and.

Conflict of interest
The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Financial assistance to Miss Sumaiya Anees as a Maulana Azad
National Fellowship by UGC, New Delhi is gratefully
acknowledged. Authors are thankful to the Prof. (Dr.) A.K.
Srivastava, Head, Department of Biosciences for providing
necessary laboratory facilities and making arrangement for the
SEM and GC-MS analysis. Authors are also grateful to the Vice
Chancellor and Pro-Vice Chancellor for encouragement and
providing necessary facilities.

Citation:Anees et al, Bioinformation 10(6): 365-370 (2014)

effects of butachalar on cell survial of N. muscorum
measured after 15 days.Mean ± SE. All the treatments are
significantly different at P&lt;0.01.

Scanning electron micrographs of N.muscorum
treated with butachlor; (A) Control filament (B) 5ppm (C)
20ppm and (D) 80ppm.

Growth characteristic of N.muscorum under different
concentration of butachalor in liquid medium. Mean ± SE with
n=3.

The SDS-page of total protein of Nostoc muscorum
treated with different concentrations of butachlor, lane 2
(Control), lane 3 (5ppp), lane 4 (10ppm) and lane 5 (20ppm). The
polypeptide bands which became enhanced or appared in
response to butachlor is indicated by arow.

GC-MS determination of butachlor degradation in media including the 5ppm herbicide performed after 72hrs of
incubation (A) Total butachlor was found to be 0.408 mg/ml. (B) Mass spectra of butachlor (C) library match of butachlor (D) GCMS
chromatogram in full scan.

