Background
Using high-throughput gene expression microarrays, thousands of genes are now able to be profiled in a single analysis. The Affymetrix GeneChip® Human Exon 1.0 ST array has been designed to detect novel exons, spliced exons or sub-exons of a gene in human samples []. The exon 
array uses over 5.4 million probes representing about 1.4 million probesets that are designed based on the genomic regions of known genes and regions that may harbor hypothetical genes. Compared with other arrays including the Affymetrix Genome Human Focus® array, U95® and U133® series 
array, the probes on the exon array are designed to cover the whole gene region instead of the 3′-untranslated regions []. Additionally, gene structures are represented by the probe sets with each probe set on the exon array consisting of up to 4 perfect match probes transcribed to a 
region of the exon. This is quite different from previous Affymetrix gene expression arrays that contain a set of perfect match and mismatch set of oligonucleotides tiled onto the microarray that account for nonspecific hybridization [,]. However, studies have shown that SNPs within 
probes can affect hybridization of the 3′ expression arrays [] as well as the exon arrays [-]. Given that there are 5.4 million probes on this human exon array, there are more probes hybridizing to regions containing SNPs and the effect can be dramatic when evaluating exon level expression.

SNPs found in the probe-covered regions were shown to affect the hybridization efficiency of some probes and this can cause false relationships between the SNP genotypes and gene expression levels that are represented by the probes [-]. Furthermore, the hybridization difference 
of certain probes among individuals may not actually reflect the actual expression differences of the probe-representing regions but be due to the genotype differences of the common SNPs inside the hybridized sequences of the probes [-]. Quality control should include the identification 
of the probes containing SNPs in order to filter out the affected probes prior to expression analysis, thereby controlling the confounding effects that can be caused by these SNPs [,,].

Methodology
Dataset
The dataset [] contains the probes affected by the SNPs in their hybridization regions based on the dbSNP database (version 129, genome build 36, April, 2008) []. 

Development
The genomic positions (build 36) of over 18 million SNPs were retrieved in the dbSNP database (version 129). The sequences of over 5.4 million probes and over 1.4 million probe sets were downloaded at the Affymetrix website []. Since the probesets are given with the genomic regions 
(build 36), while the probes are still annotated with the old genomic regions (build 34), a local BLAT [] between probes and their probesets were performed to update the probe covered genomic regions. Then, a genome-wide search process was performed between ~18 million SNPs and over 
5.4 million probes to identify the probes affected by the probesets.

Database content
This database [] provides 597,068 probes within 350,382 probesets affected by the known SNPs in dbSNP (version 129).

Database usage
The user can download the list of affected probes and probesets [], and then apply the list to filter out the affected probes using the program provided by the Affymetrix Power Tools (1.8.6) (). This software is a free tool with the functionality to filter 
out a known set of probes. Removal of affected probes can be accomplished by using their highly experimental workflow through using the apt-probeset-summarize function together with the --kill-list function []. Resulting probeset intensities will be summarized solely on those probes not affected 
by SNPs. The generated expression data will be good for routine expression analysis.

Caveats
There are 111,685 probes (2% of the total probes) that failed in the BLAT process possibly due to the fact that they are the background controls. We also include them in the database [].

This Pharmacogenetics of Anticancer Agents Research (PAAR) Group http://pharmacogenetics.org) study was supported by the NIH/NIGMS grant U01GM61393.

The process of filtering out the affected probes by SNPs inside.

