Background
Betv1 an allergic protein with molecular wt of 17 kd is a constituent of
the pollen of white birch tree Betula verrucosa. White birch pollen is
one of the main causes of Type I allergic reactions (allergic
rhinoconjunctivitis, allergic bronchial asthma) in Middle and Northern
Europe, North America []. Type I allergy represents a major health
problem in these countries, since 10-15% of the population suffer from
these diseases. The structures of Betv1 were determined independently
by two methods X-ray diffraction and NMR spectroscopy []. The main
structural feature of Betv1 consists of a seven stranded anti-parallel β-
sheet that wraps around a 25 residue-long C-terminal amphipathic α-
helix. The β-sheet and the C-terminal part of the long helix are
separated by two small consecutive helices []. The presence of a large,
forked, hydrophobic, solvent-accessible cavity spanning through the
entire protein is the most unique feature of the structure. Besides, the
protein contains a Gly rich P-loop motif found in many nucleotide
binding proteins. The biological function of Betv1 has not yet been
elucidated. It is homologous to a group of pathogenesis-related proteins,
the PR-10 proteins, which are expressed in disease and stress condition	
[] such as during microorganism infection. Structural similarity of
Betv1 with the START domain of MLN64 [] suggests a similar
function for Betv1 as a steroid binding protein. Previous workers
identified a range of physiologically relevant ligands including fatty
acids, flavonoids and cytokinin that are able to bind in the cavity of
Betv1 with moderate to high affinity []. So far, no structural
information about the binding modes of any of these ligands into the
hydrophobic cavity of Bev1 is available. However these ligands i.e fatty
acids, flavonoids and cytokinins, are involved in a myriad of cell-cell
recognition and signaling events. Here, in this paper we employ
molecular docking to study possible interactions of these ligands into
the hydrophobic cavity of Bev1 using the program AutoDock 3.0.5 [].
The availability of experimentally determined IC50 values of these
ligands gives us a unique opportunity to correlate the same with the
binding free energies (ΔGb) derived from AutoDock. The complex
formed between the protein and the best docking pose for each ligand
has been optimized by molecular dynamics simulation. An implication
of these ligands for a possible biological function of Betv1 has also been
discussed.

Methodology
Docking
The crystal structure of Betv1 (pdb code: 1BV1) [] was obtained from
PDB []. The structures of ANS, kinetin, flavone and naringenin were
downloaded from Cambridge Structural Database (CSD) []. All other
ligands were constructed using the Biopolymer utility of the software
Insight II. Docking calculations were carried out using AutoDock 3.0.5
[]. The grid maps representing the protein in the actual docking
process were calculated with the aid of AutoGrid. The dimension of the
grid was 
40X40X40 points in each dimension for smaller ligands (ANS and lower chain length fatty acids) and

60X60X60 points in each dimension for rest with spacing of 0.375 Å between the grid points.

 Gasteiger charges computed by ADT (AutoDock tools) were
used on the atoms for each ligand. The AUTOTORS utility, included in
the AutoDock software, was used to define all possible torsions of
ligand molecules for the docking algorithm. Docking simulations were
carried out using the Lamarckian Genetic Algorithm, with an initial
population of 150 randomly placed individuals, a maximum number of
2,50,000 energy evaluations, a mutation rate of 0.02, a cross over rate of
0.08 and an elitism value of 1. For the local search, the pseudo-Solis
and Wets algorithm was applied. Each job consisted of 100 independent
runs. Finally, resulting docking orientations lying within 1.5 Å in the
root-mean square deviation (rmsd) tolerance of each other were
clustered together and represented by the result with the most favorable
free energy of binding (ΔGb). The lowest free energy conformers are
listed in .

MD simulation
Molecular dynamics simulations of all Betv1-ligand complexes as well
as the crystal structure of unliganded Betv1 were performed using the
GROMACS 3.3.1 package [] and gmx (modified GROMOS 87) force
field implemented on LINUX architecture. The ligand topology files
were prepared using PRODRG2 server []. The protein-ligand
complexes were solvated in a triclinic water box having a dimension of
7.22 nm containing approximately 8800 SPC water molecules. All
protein atoms are at a distance equal or greater than 1.0 nm from the
box edges. Appropriate number of NA+ ions was added to neutralize the
charge of the system followed by energy minimization for 2000 steps
by steepest descents. The minimized systems were equilibrated for 50
ps each at 300 K by position restrained molecular dynamics simulation in order to relax the solvent. The equilibrated systems were then
subjected to molecular dynamics simulations for 10 ns each at 300 K.
The LINCS algorithm [] was used to constrain bond lengths using a
time step of 2 fs for all calculations. Periodic boundary conditions
combined with the minimum image convention were used under
isothermal, isobaric conditions using Berendsen coupling algorithm
[] with relaxation times of 0.1 ps and 0.5 ps respectively.
Electrostatic interactions were calculated using the Particle Mesh Ewald
(PME) [] summation scheme. van der Waals and Coulomb
interactions were truncated at 0.9 nm. The non-bonded pair list was
updated every 10 steps and conformations were stored every 2 ps.
Secondary structure analysis was performed using the program DSSP
[]. Other analyses were performed using scripts included with the
Gromacs [] distribution. LPC software []was used to calculate the
ligand-protein interactions.

Discussion
Molecules 1-13 () have been successfully docked into the
hydrophobic cavity of Betv1. AutoDock estimates binding free energies
(ΔGb) based on AMBER force field and empirical weighting factors.
 shows the results of the docking experiments: calculated free
energy of binding for the ligands and their corresponding IC50 values.
We have plotted ΔGbs values against the corresponding IC50 and
obtained a good linear relationship with correlation coefficient (R2) of
0.6. The complex formed between the protein and the best docking pose
for each ligand has been optimized by molecular dynamics simulation.

Interaction with ANS
Previous NMR study indicates that fluorescent probe 8-anilino-1-
naphthalenesulfonic acid (ANS) binds in the cavity of Betv1 but the
authors did not pinpoint specific ANS binding site []. Our docking and
subsequent molecular dynamics simulation result of ANS shows that it
is involved in hydrophobic interaction with side-chains of residues
Ile23, Phe30, Pro31, Ile38, Val41, Lys54, Ile56, Ile102, Ile116 and
Leu143 of Betv1 (). The anilino and naphthalene-sulphonic
acid moiety of ANS interact with the side-chain residues of Phe30,
Phe58, Tyr81 and Phe22, Phe30, Phe58, Tyr81, Tyr83 respectively via
π-π interaction. Our result corroborates well with the NMR experiment
where the perturbed protons are shown to form a large patch along the β
sheet and several distinct regions in α–helices []. Most of the
interacting residues found in our study also belong to these two regions.

Interaction with Fatty acids
It has been shown experimentally that fatty acids are important ligands
for Betv1 []. Our result with lower chain fatty acids (caprylate,
caprate and laurate) shows that the binding modes of these fatty acids
into the cavity of Betv1 are quite similar. The C atoms of these fatty
acids make hydrophobic interactions with side chains residues of
Phe22, Ile23, Gly26, Phe30, Tyr81, Tyr83, Ile102, Ile116, Gly140 of
Betv1 (). The binding affinity of fatty acids increases with the
rise in the number of C atoms (). Betv1 displays highest
affinities for medium length fatty acids (myristic, palmitic and stearic)
(). These medium length fatty acids generate several new
hydrophobic interactions with the adjacent apolar residues i.e Ala21,
Val41, Ile56, Phe58, Phe64, Val85, Leu114, Met139 in addition to the
above mentioned interactions occurring between small chain fatty acids
and Betv1. These additional hydrophobic interactions stabilize medium
chain fatty acids even more into the cavity of Betv1. Saturated and
unsaturated fatty acids (stearic acid and oleic acid) exhibit quite similar
binding affinity for Betv1 (). Our results are in agreement with
the previous experimental results, which show that the binding affinity
of fatty acids with Betv1 increases from lower to medium chain fatty
acids and the unsaturation has no effect on binding [].

Interaction with Flavonoids
Flavone and 4',5,7-trihydroxyflavone (naingenin) are two important
plant pigments belonging to the flavonoid group. These compounds are
shown to bind Betv1 with moderate affinity []. The exact binding site
has not been suggested in that study. Our result shows that the binding
modes of flavone and naringenin within the cavity of Betv1 are quite
similar and both the compounds show similar binding affinities (). Flavone and naringenin adopt a position in a hydrophobic cage
surrounded by residues Phe22, Phe23, Phe30, Ile38, Val41, Ile56,
Phe58, Val71, Tyr81, Tyr83, Ile102, Leu114, Ile116, Met139 and
Leu143 (). The benzopyran group of flavone has strong
hydrophobic interaction with side chain of residues Ile23, Ile38, Ile56,
Ile102, Leu114, Ile116 and Leu143, while the phenyl group interacts
with Ile56, Val71, Lys54 and Lys46. In addition to these residues
benzopyran and phenyl group of naringenin have additional
hydrophobic interaction with Phe22, Phe30, Tyr83 and Ile23,
respectively. The phenyl and benzopyran moieties of the flavones make
a strong π-π interaction with residues Phe22, Phe30, Tyr81 and Try83.

Interaction with Cytokinins
Cytokinins are plant growth hormones that regulate differentiation and
proliferation of plant cells []. N6-(Δ2-isopentenyl)adenine (IPA) and
N6-furfuryladenine (kinetin) are two extremely potent cytokinins. Our
result shows that the adenine ring of kinetin and IPA interacts
hydrophobically with Gly46, Asn47 and Gly48, residues belonging to
the P-loop motif (-G-X-G-G-X-G) of Betv1 (). In addition to
these residues cytokinins interact with Ile23, Leu24, Phe30, Thr52,
Val71, Val74, Tyr81 and Ile102 of Betv1 via hydrophobic contact. The
adenine ring of kinetin forms two hydrogen bonds, one with ND atom
of Asn47 and the other with main chain N atom of Gly49, while the
adenine ring of IPA forms two hydrogen bonds, one with the side chain
O atom of Asn28 and the other with main chain O atom of Leu24. Our
result is in agreement with the previous experimental study, which
shows that cytokinins bind near the P-loop motif of Betv1 [].

Interaction with DHE
Dehydroergosterol (DHE), a naturally occurring sterol with similar
properties to cholesterol is capable of binding within the hydrophobic
cavity of Betv1. DHE interacts with Betv1 via extensive van der waals
contacts between the hydrophobic side-chains lining the binding cavity
(Phe22, Ile23, Phe30, Ile38, Val41, Ile56, Phe58, Leu62, Pro63, Phe64,
Val67, Val85, Ile98, Ile102, Met139 and Leu143) and the polycyclic
ring system of DHE (). The binding mode of DHE within the
hydrophobic cavity of Betv1 is very similar to deoxycholate an
important family of plant steroid []. Most of the residues involved in
the interaction of both the ligands are highly conserved.

Implications of ligand binding on biological function of Betv1
Betv1 is an allergenic protein, which release allergenic proteins via their
pollen or accumulate allergens in tissues used for the production of
plant food []. The internal cavity of Betv1 plays a key role in the
biological function of Betv1. The presence of large quantities of Betv1
in pollen grain suggests that Betv1 is involved in the processes leading
to plant reproduction such as germination of pollen grain on stigma,
directional pollen tube growth and fertilization []. Most of the ligands
studied here such as cytokinins, fatty acids, flavones participate in such
processes. Cytokinins are plant growth hormones that control
differentiation and proliferation of plant cells []. It has been suggested
that cytokinin binding proteins may act as storage compartments for
cytokinins in seeds allowing rapid release of cytokinins upon
germination []. Fatty acids are responsible for hydration of the pollen
grain. They form a watertight seal between pollen and stigma
facilitating rapid transport of water into the pollen through channels in
the stigma and pollen membranes. Favonoids are required for pollen
fertility []. The ability of Betv1 to bind long chain fatty acids and
flavonoids suggests probable role for Betv1 in ensuring proper
hydration and germination of pollen by transporting the lipids or
flavonoids to the stigmatic surface and releasing them there []. Our
study demonstrates that these naturally occurring ligands bind to Betv1
with moderate to high affinity. Binding modes of these ligands with
Betv1 has also been studied. Since these ligand-binding activity is an
important aspect of the biological function of Betv1 structural
modification or inhibition of some of these ligands could modify the
biological function of this protein.

Conclusion
In the present study thirteen ligands have been successfully docked into
the hydrophobic cavity of Betv1 and binding free energies of the
complexes have been calculated using AutoDock 3.0.5. A linear
relationship with correlation coefficient (R2) of 0.6 is obtained between
ΔGbs values plotted against their corresponding IC50 values. The
complex formed between Betv1 and the best docking pose for each
ligand has been optimized by molecular dynamics simulation. We
described the ligand binding of Betv1, which provides insight into the
biological function of this protein. This knowledge is required for
structural alteration or inhibition of some of these ligands in order to
modify the allergenic properties of this protein.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This study was supported by grants from Department of Biotechnology
Govt. of India.

Citation:Lim et al, Bioinformation 4(7): 326-330 (2010)

Overview of the structure of the ligands for Betv1.

(A) Graphical representation of docked orientation of ligands 1, 2 and 7 with Betv1. Compounds 1, 2 and 7 are shown in pink, cyan and
blue respectively. (B): Graphical representation of docked orientation of ligands 9, 12 and 13 with Betv1. Compounds 9, 12 and 13 are shown in
cyan, pink, and blue respectively. P-loop is shown in red.

