Background
A phylogenetic tree is a graphic representation of the
evolutionary relationships of species, and the phylogenetic
distances among the species reflect the closeness of
evolutionary relationships. Traditional construction of
phylogenetic trees was mainly based on physical similarities
and differences. However, the way of the measurement has
been changed due to the generation of huge amounts of
biological data. For instance, high-throughput sequencing
technologies have generated genome sequences in several
thousand organisms. A genomic sequence is basically a string
of four different kinds of nucleotides (A, C, G and T), with the
length from hundreds of thousands to millions. It has been
widely accepted that the genomic sequences are highly similar
for evolutionary closed organisms, but not similar for
evolutionary distant organisms. Therefore, genomic sequences
have been widely used for building phylogenetic trees 
[–].

The construction of phylogenetic trees using genomic sequences
does have some issues. The genomic sequences are usually
long, thus comparing genomic sequences across species for
building phylogenetic trees is computationally expensive. On
the other hand, living organisms in a small niche frequently
exchange their genetic materials each other, also known as
horizontal gene transfer, making it harder to determine
evolutionary relationships based on genomic sequences only.
Furthermore, current genomic sequence similarity
measurement cannot truly reveal evolutionary relationships
across the species. Thus, it is necessary to use other data and
methods to reveal true relationships [].

In parallel to the high-throughput genome sequencing
technologies, high-throughput metabolic data have also been
generated in the past decade. The study of using of metabolic
data for biological studies is also known as Metabolomics. The
metabolic data from organisms are very informative since they
can reveal internal metabolism mechanisms. Theoretically,
evolutionary distant species should have different metabolic
activities and patterns, while closely related species should
have similar metabolic patterns. Therefore, it is desirable to use
metabolic data for phylogenetic exploration, or complement the
gene-based phylogenetic exploration to some degree.

Metabolic data have been mined and annotated, and
corresponding metabolic related databases have been built for
scientific communities. For example, KEGG [] is one of
databases hosts the Network of Interacting Pathways (NIPs).
NIP is a useful resource for phylogenetic distance analysis. The
quantitative annotations of metabolic reaction pathways can
facilitate for identifying phylogenetic distances [].

As we know, metabolic reaction pathways can be represented
as directed or undirected graphs. The nodes in graphs can
either be represented as metabolites that are linked by the
enzymes, or be represented as enzymes linked by metabolites.
Thus, using the information encoded in the graphs can reveal
evolutionary relationships across the species.

We can compute phylogenetic distances using actual node
information such as enzymes or metabolites in the graphs.
Some issues [] of using this approach include: (a) the existence
of so-called ubiquitous metabolites. For instance, water, can
involve functionally far metabolites together without real
biological meaningful representatives; (b) Structures of such
networks are highly delicate to inappropriate citation; (c) The
induction of some enzymes in a set of reactions may not be the
ones which are really involved in those referenced species.

Methodology
In this paper, we aim to reveal phylogenetic distances across the
species using structural information, rather than detailed node
information in the graphs. We use the data of metabolic
reactions, which are represented as a directed network of
interacting pathways (NIPs), and from KEGG Metabolic
Relation Network (Directed) Data Set []. In the relation
network, enzymes and genes are represented as nodes, while
the substrate and product compounds are represented as edges.
The related structural information from the graphs was used for
computing phylogenetic distances. By utilizing this higher
functional approach—metabolic networks, we anticipate
revealing phylogenetic relationships across the species.

Description of data set:
We collected the processed dataset for KEGG Metabolic
Relation Networks from UCI machine learning repository 
[].
This dataset has 53,414 instances in total, each of which
represents the derived structural information of a metabolic
reaction of any species. The structural information is
characterized by 24 features. The features types include integer,
real and text. The detailed description of all 24 features for
graph structures is listed in  (see supplementary
material).

Data processing:
The flow chart of our approach is outlined in (), and the
detailed description of each step is presented as follows:

(a) Partition pathway feature:
For each instance of the dataset,
the first attribute consists of two parts. In order to cluster every
species, and calculate the distances based on pathway's
variation, the pathway feature must be split into species
identifier and pathway identifier. For example, aac00010 is one
from the original dataset file, representing the metabolic
reaction of Glycolysis Gluconeogenesis (00010) for the species of
Alicyclobacillus acidocaldarius subsp. acidocaldarius DSM 446
(aac). We broke it into aac and 00010.

(b) Select target species:
The original dataset covered 788
species (including eukaryotes and prokaryotes), and 117
pathways  (see supplementary material) shows the first
ten pathway IDs and names. Due to the fact that not all species
have all 117 pathways, we want to select those species that have
at least minimum number of pathways for our study. To do so,
we constructed a zero-one matrix which is based on species and
pathways. Based on the zero-one matrix, we set a threshold of
pathways' number so that we pick the species with large
number of related pathways.

(c) Refine the target instances:
Even if we pick those species
with high number of pathways, we cannot guarantee that any
two species have the same pathways. In most cases, the
pathways in these species could be overlapped. For instance,
species #1 may contain pathways #10, #20 and #30, while
species #2 may contain pathways #10, #20 and #40. Most of
selected species will miss some pathways out of 117 pathways,
which is problematic when such data are applied in distance
calculation in next step. To resolve this problem, we filled those
missing pathways using the average values of existing
pathways.

(d) Calculate Euclidean distances:
Generally, the input for the
clustering algorithms is the similarity or distance matrix
between entities in the data. There are various distance (or
similarity) metrics, and they all produce broadly similar results
[]. In this study, we have chosen the most commonly used
distance metric, Euclidean distance (For formula see
).

Clustering algorithm:
Clustering is an unsupervised learning algorithm that finds the
hidden structure in the unlabeled data. In this study, we used
the hierarchical clustering, which is based on the core idea of
objects being more related to nearby objects than to objects
farther away. We choose Cluster 3.0 [] to cluster our processed
data. The results were visualized by Java TreeView [].

Discussion
In order to test the effectiveness of our approach, we separated
the original dataset into subgroups, one group for the
eukaryotic species, and other group for the prokaryotic species.
Thus, we produced two distance matrices, one for eukaryotic
organisms, and the other for the prokaryotic organisms. For the
eukaryotic organisms, we set the threshold of 80 for the
minimum number of pathways for each species, and we
selected 23 species, and a distance matrix of 23 × 23 was
produced. For the prokaryotic organisms, we set the threshold
of 90 for the minimum number of pathways for each species,
and we selected 30 species, and a distance matrix of 30 × 30 was
produced.

We have applied Cluster 3.0 on these two groups of datasets,
and used Java TreeView to generate the dendrograms (or
phylogenetic trees) for each of the dataset.  &amp; 
 show
the dendrograms of eukaryotic species and prokaryotic species
respectively, with the lengths of the branches reflecting the
distances between species. Therefore, the shorter the branches,
the evolutionarily closer the species are, and the longer the
branches, the evolutionarily more distant the species are.

From the phylogenetic tree in (), we can find some
interesting results. For instance, we can see the closest species
with human beings is Mus musculus, so-called house mouse. To
understand why these two species stay close, we did literature
search about the closeness of these two species. We found that
almost all genes in the mouse were also present in humans.
Actually, researchers have reported that approximately 99% of
mouse genes have counterparts in humans []. Therefore, it is
not such a surprise that the phylogenetic distance between mice
and humans,

In , we can also see that the two plant species,
Arabidoposis thaliana, and Oryza sativa japonica (also known as
Japanese rice) stay close in the dendrogram, which is consistent
with our expectations.

 shows the dendrogram of 30 prokaryotic organisms.
Like the tree for the eukaryotes, most of phylogenetically close
species stay very close. For instance, two Escherichia coli (O1
39:H28 E24377A, and O9 HS) are very close in the tree, two
Bradyrhizobium (sp. BTAi1 and sp. ORS 278) are in the same
branch. The dendrogram result for the prokaryotes also
strongly indicates the effectiveness of our approach.

Conclusion
In this paper, we have reported our approach that uses the
information of metabolic reactions to unveil the relation of
evolution among species. The main contribution of this research
is to demonstrate that with the usage of clustering, the
phylogeny of species can be constructed by a higher level
functional component—metabolomics. While we only relied on
the structural information from these metabolic reactions, our
experimental results have shown that our approach is pretty
accurate in most of cases, strongly indicating that effectiveness
of our approach.

We do realize that the evolutionary distances for some species
were not accurately characterized in our study. The
inaccurateness could be caused by the followings: i) The
missing data of pathways within some species, where we used
the average values to fill them up; ii) for each pathway, we
treated them the same weights in computing the distance of
phylogeny. We hope more metabolic data will be available to
fill the gap, and a sophisticated weight schemes for different
pathway may help improve our approach.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This research was partially supported by President Research
Fund, FDR major grant, and FDR mini grant at East
Stroudsburg University, USA.

Citation:Wan &amp; Che, Bioinformation 9(7): 363-367 (2013)

Flow Chart of Our Approach.

Phylogenetic Tree of Eukaryotes.

Phylogenetic Tree of Prokaryotes.

