Background
The human immune deficiency virus type 1(HIV-1) Tat (trans acting
activator of transcription), is one of the essential
proteins, which directly enhances HIV-1 replication through
interaction with HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR) promoter
[]. 
Tat is therefore a promising target for developing HIV-1
vaccines and anti-HIV-1 drugs [–
]. Unlike viral essential
enzymes, such as protease and reverse transcriptase, Tat
undergoes continuous substitutions due to host selection
pressure [], 
leading to viral escape from Tat-specific CD8-
positive T-lymphocyte responses [–
]. The sequence variation
of target epitopes in Tat reduces antibody recognition and
neutralization [,
]. Molecular characterization of full-length
Tat in globally circulating strains is therefore imperative.

is a 101-amino acid protein encoded by two exons (exon 1:
1 to 72 residues, and the exon 2: 73 to 101 residues) in most of
the clinical isolates []. 
As shown in , Tat has been
categorized into six different functional domains [,
]. The
first domain (residues 1 to 21) is the N-terminal acidic domain
consisting of a Pro-rich tract and a conserved Trp residue at the
position 20 (Trp20) []. The second domain (residues 22 to 37)
contains a highly conserved seven Cys tract at positions 22, 25,
27, 30, 31, 34, and 37 [,
]. The third domain (residues 38 to 48)
contains a hydrophobic core sequence: 43LeuGlyIleSerTry
Gly48 []. The fourth domain (residues 49 to 57) is a positively
charged region composed of a well-conserved arginine-rich
motif, 49-ArgLysLysArgArgGlnArgArgArg-57, and acts as a
transactivation response element (TAR) binding domain 
[].
This domain has an extra ordinary property for nuclear
localization [,
] and protein transduction, thus it has also
been used to deliver various molecules inside the cells in vitro
[–]. 
The fifth domain (residues 58 to 72) is a Gln rich region
[,
], and the fourth and fifth domains (residues 49 to 72) are
known as basic domains for transactivation [,
,
]. The sixth
domain (residues 73 to 101) encoded by the exon 2 is known as
RDG domain; this domain contains the highly conserved Glu
Ser Lys Lys Lys Val Glu motif, which is related to optimal
HIV-1 replication in vivo [], thereby, the region may
contribute to viral infectivity and binding to cell-surface
integrins [,
]. It is therefore worthwhile to investigate the
genetic diversity of HIV-1 full-length Tat in commonly
circulating subtypes, which has an impact on clinical outcome
of HIV disease as well as success of Tat-based vaccination and
Tat-targeted antagonists. However, updated information
regarding the evolution of HIV-1 focusing Tat protein at the
global level is still unavailable. We therefore performed
phylogenetic, selection pressure, and mutation analyses to
understand diversity of Tat and its phylogenetic relationships
between the subtypes using global data sets of sequences in
subtypes B and C, the two major subtypes of HIV-1 circulating
worldwide [].

Methodology
Sequence data:
Full-length HIV-1 Tat sequences were collected from the ‘Web
alignment’ in the Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL)
HIV sequence database []. The sequences were downloaded
on February 2, 2014. Notably, the sequences ‘up to 2012’ were
available on the accessed date. A total of 2156 sequences were
initially downloaded. Sequence data of the other subtypes than
subtype B or C, and of circulating recombinant forms (CRFs)
were then excluded. Consequently, totals of 713 and 353
sequences for subtype B and subtype C, respectively, were
obtained. The sequence data for full-length coding regions
were only used after eliminating the problematic sequences.

The reference strains for subtype B and C sequences were also
obtained from the Los Alamos HIV-1 sequence data base. The
reference sequences were also downloaded on February 2,
2014. As the reference sequences, accession numbers AY423387
(Europe), AY173951 (Asia), and AY331295 (North America) for
subtype B and AF067155 (India), U52953 (South America), and
AY772699 (Africa) for subtype C were used for alignment.
Finally, we prepared a data set of totals of 493 and 280
sequences for subtype B and subtype C, respectively, which
contained 100 amino acids encoded by 300 nucleotides (nt)
from the positions 5831 to 6045 nt in exon 1 and 8379 to 8463
nt in exon 2, respectively of HXB2 genome (GenBank accession
No. K03455), the details information of the sequences (the
isolation year, isolated country etc), were mentioned in Table 1
(Available with authors). A multiple-sequence alignment of
the nucleotide sequences (without any gap) was made using
the ClustalW []. The divergence of sequences was
schematically visualized using Weblogo 
[].

Estimating Phylogenetic tree:
Maximum likelihood method was employed to built the
phylogenetic trees. Notably, the method was selected as the
best model by model test performed in MEGA 6 
[]. A
discrete gamma distribution was used to measure the
evolutionary rate differences among sites (5 categories) and the
analyses were done using 1,000 bootstrap replicates. The tree
was rooted by using following reference strain: simian
immune deficiency virus (SIV) sequence, CPZ.US.85.US_
Marilyn.AF103.

Selection pressure analysis:
Global (ω) value of relative rates of non-synonymous (dN) and
synonymous (dS) substitutions were calculated to measure the
positive selection strength []. All analyses were carried out
using the online Datamonkey facility [–
] after identifying
the best fit model from every possible time-reversible model.
Positive selection pressure analysis was performed at whole
gene and site-by-site codon level using three likelihood
methods: single-likelihood ancestor counting (SLAC), fixed
effects likelihood (FEL), and interior branches Fixed Likelihood
(iFEL). Briefly, in the SLAC method, the mean ratio of nonsynonymous
changes per non-synonymous site (dN) and the
synonymous changes per synonymous site (dS) were
measured using SLAC which considered inferred ancestral
sequences for each internal node in a phylogeny using a codon
model and then, calculated the synonymous and nonsynonymous
mutations by comparing each codon to its
immediate ancestor. The FEL method is based on maximumlikelihood
estimates. This method estimates the ratio of nonsynonymous
to synonymous substitutions on a site-by-site
basis for the entire tree. iFEL is principally the same as FEL,
except that selection is only tested along the internal branches
of the phylogeny. To detect co-evolving sites from multiple
alignments of amino acid sequence data and to identify
significant associations among sites, we applied the Bayesian
graphical models (BGM) method implemented in
Spidermonkey through the Datamonkey web-based interface
[].

Results
Sequence homology and Mutation analysis:
Nucleotide sequence identities of HIV-1 Tat subtypes B and C
were 81% and 84%, respectively. In comparison to subtype C,
amino acid substitutions were more frequently observed in
subtype B, as shown in  (see supplementary material).
Amino acid sequences diversity in both subtypes B and C were
illustrated by sequence logo (). The detailed
substitution positions in each domain were described below
following HXB2 numbering in both subtypes (the position of
amino acid, aa, which had major changes).

In domain I, we found that positions 1, 11, 14, 15, and 16were
completely conserved in both subtypes; in addition, Asp5 in
subtype C was also completely conserved. Notably, Lys12Asn
(90%) and Ala21Pro (53%) were frequently observed only in
subtype C.

In domain II, among the conserved Cys positions, Cys27 in
subtype B and Cys22 and Cys34 in subtype C were completely
conserved.Lys28 in subtype B and His33 in subtype C were
also found as completely conserved in our analysis. Cys31Ser
was observed in subtype C (83%), and all sequences of subtype
C in our data sets were substituted as Phe32Tyr.

In domain III, we found mutations in all positions in this
domain except Lys41 in subtype C and Gly48 in subtype B. In
subtype C, 80% sequences were substituted as Ile39Gln. In
both subtypes, most of the sequences contained Ala42Gly
(99%).

In domain IV, the consensus Arg-rich motif provided two of
the key functions of Tat, nuclear localization and membrane
transduction [–
], a total of 6 Arg at the positions 49, 52, 53,
55, 56, and 57. We did not find any conserved Arg position in
subtype B. Only positions 49 and 55 were found conserved in
subtype C accompanied with Arg57Ser substitution
predominantly (88%). In domain V, only Gln66 was conserved
in both subtypes; besides, Gln72 was almost completely
conserved in subtype Band subtype C. For other sites,
His59Pro substitution was apparent in both subtypes (81% and
95% in subtype B and C, respectively). In addition, Asn61Asp
(64%) and Asn67Val (44%) in subtype B, and also Gln60Pro
(89%), Asn61Ser (92%), Gln63Glu (75%), Thr64Asp (87%),
Ala67Asn (73%), and Lys69Ile (61%) substitutions were
frequently found in subtype C.

The domain VI also known as the RGD (Arg-Gly-Asp) domain,
and RGD is a ligand for several integrins, which play
important roles in HIV replication and cell surface binding 
[,
,
]. Even though representative conserved domain in Tat
was well maintained in both subtypes, we observed genetic
variation in the sixth domain of our data set. In subtype B,
87Ser (77%) was most frequently found with many different
substitutions in small percentages atother positions of exon 2.
In subtype C, high frequencies of substitutions were observed,
includingThr74Leu (92%), Pro77Thr (79%), Pro84Ser (80%),
Lys85Glu (89%) and 87Ser (95%) indicating that this domain is
also variable. In subtype C Tat exon 2, we mostly observed
substitutions, 93Ser (98%) and 94Lys (97%).Overall, we found
genetic variation in domains IV, V, and VI, which may have an
impact on the functional properties of Tat, such as Tat-TAR
interactions, protein transductions as well as cell surface
binding and replication. The summary of substitutions was
shown in  (see supplementary material).

Phylogenetic inference:
Analysis of the phylogenetic relationship was performed using
the maximum likelihood (ML) tree based on the nucleotide
sequences of subtypes B and C (). The phylogeny
of Tat in subtype B featured with well intermixing of
sequences among the different continents. The wide genetic
diversity and several poorly defined clusters were observed in
the sequences particularly in the strains from USA, South
America and Europe. However, Asian strains, especially Thai
and Korean strains clustered together distinctly, may result
from different single introduction. In subtype C, it was hard to
define clear clustering ().In the tree, the majority of
subtype C strains were found in Africa and those African
stains did not show any monophyletic distribution, and there
was a interspersing of Asian, South American and European
strains with African stains. Overall, we observed a slow and
continuous introduction of new HIV-1 strains in different parts
of the world with repeated cross-border transmission as
reflected by diffuse distributions and intermixing of the
different HIV-1 variants in both subtypes B and C.

Analysis for selection pressure:
Global ω values for the nucleotide sequences of Tat in subtypes
B and C were 0.883 and 0.760, respectively (less than 1),
indicating that there is no detectable positive selection on the
entire Tat genes. We found that a total of 23 and 18 amino acid
positions in subtypes B and C, respectively, were under
significant positive selection based on the FEL, iFEL and SLAC
methods. The detailed positively selected codons with
statistical significance were calculated with SLAC, FEL, and
iFEL methods as shown in  (see
supplementary material). Position Thr40 in the third domain
was positively selected in both subtypes by all three methods.
We found several positively selected sites in the basic region of
Tat, such as Ser68 and Ser70 in both subtypes; His59, Asn61,
Ser62, and Thr64, His65 in subtype B; and Ala58, Ala67, and
Leu69 in subtype C. Remarkably, in both subtypes of exon 2,
Ser75, Pro77, Asp80, Pro81, and Ser87 were positively selected
by all 3 methods.

Discussion
We observed high genetic diversity in HIV-1 full length Tat in
both subtypes B and C irrespective of their region of origin as
revealed by the phylogenetic tree and mutation analysis.
Genetic diversity reflected by relative branch lengths in the
phylogenetic tree, particularly in subtype B suggests that the
clustering occurs due to the transmission network at
individual or at local level. Previous study also showed high
genetic divergence of HIV-1 Tat exon-1 in both subtypes 
[].
Furthermore, we found several positively selected sites located
in the sixth domain of Tat encoded in exon 2. We found
substitutions even in highly conserved Cys-rich and49Arg Lys
Lys Arg Arg Gln Arg Arg Arg57 domains. In addition, we
found a Ser31Cys substitution (both belong to nucleophilic
amino acid group) in HIV-1 subtype C as described previously
[]. Absence of a critical Cys31 in the Cys-rich domain has
been reported only in subtype C []; this position may play a
role in evolution of subtype C. In fact, we observed
substitutions such asArg57Gly or Thr in subtype B, Arg57Ser
in subtype C, and Gln63Asn in both subtypes B and C, which
are within and close to the basic domains, respectively.
Interestingly, we found position 63 was under significant
diversifying selection for subtype B. However, position 57 was
not positively selected in either subtype. Rather, it showed
purifying selection in subtype B (data not shown). Previous
study showed that mutated Tat in HIV-1 subtype C in those
sites exhibited greater transcriptional activity in Jurk at cells
compared with subtypes B and E, without LTR sequence
dependency [,
]. Overall, the amino acid diversity that we
found in well conserved positions is likely to have an impact
on Tat mediated viral transcription as described previously
[,
,
].

We have found that Ser68 and Ser70 positions in the basic
domains were positively selected in both subtypes which were
previously reported as genetically variable region 
[], and we
also observed similar results. This result implies that changes
in amino acids in basic region may have a functional impact,
and those changes may fix in the virus population. However,
further in vitro experiment is needed to validate this
hypothesis. We found that positions encoded in exon 2 such as
Ser75, Pro77, Asp80, Pro81, and Ser87 were positively selected.
As reported previously, exon 2 plays a role in the kappa-lightchain
enhancer of activated B cell-(NF-κB) dependent control
of HIV-1 transcription in T cells [,
]. It has been previously
reported that unlike laboratory-passaged strains, such as HIV-
1HXB2 with premature stop codon at position 87, majority of
HIV-1 strains encode 101 amino acids without any truncation
beyond the position 86 []. We found Ser87 in subtypes B and
C which was positively selected. As previously noted, the
existence of two exons is essential to maintain stability of Tat in
vivo []; therefore, this position may be crucial to maintain the
functional stability of Tat. Again, mutations of the exon 2 were
found particularly at intimately networked coevolving sites
with exon1 in the fourth, fifth, and sixth domains (data not
shown). This may also have some impact on HIV mRNA
transcription through Tat-TAR interaction and initiation of
reverse transcription, which were previously reported as
influenced by genetic variation of Tat [,
].

Developing antivirals targeting the interaction site between
HIV-1 Tat and TAR has been under process []. In addition,
Tat based vaccine development is also underway 
[].
Examining the molecular diversity of full-length Tat gene in
globally circulating strains is therefore imperative. Thus, our
study findings accomplish to understand the genetic diversity
of full-length Tat in common HIV-1 subtypes like B and C.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We would like to thank Ms. Karen Lewis for her careful
reading the manuscript. We also thank Drs. Yasuhiro Suzuki
Junji Imamura and Eiichi N. Kodama for their guidance,
inspiration and critical comments regarding writing the
manuscript.

Citation:Roy et al, Bioinformation 11(3): 151-160 (2015)

Functional domains of Tat and its genetic diversity.
Schematic presentation of the domains of tat exon 1 and 2 were
highlighted (1a): domain I (residues 1 to 21), an acidic/Pro-rich
region; domain II (residues 22 to 37), a Cys-rich/Zn2 Finger
domain; domain III (residues 38 to 48), containing conserved
Phe (F); domain IV (residues 49–57, the basic domain); domain
V (residues 58–72, a Glu rich domain); and domain VI
(residues 3–101, encoded by the second exon). Sequence logo
showing the Tat amino acid diversity observed at positions 1
to 100 in both subtype B (1b) and subtype C (1c)

Phylogenetic trees of HIV-1 subtypes B and C. Maximum likelihood (ML) phylogenetic tree of HIV-1 subtypes B (a) and C
(b) sequences based on 300 nucleotide sites of Tat gene sequence generated through the Los Alamos database. GTR+I+γ5nucleotide
substitution model was employed with 1000 bootstrapped data by MEGA 6. The reference Tat sequences were downloaded from
the Los Alamos database showed in round bullet. SIV sequence (Ref.CPZ.US.85.US_Marilyn.AF103) was used to root the tree
showed in red square bullet

