Background
Garlic (Allium sativum L.), the “spice of life” is a unique
monocot plant from the economically important family
Liliaceae. It belongs to the genus Allium consisting of 1250
species which has been used throughout history for both
culinary and medicinal purposes []. It is attributed with
several medicinal properties including being a stimulant,
diaphoretic, an expectorant, a diuretic and a tonic due to the
presence of allicin in the bulb and garlic oil in both bulb and
leaves []. Presently it is considered to be useful for the
treatment and prevention of a number of diseases, including
cancer, coronary heart disease, obesity, diabetes type-2,
hypertension, cataract and disturbances of gastrointestinal tract
[]. The interest and demand in garlic has significantly
increased in the recent times due to its nutritional and
pharmaceutical properties. India contributes about 4.1% of
global garlic production and lies next only to China in terms of
productivity []. The Food and Agricultural organization of the
United Nations has estimated an annual growth rate of 4.7% in
the world demand for garlic. Although sexual reproduction is
possible in garlic, nearly all garlic plants are propagated
vegetatively. Clonal selection is the main breeding method for
modern garlic since no sexual propagation in garlic usually
precludes crop improvement through hybridization. In garlic
breeding programme, genetic variation is increased only by
somaclonal variation, genetic transformation and mutation 
[].
Continuous domestication of preferred genotypes together with
their exclusive asexual propagation have eroded the genetic
base of this crop and make the plant vulnerable to various
biotic and abiotic stresses which together attributes for upto 
60% yield losses []. Therefore, it is highly essential to develop
efficient and reliable molecular markers to analyse the genetic
diversity among garlic species for conservation of germplasm
and improvement of the extant crop. Several molecular marker
systems are used in plants for characterization and mapping of
important traits []. Among them, the most reliable are the
microsatellites.

Microsatellites or simple sequence repeats (SSRs) are small
array of tandemly arranged 1 to 6bp nucleotides present
throughout the genome and mainly used as marker in genetic
variation and population genetic study []. SSRs have great
advantages over other markers as they are simple, highly
abundant, polymorphic, polyallelic, co-dominant and occur in
both coding and non-coding regions of the genome 
[].
Although several SSR markers have been identified in garlic 
[,
], additional SSRs with polymorphism are needed,
particularly for the development of linkage maps for use in trait
specific mapping studies. In the recent years, high throughput
next generation sequencing technologies has led to the
generation of large databases of expressed sequence tags (ESTs)
and genomic sequences. ESTs are the short and single pass
sequence reads of mRNAs or cDNAs corresponding to the
partial coding sequences of expressed genes and acts as an
attractive alternative source for mining of SSRs from the coding
regions of the genome []. EST-SSRs are more advantageous
than the genomic SSRs due to their easy availability and high
transferability to related species thereby serving as reliable
markers for gene mapping analyses []. Use of ESTs to
generate EST-derived SSRs has been reported in several plants
species [].

Considering the above facts into account, the present study
aims to exploit the EST database of Allium sativum to develop
EST derived SSRs. There are 21694 numbers of Allium sativum
ESTs available in the dbEST database of National Centre for
Biotechnology Information (NCBI) (as of 22nd December 2014).
A user friendly SSR identification tool-SSRLocator 
[] was
used for this purpose. Further, primers were designed from a
selected set of EST-SSRs to determine polymorphism and
validate their utility by evaluating genetic diversity among
different garlic accessions.

Methodology
A total of 21,694 expressed sequence tag (EST) sequences were
downloaded from the dbEST database hosted in GenBank at
NCBI using the key word “Allium sativum”. The 21694 ESTs
retrieved were from three different garlic tissues i.e leaf, stem
and root. The Cross_Match program [] was used with
parameter set at minmatch ≥13 and minscore ≥20 to screen the
ESTs against the UniVec database (
ftp: //ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/pub/ UniVec/) 
to detect vector and adapter sequences.
Additionally, the polyA/T tails and X characters were removed
from the EST sequences using EST_trimmer.pl script 
(
http: //pgrc.ipk-gatersleben.de /misa /download /est_trimmer.pl).
The trimming of the ESTs were done until no stretch of (A/T)5
or (X)1 was observed in a window of 100bp at the 5׳ or 3׳ end,
respectively. The assembly program CAP3 [] was used to
assemble all the ESTs thereby creating a non-redundant dataset.
The resulting output of unigenes, contigs and singlets were
combined together as a selected non-redundant dataset for SSR
identification. The SSR detection tool SSRLocator was used to
detect EST-SSR loci from the garlic EST datasets. Two repeat
motifs found close to each other within an EST were considered
as individual entity and not compound SSRs as suggested by
Gupta et al., []. Primers were designed from Class I SSR
containing EST sequences using Primer3plus [] and validated
using NetPrimer (
http: //www.premierbiosoft.com/netprimer/index.html). 
Primers having a score of more than 75 as
evidenced by the absence of self dimer and/or cross dimer
were selected and synthesized. 7 selected set of primers were 
tested for functionality and polymorphism against a panel of 14
Allium sativum accessions.

Results &amp; Discussion
The 21694 redundant EST sequences retrieved from NCBI
represented approximately 11.87Mb of Allium sativum genome.
During the scan for class I microsatellite repeats, 793 SSRs were
detected in this dataset corresponding to 1.0 SSR per 14.9 kb.
53672 bp of empty vectors, low-quality sequences and Poly
A/T tails were removed successfully during the pre-processing.
Rest of the sequences were clustered and assembled into a nonredundant
dataset of 14054 unique gene sequences (1491
contigs and 12563 singlets). Mining of Class I microsatellites
revealed 642 unique SSR containing sequences within the non-
redundant datasets accounting for one SSR per 11.19 kb of
garlic genome  (see supplementary material). The
reduction in redundancy of SSR׳s obtained by trimming and
clustering of non-redundant sequences is shown in .
Assembling of ESTs into contiguous or single gene sequences
reduces the redundancy to calculate the accurate frequency and
design unique primer sets. The parameters for SSR detection
and frequency analysis are highly variable in different plant
species [,
]. Cradle et al., 
[] used a comprehensive
computational strategy to estimate the average distances
between SSRs in non-redundant ESTs of various plant species
such as rice (3.4Kb), soybean (7.4Kb), tomato (11.1Kb),
Arabidopsis (13.8Kb), poplar (14.0Kb) and cotton (20.0kb). We
followed the same strategy and found one SSR per 11.19 kb of
garlic non-redundant EST dataset. This suggests that frequency
of EST-SSRs in the expressed portion of the garlic genome is
high in comparison to rice, soybean and tomato and lower than
other plant species.

The distribution of the individual SSR motifs among the nonredundant
set of 642 SSRs is represented in  (see
supplementary material). The mined EST-SSRs were classified
as simple motif type, with a single motif; and compound SSRs,
with more than two motifs. Among the 642 EST-SSRs, 12 loci
(1.86%) represented compound SSRs while the rest 630 loci
(98.14%) consisted of simple repeats (). Among the
Class I SSR motifs detected, mononucleotides were the most
abundant (32.86%) followed by trinucleotides (28.50%) and
dinucleotides (13.39%). The most common repeat motif was
(A/T) in mononucleotides, (AG/CT) in dinucleotides,
(AAG/CTT) in trinucleotides, (AAAC/GTTT) in
tetranucleotides, (AAAAC/GTTTT) in pentanucleotides and
(AGCCTG/CAGGCT) in the hexanucleotides. The high
occurrence of mononucleotide repeats in the poly A/T trimmed
dataset suggests that they are located within the expressive
regions and not at the end of the mRNA sequences. This is in
agreement with earlier report in Catharanthus 
[] and turmeric
[]. The dinucleotide motif AT (18%) had the lowest
abundance while AG (68.6%) showed the highest frequency
among the dimeric SSRs  (see supplementary material).
The deficit of AT SSRs in EST sequences is in compliance with
reports from rice [] and Arabidopsis 
[]. AG/CT corresponds
to GAG, AGA, UCU and CUC codons encoding for arginine,
glutamic acid, alanine and leucine respectively. The surplus of
AG/CT in the garlic genome corroborate with the fact that
majority of plant proteins contains higher concentration of
alanine and leucine. Among the trimeric SSRs, AAG (34.4%),
AAC (20.2%) and AAT (11.4%) were the most common patterns
in the garlic ESTs. AAG is the most common plant trinucleotide
repeat as has been reported with highest percentage in cotton
[] and Catharanthus 
[]. AAC/GTT and AAT/ATT repeats
are also significantly represented in periwinkle [], turmeric
[], pearl millet 
[] and barley 
[]. Likewise, majority of the
monocot genomes boast a specific occurrence of CGG repeats
[]. ATT represents only 4% of the total garlic SSRs which is in
accordance with the fact that most plants have the least
percentage of ATT repeats because TAA-based variants encode
stop codons []. The most frequent tetranucleotide SSR motifs
were AAAC/GTTT (27) and AAAG/CTTT (09). The
pentanucleotide, hexanucleotides repeats and the compound
SSRs accounted for less than 3% contribution to the total SSR
patterns.

Seven AsEST-SSRs primers designed from the selected set of
SSR loci resulted in the amplification of 82 unambigously
scorable bands in 14 accessions of Allium sativum
 (see
supplementary material). The test retrieved 63 polymorphic
bands (76.8%), averaging 9 bands per primer. Of the 63
polymorphic loci, 39 (61.9%) were highly informative, as they
were characterized by allele frequencies ranging from 0.2 to 0.8.
The 7 AsEST-SSRs had a polymorphism information content
(PIC) range of 0.689-0.780 with an average of 0.730. Thus, the
markers exhibited good power to discriminate among the
genotypes of Allium sativum used in this study. The resolving
power of the markers varied from 4.286 (AsSSR7) to 18.143
(AsSSR13). The AsEST-SSRs were characterized by an average
marker index (MI) of 5.087 with values ranging from 1.540
(AsSSR9) to 8.504 (AsSSR2). Three pairs of AsEST-SSRs
(AsSSR2, AsSSR8 and AsSSR11) revealed high level of
polymorphism among the garlic accessions by revealing higher
number of alleles. Hence these EST derived SSR primers have
potential as informative markers for genetic diversity analysis
and selective trait identification studies in garlic improvement
programmes.

Conclusion
Microsatellites markers have myriad uses in plant genome
analysis. The present study highlights the frequency, type and
distribution of garlic EST derived microsatellites and
demonstrates the successful development of EST-SSR markers
in garlic accessions. Reproducible EST-SSR markers developed
in this study could enrich the molecular marker resource for
garlic and could be applied for trait mapping, assessment of
genetic diversity, marker-assisted selection and functional
analysis of candidate genes in commercial inbred varieties as
well as in related Allium species.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors gratefully acknowledge the research support from
Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB), Dept.of
Science and Technology, Govt.of India and thankful to Prof.
Sanghamitra Nayak, Head, Centre of Biotechnology, Siksha O
Anusandhan University for her encouragement and support.

Citation:Chand et al, Bioinformation 11(3): 145-150 (2015)

Reduction in redundancy and assembling Allium
sativum ESTs by CAP3 program.

 Distribution of EST-SSRs based on the motifs.

