Background
Snakes are a group of amazing reptiles which have fascinated
human being since beginning of mankind. Venomous snakes
are regarded as most frightening animals with awesome
striking power combined with lethal venoms. Venom from a
single venomous snake species may contain 50-200 different
venom components which are proteins or peptides []. Each of
these proteins and peptides has profound effect on various
physiological systems of the victim or prey [,
]. These venom
toxins are of biological interest due to their diverse and selective
pharmacological and physiological effects through their
interaction with different molecular targets. They play
significant role in the development of therapeutic agents. For
example, Captopril®, the most extensively used drug to control
the blood pressure and cardiac disease was developed from one
of the venom component of pit viper snake (Bothrops jararaca)
[]. Moreover, for the diagnosis of several diseases snake venom
proteins are used as pharmacological probes. For example,
thrombin-like enzymes from snake venom are used for
fibrinogen and fibrinogen-breakdown product assays as well
as detecting dysfibrinogenaemias [].

Snake venom proteins are classified into a small number of
superfamilies. Among these, one of the most abundant and well
characterized groups of non- enzymatic polypeptides is the
three-finger toxin family which containing 60–74 amino-acid
residues and confers lethality to Elapidae and Hydrophidae
venoms []. Members of this superfamily illustrate resemblance
in their primary, secondary and tertiary structures but, at times,
they show vivid diversification in their biological functions 
[].
All 3FTXs have three beta stranded loops resembling threefingers,
emerging from a globular core and stabilized by four
conserved disulfide bridges. Members of 3FTxs have a
molecular mass within the range of 6000- 8000 Da with high
affinity and specificity for different receptors and ion channels.
Due to their pin point accuracy of targeting capability they
confer a wide array of specific pharmacological effects.
Postsynaptic neurotoxins, cardiotoxins, cytotoxins, fasciculins,
platelet -aggregation inhibitors and specific ion-channel
blockers are included in this family A large number of members
of 3FTxs are neurotoxins. They interfere with cholinergic
transmission at post synaptic sites in the peripheral and central
nervous systems. Snake venom neurotoxins are exploited for
the identification and characterization of membrane ion
channels and receptors in vertebrate cells, including human
neurons [].

Based on their receptor selectivity, they can be generally
classified as α-neurotoxins (curaremimetic), κ-neurotoxins and
muscarinic toxins that target muscle n- AChR, neuronal nAChR
and various subtypes of muscarinic receptors, respectively.
Another member of 3FTXs is cardiotoxin which is the secondlargest
group of this toxin superfamily and only found in cobra
venoms. At lower concentrations, they are responsible to
increase heart rate while, at higher concentrations, kill the
animal by cardiac arrest []. Acetylcholine receptors are blocked
by α-neurotoxin [], cardiotoxins (cytotoxins) that exert their
toxicity by forming pores in cell membranes [], acetylcholine
esterase and L-type calcium-channel blockers are inhibited by
fasciculins []. The aim of this present study is to carry out an
in silico comparative characterization and analysis of three
finger toxin proteins from four venomous snake species (Naja
naja, Astrotia stokesii, Hydrophis cyanocintus and Pelamis platura)
using various bio-computational tools which are related to their
physico-chemical, structural and functional properties. From the
perspective of application, the results will provide significant
information in developing rational drug through protein
engineering and understanding different physiological function.
Moreover, this would set a guideline for comparative
characterization studies of other large protein families.

Methodology
Sequence retrieval of three finger proteins:
A total of nineteen protein sequences of long neurotoxin, short
neurotoxin and cardiotoxin from Naja naja, Astrotia stokesii,
Hydrophis cyanocintus and Pelamis platura reported so far were
retrieved from the national center for biotechnology
information (NCBI: http://ncbi/nlm/nih.gov) source in
FASTA format.

Physico-chemical properties analysis:
The protein sequence was used as the input data type to
compute the amino acid composition (%), molecular weight,
theoretical isoelectric point (pI), and number of positively and
negatively charged residues, extinction coefficient, instability
and aliphatic index, Grand Average of Hydropathy (GRAVY)
using Expasy Protparam tool (http://web.expasy.org/protparam).

Secondary structure analysis:
To analyze the secondary structural features of amino acid
sequences, SOPMA tool (Self- Optimized Prediction Method
with Alignment) of NPS (Network Protein Sequence Analysis,
http://npsapbil.ibcp.fr /cgibin/cgibin/npsa
automat.pl?page=/NPSA/npsa_sopma.html) server was used
to illustrate alpha helix, 310 helix, Pi helix, beta bridge, extended
strand, beta turns, bend region, random coil, ambiguous states
and other states [].

Functional properties analysis:
The analysis of the selected three finger toxins were done with
the help of Motif scan (
http://myhits.isb-sib.ch/cgibin/motif_scan) 
tool []. The input data type was in FASTA
format and scanned against ‘PROSITE Patterns’ which is a
selected protein profile database.

Phylogenetic analysis:
Phylogenetic analysis of three finger toxin protein sequences
was done by two software namely, ClustalX and TreeView. All
the sequences were aligned by using the clustalx version 2.1 and
phylogenetic tree was constructed using NJ (Neighbor Joining)
method. Phylogenetic tree was viewed by TreeView in Phylip
format.

Discussion
In the current study, the NCBI database was searched to
retrieve the 3FTXs sequences from four specific snake species
(Naja naja, Astrotia stokesii, Hydrophis cyanocintus and Pelamis
platura). A total of 19 complete sequences (after removing the
duplicates and partial sequences) were obtained from the
selected four venomous snake species  (see
supplementary material). Amino acid composition analysis of
each sequence shows that the cysteine residues are highly
conserved irrespective of snake species  (see
supplementary material). Cysteine residues play vital roles in
protein structure and function by granting stability through
disulfide bond formation, which maintaining proper maturation
and localization during protein-protein intermolecular
interactions []. Sequence analysis shows that high percentage
of positively charged lysine residues is present in cardiotoxins
and short chain neurotoxins. In short neurotoxins arginine is
present in high quantity which is a positively charged amino
acid responsible for the receptor binding mechanism. Both,
Arginine and Lysine and their sufficient presence assist short
neurotoxin to become an effective lethal bio-molecule.
Moreover, short neurotoxins also manage well negatively
charged amino acid than cardiotoxin. Both aspartic acid and
glutamic acid are negatively charged which supported
appropriate attachment to membrane receptor [].
Nevertheless, the amount of negatively charged amino acid is
very high in Long neurotoxin 1/ Toxin A which is contributed
by the presence of Aspartic acid residues in the sequence. Other
physico-chemical parameters also indicate the behavior of
toxins in different conditions  (See Supplementary
material). pI values for all of toxins lie in the alkaline range
(pH&gt;7). Besides this, the instability index shows that Long
neurotoxin 1, Cardiotoxin, Cardiotoxin 7, Cardiotoxin 8,
Cardiotoxin I-like protein, Cardiotoxin V-like protein,
Cardiotoxin 1 , Cardiotoxin 3 , Cardiotoxin 6, Cardiotoxin V ,
Cardiotoxin N and Long neurotoxin 2 are stable (Instability
index &lt;40) in nature. In the current study postsynaptic
neurotoxin short chain/ toxin-3 is observed as the most
thermostable toxin. Moreover, high extinction coefficients are
observed for postsynaptic neurotoxin short chain /toxin-5 (Naja
naja), Long neurotoxin 1/ Alpha-elapitoxin- Ast2a (Astrotia
stokesii), Long neurotoxin 2/Alpha-elapitoxin-Ast2b (Astrotia
stokesii) and Short neurotoxin 2/Hydrophitoxin b (Hydrophis
cyanocintus), which is associated with a high concentration of
lysine, tryptophan and tyrosine residues in the sequence and
may be valuable in protein-protein and protein ligand
interaction studies in solution. In addition, aliphatic index,
suggesting the relative volume of protein engaged by aliphatic
side chains helps to study thermo stable properties of an
enzyme. It is found to extent within a range of 23.55 to 112.96.
Grand Average of Hydropathy (GRAVY) was computed for all
the toxin proteins. A wide range of GRAVY value was found
from -1.273 to 0.154 for all protein sequences. SOPMA analysis
was done for all snake toxins and it displayed a high value for
Random coil in all the toxin proteins  (see
supplementary material). The analysis of secondary structure
signifies that values for extended strands were found higher
than alpha helix in all members of protein family. High value
for random coil allows important consequence in the study of
protein tertiary structure and related functions. All three finger
toxin members like Long neurotoxin, Cardiotoxin and short
neurotoxin motifs were described as Snake toxins signature
 (see supplementary material). Three finger toxins are
comprised of sixty to seventy five amino acids. Among the
invariant residues are eight cysteines all involved in disulfide
bonds and a signature pattern was developed which consist of
four of these cysteines as well as a conserved proline thought to
be significant for the maintenance of the tertiary structure.
Using distance based Neighbor-Joining method Phylogenetic
tree was made. Different clusters with close relationships were
identified including Cardiotoxin 8 (4388776) and Cardiotoxin N
(1000509), Cardiotoxin (213375) and Cardiotoxin 3 (1054811),
Cardiotoxin I-like protein (1134873) and Cardiotoxin 1
(1000502), Cardiotoxin V- like protein (1134875) and
Cardiotoxin V (1000511) relating closely to Cardiotoxin 7
(1000505). Furthermore, Postsynaptic neurotoxin short chain/
toxin-3 (786434) and Postsynaptic neurotoxin short chain
/toxin-5 (786435), Pelamitoxin a (55977292) and Short
neurotoxin 2/Hydrophitoxin b (166214961) are closely related
with Short neurotoxin 1/Hydrophitoxin a (128965) whereas,
Long neurotoxin 1/ Alpha-elapitoxin-Ast2a (128922) and Long
neurotoxin 2/Alpha-elapitoxin-Ast2b (128937) has close relation
along with Long neurotoxin 1/ Toxin A (128932) (). In
close evolutionary relationship of Proteins may be investigated
jointly for their contribution in related biological processes.

Conclusion
In this investigation, we reveal the buried information about
three finger toxins of four venomous snake species by analyzing
their structural features such as amino acid content, physicochemical
properties, secondary structural features and
phylogenetic relationship classification. Snake venom toxin
proteins facilitate to know what kind of compositional biasness
and differences plays role for adaptation to different biological
systems that are venom system, pheromone system,
complement system and cellular communication system.
Comparative analysis and intensive characterization of the
three finger toxin family of proteins with the help of numerous
bio-computational tools yielded latest insights and perspectives
which can be used to identify changes in protein structure that
can cause impairment of protein function and also responsible
to develop many pathological conditions. The findings
throughout this study may be used by researchers working on
three finger toxins in context of any experimental system. The
amino acid composition demonstrates a considerably high
percentage of cysteine residues in Short neurotoxin 1/Toxin A
(Astrotia stokesii), along with Short neurotoxin 1/Hydrophitoxin
a (Hydrophis cyanocinctus) and Pelamitoxin a (Pelamis platura).
In addition, Postsynaptic neurotoxin short chain/ toxin-3 are
found to be the most thermo stable toxin protein.
Physicochemical characterization of these toxin proteins depicts
inside the Laboratory of Nature how proteins are engineered for
modified biological necessitates. To one side from these based
on analyzing the evolutionary relationship t can be
hypothesized that this in turn helps to generate therapeutic
molecules of medicinal value for the treatment of snakebites.
Furthermore, this investigation may be taken as an example for
related in silico investigational studies to observe other large
protein superfamilies.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Roly et al, Bioinformation 10(5): 281-287 (2014)

Phylogenetic tree of three finger toxin protein
sequences by using Neighbor- Joining Method.

