Background
DNase hypersensitivity (DH) profiling enables the discovery of
genomic regions where DNA is exposed to action by DNase 
[].
Exposed DNA may presumably be accessed by other molecules,
and so may be more likely to have functional cis regulatory
elements. The ENCODE consortium have released genomewide
DH profiles from a wide range of human cell lines,
cataloging an estimated 2.9 million DH regions, providing a
new reference resource for genomic bioinformatic studies 
[].
Moreover, these DH maps have revealed significant
connectivity of promoter and enhancer elements, with these
interactions taking place over large distances (median
distance=214 kbp) []. Motif Enrichment in the analysis of Gene
Expression (MEGE) allows for the discovery of motifs, which
are over-represented, in up- and down-regulated genes. These
motifs can serve as a proxy for DNA-binding transcription
factors (TFs) and other sequence-specific elements that regulate
gene expression. Restricting MEGE to the immediate vicinity of
known transcriptional start sites (TSS) ignores cis regulatory
elements outside of the promoter, while other approaches using
sequence conservation overlook cis elements which may be
unique to a species [,
]. The MEGE method described here
limits motif discovery to DH regions and takes advantage of the
DH connectivity map provided by ENCODE, enabling the
identification of long-range distal cis elements which potentially
drive changes in expression []. Genes that share an exposed
motif are collected into individual gene sets and can be
appended to existing motif gene collections [] and tested using
conventional Gene Set Enrichment Analysis [].

Methodology
A schematic workflow of the DHC-MEGE program is shown in
(). The DHC-MEGE program utilizes lists of up- and
down-regulated gene symbols for motif analysis. It also
requires a DH connectivity map in BED8 format, which
describes the interaction between a promoter and distal
elements together with the connection correlation coefficient.
The human ENCODE DH connectivity map is accessible from
EBI []. The program extracts the DH regions associated to the
‘up’ and ‘down’ gene expression sets. These BED regions are
then searched for significantly enriched 8-20 nt sequence motifs
with the Hypergeometric Optimization of Motif EnRichment
program (HOMER) compared to the background genome
sequence. HOMER initially utilises a library of known motifs,
then performs de novo enrichment analysis for further enriched
motifs and outputs these as a position weight matrix (PWM).
Instances of these motifs are then counted in DH regions
genome-wide, scored and sorted based upon their degree of
sequence similarity to the HOMER PWM [].

Users are able to fine-tune the analysis by setting a DH site
correlation threshold, gene set size as well as motif sequence
similarity thresholds. Paths to input files and parameter settings
are provided in a properly formatted configuration file. The
output from DHC-MEGE is a list of gene sets in the GMT
format. Because initial motif searching is restricted to sets of
differentially expressed genes, the motifs identified will be
unique for each experiment. Gene lists generated in the GMT
format are accepted by the freely available Gene Set Enrichment
Analysis (GSEA) software [].

Utility to the biological community
Gene sets provide a convenient way to systematically
summarise complex empirical biological information such as
GSEA analysis modules for genome-wide profiling
experiments. Motifs identified as significant from GSEA could
represent the activation or repression of DNA binding factors
that drive gene expression changes. The most significant
advantage of this approach over current methods is the ability
to identify long-range distal cis elements, which can only be
achieved by incorporating chromatin connectivity maps. To
demonstrate the utility DHC-MEGE, we have re-analysed a
microarray expression data set investigating the effect of 2 hr
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) treatment on the THP-1 immortal
monocyte cell line (GEO: GSE32141) []. The publically
available dataset was examined for differential expression with
GEO2R. There were 590 up-regulated and 714 down-regulated
array probes assigned to genes (nominal p≤0.01). We used the
ENCODE human DH connectivity map with a correlation
threshold of 0.8, a sequence similarity threshold of 10 and a
maximum gene size set of 1000.

After motif identification and genome-wide screening, there
were 105 de novo motif gene sets and 150 known motif gene sets
(). Probes with a signal above the detection threshold
and annotated with a valid RefSeq gene identifier were
submitted to GSEA with the newly generated GMT files. GSEA
identified 20 motifs to be enriched in the up-regulated genes
(FDR adj p-value≤0.05), including known NF-κB motifs, but
there were also several high-ranking de novo motifs such as
TATGACAATC (). The ADORA2A gene is the most
highly upregulated gene associated to the TATGACAATC
motif, with the motif occurring in a DH region 274 kbp
upstream of the ADORA2A promoter DH site within a CABIN1
intron. This distal DH site (chr22:24549440-24549590) is bound
by FOXA1 and USF-1 transcription factors, while USF-1 is also
found at the ADORA2A promoter according to ChIP-seq
profiling, suggesting that USF-1 might be an adapter protein in
a chromatin loop []. The ADORA2A example also highlights
the combinatorial contribution of distal elements, with the two
ADORA2A promoters associated with regions containing
FOXA2, GATA-IR3 and CTTACGTAAGTT elements that are
significantly associated with up-regulated genes (FDR-adjusted
p-values of 0.013, 0.22 and 0.047 respectively). This example
highlights the biological complexity of long-range chromatin
interactions that are overlooked by current promoter motif
analysis tools.

Conclusion
The contribution of long-range chromatin interactions to the
control of gene expression remains poorly understood, but this
will improve as higher-resolution maps from chromatin
conformation profiling experiments are integrated. Tools such
as DHC-MEGE may also assist researchers understand the
complex interplay between gene expression and epigenetic
marks such as DNA methylation in disease.

The authors acknowledge support from the Juvenile Diabetes
Research Foundation International (JDRF), the National Health
and Medical Research Council (NHMRC), and the National
Heart Foundation of Australia (NHF). AE-O is a Senior
Research Fellow supported by the NHMRC. Supported in part
by the Victorian Government's Operational Infrastructure
Support Program.

Citation:Ziemann et al, Bioinformation 9(4): 212-215 (2013)

(A) Schematic diagram of DHC-MEGE methodology
of generating custom motif-gene association sets with the file
format shown in brackets; (B) Statistics from an example
analysis using a publicly-available microarray expression data
set with a correlation threshold of 0.8, minimum sequence
similarity score of 10 and maximum gene size of 1000.

Example GSEA using DHC motif gene sets for gene expression analysis. The LPS-stimulated THP-1 cell microarray data
is publically available []. (A) The top 10 ranked motif gene sets in up-regulated genes contains known and novel motifs (ranked
by FDR-adj p-value). Abbreviations; SIZE, number of genes in the set detected in the experiment; ES, enrichment score; NES,
normalised enrichment score; NOM p-val, nominal p-value; (B) Enrichment plot of the newly identified TATGACAATC motif
gene set, showing the majority of genes associated with this motif are highly up-regulated; (C) List of the top 10 up-regulated genes
associated with the TATGACAATC motif; (D) Example of long-range cis elements interacting with the ADORA2A promoter. The
TATGACAATC motif is positioned in a distal DH peak 274 kbp upstream of the ADORA2A promoter DH peak (red line) in a
CABIN1 intron. ADORA2A is also associated with GATA-IR3 (orange), CTTACGTAAGTT (blue), FOXA1 (pink) motifs that were
significant in GSEA analysis (FDR&lt;0.05).

