Background
Today, the heavy metal contamination is a global concern,
caused by natural occurring process (volcanism and erosion)
and several anthropogenic activities. Metals tend to bioaccumulate
in food chain as large areas of agricultural land
have been contaminated with heavy metals. Rayon grade pulppaper
effluent (RGPE), which represents a foul smelling, dark
brown and complex waste effluent discharged by pulp paper
industries is also a major source of soil and aquatic pollution. It
is estimated that about 270-455 M3 (60,000-1, 00,000 gallons) of
water is required per tonne of paper production and discharge
more than 47,000-80,000 gallons of wastewater containing
lignin and Chlorophenols. Along with high pollution
parameters a significant quantity of heavy metals (Cd, Cu, Fe,
Mn, Ni and Zn) is also contributed from pulp originated from
plant extract and during the different industrial process 
[]
thereby turning pulp and paper mill effluents into ‘a Pandora׳s
box of waste chemicals’. This waste effluent when released as
such into water bodies, it adversely affected the aquatic
ecosystem by reducing the penetration power of sunlight and
ultimately reduces the photosynthetic activities and dissolved
oxygen content [] whereas in agricultural soil, it causes
inhibition of seed germination and depletion of vegetation by
reducing the manganese availability and amylase activity 
[].

Provided conventional approaches (Physical and chemical) to
the remediation of contaminated wastewater are inefficient and
costly and can also lead to the formation of toxic intermediate
[]. 
Particularly, phytoremediation technique may be a better
approach for industrial waste minimization because these are
cost-effective and environment-friendly technology. Ideal
plants for phytoremediation should have a high biomass
production, deep penetration of roots, fast growing and able to
tolerate and accumulate high amount of potentially toxic heavy
metals in their aerial and harvestable parts. Recently, the Indian
mustard plants (Brassica sp.) have been reported to have high
potential to tolerate and accumulate high quantities of
potentially toxic heavy metals and can be used for
phytoremediation of metal-polluted soils. Indian mustard plant
(Brassica sp.), the major oil seed crop and used as food, is
reported as a most promising and interesting model plant for
phytoremediation [].

The effect of different industrial effluents as a source of
irrigation and their effect on growth and productivity of
various crop plants have been studied by various workers 
[].
Instead of various pollutants, the effluent from paper mill is
rich source of organic and inorganic matter such as nitrogen,
phosphorus, calcium, magnesium and the trace elements. This
showed a significant scope for pulp-paper mill effluent
recycling for land application. Moreover, the direct use of
RGPE in agricultural field for irrigational purposes is generally
not recommended safe for environmental health and plant
growth due to high pollution parameters of RGPE. On the other
hand, there is no data or study to support the irrigation and its
toxic effect on long-term application on environment health
problems. In addition, many farmers in developing countries
including India are cultivating mustard plants in soil
contaminated with potentially toxic heavy metals. The status of
metals in different parts of mustard plants grown on
contaminated soil is still ambiguous. Hence, the experiments
were planned and conducted to study the accumulation of
various heavy metals (Cd, Mn, Ni, Cu, Fe and Zn) into its
different parts and their effect on the biochemical parameters
on the potential of Indian mustard plant (Brassica nigra L.)
cultivated in agricultural soil irrigated with RGPE.

Methodology
Sample collection and investigational setup:
Rayon grade paper mill effluent (RGPE) was collected from
wash machine section of M/s. Century Pulp Paper Mill,
Lalkuan, Nainital, Uttrakhand, India located (79°10׳E
longitude and 29°3׳N latitude) at foot hills of Himalayas. The
samples were taken into pre-sterilized container (20 liter
capacity), immediately preserved at 4°C. Further, the physicochemical
parameters were accomplished as described in
standard methods for the examination of water and
wastewaters (6). Metals and different salts (chloride, sodium
and nitrate) were analyzed by atomic absorption
spectrophotometer and ion meter (Orion Model 960) using
selective ion electrode.

For the construction of pot experiment uncontaminated garden
soil were collected from the Scientific and Applied Research
Center (SARC), Meerut, India. The uncontaminated garden soil
was completely air-dried, finely powdered and sieved (2.0 mm
mesh) and equal amount (20 kg dw) was filled in pots having
dimensions 50 X 35 cm and were irrigated with equal volume (4
liter) of 25%, 50%, 75% and 100% (v/v) RGPE and control with
tap water. The seeds of Brassica nigra L. were surface sterilized
in 75% (v/v) ethanol for 2 min, followed by 10% (v/v) sodium
hypo chloride for 10 min to avoid any fungal contamination,
washed thrice with double distilled water. The sterilized 10
seeds of tested plant were equally sown in each pot to a depth
of 2.0-2.5 cm. The experiment pots were kept in outdoor natural
conditions with temperature (20-30 °C) and moisture (50-55%)
variation. This pot experiment was conducted in triplicate with
an analogous set of controls.

Physico-chemical analysis of garden soil:
pH (Orion ion meter Model-960) and electrical conductivity
(EC) (Thermo Orion Model-162A, USA) were determined after
mixing a soil and water (1:5 w/v slurry) for 1 h, total nitrogen
(TN) by TOC-Vcsn analyzer (Shimadzu, JAPAN). Water content
was determined by drying the soil samples at 80°C for 24 h.
Phosphate and sulfate was measured by vanadomolybdophosphoric
acid colourimetric and BaCl2 precipitation methods,
respectively (6). Prior to total heavy metal analysis, soil samples
were air dried (25 °C, 14 days). The concentration of different
heavy metals (Cu, Cr, Zn, Fe, Ni, Mn and Pb) was measured
using inductively coupled plasma spectrophotometer (Thermo
Electron; Model IRIS Intrepid II XDL, USA).

Seed germination test &amp; amylase activity:
Four dilutions of RGPE (25%, 50%, 75% and 100%, v/v) were
made with double distilled water. A (10 ml) aliquot of these
dilutions was transferred separately to petri dishs. Ten seeds of
Brassica nigra L. were placed in each dish and left for 10 days at
25°C. The germinated seeds were counted at the initial
appearance of the radical by continuous visual observation for
10 days. The percent germination and amylase activity was
calculated according to the method of Ana et al. 
[].

Assessment of growth and biochemical parameters of tested plant:
The tested plants with their respective controls were harvested
manually after 30, 60 and 90 days of sowing and washed with
distilled water to remove any contiguous particle. The
chlorophyll content in fresh leave samples of mustard plants
were estimated by the method of Arnon's []. Protein content in
root, shoot and leaves of treated plants including control was
estimated by using BSA as standard protein Lowry et al. 
[].
Lipid peroxidation in plant tissue was determined indirectly in
terms of malondialdehyde (MDA) content. The MDA content
was measured by thiobarbituric acid (TBA) reaction Heath and
Packer, []. The ascorbic acid and cysteine content in freshly
harvested plant samples (root, shoot and leaves) of treated and
untreated (control) mustard plants was estimated according to
the method given by Gaitonde, [] respectively.

Heavy metal analysis in different parts of plants:
The different plant parts (root, shoot and leaves) were washed
separated chopped into small pieces and dried in oven (60-65
°C). The dried plant parts were used for the estimation of
various heavy metals (Cd, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni and Zn).

Statistical analysis:
To confirm the variability of data obtained and validity of
results, all the data were subjected for the statistical significance
using one-way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) to make
comparison between more than two means followed by
Tukey׳s test (Ott, 1984) for comparison of individual means
using the Graph Pad software (Graph Pad Software, San Diego,
Calif.). Analytical precision of the method was improved by
including the triplicate samples.

Results
Physico-chemical characteristics of RGPE and garden soil:
The chemical characteristics of RGPE and garden soil are
showed in  (see supplementary material). Moreover, in
present study, the germination of seed was recorded and it was
observed that 50% (v/v) RGPE has pronounced effect on seed
germination and early seedling growth. But, higher
concentration (i.e. 75% and 100% (v/v) of RGPE has shown 30
and 50% inhibitory effect on seed germination and amylase
activity, respectively as shown in  (see supplementary
material).

Evaluation of Physiological and biochemical effects:
The increases chlorophyll contents (chlorophyll a, b and total
chlorophyll) in leaves of tested plant were recorded at all
concentrations of RGPE (25, 50, 75 and 100% v/v) at 30 and 60
days of growth period. But, these pigments decreased
significantly beyond 50% RGPE at 60 and 90 days of growth
period compared to their respective controls (). The
maximum increase of 44.7%, 40.6% and 47.0% were recorded in
chlo-a, b and total chlorophyll content respectively in mustard
plants treated with 50% RGPE at 60 days of growth period as
compared to their respective controls. The protein content in
root, shoot and leaves also increased compare to respective
controls in mustard plants irrigated with 50% (v/v) RGPE at 60
days of growth period (). Nevertheless at higher
concentrations (&gt;50%, v/v) of RGPE, there was a decrease in
protein content of root, shoot and leaves at 60 and 90 days of
growth period. Moreover, the MDA content in root and leaves
of mustard plants treated with RGPE increased with rise in
RGPE content versus to control at all the exposure periods
indicating the enhanced lipid peroxidation in mustard plants
grown in RGPE irrigated soil .

Antioxidants are considered to play an important role in the
detoxification of toxic oxygen species generated in presence of
metal ions. However, to protect from oxidative stress
conditions induced by free radicals, plants have adopted
several cellular entities consisting non-enzymatic cellular
entities as ascorbic acid, cysteine and non-protein thiol etc. The
maximum induction in ascorbic acid content of root, shoot and
leaves of the treated plants were recorded as 68.8%, 42.2%, and
38.1% at 90, 60 and 60 days of growth period respectively as
compared to their respective controls (). Moreover,
cysteine, a –SH containing amino acid is a key constituent of
phytochelatins and plays an important role in metal
detoxification. The cysteine content in root, shoot and leaves of
tested plants treated with various concentrations of RGPE has
increased at all the RGPE concentrations and growth periods
versus to their respective controls (). The maximum
increase in cysteine content of root was recorded as 77.8% at
50% RGPE concentration after 90 days of growth period
compared to control plants. Further, the cysteine content in
leaves of treated plant increases up to 50% RGPE concentration
at all the tested growth periods except at 90 days, while higher
RGPE concentration showed inhibitory effects compared to
control plants ().

Accumulation and distribution of heavy metals:
The distribution pattern of different heavy metals (Cd, Cu, Fe,
Mn, Ni and Zn) in different parts of mustard plant was
apparently related to the RGPE concentration and growth
period as shown in  (see supplementary
material). The accumulation of all the tested heavy metals was
found maximum in root followed by shoot and/or leaves,
which increases with increase in RGPE concentration and
growth period. The RGPE concentration dependent maximum
accumulation of Fe was observed in root and leaves of mustard
plant at initial days while at later days of plant growth (i.e. 90
days) shoot accumulated the higher Fe content. The
accumulation of all tested heavy metals was found minimum in
the edible parts (seeds) of treated mustard plants as than the
other plant parts  (see supplementary material). The
order of cumulative heavy metals accumulation in irrigated
mustard plants was root &gt; shoot &gt;leaves at 30 days and roots &gt;
leaves &gt; shoots at 60 and 90 days of growth period as shown in
 (see supplementary material).

Discussion
RGPE is a complex aqueous system containing mainly lignin
and its chloro-derivatives and many other organic pollutants.
The physic-chemical characteristics of RGPE and garden soil
have revealed that pH values and EC of RGPE were higher
than of garden soil. The Century industry uses kraft pulping
process, where wood pieces are heated with sodium hydroxide
and sodium sulphite. Use of sodium hydroxide makes the
effluent alkaline in nature. The high EC value of RGPE may b
due to presence of different salts in RGPE as TDS (8,780± 26.7),
TOC (1,200± 25.8), organic matter (3.48± 0.53), nitrate
(36.73±1.04), sulphate (986 ±25.1), chloride (600± 26.9) etc.
Moreover, high COD/BOD ratio (approximately 2.8) in RGPE
is due to presence of high molecular weight compounds, i.e.
chloro-phenols, lignin and its derivatives which contribute high
COD and color, respectively instead of BOD []. The source of
sulfate ions in effluent might be sodium sulfite, which is used
in pulping process and the nitrates detected in RGPE indicated
the presence of nitrogen in lignin []. The high concentrations
of heavy metals in RGPE are mainly due to the corrosion of
digestion vessels and possibly due to bioaccumulation of these
metals by plants which are used as raw material.

The application of higher concentration of RGPE in agricultural
soils may result in an increase the pollution parameters, which
adversely affected the growth of mustard plants. Similar
findings also have been reported by different authors 
[,
].
Indeed, a variety of crop plant species differed widely in
response to different concentration of industrial effluent with
respect to the germination and other biochemical parameters
[]. The inhibition in seed germination at higher
concentrations of RGPE might be attributed to the high
pollution parameters load in RGPE, which induces high
osmotic pressure and anaerobic conditions []. This high
osmotic pressure and anaerobic condition render various
biochemical processes such as movement of solute, respiration
process of seeds and enzymatic steps of seed germination.
Further, it has been reported that high RGPE content act as
inhibitor for plant growth hormone (s) (auxin and gibberline),
which are mainly required for the growth and development of
plants. At the same time, higher biomass was noted up to 50%
(v/v) RGPE concentration versus the control and thereafter, it
decreased drastically in all tested samples of above 50% RGPE.
The higher biomass production has given strong evidence for
the inducible effect of RGPE on plant growth parameters. This
finding was also corroborated well with Chandra et al. 
[].

The increase in photosynthetic pigments was observed in
Brassica nigra plants due to higher accumulation of Fe in leaves.
These findings of our results were also strengthened by
Chandra et al. [], who reported an increase in total
chlorophyll and protein contents of Phaseolus aureus L. treated
with industrial effluent. On the other hand, the reduction in
chlorophyll contents observed in present study may be
attributed to the interaction of potentially toxic heavy metals
present in effluent with the functional –SH group of
chlorophyll-synthesizing enzyme [].

In the same way, the raise in total protein content might be due
to the induction of several stress proteins in treated plants at
higher concentration of industrial effluent []. The decrease in
chlorophyll and protein content in plants at any given
concentration might be attributed to the overall decrease in
plant growth parameters and photosynthetic activity 
[].
Furthermore, formation of melondialdehyde (MDA), a major
cytotoxic product of lipid peroxidation acts as an indicator of
peroxidation of membrane lipids in plants []. The level of
MDA formation can be considered as the level of lipid
peroxidation. Ascorbic acid, which is a powerful secondary
antioxidant, plays a prominent role in scavenging free oxyradicals
[].

The increased level of cysteine content corresponds to the level
of tolerance exhibited by metal-treated plants. The decrease in
cysteine content in the plants treated with higher RGPE
concentrations (&gt;50%) and at higher exposure periods was
probably due to the decreased activities of sulfate reduction
enzymes, ATP sulfurylase and adenosine-5-phosphosulfate
sulfo transferase under metal stress [].

The higher accumulation of heavy metals in different parts of
Brassica nigra L. has also shown by different authors during the
comparison of heavy metals accumulation in other plant
species. Studies carried out with different varieties of Brassica
have shown that these plants were able to take up and
accumulate the high concentration of heavy metals in
intercellular spaces []. Interestingly, the edible parts (seeds)
of treated mustard plants have shown the least accumulation of
all the tested heavy metals () than the other plant parts.
It may be attributed to the slow translocation of metals from
root to the aerial parts. The high accumulation of Fe, Zn and Cu
in various parts of Brassica nigra L. indicated the fast mobility of
these metals in the plants.

Conclusion
In present study, a significant higher accumulation of heavy
metals was observed in the various parts of the Indian mustard
plant treated with different concentrations of RGPE. Moreover,
the 50% level of RGPE application has been just enough for
phytoremediation as the seed germination, amylase activity
and other biochemical parameters had no adverse effect. Thus,
the study concluded that the indiscriminate application of
RGPE is health hazards during the irrigation in Indian
agricultural practices.

Conflict of Interest
Authors declare that there is no conflict of interest in
preparation of the manuscript.

Supplementary material
Data 1
My gratitude and acknowledgements to: Dr. C.S. Nautiyal
Director, CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology Research,
Lucknow, and all the members of Environmental Chemistry
Division, IITR, Lucknow.

Citation:Singh et al, Bioinformation 11(3): 138-144 (2015)

Chlorophyll-a, b, total chlorophyll and carotenoid
content (mg g-1) in leaves (A), Protein content (mg g-1) (B),
MDA content (µmol g-1) (C), of Indian mustard plants irrigated
with RGPE and tap water (control).

Ascorbic acid content (µg g-1) (A), and Cysteine
content (nmol g-1) (B) in root, shoot and leaves of Indian
mustard plants irrigated with RGPE and tap water (control).

