Background
Rotavirus, member of genus Reoviridae is one of the major diarrheal agents causing
                huge number of deaths worldwide especially among children and dairy animals. An
                estimated 527,000 children aged &lt;5 years die from rotavirus diarrhea
                each year, with &gt;85% of these deaths occurring in
                low­income countries of Africa and Asia []. There are seven groups of
                rotavirus, designated as A, B, C, D, E, F and G. Humans are primarily infected by
                group A, B and C, however group A is most pathogenic. The viruses consist of eleven
                double stranded RNA genome encoding twelve proteins. Among the twelve proteins
                NSP1­NSP6 are nonstructural and remaining six VP1­VP4, VP6
                &amp; VP7 are viral RNA polymerase and others structural components of the
                virus [].
                Rotaviruses primarily infect the enterocytes of the small intestine though there are
                few recent reports of extra­intestinal infections. From 1975 through
                2000 there were 12 case reports where rotavirus infection was found in CNS
                complications [].

Viruses are the major cause of several newly emerged diseases throughout the world.
                In spite of their small genomes, viruses are capable of capturing host machinery for
                replication and propagation. Viruses in general express multifunctional proteins,
                with various sites for post­translational modification (PTM). This
                flexibility gives them chance to participate in cellular signaling events, either to
                increase their pathogenicity or to escape the robust host immune system. The
                modification of this kind is not probably mediated by host factors. Some
                modifications of the rotavirus proteins are known, such as the hyperphosphorylation
                of the NSP5 protein and glycosylation of the VP7 protein. But overall
                posttranslational modification status of the proteome of rotavirus is yet to be
                elucidated. As rotavirus is a eukaryotic virus and utilizes the host machinery to
                replicate and propagate, it can be hypothesized that rotaviral proteins are also
                modified in host cells.

The phenomenon by which a single protein exhibits different roles in different
                environment or in different subcellular location is known as
                ’moonlighting‘ []. As previously stated, viruses with their small
                repertoire of proteins are capable to capture host machineries, so it is possible
                that viral proteins moonlight in the host environment either by interaction with
                cellular multifunctional protein complexes or with the help of
                post­translational modification. Examples of multifunctional viral
                proteins are, NS1 protein of influenza virus which inhibits host immune responses by
                limiting both interferon (IFN) production and the downstream effects of
                IFN­induced proteins and also acts directly to modulate other important
                aspects of the virus replication cycle, including viral RNA replication, viral
                protein synthesis, and general host­cell physiology [], Nucleocapsid (N) protein of
                Hantaviruses is associated with viral RNA but it also interacts with the virus
                polymerase and as one of the glycoproteins, interferes with important regulatory
                pathways in the infected cells []. Similarly hepatitis B virus (HBV) protein HBx is a
                multifunctional viral protein that modulates transcription, cell responses to
                genotoxic stress, protein degradation, and signaling pathways [] and NS5A of hepatitis C virus
                (HCV) has role in viral replication, modulation of the cellular signaling apparatus
                and cell cycle­regulatory kinases []. Functional families of JEV proteins have been
                assigned previously using a Support Vector Machine based software (SVMProt) which
                categorizes every viral protein into different families [].

Examples of major modifications of the proteins which might help the virus during the
                life cycles are phosphorylation of PB1­F2 protein which results in
                promotion of apoptosis in influenza [], phosphorylation of HCV NS5A to modulate host
                interferon­induced antiviral response []. Similarly glycosylated WNV envelope protein
                plays an important role in replication and maturation processes, glycosylation of E1
                protein in HCV caused the translocation of the protein to the cell surface whereas
                glycosylation decreases the virulence of influenza virus H3N2 []. SUMO modification of the
                adenoviral oncoprotein E1B­55kDa results in localization of the protein
                from cytoplasm to nucleus [] and SUMOylated EBV protein BZLF1 disrupts PML Bodies
                    []. Methylation
                is mostly studied in the case of histones, which are associated with DNA and can
                activate or repress gene expression []. Nuclear proteins and various cytoplasmic regulators are
                subject to lysine acetylation. Lysine acetylation can results in diverse functional
                role of proteins []. In proteins with one or few sites, it generally acts as an
                on­off switch or it may interact with other PTMs to exert their effects.
                Thus understanding the functional role of viral proteins is a very important aspect
                in studying the virus mediated pathogenesis.

Methodology
Sequence retrieval
Rotavirus protein sequences were downloaded from NCBI database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). Sequences of human Rotavirus
                    strain PA169 were considered for the study. As NSP6 protein is not indispensable
                    for the Rotavirus life­cycle in the cell, it is not included in the
                    study. Accession numbers for the viral sequences are as follows: NSP1
                    (EF554132), NSP2 (EF554133), NSP3 (EF554134), NSP4 (EF554135), NSP5 (EF554136),
                    VP1 (EF554126), VP2 (EF554127), VP3 (EF554128), VP4 (EF554129), VP6 (EF554130)
                    and VP7 (EF554131).

Prediction of protein functional family by web-based Support Vector Machine
                    software SVMProt
SVMProt (http://jing.cz3.nus.edu.sg/cgi-bin/svmprot.cgi) classifies a
                    protein into different functional families from its primary sequence
                    information. A slightly modified reliability score, R­value, is used
                    in SVMProt. R­value is a scoring function for estimating the
                    accuracy of support vector machine classification. P­value is the
                    expected classification accuracy (probability of correct classification). It is
                    derived from the statistical relationship between the R­value and
                    actual classification accuracy based on the analysis of 9,932 positive and
                    45,999 negative samples of proteins [].

Prediction of phosphorylation sites in proteins using Netphos 2.0 server
Serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation status of the Rotavirus proteins
                    were predicted using the online open access server NetPhos 2.0 (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetPhos/). The NetPhos 2.0 server
                    predicts serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation sites in eukaryotic
                    proteins based on artificial neural network. The threshold value for the
                    prediction is 0.5 [].

Prediction of N­Linked and O­Linked Glycosylation
                    profile for the rotavirus proteins
NetNGlyc 1.0 server was used to find the N­glycosylated proteins of
                    the virus. NetNGlyc 1.0 server (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetNGlyc/) predicts
                    NGlycosylation sites in human proteins using artificial neural networks that
                    examine the sequence context of
                    Asn­Xaa­Ser/Thr sequences. Sequences having
                    N­glycosylation potential &gt;0.5 are considered as
                    cut­off value [].

NetOGlyc 3.1 server (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetOGlyc/) was used to find the
                    O­glycosylation of the viral proteins during infection. The NetOglyc
                    server produces neural network based predictions of mucin type GalNAc
                    O­glycosylation sites in mammalian proteins. The G­score
                    is the score from the best general predictor; the I­score is the
                    score from the best isolated site predictor. If the G­score is
                    &gt;0.5 the residue is predicted as glycosylated; the higher the score
                    the more confident the prediction. For threonines an additional score is used
                        [].

Prediction of potential SUMOylation sites in viral proteins
SUMOylation prediction sites were analyzed using SUMOsp2.0 server (http://sumosp.biocuckoo.org/online.php). Low threshold was
                    chosen for the prediction of the modification. GPS and MotifX, two powerful
                    prediction strategies previously used for phosphorylation prediction were used
                    to create this algorithm [].

Prediction of few other post-translational modifications in AutoMotif2.0
                    Server
The AutoMotif 2.0 Server (http://ams2.bioinfo.pl/)
                    allows the identification of post­translational modification )PTM)
                    sites in proteins based only on local sequence information. The Support Vector
                    Machine )SVM) search type was used for the screening. The performance of SVM
                    models is described by recall R and the precision P. The recall R value measures
                    the percentage of correct predictions, whereas precision P gives the percentage
                    of observed positives that are correctly predicted []. AutoMotif 2.0 search was
                    done taking Methylation and Acetylation in consideration.

Discussion
The data on the types &amp; numbers of PTM sites and functional classification of
                Rotavirus proteins is given in Table 1 (see ). NSP1, the viral IRF3 antagonist
                contains 26 phosphorylation sites. It also has total 5 glycosylation sites, 4 of
                them are N­linked in nature. Though SUMOylation reveals 3 type II sites,
                no type I site was found. It does not have a methylation site but one acetylation
                site is present. Prediction of functional family of proteins using the SVMProt
                classifies NSP1 into 6 functional families with highest Pvalue for the Zinc-binding
                family. Next to come according to the Pvalue are RNA-binding, Metal-binding, Nuclear
                receptor, DNA repair and Magnesium-binding. The results are consistent with previous
                wet-lab experiments of having a Zinc-binding domain and RNA-binding activity. 

NSP2 is a smaller protein than NSP1 and contain 12 phosphorylation sites. It has only
                one N­linked glycosylation site. NSP2 has 5 type II and type I
                SUMOylation sites. It has only one methylation site but is devoid of any acetylation
                sites. NSP2 may function as Zinc binding, Actin binding, Calcium binding, Type II
                secretory pathway and Poreforming toxins.

NSP3 has 23 phosphorylation sites; it has no predicted glycosylation and acetylation
                sites. NSP3 has 4 SUMOylation sites and one methylation site. NSP3 belongs to seven
                families which according to P­value are Zinc binding, all
                lipid­binding, metal binding chlorophyll biosynthesis, Actin
                biosynthesis, DNA repair and DNA condensation. 

NSP4, the putative viral enterotoxin has 9 phosphorylation sites. NSP4 sequence
                contains 3 glycosylation and one type II SUMOylation sites. It also possesses one
                methylation site. NSP4 is predicted to be belonged to following three families
                Transmembrane, ABC family and Magnesium­binding.

NSP5 as previously reported was found to be hyperphosphorylated in 31 sites. Though
                VP1 &amp; VP4 contains more phosphorylation sites; considering the size of
                NSP5 the extent of phosphorylation is much higher in NSP5. As NSP5 is involved in
                replication of the virus so phosphorylation might have a role during it.
                Glycosylation status prediction has shown total 9 sites but contrary to other
                proteins, 8 out of them are O­glycosylated. It has 5 SUMOylation sites
                and 1 acetylation site but no methylation sites. According to SVMProt, NSP5 belonged
                to the Coat protein family which was not known previously. 

VP1, the largest protein of the virus is the viral polymerase contains 64
                phosphorylation sites, high compared to other viral proteins. VP1 also has 5
                glycosylation sites, 3 SUMOylation sites, 2 methylation sites and 3 acetylation
                sites. VP1 belongs to following seven families; Transferase, Structural, DNA
                replication, DNA­binding, Zinc­binding, Photosystem I and
                Pore forming toxins.

VP2 has 26 phosphorylation sites and 4 glycosylation sites. The VP2 protein has 13
                SUMOylation sites and may play a big role in the virus life­cycle. VP2
                protein is found to have 4 methylation sites, which is more than any other rotaviral
                proteins but it lacks the acetylation site. Previously it is known that VP2 remain
                associated with viral RNA and acts as a scaffolding protein. So there is a
                possibility that it may control the expression of viral RNAs after infection. VP2
                may function as RNA­binding, Oxidoreductases, Type II secretory pathway
                and Magnesium­binding proteins.

VP3 has 46 phosphorylation sites. It is also one of the most glycosylated proteins
                and has 9 N­linked &amp; 1­ O­linked
                glycosylation sites. It is also highly SUMOylated as it contains 5, type I and 5,
                type II sites. VP3 has only 2 methylation and 1 acetylation sites. VP3 classifies as
                with Zinc­binding and Poreforming toxins family of proteins. 

VP4 also contains 64 phosphorylation sites same as VP1. It is the most glycosylated
                protein and contains 13 sites. Rotavirus VP4 is the surface protein so there is a
                possibility that number of glycosylation sites modulate the virulence of the virus
                which can only be proved by in vivo studies. It has 3 SUMOylation
                sites and 1 methylation site. VP4 is predicted to be member of two families, Coat
                protein and Structural protein.

VP6 has 18 phosphorylation and 4 glycosylation sites. It contains 1 SUMOylation and 1
                methylation sites but no acetylation site. VP6 belong to coat protein family which
                is same with respect to its actual role in virus.

VP7 contains 13 phosphorylation, 1 glycosylation and 2 SUMOylation sites. VP7 has
                neither methylation nor acetylation sites. According to SVMProt, VP7 belong to
                transmembrane, coat protein and all lipid­binding proteins.

Conclusion
Based on the sequence analysis, it is found that rotavirus proteins have many
                potential sites which may undergo PTM. On the other hand, study of
                “functional family of proteins” has categorized each of them
                into different groups. These two aspects of the present study have raised the
                possibility of moonlighting behavior of rotavirus proteins. Protein phosphorylation
                results in either modulation of protein activity or effect replication or changes
                their specificity for interaction with other proteins. Phosphorylation prediction of
                rotavirus reveals moderate to many phosphorylation sites on different proteins.
                Further experimental studies on analyzing the role of phosphorylation in different
                viral proteins will uncover function of this kind of modification. Glycosylation is
                generally correlated with virulence of viruses. So glycosylated proteins of
                rotavirus may have some possible roles in their virulence or cellular effects.
                Similarly SUMOylation, Acetylation and methylation of the proteins may have
                different roles which depends on the context of its action or interaction with
                others cellular factors.

Functional family analysis of rotavirus proteins revealed different predicted roles,
                some of which were known previously, while some are completely novel;
                proper investigation of these functions in wet laboratory may open a new window for
                better understanding of rotavirus pathogenesis. Understanding of the role of
                posttranslational modifications in biology of viral infection is one step towards
                developing successful treatment strategies. Importance of glycosylation,
                phosphorylation or SUMOylation in viral protein function &amp; virus
                replication is well established. This knowledge should be exploited in future while
                designing novel therapeutics, which specifically target one and more crucial PTMs in
                virus life cycle.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The study was supported by financial assistance from Indian Council of Medical
                Research )ICMR)s New Delhi and the Program of funding research centers for emerging
                and reemerging infectious diseases )Okayama University­NICEDs India)
                from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sportss Science and Technologys Japan.

Citation:Chattopadhyay
                    et al, Bioinformation 4(10): 448-451 (2010)

