Several countries in the world are able to support health
research. This capability is dependent upon the economy. One
measure of economies that is generally used is the country's
gross national product (GNP). Thus, it is of interest to ascertain
the GNPs of a few countries. The GNP of the USA in 2014 was
approximately $17,555.2 billion. For comparison, the GNPs of
India, Great Britain, and Japan were respectively, 999,165.15
billion Indian rupees (INR), 438,278.0 million British pounds
(GBP), and 518,958 billion Japanese yen (JPY) [,
].

Countries capable of supporting extensive health-related
research generally have institutes that house and support such
research as well as support for research outside of such
housing. One example is the USA as is mentioned here this
month. The USA National Institutes of Health (NIH) is a
primary source of funding for clinical and
research/development related to public health in the USA as
well as world-wide. NIH is composed of about 30 institutes and
centers and has an annual budget of approximately $30 billion.
[,
,
].

Returning to the question of GNPs, it is of interest to consider
what percentage of its GNP a country should be expected to
expend on public health. The World Health Organization in
Geneva (WHO) has published many articles on this question.
For example, in a 2003 WHO report, it was stated that certain
approaches need to be addressed in answering this
straightforward question. This is really a very complex question
and the following are some factors recommended by WHO as
follows: a). What health problems does each country face? b).
What health status is aspired to? c). How effective are the health
services, activities, as well as policies? d). What are the prices
and costs of input services? e). Are there better uses of funds for
other purposes? The problem as to what degree of support
should be provided for research itself is even more complex 
[].
It can be noted that the USA NIH budget is approximately
0.17% of the USA GNP.

How individuals and households organize their expenditures is
also a pertinent factor as well as governmental expenditures. In
the USA, individual household expenditures in many categories
are shown and described in the web-site of the USA Bureau of
Labor Statistics []. There is an extensive description and
analysis of such expenditures divided into categories including
durable goods, nondurable goods, as well as services 
[]. Thus,
for example, one of the categories indicates that people in the
USA spent close to $60 billion on pet management in 2013
(approximately 0.34% of the GNP) 
[].

The governmental expenditures on public HealthCare have not
been in existence until recently. It is thus of interest what
occurred in the USA. Milestones in the advancement in
healthcare research in the USA occurred over several years and
with many steps. These steps include formation of a National
Cancer Institute (NCI) in 1940 by President F. D. Roosevelt.
Later, President H. S. Truman laid the cornerstone foundation
of the NIH Clinical Center in 1951 []. Today, the NIH has
grown further and is constituted by approximately 30 institutes,
centers, as well as the National Library of Medicine (NLM). The
NIH has a highly complex, multilevel, hierarchical,
administrative structure paradigm that includes far-ranging
responsibilities such as Women׳s Health, Budget, Data
Analysis, and Ethics. In about 2,500 medical schools,
universities, and other research institutions, approximately
300,000 researchers are funded by 50,000 competitive grants in
the USA and internationally/globally. In addition, 6,000
scientists are funded for research housed at specific NIH
laboratories [,
,
,
].

The administrative and scientific responsibilities of the Public
Health Service, NIH, the institutions that receive grants from
the NIH, as well as the responsibilities of the recipient scientists
themselves are set forth in detail in the USA Federal Register
and Code of Federal Regulations (CFRs). A few examples of
CFRs are of interest and illustrate the various responsibilities
and ethics codified by law for grant recipients [,
,
]. As
summarized by the NIH website, peer review is a central
benefit at NIH as a means of optimizing the most constructive
outcomes for research and clinical grant support. At NIH, the
core values of peer review institute the highest ethical standard
levels. This lays a foundation for policies, laws, and regulations
by which the process of NIH peer review advances. The grant
review process is mandated by statute or law. There is a dual
peer review system stated in section 492 of the Public Health
Service Act and federal regulations governing “Scientific Peer
Review of Research Grant Applications and Research and
Development Contract Projects” (42 CFR Part 52h). This grant
review process is envisioned to form a basis for a timely,
equitable, and fair review of grant applications submitted to
NIH, and also bias-free. 1. The first level of review is
accomplished by panels of principally non-federal scientists
with relevant demonstrated scientific expertise in contemporary
areas of research (termed Scientific Peer Review [SRG] group).
2. The second level of review is done by Institute and Center
(I&amp;C) National Advisory Councils or Boards. These councils are
composed of wider selected individuals (both scientific and
public representatives) who have activity, interest, and
expertise in matters related to health and disease. Applications
designated for funding must be recommended for approval by
both the SRG and the I&amp;C. I&amp;C Directors make final funding
decisions after this entire process is completed 
[].

In addition, details of the NIH peer review paradigm are
described in other publications as well. Thus, for example, it
should be noted that NIH deals with approximately 80,000
applications and involves approximately 20,000 reviewers per
year, currently [].

As mentioned in this Editorial, challenges are great and
complex in regard to health research/development. The
administration and carrying out of objectives for research and
clinical grants is a huge and complex task. Due to this
complexity as described above, there are some suggestions that
could be made. For example, future recommendations would
include the increased utilization of computerization. The
complex administration of clinical and basic health research and
development is exceedingly intricate. Possibly, computerization
using ‘thinking’ computers running supervised learning and
neural network capabilities may be tested and instituted in the
future. As complexity continually increases and as computer
power resources and capabilities correspondingly increase (e.g.
the future of quantum computers and nanotechnology), such
inventions and resources may be the wave of the future 
[,
,
].

There are no financial conflicts.

Citation:Shapshak, Bioinformation 11(2): 055-056 (2015)

