Background
The influenza virus is a common cause of respiratory infection all over the
world. The subtype of influenza A virus is determined by the antigenicity of
two surface glycoproteins, hemaglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA). The
subtypes circulating in the human population are H1N1 and H3N2. The HA
protein is responsible for virus attachment and the subsequent fusion of viral
and cellular membranes. [,
] Besides, there may also be a structural role for
the HA in budding and particle formation. [,
] The HA is a rod-shaped
molecule with parts inserted into the viral membrane and projecting as spike
away from the viral surface. It is synthesized as a single polypeptide chain
(HA0), and the HA0 precursor cleaves into HA1 and HA2 subunits. A long
fibrous stem is comprised of HA2 part and globular head is comprised of
HA1 part. Receptor-binding site lies within the globular head of the molecule.
[]
 The receptor-binding specificity of HA, which is determined by the
nature of the amino acids that form the receptor-binding pocket, is
responsible for the host range restriction of the virus. []

Antigenic drift is driven by an accumulation of point mutations in the HA or
NA proteins, leading minor and gradual antigenic changes. [] Drift variants
emerge due to a positive selection of spontaneous mutants that can escape
from existing host's antibodies. The HA protein is the major antigenic
component of the virus. For H1 viruses, the antigenic sites are designated
Ca1, Ca2, Cb, Sa, and Sb. [] The antigenic sites surround the sialic acid
receptor-binding site. Single point mutations in one HA antigenic site can be
sufficient for antigenic variation. Operating natural selection theory on HA,
positively selected sites could be found. [] They may be useful for
identifying the epitopes involved in the elimination of viruses from infected
patients.

In April 2009, large outbreaks of novel H1N1 influenza in human population
were reported from Mexico and the U.S. The H1N1 virus has spread
worldwide and the World Health Organization (WHO) raised its official
pandemic alert level phase 6 on its six-phased scale on June 11, 2009.
According to the WHO, more than 208 countries and overseas territories or
communities have reported laboratory-confirmed cases of pandemic
influenza, including at least 12,799 deaths as of January 2010. The pandemic
H1N1 virus originated from swine influenza virus. [] Reassortment between
swine influenza viruses in two distinct lineages (‘triple-reassortant’ and
‘ Eurasian avian-like swine’) led to generation of the pandemic virus. The
source of a swine lineage (triple-reassortant) itself comprised genes derived
from avian, human and swine lineages.

Mechanisms the pandemic virus broke the host range restriction is a major
topic to be studied. Besides, evolutionary process of the pandemic virus after
its introduction to human population remains to be clarified. For Spanish Flu
in 1918 to 1919, it is believed that the virus evolved becoming much more
lethal after its emergence, leading the second wave with high impact []Thus, genetic analysis on current pandemic virus should provide critical
insights into evolutionary course and evolutionary mechanisms of the
influenza virus. Here, we conducted phylogenetic analyses constructing a
phylogenetic tree for and calculating site-by-site selective pressures in the
HA gene.

Methodology
Sequence data
All data were obtained from the influenza sequence database [Influenza Virus
Resource on: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/FLU/FLU.html,
accessed on January 14, 2010]. All sequencing data for the strains with a fulllength
HA gene of pandemic H1N1 human influenza A virus were included.
Sequences derived from laboratory strains were excluded and a total of 1,332
sequences were obtained. Sequences containing minor insertions, minor
deletions or untranslatable codons were excluded. A multiple alignment of
the nucleotide sequences was constructed using ClustalW.

Phylogenetic tree
A phylogenetic tree was inferred by RAxML. [] The sequences data only for
the coding region were used. The basic sequential algorithm of RAxML is
described elsewhere. [] RAxML is one of the fastest and most accurate
sequential phylogeny programs. In this method, a rapid bootstrap search is
combined with a rapid maximum likelihood search on the original alignment.
The tree was constructed using Web-servers, RAxML BlackBox (mirror at CIPRES): 
‘http://8ball.sdsc.edu:8889/cipres-web/Home.do’. 
The tree is color-coded according to geographical or temporal information using FigTree (ver.1.3.1).

Selective pressure
Identical nucleotide sequences in the dataset were removed before calculating
selective pressures. A phylogenetic tree was constructed using the maximumlikelihood
method implemented in PhyML-aLRT. [] with the GTR modelf
(four rate categories, all parameters estimated from the data). Positive
selection sites were detected using fixed-effects likelihood (FEL) method,
which is based on maximum-likelihood estimates. The relative rates of nonsynonymous
and synonymous substitutions (dN/dS) in each codon were
compared. Sites where dN/dS &gt;1 and dN/dS ≫1 were inferred as positively
and negatively selected, respectively. The details of the method are described
elsewhere. [] H1 numbering was counted from initiation codon to
termination codon based on A/South Carolina/1/18 (H1N1). H3 numbering
was counted by HA1 and HA2 regions seperately. []

Discussion
We constructed a phylogenetic tree for the HA gene of pandemic influenza
viruses collected worldwide in 2009. The tree is shaded in colors by
geographical or temporal information ( and ). Pandemic viruses
were not clustered clearly by their geographical location or isolation time in
the phylogenetic tree. It should be noted that North American strains
collected in April and May look to be clustering in the lower right part of the
tree because intensive surveillance was done in countries in North America at
that time. Basically, the tree shows scattered and mixed strains from different
countries at different time periods. The results suggest that multiple
importations from outside occurred frequently. Nelson et al. showed genetic
multiple lineages of pandemic viruses and co-circulation of these lineages.
[] The virus has been circulating the globe extensively with multiple
introductions into most geographical areas [,
] In future, it is intriguing to know whether a specific strain (and its progeny) will predominate globally
or not. We should keep monitoring the spatial movements and evolution of
the pandemic virus.

Then, we calculated site-by-site selective pressures. We found 3 sites
positively selected in the HA gene for pandemic H1N1 virus: 1 in signal
domain, 2 in HA1 and 0 in HA2 (Table 1 in ).
Reason for positive selection at position 8 (H1 numbering) is unknown. The
site is located in signal domain and is not involved in the structure of HA.
Position 206 (H3 numbering) are located in an antigenic site. Mutation on the
site could be due to positive selection imposed by host's immune response. It
is surprising that selective pressure has been already imposed on pandemic
virus, although only a year has passed since its introduction into human
population. The virus must be circulating in human population very rapidly
and extensively, evolving under positive selection by host's immune
response. It is believed that most people do not possess immunity to the
pandemic virus, except for cross-reactive immunity observed in some elderly
people. [,]
Therefore, re-infection in persons who had been infected
once may lead antigenic drift. Actually, re-infection with the pandemic virus
was reported. [] Otherwise, mutation on the site can be advantageous for
the virus such as increasing receptor binding affinity and/or replication
ability.

Other sites in antigenic sites are not under significant positive selection
although selective pressures on some of them are higher than 1 
(Table in ). Non-synonymous mutations in at least one strain
were observed in 49.0% of antigenic sites (25/51). In contrast, nonsynonymous
mutations in at least one strain were observed in only 33.6% of
all codons in the HA gene (190/566). We should keep monitoring whether
mutation on the antigenic sites will occur leading antigenic drift. Further, no
sites which are involved in receptor binding specificity are under significant
positive selection (table). Pandemic virus is considered to recognize humantype
receptors [] Receptor binding sites do not have to be mutated to
increase adaptation in humans. However, we also did not find significant
negative selection on any of the receptor binding sites. We should keep
monitoring whether mutation on the receptor binding sites will occur, leading
change in receptor binding specificity.

We identified a site at position 264 (H3 numbering) as positively selected.
However, its specific role is unknown. Experimental studies are needed to
clarify the significance. The site may possess unknown characteristics such as
a part of unidentified antigenic sites. Besides, mutation at position 225 was
reported to be associated with fatal cases. [] We did not find positive
selection at the site. Yet, the site possess various residues (D, E, G, and N)
and selective pressure on the site is higher than 1 (1.7, P value = 0.45).

Conclusion
This study precisely intrigue to investigate the evolutionary way of the HA
gene of pandemic H1N1 influenza virus in the first year of its emergence.
Our analyses revealed that the virus has been circulating extensively and
globally, evolving under unique selective pressure. Furthermore, the study
predicts sites which may be involved in significant roles.

Supplementary material
Data 1
YF is a recipient of a scholarship through the Honjo International Scholarship
Foundation. This work was supported by the Health and Labor Science
Research Grants from the Ministry of Health, Labor, and Welfare, Japan.

Citation:Furuse et al  Bioinformation 5(1): 7-10 (2010)

Phylogenetic tree for the HA gene. Phylogenetic trees constructed using RAxML. Scale bar shows evolutionary distance inferred by RAxML
algorithm. Trees are shaded in colors according to geographical information.

Phylogenetic tree for the HA gene. Phylogenetic trees constructed using RAxML. Scale bar shows evolutionary distance inferred by RAxML
algorithm. Trees are shaded in colors according to temporal information.

