Background
White spot syndrome virus (WSSV) causes the dreadful disease
in crustaceans and cripples the fast growing aquaculture
industry []. WSSV belonging to the family nimaviridae is an
enveloped, non-occluded, rod-shaped DNA virus infecting
penaeid shrimps and other crustaceans. WSSV was first
reported from farmed Marsupenaeus japonicus in Japan in 1993
and named the Penaeid rod-shaped DNA virus []. WSSV
causes 100% mortality in cultured shrimp within 3 to 4 days.
The principal clinical symptom of WSS is the presence of white
spots in the exoskeleton of the infected shrimp. Other signs
include a rapid reduction in food consumption, lethargy and
reddening of appendages. WSSV also destroys the host
cytoskeleton and shuts down the genes involved in host energy
metabolism []. Envelope proteins play a critical role during
early events of virus infection, especially in attachment in many
host species. Of 39 structural proteins of WSSV, 22 are of
enveloped proteins constructing the infection-related structure
[]. VP28 envelope protein of WSSV plays a key role in the
systemic infection in shrimp []. It has been reported that VP28
binds to shrimp cells as an attachment protein and help the
virus to enter the cytoplasm []. Besides viral infection,
envelope proteins are important for viral assemblage [].
Mangrove plants are a rich source of medicinal compounds
such as steroids, triterpenes, saponins, flavonoids, alkaloids and
tannins []. Over 349 metabolites have been isolated from
mangrove species []. Extracts from mangrove and mangrove
associated plant species have proven their activity against
human and animal pathogens. Avicennia marina (Forssk.) Vierh,
is a predominant tree species of mangrove forests, and widely
distributed along tropical and subtropical coastlines []. This
mangrove plant has been traditionally used for treatment of
rheumatism, small pox, ulcers and other ailments []. The
serious impact of WSSV in shrimp culture industry worldwide
and the broad host range call for an efficient control strategy
against the virus. Therefore, the present study was undertaken
to substantiate the inhibition potential of A. marina-derived
phytochemicals against the WSSV envelope protein VP28.

Methodology
Retrieval of protein Structure:
The target envelope protein VP28 of White spot syndrome virus
[] 
(PDB ID: 2ED6), having the resolution of 2.0Ao was
retrieved from the protein data bank (PDB)
(www.rcsb.org/pdb). Structural and active site studies of the
protein were done by using CASTP (Computed Atlas of Surface
Topography of Proteins) and pymol molecular visualization
software.

Phytochemicals screened:
Seven phytochemicals namely stigmasterol, triterpenoid,
betulin, lupeol, avicenol-A, betulinic acid and quercetin
identified from A. marina of the coastal mangrove ecosystems
[,
–] were screened against the VP28 envelope protein. The
phytochemical molecules were retrieved from the pubchem
database and the chemical structures were generated from
SMILES notation (Simplified Molecular Input Line Entry
Specification) by using the Chemsketch Software
(www.acdlabs.com).

Active site prediction:
Active site of the target protein were predicted by using “Active
site prediction tool” from SCFBio Server 
(http://www.scfbioiitd.
res.in/dock/ActiveSite.jsp) which requires a “pdb” file as
an input and this tool explains the total number of active sites
along with information on their amino acid sequence, cavity
points and the average volume of the cavity.

Docking methods:
Argus Lab 4.0.1, most common and freely available software
was used for docking analysis (to calculate the binding energy
requirements of different ligands with VP28 envelope protein of
WSSV). The inhibitor and target protein were geometrically
optimized and “Argus dock‟ docking engine was used.
Calculation type was set to “Dock” mode whereas “flexible
mode” was selected for the ligand. Grid resolution was set to
0.40Ao. Least energy represented the easy binding character of
ligand and receptor.

Ligand binding sites prediction:
After docking the docked structure was saved as “.pdb” file and
further explored to predict the binding sites using “ligand
explorer” software. The predicted binding sites, based on the
binding energy, and amino acids make up the binding cavity.
Here ligand binding site represents the site where the ligands
most efficiently bind with the protein, among all the active site.

Drug likeliness prediction:
Ligand property was predicted by using “Lipinski drug Filters”
(http://www.scfbio-iitd.res.in/utility/LipinskiFilters.jsp).
Lipinski rule of five helps in distinguishing drug-like and nondrug-
like properties and predicts high probability of success or
failure due to drug likeliness for molecules. The Lipsinki filter
helps in early preclinical assessment and thereby avoiding
costly late stage preclinical and clinical failures.

Discussion
White spot syndrome virus is the most virulent and the largest
animal virus known to affect all crustaceans in particular
cultured shrimp [,
]. Hence, developing an efficient
treatment method is of the greatest urgency for aquaculture to
survive. Argus lab molecular docking software 4.0.1 was used
to dock seven A. marina derived phytochemicals namely
stigmasterol, triterpenoid, betulin, lupeol, avicenol-A, betulinic
acid and quercetin against the WSSV envelope protein VP28.
Totally 135 active sites were predicted in the target protein by
the “Active site prediction tool”. This high number of active
sites may be due to the high structure weight (220675.19) 
[].
The docking interaction of the protein and ligand, and the
predicted ligand binding site residues are shown in ()
and () respectively. The docked ligand molecules were
selected based on docking energy and good interaction with the
active site residues and the results are shown in  (see
supplementary material). Of seven phytochemicals, three were
found potent namely stigmasterol, lupeol and betulin which
exhibited minimum docking score of -15.0363, -11.9573 and -
11.5012 Kcal/mol respectively. Lesser the docking score more is
the binding capacity of the ligand. Antiviral activity of A.
marina against herpes simplex virus type 1 and vaccine strain of
poliovirus has already been ascertained []. Apart from
antiviral activities few studies on the anti-parasitic, antifungal
and antibacterial, antimalarial and anticandidal activities as
well as cytotoxicity of A. marina has also been reported 
[–,
]. In majority of the previous studies on anti WSSV property of
plant extracts, there have been very few attempts to purify the
components responsible for anti WSSV activity. All these
investigations were focused mainly on crude extracts from a
single plant or combination of plants []. All the docked
phytochemicals passed the Lipinski drug filter as evident in the
 (see supplementary material). Hence, stigmasterol
which showed minimum docking score could be considered for
further in vitro and in vivo studies. The potential of mangrovederived
compounds has been already corroborated by
molecular docking studies in our laboratory against, sterol
containing protein (AeSCP-2), breast cancer protein (BRCA1)
and dihydrofolate reductase [–]. Recently, a few studies
have made efforts to develop polyclonal antibodies (pAbs)
against specific viral peptides such as VP28 and VP19 and have
obtained promising results with indoor experiments [].
Envelope protein, VP28 is involved in systemic infection of
shrimp []. Hence blocking this protein can possibly impede the
entry of WSSV in the host. However, further in vitro and in vivo
experiments are needed to demonstrate the effectiveness of
stigmasterol for inhibition of WSSV.

Conclusion
The results obtained from this study would be useful in both
understanding the inhibitory mode of A. marina-derived
phytochemicals as well as in rapidly and accurately
predicting the activities of newly designed inhibitors on the
basis of docking scores. The present study showed that of seven
phytochemicals, stigmasterol could be the most potential
inhibitory source against VP28 envelope protein of WSSV.
However, ratification of the mechanism of envelope protein for
a viral infection can provide important molecular targets. We
anticipate that further exploration of the functions of envelope
proteins, including VP24, will facilitate a better understanding
of the molecular mechanism underlying WSSV infection for
control of viral infection.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors are thankful to the authorities of Annamalai
University for providing necessary facilities to carry out
this work, and Department of Science &amp; Technology, Govt. of
India, New Delhi for providing INSPIRE fellowship (SK
Sahu).

Citation:Sahu et al, Bioinformation 8(18): 897-900 (2012)

Molecular visualization of stigmasterol (A) Proteinligand
interaction (Pymol software) (B) Amino acids in the
binding pocket, ARG563, ILE564, THR578, PRO565 (Beta
strand), LEU562 (Coil) (RCSB Ligand explorer)

