Background
Lipids include vegetable oils and fats that are very important in our daily
food. The major sources of vegetable oils in the world market of fats and oils
is from oil‐palm, palm kernel, soybean, cotton, groundnut, sunflower,
rapeseed, corn, coconut, olive, castor, sesame and linseed. In year 2008, the
world production of fats and vegetable oils was 160,471,000 tonnes. In Asia,
Malaysia and Indonesia are the major producer and exporter of vegetable oil
(palm oil). In tropical countries, SAOP (Elaeis oleifera) is not preferred for
large scale cultivation due to low yield of palm oil derived from its fruit
mesocarp [–
]. But, its fruit mesocarp 
oil contains about 68.6 % oleic acid (C18:1) which 
is more than double in comparison to palm oil obtained fromcommercially cultivated 
oil‐palm, Elaeis guineensis Jacq Tenera (hybrid of Dura (♀) x Pisifera 
(♂)) [– 
].  Elaeis oleifera 
(2n=32) is also a good source of tocotrienols and carotenoids. As stated by 
Singh et al., (2009), in South America, preference to E. oleifera 
for cultivation is due to its resistance to bud rot disease 
[].

The SAOP is an important edible‐oil producing plant, but not much research
is done on this plant. As of July 13, 2010, search in all databases available at
the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) shows only 18
publications, 198 core-nucleotides and 3251 expressed sequence tag (ESTs)
records (our unpublished data). In this era of modern biotechnology, it is
possible to enhance the nutritional value of palm oil and productivity of the
oil‐palm in short time compared to traditional methods of crop improvement
[,
, ].
However, traditional breeding remains equally important though the
long‐term nature of oil‐palm breeding mostly impair its improvement.

In perennial plants like oil‐palm, genomic science holds promise of their
improvements and in the E. oleifera the development of genomic tools is
crucial for its understanding and exploitation in palm oil yield improvement.
In this paper, we report the guanine‐cytosine (GC) content in E. oleifera
genome based on a glimpse by analysis of 76 randomly isolated GSSs for GC
content using free online Bioinformatics tools. In double stranded DNA, the
GC pair is bound by three hydrogen bonds, while adenine‐thymine (AT) pairs
are bound by two hydrogen bonds. The level of GC content is an important
attribute of plant (and other living organisms) genomes. The GC content is
strictly controlled and moderately balanced across the genome 
[]. To
determine GC content, flow cytometry is most commonly used for large
number of samples []. 
However, if the coding or non‐coding DNA or cDNA molecules under investigation 
are sequenced then by using the free onlineBioinformatics tools (GC calculator) 
the GC-content can be precisely calculated [,
].

Methodology
Plant material
Young leaves from the field grown E. oleifera at the United Plantation
Berhad, Perak, Malaysia were collected and brought to the laboratory.
Collected young leaves were washed with plenty of running tap water and
then in 70 % ethanol for 5 minute followed by washing with deionized water
for 2 minute to avoid surface contamination. Leaves samples were frozen in
liquid nitrogen, and stored at ‐80 °C until required. Two (2) gram leaf‐tissue
was used to isolate total gDNA for gDNA library construction.

Genomic DNA preparation
Two (2) gram leaf‐tissue was ground into powder with the help of liquid
nitrogen using mortar‐pestle. The gDNA was isolated from powdered leaftissue
using a method described by Sambrook et al. 
[] with some minor
modifications. Leaves tissue powder was added to 15 ml extraction buffer
(0.1 M Tris HCl, 0.05 M EDTA, 0.5 M NaCl, 1% PVP, 1.4% SDS, and 10
mM 2-mercaptoethanol). The suspension was incubated in a water bath at 37
°C for an hour. Potassium acetate was added to each tube and again incubated
on ice for an hour. The phases were separated by centrifugation and
isopropanol was added to the new suspension. The mixtures were then
allowed to precipitate for an hour at ‐20 °C. After centrifugation, pellets were
dried and dissolved in TES buffer. RNase (10 mg/ml) was added to each tube
and incubated for an hour at 37 °C. The gDNA was purified by using
phenol/chloroform/isoamyl‐alcohol extraction method, followed by
precipitation with isopropanol and sodium acetate. Finally, DNA pellet was
washed with 70 % ethanol twice. The dried pellet was dissolved in 1X TE
buffer. The quantitative estimation was carried out using spectrophotometer.
DNA samples were stored at ‐80 °C till its use in DNA library construction.

Genomic DNA library construction and GSS clones isolation
Three libraries of gDNA were constructed to generate GSSs. The first gDNA
library was constructed using lambda ZAP-II as the cloning vector. The
genomic DNA (10 µg) was digested with EcoRI restriction enzyme and
generated EcoRI fragments were cloned into Lambda ZAP‐II cloning vector.
Cloning of the DNA fragments and packaging was completed following
guidelines given by the Lambda ZAP‐II vector supplier (Promega).
Recombinant (white) plaques were selected from plates for the in vivo
excision. The gDNA inserts were excised to pBluescript vector with the aid
of helper phage (Stratagene). The second gDNA library was constructed
using pGEM®‐T Easy cloning vector (self‐ligated and predigested with
EcoRI) (Promega). Ampicillin resistant recombinant colonies were selected
by blue/white colony selection method. Plasmid DNA was isolated and
purified using Wizard®Plus SV minipreps DNA purification system
(Promega). The third gDNA library was constructed by using gDNA
fragments generated by NdeI/DraI restriction enzymes and components from
the CloneMinery™ cDNA library construction kit (Invitrogen). The quality of
all three gDNA libraries was evaluated by random analysis and % of
recombinant clones was calculated. The gDNA insert carrying entry clones
(pDNAs) were used in transformation of E. coli DH5α and Kanamycin
resistant E. coli colonies were selected, cultivated and GSSs were generated.

DNA Sequencing
GSS clones obtained from gDNA‐Lambda ZAP-II Library were sequenced by
using T3 (5♂‐AATTAACCCTCACTAAAGGG‐3') and T7 (5♂‐
GTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGC‐3♂) primers. The GSS clones obtained
from gDNA‐pGEM®‐T Easy cloning vector library were sequenced by using
T7 (5♂‐TAATACGACTCACTATAGGG‐3♂) and SP6 (5♂‐
TATTTAGGTGACACTATAG‐3♂) primers ; whereas GSS clones obtained
from gDNA Entry Library (CloneMiner) were sequenced only from one end
using universal primer M13 (Forward) (5♂‐GTAAAACGACGGCCAG-3♂).

DNA sequences data analysis
All GSSs were processed by using VecScreen program 
[] available at
NCBI to identify nucleic acid sequence of cloning vector. After processing
and trimming single reads of GSSs, sequences were blasted by using blasn
and blastx and putative identities were given to GSSs. The annotated GSSs
nucleotide sequence data was submitted to GSS database of
GenBank/DDBJ/EMBL. Guanine and cytosine content (GC %) calculation
was carried out using ‘DNA/RNA base composition calculator’, a free online
Bioinformatics tool that calculates the molecular mass, elemental
composition, base composition, and percent AT and GC content for DNA and
RNA sequences [http://www.currentprotocols.com/tools/dnarna-basecomposition-calculator[.

Results and Discussion
Elaeis oleifera nuclear genomic DNA was isolated in good quality from
young leaf‐tissue. The total yield of the isolated intact nuclear genomic DNA
was 350 µg from 2 gram leaf tissue. Three libraries of gDNA were
successfully constructed by using 10 µg gDNA. The quality analysis of three
libraries by evaluation of randomly selected clones suggests that lambda
ZAP‐II library, pGEM®‐T Easy library and CloneMiner library was with
80%, 60% and 90% recombinant clones. It suggests that gDNA library
constructed using CloneMiner™ DNA library construction kit method is
most effective out of three different methods used to construct gDNA
libraries to generate GSS in this study ().

In order to generate GSSs on a small scale, altogether 14, 5 and 39
recombinant clones were isolated randomly from gDNA‐lambda ZAP-II
library, gDNA‐pGEM®‐T Easy library and gDNA‐CloneMiner library
respectively. By sequencing each recombinant clone from both sides with T3
and T7 primers, 28 GSSs (GSS#: EoGSS0001‐EoGSS0028; accession
numbers: DX575945‐ DX575972) were generated from gDNA‐lambda ZAPII
library. Altogether, 9 GSSs (GSS#: EoGSS0029‐EoGSS0037; accession
numbers: EI798032‐ EI798040) were generated from 5 recombinant clones
obtained from gDNA‐pGEM®‐T Easy library. Whereas, all 39 recombinant
clones from CloneMiner library were sequenced only from one side, hence
only 39 GSSs (GSS#: EoGSS0038‐EoGSS0076; accession numbers:
EI798041‐EI798079) were generated from 39 recombinant clones. Based on
blastn and blastx analysis, putative identities were assigned to GSSs. From
isolated 76 GSSs sequences, 13% GSSs were with partial sequences of
known genes in it; and 87% GSSs were identified as unknown. The annotated
GSSs nucleotide sequence data was finally submitted to GSS database of
GenBank/DDBJ/EMBL. The assigned accession numbers to GSSs are
DX575945‐DX575972 and EI798032‐EI798079.

Guanine and cytosine content calculation for all 76 GSSs carried out using a
free online Bioinformatics tool [] 
and data analysis suggested that the rage of the GC content in isolated GSSs 
was spanning from 22% to 63%. Maximum GSSs (13%) were showing 
37% GC content, where as 12% GSSs were showing 41% GC content. 
The precisely calculated CG content (%) in isolated 76 GSSs is depicted in 
. The calculated AT%, GC% 
and individual nitrogenous base content in % in each of 76GSSs was compiled 
using Microsoft Excel spread sheet and average % of individual nitrogenous 
bases, AT, and GC was calculated. The A, T, G, C, AT and GC content analysis in 
isolated GSSs and their average % calculation suggests that AT content 
(%) was 60%. This calculation also clearly gives a glimpse into 
E. oleifera genome, indicating that it contains 40%GC. 
The average content of the individual nitrogenous bases based on analysis of 76 GSSs is shown in
.

The GC content of genome varies in different plant species. For instance, the
GC content in Arabidopsis thaliana genome is reported 36 % 
[]. Oil‐palm
is a perennial plant species. The GC contents reported in some other perennial
plants such as Scots Pine (Pinus sylvestris) and yellow‐poplar (Liriodendron
tulipifera) is 39.5% and and 41% respectively 
[&amp;]. 
The GC content reported by other researchers in some other plants is shown in 
Table 1(see ). 
The reported GC content in Solanaceae species(coding regions) such as Nicotiana tabacum 
(40.4%), Solanum tuberosum (39.0%), and Solanum esculentum 
(39.8%), or the Fabaceae Pisum sativum (39.2%) 
[] is also close to the 
GC content depicted in this study for SAOP. In the recent past (November 2009), Malaysian 
Palm Oil Board (MPOB) has announced that they have completed sequencing of 
oil‐palm (E. oleifera and E. guineensis) 
genomes []. However, 
genome sequence and or its annotation information is not available in the public domain.

Conclusion
In conclusion, based on the precise GC content analysis of the randomly
isolated 76 GSSs by using online Bioinformatics tools we hypothesize that
GC content in E. oleifera genome is 40%. Despite the consideration that the
percentage of genome surveyed by using only 76 GSS in this study which is
extremely less in comparison to the whole genome size of E. oleifera, the
glimpse provided by GC % calculation in these GSS is in rage with the GC
content reported in other plants. Nonetheless, when the whole E. oleifera
genome study findings will be available the GC content in genome is
expected to be close to the 40%.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors are grateful to the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation
(MOSTI) of Malaysian Government for research funding [Grant Code: IRPA:
01‐02‐02‐0014/PR0015/07‐07], to the United Plantation Berhad, Perak,
Malaysia for supplying fresh leaf samples of Elaeis oleifera for this study,
and to Ms. Naqsya S.M. for her assistance in plasmid DNA purification.

Citation:Bhore et al; Bioinformation 5(4): 141-145 (2010)

Three different methods used in Elaeis oleifera nuclear genomic DNA 
library construction to generate genome survey sequences (GSSs) by random method.

The guanine-cytosine (GC) content (%) in randomly isolated 76 genome 
survey sequences (GSSs) from Elaeis oleifera genome.

A diagrammatic representation of the adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G) 
and thymine (T) content (%) in Elaeis oleifera genome as depicted by
76 randomly isolated genome survey sequences (GSSs).

