Background
The discovery of a short RNA product regulating the expression
of the lin-14 gene in C. elegans 
[] opened the door to a new
family of biologically important RNAs that proved to be crucial
in fine-tuning the expression patterns of genes. MicroRNAs
have later been identified as short sequences (18-22 nucleotides)
of RNA, which act as post-transcriptional regulators by binding
to complementary sequences on target messenger RNA
transcripts, in both the plant and animal kingdoms 
[–]. The
mature miR binds to the 3'Untranslated Region (UTR) [], 5'
UTR [] and CDS 
[] of target mRNA sequences, thereby
downregulating or upregulating the translation of these genes.
This downregulation is achieved either by translational
inhibition, or increased mRNA de-adenylation and
degradation, or mRNA sequestration [–] and upregulation
by translational enhancement []. Recent evidence however
suggests that the target mRNA may also regulate the level and
function of miRNAs [].

The extent of complementarity of the so-called “seed” region –
generally positions 2-7 [,
] of the miR, was thought to be the
basis for identification of potential mRNA targets by a miR 
[,
]. However, Chi, Hanon and Darnell 
[] present a new
alternative mode for miRNA target recognition involving
transitional nucleation, which allows for bulge formation and
consequent seed propagation. Recent studies [] also suggest
that the regions outside the so-called “seed” may also be
important to consider while ascertaining miR-mRNA binding.

Several reviews and articles have been published relating the
complicity of certain miRNAs to some cell types [–]. Most
studies aimed at identifying cancer specific miR signatures are
rather sketchy and specific to a group of related cancerous cells.
However, there is no literature or work on common
“signatures” to distinguish a miR to be associated with cancer.
In an attempt to fill up this void, we have undertaken an
extensive exercise, involving all the experimentally validated
mRNA targets and their corresponding microRNA interactions,
where the mRNA has an established role in cancer
development. This dataset was analysed with an aim to
discover sequential, structural or hybridization properties to
identify microRNAs associated with the cancer pathway. We
infer that there are distinct signatures or trademarks that can
enable us to demarcate a miR to be involved in the cancer
pathway – features that are present in the mature sequences
and in the selective arrangement of the seed regions as well.

Methodology
For the purpose of the present study, construction of an
extensive dataset is a prerequisite. A list of genes involved in
cancer was obtained from Cancer Gene Census Database
(COSMIC) []. From the listed 488 genes, it was observed that
they contained both oncogenes and tumor suppressors. List of
genes which were not involved in cancer were obtained by
calculating their Cancer Linker Degree (CLD) []. A jack-knife
selection of 100 from the total list of 1025 genes would serve as
the negative dataset. Further, a list of gene targets which have
documented miR interactions was obtained from miRTARBASE
(release 2.5) [], which is accepted as the curated database of
experimentally validated miRs. A comparison of the list
obtained from COSMIC with the interaction data from
miRTARBASE yielded the final list of miRNAs involved in
cancer. MicroRNA sequences thus filtered were retrieved from
miRBASE version 17.0 [], and checked for redundancy. The
final size of this dataset came to 2926 microRNAs, which were
experimentally validated and unique. Since the 3'UTR regions
of genes is the major site for microRNA interaction, we
obtained the 3'UTR regions for all the 488 genes in question
from the ENSEMBL-BIOMART portal [].

A multiple sequence alignment was done using “MultiAlign”
function of MATLAB with “ExitingGapAlignment” method to
search for sequence signatures, following our previously
published method []. To find the hybridized structure with
the best fit in terms of free energy, the miR sequence along with
their specific 3'UTR sequence were hybridized using the
RNAHybrid program []. Hybridization results obtained from
RNAHybrid were parsed and analyzed using an indigenous
Perl script, “PairFinder”, which identifies seed, regions outside
seeds, mismatches and bulges [http://universe.bitspilani.
ac.in/goa/sumit/Research]. Regions of complementarity
having atleast four bases at a stretch were considered to be
“seed” regions []. Since regular Watson-Crick base-pairings,
especially AU are found to be abundant in functional sites of
miR-mRNA interactions [], we wanted to investigate the
nature of the base pairing both in the seed regions as well in the
regions outside seed. Finally, seed scores, which are indicators
of the relative stability of the miR-mRNA interaction were
obtained by the formula n(AU)+ n(GC) – n(GU), where AU and
GC are assigned positive scores and GU was assigned a
negative score.

Results &amp; Discussion
Construction of the miR dataset was strictly based on the
premise that predicted miR will not be, and only experimentally
validated miR sequence will be considered. Similarly, all miRs
which do not have an experimentally validated target were also
excluded from the dataset. Looking for sequence preference in
the dataset of oncogenically involved miRs, it was evident that
Uracils are the most preferred nucleotides, whereas Cytosines
are the least preferred () a result which is in complete
agreement to our previous work with a pilot dataset []. Each
stack of bases in the figure represents the relative frequency of
the bases at that position []. The letter at the top of the stack is
also the tallest and implies its relative abundance at that
position. However, the sequence preference for the negative
dataset () shows a relative abundance of mainly
Guanines, Cytosines are fairly represented as well, while
Uracils are least preferred.

Multiple sequence analysis with the ‘MultiAlign’ function and
‘ExistingGapAdjust’ option showed that mature miRs
associated with cancer have a sequence signature which can be
generalized as ‘AG-UU-U-U--CU’. This result was verified
manually with the regional percentage conservation score data
and found to be true. Additionally the region of consensus lies
exactly in the seed region within the position 2-13 nt. This
sequence pattern does not have any semblance to the sequences
in the negative dataset.

Pairfinder was used to identify and categorise the seed, regions
outside seeds, mismatches and bulges in the miRNA interacting
with the mRNA. Patches of complementarity (PC) are
demarcated as the seed regions, as well as the regions outside
seeds where base pairings can occur (but in less than four
pairs). All bases outside the PCs are unpaired bases.
Quantitatively, the number of unpaired bases in miRs not
involved in the cancer pathway was quite higher than those in
the cancer pathway dataset (). For a miRNA-mRNA
interaction which has a single patch of complementarity to
those which have multiple PCs, it was always observed that the
number of unpaired bases is more in the interactions involving
miRNAs not associated with the cancer pathway. This was a
pointer to the better complementarity of the miRNA while
binding to the respective mRNA of genes associated with
cancer. Looking for the distribution of the regular Watson –
Crick (WC) and the non-WC base pairings, it was evident that
AU pairs in the patches of complementarity were much higher
in the miRs involved in the cancer pathway than in those which
were not (). Higher average of (A+U) % contents have
already been cited as an indicator of higher stability 
[].
However, the scenario is reversed when we considered GC
pairs. These are more abundant in the interactions of miRNA
not associated with cancer (), with the difference
being more pronounced in the regions of complementarity
outside seeds. The non-WC base pairing, again shows relative
abundance in the seed regions of the negative dataset, but are
negligible in the regions outside the seed when compared to the
dataset of the miRs associated with cancer ().
Consequently, the seed score of the cancer associated
microRNAs is higher on an average (4.108 ± 1.67) than for those
microRNAs which are not involved in the cancer pathway
(2.151 ± 1.16). This provides a further confirmation to the
stability of interactions of those miRNAs which have been
experimentally validated to be involved with cancer.

Conclusion
The work presented in this manuscript highlights the presence
of trademarks or signatures that can be used to distinguish
between a microRNA which is associated with cancer from one
that is not. While sequence signatures show a clear bias towards
Uracil usage and against Cytosine in cancer associated miRs,
the trend is reversed in the case of non-oncogenically involved
miRs. The regions of mRNA-miRNA interaction were
categorized using the script “Pairfinder” and Patches of
Complementarity were ascertained to distinguish between
paired and unpaired regions. Unpaired bases, which contribute
to weaker binding, were decidedly more abundant in the
negative dataset. So, by the corollary, the miRs associated with
the cancer pathway, were found to have stronger interactions
with their binding mRNAs. To further augment this hypothesis,
the nature of base pairings in the PCs was investigated and the
number of AU pairs (which contribute to stability) in both the
seed regions and the regions of complementarity outside the
seeds was found to be higher in the cases of miRs involved in
cancer.

The hypothesis is further strengthened by the seed score – again
an indicator of stability of interactions – which is found to be
significantly higher for miRNAs with oncogenic associations.
Thus, we can safely conclude that miRNAs associated with
cancer have more stable and stronger interactions with their
mRNAs, as compared to those which are not associated with
cancer. While this study was based on the interactions between
the 3'UTR region of the gene and the microRNA, it is also true
that some interactions in the 5'UTR and coding sequence of the
genes need to be analysed as well, and work is being
undertaken for the same. These findings, along with other
ongoing searches for thermodyanamic signatures would be
beneficial to the ultimate goal of constructing an algorithm for
identification and validation of microRNAs which could be
associated with cancer.

Citation:Ram &amp; Biswas, Bioinformation 9(10): 524-527 (2013)

Sequence Conservation in miRs associated with cancer
(A) and in the negative dataset (B).

Variation in number of unpaired bases in miRs
associated with cancer and the negative dataset. The first pair of
bars stands for the variation in the hybrids having a single
patch of complementarity (PC), the second for hybrids having
two patches, and so on.

Distribution of the regular Watson – Crick (WC) and the non-WC base pairings between miR associated with cancer and
the negative dataset. The panels on the left are for the pairings in the seed region, while the panels on the right are pairings in the
regions outside the seed (OS).

