Background
Entomopathogenic nematodes (EPN) and their symbiotic 
bacteria possess the ability to kill insect pests and therefore are 
efficient biological pest control agents []. Together, they 
provide an emerging model system for research of important 
biological processes including pathogenesis, symbiosis and 
parasitism. However, genetic markers for entomopathogenic 
nematodes are limited and the tools of their population genetic 
studies are scarce. There are different genetic markers that can 
be utilized in molecular population genetics. For example, 
microsatellite markers sets that have been described for 
entomopathogenic nematodes Heterorhabditis bacteriophora 
[].

In addition, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is widely used in 
population genetics investigations, phylogeny reconstruction 
and molecular evolution [,
]. This is because mtDNA is 
highly variable, maternally inherited, lacks recombination and 
seems to be selectively neutral [,
]. The elevated evolution 
rates of mtDNA genes permit their use in comparison of both 
inter- and intra-specific variation. Among mitochondrial genes, 
NADH dehydrogenase subunit 4 (nd4) and cytochrome c 
oxidase subunit 1 (cox1) provide ideal markers for population 
genetic structure and molecular evolution [,
]. On the other 
hand, the complex life cycle of Heterorhabditis species has 
consequences on their natural populations, such as genetic 
structuring, gene flow and genetic diversity. The alternation 
between sexual and asexual (hermaphroditic) reproduction in 
EPN should lead to continuous change of allele frequency and 
population structure [–
]. The is no doubt that population 
genetics studies in EPN is very complicated due to the 
microscopic size of the individuals, lack of morphological 
distinguishing characters, lack of suitable genetic markers, the 
need for host dissection to collect individuals and difficulty of 
purification of good quality DNA from individual nematodes. 
To address these problems that hinder EPN population genetics 
studies, we are suggesting a molecular sampling method for 
studying population genetics of EPN and comparing its 
resulting genetic diversity with traditional dissection method. 
Particularly, in the present study we used both morphological 
and molecular approaches to confirm identity of individual 
nematodes to the species level. Then, in order to investigate the 
genetic diversity between the molecular sampling method 
(MSM) and traditional sampling method (TSM), the pcox1 genes 
was isolated, sequenced and analyzed.

Methodology
The nematode population occupies an area approximately 3700 
m2 with a nematode density range from 0.25-2 per gram soil.

Nematode Sampling:
A total number of 15 sampling satiations were used to cover the 
Mohican Hills golf course at the state of Ohio, USA. A distance 
of 40 and 100 meters separated the sampling points. Nematodes 
were recovered from the soil samples using the larvae of wax 
moth Galleria mellonella baiting technique 
[]. Emerging 
nematodes were collected, washed three times with sterile
distilled water and frozen at -80°C immediately untill used in 
the MSM (). For comparison using the TSM, a total 
number of 50 individuals of first generation hermaphroditic 
nematodes were collected by dissection from the infected larvae 
and subjected to the molecular genetics analysis following 
Blouin et al. [].

Molecular Genetics Analysis:
For molecular sampling method, the nematode pellet was 
crushed into powder in liquid nitrogen and DNA was extracted 
using Qiagen® Genomic Tip 100/G according to the 
manufacturer׳s recommendations. Four µL of the supernatant 
was used to amplify the selected genes. For the traditional 
dissection method, 50 adults H. bacteriophora nematodes were 
collected from insect cadaver in placed in 25 µL lysis buffer 
[] 
and incubated at –80°C for 2 h, followed by incubation at 60°C 
for 1 h and 95°C for 15 min. For the specie confirmation, the 
ITS2 sequences of each individual nematode in TSM and 
collective MSM sample were amplified, sequenced and 
analyzed. The following primer set were used Forward: 5׳-
ACGTCTGGTTCAGGGTTGTT-3׳and Reverse: 5׳-
TTAGTTTCTTTTCCTCCGCT-3׳. For the amplification of the pcox1 
gene primers: Forward: 5׳-TTT TTT GGG CAT CCT GAG GTT TAT-
3׳ and Reverse: 5׳-AAA GAA AGA ACA TAA TGA AAA TG-3׳ were 
used. PCR amplification products were cleaned up using 
Qiagen® PCR purification kit. The PCR products were TA 
cloned then sequenced using M13 primer.

DNA Sequencing and Data Analysis:
All DNA raw sequence data were edited to remove low quality sequences, 
using Bioedit sequence alignment editor [] and subjected to BLAST 
(Basic Local Alignment Search Tool) to perform sequence similarity searches. 
Sequences were initially aligned using the Bioedit built-in clustal W program. 
Additional sequence alignments were performed using MAFFT multiple sequence 
alignment program [] and with 
PRRN (the best-first iterative refinement strategy with tree-dependent partitioning) 
multiple sequence alignment []. 
Resulting alignments were compared and the final alignments were improved manually 
and prepared in required formats. In order to select the best substitution model, 
we used FindModel program []. 
For cox1 we used Jukes-Cantor (AIC1 = 1209.691724 lnL = -604.845862) as the 
substitution model for cox1. Pairwise distance calculation was performed using 
Jukes-Cantor models and gaps, marked as (-), and missing data and stop codons marked as 
(?), were taken into account using the complete deletion method in MEGA software 
[] and the default gap values 
in PAUP V4B10, MrBayes v3.1 and TreeBuzzel [,
]. 
Amino acid translations of partial nucleotide cox1 sequences were obtained and analyzed 
by MEGA 6 software. Poisson correction was used as amino acid substitution method. 
DNA sequence polymorphism analysis was performed using DnaSP 5.10.1 software 
[]. Over all pairwise comparisons of sequence differences (D) was determined 
using the formula D = 1–(M/L), where M is the number of alignment positions at 
which the two sequences have a base in common, and L is the total number of 
alignment positions over which the two sequences are compared. The computer 
software DnaSP 5.10.1 was used to calculate the haplotype diversity (H) 
using the formula: H = n (1- Σχi2) / (n-1), where χi is the frequency of 
the i-th haplotype and n is the sample size for tested sampling method.

Results &amp; Discussion
Successful amplification of the target (pcox1) gene:
Molecular Sampling Method (MSM):
A total number of 50 E. coli positive white colonies were 
selected and processed as stated in the materials and method 
section. Of those, 44 high quality cox1 nematode gene sequences 
were obtained. One insect cox1 gene sequence, 3 amoeba and 2 
non-recombinant plasmid (no insret = false positive) sequences.

Traditional Sampling Method (Dissection for Individual Nematodes) (TSM):
A total number of 50 individual first generation hermaphroditic 
nematodes were collected from the infected larvae and
subjected to the molecular genetics analysis following Blouin et 
al. (1999) []. Of those 50 individuals, only 15 high quality 
nematode sequences were obtained. 20 low quality sequences 
were observed, 5 insect cox1 sequences, of lepidopteran origin, 
7 pcox1 of bacterial origin and 3 amoeba sequences.

Our results showed that, MSM success rate in obtaining the 
nematode cox1 gene was 88%. Whereas, the TSM was only 
successful in obtaining the nematode cox1 gene in 30% of the 
sequenced amplicons. Thus, suggested MSM is more efficient in 
acquiring the nematode target gene compared. This also 
implies that MSM is more cost effective to be used in molecular 
population genetic studies compared with TSM. Furthermore, 
in TSM, the amplification of cox1gene from untargeted 
organisms such as the insect host, symbiotic bacteria and 
contaminating amoeba emphasize on the failure of the removal 
of contaminates of insect tissues and bacteria or amoeba cells 
using the traditional dissection method despite the several 
washing steps of the hermaphroditic nematodes. While, in case 
of the molecular sampling method, the white trapping and the 
collective washing steps were able to remove greater part of the 
non-target tissues and cells before DNA isolation step, leaving 
behind only nematode templates for pcox1 gene PCR 
amplification. Moreover, dissection and follow-up cleaning 
steps to at least 5-8 minutes for each infected cadaver to obtain 
the 50 individuals required for the study.

Genetic Diversity Evaluation:
 shows a comparative analysis between polymorphic 
sites achieved via MSM and TSM. Results in  (see 
supplementary material) showed that Molecular Sampling 
Method was able to provide higher levels of variability in DNA 
sequence levels compared to the traditional method. For 
instance, the total number of observed mutations in the gene 
using molecular sampling method was 288 while it was zero in 
case of traditional method. Similar results were obtained from 
the DNA polymorphism analysis and nucleotide diversity 
 
(see supplementary material) &amp; . Higher 
genetic polymorphism was observed in the MSM compared to 
the TSM that exhibited no genetic polymorphism in pcox1 in the 
tested individuals. For example, nucleotide diversity value (Pi) 
for MSM was 0.28330 while, it was 0 in case of TSM. Moreover, 
overall average distances among tested sequences of MSM 
using Kimura 2-parameter model was 0.4902 while it was 0 in 
TSM. 

In addition,  (see supplementary material) shows a 
haplotypic diversity comparison between MSM and TSM. The 
number of observed genetic haplotypes among sequences 
obtained by MSM was 8 while only 1 haplotype was observed 
using TSM. After considering the sites with alignment gap 
number of observed genetic haplotypes among sequences 
obtained by MSM was 11 while only 2 haplotype was observed 
using TSM. In both cases the haplotypic diversity was higher 
in case of MSM compared to TMS. Moreover,  (see 
supplementary material) representing Genetic code, Genetic 
recombination analysis and amino acid comparisons between 
MSM and TSM. Similarly, results in table 4 further demonstrate 
the ability of MSM to produce and detect genetic variability 
among parasitic nematode compared to TSM. For instance, the 
minimum number of recombination events detected using 
MSM were three, namely, between sites [,
], (146,154) and 
(154,167). On the other hand no recombination events have 
been detected using TSM. In addition, deduced amino acid 
sequence analysis showed that using MSM, we detected 111 
Parsimony informative sites, while, have been detected using 
TSM. Thus, MSM superseded TSM in all levels of genetic 
diversity investigated in this study.

There is no doubt that our suggested MSM has many advantages over the TSM. 
For example, MSM is greatly less labor intensive, less time consuming and requires 
no specific experience with nematode identification using morphological traits 
which is very intricate in the case of Heterorhabditis EPN and many other parasitic 
nematode species which are extremely morphologically conserved. Moreover, MSM enable 
us to effortlessly seizing for maximum number of genetic make-ups in the sampling site 
by treating larger number of nematodes from single or multiple infected insect cadavers. 
Moreover, MSM allows identification of more haplotypes and DNA sequence variability by 
allowing processing more positive colonies containing different haplotypes. Furthermore, 
this method allows revisiting the –80°C preserved white transformed colonies in case of 
technical difficulties and/or searching for more DNA variability. In addition, MSM 
allows precise identification of the nematode species targeting the ITS1 region, which 
is not possible in case of using individual nematode which dose provide enough material 
for both molecular identification and pcox1 analysis. Furthermore, this method eliminates 
majority of molecular contamination problems faced when using chelex based methods. 
Moreover, it allows sampling more individuals to produce a more reliable and credible 
representative sample. Last but not the least, MSM allows identification of the presence 
of cryptic species in our sample and eliminating it from our analysis.

Conclusion
We showed that MSM supersedes TSM in labour intensity, time 
consumption and requirement of no special experience. 
Moreover, it is more efficient in exhibiting genetic diversity 
among parasitic nematode used in this study. 


Abbreviations
EPN - Entomopathogenic Nematodes, 
MSM - Molecular Sampling Method, 
TSM - Traditional Sampling Method, 
mtDNA - mitochondrial DNA, 
nd4 - NADH dehydrogenase subunit 4, 
cox1 - cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1.

Competing Interests
The authors declared that they have no competing interests 
period.

Authors' Contributions
ATMS, designed the study collected samples, performed the 
molecular analysis, performed phylogenetic and bioinformatics 
analysis and prepared the manuscript; SKD, assisted in 
collecting information, performing phylogenetic and 
bioinformatics analysis and preparing the manuscript.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We like to thank all members of the Information Technology 
Department for facilitating the conduction of the data analysis. 
We also want to thank the Department of Entomology, Ohio 
State University for facilitating field work.

Citation:Saeb &amp; David, Bioinformation 10(6): 347-352 (2014)

A summary of the suggested molecular sampling 
method.

DNA Nucleotide diversity models, Pi ( the average 
number of nucleotide differences per site between two 
sequences). Theta (calculated nucleotide diversity per site in the 
sequences) and S (the number of segregating sites in the 
sequences) for both molecular sampling method and traditional 
sampling method.

