Background:
Transposable elements are found in all eukaryotic genomes. A 
particular class of these elements, the Non-LTRretrotransposons, is also the component of large plant genomes 
as LTR retrotransposons []. But the LINE and SINE 
retroelements also contributed some part of plants genome 
composition. Our observation suggested the rice genome has 
seven LINE and twelve SINE types of retroelements most 
frequently dispersed throughout in all twelve chromosomes as 
characterized in supplementary material File 2 (S2). These 
elements transpose via RNA intermediate through a 
copy/paste mechanism, this results in the amplification or 
genomic expansion []. 
Rice genome (Oryza sativa) is about 430 
MB in size having twelve chromosomes and only two percent of 
total retrotransposons in all chromosomes are LINE and SINE 
type of elements but they successfully and completely 
dispersed as characterized in  (see supplementary 
material). Previous studies of eukaryotic genomes suggested 
that the analysis of these LINE and SINE type of retroelements 
is very significant for revealing the secrets of genomic 
organization and evolution of any genome therefore we used 
the computational approach for the characterization and 
distribution analysis of these non-LTR elements in the vast rice 
genome. Transposable elements are separated into two major 
groups (class I and class II) depending on their mode of 
transposition [,
]. The analysis suggested that rice also has 
notable amount of these nonLTR retrotransposons.

Retrotransposons are subclass of transposable element which is 
further classified into LTR and nonLTR. These retrotransposons 
are particularly abundant in plants where they are principal 
component of nuclear DNA for example maize, wheat etc. The 
main objective of our work is to map the LINE and SINE type of 
retroelements which come under the category of non-LTR 
retrotransposons.

Methodology:
The genome of rice (Oryza sativa) was collected from FTP server 
of NCBI and the retroelement sequences were taken from 
REPBASE database []. Standalone Blast was used for searching 
the copies of all LINE and SINE type of repetitive element in 
rice genome []. The BioPERL program was developed and 
used to extract the information required for the map generation 
and extraction of upstream sequences to the insertion site of 
these repetitive elements []. The total output file of developed 
BioPERL program is provided in supplementary material File 2 
(available with authors). M.S. Excel was used for managing 
and graphical representation of data. WEB LOGO was used to 
generate the upstream sequence logo for further analysis [].

Results and Discussion:
The survey of all transposable elements revealed that 60% are 
retroelements, 22% transposons, 18% are MITES, and only 2% 
of retroelements observed as LINE and SINE type of elements 
in the rice genome. The percentage of these LINE and SINE 
retroelements are much less in comparison to other eukaryotic 
genome such as human genome where these LINE and SINE 
elements are highly dispersed and constituted the major part of 
total genome.

About 15047 copies of total LINE and SINE type retroelements 
are found uniformly distributed in the rice genome, out of 
15047, 13487 copies are of SINE type of elements (, see 
supplementary material) and 1560 copies are LINE type of 
elements (, see supplementary material). There are 
twelve SINE type and seven LINE type of retroelements found 
in the genome (Oryza sativa), 13487 copies scattered throughout 
the genome of all SINE type elements and the LINE type of 
elements were observed in a total 1560 copies, in the genome. 
The F524 type of SINE element showed very significant result. 
It was found that 119 copies successfully inserted both intact 
ends which further revealed that the F524 is the most successful 
dispersed SINE type of retroelement in comparison to other
SINE elements as indicated in  (see supplementary 
material).

The highest populated SINE type of element was observed as 
SINE3_OS which have more than seven thousand copies 
distributed throughout in the genome but it has only ten both 
intact ends copies as shown in  (see supplementary 
material). The following order represents the population 
density of each and every SINE type of retroelements scattered 
in the rice genome i.e., SINE03_OS&gt; SINE9_OS&gt; 
f524&gt; pSINE1_OS1&gt; p-SINE1_OS&gt; SINE1r5_OS&gt; SINE16_OS&gt; 
CaSINE&gt; SINE6_OS&gt; SINE1OS&gt; ormosia&gt; SINE8_OS, where 
SINE03_OS element populated maximum and SINE8_OS has 
minimum population. In case of LINE elements 1560 copies are 
dispersed in the genome, out of these 2.5% dispersed elements 
have both intact ends, 79.55% showed both truncated ends, 
8.14% have 3' truncated ends and 9.8% of LINE type elements 
showed 5' truncated ends, which further revealed that the most 
of the dispersed element are not successfully inserted by both 
intact ends. Only very few elements such as LINE5A, LINE-5 
showed complete insertion in rice genome having both intact 
ends than other LINEs but LINE-1 and LINE-3 also have 
maximum copies distributed in the rice genome beside this it 
has very less number of complete insertion by both ends (intact 
ends) as shown in  (see supplementary material). 

To enhance our understanding about the genome evolution in 
rice, it is necessary to develop a well organized map of 
repetitive elements, therefore we have developed the graphical 
map of whole rice genome further classified by the twelve 
chromosomes populated with nineteen different LINE and 
SINE type of retroelements as shown in . The map 
represents only the successful both intact ends copies 
distributed in the rice genome of all LINE and SINE 
retroelements. The distribution datasheet of total LINE and 
SINE retroelements (truncated and intact ends) are provided in 
supplementary File 2 (available with authors). The datasheet 
helps the researchers to map its own interest of intact or 
truncated elements for further studies.

During the analysis, we observed that the copies of non-LTR 
elements of upstream sequence in the insertion site showed 
specific and unique pattern in their nucleotide sequence of 40th 
to 100th base pair position. The AG (Adenine, Guanine) rich 
region was found in all LINE type of retroelements which 
further represent the selection site of high AG density in 40th to 
100th base pair of upstream region.

In case of SINEs the similar kind of pattern is found but A, T 
(Adenine, Thymine) concentration rich region was clearly 
visible instead of A, G. In other words we can say that A, G rich 
region can be a signal to select the insertion site by LINE types 
of retroelement for their insertion and A, T pattern in upstream 
region can be a insertion site selection signal used by SINE type 
of retroelements for their insertion in the host genome. 
 and 
 (see supplementary material) also 
supports the above interpretation as its values indicated i.e., 
total A, G (Adenine, Guanine) concentration is more than 68 
percent which is dominant over T, C (Thymine, Cytosine) in 
LINEs and in case of SINE 63% A, T rich concentration was 
found in upstream sequences of all SINE type of retroelements.

Conclusion:
The main emphasis of this work is to map the successfully 
inserted LINEs and SINEs retroelement as shown in . 
Another objective of this work is to check the status of these 
elements in the rice genome; whether they are completely 
inserted (Both intact ends) or truncated (break) end. As 
expected these Non-LTR type of retroelements (LINEs, SINEs) 
were inserted successfully in hundreds of copies but more than 
97% of LINEs and SINEs are truncated in the form of both 
truncated ends and one side truncated ends (either 3'or 5'end). 
The observed percentage of LINEs and SINEs having both 
intact ends is very less in comparison to total truncated ends 
elements dispersed in the genome. As shown in map (),
the all LINEs and SINEs laid up to 200000 base pair position in 
all twelve chromosomes while most of the chromosomes of rice 
have more than 400000 base pair long which means the all 
LINEs and SINEs is present inside the half range of all 
chromosomes and still amplifying its status towards the 
boundaries of chromosomes in rice genome. It was reported 
during the analysis of upstream regions that the insertion site of 
completely inserted (both intact ends) LINE and SINE 
retroelements are heavily populated with A,T and A,G 
concentration. The A,T rich upstream region is responsible for 
the insertion of SINEs elements while the A,G rich region is 
required for the insertion of LINEs elements as indicated in the
,  and 
 (see supplementary material).

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Faheem Khan et al, Bioinformation 7(6): 276-279 (2011)

Percentage distribution of transposable element in rice genome

Map of rice genome populated with all successful 
SINEs and LINEs

Frequency distribution LOGO of upstream sequences 
to the insertion site of LINEs in rice genome

Frequency distribution LOGO of upstream sequences 
to the insertion site of SINEs in rice genome

