Background
The role homodimers play in regulation is critical. The formation of
homodimer interfaces is inspiring. Homodimer interfaces are formed
through 3 folding mechanism (2­state (2S), 3­state with monomer
intermediate (3SMI) and 3‐state with dimer intermediate (3SDI)).
Neet and Timm (1994) reviewed 17 homodimers with known
unfolding data (denatured species fraction measured by spectroscopic
techniques such as fluorescence, CD, NMR and absorption) []. They
noticed that some dimers unfold through a step forming intermediates
(3 state ‐ 3S), while others do not (2 state ‐ 2S). Unfolding of
desulfoferridoxin homodimer using GuHcl was shown by Apiyo and
colleagues (2001) []. They observed a high thermodynamic stability
of desulfoferridoxin indicating the formation of intermediates in
unfolding (showing evidence for 3S folding mechanism). Mazzini and
colleagues (2002) observed dimer dissociation before unfolding rather
than the reverse in bovine odorant binding protein [].

The role of homodimer structures in understanding homodimer folding
mechanism is eminent. More than forty homodimer structures with
known folding data have been compiled []. Therefore, it is of interest
to identify and relate common structural features within known folding
class of homodimers. Tsai and colleagues (1997) investigated 187
stable and 57 symmetry related oligomeric structural interfaces [].
They observed that 2S interfaces are similar to protein cores and 3SMI
interfaces resemble monomer surfaces in structural elements. Tiana
and Broglia (2002) studied the evolution of two identical 20 letter
residue chains (homodimer) within the framework of a lattice model
using Monte Carlo simulation []. They proposed that 3S binds as it
folds, while 2S folds and then binds. Levy and colleagues (2004)
grouped 2S and 3SMI dimers based on the relationship between the
intramolecular/intermolecular contacts ratio and interface
hydrophobicity using information gleaned from 11 homodimers with
known unfolding data []. They suggested that the native protein 3D
structure is the major factor governing the choice of homodimer
folding and binding mechanism.

Mei and colleagues (2005) reviewed 32 homodimer structures (class A
‐ 18 (potential 2S); class B ‐ 10 (potential 3SMI); class C ‐ 4
(potential 3SDI)) with known unfolding data []. They defined
interface amino acid residue (IAR) and squared loop length (SLL) to
illustrate 2S, 3SMI and 3SDI interfaces. IAR is the distance between
the first and last amino acid that take part in the intersubunit
interaction. SLL is the sum of the squared distances between two
successive residues of the monomer. They described three models of
interfaces: 
large IAR and small SLL;

large IAR and large SLL; and

medium IAR and small SLL.

 They suggest that class B
structures mimic the second model with large IAR and larger SLL like
the second model. Li and colleagues (2005) used 41 homodimer
structures with known folding mechanism data to distinguish 2S from
3S []. Their analysis showed that small proteins with large interface
area and high interface hydrophobicity are 2S (80%). However, 3S are
large proteins with small interface area and low interface
hydrophobicity (60%). Lulu and colleagues documented structural
features to discriminate 2S and 3S homodimers in a dataset of 42
structures []. Here, we describe the analysis of 47 homodimers
(twenty eight 2S, twelve 3SMI and seven 3SDI) to examine the types
of inter subunit interactions at their interfaces.

Methodology
Dataset
We created a structural dataset 47 homodimers from Protein databank
(PDB) with known corresponding folding data through literature
survey (Table 1 in ). The dataset consists of
twenty eight (28) 2S, twelve (12) 3SMI, and seven (7) 3SDI. The
mean length of monomers for 2S is 122.6; 3SMI is 228.4 and 3SDI is
397.4 (Table 2 in ). Thus the mean length in
the dataset is small for 2S, moderate for 3SMI and large for 3SDI.
However, it should be noted that the standard deviation about the
mean is small for 2S, moderate for 3SMI and high for 3SDI (Table 2
in ).

Interface area
Interface area in each homodimer structure is defined as the change in
accessible surface area (delta ASA) from monomer to dimer
formation. It is calculated as the mean difference in ASA of each
monomer in un-complex state and complex state. The distribution of
interface areas to monomer length for 2S, 3SMI and 3SDI complexes
in the dataset is given in . ASA was calculated using the
software SURFACE RACER 5.0 [].

Interface to total (I/T) ratio
The interface residues involved in homodimer binding are identified
for each structure using delta ASA data (residues having delta ASA ≫
0 are interface residues). Thus, i/t ratio was calculated as the ratio of
the number of interface to total residues. The distribution of i/t ratio in
2S, 3SMI and 3SDI datasets are shown in . The percent mean
i/t ratio (Table 3 in ) for 2S is larger (38%)
than 3SMI (18%) and 3SDI (17%). The grouping of 2S, 3SMI and
3SDI homodimers based on large (≫ 50%), moderate (50-25%) and
small ( ≪ 25%) i/t ratio is given in Table 4 (see ).

Representation of interface in 2-dimension
We represented the interface for each homodimer in 2-dimersion as a
function of residue number (see Figure -). We then grouped 2S,
3SMI and 3SDI interfaces based on I/T ratio and by the type of
interface interaction based on visual inspection.

Types of interfaces
The 2-dimensional patterns of interfaces between monomers in
homodimers are different. These patterns are 
N type ‐ N terminal interaction;

C type ‐ C terminal interaction;

M type ‐ Middle interaction;

NAC type ‐ N and C terminal interaction;

CAM type ‐ C terminal and middle interaction;

NMC type ‐ N and C terminal and middle interaction;

FL type ‐ Full interaction

. Please see  for
examples of each type of interfaces. The distribution of the interface
types in 2S, 3SMI and 3SDI is given in Table 5 (see ).

Results
 shows the distribution of 2S, 3SMI and 3SDI with increase in
monomer length (ML) and interface area (B/2). 2S proteins fall within
300, 3SMI within 400 and 3SDI within 900 residues. This implies that
2S proteins are small sized, 3SMI are moderate sized, and 3SDI are
large in size.  shows the distribution of 2S, 3SMI and 3SDI
with respect to interface-to-total residues (I/T) ratio. The average
percent I/T ratio for 2S, 3SMI and 3SDI is given in . Thus,
 implies that I/T ratio for 2S are considerably larger than
3SMI and 3SDI.  illustrates the hypothetical scenario for
representing interfaces with large (≫50%), moderate (25-50%), and
small ( ≪ 25%) I/T ratios.  gives the types of possible
interactions at the homodimer interfaces. This illustrates the mode of
interactions between subunits. Eight different modes of interactions
are shown, namely, N (interaction only at the N terminal); C
(interaction only at the C terminal); M (interaction only in the middle);
NAC (interaction at both the terminals); NAM (interaction at the N
terminal and in the middle); CAM (interaction at the C terminal and in
the middle); NMC (interaction at both the terminals and in the
middle); FL (full interaction).  to  shows the type of
homo-dimer interfaces in 2S, 3SMI and 3SDI, respectively. Examples
of different interface associations in 2S (), 3SMI ()
and 3SDI () are shown.

Discussion
The formation of homodimers through distinct folding mechanism and
their role in regulation is intriguing for cell and molecular biologists.
The relationship between homo-dimer folding mechanism and known
homodimers structures have been investigated in recent studies using
structural datasets [–]. Neet and Timm (1994) reviewed unfolding
data for 17 homodimers and documented some homodimers having 3S
mechanism while others with 2S mechanism []. Tsai and colleagues
(1997) observed that 2S interfaces are similar to protein cores and
3SMI interfaces resemble monomer surfaces in structural elements
among 187 stable and 57 symmetry related oligomeric structural
interfaces []. Levy and colleagues (2004) suggested that the native
protein 3D structure is the major factor governing the choice of
homodimer folding and binding mechanism in 11 homodimers with
known unfolding data []. Mei and colleagues (2005) defined interface
amino acid residue (IAR - distance between the first and last amino
acid that take part in the inter-subunit interaction) and squared loop
length (SLL - sum of the squared distances between two successive
residues of the monomer) in 32 homodimer structures and proposed
that 3SMI models have large IAR and larger SLL []. Li and
colleagues (2005) used 41 homodimer structures and showed that
small proteins with large interface area and high interface
hydrophobicity are 2S and 3S are large proteins with small interface
area and low interface hydrophobicity. [] Lulu and colleagues (2009)
showed that interface to total (I/T) residues ratio is large for 2S than
3SMI and 3SDI in a dataset of 42 homodimers []. Thus, these studies
provide structural insight to homodimers folding mechanism using
structural data. However, the structural relevance of known
homodimers to folding mechanism is not yet explicit. Hence, we
created an extended dataset of 47 homodimers with known folding
data (Table 1 in ). The monomer length
characteristics of the dataset for 2S, 3SMI and 3SDI are given Table 2
(see ). The mean size for 2S (122.6) is
smaller than 3SMI (228.4) and the mean size for 3SMI is smaller than
3SDI (397.4). It should be noted that small sized proteins of less than
100 residues are available in all the three categories of homodimers.
However, large sized proteins (≫ 500 residues) are characteristics of
3SDI. The size of individual subunits in homodimers does influence
the formation of interface area in each structural complex. The
distribution of interface area in 2S, 3SMI and 3SDI with subunit size
(monomer length) is given in .  shows that 2S are
often small sized with small to large interface area, while 3SMI are
small to medium sized with small to medium interface area. This is
similar to the conclusions made by Li et al. (2005) [] that small
proteins with large interface area are 2S and 3S are large proteins with
small interface area. The ratio of interface residues to total residues
(I/T) is larger for 2S than 3SMI and 3SDI () similar to that
shown by Lulu et al. (2009) []. The mean value for I/T ratio in all
three categories is given in Table 3 (see ).

The significance of monomer subunit size, interface area and ratio of
interface to total residues in 2S, 3SMI and 3SDI homodimers has been
realized in this analysis and elsewhere [,]
. However, the utilization
of these features in further understanding the mode if homodimers
interfaces has not yet been comprehended. Thus, we grouped 2S,
3SMI and 3SDI structures into three categories based on large (≫50%),
moderate (25-50%) and small (≪ 25%) I/T ratio values (Table 4 in
). The grouping shows that 3SMI and 3SDI
structures are with either moderate or small I/T ratio values unlike 2S
with small to large I/T values. Thus, homodimer interfaces exist with
small to large I/T ratio values in the dataset. Hence, the physical
interface between subunits in them is subsequently formed in different
ways as hypothetically illustrated in . The interface formed
between monomer subunits are either with inverted or non-inverted
terminals as shown in . A similar classification has been
proposed earlier by Mei et al. (2005) using interface amino acid
residue (IAR - distance between the first and last amino acid that take
part in the inter-subunit interaction) and squared loop length (SLL -
sum of the squared distances between two successive residues of the
monomer) [].

We represented the interface for each homodimer in 2-dimersion as a
function of residue number (see Figures -). We then grouped 2S,
3SMI and 3SDI interfaces based on I/T ratio and by the type of
interface interaction based on visual inspection. The physical
associations between interacting monomer subunits at the interface is
hypothetically illustrated in . Eight different modes of
interactions are shown, namely, N (interaction only at the N terminal);
C (interaction only at the C terminal); M (interaction only in the
middle); NAC (interaction at both the terminals); NAM (interaction at
the N terminal and in the middle); CAM (interaction at the C terminal
and in the middle); NMC (interaction at both the terminals and in the
middle); FL (full interaction).  to  shows the type of
homodimer interfaces in 2S, 3SMI and 3SDI, respectively. Examples
of different interface associations in 2S (), 3SMI ()
and 3SDI () are shown. The distribution of types of different
interfaces against I/T ratio is given for all homodimer structures in the
dataset (Table 5 and Table 6 in ). Thus, data
presented here provides a framework for understanding homodimer
interactions and their folding mechanism using structures. However,
the extrapolation of these observations to monomer subunit sequences
for potential application in the prediction of homodimer folding and
binding is not yet explicit. It should also be noted that relationship
between homodimer folding with biological function is of interest in
future.

Conclusion
The consideration of homodimers as potential drug targets has been
recognized in recent years. Therefore, an understanding of their
structure and mechanism of folding is of value. Homodimer folding is
usually established using CD, NMR, adsorption and fluorescence
techniques. This is generally time consuming and tedious.
Determination of folding mechanism for known homodimer structures
using structural features is of interest. Hence, we show here that 2S,
3SMI and 3SDI homodimers have distinct structural interfaces
corresponding to their folding mechanisms. 2S are small, 3SMI are
medium and 3SDI are large sized. We grouped 2S, 3SMI and 3SDI
into categories with large I/T (≫ 50%), moderate I/T (50 - 25%) and
small I/T (≪ 25%) interfaces. 2D representation of the interface shows
eight different forms of interactions in these homodimers. 2S
homodimers frequently have large I/T and thus, utilize the entire
protein structure in the formation of the interface where the individual
subunits are heavily inter communicated with each other. This is not
true in the case of 3SMI and 3SDI. 3SMI subunits usually interact with
each other at the interface with a gentle touch-like contact and hence,
they have low I/T ratio. 3SDI are often quite different in interaction
compared to 3SMI and their subunits do deeply interact at the interface
with only one part of the surface and hence also having low I/T ratio.
Data presented here finds utility in understating homodimer folding
mechanism from known structures.

Author's contribution
PK conceived the idea and designed the experiment. VK and AS
performed the analysis and summarized results. SL participated in the
analysis and UK helped in manuscript preparation.

Supplementary material
Data 1
VK, AS and SL wish to express their sincere thanks to all members of
Biomedical Informatics for providing necessary support and material
for the analysis. SL is a visitor to Biomedical Informatics.

Citation:Karthikraja et al, Bioinformation 4(3): 101-111 (2009)

Distribution of Interface area along the Monomer length for 2S, 3SMI and 3SDI. According to monomer length, 2S proteins fall within
the range of 300, 3SMI within 400 and 3SDI within 900. This implies that 2S proteins have a small ML, 3SMI have a moderate ML, and 3SDI
have a larger ML.

Distribution of I/T ratio for 2S, 3SMI and 3SDI. The figure implies that the I/T ratio for 2S is larger than 3SMI and 3SDI.

2 ‐ Dimensional representation of interfaces with large, moderate and small I/T ratio for both symmetric and asymmetric homodimers.

Types of interface interactions that were resolved from the information gleaned by visual inspection. There are eight types of intersubunit
interaction: N (interaction only at the N terminal); C (interaction only at the C terminal); M (interaction only in the middle); NAC
(interaction at both the terminals); NAM (interaction at the N terminal and in the middle); CAM (interaction at the C terminal and in the middle);
NMC (interaction at both the terminals and in the middle); FL (full interaction).

Example of types of interfaces in 2S in accordance with large, moderate and small I/T ratios. The two vertical axes indicate residue
numbers and the two horizontal axes indicate interface area.

Example of types of interfaces in 3SMI in accordance with large, moderate and small I/T ratios. The two vertical axes indicate residue
numbers and the two horizontal axes indicate interface area.

Example of types of interfaces in 3SDI in accordance with large, moderate and small I/T ratios. The two vertical axes indicate residue
numbers and the two horizontal axes indicate interface area.

Example of 3 ‐ D representation of interactions by non-inverted (1BET) and inverted (1ROP) homodimers in 2S.

Example of 3 ‐ D representation of interactions by non-inverted(1HQO) and inverted (1LUC) homodimers in 3SDI.

Example of 3 ‐ D representation of interactions by non-inverted (1DFX) homodimers in 3SMI.

