Background
Decomposing each protein into modular domains and each domain
into subclasses is a basic prerequisite for accurate functional
classification of protein molecules. The protein sequence
classification is also helpful in organizing huge data produced by
large-scale genome sequencing projects. The domain HNHc
(SMART id: SM00507) is a conserved domain of around 50 amino
acids, characterized by the presence of central conserved Asp/His
residue flanked by conserved His (N-terminal) and His/Asp/Glu (Cterminal)
residues at some distance. HNH domains are found among
homing endonucleases, inteins, Group I and Group II introns, as
well as free standing ORFs in viruses, archaebacteria, eubacteria
and eukaryote, showing a polyphyletic relationship and are
associated with a range of DNA binding proteins, performing a
variety of binding and cutting functions [–]. They are involved in
a variety of cellular activities including bacterial toxicity, homing
functions in group I and II introns and inteins, recombination,
developmentally controlled DNA rearrangement, phage packaging
and as restriction endonuclease [–]. HNH homing endonucleases
are members of the five families of homing endonucleases including
LAGLIDADG, GIY-YIG, HNH, HIS­CYS box and cyanobacterial
intron homing endonucleases. Among these five families, HNH
family is evolutionarily more related to His­Cys box nucleases.
Structurally, HNH­motif family is one among the six families of
His­Me finger endonucleases and has a topology similar to that of a
zinc finger motif [] or treble clef motif [], containing two βstrands
and one α-helix linked together by a divalent metal ion often
referred to as ββα-Me motif. Although variations in sequence are
common among the members of the His-Me finger endonuclease
superfamily, they share a structural similarity over some particular
residues in the active site region [] and many of the type-II
restriction endonucleases are found to belong to HNH fold [,].
The HNH catalytic motif are highly adaptable and shows slight
configurational modifications depending on the enzyme and the
substrate [,]
 and they are found to differ in their activity
against double stranded DNA, single stranded DNA and single
stranded RNA. The goal of this classification is to address the
growing need to corroborate and integrate data by delineating
characteristic subsequences using a regular expression type method.
Since few of the HNH proteins are of known function such a
classification database will help functional and structural analysis.

Methodology
Datasets
We used HNH domain sequence family derived from
SMART database.

HNH Protein sub-classification
 The sub-classification of HNH proteins involves two steps. 
Generating a PROSITE pattern from unaligned HNH domain sequences with the PRATT program []
and the resulting multiple patterns are used to generate weight based matrices [].

The WAPAM was used to search against sequences in SMART [] database 
and cluster them into subsets.

 
A total of
2483 HNH domain sequences obtained from the SMART database
were cross­checked with Swissprot. The redundant sequences were
removed and obsolete entries were deleted, forming set of 2143
sequences. These subset members along with other features were
inlaid in planned database architecture.

Database Design
 The HNH database is implemented in MySQL (v 4.1.12) (RDBMS) with PHP
(v 4.3.5) as a front-end tool. Perl scripts are used to generate the
PROSITE patterns and construction of this database. HNHDb is
well linked to other databases like Swiss­Prot by its accession
number, PDB by its Id. HNH protein sequences can be queried
using accession numbers, PROSITE pattern or a key word search of
protein name/function. ClustalW and Mview are integrated so that
user can select sequences and align. The subsets are named
HNHDb:Sub:1 to HNHDb:Sub:10.

Discussion
About 90% (1913 HNH domain proteins into 10 subsets) of the
available HNH proteins are classified and the database covers 100%
of all HNH proteins in Pfam []. Each subclass has a particular set
of defined conserved patterns. Few functional classes were derived,
which have combinations of these patterns. The whole HNH domain
appears to be a mere combination of these patterns. Their functional
variation could possibly result from the presence or absence of these
significant regions.

The HNH domain sequence can be characteristically represented in
a PROSITE pattern as: [L]-[L]-x-[R]-[D]-G-G-x(2,4)-C-x(2,4)-Cx(
6,7)-[D]-H-x(5,6)-G-G-x(5)-N-x(1,3)-[L]-[L]-x(2,5)-C-x(2,4)-C-
[NH]. Most of the HNH domain sequences contain repetition of the
few dyads i.e. -G-G- or –L-L- or -C-x(2,4)-C-. This could possibly
make the difference in the function or different DNA-binding
strategies. The sequences which do not have these characteristic
patterns may be due to mis-annotation or the group may be different
altogether. Apart from H-N-H residues, there are three dyads, which
by combinations i.e. either by presence or absence, forms particular
pattern.

Defining features
Common protein signatures () are: 
A L-L leucine dyad at the beginning of the domain;

An R-D, immediately following leucine dyad;

Presence of Cysteine double dyad one before the first H and the other between N and H. This cysteine dyad is found to be delimiting the domain boundary;

Presence of GG double dyad, one before first H and the other between H and N of the HNH

H-x(*)-N-y(*)-N/H. The unusual property is that the defining features in the patterns occur twice, one at the N-terminal side and the other at the C-terminal, wrapping around the 
HNH pattern active residues.

 

Subset description
The seven distinct features seen in HNH sub-classification by
Mehta et al [] is diffused among 10 subsets adding some more
features to the HNH proteins. The most prominent patterns () are G-G and -C-x(2,4)-C-, which marks the boundary of the
domain at the N and C-terminal. The two Cysteine dyads are present
at both ends of the domain sequence, with 30 amino acids gap. If
the domain sequence is long then the mid portion is increased and
the dyads remain at the ends. These pattern can then be
characteristically represented as ­C­x(2,4)­C­x(30)­C­x(2,4)­C­.
The glycine dyad at the C­terminal is more conserved than the one
at the N­terminal. Each subset has particular number of hits and
their similarity is in large variation, although a common pattern is
found ().

Functional annotation
We observe that a particular functional class has a specific set of
protein signature combination (Table 1 in ). 
Most of the functional classes are assigned based on the
associated domain. Although the DNA binding activity is invariable
to the HNH domain, the biological function may vary due to the
associated domain. These functional classes ensure that the derived
patterns are highly unlikely to have emerged by chance. PDB
structures of few members of functional classes are known. These
can help in homology modeling of the members of the clusters
whose structures are not known.

Further, residues of subset 1 to subset 9 may be part of SDRs
(specificity determining residues) and subset 10 is active residues or
functionally conserved residues (FCRs). The variation in the SDRs
may leads to divergence in activity. Regular expression based
methods are better at differentiating SDRs and FCRs. DATABASE
ACCESS: The database () and associated information
files are freely accessible at the URL http://bicmku.in:8081/hnh.

Conclusion
The relationship between the cellular role of a protein, conserved
subsequence in a domain and the type of domain association is
established in HNH domain containing sequences. The promiscuity
of the HNH domain sequences, conservation of SDRs and their
organism wise distribution among the subsets, suggests horizontal
transfer and co­evolution.

Supplementary material
Data 1
DBT, GOI for COE in Bioinformatics facility

Citation:Veluchamy et al, Bioinformation 4(2): 80-83 (2009)

(a) HNH pattern; (b) Subset patterns and number of hits; (c) Percentage identity of the HNH sequence across the subsets; (d)
Screenshot of the web interface of the HNH Database.

