Background
The translation of codons to amino acids takes place via charged tRNA
molecules that can recognize and bind to each codon while carrying
the corresponding amino acid []. Owing to wobble pairing between
codon and anticodon, there are many tRNA isoacceptors that
recognize more than one codon [–]. The tRNA-codon recognition
pattern is known to vary across eubacterial species and even across
different strains of the same species (note that Table2 in [], which is
based on E.coli K-12 strain W3110, differs from Table2 in [] which
pertains to strain W1485 of E.coli K­12). It is cumbersome to
experimentally identify these codon recognition “rules” and to
measure the concentration of each individual isoacceptor accurately
[]. The presence of many modified versions of tRNA isoacceptors
further complicates matters [,].

The rate at which the ribosome translates codons in a eubacterial
mRNA sequence is shown to depend on the availability or abundance
of the corresponding tRNA isoacceptors []. Genes that are highly
expressed generally tend to have codons recognized by relatively
abundant tRNAs []. The frequency of codon usage has been shown to
be roughly proportional to the tRNA isoacceptor concentration [,],
leading, alongwith other evidence, to the Translational Efficiency Hypothesis, which states that natural selection favors codons that
increase the rate of peptide elongation []. It has also been proposed
that tRNA abundance and codon usage can co-evolve to favorable
states [,]
. Extensive studies have been conducted to understand the
distribution of poorly-translated codons, i.e. codons whose tRNA
isoacceptors are in low concentration in the cell, and to investigate if
they serve any functional roles []. Such investigations have led to
quite a few interesting findings, such as the effect of rare codons on
modulating gene expression [] and in attenuating viruses []. Most
recently, it has been shown that the presence of rare codons serves to
pause the ribosome and gives protein domains time to fold [].

In heterologous gene expression systems, it has been shown that
eliminating such pausing signals leads to high level expression of
protein [,]. Substituting rare codons with synonymous codons
that are recognized by abundant tRNA isoacceptors reduces the total
time of translating an mRNA sequence, thereby increasing efficiency
[]. In order to identify locations or regions of such poorly-translated
codons using statistical methods, a clear way of quantifying the
“rareness” of a codon is needed. In order to make such a quantification
method widely applicable to any species/strain, it should not rely on
the exact pattern of isoacceptor­codon recognition and measurements
of isocacceptor concentration. The frequency of use of codons is
known to correlate reasonably well with the concentration of tRNA
isoacceptors, so it seems logical to rely on codon frequency to help
identify codons that most-inhibit translation efficiency. It also seems
worthy to investigate how the estimates of codon frequency vary
across different gene categories. Our objective in this paper is to
compare the sensitivity of computational (sequence-based) approaches
to finding poorly translated codons. In particular, we use a crude
measure of codon frequency based only on the gene sequence without
taking the corresponding protein abundance into consideration. We
will also investigate the effect of cellular growth rate on our proposed
methods.

Methodology
We use experimental data on tRNA isoacceptor concentration
measured at different growth rates, as published in []. These
measurements have been made using the Ecoli K­12 strain W1485, for
which, unfortunately, the whole genome sequence is not available.
But, W1485 is very closely related taxonomically to the welldocumented
Ecoli K­12 strain MG1655 [], and we assume that
codon frequencies calculated using gene­sequences from the MG1655
strain can be meaningfully used as close substitutes for the W1485
strain.

Calculation of codon frequency
We downloaded the complete genome sequence of Escherichia coli K­12 strain MG1655 from Genbank [], and extracted sequences for the
following sets of genes: 
 all annotated genes from Genbank;

 verified genes listed in the EcoGene database []; 

 genes classified into functional categories based on their cellular role []



We calculated codon frequencies using each of the above gene sets
separately. Ignoring genes that contain a frameshift, we calculate the
total number of times each codon occurs in the selected set of genes,
and divide it by the total number of codons in the gene­set to get its
usage frequency. This is not an accurate way of estimating codon
frequency, since we ignore the abundance of each protein. Accurate
measures of codon usage that take protein levels into consideration are
presented in []. Our method, on the other hand, relies only on the
gene sequences and is very straightforward and simple.

Calculation of tRNA availability
Using the experimental measurements of tRNA isoacceptor
concentration (see Table5 of []) and the pattern of tRNA-codon
recognition (see Table2 of []), the tRNA “availability” for each codon
is calculated as described in []: 
 if the codon has only one tRNA isoacceptor and vice versa, the concentration of that tRNA isoacceptor is assigned to the codon;

 for an isoacceptor that recognizes more than one codon, its concentration is distributed among those codons in the ratio of their usage frequency 




Discussion
We calculated the Pearson correlation coefficient between the
estimated tRNA availability and codon frequency for each set of
selected genes (Table 1 in ). We see that the
correlation is quite strong (approximately 0.8), regardless of which
gene set is used. We also find a similar correlation across growth-rates,
consistent with what was previously thought to be the case []. We
then compared the codons having lowest usage frequency with those
having lowest tRNA concentration by creating two lists: one list (C)
containing 10 of the codons having lowest usage frequency and
another list (T) containing 10 codons of lowest tRNA availability.
Note that the list T needs to be re-calculated for each growth rate,
since the concentration of tRNA isoacceptors varies across growth
rates (see Table5 of []). For each set of genes, at each growth rate, we
count the number of codons that are present in both lists, i.e. how
many codons from T are present in C, as a measure of how accurate
our codon usage frequencies are in identifying slowly­translated
codons. We found that about 5-6 of the codons from T are are usually
present in C, regardless of which gene set is used to prepare the two
lists (Table 1 in ). This indicates a fairly
good accuracy in finding poorly translated codons based on our simple
measure of codon usage frequency.

Based on their own calculations as well as some experimental
evidence from others, Zhang et al [] have prepared a set of 10
codons that they consider to have slowest rate of translation. This list
(K) contains the following codons: (CUA, UCC, UCA, CCU, CCC,
CCA, ACA, AGG, UUA, GUC). On an average, we found that about
5-6 of the codons from C are present in K (data not shown), indicating
that our measure of codon frequency alone is not a very good estimate
of translation rate. Most of the previous studies evaluating the
correlation between codon frequency and tRNA concentration use old
data [] and have been published almost three decades ago. It is
worthwhile to re-evaluate these results using more recent data (as
published in []). Kanaya et al [] attempt to do almost the same
things that we do in this paper, but they use an unconventional way of
measuring codon frequency. Ikemura [] addresses similar issues, but
our focus in this paper is not on the strength of correlation between
tRNA isoacceptor concentration and codon frequency as a whole,
rather our aim is to find codons having poorest translation rate.

We have begun to analyze the distribution of poorly-translated codons
in relation to ribosome-mRNA hybridization. Recent papers [,]
use sliding-window methods for finding clusters of rare codons, but
such methods are not statistically rigorous. In order to refine our
models to capture the coding regions that are genuinely “problematic”,
we need a set of codons that are known to have low tRNA isoacceptor
concentration under the desired experimental conditions for the
specified species strain. This information is usually hard to attain when
the exact number of tRNA isoacceptors and their codon­recognition
rules are not completely known. True measures of codon frequency
need to consider protein abundances, which are not easily accessible
for every species and strain. What we have shown in this paper is that
quick­and­easy ways to estimate translation rate (based only on simple
codon usage frequency in a closely­related strain, without relying on
exact codon­tRNA mapping) do a reasonably good job of identifying
poorly­translated codons, irrespective of cellular growth conditions.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that codon
frequencies calculated without considering protein abundance have
been compared against experimentally measured tRNA concentrations.
We hope the results in this paper clarify some of the issues relating
tRNA availability and codon usage.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation: Ponnala et al, Bioinformation 4(2): 63-65 (2009)

