Background
Recent advances in molecular biology and genetic engineering help
scientists to better understand the various mechanisms underlying
plant development and growth. This in turn resulted in development
of more productive crops possessing resistance to biotic and abiotic
stresses by the introduction of foreign genes. Cry genes from
Bacillus thuringiensis are important sources for development of
insect/pest resistance in plant varieties []. Data from increased use
of Cry genes in the development of transgenic plants by scientist
world wide demands databases and tools for efficient
storage/retrieval of required data. Hence, we describe the
development of a method to use Cry gene database that enable
identification of Cry genes present in transgenic crops [–]. This
will further help in the design of primer sets for the PCR
identification of specific Cry genes. The tool also enables users to
access information related to Cry genes present in different online
literature, nucleotide/protein sequence databases for sequence
comparison and analysis [–]. The tool is designed based on
relational database model that interacts with different sources of
information located in various online-databases.

Methodology
Tool Design and implementation
Cry-Bt identifier was developed and deployed using an open source
software system. The system used is MySQL database to store gene
and protein sequence data. We used GenBank to retrieve gene
sequence data and the data was processed using a filtering
algorithm. The filtering algorithm was implemented using a set of
routine scripts written in Hypertext Preprocessor (PHP). A
GenBank record is considered for retrieving a sequence if the Gene
name contains ’DNA‘ or ’PROTEIN‘. Additionally, the GENE
record in the FEATURES should also contain terms describing
CRY-BT (for example, ’Cry1Aa‘ or ’Cry1Ab‘ or ’Cry1Ac‘).

Programs written in PHP enabled database search using keywords
like ’organism name‘, ’Gene name‘, ’Gene Id.‘ and ’Gene &amp; Protein
Sequences‘ of Cry-Bt genes. The database facilitates to retrieve
results in ’Text‘ or ’Table‘ or ’Graphical‘ formats. Detailed
sequence and literature data can be obtained from the corresponding
hyperlinks. Relational database schema employed in design of the
tool provides representation of the Cry­bt database system with its
filtering algorithm to store, retrieve data with out redundancy up to
3rd normalization form with no loss of functional information [–].

The tool is also embedded with a primer design tool­ E­PCR
(Electronic PCR). EPCR employs a computational procedure that
identifies sequence tagged sites (STS), present in the user fed DNA
sequences. E­PCR initially looks for potential STS sites present in
DNA sequences by searching subsequences that closely match to
the PCR primers with correct order, orientation, and spacing that are
used to generate known Sequence Tagged Sites.

Embedded E-PCR enables a choice of three options: 
Identification of suitable restriction enzymes suitable for the given sequence.

Designing a Primer where at the starting positions are placed restriction sites for amplification.

Designing a common primer for two genome sequences for a given restriction enzyme.

This feature enables to find out the best restriction enzyme for the
both the homologous sequences. Designing a common primer can
significantly cut the expenditure on primer design. Here we
included information here about online linkage with our Cry-bt identifier tool to perform in bioinformatical research work. Pfam is
a large collection of multiple sequence alignments and hidden
Markov models covering many common protein domains and
families, ProDom is a comprehensive set of protein domain families
automatically generated from the SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL
sequence databases, helps to discover motifs (highly conserved
regions) in groups of related DNA or protein sequences using
MEME and, search sequence databases using motifs using MAST.
Primer3 is a tool for picking primers from a DNA sequence. The
Biology WorkBench is a web-based tool for biologists. The
WorkBench allows biologists to search many popular protein and
nucleic acid sequence databases. Database searching is integrated
with access to a wide variety of analysis and modeling tools. Thus,
the developed Cry-Bt identifier database will enable to provide
useful information to users.

Citation:Singh et al., Bioinformation 4(5): 182-183 (2009)

Front view of Cry­Bt identifier

Representation of Various features (a, b, c &amp;d) that can be performed using Cry­Bt Identifier

