Background
Tuberculosis continues to be a major health problem worldwide
and it is estimated that in 2011, nearly 8.7 million new cases of
TB with 1.4 million deaths among HIV-negative people and an
additional 0.43 million deaths from HIV-associated TB 
[]. It has
been found that proteases of Mycobacterium tuberculosis have an
important role in pathogenesis of the organism 
[]. Mehaffy et al
(2012) in their review on MTB proteomics, highlighted the role
of proteases in the virulence and pathogenicity of human
pathogens []. Nontuberculous Mycobacteria (NTM) can also
produce localized disease in the lungs, lymph glands, skin,
wounds or bone []. So, our effort is to explore proteases of
MTB complex and NTM at gene, protein and structural level.

Methodology
Database Architecture &amp; Design:
The relational database was developed using Microsoft SQL
Server 2005 as the back end. The website is powered by Apache
HTTP Server 2.2.6. HTML, JavaScript and CGI-PERL based web
interfaces have been developed which dynamically execute the
SQL queries. The MycoProtease-DB data and related
information are stored in MS SQL relational database tables.

Data Curation:
Twelve Mycobacterial strains (Eight MTB complex and four
NTM) were identified whose complete genome sequences were
available at National Centre for Biotechnology Information
(NCBI) [] 
as follows: 5 strains of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
(H37Rv, H37Ra, CDC1551, F11 and KZN 1435), 3 strains of
Mycobacterium bovis (AF2122/97, BCG Pasteur 1173P2 and BCG
Tokyo 172) and 4 strains of NTM (Mycobacterium avium 104,
Mycobacterium smegmatis MC2 155, Mycobacterium avium
paratuberculosis K-10 and Nocardia farcinica IFM 10152). Protease
information was collected from MEROPS [] followed by NCBI,
UniProt [], Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes
(KEGG) [], 
TubercuList [] and published literatures for
individual strain. Protease length, molecular weight, theoretical
isoelectric point was calculated using ExPASy ProtParam 
[]
tool. Then, all the curated information of each protease was
inserted into MycoProtease-DB. Standalone BLAST [] was
used for obtaining homologous sequences of each protease and
corresponding homologous IDs were also added in the
database table.

Data Access:
The interfaces in MycoProtease - DB are designed in a manner
to help users in easy navigation and retrieve information from
database (). The database can be queried to obtain the
protease information in many ways through a user friendly web
interface as follows. i) The user can enter the desired protease
name to access the Meta information about proteases. The user
can also search by catalytic type, amino acid length, molecular
weight, NCBI GI, RefSeq, UniProt, KEGG, Locus ID etc. ii)
Advanced search option is provided for searching more user
specific information regarding proteases. Using this option,
user can search protease information according different
strains, catalytic type, specific protease length &amp; molecular
weight range etc. There is also an option for downloading
selected sequences in fasta format. iii) A dynamic result page
appears after any search in which user can sort the searched
result (protease list) by name, catalytic type, molecular weight
and sequence length. The user can also restrict the no of items
to be shown per page obtained in searched result. iv) Along
with Summary information (Name, Gene, Clan, Family,
Catalytic type, Cellular location, Function etc.) each protease
entry has also Sequence information (amino acid sequences,
length, molecular weight, theoretical isoelectric point (pI),
nucleotide sequence &amp; length and related homologous ids),
Protease parameters (Amino acid length, composition,
molecular wt, pI, atomic composition, formulae etc), Phylogeny
(Multiple Sequence Alignment [MSA] &amp; Phylogenetic tree of
homologous sequences) by GeneBee - Molecular Biology Server
[], 
Structure (3D structure if available viewed by Jmol 
[],
Citation and Linkout (Links to NCBI, UniProt, KEGG,
MEROPS, Pfam, InterPro of corresponding protease entry). v)
Protease Comparison: Provides protease - protease comparison
in “Tools &amp; Analysis” page. The user can enter the
corresponding ID either of NCBI-GI, locus, RefSeq, Uniprot,
KEGG ID to compare two proteins. Tools for calculating protein
parameters, Residues finder are also integrated in “Tools &amp;
Analysis” page.

Comparison with other Databases:
Presently, MEROPS, the database of peptidases, contains
protease information of 8546 organisms. In addition, protease
data is available at NCBI, UniProt, KEGG and Tuberculist
databases but they are not specific and comprise of huge data of
other organisms also. MycoProtease-DB is a comprehensive
database with information on Mycobacterial proteases.

Utility
MycoProtease-DB is a comprehensive database on proteinases
of 8 MTB complex and 4 NTM strains. It has total of 1324 (641
distinct) peptidases, which include 906 proteases from MTB
complex with 237 distinct &amp; 418 from NTM with 404 distinct
proteases. This information facilitates further analysis of MTB
and NTM proteases in molecular and functional level. It will be
supportive to the researchers to carry out further work in this field.

Caveats
MycoProtease-DB does not include protease information of all
mycobacterial strains as they are not completely sequenced.
There are 154 hypothetical proteins with protease activity in
MycoProtease-DB which are yet to be annotated.

Future Developments
As and when in future, new mycobacterial strains are
sequenced and protease data are available in public databases;
we shall continue to update MycoProtease-DB including
annotated information of hypothetical proteases.

This study was supported by Department of Biotechnology,
Ministry of Science &amp; Technology, Govt. of India. Authors
convey thanks to Shri Dhiru S Mehta, President, KHS for his
keen interest and encouragement.

Citation:Jena et al, Bioinformation 8(24): 1240-1242 (2012)

MycoProtease-DB snapshots (a) Advanced search Page; (b) Search result; (c) Summary page; (d) Structure visualization
page powered by Jmol; (e) Protease Comparison page.

