Background:
Hepatitis C virus genotype 4 (HCV-4) is the most common 
variant of the hepatitis C virus (HCV) in the Middle East and 
Africa, particularly Egypt. This region has the highest 
prevalence of HCV worldwide, with more than 90% of 
infections due to genotype 4. HCV-4 has recently spread in 
several Western countries, particularly in Europe, due to 
variations in population structure, immigration, and routes of 
transmission. Employing HCV proteins as targets, directly 
acting antiviral agents have been identified and collectively 
described as ‘specifically targeted antiviral therapy for HCV’ 
(STAT-C) [–
]. Among the nonstructural proteins, NS3–4A 
protease, NS5B polymerase, NS3 helicase and NS5A have been 
the object of intense research efforts both by academia and 
pharmaceutical companies. NS5B RNA-dependent RNA 
polymerase is recognized as a key target for therapeutic 
intervention mainly because it is not present in mammalian 
cells and offers a wide range of possibilities for the discovery of 
new molecular entities as anti-HCV agents [–
]. Mechanistic 
and structural studies of this enzyme have revealed the 
existence of multiple allosteric binding sites, and in particular 
two thumb sites (thumb I and II) and three palm pockets (palm 
I, II and III) have been identified to date. According to the target
site, the different inhibitors will be referred to as palm site I 
NNIs (PSI-NNIs), palm site II NNIs (PSII-NNIs), palm site III 
NNIs (PSIII-NNIs), thumb site I NNIs (TSI NNIs) and thumb 
site II NNIs (TSII-NNIs) [,
]. Out of these different allosteric 
sites and their corresponding inhibitors, we focused this study 
on palm I site and particularly Benzoisothiazoles dioxide as one 
of the main Palm I-NNI. The palm I site in genotype 4 shows 
high degree of mutation with respect to the other genotypes. 
This has an impact on the activity of the inhibitors of this site 
where it decreases drastically. This triggered us to study the 
impact of these mutations on binding by constructing a 
validated homological model for this genotype and analyzing 
the ligand-protein interactions. The main aim of this analysis 
was to optimize the Benzoisothiazoles dioxide on this specific 
genotype. On the other hand, from a ligand design perspective 
we attempted to modify this class of ligands such that it has a 
high diversification capability and high synthetic feasibility that 
can enable us to optimize it rapidly within the binding site. 
Thus, we decided to use a reaction-driven scaffold-hopping 
procedure to achieve this aim.

Methodology:
The protocol consists of two workflows that intersect at some 
point where the first depends on developing a ligand-protein 
complex that can be used to study the essential interactions 
criteria, calculating mutation binding energies and generating a 
structure-based pharmacophore to filter ligands while the 
second is ligand dependent where it is used to generate a 
focused library of synthetically feasible ligands against this 
target. They intersect at the point where the pharmacophore 
(first workflow) is used to filter the focused library (second 
workflow) to handle the hits to an optimization protocol (Enovo) 
[]. This is illustrated in 
(). 

First workflow:
The aim of this workflow is to provide a refined homological 
model of genotype 4 to be used for structure-based 
pharmacophore screening and docking of the virtual library 
generated for optimization aim.

Ligand-steered Homological modeling:
Homological model was constructed using Modeler 
[] in 
Discovery Studio. Uniprot was searched for HCV polymerase 
NS5b sequence for genotype 4a.It was found under accession 
code O39929 []. According to the sequence annotation, the
RNA-directed RNA polymerase is represented by the sequence 
from 2418 to 3008 []. Uniprot sequence was blasted using 
Discovery Studio against PDB_nr95 database. This was done in 
order to obtain template structure for homology modeling 
where 3D5M was chosen as template with 77% identity. The 
sequence alignment was done using align sequence protocol as 
shown in (). After that, the sequence alignment with the 
template was further used to build a homology model using 
Modeler while adjusting the settings to high optimization and 
copying Water molecules and the ligand from the template to 
the model. 5 models were created. From which, we have chosen 
the first model that was further minimized using ligandX 
algorithm, simulated using molecular dynamics protocol in 
MOE to investigate essential features.

2D-interaction analysis:
Based on the refined complex, 2D interaction analysis was 
carried out using MOE 2010 ligand interaction generation. This 
was very useful to study the actual interactions that are 
responsible for the activity.

Mutation binding energy studies:
In order to show the impact of the natural polymorphism in 
genotype 4, we calculated the mutation binding energies of the 
variable amino acid residues in the Palm I binding site. The 
difference in binding due to mutation was calculated by finding 
difference between the free energy of binding in case of 
mutation and no mutation. The free energy of binding was 
calculated using CHARMm force field according to this 
equation: ΔG =αΔGFF +βTΔS where ΔS was calculated using 
Abagyan and tortov amino acid chain entropy scale with 
correction according to the side chain solvent accessibility. 
Calculations were carried out by Accelrys Discovery Studio 3.0 
using “calculate mutation binding energy protocol”. The 
reported energy is the sum of weighed terms: electrostatic 
(0.45), van-der Walls (0.45) and entropy (0.8). Generalized Born 
implicit solvent model was used with dielectric constant of 80.

Structure-based pharmacophore:
Using the refined complex of the genotype 4 with 
benzoisothiazole dioxide, a structure-based pharmacophore 
was create using the technique that was developed by Wolber 
and Langer for screening of new compounds instead of the 
computationally expensive docking[]. The technique was 
implemented already in ligandscout software []. This 
algorithm extracts information according to certain rules 
depending on nearby contact residues. It was used here to 
rapidly filter ligands of the virtual library used for 
optimization.

Second workflow:
The aim of this workflow is to generate the virtual library that is 
focused to this target such that it will be screened using the first 
workflow.

Reaction-driven scaffold-hopping:
Due to the limited SAR expansion capability of the existing 
scaffold that can hinder rapid probing of the effect of various 
substituents on activity, we carried out a reaction-driven 
scaffold hopping. Initially, the ligand co-crystallized with the 
protein in 3D5M complex was used as a starting point for 
retrosynthetic-disconnection [] into two scaffolds: A and B. A 
query was built according to scaffold A as shown in (). 
This query was used for substructure search in Scifinder such 
that the retrieved hits synthesis can be done in not more than 2 
steps. Besides, we focused while analyzing the results on the 
high diversification capability, high synthetic feasibility and the 
availability of a wide panel of the forming starting materials. 
Regarding scaffold B, a bioisosteric replacement based on field 
technology [] in the Fieldstere software was carried out as 
shown in the ().

Library design:
Based on the new scaffolds retrieved (), we constructed 
a reaction-based virtual library where enumeration of ligands 
was carried out according to the reaction used to synthesize 
scaffold A. Library design “Enumeration by reaction” module 
in Accelrys discovery studio was used.

Pharmacophore-based screening:
Due to the fact that many of the ligands enumerated in the 
virtual library will show steric hindrance with the binding site, 
a rapid screening was carried out to filter those ligands which 
show steric clash with the binding site. This was based on the 
presence of excluded volumes in the structure-based 
pharmacophore created.

E-novo optimization workflow:
The filtered library was screened using E-novo protocol. This 
protocol is usually applied for structure-based lead 
optimization as it is based on using core-constrained docking. A 
scaffold core is generated from the ligand-bound protein 
homology model. After that, Ligands are generated from that 
scaffold using R-group fragmentation/enumeration tool such 
that the cores are aligned. The ligands side chains are 
conformationally sampled and are subjected to core-constrained 
protein docking using modified CDOCKER. Finally, a physics–
based binding energy scoring function is applied to rank top 
ligand CDOCKER poses using more accurate molecular 
mechanics generalized Born with surface area method. 

Results and Discussion:
The sequence alignment and the homological model clearly 
indicate which amino acids are mutated in the palm I site. This 
aided us to conduct the mutation binding energy calculations 
on those varied amino acids. The results are shown in 
(, 
see supplementary material). They show that the mutation of 
Met414 to valine is a strong effector on binding and that 
optimization should focus on efficient binding with valine in 
genotype 4 (it has shorter side chain than that of Met). Applying 
minimization and molecular dynamics on the complex enabled 
us to carry out a ligand-protein interaction analysis as depicted 
in (). This analysis shows that importance of 
methansulfonamide group where it hydrogen bonds with 
Asp318 and Asn291. It also showed that the hydroxyl group of 
the tetramic acid is an important feature where it hydrogen 
bonds with Tyr448. Regarding the important hydrophobic 
features of the ligand, it is shown that the tertiary butyl group 
and the substituted phenyl ring attached to the tetramic acid 
interact with Val414, Pro197 and Leu384. Additionally, the 
refined complex was used as a starting point to create a 
structure-based pharmacophore that is totally dependent on the 
actual interactions between the ligand and the protein as shown 
in (). The pharmacophore clearly takes into 
consideration the excluded volume (amino acids of the binding 
site that the ligand should not sterically clash with) besides the 
important features that are responsible for the aforementioned 
interactions in the 2D interaction analysis.

The optimization of the benzisothiazole dioxide inhibitory 
activity against genotype 4 was carried out with the aid of the 
homological model and the pharmacophore. Initially, we 
carried out a retrosynthetic dissection for the ligand as shown 
in () 
into two scaffolds A and B. In our case, we wanted 
to find a bioisoster for A that is synthetically feasible and with 
an economic capability of diversification such that it enables the 
very rapid probing of different substituents in that binding site. 
One of the best hits in scifinder that is based on two steps 
synthetic procedure was that of pyrazolidine-3, 5-Dione: A 
substituted hydrazine condensation with the readily available 
diethylmalonate yield the desired product which can be further 
substituted by any isocyante to form a urea using a simple 
workup. On the contrary, tetramic acid derivatives require a
suitable amino acid that should be protected followed by 
reductive amination with a suitable aldehyde in a reaction that 
requires tedious purification by chromatographic techniques 
and higher number of steps. Regarding the scaffold B, a 
fieldstere hit was used based on the alignment of that hit with 
the original scaffold. This was carried out in order to minimize 
number of synthetic steps and avoid protection-deprotection 
schemes which affect the final yield as depicted in 
().

The library design module was applied on a reaction basis 
where the scaffold A was varied by different isocaynates and 
hydrazines that were retrieved from Scifinder such that they are 
commercially available. The constructed virtual library was 
screened rapidly using the pharmacophore in a way to remove 
those bulky substituents that will not fit into the binding site. 
The refined library was used to conduct the optimization study 
using the E-novo protocol as mentioned in the methodology. 
One of the top ranked-hits was checked for stability in the 
binding site using molecular dynamics where it showed a stable 
sigma-pi interaction between the ligand and Valine414 
(). 
The simple synthetic feasibility of this hit triggered us to 
verify it experimentally where it showed 70% inhibition at 
10uM concentration on genotype 4.

Conclusion:
In this study, we provided a novel workflow that can be used to 
optimize an inhibitor activity on another genotype that shows 
mutation in the binding site. This workflow was applied on 
HCV NS5b polymerase enzyme of genotype 4 to optimize 
benzisothiazole dioxide inhibitors on it. A focused library 
created using reaction enumeration was screened using 
structure-based pharmacophore followed by core-constrained 
docking and scoring using MM-GBSA. This tweaked protocol 
was used to identify an optimized inhibitor for this genotype.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Mahmoud et al, Bioinformation 7(7): 328-333 (2011)

The workflow used to optimize the benzisothiazole 
dioxide activity of NS5b polymerase of genotype 4

Alignment of the sequence of genotype 4 with that of 
template (3D5M).Red boxes show the amino acids of the 
binding site. 

2D-interaction analysis of the reference ligand in the 
homological model of NS5b polymerase enzyme of genotype 4. 

Structure-based pharmacophore created using the 
ligand-homological model of NS5b polymerase. The 
pharmacophore represents HHAAA where H is hydrophobic 
feature and A is the acceptor feature. Grey spheres represents 
excluded volumes, blue represents hydrophobic features while 
the green represent acceptor features.

Reaction-driven scaffold hopping. The disconnection 
approach resulted in two scaffolds A and B. A was modified 
using a simple scifinder substructure query limiting results on 2 
steps synthetic pathways while B was modified using a fieldbased 
approach which was influenced too by the ease of 
synthesis and overall yield. Regarding synthesis of A: (a) for 
aromatic aldehydes :i—RCHO, TEA, MgSO4, THF, 25°C, 12 h; 
ii—NaBH4, MeOH, 25 °C, 1 h; for aliphatic aldehydes: RCHO, 
NaBH3CN, MeOH, 25°C, 12 h; (b) HO2CCH2CO2Et, EDC_HCl, 
TEA, DCM, 25 _C,12 h; (c) (i) NaOEt, EtOH, 25°C, 12 h; (ii) 1 M 
H2SO4 (aq), reflux, 1 h. Regarding synthesis of the new A 
analogue: (d) malonic acid,SOCl2 ;(e)RNCO,140°C, 10 min. 

Scaffold hopping of the benzisothiazole dioxide. 
Regarding synthesis of A: (a)i- BuLi, THF, Me(CH2)4Me, rt to -
23°C; 1 h, ­23°C ;ii- isobutylchloroformate, ­23°C to rt; 
overnight, rt; iii- H2O;(b) Pd(OAc)2, Dioxane, CsF, 
methylboronic acid , dicyclohexylphosphanyl-biphenyl-2-yl)-
dimethyl-amine, 12 h,90°C (c) NBS, (BzO)2, CCl4, reflux, 1 d, 
49%; (d) NHBocMs, Cs2CO3, DMF, 35–70 C, 6 h, 81%; (e) ˚
AcOH, reflux, 1–2 d, 94%; (f) POCl3,DMF, reflux, 10 min, 70%. 
Regarding synthesis of B: (g) i-ClSO3H, 120°C ii-NH4OH; (h) 
CrO3, H2SO4; (i) H2/Pd; (j) CH3SO2Cl, pyridine; (j) PCl5, 
150°

2D interaction analysis of the hit chosen for 
experimental validation. It is clear that Val414 can 
form sigmapi interaction with the phenyl substituent.

