Background
Bamboo the “poor man's timber” is the fastest growing perennial
evergreen arborescent plant belonging to the true grass family Poaceae,
subfamily Bambusoideae, tribe Bambuseae []. 
There are about 1,500 species under 87 genera worldwide [], 
which are unevenly distributed in various parts of the humid tropical, sub-tropical and temperate regions.
Vegetative growth phase among species of bamboo ranges from 1 to 120
years []. India is well endowed 
with bamboo resources, and is the second largest in the world after China 
[]. In India, bamboo grows on millions of
hectares (almost 8.96 million hectares) of forest land, in homesteads and
on private plantations which accounts for about fifty percent of the total
land area under bamboo in Asia. There are almost 136 indigenous and
exotic species, found naturally and/or under cultivation in India 
[], spread
across 36 genera. North Bengal has a large variety of bamboos. Its wide
range of uses and versatility makes it eligible to be of multiple use
alternatives to timber, food for rural poor and tribal in particular. North
Bengal is endowed with some important genera of Bamboo like Bambusa,
Cephalostychum, Dendrocalamus, Drepanostachyum, 
Gigantocloa, Himalayacalamus, Melocanna, 
Pleioblastus, Phyllostachys, Pseudosasa, 
Sasaella, Shibataea, and Yushnia which 
include different species, subspecies and varieties. Since bamboo is considered to be a
multipurpose plant having about 1500 documented uses 
[], its importance
has increased many folds in the last few decades.

There is no such academic public domain available on bamboo worldwide
and those available are commercial. Considering the ecological and
economical significance of bamboo in North Bengal, authors are making
first effort to explore this region to have an insight into the distribution and
diversity of bamboo, after consulting a bamboo taxonomist. The primary
objective of this database is to extensively explore the published literature
on bamboo taxonomy, edible properties, morphological features, along
with tissue culture specifications and chemical constituents. This database
is an attempt to give compiled information on various species of bamboo’s
encountered in this region which in turn will help the interested researchers
and bamboo lovers to have an in-depth idea about each species.

Methodology
Construction of Bamboo-infoline: []
Bamboo-infoline is constructed using HTML and can be accessed at 
http://www.bamboodb.ind.in/
. Data were collected from various literature sources such as, PubMed 
[], Science Direct 
[], and
others. A panel of technical experts representing diverse disciplines was
established to advice us throughout the preparation of this database. For
searching we used the MeSH terms “Bamboo” or “chemical constitutes” or
“taxonomy” combined with the botanical names of different bamboo
species. As a part of this, several Indian journals were surveyed to gather
information. Additional articles were obtained from supplemental searches
which focused on the books and review articles. All titles, abstracts, and
articles were reviewed by two reviewers, and all disagreements were
resolved by consensus. Data was collected using screening forms, which
was developed for this purpose. We analyzed the data regarding the
general characteristics or taxonomic values from the literature and used
this information to construct bamboo-infoline. 
 shows diversity of
bamboo worldwide and in India. The complete list of 45-50 species can be
found at 
http://www.bamboodb.ind.in/bamboomining.html. A screenshot
of the Bamboo - infoline is given in .

Description of the evidence
More than 1000 articles were searched and considered in the preparation of
this database (given in reference section of database as link to PMID).
Regional studies are provided to show our collection points. Maximum
annotated studies came from the different published literatures as well as
from the forest dwellers. All pictures incorporated in this database are
original and photographed from the forest of SUKNA, after a taxonomical
identification and deserve copyright by the authors. There are several
commercial databases to provide commercial value and information on
bamboo.Our databases, which are more academic oriented, have higher
endues and will be regularly updated. Database will have direct links with
original research articles, which makes our database unique from the other
databases. Inputs from the authors, while seeking their permission to use
their papers to update our database, provides more information to our
existing database.

Utility
Empirical evidence of efficacy of this database for bamboo would be
helpful to identify areas for future research in providing a quick review on
the number of bamboo species for the benefit of scientific community and
bamboo lovers.

Future Development
Bamboo-infoline is the first approach as a free accessible academic real
time database for bamboo worldwide. We are going to incorporate more
scientific information regarding bamboo species of this region.
Periodically continuous updates shall be released to include other bamboo
species. We plan to incorporate a provision to avail the required
information using keywords.

Conflict of interest
Authors don't have any conflict of interest


The authors are thankful to the Department of Biotechnology, Government
of India, for providing the Bioinformatics facility under BTISnet at NBU
and MLACW. We are also grateful to the Mr. Ajay Kr. Dubey, DFO, and
Mr. Prasanta Kr. Ghosh, Range Officer, Directorate of Forests,
Government of West Bengal, Silviculture (Hills) Division, Kurseong
Research Range and Dr. T.L. Shantha, Director MLACW, Bangalore for
their necessary help, support and information. The authors are also obliged
to the bamboo taxonomist Mr. P. P. Paudyal, for helping in identifying the
species of bamboo.


Citation:Goyal et al; Bioinformation 5(4): 184-185 (2010)

Snap Shot of Bamboo-infoline

