Background
The Protein Data Bank (PDB) format provides a standard representation for
macromolecular structure data derived from X-ray diffraction and NMR
studies. This representation was created in the 1970's and a number of software
tools have been developed and used for this purpose. Structure-data file (SDF)
is a family of chemical-data file formats developed by MDL; it is intended
especially for structural information. SDF files wrap the molfile
(MDL_Molfile) format. Multiple compounds are delimited by lines consisting
of four dollar signs ($$$$). A feature of the SDF format is its ability to include
associated data []. 
Creating SDF files from the given PDB file will help to
find the ligand property.

Methodology
Application Software
The application software using java [] has been developed to divide the
Structure Data File (SDF), the calculation of the properties of ligands as
molecular weight, the number of hydrogen bond acceptors and donors on the
basis that you can search in the ZINC database.

Separating ligand data from PDB file
(1) Identify the lines starting with HET, which represents ligands in PDB file;
(2) Identify the HETATOM for individual ligand based on HET atom; (3)
Similarly find the CONECT data which represents bonding information for
individual ligand; (4) Separate and save the information in Step 2, Step 3 in .sdf
file.

Calculation of molecular weight
Sum up of atomic weights for each atom is generated in .sdf file. (Table 1, see
)

Hydrogen bond acceptors, donors
Acceptor atoms have a lone pair of electron; usually sum of N, O. A donor
atom is connected with at least one H atom; usually sum of OH, NH. When
PDBToSDF file is executed, SDF file is generated, showing the molecular
weight for each ligand. In this example, 1AH3.pdb is the input, it has 3 ligands
namely AYA, NAP, TOL.  shows the molecular weights for these 3
ligands.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Muppalaneni &amp; Rao, Bioinformation 6(10): 383-386 (2011)

Executing the PDBToSDF

