Background
Filariasis, caused by spirunid nematodes, is one of the most
prevalent diseases of tropical and subtropical countries and
encompasses a number of different pathological conditions 
[].
Lymphatic Filariais is an infectious disease that causes serious
social and economic burden []. Lymphatic filariasis (LF) is a
mosquito-borne tropical disease caused by the nematode
parasites Wuchereria bancrofti, Brugia malayi and Brugia.timori
live in human lymph system []. Three physiological races exist
in W.bancroofii and B.malayi, depending on the microfilarial
periodicity []. They are the nocturnally periodic, nocturnally
subperiodic and diurnally subperiodic forms. In the Indian sub
continent both the parasites exist as nocturnally periodic forms.
The vector of W bancrofri is C quinquefmciatus and vector of B.
malayi is Mansoni species. There are eight species of filariae
which parasitise man along with many other species, which
infect other vertebrates. In humans these reside in lymph
glands, deep connective tissue, subcutaneous tissues or
mesenteries.live in human lymph system. It is the major cause
of acute and chronic morbidity in 81 countries in Asia-Pacific,
Africa and the Americas. Approximately 1.3 billion people
living in these regions are at risk of infection [].

Lymphatic filariasis is a major health problem in tropical and
subtropical countries and control of this infection is still
dependent on the application of diethylcarbamazine (DEC) or
Ivermectin. Both are mainly a microfilaricides with poor or no
activity on adult parasites. In spite of the significant progress
made towards control of lymphatic filariasis by advocating
single-dose treatment with DEC or Ivermectin, combination of
DEC or Ivermectin with albendazole. This mosquito-borne
disease has been targeted by the World Health Organization for
elimination by the year 2020. The key strategy of the Global
Program to Eliminate Lymphatic Filariasis (GPELF) is to
eliminate the microfilariae (mf) from the human host through
mass drug administration (MDA) of the population at risk of
infection with the aim to interrupt transmission. Sensitive and
specific diagnostic tools are required to monitor the success of
MDA and to establish endpoints for intervention. Glutathione-
S-transferase (EC. 2.5.1.18) is a major phase-II detoxification
enzyme in parasitic helminthes. Published research highlights
the importance of GSTs in the establishment of chronic
infections in cytotoxic microenvironments. Filarial nematodes
depend on these detoxification enzymes for their survival in the
host. The ability of helminth GSTs to effectively neutralize
cytotoxic products arising from reactive oxygen species (ROS)
attack on cell membranes provides evidence that GSTs have
potential to protect the parasite against the host immune
response [].

Inhibition of GST(s) is important from several points of view.
These involve applications in studies of the catalytic
mechanism, e.g. studying the topological and binding
characteristics of the active site. Also, from a therapeutic point
of view, inhibition of GST(s) steadily becomes more interesting,
since these enzymes appear to be involved in drug resistance
and in the biosynthesis of a number of important arachidonic
acid metabolites such as prostaglandins and leukotrienes 
[]. In
the view of present background, we have used bioinformatics
approach to compare the efficacy of most commonly used
antifilarial compounds against GST of B.malayi and W.bancrofti.

Homology modeling along with docking studies was
performed in order to understand the interaction of antifilarials
compounds against GST from Brugia malayi (BmGST) and
Wuchereria bancrofti (WbGST). The structure of GST from
W.bancrofti was available with protein data bank, while that of
B.malayi was modeled and was further verified using SAVES.
The information revealed from this study would aid in
structural analysis and screening and designing new
antifilarials inhibitors for chemotherapy against filariasis.

Methodology
Preparation of protein:
The three dimensional structure of the GST of W.Bancrofti was
retrieved from RCSB protein databank (pdb id: 3T2U). All the
heteroatoms and water molecules were removed. The crystal
structure of was extracted from rcsb protein databank. The
complete amino acid sequence of Glutathione S transferase of
Brugia malayi, which contains 301 amino acids, was extracted
from the UniProt Database with an accession number of
O02636. Blastp search was performed against protein databank
to identify template structure. The automated comparative
protein modeling program MODELLER9v8 [] was then used to
generate an all-atom model by alignment of the target sequence
with the selected template sequence in an alignment file. The
models generated and the previously prepared structure of the
GST of Wuchereria bancrofti were subjected to three steps
energy-minimization processes using Steepest Descent,
conjugate Gradient and adopted Basis NR algorithm for 2000
steps and RMS Gradient 0.1, 0.05 and 0.01 respectively.

Structure Validation and Submission:
The overall stereochemical quality of the modelled structure of
Brugia malayi's GST was checked using PROCHECK 
[]. Quality
factors for the enzyme models were calculated using ERRAT2
[]. The best generated model of BMGST was successfully
submitted in Protein Model DataBasewith PMDB id:
PM0078779.

Ligand preparation:
The 3D structure of albendazole, BHA, Diethylcarbamazine,
Ethacrynic acid and Hexylglutathione were extracted from
pubchem compounds database with pubchem id: 2082, 8456,
3052, 3278 and 97536 respectively.

Molecular docking:
Molecular docking study was performed using GOLD (Genetic
Optimization for Ligand Docking) 5.0 [] for analysing the
binding affinity and mode of interaction of selecte antifilarial
compounds against GST of both B.malayi and W.bancrofti.
Docking annealing parameters for Van der Walls and hydrogen
bonding were set to 5.0 and 2.5 respectively. The parameters
used for genetic algorithm were population size 100, selection
pressure 1.2, number of operations 1,00,000, number of islands
5, niche size 2, migrate 10, mutate 100 and cross -over 100. The
best ranked poses were further analysed using a consensus
scoring function of X-Score [] to calculate the binding affinity.
Interaction figure was generated using discovery studio
visualizer.

Result &amp; Discussion
Glutathione-S-transferase(s) (GST) enzyme has been exploited
as an important therapeutic target in lymphatic filariasis 
[–]. 
Glutathione-S-transferase is a 208 residue long homodimer
(smaller α/β domain and larger α domain). The N-terminal
small domain (residues 1 to 74) is an α/β structure with the
folding topology βαβαββα arranged in the order β2, β1, β3 and
β4 with β3 anti-parallel to the others, forming a regular β-sheet
with a right-handed twist surrounded by three α-helices
(). The C terminal, large domain 2 (82–208 residues) is
α-helical []. 
GST from human filarial parasites is significantly
different from human GST in sequence and structure 
[].
Hence one can speculate high sequence similarity between the
B. malayi and W.bancrofti since both belong to same family, i.e.
Onchocercidae. Multiple sequence alignment shows a high level
of similarity between GST of B.malayi and W.Bancrofti in
comparision to their human counterpart (). GST protein
of B. malayi (BmGST) and W. bancrofti (WbGST) shares 98%
similarity.

The absence of the structure of GST of B.malayi has always been
quest for the researchers working in this field. Realising this
need, here in this study we have modelled the structure of
BmGST. The final constructed model was validated by
Ramachandran Plot. As revealed by their Ramachandran plots,
94% of the amino acid residues in the modeled BmGST were
found to be present in the most favoured regions while 0% of
amino acids were found to be in the disallowed region 
(). All the enzyme structures were modelled using the crystal
structure of WbGST (pdb id: 3T2U) as a template. Distribution
of amino acid pattern in BmGST, WbGST and HGST reveals the
presence of Tyr, Phe, Asp, Lys, His and Ile at most instances
(). Molecular docking study reveals binding affinity of
compounds along with their binding mode within the active
site of target enzyme.

The compounds (albendazole, Diethylcarbamazine and BHA)
were docked into GST of each filarial parasite. The compounds
were ranked according to their goldfitness score. The top
ranked poses were further analysed using a consensus scoring
function of X-Score to calculate the binding affinity. This study
revealed amino acid residues crucial to the interaction of GST
from both the filarial parasite with albindazole,
Diethylcarbamazine and BHA. On the basis of goldfitness score
and binding free energy, Hexylglutathione was found to the
most potent against GST of both B.malayi and W.bancrofti
followed by Ethacrynic acid and albendazole. The binding
mode of Hexylglutathione within the active site of BmGST and
WbGST is shown in (). Albindazole has always been a
drug of first choice in case of filarial infection. Its effectiveness
against GST has also been reported many times in earlier
studies [,
].

Apart from Hexylglutathione, Butylated hydroxyanisole was
found to be the most potent compound candidate against
BmGST while Diethylcarbamazine was found to be least
effective (binding free energy -6.93 and -6.23 Kcal/mol
respectively). Diethylcarbamazine was also found to be least
effective against WbGST (binding free energy -6.22 Kcal/mol).
BHA, Ethacrynic acid and albendazole were found to be
moderate against GST of both the filarial parasites.  (see
supplementary material) depict the binding affinity of various
compounds against BmGST and WbGST. The binding pattern of
all the compounds within the active site of BmGST and WbGST
was found to be more or less very same. Butylated
hydroxyanisole (BHA) has been reported for markedly
reducing worm viability []. Tyr7, Phe8, Gly12, Leu13, Trp38,
His98, Thr102, Tyr106 and Thr203 were found to be the most
important residues involved in the orientation of compounds
within the active site of both BmGST and WbGST. Overall,
Hexylglutathione was found to be a modest inhibitor of GSTs of
both the filarial parasites.

Conclusion
The binding modes exhibited by various docked compounds
illustrated the importance of specific residues within the active
site region of the targets. Role of some other important
aminoacids have also been revealed, that were found to be
playing important role in the positioning of inhibitor within the
active site. Thus based on above outcomes we conclude that
these inhibitors can behave as a lead to promising compounds
against the targets selected for our study. However, some
experimentally work is still needed for validating these
outcomes.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We would like to express our sincere thanks to Vice Chancellor,
Integral University, Lucknow, India for providing necessary
facilities and encouragement. One of the author (MS) is
thankful to UGC, New delhi for granting Maulana Azad
National Fellowship. We are also thankful to Dr Mohd Sajid
Khan, Dr Salman Khan, for their help and cooperation.

Citation:Saeed et al, Bioinformation 9(5): 233-237 (2013)

Schematic representation of secondary structure of
BmGST. Red regions: α-helices, yellow color: β-sheet and green
regions: loop.

Multiple sequence alignment (ClustalW) of GST
sequences of B. malayi, W.bancrofti and Homo sapiens.

Binding pattern of Hexylglutathione within active site
of (a) BmGST and (b) WbGST.

