Background
Many proteins contain conformationally flexible segments. These
segments undergo significant changes in backbone conformation, or
are completely disordered (lack a well-defined structure) [–]. A
quantitative representation of the conformational flexibility of the
protein backbone is important for many applications. Previously, we
developed generalized local propensity (GLP), a quantitative
sequence-based measure of backbone flexibility []. The GLP can be
used to construct sequence-based protein flexibility profiles, and
provides an objective numeric threshold for defining conformationally
flexible segments []. For a given sequence position k, the GLP
measures the width of the context-dependent distribution of backbone
conformations accessible to this position, glp(k) (see references [–]
for details). If glp(k) ≥ 1, it indicates that sequence position k is
conformationally flexible.

Here, we present the CFP (Conformational Flexibility Profile) web
server that constructs the GLP flexibility profile for a user-submitted
sequence and uses this profile to identify segments with high
conformational flexibility. Below is a brief outline of the steps
implemented in CFP: The GLP flexibility profile is constructed for the
query sequence and then smoothed using a sliding window of size W1.
Consecutive positions which have GLP above a threshold T1 are
merged into seed flexible segments. Each seed flexible segment is
extended by adding extension windows of size W2 until its average
GLP drops below an extension threshold T2. An extension window is
added only if its average GLP is above a certain threshold T3. This
extension procedure is similar to that used in the SEG program [].

The extended flexible segments are reported in the final table. If the
number of flexible residues observed in a given final flexible segment
is unusually high (p-value ≪ 0.05), then this segment is marked as
statically significant. The significance of the number of flexible
residues is estimated using the discrete scan statistic. This statistical
procedure is the same as the one we previously implemented in the
BIAS software to identify statistically significant clusters of userspecified
amino acid types [–]. The web-server is publicly available
at http://cfp.rit.albany.edu.

Methodology
Input
The only mandatory input is the query protein sequence. All other
input fields have default values that can be modified by advanced
users, if desired. These input fields are described below. Instructions
for each field and general information about the methodology and the
output format can be found by clicking a corresponding help hyperlink
on the input page.

Smoothing window size
The size of the sliding window (W1) used to
smooth the raw profile. High values of W1 tend to reveal long flexible
segments and mask the short ones. Lower values tend to reveal short
segments.

GLP threshold for seed segments
The threshold T1 used to identify seed flexible segments. Contiguous sequence positions that have
values of the smoothed GLP profile above this threshold are merged into a seed flexible segment.

Extension threshold
Each seed segment with high flexibility is extended on both sides until its average GLP drops below this
threshold (T2)

Extension window threshold
The ends of a seed flexible segment are extended if the extension window has the average GLP above this
threshold (T3).

Extension window size
The size of the extension window (W2).

Hat­shaped local smoother
Positions in the center of the smoothing window contribute more to the smoothed GLP score than positions at
the ends of the window.

Equal weights smoother
The smoothed GLP score is the unweighted average computed over all positions in the window.

Minimum seed segment
Seed segments with length smaller than this threshold are not extended.

Maximum separation between merged segments
Flexible segments separated by this or smaller number of positions are merged into one.

Flexible residues
A set of flexible residues used in the scan statistics to estimate the statistical significance of flexible segments (G, H, D, N by default).

SWIS-PROT or PDB background frequencies
The amino acid frequencies of the SwissProt or Protein Databank are used to estimate the statistical significance.

X axis size, Y axis size
The size of X and Y axis of the plot in pixels.

Create a plot
Display the smoothed GLP profile in web­browser.

Create a text file
Save the raw and smoothed GLP profiles in a text file.

Output
The CFP output consists of two parts. The first part shows the
smoothed GLP plot of the input sequence (). The second
part shows the detailed information for every flexible segment found
in the input sequence and the p­values that provide the estimates of the
statistical significance (). If the p­value for a given segment
is less than 0.05, this segment has an unusually high density of
residues with high degree of backbone flexibility.

This work was supported by grant number R03LM009034 from the National Library of Medicine/NIH, and by grant number LM06789
from the National Library of Medicine/NIH.

Citation:Kuznetsov &amp; Rackovsky, Bioinformation 4 (5): 176-178 (2009)

a) First part of the output ­ the GLP flexibility plot; b) Second part of the output ­ the summary
of all flexible segments.

