Background
Medical practitioners diagnose on the basis of information collected from different sources, effectively fusing the
             information to reach the decision. Information fusion refers to the combination of data originating from multiple sources and
             improving decision tasks, such as classification, estimation and prediction. Ultimately it provides a better understanding of the
             phenomena under consideration. In case of breast cancer, number of factors such as heterogeneity in diet, age, race,
             environmental factors, geographic location, number of pregnancies, as well as genetic makeup determines the risk of
             malignancy. [,] The degree of complexity 
             of the disease is further enhanced by chromosomal rearrangements frequentlyassociated with the pre-malignant disease. The cellular pathways that 
             are altered by these aberrations have beendifficult to evaluate in patients, especially during early stages of the disease process. 
             [,]

Since there are number of factors that determined the risk of breast cancer, so it is not advisable to rely on just one source of
            information for diagnosis. There is a well established association between different symptoms of breast cancer e.g.
            germline BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations are associated with increased lifetime risk of developing breast cancer [] but not all mutation carriers develop breast cancer and the age of onset of breast cancer remains unpredictable. 
            [] There is a well established association between atypical ductal epithelium identified 
            by histological biopsy, nipple aspiration (NA) or fine needle aspiration (FNA) and an increased risk of future breast 
            cancer. [] The relative risk of developing invasive breast
            carcinoma for women found to have atypical ductal hyperplasia on breast biopsy is 4.3 times that of the general
            population and, when combined with a positive family history, the relative risk of invasive breast cancer rises to 9.7 times that
            of the general population. []

Association between the different symptoms are not only factor that contribute the idea of fusing information from
             different resources but the limitation of diagnostic methods are one of the major fact as well e.g. mammographic screening is
             the most reliable method but often fails to detect tumors that are less then 5mm in size and also dense breast tissue are
             difficult to interpret. [] The limitation of FNA can either be
             technical or related to the nature of the lesion itself. []

Medical information fusion has been demonstrated by Azuaje et al., [] 
             an information fusion technique based on a knowledge discovery model and the case-based reasoning decision framework using data from heart disease risk
             estimation domain. Fusion techniques combine information at the retrieval-outcome level and data at the discovery-input
             level.  [] Paquerault et al., proposed a technique based on the
             fusion of one-view and two-view information to improve the performance of mammography mass detection of breast cancer.
             A classifier was trained to differentiate the true mass pairs from the false pairs. A final fusion stage combined the twoview
             object pair information with the one-view object scores.[]

There is wide recognition of Fine Needle Aspiration (FNA) and microarray analysis as the principal diagnostic methods.
              [,] Microarray methodology involves placing 
              a large number of DNA fragments corresponding to the different genes to be studied on a glass slide or glass wafer. [] Microarray analysis determined the level of expression in a tissue sample of many genes simultaneously. Microarray
              experiments generate large datasets with expression values for thousands of genes [], but 
              usually not more than a few dozens of array, that gives rise to the issue of the curse of dimension. FNA cytology is the technique that involves the 
              insertion of a fine needle (between 21 and 25 gauge) into a lesion and the extraction of a small sample of cellular material which is smeared onto glass 
              slides. The cells are stained and examined morphologically by cytopathologists. [] The features are
              computed from digitized image of a fine needle aspirate to a breast mass. They describe characteristics of the cell nuclei present in the image. 
              []

The aim of our work is to study and apply Dumpster Shafer theory of mathematical belief to fuse breast cancer data
               obtained from different diagnostic techniques in the management of breast disease. Input data, consisting of feature
               vectors ported into three different classifiers as input. The classifiers we used in this study are SVM with linear,
               Polynomial and RBF kernel. Each classifier provides beliefs of two classes benign and malignant. These beliefs are then
               combined to reach a final diagnosis using Dempster's combination formula. The experiments are carried on two
               types of breast cancer data. One is Fine Needle Aspirates Cytology (FNAc) data, other is obtained from gene expression
               pattern in peripheral blood cells. FNAc breast cancer data collected by physician W.O. Wolberg, University of Wisconsin
               Hospitals, contained 699 samples, 458 of which were benign and 241 of which were malignant. [] FNAc data set is publicly available on UCI machine learning repository. Gene expression data consist of 60 blood 
               samples obtained from 56 different women of which 24 were malignant and 36 were benign. [] 
               We have used leave one out cross validation. To implement this method, the available data was divided into k disjoint sets; k models were trained 
               using different combination of k­1 partitions and were tested on the remaining partition. Cross-validation makes good use of the available
               data as each sample is used both as training and test data. Cross-validation is therefore especially useful where the
               amount of available data is insufficient to form the usual training, validation and test partitions required for split-sample
               training. []

Methodology
To describe the methodology in  we start with the visualization of FNAc and microarray 
			data. Each element of FNA cytology pattern sets consisted of 9 cytological characteristics. Each of 9 cytological characteristics of breast
            Fine Needle Aspirates (FNA) differs between benign and malignant samples.

The nine independent parameters of FNAc data are: clump thickness, uniformity of cell size, uniformity of cell shape,
            marginal adhesion, single epithelial cell size, bare nuclei, bland chromatin, normal nucleoli, and mitoses. [] Each of these characteristics is assigned a number between 1 and 10, with the
            largerest numbers generally indicating a greater likelihood of malignancy. However, not a single measurement by itself can
            be used to determine whether the sample is benign or malignant.

It was noted in  that the benign samples had lower parameter values than the malignant samples 
            shown in . It was apparent that simultaneous simple frequency distribution histograms all nine parameters 
            for each class, would graphically illustrate any differences between the two classifications, which is highlighted in  and .

The second data is from Sharma et al. that consist of microarray gene-expression pattern of 1368 genes in peripheral blood cells of 24 women 
            with malignant breast cancer and 36 women with benign cancer. [] Out of 1368 genes a panel of
            37 genes had been identified with distinct expression patterns in malignant versus benign samples. We have used data matrix of 60 samples and 37 genes 
            with two classes benign and malignant.

The relative expressions of 11 features of selected genes are presented in  and 
            . The expression level of cancer genes are shown in figure 4 with 36 samples of women with
            malignant cancer. The expression level of 11 genes with benign cancer of 24 samples is shown in .



Results &amp; Discussion
This section provides the results of individual classifiers as well as the combination of classifiers using DST for breast
               cancer data. The performance of SVM based classifiers with linear, polynomial and RBF kernel has been evaluated using
                sensitivity, specificity, positive predicted value (PPV), negative predicted value (NPV) and accuracy. To highlight
                these parameters, let’s for some class A, the results would be True Positive (TP) if samples of class A are predicted as A and
                the results would be False Negative (FN) if samples of class A are predicted as non-A. The result would be False Positive (FP)
              if samples of non-A predicted as A, and True Negative (TN) if samples of non-A predicted as non-A. The following
               parameters are used to characterize performance of classifier and are given below
               
                 Sensitivity=TP/(TP+FN) (14)
                 Specificity=TN/(FP+TN) (15)
                 PPV=TP/(TP+FP) (16)
                 NPV=TN/(FN+TN) (17)
               

Sensitivity is the probability for a class A sample to be correctly predicted as class A, Specificity is the probability for
               a non class A sample to be correctly predicted as non-A, PPV is the probability that a sample predicted as class A actually
               belongs to class A, NPV is the probability that a sample predicted as non class A actually does not belong to class A.
               For each classification method and each class, these parameters are listed in the tables below.  shows the results of SVM classifiers on FNA data. The overall accuracy is 90.25% with sensitivity of malignant is 
               91.6% and benign is 88.8%.shows the performance of the microarray data the overall 
               accuracy is 81.94% with sensitivity of malignant is 80.50% and benign is 83.30%. %. shows the result of application of DST to fuse the classifiers. The overall accuracy
               shown in %. is 94.4% with sensitivity of malignant is 97.1% 
               and benign is 94.4%. shows improved accuracy using information fusion with DST.

A confusion matrix in  shows the classification results of classes Malignant (M) and 
               Benign (B) classes. Fusion with DST shows the maximum accuracy where 35 malignant classes were correctly identified while 1 was classified as benign. The
               use of FNA data with the SVM classifiers identified 33 benign classes and 3 were incorrectly classified as malignant.  shows that when two single sources of data: gene expression and Cytology FNA data were fused using Dempster Shafer it
               showed higher accuracy.

Overall accuracies of individual and DST classifiers in  show that fusion by DST has improved 
               the breast cancer prediction as compared to individual classifiers.

Conclusions
We have looked at the fusion of data from disparate sources for the prediction of breast cancer tumors. We have demonstrated
            our methodologies for fusing data form FNAc and microarray data set to achieve a batter overall prediction of breast cancer
            tumors. The paper has presented a method for fusing medical data using multiple classifiers where uncertainty and unequal
            costs of errors are present. The fusion framework has been presented for the computation of belief functions and
            uncertainty values from individual classifiers and data fusion through the Dempster-Shafer theory, in which class
           differentiation quality is used for the computation of uncertainties. The fusion approach has shown the best
           classification accuracy of breast tumor classification. The fusion approach remained robust in the presence of fairly
           different classifier performances. The ability to handle such situations robustly and the ability to classify samples in the
           presence of classifier uncertainty, makes this approach attractive for healthcare applications.

Supplementary Material
Data 1
Figures and Tables
Performance of the Support Vector Machine Classifier on FNA data
Class	Sensitivity	Specificity	PPV	NPV	
Malignant	0.916	0.888	0.891	0.923	
Benign	0.888	0.916	0.923	0.891	
Performance of the Support Vector Machine Classifier on gene expression data
Class	Sensitivity	Specificity	PPV	NPV	
Malignant	0.805	0.833	0.828	0.878	
Benign	0.833	0.805	0.878	0.828	
Performance of the combined result of fusion using DST
Class	Sensitivity	Specificity	PPV	NPV	
Malignant	0.971	0.944	0.921	0.972	
Benign	0.944	0.971	0.972	0.921	
Confusion matrices of individual classifiers and the combined result of fusion using Dempster Shafer Theory
SVM-Micro	SVM-FNA	Combined-Fusion (DST)	
	M	B		M	B		M	B	
M	29	7	M	33	3	M	35	1	
B	6	30	B	4	32	B	3	33	
Accuracy of classifiers for test cases on malignant and benign
	SVM-Micro	SVM-FNA	Combined-Fusion (DST)	
Overall Accuracy	82.00	90.27	94.44	
FNA-Cytology and gene-expression data fusion methodology using Dempster-shafer theory of evidence

Visualization of FNAc malignant data set

Visualization of FNAc benign data set

Visualization of microarray malignant data set

Visualization of microarray benign data set


        Citation:Razaet al., Bioinformation 1(5): 170-175 (2006)

