Background
Basic Local Alignment Search Tool, (BLAST) [,
] is the most frequently used algorithm for computing 
sequence similarity. It enables comparing a query sequence/s to a database/s of sequences and identifies 
sequences that are similar to the query above a defined threshold.

While there are a few BLAST applications that allow searching against several target databases, like 
TimeLogic ' s DeCypher ® server [] 
and ViroBLAST (which provides only a limited number of target databases) 
[], they perform a single BLAST search against 
a combination of target databases. The present application launches a series of BLAST searches, 
searching with one query list of proteins against each of several requested target protein or nucleotide 
databases. The application merges the results into one output file, presenting the results from each 
target database in consecutive columns. This format is especially useful for either comparing the results 
from the different target databases, or analyzing the results while keeping the identification of each 
target database separate. MULTBLAST provides further advantages by pre–processing the query file and by 
allowing useful formatting options for the output file.

TimeLogic ' s DeCypher system (available from Active Motif, Inc.) offers a 
hardware-accelerated implementation of the BLAST algorithm (TeraBLAST™) 
[]. MULTBLAST utilizes these accelerated 
searches, thus allowing the completion of a large number of BLAST searches against large databases 
within a reasonable amount of time.

Methodology
The application includes several Perl scripts (Perl v5.10.0) that perform the following tasks: 
upload and process the query file (including sorting, deleting duplicate identifiers, and when 
requested, retrieving sequences from the appropriate database), incorporate the user defined parameters 
into command files to be sent to the DeCypher server (ver. 8.5.0), launch a series of BLAST searches on 
the DeCypher server [], utilizing DeCypher 
Client 8.5, and retrieve and combine the results into the requested output file. The searches are either 
protein to protein (Tera-BLASTP) or protein to DNA (Tera-TBLASTN; comparing protein sequences to nucleic 
sequences translated using all 6 reading frames).

Program input
A web form prompts the user to enter job parameters and upload a query file used for all BLAST 
searches (). The query file can be a FASTA formatted file 
with protein sequences from any specie/s or a personalized text file containing only a list of sequence 
identifier numbers, one Id on each line. If the user uploads a list of identifiers, the application 
will retrieve the corresponding protein sequences from the requested database. At this point the 
application can retrieve sequences from TAIR or, for Caenorhabditis elegans, from 
Ensembl (future plans include adding other databases). The user can select target databases against 
which the query will be compared from a list of 10 protein databases, including NCBI NR, Swiss-Prot, 
TrEMBL, UniRef100 and TAIR8, or 7 nucleotide database, including NCBI NT.

The user can define the following BLAST search parameters: maximum number of matches printed 
for each query id, significant threshold (only results at or better than this threshold, i.e., 
lower P value, will be reported) and gapped alignment processing method. Additionally, the following 
default settings are used: Weight matrix: Blosum 62; Word size: 4; Query increment: 1; Extension 
threshold: 20; Open penalty: -11, Extend penalty: -1, Query filtered (masks repetitive elements in 
the data).

Program output
The user receives, based on his or her request, an email with either attachments of or links to 
the following two results files: A final tab-delimited text file (Table 1 see ,) 
with a query identifier column (QUERYTEXT) followed by three columns for each target database: rank, 
significance level (E value) and the target sequence identifier (TARGETLOCUS). These three columns 
are the BLAST search results for the comparison between the respective query and target sequences. 
Results are based on matches between the query and each individual target database. No claims 
are made for matches between sequences of the different target databases. The file can be opened 
in Microsoft Excel for easy viewing and further analysis. BLAST results can contain, for a 
given query sequence, more than one of the same target sequence. The user can request to remove 
or keep these duplicate target sequences. Additionally, the user can request to either print the 
query id in each row (useful for further analysis), or only print the first instance of each query 
id, leaving the query id column empty for all following rows of the same query id (allowing clearer 
viewing). 1) A log file for that run, containing the names of the input and output files, the target 
databases and the BLAST search parameters.

Future development
Future developments will include adding other databases from which query sequences 
can be retrieved and additional target databases to search against, as well as incorporating 
an option to paste the query data into the application form in addition to the ability to 
upload a query file.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We would like to thank Dr. Ron Mittler for initiating the idea behind this 
application as well as for his helpful comments and feedback and Dr. John Cushman and 
Richard Tillett for their helpful input and feedback.

Citation:Schlauch etal, Bioinformation 5(5): 224-226 (2010)

A screen shots of a portion of the web-application form.

