Background
Noncovalent interactions are ubiquitous in chemistry and are a
main source of stability for many molecular complexes in
nanoscience, materials chemistry and biochemistry 
[–]. Weak
interactions although small in magnitude, being numerous,
contribute to the overall stability of protein molecules 
[,
].
Protein structures are stabilized with various non-covalent
interactions such as hydrophobic, electrostatic, hydrogen bonds
and Vander Waals interactions. In addition, the π-π interaction
is an important non-covalent binding interaction in structural
biology. Interactions between aromatic residues (Phe, Tyr, Trp
and His) contribute to the stability of native fold 
[].
Interactions among side chains of protein residues and protein
subunits are primarily responsible for the structure, stability
and function of proteins. The π-π interactions between aromatic
rings are recognized to play an important role in structural
stability in protein and DNA [–] and form recognition motifs
in proteins and enzymes [,
]. Cytokines are proteins that
regulate and mediate immunity, inflammation, and
hematopoiesis. ILs and TNF are immunoregulatory,
proinflammatory cytokines that strongly synergize in numerous
biological functions, both in vitro and in vivo. IL-1α is produced
mainly by mononuclear phagocytes but also by many other
types of cells in response to inflammatory stimuli 
[]. It has a
wide range of biological activities on many target cell types,
including B cells, T cells and monocytes [,
]. TNF-α is
known to regulate growth and differentiation of a variety of
immune cells. It is secreted by activated macrophages,
monocytes, and many other cells, including B cells, T cells and
fibroblasts [–]. TNF-α, in particular, has received much
attention and cardiac-specific over expression of this cytokine
promotes a phenotype mimicking several features of clinical
heart failure including cardiac hypertrophy, ventricular
dilatation, fibrosis and several biochemical and cellular defects
[]. Recent data indicate that a complex TNF-α mediated
regulation of matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) and tissue
inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMP) may significantly
contribute to myocardial remodeling [,
]. In autoimmune
diseases, the pro-inflammatory cytokines are typically
considered to be pathogenic, whereas the anti-inflammatory
cytokines are regarded to be protective in nature 
[–]. Our
group has already analyzed the cation-π interactions in ILs and
TNF proteins []. There is no systematic analysis of π-π
interactions in ILs and TNF proteins. Hence, we investigated
the role of π-π interactions in ILs and TNF proteins by
bioinformatics approaches.

Methodology
Data Set:
We have selected five ILs and two TNF proteins from PDB
(Protein data bank) [] for our investigation, the details of
which are given in  &amp; 
 (see supplementary
material). Criteria that were followed for selecting the data set
are (i) the three dimensional structures of these proteins have
been solved with ≤3.0 Å resolution and (ii) the sequence
identity among the proteins in the dataset was less than 40%.

π-π interactions:
The stand alone program NCI (Non-canonical interactions)
server [] was used to identify π-π interactions in a protein.
NCI used the geometric criteria of separation 4-6.5 Å between
the centroids of aromatic ring of interacting residues to predict
π-π interactions. All significant π-π interactions, where the
aromatic residues (Phe, Tyr &amp; Trp) donate π electron density
with other acceptor aromatic residues were identified. We did
not consider C-H..π interactions for our analysis in the present
study. Because in C-H..π interactions, the donor residues were
not always π-residues. The π-π interaction types were
represented by a two letter code S and S5. S represented the
side-chain (6 membered aromatic ring) of amino acids Phe, Tyr
and Trp. S5 represented the side-chain (5 membered ring) in
Trp. Eventhough His has a 5 membered aromatic ring, it was
not considered as the protonation state of histidine depended
on the pH and local environment of residues. It may act as
either cation or π residue and can change the preferred relative
orientations of the π-π interaction. π-π interactions were
classified into three types namely (π-π -SS) side-chain to sidechain
π-π interactions, (π-π -SS5) side-chain to side-chain five
member aromatic ring π-π interactions and (π-π -S5S) sidechain
five member aromatic ring to side-chain π-π interactions.

Location of π-π interaction forming residues based on
secondary structure and solvent accessibility:
Secondary structure and solvent accessibility are very
important to understand the biochemical activity of proteins. A
systematic analysis of each π-π interaction forming residue was
performed based on their location in different secondary
structures and solvent accessibility of ILs and TNF proteins. We
obtained the information about secondary structures from PDB
[] and identified solvent accessibility of the proteins using the
program ASAView [].

Conservation score:
Conservation score is a useful parameter for the identification
of conserved residues in a protein sequence based on the
phylogenetic relations between homologous sequences. For
computing conservation score, we used Consurf [] in which
the following methodology was adopted. 1) The amino acid
sequence was extracted from the PDB file; 2) Search for close
homologous sequences using BLAST (or PSI-BLAST) [,
].
The sequences were clustered and highly similar sequences
were removed using CD-HIT []; 3) Multiple sequence
alignment of the homologous sequences was constructed using
CLUSTALW []; 4) The MSA was then used to build a
phylogenetic tree using the neighbor-joining algorithm as
implemented in the Rate4Site program []. Position-specific
conservation scores were computed using the empirical
Bayesian [] or ML algorithms 
[]; 5) The continuous
conservation scores were divided into a discrete scale of nine
grades. Grade 1 contained the most variable positions, grade 5
contained intermediately conserved positions, and grade 9
contained the most conserved positions [,
].

Computation of stabilization center:
Stabilization centers (SCs) were clusters of residues that were
involved in medium or long range interactions []. Computer
simulations and analysis of experimentally determined real
protein structures indicate that long range interactions play the
dominant role in stabilizing the native structures 
[–]. Two
residues were considered to be in long-range interaction if they
were separated by at least ten residues in the sequence and at
least one of their heavy atom contact distances was less than the
sum of the van der Waals radii of the two atoms plus 1.0 Å.
Residues can be considered part of stabilization centers if they
were involved in medium or long range interactions and if two
supporting residues can be selected from both of their flanking
tetra peptides, which together with the central residues form at
least seven out of the nine possible contacts. The interactions of
stabilization center residues hardly influence the formation of
the various secondary structure elements and the distribution of
the stabilization center residues was rather uneven among the
secondary structure element []. We used the SCide for
predicting stabilization centers among π-π interacting residues
[].

Sequential separation between residues that are involved in π-π interactions:
The sequential distance between the π-π interacting residues
was computed using standard methodology 
[–]. The short,
medium and long range interactions have been classified
according to the distance of separation between the residues
along the polypeptide chain. The contribution from &lt;±4 were
treated as short-range contacts, greater than ±4 to less than ±10
as medium-range contacts and greater than ±10 were treated as
long-range contacts.

Discussion
Preference of aromatic residues for forming π-π interaction in
interleukins and TNF Proteins:
We have analyzed the frequency of occurrence of aromatic
amino acid residues which are involved in π-π interactions.
There are 25 π-π interactions in ILs and 6 interactions in TNF
proteins in the whole data set. It is interesting to observe that,
there is an average of one significant π-π interaction for almost
2 aromatic aminoacid residues in ILs and 5 aromatic aminoacid
residues in TNF proteins. We observe that in ILs, the
contribution of Phe residue is higher than Tyr and Trp residues.
The occurrence of Phe, Tyr and Trp residues involved in π-π
interactions are 48%, 30% and 22% respectively. Considering
the benzene in Phe residues, the greater electro negativity of sp2
C relative to H, produces substantial C--H+ dipole. The C-H
dipole accounts well for π-π interaction in phenylalanine 
[].
In TNF proteins, Tyr residues have the highest contribution
than other two aromatic residues for π-π interactions. The
occurrence of Phe, Tyr and Trp residues involved in π-π
interactions are 25%, 58% and 17% respectively. In tyrosine, the
hydroxyl group in the ortho position on the benzene ring,
increase the π-stacking by withdrawing π-electron density from
the substituted benzene; reduce the electrostatic repulsion with
other benzene []. Also the ability of hydroxyl group of
tyrosine to act as H-bond donor considerably potentiates the
binding ability of phenolic ring []. These results are depicted
in (). From these results we believe that, Phe residues in
ILs and Tyr in TNF proteins are more important than other
aromatic residues for π-π interactions. In general, Trp is the
least occurring aminoacid in any protein []. This is in accord
with our result that Trp have the lowest occurrence in both ILs
and TNF proteins. These observations are comparable to the
earlier reports on CH- π hydrogen bonds in interleukins 
[].

Secondary structure preferences:
The systematic analysis of secondary structure preference of
each amino acid, which participated in different types of π-π
interactions are performed. The preferences of secondary
structure correlate with the chemical structure and
stereochemistry of the amino acids []. Secondary structure
types were assigned using letters: H for helix, T for turn, and S
for strand. The secondary structure preference of each of the
amino acids involved in π-π interactions are obtained from
PDB. In ILs, among the π-π interacting Phe residues, 42, 46 and
12 % of residues prefer to be in helix, strand and turn
conformations respectively. 60% of Tyr residues are in strand
conformation and 7, 33 % of residues are in helix and turn
conformations. Similarly, 55% of Trp residues are preferred to
be in strand, only 27 and 18% Trp residues are in helix and turn
conformation. We observe that in ILs, the π-π interacting Phe,
Tyr and Trp residues predominantly prefer the strand
conformation. These results are depicted in (). We
find that in TNF proteins, none of the π-π interacting residues
are in helix conformation. All the Phe and Trp residues are in β-
strand. Among the Tyr residues, 86% of residues are preferred
to be strand and 14% are in turn conformation. These results are
depicted in (). In both ILs and TNF proteins, the π-π
interacting aromatic residues prefer strand conformation. These
results are consistent with the conformational preferences of
amino acids in globular proteins [].

Conservation score of interacting residues:
The level of evolutionary conservation is used often as an
indicator of importance of the position in maintaining the
protein's structure and/or function [,
]. Conservation score
of ≥ 6 is the cutoff value used to identify the stabilizing
residues. In ILs, 90% of residues have the conservation score ≥6.
In TNF proteins, 83% of amino acid residues involved in π-π
interactions have the conservation score ≥6. These results are
shown in (). Thus from these observations, we are
able to infer that most of the amino acid residues involved in π-
π interactions are evolutionary conserved in both ILs and TNF
proteins . Hence, we believe that π-π interacting residues have
an additional role in maintaining the structure and function of
ILs and TNF proteins. The conservation grade of π-π interacting
residues in ILs [PDB ID 1I16] using PyMol is shown in ().

Stabilization centers:
The unit of SC (Stabilization center) is one pair of interacting
residues that are far enough in the primary structure and whose
interactions are also supported by other interactions formed by
residues located in their vicinity in the primary structure 
[].
We have computed the stabilization center [] for all π-π
interaction forming residues in both ILs and TNF proteins. 32%
of π-π interacting residues in ILs and 50% of π-π interacting
residues in TNF proteins have one or more stabilization centers.
The percentage of stabilization centers is more in the case of
TNF proteins than ILs. From these results we infer that, the role
of π-π interacting residues might be significant in the structural
stability of TNF proteins through π-π interactions. All these SC
residues might contribute additional stability to ILs and TNF
proteins in addition to their participation in π-π interactions.
These results are shown in ().

π-π interacting residues in different ASA ranges:
The solvent accessible surface area (ASA) is computed using the
program ASAview to estimate the solvent accessibility of the
residues involved in π-π interactions. In ILs, considering the
Phe residues, 92% of residues are in solvent buried region
whereas each 4% of residues are in partially buried and
exposed regions. 86% of Tyr is buried and each 7% of residues
are in partially buried and exposed regions. Among the Trp
residues, 73% of residues are in buried region and 27% in
partially buried regions. In TNF proteins, all the Trp and Phe
residues are in solvent buried region. 71% and 29% of Tyr
residues are in buried and partially buried regions. It is
interesting to note that none of the π-π interacting residues are
exposed to solvent. In both ILs and TNF proteins, it is observed
that all π-π interacting residues are preferred to be in the buried
region. Hence, π-π interacting residues stabilize the inner core
regions in these proteins. These results are shown in 
().

Residue pairs involved in π-π interactions and π-networks:
There are six possibilities of π-π interacting pairs namely Phe-
Phe, Phe-Tyr, Phe-Trp, Tyr-Tyr, Tyr-Trp and Trp-Trp pairs.
When homo-pairs of aromatic side chains are considered, the
highest percentage of interactions is observed between Phe-Phe
residues. 20% of interactions are Phe-Phe interactions, 8% are
Tyr-Tyr interactions and there are no Trp-Trp interactions. The
percentages of interacting pairs (F-Y, F-W, and Y-W) towards π-
π interactions in ILs are 28, 28, and 16% respectively. In TNF
proteins, we find four types of interacting pairs, Phe-Tyr, Tyr-
Tyr, Phe-Trp and Tyr-Trp interactions. The percentages of
interacting pairs (F-Y, Y-Y, F-W, Y-W) towards π-π interactions
in TNF proteins are 33, 17, 33 and 17% respectively. We have
analyzed the distance between the centroids of π-π interacting
residues. The π-π interacting pairs in ILs and TNF proteins are
most favorable in the distance range of 5-6 Å as shown in
(). We have also analyzed the π-networks in ILs and
TNF proteins. There are π-networks in ILs and TNF proteins.
These π-networks might add more stability and play an
important role in understanding the 3D structure of proteins.
The 3π, 4π and 7π - networks in the data set of ILs and TNF
proteins are shown in (). The PyMol view of Trp-Phe
interacting pair in ILs [PDB ID 1I16] and linear 7π network in
ILs [PDB ID 1F45] are shown in ().

Sequential separation of interacting pairs:
Long range interactions play an active role in the stability of
protein molecules. Short, medium and long range interactions
as a function of percentage of interaction in ILs and TNF
proteins are studied. It is interesting to note that, 68% of π-π
interactions in ILs are long range interactions and 8, 24% of
interactions are short-range interactions and medium-range
interactions respectively. It is observed that in TNF proteins,
67% of π-π interactions are long range interactions whereas 33%
are medium range interactions. Long range π-π interactions are
the predominant type of interactions in ILs and TNF proteins
and hence π-π interactions contribute significantly to the
tertiary structure stability of these proteins. These results are
shown in ().

Conclusion
We have analyzed the role of π-π interactions in ILs and TNF
proteins and made a comparative study. In ILs, Phe residues
have maximum contribution whereas, it is Tyr in TNF proteins
to form π-π interactions. The occurrence of Trp is very low in
both ILs and TNF. Several π-π interactions are observed
between the residues in β-strand. Since, most of the π-π
interacting residues have the tendency of being buried in the
interior of ILs and TNF proteins, these interactions might be
important in stabilizing the inner core regions of these proteins.
It is interesting to note that in both ILs and TNF proteins, none
of the π-π interacting Trp residues are at the surface. Our
investigations on sequential distance between the interacting
pairs suggest that most of the π-π interacting residues are in
long-range contacts and hence, these interacting residues might
play an important role in global structural stability of these
proteins. Majority of π-π interacting residues are evolutionary
conserved in both ILs and TNF proteins. Conserved residues
are comparatively high in case of ILs than TNF proteins.
Considerable percentage of π-π interacting residues had one or
more stabilization centers and these residues might contribute
significantly to the stability to ILs and TNF proteins. Most of the
π-π interacting pairs prefer to be in distance range of 5-6 Å in
ILs and TNF proteins. There is also a significant number of π-
networks in both ILs and TNF proteins. On the whole the
results obtained from this study will be very helpful in further
understanding the structural stability and functions of ILs and
TNF proteins.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Dr. Anand Anbarasu gratefully acknowledges the Indian
Council of Medical Research [ICMR] Government of India
agent for the research grant IRIS ID: 2011-03260. P. Lavanya
thanks ICMR for the research fellowship from the ICMR grant
IRIS ID: 2011- 03260 and would like to thank the management
of VIT University for providing the necessary facilities to carry
out this research project. We also thank Dr. M. Madan Babu,
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road, Cambridge
CB22QH, UK, for helping us with the NCI server.

Citation:Sivasakthi et al, Bioinformation 9(8): 432-439 (2013)

Preference of π-π interacting residues in ILs and TNF
proteins.

Secondary structure preferences of proteins A)
Structural preferences of π-π interacting residues in ILs; B)
Structural perferences of residues in TNF Proteins.

A) Conservation score of π-π interacting residues in
ILs and TNF proteins; B) Conservation pattern of ILS [PDB ID
1116] using PyMol.

Stabilization centers of π-π interacting residues in ILs
and TNF proteins

A) Solvent accessibility patterns of π-π interacting
residues in ILs; B) Solvent accessibility patterns of π-π
interacting residues in TNF proteins.

Preferential distance (in A) of π-π interacting residues
in ILS and TNF proteins

A) 3π, 4π and 7π- -networks in ILS and TNF proteins; B) PyMol view of Trp-Phe interacting pairs in ILs [PDB ID 1116]; C)
The PyMol view of 7π network in ILs [PDB ID 1F45].

Sequential distances of interacting pairs in ILs and
TNF proteins.

