Background
Flavivirus is a viral genus of the family flaviridae comprising
of viruses with enveloped RNA genome and human
pathogenic nature. Flaviviruses, most likely found in the
tropical and temperate parts of the world are a root cause of
dengue fever, West Nile fever, tick-borne encephalitis, and
yellow fever in human []. One of the major infectious
flavivirus is the dengue virus (DENV-1, DENV-2, DENV-3,
and DENV-4) having infected Aedes aegypti mosquito bite as its
route of transmission. According to statics, Dengue virus
claims approximately 25,000 lives and infects over 50 million
human beings annually [,
]. Dengue viruses are etiologic
agents of dengue fever (DF), dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF),
and dengue shock syndrome (DSS) []. DENV infection has
become a serious problem and dreadful threat for life in major
tropical and subtropical areas of the world including Asia,
Central and South America and Africa [,
]. It is unfortunate
that no vaccine has passed the clinical trial till date, inspite of
the fact that massive research is conducted for the
development of a DENV vaccine []. The 11kb genome of
DENV encodes a single polyprotein which is then
proteolyticaly cleaved into three structural and seven nonstructural
proteins. These ten viral proteins are capsid (C), premembrane
(prM/M), envelope protein (E), NS1, NS2A, NS2B,
NS3, NS4A, NS4B and NS5. The structural proteins are
involved in structural formation of virus and non-structural
proteins have their role in viral replication []. The flavivirus
NS1 protein bears certain interesting and peculiar properties as
compared to nonstructural proteins encoded by other RNA
viruses. NS1 of Dengue virus, a highly conserved glycoprotein
of 46 kDa size, is found both intracellularly and extracellularly
and sometimes also attached to cell surfaces. As NS1 is
synthesized, it moves towards endoplasmic reticulum where it
modifies into a homodimer of partial hydrophobic nature. NS1
remains confined to intracellular membranes that are
presumed sites of viral RNA synthesis []. The analyses of
yellow fever virus NS1 suggest a high possibility of NS1
involvement in viral RNA replication process [,
]. For the
replication of NS1 its glycosylation sites are significant. Three
glycosylation sites are positioned at Asn130, Asn175 and
Asn207 residues in NS1 [,
]. Asn-207 is involved in
secretion and cell surface expression of protein while Asn-130
has imperative role in NS1 structural stability and interaction
with complement proteins []. The results of previous studies
revealed the role of Asn-130 in viral growth, NS1 secretion,
cytopathic effect in cells [,
,
,
,
]. Different in-vivo
experiments results proved that loss of ASN-130 in NS1 results
in attenuated dengue virus infection in mice [,
,
].

Asn-130 is thus considered an essential target to screen and
calculate effects of various drug candidates on NS1.
Phytochemicals are found abundantly in Medicinal Plants 
[].
These phytochemicals act as a strong defense mechanism for
plants and also safeguard human bodies and animals against
various contagious viruses and epidemics []. A broad range
of phytochemicals can be traced in medicinal plants including
organosulfur compounds, limonoids, furyl compounds,
alkaloids, polyines, coumarins, thiophenes, peptides,
flavonoids, terpenoids, polyphenolics and saponins. These
phytochemicals serves their remedial function by scavenging
and hindering viral entry and DNA\RNA replication against a
wide range of viruses []. According to previous studies,
Flavonoids can play an active role in the cure of Dengue virus
infections due to their efficient anti-viral activity [].
Treatment of Dengue Virus with medicinal plant costs less as
compared to good old traditional methods []. It may also be
preferred because of the multiple target activities, little
probable to cause resistance and nominal side-effects [].

Recent advancements in computational biology techniques
have broadened the horizons of research in the field of drug
development. These days, in drug designing and screening of
newly discovered antiviral compounds against threatening
diseases, Molecular docking for prediction of predominant
binding mode of a ligand with a protein of known threedimensional
structure is considered a key technique [].
Hence, the aim of the present study is to screen 2200
flavonoids of 405 antiviral medicinal plants against Dengue
virus NS1 using in-silico techniques. The focal idea of this
study is to target the N-glycosylation sites (Asn-130) of Dengue
virus NS1 to screen novel flavonoids that could help to
restraint the DENV infection. The result of this study will
provide worthwhile information regarding drug development
and would also prove beneficial in computer aided screening
of the drugs against DENV infection.

Methodology
This study involves the docking of 2200 flavonoids of 405
antiviral medicinal plants against Dengue virus NS1 protein.
Molecular Operating Environment (MOE) software package
was used to carry out docking [].

Ligand׳s searching and database preparation:
An extensive literature survey was performed to hunt for
flavonoids from antiviral medicinal plants, which have shown
their potential as drugs against viral diseases specially against
Dengue Virus. Chemical structures of Flavonoids were
downloaded from MAPS Database [], PubMed
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed), Pubmed Central
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/), Pubchem
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pccompound), Zinc Database
[] and ChEMBL 
(
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3245175/). Structures were stored in .mol
format. Structural optimization was done by adding hydrogen
atoms using MOE software. Energy minimization of selected
molecules was performed with parameters (gradient: 0.05,
Force Field: MMFF94X, Chiral Constraint and Current
Geometry). All these refined flavonoid structures were then
saved in .mdb database to be further analyzed through
molecular docking.

Refinement of receptor protein:
Three-dimensional (3D) structure of the Dengue virus NS1 was
retrieved from the Protein Data Bank (PDB) using PDB ID:
4O6B [] and was optimized by removing water molecules, 3D
protonation and Energy minimization using Molecular
Operating Environment (MOE). Moreover, energy
minimization was done using parameters (Force Field:
AMBER99+Solvation, gradient: 0.05, and Chiral Constraint:
Current Geometry). This refined structure was then used as
receptor for docking analyses.

Molecular docking:
Active site Finder tool of MOE was used to identify and
calculate active sites in the receptor molecule from the 3D
atomic coordinates of the receptor. By default, all calculated
sites were appeared as selected. Active site containing ASN
130 was selected for future docking and that particular site
was isolated from rest of the structure. Secondary structures
were removed from the receptor and docking of ligand
database against Asn-130 of Dengue virus NS1 was then
executed. The parameters were set (Re-scoring function:
London dG , placement: triangle matcher, Retain: 10,
Refinement: Force field, and Re-scoring 2: London dG).
Docking program of MOE provides correct conformation of
the ligand so as to obtain minimum energy structure. After
docking, S score was considered the criteria to select best
conformation for flavonoids and these were then further
studied to analyze the hydrogen bonding/π-π interactions
through LigX tool of MOE.

Drug Scan:
Drug scan of flavonoids was performed using the ligand
properties checking tool of MOE to ensure that the compounds
possess suitable molecular properties to be a drug candidate.

Results
The 3D X-Ray diffraction structure of Dengue virus NS1 with
resolution of 3.00 Å was retrieved from the Protein Data Bank
(http://www.rcsb.org/pdb) using PDB ID: 4O6B. This section
presents the results obtained by docking of 2200 flavonoids
from all medicinal plants against Asn-130 glycosylation site of
NS1.

Molecular docking:
Ten different conformations for each flavonoid had been
provided by MOE. All these conformations were sorted
according to S score with minimum S score being the criteria
for the best conformation. Out of all the flavonoids used for
docking top 100 flavonoids with minimum S score were
selected for further Hydrogen bonding/π-π interactions.

Interaction analysis:
Out of 100 selected flavonoids used for interaction analysis
only 6 flavoniods ( Deoxycalyxin A, 3,5,7,3',4'-
pentahydroxyflavonol-3-O-beta-D-galactopyranoside, (3R)-
3',8-Dihydroxyvestitol, Sanggenon O, Epigallocatechin gallate
and Chamaejasmine ) have shown significant interactions with
Asn130 and bound deeply inside the binding pocket. Chemical
structures of selected flavonoids are shown in ().
Deoxycalyxin A ranked at top had potential interactions with
Asn130, His129, Lys85 and Asn76. Moreover, 3,5,7,3',4'-
pentahydroxyflavonol-3-O-beta-D-galactopyranoside which
was ranked next to Deoxycalyxin A had interacted strongly
with Asn130, His129 and Lys85 and (3R)-3',8-
Dihydroxyvestitol had also shown strong interactions with
Asn130, Ser80 of NS1. Sanggenon O, Epigallocatechin gallate
and Chamaejasmine had also shown to have potential
interactions with N-glycosylation site Asn-130 of NS1. Selected
flavonoids S score and Interacting residues of the NS1 with
flavonoids are shown in  (see supplementary
material). Interactions between receptor and ligands in 3D and
2D form are shown in (). Binding mode of ligands with
receptor protein is shown in (). Flavonoids have
shown strong interactions with Asn-130 glycosylation site of
DENV NS1 along with having minimum S Score. These results
elucidated that flavonoids could be strong drug candidates
against NS1.

Drug Scan:
Final selected flavonoid compounds were analyzed using the
Ligand properties checking tool of MOE which assessed the
molecular properties and practicability of these compounds of
being drug candidates on the basis of “Lipinski׳s Rule of Five”
[]. The rule describes molecular properties important for a
drug׳s pharmacokinetics in the human body, including their
absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion. These
compounds were examined for their drug-suitableness and the
results are shown in  (see supplementary material).
Our results showed that all the flavonoid compounds used in
this study fulfill the criteria of being drug candidates.

Discussion
Dengue infection has become a major medical concern for the
world now. Every year over 50 million people become a victim
of dengue and about 25000 lose the battle of life against this
fatal infection [,
].The causative agent of this life claiming
infection is a mosquito-borne flavivirus, DENV. The DENV has
a highly conserved nonstructural glycoprotein NS1. Previous
studies reflect that dengue victims who developed DHF rather
than DF have high concentrations of NS1 in their sera, which
indicates that the severity of DENV-infected patients depends
on the concentration of NS1 [,
]. NS1 contains three Nlinked
glycosylation sites located at ASN-130, Asn-175 and
Asn-207. NS1 is involved in replication and pathogenicity of
DENV [,
]. Asn-130 site plays a vital role in biological
activity of NS1. Different studies have shown that if we mutate
Asn-130 or block this site, DENV replication attenuated 
[,
,
,
,
]. Extensive researches have been performed to
develop vaccines against this infection but these efforts have
not proven successful till today. There is a need to design new
approaches to combat this viral infection []. Use of natural
pharmaceuticals like medicinal plants may prove an efficient
treatment for this unresolved medical problem []. Flavonoids
can play an important role in the cure of Dengue virus
infections []. For past few years, binding analyses of
compounds through in-silico techniques prior to their lab
manufacturing and examination has become a common and
useful practice among researchers. One of the popular
computational techniques used in medical researches is
molecular docking which is used to find the binding behaviors
of small molecules against their target proteins. This technique
proves helpful in providing a clear molecular vision of viral
genes and identification of novel inhibitory compounds
against fatal viral infections []. Therefore current study
exploits the fact that blocking of Asn-130 from NS1 inhibits
replication of DENV and anti-viral activity of flavonoids from
medicinal plants. 2200 flavonoids from 405 medicinal plants
have been docked against Asn-130 glycosylation site of NS1.
Flavonoids have strong interactions with Asn-130 of NS1.
Deoxycalyxin A not only interacts well with Asn130 but also
with His129, Lys85 and Asn76. Some other flavonoids also
show stable interactions at multiple residues of selected active
site of NS1. Strong binding of NS1 and flavonoids suggests a
strong possibility of flavonoids being used as drugs against
dengue virus.

Conclusion
Dengue, for more than a half century now, has been a major
health concern world widely with one third of the world׳s
population at the risk of this infection. Dengue has proven to
claim the lives of a million people yearly but no vaccine has
been successfully developed for this dreadful disease up till
now. It has now become inevitable to design new and novel
strategies for developing drug candidates that can target
DENV. Current study focuses on the assessment of flavonoids
from medicinal plants as drug candidates against NS1.
Molecular docking of flavonoids against NS1 has revealed
strong interactions between flavonoids (Deoxycalyxin A,
3,5,7,3',4'-pentahydroxyflavonol-3-O-beta-D- alactopyranoside,
(3R)-3',8-Dihydroxyvestitol, Sanggenon O, Epigallocatechin
gallate and Chamaejasmine ) and the Asn-130 glycosylation
site of NS1. The information acquired through this study on
the binding mode of flavonoids and NS1 will highly facilitate
the synthesis and testing of flavonoids as drugs against DENV.
On a concluding note, this study has suggested that flavonoids
will be strong future drug candidates against DENV.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Qamar et al, Bioinformation 10(7): 460-465 (2014)

Chemical structure of A) Deoxycalyxin A; B)
3,5,7,3',4'-pentahydroxyflavonol-3-O-beta-Dgalactopyranoside;
C) (3R)-3',8-Dihydroxyvestitol; D)
Sanggenon O; E) Epigallocatechin gallate; F) Chamaejasmin.

3D and 2D interaction images respectively 1A, 1B) Deoxycalyxin A interaction with DENV NS1 ; 2A, 2B) 3,5,7,3',4'-
pentahydroxyflavonol-3-O-beta-D-galactopyranoside interaction with DENV NS1; 3A, 3B) (3R)-3',8-Dihydroxyvestitol interaction
with DENV NS1 ; 4A, 4B) Sanggenon O interaction with DENV NS1 ; 5A, 5B) Epigallocatechin gallate interaction with DENV NS1 ;
6A, 6B) Chamaejasmin interaction with DENV NS1.

A) Docked Deoxycalyxin A complex with DENV NS1 pocket; B) Docked 3,5,7,3',4'-pentahydroxyflavonol-3-O-beta-Dgalactopyranoside
complex with DENV NS1 pocket; C) Docked (3R)-3',8-Dihydroxyvestitol complex with DENV NS1 pocket; D)
Docked Sanggenon O complex with DENV NS1 pocket ; E) Docked Epigallocatechin gallate complex with DENV NS1 pocket; F)
Docked Chamaejasmin complex with DENV NS1 pocket.

