Background
To detect changes in gene expression data from microarrays, a
threshold for fold difference has been used widely 
[–]. In this
approach, a small threshold value may cause many false
positives and this makes interpretation of results difficult.
Although dividing a number by a small number could result in
a large fold difference by chance, some truly differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) could be missed with a large threshold
value. In this way, it is not always guaranteed that a value
which is appropriate for highly expressed genes is suitable for
lowly expressed genes []. Some researchers have addressed
this problem. Rocke and Durbin have developed a model for
measurement error in expression data as a function of the
expression level []. They divide the total noise into additive
and proportional components and employ replicated
measurements to model the noises. They also apply the model
to compare expressions between conditions, but the expressions
are divided into only two levels. Colantuoni et al. (2002)
proposed a method for local variance correction, in which a
standard deviation (s.d.) was calculated locally across
expression levels []. 
Loots et al. (2006) developed a similar
method, in which fold differences between signal and control
are binned into groups according to the expression level and
local variation is calculated for each group 
[]. These methods
employ fold difference between control and signal.
Consequently, it is not always guaranteed that these can model
the additive and proportional noises correctly. There are some
other methods which estimate variation in
duplicated/replicated data. These are similar to the method
proposed here and are described later. In this study, aiming at
detecting true DEGs from a wide expression range, we propose
adaptive thresholds for fold difference. It employs two
measurements under the same condition to model the total
error and divides the data into some bins according to the
expression level. Based on local variance, upper and lower
thresholds are calculated in each bin. The minimum
requirement of the method is two measurements under the
same condition. The method is designed to detect DEGs from
small size data, in which there is a trade-off between
suppressing false positives and achieving perfect DEG
detection. This paper focuses on the former, namely a low false
discovery rate (FDR), because it makes interpretation of results
easier.

Methods which employ thresholds based on variations in
duplicates/replicates have been proposed. Tsien et al.
developed a method for evidence-based noise reduction 
[]. In
this method, a threshold is calculated to define a region of noise
inherent in the data. They assume that corresponding pairs
should have fold differences of 1.0. The method requires
duplicates, in which the operating conditions, etc., are exactly
controlled to be identical. Determination of the threshold
involves segmental calculation of the average and s.d. in each
segment. Then a candidate border point is determined as
(average) + (a constant value) X (s.d.). Based on the candidates,
a best-fit line/curve is calculated to define the border of the
identity region of insignificant fold changes. Draghici et al.
proposed a similar method, named a noise sampling method
(NS) [,
], 
based on an analysis of variance approach 
[,
].
The method employs replicate spots to estimate a distribution
of noise. The measured log ratio, log R(i, s), for gene i and spot s
is modeled as log R(i, s)=µ+G(i)+ε(i, s), where μ is the average
log ratio over the whole microarray, G (i) is a term for
differential regulation of i, and ε (i, s) is a noise term. Based on
the equation, we can calculate an empirical distribution of the
noise. In order to detect DEGs at a given confidence level, the
deviation from the mean of the distribution is calculated.
Bootstrapping is used to map the confidence level from the
noise distribution to the log ratio of expression.

Methodology
Algorithm
In the proposed method, thresholds which have different values
for different expression levels are calculated before comparing
expressions from different conditions. The adaptive threshold
method (AT) requires two measurements under the same
condition to evaluate local variations. First, the data are
normalized by the median. Second, a ratio of the expression in
the first measurement to the second is calculated for each gene.
The ratios are plotted against the logtransformed expression
levels in the first measurement. Then, the data are divided into
bins, whose width is d (d=0.2 in this study). In each bin, 50
genes are randomly selected and the maximum and minimum
ratios are determined. This process is repeated 50 times. The
upper and lower thresholds are determined based on a
confidence interval (CI) of the population mean of the 50
maximum and minimum ratios in the bin, respectively. The
lower threshold is calculated as (the lower limit of the CI of the
minimum ratios)/g, where g is a constant. The upper threshold
is (the upper limit of the CI of the maximum ratios)Xg. Thus
false positives are expected to be suppressed as g increases. The
thresholds are used to compare the control to signal data. If a
fold difference between the control and signal is smaller/larger
than the lower/upper threshold, the gene is considered down-
/up-regulated.

Simulations
The sensitivity, specificity and FDR of AT were investigated.
The performances of NS were also calculated using the same
data. The simulation data were constructed as follows. The
average of the 13 measurements from normal aged
hippocampus in GSE5281 []
(
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo) was used as the true value
for the control data, which is denoted as c. Each measurement
included 48403 probes. For the sake of simplicity, we assumed
that a measurement included expressions of 48403 genes. Both
additive and proportional noises were employed in the
simulation. A value ep from N (0, vp) was added to 1 and that
was used as the proportional noise. The additive noise, ea, was
generated from N (0, va). The expression value with the noises
was thus denoted as c (1+ ep) + ea. Among the 48403 probes,
500 were randomly selected as up-regulated genes and another
500 as down-regulated. The effects of up-/down-regulation
were represented with random values from N (4, 0.8)/N (-4,
0.8), respectively. After the true values, c, of the regulated genes
were natural logarithmical transformed, the random values
were added to the transformed values. Then, the noises were
applied in the same manner to the control data. The first
simulation investigated the effect of noises on the performance.
In AT g=2 was used while the confidence level in NS was
99.5%. The variances of noises, (va, vp), examined were (0.01,
0), (0.01, 0.05), (0.01, 0.1), (1, 0), (1, 0.05), (1, 0.1), (10, 0), (10,
0.05), (10, 0.1), (20, 0), (20, 0.05), (20, 0.1), (50, 0), (50, 0.05) and
(50, 0.1). The adaptive thresholds were calculated based on two
control measurements. In NS, the noise distribution was
obtained using the same data. Ten different realizations of the
regulated data were generated. These steps were repeated 10
times with different sets of control data and thus 100 trials were
performed in total. The sensitivity, specificity and FDR were
evaluated under each noise condition. The definition of FDR is
FDR=E [F/ (F+T)], where F and T are the numbers of the false
and true positives and E [] denotes an expected value 
[]. The
second simulation compared receiver operating characteristic
(ROC) curves among AT, NS and the fixed threshold. We
investigated g between 1 and 7 in AT, confidence levels
between 99.0 and 99.98% in NS and fixed thresholds between 2
and 20. The variances va and vp were fixed at 20 and 0.05,
respectively, because this combination best reproduced the
average and s.d. in the bins of GSE5281.

Results and Discussion
A typical distribution of the ratios between two control
measurements (va=20, vp=0.05) is shown in 
. The
figure also shows the upper and lower adaptive thresholds
(solid lines) and the confidence levels in NS (dashed lines). A
dot represents the ratio of a gene and the vertical, dashed lines
indicate the bins. Less than 0.5% of the 48403 genes were greater
than the upper adaptive threshold while almost no genes were
smaller than the lower boundaries of AT and NS. The upper
confidence level of NS was smaller than the upper adaptive
threshold. Accordingly, more genes were greater than the
upper confidence level. The relationship between the
expression level and the number of false detections was
investigated (). There were many false positives in a
low expression range (&lt;0). The upper adaptive threshold
steeply changed around this range () and this
contributed for suppressing false positives. The upper
confidence level in NS also changed in this range. However, it
was smaller than the upper adaptive threshold and therefore,
more false detections occurred. This explains a larger FDR with
NS.  compares the shapes of the adaptive thresholds
obtained under (0.01, 0), (0.01, 0.1), (20, 0) and (20, 0.1). When
the noises were (0.01, 0), the thresholds were almost constant
for all expression levels. Without the noises, g=2 corresponds to
a fixed threshold of 2 whereas the upper and lower confidence
levels in NS were 1. The thresholds under (20, 0) indicate that
the additive noise had minor influence on highly expressed
genes. The influence of the proportional noise appeared to be
large for all levels because the upper and lower thresholds were
similar under (0.01, 0.1) and (20, 0.1). In this way, the shape of
the adaptive thresholds varies according to va and vp,
demonstrating that the method can model both additive and
proportional noises.

Table 1 (see ) summarizes
relationships between the noise variances and the
performances. The numbers represent the average±s.d. over the
100 trials. The sensitivity became lower for larger noises and the
sensitivities of AT and NS were comparable to each other
(). 
The influence of the noises was weaker for the
specificity and it was greater than 99.3% for AT while it was
about 99% for NS (Table 1b). 
The specificity greater than 99.3%
leads to a smaller FDR in AT (Table 1c). 
, which
compares the ROC curves, indicates that AT achieved the best
performance among the three. AT was developed by expanding
a fixed threshold so that local variations are considered in
calculation of thresholds. This is the reason for employing a
parameter g, which makes it easier to adjust the width between
the upper and lower thresholds. A wider width is a key feature
to suppress false positives. Tsien et al., (2002) proposed a similar
threshold method, in which a certain noise distribution is
assumed []. 
In contrast, AT and NS assume no distribution
and accordingly, these are more flexible.

Conclusion
In this study, aiming at detecting true DEGs from a wide
expression range, we proposed an adaptive threshold method.
Simulations were conducted to investigate the performance of
the method. The sensitivity and specificity under various noise
conditions were greater than 89.7% and 99.3%, respectively. The
method achieved a low FDR, indicating that it can suppress
false positives and make the interpretation of results easier. The
minimum requirement of the method is two measurements,
under the same condition, and it is applicable to small size data.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This study was in part supported by a grant from Kitasato
University School of Allied Health Sciences (No. 2007-10014) to
H. Inaoka and a scientific research grant from the Ministry of
Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan
(#20510184) to Y. Fukuoka.

Citation:Fukuoka et al Bioinformation 7(1): 33 - 37 (2011)

Simulation results with g=2 in the adaptive threshold
method and the confidence level of 99.5% in the noise sampling
method. a) An example of distribution of the ratio between the
two control measurements and the upper and lower adaptive
thresholds (solid lines). The upper and lower confidence levels
in the noise sampling method were also displayed (dashed
lines). The variances of the additive and proportional noises
were 0.05 and 20, respectively. A dot represents a ratio of the
two expression values of a gene. The bins used to calculate the
adaptive thresholds are illustrated by the dashed lines. Only
few genes were greater/lower than the upper/lower adaptive
thresholds. b) The upper and lower thresholds obtained with
different noise conditions: (0.01, 0), (0.01, 0.1), (20, 0) and (20,
0.1). c) The ROC curves for the three methods. The horizontal
and vertical axes represent the false and true positive rates,
respectively. The false positive rate equals to 1-(specificity),
while the true positive rate is equivalent with the sensitivity.

The number of false detections for different expression
levels: a) the adaptive threshold method and b) the noise
sampling method. The horizontal axis represents the logtransformed,
normalized expression level while the vertical axis
indicates the number of false detections. Each mark represents
the number of false positives (FP) and negatives (FN) in the bins
shown in . FN down/up represents the number of FN
for down-/up-regulated genes.

