Background
The protein-protein interaction (PPI) data provide a powerful
representation for discerning organization of cells besides
predicting biological functions and providing insight into a
variety of biochemical processes []. In the recent-past, there has
been a twofold increase of the PPI data using protein interaction
networks (PIN) while several advanced methods [] connecting
orthology mapping and comparative approaches have come up
to analyze and visualize proteins. These approaches aid
bioinformatical algorithms to discover families of proteins that
have shared functional modules. However, bioinformatical
methods stated as above are usually applicable when the
protein has known functional relationship and not for those
proteins like ‘predicted’ or ‘similar to’ or ‘hypothetical’. On the
other hand, significant experimental efforts have allowed us to
analyze the interactions of known proteins in various
organisms. The interactomes established so far represent
proteins corresponding to various organisms and sometimes
organelles. With high-throughput data still limited for the
human proteome, genome-wide approaches have been used to
elucidate the human interactome. However, assuming that
functional protein interactions are conserved in evolution, one
can consider extending the experimentally determined human
protein interaction network by using data from protein
interaction data-sets of the model organisms. Transferring the
information from known interaction networks to the unknown
have been accomplished [] further requiring identification of
genes that have a common ancestor and therefore share the
same function between the orthologs. In addition, web-based
databases such as String (http://www.string.embl.de) contain
several thousands of predicted interactions which are
assembled by mapping interactions from model organism to
various orthologs using sequence similarity searches, bidirectional
and reciprocal best hit approaches. All the inferred
interactions work on either one or two methods which contains
lots of false positive data. Hence there remains a challenge to
develop efficient tools to predict and accurately define function
to the hypothetical proteins.

The orthology mapping poses a great challenge as many known
HPs remain un-annotated even after being ‘mapped to’ or
'associated' with certain known proteins. For example, a HP
queried using a visualizer Osprey [] would still be shown as a
grey node (meaning unknown) and therefore remain
unsupported. In addition, there is a challenge in analyzing huge
data-sets of HPs as flow of operations are to be executed
simultaneously for better protein annotation. Thanks to the
Cloud architecture [], the work is made simple with the data
mapped into reduced phase. The reduced phases combine all
the outcomes from the multiple nodes into a single outcome.
Further, such learning algorithms can be implemented over
multiple nodes on map-reduce framework. The data thus
analysed can then be used to validate each parameter and
further statistical analysis might be employed to validate the
results. To overcome this, we have employed a six-point
classification schema based on some set of features. Our
classification was employed on a subset of 20 HPs that have
been randomly considered from a group of 1455 HPs []. In
employing the classification system, we ideate bona fide protein
interactions can be determined making sensitive Protein
Interaction Networks (PIN).

Methodology
Six-point Classification:
Each classification is a measure of different methods, viz. Pfam
score, orthology inference, functional linkages, back to back
orthology for protein interactants, subcellular location and
protein associations taken from known databases and
visualizers. Each protein is given a value of 1 if the protein
matches the classifier; else 0 is given against them. The
annotation scores, based on the features are available in (
, see supplementary material).

Classification 1: Pfam identities:
Score:
Best Pfam scores are given as per the assignment
returned by Pfam []. The Pfam-B is given value 0 and Pfam-A
is given value 1.

Principle:
The underlying principle is that the presence of
domains in varying combinations in different proteins tends to
provide insights into the function of the protein. The Pfam,
represented by multiple sequence alignments and Hidden
Markov Models (HMMs) classifies the query into Pfam-A and
Pfam-B. While the Pfam-A are curated and built from the seed
alignment, the Pfam-B are lower quality sequences generated
automatically from electronic annotation using the nonredundant
clusters.

Classification 2: Orthology mapping:
Score:
E value &lt;1 were given a score of 1, else 0

Principle:
The ortholog proteins often retain similar functions,
so a pair of orthologs that interacts in subject organism is likely
to interact in target organism too (putative interactions in other
organisms are called interologs). The protein sequences were
blasted against the Arabidopsis thaliana and Non Redundant
(NR) databases. Besides these, other organisms were also
targeted towards hot spots for functional linkages. We
transferred the information of the ortholog data to Arabidopsis
thaliana, and mapped them to functional linkages.

Classification 3: Functional linkages using protein interactions and associations:
Score:
If there is an association or linkage found through
Rosetta stone method, a score of 1 is given, else 0.

Principle:
A protein Navigator tool [] to check orthology pairs
was used to predict the functional linkages linked to them: 1.
Rosetta stone method [] works on a rationale that two
polypeptides X and Y in one organism are likely to interact if
their homologs are expressed as a single polypeptide XY (which
is called as a Rosetta Stone) in another organism. It is also likely
that some proteins might be functionally represented as
pathways or chemicals or simply in GO database. 2. Gene
fusion method [] works on the theory that pairs of monomeric
proteins fused in other organisms tend to be functionally
related or physically interacted. 3. Gene neighbours method
works on the assumption that the operons of one organism may
be conserved across other organisms.

Classification 4: Back to back orthology:
Score:
The associators or interactors found in classifier 3 are
searched in query organism, if found distinctively and are
correlated a score of 1 is given; 0, if absent.

Principle:
The interaction is linked only if the interactant
ortholog is present in the query organism too. This is similar to
the bi directional best blast hits.

Classification 5: Presence of sorting signals and localization to the same organelle:
Score:
If localized to the same organelle, 1 else 0.

Principle:
An approximate 50% of interactions are between the
same organelle and rarely do we find transmembrane
interactions. If the proteins are predicted to be localized to
different organelle, the perchance of protein interacting to the
query would be less. TargetP [] was used to employ the
subcellular location classifier.

Classification 6: Presence of interactors (available through databases and visualizers):
Score:
1 and 0 for presence and absence respectively

Principle:
The experimentally confirmed interacting pairs are
documented in databases like Database of Interacting Proteins
(DIP) [], MINT 
[], IntAct 
[], thebiogrid.org 
[] which
finally are visualized using cytoscape [] and Osprey 
[]. The
classification 3 developed on the assumption that there is
presence of RS sequences is based on the presence of interacting
partners from existing databases and those that we visualized
using Osprey.

Total Reliability Score (TRS):
The total reliability score (TRS) is summation of all the scores
employed for all the six classifiers. If the value exceeded 3, then
we believe that the candidate is likely to have a probable
interacting partner. The first five classifiers, viz. Pfam score,
orthology inference, functional linkages, back to back orthology
for protein interactants, subcellular location are based on the
manual annotation and prediction that we have employed
while the protein associations/interactions are based on the
existence of known protein interactors. A scoring schema
similar to phylogenetic profiling of 0 and 1 for absence and
presence of genes respectively in an organism was employed to
make the PIN sensitive. These scoring patterns are applicable
either when annotation is transferred to another organism or
when the protein is waiting to be annotated. However, the fact
that the use of six classifiers makes this method more stringent,
the scores are averaged into two sections, viz. the 1+2+3
classifiers and 4+5+6 classifiers and an over all, TRS summing
them. In employing these scoring patterns, we ideate that the
sensitivity of the proteins based on any three or more methods
can give better results.

Evaluation of classification:
To circumvent the problem of protein annotation on current
dataset, we further evaluated the classification scores with
single node through learning algorithms J48 (a version of C4.5
decision tree), SMO (a version of Support Vector Machine),
Naive Bayesian, and Multilayer Perceptron (a version of Neural
Network) and 22 learning algorithms [–]. We implemented
WEKA machine learning package [] (Version 3.6.4) on Cloud
with a single node. The data-set containing the proteins over
six-point classification scores was further modeled through
learning algorithms with ten-fold cross validation scheme
(, see supplementary material).

Statistical analysis using Anova and Kruskalwallis:
We statistically interpreted the six-point classification metrics
further using MATLAB [] (Version 7.11 on a Windows 7
desktop). We finally tested the matrix (protein and six-point
classifiers) using one-way analysis of variance (Anova) and
Kruskalwallis methods.

Discussion
The classification scoring schema from the TRS was employed
on the test dataset (, see supplementary material). The
permutations and combinations of the dataset gave a valid
protein interaction networks. For example, when the classifier 3,
viz. functional linkages and classifier 6 were analyzed, only 4 of
the 20 turned out to be Rosetta Stone sequences, making a
putative and novel protein interaction map (). We
observe that the protein NP_057673.2, a mitochondrial protein
is known to interact with AAM10026.1 suggesting that they
make a bona fide interaction pairing. Further, we evaluated the
classification scoring system using machine learning algorithms
and statistical interpretation suggesting the fact that the
subcellular location (sorting signals) make a very good impact
amongst all classification features. These results demonstrate
that the six-point classification scheme is capable of yielding an
ultimate TRS which is capable of interpreting PIN. From 
, 
we get the best accuracies through data methods: ALL (MLP:
81.08), Split (MLP: 76.92); CFS (RandomTree: 67.57), PCA (MLP:
81.08), SVM (MLP: 78.38) using different approaches (as
mentioned in Columns 2-6). Feature selected through InfoGain,
ChiSquare &amp; Probabilistic Significane and modeled by Smo-
PolyKernal algorithm yielded similar accuracy of 78.38. The
highest among all data methods and algorithms is ALL::
MLP::81.08. This means all six classifiers scheme are required in
accurate modeling of TRS. Further we derived best data subsets
from six classification schemes by choosing top score from
all combination using Hill Climbing method []. 
 (see
supplementary material) illustrates that all subset combination
method “0 1 2 3 4 5” by MLP (81.081) and Hill selected data sub
set “4 0” by MLP (78.378) are the best accuracies by these
methods. This further adds to the confidence that all the six
classification schemes helps better modeling of TRS compared
to the sub sets. From the statistical interpretation, we used a
matrix; whose rows are proteins and columns are different
classifiers (, see supplementary material) and observed
that the function returns the p-value after transforming 37-2
degree of freedom. Covariance test further revealed that the
data is unbiased in the covariance matrix, forming a normal
distribution (, see supplementary material). The
statistical results indicate that the six-point classifiers are
uniformly useful in modeling TRS as evident from the scores
(Anova = 8.0645e-031; kruskalwallis= 6.3123e-011; 
( and 
). This adds to our confidence that having such
classification schema is valid and could be extended to protein
annotation using cloud architecture, if the dataset is larger.
However, in order to overcome the impact of ranking all
classifiers, we propose either unimposing a specific classifier or
employing all classifiers. Disregarding any of the classifiers will
yield less score for which we propose yet another classifier
based on the total number of possible pairwise interactions and
degree of paralogy for the fact that paralogy increases the
number of possible interactions thereby decreasing the certainty
of the prediction. The bottom line in this proposed classification
is that higher the TRS, greater is the chance of the protein to be
interacting and more reliable the functional linkage.

Conclusions
A six-point classification system is proposed to solve the
problem of hypothetical protein annotation with respect to
interaction networks. In this work, by employing our
classification schema, we have shown an example taking a
protein NP_057673.2 that is known to be localized to
mitochondria. The functional linkages through Arabidopsis
thaliana indicate that the protein is a Rosetta Stone sequence
with AAM10026.1 and the fact that the protein has already been
shown to be interacting with HGS (ZFYVE8) makes
promiscuous interaction (, see supplementary
material). We believe with a variety of statistical interpretation
that we put forth, our in silico selection strategy can be used to
select the most promising candidates from a PIN. Further the
cloud computing resources employed were quite useful in
validating accuracies on TRS modeling through multiple
algorithms and data sub-sets.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Sundararajan VS got funding from a project “User Domain
Driven Data Analytics Service Framework”, A-Star, Singapore.
Scientific comments from Claus Desler and Lene Juel
Rasmussen is greatly acknowledged

Citation:Suravajhala &amp; Sundararajan, Bioinformation 8(1): 034-039 (2012)

A more reliable protein-protein interaction map for
protein accession, NP_057673.2 based on the functional
linkages.

Outcome of Anova on six-point classifiers using
MATLAB. X-axis shows 1-6 classification schemes and TRS
while Y-axis shows values corresponding to them.

Outcome of Kruskal_Wallis on six-point classifiers
using MATLAB. X-axis shows 1-6 classification schemes and
TRS while Y-axis shows values corresponding to them.

