Background
Platyhelminthes are among the most phylogenetically basal
group of bilateral animals [,
]. Although, with the increased
used of molecular methods there has been an explosive interest
in the systematics of Platyhelminthes. Molecular systematic
methods have also been used to assess relationships within
Platyhelminthes [–]. 18S and ITS 1 ribosomal DNA
sequences evidence was frequently used for assessing the
phylogeny of monogenean parasites [–]. During our survey
of freshwater fish fauna for monogenean infection,
Dactylogyroides longicirrus [–] was found to be infected, gill
filaments of host fish Puntius sophore from river Brahmaputra at
the site Guwahati, Assam, India. Currently, due to the lack of
parasite surveys only a little bit is known of the monogenean
fauna from this region of India. Although, identification of
Dactylogyroides longicirrus [–] was sufficient earlier using
morphological features but the present study, based on a
combination of molecular biology in addition to secondary
structure prediction reported here to determining the
phylogenetic analysis of this parasite.

Methodology
Sampling site, Host and Parasites:
Brahmaputra River enters India and further continues its
journey to the Bay of Bengal through Bangladesh. During a
survey, host species, Puntius sophore was caught from the river
Brahmaputra at the site Guwahati (26°11'N and 91°44'E)
(). Immediately after capture, the fish were killed by a
sharp blow on the top of the head and dissected. Monogeneans
were collected from the gills according to the method suggested
by Malmberg []. This parasites were identified with the help
of morphology of the haptoral hard parts and copulatory
complex (). Study of morphology of hard parts were
analyzed as described by Malmberg []. The slides have been
deposited in the museum of the Department of Zoology
(voucher number HS/onogenea/2012/12), Chaudhary
Charan Singh University, Meerut (U.P.), India.

Amplification, sequencing and phylogenetic analysis:
The ribosomal DNA of parasite was extracted using DNeasy
Tissue Kit (Qiagen). The purified DNA obtained was
suspended in buffer and stored -200C. The PCR amplification of
18S and ITS 1 ribosomal RNA gene was carried out by
specifically designed primer, (forward, 5'-
CGGTTGCAATTTTTATGTGG-3') and (reverse, 5'-
GAGTGATCCACCACTTGCAG-3'). Reaction was performed in
final 25 µl volume containing 3 µl of lysate, 10 X polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) buffer, 1 unit of Taq polymerase (Biotools,
Madrid, Spain), 0.4mM dNTP and 10 pM of each primer pair.
PCR products were examined on 1.5% agarose–TBE (Trisborate-
EDTA) gels, stained with ethidium bromide and
visualized under ultraviolet light. Amplification products were
purified by a Chromous PCR clean up kit (#PCR 10, Chromous
Biotech, Bangalore, India). Gel-purified PCR products were
sequenced using a Big Dye Terminator version 3.1 cycle
sequencing kit in ABI 3130 genetic analyser (Applied
Biosystems) with the same primers. The closely related
homologous sequences were identified by comparing the 18S
and ITS 1 rRNA gene sequence of D. longicirrus with the
monogenean sequences available at NCBI. ClustalW2 
[] was
used to align all sequences with default settings. Phylogenetic
trees were reconstructed using MEGA version 5 
[].
Phylogenetic analysis was performed based on neighbourjoining
(NJ) and maximum-parsimony (MP) methods. In
reconstructing the NJ tree, the Kimura two-parameter model
[] was used to estimate the distances.

Prediction of secondary structure and analysis:
An RNA secondary structure was predicted by using Mfold
[]. The inferred structure was subsequently examined for
stems, loops and bulges. GC content is known to influence
structural energy, since GC percentage was determined using a
GC calculator. Energy levels of presumptive secondary
structures were then calculated with Mfold [,
].

Nucleotide accession number:
The 18S and ITS 1 rRNA sequence of the parasite was deposited
as GenBank ID: KC685371.

Results
Molecular characterization:
The 18S and ITS 1 rDNA sequence of D. longicirrus in BLAST
analysis showed 97% maximum similarity with the sequences
of species of genus Dactylogyrus available at NCBI. Phylogenetic
relationship of the species D. longicirrus and related taxa are
given in figure ( &amp; ). Phylogenetic analysis using the
various methods like neighbour-joining (NJ) and maximumparsimony
(MP) showed that the topology is similar among the
trees obtained ( &amp; ). The analysis revealed a close
relationship of D. longicirrus with isolates of genus Dactylogyrus
because the genus Dactylogyroides was originally differentiated
by Gussev [] from Dactylogyrus including the species i.e.,
Dactylogyroides longicirrus from India. Although, 28S rDNA
partial sequence of the D. longicirrus was submitted to the
GenBank under the accession no. GU903482. However, this
analysis showed the first 18S and ITS 1 sequence for any species
of the genus Dactylogyroides but to further strengthen the
validation of species of genus Dactylogyroides more data is
required from different species under this genus for
comparative analysis.

Secondary structure analysis:
Secondary structure was reconstructed from the 18S and ITS 1
sequence with highest negative free energy ΔG= -290.40
Kcal/mol of D. longicirrus to provide the basic information for
phylogenetic analysis (). The secondary structural
features of 18S and ITS 1 region as shown in the figure were
analyzed based on conserved stems and loops. In the structure
of D. longicirrus the orders of preference of loops in their
number were interior loop, hairpin loop, bulge loop, multi loop
and exterior loop (). The stems stabilize RNA secondary
structure and the different features of the structure are: G+C
content (%) = 51.8; number of GC = 382; AU = 356 and GU =
381. The Energy dot plot () represents the superposition
of all possible folding and the different colors are used to
indicate varying levels of sub optimality. The ss-count 
() showed the propensity of a base to be single stranded, and in
a group of predicted folding measured by the number of times
it is single stranded. The topology based only on the predicted
RNA secondary structure of the 18S and ITS 1 region would
help in future studies to resolve most relationships among the
different species of this genus studied.

Discussion
Traditionally, monogenean classification was based, to a large
extent, on the morphology of the sclerotized components of the
haptoral parts. PCR technology and DNA sequencing
techniques permit the identification of species more easily. The
analysis of 18S and ITS 1 rRNA gene sequence has also revealed
that the D. longicirrus showed 97% similarity with the closely
related species of the genus Dactylogyrus. The present study,
inferred from 18S and ITS 1 rDNA data depicted that
Dactylogyroides and Dactylogyrus as genetically closely related
sister taxa. Therefore, based on the molecular results, the
investigator proposed that, the species D. longicirrus was
correctly transferred in the genus Dactylogyroides by Gusev 
[].
This study further indicated that molecular markers such as
rDNA is useful for distinguishing sister genera or species. It
may be helpful in discriminating species especially when
morphological differences are often difficult to determine.
Investigators also believes that such taxonomic revisions based
on molecular biology will continue with the increasing number
of species being used for molecular phylogenetic investigations
in the future. To the best of my knowledge, there has been no
such previous 18S and ITS 1 sequence of this species and even
this genus on GenBank database.

In phylogenetic studies, the molecules measurable structural
parameters are used directly as specific characters to construct a
phylogenetic tree. These structures are inferred from the
sequence of the nucleotides, often using energy minimization
[]. 
In the study of phylogenetics, only the size variations of
homologous structural segments are considered, whereas
molecular morphometrics infers the folding pattern of RNA
molecule. RNA secondary-structure models add significant
dimensions to our understanding of the relationships among
the sequence features and structural parameters that come into
play in determining the structural energy. Therefore, structural
model-based analyses of DNA sequence data have become
increasingly important for phylogenetic inference.
Incorporating secondary structure information will allow
improved estimates of phylogeny among several
Dactylogyroides species based on 18S and ITS 1 rDNA evidence
in future studies. Extension of these molecular data, in the
number of species should allow molecular systematics to
continue to make a significant contribution to elucidate the
phylogeny of these fascinating organisms.

Special thanks to the Department of Zoology, Ch. C. S.
University, for resources. We are thankful to Prof. Umesh C.
Goswami, Department of Zoology, Guwahati University,
Guwahati, Assam, India, as the identification of the hosts was
kindly confirmed (from specimens) by him.

Citation:Chiary et al, Bioinformation 9(5): 250-254 (2013)

Location of river Brahmaputra in Assam, Guwahati
and its course through India.

Morphology of D. longicirrus (Tripathi, 1959) Gusev,
1976 A. copulatory complex; B. Egg; C. Haptoral armature.

Phylogeny of 18S and ITS 1 rDNA of D. longicirrus
(Tripathi, 1959) Gusev, 1976 obtained by Neighbour joining
(NJ).

Phylogeny of 18S and ITS 1 rDNA of D. longicirrus
(Tripathi, 1959) Gusev, 1976 obtained by maximum parsimony
(MP). The scale bar indicates the proportion of the sites
changing along the each branch.

Schematic representation of 18S and ITS 1 rRNA
predicted secondary structure for D. longicirrus (Tripathi, 1959)
Gusev, 1976 reported from India. The base pairs in green
showed arrangement of 18S sequence whereas base pairs in
black showed ITS 1 region.

Distribution of different type of loops in the 18S and
ITS 1 region of D. longicirrus (Tripathi, 1959) Gusev, 1976.

The corresponding energy dot plot for the annotated
structure plot showed in the figure for D. longicirrus (Tripathi,
1959) Gusev, 1976.

The figure showed the ss-count, it is included to
assume the expected probability for each base of being singlestranded.

