Background
Transcription factor (TF), termed as the major regulator of tissue and environment specific gene expression, binds to sequence specific sites in the 
regulatory region to control the transcription of its target gene. Extensive efforts have been made in developing statistical methods to describe DNA 
binding specificity of transcription factors [–] based on known transcription factors and their binding sites [,]. Early in the 1980s, Gary D. Stormo [] 
proposed the widely used Position Weight Matrix (PWM) model to characterize the binding preference, which rests on the main assumption that the probability 
of any nucleotide that occurs at a certain position of the binding site is independent of those occurring at all other positions. However, this assumption 
of independency remains disputed in some circumstances. Recent work demonstrated the necessity of the inner dependency among nucleotide positions [,] 
and employed new methods to capture the inner dependency [,,], such as the Bayesian Network Model [], serving as a more natural approach to uncover 
the substance of transcription factor binding site (TFBS).

Given the model which characterizes DNA binding preference, we can perform a genome-wide scan to identify putative TFBSa. Each putative TFBS will be 
assigned a score by a certain score scheme to evaluate the binding potential. But it remains a challenge since controlling the false positive/negative 
prediction is urgently needed in performing such a scan, especially for eukaryotic genomes where binding sites appear in extremely long intergenic regions. 
Calculating statistical significance of these scores provides a conventional method to reduce errors in prediction. Formally, for a statistical model M to 
predict TFBS of the fixed length L, the p-value of a putative binding site with score S is calculated using equation (1) (given in ).

A simple idea is to exhaustingly enumerate the total nucleotide sequences with length of L, named as the sequence set hereinafter. Unfortunately, this naive 
method takes a time complexity of O(4L), an undesirable task when L is larger than 10. In 2005, Barash Y. improve this naïve method by introducing importance 
sampling technique []. However, due to the nature of the sampling technique, it produces an approximate result rather than an accurate solution.


To overcome the time complexity raised by directly enumerating the sequence set, we turn to enumerate the total scores, named as the score set hereinafter, 
of all possible nucleotide sequences with length of L. It is a compressed set much smaller than the sequence set since an element of the score set may have 
several mappings into the sequence set, that is to say, some different sequences often have the same score. Based on this idea, in this contribution, we propose 
an accurate solution with time complexity of O(4xLxΩ)&lt;&lt;4L to calculate p-values, where Ω is a constant about 104.

Methodology
Consider a binding site R = R1R2…Rl…RL with L nucleotides, where LϵZ+. Obviously, each site Rl could be any one of the four nucleotides ‘A’, ‘C’, ‘G’ and ‘T’, 
where 1≤l≤L, lϵZ+. And, the probability of Rl being ‘A’ is denoted as p(l, Rl = ‘A’). Generally, the nucleotide selecting preference of binding sites R can be 
expressed in terms of probability matrix, using equation (2) in . 

The independency assumption is not always reliable as it is common that a single amino acid residue contacts with more than one nucleotide and vice versa. 
So, to some extent, a nucleotide Rl is correlated with other nucleotides. In this case, the probability of Rl being ‘A’ is expressed in terms of the conditional 
probability using equation (3) (under ).

Generally, a more reasonable statistical model for describing the nucleotide selection preference of transcription factor DNA binding sites can be denoted 
as in equation (4) (shown in ).

Next we scan regulatory regions followed by assigning each sites a score in the light of the following score scheme, by using formula (5) (given in 
).

Then potential TFBS, R, can be identified according to the score cutoff, where binding sites with scores larger than the threshold or with adequate 
statistical significance are considered as potential TFBSs. Calculating the statistical significance, usually known as the p-value, is a conventional 
way to define cutoffs. Since the null-distribution of total scores is known, the p-value of any potential TFBS can be easily obtained according to 
equation (1) (). Therefore, our task is to offer an effective and accurate solution for calculating the null-distribution of all scores, which is regarded 
as the prerequisite to p-values.

Assume that the sequence set is composed of all short nucleotide sequence with length of L, denoted as in equation (6) shown in the .

Intuitively, the size of SL is smaller than RL, since some of the different sequences in Rl result the identical score in SL. Hence, enumerating 
set SL can be much more efficient than enumerating RL, leading to considerable reduction of computation time. In fact, our improvement in time economy 
goes far beyond this extent. Since the exact size of Sl contributes remarkably to the efficiency of our method as we mention above, how we control this 
factor is of great importance. Here we estimate that the size of Sl, is less than 10m+n, where m, nϵZ+ are parameters that represent the count of effective 
digits of S(Rl), S(Rl) ϵSl,l=1, 2…,L before the decimal point and behind the decimal point respectively (equation (4) see ). Here, we 
summarize our method into pseudo codes presented in .

Results
The dataset of all our computational experiments is taken from the database JASPAR [], including matrices that describe transcription factor DNA binding 
preference as well as their corresponding DNA binding sites. All the calculations were performed in a Dell Optiplex 270 machine, which has an 
Intel(R) Pentium(R) 4 CPU of 2.60GHz and 1.5GB RAM. 

Selecting the optimal parameter
As we discussed in the method section, the adjustable parameter c, affects the size of score sets, and therefore affects the operation time greatly, 
where c = m+n, cϵZ+ and m, nϵZ+ represent the count of effective digits before the decimal point and behind the decimal point respectively of elements in 
score sets. We must find the optimal value of c so as to determine the upper limit of time complexity of our algorithm O(Lx10c). In our computational experiments, 
transcription factor DNA binding sites with various lengths in database JASPAR were used to compute the p-values and the result shows that c=4 is already good enough 
for calculating p-values even when the p-value is more strict than 10-5.

Comparison among different scoring schemes
As we mentioned in the introduction, p-value calculation is also dependent on scoring schemes (see equation (1) in supplementary material). Many researchers proposed 
their own scoring schemes [,,], 
and whether different scoring schemes lead to different results of p-values has become of great interest to researchers. Authors of 
software package MATCH, proposed an information theory based method for calculating scores for potential TFBSs is shown in equation (7) under .


How it outperforms the conventional cumulative probability based scoring scheme is given in equation (8) (see ).

Here we adopt two different score schemes to calculate the TFBSs from database JASPAR. The result shows there is no significant difference between each other in 
.

Besides, according to the p-value distribution in , we found that most of these p-values are around 10-4, thereby supplying a reference point for credible 
p-values to transcription factor binding sites. 

P-values serve as a better criterion to identify TFBS than the raw scores do
In previous sections, we repeatedly mentioned that adopting p-value as a conventional way to define cutoffs for distinguishing the true TFBS from its background 
sequences. Why bother to do so rather than simply adopting raw scores directly obtained from scoring schemes, as showed in formula 5, 7 and 8 (under ), 
to define the cutoff? Another computational experiment gives a credible explanation to this question. We collected the true TFBS from database JASPAR as the positive 
dataset, and some DNA sequence with the same length of those TFBSs from genome background as negative control. We calculated raw scores as well as p-values of the type 
data. As results shown in , there is a blurred part between the true TFBS and the genome background when we adopt raw scores to distinguish them, whereas there 
is a sharp distinction between true TFBSs and genomic background when we adopt p-values. It is the blurred part that is very likely to cause the error in the identification. 
Therefore, we are able to conclude that p-values serve as a better criterion to identify TFBS than the raw scores do.

Discussion
Various statistical models have been developed to describe the transcription factor DNA binding preference, by which we identify putative transcription factor binding 
sites according to scores assigned. Statistical significance of these scores play a critical role in assessing the efficiency of prediction. We developed an efficient 
algorithm to provide precise calculation of the statistical significance. With regards to the time efficiency of our algorithm, our major improvement rests on two key points. 
First, by calculating the scores of the overlapping part of sequences foremost, we reduced the total time consumption considerably. Further, instead of enumerating elements 
in the sequence set, we performed our calculations with the more compressed score sets, thus we skillfully convert the time complexity of being a exponent in relation to 
TFBS length L to that of a linear relation with L, which is a remarkable improvement. 

Moreover, since our algorithm is generally based on the enumerating approach, the p-value calculated by our method is a precise solution, different from the result of 
the sampling method, which is the approximate solution due to the nature of sampling strategy.

Beside the speediness and preciseness of this algorithm, another positive point lies in its applicability. As an alternative to Probability-Generating-Function-based 
methods, such as Staden's [] and Huang's methods [], 
our method can be applied not only to the context of  independent identical distribution of relevant nucleotides, 
like PWM models, but also to Bayesian Network models. In all, table 1 under  summarizes the properties of our method compared with others.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The pseudo code of our method

Comparison of p-values obtained based on different scoring schemes. The vertical axis in this figure depicts the −log(p-value) 
and the horizontal axis of left two sub graphs depicts length of TFBS, while the horizontal axis of two sub-graphs (right) depicts the 
frequency of different p-values. Each point in the two left sub-graphs represents the log of p-value corresponding to a certain TFBS. 
The two right sub-graphs are the distribution of p-values by accumulating probability and MATCH score scheme. Although different scoring 
schemes were used, p-value distributions not very different.

p-value is better than the raw score for identifying TFBS. The vertical axis of the two upper sub-graphs depicts 
the −log(p-value), while the vertical axis of the two lower sub-graphs depicts the raw score directly obtained from scoring schemes. The 
horizontal axis in all sub-graphs depicts the various lengths of TFBS. The blue dots represent p-values of true TFBSs provided by JASPAR 
whereas red dots represent p-values of DNA sequence fragments of various lengths from genome background. According to the two upper sub-graphs, 
there is a sharp distinction between true TFBSs and genomic background for both the cumulative probability based scoring scheme and the MATCH 
scoring scheme. However, in the two lower sub-graphs, blue dots and red dots appear fused together, indicating that raw scores are not 
appropriately used as the criterion to identify TFBS

