Background
Glaucoma is a disease in which the optic nerve is damaged, leading to 
progressive irreversible loss of vision  []. It is often, but not always, 
associated with increased pressure of the fluid in the eye. Primary open 
angle glaucoma is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by 
progressive excavation of the optic disc with corresponding loss of 
peripheral vision, and is frequently associated with elevated intraocular 
pressure (IOP).

Genes that are associated with Glaucoma are MYOC, CYP1B1, WDR36 
and OPTN. MYOC gene maps to the GLC1A locus at 1q24-q25. The gene 
has three exons, encoding myocilin, 504-amio acid polypeptide, which has 
an N-terminal leucine zipper domain and a C-terminal olfactomedin-like 
domain  []. 
CYP1B1 gene maps to the GLC3A locus at 2p21 which 
contains three exons, encoding cytochrome P450, 543 aminoacid 
polypeptide. OPTN gene maps to GLC1E locus at 10p15-p14 and contains 
3 noncoding exons in the 5'-untranslated region and 13 exons that code for 
a 577-amino acid protein. It plays a neuroprotective role in the eye and 
optic nerve. WDR36 gene maps to locus at 5q21.3-q22.1. It contains 23 
exons that code for 951 amino acid protein. Mutation in this gene accounts 
for 1% of glaucoma.

Methodology
Data collection and curation
A literature search was conducted using PubMed from that all the available 
data collected till date. Search term included myocilin, MYOC, CYP1B1, 
OPTN, WDR36, glaucoma. The information has also been collected from 
the genecards database  [], 
myocilin database (www.myocilin.com)  
[]. 
Data have been curated manually.

Data Management
Glaucoma database runs on MySql server as back end tool with Perl CGI 
in the front end. The database has more than 500 entries. To ensure 
flexibility and ease of management, the database was constructed using the
MySQL database. The database contains tables with the information being 
stored in an organised way. The total number of control and glaucomatous 
case subjects recruited, as well as the number of case and control subjects 
identified as carrying a particular variant in the each gene is also recorded. 
The variant, phenotypic field, ethnicity, age, IOP and Number of patients 
for each identified gene is recorded in different tables.

The database contains information relating the mutations and SNPs 
involved in the disease. The disease-causing mutation in the gene is coded 
as a field in the database and as a drop-down menu that allows the 
selection of the particular mutation. The information is used to determine 
the genomic location (nucleotide index), and its corresponding site in the 
gene (e.g., promoter,exon,introns etc). The Study type button allows the 
user to know about the phenotypic status of the selected mutation. There is 
a separate column named candidate gene where major genes such as 
MYOC, CYP1B1, OPTN, and WDR36 are displayed and  shows 
the gene distribution pattern in the database. There is also a similar column 
named associate genes which contains the information stored in the 
associate gene table in the MySql database.  The phenotype-genotypic 
information of the respective gene can be viewed by clicking the link 
provided. The database also presents the user with other associative genes 
involved in the glaucoma with their genomic location and phenotype. This 
database provides clinical information of the particular mutation which 
will help to predict severity of the disease for clinicians and  
shows snapshot of the Database.

Website Structure
A hypertext mark-up language (HTML) script, which uses minimal 
embedded script so as to eliminate browser-browser variation, was written 
for the website. Using the heading bar, it is easy to navigate from the 
homepage to other information such as physiology, overview, gallery etc., 
Perl programming along with CGI script is used to extract the user 
specified information from the MySql database. Phenotype and mutation 
data have been compiled initially from the published literature.

Utility and Future direction
The database provides the user with the SNP and mutation information for 
the major genes involved in the disease glaucoma. It also provides the user 
with the other associated genes which are indirectly involved in the disease 
glaucoma. The database aims to provide the user with the SNP information 
of the major genes thus providing the researcher useful information. A web 
server can be developed to predict mutation severity. 

We would like to thank Aravind Eye Hospital, Madurai, Tamilnadu, India  
for the encouragement and Department of Biotechnology (DBT) for the 
support by providing the Center of Excellence in Bioinformatics facility. 

Citation:Rangachari et al, Bioinformation 5(9): 398-399 (2011)

The distribution of variants identified in gene. About 40% of disease causing variants were identified in CYP1B1, 18% of the variants were 
identified in OPTN and 10% of the variants were identified in WDR36 gene.

Screenshot of the main page of the website.

