Background
Staphylococcus aureus is a Gram positive human pathogen causes
severe community and hospital acquired infections which range
from minor skin infections to life threatening diseases like
endocarditis, toxic shock syndrome and pneumonia []. One of
the main virulence factors of S. aureus is its ability to form
biofilms which also makes the organism to resist antibiotics,
with the occurrence of multidrug resistant strains of S. aureus
where high reductive conditions prevails the elevated biofilm
formation [,
] this has warranted urgent need for the
development of effective drugs which are highly narrow and
pathogen specific as it would minimize the transfer of drug
resistance among the bacteria []. In S. aureus TCA cycle is
suppressed upon depletion of rapidly catabolizable carbon
sources; this coincides with the transition to producing only
formylated δ-toxin and results in an increased inflammatory
response and subsequent biofilm formation suggesting that
there is an important linkage between bacterial TCA cycle and
pathogenesis [,
]. Carbon flow between the Krebs cycle and
the glyoxylate cycle is controlled by isocitrate dehydrogenase
(IDH) via its own activation and inactivation mechanism 
[].
Oxidative decarboxylation of isocitrate to α-ketoglutarate is
catalysed by IDH enzyme with the release of CO2 and NADPH.
It is existed as homodimer with its monomeric form having 40-
70 kDa in various bacteria []. Though some bacteria contain the
NAD-IDH (EC 1.1.1.41) but most of the bacteria have NADPdependent
enzyme (EC 1.1.1.42) [], 
[]. IDH enzyme from
bacteria lacks the βαβαβ motif [,
]. The IDH activation drives
the flow of carbon through the TCA cycle inducing a decrease in
the intracellular level of isocitrate and an increase in the level of
α-ketoglutarate thereby regulating redox status in the bacteria
which is a vital factor in the virulence of S. aureus 
[]. These
features are best explained through docking of substrate to its
3D structure of the enzyme and correlating with its kinetics [,
]. Therefore, the present study the structural and functional
characterization of S. aureus IDH and also its comparative
structural analysis with other bacterial and human IDH to
predict the role of IDH in the pathogenesis.

Methodology
3D Structure building for S. aureus IDH:
IDH gene was amplified from chromosomal DNA of S. aureus
by using the IDH1 5'-CATGCTGATGTAGAAACT-3' and IDH2
5'-TCAAGGAACTGAAGGAT-3' primers, which were designed
from the IDH gene sequence of S. aureus Mu 50 strain. The
cocktail reaction mixture consists of 10 mM Tris–HCl (pH 8.8),
1.5mMMgCl2, 100 µmol of dNTPS mix, 100 ρmoles of each
primer, 1 U of Taq DNA polymerase (Mereck Biosciences Pvt
Ltd) and 0.5 µg of chromosomal DNA. Amplification conditions
included an initial denaturation step for 10 min at 94 °C; 35
cycles of each having denaturation at 94 °C for 60 s, annealing at
33.1 °C for 60 s, amplification at 72 °C for 100 s and final
extension step at 72 °C for 5 min in a Mastercycler gradient
Thermocycler (Eppendorf). The amplicons were purified by
NP-PCR kit (Taurus Scientific, USA). After purification the
products were sequenced and deposited at GenBank
(www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/submt.html). The 3D model
of the S. aureus IDH was built by using Modeller 9v8 tool 
[,
]. The S. aureus IDH complete protein sequence (YP_041160.1)
was submitted to BLASTp against PDB [] and the putative
IDH crystal structure from Bacillus subtilis (PDB ID: 1HQS)
which showed 80% identity was taken as template to build the
3D structure. In the same way, the IDH protein sequences of H.
pylori and Mycobacterium tuberculosis were Submitted to BLASTp
against PDB and the putative IDH crystal structure from E. coli
(PDB ID: 1BL5) showed 70% identity with H. pylori and was
taken as template while, for M. tuberculosis 61% identity with
Azatobacter vinelandii (PDB ID:1ITWA) was observed and was
chosen as template. In Mycobacterium tuberculosis there are two
isoforms of NADP-dependent IDH [,
] since both the
isoforms are NADP -dependent we took one isoform to built the
structure for comparative analysis. Clustal X tool was used for
generating alignment files in PIR format for Query and template
sequences []. The Python script was written and 20 best
models were generated. The best predicted model with least
DOPE (discrete optimized protein energy) score was selected
for further investigation.

Validation of S. aureus IDH Model:
The stereo chemical quality of the predicted model was
validated by PROCHECK and ProSAweb servers. Both can read
the atomic co-ordinates of the 3D model and judge the quality
of the structure. PROCHECK validation server [] was used to
generate the Ramachandran plot, whereas overall quality of the
predicted model and its identity nearest to crystal X-ray
structures was determined from ProSA web server which is
expressed as Z score.

Structural and comparative Analysis between S. aureus IDH with Human and other bacterial IDH:
The comparative structural analysis to ensure the identity and
variability of IDH structure from S. aureus with other IDH
structures were carried out using Pymol software. This program
has distinctive features where it can define the structural
resemblance score as the log-odds of two probabilities using a
scheme similar to Dayhoff׳s amino acid replacement score. In
the program we have crystallized structures by inputting the
PDB code and by loading the PDB format files in the user׳s
computer. The validated 3D model of S. aureus IDH was super
imposed with bacterial IDH: Bacillus subtilis (PDB ID: 1HQS)
and Escherichia coli (PDB ID: 91CD) were retrieved from PDB
database while H. pylori IDH and Mycobacterium tuberculosis
IDH structures were generated following the protocol
mentioned earlier [,
]. Further, the study was extended to
understand the structural differences with human NADPdependent
IDH isoforms (PDB ID: 1TOL, 1TO9).

Molecular Docking analysis of Human IDH and S. aureus IDH:
Docking was performed for S. aureus IDH and human IDH with
isocitrate by using Molecular Operating Environment (MOE
2011.10) software. Three dimensional molecule of isocitrate was
retrived from PubChem [] and its structure was optimized in
MOE. Structures of S. aureus IDH and Human IDH were loaded
individually into MOE tool for removing hetero atoms, H2O
molecules and polar hydrogens were added. Protonation (at
temperature of 300K, pH 7) and energy minimization were
carried out in OPLS (optimized for potential for Liquid
simulation) force field at a gradient of 0.05 to calculate the
atomic coordinates of the protein that are local minima of
molecular energy function and in order to determine low
energy conformations for molecular dynamics simulations.
Docking was performed for S. aureus IDH and Human IDH
with isocitrate to find out the binding modes and affinity
variations. After completion of the process the conformation
with least docking score was taken from the total docked
conformations in each docking process and the binding
conformations of isocitrate was analyzed in the binding sites of
S. aureus and human IDHs [,
,
].

Results
Structural analysis of IDH:
The deduced amino acid sequence of S. aureus IDH gene was
used to built the structure of IDH. Total 20 best models were
generated for IDH using Modeller 9v8 tool using the structure
of IDH from Bacillus subtilis (PDB ID: 1HQS) as template which
showed 80% identity. The lowest DOPE score of -30582.42383
was found with the model 11 among 20 models and it was
considered for further study. The stereochemistry of the final
model was verified by submitting to PROCHECK validation
server and Ramachandran plot showed 91.3% of the residues in
most favorable region and no residues were found in
disallowed region (). The ProSaWeb evaluation of IDH
model revealed a compatible Z-Score value of -8.24 that falls in
the range of native conformation of X- ray crystal structure
(). Similarly, the IDH structures for H. pylori and M.
tuberculosis were built using E. coli and Azatobacter vinelandii
IDH crystal structures as templates respectively. These
structures were validated by using PROCHECK and ProSaweb
servers and the results indicated that the built structures were
highly reliable  (see supplementary material).
Superimposing of S. aureus IDH structure with other bacterial
IDH structures revealed extensive structural differences as
evidenced from the RMSD values ().

In order to assess the same we have also compared S. aureus
IDH structure with human IDH structure which showed
extensive variations both in the domain and non domain
regions as indicated from RMSD values of 14.284Å and 10.073Å
(). The identical regions were random throughout the
alignment especially in the substrate binding regions which
showed much extent of variation and completely showing
different conformations (). The results of MOE docking
studies showed that isocitrate was placed close to the residues
D187, D 187, N207 and R20 by means of hydrogen bonds in S.
aureus with a docking score of -10.963. Here D 187 exclusively
formed two hydrogen bonds with isocitrate indicating strong
involvement of D 187 in the substrate binding region. While
human IDH was found to be interacting with V276, V276, V276
and N275 with a docking score of -11.6169 respectively 

(see supplementary material) (). In human IDH V276
was found to be playing a predominant role forming 3
Hydrogen bonds with isocitrate providing much extent of
strength to the docking complex.

Discussion
In S. aureus the TCA cycle which plays pivotal role in the
growth of the organism and this cycle is regulated by IDH
whose expression makes carbon to enter into Krebs cycle in
post-exponential growth phase []. In this phase bacteria tends
to synthesize more exopolysaccharides and PIA (Polysacharide
Intracellular Adhesin) molecules which are very critical in
biofilm formation and these features are common in multidrug
resistant strains of S. aureus () 
[,
,
], therefore IDH
expression plays critical role in the pathogenesis of S. aureus 
[]
and bacteria have placed Krebs cycle to cater to its environment
needs therefore, comparative structural analysis of IDH which
regulates TCA cycle in both pathogen and host will probably
through light in understanding the host pathogen interactions
in the establishment of infection. Keeping in view we have
carried out comparative structural and functional studies on
NADP dependent IDH in both S. aureus and human [,
].
Bacteria utilize TCA cycle differently and IDH must be playing
crucial role in their pathogenesis and biofilm formation 
[]. The
S. aureus IDH structure was built using the homology modeling
method was close to the crystal structure of Bacillus subtilis. The
multiple sequence alignment results showed very high
sequence homology exists between S. aureus IDH sequence and
with other bacterial IDH sequences however, the comparative
structural analysis showed extensive variations as indicated
RMSD values and the regions showing identity were spread
randomly in the structures () which correlated with the
IDH kinetic results [] suggesting that in S. aureus TCA cycle is
uniquely placed which also correlated with the growth pattern
and biofilm formation []. The structural superimposition of S.
aureus IDH with both human IDH isoforms (PDB ID: 1T09,
1TOL) showed considerable variations in both domain and non
domain regions and these differences were also observed in the
sequence and active site structures () 
[,
]. The
docking of isocitrate to both human and S. aureus IDH
structures revealed higher affinity for human IDH compared to
S. aureus [,
] correlating with enzyme kinetics 
[,
] 

(). This pathogen colonizes mostly in the
nasopharyngeal tract as biofilms by adjusting its metabolic flux
[,
,
] and regulates TCA cycle to produce virulence factors
thus spreads its infection.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We sincerely acknowledge Sri Venkateswara Institute of
Medical Sciences and University for providing funds and
facilities under SBAVP scheme (SBAVP/Ph.D/02) to carry out
this work and this paper forms a part of Ph.D work going to be
submitted to SVIMS University.

Citation:Prasad et al, Bioinformation 10(2): 081-086 (2014)

Ramachandran plot generated by PROCHECK
validation server showing the stereochemical quality of the S.
aureus IDH structure.

ProSA-web and Z-score of S. aureus IDH structure in
PDB. The energy plots were presented with window size 10
(light green) and window size 40 (dark green). The Z-score plot
of IDH model (left). Energy plot of IDH model (right).

Structural comparison of NADP dependent S. aureus
IDH with other bacterial NADP dependent IDH and Human
NADP dependent IDH isoforms.

A) Alignment of active site residues of Human NADP
dependent IDH and NADP dependent S. aureus IDH; B)
Superimposed active site region structures of Human NADP
dependent IDH and NADP dependent S. aureus IDH.

A) Docking of isocitrate with the Human IDH and S.
aureus IDH. The dotted lines indicated the hydrogen bond
interactions between IDH active site and Isocitrate 1. Human
IDH interaction with isocitrate; B) S. aureus IDH interaction
with isocitrate.

An explanation of TCA cycle repression through
altered IDH metabolic status of S. aureus resulting in its massive
redirection into Exopolysaccharide and PIA synthesis and
finally leads to Biofilm formation.

