Background
Mycobacteriophage genomes were chosen because of their abundance, their
wide size distribution and their very compact genome organization. This
enables them to be the ideal choice to function as genetic tool in tuberculosis
research. All these features were expected to raise most of the technical
challenges to be solved in building up the database. Despite their importance,
little is known about the genomic diversity harbored in phages. Methods to
capture complete phage genomes have been hampered by the lack of
knowledge about the target genomes []. The sheer abundance and importance
of mycobacteriophages coupled with knowledge of their genetic makeup,
demands establishing comprehensive annotation methods that can be applied.
This wealth of information helps to decipher the genetic framework that drives
phage biology, thus providing a window into understanding how these
important organisms modulate and by extension, impact human health.

Database Content
The present version of the mycobacteriophage genome database (version 1.0)
contains 6086 genes from 64 mycobacteriophages. All the sequence data used
has been downloaded from the NCBI genomes section
(
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes). As a first step towards building a
comprehensive mycobacteriophage functional classification of the 64
sequenced genomes, it has been subjected to several servers like PFAM 
[],
PROSITE [], CATH 
[], SCOP 
[] and so on for annotation. The proteins
from 64 mycobacteriophages were clustered into families based on ACLAME
classification []. 
The output of the analysis resulted in 72 clusters covering a
total of 2082 proteins representing 34.7% of all analyzed proteins.

Methodology
Tool Design and implementation
The system used is MySQL database to store gene and protein sequence
annotated data. Programs are written in PHP enabled database search using
keywords like ‘Genome name’ or ‘mycobacteriophage genes’. The database
facilitates to query and retrieve results in ‘Text’ or ‘Table’ or ‘Graphical’
formats as ‘Description’, ‘Summary’, ‘predicted results’ and ‘graphs’
respectively. Detailed sequence data can be obtained from the corresponding
hyperlinks. Data flow diagram for MGDB is represented in the . The
browsing and query web pages are shown as snapshots in .

Future Development
The database will be periodically updated and enriched with more features to
make it further interactive and user friendly. Tools like BLAST [] and
CLUSTAL W [] are to be incorporated in the database, to better equip the
mycobacteriophage research community. Phage genome comparison and newly
identified drug targets of M. tuberculosis will also updated in the future. While
these resources are perused by a great number of the mycobacteriophage
research community, we will undertake the initiatives to acquire curate and
enhance the content of this database in service to the wider research
community.

The authors wish to acknowledge the Department of Biotechnology (DBT) for
their financial support for this work.

Citation:Joseph et al, Bioinformation 6(10): 393-394 (2011)

Data flow diagram for mycobacteriophage genome database.

Mycobacteriophage genome database query and browser sample web pages.

