Background
Streptococcus gordonii is a primary colonist of multispecies that
forms biofilm, dental plaques and a potential agent of infective
endocarditis (IE) []. IE occurs along the edges of the heart
valves forming vegetations of commensal pathogens at the site
of infection. As inflammation continues, ulceration may result
into the host death by intractable heart failure. Mortality due to
IE is high; more than one-third of patients die within first year
of diagnosis []. Despite improvements in the diagnostic and
therapeutic strategies, the fatality rate due to IE has not
significantly decreased []. This strongly indicates the need to
search new therapeutic targets for pathogens that would offer
better protection against IE.

Currently, various post-genomic methods are being widely
used to identify novel drug and vaccine targets. There is a
requirement for identification of novel drug targets for drug
resistant pathogens, and theoretical approaches cater the need
through ‘in silico’ methods [,
].

In recent years the number of whole genome sequenced species
has increased rapidly with approximately 6862 bacterial
genomes currently available (Genomes OnLine Database-GOLD
- http://www.genomesonline.org). Among these, genomes of
several streptococci including S. gordonii and S. sanguinis are
also available which are predominantly reported as causative
agents of IE []. This study reports a strategic approach of
prioritizing the identification of putative drug targets that are
unique for S. gordonii.

Methodology
Subject organism, genome comparison and synteny:
An electronic taxonomy of bacteria, eMLSA.net
(http://viridans.emlsa.net/) was considered for streptococci
classification. Viridans group streptococci (VGS) database was
focused which are reported for IE []. All the strains within VGS
available in eMLSA were cross-checked in the literature for IE
infection. Organisms with complete genome sequence that were
common in both eMLSA and SynteBase were subjected for
comparative study. SynteView visualizer of SynteBase was
used to select these common organisms []. S. gordonii was
considered as reference genome and compared with ten other
strains namely S. sanguinis SK36, S. agalactiae A909, S. agalactiae
NEM316, S. agalactiae 2603V/R, S. pneumoniae D39, S.
pneumoniae R6, S. pneumoniae TIGR4, S. suis 98HAH33, S. suis
05ZYH33, S. mutans UA159, which are reported for IE. Gene
order was visualized with SynteView as synteny blocks. All
proteins of S. gordonii that were putative and non-homologous
to any compared strains were obtained from SynteView.
Homologous putative and non-homologous hypothetical
proteins within the comparison were excluded from the study.

Identification and subcellular localization of unique non-host pathoproteins:
To identify putative candidate drug targets, the foremost
concern was to find proteins present in S. gordonii and absent in
humans (non host). Unique non-host proteins of pathogen were
identified by two consecutive steps, one by sequence similarity
search, followed by metabolic pathway mapping and
annotation. All the unique putative proteins of S. gordonii were
submitted to DELTA-BLAST program []. E-value was
restricted to 1e-3 for similarity search against human proteome
with taxonomic id 9606. Hits obtained were neglected for
further study, and the proteins with no significant similarity
were subjected to KEGG database analysis tools (Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes at http:// www.kegg.jp/kegg/). 
With ‘sgo’ as the KEGG organism code for S. gordonii,
available pathways were mapped by using KEGG Mapper (ver.
1.6) []. Unmapped proteins were annotated by KAAS (KEGG
Automatic Annotation Server ver. 1.67x) for pathway
reconstruction using bi-directional best hit method, where
functional annotation of genes are assigned by BLAST
comparison against the manually curated KEGG GENES
database []. Entire 526 organisms of phylum Firmicutes
available in KEGG was considered for similarity search by
KAAS. All the metabolic pathways of humans from KEGG were
extracted with the code ‘hsa’. Pathways common to human and
S. gordonii were disused and only proteins involved in unique
pathways and unannotated by KAAS were noted. These
proteins were submitted to iLoc-Gpos server which predicts
subcellular localization of gram-positive specific bacterial
proteins with single and multiple sites []. Proteins localized to
cell membrane, cell wall and cytoplasm were considered for
further study and extracellular proteins were neglected.

Prioritization of target proteins:
Screening was performed based upon the proteins druggibility.
DrugEBIlity service at EMBL-EBI (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/chembl/drugebility) 
was used. It exploits the structural data
to evaluate whether a protein can be targeted with small
molecule either by using structure or sequence file as input.
Tractability, druggibility and ensemble were predicted using
protein BLAST. Search was set to PDB Domains, filtered by
greater than 30% identity with cutoff E-value 0.0001. Proteins
with that of tractability and druggibility valued as 1 and
ensemble being positive was preceded. Ensemble score ranging
from +1.0 (signifies as druggable) to -1.0 (as undruggable) were
analyzed. Only positive ensemble score were considered for
target prioritization in descending order. For these predictions,
relevant literature was collected, emphasizing the role of each
protein in pathogenicity.

Results &amp; Discussion
In reductive genomics, any pathoprotein can be a candidate
drug target with at least 5 targetability characters. 1) It
shouldn't represent similarity with host proteome. 2) It should
not be a secreted protein. 3) Shows tendency towards forming a
protein structure with adequate residues being accessible to
drug-like molecule. 4) Should have a biological significance in
pathogen, being alterable and disturb the system and 5). After
disturbing the nativeness of pathoprotein, the pathogen should
be unable to develop an alternate ways to compensate the
changes in its system [,
,
,
,
]. First criteria were
contented by DELTA BLAST and metabolic pathway deduction
between host and pathogen. Second criteria were checked by
iLoc-Gpos, third criteria were screened by EBIs DrugEBIlity
portal. The fourth and fifth criteria were screened by literature
search.

Unique putative genes of S. gordonii:
A new and electronic taxonomy of VGS available through
eMLSA.net was followed, as it has always been problematic to
classify streptococci taxonomically. Currently VGS database of
eMLSA constitutes of 19 strains, of which 11 strains were
considered for study. Among these, S. agalactiae and S.
pneumonia consists 3 serotypes each and S. suis consists 2. S.
gordonii, the reference organism, consisting of 2051 genes was
subjected to SynteView. SynteView has many prokaryotic
genomes accessible for which synteny based orthology and
neighborhood data have been computed and stored in
SynteBase []. Among the compared strains, a large part of 534
genes (26.04% of genome) account for non-homologous,
probably contributing for its unique adaptability, pathogenicity
and virulence. This may be due to horizontal gene transfer for
either gene gain, loss, change and gene decay which are
considered to be a hallmark in the evolution of any pathogenic
bacteria []. These might also be an essential gene set, evolved
unique to S. gordonii and might be similar to other class of
commensal species. Within 534 genes, 334 (62.55%) are putative
and 200 (37.45%) are hypothetical.

Non-host proteins:
Homology between pathogen and host were primarily
identified by DELTA-BLAST, which is considered to be more
sensitive than BLASTp, as it searches a database of preconstructed
PSSMs before searching a protein-sequence
database to yield better homology detection []. By this, unique
putative proteins of S. gordonii were separated showing
tendency towards drug targetability at sequence level.
Targeting the non-homologous set would cause no harm to host
[]. Of 334 proteins, 110 didn't explain any similarity with
host; this may be due to involvement of Low-complexity
regions (LCRs) in some protein sequences, constricting the
similarity search algorithms. LCRs were unfiltered as these
facilitate in adaptation to fast evolving environments hence
contributing to virulence []. These 110 proteins were
separated, adding to the first step towards populating the
candidate protein targets.

Metabolic pathway annotation and reconstruction:
The non-host 110 proteins obtained after DELTA similarity
search were subjected to KEGG tools, resulting into 28
pathoproteins involved in various pathways. Among 28
proteins, 22 were mapped in S. gordonii specific pathways in
KEGG with 16 involved in pathways similar to host and
remaining 6 were reconstructed and annotated from KAAS
against all 526 Firmicutes available in KEGG. KAAS results also
described KEGG and COG (Clusters of Orthologous Groups)
definitions for 26 proteins. Pathoproteins involved in pathways
similar to host (16 proteins) were neglected and remaining 94
were conceded for further analysis in an attempt to identify
strain specific targets. Protein sequences without pathway
similarity to host or unpredictable pathways were 82 (74.54% of
110), which is a significant number. This may be again either
due to involvement of LCRs at the sequence similarity search
performed by KAAS [,
] or involvement of reduced dataset
in KEGG server or pathogen evolution.

Subcellular localization:
Subcellular localization of 94 non-host proteins resulted into 73
targetable pathoproteins. Among 94 proteins, 17 were predicted
as extracellular, 33 as cytoplasmic, 6 as cell wall bound, 34 as
cell membrane proteins and 4 were not possible with any
predictions due to inadequate sequence length. Those confined
to extracellular and remained unpredictable were ignored, as
the interest was to uncover drug targets, and not vaccine
targets. Hereafter, dataset was reduced to 73, and carried to
druggibility screening.

Druggable targets:
Pathoproteins though unique to pathogen are not always
druggable, as they may lack the ability to form the structure,
where a ligand can bind. Seventy three pathoproteins were
screened by searching against existing PDB domains by
considering three components. Firstly, Tractability scoring to be
1, evaluates the chemical drug available to pocket of a
prospective target, modulating its activity leading to desired
biological effect which is biologically viable. Secondly,
Druggibility valued to 1, signifies the ability of a protein to bind
a drug-like molecule with a therapeutically useful level of
affinity. Lastly, ensemble described to be positive and nearing
to 1 was selected as it is calculated by averaging the different
structure-based druggability scores. The Ensemble Score
ranging from Druggable: +1.0 to Undruggable: -1.0 was
analyzed. Only positive scores of ensemble were considered as
they are valuable representations of conformational flexibility
of protein structures.

Restricting the results of ‘DrugEBIlity’ scores to 73 proteins, 57
were excluded. Remaining 16 proteins were further explored
with literature search ensuring 9 as potent drug targets, 3
associated with at least one of the significant biological function
for the pathogen survival and 4 revealed nothing  (see
supplementary material).

This approach can be used to answer the pathoprotein
sequences persisting with two problems. 1) Sequences whose
identification of gene essentiality using databases like DEG fails
to identify any pre-deposited essential gene (as only 4 out of 31
bacteria are gram positive in DEG 10.0 at the time of manuscript
preparation). 2) Sequence similarity search with conventional
and experimentally reported drug targets using databases like
DrugBank, Therapeutic Target Database, Potential Drug Target
Database etc., where one fails to identify any similarity.

Conclusion
With the availability of complete genome and proteome of
human pathogens, omic tools and databases, it is able to
identify and characterize new and likely drug targets. This
work exemplifies a theoretical approach for screening drug
targets for a given human pathogen which is rapid but
meaningful and momentous. This approach is based on
genomic syntenies of pathogenome, similarity search,
tractability, druggibility and ensemble of a pathoprotein. The
study reveals; 16 potent, unique and putative drug targets in S.
gordonii. Molecular modeling followed by virtual screening of
these drug targets might be useful in the discovery of potential
therapeutic compounds against S. gordonii. This strategy can be
followed for other human pathogens to prioritize potent drug
targets.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Telkar et al, Bioinformation 9(19): 983-987 (2013)

