Background
As the intergenic regions are home to a wide diversity of functional
elements, its analysis will be adding more annotations in genomes. In the
past few years, the intergenic regions in microbial genomes are largely
analyzed for noncoding RNAs such as rRNA, tRNA and especially small
RNAs (functionally active regulatory sRNAs) which play an important role
in cellular functions, including RNA processing, mRNA stability,
translation, protein stability and secretion []. 
Exploring the locations ofgenes encoding the known sRNAs, Argaman et al found that they are
primarily located in the empty intergenic regions with no other annotated
genes on either strand []. 
Based on computational analysis in theintergenic regions, several sRNAs are 
identified in microbes and itsnumber is increasing day‐by‐day. Genes encoding peptides are often
missed in genomic annotations due to their small size. Search for
unannotated small ORFs in the intergenic regions has revealed several
peptides which are important regulators of growth, development and
physiology of organisms []. 
Besides this, several promoters, terminators,
riboswitches etc… have been identified and annotated from the intergenic
regions.Microbial genomes are highly diversified in terms of chromosomal
size, copy number, topology, and GC content. For example, Mycoplasma
mobile is having 24.9% GC content [] 
while for Micrococcus luteus it is74% []. 
The base composition of a sequence tells us the nature of that
sequence. The unusual GC content in the intergenic regions may reveal
horizontally transferred genomic islands, sRNAs, or other functionally
important elements. GC content was used to detect sRNA genes in AT-rich
archael genomes such as Pyrococcus furious and Methanococcus
jannasehii []. 
GC content is an important parameter of a particular
bacterial species that can be accurately obtained from the genome
sequence.We have developed an online tool for extraction of intergenic
regions and calculation of its GC content from microbial genomes at
NCBI. The first step in finding any of the functional elements in the
intergenic region is the extraction of intergenic sequence. So we hope this
tool may reduce time of script writing and make the analysis of microbial
intergenic regions much easier.

Implementation
The web server IntergenicS (see ) 
is implemented on Apacheserver and the web interface is designed using HTML and PHP. The
algorithms to extract intergenic regions of bacterial genomes in silico are
complemented with the language of python.

Main functions include: 
Intergenic region extraction ;

Unannotated intergenic region extraction (excludes annotated noncoding RNAgenes in the IRs) ;

%GC calculation. Once the genome is selected, the intergenic region or unannotated region of the selected genome is displayed based on
user's choice.


 Initially user has to select the microbe of their interest then
they have to choose either intergenic region or unannotated region for
displaying corresponding coordinates and sequence. The output can be
further filtered by specifying the size of the region. GC content calculation
which helps in the further analysis of intergenic regions is also
incorporated into this tool. Results are displayed in tabular format. User
can either view the results or save the results into their in-house systems
and do further analysis. The work flow of the server is given in 
.

As these intergenic regions will be having annotated noncoding RNA
genes also, one who is interested in the analysis of completely unannotated
regions, this tool will help to omit all the annotated protein coding genes
and noncoding RNA genes and will extract the rest of the sequence. Due to
the small size of small noncoding RNAs is (below 500bases), many
researchers avoid the intergenic regions of size less than 500 bases for
more accurate prediction. For purposes like this, this tool will allow the
user to specify intergenic regions of particular size range. The calculation
of GC base composition will give an idea of the nature of the sequence in
the selected intergenic region.

Conclusion
IntergenicS is expected to be a useful tool for those biologists who are
interested in regulatory elements in the noncoding regions of microbial
genomes. Currently this user friendly tool is designed only for the purpose
of sequence extraction and to get GC content. In future, we would like to
extend this tool so that the user will be able to retrieve all the functional
elements in the intergenic regions from any organism of their interest.
Project home page: 
http://bicmku.in:8081/intergenics

We dedicate this work in fond memory we have of Late Prof. Ziauddin
Ahamed Rafi, Professor, SBT, MKU who passed away in june 2009.
Special thanks to Prof. S. Krishnaswamy for suggestions and help. We
acknowledge Dept of Biotechnology, Govt of India for support to Centre
of Excellence in Bioinformatics, MKU.

Citation:Kurup etal; Bioinformation 5(3): 83-84 (2010)

The search page of IntergenicS

Diagram showing the work flow of the server

