Background
A broad spectrum of physiologic function essentially important
for life is regulated by Glucocorticoids (GCs). The GCs play an
important role in maintaining of the basal and stress related
homeostasis [–]. GCs such as DEX bind to the cytosolic GRs,
which gets activated by ligand binding. After a ligand binds to
a corresponding receptor, the newly formed GC-GR complex,
gets translocated into the cell nucleus, where it binds to
Glucocorticoid Response Element (GRE) in the promoter region
of the target genes resulting upregulation of anti-inflamatory
protein expression – transactivation. The anti-inflamatory GRs
lead to enhanced synthesis of the proteins collectively known as
lipocortins, which inhibit phospholipase A2, leading to
decreased eicasonoid synthesis []. GRs are part of the feedback
mechanism in the immune system that turns immune activity
or inflamation down. These are therefore, used as medicine to
treat diseases caused by an overactive immune system such as
allergies, asthma, autoimmune diseases and sepsis. DEX is one
of the potential GCs used for the treatment of inflammatory and
autoimmune conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis [] and
asthma []. DEX is also prescribed by dentists in small amounts
before and/or after some forms of dental surgery [], often it is
administered before use of antibiotics in cases of bacterial
meningitis, to reduce the inflammatory response of the body to
the bacteria killed by the antibiotics [].

Although GCs have potentially diverse regulatory effects but
induces many side effects upon chronic use Patients receiving
chronic steroids have an increased susceptibility to many
different types of infections. The risk of infection is related to
the dose of steroid and the duration of therapy []. The chronic
use of steriods therefore, may also invite and increase the
chances of incidence of most of the pathogenic organisms.

In India, since time immemorial use of indigenous plants are
prevelant against many disease and some are also used against
inflamation - ayurvedic medicine or anthropogonial treatment.
Traditionally, the plants such as Calotropis sp. and Swertia
chirata are applicable against inflamation, the root of Calotropis
gigantea is used in treatment of inflamatory response because of
leprosy, asthma, bronchitis, and expectorant. Root of Calotropis
gigantia contains α-amyrin, β-amyrin, taraxasterol, β-sitosterol,
stigmasterol [,
], α-and β-amyrin are reported to possess
anti-lipoxygenase activity []. The compunds of Calotropis
gigantea are reported as free radical scavenger [,
]; having
procoagulation [] and wound healing activity 
[]; also are
antidiarrheal [], anticonvulsant [,
], analgesic 
[],
pregnancy interceptive [], anti-inflammatory 
[–],
hepatoprotective [,
] and Anti-diabetic 
[]. Swertia chirata
contain amarogentin a topoisomerase inhibitor revealed by Ray
et al. (1996), amaroswerin Gastro-shielding reported by Niiho Y
et al. (2005), gentianine Anti-inflammatory, anesthetic,
antihistaminic reported by Song Zhen Yu et al. (1958), Geng Tao
et al. (1959) and Kwak et al. (2005), swerchirin is an antimalarial
compound, suggested by Arino et al. (1997), and swertiamarin is
having analgesic property reported by Lei et al. (1982) 
[]. The
review suggests that the compounds of the C. gigantia and S.
Chirata are having manifold medicinal role, however, reports on
the molecular interactions that may take place for the respective
physiologic functions are lacking. The present work therefore, is
to simulate the interataction of the compounds of C. gigantia
and S. chirata with 1M2Z a crystallographic model of a GR –
regulated for anti-inflamation by DEX so as to get a probable
alternative to DEX and understand the insight of the interaction
through docking simulation approach.

Methodology
The information about ligand molecules for docking simulation
Taraxterol (TARA), Beta-amyrin (BAMA), Alpha-amyrin
(AAMA) Beta-sitosterol (SITO) and Stigmasterol (STIG) of
Calotropis sp. and Amarogentin (AMAR), Amaroswerin
(ASWE), Gentianine (GENT), Swerchirin (SWER), Swertiamarin
(SAMA), Xanthone (XANT), Mangiferin (MANG) and
Syringaresinol (SYRI) of S. Chiraytia were downloaded from
PubChem chemical database of NCBI
(http://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) 
[]. The 3D coordinate file
of the GR (1M2Z) was retrieved from the Protein Data Bank
(PDB). The Docking simulation was carried out using
AutoDock 4.0 suite []. Before docking, the protein structures
file was cleaned, removing the H2O molecules and HETATM,
and then H-atoms were added to the target protein to attain
correct ionization and tautomeric states of amino acid residues.
Further, Gasteiger charges were added to the receptor molecule.
The ligands to be docked were kept flexible, so as to explore
number of torsional degrees of freedom in addition to the
translational and rotational parameters. The rigid roots of each
ligand were defined automatically; all rotatable dihedrals in the
ligands were allowed to rotate freely. The required
precalculated grid map was prepared covering the chain A of
1M2Z (1M2Z: A). To prepare, run and analyze the docking
simulation the GUI program AutoDockTools (ADT) was used.
The Lamarckian Genetic Algorithm (LGA) was chosen to search
for the best conformers. During the docking process, a
maximum of 10 conformers was considered for each
compound. The population size was set to 150 and the
individuals were initialized randomly. Maximum number of
energy evaluation was set to 2500000, maximum number of
generations 1000, maximum number of top individual the
automatically survived set to 1, mutation rate of 0.02, crossover
rate of 0.8, step sizes were 0.2 Å for translations, 5.0 for
quaternions and 5.0 for torsions. Cluster tolerance 0.5Å,
external grid energy 1000.0 max initial energy 0.0 max number
of retries 100000 and 10 LGA runs were performed. All the
AutoDock docking runs were performed in Intel Pentium
vostro 1510 3.0 GHz of Dell with 1GB RAM. AutoDock 4.0 was
compiled and run under Ubuntu 11.10 OS. Before docking of
the compounds of C. gigantia and S. chirata, the 1M2Z chain was
first docked using DEX ligand after removal of the existing
bound ligand, so as to acertain whether the parameters used for
study are satifactory. The ADME toxicity and other descriptors
of the compounds were explored using online softwares
Molinspiration, Osiris and FAFDrug2 
[–].

Discussion
The Ligands:
The structure of the compounds of Calotropis sp. and S. chirata
were downloaded from the PubChem compound database of
NCBI are shown in (). The descriptors of these
compounds shown in  (See supplementary material)
only the result of FAFDrug2 has been shown since the entire
three properties explorer computed similar scores for the
descriptors. Except the compunds amarogentin and
amaroswerin rest of the compounds have molecular weight &lt;
500. Each of the compounds of Calotropis sp. are violating 1
lipinski rule, where as amarogentin, amaroswerin and
mangiferin of S. chirata are violating 3, 3 and 2 respectively.
The logP value of all compounds of Calotropis sp. are high
determining low hydrophlicities and therefore accounting to
poor solubility whereas the compounds of S. chirata are
indicated to be readily soluble. The Topological Polar Surface
Area (TPSA) of all compounds reveals as good human intestinal
absorbant, Caco-2 monolayers permeable, and blood-brain
barrier penetrator. Among the ligands the syringaresinol of S.
Chiraytia achieved a better drug score of 0.7 table1, but it may be
moderately irritant. The bioavailabilities of all of these
compounds are reported to be good and are acceptable
candidate drug reported by FAF-drug2,  (See
supplementary material). The comparative analysis of the
values for molecular descriptor of DEX to all others reveals that
the compounds of S. chirata have higher positive correlation of r
&gt; 9, Table 1.

The GR (1M2Z):
The 3D coordinate file of the crystal structure of the
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) was downloaded from PDB [PDB
ID: 1M2Z]. This receptor has dimer interface, consisting of a
ligand binding pocket composed of residues from six helixes, an
N-terminal activation function (AF') domain, a central DNA
binding domain and a C-terminal ligand binding domain (LBD)
with an ligand dependent activation function (AF) helix 
() 
[]. The existing bound ligand occupies 65% volume of the
pocket []. The binding affinity is because of the hydrophilic
and hydrophobic interaction and hydrogen bonding between
the ligand and the receptor molecule. From the downloaded
PDB coordinate file of 1M2Z, HETATM or the ligand DEX was
removed from the receptor to vacate the binding pocket and
then DEX was allowed to dock into one of dimer made of chain
A [1M2Z:A]. As expected the ligand docked into the same
binding pocket of the receptor and shown similar hydrophilic
and hydrophobic interactions explaining higher binding affinity
equating to the existing crystellographic model ().
However, slight deviation in polar contacts is also visualised
(), the comparative analysis of the docked outputs for
all best conformers to that of DEX-1M2Z. A docked model
reveals that XANT, GENT and SWER, occupied the same
binding pocket with binding properties positively correlating r
&gt; 6  (see supplementary material), rest of the
compounds although docked but on to the surface of the
receptor molecule .

Docking of DEX into GR (1M2Z: A):
Docking simulation of DEX into GR (1M2Z: A) resulted in
seven cluster of coformers result of the best conformer is shown
in . The DEX docked into the same active site, described
in the experimentally determined model 1M2Z, orienting with
its A ring towards β strands and 1 and 2 helix and its D ring
towards the AF helix, an extensive hydrophobic and
hydrophilic interaction is seen between the ligand and the
receptor, however, a slight deflection towards the β strand
because of the 4 rotatable bonds of the ligand molecule is
visualized (). In the crystal complex the complex
stability is attributed to the hydrogen bonds formed with the A
ring carbonyl to the guanidium of R611 and to the γ-amid to
Q570, the side chain of N564 forms H-bonds to C ring 11-
hydroxyl and 24-hydroxyl, 21 hydroxyl and 22-carbonyl forms
H-bonds with residues Q624 and T739 respectively besides the
hydrophilic and hydrophobic interactions. While in the DEX-
1M2Z:A the insilico docked complex shows probable polar
contacts of A ring carbonyl to the guanidium of R611, the gamid
of Q570 or with the carbonyl of M604, besides the H-bond
between the side chain of N564 to C ring 11-hydroxyl, the
hydroxyl may also establish polar contact with the side chain of
L563, 21 hydroxyl and 24 hydroxyl may form H-bonds with
residues Q624 and T739 respectively, 22-carbonyl of the C ring
do not show any polar contact ().

Docking of GENT into GR (1M2Z: A):
GENT a compound of S. chirata docked into the same pocket as
DEX with binding energy -5.56  (See supplementary
material). Comparatively molecular weight and tpsa of GENT
is much lesser than DEX. Approximately 15-20% of the volume
is occupied by the ligand effectively with polar contacts of 2-
Oxygen and the side chain of M560 and Q564 moreover;
hydrophylic and hydrophobic interaction of the surrounding
residues may be attributed for the stability of the complex.
Although it occupy a small volume in the binding pocket the
ligand stays more closely towards the AF helix which may be
an important consequence leading to the activation of GR
().

Docking of SWER into GR (1M2Z: A):
The model of SWER-1M2Z: A reveals that the ligand docked
into the LBD of the receptor occupying almost 40-50% of the
volume of the pocket with a binding energy of -6.74 
(see supplementary material). Visual analysis of the model
shows that the ligand is oriented with its C ring towards the AF
helix and A ring towards tha β strand (). The stability
of the complex is explainable because of the extensive
hydrophilic and hydrophobic interaction of the residues in
proximitity to SWER. Further stabilization, is attributed to the
probable polar contacts established by 14-carbonyl of C ring
with the B-carbonyl of L563, 3 and 1- carbonyl of A ring with
the side chain of T739 and L732.

Docking of XANT into GR (1M2Z: A):
In this dock model the ligand is oriented with its C ring facing
towards the AF helix and A ring towards tha B strand. The
occupy a deeper region of the cavity towards the β- strand.
Besides the hydrophilic and hydrophobic interactions of the
residues in proximitity, the complex stabilization can be
attributed to the polar contact of 7-carbonyl of B-ring with the
β-caronyl of M604 (). Visualization of the interaction
at vendarwaals (vdw) scaling factor of 1.4 Å radius the GENT-
1M2Z: A and SWER-1M2Z: A seems to be more stable than
XANT-1M2Z: A complex. The GENT and SWER makes a weak
contact with AF helix (L753) at vdw scaling factor 1.4 Å and the
loop preceding the AF-helix (I747 and F749), therefore, are
suspected to stablize the AF-helix in the active conformation
and may serve as a molecular basis for ligand -dependent
activation of GR, on the other hand being deep inside the
binding pocket towards the β-strand chances of XANT as a GR
activator is reduced ().

Docking of other compounds into GR (1M2Z: A):
Rest of the compounds under study although docked, with
better binding energy such as BAMA, AAMA, and TARA, are -
7.71, 7.68, and -7.64 respectively, but far away from the LBD.
The docked optput poorly correlates with DEX-1M2Z: A
complex. Visualization of the docked the complexes reveals that
most of ligands docked on the surface of the 1M2Z: A, below
the AF helix as in the case of BAMA (), or below the
H3 helix as in the cases of AAMA and TARA. Among all of
these compounds BAMA shows a better binding energy,
however, the activation of the GR may not be fruitful because if
occupancy of the binding pocket is essential. The docking
simulation as a whole shows that the compounds GENT, SWER
are the better compound for the activation compound of GR
and may be alternative to DEX.

Conclusion
Herbal medicines remain the major source of health care for the
world since time immemorial. The plant kingdom represents a
rich source of organic compound inspite of advances in modern
system of medicine, there are several areas like tropical disease,
herpes, AIDS, cancer, bronchial asthma etc., which still remain a
challenge to present day drug therapy. Therefore, the search of
natural product alternative to DEX by docking approach
concludes that the compounds such as GENT and SWER may
remain effective against inflamation, where GENT was already
been reported as an anti-inflamatory by Song Zhen Yu et al.,
(1958) []. Here, the molecular basis of the GENT action
repoted theoriticaly by docking approach and together with
GENT this docking simulation also reveals that the SWER of S.
chirata may be another anti-inflamatory ligand. As S. chirata is
commonly used in Assam for the releaf of cough or asthmetic
trouble and the binding of three compounds into the active site
of the GR receptor with better binding energies, hence explain
the use of the plant as medicine against inflamation is one of the
correct anthropology.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The work is suported by the Centre for Bioinformatics Studies,
Dibrugarh University, facilitating all the necessary facilitites for
compeletion of the work. The author is thankfull Deepjyoti Das
for his helps during compilation of the work.

Citation:Sarmah, Bioinformation 8(20): 963-969 (2012)

The characters in caps showing the ring codes and number showing the position of C in the molecule. These marking are
shown only in those molecules that bind to the LBD pocket.

(A) Cartoon showing the binding pocket occupied by DEX in experimental model (red-colored ligand) and docked (green
colored) using AutoDock4; (B) artoon showing the probable polar contacts of DEX in the pocket of IM2Z; (C) cartoon showing
GENT docking into the binding pocket; (D) cartoon showing SWER docking into the binding pocket; (E) Cartoon showing XANT
docking into the binding pocket; (F) Cartoon the helixes of the 1M2Z and the surface docked BAMA (red), AAMA (yellow) and
TARA (wheat) colored.

