The analysis of Alzheimer's disease is an important topic of
research because the results and findings help elucidate
problems associated with aging as well as other diseases
including Downs' syndrome, Parkinson's disease, dementia
with Lewy bodies, Multiple Sclerosis, Amyotrophic Lateral
Sclerosis,and infectious disease including NeuroAIDS. Here we
review just a few points from an ever growing and productive
literature.

A recent article dealt with oxidation effects and
neurodegeneration []. The hypothesis addressed was that
oxidation of RNA affects miRNA and protein expression. In
human as well as in rodent brain, neurodegeneration (neuronal)
that is age-associated was demonstrated that is consequent to
oxidation of nucleic acids and proteins. Such neuronal
degenerative factors have also been analyzed in dementia with
Lewy bodies, Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis, Parkinson disease,
and Alzheimer disease. These findings occurred in cellular as
well as animal models. Coding RNA as well as non-coding
RNA were affected and deleterious effects on cell fate were
analyzed. Such studies are needed for developing strategies of
therapy.

A recent study also analyzed miRNAs in Alzheimer's disease
pathogenesis []. The analysis of extracellular fluid from neocortex
associated with temporal lobe from patients who had
Alzheimer's disease indicated increased miRNAs. These
miRNAs included miRNA-155 and miRNA-146a that are
proinflammatory. Moreover, when cell culture medium was
used with these miRNA added, Alzheimer's disease-like gene
expression occurred. This profile was associated with downregulation
of complement factor H (CFH), a repressor of the
innate immune response. Anti-miRNA approaches reduced the
pro-inflammatory effects. Additional miRNAs, miRNA-9 and
miRNA-125bwere involved as well []. These miRNAs were
regulated by NF-кB andbound independently to the mRNA 3'-
untranslated region to reduce CFH translation.

The authors of an article in 2011 [] stated that transcription
factor, TAp73, drove expression of miRNA-34a (but not
miRNA-34b or miRNA-34c). This was associated with
decreased expression of synaptic proteins synaptotagmin-1and
syntaxin-1A. These controlled molecular reactions generally
occurred in retinoid-stimulated differentiation of
neuroblastoma cells and rodents. The synaptotagmin-1 protein
expression changes also occurred in Alzheimer's disease brain
tissue.

These observations were extended to non-classical infectious
disease related to prion infections. Several neurotrophic RNA
and DNA viruses induced miRNA-146a in human brain cells. In
addition, oxidative stress, neurotoxic metals,pro-inflammatory
cytokines,as well as Aβ42 peptideupregulated miRNA-146a as
wellin primary cell human glial-neuronal cocultures. These
findings were in Alzheimer's disease and murine scrapie
studies. miRNA-146a quantitieswere related to disease severity
and inflammatory neuropathology in Alzheimer's disease.
Moreover, findings were similar in Gerstmann-Straussler-
Scheinker syndrome and sporadicCreutzfeldt-Jakob disease 
[].

In addition, Aβ oligopeptide down regulated miRNA-9 and
miRNA-181c in earlier studies. This occurred in hippocampal
cultures. In addition, APP23 transgenicmice and human
Alzheimer's disease tissue showed deposition of Aβ. Moreover,
APP is a target of miRNA regulation and additional 3'-
untranslated regions were identified from several mRNAs.
These are down regulatedbymiR-9 and -181c, separately and
contemporaneously and includedTGFBI, TRIM2, SIRT1 and
BTBD3 [].

NF-kB has a very large well-known number of protein-protein
interactions and is not included here. Based on the literature,
the protein Tap73 is more often recognized as TP73. Tap73 was
absent in the GNCPro database and so the term TP73 was used.
The figure illustrates various gene interactions among the
proteins mentioned above:complement factor H (CFH),
synaptotagmin-1 (SYT1), syntaxin-1A (STX1A), tumor protein
p73 transcription factor (TP73), transforming growth factor
(TGFBI), tripartite motif containing 2(TRIM2),sirtuin 1(SIRT1),
andBTB (POZ) domain containing 3(BTBD3). It is left as a
puzzle for the interested reader to identify the various genes
and their functions in the  
[–].

There are no financial conflicts.

Citation:Shapshak, Bioinformation 9(5): 222-223 (2013)

Network of input proteins (complement factor H,
synaptotagmin-1, syntaxin-1A, TP73, TGFBI, TRIM2, SIRT1,
andBTBD3) and the input neighbors of these proteins. In this
figure, line-colors and various interactions with other genes are
red Down-regulation, green Up-regulation, beige Regulation,
purple Co-expression, brown Physical Interaction, turquoise
dotted Predicted Protein Interaction, and mauve dotted
Predicted TFactor Regulation (www. sabiosciences.com).

