Background
The ever increasing drug resistance amongst bacteria has 
caused attention to shift to alternative methods of treatment to 
stop the increasing drug resistance, and also to find drugs with 
less side effects and toxicity. 50 years have passed since 
antibiotics have been used to treat infections but inappropriate 
use of these drugs has caused resistance to them in some 
species of bacteria []. The drug resistance is one of the reasons 
that herbal drugs have been receiving attention. 
Staphylococcus is a gram positive pathogen and is the most 
important bacteria in skin infections in humans [,
]. Different 
types of the staphylococcus are common causes of hospital 
infections across the world [,
]. This bacterium is one of the 
most important causes of acquired infections 
[], in society 
which can lead to bacteraemia, toxic shock syndrome, 
osteomyelitis and skin infections [,
]. According to recent 
reports staphylococcus aureus has developed resistance to 
some antibiotics []. Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a gram 
negative pathogen which is mainly associated with infections 
in the intensive care unit []. This bacterium is innately 
resistant to a lot of antibiotics [,
]. As science and 
technology progresses so should the use of herbal drugs. The 
analysis of antibacterial effects of plants could help in 
synthesising new antibacterial drugs. Up to now plants such as 
aloe Vera, thyme and garlic have been used in treating 
infectious diseases [,
,
] and 75% of people across the 
world still use herbs to see to their needs []. In western Iran, 
the fruit of the oak tree is still used to treat gastropathies, acute 
diarrhea and inflammation []. The fruit of the oak tree has an 
internal and an external stratum. The internal stratum is also 
known as the placenta. From the many types of oak available 
in Iran, the Quercus coccifera strain is found readily in Ilam 
whose anti fungal properties have been proven to exist in its 
aqueous extract []. The aim of this study is to analyse the 
antibacterial effect of the aqueous extract of the inner stratum 
of the oak fruit on staphylococcus aureus and pseudomonas 
aeruginosa under in vitro conditions.

Methodology
Collecting samples:
30 clinical samples of the pseudomonas aeruginosa and 
staphylococcus aureus bacteria were collected from Ilam city's 
hospitals and were kept in TSB cultivation media and at a 
temperature of -20 degrees centigrade. Samples were prepared 
using blood agar culture media in suspensions with different 
concentrations []. Standard strains of pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, ATCC1568 and staphylococcus aureus, 
ATCC417584 were also used.

Collecting plant and aqueous extract:
The oak tree fruit was collected then it was washed and the 
external stratum was removed and the internal layer was 
separated. Then after being washed, the collected stratums 
were dried in a warm dry environment and away from direct 
sunlight and then they were pestled. 10 grams of the herb 
powder was mixed with 200 ml of boiling distilled water and 
was put on the heater stride device for 20 minutes along with 
mixing. Then the mixture was filtered using a fine fibred sterile 
cloth and was centrifuged at 3500 rpm for 15 minutes. The 
mixture was left in open air until the solvent have completely 
evaporated. The extract powder was kept in a dark glass 
container at 4 degrees centigrade [].

Disk diffusion method:
First a suspension of the bacteria being studied was prepared 
with a concentration of 0.5 McFarland and using the a sterile 
valve on top of the plates containing Mueller Hinton Agar 
culture media, the bacteria were cultivated. After the surface of 
the plate had dried, paper disks with a diameter of 6mm, 
impregnated with 10 µl of the extract with different 
concentrations of 10, 20, 40 and 80 mg/ml were placed on the 
plates and they were incubated for 24 hours at 37C. After 
incubation the inhibition zone was measure using a ruler 
[].

Determining MIC:
Different concentrations of aqueous extract were added to 
similar volumes of bacteria suspension equal to 105 CFU/ml of 
staphylococcus aureus and pseudomonas aeruginosa in BHI3 
liquid culture medium and after 24 hours incubation at 37C and 
the MIC was determined according to SLCI instructions.

Determining MBC:
To determine MBC, 100 µl of three of the concentrations prior 
to MIC were cultivated separately on Mueller Hinton Agar and 
the concentration in which no bacteria had grown would be 
the MBC [].

Determining bacterial sensitivity:
To determine the bacterial sensitivity vancomycin (for 
staphylococcus aureus) and amikacin (for pseudomonas 
aeruginosa) were used (1µg/ml)

Statistical analysis:
The entire halo diameters recorded in relation to the herb 
extract and positive control were analysed using variance 
analysis, T-test and repeat measure [].

Results
Results of the inhibitory effect via the disk diffusion method:
In this method, the minimum and maximum inhibitory effects 
of the aqueous extract on staphylococcus aureus were at 10 
and 80 mg/ml consecutively and the inhibition zones for these 
concentrations were 13.2 and 27.2 mm consecutively. The 
minimum and maximum inhibitory effects of the extract on 
pseudomonas aeruginosa were at 10 and 80 mg/ml 
consecutively and the inhibition zones for these concentrations 
were 11.1 and 23.7 mm consecutively  (see 
supplementary material)

MIC and MBC results of the aqueous extract on staphylococcus aureus and pseudomonas aeruginosa:
The results obtained for determining the MIC and MBC of the 
extract on staphylococcus aureus were 10µg/ml and 15µg/ml 
consecutively. The MIC and MBC of the extract on 
pseudomonas aeruginosa were 15µg/ml and 25µg/ml 
consecutively  (see supplementary material).

MIC and MBC results on samples of standard strains of staphylococcus aureus and pseudomonas aeruginosa:
MIC and MBC of the extract on the standard sample of 
staphylococcus aureus were 10µg/ml and 12.5µg/ml 
consecutively. MIC and MBC for the standard sample of 
pseudomonas aeruginosa were 10µg/ml and 17.5µg/ml 
consecutively.

Bacterial sensitivity results:
The results showed the average inhibition zone for clinical 
samples of pseudomonas aeruginosa was 20.1 mm and for 
standard samples of this bacterium was 23.4 mm. The average 
inhibition zone for clinical samples of staphylococcus aureus 
was 23.9mm and for the standard sample it was 27.6mm. The 
standard samples were more sensitive to the mentioned 
antibiotics  (see supplementary material).

Discussion
The analysis carried out in this study shows the antibacterial 
effect of the placenta of the oak tree fruit and its aqueous 
extract on staphylococcus aureus and pseudomonas 
aeruginosa and that it prevents their growth. Also this effect 
was stronger when compared to standard antibiotics and their 
difference was statistically meaningful (p&lt;0.05). Considering 
that the size of the inhibition zone means a stronger 
antibacterial effect, the difference between the extracts effect 
and the effect of standard antibiotics is discussable. It seems 
this extract is stronger than other extracts and essences 
analysed in other studies. In a study on the inhibitory effect of 
the Helichrysum italicum's extract on staphylococcus and 
pseudomonas aeruginosa the inhibition zones were 15 and 8 
mm consecutively []. In another study effect of some extracts 
including A. Fraasii, A. Holosericea and Achilla taygetea on 
staphylococcus aureus caused an inhibition zone of 16mm 
[]. 
In another study it was shown that the inhibition zone created 
by the Salvia ringens plant on the staphylococcus was less than 
10mm []. In Khosravi et al.'s study it was seen that the inner 
stratum of oak fruit extract had a noticeable antibacterial effect 
on salmonella and E.coli which correlates with the results of 
this study [,
]. In another study by Khosravi et al. showed 
that the extract from lavandula stoechas also had an inhibitory 
effect staphylococcus aureus which was less than the effect 
recorded in this study []. In the study carried out by Mirzaei 
et al. in 2013 showed that the extract from inner stratum of 
Quercus brantii had no toxic effect on the liver and kidneys of 
laboratory mice [] and it could be same for the species in this 
study. In another study by Safari et al. in 2009 on the ethanol 
and methanol extract of the Quercus brantii species it was 
proven that this extract affects on various bacteria such as 
pseudomonas aeruginosa which correlates with this study but 
the inhibitory effect of the oak's aqueous extract is much more 
than the ethanol and methanol extract of Quercus brantii and 
their difference is meaningful (P&lt;.0.05) []. This goes to show 
that different species of oak have antibacterial and antifungal 
effects. In another study by Abbasi et al. it was proven that the 
extract from Scrophularia striata Boiss has a stronger effect 
compared to the inners stratum's effect on staphylococcus 
aureus and pseudomonas aeruginosa []. Also in Behdani et
al.'s study it was shown that Henna extract also has a stronger 
inhibitory effect compared to the study at hand on 
staphylococcus aureus and pseudomonas aeruginosa 
[]. The 
results of this study show that with the increase in the amount 
of extract in all the samples, the average inhibition zone also 
increases (p&lt;0.05). This may be due to an increase in the 
bacterial sensitivity of pseudomonas aeruginosa and 
staphylococcus aureus against higher amounts of extract or an 
increase in the antibacterial effect of the extract in higher 
amounts. However it should be mentioned an increase in 
concentration could lead to an increase in toxicity 
[]. Results 
showed that the inhibitory effect on bacteria after 48 hours 
after cultivation wasn׳t much different than after 24 hours and 
the difference wasn׳t statistically meaningful (P&gt;0.05). As there 
is an ever increasing resistance to antibiotics developing in 
various countries, the results obtained especially those in 
relation to the effect of high doses of extract on bacteria 
(staphylococcus aureus and pseudomonas aeruginosa) could 
be of importance and show that besides the effective results of 
the aqueous extract the phenolic and alchololic extracts could 
be useful and should be analysed. The clinical use of this 
extract requires more extensive studies and if the results prove 
successful and the results are standardized the herb can be 
used as a replacement for ineffective antimicrobial drugs.

Conclusion
The results obtained from the experiments carried out show 
that the aqueous extract from the inner stratum of oak fruit has 
a noticeable inhibitory effect on pseudomonas aeruginosa and 
staphylococcus aureus and if more extensive studies are 
carried out, it could be a suitable replacement for ineffective 
antibiotics. In later studies the toxicity of this substance on 
human and animal cells will be analyzed.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Judaki et al, Bioinformation 10(11): 689-692 (2014)

