Background
There is lot of work gone into proteins to understand the ultimate truth of
real information [–
]. Hydrophobic interaction is the dominant force that
comes from presence of carbon. Recent studies reveal that proteins prefer
to have 31.45% of carbon in its structure and in sequence 
[]. To
understand the buried information further in proteins this work has been
taken up.

Methodology
The idea behind this method is visualising the molecule on actual basis.
That is the basic units of proteins are elements such as carbon, sulphur,
nitrogen, oxygen and hydrogen. In this method the amino acid sequences
are converted into atomic sequences. Example is given in supplementary
material.

It is also hoped that a protein sequence with 100 amino acids should have
about 1555 atoms in the atomic sequence. Further the percentage of carbon
in the first 500 atoms are computed and marked as carbon percentage at the
point of 250. Residue number that carries the 250th atom is taken as
reference point. Next the group of 500 atoms is taken from 5 to 505. Again
the carbon percentage computed is assigned to reference point of 255. This
way by a shift of 5 atoms all 500 groups are computed with carbon
percentage and assigned to corresponding reference point. This shift by 5
atoms can increased or decreased depends upon the resolution required.
Similarly the window length 500 atoms (˜32 amino acids) can changed for
different calculations. A plot of carbon percentage versus the reference
point is plotted to indentify the carbon distribution profile along the
sequence. A C program has been written to carry out all these calculation.
A sample input, output (see ) and plot
() are given and discussed.

Discussion
The program reads protein sequences and converts it into array of
elements. The percentage of carbon is computed for a group of atoms is
assigned to reference point residue. Normally the shift value of 5 is used. It
can be increased or decreased depends upon the resolution required.
Reduction in shift value creates too many points and makes the plot
congested. A shift value of 17 may be optimum. This value is half of the
smallest unit (35 atoms) that is producing 31.45% of carbon. Further
improvements in having all amino acids (including first and last 17
residues) represented in the output and in figures are underway. Also the
computation of carbon percentage at alpha carbon position will be
implemented for mutational studies and for other applications.

There is window length of 500 atoms taken for carbon percentage
calculation (). This value may be increased or decreased depends
upon required resolution. This can be from 35 to 1000 atoms length. The
35 atom length is chosen because the smallest unit which can produce
31.45 is 35 with 11 carbons in it. Carbon accumulation in active site or in
core can be easily identified at length of 500. So by default a length of 500
atoms is taken for general carbon profile study. To identify the residue
contributing to the stabilization or destabilization factors, one can reduce
this length. For mutational study a length value of 50 atoms may be
appropriate. A sample input and output are given below for length of 500
atoms and shift size of 17 atoms.

Input
&gt;gi|110833718|ref|YP_692577.1| hypothetical protein ABO_0857
[Alcanivorax borkumensis SK2]
MRHVMKRKATTLMATAISALILSGCGGEQAATPVSGIEPKVYTDSL
FAVMNADRTNYTKLIIGRLGPAGADSIKPHEYWEDLENGAPLPAQ
MFRYGAESVSEMTSEFSYSLQSLWPINGQNEPKTGLEKEGLQYIVD
NPGENFYGEEKLGDVTYYTAVYPDVAVAAPCVACHNNHKDSPKT
DFELGDVMGGVVIRVPM
So the input is protein sequence and the output is the residue number and
corresponding carbon percentage. This output can be plotted in XY plot for
better visualisation as shown in .

Conclusion
Carbon profile analysis software [CARBANA] has been developed and
presented here. This program is capable of locating the carbon accumulated
site in proteins. It can clearly identify the hydrophobic and hydrophilic
regions along the sequence. It can also pinpoint an amino acid which is
causing instability. Atomic level representation of proteins can yield better
results. This carbon analysis program is available online. This new
program is hoped to address several biological problems based on
hydrophobicity. Particularly, it can help in identification and development
of active sites, address the proteins in diseased and healthy state,
characterize the disordered proteins, address the role of carbon in half of
proteins and understand patterns and repeats in proteins.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Rajasekaran &amp; Vijayasarathy, Bioinformation 5(10): 455-457 (2011)

Plot of Carbana output. Points above 31.45% are hydrophobic regions.

