Background
Hop (Humulus lupulus) is a medicinal plant, but its major
profitable use is in flavoring of beer. This plant is dioecious (2n
= 2x = 20) with two heteromorphic sex chromosomes, X and Y
[,
,
]. 
The reproductive mode affects many aspects of
breeding and crop management such as male and female
reproductive organs are dimorphic [], families are highly
heterozygous, phenotypically variable and breeding while
cultivar developments are accomplished by single mating
followed by selection and fixation of favorable genotypes by
various means of asexual reproduction. SSR discovery in hops
has relied on the hybridization-based screening of genomic
libraries by means of artificial repetitive sequences and
sequencing of isolated clones in order to build up locus-specific
primers previously []. However, high-throughput sequencing
results engender information on thousands of expressed
sequence tags (ESTs) [].

Microsatellite or Simple Sequence Repeats (SSR) or Short
tandem repeats (STR) are 1-6 bp tandemly repeated motifs
present in both coding and non-coding regions of prokaryotic
and eukaryotic genome. The prominent frequencies of length
polymorphism associated with microsatellites provide the basis
for development of a marker system that has extensive
application in genetic research including studies of genetic
variation, linkage mapping, gene tagging and evolution [].
SSRs are used extensively as molecular markers because of their
multiallelic nature, co-dominant inheritance and relative
abundance. The foremost annoyance of SSRs as markers has
been their time consuming development in laboratory.
However, with fast-paced boost of nucleic acid in recent years, it
became realistic to screen for microsatellites in database for
numerous plant species. Variations in SSR regions originate
mostly from errors during the replication process, frequently
DNA polymerase slippage. These errors generate base pair
insertions or deletions respectively. [,
]. We have mined SSRs
from EST of Humulus lupulus to get the SSR polymorphism.
ESTs are short and single pass sequences read from mRNA
(cDNA) []. This represents a snapshot of genes expressed in a
given tissue. The use of EST or cDNA-based SSRs has been
reported for several species including grape [], sugarcane 
[],
durum wheat [], rye 
[], medicinal plant like basil 
[] and
Periwinkle []. There are various SSR identification softwares
such as MISA, SSR Finder, SSRIT, TRF, TROLL and sputnik. We
used MISA [] to identify SSR. Different types of SSRs and
their percentage distributions were examined. The forward and
reverse primer pairs were designed from the flanking ends of
SSRs. The functional annotation of these SSR containing
sequence was done.

Methodology
Sequence data source:
There are 25,495 ESTs of Humulus lupulus present in dbEST at
NCBI. The retrieved sequences were isolated from different
plant tissues like leaves, stem, root, etc. There is a chance of
occurrence of redundancy in the EST sequences. In order to
remove the redundancy, CAP3 assembler [,
] was used for
sequence assembly. The resulting non-redundant sequences are
contigs and singletons.

Microsatellite Identification:
SSR were detected using MIcroSAtellite identification tool
(MISA) written in the Perl scripting language [,
]. This tool
analyzes microsatellite repeats in FASTA formatted contig and
singlet files. EST derived SSRs were considered to contain
repeat motifs ranging in length from 1 to 6 bp. The minimum
numbers of repeats were 10 for mononucleotides, 6 for
dinucleotides and 5 for trinucleotides, tetranucleotides,
pentanucleotides and hexanucleotides. The analysis of SSRs was
done based on their types (mono to hexanucleotides), number of
repeats, percentage frequency of occurrences of each SSR motif
and their distribution in the sequence.

Gene Ontology Classification:
SSR-ESTs sequences with significant matches to protein entries
of Swiss Prot-Uniprot KB database were functionally classified.
Characterization of SSR-ESTs performed through gene ontology
terms using Amigo [,
]. The ontology classification was
done in terms of their biological process, molecular function and
cellular component. This characterization has been based on
analyzed SSR repeats.

Marker development:
Primer pairs for the SSR containing sequences were designed
using BatchPrimer3 software for developing microsatellite
markers []. 
The microsatellites containing contigs and
singletons were used for designing primers pairs. Forward and
reverse primer pairs were designed for marker development.

Discussion
ESTs are often represented by redundant cDNA sequences
making them difficult to analyze effectively for SSRs. To
eliminate the redundancy in sequences CAP3 program was
used. The identification of overlapping sequences to generate
contig and singleton sequences was done. 88.84% of ESTs
forming contigs indicate that the majority of the ESTs have
overlapping sequences while only 27.47% sequences were
unique and have no corresponding overlapping sequences. The
reduction of redundancy was found to be a sizeable proportion
that has reduced 61.39% that means that number of ESTs prior
to SSR analysis  (see supplementary material). The
study of occurrence of different types of SSR repeats revealed
that percentage distribution of mononucleotide SSRs is 60.44%
in contigs and 62.16% in singletons followed by dinucleotide
SSRs, 21.48% in contig and 19.9% in singleton 
(, ).

Among mononucleotide repeats, polyA/polyT repeats were
predominant while polyC/polyG repeats were rare 
(, ). 
A-T repeat motifs are the most abundant type of SSRs in
plants []. All dinucleotide repeat combinations excluding
homomeric dinucleotides can be grouped into classes namely,
(AG)n, (AT)n, (AC)n, (GT)n and (TC)n. It is evident that AT/TA
dinucleotide repeats were more frequent followed by CT/TC
and AG/GA (, ).

Among 10 unique trinucleotide repeat classes,
AAG/AGA/AGG/GAA/GAG/GGA (Contig-25% and singlet -
20.50) was the most frequent. The lowest frequency of
trinucleotides was observed with TGC/TCG/GTC/CGT/CTG
(contig-2.17% and singlet-2.2%) 
(, ). No
tetranucleotide, pentanucleotide microsatellite was observed in
contig sequences however these can be seen in singleton
sequences Frequency of AACT/CCTA (50%) was maximum
followed by AAAT/TATT and least frequency depicted in
AGAA (). Only two pentanucleotides repeats were
found there contribution was 50% ().In hexanucleotide
SSR motif CCGCCT depicted in contig and in singlet
CTCCGC/TCCTGC and CGAAGA/AGGAGC both are seen
with frequency of 50% ().

Codon Repetitions:
The trinucleotide SSRs are triplet codon that code for a
particular amino acid. It was observed that out of all triplet
codons of contig sequences, GAA (encoding Glutamic Acid)
repetitions are predominant followed by AAG (encoding
Lysine) and CAC (Histidine), while in singleton sequences CAC
is predominated followed by GAA. The triplet codon forms an open reading 
frame (ORF) translated to proteins ().


Amino acid distribution:
The trinucleotide microsatellite codes for 21 types of amino
acids, which includes stop codon. It was observed that out of all
coded amino acid in contigs sequences Asparagine and
Glutamic acid demonstrated the highest percentage of
occurrence followed by Isoleucine and Leucine ().
Where as in Singleton sequences Serine demonstrated the
highest percentage followed by Histidine ().

In Humulus lupulus serine occurs in Serine/threonine-protein
kinase and is involved in protein phosphorylation, positive
regulation of DNA and Serine acetyltransferase is involved in
cellular response to sulfate starvation. In contigs sequences
valine showed the least occurrence and in singlets methionine
and Cysteine were lowest in frequency.

The analysis of data revealed that the majority of amino acids
were polar in nature, both in contig (63.57%) and singleton
sequences (61.47%) and frequency of non polar contigs and
singleton sequences are 37.38% ,36.87% respectively
(, ). 
Similarly, frequency of occurance of aliphatic amino
acids in contig and singleton sequences 27.7% and 23.01% were
more than aromatic amino acids in contig and singleton (14.68%
and 20.8%) (, 
). The distribution study of chemical
nature of amino acids gives an insight that neutral amino acid
occurred more frequently than with 53.24 in contigs sequences
and 56.73 in singleton sequences in comparison with basic
amino acids (contig-22.28%,singleton-23.01%) and acidic amino
acids (contigs-15.21%, singleton-8.83%) (, 
).

Gene Ontology Classification:
Gene ontology based functional annotation of SSR- ESTs was
performed through BLASTx using NCBI database. BLAST best
hit were retained meeting the following criteria: E-value &lt; 1e-4,
and similarity &gt;=70%. The most significant matches for the SSRESTs
with unique SSR motif were considered. Out of 2651
unique SSR-ESTs, 835 had significant matches to proteins.
Functional annotation of these SSR-ESTs was performed using
Amigo. Gene ontology for the corresponding SSR's was
determined on the basis of sequence, domain and motif
similarity  and 
 (see supplementary material). A
biological process is a series of events accompolished by one or
more ordered assemblies of molecular functions. In a gamut of
biological process corresponding to SSR-ESTs, the most frequent
was Ribosome Biogenesis (32SSR-EST) followed by translation,
protein folding, embroyo development in seed dormancy,ATP
synthesis coupled proton transport, brassinosteroid biosynthetic
process, regulation of transcription, DNA-dependent, protein
phosphorylation, Photosynthesis.Molecular Function describes
activities, such as catalytic or binding activities,that occur at the
molecular level.In a gamut of molecular function, the most
frequent was Structural constitue of ribosome (95 SSR-ESTs),
protein binding, DNA binding, ATP binding, electron carrier
activity, hydrogen ion transporting, ATP synthase activity,
rotational mechanism, metal ion binding, lipid binding,
sequence specific DNA binding. A cellular component is a
component of a cell, but with the provision that it is a part of
some larger object; this may be an anatomical structure or a
gene product group. In a gamut of cellular components housing
putative proteins,the most frequent was chloroplast (151SSRESTs)
followed by cytosol (94 SSR-ESTs), Cell wall (66 SSRESTs),
Cytoplasm, Nucleus, Plasma Membrane.

Primer designing:
The primer designing have been done for PCR amplification of
the desired microsatellites using BatchPrimer3.0 software. Out
of 829 SSR-ESTs with significant matches, primers were
designed for 268 SSR-EST contigs and 373 SSR-EST singletons. It
was observed that forward and reverse primer pairs were
obtained from mononucleotide SSRs (264) followed by
trinucleotide (226). Hence a total of 641 SSR primer pairs were
designed.

Conclusion
Microsatellites serve for divergent roles in the field of plant
genomics.EST database provide a valuable resource for the
development of microsatellite markers, which are associated
with transcribed genes. Simple Sequence Repeats are an
important class of molecular markers for genomics and plant
breeding applications due to their abundance, hyper variability,
and suitability for high-throughput analysis, high
polymorphism and transportability. Development of SSR
markers from the EST database saves both cost and time, once
sufficient amounts of EST sequence are available.
Computational Approaches have been used here to mine ever
increasing EST sequences in public databases. The publicly
available collections of 25,495 expressed sequence tags (ESTs)
from Humulus lupulus have been assembled and clustered using
CAP3 assembly program. Assembly of EST sequences resulted
in 9844 non-redundant EST sequences which were reported to
have 2955 EST-SSRs. Among all the percentage frequency of
mono-nucleotide SSRs is maximum and hexanucleotide has
minimum frequency. Functional annotation of 2651 SSR-EST
was performed and 835 have significant matches.829 SSR-ESTs
were subject for primer designing which yielded a total of 641
primer set for Humulus lupulus that can be applied in studies of
genetic variation, linkage mapping and comparative genomics.

Supplementary material
Data 1
First Author is thankful to University Grants Commission, New
Delhi for a research fellowship. The help of Sanchita Gupta,
Research Scholar, CIMAP, at various stages of manuscript
preparation is also acknowledged.

Citation:Singh et al, Bioinformation 8(3): 114-122 (2012)

(A) Percentage distribution of different SSRs; (B)
Percentage distribution of mononucleotide SSRs; (C) Percentage
distribution of drinucleotide; (D) Percentage distribution of
rinucleotide SSRs; (E) Percentage distribution of hexanucleotide
SSRs

(a) Percentage distribution of different SSRs; (b)
Percentage distribution of mononucleotide SSRs; (c) Percentage
distribution of drinucleotide SSRs; (d) Percentage distribution of
trinucleotide SSRs; (e) Percentage distribution of tetranucleotide
SSRs; (f) Percentage distribution of pentanucleotide SSRs; (g)
Percentage distribution of hexanucleotide SSRs.

Frequency of distribution of contig triplet codon (A) Repetition of contig sequence codon; (B) Repetition of singlet
sequence codon.

(a) Percentage distribution of amino acids of contig
sequences; (b) percentage distribution of amino acids of singlet
sequences.

(a) Percentage frequency of polar &amp; non-polar amino
acids; (b) Percentage frequency of hydrop hilic &amp; hydrophobic
amino acids; (C) Percentage frequency of aromatic &amp; aliphatic
amino acids

a) Percentage frequency of polar &amp; non-polar amino
acids; b) Percentage frequency of hydrophilic &amp; hydrophilic
amino acids; c) Percentage frequency of aromatic &amp; aliphatic
amino acids.

