Background:
In late years, relations of carcinogenesis and copy number 
alteration (CNA) attract attention in conjunction with impaired 
expression of genes. Microarray-based genome-wide copy 
number analyses have revealed that a tremendous amount of 
alterations were in malignant genomic DNAs comparing to 
normal DNAs in various malignancies [,
]. Accumulation of 
CNAs is thought to be one of triggers for malignant 
transformation and also for remarkably decreasing prognosis 
by easily causing recurrence or metastasis [,
,
]. Although 
comprehensive analyses for either genomic CNAs or gene 
expressions have been frequently performed by a number of 
researchers, the precedence study has rarely reported in 
genome-wide correlation between CNAs and abnormal gene 
expressions [,
,
,
]. Some reports showed that approximately
15 to 60% of CNAs were positively correlated with gene 
expression profiles [,
,
,
].

Epigenetic regulation, such as DNA methylation or histone 
modification including methylation, acetylation and 
phosphorylation, is thought as one of the factors which may 
lead a discrepancy between CNAs and gene expression profiles 
[,
,
]. 
However, it may be possible that some of the gene 
expression changes are more severely influenced by CNAs than 
epigenetic regulations. Although there should be some 
biological mechanisms for the correlation between CNAs and 
gene expressions, the mechanisms are not fully understood. 

Generally, each CNA has a difference in the length of DNA 
sequence which can be short as tens of thousands of base pairs, 
longer than hundreds of millions of base pairs, or something 
between them []. Therefore, in addition to CNA profiles such 
as loss/deletion and gain/amplification, the length of the 
genomic mutation is possibly another factor to cause expression 
changes of genes encoded on the genomic region which has an 
abnormality in DNA copy number. To the best of our 
knowledge, no comprehensive study has been performed for 
discovering the association between genomic length of CNAs 
and gene expression changes. We hypothesized that the 
expressions of genes encoded on a long CNA segment tend to 
be more susceptible for copy number changes than genes on a 
shorter CNA segment because a wide range of chromosomal 
region covers more valuable sequences for genes to be 
efficiently translated from genomic DNA. Those gene 
expressions may show changes positively correlated with 
patterns of altered copy numbers; down-regulation for 
loss/deletion, up-regulation for gain/amplification. This is the 
first report discussing about the association between genomic 
lengths of genome-wide CNAs and expressions of genes 
encoded on those CNA segments by analyzing the data from 
microarrays for human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and 
colorectal carcinoma (CRC).

Methodology:
Clinical specimens:
Fresh-frozen tissue samples were collected from 10 HCC 
patients (9 male, 1 female) and 7 CRC (3 male, 4 female) 
patients who had undergone surgical resection at the Tokyo 
Medical and Dental University (TMDU, Tokyo, Japan) between 
2005 and 2008. This study was approved by the institutional 
review board. Informed consent was obtained from all patients 
in accordance with the guidelines by the review board. 
Adjacent nonmalignant tissues corresponding to the malignant 
tissues were also collected as non-tumor samples. All specimens 
were collected in cryotubes, frozen just after the resection and 
stored at ­80°C until the time of use. Clinical characteristics of 
samples are shown in  (see supplementary material).

DNA copy number analyses:
Genomic DNAs were extracted from frozen specimens except 
CRC malignant tissue and isolated using a QIAamp DNA Mini 
Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). For malignant CRC samples, laser 
microdissection (LMD) was applied to isolate tumor epithelial 
cells from sectioned tissues using LMD6000 (Leica 
Microsystems GmbH, Wetzlar, Germany) and extractions of 
genomic DNAs were done with Qiagen QIAamp DNA Micro 
Kit. The experiment was performed by strictly following the
assay manual and using GeneChip Human Mapping 250K Sty 
Arrays (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA), which contained 238,229 
SNP probe sets.

Gene expression analyses:
Total RNAs were extracted from frozen specimens except CRC 
malignant tissue using RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). 
For malignant CRC samples, LMD was applied to isolate tumor 
epithelial cells from sectioned tissues using Leica LMD6000 and 
extractions of total RNAs were done with Qiagen RNeasy Micro 
Kit. Following the manufacturer's instructions, prepared 
cocktails were hybridized on GeneChip Human Genome U133 
Plus 2.0 Arrays and signal intensities for probe sets were 
detected by GeneChip Scanner 3000 7G.

Data analysis:
The raw intensity data of SNP probe sets were first analyzed by 
Affymetrix Genotyping Console 4.0 software to produce the 
genotype data to generate the CNA data by estimation of the 
copy number for each SNP probe set comparing each intensity 
data with corresponding normal DNA. Subsequently, we 
identified continuous CNA regions based on integrated 
chromosomal positions of SNP probes and annotated these 
regions with relative gene symbols which were about 23,000 
genes taken from the EntrezGene database []. If a gene has 
multiple probes, the mean of the expression values of all the 
probes was used for the gene. Then, a log ratio between the 
gene expressions of the non-tumor and tumor tissues was 
calculated for each gene. The genes without locus information 
were excluded and remaining 20,532 genes were used for the 
subsequent analysis. The CNA data and the log ratios were 
merged based on locus information. For each continuous CNA 
region, the numbers of the up- and down-regulated genes in the 
tumor tissue were counted. Then the data for all CNA regions 
were merged and classified into 8 classes based on the length of 
the region: &lt;100Kb, 100-500Kb, 500Kb-1Mb, 1-5Mb, 5-10Mb, 10-
50Mb, 50-100Mb and 100-500Mb. A fraction of the up/down 
regulated genes was calculated in each class and the 
CochranArmitage test was performed to test if the data have a trend.

Results and Discussion:
In terms of an integration analysis between CNAs and 
corresponding gene expressions, there has been no study 
describing a higher correlation. Secondary factors may have 
influence to reflect a copy number change to gene expression. 
Therefore, we hypothesize that a length of CNA segment may 
affect transcriptional efficiency and performed a comprehensive 
correlation study between the lengths of CNA segments and 
corresponding gene expressions by analyzing microarray data 
of DNA copy number and gene expression in two different 
cancers.

First, we investigated the relationship between the genomic and 
transcriptional profiles by directly comparing array data which 
were normalized and annotated with gene information (data 
not shown). However, the direct comparison did not show any 
significant correlation. In terms of the effect on the 
transcription, there might be mainly two different types of 
CNAs: influential CNA and non-influential CNA. Epigenetic 
regulation such as DNA methylation could be another factor to 
change the transcriptional switch directly without having 
genomic alterations. CNA may have an indirect effect to gene 
expression through epigenetic regulation.

Secondly, we compared the lengths of CNA segments and the 
fractions of gene expression within the segments. The 
correlation between CNA and gene expression was analyzed by 
the Cochran-Armitage trend test. Results of the 
CochranArmitage trend test revealed a significant association between 
the length of CNA region of amplification/deletion and the 
fraction of up/down regulated genes in HCC-gain (p=0.021), 
HCC-loss (p=2.7×108
) and CRC-gain (p=0.021). There was no 
significant association in CRC-loss (). To the best of our 
knowledge, this is the first time that the correlation between the 
lengths of CNA segments and the corresponding genes 
expression profiles were investigated by the genome-wide 
integration analysis.

For gain of copy number, the lengths of CNA and gene 
expressions were significantly correlated in HCC and CRC. 
Genome sequence and secondary and/or higher-order structure 
might be the causes for a larger influence on a gene expression 
within a longer CNA region. A wide range of CN gain 
segments might cover a larger number of gene sequences. In 
addition, it could increase the copy number of not only a whole 
gene sequence but also non-coding sequences and a promoter 
region which is necessary to initiate the transcription of the 
gene. In contrast, a gene may not be properly transcribed with 
incomplete sequence of gene or promoter region which is not 
fully covered by CNA segment. Therefore, a longer gain region 
tends to cover more complete DNA sequence and up-regulate 
the gene expression. Since a higher-order structure of genome 
DNA is formed for a transcriptional event, genome sequence 
with a wide range of CNA regions may be more likely to form a 
higher-order structure [,
,
], resulting up-regulation of 
genes.

For CN loss, the trend analysis in HCC showed a significant 
correlation but the gene expressions were not significantly 
correlated with the length of segments in CRC. Whenever a part 
of the gene sequence or the promoter region is lost, it may 
become impossible to promote the transcription. As same as the 
effect of gain, the length of loss might have an influence to 
structure of genomic DNA, such as an imbalance in a 
multidimensional formation of chromosomes and unfolded 
structure of DNA during a gene transcription. It may be
possible that the imbalance affects even gene transcriptions 
around the genomic region with sequence deletions. A 
secondary effect of the imbalance could be associated with 
irregular transcriptions of genes without any alterations in copy 
number. However, the influence of CN loss is more complicated 
because the chromosomal location of loss seems also critical for 
the transcription. We assume that the influence of loss varies 
depending on which part of sequence missing and the length of 
it.

Conclusion:
The results of the Cochran-Armitage trend test revealed a 
significant association between the length of CNA region of 
amplification/deletion and the fraction of up/down regulated 
genes in HCC-gain, HCC-loss and CRC-gain. There was no 
significant association in CRC-loss. These results suggest that 
more genes are up-regulated as the length of gained region 
increases. As for the lost region, further analysis is required 
because of the discrepancy in the results of the two different 
types of cancers.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work was supported in part by grant-in-aids from Science 
and Technology Promotion Adjustment Expenses of Japan (No. 
08005234), Integrated Database Project and a scientific research 
grant (No. 20510184) from the Ministry of Education, Culture, 
Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) in Japan.

Citation:Miyaguchi et al, Bioinformation 7(6): 280-284(2011)

Relationships between the length of CNA region and the number of up/down regulated genes. The horizontal and 
vertical axes represent the length of chromosomal region of amplification/deletion and the fraction of the up/down regulated 
genes. Results of the Cochran-Armitage trend test revealed a significant association between the length of CNA region of 
amplification/deletion and the fraction of up/down regulated genes in HCC-gain (p=0.021), HCC-loss (p=2.7×108) and CRC-gain 
(p=0.021). There was no significant association in CRC-loss. These results suggest that more genes are up-regulated as the length of 
gained region increases. As for the lost region, further analysis is required because of the discrepancy in the results of the two 
different types of cancers.

