Background
Myristoylation is an irreversible post-translational protein modification (PTM),
in which a myristoyl group is derived from myristic acid and covalently
attached via an amide bond to the alpha-amino group of an NH2-terminal
residue of a nascent polypeptide. This PTM occurs most commonly on glycine
residues exposed during co-translational NH2-terminal methionine removal.
The usual irreversible modification is absolutely essential for the biological
functions of most myristoylated proteins. A cytosolic enzyme, N-myristoyl
transferase (NMT; E.C. 2.3.1.97), is responsible for the transfer of myristate
(from myristoyl-CoA) onto the NH2-terminal residue of protein substrates.
Therefore, NMT is a potential chemotherapeutic target in antifungal 
[] and
anticancer drug design[]. 
The protein substrates of NMT (reviewed by Boutin
[]) 
are so diverse, including regular enzymes, such as the protein kinase A,
protein kinase G, cytochrome b5 reductase, NO synthase, most of G
proteinαsubunits, and key enzymes in transforming processes, such as nonreceptor
associated tyrosine kinase (fyn, lyn, src, hck), and structural proteins
(gag, UL, etc) of retroviruses and other viruses which include poliovirus,
polyma virus, herpes simplex, influenza virus and so on. Attachment of the
myristoyl residue provides hydrophobicity to influence the partitioning of
proteins to cellular membranes; it can serve to promote protein-protein
interactions []. 
Since myristoylation has a central role in virus maturation and
oncogenesis, specific NMT inhibitors might also lead to potent antivirus
agents. The experimental procedure for identifying a myristoylated protein
includes cellular labeling by [3H] myristate, isolation of the protein, and
recognition of the released fatty acid. The experimental techniques involve
reverse phase high-performance liquid chromato- graphy (RP-HPLC), gas
chromatography and mass spectrometry. The ionization techniques of mass
spectrometry also involve fast-atom bomdartment, chemical ionization,
electrospray and tandem mass spectrometry. The sensitivity of these techniques
is insufficient and they often require much more biological materials. It is,
therefore, desirable to identify precisely and reliably myristoylated proteins for
protein functional annotations in the proteome-wide, especially when
experimental measurements are unavailable.

Studies of specificity of NMT protein substrates 
[] led to a proposed model of
the 8-residue NH2-terminal consensus sequence (GNXXXXRR). In PROSITE
[], 
a 6-residue sequence model, pattern PS00008 (G−{EDRKHPFYW}
−X(2)−[STAGCN]−{P}), is presented as the consensus sequence of
myristoylated proteins. In this motif, uncharged residues are allowed in
position 2 while charged residues, proline and large hydrophobic residues are
not allowed; most residues are allowed in position 3 and 4; small uncharged
residues are allowed in position 5 and Serine is favored; proline is not allowed
in position 6. Then, Johnson et al. 
[] focused on the fifth position of the 8-
residue model and proposed one which only Ser or Thr is allowed in the fifth
position (GXXXS/TXXX). Later, sequence analysis of myristoylated proteins
[] 
suggests a protein motif that has three regions: positions 1-6 for fitting the
binding pocket, positions 7-10 for interacting with the surface of Nmyristoyltransferase
at the mouth of the catalytic cavity and positions 11-17 for
containing a hydrophilic linker. Many attempts have been done for developing
predictors for myristoylated proteins, such as pattern search, scoring system,
neural network (NN). Hitherto, the proposed predictors are based on protein
sequences alone. Among them, PS00008 of PROSITE [] constructed from a
small dataset was available in 1990; however, it had not been updated since
then, and was reported that it produces a great number of not only false positive
but false negative predictions. Maurer-Stroh et al. 
[] showed a taxon-specific
and score-based predictor named as NMT predictor. Regarding predictions
with scores lower than the threshold, they gave a lower bound and defined
them as “twilight zone” predictions. Although Boisson, Giglione and Meinnel
(BGM) [] 
attempted to modify its threshold parameter and improve
identification for plant protein sequences, “twilight zone” predictions are still
unsolved. Bologna et al. [] 
suggested a rule-based model using average
output scores generated from 25 NNs, and Podell and Gribskov 
[] put
forward a plant-specific hidden Markov model. However, the former one needs
much more samples to optimize the rule set and the latter one is also taxonspecific.
In the present study, we show new predictors, trained by using support
vector machine (SVM), to improve the prediction of myristoylated proteins.

Methodology
Training Datasets
We retrieved 447 entries, each of which is clearly labeled with “N-myristoyl
glycine” in the field of feature table, through online search with a keyword
“myristate” against the UniProtKB database. Each sequence length of these
proteins is larger than 100 residues; they cover a wide range of functions,
including kinases, phosphatases, cytochrome c oxidase and so on. We noted
that Maurer-Stroh's learning dataset and ours share 210 common entries. The
negative dataset [] 
consists of 429 entries, which were selected from
GenBank by text-based searching. These entries contain four kinds of proteins:
cytosolic proteins, secreted proteins, N-TM-C (transmembrane proteins with an
NH2-terminal export signal predicted by SignalP and a hydrophobic COOHterminus),
and transmembrane proteins. Homology similarity of sequences in
the negative set was reduced to less than 50% by the employment of Smith-
Waterman algorithm. Sequence-length requirement for these proteins in the
negative dataset is also larger than 100 residues.

Feature vector construction
According to the motif proposed by Maurer-Stroh et al. 
[], we used 17
residues at NH2-terminus as input for each protein sequence. To transform
these residues into a numerical format (called a feature vector), we applied a
binary transform (20 binary values per residue), or the value Kyte-Doolittle
(KD) scale, or their combination. Here, we exemplify the numerical
transformation of a protein sequence with the feature vector named
“KD+binary”, which is a vector of 355 components. Of 355 components, the
first 15 components are generated by applying the KD scale (window size of
three residues; 15 windows in a 17-residues sequence), and the remaining 340
components (17×20) are generated from binary transformation. Also, we tried
to combine KD with another scale representing physicochemical and biological
properties of amino acids. As for this additional scale, we examined all the 543
scales in AAindex database [].

SVM and Cross-validation assessment
In this study, 1-norm soft margin optimization of SVM 
[] and Radial basic
Function (RBF), as the kernel function, were employed for our task. A K-fold
cross validation (CV) scheme was used to prevent the over-fitting problem and
K = 5 was adopted here, i.e. the whole data set was divided at random into five
equal subsets, each of them served as the test set in turn and the remaining
subsets used for training. Regarding CV assessment, the most frequently used
performance measure, the area under the ROC curve (AUC) that provides us a
single numeric value, was also used in this study; the closer AUC is to 1.00, the
better performance of the predictor is; AUC of 0.50 means the predictor that
predicts the class at random.

Discussion
Since myristoylation has a central role in virus maturation and oncogenesis,
NMT inhibitors would be potent antivirus and anticancer agents. Hence, the
ability to computationally recognize NMT substrate has important implications.
Apart from accelerating NMT protein substrate annotation in the current
database, it would be helpful for designing NMT inhibitors. The assessments of
various SVM predictors are summarized in (see 
). 
As it's shown, the “Binary” predictor shows better performance than
the “KD” or the “KD+binary” predictor; however, the remaining predictors in
Table 1 improve the performance of the “Binary”. Owing to addition of
properties of amino acids, the prediction accuracies are all over 98% (the
average value is 98.34%) and corresponding AUC values are also over 0.98,
which is close to the perfect value (1.0). Regarding the top ten of 543
predictors whose features were generated by utilizing KD with other scales (the
remains of them are not listed here), these ten scales representing properties of
amino acid could be roughly classified into three categories: preference of
protein secondary structure (AURR980117, RICJ880115, MAXF760104,
MAXF760105, TANS770107 and ISOY800108), relative stability
(ZHOH040102) and geometry property (FAUJ880104, FAUJ880106 and
LEVM760102). The motif search by PS00008 of PROSITE, reported by
Maurer-Stroh et al. [] and Bologna et al. 
[], generates a great number of the
false positive hits as applied to large database scan. Therefore, we first
compared our results with those of NMT predictor developed by Maurer-Stroh
et al. []. 
They showed the jack-knife tests for their learning dataset show that
for the fungi dataset, the prediction accuracy is 95.9% (353/368) and is 95.5%
(21/22) for the eukaryotic and viral sequences. Comparing with these results,
the average prediction accuracy (98.34%) produced by our SVM predictors is
higher and improved by 3%. The NMT predictor is based on a statistical
scoring scheme and is taxon-specific, i.e., one has to choose the parameter set
according to the taxonomy of the query protein sequences. There are two
taxon-specific fields: one is fungi, the other is eukaryota and their viruses (nonfungal).
In contrast, our SVM predictors are taxon-free and have few
parameters. Further, the classification rule of the NMT predictor generated is
based on positive sequences. For screening of unknown proteins, however, it is
difficult to balance between false positive and false negative errors.

Second, we also compared our predictors with the NN predictor 
[]. In the
NN predictor, Bologna et al. used 16 amino acids after the NH2-terminal
glycine. NN input vectors of amino acids were encoded by sparse coding, i.e.,
binary values. Each amino acid was represented by 40 binary values. The first
20 binary values stand for amino acid types and the last 20 binary values stand
for properties of each amino acid which are based on taxonomy of 20 amino
acids, such as aromatic, aliphatic, neutral, charge, and so on. The prediction
accuracy produced by the NN method is 93.8%. Compared with those in Table
1 (except for “KD”), the prediction accuracy is improved by 4.12% (97.92%)
for “Binary”, 3.53% (97.15%) for 
“KD+binary” and 4.54% (average 98.34%)
for the remaining predictors. Compared with predictors proposed in the
previous studies, the current predictors trained in this work show higher
performance. We must note that since there is a subtle difference among the
conditions used in the different methods, it could not make us do a complete
fair comparison.

Conclusion
In this study, we presented new predictors based on the SVM for myristoylated
protein prediction. The ten SVM predictors, whose features were generated by
applying the KD scale and other scales, showed average accuracies of 98.34%.
Roughly compared with those of previous studies, the prediction accuracies
were improved by about 3 to 4%. Achievement of the higher prediction
accuracies of our SVM predictors may imply that, except for hydrophobicity of
amino acids represented by the KD scale, preference of protein secondary
structure, relative stability and geometry property represented by the other ten
scales might also be important to myristolation. Our SVM predictors have
remarkable generalization ability by virtue of support vector machine
algorithm, and we believe that our new predictors will be helpful to identify
myristolated proteins on the proteomic scale. A crystal structure (PDB code:
1IID) shows that protein substrate in active site prefers to α helix and coil
rather than β sheet since β sheet needs more space. Regarding myristoylation of
proteins, the further investigations of the secondary structure and space
requirement also need be done in future.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Cao et al, Bioinformation 6(5): 204-206 (2011)

