Background
Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension (PAH) is a severe disease of
Pulmonary arteries involving vasoconstriction, pulmonary
vascular remodeling, and insitu thrombosis []. PAH develops
the blood flow through the pulmonary arteries and the right
side of the heart is under increasing strain to pump blood
through to the lungs, leads to breathlessness, chest stiffness and
fatigue []. Laboratory and clinical investigations have clearly
shown that Endothelin receptors are over expressed in several
forms of pulmonary vascular disease and play a significant
pathogenetic role in the development and progression of
pulmonary vasculopathy []. There are two distinct receptors
for the endothelin family of peptides, endothelin receptor A
(ETA) and endothelin receptor B (ETB) and these two receptors
have unique locations and binding affinities for the endothelin
peptides []. The ETA receptors are expressed on pulmonary
vascular smooth muscle cells, whereas ETB receptors are located
on both pulmonary vascular endothelial cells and smooth
muscle cells. ETB receptors have an important role in the ETdependent
protracted presser effects. Under some
circumstances it actually contributes to pulmonary
vasoconstriction, through a population of ETB receptors located
on vascular smooth muscle cells []. Bosentan is the first oral
endothelin receptor antagonist (ERA) that blocks the effect of
endothelin receptors. It belongs to a class of highly substituted
pyrimidine derivatives, with no chiral centers. It is designated
chemically as 4-tert-butyl-N - [6-(2-hydroxy-ethoxy) -5- (2-
methoxy-phenoxy) - [2, 2] - bipyrimidin-4-yl] - benzene
sulfonamide monohydrate []. In vitro functional experiments
performed on animal and human tissues showed that Bosentan
behaves as a competitive antagonist on ET receptors. It is
intended to inhibit vasoconstriction, hypertrophic and fibrotic
effects by blocking the actions of receptors (ETA and ETB) which
leads to reduction of blood pressure in lungs. Bosentan interact
with the binding of ET-1 and other ET peptides to both ETA and
ETB receptors []. The objective of this work is to identify the
role the mechanism of Bosentan on ETB receptor and to model
the protein, and to identify the interactions with Bosentan and
their derivatives.

Methodology
The sequence information of Endothelin-B receptor-
Homosapiens (Accession No: P24530) is retrieved from Swiss
Prot (http://www.swissprot.org) and submitted to SBASE
server (http:// hydra icgeb.trieste.it/sbase) for domain
prediction. The predicted domain (118-386) is search for
similarity (Protein blast) and the related protein structure was
identified by the BLAST program against PDB. The
macromolecular structure (PDB ID 3C9M []), which shows
maximum identity with high score and less e-value designated
as template. The 3D model was generated by using the
academic version of MODELER9v7
(http//:www.salilab.org/modeler), based on the information
obtained from sequence alignment []. The 3D structure
obtained from modeler were further refined through molecular
dynamics and equilibration methods using NAMD 2.5 with
CHARMM27 force field and the system contains TIP3P water
model. The energy of the structure was minimized with 10,000
steps with cutoff of 12 Å for vdW interactions. The equilibrated
system was simulated with 1 picoseconds (PS); to hold back the
original conformation, for that (NPT) constant pressure and
310K constant temperatures has been choosed []. Finally, the
structure having the least energy with low RMSD was used for
further studies. The final structure obtained, was analyzed by
Ramachandran's map drawn using PROCHECK v.3.0, and
environment profile using ERRAT graph (Structure Evaluation
server). The model satisfying all the parameters after evaluation
was considered for the further process []. Theoretical Active
site prediction of Endothelin-B receptor was predicted using
CASTP server. CASTP identifies and measures pockets and
pocket mouth openings, as well as cavities. Here we input the
modeled protein for predicting the ligand binding sites and the
CASTP server predicts the amino acids crucial for binding
interactions []. The Bosentan library was generated manually
by addition of polar groups in the required position and 30 new
compounds were generated as derivatives of Bosentan Table 1
(see supplementary material). The Docking interactions are
done with GOLD (Genetic Optimization of Ligand Docking),
based on genetic algorithm which is used for docking of
Bosentan and their derivative compounds []. The interaction
of these derivatives with the active site residues are thoroughly
studied using molecular mechanics calculations. The
parameters used for GA were population size 100, selection
pressure 1.1, and operator parameters for crossover, mutation
and migration were set to 100, 100 and 10 respectively. Default
cutoff values of 3.0 X (dH-X) for hydrogen bonds and 6.0 X for
vdW were employed. During docking, the default algorithm
speed was selected and the ligand binding site in the
Endothelial B receptor was defined within a 10 A° radius with
the centroid as CE atom of ASP81. The number of poses for each
inhibitor was set 100, and early termination was allowed if the
top three bound conformations of a ligand were within 1.5X
RMSD []. After docking, the individual binding poses of each
ligand were observed and their interactions with the protein
were studied.

Results
Homology Modeling of Endothelin – B receptor Domain:
A high level of sequence identity should guarantee a more
accurate alignment between the target sequence and template
structure, and here 3C9M (Chain A, Structure of a mutant
bovine Rhodopsin in hexagonal crystal form protein) with
Endothelin-B receptor have high sequence identity and the
identity of the reference protein with the Endothelin B receptor
domain is 36%. Structurally conserved regions (SCRs) for the
model and the template were determined by multiple sequence
alignment (A) superimposition of template and model structure
(B), 3D structure of modeled protein (C) and Ramachandran’s
plot (D) are illustrated in . In this study, the model is
made up of residues 118 - 386 because the active domain region
was identified in between these residues by the SBASE server.
Coordinates from the reference protein (3C9M) to the SCRs,
structurally variable regions (SVRs), N-termini and C-termini
were assigned to the target sequence based on the satisfaction of
spatial restraints (C).

Superimposition of 3C9M with Endothelin- B receptor domain:
This model was refined by molecular dynamics method and the
final stable structure of the Endothelial B receptor is
superimposed with Cα trace of template. The weighted root
mean square deviation of Cα trace between the template and
final refined models was 1.81 Å. This final refined model was
used for the identification of active site and for docking of the
substrate with the protein. This protein has the structural
alignment with 13 helices and 2 sheets like a covered barrel
shape. The overall scores indicates acceptable protein
environment. After the refinement process, validation of the
model was carried out using Ramachandran plot calculations
computed with the PROCHECK program. Altogether 86.7% of
the residues of Endothelin B receptor were in favored and
allowed regions. The overall PROCHECK G-factor of
Endothelin-B receptors was – 0.16 and VERIFY 3D environment
profile was good. The compatibility score above zero in the
VERIFY-3D program showed except ten, all residues are
reasonable which makes us to believe that the structure of the
Endothelin-B receptor protein is reliable.

Active site Identification of Endothelin B receptor:
The possible binding sites of Endothelin B receptor was
searched based on the structural comparison of template and
the model build with CASTP server. Since, Endothelin B and
the 3C9M are well conserved in both sequence and structure;
their biological function should be identical. The predicted
results are interesting and its shows the amino acid position 17-
22, 78-98 and 197-208 are predicted to conserved with the active
site. Here we consider the experimental binding sites of 3C9M
include some of the residues as mentioned above. Thus in this
study ARG 82, ARG 84 and HIS 197 are chosen as the more
favorable sites to dock the substrate.

Docking of inhibitors within the active site of Endothelin B receptor:
In the presence of inhibitory results of Bosentan, new structural
features and fictionalization requirements were proposed for
the basic Bosentan scaffold that could increase affinity with
Endothelin B receptor and consequently improves the anti
hyper tense property []. Among these requirements, the
modifications of the group in the structure by a more polar
group were expected to increase the activity. These interesting
results prompted us to prepare Bosentan analogues. Here we
developed different analogues based on the structure of
Bosentan by replacing with more polar groups than already
existing groups, with little change in the properties of
analogues represented in  (see supplementary
material). These were used for docking studies to identify
better drug derivative. Docking of inhibitors given in 

(see supplementary material) with Endothelin B was
performed using GOLD 3.0.1, which is based on genetic
algorithm (CCDC). The structure of Bosentan used for
designing derivatives. The docking procedure includes several
steps. First, the protein-ligand complex is generated using the
GOLD package without constraints between the ligand and the
specific amino acids of the pocket. The algorithm exhaustively
searches the entire rotational and translational space of the
ligand with respect to the receptors. The flexibility of the ligand
is given by dihedral angle variations. The various solutions
evaluated by a score, which is equivalent to the absolute value
of the total energy of the ligand in the protein environment.
Thus docking with the program GOLD version 3.0.1 was
employed to locate the appropriate binding orientation and
conformation of compounds with Endothelin B receptor.

Gold Score fitness function:
Gold Score performs a force field based scoring function and is
made up of four components namely, hydrogen bond energy
(H-bond); vander Waals energy (External vdW); vander Waals
energy (internal vdW) and Intermolecular hydrogen bond
(internal H-bond) energy. The external vdw score is multiplied
by a factor of 1.375 when the total fitness score is computed.
This is an empirical correction to encourage protein-ligand
hydrophobic contact. The fitness function has been optimized
for the prediction of ligand binding positions [].

GoldScore Fitness = S (hb_ext) + 1.3750*S (vdw_ext) + S (hb_int) +
1.0000*S (int)
S (int) = S (vdw_int) + S (tors)

Where S (hb+ext) is the protein-ligand hydrogen bond score, S
(vdw+ext) is the protein-ligand van der Waals score, S (hb+int)
is the score from intramolecular hydrogen bond in the ligand
and S (vdw+int) is the score from intramolecular strain in the
ligand.

Among the 29 inhibitors BD6 derivate of Bosentan showed high
affinity than others towards Endothelin B. The structure of the
BD6 was shown in the . Bosentan docked results shows
interaction of Endothelin B receptor with 2 hydrogen bonds.
The active residues in the Endothelin B receptor ARG84 binds
to O4 of Bosentan with one hydrogen bond. The other hydrogen
bond is formed between SER88 and O25 of Bosentan. BD6
derivative forms four hydrogen bonds with Endothelin B
receptor with the active residues. It is observed that BD6
derivative was located at center of active site and is stabilized
by hydrogen bonding interactions and these interactions are
represented in . Bosentan total Gold Score fitness
function is 30.03 Kcal/mol. This shows that Bosentan has good
inhibitory activity on Endothelin B receptor. Gold Score fitness
function of BD6: Total Gold Score fitness function is 45.21
Kcal/mol. Here we have chosen Gold Fitness function than
Chem score fitness function as Gold score fitness function is
marginally better than ChemScore fitness function. Even
though, some other compounds in this library are having better
scoring the BD6 shows better interactions and those interactions
in Bosentan binding region  (see supplementary
material). So, we have demonstrated that, among the 29
derivatives designed the binding capacity is highest for BD6 and
can be further used for further investigations.

Conclusion
In this work, we have constructed a 3D model of Endothelin B
receptor of Homosapiens, and obtained a refined model after
energy minimization. The validation of protein structure
through SAVS server and NAMD validates the protein is stable
enough. The stable structure is further used for docking with
Bosentan and its derivatives. Docking results indicate that
conserved amino-acid residues in Endothelin B receptor play an
important role in maintaining a functional conformation and
are directly involved in donor substrate binding. The
interaction between the domain and the inhibitors proposed in
this study are useful for understanding the potential
mechanism of domain and the inhibitor binding. The hydrogen
bonds play important role for the structure and function of
biological molecule in this study, and we found that ARG 82,
ARG 84 and HIS 197 of Endothelin B are important for strong
hydrogen bonding interaction with these inhibitors. To the best
of our knowledge ARG 82, ARG 84 is conserved in the domain
and may be important for structural integrity or maintaining
the hydrophobicity of the inhibitor-binding pocket. Among 29
derivatives used for docking, BD6 derivative showed best
binding energy than other compounds. The total fitness
function is high for BD6 when compared to other derivatives
including Bosentan. According to our investigations from the
docking results BD6 (C26H27N5O7S) can act as better Endothelin
antagonist. Future investigation of other theoretical studies and
experimental studies may confirm that BD6 as a potent
inhibitor.

Supplementary material
Data 1
One of the authors Mr. Chandrabose Selvaraj thanking
Alagappa University for research grant and P. Seshapani
Thanking Sri Venkateswara University for research support

Citation:Rayalu et al, Bioinformation 8(2): 081-086 (2012)

Modeling of Endothelin B receptor with sequence
aligned (A) with 3C9M morphed (B) to build 3D model
structure (C) and the model structure Ramachandran's plots
(D)

Comparisons of interactions between Bosentan and
its derivatives against Endothelin B receptor

