Background
Vibrio cholerae is the cause of a waterborne disease affecting thousands of life
every year []. 
The outbreak in October, 2010, in Haiti demonstrates the global
issue of cholera and resulted in approximately 1,000 deaths within a month 
[].
Cholera is an acute diarrheal disease caused by the gram-negative bacterium,
Vibrio cholerae. There are more than 200 serogroups of Vibrio cholerae
present in the natural environment []. However, two serogroups, O1
(widespread with El Tor and classical biotypes) and O139 (colonizes few
regions of Asia) have been associated with the epidemics and pandemics of
cholera during the last 25 years [–
]. The O1 (El Tor biotype ¯ Ogawa
serotype) serogroup is responsible for the recent outbreak in Haiti 
[]. The
symptoms of cholera are caused by the secretion of an entero-toxin called
cholera toxin (CT) [–
] which is encoded by virulence factor genes; ctxA and
ctxB [–]. 
These genes are acquired from a lysogenic filamentous
bacteriophage (CTXφ) through CTXφ DNA integration into the host Vibrio
cholerae genome [–
]. It should be noted that the incidence of cholera
outbreaks with serogroups other than O1/O139 (collectively referred as non
O1/non O139) has also been recorded [,
,–
]. These strains are
responsible for the sporadic outbreaks [–
]. It is known that the virulent
factors for non-(O1/O139) are different from the O1/O139 strains 
[,
,
].
However, non-(O1/O139) strains with ctxA and ctxB genes also have been
observed [–].

CT, also known as choleragen, is a hetero-hexameric AB5 complex in structure
() 
[–] 
and is composed of an enzymatic A subunit (CTA) and a
cell targeting B subunit (CTB) [–
]. The enzymatically activated A subunit
catalyzes adenylate cyclase to cause massive excretion of electrolytes from
bowel [,
]. 
However, the homo-pentamer B subunit is mandatory for
pathogenesis because of its vital role in binding to receptors of target cells 
[–]. 
The B complex binds to the intestinal epithelium and the A molecule then
detaches and enters the cell via endocytosis. The A molecule then goes onto
ribosylating the Gs alpha-subunit of G proteins that results in constitutive
production of cAMP. The result is excretion of bicarbonate, chloride,
potassium, and sodium ions as well as water from these cells 
[]. Thus, the
AB5 complex assembly is critical for pathogenesis. The virulence factors in
both O1/O139 and non-(O1/O139) strains have been identified 
[,
,
,
,
,
,
]. 
It should be noted that information on the diarrheagenic potential
of non-(O1/O139) is limited. The effect of mutations in the toxin from all
known serogroups is not available. Therefore, it is of importance to describe
the virulence factors in both O1/O139 and non-(O1/O139). This is possible
with the help of known structural complexes available in Protein databank
(PDB). A comprehensive analysis of the AB5 CT structures from PDB
describing the nature of A and B5 interface has been documented elsewhere
[]. 
Here, we describe the significance of mutations in CT among serogroups
based on their residue positional occurrence (either at solvent exposed or
interface regions of the AB5 complex).

Materials and Methodology
CT sequence dataset
We created a dataset of 27 CTA (O1: 14; O139: 5; non-O1/O139: 8) and 165
CTB (O1: 121; O139: 37; non-O1/O139: 7) sequences as available from
GenBank (release 177; year 2010 [] using the procedure outlined in 
. 
The number of sequences in the datasets is stated in Table 1 (see
). There are more CTB sequences than CTA
sequences suggesting a higher frequency of mutations in CTB. Some partial
sequences have been included in the dataset due to the non-availability of their
full-length sequences in GenBank. In addition, these partial sequences also
harbored mutations compared to wild type sequences.

Multiple Sequence Alignment (MSA) of CTA and CTB
MSA is performed using ClustalX 2.0.12 [] with the substitution matrix
PAM 80. A gap-opening penalty of 10 and extension-penalty of 0.2 were used
for the alignment. Sequences of CTA and CTB with known structures (PDB
ID: 1XTC []) 
belonging to the O1 classical 569B strain were used as
reference sequences in this alignment. The alignment was used to identify
mutations in CTA () and CTB 
() among the different
serogroups. Mutations were identified at six residue positions (7, 28, 112, 134,
163 and 222) in CTA () and at 13 residue positions (3, 7, 13, 15, 18,
22, 25, 34, 46, 47, 52, 60 and 94) in CTB () among O1/O139 and non-
(O1/O139) strains.

CT structures
The formation of the AB5 complex is critical for pathogenesis. This is achieved
through the formation of B5 and AB5 complexes. The B5 complex is formed
through the assembly of 5 monomeric B subunits arranged in a circle with a
central groove in the first stage. This results in an assembly with each B
subunit juxtaposed on either side with two other B subunits with a stable
interface as shown in . Mutations in the B subunit and the potential
occurrence at the CTB/CTB interface influence the formation of the B5
complex. The formation of AB5 complex occurs through the interaction of
CTA and B5 complex. Thus, mutations in either CTA or CTB among the
different serogroups have effect at the interface of CTA/ CTB complex.

Interface residues
Interface residue positions were identified using the change in solvent
accessible surface area (ASA) upon complex formation from a monomer state
to a dimer state both within B5 complex and between CTA/CTB. ASA is
calculated using an algorithm developed by Lee and Richard (1971)
implemented in the software SURFACE RACER with a probe radius of 1.4 Å
[]. 
We identified the interface residues between CTA/CTB complex and
within the B5 complex in respective serogroups using the procedure described
elsewhere []. 
In this procedure, interface residue positions were identified
using ASA analysis of subunits in the AB5 structural complexes.

Mapping mutated residue positions to structures
The structures for AB5 and B5 complexes of the wild type O1 strain are
available at the PDB. It is of interest to infer structural effect caused by the
mutations in other known serogroups. It is well known that homologous
sequences have similar structures and they differ only in side chain details.
Therefore, mapping of mutated residue positions from MSA ( and
) to known structural regions (exposed, buried, interface) provide the
opportunity to identify mutations at the interface of CTA/CTB and within B5
(). This approach identified mutations (at six residue positions such as
7, 28, 112, 134, 163 and 222) in CTA that are located at structurally solvent
exposed regions of the complex (). It also helped to locate several
mutations (seven residue positions such as 3, 15, 25, 34, 47, 52 and 60) in CTB
that are at the B5 homo-pentamer subunit interfaces ( and 
).

Structural 3D visualization of mutated residue positions in serogroups
We used Discovery Studio Visualizer (v2.5.5.9350) to illustrate the mutated
residue positions in CTA () and CTB 
() among the
serogroups. The mutated residue positions at the interface of CTA/CTB
() and with B5 
() is also shown.

Results
 
describes the dataset of CTA and CTB sequences retrieved from
GenBank (release 177; year). The dataset consists of CTA and CTB sequences
from O1 (El Tor, Classical, Matlab), O139 and non-(O1/O139) serogroups. We
compared the CT sequences for O139 and non-(O1/O139) with the wild type
Classical O1 serogroup.  and 
 show the results of MSA for
CTA (27 sequences) and CTB (165 sequences), respectively. The wild type O1
Classical sequence with known structure (PDB ID: 1XTC) from strain 569B
was used as reference in the alignment. The alignment is showed only for
sequences with mutations (7 CTA and 52 CTB mutants) to the wild type
reference sequence ( and 
). The mutations observed from the
MSA of known CTA and CTB sequences are summarized in and
(see ), respectively. The mutations in CTA
are found at 6 residue positions (7, 28, 112, 134, 163 and 222) among
serogroups in the dataset. The mutations in CTB sequences are at 13 residue
positions (3, 7, 13, 15, 18, 22, 25, 34, 46, 47, 52, 60 and 94) in the dataset.

 
shows that the I222Y mutant is in the O139 strain (4260B) and the
other six are in non-(O1/O139) strains. Data also shows that all strains except
for strains B (2 positional mutations) and J31W (3 positional mutations) have
only one positional mutation ( and 
). Similarly, mutations
were seen at one position in 18 strains (O1: 12; O139: 6), at two positions in 26
strains (O1: 14; O139: 7; non-(O1/O139): 5), at 3 positions in 6 O1 strains, 4
positions and 6 positions in one non-(O1/O139) strain for CTB ( and
). The non-(O1/O139) serogrouped J31W strain carried the maximum
number of mutations in CT (CTA and CTB). Thus, the position specific
mutations for CTA and CTB sequences were observed.

The availability of CT structure (PDB ID: 1XTC) provides an opportunity to
map position-specific mutations in different serogroups to its structural
preference (solvent exposed, buried, interfaces). Therefore, the significance of
these mutations in the formation of the AB5 assembly could be subsequently
inferred. The mutations (dark shades as background) in the CTA and the CTB
are shown in  and 
 along with corresponding interface
residues (light shades). This helps to relate the consequence of mutations in
structure. CT is an AB5 complex () consisting of several layers of
subunit protein interfaces formed by non-covalent interactions. Therefore, it is
of interest to map the mutations in serogroups to their structural positions
(interior, interface, surface).

Protein-Protein interfaces are formed between A and B5 as well as within B5.
The mutations in A and B will potentially affect A/B5 interface (
). B5
is a homo-pentamer and each B subunit is juxtaposed with similar CTB units
on either side (). Similarly, mutations within B will possibly affect the
formation of B5 such that the D-E and D-H interfaces are affected 
().
Nevertheless, these interfaces should be translated into sequence positions
using ΔASA in solved CT structures as described in 
. Moreover, 
maps the mutations in CTA to their occurrence at the CTA/CTB interface
() and in CTB to their possible occurrence at the D-E and D-H
interfaces () in B5. This comparison helps to identify the
presence of mutated residues () 
in CTA () and CTB () 
at their respective CTA/CTB () interface and CTB/CTB 
() interfaces. The 6 mutations (R7W, S28N, E112G, V134G, G163R and
I222Y) in CTA are positioned at the solvent exposed regions of the subunit
() with no mutations at the CTA/CTB interface. However, it should be
noted that the S28N and I222Y mutation were closely located to the CTA/CTB
interface (). 
The role of these mutations in CT complex assembly is of
interest. A number of mutations in the CTB sequence are positioned at the
CTB/CTB interfaces unlike the mutations in CTA sequence. The mutations at
residue positions 3, 15, 25, 34, 47, 52 and 60 are within CTB/CTB interfaces
(). The nature of amino acid mutations in CTA and CTB among
O1/O139 and non-(O1/O139) serogroups are given in (see
).

Discussion
Choleragen (CT) and Choleragenoid (CTB) have been used as cholera vaccine
candidates []. 
A number of subunit vaccine candidates using CTA ((S63K,
R192G, R192N) [], 
(I16A or V72Y, I16A+Y68S, V72Y+Y68S) [],
(V53D, V53E, V53Y, S63K, V97K, V97Y, Y104K, Y104D, Y104S, P106S)
[]) 
mutants and CTB recombinants have been developed in addition to heat
killed attenuated Vibrio cholerae as vaccines. Sequence and structural studies
of CT offer tremendous opportunity for the improvements in vaccine candidate
design and development. The presence of CT epitypes 
[] and heterogeneity
in CTB subunit [] 
also need to be considered from a vaccine perspective. A
vaccine for cholera must target O1, O139 as well as non-O1 and non-O139
strains to have effective control over cholera outbreaks. Moreover, different
serogroups of non-(O1/O139) strains (with ctxAB genes 
[,
,
,
]) and
newly emerging Vibrio cholerae strains (O1 Matlab 
[–], O1 El Tor with
altered CTB [,
]) must be taken into consideration in cholera vaccine
design. Hence, comparison studies on CTA and CTB sequences from various
Vibrio cholerae serogroups provide insights in developing an effective toxin
analog for vaccine design against multi serogroups.

A number of sequence comparison studies show CT sequence homology
among various Vibrio cholerae serogroups. Recently, Kumar et al. (2009)
documented a new CT variant of the Vibrio cholerae O1 El Tor biotype
isolated from Orissa (India) []. The study highlighted a novel mutation
(H20N) in CTB and the presence of altered CTB of the Classical biotype in the
El Tor clinical isolates. Raychoudhuri and team (2009) conducted a study to
attest the replacement of El Tor biotype ctxB allele by Classical biotype ctxB
allele in O1 strains []. A study by Ansaruzzaman and colleagues (2004)
reported H18Y and T47I substitutions in CTB of El Tor strain and these
sequences are similar to CTB of Classical biotype []. Previously, a study
demonstrated the emergence of new El Tor strains with a modified Classical
biotype CT []. 
Thus, a dataset of sequences () for CTA and CTB
representing diverse serogroups isolated at various periods of time from a
variety of sources and locations available in GenBank (release 177) is created
for this study. The nature of mutations () among the serogroups is
presented for CTA () 
and CTB () sequences. Several studies
have demonstrated the effects of site directed mutations in CTA as well as in
CTB subunits for the wild type O1 strain (Table 5 see 
). 
Manufactured site directed mutants leading to decrease or loss in
toxicity has been reported for CTA (R7K, R11K, I16A, R25G, E29H, S68Y +
V72Y, E112Q, F223D) and CTB (R35D, H57A, L77D, I74D, T78D). Thus,
the role of site directed mutants in the loss of toxicity is known for the wild
type O1 strain. Therefore, it is important to evaluate the effect of mutations
caused by natural selection pressure among serogroups.

The multiple sequence alignment (MSA) of these sequences showed mutations
in CTA (at six residue positions such as 7, 28, 112, 134, 163 and 222) and CTB
(at 13 residue positions such as 3, 7, 13, 15, 18, 22, 25, 34, 46, 47, 52, 60 and
94) among O1/O139 and non-(O1/O139) strains. The effects of these mutations
in the formation of a clinically functional cholera toxin (AB5 hetero-hexamer)
are of significant importance. Reports describing the emergence of new
serogroups with novel mutations in CTA and CTB are available. However,
studies on the effects of mutations in CT relative to CTA/CTB-pentamer
interface () and within CTB/CTB interfaces 
() are not yet
available. Here, we present results of a comprehensive analysis of mutations in
CTA and CTB sequences from several serogroups ().

This mutational data is presented relative to A/B5 and CTB/CTB interfaces for
AB5 assembly to understand its functions. Data suggest the presence of
mutations in CTA () 
and CTB () at the solvent exposed,
interior, subunit interface regions of the complex. The mutations (at 6 residue
positions such as 7, 28, 112, 134, 163 and 222) in CTA are located at
structurally solvent exposed regions of the subunit. However, several mutations
(7 residue positions such as 3, 15, 25, 34, 47, 52 and 60) in CTB are at the B5
homo-pentamer subunit interfaces. Thus, the role of these mutations in CTA
and CTB towards the assembly of AB5 CT among the O1/O139 and non
(O1/O139) strains is inferred from this study ( and 
). It should also be
noted that some of these mutations (polar to non-polar or vice versa) are largely
non-synonymous (causing physical and chemical property shift) in nature and
have potential effect on protein-protein interactions of the CT subunits
affecting AB5 formation (). 
Thus, data presented in  is allinclusive,
updated, relevant and specific for several known serogroups. This is
of significance towards the improvement of recombinant CT protein complex
analogs for vaccine design against multi serogroups.

Conclusion
The structural role of cholera toxin in pathogenesis is known for the wild type
O1 strain. It was of interest to document its role in other known serogroups
showing mutations with the wild type. We described the structural location of
such mutations in the known serogroups to infer its functional role. We
documented that mutations in CTA are at the solvent exposed regions of the
AB5 complex, while those in CTB are at the CTB/CTB interface of the homopentamer
complex. It is observed that these mutations are also nonsynonymous
(i.e. polar to non-polar or vice versa) in property. Thus, the effect
of these mutations in the AB5 assembly is inferred. It is also of global
importance to quantify precisely the structural effects caused by these
mutations. The resulting data is relevant in designing a recombinant CT protein
complex analog for vaccine design against multiple serogroups. Coupled to
these analyses, it may be stated also that from a clinical perspective, the task of
enhancing oral cholera vaccines entails reducing bacterial and Giardia infection
and improving diet [].

Supplementary material
Data 1
[–]

We wish to express our sincere appreciation to members of Biomedical
Informatics (Pondicherry, India) for many discussions on the subject of this
article. GS is thankful to the Department of Biotechnology (AIMST University,
Malaysia) for support.

Citation:Shamini et al, Bioinformation 6(1): 1-9 (2011)

Structural model of a cholera toxin (CT). CT is a hetero-hexameric
complex (AB5) consisting of CTA (194 residues A1 and 46 residues A2) and
CTB (103 residues) pentamer with D, E, F, G and H chains.

Creation of sequence dataset for CTA and CTB. A sequence dataset
of CTA and CTB was derived from GenBank (release 177) using KEYWORD
search as illustrated in the flowchart. The KEYWORD search “cholera toxin”
resulted in 1257 hits. This set consists of 27 CTA sequences, 165 CTB
sequences according to GenBank description and available annotations. The
remaining 1065 sequences with descriptions such as secretion protein, cholera
toxin transcriptional activator, ADP-ribosylation factor, GNAS complex,
dopamine receptor, Pertusis toxin, Shiga-like toxin and the like are eliminated
from the dataset. Thus, a CT sequence dataset of 192 sequences (Table 1 in supplementary material)
consisting of 27 CTA and 165 CTB was created. The CTA and CTB sequences
are included in the dataset as available in the GenBank. The biased availability
on the amount of CTA and CTB sequences in GenBank is attributed to the
likely observation of frequent mutations in CTB.

MSA for the CTA subunit of different serogroups. The MSA was performed using the wild type O1 classical strain sequence with known structure
(PDB ID: 1XTC) as reference. The position specific mutations among the available CTA sequences (27) with reference to the classical sequence are indicated
using dark shades. CT is an AB5 hetero-hexamer and hence, the CTA/CTB interface residues in CTA are indicated using light shades.

MSA for the CTB subunit of different serogroups. The MSA was performed using the wild 
type O1 Classical strain with known structure (PDB ID:1XTC) as reference. The position specific 
mutations among the available CTB sequences (165) with reference to the Classical sequence are indicated using dark
shades. B5 is a homo-pentamer and hence, the CTB/CTB interface residues in B5 are indicated using 
light shades. It should be noted that the mutated residues at the CTB/CTB interfaces in B5 are 
highlighted using both dark and light shades at their corresponding position specific residues.

Structural model of CTB/CTB interfaces in B5. B5 is a homopentamer
and each CTB subunit (D) is juxtaposed by two other CTB units on
either side (E and H). Thus, the D subunit creates two different types of
interfaces (D-E and D-H) on either side. This subsequently results in two
different “position specific interacting” patterns in sequence for subunit D.

Representation of mutated residue positions in serogroups to
interface residues in CT complex as a function of their residue position
identified using ΔASA measure.
Mapping of CTA mutations to CTA/CTB interface residues in CTA 
(Please refer to  for the visual illustration of
CTA/CTB interface).

Mapping of CTB mutations to CTB (D subunit)/CTB
(E subunit) interface residues (Please refer to  for the visual
illustration of D-E interface).

Mapping of CTB mutations to CTB (D
subunit)/CTB (H subunit) interface residues (Please refer to  for the
visual illustration of D-H interface).

 It should be noted that mutated residue
positions are mapped on to corresponding interface residue positions in all the
three cases (a), (b) and (c).

Structural models of CTA (a) and CTB (b) subunits with known
mutations among archived serogroups. We used the structure with PDB entry
(1XTC) for generating this visual using the freeware Discovery studio from
Accelrys Inc. A total of 6 unique mutations thus observed among the known CTA sequences 
(Table 2 in supplementary material) from several serogroups are shown at their corresponding 6 residue positions using the 
Corey-Pauling-Kultun (CPK) residue model representation. 

Fourteen unique mutations thus observed among the known CTB sequences 
(Table 3 in supplementary material) from several 
serogroups are shown at their corresponding 13 residue positions using the CPK residue model representation.



Structural models of CTA (a) and CTB (b) subunits with known
mutations at the respective structural interfaces or solvent accessible regions in
the complex among archived serogroups. We used the structure with PDB entry
(1XTC) for generating this visual using the freeware Discovery studio from
Accelrys Inc. 
 A total of 6 unique mutations thus observed among the known
CTA sequences (Table 4 in supplementary material) from several serogroups are shown at their
corresponding 6 residue positions using the CPK residue model representation.
All of these 6 mutated positions are present at the solvent exposed regions of
CTA in both monomer and CTA/CTB complex state.

A total of 7 out of 14 unique mutations thus observed among the known CTB sequences (Table 4 in supplementary material)
from several serogroups are shown at their corresponding 7 (3, 15, 25, 34, 47,52 and 60) out of the 13 residue positions using the CPK residue model
representation are at the CTB/CTB interfaces in the B5 complex.



