Background
Dihydrofolate Reductase is a small enzyme that plays a supporting, but an
essential role, in the building of DNA and other processes. DHFR catalyzes the
reduction of 7, 8-dihydrofolate (DHF) through stereo-specific hydride transfer
from reduced nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) cofactor.
The enzyme is essential for tetrahydrofolate (THF) biosynthesis, plays a central
role in promoting cell growth and proliferation, and is the target of several
anticancer and antibiotic drugs []. Enzymes with essential roles are sensitive
targets for drug therapy. Dihydrofolate reductase was the first enzyme to be
targeted for cancer chemotherapy []. PfDHFR is a well-characterized target
for antimalarial antifolate drugs, such as pyrimethamine (Pyr) and cycloguanil
(Cyc). DHFR of Plasmodium and other protozoa are expressed on the same
polypeptide chain with its accompanying enzyme, thymidylate synthase (TS).
TS and DHFR sequentially catalyze consecutive reactions in the biosynthesis of
thymidylate, which is required for DNA synthesis [].

Malaria, caused by the protozoan parasite Plasmodium falciparum, affects
about 300 million individuals and causes about 2 million deaths per year.
Traditional anti malarial agents such as chloroquine are ineffective in many
regions of the world due to drug resistance, chemotherapy targeted at
dihydrofolate Reductase (DHFR) and thymidylate synthase (TS) has proven to
be highly effective. Even partial inhibition of DHFR or TS can lead to DNA
strand fragmentation and cell death [–
]. In malaria pharmacology, these two
enzymes are of particular interest because traditional drugs such as
pyrimethamine and cycloguanil are known to inhibit parasite DHFR-TS. In
recent years, however, the effectiveness of these inhibitors has been
compromised by malarial parasite strains expressing mutant forms of DHFRTS
[]. 
One obvious way to continue selective killing of malarial parasites is to
identify new folate analogs directed at DHFR- or TS-active sites that are
effective against drug-resistant parasites 
[]. The folate antagonists are an
important class of therapeutic compounds, as evidenced by their use as antiinfective,
anti neoplastic, and anti-inflammatory drugs 
[]. Dihydrofolate
reductase -thymidylate synthase (DHFR-TS) from Plasmodium falciparum is a
validated target for antifolate antimalarials 
[]. Hence, inhibition of DHFR and
its role in combating malaria has provided us the rationale to carry out structure
based drug design studies. In this study, compounds synthesized to target
malaria, from literature, are considered to perform DHFR protein, extracted
from Protein Data Bank, and ligand interactions using docking software,
AutoDock. The validation procedures are carried out and the interactions and
scores are generated.

Materials and Methodology
Out of all the entries for DHFR (dihydrofolate reductase) from RCSB protein
data bank, Plasmodium vivax 2BL9 was taken for docking analysis. The active
site residues were found to be THR194, ASP53, MET54, PHE57, LEU45,
SER117, ALA15, ILE13 and ILE173. Protein - ligand docking studies were
performed to evaluate the algorithm and scoring function efficiency between a
standalone AutoDock 3.0.5 and experimental activities. The five 2, 4, 6-
trisubstituted triazine inhibitors (active, moderately active and inactive) were
selected from the article Bioorganic and Medicinal Chemistry Letters 15 2005
531-533 for docking studies. All these molecules as well as the bound ligand of
the protein 2BL9 were docked by using the software AutoDock and the binding
affinities were predicted. All molecules are drawn using ISIS draw and energy
minimized using Tsar Software (www.accelrys.com).

Automated docking was used to locate the appropriate binding orientations and
conformations of various inhibitors in the 2BL9 binding pocket. To perform the
task, genetic algorithm routine implemented in the program AutoDock 3.0. was
employed []. 
All water molecules were removed from the original Protein
Data Bank file. Polar hydrogen atoms were added and Kolllman charge, atomic
solvation parameters and fragmental volumes were assigned to the protein
using AutoDock Tools (ADT). To validate the docking protocol, bound ligand
CP61240 coordinates in the crystal complex was removed and the bond orders
were checked. For docking calculations, Gasteiger partial charges were
assigned to the tested derivatives and CP61240, and non-polar hydrogen atoms
were merged. All torsions were allowed to rotate during docking.

The program AutoGrid used to generate the grid maps. Each grid was centered
at the crystal structure of the corresponding 2BL9 bound ligand CP61240. The
grid dimensions were 60 × 60 × 60 A°3 with points separated by 0.375 A°.
Lennard-Jones parameters 12-10 and 12-6, supplied with the program, were
used for modeling H-bonds and van der Waals interactions, respectively. The
distance-dependent dielectric permittivity of Mehler and Solmajer 
[] was
used for calculation of the electrostatic grid maps. For all ligands, random
starting positions, random orientations and torsions were used. The translation,
quaternion and torsion steps were taken from default values in AutoDock. The
Lamarckian genetic algorithm and the pseudo-Solis and Wets methods were
applied for minimization using default parameters. The standard docking
protocol for rigid and flexible ligand docking consisted of 10 independent runs
per ligand, using an initial population of 50 randomly placed individuals, with
2.5 × 106 energy evaluations, a maximum number of 27000 iterations, a
mutation rate of 0.02, a crossover rate of 0.80, and an elitism value of 1. The
probability of performing a local search on an individual in the population was
0.06, using a maximum of 300 iterations per local search. After docking, the 10
solutions were clustered into groups with RMS deviations lower than 1.0 Å.
The clusters were ranked by the lowest energy representative of each cluster.

Results and Discussion
Before docking the ligands (Table 1 see ) into the
2BL9 binding site, the docking protocol was validated. CP61240 bound ligand
was removed from the active site and docked back into the binding pocket.
AutoDock predicted binding conformation of CP61240 is shown in 

with the X-ray crystallographic obtained conformational superposition 
[].
The RMSD of all atoms between these two conformations is 0.72 A° indicating
that the parameters for the docking simulation are reasonable in reproducing
the X-ray crystal structure and can be extended to search the enzyme binding
conformations for other inhibitors accordingly. The ligands selected for
docking studies and the corresponding interaction energies are given in 
. 
The active site of 2BL9 offers many different binding modes for these
compounds as they are strongly dependent on the attached substituent. This
observation results from the comparison of ligand binding orientations in the
active site for known CP61240 and selected compounds. All the ligands were
docked deeply within the binding pocket region of 2BL9 forming more
hydrogen bonds with Ile173, Asp53 and Cys14 ( and 
). As shown in
, 
their AutoDock binding free energies (ΔGb, kcal/mol) and inhibition
constants were obtained. Among them compound1 exhibited the lowest free
energy -7.14 kcal/mol. In other words, it posses the highest potential binding
affinity into the binding site of 2BL9 protein. The overall good correlation,
given in , between the experimental biological activities and the
AutoDock binding affinities made a clear representation of utilizing
computational techniques for drug design. The correlation coefficient of 0.961
indicates that the correlation was fairly good and demonstrates the applicability
of the method.

Most docked inhibitors interacted in the same fashion as observed with cocrystallized
ligand of 2BL9 protein showing H-bonds with Ile13, Asp53,
Thr194 and Ile173. The binding modes and geometrical orientation of
compounds 2a, 2b, 2c, 2l and compound 1 nearly resemble the 2BL9 bound
ligand CP61240. Moreover, the compound 2a showed two hydrogen bonds
with Ala15, and the compound 2b showed only one interaction with Cys49
respectively, where as compound 2c has no H-bond interactions. Compounds
2l and 1, showed low binding energy than others, yet the number of hydrogen
bond interactions are two with Thr194 and Ser117 and four with
Thr194,Ile13,Asp53 and Ile173, respectively. The most active molecule was
found to be 2a and the inactive compound was compound 1. Compound 2a
exhibited the dock score -10.72 kcal/mol and it showed two H-bond
interactions () 
with active site of 2BL9, one with carbonyl oxygen of
Ala15 and the other with nitrogen of Ala15. From the 
, it became
evident that there existed a good correlation between experimental activities
and computational binding energies as obtained with AutoDock. Hence, further
proof was provided by plotting a graph between experimental values and dock
scores in , 
where it is clear that they represented a correlation of 0.961.

Conclusion
AutoDock runs resulted in binding energy scores that range from -7.14 to-
10.72 kcal/mol. Among the five 2, 4, 6-trisubstituted triazine inhibitors selected
for docking studies, an excellent correlation of 0.96 was observed. Therefore,
the dock analysis suggests the importance of evaluating the prediction accuracy
of scoring functions adopted in AutoDock and showed excellent correlation
between binding free energy (kcal/mol) and IC50 (µM) values against 2BL9
DHFR protein. Hence, this study demonstrates the importance of drug design
studies and utility of computational tools in correlating experimental values
with computational binding energy scores.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Adinarayana &amp; Devi. Bioinformation 6(2): 74-77 (2011)

Docked superimposed image of 2BL9 bound ligand CP61240 within
the binding site region.

Image showing compound 2a interacting residues within the active
site region of 2BL9.

Image showing Compound 1 interacting residues within the active
site region of 2Bl9.

Correlation between experimental and AutoDock binding free
energies of selected 2, 4, 6-trisubstituted triazine ligands.

