Background
Toxoplasma gondii is an obligate intracellular
Apicomplexan parasite that can infect a wide range of warmblooded
animals including humans []. Toxoplasma gondii was
initially discovered by accident, in 1908, by a scientist, Charles
Nicolle, who was working in North Africa and searching for a
reservoir of Leishmania in a native rodent, Ctenodactylus gundi.
The gundis live in the foothills and mountains of Southern
Tunisia and were commonly used to study Leishmania at
the Pasteur Institute in Tunis. The name Toxoplasma means ‘arc
form’ in Greek and was named according to the crescentshaped
morphology of the tachyzoite and bradyzoite stages
of the organism observed by the scientists. At about the
same time, Alfonso Splendore working in Sao Paulo discovered
a similar parasite in rabbits. This pathogen is one of the most
common in humans due to many contributing factors that
include: (1) its complex life cycle allows it to be transmitted both
sexually via felid fecal matter and asexually via carnivorism.
(2) Toxoplasma has an extremely wide host cell tropism that
includes most nucleated cells. (3) In humans and other
intermediate hosts, Toxoplasma develops into a chronic infection
that cannot be eliminated by the host’s immune response or by
currently used drugs. In most cases, chronic infections are
largely asymptomatic unless the host becomes immune
compromised. Together, these
and other properties have allowed Toxoplasma to achieve infection
rates that range from ~23% in the USA 
[] to 50-70% in France
[].

There are two major reasons that new drugs are needed to treat
Toxoplasma infections. First, the drugs currently used to treat
Toxoplasma infections are poorly tolerated, have severe side
effects, and cannot act against bradyzoites []. Second, there are
reports that Toxoplasma is developing resistance to the current
generation of drugs [,
]. How resistance to these drugs has
developed is not known but is critical to understand because it
will lead to improved drug design and will increase our
understanding of the biological functions of these drug targets.
One way to understanding mechanisms of resistance is to
compare the transcriptional profiles of wild-type and resistant
parasites grown in the absence or presence of the drug. Such
studies in bacterial resistance have demonstrated that pathogen
responses to antibiotics are multifactorial and complex 
[].
Whether the same will be true in Toxoplasma is unclear, but data
from these types of experiments will likely impact new anti-
Toxoplasma drug design.

Over the last decade, complete genome sequences of several
pathogens have been determined, and many more such projects
are currently under way. While, these data potentially contain
all the determinants of host-pathogen interactions and possible
drug targets, Development of effective therapies for
intracellular eukaryotic pathogens is a serious challenge, given
the protected location of these pathogens and the similarity of
their biology to that of the host []. Genomics approach can be
applied to evaluate the suitability of potential targets using two
criteria, i.e. “essentiality” and “selectivity” 
[]. The target must be
essential for the growth, replication, viability or survival of the
microorganism, i.e. encoded by genes critical for pathogenic lifestages.
The microbial target for treatment should not have any
well-conserved homolog in the host, in order to address
cytotoxicity issues. This can help to avoid expensive deadends
when a lead target is identified and investigated in
great detail only to discover at a later stage that all its inhibitors
are invariably toxic to the host. Genes that are conserved in
different genomes often turn out to be essential 
[]. A gene is
deemed to be essential if the cell cannot tolerate its
inactivation by mutation, and its status is confirmed using
conditional lethal mutants. Identifying cellular processes that are
unique to the parasite is therefore a crucial step towards
defining appropriate drug targets. Detection of genes that are
non-homologous to human genes, and are essential for the
survival of the pathogen represents a promising means of
identifying novel drug targets [].

We have performed a comparative analysis of metabolic
pathways of the host Homo sapiens and the pathogen T. gondii.
Enzymes from the biochemical pathways of T. gondii from the
KEGG metabolic pathway database were compared with
proteins from the host H. sapiens, by performing a BLASTp
search against the non-redundant database restricted to the H.
sapiens subset. Enzymes, which do not show similarity to any
of the host proteins, below the threshold, were filtered out as
potential drug targets []. The T. gondii genes for the
identified enzymes were also retrieved for BLASTP search to
identify any homologous protein in humans. We have listed
out such potential drug targets which are playing some
important work in more than one pathway. Out of these, one
important target is Glutamate dehydrogenase enzyme, which is
having several activities like catalytic activity, oxidoreductase
activity and binding activity. Glutamate dehydrogenase is also
involved in oxidation process, metabolic process and amino
acid metabolic process. During metabolic pathways analysis it
was found that, it is a common enzyme in three metabolic
pathways Alanine, Aspartate and Glutamate Metabolism,
Arginine and Proline Metabolism and Nitrogen Metabolism. As
this is also present in the targets of tropical diseases of TDR
(Tropical disease related Drug) target database and no PDB and
MODBASE 3D structural model is available. Thus, as a case
study, we have built homology models and validated by using
various online servers. The model was further explored for the
molecular dynamics simulation study, virtual screening and
molecular docking studies with suitable inhibitors. The three
dimensional model of glutamate dehydrogenase presented here
would be helpful in guiding both enzymatic studies as well as
design of specific inhibitors. A complete drug target
identification using metabolic pathways analysis and molecular
modeling, docking studies workflow is followed in this work and
given in .

Methodology
Identification of Unique Enzymes as Drug Targets:
Metabolic pathway information was obtained from the pathway
database Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes. Enzyme
commission numbers (EC) of the pathogen Toxoplasma gondii
and the host H. sapiens were extracted from the KEGG database.
Pathways unique to Toxoplasma gondii were filtered out. Out
of total 84 metabolic pathways in humans 55 metabolic
pathways were present in T. gondii. Out of these 55 metabolic
pathways, 29 were such which contain unique enzymes
which are only present in T. gondii and absent in humans
(, see supplementary material). These are the pathways
that do not appear in the host (H. sapiens) but are present in the
pathogen. We further identified unique enzymes among shared
pathways under carbohydrate metabolism, energy metabolism,
lipid metabolism, nucleotide metabolism, amino acid metabolism,
glycan biosynthesis and metabolism of co-factors and vitamins
were obtained from the KEGG database. A total of 48 enzymes
that are present in Toxoplasma gondii but absent in H. sapiens
were obtained and their corresponding protein sequences
were retrieved from the KEGG database. Out of these 48 enzymes,
11 enzymes were commonly present in more than one pathway
(, see supplementary material) The protein sequences
for these 48 unique enzymes were retrieved and were
subjected to BLAST search against human protein sequences
database at an expectation E-value cutoff of 10-2 to identify nonhomologous
genes in Toxoplasma gondii. Removing enzymes
from the pathogen that share a similarity with the host protein
ensures that the targets have nothing in common with the
host proteins, thereby, eliminating undesired host protein-drug
interactions []. The above search resulted in 48 enzymes that
had “no hits” in BLAST search. Thirty of these 48 “no hits”
belonged to the unique pathways set.

Comparative Homology Modeling:
Out of the 11 enzymes, commonly present in more than one
pathway, we have built a homology model of one of the
potential drug target, Glutamate dehydrogenase enzyme (Gene
I.D.: TGME49_093180 and EC No. is EC: 1.4.1.4.

Template Selection and Model Building:
Template selection is a critical step in homology modeling. The
amino acid sequence of NADP-specific glutamate
dehydrogenase of Toxoplasma gondii ME49 (target)
(XP_002370120.1) was retrieved from the protein database of
National Center of Biotechnology Information (NCBI,

http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). The three-dimensional
structure of the protein was not yet available in Protein Data
Bank and Modbase Database. Also there is no expression
information available for this gene; hence the present exercise of
developing the 3D model of the glutamate dehydrogenase of
Toxoplasma gondii was undertaken. BLASTP search was
performed against Brookhaven Protein Data Bank (PDB) with
the default parameters to find suitable templates for homology
modeling.

The academic version of MODELLER9v6
(http//:www.salilab.org/modeller), was used for 3D structure
generation based on the information obtained from sequence
alignment. The MODELLER software employs probability
density functions (PDFs) as the spatial restraints rather than
energy. The 3D model of a protein is obtained by optimization
of the molecular pdf such that the model violates the input
restraints as possible. The molecular pdf was derived as a
combination of pdfs restraining individual spatial features of
the whole molecule.

Model Assessment and Refinement:
Out of 6 models generated, 5 by MODELLER and one by
ModWeb server, the one with the best G-score of PROCHECK
and with the best VERIFY3D profile was subjected to energy
minimization. VERIFY3D (a structure evaluation server) was
used to check the residue profiles of the obtained threedimensional
models. In order to assess the stereo-chemical
qualities of the three dimensional models, PROCHECK analysis
was performed. Quality evaluation of the model for the
environment profile was also predicted using ERRAT structure
evaluation server. The final refined model was evaluated for its
atomic contacts using the Whatif program to identify bad
packing of side chain atoms or unusual residue contacts. The
predicted model was also analyzed for the recognition of errors
in the three dimensional structure by using the ProSA web
server. This model was further subjected for identification of
active site and docking study.

With the aim of evaluating the stability and folding,
conformational changes and getting insights into the natural
dynamics on different timescale of protein in solution, 10
nanoseconds (ns) molecular dynamics simulation were
performed. The molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of
modeled glutamate dehydrogenase protein were carried out
with the GROMACS 4.0.6 software package by employing
GROMOS 96 force field and the flexible SPC (Simple Point
Charge) water model. The initial structure was immersed in a
periodic water box of cubic shape (0.5 nm thick). Electrostatic
energy was calculated using the particle mesh Ewald method.
Cutoff distance for the calculation of the coulomb and van der
Waals interaction was 1.0 Ǻ. After energy minimization using a
steepest descent for 1000 steps, the system was subjected to
equilibration at 300k and normal pressure for 100 ps under the
conditions of position restraints for heavy atoms. LINCS
constraints were performed for all bonds, keeping the whole
protein molecule fixed and allowing only the water molecule to
move to equilibrate with respect to the protein structure. The
system was coupled to the external bath by the Berendsen
pressure and temperature coupling. The final MD calculations
were performed for 10 ns under the same conditions except that
the position restraints were removed. The results were analyzed
using the standard software provided by the GROMACS
package. An average structure was refined further using a
steepest descent energy minimization.

Binding Site Prediction:
Binding site was characterized by CASTp and PASS and
compared by using the information of binding sites. By
comparing prediction of above two algorithms, best active site
was selected.

Molecular Docking:
The docking of glutamate dehydrogenase was performed,
against the NCI subset II molecules retrieved from ZINC
database by using Autodock- vina (http://vina.scripps.edu/),
where 1,364 molecules from the NCI diversity subset II
(http://zinc.docking.org/index.shtml) were screened. The
Python scripts in MGL tools package were used to analyze the
docking results.

Analyzing the Docking Results:
The search for the best ways to fit ligand molecules from the
NCI diversity subset II, into glutamate dehydrogenase modeled
structure, using Autodock- vina resulted in docking files that
contained detailed records of docking. These log files were read
into ADT (Auto Dock Tool) to analyze the results of docking.
The similarity of docked structures was measured by
computing the root mean square deviation (RMSD) between the
coordinates of the atoms and creating clustering of the
conformations based on the RMSD values. In most cases the
first cluster was also the largest cluster found. The lowest
binding energy conformation in the first cluster was considered
as the most favorable docking pose. Binding energies that are
reported represent the sum of the total intermolecular energy,
total internal energy and torsional free energy minus the energy
of the unbound system. The top ten ligands were selected based
on the energy score after virtual screening 
 (see
supplementary material) and were further analyzed by the
program LIGPLOT. The Ligplot represents the hydrogen and
hydrophobic interactions between ligand and active site
residues.

Discussion
Metabolic pathways analysis:
A total of 48 enzymes that are found present in Toxoplasma
gondii but absent in H. sapiens were listed out as potential
drug targets. Out of these 48 enzymes, some are already reported
in literature and often used as target in treatment of toxoplasmosis e.g. 
 Pyrimethamine is a competitive inhibitor of parasite DHFR with narrow (~ six-fold) selectivity for the T. gondii enzyme compared with the mammalian enzyme [,],

DHPS is the target of sulfa drugs [–],

Acetyl-CoA, which mediates the formation of malonyl −CoA [] etc..




Template search and Model Building:
Based on the maximum identity with high score and lower evalue
crystal structure of Glutamate dehydrogenase (NADP+)
of Plasmodium falciparum (PDB code: 2bma_A) was selected as
template. The sequence identity and similarity between the
target and template are 58% and 73%, respectively. E- Value
was 0.0. The sequence alignment of glutamase dehydrogenase
of Toxoplasma gondii and Plasmodium falciparum was carried out
using the CLUSTALW (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/clustalw/)
program.

Model Assessment and Refinement:
All the six glutamate dehydrogenase models obtained were
validated by using the SAVS and PROSA server.
Ramachandran plots were drawn and the structures were
analyzed by PROCHECK, a well-known protein structure
checking program. By comparison of the results for all the
models second model was judged as best among six ().
In the case of second model, it was found that the phi/psi
angles of 91.3% of the residues fell in the most favored regions,
8.0% of the residues fell in the additional allowed regions, 0.7%
fell in the generously allowed regions, and only 0.0 % of the
residues fell in the disallowed regions. All these findings
suggest a stereo-chemically very good model. The overall
PROCHECK G factor for the homology-modeled structure was
0.00. The energetic architecture as predicted by PROSA score
was negative (­9.62) for the modeled protein. The value is close
to that of template (­9.60), which indicates the reliability of the
model. The final structure was validated by an ERRAT graph.
The quality factor of 77.106 indicated good quality, as scores of
&gt;50 are acceptable for a reasonable model. High quality of
model is also confirmed from VERIFY 3D server as 76.00% of
residues of modeled protein showed a score higher than 0.02
thus the model showed satisfactory 3D-1D scores for all the
residues in the sequence. Results of WHAT_CHECK also
indicate about the correctness of the modeled structure. These
results indicate that the obtained structure has reasonably good
quality. This model was used for virtual screening of the
potential inhibitors for glutamate dehydrogenase.

Molecular Dynamics Simulation:
The predicted Model of glutamate dehydrogenase has shown
good accuracy of the structure. But in order to use this model
for virtual screening predicted model should have stable
molecular dynamic behavior. The molecular dynamic stability
has been established by performing the molecular dynamic
simulation study using GROMACS 4.0.6 software package. The
root mean square deviation (RMSD) during the simulation was
increasing in the beginning but after 220 ps it becomes almost
constant for rest of the duration of the simulation. This suggests
that the glutamate dehydrogenase model has very less RMSD
for the backbone and it also has less flexibility, indicating that
model has a stable dynamic behavior structure. Molecular
dynamic simulation study showed that the energy of the
molecule was found to be constant throughout the time period
of simulation. This suggests that the molecule has a stable
structure as required for the virtual screening and drug
designing. The root mean square (RMS) fluctuations were very
less. Most the atoms were free from the RMS fluctuations. Very
few atoms have shown RMS fluctuation at C and N terminal
due to the loop region. This suggests the glutamate
dehydrogenase model has an accurate and stable structure
which can be used for virtual screening. The simulation studies
also indicated that radius of gyration was increasing in the
beginning but after 400 ps it decreases upto 420 ps and finally
became almost constant for rest of the duration of the
simulation. This suggests that the glutamate dehydrogenase
model has a compact structure which provides the required
stability to the molecule.

Active Site Identification:
After getting the final model, the possible binding sites of
modeled structure were searched using the CASTp server and
PASS program. Ten possible binding sites were obtained. These
sites were compared with active site of the template and it was
found that pocket1 is highly conserved with the template. Since
the glutamate dehydrogenase protein of Toxoplasma gondii and
Plasmodium falciparum are well conserved in both sequence and
structure, it is predicted that their biological function may be
identical. From the structure-structure comparison of template
and final refined models of glutamate dehydrogenase using
SPDBV program, it was found that the residues in the site1
Phe294, Pro295, Lys292, Gly293, Gly275, Ala272, Leu296,
Ala276, Lys277, Arg417 and Asp421 are highly conserved
within the active site of template. In this study, site1 is chosen
as the binding site to dock with the NCI diversity set molecules.

Virtual screening:
The top ten ligand molecules having minimum energy were
screened out as the possible inhibitors for glutamate
dehydrogenase [] 
 (see supplementary material). All
selected molecules were having energy score as follows: Ligand
ZINC01690699 is having minimum energy score ­9.1 Kcal/Mol.
Ligand ZINC17465979 are having ­8.1 Kcal/Mol. Four ligands,
ZINC17465983, ZINC18141294_03, ZINC05462670 and
ZINC01572309 are having energy score ­7.9 Kcal/Mol, Four
ligands, ZINC18055497_01, ZINC18141294, ZINC05462674 and
ZINC13152284_01 are having energy score ­ 7.8. With the help
of the Ligplot study we have selected ZINC01690699 as the
possible inhibitor lead molecule, as it has minimum energy
score and one of the highest number of interactions with the
active site residue, it has 09 hydrophobic and 2 hydrogen
interactions. , represent interactions of the top
five ligands drawn by ligplot according to the energy score.

Correlation coefficient analysis was performed between energy
score calculated for all selected ligands molecules; log P value
and molecular weight  (see supplementary material).
The correlation coefficient is a statistical calculation that is used
to examine the relationship between two sets of value. The
Correlation coefficient between energy score and log P value
was ­0.101603358 and between energy score and molecular
weight was ­0.236816724. These values suggest a clear negative
correlation between energy score of the ligands and their
molecular weight and log P value. Thus the energy score of the
ligands is independent of their molecular weight and log P
value. The value of the correlation coefficient tells us about the
strength and the nature of the relationship. Correlation
coefficient values can range between +1.00 to ­1.00. The
negative correlation suggests that energy score may depend on
interactions or the conformation of ligands and active site
residues [].

It was found the inhibitor ZINC01690699 has minimum energy
score which reveals higher binding affinity towards the
glutamate dehydrogenase and the inhibitor was also showing
one of the best interactions with residues of the active site. The
other important drug like properties like molecular weight and
logP value were also found within the limits of drug like
molecules. For the wet laboratory validation of present study,
samples of T. gondii can be collected from the pathological
laboratories and the molecule ZINC01690699 can be procured
from the Pubchem database. Growth inhibition of T. gondii by
inhibitor ZINC01690699 can be established by the qualitative
and quantities microbiological techniques. Thus, the three
dimensional model of glutamate dehydrogenase presented here
would be helpful in guiding both enzymatic studies as well as
design of specific inhibitors.

Conclusion
Our approach of comparative metabolic pathway analysis
and molecular docking analysis resulted in the identification
of potential drug targets. For the first time, the availability of
complete genome sequences of many bacterial species is
facilitating many novel computational approaches. The complete
definition of all gene products by gene identification tools
exemplified here is just the first step. The data presented here
demonstrates that stepwise prioritization of genome open reading
frames using simple biological criteria can be an effective way of
rapidly reducing the number of genes of interest to an
experimentally manageable number. This process is an
efficient way for enriching potential target genes, and for
identifying those that are critical for normal cell function.
The generation of a comprehensive essential gene list will
allow an accelerated genetic dissection of traits such as metabolic
flexibility and inherent drug resistance that render Toxoplasma
gondii such a tenacious pathogen. Such a strategy will enable us
to locate critical pathways and steps in pathogenesis; to target
these steps by designing new drugs; and to inhibit the
infectious agent of interest with new antimicrobial agents.
Hence, in present study, it can be concluded that the molecule
ZINC01690699 1-N, 4-N-bis [3-(1H-benzimidazol-2-yl) phenyl]
benzene-1, 4-dicarboxamide has the potential to inhibit the
growth of Toxoplasma gondii and can act as remedy for the
treatment of Toxoplasma gondii infection.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors are grateful to the Sam Higginbottom Institute of
Agriculture, Technology &amp; Sciences, Deemed to be University,
Allahabad for providing the facilities and support to complete
the present research work.

Citation:Gautam et al, Bioinformation 8(3): 134-141 (2012)

A workflow for complete drug target identification
using metabolic pathways analysis and molecular modeling,
docking studies.

Ribbon representation of modeled glutamate
dehydrogenase protein. The a-helices &amp; β -sheets are shown as
helices and ribbons respectively &amp; rest are shown as loops.
(Pymol Model)

Ligplot showing the protein-ligand interactions of top
five ligands, based on energy score (hydrogen bonding and
hydrophobic), generated by Ligplot program. (A)
ZINC01690699; (B) ZINC17465979; (C) ZINC17465983; (D)
ZINC18141294_03 and (E) ZINC05462670.

