Background
The 3-base periodicity (TBP) is an intrinsic property of all coding DNA 
[–]
that is characterized by the disposition of nucleotides and higher order n-tuples,
e.g. trinucleotides (triplets), so that they are preferentially separated by
multiples of 3 bases, i.e. 3, 6, 9, 12 etc. TBP, or period-3 structure, has been
found to be present in exons but not in intron sequences 
[]. TBP can be used
to identify coding regions in genomes [–
] and the length of the period equal
to three has been proposed to be caused by the usage bias of nucleotides within
synonymous codons []. 
However, we have put forward a model wherein TBP
was proposed to be produced by clustering of same-phase triplets 
[]. A role
for triplet clusters in TBP has also been suggested by others 
[]. Nonetheless, it
has not yet been established what causes clustering of same-phase triplets and
therefore TBP; however, two levels of influence are possible: clustering
associated to protein sequence and clustering independent of protein sequence.
At the protein level same-phase triplet clustering and hence TBP occur because
in natural protein-coding sequences codons are never used in equal proportions;
that is, the influence of protein is reduced to codon composition. This would
explain why computer generated sequences with the same codon usage as
native sequences expressed TBP [] and why TBP persisted after shuffling of
codons [], although differences in TBP were pointed out 
[]. We then
postulate that codon-composition-independent differences in TBP are due to
protein-sequence-independent intercodon dinucleotide tendencies. We here aim
at determining if such hypothesis is correct and whether intercodon tendencies
reflect in TBP and in the clustering of same-phase triplets.
Due to the so-called degeneracy of the genetic code with the exception of two
cases (methionine and tryptophan) the cell can use more than one synonymous
codon to specify the same amino acid in proteins. Nevertheless, in most coding
DNA, especially in higher organisms such as vertebrates, synonymous codons
are not randomly distributed []. 
The existence of this bias in the distribution
of synonymous codons, also called neighboring codon choice, has motivated
comprehensive analyses of dicodon frequencies 
[]. Why such bias exists is
not yet clear, but it may be associated to local RNA secondary structure 
[], to
protein translation [] or it may have a role in protein folding 
[].
Independently of its origin, the non random distribution of synonymous codons
reflects in intercodon dinucleotide frequencies []. Then, to investigate if and
how intercodon dinucleotides affected TBP, we disrupted the natural
distribution of synonymous codon by randomly shuffling them without
changing protein sequences. We found differences between native and
synonymous-codon-shuffled sequences in TBP as well as in clustering of samephase
triplets; we consequently propose that intercodon dinucleotides affect
TBP via changes in same-phase triplet clustering.

Methodology
The human ORFeome version hORFeome v3.1 consisting of over 12,000
human coding sequences was downloaded from http://horfdb.dfci.harvard.edu/.
Annotations were edited out and sequences were subsequently semi-manually
curated to eliminate: out-of-frame sequences, sequences lacking stop codons,
and sequences not starting with ATG. One thousand randomly selected coding
sequences were analyzed. Other used sequences were obtained from
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov and equally curated before analysis. Sequences were collected
and analyzed using either one or a combination of the programs Word
(Microsoft Inc, MS), Excel (MS), OMIGA 2.0 (Oxford Molecular Ltd, UK),
GSCalc 6.0 (
http://www.jps-development.com) or the program SWAAP 
[].
For codon randomization each coding sequence was first separated into codons,
and synonymous codons were randomly exchanged internally for each coding
sequence for 6 consecutive times. Five independently shuffled replicas were
generated for coding sequences. Shuffling was carried out separately for each
coding sequence.

Assessment of TBP
To assess TBP we determined frequency distribution of distances (FDD)
between triplets as earlier described []. 
In brief, all positions of a given triplet
were determined and distances (measured in bases) between successive triplets
were calculated. The number of occurrences (frequency) at each distance was
then counted.

Clustering of same-phase triplets
To estimate the degree of clustering of same-phase triplets, we determined the
number of triplets that were engaged in clustering in a head-to-tail collage of
all analyzed coding sequences using non-overlapping windows of ten thousand
bases each. Additionally, we determined clustering in the three reading frames
identifying the size of each cluster (i.e. number of triplets per cluster); those
determinations did not require the use of windows because all triplet clusters
were quantified independently [].

Discussion
Intercodon dinucleotide frequencies in native and randomized sequences
We found higher intercodon T|G, C|A A|G and C|T (wherein the vertical line
indicates the boundary between codons) frequencies in native sequences as
compared to controls. Conversely, we found lower frequency of C|G and T|A in
native sequences than in randomized controls. These results are summarized in
, wherein bars represent the ratios of native dinucleotide frequency
to synonymous-codon-shuffled dinucleotide frequency minus one (­1). The
tendencies shown in  should not be taken as equal to the long-known
global dinucleotide tendencies in the genome [,
], even though those
tendencies partially agreed with ours, especially in the marked reduction of
C|G; however, other dinucleotide tendencies did not coincide and could even
go in opposite directions. Irrespective of it, coincidences are suggestive of
intercodon tendencies being generated by the same mechanisms that affect e.g.
CpG dinucleotides in the whole genome [].

Analysis of TBP and correlation with intercodon dinucleotide frequencies
and with clustering
According to results shown in , high or low intercodon dinucleotide
frequencies could affect TBP differently. We therefore, investigated them
separately by applying frequency distribution of distance (FDD). To study
higher than random intercodon dinucleotide frequencies, we elected CA- and
TG-related triplets, while for lower than random intercodon dinucleotide
frequencies, we chose CG- and TA-related triplets. To reduce the number of
calculations, we computed FDD for the triplet formulas CAN and TGN and
CGN and TAN, wherein N jointly represents A, C, G and T. We found a
correlation between the intensity of TBP and the type of analyzed triplet
formula, so that TBP for CAN () and TGN 
() was more intense in native than in synonymous-codon-shuffled
sequences and this coincided with preference for the intercodon dinucleotides
C|A and T|G (). Conversely, TBP for CGN 
()
and for TAN () was less intense in native than in the
shuffled sequence, which concurred with lower frequencies of C|G and T|A
().

We subsequently investigated clustering of C|AN, T|GN, C|GN and T|AN.
Results in  demonstrate more frequent clustering of C|AN and T|GN
triplets in native sequences than in their codon-shuffled counterparts. In
contrast, clustering of same-phase triplets C|GN and T|AN was less frequent in
native sequences than in shuffled controls. Therefore, in the native coding
sequence TBP was more intense when the related intercodon dinucleotide was
preferred and less intense, when it was avoided. This was just as predicted by
the model for TBP []. 
Because of the formal possibility that other reading
frames could contribute to the proposed effect, we quantified triplet clustering
also in the two other possible reading frames, i.e. CG|N and CGN|. It should be
noticed, however, that given the conservation of position 1 and 2 in codons,
these calculations might reveal only potential clustering of codons. As
expected, contrasts in clustering of CG|N and CGN| between native and
shuffled sequences were much weaker (data not shown). Quantification of the
variously sized same-phase triplet clusters in the three possible CGN reading
frames confirmed those findings (), which demonstrate that
clustering in the C|GN reading frame was more frequent in the randomized
sequence than in the native one. That is, the two other reading frames did
account for the effect over TBP.

To determine how different intercodon dinucleotide tendencies in other
eukaryotes affected TBP, we contrasted native TBP patterns against those in
synonymous-codon-shuffled coding sequences of Caenorhabditis elegans,
Xenopus laevis, Arabidopsis thaliana and Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The
observed differences in TBP for the triplet CGN () fully agreed with
pre-existing C|G tendencies. Hence in C. elegans there was only marginal
preference for C|G and this produced almost no difference in TBP for the triplet
CGN (). In contrast, 
C|G was strongly avoided in X. laevis and as a
consequence CGN triplet TBP was more intense in the shuffled (,
red line) than in the native X. laevis coding sequence 
(, blue line);
this tendency was very similar to that observed in human coding DNA 
(). 
Finally, in the native coding DNA of S. cerevisiae and in A. thaliana there
was also C|G avoidance and this resulted in less intense TBP in the native
sequence than in the shuffled one (). We also briefly explored the
effect of intercodon dinucleotides in 63 type I dengue virus coding sequences,
in 244 HIV env protein coding sequences and in just over one thousand
Escherichia coli ORFs. Fully compatible results were obtained for these
organisms with similarity in CGN TBP and C|G clustering between the tested
viruses and human (data not shown).

Potential biological relevance
TBP may have a physiological consequence in the cell, which according to our
results could involve intercodon dinucleotides, because it has recently been
shown that 3-base periodicity and codon usage in yeast may be correlated with
gene expression at the level of transcription elongation 
[]. If transcription
elongation was affected by TBP its variability among different eukaryotes
would suggest different transcription elongation needs. The C|G intercodon
dinucleotide may additionally be needed for gene expression. Therefore,
removal of all CpG dinucleotides in the green fluorescent protein (GFP) led to
a significant reduction in its expression via transcriptional attenuation 
[]. We
calculated that 80% of all removed CpG in GFP were C|G intercodon
dinucleotides. Hence a low frequency of intercodon C|G and perhaps by
extension a low level of C|GN clustering may be required for gene expression.
Moreover, the similarity in C|GN clustering between dengue and HIV viruses
and human coding DNA could suggest that viral genomes have adapted their
transcriptional needs according to those of their host.

Conclusion
Given the connection between TBP, intercodon dinucleotides and gene
expression it is possible that details in TBP patterns will help reveal gene
properties in a simple and expedite way, but techniques finer than the ones here
employed need to be applied/developed for that purpose.

Citation:Sánchez, Bioinformation 6(9): 327-329 (2011)

A) Assessment of intercodon dinucleotide tendencies. Tendencies
were estimated by comparing native dinucleotide frequencies at codon
junctions (e.g. A|G) against those in synonymous-codon-shuffled sequences.
The y-axis shows ratios of native to synonymous-codon-shuffled frequencies
minus the unit (­1), i.e. (native/shuffled) ­1. Therefore positive values indicate
intercodon preference while negative values indicate intercodon avoidance.
Error bars represent 3 standard deviations (n=5). B) Analysis of 3-base
periodicity by FDD of triplet formulas CAN, TGN, CGN and TAN in native
and synonymous-codon-shuffled sequences. The x-axis is presented in
logarithmic form to aid visualization of differences. Note that FDD does not
discriminate between the different triplet phases. The blue line is for the native
sequence and the red line is for the synonymous-codon-shuffled sequence. In
the upper panels TBP is more intense in the native than in the shuffled
sequence while in the lower panels dominance is inverted and TBP is more
intense for the synonymous-codon-shuffled sequence than for the native one. In
all cases error bars (on red line) represent 3 standard deviations. C) Clustering
of same-phase triplets. The upper two panels correspond to triplet formulas
CAN and TGN that displayed more intense 3-base periodicity in native
sequences than in shuffled controls () with total
frequencies of 25,521 and 15,454 ± 121 for C|AN and 27,047 and 17,906 ± 69
for T|GN and the lower two panels correspond to triplet formulas CGN and
TAN that displayed less intense 3-base periodicity in native sequences than in
shuffled controls () with total frequencies of 9,385
and 26,985 ± 71 for C|GN and 8,668 and 16,361 ± 63 for T|AN. Note that
values above and below zero in the x-axis are both positive; hence in all cases
the abundance and length of vertical lines are proportional to the number of
same-phase triplets engaged in clusters as indicated in the y-axis. In the bottom
of graphs the position of non-overlapping 10,000-bp windows is shown. D)
Determination of same-phase triplet clustering in the three reading frames. The
case for CGN is presented. In the x-axis the size of each cluster (number of
triplets in each cluster) is shown. Clustering is presented for CGN|, CG|N and
C|GN as indicated above each column set. Note that in the y-axis values above
and below the x-axis are positive so that in both cases the column length is
proportional to the number of triplets in clusters, i.e. cluster size x cluster
frequency. Red columns above the x-axis are for the synonymous-codonshuffled
sequence and blue columns below the x-axis are for the native
sequence. E) Analysis of 3-base periodicity of triplet CGN in coding DNA of
the indicated organisms. With a blue line TBP patterns for native sequences are
shown while patterns for synonymous-codon-shuffled sequences are shown
with a red line. As in other cases the x-axis is presented in logarithmic form to
help visualization and frequency values are shown in the y-axis.

