Background
A shRNA is a tight hairpin turn, with a loop of 4–23 nucleotides
and a stem (two anti parallel strands) of 19–29 nucleotide base
pairs []. 
shRNAs are pivotal in the field of gene silencing as
these are cheaper than siRNAs for large-scale studies 
[].
However, currently available web-based tools fail to predict
shRNAs from a large set of nucleotide sequences. Also, hardly
any stand alone software exists in the public domain for this
purpose. Hence, the aim of this paper is to develop standalone
software, to facilitate prediction of ‘shRNA-like’ regions, by
considering an exhaustive list of hairpin parameters, from
voluminous genomic sequence data. This software will cater the
needs of the researchers and scientists working in the field of
RNA interference in designing shRNA.

Methodology
Initially, different properties of shRNA, like, stem and loop
lengths, perfect stem complementarity, GC content, melting
temperature (Tm), position specific nucleotides and low
complexity regions are taken into consideration while
developing the script for shRNAPred (version 1.0). The script is
developed using Active PERL 5.12.3. Further, the executable file
was generated by using Perl Packager (pp) module, provided
by Perl Archive Toolkit (PAR) version 0.85_01 of
Comprehensive Perl Archive Network (CPAN) in windows
environment. In addition, the script is configured with modules
for each property and the software uses these modules based on
the software options. The parameters GC content and Tm
considered in the software are calculated as follows;

Calculation of GC content: [(C_count+G_count)*100]/
[(2*(Stem_Length) +Loop length)]; Calculation of Tm a)
Tm[oC]=64.9+[(41*(nG+nC-16.4))/(nA+nT+nG+nC)](if length&gt;15)
[]; b) Tm[oC]=2*(nA+nT) + 4*(nG+nC)( if length&lt;=15) Where n=
number of nucleotides

Scoring System:
Different scores are assigned for each parameter by considering
various favorable and unfavorable properties of shRNA. The
favorable properties are assigned with positive scores whereas
unfavorable properties are assigned with penalty. For property
TM, a score +1 is given when it lies in the range 20°C-60°C 
[].
In a similar way, for GC content a score of +1 is given in the
range 35% - 60% []. A penalty of -1 is added for presence of
Poly A or Poly C and +1, otherwise []. A penalty -0.2 is added
for each complimentary base pair in the loop sequence since
more the number of complementary bases the lesser is the
chance of the sequence being a loop. Presence or absence of
certain nucleotides at specific positions in stem often increases
the efficacy of the shRNA [,
]. Hence, suitable scores, are
given for the properties like A at 3rd position of 5'sense strand
(1,0), T at 10th position of 5' sense strand(1,0), G/C is present at
1st position of 5' sense strand (1,-1), A/T at 19th position of 5'
sense strand(1,-1), G at 13th position of 5' sense strand(-1,0), T is
at 13th position of 5' sense strand(1,0), T at 1st position of 5'
antisense strand(2,0) and A/U nucleotide in any of the first five
position at 5' antisense strand(1,0); where the first value in
every parenthesis ( ) is meant for presence and the second value
meant for absence of a nucleotide at a given position on 5' sense
/ antisense strand. Based on the above set parametric score a
total score is computed for each shRNA-like region. Ranks are
then assigned to these regions based on magnitude of the score,
with rank 1 being given to highest scored region.

Software input / output
Input:
The software accepts the input sequence file in FASTA format.
The header line for every sequence should contain the
information viz., Gene ID, accession number and definition,
separated by pipelines and multiple sequences must be
separated by a new line.

Options:
The software provides three different options and the user can
choose one option at a time for predicting shRNA from the
input.

User defined Stem and loop lengths:
In this choice the user needs to enter stem length and loop
length of his choice. Besides, range of GC-content and number
of loop-end complementary residues is to be provided by the
user under this option.

Predefined Stem and loop length combinations:
In this case, the users don't need to provide the stem and loop
lengths, as the stem and loop length combinations viz. 29-4, 19-
9, 19-10, 21-9, 25-10, 19-4, 29-9 and 27-4  (see
supplementary material) are predefined based on literature.
Here also the user is required to enter the range of GC content
and number of loop-end complementary residues as given in
option - User defined stem and loop lengths.

Specific Loop Sequences (SLS):
This option, initially, prompts the user to enter the stem length.
Further, it asks the user to either choose a loop sequence from a
set of literature based SLS or define a new SLS. The literature
based SLS are TTAA, TTCG, CCACC, CTCGAG, AAGCUU,
CCACACC, TTCAAGAGA, AAGTTCTCT, AAGTTCTCT,
TTTGTGTAG, GAAGCTTG, CTTCCTGTCA, TCAAGAG,
GTGTGCTGTCC, TTCAAGAAC, TTGTGAGA 
 (see
supplementary material).

In addition, this option also prompts the user to enter GC
content range as an additional parameter. After a successful
execution, the software displays the total number of shRNAs
predicted and the name of the generated output file. 
 &amp; 
show the illustration and flowchart of the software.

Output:
The output file is created in the directory where the input file
exists. It is a tab delimited text file containing the shRNA
information, viz. stem length, loop length, shRNA sequence,
position of shRNA in the input sequence, GC content, Tm,
shRNA score, presence of polyAs and PolyCs in both positive
and negative strands, number of complimentary nucleotides in
loop sequence, accession number of the mRNA, gene ID and
definition of the mRNA sequence. All the columns of the output
can easily be imported in excel, access and MySQL databases.
The program also generates a log file containing the sequence
accessions having no shRNA complements.

Caveat and future development
In the next version, web-based software will be developed with
an additional module on prediction of shRNAs from all
possible stem and loop length combinations.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This study was supported by World Bank Funded - National
Agricultural Innovation Project (NAIP), ICAR Grant
NAIP/Comp-4/C4/C-30033/2008-09.

Citation:Singh et al, Bioinformation 8(13): 629-633 (2012)

Screenshot of software's illustration

Flowchart for shRNAPred (version 1.0); SL-shRNA having Stem and Loop lengths of user's choice (option “1”), SLCshRNA
having Stem and Loop length Combinations from literature (option “2”), SLS- shRNA with Stem Length of user's choice
with Specific loop sequences (option “3”), GC-range of Guanine-Cytosine content, LTSLS- Literature based Specific Loop
Sequences, CER- Complementary End Residues, CRO- Choose Right Option, DNM- Does Not Matter, SF- re-execution with Same
File, NF- re-execution with New File , Y- Yes, N- No.

