Background
The diversity among newly emerging pathogens calls for a fast
and accurate identification technique for the characterization of
the pathogens. Genomic and molecular biology techniques such
as plasmid profiling, restriction fragment length polymorphism
(RFLP), polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and whole genome
sequencing (WGS) are regularly applied in clinical settings for
detection of pathogens []. However, a major bottleneck in
discovery of novel variants is the availability of datasets and
the approach used in their discovery. Advent of fast and
accurate WGS technology bridges the gap of genomic dataset
availability []. Comparative genomics among datasets of
closely related species of same organisms is extensively used to
identify genomic variation signatures. The term genomic
signatures are used in various contexts such as specific
expression pattern in disease or organism [] or a stretch of
nucleic acid/amino acid sequence specific to a particular trait
[]. Here we define a genomic signature as a point mutation
specific only to one subtype/strain of an organism.
Identification of genomic signatures would not only help in
differentiating the different subtypes infecting the host but
would also help in understanding the relationship between
subtypes and the patients' response to treatment and may help
in providing the optimal duration and type of therapy, which
may ultimately improve patient management. Such approaches
have been previously extensively used to develop and improve
diagnostic procedures, as well as, explore the relationship
between infection and drug response [,
]. Here we present
genomic signature identification tool (GSIT), which employees
comparative genomics technique for identification of genomic
signatures among subtypes/strain of same species of organism
and provides a list of significant genomic signatures for many
applications including pathogen characterization and
epidemiological applications.

Methodology
Input:
The input to server consists of whole genome sequence of three
or more subtype/strain of same species along with a reference
sequence of each subtype/strain respectively. Length difference
among input sequences should be less than 10% in order to
confirm quality sequence alignment. Users also need to provide
their functional email id where the results will be sent after the
job is completed.

Algorithm:
The web server is implemented in Perl/CGI. Once the user files
are uploaded to the server, multiple sequence alignment (MSA)
of all the individual subtypes and representative sequences is
constructed using a MSA tool ClustalW- MPI [] and the
alignments are used to determine the consensus sequence for
each subtype. The consensus sequences of each subtype are
then aligned with each other in another round of MSA. The
MSA generated is parsed through custom scripts, which
analyze each position of alignment and determines sites with a
unique base as compared to other subtypes. Next, a
probabilistic method is implemented to determine the statistical
significance and subtype prediction probability of each of the
unique site shortlisted in previous module. The probability of
misclassification within a subtype (Pn(x | z)) and between
different subtypes (Pn(x | z!)) for each site is calculated as
(Please see  for equation and
explanation).

The sites showing highest probability of classification within a
subtype and lowest or null probability of misclassification both
within and between subtype sequences are shortlisted and
termed as genomic signatures of that particular subtype. A
concise workflow showing the working of GSIT is shown in
.

Output:
Once the results are available, link to the result table is sent to
the user via email. The output consists of a table showing the
top 5 genomic signatures for each subtype along with
Probabilities of misclassification. The table also shows the
informative signature along with 50 bp sequences flanking the
signature. Users can also download the flanking sequences to
the genomic signature in fasta format as an archive file.

Proof of Concept:
We validated the pipeline using Hepatitis B as a representative
model. Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) whole genome sequences (N =
174 ) obtained from Hepatitis B Virus database
[s2as02.genes.nig.ac.jp] and reference sequences for the eight
representative genotypes (A-H) obtained from NCBI- Genbank
[http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/genotyping/view.cgi
?db=2] were used to correlate genomic signature based
identity of subtypes. A systematic analysis of HBV genotypes
was performed using the GSIT tool. In all 10 Genomic Signature
sites were identified for Hepatitis B Virus genotypes A-H.

Applications:
Genomic signatures find applications in a diverse set of clinical
and non-clinical scenarios. Different subtypes of same viral
species are known to show very different responses to therapy.
An understanding of the relationship between genotypes and
the patients' response to treatment may help in providing the
optimal duration and type of therapy, which may ultimately
improve patient management. The advantages of our technique
include its ability to simultaneously compare strains at the
whole-genome level with high sensitivity to detect subtle
differences. These genomic signatures can be highly
informative and can also be used for detection and monitoring
of infectious diseases and their causative agents. Translating
genomic signatures into a diagnostic and prognostic aid
remains to be demonstrated.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors thank Dr. Siddhartha Kundu and Dr. Vinod Scaria
for useful inputs and discussions regarding algorithm and
manuscript.

Citation:Tuteja et al, Bioinformation 10(8): 551-554 (2014)

Organization of different modules in GSIT web
application and steps employed for functioning of GSIT

