Background
Haplogroup is a group of similar haplotypes that share a
common ancestor with a SNP mutation []. Y-Chromosomal
DNA (Y-DNA) and Mitochondrial DNA (mt-DNA)
haplogroups are most studied in human genetics; their
exchange of genetic information is independent to each other.
Y-DNA passes along patrilineal lineages and mt-DNA passes
along matrilineal lineage both pertain to deep ancestral origins
dating back to thousands of years.  showing the
overview to the database. Large numbers of haplogroups have
been reported till date, we have reported 42 main branch of mt-
DNA and 34 Y-DNA every Haplogroup represents a major
role in the phylogenetic tree of mankind.

Y-DNA and mt-DNA have emerged as a marker of choice to
study the genetic history of human populations []. We had
collected data from NCBI reporting Origin of haplogroups i.e.,
seventy-Six reported main branch  and responsible
Haplogroup of various disease as Molecular risk assessment
(MRA) constitute 140 haplogroups involved in risk factors as
in . Studies on various complex conditions such as
ischemic cardiovascular, cancer, metabolic, male infertility,
mortality, and longevity, and infectious diseases, etc. are
associated with hgs have been reported to be associated with
Y-DNA and mt-DNA hgs [–]. In this section, we had
developed a unique database that possesses information of
both mt-DNA and Y-DNA haplogroups. Diversity of both
haplogroups in modern populations has been used to retrace
important past human migration constituting one forty two
haplogroups as in . Comparison of the Y-DNA and mt-
DNA along with human history has suggested different
migration patterns of males and females.

Methodology
Data information about the migration and molecular risk
assessment was collected through literature survey through
PubMed [].

Origin, evolution, molecular risk assessment and migration
route of mt-DNA and Y-DNA hgs types has been studied over
different period of time throughout the world. The relation
between haplogroups with various human disorders has been
already reported []. We had collected data about all those
haplogroups and diseases. Web pages are designed as front
tier for showing data from databases and entering data that
has to be stored in databases. We followed HTML approach for
the creation of the database. The front end of the database was
designed with Hyper Text Markup Language (HTML) for
creating web pages and Cascading Style Sheets (CSS), a style
sheet language, for enriching the look and format of the web
pages. An open source JavaScript library was used to generate
visual effects on the web pages that display search results.

Database access:
The list of Haplogroups from different continents has been
organized here. The database is easy to access and retrieve
information of both mt-DNA and Y-DNA. Information
possesses geographical distribution of different haplogroups
and the risk they have been carried at the molecular level.
().

Conclusion
HgsDb 1.0 is a database that will enable effortless pursuit of
relevant knowledge on Haplogroups. HgsDb 1.0 will help in
Molecular Risk Assessment, personalized drug designing, prebirth
cure by disease diagnosis, to determine genetic variation
related to disease/environmental effects, knowledge of deep
ancestry or traces of the human origin, to know about
evolutionary history, genetic relation with other populations,
and description of specific population at molecular level in the
world.

Personalized medicines enable to respond against different
pathogen and chemicals by understanding the variations in
human DNA sequences and how these changes are responsible
for development of any disease [].

These markers are not only helpful in tracking human
genealogy but also in tracing diseases among different
populations based on their migration and corresponding
adaptations, if any, in the form of mutation. So, they are
helpful in tracking time period of evolution of different
populations, mutations as well as many diseases. Molecular
risk assessment of each haplogroups in HgsDb is linked with
PubMed for validation and authentication of data retrieved.
We are continuously putting our efforts to update the data
possessing information regarding the information of different
haplogroups. Additional search and retrieval features will also
be added to enhance the usability of the web interface in
future.

Significance of this work
Access to this database will allow understanding the molecular
risk assessment associated with each group which led to help
in development of personalized drug to particular disease,
study genetic variations, deep ancestral knowledge to trace
human origin, and genetic relation to migrated populations.

This study was conducted in the Department of Biotechnology,
G.B. Pant Engineering College (GBPEC), Pauri Garhwal
(Uttarakhand). Authors gratefully acknowledge the necessary
computational facilities and constant supervision provided by
the Department of Biotechnology, GBPEC. DA and VS are
thankful to TEQIP-II (Technical Education Quality
Improvement Program) for fellowship.

Citation:Arora et al, Bioinformation 11(6): 272-275 (2015)

Flow Chart of HgsDb

A is showing origin of different haplogroups at different place and B is showing the risk assessment of various
haplogroups.

Migration route showing different haplogroups subtypes migrating at different geographical place.

Screenshot from the web interface of HgsDb showing overview to different geographical conditions.

