Background
α2-µ-Globulin fragment (A2-f) is an unusual protein because
unlike most other physiologically known proteins, it is
synthesized in the male rat liver but enters another organ. Some
of the unusual properties of A2-f are: (i) it escapes degradation
by proximal tubule lysosomes; (ii) it selectively accumulates in
the proximal tubule, where it may represent the most abundant
cytosolic protein; and (iii) it crosses a biological membrane to
enter the cytosol. The structural features that mediate this
unusual behavior have not been identified []. A2-f is also
thought to be a unique kidney fatty acid binding protein for
several reasons: (a) it has a similar molecular size as all known
FABPs; (b) it is found in the soluble protein fraction; and (c) it is
abundant in cells with high fatty acid flux and binds long chain
fatty acids in vitro []. The potential role of this protein in the
proximal tubule was determined in isolated proximal tubule
segments []. The presence of A2-f in proximal tubule, the site
of the highest fatty acid flux, further supported the idea that
A2-f is a unique kidney fatty acid binding protein 
[].

Complete sequence analysis of A2-f revealed that it is derived
by the proteolysis of A2U. Proteolytic removal of amino acids
from A2U (18.6 kDa) produces A2-f, which has an apparent
Molecular weight of 15.5 kDa [,
]. The proteolytic conversion
is believed to be mediated by lysosomal cysteine proteases.
However, the specific enzyme(s) responsible for converting
A2U to A2-f have not been identified []. The amino acid
sequence of the signal peptide of A2U has been determined
using a combination of nucleic acid and protein sequencing
techniques []. Like most secreted proteins, the majority (13 out
of 19) of the amino acid residues in the N-terminus are
hydrophobic (or uncharged). Using a combination of protein
and nucleic acid sequencing, the amino acid sequence of signal
peptide of A2U has been determined []. Like many secreted
proteins, the majority of N-terminus residues (13-19) are
hydrophobic or unchanged. There is no clear resemblance
between this signal sequence and the one identified for prealbumin,
a protein produced and secreted by the same cells in
liver.

A2-f binds long chain fatty acids in vitro with a 1:1
stoichiometry and with a high affinity (Kd ranges from 0.1-2
µM) []. Metabolic data obtained from suspensions of fresh
proximal tubule segments showed that A2-f facilitates fatty acid
oxidation and promotes ATP production []. A2-f helps
maintain a large, intracellular pool of readily available
substrates which allows support of a high rate of fatty acid
oxidation []. In addition to its effect on metabolism, A2-f can
also prevent injury caused by free fatty acids by partitioning
fatty acids away from membranes and preventing them from
disrupting membrane function and causing organelle injury 
[].
A2-f can also modulate a “second messenger” effect of fatty
acids on specific ion channels [].

A study has shown that direct lysosomal uptake of A2-f
contributes to chemically-induced nephropathy 
[]. The
increment in lysosomal levels of A2-f cannot be explained by a
decrease in its proteolytic susceptibility. In rats exposed to
TMP, the specific lysosomal transport of A2-f increases, as well
as the ability of lysosomes to directly transport other substrates
for this pathway. This result suggests that the chemically
induced accumulation of cytosolic A2-f in lysosomes is
mediated by an increased rate of direct uptake into lysosomes.
Since nothing is known about the structure of A2-f, homology
modeling has been employed in the present study to determine
its structural elements and they have been compared with the
published structure of A2U.

Methodology
The sequence of A2U was acquired from the SWISS-PROT data
base using the accession code P02761. The published amino acid
sequence of A2-f was used as the target protein 
[]. Secondary
and tertiary structures of A2-f were determined by the use of
3D-JIGSAW program [,
&amp;
]. This program is modular in
design with each module centered on a particular algorithm
required in the modeling process. It is based on rigid-body
assembly and can either be run in fully automatic mode via a
web server or the program modules may be executed separately
and the intermediate files saved. The homology modeling
comprised three steps: (i) template selection, (ii) target-template
alignment and (iii) model building. Essentially, this is an
iterative procedure until a satisfactory model is obtained. 3DJIGSAW
predicts protein structure on the basis of each amino
acid in the protein sequence based on the probability that it will
form an a-helix or a γ-strand, etc. In the predicted secondary
structure, each amino acid is given a score between 0-9, where 0
means that system cannot predict it and the amino acid residue
can form any structural element whereas a score of 9 means it
has a very high probability of forming a particular structural
element.

Discussion
In the present study, the secondary and tertiary structures of
A2-f were determined by the use of the program, 3D-JIGSAW.
This program has been designed to work on targets found to
have at least one parent structure with no less than 40%
sequence identity between target and parent(s). 3D-JIGSAW
superimposes proteins to create a multiple sequence alignment.
It uses rigid-body fragments to construct the complete
backbone and uses fragments that vary in size between those of
loop replacements to multiple secondary structure motifs when
more than one template is used [,
]. Side-chains are then
added using knowledge-based information and refined by a
mean field approach in which the effects of solvation are
considered.

A2-f is a member of a family of fatty acid binding proteins
called lipocalins. These proteins are very diverse at the
sequence level yet have highly conserved tertiary structures.
Twelve structures of members of the lipocalin family have been
solved experimentally []. Knowledge about structures has
revolutionized the understanding of properties of lipocalins.
The structures show that most lipocalins share three conserved
sequence motifs (kernel lipocalins) while others share only one
or two sequence motifs (outlier lipocalins). The lipocalins are
part of a larger protein superfamily, the calycins, which
includes the fatty acid binding proteins, avidins, a group of
metalloproteinase inhibitors, and triabin. The superfamily is
characterized by a similar structure (a repeated +1 topology γ-
barrel) and by the conservation of a structural signature 
[].
Analysis of known crystallographic structures of lipocalin
family reveal that there is overall structural similarity. The
structure of individual proteins is specifically adapted for
binding ligands by forming a binding site in the internal cavity
(inside the γ-barrel) and/or an external loop scaffold. The
structure of the lipocalin fold reveals that both the ends and
sides of this barrel are different. These differences are also
shown by analyses of structural and sequence variation within
the family. These differences can be explained by a possible
difference in functional role between the two ends of the
lipocalin fold. The structurally conserved end of the molecule
may be involved binding to cell surface receptors, while the
structurally variable end may be involved in binding of small
ligands and forming macromolecular complexes [].

The tertiary structure of the precursor protein, A2U in complex
with a hyaline droplet inducer, was deduced earlier by X-ray
crystallography []. The A2U monomer has a folding topology
of an eight-stranded γ-barrel made up of two antiparallel
orthogonal γ-sheets, with both N- and C-terminal extensions
(supplementary material). The larger extension at the Cterminus
of the barrel consists of an a-helix, which packs onto
one face of the barrel, followed by a loop which brings the Cterminal
part of the protein back to the other face of the barrel.
In both A2U and mouse urinary protein (MUP), the N-terminal
extension forms a short γ-strand not present in Retinol Binding
Protein []. The crystal structure identified Tyr-124 as involved
in hydrogen bonding with the carboxyl group of the ligand
fatty acid []. According to the investigators, the hydroxyl
group of Try-124 interacts with the ionized form of the carbonyl
group of the fatty acid. Comparison of the cavities in A2U and
in the corresponding MUP reveal that the former is tailor-made
for small oval hydrophobic ligands such as d-limonene 1,2-
epoxide. The cavity in MUP is more shallow and elongated and
cannot easily accommodate such ligands.

Comparison of the amino acid sequence of A2U and A2-f
revealed that the difference in the number of amino acids
between the two proteins is thirty one. A2U has 181 amino
acids while A2-f has 150 amino acids. In A2-f, twenty eight
amino acids have been omitted at the N-terminus and three
amino acids at the C-terminus. The additional amino acids in
A2U at N-terminus and C-terminus are present either as
random coil or as a bend. The homology modeling determined
tertiary structure of A2-f is typical for lipocalins (). It is
an eight-stranded, antiparallel, symmetrical γ-barrel fold, which
is actually a γ-sheet which has been rolled into a cylindrical
shape. Inside this is a ligand binding site, which plays an
important role in the transport properties of A2-f. The
secondary structure () shows that A2-f posseses five
a-helices and nine γ-strands. There are also 3 single amino acid
γ-turns, 1 two amino acids γ-turn, 1 three amino acids γ-turn, 5
four amino acids γ-turns, 1 five amino acids γ-turn and a single
six amino acids γ-turn. There are three Glycine residues present
in the secondary structure elements. Gly-8 is present at the
beginning of γA; Gly-44 is present in the middle of γC and Gly-
112 is at the end of γH. The rest of the Glycine residues and all
of the Proline residues are present in the γ-turns.  (see
supplementary material) summarizes the ten observed
structural differences between A2-f and A2U. It shows that
there are differences between A2-f and A2U in both the position
and length of αI, αIII, αV, γA, γB, γC, γF and γG. There is also an
additional γ-strand and 310-helix present in A2U.

Kimura et al. [] earlier showed that A2-f possesses a disulfide
bond between Cys-55 and Cys-148. A free Cys-129 was also
found to be present by reaction with iodoacetamide under
denaturing and non-reducing conditions. From structural
studies on many lipocalins it is likely that the disulfide bond
may be important to maintain the 3-D structural integrity of the
protein for binding of hydrophobic ligands []. The role played
by the disulfide bond has also been examined in rat cutaneous
fatty acid-binding protein by chemical and mass spectrometric
analyses. These analyses revealed two disulfide bonds between
Cys-67 and Cys-87, and between Cys-120 and Cys-127. Cys-43
had a free sulfhydryl group. A homology modeling study of the
protein also provided evidence for the presence of the disulfide
bonds. These disulfide bonds apparently are not directly
involved in fatty acid-binding activity, because a recombinant
rat protein expressed in E. coli in which all five cysteine residues
were fully reduced still showed fatty acid-binding activity. The
fact that the evolutionarily distant shark liver fatty acid-binding
protein also has a disulfide bond corresponding to the one
between Cys-120 and Cys-127, suggests that some functions of
cutaneous fatty acid-binding protein might be regulated by the
cellular redox state through formation and reduction of
disulfide bonds [].

Conclusion
The structure of A2-f predicted by homology modeling contains
a b-barrel formed by two sets of four anti-parallel b-strands and
an a-helix consisting of 12 residues near the C-terminus. An
internal cavity and an external loop scaffold is present within
the γ-barrel which gives rise to different binding modes for
ligands of different size and chemical structure. The determined
structural elements of A2-f do not readily explain its properties
such as escape from degradation by proximal tubule lysosomes,
the crossing of a biological membrane to re-enter the cytosol
and selective accumulation in the proximal tubule cells.
However, the structural elements do reveal differences between
A2-f and its precursor protein, A2U.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Hai &amp; Kizilbash, Bioinformation 9(3): 145-149 (2013)

(a) Comparison of secondary structure elements of A2-f with A2U. The secondary structure elements of A2U are based on
the crystal structure of A2U; (b) Tertiary structure of A2-f obtained by homology modeling.

Schematic of the methodology for homology modeling
of A2-f.

Secondary structure elements of A2-f obtained by
homology modeling.

Ribbon diagram of A2U based on the crystal structure
solved at 2.5 Å resolutions [].

