Background
Bacterial lipoproteins have many important functions owing
to their essential nature and roles in pathogenesis
representing a class of possible vaccine candidates. They are
functionally diverse class of membrane-anchored proteins
that typically represent approximately 2% of the bacterial
proteome []. 
They consist of a large group of proteins and
perform many different functions: promote antibiotic
resistance, cell signaling and substrate binding in ABC
transport systems, protein export, sporulation, germination,
bacterial conjugation, and many others are yet to be
assigned a function []. Lipoproteins are required for
virulence in many bacteria. They perform variety of roles in
host-pathogen interaction, from surface adhesion and
initiation of inflammatory processes through translocation
of virulence factors into the host cytoplasm []. Several
methods have been devised in literature to predict bacterial
lipoproteins, using different approaches and data sets.
Identification of Gram-positive bacterial lipoproteins has
resulted in various servers and databases such as DOLOP
[], LIPO 
[], PSORT 
[] and ScanProsite 
[]. LipoP 
[] and
Phobius [] use hidden Markov model. LipPred 
[] uses
Naive-Bayesian network and SPEPLip [] uses neural
network. LipoP [] identification of Gram- negative bacterial
lipoproteins uses pattern matching methodology. In this
work, we present a SVM based method using amino acid
composition to identify bacterial lipoproteins.

Methodology
Bacterial Lipoprotein Dataset:
The dataset of bacterial lipoproteins consists of
experimentally annotated 222 sequences. It has been derived
from distinct bacterial lipoproteins available in the DOLOP
[] database.

Bacterial Non Lipoprotein Dataset:
222 bacterial non lipoprotein sequences which were
obtained from various databases such as NCBI [],
UNIPROT [] were used for the construction of the dataset.

Both the datasets were compiled after performing CD-HIT.
The program CD-HIT (Cluster Database at High Identity
with Tolerance) [] 
[] removes homologous sequences by
clustering the protein dataset at user-defined sequence
identity thresholds. Here we employed multiple CD-HIT
runs; for example 90%, and then 60% and then 50%
generating more efficient non-redundant datasets.

Server Implementation:
The prediction method described in this paper is
implemented in the form of a web-server LIPOPREDICT:
Bacterial Lipoprotein prediction server (). Bacterial
lipoproteins are a diverse and functionally important group
of proteins that are amenable to bioinformatic analyses
because of their unique signal peptide features. They are
characterized by the presence of a signal peptide in their Nterminus,
followed by presence of a specific cysteine residue
[]. 
The lipidation motif, represented in PROSITE by the
regular expression DERK (6) [LIVMFW STAG] (2) −
[LIVMFYSTAGCQ] −[AGS]−C(PS00013), is present in both
Gram- positive and Gram-negative bacteria. Signal peptides
of bacterial lipoproteins possess many distinctive physio
chemical features, along with the presence or absence of
specific amino acids []. 
G. von Heijne [] showed that
considerable structural and compositional differences exist
between signal peptides of bacterial lipoproteins and
bacterial non lipoproteins. The two classes differ from each
other in terms of the physio-chemical properties like charge,
hydrophobicity, secondary structure propensities and
amino acid size. All those differences in signal peptides
from lipoproteins and non-lipoproteins can be attributed to
the amino acid composition of the signal peptide. Hence
compositional features like amino acid and dipeptide
composition can be employed for discriminating these
signal peptides, which in turn will result in differentiating
bacterial lipoproteins and non-lipoproteins. In our work, we
analyzed the amino acid sequence of the signal peptides of
lipoproteins and bacterial non lipoproteins. The average
length of signal peptides in bacteria ranges from 24 amino
acids for Gram-negatives and 32 amino acids for Gram
positives []. Considering few variations in the lengths, we
selected first 35 residues for the analysis.

Server description
Prediction Input Interface:
Users can click on the prediction icon and the prediction
interface displays various input type option. In which user
can either type or paste sequence () or submit the
file using the option upload file (). Submitting
sequence/s must be in FASTA format, on submission the
input sequence is validated and if invalid the errors are
reported to the user to rectify the problem.

Prediction Output Interface:
When the run prediction button is clicked, the users are
directed to the results page, best model (Selected Dipeptide
Composition) with highest cross validation were created
and used for prediction. Compositional feature model
selected dipeptide is been used to generate prediction
results. Support vector machines (SVMs) with probability
estimates are calculated and the prediction result with
probability estimate of the sequence belonging to the
respective class is displayed in the result page. Result page
also gives an option to download the prediction results for
further use.

Discussion
SVM kernel types and kernel parameters were tuned based
on 10 fold cross validation accuracy as performance
measure. The results are tabulated in  (see
supplementary material). Bacterial lipoprotein prediction
problem with feature selection gave the highest accuracy of
97% with selected dipeptide composition feature. We
employed information gain feature selection using WEKA
software [] 
with the view to extracting the subsets of
informative features. With feature selection the maximum
accuracy increased for selected dipeptide, so we employed
67 selected dipeptide composition features as SVM domain
feature input for building the model.

Conclusions
In this study we have presented a prediction server,
LIPOPREDICT for identification and classification of
bacterial lipoproteins. The server employs Support Vector
Machines supervisory learning model, which is rigorously
based on statistical learning theory. For prediction of
bacterial lipoprotein, selection of most informative features
in dipeptide composition further improved model accuracy.
Our results indicate that this SVM model can be employed
for accurate prediction of bacterial lipoproteins. The
prediction models include probability measures in the
output, so it can be used to assess the confidence of SVM
predictions. Further, our user friendly web server can be
readily used for annotation of novel proteins.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Dr. VKJ gratefully thanks CSIR, New Delhi for support in
the form of Emeritus Scientist Grant. The authors also thank
NPSF group members of CDAC for help and support for
hosting of web server.

Citation:Kumari et al, Bioinformation 8(8): 394-398 (2012)

Snapshot of the index page of LIPOPREDICT server.

Snapshot of query prediction page − Type or Paste
Sequence.

Snapshot of query prediction page − Upload File.

