Background
Adverse effects on plant productivity during environmental
stresses are primarily due to the production of reactive oxygen
species (ROS). Plants have evolved efficient antioxidant
systems to scavenge cellular ROS by an interconnected network
of antioxidants and ROS-scavenging enzymes []. In plants, the
ascorbate-glutathione cycle that exists in every cell is a
coordinated chain of biochemical reactions that performs a
crucial role in H2O2 homeostasis. One of crucial enzyme of this
cycle is ascorbate peroxidase (APX; EC 1.11.1.11) a haeme -
containing protein that plays a central role in scavenging H2O2
to protect higher plants from oxidative stress. Under
physiological conditions, it is responsible for the rapid
reduction of H2O2 to water at the expense of two ascorbate
(AsA) molecules as specific electron donors. Several isoforms of
APX have been reported in Arabidopsis thaliana and Oryza sativa
[]. APX isoenzymes are distributed in various cellular
compartments, i.e. stromal and thylakoid membrane of
chloroplasts, microbodies including peroxisomes and
glyoxysomes, cytosol, mitochondria []. The cytosolic APXs are
highly responsive to various types of stresses, even though the
cytosol is not the dominant source of reactive oxygen species.
The cytosolic APXs are central regulators of cellular ROS levels
and are essential for regulating cellular redox states in Oryza
sativa [].

Structural studies on bio-molecules have changed our
perception of the biological world in the last few years.
Homology modeling is one such technique that has found wide
appreciation, which aims at predicting the 3D structure of biomolecules,
relying largely on resources such as
pattern/function and sequence. There is great concern
regarding cytosolic APX genes in plants for enhancing
tolerance to abiotic stresses. Rice being a staple food crop
throughout the globe, thus, revealing the three dimensional
(3D) structure of cytosolic APXs from rice would provide
insights in to their functional mechanism during stress.
However, 3D structure of cytosolic APX1 from Oryza sativa
remains unknown. In the present study, we generate the 3D
structure of the cytosolic OsAPX1 (EC 1.11.1.11) from Oryza
sativa based on the available cytosolic soybean APX (2XIF)
structural homologue as template. The model structure
OsAPX1 was validated with standard parameters
(PROCHECK, PROSAII, Verify3D, RMSD). This study could
prove useful in functional characterization of plant ascorbate
peroxidases in rice in response to stress.

Methodology
Sequence search:
The FASTA sequence of cytosolic APX1 (A2XFC7.1) from Oryza
sativa was retrieved from the NCBI database (National Center
for Biotechnology Information). Comparative modeling usually
starts by searching the PDB of known protein structures using
the target sequence as the query []. This search is generally
done by comparing the target sequence with the sequence of
each of the structures in the database. The target sequence was
searched for similar sequence using the BLAST (Basic Local
Alignment Search Tool) [] against Protein Database (PDB). The
BLAST results yielded X-ray structure of 2XIF cytosolic APX1
from soybean with 83% similarity to our target protein
(OsAPX1).

Comparative modeling:
The theoretical structure of OsAPX1 from Oryza sativa was
generated using Modeller 9.12 by comparative modeling of
protein structure prediction. MODELLER implements
comparative protein structure modeling by satisfaction of
spatial restraints. The program was designed to use as many
different types of information about the target sequence as
possible.

Model validation of OsAPX1:
The model was evaluated on the basis of geometrical and
stereo-chemical constraints using PROCHECK, ProSA-Web 
[]
and Verify 3D [].

RMSD:
Root Mean Squared Deviation (RMSD) generally represents the
distance between two objects. In a structural sense, this value
indicates the degree to which two three dimensional structures
are similar. The lower the value, the more similar the structures
are. The RMSD value between the template 2XIF and our model
structure was calculated using MOE.

Phylogenetic analysis:
Phylogenetic analysis of the sequences was done by Molecular
Evolutionary Genetic Analysis (MEGA) software (version
4.0.02) [], using UPGMA method. Each node was tested using
the bootstrap approach by taking 1,000 replicates.

Results &amp; Discussion
Comparative modeling of cytosolic APX1:
The rice protein sequence comprises of 250 amino acid residues.
The homology search using PDB blast analysis revealed 83 %
sequence identity to cytosolic APX from soybean (PDB ID:
2XIF) with an e-value of 6e-153. ScanProsite server identified
the fragment APLMLRLAWHSA as the plant peroxidase
signature motif (33-44 residues) as a consensus pattern in both
rice and soybean APXs. Sequence alignment revealed that
haeme ligand interacting signature motif IVALSGAHTL was
also conserved in both target and template APX sequences
(). Further we developed five model structures for
cytosolic OsAPX1 using Modeller 9.12. The model with the
lowest DOPE (Discrete Optimized Protein Energy, a statistical
potential used to assess homology models) score of -33107.04
was considered to be thermodynamically stable and chosen for
further refinement and validation. This was later visualized by
Accelrys Discovery Studio Version 2.5.

Validation of OsAPX1 structure:
The stereochemical quality and accuracy of the predicted model
was evaluated using Modeller 9.12, which is based on
Ramachandran plot calculation. In general, a score close to 100
% implies good stereochemical quality of the models. The
reliability of the target proteins was examined by torsion angles
Ø and ψ and a percentage quality measurement of the protein
structure was used, in which four sorts of occupancies were
called core, allowed, generously allowed and disallowed
regions respectively (). The Modeller 9.12 generated
model revealed 94.6 % residues falling in most favoured region,
4.9% residues in additionally allowed region, and 0.5% residues
in generously allowed region with no residues in the
disallowed region of the Ramachandran plot.

ProSA-Web analysis of the model revealed a Z-score value of
target protein. The Z-score indicates overall model quality and
measures the deviation of the total energy of the structure with
respect to an energy distribution derived from random
conformations. In order to facilitate interpretation of the Z score
of the specified protein, its particular value was displayed
in a plot that contains the Z scores of all experimentally
determined protein chains in OsAPX1 PDB. Groups of
structures from different sources (X-ray, NMR) are
distinguished by different colours (NMR in dark blue and X ray
in light blue). This plot can be used to check whether the Zscore
of the protein in question is within the range of scores
typically found for proteins of similar size belonging to one of
these groups. It can be seen in () that Z-score value (-
8.04) of the target model of cytosolic OsAPX1 is located within
the space of proteins determined by X ray crystallography and
NMR. This value was extremely close to the value of template
GmAPX (-8.6), which suggested that the obtained model was
reliable and very close to experimentally determined structures
(). Verify3D showed 86.06% of the residues had a
score greater than 0.2 that corresponded to the quality of the
OsAPX1 model that was reliable and acceptable. The degree of
structural similarity was measured by RSMD performed
between equivalent atom pairs. RSMD analysis of the OsAPX1
model was measured from its template (2XIF) from soybean
using MOE software. The Cα RMSD and backbone RSMD
deviation for the OsAPX1 model and the GmAPX template
(2XIF) crystal structure were 1.06 Å, and 1.04 Å, respectively
and over all RMSD was 1.57 Å (). Thus, the OsAPX1
model generated by Modeller 9.12 was confirmed to be reliable
and accurate.

Comparative structural alignment of OsAPX1 protein with other plant homologues:
Comparative alignment of OsAPX1 with its homologous
protein sequences revealed that helices (10) and strands (2)
were conserved in all the selected plant species (). High
sequence similarity was observed at both the C- and N- termini.
The haeme ligand binding and peroxidase signature motifs
were present in right handed alpha helix (). Our
analysis revealed that alpha helix might be involved in haeme
ligand interactions. In addition, it revealed that haeme ligand
signature or consensus pattern ([D/E]IVALSG[G/A]T[L/I]G)
was conserved in dicots and monocots (as rice being monocot
and soybean dicot) with 83% similarity. Thus, the model
provides insight into the molecular function of the haeme
binding residues and peroxidase activity of OsAPX1 in
response to stress.

Phylogenetic analysis:
The APX proteins were highly conserved across all higher
plants and encoded by a multigene family. Duplication of genes
and their subsequent divergence were central to multiplicity of
the APX gene family. To establish and evolutionary
relationship of OsAPX1 (used in this study) with other plant
orthologs, we selected protein sequences available in NCBI
database for cytosolic APXs from monocots (10) and dicots (9)
for phylogenetic analysis. Phylogenetic analysis showed a clear
demarcation of plant cytosolic APXs into two prominent
clusters; cluster A and B. Cluster A comprised of sequences
from monocots (Aeluropus littoralis, Eleusine coracana, Setaria
italica, Zea mays, Sorghum bicolour, Brachypodium distanchyon,
Hordeum vulgare, Oryza sativa, Triticum aestivum), whereas
cluster B included sequences from dicots (Theobroma cacao,
Gossypium hirsutum, Medicago truncatula, Glycine max,
Bruguieran gymnorhiza, Brassica rapa, Brassica oleracea, Nicotiana
tabacum, Solanum lycopersicum, Capsicum annuum) ().
Cluster A has two subgroups a and b wherein; subgroup a
included (Eleusine coracana, Setaria italica, Zea mays) and
subgroup b contained (Triticum aestivum, Hordeum vulgare,
Oryza sativa). On the other hand cluster B comprised of
subgroups c, d and e, wherein; subgroup c contained
(Theobroma cacao, Gossypium hirsutum), subgroup d contained
(Medicago truncatula and Glycine max) and subgroup e contained
(Brassica rapa, Brassica oleracea, Nicotiana tabacum, Solanum
lycopersicum and Capsicum annuum). However, H. vulgare and B.
distanchyon showed highest sequence similarity to OsAPX1. All
the major clusters gave bootstrap values higher than 60. The
tree showed distinct crop-specific clustering of sequences,
revealing clear crop-specific differences.

Conclusion
To our knowledge this is the first report regarding rice cytosolic
APX1 homology modeling. Ascorbate peroxidase is a key
enzyme for regulation of ROS levels in different subcellular
compartments that plays a significant role in conferring stress
tolerance in plants. The model provides insight into the
molecular functions of haeme ligand binding and peroxidase
signature motifs during stress resistance in plants. Hence, the
model structure of OsAPX1 shall prove to be crucial in
comprehending its molecular function in response to stress.

Authors like to appreciate and thank the Department of
Biotechnology for funding this research.

Citation:Pandey et al, Bioinformation 10(3): 119-123 (2014)

A) Alignment of deduced amino acid sequences of cytosolic ascorbate peroxidases from Glycine max (G. max; template)
and Oryza sativa (O. sativa; target) revealing the signature motifs for peroxidase activity and haeme ligand binding shown in blue
and red, respectively; B) Cartoon structure of OsAPX1 model showing its N- and C- terminals in blue and red, respectively; C)
Alpha helical model of OsAPX1 showing ten helices and two sheets.

Plot for OsAPX1 designed by PROCHECK program.
All residues of OsAPX1 are in most favoured region.

Validation of OsAPX1 structure model by ProSAII
tools. The Z-score values of A) OsAPX1 (Target) and B)
GmAPX1 (Template) proteins determined by NMR
(represented in dark blue) and X-ray (represented in light blue).
The two black dots represent Z-score value of template and
target.

Superposition of Cα backbone of OsAPX1 (target) and
GmAPX (template PDBID: 2XIF) represented by red and yellow
colours, respectively.

Comparative alignment of deduced amino acid sequences of OsAPX1 and other plant homologues showing peroxidase
signature motif (H 1 &amp; 2) in blue and the haeme ligand signature motif (H 6) in black.

Phylogenetic analysis showing similarity of rice cytosolic ascorbate peroxidase (OsAPX1) with other cytosolic ascorbate
peroxidases from dicots and monocots.

