Background
Chancroid is a sexually transmitted infection caused by the
Gram negative bacterium Haemophilus ducreyi. The disease
manifests as genital ulceration which may be accompanied by
regional lymphadenitis and bubo formation. Chancroid
remains a major cause of the genital ulceration syndrome. This
has been shown to be a major co-factor in the transmission of
HIV-1 infection both through cross sectional cohort and
prospective longitudinal studies [,
]. Infection of Haemophilus
ducreyi occurs in genital and non-genital skin, mucosal
surfaces, and regional lymph nodes []. Generally, one or a few
painful, infected sores at the site of the infection characterize
chancroid. The lesions occur most often on the penis, with
good visibility that is easily distinguishable in males. The
genital ulcers of chancroid dole out as a portico of admission
for HIV infection in both males and females. The occurrence of
genital ulcers has been reported in many individuals
diagnosed with HIV. In addition, if the individual gets infected
with HIV, it increases the severity of ulcers when they get
infected with chancroid. Chancroid and HIV together augment
each other׳s infectivity. The lymphadenitis is excruciating and
may form an abscess. It is sometimes indispensable to aspirate
the infected inguinal nodes to prevent rupture and to afford
symptomatic relief. In its infection to foreskin keratinocytes,
fibroblasts co-cultures have stimulated a profound secretion of
pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-6 and IL-8, but not IL-1α and
TNF-α. The persuasive activity of polymorphonuclear
leucocytes is held liable for localized accumulation activity of
inflammatory neutrophils [,
].

Therefore, effective diagnosis and treatment of chancroid may
play an important part in slowing down the HIV-1 epidemic in
those parts of the world where both diseases are prevalent. The
connotation between chancroid and HIV transmission
stimulated several laboratories to investigate Haemophilus
ducreyi pathogenesis during the past 15 years 
[]. In this
investigation, the screening of natural antimicrobial
compounds against putative novel drug targets of H. ducreyi
using subtractive proteomics and in-silico drug designing
approach has been carried out.

Methodology
Retrieval and selection of target:
Proteome of Haemophilus ducreyi was retrieved from Uniprot
knowledgebase []. 
Total 121 proteins of Haemophilus ducreyi
were retrieved. The target enzymes were selected by using
subtractive proteomic approach against proteome of Homo
sapiens. All the proteins were analyzed using BLASTP 
[]. The
enzymes whose similarity was lowest while aligning with
proteome of Homo sapiens were selected. Finally, Acetyl Co-A
carboxylase, Fructose 1, 6, bisphosphatase and
Phosphoenolpyruvate phosphotransferase were selected and
searched for coordinate files in protein data bank.

Homology modeling and validation:
Three dimensional coordinate files were not found, therefore,
complex was done with IgG using Autodock Vina at default
parameters and similarly with Rifabutin and enzyme complex.
Simulation of molecular dynamics was completed using
NAMD graphical interface module incorporated in VMD.

Prediction of toxicity:
Finally, the prediction of toxicity was carried out by the toxpredict
application of the Open Tox server (http:// www.opentox.org/toxicity-prediction) 
[] and Osiris property
explorer (http://www.organic-chemistry.org/prog /peo/)
[], 
which uses an algorithm of similarity search of structure
for prediction of various toxicity values.

Results &amp; discussion
Natural compounds always play profound roles in their
existence in day to day life and generate curiosity towards
their mode of action to combat diseases. The correlation
between HIV and Chancroid has projected the challenge to
develop new class of drugs other than traditional bactericidal
drugs like Rifabutin due to their colossal side effects like
neutropenia, liver enzyme elevation, uveitis and malaise with
myalgia []. Addressing these challenges, novel strategies are
required to combat the issues of efficacy, ADME properties,
toxicity and immunogenicity. Phosphoenolpyruvate
phosphotransferase was selected as the potent target due to the
large conserved sequences which refrains it from being
mutated.

Modeling and validation of target enzyme:
During the model validation progression,
Phosphoenolpyruvate phosphotransferase was best validated
by all the servers. Errat provided an overall quality factor of
90.340 to the enzyme. ProQ predicts the model as an
‘extremely good model’ with predicted LG score of 5.132. Zscore
of -11.11 and local model quality calculated by ProSA
also validates the model beyond gratification. Ramachandran
plot analysis through RAMPAGE states that total 534 amino
acids i.e. 94.5% lie in the favored region thus imparting a solid
base to the model.

Molecular docking and calculation of RMSD:
Using Q site finder ASN (346), LEU (347), PRO (348), LYS
(349), GLU (350), PRO (353), TRP (357) of Phosphoenolpyuvate
phosphotranferase were foreseen to participate actively as
binding pocket of the enzyme. Binding analysis commenced in
a rigid fashion using Hex 8.0 on a correlation type of shape
along with electrostatics with 5D FFT mode. Parameters
included grid dimension of 0.6, receptor and ligand range of
180 with step size of 7.5 and twist rage of 360 with a step size
of 5.5. The Etotal value of lead molecule parillin was -472.13.
Rigid docking of Rifabutin with same target at same
parameters resulted in an Etotal value of -342.49 thus
supporting that fact that parillin binds in a better manner than
Rifabutin. In a semi flexible fashion using Autodock Vina.
Parillin was found to have very low binding affinity of -12.4
kcal/mol with Phosphoenolpyruvate phosphotransferase
while Rifabutin showed -9.7 kcal/mol as shown in  (see
supplementary material). The binding pocket comprised of
VAL509, LEU253, HIS532, GLY507, ARG510, ARG186,
ARG195, LYS250, ILE223 amino acids. Three hydrogen bonds
were also detected as ARG186: HE 1, ARG195:HH22 1 and
VAL509:HN 1 as shown in . Prediction of hydrogen
bonds using SPDBV resulted into 2 H bonds. First H-bond was
formed between GLN 243 OE1 (42.992, 35.708, 3.555, 50.00) and
LIG H (43.535, 33.599, 3.117, 99.99) with a bond length of 2.76
Å. Second H-bond was formed between GLU249 OE1 (39.688,
34.358, 16.037, 50.00) and LIG H (41.354, 32.156, 16.111, 99.99)
with a bond length of 2.22 Å as depicted in . Further
UCSF Chimera was also used to predict hydrogen bonds and 3
hydrogen bonds were predicted from the complex generated
from Hex 8.0 by relaxing the constraints by 2 Å. First bond
formed between Lig1 het H and GLN243 O with a bond length
of 3.797 Å, second bond was formed between Lig1 het H and
GLN243 OE1with a bond length of 2.217 Å, third bond was
formed between Lig1 het H and ALA11 O with the bond
length of 3.515 Å as shown in . This simplifies the fact
that there is enormous possibility of proper binding as there is
an immense possibility of formation of hydrogen bonds. The
highest peak reached by the RMSD curve of parillin complex
was around 4.5Å while that of Rifabutin complex was around
5Å. Both the complexes were simulated at equal time window
of 2000 picoseconds as depicted in . The complex of
parillin with Phosphoenolpyruvate phosphotransferase was
more stable by being less deviated in comparison to the
complex formed by Rifabutin with Phosphoenolpyruvate
phosphotransferase.

In-silico prediction of immunogenicity:
This study also focuses on the immunogenicity caused by
stabilization of the complexes formed by interaction of target
and lead molecule. The binding simulation of complexes of
Rifabutin and parillin were done with IgG (4HDI). Binding
analysis was initiated in a rigid fashion using Hex 8.0 on
default parameters except the correlation type of shape and
electrostatics with 5D FFT mode. The Etotal value of parillin
complex was -531.69. Rigid docking of Rifabutin with same
target at same parameters resulted in an Etotal value of -581.58
which is smaller than that of parillin thus supporting the fact
that Rifabutin complex binds in a better way than parillin
complex.

Prediction of toxicity:
The toxicity analysis renders positive results towards low
toxicity.  (see supplementary material) describes
various parameters of toxicity calculated via open tox server
and Osiris property explorer. Parillin was found to be
prominent in the field of cLogP, pKa= -SMARTS,
biodegradability, acute toxicity to fish, carcinogenicity, skin
irritation, eye irritation, mutagenicity, reproductive effect and
drug score.

Conclusion
In the current study, various discrepancies have been
permeated by incorporating computational binding
simulations of lead compound along with their molecular
dynamics simulation. During the model validation
progression, Phosphoenolpyruvate phosphotransferase was
best validated by all the servers. The above mentioned enzyme
has been superiorly inhibited in rigid and semi flexible manner
by parillin in comparison to Rifabutin. Molecular dynamics
simulation also enhances the authenticity of inhibition.
Regarding immunogenicity, the interaction of IgG with
Rifabutin and parillin complexes reveals that Rifabutin
activates immune response more strenuously than parillin. The
interactions of IgG were also simulated for molecular
dynamics and had furnished positive results towards the fact
that parillin is less immunogenic. The ADME-T properties and
prediction as non-carcinogenic and non-irritant further
establishes it firmly as possible drug candidate. The current
study presents a novel target and a novel system of medication
towards the inhibition of Haemophilus ducreyi.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We gratefully acknowledge TEQIP–II and G. B. Pant
Engineering College, Pauri Garhwal for financial support and
providing instrumentation facilities. Pranav Tripathi is
thankful to AICTE (All India Council for Technical Education)
for fellowship.

Citation:Tripathi et al, Bioinformation 10(8): 502-506 (2014)

Detailed positions of amino acids present in the
vicinity of ligand along with formation of 3 hydrogen bonds as
generated by Autodock Vina. Near residues are VAL509,
HIS532, ARG510, ARG 186, ILE223, LYS250, LEU253 and
GLY507 while the H bond forming amino acids are ARG186,
ARG195 and VAL 509 (green dotted structures).

Prediction of H-bonds by SPDBV where 2 H-bonds
was detected. The bond lengths of H bonds predicted are of
2.22Å and 2.76Å, this low value of bond length predicts high
bond energy and ensuring better binding.

Prediction of H-bonds where 3 H-bonds were
detected, O of GLN243, OE1 of GLN243 and O of ALA11 O in
Phosphoenolpyruvate phosphotransferase. It ensures the role
of other residues like GLN243 and ALA11 that participate in
formation of H bonds.

RMSD curve of Phosphoenolpyruvate
phosphotransferase in complex with Parillin and Rifabutin.
The stability of complex is inversely proportional to RMSD and
calculated over a time window of 2190 picoseconds. The high
values of Rifabutin-PTS-complex (red curve) states a highly
deviated state thus ensuring low stability of the complex while
the low value of Parillin-PTS-complex (blue curve) ensures
high stability of complex.

