Background
Chemokines are small proteins fundamentally involved in cell
migration, angiogenesis, proliferation and apoptosis 
[].
Chemokines play multifaceted roles in numerous physiological
and pathological states. Chemokines interact with major seven
trans-membrane (7TM) receptors of immune system 
[].
Interaction between CCL19 and CCL21 ligands and CCR7as
their cognate functional receptor, play a fundamental role in
lymph node metastasis in many solid tumors 
[]. Human
CCRL1 (Accession number 29169303) contains 350 amino acids
and is expressed in various tissues as heart, thymus, liver,
kidney, spleen, lymph node, placenta, brain, trachea, small
intestine, colon, lung, astrocyte, T cell and dendritic cells 
[].
CCRL1 belongs to the family of silent chemokine receptors like
Duffy antigen receptor of chemokines (DARC). These receptors
lack signaling elements which observed in traditional
chemokines. This matter enabled them to have a broader
spectrum of ligands. These chemokines activate no signaling
cascade. Naturally, these proteins dose not induce a string
calcium response. These receptors compete in binding to
ligands and internalize and degrade ligands. It leads to
chemokine depletion and inhibition of cell migration.
Chemokine transcytosis which results in ligand transfer across
certain barriers is also proposed []. It binds and clears the
constitutively expressed chemokines considered as homeostatic
chemokines compromising CC chemokine ligands CCL19
(ELC), CCL21 (SLC, 6Kine), CCL25 (TECK) and CXCL13 (BCA-
1, BLC). These haemostatic chemokines are involved in
CCR7/CCL19 (CCL21), CCR9/CCL25 and CXCR5/CXCL13
axes which participate in the process of migration of T cells.
Migration of T cells to the secondary lymphoid organs affords
maturity to naive T cells and this is also associated with antigen
presentation to these lymphatic organs which consequently
arise defensive immune responses. An atypical chemokine
receptor as CCRL1 disrupts this chemokine-chemokine receptor
axis and consequently reduces defensive immune responses.
Down-regulation of CCL19 and CCL21 in vitro and in vivo with
consequently has been demonstrated using CCRL1. In the other
word, CCRL1 is capable to blunt the actions of CCL19 and
CCL21 through disrupting the interaction of these chemokines
with their functional receptor. Indeed, xenographs transfected
with this atypical chemokine binder indicated significant
reduction in CCL25 and CXCL13 concentration with a high
clearance capability for post-translational chemokine targeting.
In this regard, natural decoy chemokine receptors were
observed to potentially block attraction of these chemokines.

Chemokine sequestration using atypical receptors as decoy
receptors [] 
has a negative regulation on the development of
proper immune responses. This chemokine scavenging might
be a new therapeutic avenue for stimulation and potentiaiton of
immune responses and treatment of immune-deficient diseases
states. Therefore, the aim of this study is finding potential
agonists for this protein.

Methodology
CCRL1 sequence obtained from NCBI database with Accession
number 29169303 and CCL21 crystallographic structure
retrieved from Protein Data Bank with PDB number 2L4N.

Prediction of 3-D structure:
In order to predict the 3D structure of CCRL1, three web servers
were used. In the first approach we used automated mode of
swissmodel. [] 
This server predicts query 3D model using
comparative modeling method based. This server used
template of intracellular loop of the alpha 2A adrenergic
receptor (1ho9) Chain: A for prediction of the query. As an
alternative approach phyre2 server [] was used. Any 20
identical amino acids between query and templates is a hit for
this server. After finding similar structures, this server predicts
query model based on identical folds. Phyre2 output model was
predicted based on template of Family a G protein-coupled
receptor-like (d1u19a) from family of Rhodopsin-like.The
model constructed by this method showed high coverage (97%)
and template alignment confidence (100%) values. Also a
Hidden Markov Model based server used for modeling of
CCRL1. SAM-T08 server [] first makes HMM cluster from
query and then aligns this cluster against a HMM database
which is constructed from PDB structures and finally generates
model based on HMM alignment. Therefore numbers of
misaligned residues decrease by using this algorithm.

Model evaluation:
Q-mean score [] was used for evaluation of predicted models.
Q-mean is a parameter between 0-1. Scores reach near 1 are
similar to crystallographic structure. But tranmembrane
proteins even in crystallographic structures reach low score.
The model Predicted by swissmodel reached score of 0.05 and
score of phyre2 was 0.271 and SAM-T08 predicted model
reached 0.440. Predicted models by Phyre2 and swissmodel did
not cover all of query residues while in the SAM-T08 output all
of 350 residues were modelled. Because of reaching highest
score in Q-mean and complete query coverage, the SAM-T08
output was chosen for further study ().

Model optimization:
Modeller v9.8 [] was used for optimization of SAM-T08
predicted model. Optimization was performed in 10 steps. Also
100 steps of structure minimization were performed using
UCSF chimera candidate version1.5.3. During this step the date
interval was 10 and step size was set on 0.02.

Virtual screening:
Using FindSite server, the KEGG compounds library was
screened for potentially binding ligands 97 poten ligands were
obtained. These ligands were used for further simulated
docking study in order to find best inhibitor structure.

Molecular docking study:
molegro virtual docker (MVD) 2011.4.3.0 used for computer
simulated docking study. Before initiation of the docking
operation, protein and ligand structures were prepared using
MVD. For this purpose charges assigned to the model of protein
and ligands structures and flexible torsions in ligands were
detected by this software. This approach also identified
probable missing explicit hydrogens and assigned possible
missing bonds. Side chain minimization of the derived CCRL1
and CCL21 models was performed during which only torsion
angles in the side chains of model were modified and other
properties (bond lengths &amp; backbone atom positions) were kept
unchanged.

Discussion
Prediction of interacting residues between CCRL1 and CCL21:
Binding CCL21 to CCRL1 causes activation of CCRL1 inducing
intracellular signal transduction and decreasingm the number
of free CCL21 molecules. As the result formation of the CCL21-
CCR7 complex which is an immune activator is decreased. This
cause immune extinction in masked immune diseases. Thus,
inhibition of the interaction between CCRL1-CCL21 causes
formation of a CCL21-CCR7 complex and activation of the
immune response. For preventing this interaction, interactive
residues must be defined. To do this we used ClasPro 
[], a
rigid body based protein-protein docking webserver. In the
output data, interaction of CCL21 with N-terminal of CCRL1
with least energy level (-979.9 in scale of Weighted Score) was
selected and by using ligand scout software we detected that
residues number 138, 142, 143, 144 and 226 are interacting
residues of CCRL1.

Molecular docking study:
MolDock score [] with a grid resolution of 0.30 Ȃ used as
scoring function for docking. Internal electrostatic interaction
and hydrogen bond between ligand and protein were
permitted. MolDock SE was used as the docking algorithm and
ten runs for ligands were carried out. After docking, energy
minimization and optimization of hydrogen bonds performed.
The energy threshold was 100.00 and similar poses were
ignored. Docking radius was defined to cover amino acids
positions 138, 142, 143, 144 and 226 which were predicted as
interactive residues with CCL21. Using these docking radius
results finding a chemical compound which can bind exactly in
the interaction place and act as a potential inhibitor of
interaction between CCRL1-CCL21. Docking results evaluated
based on MolDock and Re-ranking score. Re-rank score is
estimation for interaction. For the defined docking radius in Nterminal
of CCRL1, the best pose derived from MolDock score
was -142.991with Reranking score equal to -70.069. 
 (see
supplementary material) describes energy level of five top pose
of best inhibitor structure. Also 2D and 3D structure of the
ligand is depicted in ().

Identification of inhibitor structure:
PubChem database was used for identification of the inhibitor
structure and Hexadecanal found as our query. Interaction
between CCRL1 and Hexadecanal is depicted in ().
Hexadecanal (drug bank: DB03381) with chemical formula
C16H32O is and aldehyde which drives from degradation of
sphinganine. As a therapeutic application of hexadecanal, it has
been reported that injection of this chemical can prevent growth
of goiter in rat. [] After increasing the intracellular level of
hexadecanal, fatty acyl-CoA reductase oxidizes this chemical to
hexadecanoyl-CoA. This product can follow fatty acids
oxidation pathway in cell and detoxifies in this pathway.
Inhibitory effect of hexadecanal on CCRL1-CCL21 interaction is
due to its flexible carbon chain and its aldehyde functional
group. It is probable that any similar and synthetic structure
can have similar inhibitory effect.

Conclusion
Based on obtained binding energy level between hexadecanal
and CCRL1, it is mostly probable that binding this potential
inhibitor to CCRL1 occupies interaction site of CCRL1 and
CCL21. Occupation of this place prevents formation of CCRL1
and CCL21 complex. Thus, increased free CCL21 molecules
result in its interaction with CCR7. After binding CCR7 to
CCL21, this complex can potentiate immune responses through
enhanced conveying of immune antigens to secondary
lymphoid organs. Then, we suggest that any synthetic and
drug-like compound similar to hexadecanal can be used as a
potential inhibitor of CCRL1-CCL21 complex for further
experimental analysis in order to stimulate immune responses.
This might be valuable in the stimulating of attenuated immune
system.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Behjati et al, Bioinformation 8(7): 336-340 (2012)

SAM-T08 predicted model of CCRL1

(A) 2D and (B) 3D structure of Hexadecanal

interaction between CCRL1 and Hexadecanal. This
interaction is in the exact place of interacting residues of CCRL1
with CCL21

