Background
Regulatory science is defined by the Food &amp; Drugs
administration as the “development and use of new tools, standards,
and approaches to more efficiently develop products and to more
effectively evaluate product safety, efficacy, and quality”. It is
becoming, together with the translational research-translational
effectiveness transaction, the centerpiece of the evidence-based
health care strategy for fostering innovation and integration of
laboratory test results into clinical decision-making. Laboratory
test requests are one of the tools used by physicians to
investigate a large amount of health problems. About 70% of
medical decisions, among diagnostics, treatments and
monitoring are supported mostly by laboratory tests. The
purpose of laboratory tests and their outcomes are rarely
explained satisfactorily to the patients, the caregivers, and other
stakeholders. In brief, the lack of adequate information,
compounded by the overestimation of complementary
laboratory investigation is an important issue in medical
practice, because it reveals a counter-productive situation where
an overrating of exams co-exists alongside with a poor medical
patient relationship and with sub-par communication skill. As a
consequence, the doctor rely less on the best available evidence,
and under-utilize diagnostic reasoning, which in and of itself
may lead to an increase error rate in diagnosis. Stakeholders are,
and feel misinformed, non-participants in the evidence-based
patient-centered process of care, and are overall disengaged.
Taken together, these elements increase risk, decrease benefit
and increase costs to the patients, in brief, and as shown in
(), improving the patient-centered communication of
laboratory tests results is at the very the core of bioinformation
in evidence-based health care because it ensures effectiveness of
diagnosis and treatment and stakeholder engagement 
[–].

Case in point
Reduction of the consultation time, based on the productive
logic model, leading to:
Less time to listen and to talk with patients; Absence or minimal
physical examination; Less time to think and to discuss the
diagnostic hypothesis; Lack or less time to show patients the
benefits of the tests asked and how to prepare for them; Less
time to clarify the doubts of patients about their expectations.

Consultation based on disease, rather than patient-centered,
characterized by:
Less value to listen; Not sharing the decisions; Imposing
medical management for the patient; Unequal physician patients
relationship; Low patient adherence to medical
guidance for lack of trust.

Absence or minimal reflection by physicians on his/her own
practice:
Lack of professional experience; Erroneous replication models;
Inability to self-criticism; Low qualification; Low adherence to
permanent education programs.

Increased chance of laboratory errors, pre-analytical and
analytical, by the negligence of the doctor and misinformation
of the patient (i.e., decrease health literacy):
Omission on the guidance for medical laboratory tests; Transfer
to the laboratory for any information concerning exams.

Greatest impact on service management and relevant expense:
Reduced cost-effectiveness; Increased overall risk and burden
on patient and stakeholders; In brief, five key dimensions can be
recognized to differentiate the practice of clinical care focused
on the person of the biomedical model of care as part of the
Biomedical Model [].

1) Biopsychosocial perspective – addresses the patients' tri-axial
diagnostic process, and considers the importance of opening a
“hidden agenda” for the patient, where they take care of a
dysfunctional state and not just a physical illness; 2) Patients as
a subject – considers the patients' biography as well as their
individual experience with the disease. “You must understand the
signs and symptoms found by the physician and patient
dissatisfaction, shown by and a manifestation of their individual
conflicts and problems” []; 3) Shared strengths and
responsibilities – the conflict between the medical and patient
autonomy is central to the physician-patient relationship; 4)
Therapeutic alliance – the doctor must act so that the patient
perceives the relevance and effect of the proposed treatment
and agree to the objectives outlined, always considering the
affective and cognitive characteristics of the patient; 5)
Physician as a subject – The biomedical model focuses on the
diagnosis and treatment, based on the “medicine of a subject”,
i.e., the physician. On the other hand, the patient-centered
model involves a two-subject medicine model: the physician
and patient.

In this context, Faria et al. (personal communication) examined
the model of care clinical scenario performed in the outpatient
medical education level, and observed that the information
about laboratory tests were among the most neglected issues in
the bioinformation-dissemination process.

Discussion
Inappropriate use of laboratory tests has been the subject of
studies around the world due to impact to both patient and
health care system. In relation to the patient, this practice may
increase the chance of occurrence of false positive results, and
diagnostic errors, generating unnecessary worry and
discomfort, as well as new demands to be investigated.
Regarding the health care system, this situation generates a
greater transfer of funds to laboratory that could have been
used in other health sectors [,
,
]. Inappropriate use of
laboratory tests is related to several factors, including:
unnecessary tests ordered; lack of proper instructions to the
patient before the collection of material for the execution of the
test; repeated examinations at intervals not recommended, and
use of medications that alter the outcome of examinations; It is
important to reinforce that the appropriate use of laboratory
tests depends on both the patient and the doctor. Therefore, the
quality of physician-patient communication is fundamental
both for the patient's improvement and for the health service. In
this context is essential for the physician to know the
expectations and feelings of the patient regarding their problem.
Moreover, during the discussion of the problem is important to
make all the information clear and accurate []. The decision
about treatment should be shared between patient and doctor in
an equal process []. Our findings to date confirm the results of
others that curricular interventions that aim to help students to
practice medicine patient centered are needed to improve the
medical care [], in large part because of increased active
stakeholder engagement []. These interventions should
encourage students to reflect on their practice with their
mentors.

Conclusion
Taken together, our observations indicate that educational
interventions related to the model of care in medical school may
improve the dissemination of information to the patient and
stakeholders, with the inference that there will be an associated
increase in health literacy []. The new medical intervention
program we describe here specifically targets improving the
patient-centered communication of laboratory tests results, and
contributes to a more effective and rational utilization of
bioinformation dissemination in patient-centered medical
practice. When put into place, the program we advocate for
improving medical students training in communication skills is
expected to optimize cost-effectiveness and stakeholder
engagement in evidence-based health care, because it informs
and expands the traditional Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI) model
of evidence-based health care [].

The authors thank the students and stakeholders of the EBDPBRN
who have participated in early discussions on the subject
of this manuscript. This work was supported in part by
Fulbright Specialist grant (FC).

Citation:Moura et al, Bioinformation 9(14): 718-720 (2013)

Translational Research-Translational Effectiveness
Transaction and Regulatory Science for Enhancing Stakeholder
Engagement: Central Role of Laboratory Test Bioinformation
The figure shows a schematic representation of the central
importance of improved bioinformation of laboratory tests
rational and results in the translational research-translational
effectiveness transaction and for increasing health literacy and
leveraging stakeholder engagement in regulatory science.

