Background
Cell culture is a highly controlled, fragile and complex setting
for scientific research. In order to successfully transfect cells,
several variables such as nutrient levels, temperatures, reagent
concentrations, media, and most importantly – time, must all
carefully be balanced. With the proliferation of cell line
sources and strains, plasmids, media, selection agents and
growth conditions in recent decades it has become
increasingly difficult to quickly analyze large samples of data
related to transfection of a particular cell line against a specific
plasmid.

It is well known that cells for various reasons often times
refuse to grow or be transfected. Sometimes irregularities can
be attributed to problems in media, cultivation conditions, or a
sudden Mycoplasma infection while other times the cause is
unknown []. Some these irregularities can originate from
external factors such as cell line contamination (since 2000,
estimates of cross contamination of cell lines have increased
sharply), while others are a result of incorrect experimental
practices []. Often time's frustration arises when of set of
experimental conditions from another paper or protocol is
strictly followed, but leads to non-growth of cells. Questions
which naturally arise from these challenges relate to how
variations in materials and methods (ex. media, selection
agent, concentration, etc.) can be made without adversely
affecting the cultured cells. Through the presentation of large
datasets, the Cell-culture Database seeks to alleviate some of
the aforementioned challenges and provide a comprehensive
and reliable resource for those who frequently transfect cells.

Methodology
Construction of the Database:
The several thousand papers in the database originate from
over 100 journals including: The Journal of Biological
Chemistry, Brain Research, Diagnostic Microbiology and
Infectious Disease, Journal of Virology, Journal of Physical
Chemistry, etc. Google scholar was utilized for harvesting
papers and EndNote was used to organize and publish
references [,
]. The electronic, web-based version of the
database is written in C# and can be accessed at 
http://celllines.toku-e.com /.

Features:
The Cell-culture Database currently consists of over 3,900 cell
lines (Human and Mammalian) and 1,900 plasmids/vectors
collected from 2,700 pieces of published literature.
Furthermore, details related to experimental conditions such
as cultivation temperature and time has also been noted. The
dataset can be searched either by cell-line or by
plasmid/vector. Once a particular cell line and plasmid of
interest (eg. 293 cells and pcDNA3) have been located, a
deeper, more specific search isolating only this one cell line
and one plasmid can be performed. Such specific data can
quickly provide alternate selection reagents/concentrations,
media, and growth conditions for those who have
encountered problems in their cell culture. Although some of
these features are commonly found in other cell culture
related literature, others remain unique to the database 
[].
References for all data are also published for future
investigation and research ().

Utility to the Greater Biological Community
The Cell-culture Database is a reference tool designed to
primarily serve and enrich the work of cell and molecular
biologists, and life-science professionals. The datasets
contained allow for the user to confirm the use of appropriate
selection agents and concentrations. At the same time, users
can switch to an entirely new set of media and/or selection
agents from the displayed alternatives encompassed therein.
Cultivation conditions can also be adjusted based on alternates
displayed in the database. Although some books and other
resources have attempted to offer suggestions for alternate
methods, large databases related to particular cell-line and/or
plasmids are not available. The database not only seeks to
allow users to confirm their experimental protocols, but also
seeks to solve some of the aforementioned uncertainties in cell
culture through logical presentation of additional culturing
methods.

Future Directions
The accuracy and breadth of the Cell-culture database is
continuously being improved upon. Plans to steadily and
significantly expand content with additional cell lines and
plasmids are already underway. At its core, the database is
most closely related to transfection of primary cells and does
not aim to be a highly technical resource like other databases
[]. 
Already, the online version of the database has received
several thousands of visitors in its first few months. With the
addition of increased unique data and functionality, this trend
is expected to increase in the coming months and years.

Citation:Amirkia &amp; Qiubao, Bioinformation 8(5): 237-238 (2012)

A screenshot of the Cell-culture Database

