Background
The therapeutic aspects of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
have undergone a dramatic change over the last one decade
due to the advent of targeted therapy. The armamentarium of
active agents is expanding rapidly and several landmark trials
and results of the targeted agents are being supported for their
clinical use in NSCLC. Tyrosine kinases have a definite role in
tumour development driving many different solid tumours
including lung cancer. Research carried over the past decade
has shed light on the expression of the proteins that are driven
by the tyrosine kinases. There has been increased success in
tyrosine kinase based therapeutic agents in several types of
cancers including lung cancers.

Echinoderm microtubule associated protein like 4 (EML4) -
anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) is a fusion type protein
tyrosine kinase found in 4-5% of NSCLC [–
]. The EML4-ALK
fusion gene was identified as tumorigenic in NSCLC in 2007 
[,
]. 
The EML4-ALK fusion oncogene arises from a recurrent
inversion on the short arm of chromosome 2 (Inv (2) (p21p23)
that joins exons 1-13 of EML4 to exons 20-29 of ALK. The
resulting chimeric protein EML4-ALK contains an N- terminus
derived from EML4 and a C-terminus containing the entire
intracellular tyrosine kinase domain of ALK. ALK rearranged
NSCLC is a molecularly defined subgroup of NSCLC but is
heterogenous due to the different isoforms of EML4-ALK
fusion proteins and other fusion partners for ALK protein. One
of such proteins was NPM-ALK protein identified as a
neoplastic agent in anaplastic large cell lymphoma. (ALCL) 
[,
] ALK has been later linked to several fusion partners
including EML4. The EML4-ALK fusion oncogene provides a
potential target for therapeutic intervention. Cells harboring the
EML4-ALK translocation are effectively inhibited by small
molecule inhibitors that target the ALK tyrosine kinase 
[].

Crizotinib is a multi-targeted small molecule tyrosine kinase
inhibitor which had been originally developed as an inhibitor
of the mesenchymal epithelial transition growth factor (c-MET)
and is also a potent inhibitor of ALK phosphorylation and
signal transduction. It was identified as a clinic ready inhibitor
of EML4-ALK at a rapid pace and shown promise 
[].
Crizotinib has been identified as an orally active small molecule
inhibitor of ALK and c-Met receptor tyrosine kinase. Crizotinib
has been shown to be highly selective for ALK and c-Met
kinases with 50% inhibitory concentrations 5-20 nM compared
with values atleast 20 fold higher for other kinases [,
]. Mode
of action of the crizotinib is by binding to the adenosine
triphosphate binding site (ATP binding site) of the ALK
enzyme and preventing binding of ATP thus inhibiting its auto
phosphorylation. Crizotinib has been shown highly effective as
a specific inhibitor of receptor tyrosine kinase c-MET
(hepatocyte growth factor receptor) and was shown as c-MET
inhibitor [].

However, it is currently the only approved drug available for
NSCLC patients who harbor EML4-ALK translocation. In
contrast to patients with EGFR mutations, patients with ALK
fusion oncogene do not appear to respond to EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) such as erlotinib or gefitinib. Therefore
there is an urgent need to explore if any of the tyrosine kinase
inhibitors currently in use would be effective inhibitor for
EML4-ALK fusion protein as well. Therefore, in the similar
lines of c-MET inhibitor identified as EML4-ALK inhibitor
crizotinib we have attempted to identify tyrosine kinase
inhibitors that are already in clinical use and that can find use
as EML4-ALK kinase inhibitor as well by molecular docking
studies.

EML4-ALK has up to 11 different variants, but the all the
different variants retain the cytoplasmic portion of the ALK
with truncation of EML4 at several points 
[–]. We have
therefore chosen the ALK portion of the fusion protein for the
docking studies and hypothesize that the findings of the study
may be suitable for all the different EML4-ALK variants.

Methodology
Details:
EML4-ALK isoform 3a and 3b were selected for the
study because of the frequent expressions in different lung
cancer types and also the size of the protein was compatible for
in-silico studies. The structures were modeled using Ab-initio
modeling approach because of the lack of suitable template
structure.

Modeling of Eml4-alk isoform 3a and 3b:
The protein sequence of EML4-ALK isoform 3a and 3b with
accession no. BAG55003.1 of length 785 AA and BAG55004.1 of
length 796AA respectively were retrieved from NCBI. The
structure of isoform 3a and isoform 3b was determined using
Robetta server. Robetta provides both ab initio and comparative
models of protein domains. Domains without a detectable PDB
homolog are modeled with the Rosetta de novo protocol 
[,
]. 
Comparative models are built from template PDBs detected
and aligned using locally installed versions
of HHSEARCH/HHpred, RaptorX, and Sparks-X. Alignments
are clustered and comparative models are generated using the
RosettaCM protocol. The procedure is fully automated.

Energy Minimization and assessment of stereochemical properties:
The models of Eml4-alk isoform 3a and 3b obtained from
Robetta were energy minimized using Chiron an online server.
Chiron performs rapid energy minimization of protein
molecules using discrete molecular dynamics with an all-atom
representation for each residue in the protein. The energy
minimized structures were analyzed for stereochemical
properties using Rampage server.

Docking studies:
The docking studies were performed using Ligand Fit function
of Accelry׳s Discovery Studio 2.4. Ligand conformations
generated using Monte-Carlo techniques are initially docked
into an active site based on shape, followed by further
CHARMm minimization. The models of Isoform 3a and 3b
were prepared for docking by adding hydrogens and atomic
valencies were corrected using Ligand Fit׳s valence check
function. The binding sites were detected using Ligand Fit׳s
flood filling algorithm. The binding site present in the catalytic
domain of the ALK region was selected for the docking
purpose. Grid generated near the potential binding sites was
extended to accommodate larger ligands. Crizotinib an
approved drug for the treatment of NSCLC with EML4-ALK
mutation was taken as the standard control for all the docking
sites in isoform 3a and 3b. Flexible dockings were performed
with the default parameters of Ligand Fit using Dreiding
ForceField. The docked poses were evaluated with the set of
Ligand Fit׳s scoring functions. The docking interactions were
checked in the graphics window 5 (Accelrys Software Inc.,) and
the 2-D interactions were plotted using Ligplot+v.1.4.

Ligand Selection:
The tyrosine kinase inhibitors already in use as a drug for
various types of cancer were selected for the study as shown in
.
The structure of the drugs were retrieved from NCBI
pubchem database and the structural geometry was cleaned
using Discovery studio clean geometry function.

Results &amp; Discussion
Modeling of EML4-ALK isoform 3a and 3b:
 shows the EML4 ALK fusion protein due to the
inversion in chromosome 2. The isoforms 3a and 3b are also
shown with exon variant 6a and 6b respectively. The presence
of additional 11aminoacids from 224-234 in isoform 3b
distinguishes it from isoform 3a. The sequences of EML4-ALK
isoform 3a and 3b (accession number BAG55003.1, BAG55004.1)
were retrieved from NCBI for analysis. The structures of the
fusion protein isoform 3a and 3b were modeled using Robetta
server. The modeled protein isoforms () were
checked for geometry and stereochemical properties using
Ramachandran plot. This plot had 94.4% and 93.5% of isoforms
3a and 3b in the most favoured region respectively. The
structure of the ALK region for both the models was well
resolved making the docking studies more consistent.

Docking studies using crizotinib as a reference to identify catalytic sites:
Catalytic domain of ALK region (aa 274-550) of isoform 3a and
(aa 285-561) of isoform b were selected for the docking purpose.
The binding site search showed 26 sites with 17/26 sites present
in ALK region for isoform 3a and 28 sites with 12/28 sites
present in ALK region for isoform 3b shown in  (see
supplementary material) shows the list of tyrosine kinase
inhibitors used for docking study. Initially the docking was
performed on all sites present in ALK region for both isoforms
using Crizotinib as a reference standard. Of all the sites, for
isoform 3a - site 7, 20 and for isoform 3 b- sites 9, 10, 17 were
found to be binding to crizotinib with good affinity. These sites
were further selected for docking with the other TKIs from the
database. The amino acid residues involved in interaction at
site 7, site 20 for isoform 3a and site 9, 10, 17 for isoform 3b is
shown in  (see supplementary material). The Dock
score of Isoform 3a and 3b for all the tyrosine kinse inhibitors
are listed in the Table 3a and 3b (Available with author).

Our study identified Tivozanib and Lapatinib as potential
inhibitors () of EML4-ALK based on the
consensus docking score for both isoform 3a and 3b compared
to all the TKIs taken for the study (). The drugs with
the top 3 scores for both the isoforms were compared. For
Isoform 3a site7, the binding order was Lestaurtinib &lt;
Tivozanib &lt; Radotinib. For site 20, the binding score order was
Tivozanib &lt; Cabozanitib &lt; Regorafenib. Tivozanib showed
good consensus binding score in both the sites. For isoform 3b
site9, the binding was of order Erlotinib &lt; Lapatinib &lt;
Nilotinib. For site 10, the binding score order seen was
Lapatinib &lt; Nilotinib &lt; cediranib. For site 17, the binding score
order was found to be Tivozanib &lt; Dasatinib &lt; Neratinib.
Lapatinib and Nilotinib were within the top 3 category for 2
sites whereas the binding of the other drugs were not
consensus in all the sites. Of the 2 drugs, Lapatinib and
Nilotinib, Lapatinib demonstrated a better binding score than
Nilotinib. Further analysis revealed, Lapatinib showed good
consensus score on all the 3 sites of isoform 3b. The interactions
between the selected drugs and the EML4-ALK isoforms were
demonstrated using Ligplot+v.1.4.5 ().

Tivozanib, oral VEGF receptor TKI suppresses angiogenesis by
being selectively inhibiting all the three VEGF receptors 
[,
].
Tivozanib has been evaluated in several clinical trials
including a Phase I and Phase II trial demonstrating safety and
efficacy for patients with advanced clear cell renal cell
carcinoma (RCC) []. Treatment using Tivozanib in the phase I
clinical study of patients with advanced solid tumors that were
resistant to other therapies showed promising trends of
decreased intratumoral vascularity with 35% of patients
showing shrinkage in tumour size. Another phase III clinical
trial in RCC done for Tivozanib versus Sorafenib as initial
targeted therapy showed a longer progression free survival for
Tivozanib []. Tivozanib has been recently shown to inhibit
multidrug resistance mediated by ABCB1 (p-glycoprotein) and
ABCG2 (BCRP) []. The other promising tyrosine kinase
inhibitor binding to EML4-ALK fusion protein in this study
was Lapatinib, originally identified as the first dual epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) and human epidermal growth
factor receptor 2 (HER2) tyrosine kinases approved by the FDA
in 2007 []. This drug is indicated for use in combination with
capecitabine for the treatment of patients with advanced breast
cancer or metastatic breast cancer with tumours that
overexpress HER2 and whose previous treatment had included
an anthracycline, a taxane and Trastuzumab []. Lapatinib can
bind to EGFR inactive form unlike gefitinib and erlotinib and
therefore has a slower dissociation rate compared to other
tyrosine kinase inhibitors. This is important for greater
duration of the effect at the target site compared to gefitinib
and erlotinib. A recent report [] shows that Lapatinib in
combination with trastuzumab (anti-HER2 antibody) and
bevacizumab (Anti-VEGF antibody) helped achieve an
impressive and durable anti-tumour activity in a heavily pretreated
NSCLC patient. Therefore use of Lapatinib in NSCLC
strengthens our hypothesis that probably it should be explored
further for ALK rearranged NSCLC as well. Our study has
identified this dual inhibitor to be binding with a good docking
score with EML4-ALK fusion protein.

Studies shows that this is the most promising oral tyrosine
inhibitor that is effective in HER2 over expressing breast
cancers and can probably tried for NSCLC patients harboring
the EML4-ALK translocation as well in future after studying its
role further. EML4-ALK fusion protein has several variants but
the common aspect of all variants is the ALK portion of fusion
protein that is constant comprising the ATP binding site.
Therefore we docked the chosen agents in the ALK region so
that the tyrosine kinase inhibitors chosen could be useful for
targeting the different EML4-ALK variants with the common
ALK active site. The future studies should involve biochemical
assays for Tivozanib and Lapatinib to determine if this can
indeed bind to the ALK region of EML4-ALK and if so the IC50
should be evaluated in NSCLC cell lines harboring EML4-ALK.
Clinical trials are currently ongoing to evaluate the safety and
antitumour activity of Tivozanib in breast, lung and colorectal
cancer.

Crizotinib was originally synthesized as the MET inhibitor, at
the ATP binding site of the MET kinase domain obtained from
the co-crystal structure. Evaluation of Crizotinib against a panel
of more than 120 kinases in biochemical assays and twelve cell
based phosphorylation assays and was determined to be nearly
20 fold more selective for ALK and MET compared to other
kinases evaluated. The phenomenon of acquired resistance is
known for crizotinib and most frequent mutations involve the
gatekeeper residue − aminoacid substitutions that can hinder
the drug binding. Since the docking sites have been derived
based on crizotinib as reference, it needs to be checked whether
the different gatekeeper mutations identified for crizotinib
mediated resistance can hinder the binding of tivozanib and
lapatinib as well.

Conclusion
Developing resistance to EGFR and EML4-ALK based TKIs
augments the need to develop therapeutic strategies to
overcome the resistance mechanisms by blocking of multiple
members of ErbB family. Identification of Tivozanib and
Lapatinib as potential inhibitors of EML4-ALK needs to clearly
pursued further. Our study thus suggests the probable
direction that could be further explored in inhibiting EML4-
ALK fusion protein harboring NSCLCs.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Ramshankar et al, Bioinformation 10(10): 658-663 (2014)

Schema of EML4-ALK fusion.

a) Structure of EML4-ALK isoform 3a with ALK
region highlighted in yellow and binding sites in green; b)
Structure of EML4-ALK Isoform 3b with the binding site
highlighted in green; c) Binding of Isoform3a with Tivozanib at
Site 7 with the drug represented in ball and stick model;
d)Binding of Isoform3a with Lapatinib at Site 20 with the drug
represented in ball and stick model; e) Binding of Isoform 3b
with Lapatinib at site 9 with the drug represented in ball and
stick model; f) Binding of Isoform 3b with Lapatinib at site 10
with the drug represented in ball and stick model; g) Binding of
Isoform 3b with Tivozanib at Site 17 with the drug represented
in ball and stick model.

a) Binding of Isoform 3a with top 15 tyrosine kinase
inhibitors; b) Binding of Isoform 3b with top 15 tyrosine kinase
inhibitors.

a) Ligplus showing interaction of Isoform3a with
Tivozanib at site 7; b) Ligplus showing interaction of Isoform3a
with Tivozanib at site 20; c) Ligplus showing interaction of
Isoform3b with Lapatinib at site 9; d) Ligplus showing
interaction of Isoform3b with Lapatinib at site 10; e) Ligplus
shows interaction of Isoform3b with Lapatinib at site 17.

