Background
The discovery and introduction of treatments by antibiotics
after World War I resulted in a dramatic decrease in number of
deaths due to bacterial infections. However, in the present era,
these antibiotics have lost their status as the “miracle drug” and
“treatment failure” is a new and often seen situation. The
antibiotic resistance became sustainable in the environment as
already resistant bacteria emerged as new dominant population
and evolve as superbugs [].

The use, overuse and misuse of antibiotics in human and
veterinary medicine are major promoters for the development
and spread of multidrug resistant bacteria world-wide.
However, large usage of antibiotics results in environmental
releases. Even though, levels of antibiotics found in the
environment are low, minimum inhibitory concentration for
most bacteria, they may still result in an increased selection
pressure at some sites []. In general practice, there are concerns
that some common infections are becoming increasingly
difficult to treat and that illnesses due to antibiotic resistant
bacteria may take longer to resolve. With the evolution of new
antibiotic resistant microorganisms, there are reports indicating
the end of era of antibiotics treatment and the need for new
methodologies to target the pathogenic microorganisms [].

Cholera toxin is a protein complex secreted by the bacterium
Vibrio cholerae which is responsible for the massive, watery
diarrhea (cholera). It is a self-limiting illness. However,
antibiotics are commonly administered as part of the treatment
regimen. In recent days, the organism is becoming resistant for
the multiple antibiotics []. Shiga toxin produced by Shigella
dysenteriae is responsible for shigellosis (bacillary dysentery).
The disease has epidemic potential and threat in Central Africa,
India and other developing countries in the world []. Many
strains of S. dysenteriae were multidrug resistant, resistance to
commonly used antimicrobials such as Ampicillin, Tetracycline,
Cotrimoxazole, Amoxicillin, Nalidixic acid and
Fluoroquinolones (such as Ciprofloxacin and Norfloxacin),
which had unusually high minimum inhibitory concentrations
[]. Similarly, Hemolysin-E of Salmonella typhi act as virulent
factors for enteric fever and food borne illness. In developed
countries many strains were found to be zoonotic in origin and
acquire their resistance in the food-animal host before onward
transmission to humans through the food chain. The multi-drug
resistant (MDR) strains of Salmonella typhi display resistance to
most of the antimicrobials and exhibit decreased susceptibility
to Ciprofloxacin and other current therapies [].

The spread of the MDR superbugs urges the need for an
alternative and promising therapy. Computer aided approach is
a novel platform to screen and select better therapeutic
substances from wide varieties of lead molecules. Many herbal
derived compounds have significant inhibitory and
antimicrobial properties against a broad range of pathogenic
microorganisms []. Our previous studies reported the
applications of novel lead molecules against multidrug resistant
Clostridium perfringens [] 
and Staphylococcus aureus []. This
study aims the selection of ligands from medicinal herbs and
their utility as potential inhibitors against virulent toxins. There
are many molecular studies indicated the scope of shiga toxin
[], cholera toxin 
[] and hemolysin-E 
[] of Shigella
dysenteriae, Vibrio cholerae and Salmonella typhi respectively as
the probable drug targets for drug discovery. The 3D structures
of these toxins are very essential for computer aided drug
discovery and the structure of shiga toxin and cholerae toxin are
available in their native form. Since there is no 3D crystal
structure of hemolysin-E of Salmonella typhi, there is a need for a
homology model. Furthermore, we have demonstrated the
effective interactions between selected phytoligands and the
drug targets by docking simulations.

Methodology
Selection of the probable drug targets:
The cholera toxin of Vibrio cholerae, shiga toxin of Shigella
dysenteriae and hemolysin-E of Salmonella typhi were identified
as probable drug targets based on their virulent function in the
diseases. The 3D structures of proteins are the fundamental
requirement for structure based drug designing. The crystal
structures of shiga toxin, PDB: 1DM0 [] and cholera toxin,
PDB: 1XEZ [] are available in their native form. But, the 3D
structure of hemolysin-E is not available in native state. Hence,
our preliminarily aim in this study was to focus on the
hypothetical modeling of hemolysin-E by computer aided
approach.

Target retrieval and template selection:
The amino acid sequence of hemolysin-E, accession number
Q8Z727 [], was retrieved from UniProt database. The FASTA
sequence of the hemolysin-E was subjected to PSI – BLAST 
[]
analysis against PDB database for the selection of best
homologous templates. The best template was selected based
on percentage of identity, similarity, expectation value, bit
scores and query coverage. A multiple sequence analysis was
performed by T-COFFEE [] and the phylogenetic
characterization was carried out by NJ plot []. These steps
ensured the accurate selection of the template for homology
modeling.

Homology modeling of hemolysin-E:
A 3D model of hemolysin-E was generated by Modeller 9v9
[]. It is a UNIX based programme based on satisfaction of
spatial restraints derived from the alignment and probability
density functions (PDFs). The chain-A of hemolysin from E. coli,
PDB: 1QOY [], was identified as the best template for
comparative modeling. The template consists of 69% α-helices,
14% coils, 12% of β-sheets and 5% of turns. The 3D structure
was solved by X-ray diffraction studies and resolution was
2.0Ao. The R-factor of the structure was 0.198 and R-free value
was 0.252. The modeled protein was visualized using Chimera
[]. The model was energy minimized by CHARMM 
[] and
the stereo-chemistry was validated by Procheck []. The
overall quality factor of non-bonded interactions between
different atoms was calculated by ERRAT []. The backbone of
the modeled protein was threaded against the template chain
by DaliLite [] and root mean square deviation (RMSD)
between the model and the template was calculated. The
hypothetical model was deposited to Protein model data base
[]. The modeled structure of hemolysin-E of Salmonella typhi,
crystal structures of cholera toxin (1XEZ) from Vibrio cholerae
and shiga toxin (1DM0) from Shigella dysenteriae were
considered as the probable drug targets.

Computer aided lead discovery
Screening and selection of phytoligands:
Many antibiotics are available against the pathogens in
contention of our study. Since the resistance towards these
antibiotics is increasing, there is a need for the identification of
natural substances which can act as potential drug candidates.
Various phytoligands against the drug targets were identified
by extensive literature studies. The 3D structures of all
identified ligands were retrieved from PubChem 
[] and
ChemSpider [] databases. The pharmacokinetic and druggish
activities were studied by Lipinski's Rule of Five 
[]. The rule
is one of the major landmarks for selecting the pharmacophoric
pattern and biological behavior of the drug molecules. In our
study, we selected 50 molecules were of herbal origin and that
none of them showed any violation towards Lipinski's rule.

Docking studies and structure based drug design:
The selected phytoligands were docked against three toxins by
Auto Dock 4.0 [] using Lamarckian genetic algorithm. The
catalytic and binding site of the target was identified and
selected by AutoGrid. The structure and chemical properties of
the active site allows the recognition and binding of the ligand.
The electrostatic interactions were evaluated by interpolating
the values of the electrostatic potential and multiplying by the
charge on the atom. Around 2,500,000 conformations were
generated by ten iterations and the best conformations were
screened in terms of lowest binding energy generated in the
clustering histogram. The AutoDock program was executed to
simulate the real time molecular interactions of the receptor and
ligands. The function scoring, energy calculations and ranking
of the best conformations were carried out as per energy
minimization and stabilizing interactions.

Disscussion
The shiga toxin of Shigella dysenteriae consists of two subunits.
The subunit-A act as major virulent factor in most of the
shigella infections. Crystal structure of the toxin (PDB: 1DM0)
has 267 amino acids in which 34 % alpha helical structures (12
helices constitutes 99 residues) and 23% beta sheet (15 strands;
67 residues). This polypeptide is inhibiting protein synthesis
through the catalytic inactivation of 60s ribosomal subunits. The
subunit-B is 69 amino acids long (17% helical- 1 helices; 12
residues; 36% beta sheet - 8 strands; 25 residues) and is
responsible for the binding of the holotoxin to specific receptors
on the target cell surface, such as globotriaosylceramide (Gb3)
in human intestinal microvilli.

The cholera toxin is a cytolysin which consists of 741 amino
acids (PDB: 1XEZ) and has significant role in the pathogenesis
of Vibrio cholerae. The toxin has one polypetide chain, which
constitutes 6% helices (10 helices; 50 residues) and 45 % beta
sheets (56 strands; 327 residues.). The molecular weight of the
toxin is 799.43 Kda and it act as potential virulent factor. During
infection it causes cytolysis by forming heptameric pores in
target host membranes. By considering the functional aspects of
the toxins in pathogenesis, the crystal structures of toxin were
used as probable drug targets.

Salmonella typhi is another multiple drug resistance bacteria
responsible for severe health hazards all over the world. Most
strains of Salmonella secrete powerful toxin called hemolysin-E
which act as major virulent factor. Hemolysin-E lyses
erythrocytes and mammalian cells, forming transmembrane
pores with a minimum internal diameter of 25 Ao. The three
dimensional structure of toxin is not available in native form.
Hence, we have modeled the structure of the toxin from its
basic sequences. The sequence consists of 303 amino acids. The
template selected for the modeling was chain-A of E. coli
hemolysin with the length of 318 amino acids. The modeled
protein has six alpha helical domains and it was visualized by
Chimera (). The structure was energy minimized by
CHARMM which yielded the energy value -2.14 kcal/mol from
the previous energy value of -1.04 kcal/mol. The backbone
structure of modeled protein is threaded with chain-A of
template by DaliLite. The superimposition showed RMSD value
of 0.2Ao with 298 aligned residue and 91% identity in their
alignment. The modeled structure was steriochemically
validated by Procheck. Ramachandran plot of the model
indicated 98.2% of the residues in the allowed region, 1.2% of
the residues in the additional allowed regions and no residues
in the generously allowed and disallowed regions ().

The number of non-glycine and non-proline residues were
identified as 282 and the number of glycine and proline
residues present in the model was 15 and 4 respectively. The
overall quality factor of the hemolysin-E identified by ERRAT
was 92.17 % (). The modeled structures further
validated by PROVE indicated the Z-score mean as 0.96, Zscore
standard deviation as 29.87 and Z-score RMS as 29.873
which indicate the reliable quality of the model. The model was
deposited to Protein model data base which can be downloaded
by the accession number PM0077415.

Since, most strains of Vibrio cholerae, Shigella dysentriae and
Salmonella typhi showed multiple drug resistance, therapeutic
significance of these drugs became limited. Hence, there is a
need for a novel approach. The present approach mainly
focused to inhibit the key virulent toxins of the pathogens.
Many studies revealed the utilities of phytoligands as potential
inhibitors against wide varieties of drug resistant bacteria 
[].
Therefore, we also tried to screen 50 best phytoligands from
various medicinal plant sources by extensive literature studies.
The selected ligands were screened for better pharmacological
features by Lipinski's rule of five. All molecules showed very
good physiochemical properties and drug likeness, enabling the
molecule to exhibit good pharmacological properties.

The fundamental principle behind computer aided lead
designing is the study of receptor ligand interactions. The
inhibitory properties and best binding conformations of novel
ligands can be studied by molecular docking. In the present
study, docking was preceded by the addition of polar hydrogen
charges to the target proteins. All phytoligands were docked
against cholera toxin of Vibrio cholerae, shiga toxin of Shigella
dysenteriae and hemolysin-E of Salmonella typhi, 
 (see
supplementary material). The best binding poses and
interactions were screened by minimum energy conformers.
Moreover, other factors influencing the stability of the ligand–
receptor complexes, number of hydrogen bonds and Vander
waals interactions, were also taken into consideration. Based on
all these theoretical principles employed in docking studies, we
identified the best phytolead against shiga toxin to be
Cadinane, a medicinal compound of Gum myrhh (Commiphora
myrrha), with minimum energy value of -5.56 kcal/mol and the
interacting residues are Ile 24, Gly 25, Leu 38, Leu 39, Met 40
and Arg 21, Ile 41 (Figure 2A). The best inhibitor against
cholera toxin identified from our study is Cedrol, a phytoligand
present in Italian cypress (Cupressus sempervirens). The binding
energy was found to be -5.33 kcal/mol and the interaction is
stabilized by a hydrogen bond. The interacting residues are Lys
283, Val 285, Trp 318, Asp 624, Ser 623 and Tyr 609 ().
Similarly, the active compound found in varieties of squash,
gourd, and pumpkin (Cucurbita pepo) known as Violaxanthin
was found to have significant inhibitory property against
hemolysin-E. The binding energy was –5.99 kcal/mol and the
interactions are stabilized by a hydrogen bond (). The
amino acids present in the binding cavity of the toxin are Lys
38, Asp 41, Lys 45, Phe 71, Glu 85, Gln 81 and His 292 

(see supplementary material).

Our studies concluded that, phytoligands such as Cadinane,
Cedrol and Violaxanthin have significant inhibitory properties
against shiga, cholera and hemolysin-E toxins respectively.
These compounds can be used to design novel therapy against
multidrug resistant bacteria when all current generation
antibiotics seem to have failed. From our study it is evident that
present data find significant applications for further
experimental studies. Moreover, the applied methods pave a
new therapeutic insight against multiple drug resistant
pathogens.

Conclusion
The increase of multiple drug resistance has lead to the
evolution of many superbugs including notorious pathogens
such as Shigella dysenteriae, Vibrio cholerae and Salmonella typhi.
Our present study concluded that computer aided approach
may serve as an effective method to screen novel therapeutic
leads when all current generation drugs seems to have failed.
We could identify novel drug targets for multidrug resistant
bacteria. In addition, we also studied the utility of structure
based virtual screening to select new therapeutic substances.
Phytoligands such as Cedrol, Cadinane and Violaxanthin can be
used as potential inhibitors against virulent toxins of Shigella
dysenteriae, Vibrio cholerae and Salmonella typhi respectively.
However, experimental studies need to be performed to
confirm the efficiency of the applied approach and present data
finds applications for such studies.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors thankfully acknowledge the R &amp; D Centre of Life
Sciences and Engineering, Dayananda Sagar Institutions for
providing all necessary facilities and also grateful to Dr. P.S
Rao, Vice President, (R &amp; D) in Life Sciences and Dr. G S
Jagannatha Rao, Senior Professor and Head, Department of
Biotechnology, Dayananda Sagar College of Engineering for
their constant support and encouragement throughout the
study.

Citation:Skariyachan et al, Bioinformation 8(9): 420-425 (2012)

Three dimensional structure of hemolysin-E of Salmonella typhi generated by homology modeling; (A) The secondary
structure of the protein displayed in Chimera shown that the toxin has seven alpha helical domains; (B) The Ramachandran plot of
the model indicate 98.2% residues (A, B, L in the plot) are most favored region and 1.8 % (a, b, l, p regions) residues are additional
allowed regions revealed the stupendous quality of the model; (C) The overall quality factor of non-bonded interactions between
different atoms types estimated by ERRAT is 92.17 implies good validity of our structure.

The docking simulations of novel phytoligands against probable drug targets of multidrug resistant pathogens. The
ligands are displayed in the form of molecular surfaces and interacting residues and hydrogen bonds are shown in stick figures.
(A) The interaction of shiga toxin (virulent factor of Shigella dysenteriae) and the best phytoligand, Cadinane is stabilized by weak
interactions (residues Ile 24, Gly 25, Leu 39, Leu 38, Arg 21 Met 40 and Ile 41) with a minimum energy of -5.56 kcal/mol; (B) The
docked conformation of Cholera toxin (virulent factor of Vibrio cholerae) and herbal ligand Cadinane is stabilized by a hydrogen
bond with an energy minimum of -5.33 kcal/mol. The interacting residues are Lys 283, Val 285, Trp 318, Asp 624, Ser 623 and Tyr
609; (C) Hemolysin-E (virulent factor of Salmonella typhi) interacted with Violaxanthin by a hydrogen bond and other interactions
(Lys 38, Asp41, Lys 45, Phe 71, Glu85, Gln 81 and His 292) by the free energy minimum of –5.99 kcal/mol. Present docking studies
revealed that herbal leads have good binding affinities against the drug targets and the data has crucial applications in further
studies.

