Background
Ganoderma lucidum are filamentous fungi come from
Basidiomycota phylum and Ganodermataceae family. It has
been used extensively as home remedy in traditional
Chinese medicine in many Asian countries for 2000 years. G.
lucidum also known as Ling-Zhi in China and Korea and
Reishi or Mannentake in Japan - has received wide of
attention in recent year due to its extraordinarily
pharmacological functions []. The pharmacological effect of
G. lucidum is based on their powerful immune-modulating
activity and immune potential capability which support and
enhance the immune system due to 200 active elements from
fruiting body, mycelia, spores and anther. The active
elements can be categorized into water soluble, organic
soluble and volatile soluble compounds and include
polysaccharide, polysaccharide-peptide complex, β-glucans,
lectins, organic germanium, adenosine, triterpenoids and
nucleosides [,
]. Triterpenoids are common chemical
constituent of G. lucidum. However, due to their unique
properties, the importance of triterpenoids is established not
only within the species but also extends to the
chemotaxonomy of Ganoderma genus []. Recently, more
than 140 different triterpenoids have been isolated and
characterized with ganoderic acids as one of the main
triterpenoids present in G. lucidum [,
]. Ganoderic acid is
highly oxygenated lanostane-type triterpenoids and due to
its valuable medicinal of pharmacological values, a lot of
studies have been done on process development in
enhancing production of ganoderic acid []. Most identified
ganoderic acids are named using Latin or Greek alphabets
along with numbering systems.

Biological effects of ganoderic acids as reported in the
literature were antitumor, anti-HIV, antihypertensive,
antihepatotoxic, anti-inflammation, inhibition of histamine
release, hypocholesterolemic, anti-complement,
antinociceptive, antioxidant, antiaging activities and platelet
aggregation effects [,
,
,
,
,
,
,
]. More than a
decade ago, El-Mekkawy and co-workers [] have tested
active compounds from Ganoderma lucidum against HIV
proliferation and HIV protease. They have successfully
identified thirteen compounds with inhibitory activities
against HIV protease (HIV-PR) and proliferation of HIV-1
from G lucidum. Five of those compounds belong to
ganoderic acid family namely ganoderic acid A, B, C1, H and
α. Today, it is a common practice to utilize molecular
modelling to complement conventional wet lab research
especially in the field of drug discovery. Molecular
modelling such as molecular docking and reverse docking
has developed by leaps and bounds in the last decades in
terms of technology and computing power. Emergence of
this field has open new possibilities and ways to learn
molecular interaction between molecules.Molecular docking
can be described as the process of docking a small molecule
(ligand, inhibitor and etc.) to a macromolecule with the
objective of observing and studying interactions between
these molecules. Reverse docking can be described as the
process of searching a small molecule-protein target over a
large database of potential protein targets. In contrast to
conventional docking approach, reverse docking screens the
molecule against specific database. The reverse docking
terms rooted from the fact that this approach starts from the
molecule of interest (usually ligands) whilst in conventional
molecular docking usually starts with the potential targets
(the proteins). From HIV drug development perspective, a
combination of molecular modelling tools namely molecular
dynamics and molecular docking has led to the discovery of
the first HIV-integrase inhibitor. Previously, these methods
have successfully pointed out a previously unidentified
region in HIV-integrase and this region later on became a
potent target for HIV-integrase inhibitor []. This report
aims to study molecular perspective of interaction for
ganoderic acid compounds with HIV inhibitory activity as
identified by el-Mekkawy and co-workers [] using
molecular docking simulation. Ganoderic acid compounds
with HIV inhibitory activity were studied using two
molecular docking approaches (reverse molecular docking
and molecular docking). Outcomes from these docking
studies are reported here.

Methodology
Compound of interest were identified from previous work
by el-Mekkawyand co-workers []. Four compounds with
IC50 ranging from 0.17 mM to 0.20 mM were chosen as the
compound of interest.They are ganoderic acid α (0.19 mM),
ganoderic acid B (0.17 mM), ganoderic acid C1 (0.18 mM)
and ganoderic acid H (0.20 mM). Three dimensional
structures of these compounds were obtained from
PubChem database []. All four structures were submitted
to TarFisDock server [] against the Potential Drug Target
Database (PDTD) [] for target identification by reverse
docking. Viral infections were selected as the target criteria
and default parameters defined in the server were used.
Targets were selected and filtered based on their match with
pharmacology activities as found in literatures, the crystal
structure resolution and distribution in regards to
compounds of interest. These selected protein targets were
subsequently used in molecular docking studies where their
three dimensional structure files were downloaded from the
RCSB Protein Data Bank []. All docking studies were
performed using the Autodock 4 and ADT suite program
[]. Hydrogen atoms, Gasteiger charges and torsion angles
were computed and added to the ganoderic acid compounds
(ganoderic acid α, B, C1, and H). For macromolecules, all
water molecules and ligand were removed prior preparing
the input files. Hydrogen atoms and Gasteiger charges were
computed and added to the macromolecules. Active site of
the target was highlighted and 50x60x60 grid box with
0.375Å grid spacing was drawn to cover the active site of the
target. Each docking trial was initiated with 100 runs.
Population size, energy evaluations, mutation and crossover
rates and local search probability were kept as default.
Molecular docking results were analyzed by cluster number,
and hydrogen bonding comparison with the target's native
ligand.

Discussion
Reverse Docking:
Based on the results by TarFisDock, two types of HIV target
proteins were identified forboth ganoderic acid α (HIV-1
Reverse Transcriptase, HIV Protease) and ganoderic acid C1
(HIV Protease, HIV-1 Integrase). On the other hand, only
HIV Protease was identified for both ganoderic acid B and
ganoderic acid H. This is in good agreement with studies
carried out by el-Mekkawy and co-workers [] where they
also demonstrated inhibition of HIV Protease by ganoderic
acid α, B, C1 and H. Based on these potential targets
resolution, their distribution with regard to compounds of
interest and by correlation to el-Mekkawy and co-workers'
findings, 1DIF and 1HVR (both are HIV-1 Protease) were
selected as target for further molecular docking analysis.

Molecular Docking:
Summary of molecular docking results are shown in 
.
(See supplementary material) Ganoderic acid B scored the
lowest cluster number in both docking studies of 1HVR and
1DIF. Interestingly, this compound also scored the lowest
mean estimated ΔG (­8.83 Kcal/mol) and with 78% of cluster
dominance in the molecular docking study of 1HVR.
Furthermore this results was also consistent to the previous
data from el-Mekkawy and co-workers [] where the lowest
IC50 (0.17 mM) were obtained from ganoderic acid B.
Cluster number, mean estimated ΔG and percentage of
dominant cluster can be employed as comparative tools to
asses molecular docking results. Cluster number represents
variance of the docked structure, mean estimated ΔG
represents energy state of each structure and percentage of
dominant cluster represents the simulated structure
dominance. Low cluster number, mean estimated ΔG and
high percentage of dominant cluster are desirable in
molecular docking simulation. Molecular docking of
ganoderic acid B and 1HVR returned better results as
compared to 1DIF, both in cluster number and mean
estimated ΔG as compared to other docking studies. This
makes ganoderic acid B an ideal candidate for further
molecular interactions studies. Molecular interactions were
studied in the best two conformations of molecular
dockingstudies of 1HVR-ganoderic acid B. The first
conformation was model 31 and the second conformation
was model 34. Model 31 was the lowest scoring ΔG of all
1HVR-ganoderic acid B docking runs. On the other hand
model 34 was the lowest scoring ΔG in cluster 2 (the most
dominant cluster) of 1HVR-ganoderic acid B docking.

1HVR-Ganoderic acid B molecular interaction:
Summary of these hydrogen bond interactions is shown in
. Four hydrogen bonds were observed in 1HVRModel
34 complex.Amide hydrogen at ILE50 and ILE50'
formed two hydrogen bonds with oxygen atom at position
29 of ganoderic acid B. Another hydrogen bond was
observed between amide of ASP30 and oxygen atom at
position 37. The last hydrogen bond was between amide
hydrogen of ASP29 and hydroxyl at position 36. Four
hydrogen bonds were also observed in the 1HVR-Model 31
complex. Amide hydrogen at ILE50 formed hydrogen bond
with oxygen atom at position 30. Amide hydrogen of ARG8
formed two hydrogen bonds with oxygen atom at position
37. The last hydrogen bond was between ASP25 and
hydroxyl group at position 22.

Interestingly similar hydrogen bonding patterns were also
observed in the 1HVR native ligand (XK2) complex in the
1HVR crystal structure. Two hydrogen bonds were observed
between amide hydrogen of ILE50 and ILE50’ andoxygen
atom position 7. Another two hydrogen bonds were from
hydroxyl atoms position 26 and 27 with ASP25. Interaction
of amide hydrogen for ILE50 and ILE50', structural water
molecule and the ligand or inhibitor through hydrogen bond
is a common and a very important feature found in HIV-1
protease []. To further highlight the importance of this
ILE50-ILE50'-ligand interactions, Lam and co-workers had
designed their HIV-1 protease inhibitor solely based on this
feature []. The lack of structural water molecule in our
docking studies is due to the limitation of the method where
molecular docking wasperformed on simplified
environment by removing all water molecules from the
macromolecule, a common practice in molecular docking
routine. Nevertheless, the strong interaction between ILE50'
ILE50' and ganoderic acid B can still be established and
observed in this study. This finding illuminates the
significance of ganoderic acid B might be a potential
inhibitor for HIV-1 protease.

Conclusions
Ganoderic acid B produced better molecular docking results
compared to other ganoderic acid compounds. This is in
good agreement with previous report where ganoderic acid
B was reported to have the lowest IC50 []. Molecular
interactions study revealed ganoderic acid B interactions
with important residues of 1HVR, thus making 1HVR and
HIV-1 protease in general suitable targets for this compound.
The fact that ganoderic acid B is a naturally occurring
compound and was found to interact with one of the most
important feature of HIV-1 protease indicated a huge
potential for HIV cure discovery based on this
compound.More rigorous binding free energy calculation
such as thermodynamics integration, free energy
perturbation or molecular dynamic simulation as well as
different vantage points such protonation state of the
interacting molecules would be implemented in upcoming
worksto obtain more in-depth information.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Akbar &amp; Yam, Bioinformation 7(8): 413-417 (2011)

(A) Hydrogen bond networks as shown in 1HVR-Model
31 complex, 1HVR-Model 34 com-plex, 1HVR-native
ligand (XK2) complex. (B) Schematic representation of
ganoderic acid B and XK

