Background
Influenza A virus is a contagious respiratory illness causing annual
epidemics and occasional pandemics killing million of people world-wide.
Therefore, it possesses significant challenge to both human and animal
health. Recent 2009 flu pandemic is a global outbreak of a new strain of
influenza A virus subtype H1N1 also commonly known as “swine flu” or
“mexican flu”. The virus has emerged because of genetic reassortment of
endemic strains of human, avian flu and swine flu
[–].
The H1N1 virushas crossed species barrier to human and apparently acquired the
capability to transmit this disease from human to human 
[–]. Influenza A
virus belongs to the family of orthomyxoviridae. It is a lipid enveloped
virus containing a negative‐single stranded sense RNA genome that are
organized into eight separate segments which code for eleven proteins
[–].

The nucleoprotein (NP) is located on segment 5 of the segmented negativestrand
RNA genome. The NP is the major component of the RNP, which is
complex comprising of RNA, NP and RNA polymerase. The NP is a
multifunctional protein that encapsidates viral RNA (vRNA) [] as well as
forms homo-oligomer and thereby maintains RNP structure []. It is also
believed to be the key adaptor for virus and host cell interaction [].
Recent study suggests a direct interaction of NP with polymerase proteins
may be involved in regulating the switch of viral RNA synthesis from
transcription to replication []. The nucleoprotein is an entirely an alpha
helical protein that has head domain, body domain and tail.
Oligomerization of the influenza virus nucleoprotein is mediated by a tail
loop that is inserted into body domain of neighbouring NP molecule [].
Thus, both tail and body domain participates in an oligomerization process.
Proper self-association is important for the biological activities of
nucleoprotein, because the R416A mutant was shown to be defective in
RNA binding and also in viral RNA synthesis [].The core protein
nucleoprotein do not mutate as fast as surface protein HA, therefore this
protein can serve as a suitable target for both drugs and antiviral vaccines
developments. In view of above, we have identified mutations in different
structural domains of NP and we have deduced the effect of mutation on
oligomerization. Further, we have also analyzed mutations in the antigenic
site. These studies revealed the structure-function relationship of NP and
cause of the antigenic variations and pathogenicity.

Methodology
The sequence of NP of influenza A virus A/New Mexico/04/2009(H1N1),
from human was analyzed in this study. The NP is available at NCBI []
with accession number [GenBank: ACR08594] Protein protein blast
[]was performed at NCBI server. This sequence was aligned with other
homologous sequence using Clustal W [] multiple alignment tool using
weight matrix GONNET. The multiple aligned sequences were analyzed
for mutations in the amino acids at specific positions in different domains
of NP. Hydrophobicity values were obtained from the program ProtScale
at ExPASy choosing Kyte &amp;Doolittle hydrophobicity scale [].
Antigenic sites in nucleoprotein were predicted by program “Antigenic”
[].

Discussion
Structure-function studies of different domains of NP
The NP is a multifunctional protein that encapsidates vRNA through its
RNA binding domain (residues 1‐181) and form homo‐oligomers. The
nucleoprotein has NPI (residues189-358) and NPII (residues 371‐465)
binding domains important for mediating NP-NP contacts and thereby
undergoes oligomerization [].It also has a PB2 binding domains [PB2-I
(1‐161), PB2‐2(255‐340) PB2‐3(340‐465] []. These domains of NP
interact with PB2 subunit of RNA polymerase.

The NP sequence of strain ACR08594 was compared with other strains of
NP ((Table 1 see ) showing 99.80% to 99.40%
identity. Thirteen sequences of NP of different strains were selected.
Structural‐functional relationship of different domains of NP was deduced
in this study. Our data of ACQ76390 strain shows that there was a
mutation Val217 to Ile 217 in the head region of helix 4 ( Table 1 )
[]. Since, this is a conservative
mutation that occurred at NP1 binding domain, it did not affect NP-NP
contact and subsequent oligomerization []. Therefore, it did not affect
oligomerization of NP. Other strain ACQ76337 showed mutation in thebody region of helix 4 in RNA binding region, which also overlaps PB2
domain. This mutation causes in the substitution of Leu133 by an Ile133.
This is also a conservative substitution. Hence, this strain binds RNA
normally and interacted with PB2 normally. These strains were pathogenic
in nature.

The strain ACQ76327 has a mutation in the body of helix 16 in
overlapping NPII and PB2 domains. Mutation causes in the substitution of
hydrophobic Val 343 by a polar Thr343. The mutation is non-conservative,
where microenvironment of both NP II and PB2 domains was changed.
Therefore, this strain formed oligomer weakly and showed reduces
interaction with PB2. These observations is supported by the findings that
oligomerization is important for NP function because R 416 A mutant was
found defective in RNA binding and viral RNA synthesis []. There is
also direct interaction of NP with PB2 []. These two strains were weakly
pathogenic.

In NP of ACS94528 strain, mutation occurred in the head region of helix 8in the NPII binding domain. In this strain, there was a conservative
substitution of Ile 189 by Val189. This leads to normal formation of NPNP
homo‐oligomer [] and hence this strain was pathogenic in nature.
Similarly, the NP of strain ACQ76406 showed substitution Val 217 by Ile
217 in the head region of helix 9 and another substitution Val343 by
Leu343 in the body region of helix 16. These mutations are conservative
mutations. Therefore, this strain formed NP‐NP oligomer normally and
interacted with PB2 normally. The NP of other strain ACR67140 has a
mutation located in the helix 10 of head region in the PB2 domain. This is
a also a conservative substitution, Ala234 by Val234, and it did not affect
oligomerization or interaction with PB2. These observations are supported
by the findings that self-association or oligomerization is important for NP
function [] and there is also direct interaction of NP with PB2 
[].

The NP of strain ACQ63285 carried mutation in the head region of helix
11 in NPII and PB2 domains, where hydrophobic Ala 251 is substituted by
polar Thr 251. This is a non-conservative substitution where
hydrophobicity decreased in overlapping NPII and PB2 domains.
Therefore, this leads to decrease in the formation of NP-NP homooligomer
and poor interaction with PB2. Similarly, the NP of strains
ACS14690 and ACQ76377 showed mutation in the head region of helix
19. The polar Ser450 is substituted by an amide derivative of acidic amino
acid Asn450. These strains showed loss of NP‐NP oligomer formation and
interaction with PB2. All of these strains were weakly pathogenic. These
results imply that self association is important for NP function 
[].
Furthermore, mutational study has shown that mutant NP has a reduced
capability to interact with the polymerase complex and that this NPpolymerase
interaction is responsible for making vRNPs switch from
mRNA to cRNA synthesis []. A mutation in the body region of helix 12
in the NP and PB2 binding domains is seen in ACR67161 strain. The
hydrophobic Leu283 is replaced by a cyclic imino acid Pro283. Since Leu
283 is a strong helix former, whereas Pro283 is a helix breaker. This leads
to alteration of α‐helix 12 and consequently overall conformation of
nucleoprotein was slightly changed. Hence, it formed homo‐oligomer
weakly and showed poor interaction with PB2 [,
].This strain was weakly pathogenic.

In NP of eight strains, Ile 373→Thr 373 mutations were found conserved
(see  Table 2). In all of these strains,
hydrophobic Ile is substituted by polar Thr. This is a non-conservative
mutation. Besides this, six strains also showed a new mutation
Val100→Ile100 which was found conserved in several strains (see 
 Table 2).These results imply that due to the
presence of multiple mutations in the NP of these strains 
(see  Table 2) the conformation of NP was altered
significantly. Hence these strains formed homo-oligomer weakly 
[]and
interacted with PB2 poorly [].
This leads to some loss of RNP structure
as well. Consequently, it inhibited the switch of genomic vRNA synthesis
from transcription to replication. These strains showed weak pathogenicity.
None of the mutations we observed occurred in tail-loop, which play an
important role in oligomerization by inserting inside a body domain of
neighbouring molecule. Our results showed non-conservative mutation in
the head domain causes in the inhibition of oligomerization. This implies
that head domain may also participate in an oligomerization process.
Strains carrying conservative mutations showed that NP domains have
native like structure, therefore these strains were virulent. Contrary to this,
strains possessing non-conservative mutations in domains showed a slight
loss of structure. Therefore, these strains were weakly pathogenic.

Antigenicity
The computer program “Antigenic” predicted 14 antigenic segments in NP
of ACR08594 strain (see  Table 3). This
antigenic profile was found conserved in all strains except ACR77442,
ACQ76384 and ACR67140. The NP of these strains namely ACR77442
and ACQ76384 showed mutation Val183→Met183 and Val352→Met352
respectively. Therefore, corresponding antigenic segments 179‐189 and
349-356 were missing. Conversly, ACR67140 strain showed mutation Ala
234→Val234 and consequently there was a gain of an antigenic site 231‐
236. These are major source of antigenic variations in NP.

Conclusion
These results suggest that head domain of NP may also participate in an
oligomerization process. These results also conclusively showed that
conservative mutation in NP is more pathogenic than non-conservative
mutation. Thus, our hypothesis confirms the structure-function relationship
of NP. Loss or gain of an antigenic site represents a source of antigenic
variations in NP.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work was supported by the DBT grant sanction no.
BT/PR7507/BID/07/201/2006 to AUK. Authors are also grateful to Prof.
M Saleemuddin for providing the internal fund for this project.

Citation:Salahuddin &amp; Khan, Bioinformation, 5 (1) 25-30, 2010

