Background
The tobacco budworm (TBW), Heliothis virescens (F.), a pest
which is responsible for substantial economic loss,
environmental pollution therefore management of this is a great
challenge to environment, researchers, cotton and tobacco
producers etc. since decades []. Tobacco budworm is a
polyphagous field crop pest, for crops such as alfalfa, clover,
cotton, flax, soybean, and tobacco. However, it also attacks
vegetables such as cabbage, lettuce, pea, pepper, pigeon pea,
squash, and tomato. Recent attempts of development of insect
resistance to transgenic crops provided new novel
biotechnological solutions such as RNA interference (RNAi),
gene silencing for pest management during 21st century.
Recently, RNA interference (RNAi) efforts to identify
endogenous small RNAs have led to the discovery of hundreds
of miRNAs in nematodes, fruit flies and humans 
[–]. These
small non-coding genes are typically transcribed by RNA
polymerase II, processed into hairpins, and exported into the
cytoplasm, where they are cleaved by the central enzyme of the
RNAi pathway, Dicer, to form single-stranded mature
microRNAs [,
]. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small endogenous
RNA molecules (~21-25 nt) that regulate gene expression by
targeting one or more mRNAs for translational repression or
cleavage. The first two miRNAs (lin-4 and let-7) were identified
from Caenorhabditis elegans and discovery of miRNA from
various organisms has since accelerated with 21,264 miRNA
known by Aug 2012 [,
]. Further, miRNAs are generally
conserved in closely related species but also conserved in
different taxonomic group. For example about 10% of miRNAs
identified in invertebrates are also conserved in mammals and
other higher animals, suggesting cross-species conservation 
[,
]. In the recent years, with the availability of whole genome
sequence data, linkage groups, expressed sequence tags (ESTs)
and various genetic markers, research on insects miRNAs has
extended gradually from D. melanogaster [,
] to other model
insects, such as Bombyx mori []. The miRNA from Apis
mellifera of order Hymenoptera and Anopheles gambiae of order
Diptera have been predicted and submitted to the miRNA
registry miRBase []. The order Hymenoptera also includes
natural enemies of a broad range of vector arthropods which
are of medical, veterinary and agricultural significance. Nasonia,
a parasitic wasp, is emerging as model for studies of complex
genetic traits. It is well positioned phylogenetically to assist in
identifying orthologs of important genes in insects and a
genetically traceable system for functional analysis. Therefore,
Sathyamurthy and Swamy (2010) identified putative miRNA
gene sequences and predicted their possible targets in N.
vitripennis species []. Singh and Nagaraju 
[] attempted to
predict miRNA from the important agricultural pest, Tribolium
castaneum of order Coleoptera for which no data is available till
date. Although, rapid progresses have been achieved in
discovering new miRNAs and exploring their biological roles in
model insects, studies on miRNAs in agricultural pest is still
very slow. Keeping in view the importance of miRNAs in
insects, we demonstrate a computational approach to predict
putative miRNA candidates along with their possible target (s)
in the polyphagous pest, Heliothis virescens.

Methodology
EST mining and pre-processing:
A total of 63,662 ESTs of Heliothis virescens were downloaded
from NCBI website (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/est/). The
sequence redundancy was removed using the sequence
assembly program, EGassembler (http://egassembler.hgc.jp/).
The program clustered the ESTs containing overlapping
sequences as contigs and non-overlapping sequences as
singletons. After removal of the repeated sequences, 63,314
were considered as reference set of H. virescens expressed
sequence tag (EST).

Prediction of miRNAs by homology search:
In order to search potential miRNAs in H. virescens, previously
known insect miRNAs including their precursor sequences
were downloaded from the miRBase []. A BLASTn search of
all the 3385 miRNA sequences of all insects with the EST
sequences of H. virescens was first carried out with the e-value &lt;
0.01 along with default parameters including low complexity
filter. With the same parameters BLASTn search is carried out
between pre miRNAs of insects and the match results of ESTmiRNA
blast. The two criteria used for screening the BLAST
results were: (1) more than 90% identity between each potential
H. virescens miRNA and the corresponding miRNA in the
reference set (known miRNA homologue); (2) the length
difference between each potential H. virescens miRNA and the
corresponding miRNA in the reference set is not more than
three bases.

Secondary structure validation:
Pre miRNA sequences were extracted using a sliding window
of about 100nt in size (moving in increments of approximately
10nt) from the region ~80nt upstream of the beginning of the
mature miRNA to ~80nt downstream of the miRNA. Extracted
miRNA precursor sequences were then submitted to Mfold
(http://www.bioinfo.rpi.edu/applications/mfold/rna/form1.cgi) 
for checking of the fold-back secondary structure. The four
criteria used for selecting pre miRNA structures were: (1) The
RNA sequence folding into an appropriate stem-loop hairpin
secondary structure that contains the ~22 nt mature miRNA
sequence located in stem region of the hairpin structure; (2)
maximum size of 7 nt for a bulge in the miRNA sequence was
allowed; (3) miRNA precursors with secondary structures
should have free energy change (ΔG) less than or equal to –
37kcal/mole; (5) no loop or break in miRNA sequences was
allowed. These criteria significantly reduced false positives and
ensure that the predicted miRNAs fit the criteria proposed by
Ambros and coworkers [].

Identification of putative candidate miRNA sequences:
In order to distinguish the real pre-miRNAs from other hairpin
sequences with similar stem-loops (pseudo pre-miRNAs), we
explored with MiPred which decides whether it is a premiRNA-
like hairpin sequence or not. If the sequence is a premiRNA-
like hairpin, the RF classifier will also predict whether
it is a real pre-miRNA or a pseudo one
(http://www.bioinf.seu.edu.cn/miRNA/) 
[].

Target prediction using miRanda program:
In animals, employing computational approaches to identify
miRNA are quite challenging because animal miRNAs are
partially complementary to their target mRNAs, whereas,
plants, miRNAs bind their targets by complete or nearly
complete complementarity [–]. The primary target of
miRNA is 3′UTRs [,
]. We employed the miRanda program
[], which utilizes thermodynamics and dynamicprogramming
alignments, along with statistical parameters, for
target prediction in H. virescens. The parameters assigned for
miRanda hybridization were default alignment score greater
than or equal to 80, MFE of miRNA::mRNA duplex less than or
equal to –37kcal/mol and the other parameters were kept as
default [,
]. The different steps involved in this target
prediction are shown in (). We also considered other
stringent filters for screening targets to minimize the
background matches, thus ensuring the least false positives.

Results &amp; Discussion
Prediction of miRNAs:
The different steps involved in miRNA prediction are shown in
(). A BLASTn search of all the known mature miRNAs
from insect group [] (miRbase Release: 9.2) against the EST
sequences of H. virescens resulted in hits. These hits were
subsequently scanned for their precursor sequences by taking a
sliding window of about 100 nt (moving in increments of
approximately 10 nt) from the region ~80 nt upstream of the
beginning of the mature miRNA to ~80 nt downstream of the
miRNA. The characteristic secondary structures of all of the 4
miRNA precursors were determined by the MFold program
[], which computes the minimum free energy (MFE)
contribution for various possible secondary structures. Further,
miRNA precursor structures having an MFE less than –37
kcal/mol or a bulge size more than 7 bp or mature miRNA
located on the loop region were excluded.

The four predicted miRNA in the present study are hvi-miR-
750, hvi-miR-750-5p, hvi-miR-6497-5p and hvi-miR-6497-3p.
The details on predicted H. virescens miRNAs including mature
miRNA sequence, source contig and segment lengths, strand, %
identity and A+U content are given in  (see
supplementary material).

Target prediction:
Prediction of miRNA targets provides an alternative approach
to assign biological functions. Since, high-throughput
experimental methods for microRNA target identification have
not been published yet, computational methods that try to
identify target sites based on their partial complementarity with
microRNAs have become increasingly important. For each of
the validated miRNA–target pairs, functional target sites are
located in the untranslated regions (UTR) of the mRNA and are
conserved in the UTRs of the homologous genes from related
species.

These UTRs have already been recognized as an important
regulatory region even before the discovery of miRNAs, due to
the presence of numerous regulatory signals involved in the
control of nuclear export, subcellular localization, and transcript
stability amongst other processes which contains multiple
target sites more than one miRNA to interact []. It is well
known that animal miRNA targets are difficult to predict,
unlike plant targets since miRNA: mRNA duplexes often
contain several mis-matches, gaps and G+U base pairs in many
positions [,
,
&amp;
]. In the present study, pairwise
comparison of the 1630 UTRs of B. mori the closest homologue
of H. virescens against 4 mature miRNA of Heliothis virescens has
been conducted. MiRanda algorithm, 32 which encompasses the
thermodynamic stability of miRNA:mRNA duplex as one of the
entity in detecting the potential binding site on the 3`UTRs has
been used. We observed 6 potential targets from hvi-miR-750
putative miRNA targeting different genes as shown in 

(see supplementary material). These potential targets are rich
in genes that are expressed at specific developmental stages and
that are involved in cell fate specification, morphogenesis and
the coordination of developmental processes, as well as genes
that are active in the mature nervous system. The predicted
miRNAs revealed target multiplicity; hvi-miR-750 was found to
have a maximum of 6 targets. In animals, cooperative binding
of one or several distinct miRNAs on a single target gene is
reported to be important for the functionality of miRNAmediated
gene regulation [,
&amp;
]. As Heliothis virescens
genome annotation is still under the way, so these predicted
miRNA and their targets reported in the present study
constitute an asset for further validation. Further, experimental
evidences are required to validate these targets in in vivo
conditions which are beyond the scope of our study.

Conclusion
Four novel putative miRNA are identified from H. virescens
from ESTs sequences based on homology search. Their targeted
proteins are also identified. These finding also strengthens the
bioinformatics approach for new miRNAs identification from
insect species whose genome is not yet sequenced. The ESTs
based identification also confirmed the miRNAs expression.
This approach holds great promise for the future as it allows a
wide range of potential targets for suppression of gene
expression in the insect. Additional genetic /molecular studies
will be needed to understand whether miRNAs typically
regulate only a handful of key targets or co-ordinately regulate
multiple targets which are equally important. These miRNAs
and their potential targets in H. virescens will help in improved
understanding of molecular mechanisms of miRNA and
development of novel and more precise techniques for better
understanding of post-transcriptional gene silencing.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Chilana et al, Bioinformation 9(2): 079-083 (2013)

Steps involved in microRNA targets prediction in
Heliothis virescens.

Steps involved in microRNA prediction in Heliothis
virescens.

