Background
Cassava, Manihot esculenta Crantz, is one of the important staple food crops in
the world which is being grown under varying environmental conditions.
Cassava grown in Tamil Nadu, Southern part of India is analyzed for the
varietal variability and is studied extensively. There are a lot of databases
operating on cassava, having cDNA, mRNA, ESTs, an online archive in the
Cassava Database Community, helping the researchers. The current database
provides accessions which are analyzed phenotypically and genotypically for
understanding their variations at the allelic level. The Tapioca and Castor
Research Station, maintains the field gene banks which provide variation both
qualitatively and quantitatively. The accessions are analyzed for their
morphological traits and marker details and stored in the database. The
variations in the accessions can be clearly studied by querying the search
options. The phenotype search, genotype search, variation search through
images and the frequency distribution by graphs are retrieved by querying the
database which is publicly accessible via the World Wide Web. The
information obtained from SSR markers is also useful for making predictions
about crossing and selection aimed at increasing the efficiency of parental
selection and varietal development. The linkage groups and the references
under which the SSR Markers are mapped are also identified and stored in the
database.

Methodology
The entries of BIOGEN BASE ‐ CASSAVA database are generated from the
text mining of the enormous work going in the genomics and proteomics
laboratory of Tamil Nadu Agricultural University. BIOGEN BASE ‐
CASSAVA is designed using PHP and MySQL []. The accessions cover both
qualitative and quantitative traits. A GUI interface is developed in PHP to
access the germplasm and genotype data via web
(
http://www.tnaugenomics.com/biogenbase/casava.php). The database
administrators are given the backend access to add, modify and remove data
from the database. The frontend PHP webpage connects to MySQL database
hosted on tnaugenomics web server to retrieve the data []. Information such as
Germplasm, Phenotype, Genotype and Variations are stored in the database.
The assessed data of germplasm are captured in germplasm table. The
phenotype [] 
table consists of shape of the plant, color of the bud, emergence
of eye (bud), alignment of internodes, color of the young leaf, shape of the leaf
lobes, color of the petiole, color of the upper surface of lamina, colour of the
under surface of lamina, colour of the lamina nerve, colour of the young stem,
shape of the tuber, colour of the outer skin of the tuber, colour of the inner skin
of the tuber, colour of pulp, tuber attachment on parent cutting, incidence of the
cassava mosaic disease, starch content (%), height of the plant (m), number of
leaf lobes (nos.), length of the petiole (cm), number of branches (nos.), number
of tubers per plant (nos.), length of the tuber (cm), girth of the tuber (cm) and
yield per plant (kg). The genotype table contains information about the
amplicon size, gel image, linkage group, forward primer, reverse primer, allelic
size of different varieties including SSR marker. The variation table consists of
images for all the qualitative traits and graphs for all the quantitative traits. The
database is supported with a user manual to have a better understanding on the
database.

Utility
BIOGEN BASE ‐ CASSAVA was created to combine data obtained by
genotyping activity of the CASSAVA research group with the available
molecular and phenotypic data in order to create a unique site and tool for
Cassava. The database as it is can have a broader platform of users like public
researchers and breeders, from private, regional and national regions. Its
maintenance and further improvement is ensured, and it is our interest to keep
it updated and usable in the long term. In fact, breeders use information and
make crosses and selection, also marker-assisted, with the use of this database.
To date, some other databases such as AppleBreed, Panzea, Germinate and
PlantDB, Maize GDB, RIKEN Cassava Full-Length cDNA Database [],
Cassava Online Archive [], have been designed to provide a way to store and
correlate genotypic to phenotypic information on plant genetic collections,
including genetic stocks and commercial varieties. With respect to the existing
databases, the unique way in which the BIOGEN BASE database is designed,
enables an intensive cross-talk between all the integrated data sources. In fact,
BIOGEN BASE provides an integrated System of data sources already
existing, to join the data produced by the genomics and proteomics laboratory,
to facilitate breeders in better approaching the large resources available for
molecular breeding. It represents a first attempt of simplification from different
sources with the mainly applied purpose of giving a tool for marker-assisted
breeding. The BIOGEN BASE database is, as far as the authors know, the first
database that enables querying both molecular and phenotypic data specific for
Cassava (). It supports breeders and geneticists in their exploration of
germplasm, available in various collections. The information stored in this
database helps the breeders not only to understand the genetics of economically
important traits and to identify marker-trait associations, but also enables them
to choose the most interesting genotypes that should be crossed to obtain a
desired progeny. The variation and frequency distribution graph may help the
users of this database to be more flexible.

This work was supported by Department of Biotechnology, New Delhi,
Government of India, under the Programme support for research and
development in agricultural biotechnology to Genomics and Proteomics
Laboratory, Centre for Plant Molecular Biology, Tamil Nadu Agricultural
University, and Coimbatore, India.

Citation:Murukarthick et al, Bioinformation 6(10): 391-392 (2011)

Database Schema

