Background
In bioinformatics data, an object can be represented by several
heterogeneous data sets. The combination of heterogeneous
data set based on kernel method is considered to produce better
classification result [,
 and ]. One of the bioinformatics data
that contains several heterogeneous data sets is data of breast
cancer patients which consists of microarray data and clinical
data []. 
The objective is to classify the breast cancer patients
that are with the distant cancer or without the distant cancer.
Simply, distant cancer, it can be called as distant metastasis,
indicates that the cancer spread from the primary tumor to
distant organs or distant lymph nodes []. Support Vector
Machine (SVM) which is introduced by Vapnik, is a powerful
classifier that is often used bioinformatics application []. The
problem in SVM is finding the proper parameters to build the
model. It takes time while the data set or the features set is a
large size, such as microarray data. Least Square Support Vector
Machine (LS-SVM) is claimed as a modified SVM that can faster
in training phase []. The main idea of SVM is finding the best
hyper plane that can be separated the data into two classes;
positive and negative. Using kernel method, mixed data can be
transformed into higher dimension, which it can be separated
linearly, implicitly using kernel function [,
].

The means which are to combine several heterogeneous data
sets can be called as data integration strategies. The various
features sets can be integrated in simple manner based on
kernel method []. This research is closely related with a
research by Daemen A et al., “a kernel-based integration of
genome-wide data for clinical decision support”. Daemen A et
al. concluded that the accuracy of cancer prediction was
increase if the multiple data sets were integrated 
[]. The main
contribution of this paper is to evaluate the performance of
classification result in the term of the distant cancer
classification which implements the data integration strategies
and not. The data sets refer to 295 breast cancer patients which
are public domain provided by Netherland Cancer Institute.
This data consist of 101 patients are with and 194 patients are
without distant metastases. The data set is spitted into training
set and validation set. The training set contains 148 data which
consist of 47 with and 101 without distant metastases and the
validation set contains 147 which consist of 54 with and 93
without distant metastases. The characteristic of the data are
woman who were younger than 53-years old and the tumor
which are smaller than 5cm [].

Microarray technology is very important tool to monitor
genome wide expression level of genes in an organism. The
microarray data contains of 24.496 spots or features which can
be selected into 70 features that are good-prognosis signature.
The clinical data contains only 13 variables; Diameter of tumor
(Numeric), T1_T2 (Binary; ≤2cm or &gt;2cm), pN (3 classes; pN0,
1-3, or ≥4), Number of positive Lymph nodes (Numeric),
Mastectomy (Binary; yes or no), Estrogen Receptor (Binary;
positive or negative), Tumor grade (3 classes; poorly,
intermediate or well differentiated), Age (Numeric),
Chemotheraphy (Binary; yes or no), Hormonal therapy (Binary;
yes or no), St. Gallen criteria (Binary; Chemotherapy or
no chemotherapy), National Institutes of Health (NIH)
consensus criteria (Binary; Chemotherapy or no chemotherapy),
NIH risk (3 classes; low, intermediate or high) []. In order to
know visually about the distribution data sets, the Kernel
Dimensionality Reduction (KDR) [] reduces the features
dimension of microarray data from 70 to 2 and 3 as showed in
( and ); 
and also feature dimension of clinical data
from 13 to 2 and 3 as showed in ( and 
). The blue circle
and the red circle represent the two classes. Based on the
visualizations, the data are mixed.

Methodology
The kernel based data integration strategies are classified in
three classes; early integration, intermediate integration and late
integration []. The early integration is a concatenation of
features sets, the intermediate integration is a combination of
kernel matrices and the late integration is a combination of the
models. Three common kernel functions will be used in this
experiment; linear kernel, polynomial kernel and Radial Basis
Function (RBF) kernel. The equations to combine the kernel
matrices in the intermediate integration are formulated
according to Equation (1) for linear kernel, Equation (2) for
polynomial kernel and Equation (3) for RBF kernel in the
Supplementary material. These kernel functions are applied to
LS-SVM. The differences of LS-SVM and SVM is that LS-SVM
uses square loss function instead of hinge loss function so that
the model's parameters can be solved linearly instead of
quadratic programming []. The technique to get regularization
parameter and kernel parameters is by using a combination of
Coupled Simulated Annealing (CSA) and a standard simplex
method with leave-one-out cross validation strategy 
[].

The issue of different signification level of each feature sets
leads to give the weight to each features sets. In this paper, it is
called as weighted data integration. It means that each features
sets will be weighted with a particular real number so that it
controls the contribution of the features set to get the final
conclusion. The implementation of weighted data integration
strategy is straight forward by multiply kernel matrix with a
real value. In this case of using two feature sets (i.e. micro-array
data set and clinical data set), the total weighted of these two
data set is 1.0. The equations of the weighted intermediate
integration are formulated according to Equation (4) for linear
kernel, Equation (5) for polynomial kernel and Equation (6) for
RBF kernel in then the Supplementary material.

Discussion
The result of the experiment scenario can be showed in 

(see supplementary material). The best performance in AUC,
0.7493, is weighted late integration using two RBF kernel
functions which the configuration are weight of 0.74 for
microarray data set, weight of 0.26 for clinical data set, gamma
parameter of 3.317 for microarray data set, gamma parameter of
1.685 for clinical data set, σ2 of 39.686 for microarray data set
and σ2 of 13.276 for clinical data set. The best kappa statistic,
0.4725, is model of only microarray data set using RBF kernel
function which the configurations are 3.380 for gamma
parameter and 46.918 for σ2. These two models have similar
accuracy, 0.7415, and also become the best accuracy. The
weighted data integration strategy (i.e. weighted intermediate
integration and weighted late integration) show better
performance than if it is treated as same weight. In the single
data set, clinical data shows worse performance than
microarray data in every kernel functions. The AUC of clinical
data is no more than 0.6605 and the AUC of microarray data
can reach 0.7421. The performance of kernel function is
moderate. It really depends on the value of kernel parameter
that is used. Overall the best performance kernel function is
RBF.

Conclusion
The experiment scenario is designed to evaluate the
performance of data integration strategy and the using of single
data set in the case of breast cancer classification. The issue of
significant level of features set is also included as weighted data
integration strategy. The experiment scenario contains 33
models that are evaluated. The complete result can be shown in
 (see supplementary material) The data is taken from
public domain from Nederland Cancer Institute that contains
microarray data set and clinical data set as supplementary data.

Based on the experiments result, the microarray his little bit
higher value of kappa statistic than the weighted late but the
value of AUC of the weighted late has little bit higher than the
AUC of the microarray. It shows that the performance of data
integration strategy is almost similar with only using single
data set. For further analysis it can be inferred that the clinical
data set shows relatively bad performance. The experiment
using microarray produce similar performance with the
weighted late because the clinical data set in the weighted late
cannot contribute much to the classification result. Generally,
the classification performance is controlled by the features sets
that are used.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Noviyanto &amp; Wasito, Bioinformation 8(3): 147-150 (2012)

Visualization of reduced microarray data features into
2 dimensions.

Visualization of reduced microarray data features into
3 dimensions.

Visualization of reduced clinical data features into 2
dimensions.

Visualization of reduced clinical data features into 3
dimensions.

