Background
Urea produced in large quantity as a product of catabolism of
nitrogen-containing compounds []. Urea accounts for over 50
percent of all nitrogen based fertilizer which shows that it is the
most widely applied nitrogen fertilizer in the world. Reasons of
its high preference in the field area are its high nutritive content,
solubility and ease handling during application [,
,
]. Urea
decomposes with a half-life of ca. 3.6 years, and without an
efficient degradation process, it would quickly accumulate and
cause severe environmental problems []. Urease (urea
amidohydrolases, EC 3.5.1.5) is a thiol-rich and nickeldependent
metalloenzyme that can catalyze the hydrolysis of
urea, thereby producing ammonia and carba-mate []. Urease
can be synthesized by several organisms, including plants,
bacteria, algae, fungi, and invertebrates. Ions and the sulfhydryl
group, especially the multiple cysteinyl residues in the active
site of the enzyme, are essential for the catalytic activity of all
ureases []. Urea is rapidly hydrolyzed by urease enzymes to
form ammonia which leads to accumulation of excess ammonia.
Access amount of ammonia is harmful for the plant and leads to
toxicity in them and posed significant environmental and
economic problems []. One of the promising strategies to
prevent toxicity to plants and to inhibit ammonia volatilization
upon application of urea is to apply urease inhibitors along with
urea [,
]. Soil inhibitors possess extensive application in
agriculture, clinical science and understanding enzyme kinetics.
Different compounds like, Hydroquinone (HQ), Phenyl
Phosphorodiamate (PPD) and N-(n-butyl) Phosphorothiocic
triamide (NBPT) reported as widely used urease inhibitors but
all these inhibitors work by inhibiting the activity of soil urease
and block the formation of ammonia during urea hydrolysis.
They reduces the loss of nitrogen from the urea fertilizers in the
form of volatile ammonia which further helps to improve the
utility of urea based fertilizers []. PPD is reported as most
effective among others urease inhibitors in retarding the
hydrolysis of urea [,
,
,
]. While Bremner and Chai
(1986, 1989) stated that NBPT is more efficient than PPD in
delaying urea hydrolysis and decreasing ammonia
volatilization. In the same way, HQ is normally preferred as a
urease inhibitor in the field because of its cost effectiveness 
[].

In the present study computational tools related to protein
modelling and docking were applied to find out the best
possible structure of Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase and its
mode of interaction with three urease inhibitors HQ, PPD
NBPT. The objective of this study was to find out the potent
residues from the active site of Hydroquinone
glucosyltransferase through which urease inhibitors occupy the
catalytic site and blocks its activity. This study will in turn help
to find out the mechanism of inhibition of Hydroquinone
glucosyltransferase upon binding of inhibitors.

Methodology
Preparation of protein structure:
Amino acid sequence of wheat Hydroquinone
glucosyltransferase was retrieved from Uniprot database
(Uniprot Id: D8LAL9) []. This amino acid sequence was
further used in 3D modeling approach. MODELLER 9.10 tool a
python based protein modeling software was utilized to
determine the 3D structure of Hydroquinone
glucosyltransferase []. Appropriate template structures were
selected from NCBI Blastp server on the basis of lowest e value
and highest similarity. Two structures 2VCE and 2VCH were
selected as templates against the target protein. After predicting
the 3D structure, its quality and reliability was checked using
different validation softwares. Model predicted by Modeller
9.10 was evaluated in PDBsum database [] in order to
calculate the Z-score and Ramachandran plot of our desired
model.

Preparation of inhibitors:
Hydroquinone (HQ), Phenyl Phosphorodiamate (PPD) and N-
(n-butyl) Phosphorothiocic triamide (NBPT) were selected as
potent inhibitors on the basis of the literature review and their
three dimensional structures were downloaded in .sdf format
from Pubchem []. Pubchem Ids of Hydroquinone (HQ),
Phenyl Phosphorodiamate (PPD) and N-(n-butyl)
Phosphorothiocic triamide (NBPT) are CID 785, CID 8194 and
CID 93502 respectively.

Molecuar docking:
Molecular docking was performed between the wheat
Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase and three wheat inhibitors
(Hydroquinone, Phenyl phosphorodiamidate (PPD) and N-(nbutyl)
phosphorothioic trimaide (NBPT) using the MOE
software []. The metal ions in the structure were deleted.
After this polar hydrogen and partial charges were added to the
model of soil urease and in the last step energy minimization
was performed to prepare the structure for docking. Sdf format
of inhibitors were converted into a 3D PDB file and
optimization steps were performed. After optimization
“inhibitors” database was created. Active site Finder tool of
MOE was applied to find and calculate active sites in the
receptor molecule from the 3D atomic coordinates of the
receptor. By default, all calculated sites were appeared as
selected. Active site of the receptor appeared at the top of the
list with highest number of receptor residues was selected. After
selecting one site, particular site is isolated from rest of the
structure and secondary structures were removed. In the next
step Gaussian Contact surface was drawn around the binding
site of soil urease and saved the specific file in .moe format.
MOE docking program with default parameters was used to
bind the selected ligands with receptor protein and to find the
correct conformation (with the rotation of bonds, structure of
molecule is not rigid) of the ligand so as to obtain minimum
energy structure. After docking, best conformations were
analyzed for hydrogen bonding/π-π interactions.

Results &amp; Discussion
Homology modeling:
Protein sequence of Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase was
retrieved from Uniprot database using D8LAL9. A BLASTp
search was performed against PDB database to find the best
matching template. PDB ID: 2VCE with 96% similarity was
selected for homology modeling. Modeller v9.10 was used to
predict the 3D structure of Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase.
Best Structure was selected on the basis of the minimum DOPE
score. The 3D structure of the protein is shown in ().
The model was used to determine the Ramachandran plot. The
results of the Ramachandran plot showed that it has 90.3%
residues in favorable regions (). According to
Ramachandran plot statistics, model was found to be of a good
quality as it has more than 90% amino residues in the most
favored regions and only 0.5% residues were in disallowed
region. Therefore it can be inferred that the predicted model is a
good quality model.

Docking analysis
Docking with Hydroquinone:
All ligands were docked with the active site of NS3/4A protease
enzyme and top ranked conformations of each ligand were
saved in a separate database. After post dock analysis, it was
observed that active site of wheat Hydroquinone
glucosyltransferase that lies close to the Hydroquinone inhibitor
are Met36, Gly37, Ile261, Lys262, Lys273, Glu274, Ser295,
Gly297, Ser298, Gln322, Val324, Trp369, Gln372, Ile 373, Lys374,
His387, Ser392 and Glu395. Among these eighteen residues of
wheat Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase that lies close to the
Hydroquinone only seven active site residues were observed as
directly interacting residues. Lys262, a basic amino acid from
the active site of wheat Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase
interacts with the hydroxyl group of hydroquinone and behaves
as a side chain donor molecule. Strength of chemical bond
between this active side residue and inhibitor is 87% 
.
Lys262 and Glu274 were also observed as strongly interacting
residue. Glu274 is acting as an acidic backbone acceptor residue.

The strength of chemical bond between the active site residue of
Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase and Hydroquinone
(inhibitor) is 82%. In  along with Lys262, Glu274 was
also observed as strongly interacting residue. Glu274 is acting as
an acidic backbone acceptor residue. The strength of chemical
bond between the active site residue of Hydroquinone
glucosyltransferase and Hydroquinone (inhibitor) is 82%. In
other docking results Asp264 was also observed as an
interacting residue from the active site of Hydroquinone
glucosyltransferase. It binds to the hydroxyl group of
Hydroquinone inhibitor and donates hydrogen ion from its side
chain group given in . Chemical bond between
Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase and Hydroquinone inhibitor
has moderate bond strength of 59%. Hydroquinone inhibitor
also binds to the Ser298 and His387 residues with the bond
strength of 98% and 27% as shown in . In the
interaction diagram given in  strongly bound Ser298
being a polar residue behave as a side chain acceptor and binds
with the hydroxyl group of Hydroquinone and makes a
hydrogen bond on the expense of a water molecule. His 387 is a
basic amino acid which acts as side chain acceptor molecule like
Ser298 and binds to hydroxyl group of Hydroquinone with
weak bond strength. Gln372, Glu395 were also bound by
Hydroquinone inhibitor. During interaction Gln372 behaves as
a side chain donor residue that binds to the hydroxyl group of
inhibitor and protonate it. The polar bond between the Gln372
(active site residue) and Hydroquinone inhibitor is having a low
bond strength (39%) shown in . While in 

stacking interaction with varied bond strength was observed
between Glu395 and inhibitor molecule. In the docking complex
between Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase with Hydroquinone
(inhibitor) given in  Glu395 is interacting as a side
chain donor molecule for hydroxyl group of Hydroquinone.
From the docking analysis it is hypothesized that Lys262,
Asp264, Glu274, Ser298, Gln372, His387 and Glu395 are the
residues that make Hydroquinone a potent inhibitor of
Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase. Through different kinds of
chemical interactions with these above mentioned residues
Hydroquinone occupies the active site of enzyme and may
inhibit or lower its catalytic efficiency. HQ is normally preferred
as a urease inhibitor in the field because of its cost effectiveness
[]. 
In a study Zhengping et al (2007) reported that HQ
decreased gaseous nitrogen loss by decreasing the activity of the
denitrifiers in the soil. The inhibitory effect was increased by
adding increasing amounts of HQ. Because denitrification is
stimulated by readily decomposable organic matter, the
retardation seems to be a short-term effect. The other urease
inhibitors, PPDA and NBPT, had no significant influence on the
denitrification process when they were applied at the rate of 4
mg per kilogram of soil.

Docking with N-(n-butyl) Phosphorothiocic triamide:
In the docking analysis between wheat Hydroquinone
glucosyltransferase and its N-(n-butyl) Phosphorothiocic
triamide inhibitor, it was observed that active site of wheat
Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase that lies close to the this
inhibitor are Met36, Ile40, Thr69, Ala72, Phe73, Ile261, Lys262,
Lys273, Arg276, Glu274, Ser295, Gly297, Ser298, Gln322, Val324,
Trp369, Pro371, Gln372, Ile 373, Lys374, His387, Asn391, Ser392
and Glu395. Out of these twenty four residues only eight
residues are directly interacting with its N-(n-butyl)
Phosphorothiocic triamide inhibitor. Most of residues that are in
close proximity to the inhibitor are hydrophobic in nature. In
the docking results given in  it was observed that
Glu395 is interacting with the -NH2 group of the inhibitor
molecule with bond strength of 61%. In this chemical interaction
active site residue Glu395 is acting as a side chain donor
molecule and it is an acidic amino residue.Threonine residue
being a polar residue was also found to be an interacting
residue in the . Thr69 is acting as backbone donor
molecule for one of the amino group (NH2) of N-(n-butyl)
Phosphorothiocic triamide inhibitor. In another docking result
shown in  Ser392 being a polar residue binds with the
amino group of the inhibitor and acts as a side chain donor
residue.Amongst the active site residues Ser 298, Gly297, Gln372
and His387 also bind N-(n-butyl) Phosphorothiocic triamide
inhibitor molecule shown in . Gly297,
Ser298 and Gln372 are polar residues that bind both the amino
groups of NBPT molecule. In the interaction diagram given in
 Gln372 is behaving as a side chain acceptor while
Gly297 is acting as backbone donor molecule for amino group
of the inhibitor molecule.In  Ser298 is acting as a side
chain donor residue and His387 is a basic amino residue and
interacting diagram shows that it is a backbone donor molecule
for one of the amino group of inhibitor. Docking results of
NBPT and wheat Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase suggests
that glutamic residue at position 274 is acting as an acidic
backbone donor residue and interacts with amino group of the
NBPT. The strength of chemical bond between the active site
residue of Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase and NBPT
(inhibitor) is 47%. In a study reported by Bremner &amp; Chai (1986,
1989) have also proved that NBPT is more efficient than PPD in
delaying urea hydrolysis and decreasing ammonia
volatilization. NBPT significantly decreased ammonia
volatilization and reduced losses from urea by 42-55%.
NBPT+DCD seemed to increase ammonia losses compared to
NBPT alone.

Docking with Phenyl Phosphorodiamate (PPD):
In the docking analysis between wheat Hydroquinone
glucosyltransferase and Phenyl Phosphorodiamate (PPD)
inhibitor, it was observed that active site of wheat
Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase that lies close to the this
inhibitor are Met36, Ile40, Phe73, Ile261, Lys262, Ser298, Gln372,
Ile 373, Lys374, His387, Asn391, Ser392 and Glu395.Out of these
thirteen residues only eight residues are directly interacting
with the PPD inhibitor molecule. In  docking complex
and interaction diagrams of Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase
with Phenyl Phosphorodiamate (PPD) inhibitor shows that
Glu395 is directly interacting with (–NH2) group of inhibitor
with bond strength of 59%.It is an acidic residue that is
behaving as a side chain donor residue for the inhibitor
molecule. In other docking results of PPD complex with
Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase Ser298, His387 and Ser 392
were observed as interacting residues from the active site of
enzymes. Serine residues at position 298 and 392 are polar
residues and both are acting as side chain donor residues and
occupy both the amino groups of inhibitor shown in .
Three other residues through which inhibitor molecule bind to
the active site of the enzyme are Lys262, Asp264 and Glu274
shown in . In docking results it was
observed that the oxygen molecule (i.e. present between the
benzene ring and amino side group) is interacting with Lys262.
Lys262 is a basic amino residue that showed varied bond
strength in both the figures but behaves as side chain acceptor
molecule. While Asp264 is an acidic amino residue that is acting
on amino group of inhibitor molecule and behave as side chain
donor residue given in . Glutamic residue at position
274 also interacts with the amino group of PPD inhibitor
molecule with weak bond strength of 11%. It is acting as a
backbone donor residue for the inhibitor molecule. PPD is
reported as most effective among others urease inhibitors in
retarding the hydrolysis of urea [,
,
,
]. Wang et al.
(1991) stated that in the presence of urease inhibitors such as
hydroquinone (HQ), phenyl phosphorodiamidate and N-(nbutyl)
phosphorothioic triamide, the urea-15N recovery in an
alkaline soil was increased by 5–30% of the amount applied as
fertilizer 15N, and the effect depended on the inhibitor and soil
type.

Conclusion
From the docking analysis it was observed that Lys262, Glu274,
Ser298, His387 and Glu395 were occupied by all the three
inhibitors. Due to the interaction of these residues with all the
wheat inhibitors it is concluded that these residues are
important residues that might be involved in the activity of the
Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase. Activity of Hydroquinone
glucosyltransferase lowered or inactivated by the chemical
interaction of the inhibitors with the active site residues. Asp264
was observed as a common interacting active site residue in HQ
and PPD while Ser392 was common active site residue that has
shown similar behavior in binding NBPT and PPD. Therefore,
the development of urease inhibitors would lead to a reduction
of environmental pollution, to enhance efficiency of nitrogen
uptake by plants and to improved therapeutic strategies for
treatment of infections due to ureolytic bacteria. Structure-based
design of urease inhibitors would require knowledge of the
enzyme mechanism at the molecular level.

Citation:Huma et al, Bioinformation 10(3): 124-129 (2014)

A) 3D structure of Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase;
B) Ramachandran plot showing 90.3% residues in most
favourable regions.

A) Interaction of Lys262 from Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase with Hydroquinone; B) Interaction of Lys262 and
Glu274 from Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase with Hydroquinone; C) Interaction of Lys262 and Asp264 from Hydroquinone
glucosyltransferase with Hydroquinone; D) Interaction of active site residues (Ser298, His387) of wheat Hydroquinone
glucosyltransferase and Hydroquinone; E) Interaction of Gln372 from Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase with Hydroquinone; F)
Interaction of Glu395 from Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase with Hydroquinone.

A) Interaction of Glu395 from Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase with N-(n-butyl) Phosphorothiocic triamide; B)
Interaction of Thr69 from Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase with N-(n-butyl) Phosphorothiocic triamide; C) Interaction of Ser392
from Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase with N-(n-butyl) Phosphorothiocic triamide; D) Interaction of Gln372 and Gly297 from
Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase with N-(n-butyl) Phosphorothiocic triamide; E) Interaction of Ser298 and His387 from
Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase with N-(n-butyl) Phosphorothiocic triamide; F) Interaction Glu274 from Hydroquinone
glucosyltransferase with N-(n-butyl) Phosphorothiocic triamide.

A) Interaction of Glu395 from Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase with Phenyl Phosphorodiamate (PPD) inhibitor; B)
Interaction of Ser298, His387 and Ser392 from Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase with Phenyl Phosphorodiamate (PPD) inhibitor;
C) Interaction Lys262 and Asp264 from Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase with Phenyl Phosphorodiamate (PPD) inhibitor; D)
Interaction Lys262 and Glu274 from Hydroquinone glucosyltransferase with Phenyl Phosphorodiamate (PPD) inhibitor.

