Background:
Toxoplasma gondii is arguably the most successful parasitic
organism in the world. It can infect all warm-blooded animals,
including people, and causes a wide spectrum of disease
severity in the different host species, ranging from acute fatal
disease in marsupials and marine mammals through to very
mild clinical signs in other hosts. Toxoplasma gondii ME49 is an
obligatory intracellular Apicomplexa parasite, with a complex
life cycle, that causes toxoplasmosis in humans, domesticated
and wild animals[].Toxoplasmic encephalitis (TE) caused by
Toxoplasma gondii ME49 remains an important human disease,
particularly in immuno-suppressed individuals . Murine
models employing the ME49 strain of Toxoplasma gondii have
been developed and used to study the pathogenesis and
therapy of TE[]
[]
[]. 
The ME49 strain of Toxoplasma gondii is of
typeII, which has been reported as the type most frequently
associated with human disease. Infection is usually
asymptomatic in people with a normal immune function and
occasionally results in eye involvement. Toxoplasmosis can
cause severe disease in foetuses of acutely infected pregnant
woman, immuno-compromised individuals (AIDS) and
therapeutically immuno-suppressed patients, as cancer or
transplant recipients. Toxoplasma gondii ME49 is a protozoan
parasite that is uniquely adapted for penetrating and surviving
within a wide range of host cells. This parasite invades
mammalian cells by an active actin-dependent mechanism, and
after entry establishes a vacuole with the assistance of products
secreted by the parasite's apical organelles [].

One of the unique features of Toxoplasma gondii ME49 is the
presence of a non-photosynthetic plastid called apicoplast (6-15)
containing its own 35-kilobase genome, which is essential for
parasite survival. Antibiotics that apparently target plastid
protein synthesis specifically block parasite replication [,
]. It
has been postulated that the apicomplexan plastid was acquired
by endosymbiosis of an alga [,
,
]. The plastid is bounded
by four membranes, and its genome shows substantial sequence
similarity to algal and other chloroplast DNA
[,
,
,
].
Although the metabolic functions of this degenerate
plastid remain largely unknown, it is possible that it provides a
site for fatty acid biosynthesis [,
]. Recent studied has
revealed directly linkage between apicoplast function and
parasite survival, validating this intriguing organelle as an
effective target for parasiticidal drug design.

In quest for developing new potent drug candidates against
Toxoplasma gondii cell-based drug development strategy has
been in use in past decade. In cell-based drug development,
researchers attempt to create drugs that kill a pathogen without
necessarily understanding the details of how the drugs work. In
contrast, target-based drug development entails the search for
compounds that act on a specific intracellular target―often a
protein known or suspected to be required for survival of the
pathogen. The latter approach to drug development has been
facilitated greatly by the sequencing of many pathogen
genomes.

To identify apicoplast associated drug targets we have
implemented the concept of subtractive genomics approach in
which the subtraction dataset between the host and pathogen
genome provides information of pathogen-specific essential
proteins. This approach has been used successfully in recent
times to identify essential genes in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. We
have used the same methodology to analyse the whole genome
sequence of the Toxoplasma gondii ME49. The differences in the
proteins of the host and the pathogen can be effectively used for
designing a drug specifically targeting the pathogen.

Methodology:
The process-flow of the methodology is displayed in .

Retrieval of Proteomes of Host and Pathogen:
The complete proteome of Toxoplasma gondii ME49 &amp; Homo
sapiens was retrieved from NCBI. Eukaryotic essential protein
sequences were retrieved from the database of essential genes
(DEG) [] from its location 
(http://tubic.tju.edu.cn/deg/) by
manual annotation.

Identification of Essential Proteins in Toxoplasma gondii ME49:
Toxoplasma gondii ME49 proteome was purged at 20% threshold
using CD-HIT [] to exclude paralogs or duplicates for further
analysis. The set of proteins obtained were subjected to Blastp
against Homo sapiens proteome with the expectation value (Evalue)
cut-off of 10-4. The protein sequences of Toxoplasma
gondii ME49 showing no significant similarity with Homo
sapiens proteome was retrieved manually. Blastp analysis was
performed for the non homologous protein sequences of
Toxoplasma gondii ME49 against database of essential proteins
retrieved from DEG with E-value cut off score of 10-10 and 30%
identity. A minimum bit-score cut-off of 100 was used to screen
out proteins that appeared to represent essential genes. The
protein sequences obtained are non homologous essential
proteins of Toxoplasma gondii ME49.

Sub Cellular Localization Prediction:
Sub-cellular localization analysis of the essential proteins has
been done by Proteome Analyst Specialized Sub Cellular
Localization Server v2.5 (PA-SUB) [] to identify the location
of the essential proteins in different cellular organelles.

Metabolic Pathway Analysis:
Metabolic pathway analysis of the essential proteins of
Toxoplasma gondii ME49 was done by KEGG Automatic
Annotation Server (KAAS) []. Comparative analysis of the
metabolic pathways of the host and pathogen was performed
by using Kyoto Encyclopaedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)
pathway database [] to trace out essential proteins involved
in pathogen specific metabolic pathways for the identification
of potential drug targets.

Protein Function Prediction:
Protein function prediction was done using PFP Automated
Protein Function Prediction Server
(http://kiharalab.org/web/pfp.php) to find the function of
uncharacterised essential protein [].

Cluster of Orthologous Genes:
Essential proteins were manually segregated into different
categories as per the norms of Cluster of Orthologous Genes
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/COG/).

Structure prediction of drug targets:
Crystal structures for the enzymes in apicoplast involved in fat
metabolism are not available in Protein data Bank therefore
modelling of the target proteins were performed using different
structure prediction methods. Homology modelling did not
give good results because of low sequence identity between
target and template sequence (less than 20%).For getting better
prediction accuracy fold based prediction using Phyre2 server
[] 
was implemented. Protein threading or fold recognition is a
method of protein modelling which is used to model those
proteins which have the same fold as proteins of known
structures, but do not have homologous proteins with known
structure. Energy minimization of generated 3D-model was
done through GROMACS (OPLS force field) by using Steepest
Descent and Conjugate Gradient Algorithms. Parameters like
covalent bond distances and angles, stereo-chemical validation,
atom nomenclature were validated using RAMPAGE and
overall quality factor of non-bonded interactions between
different atoms types were measured by ERRAT program.
RMSD (root-mean-square deviation) and RMSF (Root Mean
Square Fluctuation) was calculated for modelled structures.

Discussion:
Toxoplasma gondii ME49 proteome was found to contain 7987
functional &amp; structural proteins. The protein which had
conserved region in Human proteome detected by BLASTp was
excluded for further analysis. The non homologous proteins
when analysed with BLASTp in DEG (Database of Essential
Genes) gave a list of 950 putative uncharacterised essential
proteins. The 950 essential proteins were grouped into 12
classes according to COGs functional classification. The subcellular
localization prediction for the 950 essential proteins
of Toxoplasma gondii ME49 was done by using Proteome Analyst
Specialized Sub Cellular Localization Server v2.5 (PA-SUB) to
locate the apicoplast associated proteins. Sub-cellular
localization prediction gave the following set of proteins:
Apicoplast: 31; Cytoplasm: 396; Periplasm: 3; Mitochondria:
149; Nucleus:567; Extracellularenvironment:49;
Plasmamembrane:152;Peroxisome:4;ER:3;Golgiapparatus:5;
Cytoskeleton:4; Outer membrane: 8 and Lysosome:1. Out of 131
proteins located in apicoplast which are mentioned above, 75
are Miscellaneous Enzymes and two of the enzymes glutamate
dehydrogenase &amp; aspartate amino transferase play an
important role in the fatty acid biosynthesis pathway.

The KEGG-KAAS analysis identified the biochemical pathways
of the apicoplast associated proteins. Comparative analysis of
biochemical pathways of apicoplast associated proteins of
Toxoplasma gondii ME49 with the pathways of Homo sapiens
gives 18 proteins which are involved in pathogen-specific
metabolic pathways. The complete list of the apicoplast
associated proteins having unique pathways is given in .

(See supplementary material) has 18 drug targets which are
active in pathogen-specific metabolic pathways. Out of those 18
targets, 16 are engaged in wide-ranging metabolic processes
and only two are involved in apicoplast-specific fatty acid
metabolic reactions. Apicoplast-associated fatty acid
metabolism is very unique to the Toxoplasma gondii and any
alteration in the direction of this metabolism cascade will be
fatal to the pathogen &amp; therefore they have good prospects for
targeting of new drugs. Thus we have considered these proteins
for further structural &amp; functional analysis. The two drug
targets identified are Long chain fatty acid CoA ligase &amp;
Succinate- semi aldehyde dehydrogenase ().

Drugs designed for these targets can have potent anti-microbial
activity against the Toxoplasma gondii ME49.X ray
crystallography or NMR derived structures of these two
proteins were not available in RCSB-PDB so computationalapproach
of structure prediction was the only alternative. The
alignment of these two proteins with RCSB-PDB templates gave
less than 18% identity so homology modelling based approach
was not a good choice for such a low-alignment of targettemplate.

For structures which have low identity of template-target
alignment, fold- recognition based structure prediction is
preferred. Structure prediction using Phyre2 (Protein
Homology/analogY Recognition Engine V 2.0) server was
employed as described under Methods. (, see
supplementary material) represents the summary of Phyre2
results. The Ramachandran plot analysis (by RAMPAGE) of the
model structure from Phyre2 server showed that &gt; 90% of the
residues is in favoured and additional allowed regions. It
signifies the good quality of our model. Active site prediction using Q-Site Finder
(http://www.modelling.leeds.ac.uk/qsitefinder) predicts
pocket of Long chain fatty acid CoA ligase (having site volume
of 994 Cubic A0) and Succinate- semi aldehyde dehydrogenase
(having site volume of 618 Cubic A0) which can be used as
potential inhibitory sites ().As apicoplast is
unique to the protozoa the apicoplast associated essential
proteins may be attractive drug targets for Toxoplasma gondii
ME49. Thus, further investigations on the predicted apicoplast
associated essential proteins are required to verify the reliability
of the data.

Conclusion:
The present study has thus led to the identification of several
apicoplast associated proteins that can be targeted for effective
drug design against Toxoplasma gondii ME49 .The drugs
developed against these will be specific to the pathogen, and
therefore less or non-toxic to the host. Virtual screening against
these novel targets might be useful in the discovery of novel
therapeutic compounds against Toxoplasma gondii ME49.This
research thus draw attention to novel means of finding new
generation of drug targets for drug resistant microbes.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors express gratitude for the technical support from
Department of Biotechnology, PES Institute of Technology,
Bangalore &amp; Institute of Computational Biology, Bangalore.

Citation:Saremy et al, Bioinformation 7(8): 379-383 (2011)

Flowchart of the methodology used. CD-HIT =
Cluster Database at High Identity with Tolerance; NR Set =
Non-Redundant Set; BLASTP = Basic Local Alignment Search
Tool Protein; DEG = Database of Essential Genes; PFP Server =
Protein Function Prediction Server; KEGG = Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes; KAAS = KEGG
Automatic Annotation Server;

(a) Modeled structure of Modeled structure of Longchain
fatty acid CoA ligase (b) Modeled structure of Succinate
semi-aldehyde dehydrogenase. The structures have been
viewed using PPG (Protein Picture Generator
http://bioserv.rpbs.jussieu.fr/PPG) and DINO (Visualizing
Structural Biology (2002) http://www.dino3d.org)

