Background
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a cancer of blood cells,
characterized by replacement of the bone marrow with
malignant, leukemic cells. Many of these leukemic cells can be
found circulating in the blood and can cause enlargement of the
spleen, liver, and other organs. The BCR-ABL oncogene, which
is the product of Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) 22q, encodes a
chimeric BCR-ABL protein that has constitutively activated
ABL tyrosine kinase activity and it is basic cause of chronic
myeloid leukemia [–]. Imitanib, a small molecule ABL kinase
inhibitor is a highly effective therapy for early phase of CML
[]. It also inhibits platelet derived growth factor receptor
(PDGFR) at physiologically relevant concentrations on the field
of cancer therapy has been dramatic []. However, there is a
high relapse rate among advanced and blast crisis phase
patients owing to the development of mutations in the ABL
kinase domain that cause drug resistance .Several approaches to
overcoming resistance have been studied both in vitro and in
vivo. They include dose escalation of imatinib, the combination
of imatinib with chemotherapeutic drugs, alternative BCR-ABL
inhibitors, and inhibitors of kinases acting downstream of BCRABL
such as Src kinases. Various novel tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKI) have been synthesized and have now reached
the pre-clinical or clinical phase []. Classes of these new
inhibitors include selective ABL inhibitors, inhibitors of ABL
and Src family kinases, Aurora kinase inhibitors and non ATP
competitive inhibitors of BCR-ABL. But these drugs inevitably
damage and debilitate too many normal cells and organs. They
undermine and destroy patient's immunity and patients’
abilities to resist disease, their health and natural healing
abilities. It is ideal for a chemopreventive drug to be nontoxic,
effective at lower doses, economical and easily available. So in
recent years natural products have drawn a great deal of
attention both from researchers because of its potential effects to
suppress cancer and also reduce the risk of cancer development.
Natural products have afforded a rich source of compounds
that have found many applications in the fields of medicine,
pharmacy and biology. Natural products have taken a
secondary role in drug discovery and drug development, after
molecular biology.

Computational chemistry has been playing a more and more
important role in drug discovery. Computational chemistry
made rational design of chemical compounds to target specific
molecules. In particular, computational high-throughput
docking has become a powerful tool for screening and
identifying novel lead compounds. Computational approaches
could not only save time and costs spent during in vitro
screening by providing a candidate list of potential off-targets
but also provide insight into understanding the molecular
mechanisms of protein–drug interactions. It has been shown
that potential off-targets can be identified in silico by
establishing the structure–activity relationship of small
molecules [–]. Pharmacophore modeling is a computer-aided
drug design tool used in the discovery of new classes of
compounds for a given therapeutic category 
[].
Pharmacophores generally are fragments or functional groups
of a chemical compound []. It has to describe the nature of
functional groups involved in ligand–target interactions, as well
as type of the non covalent bonding and distances. The
compound nilotinib has previously shown high binding affinity
with BCR-ABL when compared with other kinase inhibitors.
Therefore, modeling studies can be intensively used to decipher
the molecular determinants of BCR-ABL. This knowledge can
be used to design new compounds with the help of natural
compound database of Supercomputing Facility for
Bioinformatics and computational Biology, IIT, Delhi 
[] and
develop more effective therapeutic drugs. The objective of the
current study was to evaluate the binding affinity of BCR-ABL
second generation inhibitors with the help of GLIDE and design
effective drugs with the help of pharmacophore modeling.

Methodology
C-ABL KINASE DOMAIN IN COMPLEX WITH STI-571 was
downloaded (1IEP) from PDB database [].

Protein preparation wizard:
Using Schrödinger's Protein Preparation Wizard, full PDB file
(1IEB) was imported from PDB website and we added missing
hydrogen atoms, corrected metal ionization states to ensure
proper formal charge and force field treatment to enumerate
bond orders to HET groups. Co-crystallized water molecules
were removed. Optimal protonation states for histidine residues
were determined and potentially transposed heavy atoms in
arginine, glutamine, and histidine side chains were corrected.
Optimize the protein's hydrogen bond network by means of a
systematic, cluster-based approach, which greatly decreases
preparation times. Perform a restrained minimization that
allows hydrogen atoms to be freely minimized, while allowing
for sufficient heavy-atom movement to relax strained bonds
and angles ().

Ligand preparation:
LigPrep goes beyond simple 2D to 3D conversions by including
tautomeric, stereochemical and ionization variations as well as
energy minimized 3D molecular structures. It also applies
sophisticated rules to correct Lewis structures and to eliminate
mistakes in order to reduce downstream computational errors
[]. The following 5 inhibitors of BCR-ABL kinase were
downloaded from Pubchem [] 
(). We did
ligPrep using Schrodinger tool for these inhibitors. LigPrep
optionally expands tautomeric and ionization states, ring
conformations and stereoisomer to produce broad chemical and
structural diversity from a single input structure.

Designing of compounds:
Compounds were screened using Nilotinib as model
compound. From the resulting list of 1437, eleven most similar
molecules were retrieved. Eleven compounds were
subsequently docked with c-ABL to find its binding affinity.
The compounds listed in () showed binding
affinities with BCR-ABL.

Docking:
Protein preparation is relaxation of the receptor structure so
that it at least accommodates the ligand or inhibitors. We
employed the standard Schrodinger protein preparation utility
for this purpose. Glide calculation performs Grid based ligand
docking with energetics and searches for favorable interactions
between one or more typically small ligand and a larger
receptor molecule usually a protein. After ensuring that the
protein and ligands are in correct form for docking the receptor
grid files were generated using Grid Receptor generation
programme. The ligand docking calculations were done in the
standard precision mode of GLIDE. During the docking
process, the receptor was treated as fixed while ligand was
flexible. In the minimization of ligands, we have used a
distance-dependent dielectric constant with a value of 2.0 and a
conjugate gradient algorithm with small 100 steps. All of the
inhibitors were passed through a scaling factor of 0.80 and
partial charge cutoff of 0.15 [,
].

Discussion
A grid was generated at the centroid of the active sites
consisting of residues Asp-381, Ile-360, Thr-315, Glu-286, Lys-
271 and Met-318 () and the ligands were docked into
the active site using Glide.

Docking of Tyrosine kinase inhibitors:
The ligands were docked with the active site using Standard
Precision (SP) Glide algorithm. The docking results of these
ligands are given in  (see supplementary material). The
ranking of ligands was based on the glide score. The goal of SP
Glide methodology is to semi quantitatively rank the ability of
candidate ligands to bind to a specified conformation of the
protein receptor. The purpose of scoring procedure is the
identification of the correct binding pose by its lowest energy
value and the ranking of protein ligand complexes according to
their binding affinities. In the protein receptor complex (1IEP),
whether the ligand fits appropriately into the receptor is judged
by the ability to make key hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic
contacts. Glide SP scoring function can be enumerated by the
displacement of waters by the ligand from hydrophobic regions
of the protein active site, protein –ligand hydrogen bonding
interactions as well as other strong electrostatic interactions
such as salt bridges, desolvation effects, entropic effects due to
the restriction on binding of the motion of flexible protein or
ligand groups and also interaction of the ligand with metal ions
[]. Our docking results showed that Nilotinib ranked among
top among the compounds with the best GLIDE score -18.35
(). The glide energy term is very small, which
indicates that there is a very low energy penalty when the
ligand is buried in the active site.

When we analyzed the receptor-ligand interaction nilotinb sits
deeply within the binding site and interacts with protein via
hydrogen bond with Asp 381, Met318 and Glu286 and via pi-pi
stacking interaction with Thr315, Tyr253 and pi-cation with
Lys-271. Next to Nilotinib an analogue of Bosutinib had a glide
score of -13.05 binds with almost same amino acids except
Met318; instead it showed interaction with Val269. Glide
provided the best docking results, with the most accurately
predicted binding around the active site. So we selected
Nilotinib as model to develop pharmocophore models. The
pharmacophore features selected for creating sites were
hydrogen bond acceptor (A), hydrogen bond donor (D),
molecular weight, and hydrophobic region. Using nilotinib as a
model, the best pharmacophore models were obtained from
Molecular database of Supercomputing facility, IIT, Delhi.
Eleven compounds were selected out of 1457 substances which
have mutual pharmacopohre features with nilotinib. These
eleven compounds were chosen to dock with BCR-ABL to
determine its binding affinities. The top four compounds which
showed best binding affinities were selected for further
analysis.

Docking of Nilotinib like- molecules:
Out of ten compounds studied only four compounds binds with
BCR-ABL and produced docking score. The glide score of
compound NDB5 is -12.197 () and it binds with amino
acids Glu286, Asp381 and His361 with the docking energy of -
61.443. NDB binds with Met318, Lys271 and Glu286 with the
glide score of -8.555 and its docking energy is -46.754 
(). 
NDB2 and NDB6 bind with docking score of -8.436 and -
8.335  &amp; 
 (see supplementary material).

The compounds obtained after docking were subjected to
determine their pharmacokinetics properties using QikProp
module of Schrodinger and compared with nilotinib. We
analyzed 44 physically significant analogues of these four
compounds among which are molecular weight, H-bond
donors, H-Bond acceptors, logPo/w (octonal/water), skin
permeability Kp , aqueous solubility (logS) , Predicted IC50
value for blockage of HERG K+ channels (logHERG) , apparent
Caco-2 cell permeability in nm/sec (PPCaco), brain/blood
partition coefficient (PlogBB) ,apparent MDCK cell permeability
in nm/sec(PPMDCK) and percentage of human oral absorption.
In this study, out of 4 compounds, one compound (NDB)
showed allowed values for the properties analyzed and
exhibited drug-like characteristics []. For NDB, the partition
coefficient (QPlogPo/w) and water solubility (QPlogS), critical
for estimation of absorption and distribution of drugs within
the body, ranged between -2 to -6.5 and -6.5 to 0.5 respectively
and cell permeability (QPPCaco), a key factor governing drug
metabolism and its access to biological membrane is 49.449.
Overall, the percentage human oral absorption for the
compounds ranged from ~ 25 to ~ 80% []. All these
pharmacokinetic parameters are within the acceptable range
defined for human use. When compared with nilotinib NDB
showed better ADME properties and it could be a potential
inhibitor of BCR-ABL  (see supplementary material).
Combining the results of pharmacophore, drug-likeness,
ADMET, molecular docking studies, and the novelty search, we
have found NDB (cis Resveratrol 3-O-D-glucopyranoside) as
possible virtual lead to design novel human BCR-ABL inhibitor.

Conclusion
The development of novel and potent kinase inhibitors is a
challenging task. As an attempt to develop inhibitors we have
employed pharmacophore modeling and docking studies to
identify potential inhibitors against BCR-ABL. Pharmacophore
models were generated with nilotinib as a model according to
Lipinski’s rule (i.e ME &lt;500,H-Bond donor≦5, H-bond
acceptor≦10,log P ≦5). Further the compounds were docked
with BCR-ABL using Glide. Best hit was identified on the basis
of target affinity, molecular docking, and scoring and binding
affinity predictions. Further QikProp was used to evaluate the
drug likeness of the lead molecules by assessing their
physiochemical properties. All pharmacokinetic properties
were within the acceptable range for cis Resveratrol 3-O-Dglucopyranoside.
When compared with nilotinib it showed
better ADME properties and it can be a potential inhibitor of
BCR-ABL and further analysis can be performed through
various experimental studies.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The author is grateful to Ms Saranya R, B.Tech of Sathyabama
University, Chennai; who helped in laboratory assistance.

Citation:Sabitha, Bioinformation 8(14): 658-663 (2012)

C-ABL KINASE DOMAIN (1IEP) structure predicted
by X-ray crystallography , Hydrogen bonds are added,
protonation states of residues are corrected and energy
minimized by Schrodinger Protein preparation wizard.

a) Nilotinib CID 16757572; b) Dasatinib CID: 3062316;
c) Bosutinib CID: 5328940; d) AZD0530 CID: 10302451; e) MK-
0457 CID: 5494449

a) NDB; b) NDB2; c) NDB5; d) NDB6

a) Active site of c ABL-kinase; b) Nilotinib with c ABL kinase … H bond side chain, _____ H-bond backbone, ___ π –
cation, ___ π- π stacking; c) N-(1-carbamoyl-3-methyl-butyl)-4,5-dihydroxy-3-[2-(2-thienyl)acetyl amino-cyclohexene-1-
carboxamide (NDB5); d) cis Resveratrol 3-O-D-glucopyranoside (NDB); e) N-[(1S)-1-benzyl-2-hydrazino-2-keto-ethyl]piperidine-
1,4-dicarboxamide (NDB2); f) N-[3-(2-carbamoylethylcarbamoyl)-5,6-dihydroxy-1-cyclohex-2-enyl] 3-chloro-4-fluoro-benzamide
(NDB6)

