Background
Chlamydophila pneumoniae is an obligate intracellular Gram
negative bacterium which belongs to member of Chlamydophila.
C pneumoniae infections are often persistent, and an acute
infection may sometimes turn chronic []. Acute C pneumoniae
infection is involved in the pathogenesis of different mammals
and humans which cause bronchitis, emphisema and
pneumonia []. It is been reported as TWAR organism as it was
isolated from Taiwan in acute respiratory isolate, also known as
AR-39. Serological studies indicate that almost many have
developed antibodies against C pneumoniae; men exhibit more
seroconversion than women. It is known for causing many of
the chronic infection which is being actively investigated as a
cause of several systemic diseases like COPD [], Chronic
asthma [], Coronary artery disease 
[], Atherosclerosis
[],
Multisclerosis, Alzheimer's disease [] and Lung cancer
[] etc.
Similar to viruses, Chlamydophila pneumoniae is a parasitic
organism that needs an in-vivo environment to reproduce and
is therefore totally dependent on the host cell for survival. The
C. pneumoniae life cycle provides ideal circumstances for the
establishment of chronic infection. COPD have recently been
associated with chronic C. pneumoniae infection 
[], these
chronic infections of respiratory tissues could contribute to the
pathogenesis of COPD by altering the host response which has
proven to be extremely difficult to diagnose and impossible to
treat with current antibiotics. The prevalence of COPD has
emerged as the major cause of morbity and mortality rate
globally and it is anticipated as to become the third leading
cause of death by 2020 and the 5th leading cause of loss of
‘Disability Adjusted Life Years’ (DALYs) as per the Global
burden of disease study (GBDS) []. 
the region wise projection of developing countries like India were even worse.

The successful completion of the human genome project has
revolutionized the field of drug-discovery to identify the
biomarkers and to develop vaccines against human pathogens.
Development of various computational tools to analyze the
molecules from the genome to proteome level has made a major
impact in the advancement of insilico based studies on which
we can rely upon []. 
The basic strategy of identifying the nonhomologous
proteins which contribute to identify novel drug
targets has been a preference to study host-pathogen
interactions. The computational approach of studying newer
molecular and genomics research techniques with the modern
approach like comparative metabolic pathway analysis 
[] and
protein-protein interaction network studies is contributing to
find precisely the important proteins/enzymes which interact
and play a role of pathogenicity in many infectious and
systemic diseases which can be concluded as potential drug
targets []. Recently due to the development of novel
computational tools, algorithms and methods, it's been able to
predict protein functions and protein interactions which are
experimentally proved. The current study focuses on protein
interaction network, since infections are usually initiated by
protein-protein interactions. In our study we are able to predict
single to multiple protein interaction events by using the
available sophisticated tools.

Methodology
Analysis of host and pathogen metabolic pathways:
Whole genome-wide metabolic pathway analysis of host and
pathogen was performed via the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes
and Genomes (KEGG) database []. Metabolic pathways and
assigned identification numbers of the pathogen C. pneumoniae
and the human host were extracted from the KEGG Pathway
database. A manual sorting and comparison was then
performed, and pathways that were not present in the host but
were present in the pathogen, according to the KEGG database
annotations, were identified as unique to C. pneumoniae, while
the remaining pathways were considered as common
pathways. C. pneumoniae enzymes from unique and common
pathways were then identified, and the specific protein
sequences were obtained from the NCBI Genpept database [].

Identification of Unique metabolic pathways and nonhomologous proteins:
The Two-step analysis was performed between host and
pathogen proteomes for identification of non-host proteins from
C. pneumoniae. Firstly, manual sorting of pathways was
performed then only proteins from pathogen-specific pathways
were subjected to NCBI BLASTP analysis
(http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) 
[] 
().
Secondly, proteins from common pathways were also
compared by BLASTP analysis. In each scenario, searching was
restricted to proteins from human RefSeq protein database, by
selecting the option provided under the NCBI BLASTP
parameters. Proteins without hits below the cutoff E-value 0.005
and, 35% identity were selected as non-host pathogenic
proteins.

Identification of Non-host Essential Proteins:
In the present step all the non-host proteins were identified,
they were subjected to study their essentiality by comparing the
protein sequences of the C. pneumoniae against DEG database by
using BLASTP search available specifically for prokaryotic
organisms in DEG database at (http://tubic.tju.edu.cn/deg/)
[] 
for predicting putative non-host essential proteins using
below E-value cutoff 0.005 and 35% identity.

Protein-Protein interaction network prediction (PPi):
Protein-protein interactions play a pivotal role in many
biological processes; prediction of these interactions gives an
insight into identification of next gen therapeutic targets 
[].
PPi peak analysis has been performed for identifying potential
drug targets. In the present analysis we have been able to
identify the most potential metabolic functional associations
among all identified choke point proteins through protein
interaction database STRING []. In STRING, methods namely
neighborhood (green), co-occurrence (blue), gene fusion (red),
co-expression (black) and experimental method (pink) have
been used for potential metabolic interaction prediction.

Testing the druggability and Prioritization of Drug targets:
Previous computational approaches have focused mainly on
determining whether a protein is non-homologous to H.sapiens
and its essentiality and in which pathway it is involved. Along
with these important criteria's, and with the advancement in
genome sequencing, availability of computational tools,
coupled with experimental data, indicates that there are several
additional factors which are crucial in determining the
feasibility of therapeutic targets. The most important criteria's
considered and predicted are: Molecular Weight (&lt;110kDa)
[]; toxicity and localization 
[]; absence and presence of
transmembrane [], availability of 3D structure 
[] and
druggability []. Assimilation of such additional information
paves a way in prioritizing the potential therapeutic targets.

Results &amp; Discussion
Metabolic Pathway Analysis and Identification of Non-host Proteins:
The present study focuses on in-silico based comparative
metabolic pathway analysis of host H. sapiens and the
pathogen C pneumoniae. Firstly initial information about the
metabolic pathways associated with C pneumoniae was
extensively analyzed, where KEGG pathway database was used
as a source of information for metabolic pathways. H. sapiens
and the pathogen C pneumoniae were retrieved from the KEGG
database. It presently contains information about 65 metabolic
pathways in C pneumoniae AR39 and 110 in H. sapiens. Protein
names and total number of proteins present in each pathway
were calculated, and comparative analysis was performed
manually for the identification of pathways specific to C
pneumoniae. 10 different metabolic pathways were identified as
unique to C pneumoniae, and pathways were common to
remaining C pneumoniae strains. Secondly the corresponding
protein sequences were retrieved from the NCBI database.
BLASTP search was performed specifically against H. sapiens
with the following criteria with the e-value threshold 0.005 and
identity percentage of ≥35% [] were considered as non-host
proteins which do not have human homologues.

Finding Essential Genes:
By taking the advantage of available essential genes
information from DEG database (http://tubic.tju.edu.cn/deg/), 
we report 32 proteins from the C pneumoniae genome as
essential via DEG BLASTP search against prokaryotic
organisms specifically, with E-value threshold cut-off of 10-10,
minimum bit score of 100, and identity percentage ≥35% 
[].
Following our proteome-wide analysis, a total of 32 proteins
were predicted as essential, out of the 170 total proteins in
unique pathways where, 76 proteins were of single entry, and
94 proteins were of multiple entries, therefore they were
predicted as essential in unique pathways.

Protein interaction network analysis:
Functional associations between non- homologous proteins
have been predicted by STRING database (http://string.embl.de/) 
[]. Protein interaction network has been
made between highly correlated (&gt;0.9) proteins, where 32
protein interactions based on the above mentioned methods
from which interactions has been predicted, and have been
collectively considered for potential metabolic interaction
analysis. The considered metabolically interacting proteins
were found in DEG database of essential gene with their
function and associated literature [].

Prioritization of Drug Targets:
Based on above mentioned criteria's, 21 proteins were bacterial
exotoxins and 1 protein was an endotoxin. In our earlier work
UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 1-carboxyvinyltransferase and
Transketolase are reported [] remaining targets are reported
for the first time. We recommend a single potential drug target,
ribonucleotide-diphosphate reductase subunit beta ()
after the final conclusion based on criteria's met by the target,
which is also a valid target of Cladribine an approved drug
from Drugbank, also it is proposed in many other studies as
cancer target [,
] and it plays a key role in DNA synthesis
and cell growth control by reducing ribonucleotides to their
corresponding deoxyribonucleotides which are crucial in DNA
replication and repair, and is also found to be involved in
pathogenicity as it is an exotoxin from our analysis.

Conclusion
In the present study, comparative metabolic pathway approach
and protein interaction network analysis of the causative agent
of COPD has been performed to identify the unique pathways
present in pathogen C pneumoniae which can be targeted for
effective drug discovery and vaccine development. There are 10
unique pathways in  (see supplementary material)
identified out of 65 pathways. Among them unique metabolic
pathways consists 170 enzymes, in which 150 distinct non-host
enzymes were identified. 32 different enzymes have been found
as highly interacting metabolic proteins in C pneumoniae and
their essentiality was confirmed by Database of essential genes
which play pivotal role in bacterial pathogenicity and essential
nutrient uptake. A list of 22 drug targets has been prioritized on
the basis of number of pathogenic interactants. We specifically
recommend ribonucleotide-diphosphate reductase subunit beta
as the most prioritized potential drug target for drug designing
and inhibition of C pneumoniae pathogenicity.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Ravindranath et al, Bioinformation 9(12): 605-609 (2013)

Graph showing the prioritization and classification of
proteins and unique pathways identified from the total
metabolic pathways in Chlamydophila pneumoniae AR39.

Showing nrdB (ribonucleotide-diphosphate reductase
subunit beta) protein interacting with nrdA, adk, pyk, ndk,
gmk, tmk, pnp, nrdR, CPn_0775 and dut proteins with evidence
score ranging from 0.999-0.929 predicted by STRING.

