Background
NeuroAIDS and HAD
The involvement of the CNS in HIV-related disease generally has been termed
NeuroAIDS. HIV associated dementia (HAD) and minor cognitive motor
disorder (MCMD) were terms used as well. The presence of infiltrating
macrophages and activated microglial containing HIV-1, termed HIV
encephalitis (HIVE) is part of the neuropathological substrate of this disease. In
addition, neuronal damage is a key end-point in the disease process during and
subsequent to HIV-1 brain infection [,
,
]. Since the advent of HAART, a
new term, HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND) has come to the
fore. Due to HAART, the incidence of motor abnormalities and cognitive
impairment of HAD and HIVE decreased although their prevalence has
increased. Factors possibly associated with these changes may include viral
mutations and patient longevity [,
,
]. In the results reported here, the
patients are from studies in an earlier time-period, prior to the implementation
of HAND as a diagnostic entity [].

NeuroAIDS Gene expression and Neurogenetics
The neurogenetics of NeuroAIDS has been under study for several years. A
variety of genes, largely immune-related, but also those related to
neurobiological functioning, have been found to be associated with
neurocognitive outcomes and risk of HAD, although not all findings have been
replicated [,
,
]. 
This lack of consistency may be due to the difficulty in
classifying NeuroAIDS neurocognitive disorders and the heterogeneous
mechanisms leading to neurocognitive dysfunction. Gene expression in
NeuroAIDS was studied for many years and has been previously reviewed 
[,
,
,
,
]. In addition, a recent study produced gene expression data from
Globus pallidus neurons purified by LCM from patients with HAD/HIVE,
HAD, HIVE, and HIV+ without HAD or HIVE 
[]. A variety of inflammatory
mediators and signaling pathway genes were implicated. These studies have
yielded widely variable findings that will require additional efforts to integrate.
The use of high throughput microarrays, for example, provides expression data
for tens of thousands of probes. As such, methods for biologically relevant
interpretation of these data have come into use, drawing largely from the
burgeoning fields of systems biology and bioinformatics.

Materials &amp; Methodology
Brain Tissue, LCM, RNA Purification, and Gene Expression analysis
Brain Tissue was obtained and LCM, RNA purification, and gene expression
analysis were done as previously described [,
]. Autopsied cryopreserved
brain tissue was obtained from several tissue banks in the NIH sponsored
National NeuroAIDS Tissue Consortium (NNTC) [,
]. Neurons were
microdissected, using LCM from Globus pallidus from HIV-positive
individuals in four categories HAD/HIVE, HAD alone, HIVE alone, and HIV+
only. RNA was then purified from microdissected neurons, amplified, and gene
expression analysis performed [,
]. Expression of 55,000 genes was
analyzed using CodeLink Human Whole Genome Bioarrays [].

Statistical analysis
CodeLink Expression Analysis software (GE Healthcare) was used,as
previously described, to process the scanned images from the arrays 
[].
GeneSpring software (Agilent Technologies) was then used to generate the
gene expression data including quality control gene analyses 
[]. Gene
identification was based on urls [,
]. One-Way Analysis of Variance
(ANOVA) was used to identify genes with expression that was statistically
significant (at p ≤ 0.005) across the four groups HAD/HIVE, HAD alone,
HIVE alone, and HIV+ only, as previously described 
[]. Pair-wise student t
tests were then performed using the MSE (mean square error) term from the
ANOVA, to test the simple effects of HAD/HIVE vs. control, HAD alone vs.
control, and HAD alone vs. control for each selected gene 
[]. In addition, the
selected genes were identified as to their location on each of the 23 human
chromosomes. (The Y chromosome was not considered). The expected number
of genes per chromosome was calculated by multiplying the total of ascribed
genes by the proportion of the total number of genes with known chromosome
locations on that particular chromosome. The allocation of genes to each
chromosome was then tested for randomness by a single degree of freedom Chi
Square test and Bonferroni-adjusted (p = .05/23 = 0.0023).

Pathway analysis
Gene Network Central PRO at was used to generate gene interaction and
pathway figures [].

Results
190 genes, previously shown to be significantly expressed across HAD/HIVE,
HAD alone, and HIVE alone vs. HIV+ only, had known locations on 23 human
chromosomes. The result of gene allocation to chromosome is shown in 
(see ). 
Only chromosome 22 demonstrated a nonstochastic
number of ascribed genes (p ≤ 0.0001).Six genes identified on
chromosome 22 are CSNK1E (casein kinase 1 epsilon), DGCR8 (Di George
syndrome critical region 8), GGA1 (Golgi associated gamma adapt in ear
containing ARF binding protein 1), MAPK11 (mitogen activated protein kinase
11), SMCR7L (Smith-Magenis syndrome chromosome region candidate 7-
like), andTBC1D22A (TBC1 domain family member 22A). One gene ascribed
to chromosome 22 was unidentified. The array responses of the seven genes
allocated to chromosome 22 across HAD/HIVE, HAD, and HIVE vs. HIV+,
expressed as the effect size ratio (condition mean-control mean)/(standard
deviation) are shown in . Six of the genes show very similar
responses, while the seventh shows a different response from the other six. The
six genes with similar expression profiles were CSNK1E, DGCR8, GGA1,
MAPK11, SMCR7L, and the single unidentified gene. One gene, TBC1D22A,
had a differing gene expression profile across the patient categories compared
to controls.  shows the molecular pathway network connections
among the six identified genes located on chromosome 22. This pathway
analysis shows the six genes interconnected with 69 additional nearest neighbor
gene interactions. (see ) shows CodeLink
and GE IDs, aliases, chromosome 22 band locations, and basic functions of the
six identified genes as well as the interconnecting genes.

Discussion
A plethora of genes has already been implicated in the pathogenesis of
neurological and neuropsychiatric disease that result from HIV-1 brain
infection. Recent studies implicate additional genes with progress and use of
newer techniques. Due to the complexity and prolonged course of HIV-1
associate brain disease, it should not be surprising that so many genes may be
involved. We recently identified 150 genes involved in pathogenesis of
HAD/HIVE, HAD alone, HIVE alone compared to only HIV-1 infection. The
HAD/HIVE, HAD alone, and HIVE alone gene expression means for all of
these genes are significantly different from the HIV+ control 
[]. Here, we
show that of seven genes that were associated with chromosome 22, two of the
genes are mental disease-related. Moreover, there are additional mental
disease-related genes on this chromosome.

Many additional genes interconnect the six genes that we identified on
chromosome 22 and 69 such genes are shown in . Four of the
additional interconnection genes are also on chromosome 22, AP1B1, GRAP,
CRKL, and POLR2D. AP1B1 (adapter-related protein complex 1, beta 1
subunit), forms complexes that mediate both the recruitment of clathrin to
membranes and the recognition of sorting signals within the cytosolic tails of
transmembrane cargo molecules. GRAP (GRB2-related adapter protein),
couples signals from receptor and cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases to the Ras
signaling pathway. CRKL (V-crk sarcoma virus CT10 oncogene homolog
(avian)-like), participates in intra-cellular signal transduction. POLR2D
(polymerase (RNA) II (DNA directed) polypeptide D), is a component of RNA
polymerase. Thus, dysfunction and pathogenesis for the neurons caused by the
dysregulation of the six genesis further exacerbated by the dysregulation of
networks involving the four additional interconnection genes on this small
chromosome.

Chromosome 22 is the second smallest chromosome and has several mental
disease-related genes in addition to the two that we identified in our study that
are on this chromosome. The COMT gene is located at 22q11.21-q11.23 and is
associated with cognitive decline and schizophrenia as well as with HAND 
[,
,
,
]. 
CAG repeat loci on chromosome 22 are associated with
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder at 22q11.2–q11.23 
[]. On chromosome
22, two miRNAs are associated with schizophrenia- microRNA 130b and
microRNA 301b []. 
Children with 22q11 deletions exhibit cognitive, motor,
and other neurological problems []. Emanuel syndrome is consequent to
chromosome imbalance of a derivative chromosome 22 [der(22)] as a
supernumerary chromosome with the following karyotype: 47, XX,
+der(22)t(11;22) (q23;q11) in females or 47, XY, +der(22)t(11;22)(q23;q11) in
males or, rarely, as well as a balanced (11; 22) translocation with the
supernumerary derivative chromosome[,
]. Seizures are associated with a
gene, seizure related 6 homolog (mouse)-like at 22q12.1 []. Cerebral
gyration disorders (polymicrogyria) result from deletions in the 22q11 region
[]. 
This disorder is probably due to neuronal migrational dysfunction during
development. Moreover, there are several additional genes on chromosome 22
that involve processes already implicated in neuronal damage, to state a few,
including aubiquitin pathway gene at 22q11.21, neurofilament heavy
polypeptide at 22q12.2, and synaptosomal-associated protein at 22q11.21.
[].

In a previous study, we developed a hypothesis that coerced gene expression
caused by treatment of neurons in culture with gp120, tat, and/or cocaine was
deleterious for the neurons and that this resulted in the breakdown of natural
barriers or firewalls that prevent expression spillover that could occur 
[].
Thus, uninterrupted stimulation of gene expression could result in contiguously
expressed genes that could be deleterious. This hypothesis was supported in a
recent study on the evolutionary significance of contiguous gene expression,
even up to five megabases apart, indicating that this was disadvantageous for
the organism. Moreover, on an evolutionary time-scale one gene of each such
pair of genes was likely to migrate from where it was originally located, to
another portion of the genome []. 
This indicates a driving force reacting to an
otherwise harmful condition.

Conclusions and future directions
Two of seven genes that show changes in expression on chromosome 22 are
involved in mental disease and may be involved in the pathogenesis of HAD
and HIVE (compared to HIV+ patients). In addition to disruption of molecular
gene expression-networks in these neurons, disruption of these and additional
genes on this small chromosome may occur through mechanisms involving
chromatin damage, remodeling, and miRNA. Along these lines, we
hypothesize that coerced gene expression associated with chronic disease and
persistent HIV-1 infection may result in disruption of gene expression control
of contiguous genes. Moreover, under optimal conditions, genes that are in
proximity that are undergoing gene expression, should be as far from each
other as possible. Concisely, hotspots of gene expression are potential sites of
disease association.

The pathogenesis and treatment of neurological and neuropsychiatric diseases
stemming from HIV-1 infection and subsequent invasion of the brain by HIV-1
are being extensively studied. New treatment paradigms are in progress;
however, much depends on the identification of the molecular mechanisms
involved. Clearly, total inhibition of HIV-1 replication and development of
HIV-1 vaccines are desirable goals, but yet unaccomplished. Therefore, it is
important to develop novel paradigms of molecular analysis that reveal new
areas for treatment of neurological and neuropsychiatric disease that result
from HIV-1 brain infestation.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank the National NeuroAIDS Tissue Consortium (NNTC) (NIH,
Bethesda, MD) for cryopreserved brain tissue utilized in this study. Support for
this work included: NIH Grants (PS) DA 14533, DA 12580, GM 056529 and
(ES, DC, AJL, PS) 1U01MH083500and NS 38841. PS also thanks the Division
of Infectious Diseases and International Medicine (USF, Tampa, FL) for
support. The authors report no conflicts of interest.

Citation:Shapshak et al, Bioinformation 6(5): 183-186 (2011)

Effect Size [(Condition- control)/ Std. Dev.] of genes allocated to
Chromosome 22.

Pathways interconnecting 6 genes CSNK1E, DGCR8, GGA1,
MAPK11, SMCR7L, and TBC1D22A as well as 69 additional nearest neighbor
gene interactions.

