Background
The growth and productivity of crop plants depend largely on their 
vulnerability to environmental stresses. High salinity, water deficit, and 
temperature stress are the major constraints that limit agricultural 
production  []. 
Plants respond to these conditions with an array of 
biochemical and physiological adaptations, which involve the function of 
many stress-related genes. Hence,  any attempt to improve the stress 
tolerance requires a better understanding of the underlying physiological, 
biochemical and molecular events []. 

A common adaptation in plants is the production of compatible solutes and 
they accumulate to high levels without disturbing intracellular 
biochemistry  []. 
Compatible solutes have the capacity to persevere the 
activity of enzymes that are in saline solutions. These compounds have 
minimal effect on pH or charge balance of the cytosol or luminal 
compartments of organelles. Compatible solutes include low molecular 
weight sugars, organic acids, polyols and nitrogen containing compounds 
such as amino acids, amides, imino acids, proteins and quaternary 
ammonium compounds []. 

Osmotin, a stress responsive multifunctional protein, has been reported to 
be involved in osmotolerance of the plants  [,
]. Singh et al. (1985)  
[]
isolated this protein and its gene from tobacco var. Wisconsin 38 that was 
cultured for several generations on the culture medium with high NaCl 
concentration. It is a basic protein with a molecular weight of 24 KDa that 
accumulated in the tobacco cells and imparted to them osmotic stress 
adaptation. This function of osmotin is linked to its action as compatible 
osmolyte that enhances osmotic potential of the cells. In addition to its role 
as osmoprotectant, osmotin is shown to exhibit antifungal activity against a 
broad range of fungal pathogens [,
]

Barthakur et al. (2001) []
gave evidence that over expression of osmotin 
induces proline accumulation and confers tolerance to osmotic stress in 
transgenic tobacco. Biochemical analysis of tomato transformed with 
osmotin gene showed higher proline  content in transformed plants under 
normal and stress conditions. 4 to 6 fold increase in proline content, over 
the wild type plants, was observed  in leaves of strawberry plants 
transformed with osmotin gene even without subjecting them to the stress 
conditions []. 
It has been suggested that the synthesis of osmotin protein 
could induce synthesis and accumulation  of certain solutes or could be 
involved in metabolic or structural changes of cellular proteins 
[].

Based on the available literature and protein information on osmotin, we 
hypothesized that it may be involved in modulation of plant responses to 
biotic and abiotic stresses either directly by acting as transcriptional 
regulator for the genes encoding key enzymes of this pathway or as 
signaling molecule acting through intra cellular receptors. Being a 24 KDa 
protein, osmotin is within the range of low molecular weight transcription 
factors such as members of the GATA factor family of zinc finger 
transcription factors, WRKY transcription factors family etc. In the present 
study we therefore, evaluated osmotin protein for DNA binding domains 
and potential structural similarities with transcription factors available in 
databases.

Methodology
Analysis of osmotin protein for DNA-binding domain
Tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) osmotin (1pcvA) (13) protein sequence and 
structural features were downloaded from RCSB-Protein Data Bank and 
UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database for analysis. Amino acid sequence of 
osmotin protein in Fasta format was submitted to Compute pI/Mw at 
ExPASy Proteomics Server for calculating theoretical pI and molecular 
weight. The subcellular location of  osmotin protein was predicted using 
TargetP 1.1 Server; http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TargetP hosted at 
Technical University of Denmark, Denmark. 

To identify the putative DNA binding sites on osmotin protein, amino acid 
sequence and structure were retrieved from NCBI databases and RCSBProtein Data Bank, 
respectively. GT1 protein of Trihelix family of 
transcription factors from Arabidopsis thialiana was taken as control for 
this study.  The 3D structure of GT1 (2jmwA) was downloaded from 
RCSB-Protein Data Bank. Osmotin  and GT1 amino acid sequences and 
structures (as required) were submitted to DNA-binding motif prediction 
softwares; 2-zip server, DBD transcription factor prediction database, 
GYM 2.0 and Predictdnahth [,
,,
].  

Since these programs do not cover  all types of DNA binding motifs 
especially those present in unique transcription factors, we also compared 
the osmotin protein sequence and structure with the transcription factors 
listed in Database of Arabidopsis transcription factors (DATF)  
[] from
Arabidopsis. To find unique DNA binding domain on osmotin protein, 
homology studies were carried out using sequence and structure of 
transcription factor families listed in DATF. For this, amino acid sequence 
of individual Arabidopsis transcription factor was taken from the DATF. 
At least, amino acid sequence of one and at maximum three transcription 
factors were retrieved from each of 64 families. Since the crystal structure 
of these transcription factors were not available, their nucleotide sequences 
were submitted to NCBI to blast against PDB to get a homolog on which 
modeling of these transcription factors can be performed. The best match 
was saved and used for homology modeling of the protein structure of 
transcription factors. Amino acid sequence of the representative 
transcription factor was submitted to SWISS-MODEL workspace, 
automated mode, for homology modeling of protein's structure  
[]. The 
structures were visualized and analyzed using Chimera. SuperPose 
programs was used to study the superimposition of the structures of 
transcription factors with osmotin and GT.

Osmotin thaumatin like protein in Plants
The gene and protein sequences of osmotin and osmotin/thaumatin- like 
proteins were retrieved from published completed genomes of Arabidopsis 
lyrata, Arabidopsis thaliana, Carica papaya, Medicago truncatula, Glycine 
max, Cucumis sativus, Populus trichocarpa, Vitis vinifera, Oryza sativa, 
Zea mays and Sorghum bicolor. Superfamily server was used for structural 
domain analysis for Osmotin/thaumatin-like proteins family 
[].

Results and Discussion
Evaluating osmotin protein using available bioinformatic tools, as direct/ 
indirect metabolic modulator (transcription factor/cell signal molecule), 
will help in understanding the molecular adaptations by plants against 
abiotic and biotic stresses. Motif-discovery is often one of the first steps 
performed during computational analysis of gene-regulation. For any 
protein to act as a gene regulator (transcription factor), it must contain a 
DNA binding motif. The results of transcription factor prediction softwares 
showed the presence of HTH motif on GT1 protein thus, suggesting that it 
binds to DNA molecule. However, no DNA binding domains were 
detected on 3D structure of osmotin  (Table 1 see 
). 
Thus, overall results suggest that osmotin protein lacks leucine 
zippers and HTH motifs, the two predominant and important DNA binding 
motifs. The alignment results of osmotin with the protein sequence from 
DATF showed the homology in the range of 0-20%, suggesting that it does 
not contain a DNA binding motif. In order to find unique domain, the 
superimposition of osmotin 3D structure was done on modeled 
Arabidopsis transcription factors using Chimera. The transcription factor, 
GT1 sequence was used as the control protein to check the workability of 
the program. GT1 completely superimposed on transcription factors 
belonging to Tri-helix family, whereas no significant superimposition was 
found with osmotin to any protein in the database. These results thus, 
indicate that there are no DNA binding motifs present in osmotin, similar 
to those represented by our test set (DATF).

Osmotin/ thaumatin like proteins in Plants
Existing annotation and BLAST searches of well-characterized tobacco 
osmotin protein, used to identify osmotin/ thaumatin like protein homologs 
among the completed genome of Arabidopsis lyrata, Arabidopsis thaliana, 
Carica papaya, Medicago truncatula, Glycine max, Cucumis sativus, 
Populus trichocarpa, Vitis vinifera, Oryza sativa, Zea mays and Sorghum 
bicolor showed that it is  present in all 11 plants, either alone or in 
combination of 5 different partner domains; Protein kinase-like (PK-like), 
Bifunctional inhibitor/lipid-transfer  protein/seed storage 2S albumin, 
Mitochondrial carrier, Class II aaRS ABD-related and ARM repeats 
(Table 2 see ) . Each partner domain is shown to 
occur in diverse sets of protein families. Nature often brings several 
domains together to form multidomain and multifunctional proteins with a 
vast number of possibilities  []. Proteins with multiple domains have 
advantages, providing increased stability and new cooperative functions 
[]. In a multidomain protein, each domain may fulfill its own function 
independently, or in a concerted manner with its neighbours. Thus, the 
modular nature of osmotin has suggested the multiple roles for it.

Structural domain assignments from the superfamily database showed that 
A. thaliana genome contains 31 proteins belonging to osmotin/thaumatinlike 
protein superfamily. Osmotin/thaumatin domain together with 2 
different partner domains; PK-like and Bifunctional inhibitor/lipid-transfer 
protein/seed storage 2S albumin occur in seven different domain 
combinations, among the members of this family  (). Protein 
kinases catalyze the phosphotransfer reaction fundamental to most
signaling and regulatory processes in the eukaryotic cell []. According to 
InterPro annotation, the three-dimensional fold of catalytic domain in

protein kinase is similar to domains found in proteins involved in cellular 
signalling including the catalytic domain of phosphoinositide-3-kinase 
(PI3K), the catalytic domain of the MHCK/EF2 kinase and choline kinase. 
They regulate a wide range of cellular process such as enzyme activation, 
assembly of macromolecules, protein  localization and degradation. Three 
proteins in osmotin/thaumatin-like protein superfamily in  A. thaliana
contain this domain (AT4G18250.1, AT5G38280.1, AT1G70250) along 
with osmotin/thaumatin-like domain  ( and ). The third domain 
belongs to plant lipid-transfer and  hydrophobic proteins family and is 
mainly involved in lipid metabolism.

Responses to stress are generally complicated integrated circuits involving 
multiple pathways and cellular compartments  []. The subcellular 
localization of a protein can provide important information about its 
function within the cell. The accurate function of proteins and their 
interaction networks relies greatly  on the proper localization of each 
protein component. According to in silico estimates, N. tabacum osmotin is 
a cationic protein with theoretical pI of 8.13 and theoretical molecular 
weight of 26681.08 Da. The sequence alignment of N. tabacum osmotin 
(1pcvA) with  Arabidopsis Osmotin/thaumatin-like protein superfamily 
shows that At4G 11650 (atosm34) is most similar to the  N. tabacum
osmotin, while AT4G 36000.1 is least. The score of location assignment 
program suggests N. tabacum osmotin to be a secretary protein i.e it is not 
bound to any membrane.  According to the available evidences also, PR 
proteins are synthesized as precursors with an N-terminal signal peptide 
which mediates the transport. In general, the basic and neutral isoforms 
have been suggested to accumulate in vacuolar inclusion bodies []. Gau 
et al. (2004)  [] however, showed the accumulation of osmotin like 
protein in Malus domestica cv. Remo apoplast. Target P server results for 
31 members of A. thaliana Osmotin/ thaumatin like protein superfamily 
suggests that all except seven  (AT4G18250.1, AT1G20030.1, 
AT1G73620.1, AT1G77700.1, AT4G36000.1, AT4G38660.1 (M), 
AT4G38670.1 (C)) are secretory in nature. The secretory nature and 
multiple locations targeting of osmotin are in agreement to its multi 
functional role in plants exposed to biotic and abiotic stresses.

Apart from osmoregulation and functions involving partner domains, the 
osmotin could also act as modulator of transcription factors.  This property 
of osmotin could be determined by the close protein–protein interactions 
with the transcription factors. Some  In silico algorithms for studying 
protein‐protein interactions have  been formulated over the years  
[]. 
These however, also suffer from limitations of either over dependence on 
sequence-based information or knowledge of the tertiary structure of both 
partners prior to predicting the quaternary structure. The question of which 
residues in the protein‐protein interface actually interact often cannot be 
addressed and therefore, the exact  function could be determined by the 
extensive studies involving labor-intensive experimental approaches. 
Consequently, experimental analyses are required to completely identify or 
assign a specific role for this protein.

The  in silico analyses conducted in the present investigation indicate that 
osmotin/ thaumatin like protein superfamily is a large family of structurally 
similar proteins in the plants where osmotin/ thaumatin domain is present 
alone or with a partner domain. The specific function of this domain still 
needs to be addressed. The functions of partner domains however, are 
already determined. On this basis, we hypothesise that apart from 
osmoregulation, members of this super family are involved in diverse 
biological roles including cellular signal transduction.

Conclusion
With increase in the number of completed genomes being published, 
determining protein function is one of the most important problems of this 
post-genomic era. Osmotin is a cationic protein with theoretical pI of 8.13 
and theoretical molecular weight of 26681.08 Da.  No DNA-binding motif 
was detected by DNA-binding motif prediction softwares; 2-zip server, 
DBD transcription factor prediction database, GYM 2.0, HTH motif 
prediction, Predictdnahth. Alignment  results of osmotin protein with the 
protein sequence from DATF showed the homology in the range of 0-20%, 
suggesting that it does not contain a DNA binding motif. Further to find 
unique DNA-binding domain, the superimposition of osmotin 3D structure, 
done on modeled Arabidopsis transcription factors using Chimera also 
suggested absence of the same. With these results, we concluded that 
osmotin does not contain a DNA-binding motif and may be regulating 
plant responses to biotic and abiotic stresses by acting as a modulator of 
transcription factors or metabolic signaling. Further work is progress in our 
laboratory to elucidate the exact function of osmotin in plants under stress 
conditions.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This study was supported by a research grant to Prof. M. Z. Abdin from 
UGC, Govt. of India. The Project Fellowship awarded to Usha Kiran by 
UGC is gratefully acknowledged.

Citation:Abdin et al, Bioinformation 5(8): 336-340 (2011)

The domain architecture of Osmotin/thaumatin-like protein superfamily present in Arabidopsis thaliana

3D structure of 1pcvA downloaded from RCSB PDB and visualised by Rasmol

The Protein kinases signature domains present in Osmotin/thaumatin-like protein superfamily

