Background
Microsatellites or Simple Sequence Repeats (SSRs) are the
portions of the genome consisting of a sequence of repeats of a
given string of nucleotides which have lengths from one to six
bases. These repeats exhibit a strong level of instability,
undergoing additions or deletions of repeated units, which lead
to variation in the number of copies of the repeated stretches
[]. Microsatellites can be found in the protein-coding and noncoding
regions of genome. Because of their abundance and
inherent potential for variation, microsatellites are a valuable
source of genetic markers, and are widely used in population
genetics, genetic diversity, fingerprinting and forensic analysis
in many organisms including bacteria, fungi, plants and human
[,
]. Apart from their applications as molecular marker,
determining the abundance and density of microsatellites may
help to understand whether these sequences have any
functional and evolutionary significance. Large scale genome
sequencing initiatives on the growing number of organisms had
provided an opportunity to evaluate the abundance and
relative distribution of microsatellites in different genera.
Several microsatellite-mining reports in various organisms
including fungi have appeared in recent years, providing
important data for the comparative analysis of microsatellite
distribution [,
]. These reports were focused on nuclear
genomes and relatively few microsatellite analyses have been
conducted in organelle genomes, especially in the
mitochondria.

Mitogenomes are generally characterized by low GC content,
conservation in gene function, and high copy number [] and
they can evolve at their own rate relative to the nuclear
genomes of the organisms in which they occur []. The size and
topology of the mitogenome, the number and nature of the
proteins it encodes, and even the genetic code itself can vary
greatly between the species []. The mitogenomes of fungi are
generally an order of magnitude smaller than those of plants
but larger than animal mitogenomes and usually contain 14
genes encoding hydrophobic subunits of respiratory chain
complexes, as well as genes for the large (rnl) and small (rns)
ribosomal subunits and a set of tRNAs [].

The availability of mitochondrial genome sequences is
increasing as a result of recent technological advances in
molecular biology. Although, many fungal mitogenomes are
publically available, no formal analyses of microsatellites in
these sequences are reported. Thus, the aims of this study were,
(1) to reveal various facets of the distribution and dynamics of
microsatellites in the mitogenomes of phytopathogenic fungi (2)
and to construct phylogenetic relationship between them. To
accomplish this, an in-silico approach was used to analyze the
frequency and distribution of the microsatellites in genic and
intergenic regions of the genomes.

Methodology
Sources of mitochondrial genomic sequences:
The twenty one mitochondrial genome sequences of different
phytopathogenic fungi were retrieved from National Center for
Biotechnology Information and Broad Institute
(www.broadinstitute.org) 
 (see supplementary material).
Files were obtained from the respective mitochondrial genome
for each organism in FASTA format. Of the 19 fungal species
taken, ten belongs to the phylum Ascomycota, 7 belongs to
Basidiomycota and remaining two were from Chytridiomycota
and Zygomycota. The frequency of the repeats motifs in genic
and intergenic region were analyzed using WebSat online
software [], which is accessible through internet, requiring no
programme installation. Repeats greater than twelve bases were
considered as SSRs which means that there should be twelve
occurrence of mono-nucleotide repeat, six occurrence of di –
nucleotide repeats, four occurrence tri-nucleotide repeats, and
three occurrences of tetra, penta and hexa-nucleotide repeats.
All SSR were analyzed for their frequency of occurrence and
relative abundance. Relative abundance was calculated as SSR
per kb of sequence.

Statistical analysis:
A binary data was generated on the basic of presence and
absence of repeat motifs in a mitochondrial gene and analyzed
using SIMQUAL route to generate Jaccard's similarity
coefficient using NTSYS-PC, software version 2.1. These
similarity coefficients were used to construct a dendrogram
depicting genetic relationships among the species by employing
the Unweighted Paired Group Method of Arithmetic Averages
(UPGMA) algorithm and SAHN clustering. The robustness of
the dendrogram was evaluated with a bootstrap analysis
performed on the binary dataset using WINBOOT software
(version. 2.0).

Evaluation of polymorphism:
The Polymorphism Information Content (PIC) was measured as
described by Botstein et al. 
[]. PIC is defined as the
probability that two randomly chosen copies of gene will be
different alleles and will be different within a population. The
PIC value was calculated with the formula (described in
supplementary material)

Discussion
The recent technological inventions in genome sequencing have
accelerated the decoding of organisms genetic architecture. This
results in generation of huge amount of sequencing data of
various organisms which can be exploited for evolutionary and
comparative genomics, including phylogenomics. In the
present study, we have estimated the number and frequency of
SSRs in the mitogenomes of 19 phytopathogenic fungi. The
relative abundance of SSRs is randomly distributed across all
species  (see supplementary material). This observation
is significantly evident in species from the same genera. Among
the three Eurotiomycetis, A. niger and A. tubigensis show
comparable relative abundance to each other, whereas, A. oryzae
exhibits much lower abundance. Similarly, two
Sordariomycetes fungi, F. graminaerium and F. oxysporum which
varied greatly in their genome size exhibit a more similar
relative abundance to each other, whereas, F. verticilliodes
showed higher. Karoglu et al. 
[] while comparing the SSR
repeats in nuclear genomes of fungi observed the same trend.
The possible reason of this non-random distribution of SSRs
may lies in the mechanism through which SSRs are generated.
Two possible models have been proposed to explain
microsatellite generation: replication slippage and unequal
recombination. Replication slippage generally involves DNA
polymerase pausing and dissociation []. Difference in
mutability and the bias in repair efficiency of mismatch-repair
system could also lead to over-representation of SSRs in certain
genomes [].

While comparing the different repeat classes of SSRs in genic
and intergenic regions, we observed that the trinucleotide
repeats were the most abundant classes of SSRs in both genic as
well as intergenic regions with a frequent occurrence of motif
AAT\TTA (). While comparing with other reports, we
found that in the case of genic regions, this is a common trend
because these trinucleotide SSRs in the coding region are
translated into amino-acid repeats, which possibly contribute to
the biological function of the protein [,
]. However, high
frequency of trinucleotide SSR in intergenic regions is rare.
Rajendrakumar et al. [] observed the abundance of
dinucleotide SSRs in genic and intergenic regions of
mitochondrial genome of rice. Our results show that the high
frequency of trinucleotide repeats is a characteristic feature of
mitogenomes of phytopathogenic fungi. The abundance of
motif AAT\TTA may be attributed to the nucleotide
composition of genome. It has been proposed that base usages
of motifs are significantly correlated with the genome
nucleotide composition. Percentage of AT-rich motifs will rise
with the increase of genome AT content []. The longest
repeat in the intergenic region was a mononucleotide (C)
repeated 23 times in P. noduram. Similarly, the longest repeat in
genic region was also a mononucleotide (T) which was repeated
17 times in P. sojae. We observed that SSRs in the genic and
intergenic regions of mitogenomes were of low repeat numbers
(4-5U). The possible reason for this is the genesis of SSR which
is generally through slippage and slippage can even begin at
low repeat numbers. Since mitogenomes are generally
conserved, it is likely that the SSRs first arise by chance
substitutions that make a short repetitive sequence, which can
undergo slippage if they are above some threshold size 
[].
The low repeat number is also evident in the nuclear genomes
of fungi where shorter numbers of repeats (5–7 U) were
predominated with around 90% of all motifs [,
]. Cross
genera conservation of motifs in a particular gene was also
observed in our analysis.eg. Motif (tat)5 was conserved in cox 1
gene of five species. This conservation of repeat is expected
because cox 1 gene is slightly more conserved as compared to
other genes and has been proposed as an appropriate region for
genetic barcoding of species [].

In our study, the presence of SSRs in specific genes was used to
create genetic relationship among different species ().
The result indicates that set of genes coupled with the presence
of SSR were capable of analyzing the genetic relationship.
Protein-coding genes (Cox 3 and Nad 7) were found to be most
informative whereas ssRNA and lsRNA genes were least.
Mitochondrial cytochrome genes are known to be good
performer in establishing phylogenies in vertebrates also 
[].
The possible explanation for the poor performance of RNA
genes lies in the higher variability in these RNA genes. We
observed that fungi from Ascomycota have greater proximity
with Oomycota whereas, Zygomycetes were close to
Basidiomycetes. This is expected because we have considered
only the presence of repeat in a particular gene for estimating
phylogenetic relationship. Fine resolution can be obtained by
taking the presence of a particular motif or repeat number;
however, this will lead to incongruent result.

Conclusion
The study has identified the pattern of distribution of
microsatellites in the genic and intergenic regions of 19
mitogenomes of phytopathogenic fungi and established
relationship between individual genomes. Most of the repeat
motifs were confined to the intergenic region. Hence the
occurrence of SSR is non- random in mitogenomes. Unlike
nuclear genomes, trinucleotide repeat motifs were found to be
the most abundant class of repeats in the intergenic regions.
Genetic relationship can be obtained on the basic of SSRs
present in mitochondrial protein coding genes. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first extensive study of SSR repeat
dynamics in the mitogenomes of phytopathogenic fungi.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Mahfooz et al, Bioinformation 8(23): 1171-1175 (2012)

Graphical representation of percentage of different
type of repeats found in genic and intergenic regions of
mitogenomes.

Dendrogram showing phylogenetic relationship between mitochondrial genome of 19 phytpathogenic fungi based on
SSRs present in genes.

