Background
Leishmaniasis is a disease caused by protozoan parasites that belong to the
genus Leishmania and is transmitted by the bite of certain species of sand fly
(subfamily Phlebotominae). Several species of Leishmania are known to give
rise to the visceral form of the disease. The “Old World” (Africa, Asia and
Europe) species are L. donovani and L. infantum and the “New World” (South
America) species is L. chagasi. Along with Brazil, Sudan, and Bangladesh,
India contributes to 90% of the global burden of visceral leishmaniasis 
[]. In
absence of effective vaccines, chemotherapy is the main weapon to control
infections. The first-line drug against all forms of Leishmania infection consists
of pentavalent antimony (SbV) that contains drugs such as sodium
stibogluconate (SSG) and glucantime, despite its requirement for long courses
and cardiac toxicity []. 
Unfortunately, the clinical value of antimony therapy is
now challenged because an increasing rate of treatment failure is observed in
several field sites, and it has reached to epidemic proportion in the state of
Bihar, India [,
].
The geographic and temporal groupings of SbV treatment
failures [] 
suggest the emergence of antimony-resistant strains. ATP-binding
cassette transporters (ABC-transporter) are members of a protein superfamily
that is one of the largest and most ancient families with representatives in all
extant phyla from prokaryotes to humans. These are transmembrane proteins
that function in the transport of a wide variety of substrates across extra- and
intracellular membranes, including metabolic products, lipids, sterols and
drugs. ABC-transporters utilize the energy of ATP hydrolysis to transport
various substrates across cellular membranes 
[]. Expressing cells actively
pump substrates out of the cell, which result in a lower rate of substrate
accumulation, lower intracellular concentration at steady state, or a faster rate
of substrate elimination from cells loaded with the substrate. At least two
Leishmania ABC transporters are involved in drug resistance. One is PGPA,
which is involved in resistance to arsenic and antimony-containing compounds
[]. 
Antimonials are the drug of choice against Leishmania infections.
Transfection and biochemical studies suggest that PGPA recognizes metals
conjugated to thiols []. 
The second ABC transporter is closely related to mammalian P-glycoproteins homologous to MDR1 
[]. Within this context an
insight into the mechanism of natural drug resistance could contribute to the
development of efficient strategies for monitoring antimony resistance at sites
where it is endemic []. 
The present study has been undertaken to look into the
possible mechanism of drug resistance during the course of evolution by
emphasising the insilico study of protein sequences of ABC transporters.

Methodology
Dataset Creation
In this study, we aligned the protein sequences of ABC transporters of
Leishmania spp associated with Visceral Leishmaniasis over with the similar
prediction conditions and compared the results obtained. The protein sequences
were procured from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)
through their entrez search. We compared these sequences with different
servers consisting of CLUSTAL W, T-COFFEE, Phylogram, Cladogram based
on their results and scores they assigned, data was analyzed. Analysis has been
performed on the basis of final score given by the server. Furthermore
variability amongst the amino acid residues of ABC transporters has been
further studied by three different computer generated programs of EXPASY i.e.
Shannon variability, Simpson variability and Wu-Kabat variability.

Multiple Sequence Alignment
By Multiple Sequence alignment using Clustal W and T-COFFEE we arranged
the twelve different sequences of ABC transporters of Leishmania species
associated with Visceral Leishmaniasis obtained from NCBI to identify regions
of homology that may be a consequence of functional, structural, or
evolutionary relationships. The value S' is derived from the raw alignment
score S in which the statistical properties of the scoring system used have been
considered. H which is the relative entropy of the target and background
residue frequencies was measured so that average information (in bits)
available per position that distinguishes an alignment from chance can be
compared. High-scoring segment pair of the local alignments with no gaps
achieved one of the top alignments. The Probability (P value) has been
calculated by relating the observed alignment score S, to the expected
distribution of HSP scores from comparisons of random sequences of the same
length and composition as the query to the database. The most highly
significant P values have been close to 0. Percent Accepted Mutation has been
used to quantify the amount of evolutionary change in a protein sequence. A
PAM(x) substitution matrix has been looked into scores for each amino acid
substitution. Calculations based on the frequency of that substitution in closely
related proteins that have experienced a certain amount (x) of evolutionary
divergence have been studied. The Expect value (E) described the number of
hits we can “expect” to see by chance when searching a database of a particular
size. It decreased exponentially as the Score (S) of the match increased. The
lower the Evalue, or the closer it is to zero, the more “significant” the match
has been. Space was introduced into an alignment to compensate for insertions
and deletions in one sequence relative to another during the computation work.

Phylogeny
A phylogenetic tree or evolutionary tree shows the evolutionary relationships
among various biological species or other entities that are believed to have a
common ancestor. In a phylogenetic tree, each node with descendants
represented the most recent common ancestor of the descendants, and the edge
lengths in some trees correspond to time estimates. We referred each node as a
taxonomic unit.

Protein Variability
We used the following methods to predict the variability in the protein
sequences of ABC transporters of Leishmania spp associated with Visceral
Leishmaniasis []

Shannon Entropy
Shannon entropy analysis is possibly the most sensitive tool to estimate the
diversity of a system. For a multiple protein sequence alignment, the Shannon
entropy (H) for every position can be determined. H ranges from 0 (only one
residue in present at that position) to 4.322 (all 20 residues are equally
represented in that position). Typically, positions with H &gt;2.0 are considered
variable, whereas those with H &lt; 2 are considered conserved. Highly conserved
positions are those with H &lt;1.0.

Simpson Diversity Index
The Simpson index is another diversity index calculated from genotype
proportions. This index describes the chance that two genotypes sampled at
random and with replacement from a community will be from the same
species. The value of this index ranges between 0 and 1, the greater the value,
the greater the sample diversity.

Wu-kabat Variability coefficient
The Wu-Kabat variability coefficient is a well-established descriptor of the
susceptibility of an amino acid position to evolutionary replacements. It
highlights stretches of accentuated amino acid variation.

Discussion
Clustal W (see ) shows lower identities and
positives to the order 24% to 32% and 42% to 55% respectively and
comparatively higher percentage of gaps to the order 6% to 15% between the
ABC transporters of different species of Leishmania causing Visceral
Leishmaniasis. Besides Score also has values less than 50 in most of the
alignments. Hence it can be inferred that ABC transporters of different species
strains of L. donovoni and L. infantum have undergone tremendous mutations
thereby leading to much reduced similarity and level of conservation among
themselves. Besides they still seem to be undergoing the same phenomenon in
the present time as well leading to the development of resistance against SAG.
The Cladogram () and Phylogram 
() analysis also show that
the ABC transporters [gi 134070637 and gi 146090538 are closely associated],
[gi134072850 and gi 146098831 are closely linked and gi159372, gi159363],
[gi 134066849 and gi 146075771, gi134072484 and gi146097486,
gi134069137] have remained closely associated during the process of
evolution. They have evolved through a common ancestor on a longer time
scale during the process of evolution. But gi 146091672 evolved through a
different branch and has no similarity with the other transporters during the
evolutionary process. Thus the predictability of the MSA result is authenticated
by the Cladogram and Phylogram analysis too. T-COFFEE 
() also
shows very little similarity and identity among ABC transporters of Leishmania
species. The similarity ranges from less than average to bad 
() among
different species strains associated with Visceral leishmaniasis.

Shannon's Entropy (), H has a mean value of around 2 and in a major
chunk of the protein sequence of ABC transporters; H is more than 2.5 which
advocates a higher variability. Besides much less of the sequences range
between 2 and 2.5 which shows little conservation and higher variability.
Similarly Simpson diversity index () has a mean value around 0.8
and Wu Kabat variability coefficient has a mean value of around 16 
() 
also support that the frequency of variation at a specific amino acid is more
both in the genotypic as well as in the phenotypic levels of the considered
species strains of leishmania related to visceral leishmaniasis.

Conclusion
As shown by result of MSA the relative similarity between ABC transporters of
L. donovani and L. infantum 
is to the order of less than 50% in most of cases.
Similarly Phylogram and Cladogram also predict a low level of similarity
between ABC transporters of these species. There is more branching and large
distance between the species strains in Phylogram. Moreover T-COFFEE and
variability studies also predict minute similarity and identity among the ABC
transporters of Leishmania species. During the time of evolution the ABC
transporter goes under random mutation as there are remarkable differences
within the strains of species. Hence low levels of similarity between results
lead us to conclude that evolutionary different types of ABC transporters are
present in L. donovani and L. infantum which are prone to mutations. We have
to design an inhibitor with multiple binding sites which can block the
phenomenon of drug efflux from the ABC transporter thereby keeping the
basic structure intact. The inhibition of ABC transporter with resistance
modifying agent will allow accumulation of drug SAG (sodium antimony
gluconate) and parasite killing within macrophage 
[]. Another possible way to
circumvent resistance would be to provide a combination therapy consisting of
drugs and an inhibitor that has been shown useful in Leishmaniasis. An
inhibitor, which can block both PGPA and MRP1, might be beneficial for
reverting SAG resistance in leishmaniasis. Hence our focus should be to
circumvent the phenomenon of drug efflux by the ABC transporters to enhance
the efficiency of drug to be retained by the ABC transporters for a longer
duration.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Sukrat Sinha is thankful for the financial support provided by the University
Grants Commission, India under Dr. D.S Kothari Postdoctoral Fellowship.
Technical help rendered by Dr. Pardeep Kumar, School of Life Sciences,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India in formatting figures is also
acknowledged.

Citation:Sinha et al, Bioinformation 6(3): 107-110 (2011)

CLADOGRAM explaning the relative similarity in the ABC
transporters of different species strains of leishmania associated with Visceral
Lesishmaniasis during the time of evolution. Each sequence has been denoted
with gi followed by a number as quoted in NCBI.

PHYLOGRAM explaining the relative similarity in the ABC
transporters of different species strains of leishmania as associated with
Visceral Leishmaniasis in evolutionary time scale.Each sequence has been
denoted with gi followed by a number as quoted in NCBI.

T-COFFEE scores of Multiple Sequence Alignment amongst ABC
transporters of different species strains of leishmania associated with Visceral
Leishmaniasis using Clustal W as an alignment tool..Each sequence has been
denoted with gi followed by a number as quoted in NCBI.

Variablity studies showing the frequency of variation in each amino
acid residue during evolution in the ABC transporters of different species
strains of leishmania associated with Visceral Leishmaniasis.

