Background
Supporting evidence has verified that glycans play crucial roles
in cellular functions. However, the complexity in developing
high-throughput techniques to characterize glycan structures
poses one of the main obstacles to assess the structural elements
responsible for specific functions. Thanks to the availability of
glycan structure databases such as KEGG [] and the
Consortium for Functional Glycomics (CFG) [], informatics
techniques can be applied directly to glycan data to help
researchers better understand the functions and structures of
these complicated molecules.

Compared to the linear structures of DNA and proteins, glycans
are generally nonlinear polymers that can be represented by
rooted ordered trees. Several approaches have been developed
to mine structural features embedded in glycans 
[,
]. Support
vector machines (SVMs) with tree kernels for analyzing glycan
structures have been extensively investigated 
[,
]. In 
[], 3-
mers were used to represent the features for each glycan
structure, where more weight was applied to the matching
structures of the variable region (specifically, the non-reducing
terminal structures of glycans) in constructing the kernel
matrix. As for [], the kernel function was expressed as a sum of
local kernels over all possible subtrees. One of the
groundbreaking representatives is the q-gram method 
[,
]
which considers the vector of the frequencies of all possible
subtrees isomorphic to paths with q nodes as the q-gram
distribution. Like the previously proposed kernels, the
traditional q-gram method ignores the similarity between two
different q-grams. Taking into consideration the similarity of
geometric structures, monosaccharides and glycosidic bonds in
q-grams, a new tree kernel was created [], resulting in a
weighted q-gram method: LK-method. With this method, the
classification performance was improved for some important
glycan classes. However, one of the limitations of this method
lies in the poor performance in extracting biologically relevant
glycan substructures, the most important goal of our research.
Our aim is to remedy the defects of the LK-method.

Kernel methods work by embedding data instances into a
feature space F. Due to their good performance in processing
complicated data, kernel methods have gained increasing
popularity in computational biology []. The Positive Semi-
Definite (PSD) property [] of a kernel matrix is required to
ensure the existence of a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space
(RKHS) where a convex optimization formulation can be
deduced to yield an optimal solution. However, in practice,
similarity matrices can violate the PSD property. For example,
in bioinformatics some popular functions evaluating pair-wise
similarity between DNA and protein sequences produce non-
PSD (or indefinite) kernel matrices. Unfortunately, the best way
to use them in the SVM framework is not clear. The weighted qgram
method avoids the problem of the non-PSD property by
constructing the similarity matrix as to ensure the PSD property
of the kernel matrix. The method performs well in terms of
classification accuracy for the often-used leukemia data set, but
it did not perform as well on other data sets. Furthermore, the
feature selection results of this method were poor in that the
biologically known motifs for specific data sets were not
retrieved in the results.

In order to obtain biologically meaningful results, we focused
on the similarity matrix, which is symmetric and can be
decomposed into S = X ⋅ P⋅ X T such that is the diagonal
matrix of the eigenvalues sorted in ascending order. Here is an
orthogonal matrix of the corresponding eigenvectors. The
weighted q-gram method deals with the similarity matrix as
ST S which is in fact X ⋅ P2 ⋅ X T . To some extent, we may
consider different eigenvalues as representing the roles that
each q-gram plays in classification. Furthermore, the kernel
matrix used in training the SVM should, in principle, involve
the similarity matrix S itself rather than ST S . In this context, a
negative eigenvalue –λ (λ&gt;0) will then be squared, becoming λ2,
the square of its original magnitude. This suggests a possible
reason why this method cannot perform well in all of the data
sets as the importance of those negative eigenvalues were
magnified.

Previous studies have presented methods that attempt to alter
the spectrum of an indefinite kernel matrix in order to create a
PSD one. Representatives include the denoising method which
deems all negative eigenvalues as noise and replaces them with
zero [], the flipping method which flips the sign of negative
eigenvalues so as to form a PSD kernel matrix [], the diffusion
method which takes the data distribution into account by
replacing the eigenvalues with an exponential form [], and
the shifting method which shifts eigenvalues to ensure the
nonnegativity of all the eigenvalues []. The LK-method shares
some similarity with the flipping method in that negative
eigenvalues become the absolute values of themselves.
Considering the fact that the denoising method, which neglects
the negative eigenvalues, also yields good classification results,
we propose a novel method treating eigenvalues in ascending
order.

Another problem with the previous model was that even
though the weighted q-gram method considered the similarity
between two different q-grams, the importance of the q-grams
in the context of the whole glycan structures themselves was
not taken into account. From a biological perspective, the
variability of the sugars near the leaves is larger than those near
the root []. Thus, employing the similarity matrix developed
by the LK-method, we developed a biochemically-weighted
kernel (BioLK-method) utilizing biological knowledge by
adding weight based on the layer information li of q-grams
with while e α l i ensuring the PSD property of the similarity
matrix.

The effectiveness of our BioLK-method was then compared
with the LK-method, the representative of the weighted q-gram
method in terms of predictive performance of glycan
classification and motif extraction. Our newly developed
method exhibited comparable classification performance, if not
better, with the LK-method. Moreover, our new method could
capture biologically meaningful glycan substructures through
feature selection while the LK-method failed to do so.

Methodology
Our work incorporates two innovations. The first one is to
perform a delicate transformation on the non-PSD similarity
matrix constructed in one of the representatives of the weighted
q-gram method: the LK-method. The second is to incorporate
existing biological information when computing the kernel
matrix. Major contribution of this paper is to propose a
biologically significant kernel that is robust in classification as
well as in motif selection. We first describe the similarity matrix
construction method used for the LK-method that considers the
similarity of layers, monosaccharides, glycosidic bonds and
geometric tree structures among the q-grams. Based on the
existing similarity matrix, a PSD similarity matrix using
techniques of spectrum transformation is created. We further
develop the novel kernel by combining the biological
importance of different q-grams. Different experiments of
binary classification and feature selection are performed on the
new kernel with SVMs (See  for
detailed description).

Discussion
Materials:
Three sets of glycan data are used to evaluate the classification
and feature selection performance of our developed method.
They are illustrated in (, see supplementary material).
Glycan structures in two of the data sets are retrieved from the
KEGG/GLYCAN database [] with annotations from the
CarbBank/CCSD database []. One pertains to leukemia
consisting of 355 structures originating from four human blood
components: leukemic cells, erythrocytes, serum and plasma,
containing 162, 111, 85 and 73 examples respectively. Another
data set pertains to cystic fibrosis, containing 89 glycans related
to cystic fibrosis, 107 related to respiratory mucin and 101
related to bronchial mucin. For these leukemia and cystic data
sets, the total number of glycans is not the sum of each subclass
because some glycans belong to several classes. In order to
assess the generality of our kernel method in extracting
meaningful substructures, we further utilized another data set
obtained from the CFG []. We obtained O-linked and N-linked
glycan profile data extracted from the brain of mouse strain
C57BL/6 (Mouse Strain,
http://www.functionalglycomics.org/glycomics/common/jsp
/samples/searchSample.jsp/?templateKey/=1/&amp;12/=Tissue/&amp;operation/=refine), which consisted of 47 structures in Wildtype and
50 structures in FucTIV+VII knockout mice.

Classification and Feature Selection:
The effectiveness of our BioLK-method was evaluated through
comparison with the LK-method in terms of performance of
both classification and feature selection. Because the BioLKmethod
involves the determination ofα beforehand, a program
was run to find an optimalα in a statistical sense. The
optimalα for the leukemia data set was 0.1, with 0.35 for the
mouse data set and 0.85 for the cystic fibrosis data set. These
results were consistent with our previous analysis. Since for the
leukemia data set, there are in total 6527 features involved, it is
very sensitive to largeα , while for the cystic fibrosis data set,
which contains only 1260 features, it is reasonable that the
optimalα is relatively large. In the mouse data set, the number
of features altogether was 4214, and the corresponding optimal
also lies in α = 0.35 between.

Classification Performance:
Table's 2-4 lists the performance of the SVM classifier for the
LK-method and the BioLK-method as tested on our three data
sets. We employed the Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC)
measured by five-fold cross-validation run 10 times to evaluate
the performance. For each q (q = 1, 2,K,9) , the tables illustrate
the average AUC value over the 10 runs with standard
deviations. It is clear to see that both LK-method and BioLKmethod
show comparable classification performance.

For the leukemia data, the classification performance always
achieves accuracy greater than 89%. In the cystic fibrosis data
set, the classification accuracy decreases slightly, but still
achieves around 80% on average. For q = 9 in this data set, the
performance goes down to 53% which is reasonable since this
data set is much less complex when compared to the other two
data sets, reflecting the fact that the number of features
involved in 9-gram classification are few. For the mouse data
set, the classification performance is also high, achieving
accuracies in the 80% range.

Feature Selection:
Both the direct usage of the similarity matrix and the
incorporation of the BioWeight matrix in kernel construction
enhance our confidence in extracting accurate features. The
effectiveness of our BioLK-method in feature selection is
assessed in comparison with the LK-method on the three glycan
data sets. Figures 3-5 illustrate the top three features extracted
by the LK-method and the BioLK-method. For better
illustration, the corresponding figures of the features can be
accessed (available with authors).

As shown in , the top-scoring features extracted by the
BioLK-method is the trimer structure ‘NeuAcα2-3Galβ1-
4GlcNAc’ found at layer 5. This precisely corresponds to the
substructure in previous works [,
]. The substructure with the
second highest score is the monomer structure ‘Neu5Ac’ found
at layer 7, which is also consistent with the literature []. In
contrast, the LK-method captures the features in reverse order.
In fact, our results are more reasonable due to the fact that
A.cylindracea galectin (ACG) is known to specifically bind to the
trimer structure, whereas sialic acid is known to appear in
many tumor cells. Thus ‘Neu5Ac’ is considered to be a more
generalized result, whereas the trimer is more specific.

 lists the top three motif candidates extracted by the
LK-method and the BioLK-method in the cystic fibrosis data set.
The highest score using the BioLK-method is achieved by a
dimer ‘NeuAc2-3Gal’ at layer 2, which is often found at the
non-reducing end of glycan structures. Although this is slightly
different from the result predicted by [] which captures this
structure as the second highest score, it is acceptable since in
their method, information indicating root and leaf nodes is
incorporated directly into the q-gram data. Our method is still
consistent with the result that the top scoring CF-related
structure is α2-3 sialylated structures, which corresponds with
the literature [,
]. It is also consistent with the result that the
top scoring features extracted included monomers and dimers.
We note that the top three structures captured by the BioLKmethod
are all α2-3 sialylated structures which are consistent
with the literature as well. However, the features captured by
the LK-method are structures which include the root, which
may indicate that it is overfitting to the data. Biologically
speaking, one would also assume that the structures at the
terminal end, and in particular the non-reducing end, are those
that would be considered to be drug targets, as opposed to the
larger structures containing common core structures. Indeed,
the results of the LK-method all contained a common O-glycan
core structure, whereas the BioLK-method extracted the
common terminal structure from the non-reducing end of these
results.

In order to show the robustness of our method in feature
extraction, we tested it on glycan profile data of mouse brain
collected from FucTIV+VII knockout mice, as provided by the
CFG. We then compared the feature selection results as
performed by the LK-method and the BioLK-method. The top
three features extracted by both methods are listed in .
The feature with the top score extracted by the BioLK-method
was ‘NeuAcα 2-3/6Galα
1-4(Fucβ1-3)GlcNAc‘ at layer 5, which
is sialyl-Lewis, a previously discovered motif for this sample
[]. 
On the other hand, the LK-method always captured larger
structures from the core. Similarly to the cystic fibrosis sample,
the top results of the BioLK-method contained the common
non-reducing end structure of the top results of the LK-method,
thus indicating that the LK-method is probably overfitting to
the data, whereas our method produced precisely the unique
substructures (features) of the target data set.

Conclusion
In this work, we developed a new tree kernel based on the
linkage kernel constructed using the weighted q-gram method,
but we included two major novelties that enabled us to obtain
highly accurate results, which previous methods were unable to
obtain. First, the techniques of direct usage of the non-PSD
similarity matrix to form a positive one largely aided in
maintaining the biological properties of the data. Many kernels
developed in bioinformatics ignore this important property in
kernels, and we show that this is indeed important. Secondly,
the incorporation of weighted layer information of q-grams
together enables high accuracy in discriminating between
classification groups as well as in the correct detection of glycan
motifs with flexible size. This confirms the necessity of
including weighted layer information of q-grams in order to
construct more biologically meaningful tree kernels.

Indeed, our results were shown to correspond well with known
glycan motifs obtained through experimental results, whereas
the previous methods were unable to obtain the same results.
Thus, we claim that our new kernel contributes greatly to the
field of glycoinformatics to obtain a greater understanding of
glycan functions in various areas of biological research.

Authors contributions
JH came up with the idea. JH and KFA designed the research.
KFA gave invaluable suggestions and created q-grams of the
data sets. JH performed the research and analyzed the results.
WKC supported the provided guidance on how to conduct the
research. JH, KFA and WKC wrote the paper. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Research supported in part by GRF Grant, HKU Strategy
Research Theme fund on Computational Sciences, National
Natural Science Foundation of China Grant No. 10971075 and
Guangdong Provincial Natural Science Grant No.
9151063101000021.

Citation:Jiang et al, Bioinformation 7(8): 405-412 (2011)

Glycan structure with layer information: Root layer is
defined as 0.

q-gram decomposition of glycan in : q=1, 2, 3

Top 3 features on the leukemia dataset. The topscoring
features extracted by the BioLK-method are the trimer
structure ‘NeuAcα 2-3Galβ1-4GlcNAc’ found at layer 5. The
substructure with the second highest score is the monomer
structure ‘Neu5Ac’ found at layer 7. In contrast, the LK-method
captures the features in reverse order.

Top 3 features on the cystic dataset. The highest score
using the BioLK-method is achieved by a dimmer
‘NeuAcα 2-3Gal’ at layer 2, which is often found at the nonreducing
end of glycan structures. The top three structures
captured by the BioLK-method are allα 2-3 sialylated structures
which are consistent with the literature as well. However, the
features captured by the LK-method are structures which
include the root, which may indicate that it is overfitting to the
data.

Top 3 features on the mouse_fuc dataset. The feature
with the top score extracted by the BioLK-method was
‘NeuAcα 2-3/6Galβ1-4(Fucα1-3)GlcNAc’ at layer 5, which is
sialyl-Lewis X, a previously discovered motif for this sample
[]. On the other hand, the LK-method always captured larger
structures from the core.

