Background
People are facing major life threatening disease like diabetes,
cancer, hyper tension, heart disease and stroke []. We have
chosen Diabetes Mellitus for our study. Diabetes Mellitus is a
group of metabolic diseases characterized by hyperglycemia
resulting from defects in insulin secretion, insulin action, or
both. The chronic hyperglycemia of diabetes is associated
with long-term damage, dysfunction, and failure of various
organs, especially the eyes, kidneys, nerves, heart, and blood
vessels. As the risk of cardiovascular disease is much higher
for a diabetic, it is crucial that blood pressure and cholesterol
levels are monitored regularly [].

Diabetes Mellitus is not a single disease but a group of
disorders with glucose intolerance in common. Many online
databases are available to research genes across species.
Different databases available that allows access to
information about phenotypes, pathways, and variations of
many genes across species. Before the candidate-gene
approach was fully developed, various other methods were
used to identify genes linked to disease-states. However,
these methods are not as beneficial when studying complex
diseases for several reasons. In this scenario, candidate gene
approaches were found in identifying the risk variants
associated with various diseases of interest such as dementia,
cancer, diabetes, asthma, and hypertension. The candidate
gene approach to conducting genetic association studies
focuses on associations between genetic variation within prespecified
genes of interest and phenotypes or disease states.
[,
]

With the tremendous escalation of human protein interaction
data, the entanglement of the techniques can be conquered
through protein–protein interaction networks (PPINs). The
function and activity of a protein are often modulated by
other proteins with which it interacts [,
]. Data might be
represented as networks, in which the vertices (e.g.
transcripts, proteins or metabolites) are linked by edges
(correlations, interactions or reactions, respectively).
Structural analysis of networks can lead to new insights into
biological systems and is a helpful method for proposing new
hypotheses [–].

Methodology
Proteins are the representatives of the biological networks and
they are realized only if the relationship between essentiality
and topological properties such as the degree distribution,
clustering coefficients, centrality measures, and community
structures of the network are studied []. Network centralities
are used to rank elements of a network according to a given
importance concept [].

However, the use of centralities as a structural analysis
method for biological networks is controversial and several
centrality measures should be considered within an
exploratory process []. To support such analysis and due to
the complexity of both biological networks and centrality
calculations, a tool is needed to facilitate these investigations.
Here we present CentiBin, an application for the calculation
and visualization of centralities for biological networks.

The human protein interaction data was obtained from
Human Protein Reference Database (HPRD). The main
purpose of using HPRD dataset is it focuses on likely true
Protein-Protein Interaction (PPI) set by generating sub
networks around proteins of interest. HPRD represents a
centralized platform to visually depict and integrate
information pertaining to domain architecture, posttranslational
modifications, interaction networks and disease
association for each protein in the human proteome 
[]. We
have followed the procedure mentioned in 
 for
identifying the critical genes for diabetes mellitus.

Data Set:
We have extracted the human gene involving in Diabetes
mellitus from the database developed by Jensen Group
(Jensenlab) of Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein
Research, Denmark. Jensenlab is maintaining a DISEASES
database. DISEASES database is a frequently updated web
resource that integrates evidence on disease-gene associations
from automatic text mining, manually curated literature,
cancer mutation data, and genome-wide association studies.
We have mined the Jensenlab DISEASES database for the
genes causing Diabetes mellitus. We got that 2728 genes
causing diabetes mellitus, after eliminating duplicate entries it
reduced to 2017 genes.

Network Properties and Centrality Measures:
Here we have calculated fourteen different graph centrality
measures such as degree, eccentricity, closeness, radiality,
centroid values, Stress, shortest-path betweenness, currentflow
closeness, current-flow betweenness, Katz status index,
Eigen vector, hits-authority, hits-hubs and Page Rank using
the tool CentiBin and are defined as follows 
[–,
,,
–].
Degree 
Eccentricity 
Closeness 
Radiality 
Stress 
Shortest path Betweenness 
Shortest path closeness 
pνt(t) equals the potential difference.
Katz status index 
Eigen Vector#x00009; λCIV=ACIV
Centroid#x00009; Ccen(ν) = min⁡{f(ν,w):ν{ν}}
Where f (v, w) = γ v (w) − γ w (v) and γ v (w) denotes the
number of vertices that are closer to v than to w.
Page Rank#x00009;#x00009;#x00009;#x00009;Cpr = dpCpr + (1 − d)1→
Where P is the transition matrix and d is the damping factor.
Betweenness#x00009;#x00009;#x00009;#x00009;
Where Tst(v) equals the fraction of electrical current running
over vertex v in a network
HITS-Hubs#x00009;#x00009;#x00009;#x00009;Chubs = ACaut hs
Hits-authority#x00009;#x00009;#x00009;#x00009;Caut hs = ATChubs

Correlation analysis of centrality measures:
Correlation is a statistical technique that can show
whether and how strongly pairs of variables are related.
The fourteen different centrality measures were calculated
for each and every node in the interact and ranked based
on their scores. Pair wise correlation between the various
centrality measures was obtained through Spearman's
rank correlation coefficient ρ which is defined as



Result &amp; Discussion
With the help of bioDBnet (http://biodbnet.abcc.ncifcrf.gov)
we find the equivalent HPRD ids for the 2017 genes. Out of
2017 proteins we got HPRD IDs for 1834 proteins. We are
unable to get the equivalent HPRD IDs for 183 proteins, so we
find the HPRD IDs through their aliases. Still we couldn׳t find
the HPRD ids for 39 proteins because these are the new entries
in the database. After eliminating duplicates we got 1876
unique genes.

PPI Network:
To construct the Protein-Protein Interaction network, we have
downloaded and deployed the interactions database from
HPRD website (http://hprd.org) in our local database. We
have retrieved the PPIs for 1876 unique proteins where both
source and sink proteins are in 1876 unique proteins. With that
we have constructed a network using CentiBin with 1151
vertices and 3389 edges. Finally we got 1020 vertices with 2891
edges after eliminating the self edges, parallel edges from the
network.

Using CentiBin we have calculated fourteen different graph
centrality measures such as degree, eccentricity, closeness,
radiality, centroid values, Stress, shortest-path betweenness,
current-flow closeness, current-flow betweenness, Katz status
index, Eigen vector, hits-authority, hits-hubs and Page Rank for
the PPI network constructed. The top ten genes of each
centrality measure are presented in  (see
supplementary material).

Correlation analysis on centrality properties:
The pair wise correlation coefficients of the fourteen centrality
measures depicted for the Diabetes Mellitus elucidate that they
all are positively correlated and their correlation value lies
above 0.52 as represented in  (see supplementary
material), . Here, the difference di represents the
difference in the ranks of each observation on the two variables
which here represents the centrality scores.

Conclusion
Many experimental approaches have been used to identify
candidate genes in DM. We used various graph centrality
measures integrated with the genes to identify potential
drug targets. We calculated fourteen centralities measures
for the constructed network with positive correlation having
values greater than 0.52. This helped to identify genes that
are highly critical in DM. We thus report the top 10 genes of
all fourteen centralities for consideration as potential targets
for DM.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Dr M Naresh Babu and Ms Duggineni Kalyani would like to
thank SERB, Department of Science and Technology,
Government of India under FAST Track scheme order No.
SB/FTP/ETA-436/2012

Citation:Ambedkar et al, Bioinformation 11(2): 090-095 (2015)

Flow Chart

correlation among of different pairs of centrality measures for the diabetes mellitus genes whose correlation
coefficient is above 0.9 (a) Degree vs Centroid (b) degree vs Katz status index (c) Degree vs page rank (d) sp betweeness
vs Stress (e) sp betweeness vs page rank (f) cf betweeness vs page rank (g) Katz status index vs radiality (h) cf closeness
vs degree (i) Eigen Vector vs hits authority (j) hits authority vs hits hubs (k) cf betweeness vs Stress (l) closeness vs eigen
vector (m) closeness vs hits-hubs (n) closeness vs hits-authority (o) closeness vs katz status index.

