Background
Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease is defined as accumulated
lipid in hepatocytes, more than 5% of liver weight, in the
absence of virus infections and alcohol usage (more than 30
gmper day),including a wide spectrum of liver damage, on the
one hand hepatic steatosis and the other hand nonalcoholicSteatohepatitis
related to fibrosis,necrosis,
inflammation and hepatocellular cancer [–
]. Fibrosis caused
by NASH has seen in 40% of very fat patients []. According to a
theory called “two-hit”,the changing and progressing of the
simple steatosis to hepatic steatosis and advanced fibrosis is
caused by two hits [], in which the first hit leads to insulinresistant
accumulated lipid in the liver and the second one due
to the accumulatedlipid in liver causes oxidative stress and then
facilitatedinflammation, progressing steatosis and fibrosis 
[,
].
This disease led to hepatic cirrhosis and finally death []. The
prevalence of NAFLD in20-30% of general people in the
Western countries, and the prevalence of NASH in 3-5% of them
is estimated [,
]. Whereas,the prevalence of this disease was
less in Asian countries but increased because of mellitus
diabetes, metabolic syndrome and changing life style 
[]. Also
the prevalence of that among male is more than female, it׳s
common inwomen especially after menopause []. Most of
people who were receiving treatment for this disease, were
diagnosed with high level of ALT and AST enzymes in which
the serum level of ALT is more than AST, so ALT to AST ratio is
less than 1 []. This disease is the most common reason for
abnormal values of liver enzymes in current decades []. We
can point to the other laboratory disorders such as fasting blood
sugar,LDL-TG, etc []. In fact,there must be an inflammatory
and damage intensity of parenchyme and fibrosis ranking
system in order to determine the prognosis and evaluated effect
of treat interventions during disease []. Currently, there is
nocertain treatment for NAFLD,so it seems necessary to find
new treatment approach,replacing or helping current treatment
for fatty liver. L-Carnitine with chemical formula (B-hydroxy-NTrimetylAminobutyric
Acid) has animportant role in fatty acids
Beta-oxidation with long strain in mitochondria and energy
synthetis in cell [,
], which finally causes fatty oxidation and
storing glycation []. With respect to antioxidativequality of Lcarnitine
and improving the endothelial function [,
], we
were to evaluate the effect of L-carnitine in and sonographic
evidences in treatment of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.

Methodology
Population:
In a randomized and controlled clinical trial study, we
examined 80 patients׳ withgastroenterologydisorders in Emam
Reza and Sheikh Alrais centers in Tabriz. We then divided them
into control and intervention groups each including 40 patients,
with known sonographic evidences based on Liver steatose,
while other causes of fatty liver had been rejected.

Study entrance criteria:
The patient criteria include NAFLD with liver steatose in
sonography of the liver having liver function test with greater
than 40mg/dl.

Study exit criteria:
Diabetic patients:
Other reasons increasing liver enzymes: viral
infections,hereditary diseases such as hemachromatosis,
Wilson׳s disease, auto immunity hepatitis and drugs causing
drug hepatitis Alcohol consumption more than 10 gr for female
and 20 gr for male Sonographic and laboratory evidences
confirming cholestatic Diseasestriglyceride more than 500
mg/dl in individuals

ClinicalTrial:
This study has been done onJune 2012-July 2014. At first
patients׳ height and weight by stadiometer and Seca scales with
0.1kg and 0.5 cm precisionrespectively and BMI by standard
formula have been measured []. There was a questionnaire for
each patient including personal information,gender,age, past
experience of diseasesespecially high blood pressure,
overweight, hyper lipidemia, ALT and AST quantities and
sonographic evidences.Exercising and on low fat diet were
recommended to both groups. Group A patients received
treatment L-carnitine tablet 250mg every 12 hours and group B
was considered as controlgroup.In 24 weeks,ALT and AST test
and sonographyof liver were done in order to determine fatty
liver׳s grade.

Sonography and LaboratoryTests:
After and before intervention,sonography of patients in each
group was done by radiologist who was not aware of
biochemical liver tests, with Siemens G40 and pruvconex, and
3.46 MHz frequency after 8 hours fasting.The fatty liver grade
was classified as Grade I,Grade II, and Grade III according to
sonographiccriteria (). After 12-14 hours fasting,ALT
and AST quantities for all patients at the first and end of the
period were measured by Pars Azmoon kit (made in Iran) and
auto analyzer (Hitachi 747, Japan).

Statistical Analysis:
The data was analyzed and compared by SPSS version 16 using
Qui-Square forqualitative variables and Student T-test for
quantitativevariables and registered byMean ±SD into
percentage and frequency.

Results
On the whole in 80 patients with NAFLD, 66individuals were
men (82.5 %) and 24 individualswere women (17.5 %). They
were divided into two groups A and B,so that there were 23
men (82.5 %) and 7 women(17.5 %) in each group. After the
analysis, there was no significant statistical difference between
two groups (p=0.61).The average age in all patients was40.7±8
years old which was in the range of 25-36 years (). The
average age in group A and group B was 40.3±7.8and 41.1±8.3
years old respectively. The age difference between twogroups of
patients was not significant (p=0.65). The most frequency of
patients׳age was 30-41 years old and the least frequency was
+50 years old. Patients were divided into 4 groups according to
sonographic evidences (). Therefore,before intervention,
there were 7 individuals Grade I, 31 individuals Grade II and 2
individuals Grade III in group A  (see supplementary
material), 22 individuals Grade I, 17 individuals Grade II and 1
individual Grade III in group B ().Variances after and
before interventionin group A were significant in ALT,AST,
BMI, weight and sonographic grade (). Variances after
and before intervention in group B in BMI and weight was
significant, but in ALT,AST and sonographic grade was
significant ().

Discussion
NAFLD was identified for the first time in people without
alcohol usage experience in 1980 []. In fact, this disease
includes a wide range of disorders from accumulated lipid in
big vesicular form to accumulated lipidwith inflammation,
cirrhosis and hepatic damage []. In fact, when NAFLD
appears that fat comprises 5-10% of liver׳s weight [–
]. The
prevalence of this is 34-46 % in adults, although the prevalence
of it is 21.5-31.5 % in Iran [–
]. There is have been no certain
treatment for NAFLD so far, but losing weight,
controllingmetabolic syndromes like diabetes and
hyperlipidemia, taking antioxidant drugs like Vitamin D and
those which are sensitive to insulin are recommended [,
]. It
is suggested to take Thiazolidinedione family drugs such as
Pioglitazone and Rosiglitazone, although it calls for more
investigations in comprehensiveresearch projects []. In the
present study, the effects of L-carnitine prescription on Liver
function test and sonographic evidences were evaluated. The
results indicated decrease in weight and BMI,after and before
intervention, in both groups; moreover, this decreasewas
significant in group A. InBahrami et al.,2003 study which was
done on 53 NAFLD patients, the average weight of patients
wasmore than control group,so that patients had high BMI and
10 % weight addition to their idea weight []. In our study
before any intervention, both groups were homogenized in
terms of BMI and weight, so that there was no significant
statisticaldifference. The role of BMI and weight in fatty liver
hasbeen the topic of many studies. In the past, BMI was the
more important independent predictor agent of accumulated fat
in liver [,
]. Other researcheshave accentuated that the
peripheral accumulated lipid is a more important predictor
agent in comparison with BMI [,
]. So according to the
significant reduction in BMI and weight effected by taking Lcarnitinedaily
in intervention group, this drug can be
considered as an effective drug and can be prescribed for
NAFLD patients . In this present, the reduction of serum level of
Liver enzymes andsonographic grade was significant in both
groups, but 9 individuals in group A, after 24-week period, had
normal sonographic grade. According to these results, it can be
claimed that L-carnitine 500mg prescribed cannot be considered
as an absolute treatmentto improve serum levels of Liver
enzymes and sonographic grade in NAFLD patients. While in
the results of Malaguarnera et al.,2010 study that evaluated
laboratory parameters,BMI,weight and histological observed
Liver after taking L-carnitine 1000mg twice in 24
weeks,indicated CRP, TNF-α and lipid profile reduction and
significant improvement in histological fatty Liver 
[]. The
difference between the results ofMalaguarnera's study and this
one can be because of the drug dosage during the treatment. In
Biefort et al.,2006 study which evaluated the effect of 45mg
Piolitazone in 24 weeks for fatty Liver treatment, the reduction
in lipid profile, ALT and sonographic view was significant, in
contrast AST quantity reduction was not significant []. We can
refer to Hong &amp; Lee 's study about the effect of other drugs on
improving NAFLD patients in which anyone presented a
different report about improving Liver function by taking
Resveratrol [,
]. In Celinski et al.,2014 has claimed that
melatonin can be used in the treatment ofNAFLD especially
metabolism of lipid disorders,hyper triglyceridemia and hyper-
LDL cholesterolemia [].

Conclusion
A suitable treatment protocol with L-carnitinecanbeadvised, so
the disease can be well controlled as per significant reduction of
liver enzymes and improving sonographic grade in the
comparison between both groups with NAFLD, besides losing
weight and a proper diet.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This study is a part of a thesis in sub specialty degree section
registered by theResearchEthicsCommitteeapproval with89/5-
13/10 code at the Medical university of Tabriz and with
N11RCT201102235893 code at the Clinical Trial website of
Ministry of health of Iran. Hereby we would like to appreciate
the support of Research Centerfor Gastroenterology andLiver of
Medical University ofTabriz.

Citation:Somi et al, Bioinformation 10(9): 575-579 (2014)

The grading of accumulated lipid intensity in liver
according to sonographic evidences

Comparison of sample frequency in different age
groups, between two groups

