Background
The availability of a large and ever increasing volume of microbial genomic
information have brought forth Reverse Vaccinology as a faster and cheaper
approach to design vaccines in vivo compared to traditional empirical methods.
Serogroup B meningococcus represents the first example of the successful
application of Reverse Vaccinology []. Invasive meningococcal disease is
now endemic worldwide and most cases are caused by five of the thirteen
meningococcal subgroups A, B, C, Y and W135 []. Serogroup B is the main
cause of invasive meningococcal disease in most temperate countries and
accounts for 32% of all meningococcal disease cases in the United States, 45-
80% of the cases in Europe and more than 50% of the cases in the rest of the
world [,
]. 
Applications of new approaches for vaccine design including
genome mining [–] 
and proteomics [,
] have identified several vaccine
targets against Men B as listed in (see ) 
[–]. 
However, the vaccine potential of nearly all of these candidates has been
limited either by antigenic variables, phase variability, presence of auto
antigens or low constitutive expression of the antigen by some strains 
[].
Hence, the development of a universally safe and effective serogroup B
Neisseria meningitidis vaccine still remains a challenge for researchers. T-cell
recognises a complex between a specific major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) molecules and a particular pathogen derived epitope 
[]. MHC
molecules are highly polymorphic. Till date, in human more than 225 HLA
Class I and 986 HLA Class II allelic sequences have been identified 
[]. This
polymorphism is concentrated in the region encoding the peptide-binding
groove of HLA molecules and as a result, MHC molecules exhibit a widely
varying binding specificity. Moreover, in the design of epitope-based vaccines,
the issue of population coverage in relation to MHC polymorphism is further
complicated by the fact that frequency of expression of different HLA types
varies in different ethnicities []. 
Thus the main desirable characteristics for
meningococcal vaccine candidate is that the selected epitopes should elicit Tcell
immune response and that they should bind to several alleles of HLA super
type for maximal population coverage. In the present study an effort has been
made to perform population coverage analysis of total ten promiscuous T-cell
epitopes (Class I and Class II) of Iron acquisition proteins (FrpB; Acc no NMB
1988 and FbpA; Acc no NMB0634) that has been computationally validated
using different immunoinformatics tools to elicit immune response against the
pathogen Neisseria meningitidis MC58 
[]. The resultant epitopes of the
present study would be a relevant representative of a large proportion of human
population.

Methodology
HLA Distribution Analysis
In order to determine the population coverage rate of the computationally
validated ten promiscuous high or moderate immunogenic T- cell epitopes, the
predicted putative epitopic core sequences with the corresponding HLA alleles
(Class I and Class II) were submitted to the population coverage analysis tool
of the Immune Epitope Database (IEDB) [] by keeping the default
parameters on (Population/Area= 78 populations grouped into 11 different
geographical areas). Population coverage analysis tool calculates the fraction of
individuals predicted to respond to a given set of epitopes with known MHC
restrictions. For individual population coverage, the tool computes the
following: (1) projected population coverage, (2) average number of epitope
hits/ HLA combinations recognised by the populations and (3) minimum
number of epitope hits/ HLA combinations recognised by 90% of the
population (PC90). These calculations are made on the basis of HLA genotypic
frequencies assuming non-linkage disequilibrium between HLA loci.

Blast Screening
In order to avoid generation of auto immune disease the final epitopic core
sequences showing affinity to maximum number of HLA molecules with high
population rates were searched against the human proteome using HLAPred
tool [].

Results and Discussion
Population coverage analysis plays an important role for the design of peptide
based vaccine. The frequency of expression of different HLA types varies in
different ethnicities as the MHC molecule is highly polymorphic 
[,
].
Extreme polymorphism restricts the proportion of the human population that
may respond to a particular antigen [,
]. Thus a peptide which functions as
T-cell epitope in a population with certain HLA make up may not be effective
in another population with a different HLA allelic distribution. The aim of the
study was to select promiscuous T-cell epitopes that bind to several alleles of
HLA super types for maximal population coverage.

The population coverage rate of the predicted epitopes of Neisseria
meningitidis Iron acquisition proteins (FrpB and FbpA) were analyzed by
submitting the promiscuous epitopic core sequences (Class I and class II) with
their corresponding HLA alleles to IEDB population coverage analysis tool. A
total of 27 alleles were shared by all the epitopes and approximately 90 alleles
bind to maximum number of peptides (see 
). 
The IEDB results reveal a strong positive correlation between HLA
binding affinity and population coverage rate among the peptides. For example
the peptides 148KTVDAQDLLK157 and 60ATDMRELLK68 with maximum
(83.13%) and minimum (59.55%) population coverage rate were found to be
correlated with highest (121 HLA alleles) and lowest (62 HLA alleles) HLA
binding epitopes, respectively. However, similar type of correlation does not
exist among the moderately predicted epitopes (44RATGIKVKL52 and
488HGKRGSII496). Interestingly, these epitopes, although exhibited to bind with
lower number of HLA alleles in comparison to high immunogenic peptide,
elicit wider population coverage rate (,  see
). In order to further pin-point the most potential
epitopes comparative HLA distribution analysis was preformed and the values
of two moderate and five high immunogenic epitopes indicates that the former
are equally potential candidates for vaccine design (). Finally three
epitopes have been conclusively selected one each from moderate
immunogenic (44RATGIKVKL52) and high immunogenic
(148KTVDAQDLLK157) Class I epitopes and one from Class II epitopes
(629VQKAVGSILVAG643), on the basis of high population coverage rate and
maximum affinity to HLA alleles. These epitopes exhibited coverage rates
exceeding 99% in five ethnic groups and between 96 to 98% for six other
ethnic groups (). Maximum population coverage rate (99.79%) was
observed in Europe indicating that a future vaccine based on these putative
epitopes might work most efficiently for majority of population in Europe
where the incidence of Meningococcal disease is highest (&gt; 90%) 
].

Conclusion
Vaccination programs are the most versatile means of prophylactic infectious
diseases control majors for vulnerable human population. Immunoinformatic
epitope-based vaccine development approach using computational tools,
databases and web servers is time and cost effective as compared to traditional
laboratory experiments. In the present investigation three promiscuous putative
epitopes viz., 148KTVDAQDLLK157, 44RATGIKVKL52 and
629VQKAVGSILVAG640 from iron acquisition proteins (FrpB and FbpA) have
been computationally validated as potential MenB vaccine candidates across
diverse ethnicities. This study may stimulate further in vitro investigations to
ascertain the immunogenicity of these putative epitopes for designing effective
vaccines against Neisseria meningitidis serogroup B.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Thanks are due to Director, IMMT for providing necessary facilities to carry
out the work.

Citation:Misra et al, Bioinformation 6(7): 255-261 (2011)

HLA binding affinity for the putative promiscuous T-cell epitopes of
FrpB and FbpA proteins.

Comparative Population coverage rate analysis between Moderate
(RATGIKVKL and HGKRGSII) and High (EKDLEKSVL, DAQDLLKGL,
ATDMRELLK, KFVAFLASK, KTVDAQDLLK and LVKVVSVQK)
immunogenic peptides.

Predicted population coverage rate (%) of final selected three
promiscuous T-cell epitopes viz RATGIKVKL, KTVDAQDLLK (Class I) and
VQKAVGSILVAG (Class II) of FrpB and FbpA MenB proteins

