Background
Casein kinase 2 (CK2) is a highly ubiquitous, essential, and
highly pleiotropic protein kinase [] that has been involved cell
growth, proliferation and in suppression of apoptosis in cells.
It is localized in both the nucleus and cytoplasm in normal
cells, but is particularly predominant in the nuclear
compartment in cancer cells. Down regulation of CK2 by
chemical or molecular methods promotes apoptosis in cells. It
has been reported that antisense CK2 alpha is particularly
potent in inducing apoptosis in cancer cells in culture as well
as in xenograft models of cancer such as oral cancer and
squamous cell carcinoma of head and neck []. A number of
evidence suggesting that the catalytic subunits of CK2 behave
as oncoproteins [–] consistent with the observation that they
display an antiapoptotic effect in prostate cancer cells 
[]. CK2
subunits are more abundant in tumors as compared with
normal tissues, and their overexpression is causative of
neoplastic growth in animal and cellular models, giving rise to
alterations in the expression levels of cellular oncogenes or
tumor suppressor genes [].

Nature is a rich source of anti-cancer compounds which are
used as preventive and/or curative agents with general
acceptance as a dietary element with a well-established safety 
profile. According to one of the estimates by World Health
Organization approximately 80% of the world׳s population
relies on traditional medicine for their primary health care 
[].
Ellagic acid is an antioxidant and an anti-proliferative phenolic
constituent present in fruits, nuts and vegetables 
[]. Several
research studies have identified Ellagic acid as a potent
anticarcinogenic and antimutagenic compound. At present,
ellagic acid represents the most potent known CK2 inhibitor
(Ki = 20 nM) []. Using in silico approaches, we have
identified the ellagic acid analogues, as a novel, potent and
selective CK2 inhibitor. 2. Experimental and predicted pIC50
value are plotted in graph ().

Methodology
Protein preparation:
The 3D coordinates of the crystal structure of human CK2
alpha complex with ellagic acid (PDB id: 2ZJW) was retrieved
from Protein Databank (http://www.rcsb.org/) and taken as
the receptor model in flexible docking program. Human casein
kinase II (CK2) was optimized by chimera tool 
[]. Before
docking heteroatom Ellagic acid was removed from coordinate
file of CK2 protein by charge method AMI-BCC using chimera.
After removing the water molecule, hydrogen atom were
added to protein.

Active site analysis:
The active site residues of human casein kinase II (CK2) was
taken from the PDBSUM entry of 2ZJW having binding site
residues ASP175, PHE113, LYS68, ILE174, ILE95, VAL66,
VAL53 and LEU45 for inhibitor Ellagic acid (2,3,7,8-
tetrahydroxychromeno[5,4,3-cde]chromene-5,10-dione).

Inhibitors Dataset:
The data regarding the experimentally known 38 coumarin
inhibitors, classified as potent, moderate and slightly weak,
was obtained from the literature []. The 3D structures of
known 38 inhibitors were downloaded in .sdf format from
pubchem compound database. They were later converted in
.pdb format by the help of open babel [] software. All the
ligands were subjected to energy minimization and molecular
dynamics using the HyperChem software []. Energy
calculations were carried out using the AMBER force field.
Molecular structure optimization of ligands were carried out
using conjugate gradient method Polak-Ribiere until the
maximum energy derivative was lower than 0.1kcal/Å mol in
order to obtain a correct geometry.

Molecular docking:
Docking of 38 inhibitor screened from literature against CK2
structure was done using molecular docking program
AutoDock []. Gasteiger charges are added to the ligand and
maximum 6 numbers of active torsions are given to the lead
compounds using AutoDock tool []. Kollman charges and
the solvation term were then added to the protein structure
using the same. We have made the grid and adjusted the
number of points in X, Y, Z-axis so that the entire active site
residues (ASP175, PHE113, LYS68, ILE174, ILE95, VAL66,
VAL53 and LEU45) of the human casein kinase II (CK2) are
covered.The Lamarckian genetic algorithm implemented in
Autodock was used. Docking parameters were as follows: 30
docking trials, population size of 150, maximum number of
energy evaluation ranges of 25,0000, maximum number of
generations is 27,000, mutation rate of 0.02, cross-over rate of
0.8, Other docking parameters were set to the software׳s
default values. After docking, the ligands were ranked
according to their docked energy as implemented in the
AutoDock program.

2D QSAR study:
Thirty eight known coumarin inhibitors of CK2 
[] were used
for 2D QSAR studies. Using MLR, the QSAR model was
developed with five types of energy based independent
variables such as binding energy (EBind), intermol energy
(EInterMol), torsional energy (ETors), internal energy (EEnt)
and docking energy (DE) and one dependent variable activity
(IC50) with the help of different cross-validation procedures
values.

Results &amp; Discussion
Result of molecular docking:
Docking studies predicted the interaction of ligands with
protein and residues involved in this complex. For such
interaction studies, the most important requirement was the
proper orientation and conformation of ligand which fitted to
the enzyme binding site appropriately and formed proteinligand
complex. Therefore, optimal interactions and the best
autodock score were used as criteria to interpret the best
conformation among the 30 conformations, generated by
AutoDock program. The docking results of the known
inhibitors with CK2 were shown in  (see
supplementary material).

Result of 2D QSAR studies:
After docking 38 inhibitors screened from literature 
[]
against CK2 structure, five types of energy values namely
binding energy (EBind), intermol energy (EInterMol), torsional
energy (ETors), internal energy (EEnt) and docking energy
(DE), based descriptors were then used as independent
variables for QSAR modeling. Biological activity was
expressed in terms of pIC50, the logarithm of measured IC50 
(µM) against CK2 enzyme. Using linear regression analysis, a
QSAR based model was generated having correlation
coefficient r2 value 0.4645. The equation was obtained for the
inhibitory activities represented as pIC50 values, using the five
types of energy values as variable descriptors. A model with
the correlation coefficient (r2) of 0.4645 was obtained for 38
compounds is shown in equation 1.

Predicted pIC50 = 4.68369 - 0.36245 (DE) -0.07374 (EBind) + 0.32636 (EInterMol) -0.06069 
(ETors) + 1.19649 (EEnt)… (1) Evaluation of QSAR models:
To assess the predictive performance of QSAR models,
different cross-validation procedures were adopted. First, in
leave-one-out strategy (LOOCV), one molecule was removed
from the dataset as a test compound and the remaining 37
molecules were used to build the model. This process was
repeated 38 times with each inhibitor as a test molecule. Once a
regression model was constructed, goodness about the fit and
statistical significance was assessed using the statistical
parameters.

Prediction of activity of newly designed CK2 inhibitors based on QSAR model:
A total of 20 analogues of Ellagic acid were screened from
PubChem Compound Database (http://www. ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ pccompound) 
using the criteria (Compounds
having similarity value &gt;=95%) for docking studies with CK2
structure. The docked compounds were selected for calculation
of biological activity on the basis of QSAR model is shown in
 (see supplementary material). The docked complexes
were validated and enumerated based on the AutoDock
scoring function to pick out the best compounds based on 
docked energy. Thus from the 20 compounds which were
Docked, we got best 2 (CID 46229200, CID 10003463) of them
with optimal energy. These compounds CID 46229200 (-9.73
kcal/mol) and CID 10003463 (-9.97 Kcal/mol) had lower
docking energy even lower than standard control Ellagic acid
(-8.73 kcal/mol).Further the two best-docked complexes were
analyzed through Python Molecular Viewer software 
[] for
their interaction studies and were shown in ().
Thus from the Complex scoring and binding ability it׳s
deciphered that these compounds could be promising
inhibitors for CK2.

Conclusion
A QSAR model was developed using IC50 value of thirty eight
known coumarin inhibitor with CK2 as dependent variable
and five energy based descriptors namely binding energy,
intermol energy, torsional energy, internal energy and docking
energy as independent variable having correlation coefficient
r2 is 0.4645. Further twenty analogues of ellagic acid were
screened from database and docked with CK2 and found two
compounds CID 46229200 and CID 10003463 as potent
candidate drugs for oral cancer. 

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Srivastava et al, Bioinformation 11(1): 021-026 (2015)

Depict the experimental and predicted pIC50 value in X and Y direction respectively with r2 value 0.4645 using LINEAR
MODEL.

 (A): The docking poses of complex between CK2 protein and compound CID 46229200. Two H-bonds is formed between
amino acid LYS68 (HZ3) and ASP175 (HN) of protein with compound CID 46229200(O), respectively; (B) The docking pose of
complex between CK2 protein and compound CID 10003463. One H-bond is formed between amino acid LYS68 (HZ3) of protein
with compound CID 10003463(O). Hydrogen bond between inhibitor and residue is represented by green line in each case.
Compound is colored in orange (in stick drawing) and amino acids involved in hydrogen bonds color by atom type.

