Background
Hepatitis Delta virus (HDV) is a human sub viral pathogen
which is able to infect only such individuals who were
previously or are simultaneously infected with Hepatitis B virus
[]. 
According to Kuo et al. HDV is able to replicate its RNA
within cells in the absence of hepatitis B virus but require
hepatitis B antigen for packaging and release of HDV virion 
[].
HDV currently infects about 20 million people worldwide 
[]
and is most common among populations using inject-able drugs
particularly in countries bordering the Mediterranean Sea. It is
least common in Eastern Asia, but is also present in Taiwan,
China and India. Most children with HDV have been identified
in Italy and Greece, with a few in Northern Africa. Genetic
diversity of HDV is related to the geographic origin of the
various isolates. Apart from HDV-1, which is ubiquitous, each
virus clad is geographically localized: HDV-2 (previously
labeled HDV-IIa) is found in Japan [], Taiwan 
[], and Yakutia,
Russia []; HDV-4 (previously labeled HDV-IIb) in Taiwan 
[]
and Japan [,
]; HDV-3 in the Amazonian region 
[] and
HDV-5, HDV-6, and HDV- 7 in Africa. The studies of Radjef et
al. shows that more than seven clades exist and characterized a
sequence (dFr644) that was not strongly affiliated to any of the
seven HDV clades []. Frédéric et al. described two HDV
isolates (dFr2072 and dFr2736) that have strong phylogenetic
relation to dFr644 reported by Radjef et al., and proposed as 8th
clade []. 
The whole genome of HDV was cloned and
sequenced in 1986 [], which is a single stranded circular RNA
of about 1,700nt []. Genome replication accumulates three
RNA species [,
]. The genome and its exact complement,
the antigenome, are with unit length and exist primarily in a
circular conformation but also in a linear conformation 
[]. The
third RNA species with relatively lower amounts of an 800-nt
polyadenylated RNA (antigenome polarity), is translated to
produce a 195-amino-acid protein, known as the delta antigen.

Delta antigen is essential for HDV genome replication 
[].
Clinical association of HDV with hepatitis B infection is due to
the fact that the outer coat of HDV consists of hepatitis B virus
surface glycoprotein []. Therefore immune prophylaxis
against HDV is achieved by vaccination against hepatitis B
virus. This mode of prevention is effective only in case of coinfections
in hepatitis B virus susceptible individuals [] as it
fails to show any significant effect in case of super-infection,
which is more serious state of health []. So there is an urgent
need to identify the suitable therapeutic molecule for the
treatment of HDV.

RNA interference (RNAi), an evolutionary conserved gene
silencing mechanism, uses short double-stranded RNA
(dsRNA) to trigger degradation or translation repression of
homologous RNA targets in a sequence-specific manner. This
has been used as alternative antiviral therapy 
[]. RNAi
therapy has been successful in many pathogenic infection as
well as genetic disorders, which interferes with expression of
disease causing genes. RNAi was first discovered in
Caenorhabditis elegans [] and plants, 
[], but it can also be
used to induce gene silencing in a diverse range of organisms
including fungi, protozoans and metazoan animals.

Small interfering RNAs (siRNAs), double-stranded RNAs
typically of length between 19 and 25 with 2 nucleotide
overhangs on the 3' ends, that are capable of inducing sequencespecific,
post-transcriptional gene silencing. Naturally occurring
siRNAs are cleavage products of long double-stranded RNAs
(dsRNAs) by Dicer, a ribonuclease III enzyme [,
]. The
siRNA-induced mRNA degradation is a complicated process
involving multiple steps, initiated by the binding of siRNA with
RNA induced silencing complex (RISC), followed by RISC's
activation, resulting in the recognition of the target mRNA and
its degradation [23, 25, 26]. As a gene knockdown tool used in
labs, siRNAs can also be chemically synthesized and introduced
into the cells by direct transfection [,
] or delivered into the
cells in forms of hairpin precursors through plasmid or viral
vectors [,
]. The siRNA-based gene knock-down techniques
are preferred by several investigators because of their ability to
disrupt individual gene's function without affecting related
genes []. The role of RNAi in mammalian innate immunity is
poorly understood and relatively little data is available.
However, the existences of viruses that encode genes are able to
suppress the RNAi response in mammalian cells may be
evidence in favor of an RNAi-dependent mammalian immune
response [,
]. However, this hypothesis of RNAi-mediated
immunity in mammals has been challenged as poorly
substantiated []. But Elbashir et al. in their study found that
these techniques are successful for gene silencing studies in
mammalian cells because unlike longer double-stranded RNAs,
siRNAs do not trigger interferon responses which lead to nonspecific
mRNA degradation []. The RNAi technique is being
successfully used as antiviral therapy in various known viral
diseases [–]. Currently siRNA gene silencing technology is
one of the significant aspects to block the expression of disease
causing gene in many biological systems and helpful for gene
level treatment. However, HDV genomic and antigenomic
RNAs can fold into an unbranched rod-like structure with 74%
of the bases paired [], and this folding might interfere with
siRNA action. The delta antigen protein has the ability to bind
double stranded RNA [] and thus might also interfere. Chang
and Taylor study with nonreplicating HDV RNA sequences
support the interpretation that neither the potential for
intramolecular rod-like RNA folding nor the presence of the
delta protein conferred resistance to siRNA. However, the
genomic and antigenomic RNAs are resistant to siRNA action.
The antigenome is localized in the nucleus and so could be
inaccessible for RNAi action []. But the reason for the
resistance of genomic RNA is unclear since a large amount of
genomic RNA is cytoplasmic [,
]. Chang and Taylor
subsequently showed that the delta antigen mRNA can be
successfully targeted by siRNAs in cell culture and also verified
that siRNA cannot target the replicating viral RNA transcripts
directly but only indirectly via action on the viral mRNA
species []. Thus, delta antigen protein coding mRNA of HDV
is obligatory target to inhibit the RNA processing and may be
suitable for antiviral therapy. Therefore, in the current study an
attempt has been made to identify potential siRNA molecules
for silencing of delta antigen coding mRNA or gene in HDV
using computational approach.

Methodology
Data collection and analysis
Sixty eight genome isolate sequences of HDV were retrieved
from viral GenBank database, available at
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/. The viral database contains all
experimentally identified widespread genome isolates of HDV
which were further used for siRNA designing 
 (see
supplementary material).

Target identification and rational siRNA molecule designing:
siDirect 2.0 [] 
(http://siDirect2.RNAi.jp/) tool, was used for
target identification and designing of potential siRNA
molecules. It utilized mixed rule approach of Ui-Tei,
Amarzguioui and Reynolds rules [] and melting temperature
(Tm) below 21.5°C for siRNA duplex, as parameter. For further
verification of predicted molecules GeneScript siRNA Target
Finder (http://www.genescript.com/index.html), tool was also
applied. Besides these other parameters were taken on the
concept of algorithms given in  (see supplementary
material).

Similarity search:
Blast tool (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast) 
[] was used
to identify any off target sequence similarity in other non
targeted organism's genome against whole Genebank datasets
by applying expected threshold value 10 and BLOSUM 62
matrix as parameter. The target sites having similarity of more
than 16 adjoining base pair with any other organism were
excluded from the consideration.

GC calculation and siRNA secondary structure prediction:
GC calculator tool www.genomicsplace.com/gc_calc.html was
used to calculate the GC content for selected siRNA molecule
while secondary structure and free energy of folding was
computed through Mfold server
http://mfold.rna.albany.edu/?q=mfold/download-mfold.

Thermodynamics calculation of RNA-RNA interaction:
RNAup program (www.tbi.univie.ac.at/~ulim/RNAup) at
Vienna web suit [] was used to study the thermodynamics of
interactions between target gene and predicted siRNA
molecules. It works on extension of the standard partition
function approach to RNA secondary structures that compute
energetic of RNA-RNA interactions []. Flow chart shows
complete methodology used for screening of effective siRNA
molecules in this study ().

Discussion
The HDV genome exists as an enveloped negative sense, singlestranded,
closed circular RNA. Because of a nucleotide
sequence that is 70% self-complementary, the HDV genome
forms a partially double stranded RNA structure that is
described as rod-like. With a genome of approximately 1700
nucleotides, HDV is the smallest “virus” known to infect
animals. On the basis of geographical origin of various isolates
of HDV eight major clade were identified till date 
[]. Sixty
eight genome isolates of HDV are available in NCBI Genebank
database which used in current study  (see
supplementary material). Out of these sixty eight, nineteen
sequences did not belong to any of the above described clade or
groups. After phylogenic study of these nineteen sequences,
five sequences were found to have strong similarity with group
I; four sequences had similarity with group IV, while only one
sequence had similarity to group VIII. Rest nine sequences out
of these nineteen did not come under any group, but they had
strong similarity with each other and so a new group or clad i.e.
group IX () has been proposed. It has been earlier
reported that delta antigen protein is responsible for virus
replication and RNA processing []. Hence, this protein coding
mRNA or gene from all genome isolates have immense
potential for molecular diagnosis and used as target for siRNA
molecule designing. There are diverse computational
algorithms and tools existing for rational designing of siRNA
molecules to knock down the activity of genes 
 (see
supplementary material). siDirect 2.0 tool was used in current
study to provide functional, target-specific siRNA molecules,
which significantly reduces off-target silencing. To avoid offtarget
effect, Tm for the seed-target duplex was calculated using
the nearest neighbor model and the thermodynamic parameters
for the formation of RNA duplex were also studied []. The
formula for calculating Tm is:

Tm = {(1000 × ΔH) / (A + ΔS + R ln (CT/4))} - 273.15 + 16.6 log
[Na+] ⇗ (Equation 1)

Where ΔH (kcal/ mol) is the sum of the nearest neighbor
enthalpy change, A is the helix initiation constant (-10.8), ΔS are
the sum of the nearest neighbor entropy change 
[]. R is the
gas constant (1.987 cal/deg/mol), and CT is the total molecular
concentration of the strand (100 µM). [Na+] was fixed at 100
mM. Apart from it, to check the accuracy of result Gene script
target Finder was also applied and usage statistical modeling
method.

In present study three hundred fifty three siRNA targets were
identified for small delta antigen of HDV and potential siRNA
molecules against these targets were obtained using mixed rule
approach i.e. Ui-Tei, Amarzguioui and Reynolds rule. Out of
three hundred fifty three predicted siRNA targets, only sixty
were following all three rules. Hence, these sixty siRNA targets
were filtered out for further study and considered possible
candidates. Consequently these sixty targets were subjected to
NCBI Blast tool. Out of theses sixty target only forty eight were
selected on the basis of low off target similarity 
 (see
supplementary material). No acceptable siRNA molecule was
identified for coding sequences of selected eight isolates
(highlighted in  (see supplementary material). All the
forty eight effective siRNA molecules selected on the basis of
low off target similarity were assessed for target site
convenience that can be suitable to knockdown the activity of
HDV. MSA of these selected forty eight siRNA targets were
depicted that forty one targets have precise similarity 
()
while only seven sequences are least similar to them.
Subsequently a consensus sequence was executed using
EMBOSS tool for these forty one targets and siRNA molecules
were designed against these consensus target. Therefore single
siRNA might be used to knock down the activity of forty one
isolates of HDV while rest seven molecules also create another
consensus target and siRNA molecules against that target were
also designed. After this analysis only two molecules were
found appropriate for silencing of HDV delta antigen gene.
However, there are the incompatible results regarding the effect
of GC content and secondary structure on siRNA efficiency.
Therefore, these parameters cannot be preferred as a primary
determinant of siRNA efficiency. Still, it is recommended to
choose sequences with low GC content (31- 58%) 
[–], in the
present study both predicted siRNA molecules having
recommended range of GC content. Furthermore, the possible
folding of predicted siRNA molecules for HDV was done with
the online MFold package. Mfold follows most widely used
algorithms for RNA secondary structure prediction, which are
based on a search for the minimal free energy state 
[]. Here,
one siRNA molecule is having more than zero free energy of
folding at 370C  (see supplementary material). Earlier
studies have recommended that an RNA molecule should have
minimum free energy of folding for their stability. Therefore,
the molecule with positive energy may be more accessible for
target site and have high potential to bind with target and lead
to in effective gene silencing. While other molecule is also
having less than -1 kcal frees energy of folding.

Apart from this, a variety of biologically important RNAs were
used for prediction of their function by interacting with other
RNA molecules. Thus, thermodynamics study of RNA-RNA
interactions may be an important aspect for siRNA molecule
efficiency. The predicted siRNA molecules were subjected to
RNA-RNA interaction study with their respective targets. The
Vienna web suite is a comprehensive collection of tool that
offers state of the art algorithms for RNA folding, comparison
and prediction of RNA–RNA interactions. RNAup one of the
important tools of Vienna web suite was used to predict free
energy of RNA-RNA interactions. It models the binding energy
for the interaction at a particular site as

(BE) ΔGbinding = ΔGuA + ΔGuB + ΔGh → (Equation 2)

Where ΔGuAB (ΔGuA + ΔGuB) is the free energy required to
make the binding region in molecule A (target) or B (siRNA)
accessible by removing intra-molecular structure. While ΔGh
denotes the free energy gained from forming the intermolecular
duplex by the partition function over all structures
where the short RNA binds to target region. Calculation of the
free energy of interaction (binding) between a siRNA molecule
and its target was performed by using equation (2) 
 (see
supplementary material).

Schubert et al. in their study analyzed that RNAi efficiency
correlates well with the binding energies of siRNAs to their
respective mRNA target []. Similarly, Mueckstein et al. in
their study have chosen the target sites provided by Schubert et
al. and agreed with the experimental results. Optimal free
energy of binding (BE) is highly favorable and the siRNA will
bind almost exclusively to the intended target site. The stepwise
decrease of the target accessibility is directly correlated to a
poor optimal BE and decreased silencing efficiency 
[]. In
present analysis, siRNA molecule for consensus target-1 was
found to be more effective with BE. Therefore, it may qualify as
high quality candidate for silencing the delta antigen gene and
be used to cure the delta hepatitis.

RNAi approach is successfully exploited in various cases such
as hepatitis B infection [] silencing of endonuclease
Argonaute 2 in Drosophila melanogaster 
[]. RNAi utilized in
HIV-1 infection in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells
via best env-specific siRNAs, E7145 targeted to the central
region of the V3 loop and E7490 targeted to the CD4 binding
site of conserved regions on gp120, significantly inhibited the
HIV-1 gene expression. Furthermore, E7145 and E7490 were
effective against HIV-1NL4-3 replication in PBMCs for a
relatively long time (14 days) []. In experimental brain cancer
pegylated immunoliposomes (PIL) carrying short hairpin RNA
expression plasmids driven by the U6 RNA polymerase
promoter and directed to target EGFR expression by RNAi. The
PIL is comprised of a mixture of known lipids containing
polyethyleneglycol (PEG), which stabilizes the PIL structure in vivo
in circulation. The tissue target specificity of PILs is given
by conjugation of ~1% of the PEG residues to monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs) that bind to specific endogenous receptors
(i.e., insulin and transferrin receptors) located in the brain
vascular endothelium []. Trypanosoma cruzi gp83 ligand, a cell
surface trans-sialidase-like molecule that the parasite uses to
attach to host cells, increases the level of laminin Υ-1 transcript
and its expression in mammalian cells, leading to an increase in
cellular infection. Stable RNA interference (RNAi) with host cell
laminin Υ-1 knocks down the levels of laminin Υ-1 transcript
and protein expression in mammalian cells, causing a dramatic
reduction in cellular infection by Trypanosoma cruzi 
[]. This
approach was found to be successful in targeting bovine prion
gene PRNP in livestock [], carcinoma of the breast 
[] and
crown gall tumorigenesis in plants []. This technique was also
used for silencing of capsid genes of Flavivirus using
computational methods []. However, siRNA is the most
influential means to control over gene expression in various
organisms and showing antiviral activity too. Therefore,
rational siRNA has provided the advancement in the
development of experiment based approaches to prevent the
HDV infections via gene silencing mechanism.

Conclusion
Using RNAi technology a number of siRNA molecules may be
designed for silencing of significant genes in various biological
systems. Further their interactions with target can also be
calculated, computationally. Therefore, in this study two siRNA
molecules were predicted against delta antigen protein as
effective candidate using computational approaches. These
molecules may lead to a novel antiviral therapy against HDV.
Study outcome would also provide a basis to the researchers
and pharma industry persons to develop the antiviral
therapeutics at genomic level, experimentally.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The support of Department of Biotechnology, Ministry of
Science and Technology, Government of India, to
Bioinformatics Centre at Biotech Park Lucknow is gratefully
acknowledged. The authors would also like to thank the
Department of Pharmacology &amp; Therapeutics, Chhatrapati
Shahuji Maharaj Medical University, Lucknow, India for its
great support and providing the facilities for this work. Authors
acknowledge the kind support of Dr. Sangeeta Saxena, Head,
Department of Biotechnology, Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar
University (BBAU), Lucknow for technical review of the
manuscript.

Citation:Singh et al, Bioinformation 8(16): 749-757 (2012)

Flow chart showing complete methodology used for
screening of effective siRNA molecules in this study

Phylogenetic tree for genome isolates of HDV available at NCBI Genebank database showing nine major clades or
groups. Eight major clades of HDV were already known but in current analysis ninth one was proposed after phylogenetic study.

Multiple sequence alignment of predicted siRNA target sequences. (A) All aligned siRNA target sequence. (B) Forty one
siRNA targets showing exact similarity and a consensus sequence of them executed using EMBOSS tool. (C) Seven target sequences
with dissimilarity to forty one sequences, while exact similar to each other and create another good consensus.

