Background
In animals, efficient innate immunity developed as a first barrier of host
defense to kill microbial invades such as bacteria, fungi, and viruses 
[]. In
contrast, insects have no specific, acquired immunity, but only an innate
response that includes so‐called cellular and humoral immune responses
[]. 
The humoral immune response includes rapid synthesis of a battery of
antimicrobial peptides (AMP), such as Cecropin, attacins, defensin, and
diptericins in response to bacterial invasion [] 
that were important effectors of the innate immune response in insects. The cellular response
consists mainly of phagocytosis and encapsulation. In addition to a large
number of different AMPs, reactive oxygen species (ROS) and nitric oxide
(NO) were known to have a role in humoral defense. Most AMPs were
synthesized mainly in the fat body, the major immune‐responsive tissues,
and were secreted into the haemolymph []. 
Among the AMPs, Cecropins were well understood and have been investigated in vertebrates as well as
insects. Since the discovery of Cecropin in Hyalophora cecropia 
[], many
Cecropin family genes have been found and isolated in various
lepidopteran and dipteran insect [,.
,]
Analysis of the Bombyx genomedatabase indicated the presence of A, B, D and 
E cecropins and these have been cloned [], 
except for Cecropin C. Cecropins act against Gram
positive as well as Gram negative bacteria. The mature cecropin peptides
aggregate on the membranes of infecting bacteria once a threshold
concentration has been reached; this aggregation causes disruption of the
membrane leading to death of the bacteria. This general immune response
in insects stands in contrast to the highly specific response in vertebrates.

Genes that have originated by gene duplication and retained a certain
degree of similarity form multigene families. The different members of a
multigene family were often arranged in a compact cluster although due to
chromosomal rearrangements subsequent to the gene duplications they
might be more or less dispersed in the genome. The members of a
multigene family can be functional or nonfunctional which were known as
pseudogenes. The functional genes can be very similar as the copies might
have retained the same function and be redundant. However, one of the
copies might have acquired a new function and suffered a certain degree of
differentiation. Pseudogenes on the other hand can accumulate
substitutions due to the lack of functional constraints 
[]. Concerted
evolution of the different copies of a gene, facilitated by their compact
clustering, can restrict the functional differentiation and loss of function of
the copies []. On the other 
hand where concerted evolution is weak or absent the members of that family have a higher 
probability to become pseudogenes [].

In Drosophila melanogaster, the Cecropin multigene family consists of
both functional and pseudo‐genes and the functional genes code for
cecropins [,
]
. In Drosophila, this response is mediated by at least
another eight different kinds of peptides: defensin, attacin, diptericin,
drosocin, metnikowin, drosomycin, andropin and lysozyme 
[,
,
].
Four functional Cecropin genes (Cec A1, Cec A2, Cec B and Cec C) and
two pseudogenes (Cec 1 and Cec 2) were detected in a 7-kb region. On
bacterial infection, all functional genes were expressed, mainly in the fat
body, although at different times during development. The functional
genes Cecropin A1 and Cecropin A2 were essentially expressed in larvae
and adults, while, Cecropin B and Cecropin C were mainly expressed
during the pupal stage []. 
The cecropin cluster has been analyzed
thoroughly in D.melanogaster and other lepidopteron insects 
[]. In this
connection, an attempt has been made to analyze the organization of
cecropin multigene cluster in silkworm B.mori.

In B.mori, although 13 cecropin protein genes have been cloned and
characterized by different researchers, the genomic organization analyses
of cecropin locus to identify the multigene patterns is yet to be attempted.
Recently, a complete B.mori genome sequence was obtained through the
integration of data from two whole genome sequence projects performed
independently by Chinese and Japanese scientists 
[]. Utilizing this
information, a genome wide screening of cecropin genes B. mori to
analyze the organized structure of cecropin multigene clusters in the
B.mori genome was adopted. Further, the functional characterization ofdifferent 
cecropin genes was analyzed by searching both B.mori whole
genome sequence as well as EST libraries. We have identified twelve
paralogous multigene family sequences organized in two clusters. Further,
these paralogous sequences were also characterized based on N‐terminal
signal peptide, 5’ region promoter elements and sequence similarity among
cecropin paralogous sequences. The phylogenetic analysis of twelve
paralogous gene sequences suggested that the duplicated cecropin clusters
have evolved independently among insect taxa. Comparison of EST
libraries revealed that the multigene cluster group could be correlated to
the tissue specificity.

Methodology
Retrieval of cecropin cDNA sequence
The cDNA sequences of cecropin
gene were retrieved from the NCBI database and those that expressed
exclusively in B.mori were selected. These sequences pertaining to various
target tissues were independently deposited by different researchers. The
deduced amino acid sequences were obtained through translation of the
selected cDNA sequences and were converted in to FASTA format for
ClustalX analysis. Then the cDNA sequences were converted into deduced
amino acid sequences and the ORF of individual gene was determined using ORF finder 
(www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/gorf/). The conserved
domain for cecropin protein was also identified in all translated sequences.

Identification of paralogous gene sequences in B.mori
Identification of paralogous gene sequences in B.mori: The B.mori
cDNA sequences were BLAST searched with Silkworm Genome Database
(http://silkworm.genomics.org.cn) 
to identify paralogous multigene family.Using the silkworm database, the functional annotation of genes,
paralogous gene sequences, gene products and chromosome mapping were
determined. Further, the tools provided in the database were utilized to
perform specific genomic BLAST search as well as Map view (a
visualization tool that provides a graphical view of selected genes). The
organization of paralogous cecropin multigene family on individual
scaffold was also analyzed using BLAST search with Gene ID.

Clustal W analysis
Phylogenetic analyses were performed with the
multiple sequence alignment using ClustalW through MEGA 4 
[]. The
Bootstrap consensus NJ tree for cecropin paralogous gene sequences was
constructed with the Bootstrap values. A separate Clustal W alignment was
performed with 5’ upstream regions of all paralogous gene sequences. The
sequences were manually edited using BIOEDIT programme and the
promoter elements were identified using GENERUNNER programme.

Identification of Signal Peptide
Signal peptide cleavage sites were predicted using SignalIP algorithm 
(www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/SignalIP),
based on the Neural Network and Hidden Markov Model.

ESTs of the silkworm B. mori Cecropin
To determine the expression patterns of the individual paralogous genes, a 
local BLASTN search was performed against the silkworm EST database 
(http://morus.ab.a.utokyo.ac.jp/). 
The majority of EST database sequences originated mainly
from the tissues of testis, hemocyte, prothoracic gland, brain, antenna,
microbial infected fat body, pheromone gland, ovary, midgut and fat body.
The specific expressions of the individual paralogous genes were analyzed
in EST libraries constructed from different tissues of silkworm B.mori.

Results and discussion
Multigene families often evolve in many ways that violate assumptions
necessary for simple and objective gene phylogeny estimation. Some
members of the family may evolve at much faster rate and as such are
dubbed fast evolving genes. This occurs when one member gene takes on a
significantly novel function and thus encounters significantly different
selective pressure from other multigene family members. Another usual
assumption of molecular tree construction is that each branch of the tree
evolves independently from other branches. These families often show
coincidental evolution, either indirectly through biased mutational and
selective forces or directly by mechanisms such as gene conversions 
[].

A total of thirteen B. mori cecropin gene sequences were retrieved from the
NCBI database (Table 1 see ). 
Among the thirteen sequences, three sequences belonged to cecropin A, seven to
cecropin B, one each to cecropin D, E and Enbocin gene sub‐groups.
Further, the cecropin cDNA as well as protein sequences were BLAST searched with silkworm genome database
(http://silkworm.genomics.org.cn). 
A total of 12 paralogous gene sequences were retrieved from the genomic database of which two
sequences belonged to cecropin A sub‐group, six to cecropin B, one each
to the cecropin D as well as E and two to Enbocin. The two cecropin A
sequences were located in separate scaffold viz. nscaf 1085 and 2852 of
chromosome number 6. However, all the six cecropin B as well as
cecropin D, E and two Enbocin sequences were located in the same
scaffold (nscaf 1071) of chromosome number 26 (). These ten
cecropin genes were organized on a single locus and among them six were
organized in reverse orientation, while remaining four in the forward
orientation. Interestingly, the cecropin E was located in between cecropin
B1 and B4. Similarly cecropin D and Enbocin were located in the 3’ region of the scaffold.

The genomic analysis of Drosophila revealed that, the multigene family
originated via retro position and DNA based duplication. The presence of
repetitive sequences and TEs in the 5’ and 3’ flanking regions of the
multigenes suggested that, gene duplication occurred during the formation
of drosomycin multigene family []. Earlier reports revealed, only three
cecropin families in Drosophila viz. A, B and C. Cecropin A had two sub
groups viz. A1 and A2, while, B and C had no sub‐groups indicating that,
evolution of paralogous gene sequences was based on the individual
requirement and selection pressure in the individual population. The
possibility of such gene duplication in the cecropin family was predicted
through analysis of the cecropin gene sequences in the B.mori genome
which revealed presence of 12 paralogous genes. Presence of the
Transposable Elements (TE) in the flanking regions of each paralogous
genes confirmed gene duplications giving rise to the cecropin multigene
family. The presence of six cecropin B sub‐groups was a unique feature in
the silkworm B.mori. Since the cecropin genes B, D, E and Enbocin were
located in the same gene locus, it can be inferred that all the four sequences
have closely evolved from a single gene.

Comparison of the molecular distance of paralogous gene pairs between
different and same species indicates the amount of within‐species
coincidental evolution. In B.mori, ten of the twelve cecropin paralogous
genes present formed a tight cluster over about 78.62kb length of DNA
suggesting that, these original genes probably originated from a common
ancestral by gene duplication and later individuals with multiple genes
were selected during evolution. If each protein has a slightly different
antibacterial spectrum, the presence of multiple proteins should be
advantageous for the survival of the insects in various pathogenic
environments. Genome analysis of model organisms have shown that over
one-third of all protein‐coding genes belong to multigene family
originating from the gene duplications [].

The multigene cluster of cecropin B, D, E and Enbocin was spread over a
region of 78.62 kb in length in B. mori genomic DNA 
(). Long
intergenic regions were found between cecropin B and Enbocin, and
between cecropin B4 and cecropin B5. Each of the cecropin genes
invariably contained two exons and one intron. However the lengths of the
intron regions varied among the cecropin sub‐groups.

The arrangement of cecropin‐B gene group (cecropin‐B1, B2, B3, B4, B5,
B6, D, E and Enbocin) in B.mori within the same locus over an intergenic
length ranging from 1336 to 23526 bp indicated tandem gene duplication
giving rise to paralogous genes. The findings of the present study reveals
that, the major cecropin families probably diverged and formed multigene
families in B.mori and did not evolve from a common ancestor of insects.

The phylogenetic analysis of different paralogous cecropin gene sequences
revealed that, all cecropin B members clustered together 
().
Among the six cecropin B genes, three genes as well as one of the genes
formed separate single clusters, while, remaining two genes formed a
separate cluster. In contrast, the three cecropin A genes formed a single
cluster revealing their unique evolution compared to cecropin B genes.
Further, Cecropin E, D and Enbocin formed one out group member in
which, Enbocin and cecropin D formed a separate clade. Even though
cecropin E formed an out group in the phylogenetic tree, it was located
within the cluster of cecropin B sub family. All cecropin B genes, cecropin
E, cecropin D and Enbocin were located on the chromosome number 26,
while, cecropin A genes were located on the chromosome number 6
(Table 2 see ).

Analysis of different cecropin sequences with respect to the different target
tissues based on the EST library information revealed that, majority of
cecropin A genes were expressed in the fat body of bacteria challenged
silkworm larvae (Table 3 see ). 
However, the cecropin B genes were expressed in different target tissues like testis
(12%), hemocyte (3%), prothoracic gland (1%), brain (24%), antenna
(2%), microbial fat body (55%) and pheromone gland (1%). Interestingly
the cecropin D was expressed less in the fat body (18%), and more in brain
tissue (24%), while, Cecropin E was expressed more (46%) in the fat body
and less (28%) in brain tissue.

In the above connection, the promoter regions of all the paralogous genes
were compared with the help of ClustalW program. The unique promoter
elements of cecropin genes were prominently located in the 5’ flanking
upstream region such as кβ, GATA, TATAA and CAP site. The promoter
elements were also conserved depending upon each sub‐family. The
TATAA boxes of all cecropin B paralogous gene sequences were located
at exactly the same position.

The hypothesis of Nei’s birth and death model of evolution indicates that,
some duplicate genes were maintained in the genome for long‐time but
others were deleted or become non‐functional by deleterious mutations
[]. Analyses of expression patterns of individual genes in the cecropin
gene family in B.mori comprising of 12 genes is extremely difficult due to
high degree of sequence identity. Hence, analysis of different cecropin
sequences with respect to the different target tissues based on the EST
library was carried out that, indicated that, the cecropin genes of each sub
group were selectively expressed in specific target tissue. The location and
sequence variations as well as promoter regions were prominent factors in
the tissue specificity.

In invertebrates cis‐regulatory motifs (кβ‐like, GAAANN and GATA) as
well as the R1 motif are present in the proximal promoter regions of
different insect immune genes, the number, order and orientation of which
differ. In Drosophila, the two Cecropin A genes present кβ‐like, GATA
and R1 motifs; the Cecropin B gene presents both the кβ ‐like and R1
motifs, and the Cecropin C gene presents the B‐like, GATA, and
GAAANN motifs. A survey of nucleotide variations in cecropin
paralogous genes of B.mori revealed conserved promoter elements like кβ,
GATA and TATAA in the 5’ upstream region of the Cecropin gene.
However, the positions of the promoter elements are Cecropin gene subgroup
specific.

In the above connection, the promoter regions of all the paralogous genes
were compared with the help of ClustalW program. The unique promoter
elements of cecropin genes were prominently located in the 5’ flanking
upstream region such as кβ, GATA, TATAA and CAP site. The promoter
elements were also conserved depending upon each sub‐family. The кβ,
GATA and TATAA elements of all cecropin B paralogous genes were
located at exactly the same position indicating functional and structural
similarity.

An earlier report indicated that the mature cecropin protein contained sixty
four amino acids of which twenty two located in the N- terminal region
functioned as signal peptide () 
[]. In the present study also, all
amino acid signal peptides were also conserved in the cecropin B subfamily
and approximately 30% sequence variation was observed in
different cecropin genes in B.mori. However the length of each signal
peptide did not vary between the cecropin multi gene protein sequences.

Analyses of B.mori genome lead to prediction of 220 putative genes
encoding cuticular proteins. More than 80% of these genes were present in
gene clusters []. 
Gene clusters of cuticular protein genes have also been
reported in Drosophila, Anopheles and Tribolium 
[]. In this direction,
phylogenetic analysis in B. mori genome reflected distinct organization of
cecropin genes wherein Cecropin A and B formed separate clusters. Under
the Cecropin B cluster, Cecropin E, D and Enbocin formed one out group
member in which, Enbocin and cecropin D formed a separate clade
indicating that, these two genes were closely evolved. Even though
cecropin E formed an out group member under cecropin B sub group, the
clustering of cecropin E within cecropin B sub group is intriguing. The
findings revealed that, both cecropin A and remaining cecropin members
evolved independently from a common ancestor. Further, the duplication
of cecropin B members indicated that, gene duplication occurred
exclusively in silkworm B.mori because such phenomenon was not
observed in several other insect groups like Drosophila, Anopheles and
Tribolium.

In the humoral antimicrobial defense, cecropins show evidence of
existence of genes in multi forms. The origin and organization of cecropin
gene subfamily in the B.mori has not been studied due to lack of complete
information on the silkworm genome. Critically, more studies today focus
on evolutionary properties of different immune proteins and their
multigene families in Drosophila, Anopheles and Tribolium in view of
availability of their genome database.

Conclusion
In the present study the possibility of such gene duplication in the cecropin
family was predicted through analysis of the cecropin gene sequences in
the B.mori genome which revealed presence of 12 paralogous genes.
Presence of the Transposable Elements (TE) in the flanking regions of
each paralogous genes confirmed gene duplications giving rise to the
cecropin multigene family. The presence of six cecropin B sub‐groups
was a unique feature in the silkworm B.mori. Since the cecropin genes B,
D, E and Enbocin were located in the same gene locus, it can be inferred
that all the four sequences have closely evolved from a single gene.

In B.mori, ten of the twelve cecropin paralogous genes present formed a
tight cluster over about 78.62kb length of DNA suggesting that, these
original genes probably originated from a common ancestral by gene
duplication and later individuals with multiple genes were selected during
evolution. The arrangement of cecropin-B gene group (cecropin‐B1, B2,
B3, B4, B5, B6, D, E and Enbocin) in B.mori within the same locus over
an intergenic length ranging from 1336 to 23526bp indicated tandem gene
duplication giving rise to paralogous genes. The findings of the present
study reveals that, the major cecropin families probably diverged and
formed multigene families in B.mori and did not evolve from a common
ancestor of insects.

Analysis of different cecropin sequences with respect to the different target
tissues based on the EST library was carried out indicating that, the
cecropin genes of each sub group were selectively expressed in specific
target tissue. The location and sequence variations as well as promoter
regions were prominent factors in the tissue specificity. The unique
promoter elements of cecropin genes were prominently located in the 5’
flanking upstream region such as кβ, GATA, TATAA and CAP site. The
promoter elements were also conserved depending upon each sub‐family.
The кβ, GATA and TATAA elements of all cecropin B paralogous genes
were located at exactly the same position indicating functional and
structural similarity.

Phylogenetic analysis in B. mori genome reflected distinct organization of
cecropin genes wherein Cecropin A and B formed separate clusters. Under
the Cecropin B cluster, Cecropin E, D and Enbocin formed one out group
member in which, Enbocin and Cecropin D formed a separate clade
indicating that, these two genes were closely evolved. Even though
cecropin E formed an out group member under Cecropin B sub group, the
clustering of Cecropin E within Cecropin B sub group is intriguing. The
findings revealed that, cecropin A and remaining cecropin members
evolved independently from a common ancestor. Further, the duplication
of cecropin B members indicated that, gene duplication occurred
exclusively in silkworm B.mori because such phenomenon was not
observed in several other insect groups like Drosophila, Anopheles and
Tribolium.

The information retrieved from the recently created silkworm genome
database allowed us to draw comprehensive conclusions regarding
adaptive evolution as well as functional significance of cecropin multigene
family in B.mori. This forms a very vital basis to understand evolution of
the immune system genes of B.mori with respect to interaction with the
natural diversified pathogens in the ever changing environment.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This research work was supported by grants from Department of
Biotechnology, Ministry of Science and Technology, Government of India
(BT/PR11397/PBD/19/192/2008 dated 30th June 2009).

Citation:Ponnuveletal; Bioinformation 5(3): 97-103 (2010)

The distribution of Transposable Elements (TEs) in the flanking 
regions of cecropin family in Bombyx mori. ORFs of cecropin were indicated
by black squares and the transcription directions are indicated by arrows. 
Number below the arrows indicate the intergenic length.

Neighbor‐joining tree of 12 paralogous cecropin gene percentage 
of bootstrap values (based on the 1000 replication) for the main branching
nodes shown on the tree. The paralogous gene sequences of silkworm genome 
database are indicated by Gene ID [BGIBMGA] and the sequences
retrieved from NCBI database are indicated by the name and accession number

Alignment of the amino acid sequences and phylogenetic relationship of 
the paralogous gene sequence of Cecropin gene retrieved from Bombyx
mori genomic database polypeptide of the Lepidoptera B.mori. 
The N‐terminal signal peptides of Lepidoptera are indicated by square boxes

