Background
The G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) superfamily is the largest and most diverse
protein family in mammals that is involved in signal transduction across membranes.
GPCRs share the structural motifs of a seven α-helical transmembrane domain,
an extracellular N-terminal domain, and an intracellular C-terminal domain.
Approximately 800 functioning receptor proteins are encoded within the human genome.
The GPCR superfamily comprises six sub-families that can bind to a diverse range of
ligands including photons, ions, lipids, organic compounds, peptides, and proteins
[]. Once stimulated by
these molecules, GPCRs bind to and activate Gproteins. The G-proteins then initiate
signal cascades that control numerous important biological processes []. Since GPCRs control major
biological processes through signaling, the GPCR superfamily is a prominent
therapeutic target for approximately half of all modern drugs []. Despite this fact, relatively few
of the GPCR structures have been elucidated because expressing and crystallizing
GPCRs as membrane proteins remain challenging. The first GPCR structure to be solved
was that of bovine rhodopsin in 2000 []. Seven years later, a high-resolution structure of the human
β2-adrenergic receptor (β2AR) was obtained []. Since then, the structures of other
class A GPCRs, including the β1-adrenergic receptor, [] have been solved. However, crystal
structures do not always reveal the in vivo structure, that is, the
structure formed in the actual cell membrane. Accordingly, numerous theoretical
approaches have been taken to explore the molecular mechanism of GPCR activation.
One aspect of the activation mechanism of GPCRs that remains controversial is
whether the GPCRs exist and function as monomers, (homo/hetero) dimers, or oligomers
in cell membranes []. While
there is incontrovertible evidence that class C GPCRs work as dimers [], data on the oligomerization of
class A GPCRs are less clear [, ]. Recent studies
using single molecule imaging approaches showed the transient formation and
decomposition of dimers of a class A GPCR (muscarinic and N-formyl peptide receptor)
in living cells [, ]. However, while these imaging
studies suggested that oligomers may form, they did not provide detailed information
about how receptors interact with each other at the atomic and molecular levels.

Recently, Kubo et al. used a radio receptor assay to show that a
certain group of four free fatty acids (FFAs), extracted from Flammulina
Velutipes (Curt.:Fr.) Sing, binds effectively to the β-
adrenergic receptor (βAR), but that the binding activity of each FFA
independently was poor [].
Oral treatment of this grouping of FFAs improved adiponectin and leptin secretion,
which are disrupted in some lipid metabolism disorders [].

In addition, a structural biology study showed that cholesterol effectively
stabilizes βAR [,
]. Here, we propose a
theoretical, novel βAR homodimer model with FFAs and cholesterol that
demonstrates enhanced molecular signaling via protein–protein
interactions in the homodimer. We theoretically analyzed the interactions among
βARs, cholesterol, and FFAs by using the density-functional-based tight
binding with dispersion (DFTBD) method [], which accurately estimates van der Waals dispersion
energies among protein, FFA, and cholesterol molecules without a large calculation
cost. We found that a βAR homodimer complex with cholesterol and FFA
molecules is more stable than a βAR homodimer that lacks contact with these
molecules. This stability of the homodimer may be caused by additive van der Waals
dispersion energies among the cholesterol, FFAs, and βAR. This novel model
is the first example of a complex showing explicit interactions among FFAs,
cholesterol, and βAR determined by using first-principles calculations. Our
novel homodimer complex with FFAs and cholesterol furthers our understanding of the
molecular mechanism of activation and dimerization of the GPCR and offers a
molecular basis for exploring enhanced signaling and anti-adiposity effects
via GPCR oligomerization.

Computational Methodology and Discussion
All first-principles calculations were performed at the level of the
density-functional-based tight binding with dispersion (DFTB-D) method, which
rapidly and adequately estimates van der Waals (dispersion) interactions among
βAR–FFAs, FFA– FFA, and cholesterol–FFA by using the DFTB+
[] and Gaussian09
[] programs. Small
molecules and βAR were modeled by using the Gauss View [] and MOE [] programs, respectively. PyMOL
(www.pymol.org) was used for the preparation of all structure
figures.

FFAs and Cholesterol:
We used linoleic acid (1), α-linolenic acid (2), palmitic acid (3) and
pentadecanoic acid (4) as neutral (not ionized) FFA molecules. Isolated
cholesterol (5) and FFA molecular geometries were fully optimized by use of the
DFTB-D method. This group of FFAs is contained in ethanol extracts of
Flammulina Velutipes (Curt.: Fr.) Sing, which have
anti-adiposity effects on both humans and mice. Oral treatment of this group of
FFAs led to the recovery of adiponectin and leptin. The ability to secrete
adiponectin and leptin is disrupted in some lipid metabolism disorders
[].

βAR:
The βAR structure was derived from the recently determined activated form
of the human β2AR (PDB ID: 3P0G [], chain A). Hydrogen atoms were added by using the
protonate3D wizard in the MOE2010/2011 system [] under pH 7.0 conditions. Then,
all of the positions of the hydrogen atoms were optimized by using the AMBER99
force field [] in the
MOE system.

βAR-cholesterol complex:
We superimposed a cholesterol molecule, which is contained in the crystal
structure of the inactive form of human β2AR (PDB ID: 2RH1
[]), onto the
βAR structure. Hydrogen atoms in the cholesterol molecule were added by
using the MOE system and were optimized by use of the DFTB-D method. The
interaction energy between βAR and cholesterol was calculated as -
14.1kcal/mol, which is more stable than the interaction between
βAR and each FFA []. This calculation result is in good agreement with the
experimental thermal stability of the structure of the inactive form of human
β2AR (PDB ID: 2RH1 []) due to cholesterol binding to the β2AR. Cholesterol
effectively interacts with Thr73, Cys77, and Val81 in the helix II of the
β2AR [].
Similar stable interactions were also observed in our model of the active form
of the β2AR-cholesterol complex, that is, the interactions among
cholesterol, Leu80, and Ala85 were stable. Thr73 has a van der Waals interaction
with the C4 of the sterol ring A of cholesterol. Cys77 forms a hydrogen bond
with a hydrogen atom on C9 in the sterol ring B, and a van der Waals interaction
with the C11 and C12 of the sterol ring C. The methyl groups of Leu80 and Val81
effectively interact with the hydrophobic group of cholesterol due to van der
Waals interaction. Ala85 forms a stable van der Waals interaction with the end
of the hydrophobic group of cholesterol.

Model I: Cholesterol (5)-linoleic acid (1) - α-linolenic acid
(2)/palmitic acid (3):
We built Model I, as shown in (). We
performed the geometric optimization of Model I, cholesterol (5) in complex with
linoleic acid (1) and palmitic acid (3) () or α-linolenic acid (2) (), by using
the DFTB-D method. The complex including cholesterol (5), linoleic acid (1), and
palmitic acid (3), and the complex including cholesterol (5), linoleic acid (1),
and α-linolenic acid (2) are defined as Model IA and Model IB,
respectively. Optimized geometries showed that the cholesterol (5), linoleic
acid (1), and palmitic acid (3) molecules become more stable as a result of
dispersion interactions as the molecules get closer to each other. In Model IA,
the double bond in the C12 of linoleic acid (1) appears to contribute to the
interaction with the hydrophobic group of cholesterol (5) through a CH-π
interaction. The saturated carbon chain of linoleic acid (1) forms effective van
der Waals interactions with the sterol rings A, B, C, and D due to the intact
spherical nature of those groups. The saturated carbon chain of palmitic acid
(3) also interacts with the sterol rings A, B, C, and D of cholesterol (5). The
saturated carbon chain of linoleic acid (1) seems to interact with the saturated
carbon chain of palmitic acid (3) through a van der Waals interaction.

In Model IB, linoleic acid (1) and cholesterol (5) also have CH-π and van
der Waals interactions as seen in Model IA due to the intact spherical structure
of those parts of the molecules. The double bond of the C12 in linoleic acid (1)
appears to contribute an extensive interaction with the double bond of the C12
in α- linolenic acid (2) through a π-π stacking
interaction. These data indicate that FFA composition is important for the
stability of the complex. The heterogeneous complex is more stable than the
single composite complex of FFAs and cholesterol.

Model II: Cholesterol-FFAs:
Next, we built Model II, as shown (). A pentadecanoic acid (4) was centered in this model, and we analyzed
the potential energy by changing the distance between the pentadecanoic acid (4)
and the palmitic acid (3)/ α-linolenic acid (2) (). The equilibrium distances
RA and RB between the pentadecanoic acid (4) and the
palmitic acid (3)/α- linolenic acid (2) were 3.92Å and
3.98Å, respectively. The interaction energy of the complex with
cholesterol and the FFAs was -86.8kcal/mol. The stable energy is caused
by the propagation of van der Waals interactions from one cholesterol molecule
to the other through FFA molecules.

Homodimer in complex with cholesterol and FFAs:
The complex of the homodimer with cholesterol and FFAs was formed by
superimposing Model II on cholesterol (5) in the βAR-cholesterol
complex. We obtained the stable homodimer with cholesterol and FFAs by using
optimizing geometry with the DFTB-D method. The structure of this complex is
shown in (). The distance between
the βARs is defined as the distance between Phe104 and Phe101 from helix
III, RAR-AR. The interaction energy among the βARs, cholesterol, and
FFAs from each isolated system, that is from the βAR homodimer,
cholesterol, and each FFA molecule, was -108.9kcal/mol. On the other
hand, the interaction energy between each βAR in isolation was only
-0.18kcal/mol at the same distance between each βAR. Note that
the stability of the homodimer complex with the cholesterol and FFAs is caused
by the propagation of effective interactions from one βAR to the other
βAR through cholesterol, linoleic acid, and the FFA molecules. The
stable homodimer complex with cholesterol and FFAs has the potential to enhance
molecular signaling and consequently mediate anti-adiposity effects.

Conclusion
On the basis of first-principles calculations using the DFTB-D method, we determined
that a novel homodimer model of the βAR could be formed in which FFA and
cholesterol molecules are inserted between the βAR homodimer as a result of
interactions between the βARs and FFAs via cholesterol. This stable energy
may be caused by the propagation of van der Waals dispersion interactions from one
βAR to the other via FFA–FFA and cholesterol–FFA interactions. The main
interaction between the βARs and the FFAs via cholesterol is probably the
hydrophobic interaction between the carbon chain in the hetero-complex of the FFA
and cholesterol molecules, because the total interaction energy between the
cholesterol and FFA was -87.5kcal/mol. On the other hand, the interaction
energy between the two βARs in direct contact was only -
0.18kcal/mol. Our calculation results show that this specific group of four
FFAs extracted from Flammulina Velutipes (Curt.: Fr.) Sing is an
important heterogeneous composition for the key interactions that form the stable
homodimer. From these observations, we believe that this stable homodimer complexed
with cholesterol and these FFAs could mediate and enhance molecular signals,
resulting in anti-adiposity effects. Our model offers the molecular basis for the
activation mechanism of the βAR based on FFA composition.

This work was supported, in part, by the RICOM Corporation. The authors thank the
president of the RICOM Corporation, Tadao Hamaya, and the general manager of
research and development at the RICOM Corporation, Shouich Kurihama, for their
helpful encouragement.

Citation:Nakano et al, Bioinformation 8(25):
1245-1248 (2012)

A) is the front view of Model IA. The Structures of Model IA constructed with
cholesterol (5), linoleic acid (1) and palmitic acid (3) are shown in blue,
red, and green as stick models, respectively. These compounds in B), C), and
D) are shown in blue and red as stick models and green as a wireframe model,
green and blue as stick models and red as a wireframe model, and green and
red as stick models and blue as a wireframe model, respectively. E) is the
front view of Model IB. The Structures of Model IB constructed with
cholesterol (5), linoleic acid (1) and α-linolenic acid (2) are shown in
blue, red, and dark salmon, respectively. These compounds in F), G), and H)
are shown in blue and red as stick models and dark salmon as a wireframe
model, dark salmon and blue as stick models and red as a wireframe model,
and dark salmon and red as stick models and blue as a wireframe model,
respectively.

(A) is the front view of Model II. Model II consists of Model IA, Model IB,
and a pentadecanoic acid (4) in the center. The structure of pentadecanoic
acid (4) is shown in gray. The distances between the pentadecanoic acid (4)
and the palmitic acid (3)/α-linolenic acid (2) are shown as
RA and RB, respectively; (B) is the Potential
Energy Curve; the horizontal axis represents RA, whereas the
vertical axis expresses the value of EModel II. In the Potential
Energy Curve, the equilibrium geometry shows that an EModel II of
-86.8 kcal/mol was gained at RA = 3.92 Å
and RB = 3.98 Å, respectively.

Shown is the novel βAR homodimer model with cholesterol and FFAs.
This model is derived from the βAR homodimer and the Model
II-centered homodimer. The distance between each βAR,
RAR-AR, is 25.3 Å.

