Background
Leukotrienes are synthesized in response to many triggers,
including antigen-antibody interaction; receptor activation,
physical stimuli, and any stimulation that increases
intercellular calcium []. These molecules are formed
endogenously by the breakdown of arachidonic acid, via the 5-
lipoxygenase enzyme pathway []. This pathway ultimately
generates several species of leukotrienes with various
physiological activities, including increased vascular
permeability, influx of eosinophils into the airway tissues,
enhanced mucous production – generalized inflammatory
effects associated with asthma pathogenecity [,
]. The
cysteinyl leukotreienes were also shown to have been recovered
in excess concentrations during asthma exacerbations from
bronchoalviolar lavage fluid and urine of patients with asthma
[,
]. 
These observations suggest that leukotrienes could play a
role in the pathogenesis of asthma; therefore, drugs that
antagonize the activity of the cysteinyl leukotrienes at their
receptor cysLT1 have been developed with the goal of
attenuating the leukotrienes' effects in inflammation related to
asthma [].

Antileukotriene agents are non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
bronchoconstriction preventers administered for treatment of
asthma. Montelukast and Zafirlukast are most common
antagonists which are widely prescribed in treatment of asthma
[]. These drugs competitively antagonize cysLt1 receptor
mediated bronchoconstriction, increased vascular permeability
and recruitment of eosinophils and bring about bronchodilation
and suppression of bronchial inflammation. Though overall
efficacy is lower than inhaled steroids, LTRAs may obviate
need for the latter, and may be more acceptable in children. In
severe asthma, they may permit reduction in steroid dose and
need for rescue of beta 2 agonist inhalations. According to
current guidelines, antileukotriene agents are recommended in
the long-term treatment of asthma. In combination with inhaled
glucocorticosteroids, they may allow to reduce the dose of
steroids used and to control the disease in patients with
moderate to severe asthma [–
]. Nonetheless, they are not
preferred first choice therapy because use of antileukotrienes in
adult asthma patients as a single asthma controller is usually
less effective than inhaled glucocorticosteroids [,
].
Moreover, they are usually less effective than long acting beta 2
agonists in relieving bronchospasm [–
]. In the present
study structure and ligand based approaches have been
implemented to identify drug, which we anticipate to have
better antagonizing potential than Montelukast and Zafirlukast

Methodology
Selection of multiclass antagonists:
Established leukotriene antagonists - Montelukast 
[] and
Zafirlukast [] were selected as leads for virtual screening.

Molecular Modeling of Cysteinyl Leukotriene Receptor1:
Since the three dimensional structure of human cysteinyl
leukotriene receptor 1 was not available in Protein Data Bank,
the structure was generated in silico []. The sequence of
receptor was retrieved from NCBI (Accession Number:
NP_006630.1) which was then blasted against Protein Data
Bank database. The position specific iterated BLASTp program
resulted in 36 % identity and query coverage of 55 % with
template of Mu-Opioid receptor crystal structure (PDB ID:
4DKLA) []. Protein modeling was performed using Deep
View/Swiss PDB Viewer and Swiss Model server []. The
primary polypeptide chain of the receptor was aligned on the
backbone of template obtained from PDB database, which was
then followed by side chain optimization using the
simultaneous global optimization of the energy for all nonidentical
residues. Structural validation of the modeled receptor
was assessed with structure validation tool Procheck [] and
Ramachandran plot []. 
 shows the modeled structure
of cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1.

Active site prediction:
Antagonist binding site was detected with DoGSite 
[] active
site prediction server. The server calculates potential active sites
on the protein surface based on the 3D coordinates of a protein.
DoGSite is a grid-based function prediction method which uses
a difference of Gaussian filter to detect potential pockets on the
protein surface and splits them into subpockets. Subsequently,
global properties, describing the size, shape and chemical
features are also calculated for the predicted pockets. As a
convention, the cavity with relatively greater surface area and
volume was considered as an active (antagonist binding) site
(). The calculated descriptors of the pocket are
represented in  (see supplementary material).

Protein and lead preparation:
The selected leads (Montelukast and Zafirlukast) were
uploaded in .sdf format in the PubChem structure search
engine and similar compounds were retrieved with ≥95%
structure. All the similar structures were optimized and cleaned
with Marvin View v 5.6.0.2 (ChemAxon Ltd.) 
[]. Threedimensional
structure of modeled receptor was prepared by
removing all bound water molecules and ligands. Explicit
hydrogens, bond orders, hybridization and charges were
assigned to protein structure if missing.

Virtual screening parameters:
Molecular docking program Molegro Virtual Docker (MVD)
which incorporates highly efficient PLP (Piece wise Linear
Potential) and MolDock [,
] scoring function provided a
flexible docking platform. The leads (Montelukast and
Zafirlukast) and similar chemical structures were docked in
predicted antagonist binding site of cysteinyl leukotriene
receptor 1. Docking parameters were set to 0.20 Å as grid
resolution, maximum iteration of 1500 and maximum
population size of 50. Energy minimization and hydrogen
bonds were optimized after the docking. Simplex evolution was
set at maximum steps of 300 with neighborhood distance factor
of 1. Binding affinity and interactions of similar compounds
with protein were evaluated on the basis of the internal ES
(Internal electrostatic Interaction), internal hydrogen bond
interactions and sp2-sp2 torsions. On the basis of MolDock
rerank score [] best interacting compound was selected from
each class.

Softwares, Suites and Webservers used:
Pubchem database from NCBI was used to search and prepare
library of similar chemical compounds for virtual screening. All
the chemical structures were optimized in MarvinSketch 5.6.0.2,
(1998-2011, Copyright © ChemAxon Ltd). Flexible Molecular
docking of the compounds with target was completed using
Molegro Virtual Docker 2010.4.0.0. Accelrys Discovery Studio®
Visualizer 3.5.0.12158 (Copyright© 2005-12, Accelyrys Software
Inc.) was used for visualization.

Results
Number of similar compounds screened with ≥90 similarity
corresponding to each lead antagonist is listed in  (see
supplementary material). Interestingly, similar compounds
identified had better affinity than their respective leads.
Evident from rerank score, compound UNII-70RV86E50Q
(Pubcid: 71587778) () showed 1.13 folds better
interaction than its lead Montelukast, whereas, compound Sure
CN 9587085 (Pubcid: 19793614) () was 1.15 folds
better interacting compound than its lead Zafirlukast ().
In further investigation we observed that compound Sure CN
9587085 was marginally (1.01 folds) better interacting drug than
UNII-70RV86E50Q (table 2). Sure CN9587085 not only showed
better interaction against the cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1
than its parent compound Zafirlukast but also showed superior
binding affinity than montelukast and remaining virtually
screened molecules (). The overall ligand receptor
affinity score i.e. rerank score of Sure CN9587085 with the
receptor (a function of stearic interactions, electrostatic
interactions, H bond interactions etc) is shown in  (see
supplementary material). Comprehensively shown in 
, the molecule demonstrated van der waals interactions with
Glu 175, Phe 174 &amp; 158, Thr 8,100 &amp; 83 , Val 277, Tyr 83, 241 &amp;
104, His 190, Phe 246 &amp; 158, Leu 103,107,189, 107 &amp; 281 , Ala 284
and shows electrostatic interaction with Lys 162, Arg 79, Ser
193, His 250. The ligand binding pattern of Sure CN9587085 in
the active site is shown in . Hydrogen bonding of Sure
CN9587085 with the receptor is shown if  and the
complete hydrogen bonding profile are shown in  (see
supplementary material). Further,  shows the
hydrophobic intensities of the antagonist binding site upon
binding of Sure CN9587085.

Discussion
Regardless of progress achieved in the understanding the
inflammatory process in the pathogenesis of asthma the
mortality and morbidity associated with this disease have not
appreciably declined therefore, it becomes obvious to explore
for new avenues to asthma therapy. Antileukotrienes have
emerged as first new treatment strategy for chronic asthma in
20 years. To cite evidence, in a multitude of randomized studies
of 12-24 weeks duration, patients treated with antileukotriene
drugs showed clinically significant improvements in lung
function and asthma symptoms compared with patients who
received placebo. In another study, exacerbation rates
decreased by 30% to 60% in patients with asthma treated with
antileukotriene drugs [–
]. Thus it becomes imperative from
these studies that there is quite commendable improvement in
quality of life scores in patients treated with antileukotrine
drugs. Although inhaled corticosteroids are the preferred
therapy for chronic asthma because of the long term experience
with this drug and their documented anti-inflammatory effect,
they are not without safety concerns. In addition, in patients
treated with low or moderate doses of inhaled corticostreroids
are still symptomatic wherein antileukotrine drug offer an
attractive option as add on therapy. Despite the advantages,
antileukotrienes, is still not prescribed as a single therapy for
symptomatic treatment of asthma, instead always used in
combination with corticosteroids ± beta 2 agonists. This
indicates that antileukotrienes though being efficacious, but not
always a good choice in severe exacerbations unlike ICS and
beta 2 agonist.

The molecular docking based screening of compounds that are
alike Montelukast and Zafirlukast against cysteinyl leukotriene
receptor 1 helped to identify Sure CN 9587085 from NCBI׳s
PubChem database. The identified compound showed
improved binding features with the receptor compared to the
known antagonist lead compounds (Montelukast and
Zafirlukast). The compound showed appreciable H bond
interaction profile, electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions
for further consideration.

Conclusion
There is a need for better Leukotrierne antagonists as
Montelukast and Zafirlukast falls short as mono-therapy.
Hence, molecular docking based screening of compounds
against cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1 was completed to
identify Sure CN 9587085 from NCBI׳s PubChem database for
further consideration using in vitro analysis.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We extend our sincere thanks to Mr. Prem Singh, Khushboo
Sharma and Amulya Narra, Project Fellows at Institute of
Genetics, Hyderabad. We also thank the medical
superintendent Dr. A. Sai Kumar, all physicians and supporting
staffs at the Government general and Chest Hospital,
Hyderabad.

Citation:Bandaru et al, Bioinformation 10(10): 652-657 (2014)

Structure of the 337 residues long cystenyl leukotrine
receptor modeled using template structure of Mu-Opioid
receptor crystal structure (PDB ID: 4DKLA). Binding site in the
protein was detected using Gaussian filter enabled DoGSite
server []. The N terminal of the protein is extracellular while
C terminal lies in the cytoplasmic region of the cell. Lipid
environment of membrane is majorly occupied by the polar
transmembrane helices (TM1-TM7) and the interconnecting
loops between the transmembrane helices are either
cytoplasmic or extracellular.

Structure of compound (A) UNII70RV86E50Q
(Pubcid: CID: 71587778 ); (B) Sure CN9587085 (Pubcid:
19793614) selected after virtual screening.

A) Interactions of Sure CN 9587085 with cysteinyl leukotrine receptor 1. Residues circled in green participate in van der
waals interaction with the ligand while residues in pink forms electrostatic interactions. Hydrogen bonds with bond lengths are
shown as blue arrows between ligand and residues Lys 162, Arg 79 and Ser 193; B) Binding pattern of Sure CN 9587085 with
cysteinyl leukotrine receptor 1. The pink lines represent various interactions like electrostatic, van der Waals, stearic, hydrogen
bonding and hydrophobic interactions that enable energetically favourable binding of the ligand in the cavity.

A) Hydrogen bonds (green dotted lines) formed between Sure CN 9587085 and cysteinyl leukotrine receptor 1; B) The
active site of receptor is shown with hydrophobic intensities. The hydrophobic intensities of the binding site ranges from -3.00
(least hydrophobic area - blue shade) to 3.00 (highly hydrophobic area –brown shade).

