Background
Immune-related genes in insects:
Insects have been remarkably successful in evolution. Current
estimates are that they account for major species richness
dominating any other class of biota [], and relatively account
for 80% of all animal species to date []. To fight against
infection or wounding, insect's immune system employ cellular
and humoral immune system, although they do not possess
adaptive immunity as present in case of higher vertebrates
[–]. Despite of this fact, insects' innate immune system is one of
the ancient immune system constituting first line of defense,
and conserved in different organisms, like in higher vertebrate,
human.

Review on research progress using SSH and Bioinformatics:
During these years, research on insects (physiology,
biochemistry, and immunology) has produced voluminous
information on the genome or transcriptome sequences of
several insects, and bioinformatics has played a major role in
the analysis, and management of the sequence data. There is
remarkable progress in genome sequencing from insects after
the first genome sequence of the fruit fly, Drosophila
melanogaster in the year 2000 []. SSH-based sequencing
technology has been the sequencing method used since 1960s
[–] as a low cost alternatives for whole genome/ or
transcriptome sequencing methods. The suppression
subtractive hybridization (SSH) approach, a PCR based method
which amplifies differentially expressed cDNAs, while
simultaneously suppressing amplification of common cDNAs,
was employed to identify immune-inducible genes in insects.
This technique has been used as a suitable tool for experimental
identification of novel genes in model insects whose genome
has been sequenced such as the red flour beetle, Tribolium
castaneum [], 
or the pea aphid, Acyrthosiphon pisum 
[], or the
silkworm, Bombyx mori []. In addition, and despite issues
related to the sensitivity of this method, the SSH approach has
been proven to be useful in targeted screening for immunerelated
genes in ancient insect, Thermobia domestica, for which no
genomic data are available [], or in insects which are adapted
to habitats contaminated with high loads of microbes such as
the rat-tailed maggots of the drone fly Eristalis tenax 
[]
capable of living in urine and cesspools, or the medicinal
maggots of the green blow fly Lucilia sericata which reproduce
in septic wounds or in carrions [], or the burying beetle
Nicrophorus vespilloides [] capable of living in cadaver rich with
microbes and fungi. By the use of SSH-based approach, there
are several other projects undertaken on different insects 
[–]. 
 (see supplementary material) represents a list of
projects undertaken by different research groups in identifying
immune-related genes in insects using SSH-based approach.

Suppression subtractive hybridization (SSH):
In principle, the aim of the SSH-based sequencing approach is
to build unbiased cDNAs library. The cDNA library will be the
target of the subtraction (the tester population), which is
denatured, and hybridized to another library that is present in
the excess (the driver cDNAs population). Fragments common
to both are annealed to each other, whereas tester specific
products remain single stranded. Sequencing steps in PCRselect
cDNA subtraction: The cDNA is synthesized from RNA
generated from two types of cells being compared (tester and
driver cDNAs); the tester and driver cDNAs are digested with
RsaI to produce blunt ends; The tester DNA is divided into two
parts, and each part is ligated with a different cDNA adaptor.
As the ends of the adaptor do not contain a phosphate group,
only one end of the adaptor attaches to the 5´ ends of the cDNA.
Furthermore, the two adaptors contain a portion of identical
sequence in order to allow annealing of the PCR primer once
the recessed ends have been filled in. Two hybridization steps
are performed. In the first step, an excess of driver is added to
each sample of tester cDNA. “The samples are then heat
denatured and allowed for annealing process and at last
generating a, b, c, d types of molecules from each sample” 
[].
The concentration among high and low abundance sequences
are equalized among type a molecules and at the same time
type a molecules are significantly enriched with differentially
expressed sequences, while cDNAs that are not differentially
expressed in type c molecules hybridize with driver. In the
second hybridization step, the two primarily hybridization
samples are mixed together without denaturing. Through this,
only the remaining equalized and subtracted single stranded
tester cDNAs can hybridize, and only for type e molecule. This
new hybrid is a double stranded tester molecule with different
ends corresponding to adaptor1 and adaptor 2R. Again, fresh
denatured cDNA is added without denaturing the subtraction
mix to enrich the fraction with differentially expressed cDNAs.
After this event, the differentially expressed type e molecules
are filled with DNA polymerase to make different annealing
sites for the nested primers on their 5´ and 3´ ends. The whole
population of molecules is subjected to PCR to amplify the
differentially expressed sequences. During this process, type a
and type d molecules cannot be amplified because they lack
primer annealing sites. Due to the suppression effect, type b
molecules cannot undergo the amplification process. Type c
molecules have only one primer site and can only be amplified
linearly. Only the type e molecules are equalized and
differentially sequenced with two adaptors and can be
amplified exponentially. () represents a schematic
diagram of PCR-select cDNA subtraction based on SSH
method. The overview of SSH method described above is
adopted from [], therefore the readers are requested to read
the above article for more details to set up the SSH-based
experiment.

Bioinformatics methods for analysis of sequence data:
Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs) analysis:
Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs) are single-pass reads of
approximately 200-800 base pairs (bp) generated from
randomly selected cDNA clones. Since they represent the
expressed portion of a genome, ESTs have proven to be
extremely useful for gene identification and verification of gene
predictions. They therefore represent a low-cost alternative to
full genome sequences. () represents how the Expressed
Sequence Tags (ESTs) are generated by SSH-based sequencing
method.

Transcriptome assembly:
Bioinformatics tools are required to produce reliable, high
quality data devoid of unwanted sequences in the preprocessing
stage of EST projects. Pre-processing includes
removing low-quality sequences, contaminant sequences (from
vector to any other artifacts), and special features (like Poly-A
tail or adaptors). Bioinformatics tools used in this process are
LUCY2 [], 
SeqClean (
http://compbio.dfci.harvard.edu/tgi)
and PreGap4 []. Most of the transcriptomic studies for nonmodel
organisms use the sequence assembly as a first step to
generate contiguous sequences (contigs) that consist of
overlapping reads to provide a consensus-based full length
transcript. Multiple algorithms for de novo alignment have been
developed, including: CAP3 [], PHRAP 
(
http: //www.phrap.org/phredphrap/phrap.html), VELVET 
[] and MIRA 
[].
Many assembler programs are available, which differ in details
in their algorithmic development process. For example: CAP3 is
based on Overlap-Layout Consensus (OLC) strategy, MIRA
uses a hybrid-based method, whereas VELVET uses a graphbased
approach. In terms of sensitivity, accuracy and memory
requirement, CAP3 is memory intensive due to n2 complexity of
OLC-based method, whereas VELVET is less memory intensive
as based on graph models []. Assembly programs are also
available commercially; a few of them are as follows: ‘CLC
Genomics Workbench’, ‘DNASTAR’, ‘AVADIS’, etc.
Transcriptome are assembled from shorter reads that vary in
size, depending on the sequencing technology used. Contigs are
created from these shorter reads by comparing all reads against
each other. If the sequence identity and overlap length pass a
certain threshold value, they are grouped together into a contig.
For example, the following parameters have been used for
processing transcriptomic datasets for the burying beetle,
Nicrophorus vespilloides []. Vector clipping, quality trimming
and sequence assembly using stringent conditions (e.g. high
quality sequence trimming parameters, 95% sequence identity
cutoff, 25 bp overlap) was done with the Lasergene software
package (DNASTAR Inc., Madison, WI; USA). ()
represents an overview of the EST analysis, which generates the
consensus sequences.

Homology based detection:
Homology based search is the best method for determining
function by using NCBI Blastx algorithm, either installed locally
to consume less time for large datasets, or achieved through the
use of the NCBI online server []. The Blastx program and
associated databases may be downloaded for local Blast
sequence searches (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/executables/LATEST/). Blast2GO offers a comprehensive suite
tool for Blasting, with an advanced functional annotation 
[].
SwissProt protein database provides a high level of annotations,
a minimal level of redundancy and a high level of integration
with other databases, and thus is preferred for functional
annotation. After a Blastx search, sequences may be compared
to other nucleotide sequences with the program Blastn, or
translated and compared to translate sequences using tBlastn to
identify other unique sequences where Blastx did not work.
However, Blastx is the first choice, since amino acid sequence is
more conserved than nucleotide sequences. The statistical
significant expectation value (E-value) predicts the probability
that two sequences are related by chance. It is an important
statistical parameter in performing Blast because setting E-value
too low may create a false relationship, while setting high Evalue
presents the chance of excluding real sequences. As a
consequence, by increasing the sequence length, the probability
of finding significant Blast hits also increases. In real practice,
performing Blast at low E-value and small sequence overlap
length initially, and then filtering the results based on the
distribution of hits obtained, may improve the obtainment of
significant results from homology based approach. In the case
of the Nicrophorus transcriptome analysis, first, sequences were
searched against the NCBI non-redundant (nr) protein database
using an E-value cut-off of 10-3, with predicted polypeptides of
a minimum length of 15 amino acids. Second, sequences
retrieving no BLASTx hit were searched again by BLASTn,
against an NCBI nr nucleotide database using an E-value cut-off
of 10−10 [].

Gene Ontology based functional annotation:
Gene Ontology (GO) is a bioinformatics initiative that provides
structural and controlled vocabulary of genes and genes
products, to describe their cellular phenomena in terms of
‘Biological Process’, ‘Molecular Function’, and ‘Cellular
Components’. Along with this, the GO Consortium provides
tools for easy access to all aspects of the data provided by the
project []. The interesting part of GO analysis is that GO
vocabulary terms do not directly describe the gene or protein;
rather, they describe the phenomenon of the gene or product of
the gene. Gene Ontology annotation program is integrated with
Blast2GO or can be used directly by Gene Ontology database,
which can be accessed at http://www.geneontology.org/.
Enzyme classification codes, and KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of
Genes and Genomes) metabolic pathway annotations, were
generated from the direct mapping of GO terms onto their
enzyme code equivalents by Blast2GO software program.
() describes in details about the functional annotation of
genes, which can be applied for functional characterization of
genes from prokaryotes as well as eukaryotes.

Discussion
Transcriptome of an organism is defined as its complete
repertoire of transcripts, including its splice variants. SSHbased
gene identification method was introduced as a costeffective
approach for rapid discovery and characterization of
novel genes. mRNA expression varies- some are highly
expressed in a cell while others are found in tiny amount. In
whole transcriptomic sequencing project, a very large number
of transcripts has to be sequenced, and to achieve this kind of
goal, EST-project would be costly from an economic point of
view. Thus for small scale EST-projects, SSH-based method is
being used by different research laboratories around the globe.
On the other hand, there are disadvantages in using SSH-based
approach; like chances of missing rare transcripts, limited for
gene expression studies, contigs generated are partial in length
etc. In order to avoid missing rare transcript, normalization
techniques have been devised to decrease the relative
representation of the abundant transcript while increasing that
of rare transcripts. SSH-based method is used to reduce the
representation of transcripts already surveyed in previous
libraries, as well as to enrich the sequences that are
differentially expressed among specific tissues, cell types, etc.
However, the possibility of missing rare transcripts by SSHbased
method cannot be excluded, as in case of Nicrophorus
vespilloides, we did not able to identify lysozyme 
[]. In recent
times due to the popularity of high throughput sequencing
techniques, SSH may be replaced by NGS technologies. The
benefits of using RNA-Seq include high resolution, high
dynamic range of expression (&gt;8000 fold), low background
noise, and the ability to identify allele specific expression and
different isoforms []. The use of sequence data from NGS
technologies is considered as a powerful tool for differential
gene expression analysis as well as for the fully comprehensive
measurements of lower-abundance-class RNAs [–].
Nevertheless, it is advisable to perform SSH-based approach for
generating small scale cDNAs before investing into NGS
technologies for whole transcriptome sequencing. To have a
better understanding of the molecular and cellular mechanisms
behind disease progression or biological development, the
identification of differentially expressed genes has been
important. So in recent times, the SSH-based method, have been
used to identify the differential expressed genes linked to
diseases or developmental process or to identify immuneinducible
genes in insects upon challenged with microbes. Of
note, the workflow described in this article is also applied for
analysis of data derived from NGS technologies.

Supplementary material
Data 1
I want to acknowledge my family, especially my father Mr. S. C.
Badapanda, for his constant support and encouragement during
my PhD Work. Also my special thanks to my friend Subhanjan
Mohanty, who has supported me on this journey in so many
different ways and on so many different levels.

Citation:Badapanda, Bioinformation 9(4): 216-221 (2013)

Schematic diagram of PCR-select cDNA subtraction.
Tester and driver cDNAs were prepared from the total RNA of
each treatment (control versus treatment). Suppression subtractive
hybridization was performed using PCR-Select
cDNA Subtraction kit (Clontech Laboratories, Inc.). Forward
and reverse subtraction libraries were constructed using cDNA
samples of control versus treatment. The subtracted cDNAs
were subjected to two rounds of PCR to normalize and enrich
cDNA populations. The PCR products were sub-cloned into
respective vector. Type a and type d molecules, devoid of
primer annealing sites, cannot be amplified, type b molecules,
being suppressed, cannot undergo the amplification process,
type c molecules have only one primer site and can only be
amplified linearly, and type e is differentially expressed, having
only two adapters. This figure is adopted from 
[].

Graphical representation of Expressed Sequence Tags
(ESTs). Expressed sequence tags, or ESTs, are single DNA
sequencing reads made from complementary DNAs
(cDNAs).Cellular mRNA is extracted from the tissue, it is
reverse transcribed to produce DNA complementary to the
initial mRNA, and incorporated into a plasmid, with
appropriate vectors and linkers.

An overview of the EST analysis. EST pre-processing
can be achieved by contamination check, vector sequence and
poly-A removal, masking the repeats in the transcripts,
followed by clustering and assembly of ESTs to generate
contigs. Expressed Sequence Tags in FASTA format can be
submitted to phase I for EST pre-processing. SeqClean 
(http://compbio.dfci.harvard.edu/tgi/) accepts ESTs in FASTA format,
and performs vector removal, poly-A removal, trimming of low
quality segments at the 5′ and 3′ ends and cleaning of low
complexity regions. The output from SeqClean is processed by
RepeatMasker (http://www.repeatmasker.org/) to mask
repeats. CAP3 [] then accepts repeat-masked high quality EST
sequences and performs clustering and assembly into contigs.
Alternatively, these pre-processing of ESTs can be achieved
with DNASTAR (Medison USA) or CLC Genomics Workbench.
The assembled ESTs may be submitted for functional
annotation (phases II and III) either locally or through
BLAST2GO suite tool.

