Background
QT prolongation with possible fatal TdP arrhythmia is a common cause of drug
attrition and relabeling or withdrawals from the market 
[]. Thus cardiac
liability testing of the compounds during the development process has gained
increased regulatory and public attention. The major cause of QT prolongation
is connected with a direct block of the hERG channel responsible for the
delayed rectifier potassium current (IKr) in cardiomyocytes by nonantiarrhythmic
drugs. A wide variety of preclinical in vitro studies are
employed to evaluate the drug-hERG interactions potential. The accepted and
recommended standard assay is the measurement of the patch clamp current
obtained by the expression of hERG in heterologous mammalian cells.
However the Patch Clamp technique is time-consuming, labor-intensive,
provides relatively low throughput and generates high costs thus is not
appropriate at the early stage of the drug development process. Therefore
insilico screening tests become appreciable and are widely used 
[]. Numerous
molecules or concentrations can be processed simultaneously. Although the
availability and quality of the datasets used at the models development stage
are crucial factors. The high sensitivity of the measured channel's inhibition on
the experimental settings (i.e. cell models, temperature) is a well-known
phenomenon which cannot be bypassed and has to be considered in the data 
[,
]. 
It can be done either at the data preprocessing level with the use of the intersettings
extrapolation factors or during the modeling stage by introducing
additional parameters.

Methodology of development
As the first step, a preliminary list of drugs known or suspected to have
cardiotoxic potential has been created, using Fenichel's database 
[], the
International Registry for Drug Induced Arrhytmias - Arizona resources 
[] and
Roche []. 
Drugs reported to block the hERG channel or IKr were included,
whereas compounds influencing the cardiac action potential in any other way
were excluded from the dataset. In order to collect experimental IC50 values
for hERG of listed drugs Scopus, Medline and Google Scholar searches were
performed for each drug. There was no time-limit for the search query. Key
phrases were: the name of the compound of interest and ‘IC50’, or ‘hERG’, or
‘Human Ether-A-Go-Go’, or ‘potassium channel’, or ‘potassium current’ or
‘IKr’ either in the article title, keywords or abstract. If there were no results for a
combination of a compound name with any keyword, the compound's class
name was used in the query. The recovered reports were scrutinized for
additional references not covered by the electronic search. In addition to halfmaximal
inhibitory concentration (IC50 value), papers were revised for
additional information describing experimental settings. The complete set of
information was gained only for experiments performed with one of the three
most popular expression systems: Xenopus oocytes, Human Embryonic Kidney
cells, Chinese Hamster Ovary cells, and if they employed electrophysiology
assessments. All information was tracked down to the original source, validated
over the citing article and described by both of them to allow the users to
recognize them unequivocally [].

Utility
The obtained dataset is an up to date collection of hERG IC50 values with
experimental details culled from available scientific literature sources. It
contains 263 molecular entries, totaling 642 records concerning different in
vitro measurements. The dataset provides information about the factors with a
possible influence on IC50 value such as the model applied in experiments,
measurement techniques, transfection types, experimental conditions
(temperature and K+ concentration in external solution) and voltage protocol
(protocol type: step, ramp, step-ramp; holding potential, depolarization
potential, measurement potential; depolarization pulse time). This allows the
generation of a consistent, homogenous input dataset in order to obtain high
quality and efficient mathematical models. The molecules included in the
dataset cover a wide range of IC50 values (10 orders of magnitude) and a broad
chemical space encompassing drug-specific physico-chemical properties.

Caveats
The main limitations of the dataset result from the assumptions made − there is
a limited number of cell models included, heterogeneity of the measurement
methods used is high (lack of a standard procedure).

Availability and future developments
The described dataset is freely available for download from the project website
for commercial and non-commercial use []. Its development is part of the
larger project aiming to deliver software for hERG channel inhibition
prediction. The models used are based on the described dataset completed with
the drugs physico-chemical parameters. The algorithms utilized cover artificial
neural networks and RandomForests []. Future development plans include a
regular dataset upgrade based on the newly published peer-reviewed articles.
Also being considered is the expansion of the dataset by adding new cell
models (i.e. guinea pig ventricular myocytes). As other ionic currents are
nowadays recognized as important (i.e. IKs, INa) it is planned to expand the
project from a single dataset to a database by adding new sets of information.

Citation:Polak et al Bioinformation 6(6): 244-245 (2011)

