Background
A fumigatus is the most common opportunistic pathogen that
causes life-threatening invasive aspergillosis (IA) in
immunocompromised patients. The risk of developing IA
results primarily from a dysfunction in host defense mechanism
in combination with fungal attributes that permits the survival
and growth of A. fumigatus during infection []. Due to the lack
of effective and safe antifungal therapeutics, the fungal cell wall
and the underlying associated biosynthetic enzyme of
pathogenic moulds have been placed in the spotlight in recent
research. It is now evident that the fungal cell wall is a
conserved and highly dynamic structure and their components
are essential for virulence and viability of fungal pathogens 
[].
The identification and study of these multifunctional molecules
that help and promote the growth of A. fumigatus in the host
during infection, may divulge unique infection mechanisms that
could lead to new control measures for aspergillosis. β-(1,3)-
glucans is a predominant cell wall polysaccharide of most
medically important fungi, including A. fumigatus, and is
thought to be responsible for the shape and rigidity of the wall
[]. 
The organization of the β-(1,3)-glucans in the fungal cell
wall is poorly known and it has been suggested that β-(1,3)-
endoglucanase activities are essential for the continuous
rearrangement of the wall β-(1,3)-glucans during fungal growth
[]. 
These enzymes catalyze the hydrolysis of the substrate by
two possible mechanisms: (a) β-(1,3)-exo-glucanases hydrolyze
the substrate by sequentially cleaving glucose residues from the
nonreducing end, (b) β-(1,3)-endo-glucanases cleave β-linkages
at apparently random sites along the polysaccharide chain,
releasing smaller oligosaccharides []. Because of their mode of
action, β-(1,3)-endo-glucanases have a more prominent action
on the cell wall than β-(1,3)-exo-glucanases, especially in the
morphological events such as germination and branching which
require plasticizing of the wall structure. The β-(1,3)-endoglucanases
of A. fumigatus is able to act directly on the β-(1,3)-
glucans polymers of the entire cell wall allowing for hyphal
branching as well as for germ tube emergence; and also seems
to play role in formation numerous of free reducing and nonreducing
ends necessary for the activity of β-(1,3)-glucanosy1
transferases identified in the periplasmic space of fungi 
[,
].
Although these hydrolytic enzymes are believed to play cell
wall remodeling roles during growth and morphogenesis in
filamentous fungi, they may play multiple physiological roles,
which have not been fully elucidated in A. fumigatus 
[]. We
have recently reported the immunodominant nature of β-(1,3)-
endo-glucanases isolated from A. fumigatus by the application of
immuno-proteomics approach and is considered to have
diagnostic potential as well as can be targeted as vaccine
candidate []. Information on fungal β-(1,3)-endo-glucanases is
very limited and their exact role during cell wall ontogeny is not
well known. Despite extensive studies of β-(1,3)-endoglucanases,
no structural information has been reported to date
on their mode of interaction with oligosaccharide ligands. It is
clear that computer-based homology modeling and docking
studies can be useful in the identification of conserved residues
essential for catalysis and structural domains responsible for the
regulation of enzyme activity. In the present study the
homology modeling and docking analysis of a β-(1,3)-endoglucanases
from A. fumigatus were performed. The results
provided new insight into molecular interactions of active site
residues with substrates for the enzymatic function.

Methodology
Retrieval of target sequence:
The 727 amino acid long sequence of ENGL1 from Aspergillus
fumigatus was obtained from the Protein sequence database of
NCBI and blasted [] against Protein Data Bank (PDB) entries
to find similar sequences.

Characterization of target sequence:
Subcellular localization of protein using amino acid
composition was achieved by MultiLoc []. NetNGlyc 1.0
Server predicted N-Glycosylation sites using artificial neural
networks. Physiochemical properties such as molecular weight,
theoretical pI, total number of negatively (Asp+Glu) and
positively (Arg+Lys) charged residues, extinction coefficients,
instability index, aliphatic index and grand average of
hydropathicity (GRAVY) [] of the mature protein were
computed using Expasy's ProtParam Proteomics server [].

Protein Topology prediction:
Secondary structure of the protein ENGL1 from Aspergillus
fumigatus was calculated with PSIPRED (http: //bioinf.cs.ucl.ac.uk/ psipred) 
and disulfide bonds were predicted by
the Cys_REC tool (http://sunl.softberry.com/berry.phtml?topic).

Homology modeling:
Homology modeling was used to generate a reliable 3D model
of ENGL1 protein by MODELLER 9.10 []. The model
predicted by MODELLER in our study was of poor quality with
inappropriate folded conformation as a good quality model
could not be obtained even by using multiple templates. Hence,
ENGL1 structure was predicted using the online protein
structure and function prediction server I-TASSER 
[] which
uses the threading technique to predict the 3D models. By the
use of this server, 5 best models based on multiple-threading
alignments and iterative template fragment assembly
simulations along with their confidence scores were generated.
These 5 models were visualized by the Accelrys DS 2.0 software
(Accelrys Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) and evaluated using
different validation techniques.

Model refinement and evaluation:
The stereo chemical quality and accuracy of the predicted
model was evaluated with PROCHECK [] by Ramachandran
plot analysis []. The best model was selected on the basis of
overall G-factor, number of residues in core, allowed,
generously allowed and disallowed regions. The selected model
was further put to analysis by VERIFY 3D [] and finally the
protein was analysed with Accelrys DS 2.0.

Docking Studies:
The structure of substrate β-(1,3)-glucan was obtained from
NCBI PubChem and the docking was performed using CDOCKER.
The C-DOCKER protocol is an implementation of the
C-DOCKER algorithm [] in the DS environment which allows
running a refinement docking of any number of ligands with a
single protein receptor. C-DOCKER is a grid-based molecular
docking method that employs CHARMm. The ligand was
added with H (Hydrogen) atoms using DS. The models were
energy minimized with CHARMm force field before
performing docking. The receptor is held rigid while the ligand
is allowed to flex during the refinement and the docking was
performed using default settings. At the end of docking, the
best conformation of the ligand was analyzed for its binding
interactions.

Results &amp; Discussion
All the information about a protein's biological function cannot
be ascertained by mere knowledge of its primary sequence or
the secondary structure. It is therefore, essential to know its
tertiary structure. Additionally, the 3D structure of ENGL1 has
not been reported in RCSB PDB Data bank. BLASTp similarity
search was performed against PDB data base but no significant
results with complete query coverage were obtained. 3D model
of ENGL1 protein (Q9UVV0) was predicted by homology
modeling using MODELLER 9.10 with multiple templates. The
obtained 3D structure was of poor quality with inappropriate
folded conformations. Therefore, the automated 3D structure of
ENGL1 from Aspergillus fumigatus was predicted based on the
sequence-to-structure-to-function paradigm using I-TASSER
(). The stereochemical quality of ENGL1 structure was
checked by PROCHECK () and the Ramachandran plot
for ENGL1 has been illustrated in . Altogether more
than 90% of the residues were found to be in favored and
allowed regions, which validate the quality of homology model.
The overall G-factor for ENGL1 was found to be -0.22 which is
greater than the acceptable value -0.50, and therefore suggested
that the modeled structure is acceptable. The modeled structure
was also validated by another structure verification server
Verify 3D which assigned a 3D-1D score of &gt;0.2 for the modeled
protein  (see supplementary material). This implies that
the model is compatible with its sequence and the 3D structure
predicted by I-TASSER proved to be of good quality with
proper folded conformation. Multiloc predicted the protein to
be of extracellular in nature and furthermore four asparagines
residues were found to be N-glycosylated based on analysis of
results obtained by NetNGlyc server. It has been suggested that
glycosylation of asparagines residues is required for correct
folding of protein before being exported. The physiochemical
properties of protein were computed using Expasy ProtParam
tools and are presented in  (see supplementary
material). The computed isoelectric point (pI value) of protein
determined to be 5.09, which is less than 7 (pI&lt;7), revealing the
acidic nature of protein. This computed isoelectric point (pI)
may be useful for developing buffer system for purification by
isoelectric focusing method. Total predicted negative residues of
ENGL1 protein are more in comparison to positive residues.
These results also supported the acidic nature of the target
protein. A high extinction coefficient value of protein was
obtained, indicating the presence of high concentration of Trp
and Tyr which helps in the quantitative study of protein-protein
and protein-ligand interactions in solution. Further, stability of
the protein was studied by analyzing the values for instability
index, aliphatic index and Grand average of hydropathicity
(GRAVY) index. The predicted Instability index of the target
protein was 36.65 which reveals that ENGL1 protein is
thermostable because Instability index of a protein smaller than
40 makes it stable while more than 40 considered as unstable.
The aliphatic index (AI) which is defined as the relative volume
of a protein occupied by aliphatic side chain is regarded as the
positive factor for the increase of thermal stability of globular
proteins. The high aliphatic index of protein infers that this
protein may be stable for a wide range of temperature. The very
low GRAVY index of protein infers that this protein could result
in a better interaction with water. The results of CYS_REC
indicated that the percentage of Cysteine (C) was found to be
very low in the target protein resulting in absence of disulphide
bond linkages  (see supplementary material). It is
assumed that in absence disulphide bonds the stability of this
protein may be due to extensive hydrogen bonding. The
secondary structure of target protein ENGL1 were predicted
and analyzed by PSIPRED view and were shown in ().
This protein has mixed secondary structures i.e. alpha-helices,
beta-strands and coils. The predicted structure of protein
ENGL1 from Aspergillus fumigatus was successfully deposited in
Protein Model Database (PMDB) []. This 3D structure may be
further used in characterizing the protein experimentally. The
predicted model was flexibly docked with ligand using CDOCKER
where out of ten poses produced, the best ligand pose
was selected based on C-DOCKER top score and the target
structure was chosen for further analysis. The ligand poses were
analyzed and a heat map was produced to count H bonds made
by the poses to the receptor molecule and count close contacts
(van der Waals clashes) between the poses and receptor
molecule. Interestingly no Van der Waals clashes were observed
between the ligand and the modeled structure. Docking results
indicated that amino acid residues (GLU 380, GLN 383, ASP
384, TYR 395, SER 712, and ARG 713)  in the protein
play an important role in maintaining a functional conformation
and directly involved in ligand binding. These residues
interacted with substrate molecule by forming hydrogen bonds
and all the hydrogen bond distances between ENGL1 and β-
glucan complex were observed within the range of 2.76 Å to
3.18 Å  (see supplementary material). The negative and
low value of binding energy as well as maximum hydrogen
bonding illustrated the occurrence of strong and most favorable
binding between protein and ligand molecule.

Conclusion
Precise evaluation and modeling of proteins is a major goals
and key aspect of computational Biology. In the present study
we have generated for the first time a good quality and reliable
homology 3D-model of protein ENGL1 from A. fumigatus.
Different parameters such as isoelectric point, molecular weight,
and total number of positive and negative residues, extinction
coefficient, instability index, aliphatic index and grand average
hydropathy (GRAVY) were computed for this protein in order
to determine its physiochemical characteristics. This protein
was found to be deficient in amino acid cystein that results in
lack of disulphide linkages. In the absence of disulphide bond,
extensive hydrogen bonding is believed to be responsible for
stability of these proteins. Further Docking analysis with
substrate identified important amino acids for catalytic
function. The structure generated in the present study may
serve as cornerstone for functional analysis of experimentally
derived crystal structures and can be of great importance
especially in unlocking the full potential of β-1,3- endoglucanase
enzymes.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors are thankful to Director CSIR-CDRI for providing
facilities and Rizwan Ahmed is thankful to Indian Council of
Medical Research for Senior Research Fellowship. CDRI
Communication No. 8536

Citation:Ahmed et al, Bioinformation 9(16): 802-807 (2013)

A) Homology model of ENGL1: Helix, Beta sheets and turns are in red, cyan and gray colour respectively; B) The
Ramachandran plot of modeled structure validated by PROCHECK program.

Secondary structure elements as predicted by PSIPRED

A) Docking of ligand in protein cleft: The ligand (pink) and interacting residues(purple) are shown in stick format and
green dotted lines represent H-bond; B) Active site residues (purple) and their interaction with ligand(pink); C) Molecular surfaces:
showing channel for substrate binding

