Background
Proteins are the most abundant biological macromolecules
occurring in a cell and all parts of cells. They are the chief
actors, said to be carrying out the duties specified by the
information encoded in genes [,
]. Needed by the human
body importantly for growth and maintenance, there are
different sources of proteins. Among them, pulses are
important cereals due to their high protein and essential amino
acid content []. 
Pulses are used as food and animal feed and
provide protein, complex carbohydrates and several vitamins
and minerals. Like other plant based foods, they contain
cholesterol and little fat or sodium. They are 20-25% protein by
weight, which is double the protein content of wheat and three
times that of rice. Although pulses are generally high in protein
content and the digestibility of that protein is also high, they
often are relatively poor in the essential amino acid methionine
[,
]. 
In South Asia especially in Indian subcontinent, people
are habituated to take rice and pulse as their daily meal 
[,
].
Rice is the staple food of over half the world’s population. It
is the predominant dietary energy source for the countries of
Asia and the pacific region, 9 countries of North and South
America and 8 countries of Africa. Rice provides 20% of the
world’s dietary energy supply. It is a good source of protein
and carbohydrates that is required for energy. 
[] Essential
amino acids are those that are mandatory for good health but
cannot be synthesized by the body and so must be
supplemented through the diet. There are ten amino acids
generally considered essential for humans 
[,
]. However, rice
and pulse are good sources of these essential amino acids 
[]. If
the types of pulses or rice which provide more essential amino
acids could be found, it will be easy to fulfill our daily nutrients
requirements []. 
A comparative study was performed among
cicer arietinum, Lens culinaris 
and Pisum sativum to understand
which supplies more essential amino acids. In order to analyze
essential amino acid compositions, we considered two common
proteins e.g. - Lectin and Histone H1 from cicer arietinum, Pisum
sativum, and Lens culinaris. Computational analysis showed that
Lectin and Histone H1 are relatively poor in the essential amino
acid methionine. The main purpose of our study was to observe
the essential amino acids we can identify from pulses and if it is
lacking, to provide sufficient essential amino acids that can
fulfill our daily essential amino acid requirements. Apart from
this, another study was done to see how many essential amino
acids are obtained from Oryza sativa Lectin protein or if it
provided sufficient amino acids especially Methionine. In order
to maintain a balanced diet which will provide more essential
amino acids [], 
the amino acid compositions and their
secondary structures were compared 
[].

Methodology
Sequence Retrieval:
The amino acid sequence of lectin, histone H1 and actin from 3
pulse species including Lens culinaris, Cicer arietinum and Pisum
sativum and a rice species Oryza sativa indica were retrieved
from the national center for biotechnology information (NCBI)
resource [] with the following accession numbers
AAS55887.1, AA062538.2, AAA33675.1 for lectin protein of Lens
culinaris, Cicer arietinum and Pisum sativum respectively and
AAK29456.1, CAA07233.1, AAA50303.1 for histone H1 protein
of Lens culinaris, Cicer arietinum and Pisum sativum respectively.
The sequence of Cicer arietinum and Oryza sativa indica have
accession number as ACD37723.1, CAA33874.1 for actin and
AA062538.2, AAD27889.1 for lectin successively.

Analysis of amino acid composition:
To evaluate the amino acid composition and physiochemical
properties, ProtParam was used. It is available on ExPASY 
[].

Multiple sequence alignment:
The amino acid sequence of lectin and histone H1 from
different pulse species were aligned along with each other
using Clustalw2 [].

Secondary structure analysis:
GOR was used to compare and analyse the secondary structure
of amino acid sequences. [].

Results
Sequence analysis from gene bank showed that the protein
lectin contains 268 amino acids in cicer arietinum whereas it
contains 229 amino acids in Lens culinaris, and 265 amino acids
in Pisum sativum. According to the ProtParam result, lectin
protein of Lens culinaris contains 48.9% of essential amino acids,
cicer arietinum contains 52%, and Pisum sativum, 52.1% essential
amino acids () respectively. In case of histone H1
protein () Cicer arietinum comprised of 188 amino acids,
Lens culinaris contains 293 amino acids and Pisum sativum
contains 185 amino acids. Protparam indicated that the
percentage of essential amino acids for histone H1 protein was
40.9% in Lens culinaris, 55.3% 
in cicer arietinum and 55.2% in
Pisum sativum ().

The length of amino acid sequences and percentage of essential
amino acids are found to be similar between Pisum sativum and
cicer arietinum than Lens culinaris. Analysis of lectin and histone
H1 protein among these three species of pulses using Clustal
W2 showed the changes in amino acid sequences and their
multiple sequence alignment (shown respectively in 
and ).

Secondary structure analysis was also done with GOR to
compare secondary structural changes in these significant
positions of amino acids changes (Also in 
and ). In
count of total food value, whole, dried, boiled cicer arietinum
contains 27.4gm of carbohydrates, 9.5gm of protein, 2.5gm of
lipid, per 100gm, whereas Pisum sativum contains 25.2gm
carbohydrate, 9.2gm Protein, 1gm fatty acid per 100gm dried
pea. 100gm of dried, boiled Lens culinaris contains 9gm protein,
20gm carbohydrates and 0.4gm of fatty acid. cicer arietinum and
Oryza sativa indica were compared in terms of lectin and actin
that were common in both. cicer arietinum contains 268 amino
acids and Oryza sativa indica contains 200 amino acids for lectin.
Both contains 377 amino acids for actin protein. Comparative
analysis of essential amino acid composition with ProtParam
indicated that actin of cicer arietinum contains 48.2% of essential
amino acids, while that of Oryza sativa indica contains 47.8%
(). Further, lectin protein contains 52% essential
amino acid in cicer arietinum and 21.5% in Oryza sativa indica
(). Computational analysis showed that Lectin and
Histone H1 were relatively poor in the essential amino acid
such as methionine, however, Oryza sativa provided sufficient
amino acids especially methionine. Analysis of secondary
structure, changes in amino acid sequences and multiple
sequence alignment with GOR was done for actin and lectin
protein of cicer arietinum and Oryza sativa indica.

Discussion
With reference to the analysis of pulse proteins, lectin and
histone H1 are good sources of essential amino acids.
ProtParam results from the study ( and ) show the
composition of essential amino acids of lectin and histone H1
among cicer arietinum, Lens culinaris, Pisum sativum. It also
shows that Lens culinaris provided less number of essential
amino acids than cicer arietinum and Pisum sativum 
( and ). It also showed that the other two types of pulses e.g.;
cicer arietinum and Pisum sativum provided more essential
amino acids than Lens culinaris ( and ). One of the
main aims of our experiment was to observe the amino acids
composition among three types of pulses. Accordingly,
ProtParam results indicate that Lens culinaris did not provide
many essential amino acids as compared to cicer arietinum and
Pisum sativum ( and ). It can thus be said that cicer
arietinum and Pisum sativum is better than Lens culinaris as they
provide more essential amino acids ( and ).

A comparison between Pisum sativum and cicer arietinum
showed that both were good sources of essential amino acids. In
count of total food value, cicer arietinum contains more proteins
per 100 gm (discussed in results) []. Similarly, lectin and
histone H1 proteins of the three pulses were compared by
clustalW2 software to study the similarities among them. This
showed that there were more similarities between Pisum
sativum and cicer arietinum. The secondary structures of two
proteins were also analysed by GOR software which helped
predict the functions of proteins (
and ).

Our ProtParam results indicate that cicer arietinum provides
more essential amino acids than Lens culinaris and Pisum
sativum, but it does not provide all the essential amino acids at
high concentration such as methionine for our body. In order to
maintain a balanced diet providing us with all the essential
amino acids that would be better for us. For this reason, we
analyzed rice with pulses. Actin and lectin protein are common
proteins between cicer arietinum and Oryza sativa (indica).
ProtParam results showed that actin and lectin proteins of
Oryza sativa (indica) provides a good numbers of essential
amino acids which can be the supplement to pulse proteins
( and ).Histone H1 of cicer arietinum provides 1.1%
methionine and lectin of cicer arietinum provides 0.4%
methionine whereas actin protein of Oryza sativa (indica)
provides 4.5% of methionine and lectin protein of Oryza sativa
(indica) provides 1.5% 0f methionine ( and ). Other
essential amino acids that cannot be found properly from pulse
proteins could be supplemented by rice proteins. As essential
amino acids are needed considerably in our body, we can make
a balanced diet which will provide all the essential amino acids
better []. For this purpose, our computational study revealed
that cicer arietinum and Oryza sativa (indica) could be a good
combination in case of essential amino acids.

Conclusion
The types of amino-acids in lectin and histone H1 protein were
found to be almost similar. cicer arietinum contains more
essential amino acid than Lens culinaris and Pisum sativum.
Hence, lectin and histone proteins are suggested alternative to
meat and fish for balanced diet with rice.

The authors sincerely acknowledge Md. Monirul Islam, Ahsan
Habib and Kutub Uddin Sumon (Students of Genetic
Engineering &amp; Biotechnology Dept., University of Chittagong)
for providing the necessary facilities throughout the study.

Citation:Hasan et al, Bioinformation 8(4): 196-200 (2012)

ProtParam result for amino acid composition of (A) histone H1 protein of Lens culinaris, cicer arietinum and Pisum sativum
(B) lectin protein of Lens culinaris, cicer arietinum and Pisum sativum (C) lectin protein of cicer arietinum and Oryza sativa (D) actin
protein of cicer arietinum and Oryza sativa.

GOR result of lectin protein for Lens culinaris, cicer arietinum and Pisum sativum.

GOR result of histone H1 protein for Lens culinaris, cicer arietinum and Pisum sativum

