Background
The parasitic nematodes are commonly found in humans, rats,
pigs, plants and other species. Various types of PPNs are
causing infections to worldwide consumed crops like Glycine
max, Triticum spp., Oryza spp. and Solanaceae spp 
[]. The vital life
processes of PPNs mainly depend upon carbohydrate
metabolism. The probe of the glycolytic pathway offers insight
into development of controlling strategies based on energy
production []. FBPA is a key enzyme of Glycolytic pathway
and responsible for the reversible cleavage of fructose 1, 6-
bisphosphate (FBP) to glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (G3P) and
dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) []. This enzyme also
catalyzes the segmentation of structurally related sugar
phosphates including fructose 1-phosphate (Fru 1-P) an
intermediate of fructose metabolism. FBPA has standard
classification number EC 4.1.2.13 and classified into two classes:
Class-I and Class-II. With little exception in both class, aldolase
are characterized more in vertebrates and lesser in invertebrates
[,
]. Tissue specific class I aldolase are found in animals,
plants, green algae and other higher organism 
[]. Three unique
forms of class I aldolase have been determined in various
tissues of vertebral species, including human. These are
aldolase A (found in skeletal muscle and red blood cells),
aldolase B (found in small intestine, liver and kidney), and
aldolase C (found in smooth muscle and neuronal tissues) 
[].
These forms are differentiable on the basis of immunological
and kinetic properties []. The class-II aldolase is commonly
present in lower organism e.g. bacteria, yeasts, fungi etc. Class-
II is divided into group A and B depending upon insertion or
deletion in amino acid sequences. Group A, enzymes play
major function in glycolysis and gluconeogenesis, while group
B enzymes are more heterogeneous and has diverse metabolic
roles and substrate specificities [].

The catalytic mechanism of class I and class II aldolase have
been extensively studied and it is different in both classes. The
class I enzymes use reactive lysine residue in the active site to
stabilize a reaction intermediate via Schiff-base formation 
[,
]. While the class-II enzymes polarize the substrate carbonyl
by using divalent metal ion generally zinc. Although tertiary
structures of both classes form the (β/α)8 barrel fold, also
known as the TIM barrel fold, which shares the same overall
fold but do not share any significant sequence homology or
common catalytic residues as well as distinct location of their
active sites []. In present work, we have found out the
evolutionary relationship between all available characterized
aldolase sequences from nematodes till date. In addition,
belonging class and their catalytic mechanism of PPNs aldolase
sequences have been dug out using comparative sequence
analysis and structural biology approaches.

Methodology
Collection of FBPA protein sequences:
The EMBL, NCBI and Uni-port protein databases were searched
with individual key word like aldolase, Fructose-bisphosphate
aldolase and Fructose 1, 6-bisphosphate aldolase of nematodes,
browsed protein sequences were screened and downloaded. All
incomplete sequences were excluded from dataset. Two or
more complete sequences which were having 100% sequence
identity as determined by the EMBOSS pair wise alignment
tool, were removed from dataset []. For each aldolase
sequence the locus number, name of the protein, experimentally
determined functions and associated references were collected.
In our dataset each sequence was allocated a specific name
which has a reference code followed by scientific name of the
nematodes.

Sequence and Phylogenetic analysis:
Multiple sequence alignment (MSA) of dataset sequences were
performed by online ClustalW2 Tool []. For initial pair wise
alignment, Gonnet protein weight matrix (GPWM) with gap
opening penalty 10 and a gap extension penalty 0.1 have been
used. For multiple alignments, gap opening penalty 10, gap
extension penalty 0.1, GPWM and 5 tree iteration (by Neighbor-
Joining method) have been used. To assist comparison between
PPNs (Globodera rostochiensis (FBPA_GR) and Heterodera glycines
(FBPA_HG)) and other nematodes sequences were included in
the alignment. It helped us to find out the percentage similarity
of FBPA sequences of PPNs with other dataset sequences. The
alignment file viewed and Phylogenetic tree was generated
using percentage sequence identity with neighbour-joining
algorithm in the Jalview-multiple sequence editor Tool 
[].

Tertiary structure prediction:
The functions of both class enzymes mainly depends upon
formation of the TIM barrel fold and present residues in active
site. To find out functions of dataset aldolase protein sequences
required to generate suitable molecular model. The dataset
protein sequences  (see supplementary material) have
been subjected for detecting suitable templates for homology
modeling against Protein Database PDB []. The template
searching was performed using Domain Enhanced Lookup
Time Accelerated-BLAST (DELTA-BLAST) []. The best
template for each sequence was selected on the basis of
similarity, percentage of identity, expectation value, bit scores
and query coverage area. The best template structures for each
sequence with their validation statistics depicted in 
.
The Chain A of FBPA from Rabbit Muscle (PDB ID: 1ZAH) was
common template for sequences except Nematocida parisii
sequences []. The 1ZAH structure was generated by X-ray
diffraction study with 1.80Å resolution. The R factor of the
structure was 0.167 and R-free value was 0.205. We have
generated molecular models for plant-parasitic nematodes only
as they are our prime concern. The models were generated
using Modeller 9v10 [] and validated using online server
Structural analysis and verification server (SAVS) 
[–].
Secondary structural investigation and conformation analysis of
modeled structures were performed by ProFunc, an online
server of PDBsum []. The comparative sequence and
structural analysis of active site and formation of TIM barrel
fold for modeled structures with template structure have been
analyzed by ClustalW2 tool and USFChimera.

Simulation and validation of models:
The sequences and structural comparison between generated
models of FBA_HG shows 99.9% sequence similarity with
similar active site residues and sharing same homology of 3D
Structure. To find out stable active sites and role of TIM barrel
fold in catalytic mechanism, we performed simulation of model
FBPA_HG structure using GROMACS 4.5.3 package [,
]. To
understand mechanism with exact comparison, we also
performed molecular dynamics (MD) for template structure
1ZAH_A. Selected both structure were subjected for energy
minimization using OPLS-AA/L force field []. In the
subsequent steps the structure of FBA_HG and 1ZAH_A were
embedded in a cubic box containing SPC216 water molecules
[]. Normal charge states of ionizable groups at pH 7 for
FBPA_HG and 1ZAH_A have been neutralized by adding
respective ions in the system. Energy minimization was
performed after this ion treatment. The next step of the protocol
was to maintain the equilibrium of the system which was
performed in two phases. The first phase include the NVT
ensemble, a short 100 picoseconds (ps) position-restrained MD
simulation at 300K was carried out using a Berendsen
thermostat to ensure the proper stabilization of the
temperature. The second phase include NPT ensemble for 100ps
position-restrained MD simulation at 300K and 1 bar was
carried out using a Parrinello-Rahman barostat pressure
coupling to stabilize the system with respect to pressure and
density []. Finally unrestrained 10 nanoseconds (ns) MD
simulation was initiated on the NPT ensemble for both
structures. The quality checks on the MD simulations were
performed by GROMACS applications. The numerical graphs
and interpretation of data were performed using Xmgrace
software. The structures which were qualifying the all
validation parameters with good scores were further subjected
for docking analysis.

Docking of substrate and competitive inhibitor:
To understand the catalytic mechanism of FBPA_HG the well
known substrate FBP and competitive inhibitor MBP were
downloaded from PubChem [] and docked in identified same
active site of FBPA_ HGm. In addition, to confirm the similar
catalytic mechanism, the FBA and MBA also docked in proved
active site of 1ZAH_Am []. All docking were performed
using Autodock 4.2.0 in the platform of MGLTool 1.5.4 [,
].
The grid maps were generated using AutoGrid with grid box
dimension 60X60X60 and 0.375 Å spacing between the grid
points. Each job consisted 100 independent runs and generated
log files were analyzed using MGLTool [].

Results
Sequence collection and Phylogenetic analysis:
The collection of available aldolase sequences of nematodes
from the protein databases was an initial step towards
developing a comprehensive small dataset. BLAST was used to
search other amino acid sequences of aldolase in order to obtain
all available sequences from the NCBI, EMBL and Swiss-port.
Searching results shows all aldolase sequences from nematodes
as well as nematodes keyword associated organism's aldolase
sequences. Since our main focus was on aldolase sequences of
nematodes, were downloaded and saved in a form of small
dataset. The partial and fragmented sequences have been
removed manually. The identical sequences of same nematodes
Spp. removed from the dataset after crosschecking in EMBOSS
[]. 
The screened dataset contained twenty-four unique FBPA
Protein sequences given in . Phylogenetic analysis was
performed to find out the Evolutionary relationships among
dataset sequences and generated tree among each sequence
shown in () 
[].

The tree is classified into three major groups or cluster (namely
I, II and III). The first, second and third cluster contains ten,
eight and five sequences respectively. FBPA sequences of the
PPNs clustered in group-II as shown in (). This group
contains FBPA proteins of Heterodera glycines (two), Globodera
rostochiensis (one), Ascaris suum (one), Bursaphelenchus xylophilus
(one), Caenorhabditis elegans (two) and Caenorhabditis brenneri
(one). Phylogenetic tree inferring FBPA sequences of PPNs
having similar evolutionary relationship with group-II and
slightly differ with group-I and III.

Structure models and active site identification:
The structural alignment result for all FBPA sequences using
DELTA-BLAST against PDB data base shown in  
[–].
The table contains Protein ID for best template structures for
each sequence with their template searching parameter values.
The chain A of FBPA Rabbit Muscle (PDB ID: 1ZAH) was the
best template for twenty two protein sequences 
[]. The
remaining two sequences of Nematocida parisii share 41%
sequence identity with Chain A of Human Muscle FBPA
Complex (PDB ID: 4ALD) []. The Sequence of FBPA_HG
having 68% identical amino acids with chain A of 1ZAH. The
comparative values of validation analysis for model structures,
crystal structure and simulated structures shown in 

(see supplementary material). The stereochemical quality of
each amino acid of FBPA_HG and 1ZAH_A were measured on
the basis of Ramachandran plot. The PROCHECK resultant
values for minimized structure of 1ZAH_Am and FBPA_HGm
having better stereochemical quality in comparison to initial
crystal 1ZAH_A and model FBPA_HG structure [,
].
ERRAT calculates overall quality factor for non-bonded atomic
interactions and higher ERRAT score means better quality of
structure []. The ERRAT score for minimized 1ZAH_Am and
FBPA_HGm were 93.210 and 92.879 respectively, whereas the
ERRAT score for 1ZAH_A and FBPA_HG were 92.744 and
30.086, respectively. The ERRAT score for FBPA_HG structure
shows enhancement in atomic interaction after molecular
dynamics. Evaluation of simulated structures by VERIFY3D
shows better sequence-to-structure agreement in comparison to
initial proteins shown in  
[]. The overall quality Gfactor
score for 1ZAH_Am and FBPA_HGm were -0.30, and -
0.17 respectively, indicating good quality models. A detailed
secondary structural investigation of FBPA_HG with PDBsum
[] shows that monomer unit of structure folds into 13 Alfahelices,
10 Strands, 19 Beta-turns and 2 Gama-turns depicted in
(). The tertiary structure FBPA_HG shows close
resemblance to crystal 1ZAH_A and having 0.507 Å RMSD
shown in (). Low RMSD and validation statistics
reflects the high structural conservation of model structure
through evolution.

The tetramer structure of 1ZAH is having four chains (A, B, C
and D) with identical sequences for each chain. This enzyme
has defined active site residues which were playing crucial role
during substrate recognition and competitive Inhibition. During
enzyme-substrate recognitions a Schiff base intermediate
contends and has reaction geometry with inchoate C3–C4 bond
consistently. This intermediate reaction is catalyzed by Glu-187,
which is adjacent to the Schiff base forming Lys-229. In next
subsequent step the atom rearrangements take place and
reaction intermediate mimics a pericyclic transition state. Then
Lys-146 form Hydrogen bonding with C4 hydroxyl that assists
substrate cleavage by stabilizing the negative charge on the C4
hydroxyl. On the other hand enzyme inhibition mechanism
follows the different steps. During enzyme inhibition, inhibitor
form noncovalent complex which mimics a covalent
carbinolamine precursor and transfer of a proton took place by
the formation of hydrogen bond between inhibitor C2 hydroxyl
with Glu-187. This enables stabilization of carbinolamine
transition state which reduces Schiff base formation and
inhibition of active site takes place []. The active site amino
acid residues of FBAP_HG have been identified by Pair-Wise
Multiple Sequences Alignment with template 1ZAH_A shown
in () 
[]. The following residues of FBPA_HG are
identical with crystal structure: Asp-38, Ser-40, Ser-43, Arg-47,
Lys-111, Lys-150, Arg-152, Glu-191, Glu-193, Lys-233, Leu-274,
Ser-275, Ser-304 &amp; Arg-307.The superimposition of each active
site residues of FBPA_HG with 1ZAH was depicted in 
() 
[]. The similar TIM barrel fold and identical active site
residues of FBPA_HG may follow the similar catalytic
mechanism [] and it can be proved by docking of FBA and
MBP ligand at active site.

Molecular dynamics simulation analysis of structures:
MD simulations were performed to get stable structure of
1ZAH and FBA_HG. The main-chain root mean square
deviations (RMSD) were calculated for both structures as a
function of time. The resulting RMSD profiles are shown in
(). The 10ns trajectory analysis shows that both
structures are behaving similar. The FBA_HG protein structure
having little higher RMSD compared to the crystal 1ZAH
structure. For both structures a major structural changes
occurred during the initial few picoseconds leading to RMSD to
~0.25 nm, followed by smaller structural deviations for the
1ZAH and little higher for the model structure FBA_HG. The
final RMSD values for 1ZAH and FBPA_HG are between ~0.25-
0.35 nm. The main-chain root mean square fluctuations (RMSF),
calculated over the trajectories for 1ZAH and FBPA_HG,
indicate that a large part of the residues fluctuate not more than
0.4 nm (). Both the proteins display a similar
fluctuation pattern except for C terminal and N terminal
regions. All catalytic site residue atoms are sharing the similar
fluctuation pattern for both structure depicted in ().
However, the minimum fluctuation in substrate binding site in
both proteins, leading to make a good observation of catalytic
mechanism during docking studies. The solvent accessible
surface area (SASA) for both structures is accessible to a solvent
and it can be related to the hydrophobic core. The results
indicate that the hydrophobic cores for both structures are in
the range of ~85.0-95.0nm2 and the SASA of FBPA_HG is much
higher than 1ZAH_A shown in ().

Docking analysis:
The FBPA_HG enzyme adopt the same catalytic mechanism as
of class I aldolase enzyme. A covalent catalysis entailing a Schiff
base formed between a lysine residues of the enzyme and
ketose substrate. According to mechanism the ketose(2) of
acyclic FBP substrate is attacked by reactive Lys-233 of active
site of FBPA_HG in forward reaction. This reaction is catalyzed
by Glu-191 and Lys-151 forming hydrogen bonds on the
substrate C4 hydroxyl and help in substrate segmentation by
developing negative charges on C4 hydroxyl during proton
abstraction. Our docked results of FBP substrate in the active
site of FBPA_HGm as well as 1ZAH_Am are given in 

(see supplementary material). The best conformer of FBP at
active site of 1ZAH_Am and FBPA_HG are forming nine and
ten Hydrogen bonds respectively, the binding energies shows
negligible difference in comparison to active site of 1ZAH_Am.
In addition, the FBP are forming the similar Schiff base
intermediate by forming hydrogen bonds with above said
active site residues and other residues depicted in 
( &amp;
). The competitive inhibitor MBP was docked in the active site,
which forms a noncovalent complex and intermediate geometry
which mimics the covalent carbinolamine precursor formation.
The Glu-191 forms hydrogen bonds with C2 hydroxyl of the
MBP complex and intermediate geometry which mimics the
cova-lent carbinolamine precursor formation. The Glu-191
forms hydrogen-bonds with C2 hydroxyl of the MBP inhibitor
leads to the transfer of a proton from Glu-191 which catalyzes
the conversion of the carbinolamine intermediate to Schiff base.

Comparative docking results of MBP inhibitor at the catalytic
site of both enzymes are depicted in . Both docked
conformer of 1ZAH_Am and FBPA_HGm shown in ( &amp;
Figure 5B) are forming nine Hydrogen bonds and having similar
binding energy. The MBP inhibitor is forming the Hydrogen
bonds with Glu-191 and Glu-187 of FBPA_HGm and
1ZAH_Am respectively. These results also support to conclude
that FBPA_GR is following the similar substrate recognitions
and enzyme inhibition mechanism as class I aldolase.

Conclusion
This study was carried out to find the evolutionary and
functional relationship of FBPA proteins of plant parasitic
nematodes. The respective protein sequences are collected and
after sequential refinement, a small dataset is built. The
Phylogenetic analysis of FBPA protein sequences are clustered
into three major groups according to their sequence similarity.
The structural alignment of theses sequences against PDB
database confirms that collected sequences belongs to class I
types of aldolase. To get insight of the catalytic mechanism of
Heterodera glycines and Globodera rostochiensis, molecular model
were generated and validated. In subsequent step molecular
dynamics simulation was performed to obtain stable structure
of 1ZAH and FBPA_HG. The catalytic mechanism of FBPA_HG
has been discovered on the ground by docking of substrate FBP
and a competitive inhibitor MBP at the active site of both
enzymes. The results confirmed that FBAP_HG and FBAP_GR
are following the similar enzyme-substrate and enzymeinhibitor
reaction geometry and reaction intermediate same as
class I 1ZAH aldolase. This work may be helpful to
experimental biologist in controlling the parasitic infections by
inhibition of aldolase.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors thanks to Department of Science and Technology, New
Delhi, India for supporting us financially in our ongoing project
“Development of transgenic Wheat plant against Cereal Cyst
nematode (Heterodera Aveane) and Sunnpest (Eurygaster
intergrices puton) by using Bioinformatics and Genetic
Engineering approaches” Project code: INT/ILTP/A-1.28.

Citation:Prasad et al, Bioinformation 9(1): 001-008 (2013)

Phylogenetic tree for selected 24 FBPA protein sequences from different nematodes were classified into three major
groups (I- Red, II-Green and III-Blue) with their respective distances.

Multiple sequence alignment of FBPA sequences of PPNs with template structure sequence. The common active site
amino acid residues are marked with rectangular red boxes.

(A) Superimposed ribbon structure of modeled FBPA_HG (magenta) and template 1ZAH_A (green). Active site residues
of FBPA_HG trapped in same active site cavity of 1ZAH shown as stick; (B) The secondary structural investigation for the model
structure FBPA_HG.

The comparative analysis of Root Mean Square Deviations (RMSD) plot (A) Root Mean Square Fluctuations (RMSF) plot;
(B) and the total accessible surface area; (C) for 1ZAH_A and FBP_HG structures shown as black and red line respectively.

(A, C) Docked conformer of FBA shown as stick at active site of 1ZAH_Am and FBPA_HGm respectively; (B, D) Docked
conformer of MBP shown as stick at active site of 1ZAH_Am and FBPA_HGm respectively. Each ligand forming Hydrogen bonds
(green dotted line) with active site residues depicted as line.

