Abbreviations
UDP-GlcNAc, UDP -UDP-N-acetylglucosamine ,GalE, UDP - galactose 4-epimerase, LPS -Lipopolysaccharides , 


Background
Aeromonas hydrophila is a member of the family Aeromonadaceae,
associated with disease conditions mainly in fish, amphibians and
humans []. Identification of strains of A. hydrophila capable of causing
illness in apparently healthy individuals, by infecting open wounds and
possibly by ingestion of the microorganism in food or water, has
generated immense interest in this organism []. Some of the known
virulence factors responsible for pathogenesis of A. hydrophila are
O-antigen lipopolysaccharide, capsules, exotoxins, enterotoxins, and
certain exoenzymes [,]. LPS has been reported to be involved in
adherence and may play a role in antigenic variation [–]. Importance
of the enzymes involved in galactose metabolism in bacterial virulence
has been demonstrated [–]. GalE is one of the enzymes involved in
galactose metabolism that mediates the incorporation of galactose in
extra cellular polysaccharide material such as the O-side chain of
lipopolysaccharide. The essential role of UDP-galactose 4-epimerase in
virulence of many other gram-negative bacteria is well documented
[–]. The fact that the epimerase mutants have altered LPS core
biosynthesis with significant reduction in their ability to adhere and
invade the host cells makes epimerase a potential drug target. GalE
from different species exhibits a significant degree of interspecies
variation at their gene and quaternary structure. In the present study, we
report cloning, characterization of the galE, including its putative
promoter, and structure modeling of the deduced amino acid sequence
of the GalE of A. hydrophila

Methodology
Bacterial strains and vector
A. hydrophila (AH17) isolated from pond water was obtained from Dr. I.
Karunasagar, College of Fisheries, Mangalore, India. Escherichia coli DH5α and BL21 (DE3) strains were from GIBCO BRL, USA and
Novagen, USA, respectively. Plasmid pBCKS+ was procured from Stratagene (USA).

Cloning and sequencing of galE of A. hydrophila
Genomic DNA from A. hydrophila (AH17) was isolated essentially as
described earlier []. The galE of A. hydrophila was PCR amplified
using the genomic DNA as a template and the forward and reverse
primers (5'-AGTCTGAGAAAAAGCGCGTGTG -3',
5'-TTAATCGGGATATCCCTGTGGATGG-3', respectively),
designed on the basis of available sequence information of galE of E. coli (Acc. No. NC_000913) obtained from Microsynth, Switzerland.
The PCR amplified product was purified and the ends of purified PCR
product were phosphorylated using T4 polynucleotide kinase (NEB,
USA), followed by ligation to Sma I digested dephosphorylated pBCKS
(+) vector. Competent E. coli DH5α cells (Novagen, USA) were then
transformed with the ligation mix and the transformants were analyzed
by colony PCR and were further confirmed by restriction enzyme
digestion for the release of the insert. The construct thus made was
designated as pAHGalE. The integrity of the galE insert was verified by
automated DNA sequencing (Applied Biosystem Model 393A).

Phylogenetic analysis
Sequence analysis tools of the ExPASy Molecular Biology Server of
Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics were used to process nucleic acid
sequence for the deduced amino acid sequence. The deduced amino
acid sequence of the GalE of A. hydrophila was aligned with the GalE
of other species and A. hydrophila AH3 strain was carried out using
ClustalW (Version 1.83) []. The phylogenetic tree was inferred using
Phylip's inference package, Version 3.5c.

Structure Modeling and Visualization of Model
The most appropriate template for Homology modeling of A.
hydrophila GalE (Accession No. AJ785765) was identified using
BlastP analysis. The available structure of GalE from Escherichia coli
in the Protein Database (PDB) (PDB entry 1udcA, resolution =1.65, R
value =0.177) was referred []. The target and the template sequences
were aligned using ClustalW. Homology modeling program
Swiss-Model was employed to generate a comparative 3D- structure
model of A. hydrophila GalE []. Swiss-Model [] is a server for
automated comparative modeling of three-dimensional (3D) protein
structures. No other refinements were applied. Swiss PDB viewer
software [] was employed as a tool to envisage the generated
structural model.

Validation of the generated model
The generated 3D-model was assessed/reviewed evaluated at various
structure verification servers viz. PROCHECK [] that relies on
Ramachandran plot [], WHAT_CHECK, a subset of WHATIF
programme [,], and VERIFY3D 
[,].

Discussion
Sequence analysis of the galE of A. hydrophila
Sequencing of the PCR amplified cloned galE fragment revealed the
insert to be of 1140 bp, representing full length galE and its
promoter-operator sequences (Figure 1). Sequence analysis revealed
the presence of putative RNA polymerase binding site (-35 region) at
57-65 bp and a pribnow box (-10 region) at 76-84 bp. Putative binding
site for catabolite repressor protein or cyclic AMP receptor protein
(CRP) is also present at 49-69 bp, overlapping -35 region. The binding
site for the GalR overlaps the translation start site and is present at
131-139 bp. Presence of all the regulatory sequences and components of
a promoter upstream of the GalE encoding region of the cloned
fragment indicate that the organization of galETK operon of A.hydrophila is similar to that of other gram-negative bacteria, which is organized in the order of 
galE, galT and galK. Open reading frame of
the cloned galE contains a single protein translation start site ATG at
124-126 bp and a termination codon, TAA, is present at the 1138-1140
bp (). Putative ribosome binding site is located 7 bp upstream
of the ATG at 112-117 bp position. The encoded protein is of 338
amino acid residues with a theoretical pI of 5.64 and molecular weight
of 36501.36. Genome database search (Blast N) showed varying
degrees of similarity to nucleotide sequence of the galEs of other
species. Blast P of the deduced amino acid sequence showed that GalE
of A. hydrophila shares the percentage identities ranging from ~60-95%
(95% with Shigella boydii and 63% with Photobacterium profundum)
with different species of bacteria. It is of interest to note that while the
GalE of the A. hydrophila AH17 shows significant identity with other
bacteria, it showed only 59% identity and 85% similarity with the GalE
of another strain of A. hydrophila, AH3 [], though the active site and
the catalytic sites/residues have remained conserved between the two.
Bacteria of Aeromonas spp. are highly heterogeneous group of bacteria,
and the differences in the GalEs of the two Aeromonas hydrophila
strains may only be an indication of heterogeneity.

Phylogenetic analysis
Analysis of amino acid sequence alignment of the GalE (Figure 1 in
) revealed that the A. hydrophila GalE
consisted of the characteristic Tyr-X-X-X-Lys couple (position 128 to
133) that plays a key role in catalysis and a complete N-terminal NAD
binding GXXGXXG motif (position 7 to 13), popularly known as
’Rossman fold‘. Both these motifs are conserved in all the family
members and among all the species (, boxed sequences) 
[,]. The signature sequences of the epimerase super family ‐
FSSSATVYG, ALLRYFNPVGAHP, NNLMPXXAQVAXGRR-XXXX-IFGNDYPTEDGTGVRDYIHV,
YNLGAGXXXSVLDVVN that have remained conserved across the
species are also present in the GalE of A. hydrophila (, shaded sequences). Thus, epimerases from all the species
appear to have the same evolutionary origin and employ similar
catalytic mechanisms though they differ significantly in their subunits,
quaternary structure and requirement for NAD. It is also of interest to
note that though the signature sequences and catalytic couple have
remained conserved in GalE of A. hydrophila, it differs significantly
from GalE of other species outside these domains. As evident from the
Phylogram () generated from the sequence alignment, the
closeness of A. hydrophila GalE with that of E. coli, S. typhi, S. boydii
and many others is not surprising as these are all enteropathogenic.
What is of interest to note that the encoded GalE of A. hydrophila
exhibited only 51% and 53% identities with that of H. sapiens and D.rerio, respectively, in which it is an important disease causing bacteria,
thus making it a potential drug target. The distance between these
species is also evident from the inferred phylogenetic tree.

Structural model and Overall Architecture
X-ray resolved crystal structure of GalE from Escherichia coli (PDB
entry 1udc) is available from Protein Data Bank (PDB). Based on the
sequence alignment, GalE from Escherichia coli was found to be the
best template structure for homology modeling of the target sequence.
The comparative 3D- structure model of A. hydrophila GalE was
generated by homology-modeling program Swiss-Model. The predicted
model of A. hydrophila GalE () depicted in the form of ribbons
is composed of twelve α-helices and eleven β-strands.

The assessment of the predicted model using the Ramachandran plot
showed that the modeled structure has 89.2% residues in the most
favorable regions, 10.8% residues occurring in the allowed regions and
none of the residues in the disallowed regions. Such figures assigned by
Ramachandran plot represent a good quality of the predicted model
(). All Ramachandrans show 6 labelled residues out of 336,
whereas chi1-chi2 plots show 0 labelled residues out of 192. The main
chain and side chain parameters for all of them were found to be
concentrated/convoluted in the ’better‘ region. No bad contact was
detected in the modeled structure. To define a model reliable, the score
for G-factor (a log odds score based on the observed distribution of
stereochemical parameters such as main chain bond angles, bond length
and phi-psi torsion angles) should be above -0.50. The observed
G-factor score for the present model was 0.04 for dihedrals bonds, 0.38
for covalent bonds and 0.18 overall. The distribution of the main chain
bond lengths and bond angles were 99.9% and 99.1% within the limits,
respectively. The modeled A. hydrophila GalE structure was also
validated by other structure verification servers as such
WHAT_CHECK and Verify-3D. For the modeled structure of GalE of
A. hydrophila, 96.76% of the residues had an averaged 3D-1D score &gt;
0.2 indicating a good quality of modeled structure. The modeled
structure of A. hydrophila GalE is comparable to the structurally
resolved GalE from Escherichia coli, wherein structural motifs have
been identified to remain conserved. Since A. hydrophila has also been
reported to infect humans, it is important to compare the depicted model
with that of human UDP-Galactose 4-Epimerase, with which it shares
only 51% identity. A superimposition of the A. hydrophila GalE onto
the human epimerase monomer along with UDP-GlcNAc and NADH is
shown in .

Superimposition of modeled structure of A. hydrophila GalE onto a
Homo sapiens GalE monomer (subunit A of PDB entry 1HZJ) matches
335 Cα atoms with rms distance of 1.35Å and there is high conservation
of sequence and structure between the two (). The core of the
GalE subunit is highly conserved in both the structures, with differences
confined to active site and some areas distant from the active site. In
Homo sapiens GalE, three residues Ala305, Ala306 and Cys307 form a
beta strand (β12) in C-terminal domain, whereas corresponding
residues Pro297, Ala298 and Tyr299 of A. hydrophila GalE form coiled
structure. When comparing A. hydrophila GalE to Homo sapiens GalE,
and ignoring single amino acid differences, a stretch of six amino acids
GGSLPE make a loop between β2 and α2 in Homo sapiens GalE, which
is absent in A. hydrophila GalE, . Moreover, α2 of A. hydrophila GalE
adopts a slightly different orientation compared with Homo sapiens
GalE. A. hydrophila GalE also differs from that of fish species (D. rerio)
by about 47%, therefore, the regions of differences between the two,
can be targeted for drug design against the pathogen enzyme.

Superimposition of the catalytic site of the Homo sapiens and A.
hydrophila GalE along with the UDP-GalNAc and NADH is shown in
. It is well known, that in addition to catalyzing the
interconversion of UDP-galactose and UDP-glucose, the human
epimerase is also capable of interconverting UDP-GalNAc and
UDP-GlcNAc []. Markedly, E. coli epimerase has not been reported
for this activity. It is clear from the superimposition of A. hydrophila
GalE onto Homo sapiens GalE () Tyr299, a conserved
residue in A. hydrophila GalE as well as in E. coli GalE has been is
replaced with a Cys307 in Homo sapiens GalE. It can be suggested that
the substitution of more bulky Tyr299 in the A. epimerase with a
Cys307 in the human epimerase most likely prohibit UDPGalNAc from
binding in the A. hydrophila GalE active site as has been reported for
the E. coli GalE. These points can be taken into consideration for
designing suitable inhibitors against A. hydrophila GalE.

Conclusion
The GalE activity is crucial for lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis, one of
the virulent factors of A. hydrophila, and GalE mutants exhibit altered
core LPS biosynthesis and reduced ability to infect the host cell.
Therefore, inhibition of this enzyme can result in controlling
Aeromonas infection. In the present study, cloning and sequence
analysis of GalE of one of the Indian isolate of A. hydrophila revealed it
to be different from other strains of the bacterium. The GalE of A.hydrophila exhibited greater degree of differences between the hosts,
fish and human. Structure modeling of the A. hydrophila GalE resulted
in identification of the structural differences between the GalE of the
host and the pathogen. These differences can be targeted for drug design
against the pathogen.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work is supported by a research grant from the Indian Council of
Agricultural Research, New Delhi, India to AD. The Council of
Scientific and Industrial Research, New Delhi and the University
Grants Commission, New Delhi are acknowledged for providing
research fellowships to SA and KG.

Citation:Agarwal et al, Bioinformation 4(5): 216-222 (2009)

Nucleotide and deduced amino acid sequence of cloned galE of A. hydrophila. The open reading frame encodes for a protein of 338
amino acid residues. Initiation and termination codons are shown in bold. Putative -35 and -10 regions are shown as bold and underlined nucleotides.
The shaded and the boxed bases represent putative ribosome binding site and the GalR binding site, respectively. Nucleotides pertaining to the
primers used for amplification of the gene are underlined.

Rooted phylogenetic tree of the deduced amino acid sequence of the GalE of A. hydrophila and other organisms. Amino acid
sequences for different organisms were obtained from NCBI database and aligned using Clustal W program. The distances from the nodes, i.e. the
branch lengths denoted in the tree, correspond to sequence divergence.

Homology model of the GalE of A. hydrophila. This model is produced by Swiss-Model program. Visualization of the structure was
done by SWISS PDB VIEWER and is represented in the form of ribbons.

Ramachandran plot of the predicted model of A. hydrophila GalE: This figure is generated by PROCHECK. The red regions in the
graph indicate the most allowed regions whereas the yellow regions represent allowed regions. Glycine is represented by triangles and other
residues are represented by squares.

(A). Superimposition of homology modeled structure of A. hydrophila GalE onto a Homo sapiens GalE monomer. A. hydrophila
GalE is shown in red and Homo sapiens GalE in blue. α2 and β12 correspond to human GalE. Structural differences between the two structures are
encircled. (B). Superimposition of the catalytic site of human epimerase/UDPGlcNAc/NADH structure onto the catalytic site of the
predicted model of the A. hydrophila GalE. The human protein is shown in blue with UDPGlcNAc (in CPK color scheme) and NADH (in green)
while the A. hydrophila protein is depicted in red. Figure shows the substitution of Tyr 299 in the A. hydrophila epimerase with a Cys307 in the
human enzyme.

