Editorial Message
Several years ago, George Mason University instituted the first Ph.D. 
program in bioinformatics in the world. This step was followed by many other 
organizations, and students flooded into these programs. By the end of the 
nineties, bioinformatics was one of the hottest fields in all of science, and 
college Deans were extremely proud of their new programs, for they were 
evidence that the college was modern and progressive.

Today it is possible to get a bachelor's, masters or Ph.D. at 
literally scores of schools. The University of Manchester even has an online 
bioinformatics masters' degree program. Unfortunately the job prospects 
for the students, while not dismal by any means, are not as promising as they 
seemed to be a few years ago. Bioinformatics companies are fewer and far 
between than they once were. During the heyday of the genome era, when money 
was being thrown at every idea, it seemed that there would be jobs for all the 
dot-com refugees. Salaries have suffered as well, and some have transitioned 
into other, higher paying programming jobs that require less training. This is 
particularly true with those coming from the Computer Science side of the 
field. It is much easier to find a job developing accounting databases than it 
is to find one developing algorithms for computational biology.

Today the Bio-jobs bulletin boards are full of recent graduates bemoaning 
the state of affairs, as many of them report that they cannot find a position 
in their chosen field. Certainly, the slowdown in the biotech industry is to 
blame, but part of the problem is that the term bioinformatics is too broadly 
used. While many people think about sequence based bioinformatics, I have heard 
the term being used for those who analyze x-ray crystallographic data and also 
for those who make computational models of the brain. People, that is, who may 
never work with amino acid or nucleotide sequence at all. Simply because both 
are referred to as bioinformaticists does not mean that the two skill sets are 
interchangeable, any more than zoologist is interchangeable with a botanist. 
Both are biologists, but one would not be able to take over the duties of the 
other, except, of course, in rare circumstances.

I was once asked to outline a bachelor's degree program in 
bioinformatics, and I did so. But I couldn't help wondering if this was 
really the best way of serving the student's needs. Perhaps we need a 
new paradigm: I maintain that what is most needed in the world is a combination 
of skills. Students graduating in biology or biochemistry four years from now 
ought to know their way around the Linux command line. They also should know 
when to use BLAST and when to do a PFAM search. They should know what tab 
output is and how to bring it into a spreadsheet or to a database. They should 
be able to write a Perl script.

University educators need to face the fact that the world has changed. It 
has been said that professors prepare students for the world as it was when the 
professor graduated, but this is not sufficient anymore!

There will always be a need for people who are specialists in bioinformatics 
but that need is limited. What is most needed are biologists who have a basic 
understanding of bioinformatics. A combination of wet lab skills and 
computational expertise will make a powerful combination that will be useful in 
almost any situation!


      Citation:Gollery, Bioinformation 1(7): 247 (2006)

