Background
Cervical cancer is caused by infection of cervical cells by the
Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) []. In Indonesia, there are 13
new reported cervical cancer cases per 100,000 population of
women aged 14-44 years with a mortality rate of 77% 
[]. One
of the possible treatment of cervical cancer is by inhibiting the
process of virus replication in the cell. Histone Deacetylase or
HDAC (EC 3.5.1), which exist on HPV, catalyze the role of
histone deacetylation process in eukaryotes. Deacetylation is
the release of acetyl groups from histone tails []. Inhibition of
HDAC activity is a potential strategy for cancer therapy 
[] and
HDAC inhibition by a specific inhibitor induces growth arrest,
differentiation, and apoptosis (death) of cancer cells 
[]. The
main weakness of HDAC inhibitors, such as SAHA, is having a
fairly high toxic property []. Therefore, modification of the
SAHA cluster is required to eliminate the toxic properties and
minimize side effects []. One way is to replace or add to the
triazole group in the chains of SAHA []. Triazole is a group of
compounds that act as non-classical bioisostere the amide
group [] and can replace it on the side chain of SAHA without
significant loss of activity []. Some modifications on the
triazole compounds on the chain actually has the inhibition
ability better than SAHA and have passed the pharmacological
parameters according to Lipinski's Rule of Five []. Moreover,
some other groups have already conducted studies on
modified SAHA and cancer, albeit with different emphasize
[].

This study would be carried out by molecular dynamics
simulations of the modified compound SAHA to determine the
interaction of these compounds with hydrated HDAC on the
condition that describes by the dynamic conditions in the wet
laboratory. The compounds from the simulation results will be
compared with the HDAC SAHA as standard. Finally, the
results of these interactions are evaluated to obtain modified
ligands or compounds that are potentially being developed as a
drug.

Methodology
Preparation of the 3D structure of Homo sapiens Class II HDAC:
Prepare a class II HDAC sequence data (4, 5, 6, 7, 9, and 10) that
have been available in the NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nih.gov)
and RCSB (http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/) based on the
alignment of previous studies []. The entire sequence data of
HDAC class II is modeled by SWISS model tools
(http://swissmodel.expasy.org/).

File Preparation Class II HDAC Homo sapiens:
Polar hydrogen was added into each of these HDAC. The
addition of polar hydrogen serves to provide partial/Gasteiger
charges to the enzyme. Then, Zn charge on class II HDAC
Homo sapiens should be changed from 0 to +2 by using a
python script []. Then the class II HDAC Homo sapiens was
set as macromolecular docking process.

File Preparation Class II HDAC Inhibitor Homo sapiens:
The best modified inhibitor or ligand performed on previous
research [] was computed with software AutoDockTools 
[].
The amount of torsion on the ligand is then governed by the
rotatable bonds that existed in the ligand ().

Grid Setup Box:
Determination of grid box size in this study was carried out
base on the docking results of previous research which is also
uses the class II HDAC Homo sapiens as a target inhibitor 
[].
The utilized dimensional grid box was 50 × 60 × 50 with a grid
spacing of 0.375 Å.

Docking Simulation:
Autogrid docking performed using AutoDock 4.2 and 4.2
through the terminal. The utilized algorithm is Lamarckian
Genetic Algorithm (LGA) and two repetitions was performed
by each docking simulation [].

Molecular Dynamic Simulation:
Partial geometry optimization of complex enzyme-ligand was
utilized by forcefield parameters. The stage of energy
minimization was proceeded with MMFF94× []. The utilized
parameters are the NVT ensemble (N: number of atoms; V:
volume, T: temperature) with the NPA algorithm []. Stages of
molecular dynamics simulations are as follows: initialization,
equilibration, and production.

Dynamic Process Simulation:
Molecular dynamics simulations was carried out with the
enzyme-inhibitor complex at 300 K with 10 ps heating, and
then the simulation was executed for 5 ns []. The inhibitors
used are the modified ligands and standards. The next stage of
the process was 20 ps cooling until the temperature reaches 1
K. Results of position, velocity and acceleration are saved in
every 0.5 ps. Then the interaction between the enzyme and the
ligand for molecular dynamic processes can be observed in the
MOE database viewer. Observations of contact residues and
hydrogen bonding can be seen in LigX Interaction in MOE
2008.10 software.

Results and Discussion
Preparation of Structure HDAC Class II Homo sapiens:
A captured HDAC class II Homo sapiens sequence was based on
the alignments of previous research []. 3D structure of the
HDAC class II Homo sapiens used a catalytic region that is based
on the maintained area (conserved region) [].

Visualization of the Active Side of HDAC Class II Homo sapiens:
To determine the catalytic side of the HDAC class II Homo
sapiens, the 3D structure visualization was made by PyMOL.
The visualization results show that the enzyme has the form of
a catalytic cofactor Zn2+ binding to three amino acid residues,
namely two aspartic acids and one histidine.

Preparation of Class II HDAC Inhibitor Homo sapiens:
The ligands prepared is ligand from the previous modifications
result that having the best affinity and low toxicity according to
Lipinski's Rule of Five []. Each of HDAC II will be paired
with SAHA as standard and the best ligand in order to know
the interaction differences between the two ligands in the
simulation.

Preparation for Enzyme and Ligand Docking:
In the process of preparation, AutoDock will respond to the
number of rotatable bonds of the ligand, and the number of
rotatable bonds indicate the degree of flexibility of a ligand.

Docking:
Oriented docking is a process that already has a grid box
specific parameters in determining the location of the enzyme's
active site. In this study an oriented docking process was
conducted.

Docking Analysis
Ligand Interactions with Class II HDAC Homo sapiens:
One model out of 100 ligand docking results will be taken
based on the most negative bond energy value and polar
groups of the ligand is having a strong interaction with the
Zn2+ ligand cofactor in the catalytic process. Interactions are
selected based on the formation of chelate pentagon rings
between O atoms in the cluster of C=O and -OH on the ligand
with Zn2+ cofactor.

Free Energy Association (ΔGbinding) and inhibition constants (Ki):
AutoDock 4.2 ΔGbinding calculation results show a negative
value for all ligands. This shows that conformation of complex
SAHA standard ligand and ligand modification by HDAC 4,
HDAC 5, HDAC 6, HDAC 7, 9 HDAC and HDAC 10 are more
stable than the individual conformation, because if there is
bonding interaction, it would release energy that can be used to
lower the activation energy of the catalytic reaction 
[].

Visualization Docking Results:
Visualization of the entire results of docking ligand
conformations with HDAC class II Homo sapiens has been done
by PyMOL. 3D ligand interactions with the HDAC class II
Homo sapiens can be seen in . The visualization result
shows the interaction of the Zn2+ ligands as catalytic side of the
HDAC class II Homo sapiens.

Molecular Dynamic Simulation:
Molecular dynamics simulations of the ligand and the enzyme
treated in a flexible state with solvent, in order to study the
effects of the present of solvent in the system, then applied to
explore the conformation of the receptor protein to improve the
process of drug design []. The simulation process was carried
out on 12 pairs of ligand-enzyme complex of molecular
docking results. Minimization process has been done so that
the geometry of atoms that do not fit can be returned to
produce the lowest potential energy to the system 
[].

Molecular Dynamics Simulation on Temperature 300 K:
Initialization results continued at a temperature of 300 K to
determine the initial interaction of the enzyme-ligand complex
prior to the temperature of the human body, 310 K. In this
study initialization conducted only at 300 K. Nevertheless, the
results of interaction simulation in this study can be a reference
to proceed at a temperature of 310 K.

Analysis of Results Docking and Molecular Dynamics Simulations:
The data of table 1 shows that the interaction of molecular
dynamics simulation results that reinforce the results obtained
in the docking process despite the use of different methods. On
the results of the energy analysis shows that the ligand docking
has modified the Gibbs free energy more negative compared
with SAHA. Free energy data is strengthened by the results of
residue contacts in the docking and molecular dynamics
simulations. Therefore, the modified ligands are feasible to be
developed as a drug.

Conclusion
From this study, several conclusions can be drawn. First, the
results of SAHA standard ligand docking and modified ligand
with HDAC class II Homo sapiens showed that both of ligands,
SAHA standard ligand and modified ligand, they still have the
same interaction to the HDAC class II Homo sapiens. It occurred
at the O atoms of C=O and –OH functional groups that binds
to the Zn2+ ions as the catalytic enzyme. The binding free
energy (ΔGbinding) and inhibition constants (Ki) analysis results
suggest that the modified ligand still have a better affinity than
SAHA. The dynamic analysis results show that all modified
ligands have good interaction with the active site of HDAC,
except ligand 1c with HDAC 10 are no longer bind to the Zn2+
ions. It means that ligand 1c do not meet the requirements to be
developed further. The dynamic interactions of modified
ligand and SAHA have nearly the same affinity and
interaction. However, the docking results of ligand 2c, 2a, and
1c are still better than SAHA. The dynamic results have
reinforce the docking results of these ligands. Based on the
results of ligand docking and dynamic, ligands that can
potentially be developed as a drug is ligand 2c, because it can
interact with HDAC 4, 6, and 7 much better than SAHA.
However, it is also possible for ligands 2a and 1c could be
developed as a drug for one very specific HDAC.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This research is supported by Hibah BOPTN Ditjen Dikti No:
2788/H2.R12/HKP.05.00/2013. Usman Sumo Friend
Tambunan, Ridla Bakri, and Djati Kerami supervised this
research, while Tirtana Prasetia was working on the technical
details. Arli Aditya Parikesit prepared the English manuscript
and re-verified the data.

Citation:Tambunan et al, Bioinformation 9(13): 696-700 (2013)

Triazole-modified SAHA chain based on previous
research []

3D interaction of docking simulation results between (A) ligand 2c (B) SAHA with HDAC 4. Between (C) ligand 2a (D)
with SAHA HDAC 5. Between (E) ligand 2c (F) with SAHA HDAC 6. between (G) ligand 2c (H) with SAHA HDAC 7. Between (I)
the ligand 1c (J) with SAHA HDAC 9. Between (K) ligand 1c (L) with SAHA HDAC 10.

