Background
The recognition of potential areas in protein ready to interact with
other molecules (protein, ligand, ion, nucleic acids) may be useful
for the identification of the biological function of the protein under
consideration. The interaction of proteins with other molecules
seems to represent the deterministic form since only specific
complexes are observed in the organisms. The multi-protein
complex structure is equally important for proper functioning as the
three-dimensional structure of the protein. The recognition of the
protein-protein complexation area and definition of the possible
mechanism responsible for complexation is the aim of the project
called CAPRI [–]. The interaction of protein with ligands
determines also their biological activity. The search for techniques
allowing prediction of the ligation site in proteins is also in the
focus of the research [,] as well as the interaction with ions. The
general idea aimed on the recognition of potential areas on the
proteins surface engaged in different types of interaction is
presented in this paper.

Methodology
The protein 1KFV (formamido-pyrimidine DNA glycosylase
EC#:3.2.2.23, mutation: P1G, polypeptide dimer complexed to
DNA []) deposited in PDB was selected to verify the applicability
of the assumed model. This molecule appears in form of dimer,
complexes DNA molecule, interacts with ligands and ions. Thus is
very good example to analyze the potential complexation areas
specific for particular “partner” in interaction. The specific areas
identification is based on hydrophobicity irregularity versus the
expected, idealized one.

See  for additional methodology section

Discussion
The ΔĤi profile () reveals the differentiation of the
irregularity along the polypeptide chain suggesting specificity of
particular fragments to be involved in the specific interaction with
other molecules. The spatial distribution () visualizes the
localization of the irregularities together with the residues engaged
in interaction. The structure of complex shown in the 
visualizes the spatial distribution of hydrophobicity irregularity. The
ΔĤi profile reveals the engagement of the residue of the highest
ΔĤi in catalytic activity. The hydrophobicity deficiency appears
when the low hydrophobicity residue is localized in the cavity. This
is the case in this example. This is also observed for residues of
local maxima of ΔĤi which are engaged in the interaction with
DNA molecule ‐ polar residues localized in the deep cavity. Metal
ions are localized on the surface (the hydrophobicity excess is
observed usually on the surface) in the local ΔĤi minima. The
residues representing the local maxima of ΔĤi are engaged in
protein-protein interaction although their compact localization in the
well defined area on the protein surface suggests the localization of
the protein-protein complexation. The relation of the ΔĤi values on
the ΔĤi profile () to the function in form of different
complexation is also shown. The qualitative summary of the
characteristics of the ΔĤi values for different forms of
complexation is given in Table 1 (see ).
The comparison of the values expressing average ΔĤi for residues
interacting with different molecules reveals the possible mechanism
of the ligation. The protein and ligand molecule complexed engaged
the residues of relatively high positive ΔĤi (see also  ‐ 
local maxima). The residues representing the deficiency of
hydrophobicity localized in the cavity attract the glycerol molecule
engaging its oxygen atoms to interact with ARG (74), TYR (58) and
THR (113).

Service description
Results were obtained using our own software in form of web
application written in Python programming language with help of
third-party extensions and being served by web2py enterprise
framework []. Main idea of the application is to allow automatic
evaluations of ΔĤi values and non-bonded contact maps for
arbitrary numbers of amino-acid residues from given PDB input.
These maps describe interactions between protein and protein,
ligand, ion or nucleic residues with close accordance to PDBsum
service output. User is permitted to choose any model present in the
submitted file. Ten jobs analyzing up to ten structures are available
after successful parsing and correct identification of all chains
present in the file (protein, nucleic acids, ligands). The options
oriented on selection of the object under consideration (protein,
selected fragment, set of chains) is available. The self-defined
orientation of the molecule in the coordinate system is also possible
particularly useful for molecules of axial symmetry. For selected
residue set, ΔĤi values and non-bonded contact map are evaluated
and returned together in three possible result files: textual, with
complete numeric output, PDB, for 3D visualization and vector
(PDF), containing ΔĤi plot, contact map scatter and various
histograms. Jmol applet allows the visualization of all PDB files
directly in the browser. [].

Conclusion
The selected protein appeared to be very good example to verify the
applicability of the “fuzzy oil drop” model to recognize and to
predict specific characteristics of particular fragment of protein. The
interaction between molecules present in the cell is mediated by
water molecules. Their organization form was interpreted to
influence the interaction between molecules present in the cell. One
of the important components for these interactions generating the
environment for all processes is the water-dependent hydrophobic
interaction. The “fuzzy oil drop” model seems to simulate the form
of environment pointing out the specific irregularities and
suggesting possible aim-oriented forms in the protein body and on
the surface specifically. The example protein presented in this paper
encourages its applicability for the large scale of calculation (all
proteins present in PDB are going to be analyzed using “fuzzy oil
drop” model as the criterion). Particularly the applicability to the
CAPRI experiment of the fuzzy oil drop model seems to be
promising. The “fuzzy oil drop” model was applied to the
identification of the active site and ligation site [] as well as in
simulation of protein folding process representing folding
environment oriented on concentration of hydrophobic residues in
the protein core and the exposure of hydrophilic residues on the
surface [–]. The specificity of the distribution of
hydrophobicity irregularity suggested also the necessary presence of
the specific ligand in the folding environment ensuring the
generation of specific ligand binding cavity [,
]. The large scale
analysis as well as the search for specificity of the hydrophobicity
irregularity in relation to biological activity of the proteins is under
consideration.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Banach &amp; Roterman, Bioinformation 4(3): 98-100 (2009)

The structure of 1KFV characterized according to hydrophobicity irregularity. A ‐ the ΔĤi profile with residues engaged in
particular form of complexation according to legend. B ‐ the 3-D presentation of the hydrophobicity irregularity distribution colored as
follows: the more blue color the lower negative ΔĤi value, the more red color the higher ΔĤi value. The dimer structure complexed to DNA
(representation using white lines). The white circle distinguishes the metal ion localization of high hydrophobicity excess area on the protein
surface. The residues engaged in enzymatic activity given in space-filling graphic version colored according to ΔĤi values.

