Background:
Fenvalarate, a synthetic pyrethroid is used in agriculture and 
other domestic applications due to its high insecticidal activity, 
low mammalian and phytotoxicity  [,
]. It has easy 
biodegradability compared to  organo-chlorides and organophosphates  
[]. Its stability in sunlight allows its application 
against a wide range of pests. Encouraged by these wide 
varieties of applications the study of intermolecular interactions 
and its correlation to biological activity was undertaken.

Actin is the most abundant intracellular cytoskeletal protein in 
a eukaryotic cell. In neuronal cells, actin cytoskeleton is 
involved in important cellular events like cell migration, 
intracellular transport, cellular secretions, neuronal signaling, 
organization of endomembranes, cell division (cytokinesis) etc 
[].

The insect brain tissue undergoes transition phase from a larva 
to an adult during which complex cellular events lead to the 
cellular reorganization and differentiation within the brain 
tissue. This transition phase is a highly potential target and can 
be exploited for pest control  []. Thus, disruption of actin 
filaments could lead to drastic effects on the cell morphology 
and functioning.

Methodology:
X-ray Analysis:
Fenvalarate was obtained from Rallis India Ltd., Bangalore. 
Single crystals were grown from methanol at room temperature 
by slow evaporation process. The X-ray diffraction data were 
collected on a Bruker Smart CCD Area Detector System, at IISc, 
Bangalore, using MoKa (0.71073 Å) radiation. Intensity data 
were collected up to a θmax of 25.00° for the compound in the ω–
ф scan mode. The data were reduced using SAINTPLUS 
[] and 
an empirical absorption correction was applied using the 
package SADABS []. A total of 15499 reflections were collected, 
resulting in 3878 independent reflections of which the number 
of reflections satisfying I &gt; 2  σ (I) criteria were 2416 and were
treated as observed. The structure was solved by direct 
methods and difference Fourier synthesis using SHELXS97  
[]. 
The positions of all non-hydrogen atoms were included in the 
full-matrix least-square refinement using SHELXL97  
[]. The 
hydrogen atoms were fixed geometrically and allowed to ride 
on their parent C atoms and refined isotropically. Molecular 
diagrams were generated using ORTEP 
[]. The chlorine, one of 
the oxygen and two butyrate carbons were disordered during 
refinement. By using the split atom model, proper site 
occupancy factors and displacement parameters for the Cl 
atoms (Cl1A and Cl1B) the model converged to an acceptable R 
factor of 0.0725.

Multiple Sequence Alignment:
ClustalW  [] was used to align the amino acid sequences of 
actin from different organisms, actin sequence of  Bos taurus
(gi|157878210|pdb|1HLU|A) and Homo sapiens
(gi|4501885|ref|NP_001092.1) representing mammals and 
Drosophila melanogaster (gi|114794361|pdb|2HF4|A) and 
Helicoverpa armigera (gi|1296534|emb|CAA66219.1) from 
insects were compared.

Molecular docking study:
Molecular docking simulation of Fenvalarate to  β-actin of 
mammal and insect were performed in order to gain functional 
and structural insight into the mechanism of inhibition. 
AutoDock 4.0 suite was used as molecular-docking tool 
[].

Fenvalarate and ATP Structure:
Topology file and other force field parameters were generated 
for Fenvalarate and ATP using the PRODRG program  
[].
Flexible torsions of Fenvalarate and ATP were defined using 
AUTOTORS.

Actin Structure:
The coordinates of crystal structure of monomeric actin in its 
ATP-Bound State of Drosophila melanogaster (PDB ID: 2HF4) and 
Structure of Bovine Beta-Actin-Profilin Complex with Actin 
Bound ATP Phosphates Solvent Accessible of  Bos taurus (PDB 
ID: 1HLU) were obtained from the Protein Data Bank. The 
structures were edited by deleting Calcium, ATP and water 
molecules from 2HF4 and Calcium, ATP and P-Chain from 
1HLU.

Fenvalarate − Actin Interaction:
From the ADT package hydrogen atoms were added, Nonpolar 
hydrogens and lone pairs were merged and each atom 
within the macromolecule was assigned a Gasteiger partial 
charge. A grid box of 40×40×40 points, with a spacing of 0.375 
Å was positioned at the active-site residues where ATP was 
bound to protein using AUTOGRID. The Lamarckian genetic 
algorithm (LGA)  [] was employed with the settings of 
population size of 150 individuals, maximum number of 
generations and energy evaluations of 27,000 and 2.5 million 
respectively. From the estimated free energy of ligand binding 
(ΔG), the inhibition constant (Ki) for each ligand was calculated. 
Only the best pose (the one with the lowest binding energy) 
was considered for each ligand. To evaluate the accuracy of 
AutoDock 4.0 as an appropriate docking tool for the present 
purpose, the co-crystallized ligand (ATP for 2HF4 and 1HLU 
respectively) were re-docked within the inhibitor binding cavity 
of  β-actin as reference. The best poses of docked ATP and
fenvalarate were within reasonable proximity (root mean 
square deviation, RMSD  ≤2 Å) of the original poses in the 
crystal structures of β-actin and the poses were obtained.

Discussion:
The molecular structure and the atomic numbering of 
compound are shown in  and 
, respectively. 
The dihedral angle between the 4-chlorophenyl ring and the 
methyl butyrate chain is 78.48°, which indicate the 
nonplanarity of the compound. This allows the bond to rotate and 
have six degrees of freedom and the phenoxy and benzyl rings 
are 80.77° apart from each other providing two degrees of 
freedom which in turn has a flexible interaction with β-actin.

The molecular packing reveals a two dimensional sheet like 
structure formed by a combination of C-H…O, C-H…Cl 
[,
]
and C-H…N interactions. These  non-covalent interactions not 
only structurally stabilize the compound but also allow 
predicting the probable hydrogen bond formation between the 
Fenvalarate and the active site residues of protein 
[].

Comparison of amino acid sequences shows that actin is highly 
conserved among insects and mammalian species. The 
mammalian actins share 97% sequences similarity with that of 
insects, but differ in ten positions which are marked in black 
box in the . Although 97% similarity is conserved with 
Actin of insect and mammal, change in amino acid at MET152, 
THR159, SER270 and HIS72, SER159, LEU152 which are in the
ATP binding pocket of interaction of Fenvalarate to mammalian 
(1HLU) Actin and insect (2HF4) Actin, respectively caused the 
significant steric hindrance in the binding pocket resulting in 
difference in binding energy.

Based on the binding energy and maximum hydrogen bond 
formation the chemical screening was done. The affinity of 
fenvalarate to the insect as well as mammalian Actin was 
compared against the standard ATP. Compound with Actin 
having lesser binding energy when compared to ATP are 
considered as toxic to insect/mammal and those with higher 
energy are considered safe.

It is observed that the oxygen of alcohol moiety of fenvalarate 
hydrogen bonding with the nitrogen of Gly302 of Drosophila 
Actin with bond distance of 2.187 and also hydrogen bond 
formation with the central ester oxygen of fenvalarate to zeta 
position  hydrogen  of  Lys336  with  bond  distance  of  1.939 
() is more strong compared to one hydrogen bond in 
the central ester oxygen of fenvalarate with the NH of Ser14 of 
Bovine actin with bond distance of 2.017  (). Residues 
interacting within 1Å of van der Waals radii are showed in 
 (see supplementary material).

The interaction of Fenvalarate with active site of Drosophila 
actin shows the binding affinity (­7.71kcal/mol) and IC50 
(2.23µM) as compared to ATP binding energy (­6.25kcal/mol) 
and IC50 (26.39 µM). This shows that Fenvalarate has high 
affinity and toxic effect against insect actin compared to ATP 
binding. The structural changes in the active site of Fenvalarate 
with Bovine actin is responsible for the high binding affinity (­
7.07kcal/mol) and IC50 (6.54µM) as compared to ATP binding 
energy (­6.52kcal/mol), and IC50 (16.51 µM) signifies that 
Fenvalarate has moderate toxicity to mammals as the IC50 value
is not significantly of much difference from ATP. The 
observation reinforces the fact that Fenvalarate toxicity is 
specific to insect population and fairly safe to human exposure. 

Conclusion:
Although Fenvalarate is used worldwide, in the present study 
its topological analysis of weak and strong non-covalent 
interactions using crystallographic method is performed and 
further extrapolated to molecular docking analysis to know the 
structure-activity relationship. From the analysis it was 
elucidated, why the biological activity of Fenvalarate has toxic 
effect against insect and moderate toxic effect against mammals. 
As the change in amino acids at the ATP binding pocket in both 
insect and mammalian β-actin, the steric hindrance was caused 
and sufficiently altered the shape of binding cavity resulting in 
change in binding affinity. These structural investigations and
binding interaction studies of Fenvalarate should be further 
explored to develop a novel insecticidal agent. 

Supplementary material
Data 1
PK and CRG thank Chemistry Research Center, SSMRV Degree 
College, Bangalore and RSST for providing research facility. PK 
thanks PES Institute of Technology, Bangalore and Kuvempu 
University, Shankarghatta for their kind suggestions. The 
authors also thank the DST, India for data collection on the 
CCD facility set up under the IRPHA DST program. DEV 
thanks the UGC-FIP for Teacher fellowship.

Citation:Karunakar et al, Bioinformation 7(5): 234-238(2011)

a)  Chemical structure of Fenvalarate showing acidic, 
ester and alcohol moieties. b) Chemical structure of Fenvalarate 
showing ORTEP plot of the molecule drawn with 50% 
ellipsoidal probability

Sequence alignment of  β-actin of mammalian and 
insect organisms with the bottom line showing identical (*), 
conserved (:) and dissimilar (with space). Residues are labeled 
according to bottom line.

Interaction of Fenvalarate (Ball and stick model) at 
ATP binding pocket, atom coloring to both ligand and protein. 
Green dotted lines represent the Hydrogen bond  a) With 
Drosophila Actin; b) With Bovine actin.

