Background
According to WHO, tuberculosis disease due to Mycobacterium tuberculosis
infection caused an estimated 1.3 million deaths, globally. Pyrazinamide (PZA)
is an important first-line drug for tuberculosis (TB) and appears to be the most
important drug killing M. tuberculosis in its latent stage 
[–]. The concomitant
emergence of strains resistant to PZA represents an important public health
problem as the efficacy of primary and standardized re-treatment regimens may
be inadequate. PZA-susceptible strains possess a pyrazinamidase (PZAse) that
converts PZA to ammonia and pyrazinoic acid (POA). POA is the active
compound and is transported outside the Mycobacterium by an efflux pump. If
the extracellular environment is acid, POA is protonated, returns to
Mycobacterium by passive diffusion, and releases the proton. The acidification
of the intracellular environment together with the accumulation of intracellular
POA lethally alters the membrane permeability 
[]. The major mechanism of
PZA-resistance is considered to be the loss of PZAse activity linked to
mutations in the pncA, the PZAse coding gene. Previous studies showed that
mutations in recombinant PZAses decreased the enzymatic activity in about 10
fold, according to the localization of the mutation and the type of substitution
[,
]. 
In addition, mutations in PZAses have been shown to generate clinical
resistance to PZA [–]. 
The causal pathway that links pncA mutations with
PZA resistance should be: [pncA mutations] 
→ [PZAse structural change] →
[PZAse functional change] → [PZA resistance 
level] → [“yes/no” PZAresistant
phenotype]. In order to understand how pncA mutations affect the
enzymatic function, it is necessary to analyse the three-dimensional structure of
mutated PZAses. Previous studies determined structural models of M.
tuberculosis PZAse for the PZA-resistant reference strain H37Rv.

In these studies the PZAse structure was determined by homology modelling
based on the crystallized structures of the homologues Arthrobacter Ncarbamoylsarcosine
aminohydrolase (CHSase) [] and Pyrococcus horikoshii
PZAse [,
]. 
Theoretical structural models serve as good approaches when
experimental structure data are not available []. In a recent study, the PZAse
structure of the M. tuberculosis H37Rv strain was resolved by crystallography
[], 
showing that the structure of PZAses are highly conserved among these
species. The critical residues associated with PZAse function are those of the
active site (D8, A134, C138) and the metal-binding site (D49, H51, H57, and
H71). Mutations in these residues and in residues in close proximity to these
sites highly affect the PZAse function [,
]. In the present work, we studied
the relationship between structural and physical-chemical characteristics of
mutated PZAses with the enzymatic function and PZA-resistance level of M.
tuberculosis strains.

Methodology
PZAse selection
In a previous work, the PZAse of the H37Rv strain and 12 mutated PZAses
(D12G, D12A, G24D, Y34D, K48T, D49N, H51R, T76P, G78C, F94L, L116P,
and T135P), from M. tuberculosis PZA-resistant strains were cloned,
expressed, and purified. The catalytic constant kcat, and the enzymatic activity
were measured for each recombinant enzyme. The PZA-MIC and the growthindex
in BACTEC-460TB at 100 µg/mL PZA were measured for each strain
[]. 
Data of PZAse function and PZA-resistance is shown in the Table 4 (see
).

Modelling
Theoretical structures were obtained by homology modelling and single amino
acid replacement. For each PZAse, two theoretical structures were generated.
The first set of structures was obtained by single amino acid replacement using
as template the crystal structure of the M. tuberculosis H37Rv PZAse (PDB
3pl1). The second set was obtained by homology modelling using as template
the P. horikoshii PZAse crystal structure (PDB 1im5). Modelled structures
were refined by energy minimization and molecular dynamics. Energy
minimization was performed with GROMACS [], using the steepest-descent
algorithm with a convergence gradient of 10 KJ×mol­1×nm­1. Structures were
solvated in explicit water followed by 1ns molecular dynamics (MD) using
GROMACS. The accuracy of the models were evaluated using PROCHECK
[].

Physical-chemical and structural parameters
Parameters estimated for the mutated aminoacid included: (1) change of
electrical charge; (2) change of volume; (3) change of a special aminoacid; (4)
closeness to the active site; (5) closeness to the metal coordination site (MCS);
and (6) orientation of the side chain (Tables 1 &amp; 2, see 
). 
Aminoacids were considered as: hydrophilic (Basic: K, R and H;
Acidic: D and E; and polar with uncharged side-chain group: S, T, N and Q),
hydrophobic (A, V, I, L, M, F, Y and W) and special (C, G and P). The volume
change was calculated using Pontius values []. The closeness of the mutated
aminoacid to the active-site and to the MCS, was measured as the distance
between the alpha-carbon of the mutated aminoacid and the alpha-carbons of
the 3 residues of the active-site (D8, A134, C138) and 3 residues of the MCS
(D49, H51, H71). In order to prevent a bias due to over-modelling, amino acid
H57 was not considered because its orientation and position in an external
loop, showed a low structural stability during the MD run. The distance
between the barycentre of the 3 alpha-carbons of the active-site residues and
the alpha-carbon of the mutated aminoacid (D_AS) was determined. Similarly,
the equivalent distance to the MCS (D_MCS) was also determined.

The orientation of the side-chain of the mutated aminoacid was determined by
the distance between the barycentre of the 3 alpha-carbons of the active-site
residues and the intersection of the projection of the mutated side-chain with
the plane defined by the alpha-carbons of the active-site (d_AS). The projection
of the side-chain was defined as the resultant vector connecting the alphacarbon
with each of the atoms of the side-chain. Similarly, we calculated the
equivalent distance for the MCS (d_MCS). We calculated the angle between
the projection of the mutated side-chain and the normal vector of the plane
defined by the alpha-carbons of the active site (α_AS). We calculated the
equivalent angle to the plane defined by the alpha-carbons of the MCS
(α_MCS). The orientation of the side-chain of the mutated aminoacid was
classified accordingly to whether its projection crosses the triangle formed by
the 3 alpha-carbons of the active-site (AS_triangle), and to whether its
projection aims at the plane defined by the alpha-carbons of the active-site
(AS_plane). We classified the orientation of the side-chain of the mutated
amino acid against the MCS triangle (MCS_triangle), and the MCS plane
(MCS_plane).

Prediction of PZAse-function and PZA-susceptibility
The variability of the growing-index in BACTEC, the enzymatic activity and
kcat were modelled in a linear regression. The structural and physical-chemical
parameters were tested as predictors. The PZA-MIC was also tested as a
dichotomous variable: Low-MIC (MIC&lt; 400µg PZA/mL) versus high-MIC
(MIC&gt;=400µg PZA/mL). The variability of PZA-MIC was modelled in a
logistic regression.

Discussion
This study presents the relationship of theoretical structure models of M.
tuberculosis mutated PZAses with a single amino acid substitution with PZAse
enzymatic-function and strain PZA-susceptibility. The structural alignment
between P. horikoshii and H37Rv M. tuberculosis crystallized PZAses, shows
that both structures are highly conserved (RMSD=0.661 A at backbone level).
The MCS for H37Rv M. tuberculosis PZAse is proposed to be composed by
residues D49, H51, H57, and H71 [] 
in contrast to the corresponding of P.
horikoshii that lacks H57 [,
]. H57 in M. tuberculosis PZAse is located in a
loop, which shows structural instability as detected by the MD simulation. To
prevent any bias during MD simulation, we obviate the H57 for the extraction
of structural parameters. After excluding the H57-loop-region, the two
predicted structures of each mutated PZAse were highly similar (RMSD = 0.5
A at backbone level). All results described below were similar for the two
models. The major structural changes of the mutated PZAses were in the
orientation of the amino acid side-chains and in a lesser extent the backbone.
The structural and physical-chemical parameters were able to explain a high
variability of the PZAse function and in a lesser extent the variability of the
PZA-resistance level.

The physical-chemical and structural parameters for the 12 mutated PZAses are
shown in Tables 1 &amp; 2 (see ). In the univariate
analysis, the enzymatic activity, the kcat, and the Bactec growing index were
significantly associated with several structural parameters (Table 3, see
). After adjustment, the best multiple linear model to
explain the enzymatic activity included the distance d_MCS (P=0.005) with a
determination coefficient R2 of 0.76. The best multiple linear model for the
catalytic constant kcat included the change of electrical charge (P=0.001), the
distance d_A134 (P=0.003), the angle α_MCS (P=0.05), and the indicator
variable AS_plane (P=0.024), with a determination coefficient R2 of 0.88. The
variability of the growing index in BACTEC was significantly associated with
the angle α_MCS (P=0.027) with a determination coefficient R2 of 0.40. The
change of electrical charge was the dominant term in the models. Therefore, the
most important structural parameters able to explain the variability of the
PZAse activity and kcat were related to the physical-chemistry properties of the
active site and the MCS. The closeness of the mutation to A134 as a predictor
confirms the importance of the active site in the hydrolysis of PZA. As
described by Du et al. (2001) the initial interaction of PZA with the PZAse
active site at the beginning of the hydrolysis occurs very close to A134 
[].
The closeness of the mutation and the orientation of the mutated amino acid
side chain towards the MCS, confirm the importance of the MCS in the
hydrolysis of PZA, and explain the high MIC observed in mutations that are
close to the MCS and their side chains aim directly at it. Lemaitre et al. in 2001
have previously discussed that the level of activity displayed by PZAse mutants
is correlated with the location of the substituted amino acids 
[]. Those that are
close to the catalytic site diminish the activity of the enzyme more than those
that are far apart []. 
We found that this is not generally true. This study
showed that the PZAse structure is a proximal predictor of PZAse function,
confirming the well-known structure-function relationship. The lack of a high
association between the PZAse structure and PZA-resistance level suggests that
an important amount of PZA-resistance is determined by other factors than
PZAse structure/function.

Conclusion
Our results showed that the PZAse structure was able to explain a high
variability of the enzymatic function, but in a lesser extent the PZA-resistance
level in M. tuberculosis. The PZAse structural aspects that best explained the
variability of the enzymatic activity were those associated to the physicalchemical
characteristics of the AS and the MCS. Despite the small number of
mutations analyzed, our results confirm that the PZAse structure is a proximal
predictor of PZAse function, confirming the well-known structure-function
relationship. The lack of an important association between the PZAse structure
and the PZA-resistance level suggests that an important amount of PZAresistance
is determined by other factors than PZAse activity.

Funding
This research was partially funded by the National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health US, under the terms of Award
No # 1R01 TW008669-01 and 1R03 AI067608-0. M. Zimic and P. Sheen
received support from TMRC New Tools to Understand and Control Endemic
Parasites # 1 P01 AI51976.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Quiliano et al, Bioinformation 6(9): 335-339 (2011)

