Background
Interactions between proteins and RNAs (Protein–RNA
interactions; PRIs) are essential events that control a variety of
cellular processes, such as RNA splicing, transport,
stabilization, and translation []. There are some well-known
databases (e.g., BioGRID [] and IntAct 
[]) comprising
comprehensive collections of biomolecular interactions that
include PRIs. However, the available PRI data remain limited
compared with protein–protein interaction data, which have
been collected and intensively analyzed at the network level. In
addition, it is difficult to compile a list of PRIs by searching and
browsing these databases. Therefore, the nature of networks
comprising interactions between proteins and RNAs is still
unclear. There are several other databases that deal with PRIs
(e.g., [,
]); however, those databases focus on relatively
limited aspects or subsets of available PRI data, such as
interactions based on 3D complex structures. In this paper, we
introduce PRD, an online database for consolidating various
types of PRI data dispersed across several online data sources.
Our database is not only a reference of PRIs, but will also be a
valuable resource for exploring the characteristics of PRI
networks.

Methodology
Overview of the database:
PRD is a database for storing physical interaction data between
protein and RNA molecules, with particular emphasis on
interactions at the gene level. Currently, PRD contains data on
10,817 interactions, which is the equivalent of 1,539 unique gene
pairs. More than two-thirds of the data in PRD are from
humans and yeast. A large proportion of the rest are derived
from model organisms, such as Mus musculus and Escherichia
coli. Although PRD primarily stores information about
interactions between proteins and protein-coding RNAs, it also
contains interaction data on transfer RNAs, ribosomal RNAs,
microRNAs, and viral RNAs.

Interaction data model and curation:
The interaction data model in PRD closely follows the HUPO
PSI-MI model []. Although the PSI-MI model was developed
with a focus on the interactions among proteins, we adopted it
as a base model to facilitate exchange between different
biomolecular interaction databases and to allow subsequent
analyses. Briefly, the data model used in PRD can store two
types of information. The first one concerns interactors (i.e.,
proteins and RNA), such as gene and taxonomic names.
Auxiliary information, such as binding region/motif and the
participant identification method can also be stored. The second
type of information concerns the interaction between two
interactors, such as detection interaction methods and biological
functions deduced from those experiments. Using this data
model, we extracted as much information as possible from the
literature and deposited it in PRD. Moreover, controlled
vocabulary terms defined in PSI-MI 2.5 [] were used in the
curation process, when appropriate terms were available.

Imported data:
To increase the coverage of the database, we imported data
from other public databases: BioGRID [] and IntAct 
[]. In
addition, we obtained a list of complexes containing both
protein and RNA chains from the Protein Data Bank of Japan
(PDBj), and imported them as PRI pairs if the atoms without
hydrogen were within 5Å of each other. Currently, we have
confirmed 65, 267, and 10,145 interactions from BioGRID,
IntAct, and PDBj, respectively.

PRD interface and access
Searching and browsing interactions:
PRD can be searched by gene names, Entrez GeneIDs, PubMed
IDs, or by free keywords (). Users can also browse all
the data in the database by clicking the ‘browse’ button. PRD
supports several field specifiers to limit the scope of searches.
The use of logical operators (AND, OR, and NOT) to join two or
more expressions within a single query is permitted.

Displaying interaction information:
Each ‘Interaction information’ page corresponds to an
individual interaction, and contains information about the two
participants of the interaction (i.e., protein and RNA molecules),
and related information. In the ‘Protein-’ and ‘RNA-’
information section on each page, gene names, taxonomy
names, and corresponding accession numbers for each molecule
are displayed as basic information with hyperlinks to external
databases. In this section, information about binding sites, Gene
Ontology terms, protein motifs/domains based on the InterPro
[], and 
RNA sequence motifs based on the UTRsite [] and
Rfam [] databases are also displayed, when those have been
assigned. An ‘Experiments’ section displays the detection
methods used for each interaction. In addition, biological
functions are displayed if they have been recorded. References
describing the corresponding interactions are presented on each
page with hyperlinks to PubMed.

Data export:
PRD has the ability to export PSI-MI XML 2.5 files 
[], which are
widely supported by various existing software (e.g., Cytoscape
[]), and allow users to save and analyze exported data on
local computers.

Future developments
Many articles remain to be curated. To compensate for missed
articles describing PRIs, we plan to implement a function
allowing users to directly deposit interaction data via a web
form.

We would like to thank Dr. Toru Tsuji for data curation. We
also thank Dr. Nobuhide Doi, Dr. Hiroshi Yanagawa, and Dr.
Koichi Takeda for their helpful comments on the database
construction. This work was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for
Scientific Research on Innovative Areas “Integrative Systems
Understanding of Cancer for Advanced Diagnosis, Therapy and
Prevention (No. 4201)” (23134510) of The Ministry of Education,
Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan.

Citation:Fujimori et al, Bioinformation 8(15): 729-730 (2012)

A snapshot of the PRD web interface. The Figure is a
screenshot of the search results page for a certain query.

