Background
4SNc-Tudor domain proteins (SN4TDR) have been identified as
highly conserved proteins among species, but not in bacteria [,
].
There are usually four repeat domains with homology to
staphylococcal aureus nuclease (SN) at the N-terminus followed by
Tudor domain and SN-like domain at the C-terminus, both of which
are defined as TSN domain. The SN4TDR in eukaryotes is a key
regulator of gene expression and plays an important role in both
transcription and pre-mRNA splicing. The two distinct domains of
SN4TDR SN-like domain and Tudor domain act as interaction
mediators for nucleic acids and proteins, respectively []. The
protein was first identified as a coactivator of the Epstein-Barr virus
nuclear antigen 2 (EBNA-2) [] and later found to be able to
interact with other transcription factors such as c-Myb [], Stat5 []
and Stat6 []. Notably, SN4TDR leads to cell proliferation via
activating some transcription factors and is linked to autosomaldominant
polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD). The SN4TDR was
also found to be one of the members of the RNA-induced gene
silencing (RISC) that could bind double-stranded RNA and
ultimately degrade them [], especially for hyper-edited doublestranded
RNA containing multiple I·U and U·I pairs []. Recently,
the SN4TDR was shown to be able to promote both the in-vitro
spliceosome complex formation and the first step of pre-mRNA
splicing by interacting with U5 snRNP (small nuclear
ribonucleoproteins) [].

The SN4TDR proteins from eukaryotic organisms were classified
into 5 categories based on 5th SN-like domain []. In contrast, the
overall length and sequences of the proteins from fish were highly
conserved, suggesting an essential role in this species. Furthermore,
the conservation was also observed in SN4TDR proteins between
human and fish. Although the human SN4TDR has been studied
intensively, the structure and function of fugu (Takifugu rubripes)
SN4TDR remains unknown. To investigate the function of fugu
SN4TDR, here we performed a systemic bioinformatics analysis
with a novel HCA (hydrophobic-cluster analysis) method. The
analysis reveals that the protein has such a modular architecture
including four repeat SN-like domains at the N-terminus, followed
by Tudor domain and complete SN-like domain. In addition, some
conserved amino acids were detected within fugu SN-like domains,
suggesting their important roles in the function of fugu SN4TDR.

Methodology
Searching database for right sequences
The sequence data of fugu SN4TDR (BAD32626), human SN4TDR
(NP_055205), staphylococcal aureus nuclease (2SNS_A) and SMN
(the survival of motor neurons) (1MHN_A) for sequence analysis
was obtained directly from the database at National Centre for
Biotechnology Information (NCBI).

HCA plot
Due to the low level of sequence identities, HCA program at the
Mobyle server 
(http://mobyle.rpbs.univ-paris-diderot.fr/cgibin/portal.py?form=HCA) 
based on the methods described by
Callebaut et al [] was used to detect similar plots between fugu
SN4TDR, SNase and SMN, which could determine the presence of
similar three-dimensional folds. The five SN-like domains of fugu
SN4TDR detected by HCA analysis were used for multiple
sequence alignment by the CLUSTAL W program
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/clustalw/) based on the methods described by
Thompson et al []. They were subsequently used to generate input
files to BOXSHADE for direct-viewing multiple alignment output.

Modeling of fugu SN-like domains
The five SN-like domains from fugu SN4TDR were modeled by an
automatic web server in Geno 3D home page (http://geno3dpbil.ibcp.fr/) 
according to the methods described by Combet et al
[]. The crystal structure of SNase (PDB 1SNc) was used as a
template for modeling four N-terminal SN-like domains (SN1-
SN4), and the crystal structure of p100 co-activator Tudor domain
(PDB 2HQE) was used for modeling C-terminal SN-like domain
(SN5). PredictProtein program at the ExPASy Molecular Biology
Server (http://cubic.bioc.columbia.edu/) was performed according to
the methods described by Rost et al [].

Results
The detection of five SN-like domains and Tudor domain based
on HCA plot
By searching the conserved domain against SMART database, we
found that fugu SN4TDR sequence contains two distant domains,
four repeat SN-like domains (SN1 to SN4) and TSN domain. The
later is comprised of the fifth SN domain (SN5) and Tudor domain.
The comparison between five SN-like domains shows that they
have low sequence identities in the amino acid level. In order to
understand structure of fugu SN4TDR, the four SN-like domains
and TSN domain were analyzed by hydrophobic cluster analysis
(HCA), which aligns protein sequences relying on a twodimensional
(2D) representation of the sequences rather than the
sequence similarities. The HCA plot from Mobyle was employed
for the comparison of the fugu SN4TDR with staphylococcal aureus
nuclease and SMN (the survival of motor neurons) protein
sequences for detecting similar motifs.

The results indicated that the fugu SN4TDR has a modular
architecture. At the N-terminus, four complete SN-like domains are
located in residues 22-164, 198-326, 346-495 and 531-659, and
each SN-like domain includes four similar repetitive hydrophobic
domains. At the C-terminus, the SN-like domain are located in
residues 684-704 and residues 795-896, both of which interdigitate
with the Tudor domain (residues 705-794) ().

Similar to SNase, all five SN-like domains of fugu SN4TDR protein
contain a similar hydrophobic cluster that includes eight similar
hydrophilic motifs (designated as motif C1 to C8, ).
Relative to other motifs, C1, C3, and C6 are well-conserved in all
SN-like domains (). The motifs C1 and C2 in SN-like
domains are linked by a loop (L12), which contributes a conserved
glycine necessary for nuclease binding. An exception is observed in
SN3 domain, where glycine is replaced by an alanine. For loop L3α
(linking β3 and α-helix), the sequence and length are different
between five modeled SN-like domains and SNase.

The HCA analysis showed that Tudor domain of TSN domain
(residues 705-794) () is similar to that of SMN (MHN),
which contains a typical β-barrel domain with four β-sheets.
Furthermore, the hydrophobic cluster of Tudor domain (designated
as motif C9 and C10) is also similar to that of SMN Tudor domain
(). In motifs C9 and C10, the residues Phe741, Try747,
Try764, and Try767 correspond to the residues Trp102, Try109,
Try127 and Try130 in SMN Tudor domain. The four residues of
SMN Tudor domain have been proved to form an aromatic cage that
is associated with the protein-protein interactions by enclosing a
dimethylated arginine ligand to the cage []. Previous studies
described a similar mechanism for recognition and binding of
methylated amino acids residues in the Tudor domains of JMJDA
[] and 53BP1 [].

Secondary structure and modeling of fugu SN-like domains
The secondary structure elements of all SN-like domains were
predicted by PredictProtein. The result indicates that five SN-like
domains closely resemble the overall structure of staphylococcal
nuclease, which mainly includes a five-stranded β-barrel capped by
an α-helix between β3 and β4, followed by two α-helices (α2 and
α3, termed as subdomain B). It is of note that two amino acids
(Asp21 and Asp40) in SNase required for catalysis are missing in
the structure of five SN-like domains. In despite of the similarity of
secondary structure elements, the surface residues of SN-like
domains differ from those of SNase. Model analysis of five Nterminal
SN-like domains indicates that SN1-SN4 domains have
positively charged surfaces that provide a solvent accessible
surface, whereas SN5 has negatively charged surface unable to
interact with nucleic acid ().

Discussion
4SNc-Tudor domain protein (SN4TDR) was first identified as a
transcriptional coactivator of the Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen
2, coactivating gene expression by interacting with the EBNA-2
acidic domain []. Previous studies indicated that SN4TDR was
conserved in model structures among a wide variety of organisms. It
contains four repeat SN-like domains at the N-terminus; followed
by a Tudor domain and a variety of SN-like domain (TSN). The
high degree of structural conservation in many eukaryotic
organisms may imply that SN4TDR plays an indispensable role in
eukaryotic cells. Different from the model structures, the amino acid
sequence of SN4TDR is less conserved (below 30%). Therefore,
HCA analysis was used to detect the presence of the conserved
structure within N-terminal SN-like domains and TSN domain. For
the diversity of the fifth SN-like domain (SN5), SN4TDR is
classified into 5 categories based on homology and the status of
SN5 domain []. In addition, the fugu SN5 domain contains a fulllength
secondary structure formed by residues 687-704 (β1 and β2)
and residues 795-896 (β3, α1, β4, β5, α2 and α3). Multiple sequence
alignment showed there is a low identity between five SN-like
domains and SNase. However, when compared with diverse
eukaryotes, the domains of fugu SN4TDR are conserved, suggesting
that they are functionary importance []. In addition, the secondary
structural analysis by PredictProtein () indicated that SNlike
domains contain the typical OB-folds, implying a function of
binding oligonucleotides or oligosaccharides []. It is notable that
subdomain B (α2 and α3) has more similarities than subdomain A
(β1, β2, β3, α1, β4 and β5) (). The conserved residues in
subdomain B are considered to be necessary for its stability [],
and the subdomain A appears to contribute to oligonucleotides
binding due to the presence of typical OB-fold []. In subdomain
A, the L3α loop regions of fugu SN4TDR between β3 and α1 are rich
in Arg and Lys, implying a potential to bind phosphates.
Interestingly, the overall structures of SN4TDR between fugu and
human are conserved in sequence and length, except for L3α where
residues are different, suggesting different substrates for binding
sites (). Furthermore, the charged properties of L3α of SNlike
domains except for SN5 domain have no significant difference
between fugu and human.

Tudor domains have been found in many eukaryotic organisms and
are involved in protein-protein interactions. Recent study on
mutagenesis of p100 TSN domain revealed that methylated ligands
are trapped inside a cage which is composed of at least three
aromatic amino acids residues []. The Tudor domain of the
survival of motor neurons (SMN) was demonstrated to bind to
dimethylated arginines of arginine-glycine (RG) rich sequences at
the C-terminus of Sm proteins. Here, we indicated that four amino
acids (Phe741, Try747, Try764, and Try767) in Tudor domain are
invariant and likely to form conserved aromatic cage to bind
methylated ligands.The model analysis of five SN-like domains
shows that there are highly conserved secondary structures and
differences between N-terminal SN1-SN4 and C-terminal SN5. The
similar secondary structures and positively charged surfaces
between fugu and human SN-like domains suggest that fugu SN1-
SN4 may bind DNA and/or double-stranded RNA in the same way
as human SN1-SN4 []. In contrast, the SN5 domain is unable to
bind phosphoric acids due to the presence of negatively charged
surface. In addition, it is demonstrated that TSN domain of p100
could interact with snRNP complexes and promote pre-mRNA
splicing []. Thereby charged surface of SN5 domain may
compromise methylated ligands binding of Tudor domain.

Citation: Zheng et al, Bioinformation 4(3): 127-131 (2009)

HCA plots of SN-like domains, SNase and SMN showing their structural homology. In the HCA plots, the residues are shown on
a duplicated α-helical net and the clusters of hydrophobic residues are automatically drawn. One-letter corresponds to one amino acid,
except for proline, glycine, serine and threonine which are represented by the symbols ★,♦ ,⊡ ,□ respectively. The catalytic sites
(D21, F34, D40, E43, K84, Y85 and R87) of SNase described in Christopher [] and its secondary structure predicted by PredictProtein
(β1-β2-β3-α1-β4-β5-α2-α3) are shown in HCA plot of SNase. SNase and SN-like domains are divided into subdomain A and subdomain B.
Hydrophobic clusters with similar characteristics between SNase and SN-like domains are designated as motifs C1 to C8, while similar
clusters between SMN and Tudor domain are denoted as motifs C9 to C10. Vertical lines indicate the putative correspondences between
sequences; clusters with identical characteristics are darkly shaded. SNase = staphylococcal nuclease; SMN = the survival of motor neurons.

Multiple sequence alignment of SNase and five SN-like domains based on HCA analysis. The protein sequence alignment is
performed by CLUSTAL W program using default parameters, and then handled using BOXSHADE. The secondary structure of SNase
protein sequences predicted by PredictProtein are denoted as β1, β2, β3, α1, β4, β5, α2 and α3. The corresponding secondary structures of
SN-like domains are displayed as underline at the bottom of the sequences. The region β3 between β2 and α1 in SN5 domain is predicted by
modeling SN5 and denoted as dashed line. The region β3 of SN5 domain is analyzed according to crystal structure of human SN4TDR
protein.

Structure of fugu SN-like domains modeled using Geno 3D. (A) Cartoon illustration of five SN-like domains structures. Red, α-
helix; yellow, β-sheet; (B) Surface electrostatic potential calculated by pdbviewer show positively charged surfaces as blue and negatively
charged surface as red. The classification of residues is as follows: positively charged, Arg and Lys; negatively charged, Asp and Glu.

Comparison of fugu and human SN4TDR. The protein sequence comparison is performed by CLUSTAL W program using
default parameters, and then handled using BOXSHADE. The SN-like domains are denoted using dashed line. The secondary structures of
five SN-like domains are displayed as upper line.

