Background
Simple Sequence Repeats (SSRs) in DNA sequence are composed of tandem
iterations of short oligonucleotides. SSRs may have functional and structural
properties that distinguish them from general DNA sequences. SSRs are found
abundantly in eukaryotic and prokaryotic genomes [,
]. SSRs are
ubiquitously distributed in the genomes, both in protein coding and non-coding
regions []. 
The SSRs consist of simple homopolymeric tracts of a single
nucleotide base (poly (A), poly (C), poly (T) or poly (G) or of large or small
numbers of several multimeric classes of repeats. Several classes of SSRs exist.
The genus Shigella is an important human pathogen and is responsible for the
majority of cases of endemic bacillary dysentery. Moreover, variability in the
number of repeat units at a given genomic site, i.e. the sequence heterogeneity,
among individual strains can be used to assess intra-species diversity. There is
accumulating evidence that SSRs serve a functional role, affecting gene
expression, and that polymorphism of SSR tracts may be important in the
evolution of gene regulation [,
,
]. Mutation mechanisms have been studied
in some detail in eukaryotes, essentially human and yeast. The data obtained so
far indicates that SSRs mutate by replication slippage process caused by
mismatches between DNA strands while being replicated during meiosis 
[].
Typically, slippage in each SSRs occur about once per 1,000 generations 
[].
Molecular analysis of changes in SSRs allows epidemiological studies on the
spread of pathogenic bacteria. In pathogens, SSRs can enhance antigenic
variance of the pathogen population in a strategy that counteracts the host
immune response []. 
In this scenario, SSRs located in protein coding regions
or in upstream regulatory regions can reversibly deactivate or alter genes
involved in interactions with the host. Some SSRs may also affect local
structure of the DNA molecule. SSRs are informative markers for the
identification of pathogenic bacteria, and may serve as indicators for the
adaptation of pathogens in vivo and ex vivo environments 
[]. SSR-mediated
variation has important implications for bacterial pathogenesis and
evolutionary fitness. In our study, we have analyzed the distribution and
composition of SSRs of entire genome of Shigella dysenteriae SD197 and
compared with the virulence factors of the genome and the virulence plasmid.
We have also made an attempt to show how SSR studies are useful to generate
new biological information.

Methods
DNA Sequences
All the DNA sequences were downloaded in FASTA format from
(
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/). The details of genome/gene
sequences, their lengths and other features are as follows. Genome of Shigella
dysenteriae Sd197: Chromosome: (NCBI Entrez Genome) Genbank Accession
Number- NC_007606, Size: 4369232 bp, Gene Count: 4660; Proteins: 4270.
Plasmid pSD1_197:Genbank Accession Number: NC_007607; Size: 182726
bp, Gene Count: 224, Proteins: 223.

Databases
The various databases used for downloading the genome, plasmid and genes
include NCBI GenBank, Virulence Factor for Pathogenic Bacteria (VFDB),
ShiBASE (details given in Supplementary material available with authors).

Analysis of SSRs
In this study, we have used two software for identifying SSRs. Software
developed by Gur-Arie i.e.Ssr.exe [] downloadable from
(
ftp://ftp.technion.ac.il/pub/supported/biotech/) and MICAS (Microsatellite
Analysis Server) available at 
http://www.cdfd.org.in/micas to screen the
genomes, plasmids and virulent genes of the organism included in this study
[]. 
Virulent genes are shown in Table 2 (Supplementary material available
with authors). Parameters set for extensive study of SSR analysis using ssr.exe
include minimal number of repeats = 2, minimal motif length = 1, length of
whole SSR array = (2*1) = 2. This software searches for all of the SSRs with
motif lengths up to 10 bp; records motif, repeat number, and genomic location;
and reports the results in an output file. The second software was MICAS
(Microsatellite Analysis Server) an interactive web-based server to find the
non-redundant microsatellites.

Results and Discussion
Large numbers of SSR were found to be scattered in whole genome, plasmid
and all the virulence factor families. Our study shows high density of SSR in
virulent genes and regulatory regions in SD197. The repeat number obtained
and percentage of repeats obtained is more in virulence genes compared to
structural genes. The SSR mononucleotide repeats were found to be in large
number followed by dinucleotide, trinucleotide and higher motif repeats. This
is shown in Table 1 (see ). Shorter repeats were
found to be more abundant than the longer repeats. The environmental changes
cause stress reactions such as change in copy number of tandem repeats. With
this high density of SSR stress response genes and virulent genes may undergo
such change resulting in changed activity of additionally relevant genes and
further relaxation of stress by adapting to changed environment 
[].

The A and T repeats are overrepresented as compared to C and G in plasmid
and genome. The frequency of A and T mononucleotide SSR is higher in the
virulence genes of plasmid as compared to entire plasmid (). The
overrepresentation of A and T mononucleotide SSR can be explained by
different ways like slipped strand mispairing, is more likely for poly A or poly
T as strand separation is energetically more favorable compared to poly GC.
Similarly the higher energy cost of synthesis of CG dNTPs by the cells 
[].
Longest SSR in plasmid was 10bp for A, 8bp for C, 11bp for G, and 19bp for
T. There is overrepresentation of A and G mononucleotide SSR in virulence
genes of genome as compared to entire genome (). Virulence gene
families of genome show higher percentage of G mononucleotide SSR
followed by C and A (). Presence of higher frequency of A and G
repeats in virulence gene indicates presence of secondary structure in DNA.
The longest SSR in genome was 23bp long A, 11bp long for C, 17bp for G, and
9bp for T. Longer mononucleotides SSRs have more opportunity to undergo
slipped-strand mispairing and there will be more mutability in their length than
in shorter mononucleotide SSRs. Another possible reason is the involvement of
repeated sequences in the formation of non-canonical DNA structures,
including triple stranded H-DNA. These structures are more easily formed in
GA-rich regions [,
] and could block transcription by RNA polymerase
[]. 
Genome encoded virulence genes showed higher frequency of GC/CG
dinucleotide repeats but it is lower as compared to entire genome. In contrast
there was higher frequency of AC/CA, AT/TA, CT/TC repeats than the entire
genome (Figure 4, Supplementary material available with authors). The
frequency of AT/TA dinucleotide repeats was higher in plasmid encoded
virulence genes compared to entire plasmid. It has been proposed that GT, CA,
CT, GA GC or AT repeats binding proteins could participate in recombination
process by inducing Z conformation of DNA or other alternative secondary
DNA structures. Presence of GC/CG dinucleotide in genome more frequently
compared to AT/TA could be due to the fact that TA forms thermodynamically
least stable DNA. RNases preferentially degrade UA dinucleotides in mRNA.
The large number of trinucleotide repeats was found in genome and plasmid.
The motifs containing predominantly G and C are found to be over represented
in genome. Whereas, the motifs containing predominantly A and T, are found
to be over represented in plasmid. Some motifs were completely absent such
as: AAC, AAG, AAT, CCA, CCG, CCT, GGA, GGT, GGC, TTA, TTG, and
TTC. Highly repeated motif in genome was CAG and in plasmid was ATT.
The distribution of tri and hexa-nucleotide repeats reflects codon repetition and
that of amino acids suggesting these repeats are strongly selected and shows its
association with protein function. The tetra nucleotide repeats were over
represented in plasmids whereas penta-nucleotide repeats are slightly over
represented in genome. The hexa nucleotide repeats are present more in
genome. SSRs were also found in structural genes where the motif A was over
represented (Figure 13, Supplementary material available with authors)
However, the repeat number obtained and percentage of repeats obtained is less
than that of virulence genes. Our study suggests that genomic distribution of
SSR is non random and apart from nucleotide composition of repeats the
characteristic DNA replication, repair and recombination machinery might
have important role in the evolution of SSR. Our analyses performed on the
genome, plasmid and large number of genes of Shigella dysenteriae SD197
clearly indicates that, due to the presence of this large number of SSRs, the
organism has an enormous potential for generating this genomic and
phenotypic diversity.

Conclusion
SSR of many types are found in prokaryotic genomes as well. These are
present in functional domains and play an important role in functional
alterations and implications in mutation helping the organism to adapt to its
surroundings. Higher nucleotide repeats have been observed in our study. The
repeat number obtained and percentage of repeats obtained is higher in
virulence genes as compared to other gene families. We found that frequency
of A and T repeats are higher in the chromosome, plasmid and the virulence
genes. However, in dinucleotide repeats there is a significant difference in the
motifs obtained as we observed that the frequencies of GC/CG repeats are
higher in genome whereas plasmids harbor more of AT/TA repeats. Genome
has trinucleotide repeats having predominantly G and C whereas plasmid has
trinucleotide repeats having predominantly A and T. There is
overrepresentation of mononucleotide repeats A and T and dinucleotide repeats
AT/TA in the type III secretion system of plasmid which is composed of the
mxi-spa group. This study will help in in-depth analysis and understanding of
the elements that control and regulate the pathogenicity and survival of a
microbe. This can also be used as a foundation for development of
sophisticated molecular tools and diagnostic kits.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Saurabh et al, Bioinformation 6(9): 348-351 (2011)

Frequency of mononucleotide SSR in plasmid and virulence genes of
plasmid

Frequency of mononucleotide SSR in genome and virulence genes of
genome

Frequency of mononucleotide SSR in virulence gene families of
genome

