Background
Oxidative and xenobiotic stresses including reactive oxygen
species (ROS), electrophilic chemicals and heavy metals damage
biological macromolecules and disrupt normal cellular
functions (reviewed in [] and references therein). These stress
factors are responsible for the development of many diseases
such as cancer, cardiovascular disease, diabetes and
neurodegeneration. Human bodies possess cytoprotective
mechanism for survival by defending oxidative and xenobiotic
stress factors.

The Keap1-Nrf2 system is one of the most important
cytoprotective system which has been developed over the
course of evolution []. Nrf2 (nuclear factor (erythroid-derived
2)-like 2) is a basic region-leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription
factor that plays essential role to express many cytoprotective
genes in response to oxidative and electrophilic stresses 
[,
].
The Nrf2 transcription factor belongs to the Cap ‘n’ collar
(CNC) family of transcription factors, and is composed of a
conserved N-terminal regulatory domain, termed the Neh2
domain, two transactivation domain and a C-terminal b-ZIP
domain (). Based on sequence homology, the
sequence of Keap1 from human, rat and mouse are highly
conserved between them. The (Kelchi-like ECH associated
protein 1) sequence can be sub-divided into the N-terminal BTB
domain, the intervening region (IVR), the double glycine repeat
or Kelch repeat (DGR), and the C-term region (CTR) 
(). The DGR and CTR domains are collectively to name as
DC-domain. The IVR region is also named to as the BACK
domain.

Under homeostatic/unstressed conditions, the cellular
concentration of Nrf2 remains low, and it is
repressed/modulated by Keap1 thus, Nrf2 is constantly
ubiquitinated through Keap1 in the cytoplasm and
subsequently undergoes proteasomal degradation 
[–]. Under
stress condition, such as exposure to electrophiles or ROS,
Keap1 loses repression activity and hence Nrf2 dissociates from
Keap1 and translocate into the nucleus, and subsequently
coordinately activates cytoprotective genes and exerts a
protective function against xenobiotic and oxidative stress 
[].

The Keap1 protein forms a homodimer through the N-terminal
BTB domain []. Under normal conditions, the Keap1-Nrf2
complex forms in 2:1 ratio as revealed by biochemical and
structural studies []. In the Keap1 homodimer, the C-terminal
β-propeller domain (Keap1-DC) of each monomer is free from
any intermolecular interactions, and is separated from each
other. The Keap1-DC of each monomer associates with one
molecule of Nrf2 []. The ETGE and DLG motifs in Neh2 of
Nrf2 are key motifs for direct interactions with the Keap1-DC
domain [,
], and thus, Nrf2 bridges two Keap1-DC of the
Keap1 dimer, and appears to be favorable for the efficient
ubiquitylationof Nrf2 [].

The BTB-BACK domains of Keap1 are not only important for
Keap1 homodimerization, but also serves as an adaptor for the
Cullin 3-based ubiquitin E3 ligase for Nrf2 [,
[–] 
(). Cullin-RING ligases (CRLs) are the largest family of multisubunit
E3 ubiquitin ligases and adopt a modular assembly that
facilitates the ubiquitylation of divergent substrates. The CRL3
subclass utilizes Cul3, which combines exclusively with BTBcontaining
proteins as substrate-specific adaptors []. Keap1 is
a classic example which demonstrates the importance of Keap1
dimerization for its substrate ubiquitylation as it requires two β-
propeller domains to interact with two distinct epitopes in Nrf2
simultaneously [,
,
,
]. The Cul3 binds to the BTB-BACK
domains of Keap1, and also the ring-box (Rbx1/Roc1) to form a
ternary complex of a core E3 ubiquitin ligase complex, which
helps Nrf2 to undergo proteasomal degradation.

Though the tertiary structure of Keap1-DC is known, the
tertiary structures of BTB domain and IVR region (BACK
domain) of Keap1 are not yet determined. We present here the
predicted structure of BTB-BACK domains of mKeap1 by
molecular modeling studies. We have also predicted the
structure of BTB-BACK domains of mKeap1 in complex with
Cul3. Based on the modeling results, we discuss the homodimer
formation of Keap1 and its interaction with Cul3.

Methodology
The NCBI-BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool) online
program [] was used to compare the target protein sequence
against the protein database and to calculate sequence
similarity between them. The mouse Keap1 sequence
comprising the BTB domain (aa: 52-179) and the BTB-IVR
domains (aa: 52-319) was used to obtain the protein sequences
of similar structures, using the RCSB Protein Bank Database
[]. The intermolecular contacts were analyzed by using the
program PDBsum []. The selected protein sequences, based
on the sequence similarity and the size of predicted sequence,
were then subjected to multiple-sequence alignment calculation
using Clustal W []. The multiple-sequence alignment results
were manually edited wherever necessary to obtain reasonable
predicted comparable sequences/structures between the target
Keap1 protein and the query proteins. The online STRAP
program [] was initially used to visually inspect the multiplesequence
alignment results. The ESPript program [] was used
to produce figures of multiple-sequence alignment results. The
PyMol program [] was used to analyze protein structures as
well as to produce figures.

Results and Discussion
The mouse Keap1 protein sequence corresponding to the Nterm
region (Ser14 – Cys319) has taken for sequence
comparison against the RCSB-PDB database using the program
NCBI-BLAST []. The blast search has revealed two distinct
results: (1) protein sequences corresponds to the intact BTBdomain
(hereafter, intact BTB domain, aa: 52-179, mKeap1
numbering), and (2) protein sequences possess the intact BTB
domain and the BACK domain (IVR region) (hereafter, BTBBACK
domains, aa: 52-319, mKeap1 numbering).

Intact BTB domain:
The NCBI-BLAST has revealed 12 protein structures, which
possess an intact BTB domain, show significant sequence and
structural similarity with the proposed BTB region of mKeap1
(). Multiple-sequence alignment of these proteins with
mKeap1 showed certain highly conserved amino acids between
them such as His59, Asn68, Cys77, Asp78, His96, Ser142,
Phe139, Tyr141 and Thr142 (). A conserved triplet
motif, VLA (Val99, Leu100 and Ala101), which lie in α2, was
also observed in the sequence analysis.

The predicted protein structures are from human Lrf (PDB Id:
2NN2), human Bcl6 (PDB Id: 1R28), human Miz1 (PDB Id:
3M52), human PlzF (PDB Id: 1BUO), human Fazf (PDB Id:
3M5B), human myoneurin (PDB Id: 2VPK), human Hkr3 (PDB
Id: 3B84) and mouse Hkr3 (PDB Id: 2YY9) belong to the zinc
finger family of transcription factors. Human Bach1 (PDB Id:
2IHC) and mouse Bach1 (PDB Id: 2Z8H) belong to the leucine
zipper family of transcription factor, and human BtbD6 (PDB
Id: 2VKP) is an adaptor protein for Cul3 ligase. Members of the
BTB family share a secondary structure topology in the core
BTB domain, and differ in the peripheral secondary structure
elements []. The core BTB domain as seen among the known
structures of BTB domain containing protein consists of five
conserved α-helices (α1 – α5), and three common β-strands (β1
– β3) ().

The proteins used for sequence alignment also form functional
homodimers through their respective BTB domains. Thus, in
order to predict the dimer interface residues of Keap1-BTB, the
crystal structure of the BTB dimer of human Lrf (PDB Id: 2NN2)
[] was used as a reference structure for discussion, since it has
highest sequence identity of 31% with mKeap1 compared to
other proteins. As seen from the hLrf structure, the dimer
interactions are found between α1 helix of chain A and α2 and
α3 of chain B, and vice-versa. Also, an antiparallel β-sheet
conformation occurs between β1 strand of chain A and β5
strand of chain B, and vice-versa (). The dimer
interface residues of the BTB domain of hLrf were obtained by
using the PDBsum database []. The corresponding probable
dimer interface residues of mKeap1-BTB were identified from
sequence alignment. These dimer interface residues were found
to be located in the predicted α1, α2, α3 helices, β1 and β5
strands  
(see supplementary material), ().

Among the predicted dimer interface residues of mKeap1, it
was seen that 40% was conserved, 10% was semi-conserved and
50% was non-conserved. The dimer interacting residues of hLrf
in the crystal structure were mutated to corresponding mKeap1
residues using PyMol []. When we checked residue by
residue in the dimer interface region, more hydrophilic patches
were seen on the surface of mKeap1 when compared to hLrf
(not shown). Moreover, as shown in the , the
hydrophilic environment in hLrf contributed by Gln27 and
Ser50 (Lrf numbering) is replaced with hydrophobic
environment in mKeap1 contributed by the non-conserved
residues (Leu70 and Val98). From this analysis, we speculate
that besides the interactions due the conserved residues,
variations in charge distribution in the dimer interface of
mKeap1 may play essential role to form a stable Keap1 dimer as
well as to make a complex with Cul3 for Nrf2 ubiquitination.

BTB-BACK domains:
Only two proteins, human Gigaxonin (KLHL16) (PDB Id:
3HVE) [] and KLHL11 (PDB Id: 3I3N) 
[] were resulted from
the BLAST search (). Both KLHL11 and KLHL16
adaptors recognize Cul3 of CRL3 subclass for the substrates
proteasomal degradation.

The crystal structures of the BTB-BACK domains of hKLHL11
both apo-form and in complex with Cul3 were recently
determined (PDB Ids: 3I3N and 4AP2) []. The hKLHL11
structure reveals the entire domain of BACK besides the BTB
domain; whereas the KLHL16 structure lacks two helices at the
N-terminal side of the BACK domain, which is functionally
important for the Cul3 complex formation. Hence, we have
taken the hKLHL11-Cul3 complex structure for our comparison
studies.

The homodimer of the BTB-BACK domains of hKLHL11 is an
elongated shape with overall dimensions of 150 × 35 × 25 Å
(). In the complex structure, it forms heterotetrameric
assemblies with each subunit in hKLHL11 homodimer binding
one molecule of Cul3. The BACK domain mainly consists of β-
helical secondary structures. The two N-terminal helices (α7
and α8 of hKLHL11) form the 3-box motif and subsequently
create an antiparallel four helix bundle configuration by
interacting with α5 and α6 of the BTB domain (). The
helical bundle plays critical role in making complex with Cul3.
The remaining helices, α9-α14 at the C-terminus creates a
distinct sub-domain and packing perpendicular to the 3-box.
This arrangement produces a cleft of 16 Å deep and 18 Å wide
between the BTB and BACK domains which is responsible for
Cul3 interaction.

In the complex structure, the complex is formed by α2' and α5'
of the first Cullin repeat with the BTB and 3-box domains of
hKLHL11 (). The contact surface area of the Cul3NTD
interface is 1508 Å2. A shallow cleft in the BTB surface forms via
an induced fit mechanism facilitated by conformational changes
in the α3-β4 loop. This loop is disordered in the apo-form, but
change into an α-helix when interacts with Cul3; Ser131 of
hKLHL11 hydrogen bonds with Glu132 of Cul3 α2' helix.
Moreover, Phe130 is shifted about 5 Å to insert into a deep
hydrophobic pocket produced between Cul3 helices α2' and α4'
(). The backbone carbonyl of His213 (α7) in hKLH11
makes a hydrogen bond with Lys68' of Cul3. Phe246 (α10) of
hKLHL11 also contributes a hydrogen bond with Thr24 of Cul3.

The sequence comparison between mKeap1 and hKLHL11
corresponding to the BTB-BACK domains showed 16.6%
sequence identity, and 66.8% non-conserved residues between
them. The interacting residues in the hKLHL11-Cul3 complex
were analyzed using the PDBsum database []. The
corresponding residues in mKeap1 were identified from the
sequence alignment  (see supplementary material).

The side chain of Asp181 of KLHL11 interacts with the sidechains
of Tyr125' and Tyr62' of Cul3 (). Glu55' of Cul3
makes a salt-bridge and a hydrogen bond with Arg18 and
Tyr121 of hKLHL11, respectively ().
Intriguingly, these electrostatic interactions contributed by
Tyr121, Asp181, and Arg182 in hKLHL11 may be absent in the
Keap1-Cul3 complex as these residues are replaced with
hydrophobic residues Val106, Val160 and Met161, respectively,
in Keap1 (). Another interesting feature is also
observed in the complex that Leu184 of hKLHL11
hydrophobically interacts with Met124' of Cul3. But, in
mKeap1, the corresponding residue is replaced with a
hydrophilic residue, Glu163 (). Hence, we speculate
that in the Keap1-Cul3 complex, electrostatic surface charge
distribution may be different at the Keap1-Cul3 interface when
compare to the hKLHL11-Cul3 complex. This unique difference
may play critical role for differentiating Cul3 recognition by
Keap1 and KLHL11 adaptors for their substrates proteasomal
degradation.

Keap1 is a cysteine rich protein. Mouse Keap1 contains 25
cysteine residues and human Keap1 contains 27 cysteine
residues. Out of these cysteines, a few have been implicated to
play important role as sensors viz. Cys151, Cys273 and Cys288.
Cys151 is present in the BTB domain of Keap1. It is evident
from the analysis that Cys151 is exposed to the solvent region
and hence, it has free access to the cellular environment. Also, it
is located at the N-terminal side of α5 which is a key secondary
element for Cul3 interaction (not shown). Any disturbance in
this region caused by adduction of Cys151 might bring about
disruption of Cul3 interactions, thereby, preventing
ubiquitination of Nrf2.

Conclusions
The Keap1 protein, being the master regulator of Nrf2, has
become an important therapeutic target for regulating the Nrf2
transcription function. Besides the Keap1-DC domain which is
essential for Nrf2 binding, the BTB domain of Keap1 is an
important domain to form functional homo-dimerization,
essential for Nrf2 ubiquitination via Cul3 ligase complex. The
BTB-BACK domains of Keap1 are essentially interacts with
Cul3. The important dimer interacting residues, Cul3
interacting residues, electrostatic charge distribution at the
dimer interface as well as at the Cul3 binding site have been
mapped in the comparative analysis. The information gained in
the present study will be helpful for further biochemical
analysis of the Keap1-Cul3 complex as well as to aid in
designing inhibitor molecules to inhibit the Nrf2 degradation
pathway.

Conflict of Interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

Supplementary material
Data 1
We thank Prof. P. Satishchandra, Director/Vice Chancellor to
provide the finance support for computational facility.

Citation:Chauhan et al, Bioinformation 9(9): 450-455 (2013)

Schematic diagram of the Keap1-Nrf2 pathway. (A)
Functional domains of Keap1 (top) and Nrf2 (bottom). (B) Cul3
based E3 ubiquitin ligase brings about ubiquitination of the
substrate molecule Nrf2 via an adaptor protein, Keap1. Nrf2 is
then presented to 26S proteasome for degradation.

Comparison analysis of the intact BTB-dimer. (A)
Sequence alignment of mKeap1 (aa: 52-179; KEAP1_MOUSE)
with sequences of selected known crystal structures. The dimer
interface residues are marked by blue stars. The secondary
structural features from hLrf (PDB Id: 2NN2) are shown above
the alignments. The first eight amino acids in hLrf are not
included as this region is absent in the crystal structure. The
colors reflect the similarity (red boxes and white characters for
conserved residues; red characters for similarity in a group;
blue frames for similarity across groups). The sequence was
aligned and rendered by Clustal W [] and ESPript 
[],
respectively. (B) The dimer arrangement of hLrf-BTB (PDB Id:
2NN2). The dimer interface region is only labeled for clarity. (C)
A representative figure showing hydrophilic intermolecular
interactions in the hLrf-BTB domain. (D) The corresponding
region in mKeap1 showing hydrophobic environment due to
Met67, Leu70 and Val98.

Comparison analysis of the BTB-BACK domains and its complex with Cul3. (A) Sequence alignment of mKeap1 (aa: 50-
319; KEAP1_MOUSE) with hKLHL11 (aa: 67-340; Q13618). The potential interface residues responsible for making complex with
Cul3 are shown in blue stars. The secondary structural features from hKLHL11 (PDB Id: 4AP2) are shown above the alignments.
The colors reflect the similarity (red boxes and white characters for conserved residues; red characters for similarity in a group;
blue frames for similarity across groups). The sequence was aligned and rendered by Clustal W [] and ESPript 
[], respectively.
(B) A cartoon ribbon diagram of the BTB-BACK domains (PDB Id: 4AP2). Only one chain of the homodimer is shown for clarity.
The loop connecting β1 and β2 is absent in the crystal structure. (C) A cartoon ribbon diagram of the BTB-BACK domains in
complex with Cul3 (salmon) (PDB Id: 4AP2), and labeled only the interacting secondary structure elements. (D) &amp; (E) Showing
representative diagrams at the Cul3 interface region. The corresponding residues in mKeap1are labeled in magenta.

