Background
Snakebite is a major neglected public health issue particularly
among agricultural communities living in rural regions
throughout the world [,
]. An estimated 2.5 million people are
bitten by snakes each year and these are estimated to result in
up to as high as 95000 deaths worldwide [,
]. Snake venoms
are complex mixtures of enzymatic [,
] and non enzymatic
proteins [], together with other components such as
carbohydrates, lipids, nucleosides and metals [,
]. Snake
venom serine proteases are major components and have been
identified mainly in the venoms of snakes belonging to the
viperidae family with a few occurring in members of the
elapidae, colubridae and hydrophidae families 
[]. Many snake
venom serine proteases exert their effects through the ability to
disrupt the normal haemostasis of envenomed prey and victims
[]. Indeed, viper venom serine proteases (VVSPs) affect various
stages of the blood coagulation system, activate platelets and
directly act upon fibrinogen. These include pro-coagulant
enzymes such as thrombin-like enzymes which clot fibrinogen
(fibrinogenolytic), factor V activators, kininogenases and
platelet aggregators, and anti-coagulant enzymes such as
fibrinolytic enzymes, plasminogen activators and protein C
activators [].

A detailed understanding of the components of snake venoms
is important both for acquiring a more complete understanding
of the pathology of envenomation and also to aid in the
development of improved treatments for snakebites. Moreover,
several venom enzymes, including VVSPs have proved to have
potential as therapeutics for various human haemostatic
disorders []. Despite their high sequence similarity, VVSPs
differ widely in their functions. Accelerated evolution 
[], exon
switching [] and point mutations 
[] have been reported to
be involved in the generation of novel VVSPs and adaption to
different geographical locations and available prey. Due to their
physiological and medical importance, understanding of VVSP
sequences, structures, functions and phylogenetic relationships
represent research priorities. In this article, we report the
collection of largest dataset of available VVSP sequences from
public databases and literature and the detailed analysis of their
sequence, structure, function and phylogenetic relationships.

Methodology
Collection of VVSP sequences:
Basic local alignment search tool (BLAST) 
[] was used to
search the NCBI protein database using several VVSP amino
acid sequences. The NCBI and Swiss-Prot protein databases
were searched with individual viper names and several
keywords including serpentes, colubroidea, viperidae,
viperinae and crotalinae to extract all VVSP sequences. Some
published protein sequences, which had not been submitted to
any of the sequence databases were collected directly from the
literature. Several VVSP sequences were incomplete or
contained internal deletions (longer than 10 amino acids), and
were therefore excluded from our dataset. For each complete
VVSP sequence the viper name, accession number, name (and
alternative names if available) of the protein, experimentally
determined functions and associated references were collected.
Where two or more sequences had 100% sequence identity as
determined by the EMBOSS pairwise alignment tool 
[],
duplicates were removed. Each sequence was allocated a
reference code, determined using the viper’s scientific name
followed by up to three letters representing the protein name
(e.g. CDD-SP, where CDD represent the snake name, Crotalus
durissus durissus and SP represent the protein name, serine
protease). Where, the similar first letter of two or more species
occurs within a genus, the second letter of species name was
used in lower case (e.g. CAd-CR).

Sequence analysis:
Multiple sequence alignment analysis of all the VVSP sequences
was performed using the ClustalW2 multiple sequence
alignment tool []. To aid comparison of the VVSP sequences
with other serine proteases, the sequence of bovine α-
chymotrypsinogen (NCBI accession number: P00766) was
included in the alignment. This enabled the commonly used
chymotrypsinogen numbering pattern to be identified in the
VVSP sequences. The alignment file was viewed using the
Jalview-multiple sequence editor tool []. In some of the VVSP
sequences (obtained from cDNA sequencing), the N-terminal
signal and activation peptides were identified in comparison to
previous literature and these were removed manually before
the complete analysis. NetNGlyc tool was used to predict Nglycosylation
sites, and compute pI/MW tool from Expasy
bioinformatics portal was used to predict the isoelectric points
and molecular weight of VVSPs. The number of Nglycosylation
sites and isoelectric points of VVSPs in every
snake were clustered using CIMminer software 
[].

Phylogenetic analysis:
To generate the phylogenetic tree, sequences were aligned
using ClustalW within MEGA 4 [] using a gap opening
penalty of 10 and a gap extension penalty of 0.1 for the initial
pairwise alignment and a gap opening penalty of 3 and gap
extension penalty of 1.8 for the multiple alignment and the
Gonnet protein weight matrix. The phylogenetic tree was
generated within MEGA 4 using the neighbour-joining method
and the Jones-Taylor-Thornton substitution model. The
bootstrap test was performed using 2000 replications. The
sequence of bovine α-chymotrypsinogen was used as an
outgroup.

Structural modeling:
Structural models of VVSPs were created using the IntFOLD
server []. Models were obtained for each sequence using the
structure of rat trypsin (PDB code: 1co9) as a best matched
template. Models were visualised and compared with each
other and the structures of bovine α-chymotrpysin (PDB code:
1YPH) and rat trypsin (PDB code: 1CO9) using PyMOL
molecular graphics system, version 1.3 (DeLano Scientific).

Results and Discussion
Collection of VVSP sequences:
The collection of available VVSP sequences from the protein
databases represented an initial step towards developing a
comprehensive dataset of all VVSPs. BLAST was used to search
the NCBI protein database using the amino acid sequences of
several VVSPs in order to obtain all available sequences of
VVSPs. In addition, the NCBI and Swiss-Prot databases were
searched using list of viper names and several key words. There
were several snake venom serine protease sequences from other
than viperiade family members but since our main focus was on
VVSPs, non-viper sequences were removed from the dataset. In
total 196 complete sequences (after removing the duplicates and
partial sequences) were obtained including 11 complete
sequences extracted from relevant literature 
(see
supplementary material). Of the 196 available proteins only a
small proportion (49 out of 196 or 25%) of VVSPs has been
experimentally characterised. Some (9) VVSPs have been shown
to have more than one function and others have not been
screened for more than one particular function of interest. Some
VVSPs have been designated as thrombin-like enzymes or KN
(which might mean kininogenase), but no information was
available regarding the basis of this classification. For several
available VVSP sequences, associated published article or
information regarding respective functions and other
characteristics were not available. Structural information for the
VVSPs is currently limited with structures solved for only 5
(2.6% in total) VVSPs known.

Our comprehensive dataset of VVSPs has been acquired using
semi-automated methods and to our knowledge, this is the
most complete collection to date of VVSP sequences. The
absence of some sequences from any of the sequence databases
makes it impossible to acquire this completely automatically.
The use of different naming conventions by various authors
also makes it difficult to obtain the VVSP sequences using
keyword searches. The VVSP sequences along with other serine
protease sequences from reptiles (other than viper snakes and
lizards) grouped together in BLAST analysis, indicating them to
have higher sequence similarities to each other than to nonreptile
serine proteases.

General characteristics of VVSP sequences:
To analyse the various features of VVSPs, all sequences were
aligned together along with bovine α-chymotrypsinogen. Initial
multiple sequence alignments of VVSPs demonstrated that
many sequences occurred in precursor form, containing signal
(18 amino acids) and activation peptides (6 amino acids) at the
N-terminus. These were removed from all VVSP sequences and
only the mature protein sequences were aligned for sequence
analysis (Figure S1- this figure is available from authors). The
bovine α-chymotrypsinogen-based sequence numbering was
used throughout the study to allow easier discussion with non-
VVSP sequences.

Activation of VVSPs:
Most of eukaryotic proteases (e.g. digestive enzymes) are
synthesised as precursors and become mature enzymes at their
target sites following the cleavage of signal/activation peptides.
As snake venoms are synthesised from the venom glands and
the venom facilitates the immobilization and digestion of prey,
they are also synthesised as inactive zymogens with signal and
activation peptides []. These signal and activation peptides
are only present in the sequences which were obtained through
cDNA sequencing and were absent in any of the VVSP
sequences obtained through Edman N-terminus sequencing
methods from the purified proteins. A previous study 
[]
reported that venom proteins are stored at an acidic pH in the
lumen of main secretary gland where they are maintained in
their zymogen state to prevent unwanted proteolytic activity in
the venom gland. During venom extraction or a bite, the venom
flows through the rostral portion of accessory gland which is
rich in serous secretions (contain proteolytic enzymes) that
result in activation of proteolytic enzymes [].

Isoelectric point of VVSPs:
The isoelectric point of each VVSP sequence was predicted in
order to analyse the distribution of VVSPs with varying
characteristics within and among other snake venoms. The
predicted isoelectric point of each VVSP varies between 4.6 and
9.4 (). Depending upon the number of VVSP sequences
known in each venom, the distribution of VVSPs vary. The
majority of VVSPs present in all the snake venoms analysed lie
between isoelectric points of 5 and 7 or 8 and 9. This analysis
indicates that snakes produce a mixture of serine proteases with
varying isoelectric points and these may result in alteration of
their functional properties to adapt various substrates in
diverse preys.

N-glycosylation sites in VVSPs:
Since glycosylation in two of the VVSPs (DA-ASI and DA-ASII)
has been demonstrated to affect the substrate specificity of these
enzymes [], the potential N-glycosylation sites were predicted
for all VVSP sequences. The number of predicted Nglycosylation
sites in VVSPs varies between 0 and 6 ().
This analysis indicates that although some (16) of VVSPs are not
glycosylated, many of the VVSPs have one (68) or more (112)
potential glycosylation sites. Glycosylation of VVSPs may
represent a general feature that contributes to the determination
of substrate specificity similar to DA-ASI and DA-ASII.
Moreover, the addition of glycosylation moieties will increase
the molecular weights of native VVSPs in actual venom. The
difference in molecular weights of VVSP homologs in different
species is well reported in literature [].

GWG motif:
The conversion of inactive zymogens into active enzymes is a
key step to initiate the activity of several digestive and clotting
enzymes at their target sites. This conversion is usually takes
place by proteolytic cleavage at specific sites and by altering the
structural fold of active enzymes. Fehlhammer et al. 
[]
reported that a GWG motif between residues 140 and 142 in
chymotrypsinogen was an important site for the conversion of a
flexible zymogen structure into a fixed rigid orientation in the
activated chymotrypsin. This motif is absolutely conserved in
all VVSPs analysed (Figure S1), suggesting that it may play
roles in the conversion of inactive to active VVSPs.

C-terminal extension:
The sequence alignment shows that the length of most of the
mature VVSPs is between 228 and 239 amino acid residues.
Compared to chymotrypsinogen, all the VVSPs lack 15 amino
acids at the N-terminus of the mature proteins which indicates
the removal of signal and activation peptides. While most (179)
of the VVSPs contain a C-terminal extension of 7 amino acids,
some (17) contain smaller or larger extension (Figure S1). This
C-terminus feature is not present in chymotrypsin, trypsin,
thrombin and other known mammalian serine proteases,
suggesting this to be a unique feature of VVSPs. This C-terminal
extension contains a cysteine residue which may form a
disulphide linkage with C91 in all the VVSPs to offer additional
stability for maintaining their structures as determined for VSVPA
[].

Stability of VVSPs:
Salt bridge:
Salt bridges are usually formed between an acidic and a basic
residue to stabilise the structure. A common salt bridge in
trypsin and VVSPs was reported between the residues V/I16
and D194 [,
]. This is formed after the activation of the
enzyme from its precursor form and is involved in stabilisation
of the active site structure. All VVSPs have either valine or
isoleucine at position 16 (except one VVSP, EP-SP1 which has a
deletion at this position) and aspartate at position 194 (except
VS-KN10 which has valine at this position) (Figure S1). Thus
with the exception of these two VVSPs, all others are likely to
form a salt bridge between the residues in these positions in
order to increase the stability of the enzymes.

Disulphide linkages:
The trypsin-like serine proteases contain 10 cysteine residues
which normally form 5 disulphide linkages. But in the
experimentally analysed VVSPs 12 cysteine residues are found,
and in the structure of VS-VPA they have been shown to form 6
disulphide linkages []. These are C22-C157, C42-C58, C91-
C245e, C136-C201, C168-C182 and C191-C220. It is likely that
similar disulphide bonds may form in all other VVSPs where
these cysteine residues present at corresponding position. The
disulphide linkage C91-C245e is a unique characteristic to
VVSPs []. 
In VVSP sequence alignment (Figure S1), although
7 of the cysteine residues [C22, C136, C157, C168, C182, C191
and C220] are absolutely conserved in all VVSPs, 13 VVSPs
have substitutions for one of the other 5 cysteine residues 

(see supplementary material). C42 is substituted in 4 VVSPs
(CC-CR, VS-KN5, VS-KN6 and VS-KN14); C58 is substituted in
one (DA-TL4); C91 is present in all VVSPs except for two (BAIBH
and GBB-SL); C245e was substituted in three VVSPs, EOSP2,
CAd-SP5 and EC-SP6, and a deletion was found in EO-SP5
at this position. C201 was substituted in two VVSPs, DA-DK
and DA-TL7. In some VVSPs, the C91 has been aligned at the
positions of 90 or 92, but these form disulphide linkages as
normal in modelled structures (data not shown). This analysis
shows that in some of the VVSPs, specific disulphide linkages
cannot be formed due to the substitutions. It is entirely not clear
how these substitutions and subsequent loss of corresponding
disulphide linkages would affect the architecture of the VVSP
structures and their function. GBB-SL which lacks C91-C245e,
however, has been functionally characterised to have α and β
fibrinogenolytic activities [information obtained from the NCBI
protein database].

Functional characteristics of VVSPs:
Catalytic triad:
Trypsin-like serine proteases share a catalytic triad which
includes H57, D102 and S195 (bovine α-chymotrypsinogen
numbering) []. These residues are conserved in majority of
the VVSPs (Figure S1) and so they would be expected to be
catalytically active. 21 VVSPs have substitutions for one or two
of the catalytic triad residues. Substitutions to the catalytic triad
residues have previously been observed in a small number of
VVSPs [,
,
,
]. The majority of these sequences have
been identified at transcript level only; prior to this study only
four serine proteases (BG-RHIN2 &amp; 3, BAI-BH and TJ-SPH)
with catalytic triad substitutions have been identified within the
venom of snakes [,
,
]. Functional analysis of one of these
proteins (TJ-SPH) has confirmed this to be functionally inactive
[], 
but, interestingly, another VVSP, bhalternin (BAI-BH) with
substitutions at positions 57 (N) and 102 (T) has been shown to
be functionally active []. It is therefore hard to conclude if
these VVSPs would be functionally active or inactive with
substitutions within the catalytic triad. The serine proteases
with catalytic triad substitutions are commonly called serine
protease homologues []. 
 (see supplementary
material) shows the VVSPs with catalytic triad substitutions.
The most frequently substituted residue within the catalytic
triad is H57, which has been substituted by R in 15 sequences,
by N in 3 sequences and by Q in one sequence. Ten of the
sequences have substitutions for the catalytic S195; in five
VVSPs this has been substituted by N, one protein has a S195P
substitution, three have a S195T substitution and one has
alanine at this position. In contrast, D102 is conserved in all the
sequences except one, BAI-BH which has threonine at this
position.

Structural models of these VVSPs show that they are generally
similar to each other, consistent with the sequence similarity of
the enzymes, but they differ at their catalytic site. For example,
rhinocerases, BG-RHIN2 and 3 contain catalytic triad
substitutions at positions 57 and 195, but show overall
similarity to the predicted structures of other rhinocerases, BGRHIN4
and 5 which contain normal catalytic triad ().
They show differences at their catalytic site (). D102 is
at almost identical positions in rhinocerases 2 and 4, and bovine
chymotrypsin. The catalytic serine is at a very similar position
in rhinocerase 4 and chymotrypsin, and the substituted N in
BG-RHIN2 is also similarly located. However the substitution
of the long arginine side chain instead of histidine at position 57
in BG-RHIN2 has resulted in a significant change to the
orientation of the side chain in the modelled structure 
(). Similarly other VVSPs with different amino acid
substitutions show differences in their catalytic sites.:
Proteins with substitutions to the catalytic triad are present in
many enzyme families; indeed it has been estimated that up to
15% of the members of all encoded enzyme families may have
lost their catalytic activity []. 
Siigur et al. [] suggested that
the critical substitutions in the VVSP, ML-P2 from the venom of
Macrovipera lebetina could be generated via trans-splicing of the
primary gene transcript, exon-shuffling or unequal crossing
over at the genome level. We have however, shown previously
that these substitutions may have occurred at multiple levels
[]. Although one of the VVSPs with a catalytic triad
substitution was proved to be functionally active 
[], another
was shown to be inactive []. No further VVSP of this nature
has been functionally characterised. So it is not entirely clear if
these proteins are functionally active in the venom.

In many cases in other biological systems, inactive homologues
are believed to have acquired alternative functions, such as
competing with and antagonising the active proteases, or
otherwise regulating their function. Within invertebrates, serine
protease homologues have been shown to be involved in
various defence responses []. It has however, been suggested
that some invertebrate serine protease homologues are unlikely
to bind peptide substrates by a canonical protease-like
mechanism, though other potential protein binding sites have
been suggested []. Within snake venom, catalytically inactive
phospholipase A2 such as myotoxins II and IV from the venom
of Bothrops asper are known to act as toxins and are thought to
bind to their target membrane substrates in order to reduce
their permeability control and cause subsequent necrosis 
[].
Corey et al. [] 
reported that trypsin with a H57R substitution
had 190000 fold lower activities than the wild type enzyme at
pH 8.0 but had 38 fold higher activities than the wild type at pH
10.1. Clearly, experiments to determine the function of the
serine protease homologues within snake venom need to be
performed. It is possible that they may affect the physiology of
victims or prey by binding irreversibly to substrates involved in
blood coagulation and preventing their normal function.

Specificity of VVSPs:
The primary specificity pocket of serine proteases (also called as
S1 binding site) accommodates the side chain of the P1 residue
(the residue preceding the scissile bond) of substrates and
confer specificity towards substrates. For example,
chymotrypsin contains S189, G216 and G226 and is specific for
the large hydrophobic side chains (such as F, Y and W) 
[].
Trypsin and thrombin contain D189, G216 and G226 and are
specific for positively charged amino acids such as R and K 
[].
Elastase contains S189, V216 and T226 and is specific for small
hydrophobic side chains like alanine []. In addition to the
catalytic triad residues, there are also differences found in the
residues present in the primary specificity pockets of several
VVSPs (Figure S1). In total 161 VVSPs have D189, G216 and
G/A226 and so they may confer specificity towards either or
both positively charged amino acids such as R and K at P1
position of substrates similar to trypsin and thrombin.

The remaining 35 VVSPs, however, have different combinations
of specificity pocket residues  (see supplementary
material). Although seven VVSPs contain aspartate at
position189, they have substitutions in the other two sites and
thus, they might restrict entry for substrates. For example, in
the venom of Bitis gabonica rhinoceros, BG-RHIN2 and 3 have
D189, which might indicate specificity for basic residues but
have E instead of G at position 216 and A instead of G at
position 226 ( &amp; ). These substitutions are likely to
restrict access to the specificity pocket, thus the binding
specificity of BG-RHIN2 and 3 is not clear. In contrast, two
other VVSPs (BJa-HP3 and AP-PA), contain D189-R216-G226 in
their specificity pocket. So the presence of arginine at position
216 may create a basic environment in the pocket. The functions
of these VVSPs are further critical as they contain D at 189 and
R at 216. A further two VVSPs (TG-SP3 and VS-KN8) contain
D189-G216-N/V226 in their specificity pocket. Although they
can confer specificity towards basic amino acids in their
substrates, the presence of N or V at position 226 will have
influence in their specificity.

The remaining 28 VVSPs contain substitution mainly for
position 189  (see supplementary material). Thus, these
enzymes may not confer specificity for arginine at P1 position
of the substrates. For example, 13 VVSPs have G189-G216-G226
in their specificity pocket. This is an unusual substitution in
trypsin-like serine proteases, which is similar to the human
kallikrein KLK9 whose specificity is unknown 
[]. The
substitution might be expected to increase the size of the
specificity pocket; M. lebetina α and β-fibrinogenases (ML-AF
and ML-BF) also have G189 [] and Siigur et al. 
[] have
reported that ML-AF hydrolysed the Y16 – L17, F24 – F25 and
F25 – Y26 bonds of the insulin B chain, suggesting that enzymes
with G189 can cleave substrates with large hydrophobic
residues at the P1 position. Some VVSPs such as BG-RHIN4 and
5 also have a G to A substitution at position 216 which may
narrow the specificity pocket slightly. There are also other
combinations of residues present in small number of VVSPs
whose functions are unknown.

Comparison of the positions and orientations of residues in the
S1 specificity pockets of BG-RHIN2 and 4 with those of
chymotrypsin and trypsin suggest that, the bottom of the
specificity pocket is very similar in BG-RHIN2 and trypsin,
while the glycine in BG-RHIN4 is uncharged and protrudes
even less into the pocket (). At position 226, the
glycines and alanines in all enzymes are very similarly located.
In contrast, the substitution of the large negatively charged
glutamic acid at position 216 clearly has a significant effect on
the S1 pocket in BG-RHIN2 when the modelled structure was
compared to model of BG-RHIN4 (). When BGRHIN2
model was superimposed on the determined structure
of protein C activator (AC-AN) [], G217 of BG-RHIN2 is
situated at the same position as G216 of AC-AN (). So
it is not entirely clear if negatively charged glutamate or glycine
would occupy this position in the real structure of BG-RHIN2.
However the primary specificity pocket is not the sole
determinant of specificity. For serine proteases involved in
coagulation, the importance of additional regions of the
structure e.g. exosites in recognition of substrates is becoming
increasingly recognised []. Thus the precise specificity of
these enzymes can only be determined experimentally. The
potential role of exosites in binding to substrates also
strengthens our suggestion above that the serine proteases
homologues which lack the catalytic triad may still be capable
of interfering with the coagulation cascade through exositemediated
interactions.

Oxyanion hole:
A further interesting feature of VVSP sequences is that G193,
which is generally highly conserved in serine proteases and is
involved in the formation of oxyanion hole and in inhibitor
binding [], 
is substituted in 57 sequences: R in 25, A in 7, V in
6, F in 6, Q in 4, H in 3, C in 2, Y in 2, S in 1 and T in 1 VVSP
(Figure S1). As for VS-VPA, a venom plasminogen activator
from Trimeresurus stejnegeri, which has F at position 193 
[],
bulky residues substituted for G193 may reduce the sensitivity
of the proteins to inhibitors such as bovine pancreatic trypsin
inhibitor as well as reduce their interaction with substrates.
Similarly other residues including charged residues such as
arginine and glutamine may influence the formation of
oxyanion hole and inhibitor or substrate binding.

RGD motif:
The arginine-glycine-aspartate (RGD) motif acts as a cell
adhesion signal and is present in cellular signal transduction
proteins. It has also been reported that proteins containing RGD
motifs may induce apoptosis []. 
Lee et al. [] identified a
RGD motif in brevinase (GB-BV) and suggested that it might be
involved in cellular recognition and in inhibition of platelet
aggregation through binding to integrin αIIbβ3. In our analysis
we have identified the RGD motif at the same position as GBBV
(between 192 and 194), in four other VVSPs: GB-HY, GH-H,
GU-TC and GSh-SH (Figure S1). VVSPs containing the RGD
motif could be involved in inducing cell death in order to cause
destruction of cells in the host system. They may also inhibit
platelet aggregation. As RGD motifs were found only in VVSPs
from venoms of the Gloydius genus so far, this may be a unique
feature of these snake venoms.

Phylogenetic analysis of VVSPs:
Phylogenetic analysis was performed to analyse the
evolutionary and functional relationships of VVSP sequences.
The phylogenetic tree generated for 196 VVSP sequences is
shown in (). The sequence of bovine α-
chymotrypsinogen was displayed as an out-group in the tree.
Wang et al. [] generated a phylogenetic tree with 41 VVSP
sequences using the Phylip-neighbor method. From their tree,
three categories of VVSPs were identified, which they named
kininogenases (KN), clotting enzymes (CL) and plasminogen
activators (PA). These names described the known functions of
some members of each of the categories. They also suggested
that the KN category might be divided into 2 subcategories,
with one representing GBH and another representing PMM1-
PMM5 and that this division might become more apparent if
more sequences, particularly from true vipers were added. This
classification was not apparent in our analysis with 196
sequences, which cluster together in 3 major groups (named I, II
and III).

The sequences from true vipers (viperinae subfamily) are
mostly clustered together in group II and III (shown as red
letters in ). Moreover, the VVSPs with catalytic triad
substitutions (shown as # in the ) cluster together in
group III accept two VVSPs which cluster in I and II. Similarly,
the sequences with substituted primary specificity pocket are
clustered in groups I and II, with an exception of one VVSP
which cluster in group III (shown as * in the ). This
suggests that the VVSPs from true vipers differ evolutionarily
from the pit vipers. Moreover, the evolution of VVSPs with
substitutions in the catalytic triad and specificity pocket is not a
random process in any particular snake; instead it might be a
controlled mechanism to develop novel VVSPs with differing
characteristic features.

The experimentally determined functions of some VVSPs are
indicated (as green letters in ) in the tree. Since majority
of the functionally characterised VVSPs are capable of
performing more than one function, the classification of VVSPs
based on their function is difficult. Moreover, several VVSPs
have been characterised only for the functions of interest and
thus, they were not screened for other functions which they
may perform. This analysis indicates that the classification of
VVSPs based on some of the functionally characterised VVSPs
as previously reported [], may not appropriate with all the
available VVSPs. For example, the VVSPs with kininogenase
activities are clustered in all three groups in the tree. Similarly
the coagulant enzymes such as α-fibrinogenase (AF), β-
fibrinogenase (BF) and αβ-fibrinogenase (ABF) are present
randomly in all clusters. Some enzymes such as plasminogen or
factor V activators are clustered together in a particular group
in the tree, although only a very small number of VVSPs with
those functions are identified to date. Moreover, the number of
VVSPs performing additional functions such as platelet
aggregator, factor VIII/X/XIII activator, an enzyme increases
capillary permeability and albuminolytic/ myonecrotic/
heamolytic enzymes are limited and thus it is not apparent to
predict the functions of other VVSPs which cluster together
with these enzymes.

Conclusion
To our knowledge this study represents the most complete
information about VVSPs available to date and this will serve as
a dataset for further analysis in these enzymes. VVSPs share
several sequence features such as catalytic triad and disulphide
linkages with other common serine proteases for example,
chymotrypsin, trypsin and thrombin. Some features, such as the
C-terminal extension of 7 residues and an additional disulphide
linkage, are unique to VVSPs. However, within the VVSP
family there are many sequence variations which might be
responsible for the variation in specificity of these enzymes. The
phylogenetic analysis of VVSPs shows three clusters of
sequences and the classification of these enzymes based on only
a few functionally characterised enzymes may not be
appropriate with a larger dataset. Our analysis showed that the
naming or prediction of function for each cluster may not be
possible as previously suggested when we include more
sequences as most of them are of unknown functions and some
of them are only partially characterised. A greater level of
functional characterisation is needed to obtain more complete
functionally known VVSPs for better understanding of their
sequence, function and evolutionary relationships.
Posttranslational modification predictions showed that most of
the VVSPs were predicted to be N-glycosylated. The functions
of these modifications in VVSPs are yet to be clearly identified
but, in several other proteins it has been shown that
glycosylation affects the function of the protein. Structural
analysis of VVSPs has helped to identify the functionally
important residues; catalytic triad, primary specificity pocket
and disulphide linkages. However only 5 determined structures
of VVSPs are available to date and thus more crystallisation
work should be performed to obtain more structures. The
dataset presented here with complete information of all known
VVSPs to date will form a basis for further research to explore
more about the sequence, structure, function and phylogenetic
relationships of these enzymes in order to develop improved
therapeutics for the treatment of snakebites.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Vaiyapuri et al, Bioinformation 8(16): 763-772 (2012)

Number of VVSPs with different isoelectric points in
each snake. The isoelectric point of all VVSPs was predicted and
clustered together for every snake based on the number of
VVSPs found with varying isoelectric points. Blue colour
indicates the low number (0) and the red colour indicates
highest number (17) of VVSPs.

Number of VVSPs with different N-glycosylation sites
in each snake. The potential N-glycosylation sites of all VVSPs
were predicted and clustered together for every snake based on
the number of VVSPs found with varying numbers of predicted
sites. Blue colour indicates the low number (0) and the red
colour indicates highest number (15) of VVSPs.

Structural models of VVSPs. Structural models of
rhinocerases 2 (BG-RHIN2) and 4 (BG-RHIN4) were created
using the IntFOLD server [] using the structure of rat trypsin
(PDB code: 1co9) as a template. (A) Schematic diagram showing
the overall similarities in structure between BG-RHIN2 (yellow)
and BG-RHIN4 (red). The side chain atom positions for the
catalytic triad residues are included. (B) Detailed view of the
amino acids corresponding to the catalytic triad residues in BGRHIN2
(yellow), BG-RHIN4 (red) and chymotrypsin (PDB code:
1yph; cyan). BG-RHIN2 has substitutions for the serine and
histidine residues. (C) Detailed view of the main constituents of
the S1 specificity pocket in BG-RHIN2 (yellow), BG-RHIN4
(red), chymotrypsin (cyan) and trypsin (pdb code: 1co9; green).
In chymotrypsin these residues are: S189 at the base of the
specificity pocket, with G216 and G226 at the sides. In trypsin
D189 is at the base of the pocket, with G216 and G226. All
images were generated using PyMOL. (D) Detailed view of the
main constituents of the S1 specificity pocket in BG-RHIN2
(green) and protein C activator (PDB code: 2AIQ; purple).

Phylogenetic tree of VVSPs. 196 VVSPs sequences
from were included for the generation of a phylogenetic tree
together with bovine α-chymotrypsinogen (NCBI accession
number: P00766) as an out-group. The alignment was generated
using ClustalW within MEGA 4 using a gap opening penalty of
10 and a gap extension penalty of 0.1 for the initial pairwise
alignment, gap opening penalty of 3 and gap extension penalty
of 1.8 for the multiple alignment and the Gonnet protein weight
matrix. The phylogenetic tree was generated from this within
MEGA 4 using the neighbour-joining method and the Jones-
Taylor-Thornton substitution model. The bootstrap test was
done using 2000 replications. The VVSPs from true vipers
(viperinae sub family) are shown in red. # and * indicate the
sequences with catalytic triad and specificity pocket
substitutions respectively. The experimentally determined
functions of VVSPs are shown in green letters with short codes;
AF- α fibrinogenase, BF- β fibrinogenase, ABF- αβ
fibrinogenase, KN- kininogenase, CPI- capillary permeability
increasing enzyme, FVA- factor V activator, FXIIIA- factor XIII
activator, CE- clotting enzyme, PA- plasminogen activator,
PLA- platelet activator, ABGF- αβγ fibrinogenase, PTAprothrombin
activator, FXA- factor X activator, FVIIIA- factor
VIII activator, FVIIA- factor VII activator, PCA- protein C
activator, FIXA- factor IX activator and HL- haemolytic enzyme

