Background
Next-generation sequencing has revolutionized research and
medicine, and has been accompanied by increasingly
challenging, if underappreciated, metadata management
requirements []. Sequencing projects that have large, complex
metadata demand lightweight, flexible, stable software to
support dataset standardization, biological curation activities,
and streamlining of pre- and post- processing steps with
pipeline analyses []. The few existing open-source tools for
managing next-generation sequencing metadata have limited
flexibility, thus hampering project-specific tailoring, and
cannot be easily deployed and managed by a single
administrator for multiple research sites [,
]. Commerciallyavailable
laboratory information management alternatives are
typically expensive, cumbersome and require proprietary
administration and maintenance for the software lifecycle 
[],
and none of the available tools, open-source or otherwise,
readily integrate curation, processing and advanced analyses.
We developed the Omics Metadata Management Software
(OMMS), a flexible, extensible, open-source, web-based tool
that provides semi-automated curation utilities, and integrated
implementation with widely-used bioinformatics executables,
such as BLAST [] and Bowtie 
[], for human-microbiomeoriented
research in our laboratories []. Example use cases
with publicly available human microbiome and chimpanzee
RNASeq datasets [,
] are detailed to demonstrate OMMS
function and versatility, and operation as a pipeline frontend.

Omics Metadata Management Software:
The OMMS was engineered to support a large,
multidisciplinary, geographically-dispersed research team
developing next-generation sequencing-based approaches for
identifying potentially rare etiologic agents in human
microbiomes across hundreds of distinct sample types 
[]. The
OMMS graphical user-interface (GUI) enables semi-automated
project-specific metadata entries in each table ( &amp; 
;
, 3-5), and associated input sequence data are
referenced to archiving locations in directories generated on
Linux-based file systems. Intuitive point-and-click selection of
input sequence files, analysis configuration and execution are
carried out in the “Analysis” portal (; 
). In
examples provided here, BLAST, Bowtie 2, TopHat and
Cufflinks were integrated and implemented with the OMMS
interface [,
,
], and in principle, any open-source
application can be integrated with the OMMS, including inhouse
pipelines, with custom scripts developed for that
purpose.

Methodology
Creating a record:
The three main portals are displayed after login. Tables for
detailed biological curation (“Specimen Info,” “Sample
Processing,” “Sequence MetaInfo”) reside in the “MetaData”
portal. To create an entry, select “Create New,” and then click
on “New (Empty fields)” in the “Specimen Info” table, and
provide required information (; 
). The
following (parentheses) were entered: Host Species (Homo
sapiens); Tissue Sampled (Stool). Click the “Add Specimen”
button to generate the “Specimen Unique ID” (HsStoo_01).
For the second record, repeat the previous steps, but insert
“Pan troglodyte” and “Brain” for the host and tissue,
respectively, to generate “Specimen Unique ID” (PtBrai_02).

Corresponding records are generated in the “Sample
Processing” table, with dropdown menus provided to
streamline curation by explicitly linking the “Specimen Unique
ID” (e.g., HsStoo_01, PtBrai_02) and the user-defined “Sample
Alias” with the new sample entries. “Sample Unique ID”
entries are generated by clicking “Add Sample” (e.g.,
HsStoo_01_01, PtBrai_02_01). Four corresponding records
were created in the “Sequence MetaInfo” table to complete the
curation exercise, and to illustrate functional integration with
executables (); in the “Provider Sequence Directory
Name” field, arbitrary directory names were given; for “Fastq
File Mate Pair 1” and “Fastq File Mate Pair 2,” test input file
names were used, and appropriate options were chosen for
“Read Type” field for testing in this order: Bowtie 2 (single–,
then paired end with human microbiome stool fastq files),
BLAST (with human microbiome stool fasta input), Tophat
and Cufflinks (with the single-end chimp RNASeq file). The
“Sequence Run ID” and “Unique Experiment Name” were 
generated by clicking the “Add Sequence.” In each of the
tables, the “Update” function can be used to extend curation.
Methods for generating and downloading custom metadata
tables are further detailed in the “OMMS Integrated
Workflow” link (under Quick Start).

Enabling integrated workflows:
To call integrated executables via the “Analysis” portal, click
on “Select Input” for the relevant Sequence Run ID (e.g.,
HsStoo_01_01_01), and then choose the desired program
(). To launch a Bowtie 2 run on “Sequence Run ID”
HsStoo_01_01_01, select the “Staphylococcus_aureus” index
from the dropdown menu, and enter an integer value in
“Processors” and click “Go.” The results file name will appear,
and standard output can be downloaded upon run completion.
The same steps apply for paired-end analyses with Bowtie 2.
For BLAST runs, select the pertinent Sequence Run ID and
input (HsStoo_BLAST500.fa), and choose the desired program
(blastn) and database (Clostridium kluyveri). Set the
significance threshold expectation (E) value at 0.001 or higher, 
and indicate the desired output format in the dropdown menu,
and click “Go.” Similar steps are followed for splice-variant
and/or differential expression analyses using TopHat and
Cufflinks (; 
). The chimp “Sequence Run ID”
was selected (PtBrai_02_01_01, referenced to RNASeq file
SRR023838_RNASeq.fq) and aligned with the hg19 index 
[].
Standard output can be downloaded via the “Results” portal
by choosing the “Sequence Run ID” of interest (e.g.,
HsStoo_01_01_01). The website provides additional
instructions for building integrated analyses (in the “OMMS
Integrated Workflow” link under Quick Start).

Software
Design and function:
Interoperable, open-source software packages (i.e., the LAMP
bundle, Linux, Apache, MySQL, PHP) wereused to develop
the browser-based OMMS interface to support next generation
sequencing-based research efforts in our laboratories 
[]. Realworld
metadata associated with the test datasets were entered
in the three tables, “Specimen Info,” “Sample Processing,” and
“Sequence MetaInfo” (; 
, 3-5) to instantiate
example database records. Most of the fields in the tables
accommodate varied data types (e.g., the “Sample_Alias” field
in the “Sample_Processing” table), such as character strings,
but in cases with fewer possibilities, dropdown menus are
provided (e.g., the “Nucleic Acid” field in the “Sample
Processing” table).

Test datasets for validating installation and benchmarking integrated tools:
Distinct hosts and tissues (Homo sapiens, Pan troglodyte; Stool,
Brain) were used to demonstrate automated metadata tracking,
storing and functional integration with utilities [,
]. Test
datasets were obtained from the GenBank Short Read Archive
(accessions SRX025177: SRR063480 and SRX008322:
SRR023838), and were pre-processed using the NCBI SRA and
Fastx Toolkits, and in-house custom scripts. These preprocessing
steps are explained in the README file included in
the distribution and in the “OMMS Integrated Workflows”
link (see the  for fine details
pertaining to curation and pre-processing steps).

Semi-automated curation and results downloading:
After entering the minimum required information (indicated
by asterisks) for a specimen, the OMMS generates a unique
identifier under the “Specimen_UID” field (; 
 &amp;
) describing the subject/host and tissue/microhabitat from
which nucleic acid preparations and sequence data will be
derived ( &amp; 
;
). Unique identifiers are
automatically propagated to corresponding fields in the other
tables ( &amp; 
), intuitively linking specimen, sample
and sequence data. Input sequence data files put can be
uploaded, and results files (output) downloaded, as can
metadata for specific entries, as well as table-overview custom
spreadsheets ( &amp; 
).

Concluding Remarks
The freeware reported here guarantees standardized,
intelligible, automated curation and management of biological
metadata, and supports integrated analyses. Recent events,
from the outbreak of Ebola Virus Disease in West Africa, to the
emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria (e.g., Clostridium 
difficile, Carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae), make it
impossible to overstate the importance of rigorous metadata
curation and management systems in high-intensity scenarios,
clinical and otherwise. For our project, the OMMS frontend
was foundational for handling metadata inherent to nextgeneration
sequencing-based experiments involving large
numbers of samples at a time. In the context of a host
microbiome, potential etiologic agents are typically rare and
difficult to detect using standard in silico and experimental
approaches, and careful metadata curation is crucial for
identifying signal (infectious disease) in the presence of
overwhelming noise (background microbiota) and results
interpretation. Looking ahead, the OMMS and OMMS-user
tailored versions will represent easy-to-use promising tools for
addressing microbiome-centric research, from clinical and
public health challenges, to exploring new frontiers in
agricultural research and development, where handing and
tracking hundreds, if not thousands, of samples from diverse
subjects at a particular location and time are necessary.
Additionally, the OMMS enables development of integrated
workflows with state-of-the-art utilities (Blast, Bowtie 2) and
in-house pipelines (e.g., local implementations of Galaxy),
facilitating fine-grained comparative analyses, such as strain
discrimination (e.g., Zaire vs. Sudan ebolavirus) and
microbiome composition and functional profiling.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This R &amp; D was supported by the Laboratory Directed
Research and Development (LDRD) program at Sandia
National Laboratories [under the auspices of the Rapid Threat
Organism Recognition (RapTOR) Grand Challenge (LDRD #
142042)]. Sandia National Laboratories are multi-program
laboratories managed and operated by Sandia Corporation, a
wholly-owned subsidiary of Lockheed Martin Corporation, for
the U.S. Department of Energy's National Nuclear Security
Administration (contract DE-AC04-94AL85000). We offer our
sincerest thanks to the RapTOR team, and Dr. Elisa LaBauve,
in particular, for invaluable discussions around software
design and development, and Professor Melanie Moses for
guidance on manuscript preparation. As ever, I extend my
deepest gratitude to Professors Donald O. Natvig and Gavin C.
Conant for invaluable, ongoing scientific discussions, editorial
assistance and software testing. Sincerest thanks to Steven
Arroyo, Brian Nelson, Michael W. Folsom and Mark D.
Murton for software testing and website development. We are
grateful to the University of New Mexico Center for Advanced
Research Computing and Dr. Susan Atlas, Director, for
computational resources and technical assistance provided in
support of this work.

Citation:Arriaga et al, Bioinformation 11(4): 165-172 (2015)

Omics Metadata Management Software. Core
functionality resides in three tables, “Specimen Information,”
“Sample Processing,” and “Sequence MetaInformation,” which
have fields with embedded automation supporting efficient
data metadata entry, storage and intuitive entity relationships
facilitating data sharing and analysis. These tables are
accessed via the “MetaData” portal.

Unified framework for metadata management and
state-of-the-art analyses. Curation (highlighted in aqua) and
analyses (indicated in yellow) tasks are intrinsically related
(overlap region) in next-generation sequencing studies,
because sample handling and sequence production are
multistep processes, and careful metadata tracking and
management are required for downstream analyses and
publication preparation. The OMMS supports user input of
project metadata, automated creation of consistently named
and enumerated unique identifiers for specimens, samples and
sequence production information, and straightforward
integration with bioinformatics utilities. Spreadsheets can be
generated for structured data extraction and local download.
Standard input and output of executables used here are stored
in automatically-generated files and directories.

Omics Metadata Management Software
(OMMS) curation and analysis interface. The OMMS was
designed to integrate and implement with open-source
bioinformatics tools, such as BLAST, Bowtie 2 and Tophat
and/or custom pipelines. These tools are accessed via the
“Analysis Portal” (panel A). End users select the identifier
(“Sequence Run ID”) of interest, which is referenced to
particular sequence files (panel B and inset). Following input
selection, the desired program is chosen and parameterized
(panel C and inset) to launch a run. Output from a given
analysis run can be downloaded via the OMMS “Results”
portal (not shown).

