Background
Tuberculosis has been a challenge for human for ages claiming
more lives than any other bacterial disease. With the availability
of short-course chemotherapy (DOTS) and Bacille Calmette-
Guerin (BCG) vaccine, the tubercle bacillus continues to claim
more lives each year. The emergence of drug resistancemultidrug
resistance (MDR) and extensive drug resistance
(XDR) in tuberculosis is due to the extensive period of
treatment in which patients fails to complete the therapy.
Various drugs have been developed continuously targeting
various proteins and other components of the microbe. In the
end 60's, Rifampicin (RIF) was introduced as a combination
therapy which succeeded in a declining the drug resistance and
drug susceptibility of tuberculosis. However due to the arrival
of HIV/AIDS in the 80's resulted in increase transmission of TB
associated with outbreaks of multi drug resistant tuberculosis
(MDR-TB) [,
] that are still resistant to most drugs including
Rifampicin (RIF).

The potential threat of Mycobacterium tuberculosis is due to its
ability to generate a dormant infection which evades host
responses. The enigma of its dormancy and capability of
infection in this phase is the prime reason for which most of the
treatments have failed against it as a result of which one third of
the world population is infected [] claiming two million
deaths each year []. Mycobacterium tuberculosis can persist in
the host for decades after infection, non replicative, before
reactivating to cause disease []. Persistency of the infection is
due to the characteristic feature of the bacteria to reside inside
the mononuclear phagocytes by exhibiting specific cellular
equilibrium for the phagocytes, inferring about dynamic
interactions between mycobacterial virulence factors and the
human immune system [–]. The bacteria resides inside the
alveolar macrophage vesicular compartment [,
] and
inhibits phagosome- lysosome fusion which helps the organism
to get away with direct anti microbial activity of the innate
immune system as well as effective antigen presenting and
overcoming adaptive immunity [, 
–]. The bacterium then
replicates inside the macrophages and induces the release of
cytokines that cause inflammatory response in lungs, to which
macrophages and lymphocytes migrate to form a granuloma
[].The microbe can persist in this granuloma for years 
[,
]
and this is the latent or the dormant phase which is clinically
inactive.

The ability of the bacteria to adapt itself to survive for disease
reactivation is contributed by secreted proteins called
resuscitation promoting factors (Rpfs) these factors aid in
virulence and resuscitating from dormancy of the bacteria, and
helping in the growth of the microbe. Five such Rpfs were
identified RpfA – E of which RpfB is the largest and most
complex protein and is devoted to bacterial reactivation from
the dormant state []. These proteins act on the bacterial cell
wall causing hydrolysis of the peptidoglycan in association
with other helping proteins. Resuscitation-promoting factor B
(rpfB) is required for resuscitation of M. tuberculosis in a
reactivation mouse model [] and deletion of several
combinations of three rpf genes results in viable bacteria that
are unable to resuscitate from in vitro and in vivo resuscitation
assays []. RpfB have previously been shown to interact with
the peptidoglycan-hydrolyzing endopeptidase, Rpf-interacting
protein A (ripA) regulating its activity 
[].

The present study is aimed to understand the molecular
interaction of the protein resuscitation-promoting factor B and
formulating inhibitors against the enzyme which would also
help in eliminating the microbe before it attains resistance.

Methodology
The structure of the RpfB protein was retrieved from the
Protein Data Bank (PDB) having an identification number
3EO5. Sequence analysis of the protein was done using
ProtParam and GOR []. CATH and SCOP was performed for
the classification of the protein structure [–]. The active
residues of the protein were predicted using CastP server 
[].
Ligands for study were retrieved from ZINC database
containing about 2.7 million compounds 
[] including
compounds from other databases like PubChem, ACB blocks,
NCI diversity II, Maybridge, Drugbank, etc. The compounds
from Zinc database were first screened by selecting only the
drug-like molecules. The compounds after ligand screening
were then screened for AdmeTox (poor absorption,
distribution, metabolism, elimination or toxicity) using FAFDrugs2,
a free ADME/tox filtering tool []. The compounds
passing the AdmeTox filter were considered for highthroughput
virtual screening with the target protein.

Compounds showing an interaction with the protein were then
selected for calculation of molecular properties using
Molinspiration and calculating the drug-relevant properties
using Osiris following the Lipinski rule of Five []. Molecular
docking of the filtered compounds with the protein was
performed using Gold suite 5.0.1.

Results and discussion
The three-dimensional structure of the RpfB protein was
retrieved from PDB ().

Sequence analysis:
The sequence analysis of the RpfB protein shows a theoretical PI
of 5.36 with extinction co-efficient of 40575M-1 cm-1 and a
stability index of 34.81 classifying the protein as stable. The
protein sequence shows to have a more contribution of random
colis of about 54.14% and a lesser contribution of alpha helix
and extended strand of about 24.03% and 21.82% respectively
(). CATH and SCOP results shows that rpfB belongs to
class of mainly alpha and beta proteins, architecture which is an
orthogonal bundle, topology lysozyme-like and a family of
RPF-like.

Active residues:
The active sites of the protein were predicted showing the
amino acid sequence likely to be the binding site of the protein.
The active sites targeted ranges from residue Arg194 – Gly 245
().

Ligand screening:
The ligands were retrieved from ZINC database containing
about 2.7 million ligands and only 25000 compounds were
obtained after screening the drug-like compounds. The 25000
compounds were screened for AdmeTox and 5767 drugs were
accepted by AdmeTox screening. Intermediate and rejected
compounds were not considered for further study. The
compounds accepted after AdmeTox were then virtual screened
with the protein RpfB out of which 2982 compounds showed an
interaction with the protein. Molecular properties of the
compounds after virtual screening were calculated following
Lipinski rule of five resulting in about 2526 compounds
following the rule.  (see supplementary material) shows
the calculated molecular properties of selected compounds.

The drug-relevant properties of the compounds were then
screened by Osiris and 294 compounds showed to be non-toxic
with low risk of side effects  (see supplementary
material). IUPAC name and structures of selected compounds
are shown in  (see supplementary material).

Molecular Docking:
The compounds passing through the filter were docked with
the protein resulting with better docking studies predicting the
possible binding mode of the inhibitors to the protein. The
docking results show the compounds with ZincID
ZINC01124772 and ZINC00687361 to have a high binding score
of 70.1470 and 69.2838 with 4 and 1 H-bonds, respectively
(). The compounds ZINC002146172, ZINC00687359 and
ZINC00633743 have a comparatively good binding score of
68.6334, 68.5269 and 68.8880 with H-bonds of 5, 3 and 3,
respectively showing a better interaction with the protein 
 (see supplementary material). Electrostatic interactions of the
docked proteins are ubiquitous affecting the protein structure
and stability with the ligand molecules inside the cavity 
(). Residues Arg194, Arg196, Glu242 and Asn244 of the RpfB
protein interact more with the compounds and may be the key
residues to inhibit the protein activity.

Conclusion
Based on the results, the sequence analysis indicates that the
protein is stable belonging to a class of mainly alpha and beta
proteins. The docking results shows that the best compounds
interacting with the protein are compounds with zinc Id
ZINC01124772 (IUPAC Name: 3-methyl-N-[(1R)-2-methyl-1-[4-
methyl-5-[2-oxo-2(phenethylamino)ethyl]sulfanyl-1,2,4-triazol-
3-yl]propyl]benzamide), ZINC00687361 (IUPAC Name: 3-
methyl-N-[(1S)-1-[4-methyl-5-[2-(3-methylsulfanylanilino)-2-
oxoethyl]sulfanyl-1,2,4-triazol-3-yl]ethyl]benzamide) and
ZINC00633743 (IUPAC Name: 2-({5-[(2,6-
dimethylphenoxy)methyl]-4-methyl-4H-1,2,4-triazol-3-
yl}sulfanyl)-N-[3-(4-morpholinylcarbonyl)phenyl]acetamide)
having a good docking energy with an equivalent number of
hydrogen bonds interaction which will act effectively against
the protein interacting with residues Arg194, Arg196, Glu242
and Asn244 which may be the key residues to inhibit the
protein activity. These compounds identified, thus holds
promise for design of new anti-tuberculosis drugs and can be
further validated by wet-lab studies its proper function in vivo
with the target protein.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Mylliemngap et al, Bioinformation 8(14): 646-651 (2012)

Three-dimensional structure of RpfB protein of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis

Graphical representation of secondary structure as
predicted by GOR

Active residues (space filled) of the RpfB protein

Molecular interaction of the RpfB protein with
compounds (a) 3-methyl-N-[(1R)-2-methyl-1-[4-methyl-5-[2-
oxo-2(phenethylamino)ethyl]sulfanyl-1,2,4-triazol-3-
yl]propyl]benzamide and (b) 4-[[2-[[5-[(1R)-1-[(2-
chlorobenzoyl)amino]ethyl]-4-methyl-1,2,4-triazol-3-
yl]sulfanyl]acetyl]amino]benzoate.

Electrostatic interaction of (a) 3-methyl-N-[(1R)-2-
methyl-1-[4-methyl-5-[2-oxo-2(phenethylamino)ethyl]sulfanyl-
1,2,4-triazol-3-yl]propyl]benzamide and (b) 3-methyl-N-[(1S)-1-
[4-methyl-5-[2-(3-methylsulfanylanilino)-2-oxoethyl]sulfanyl-
1,2,4-triazol-3-yl]ethyl]benzamide.

