Background
MAPK are special class of kinases which are activated by various growth
factors, differentiating factors, M-phase phosphorylation cascade reactions and
involved in biotic and abiotic stress signaling pathways 
[]. They play a key
role in the transmission of external signals such as mitogens, hormones and
different stresses. A number of prediction servers are available over the World
Wide Web. These servers facilitate the prediction like GPS: a comprehensive
www server for phosphorylation sites prediction; PPSP: prediction of PKspecific
phosphorylation site with Bayesian decision theory; PhoScan:
Prediction of kinase-specific phosphorylation sites with sequence features by a
log-odds ratio approach; MEME Suite: Motif-based sequence analysis tools;
FANMOD: a tool for fast network Protein Consensus Sequence Motif
detection; SMART (a Simple Modular Architecture Research Tool); d-Omix: a
mixer of generic protein domain analysis tool; Phospho.ELM etc. Manual
identification of MAPKs are tedious and time consuming, in order to identify
MAPK there are no specific tools as yet, which predicts altogether the
phosporylation site (P-Site), P-site consensus sequence or pattern and domain.
Thus we developed a tool MAP kinase analyzer, which solves most of the
above faced problems.

Methodology
Datasets
For training, the P-sites, positive datasets were obtained from Phospho.ELM
database [], 
which contains 2540 substrate proteins from different species
covering 4799 S, 974 T and 1433 Y sites. To remove redundant fragments
within the datasets, the initial datasets were filtered using a 30% sequence
identity. The negative (i.e. non-phosphorylation sites, NS, NT and NY) were
obtained from these 2540 protein sequences and represented all S, T and Y
residues that were not reported as being phosphorylated in Phospho.ELM
database. For the phosphorylation site consensus sequence and domain
analysis, the primary data is retrieved from TAIR [], NCBI 
[] and UniProt
databases [], 
and after retrieval these data are manually as well as with the
help of tool like Multalin [], optimized.

Algorithm
In the case of P-site prediction we designed a neural network for the prediction
and genetic algorithm for training this neural network which can be called as
genetic algorithm neural network (GANN) []. The GANN uses GA (Genetic
Algorithm) to optimize the connection weights of the ANN (Artificial Neural
Network) over the training dataset. In our GANN model, the number of input
nodes is equal to the dimensionality of feature vector, i.e 24. The neural
network uses a sigmoid function to provide a continuous activation function.
GANN is used to construct a P-site predictor with the following configuration:
(1) the maximum generation number–1000; (2) the threshold of the fitness
value–0.7; (3) population size–100; (4) crossover probability –0.9. In case of Psite
consensus pattern and domain search for the MAP kinases, firstly MSA
(Multiple Sequence Alignment) has been done using Multalin tool. From MSA,
we detected 11 conserved sub-domains which are present in all plant MAPKs.
Among all sub-domains, 8 sub-domains contain the MAP kinase activation
loop ((TE/D) Y) and the MAPK's signature sequence (T(E/D)
YxxTRWYRAPEL) []. 
These sub-domains are optimized and included in the
tool for prediction. This tool is developed on NetBeans suite with Java
language [].

User interface
In the case of P-site prediction, when user inputs a sequence in fasta format, the
sequence is then processed by the neural network and result is displayed in the
form of numeric scores corresponding to all S, T and Y present in the sequence
and also highlight them. The user can opt for a threshold value at which user
wants to see the P-sites. In the case of P-site consensus sequence pattern or
motif and domain analysis for MAPK, a file is created containing all the
patterns that have to be searched for in the given sequence. The sequence is
then processed and the motif as well as domains present in the sequence is
displayed to the user in text as well as graphical representation form.

Utility
prediction of MAPK has been developed (). We have given a
graphical and user friendly interface, so the tool is easy to use. Through this
tool we can identify whether the given protein sequence is a MAP kinase or not
on the basis of presence of the specific MAPK domain, in addition, we can also
identify the possible kinase substrate by the analysis of P-site consensus
sequence pattern, which consequently gives an idea about the functioning of
the protein.

Conclusion
Performance evaluation with dataset and database variants clearly indicates that
MAP kinase analyzer has significantly high accuracy in terms of specificity
and sensitivity. To the best of our knowledge MAP kinase analyzer is the first
ever tool which identifies the P-Site, phosphorylation site consensus sequences
and domain of the MAPK in plant genome altogether.

Authors are grateful to Sub-DIC, Bioinformatics unit at G.B. Pant University of
Agriculture and Technology, Pantnagar, India for providing computational
facility. This study was supported by Department of Biotechnology, Govt. of
India under Programme Mode Support Project. Authors also acknowledge
Payal Agarwal, Hitesh Arora, Abhishek Choudhary, and Manesh Pal for their
kind support in the development of tool.

Citation:Samantaray et al, Bioinformation 6(7): 286-287 (2011)

A Snapshots of the MAP kinase analyzer showing homepage, P-site prediction, 
P-site consensus sequence pattern and domain prediction of MAPK.

