Background
Molecular dynamic simulations of biological macromolecules
are practical tools for exploring physical basics of structures
and functions []. 
There are several programs for visualization
and analysis multiple bimolecular structures such as visual
molecular dynamic (VMD) []. The VMD contains a lot of
setting to visualize and is a powerful tool for analysis the
structure and trajectories that have been produced by most
popular simulation packages, such as NAMD 
[], CHARMM
[], Amber 
[] and GROMACS 
[] that have built-in scripting
systems.

Furthermore, distance analysis of two selected regions of
biopolymers is important in molecular dynamic simulation.
For instance, the exact calculation of distances between atom
pairs, between N-ter and C-ter, between Cα of two residues,
between center mass of two chains in dimers, and between
ligand and receptor are critical in molecular investigation 
[,
].

Generally, the center mass indicator might be evaluated by the
formula (Please see  for equation (I)).

Other significant point for analysis of molecular structures is
the Radius of gyration. With other words, Structural changes
in a time dependent manner that determines the protein
structure compactness []. The Rgyr of a protein is indicated
as the root mean square distance from each atom of the
protein to its centroid, which is calculated by the formula
(Please see  for equation (II)).

Distance calculation and Radius of gyration are two significant
indicators being frequently used in structural analysis. But,
there is no graphical user interface implement within VMD
software to calculate the above mentioned parameters.
Therefore, we aimed to design a new plug –in for VMD
software to extent its application. The new user friendly plugin
is designed under the VMD program by the TCL script in
the TK language with the requirement of PDB or trajectory
files. We termed the new plug-in to VMD DisRg, which makes
the use of different programs unnecessary. The VMD DisRg
plug-in is a sub-function under the utility ‘extension’.

Software Input
The Plug-in DisRg consists of 5 sections (Figure 1a): Section1
contains the “select molecule” for choosing molecule from
displayed DCD trajectory or PDB under the VMD. Section2
has the facility for the distance analysis with the ability of
selectable regions of interest. Section3 is for investigating the
radius of gyration. For both section 2 and 3, there are two
optional plot and sphere scale. By the use of plot (active form),
a graphic output is provided during entire simulation.

Software Output
Section 2 or the distance section calculates the distance based
on selections including: 1) Distance between two single atoms;
2) Distance between center of mass of residues; 3) Distance
between center of mass of two chains, and 4) Distance
between center of mass of ligand and chain or regions. In
addition, radius of gyration can be calculated for displayed
structure and trajectories in section3 ().

Section 4 is designated as “log file” for observing the results.
Autonomously, the output file can be saved in the directory
being accessible by a DAT file that is compatible with other
script formats. Technical implementation of the plug-in is the
visualization of the selection region in two forms for atoms
and center mass of given sphere (). The User has the
ability to change the radius of sphere by handling the sphere
scale.

Caveat &amp; Future development
VMD is a practical tool for biopolymers study that has been
applied by many researchers with the aim to calculate some
structural features with reasonable graphical visualization as
output results. One of the interesting facilities in the VMD is
the modus ‘extension’ by its assistance the software can be
extended by new plug-ins [].

Moreover, distance and Rgyr are two critical characteristics for
protein structure analysis, which can be calculated by VMD
but with no graphically plug-in. Therefore, we aimed to add a
new plug-in under the VMD to calculate these mentioned
analysis, easily. We developed a friendly graphical user
interface (GUI), which has some advantages: Calculation of
distance and Rgyr during trajectories by drawing plot, User's
selection is showed in OpenGL Display of the VMD; as a
result, the User can monitor distance of COM selections
(displaying COM is a novel graphical facility for User).
Further advantage is that the output data can be saved in a
directory or would be directly seen in the window ‘log file’.
With this plug-in the User can calculate some properties with
easy clicks, so that an inexperienced User might have success
with these new conveniences. It is to remark that the VMD
program promises additional user interface plug-in.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Falsafi-Zadeh et al, 8(7): 341-343 (2012)

(a) The main panel of VMD DisRg; (b) Illustration of
radius of gyration during simulation; (c) The distance of the
center mass is shown graphically (the distance between two
chains of a complex are calculated).

