Background:
Simple-sequence repeats (SSRs) or microsatellites, a class of 
repetitive DNA sequences, consist of 1-6 bp motifs repeated in 
tandem arrays with identical, composite or degenerate motifs 
[]. 
SSRs are ubiquitous, diverse and their distribution is nonrandom in the genomes of eukaryotes. SSR experience an 
extremely high rate of reversible and length altering mutations, 
resulting in extensive allelic variations in repeat number which 
can be functionally significant []. Because of their high 
abundance within the genome and high efficiency in detecting 
variation, SSR markers have become a widespread analytical 
tool in various organisms for identification of individuals, 
species and varieties; evolution, ecology and population 
studies; as markers for traits and genes; and in the generation of 
genetic maps. SSRs are also considered to be potential mutators 
and provide in-exhaustive source of genetic variation for rapid 
evolutionary adaptation []. The polymorphism in SSRs is 
generally believed to be the result of DNA polymerase slippage 
and unequal recombination [,
]. SSR markers have been 
developed for many species of plants, animals and fungi from 
genomic DNA through the construction of SSR enriched 
libraries. SSRs have been isolated and characterized in several 
fungi using library enrichment method; however, fungal 
microsatellites indeed appeared difficult to isolate using 
enriched libraries []. This approach is also labour intensive and 
time consuming. However in recent years, with the 
establishment of several sequencing projects in crop plants, 
animals and microorganisms resulted in a wealth of DNA 
sequence information. This sequence data for expressed 
sequence tags (ESTs), genes and cDNA clones can be 
downloaded from various databases in public domain and by 
using suitable computer programs these can be scanned for 
identification of SSRs, referred as EST-SSRs or genic 
microsatellites. Microsatellite sequences obtained through in 
silico mining have more or less the same utility and potential 
comparative with those derived from a genomic library.

However, the negligible cost of in silico mining and high 
abundance of microsatellites in different sequence resources 
make this approach extremely attractive for the generation of 
microsatellite markers.

The rusts of wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) are a group of obligate 
biotrotrophic basidiomycete fungi, causing severe disease in 
most of the areas of world where wheat is grown []. Wheat is 
host to three different rust fungi, black or stem rust (Puccinia 
graminis f. sp. tritici), brown or leaf rust (P. triticina), and yellow 
or stripe rust (P. striiformis f. sp. tritici) causing serious losses in 
wheat production. Rust populations world-wide are highly 
diverse for virulence phenotype or races. Up to 70 different leaf 
rust races are identified on annual basis in US []. In France and 
Australia, 30-50 and 10-15 races are detected annually [,
]. The 
effect of evolutionary processes in fungal pathogen populations 
may occur more rapidly and display larger effects in 
agricultural systems than in wild ecosystems because of human 
involvement by plant breeding and crop management []. The 
evolutionary forces in agricultural systems are generally 
stronger due to common farming practices by growing 
genetically uniform food crops or cultivars across large areas, 
leading to a rapid change in genetic composition of pathogen 
population. An understanding of evolutionary processes in 
plant pathogens has received increased interest from scientific 
community. Virulence tests are commonly used to detect the 
pathogen variations and a number of races have been identified. 
However, virulence tests are subjected to availability of host 
selection pressure. The DNA based molecular markers provides 
a powerful tool for virulence evaluation in wheat rust and has 
been used in diversity analysis [,
], virulence evaluation 
[,
,
]
and genetic structure of rust races [].

Large scale genome sequencing projects on a growing number 
of organisms are providing the opportunity to evaluate the 
abundance and relative distribution of SSRs in different genera 
based on available genome sequences. There have been few 
reports on meaningful comparison of SSR motifs in fungal 
species [,
]. Recent availability of genome sequence 
information of P. triticina and P. graminis f. sp. tritici have 
provided the opportunity to study the genome- wide 
distributional pattern of SSRs in wheat rust pathogens. In this 
study, we report a comparative assessment of distribution of 
SSRs between these two species.

Methodology:
Source of sequence data :
The nuclear and mitochondrial genome sequences of P. triticina 
and P. graminis f. sp. tritici available in Puccinia group database 
of Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge 
(http://www.broadinstitute.org/) were used for the present 
study.

Mining of SSRs and comparative analysis:
DNA sequences were searched to identify SSRs using Simple 
Sequence Repeat Identification Tool (SSRIT) which is available 
at GRAMENE web site 
http://www.gramene.org/db/searches/ssrtool 
[]. The 
program was run online and the parameters were set for 
detection of perfect di-, tri-, tetra-, penta-, and hexanucleotide 
motifs with a minimum of 6 repeats. The data were processed 
and counted with Microsoft Excel 2007. The total number of
repeats has been normalized in terms of relative abundance and 
relative density for accurate comparison of repeat types 
between genomes of different sizes. Relative abundance reveals 
the frequency of occurrence of particular repeat type in the 
genome, while relative density reveals the length of sequence in 
base pair contribute by each repeat type to total sequence 
analyzed []. The relative abundance and density were 
calculated by following formulas: Relative abundance = 
Number of SSRs / Length of sequence analyzed (Mb); Relative 
density = Length of SSR (bp) / Length of sequence analyzed 
(Mb).

Results and discussion:
Abundance and density of SSR:
We have characterized and analyzed perfect simple sequence 
repeats in the nuclear and mitochondrial genome sequences of 
two Puccinia species; P. triticina and P. graminis f. sp. tritici. 
Genomic sequence data of 162.95 Mb size of P. triticina 
assembled into 38,776 contigs and further assembled into 24,423 
scaffolds or supercontigs from Broad Institute 
(http://www.broadinstitute.org/) was used to search for di-, 
tri-, tetra-, penta- and hexanucleotide motifs with a repeat of ≥6 
times. The SSRIT detected 4,814 SSRs in 1,357 supercontigs from 
genomic database of P. triticina. Dinucleotides repeats were the 
most abundant (3124) repeats in the genome accounting 65% of 
SSRs followed by trinucleotides SSRs (25%) (, see 
supplementary material). Tetra-, penta- and hexanucleotide 
repeats were the least frequent repeats accounting 10% of SSRs. 
The abundance of di- and tri-nucleotide repeats has also been 
reported expressed sequence tag (EST) derived SSRs in P. triticina 
[].

Similarly, genome sequence of P. graminis f. sp. tritici assembled 
into 4,557 contigs and further assembled into 392 scaffolds of 
88.64 Mb size (
http://www.broadinstitute.org/) was analyzed 
for SSR motifs. We mined 5829 SSRs in 221 supercontigs in the 
genome sequence. The mitochondrial genome of P. triticina and 
P. graminis f. sp. tritici possessed 17 and 11 SSRs only. 
Dinucleotides repeats were the most abundant repeats in the 
genome accounting 61% of repeats followed by trinucleotides 
SSRs (33%). Tetra-, penta- and hexanucleotide repeats were the 
least frequent repeats accounting only 6% of total SSRs 
( 
see supplementary material). In a previous study 60,579 EST 
sequences of P. graminis f. sp. tritici were screened for tandemly 
repeated di- and tri-nucleotide units using bioinformatics 
approach and identified 708 unisequences containing putative 
SSRs with six or more repeat units [].

The total lengths of SSRs represented in P. triticina and 
P. graminis f. sp. tritici genomes are 109,937 bp and 117,162 bp 
representing 0.07% and 0.13% of total DNA sequence analyzed, 
respectively. P. triticina genome has less number of SSRs than P. graminis tritici 
even it has two fold genome size compared to P. 
graminis f. sp. tritici. In a comparision of similar sized genomes, 
N. Crassa has five fold SSR abundance over that of F. 
graminearum []. These results indicate that the total SSR 
contents in fungi are not influenced by the genome size.The 
relative abundance and density of SSR in P. graminis f. sp. tritici 
genome were 29.39 SSR/Mb and 1,322 bp/Mb, respectively as 
compared to relative abundance of 65.76 SSR/Mb and SSR 
density of 674 bp/Mb, respectively in the genome of P. triticina 
( see supplementary material). The relative abundance
and density vary among different fungal species and is neither 
inversely nor directly proportional to the genome size in fungi 
[].

Most common and longest SSR:
Twelve types of dinucleotide repeat motifs were found in the 
genome. The CT/TC dinucleotide repeat motif was the most 
predominant followed by AG/GA motif in P. triticina, whereas 
AG/GA repeats motif was most frequent followed by CT/TC 
motif in P. graminis f. sp. tritici 
( see supplementary 
material). The predominance of AG/GA/CT/TC dinucleotide 
motifs were also observed in P. triticina 
[]. High frequency of 
AG repeats has also been reported earlier in P. graminis f. sp. 
tritici [], 
M. grisea, N. grassa [] 
and F. graminearum [].The 
CG/GC repeat motif was very rare in both rust genomes. Low 
abundance of CG/GC repeats has also been reported in other 
fungi [,
] and neither of these repeats was found in S. 
pombe and E. cuniculi []. 
However, P. chrysosporium and A. 
gossypii were unusual as CG repeat motif was in greater 
abundance than any other non-mononucleotide repeat motif 
[]. It was proposed that CG repeats may be infrequent 
because they must possess a deleterious structural effect on 
DNA conformation []. The longest dinucleotide repeat motifs 
were found to be CA (464 bp) and TG (124 bp) in P. triticina and 
P. graminis f. sp. tritici, respectively 
( see supplementary 
material). The dinucleotide repeats are longer in larger genome 
of P. triticina compared to P. graminis f. sp. tritici and also 
reported in N. crassa and M. crisea [].

Trinucleotide repeats were found in significant frequency in 
rust genomes. Among trinucleotide repeats, 60 different types 
of repeat motifs were identified and the CAG repeat motif was 
predominant followed by CAC and CAA in P. triticina genome 
( 
see supplementary material). In P. graminis f. sp. tritici 
genome, 58 types of trinucleotide motifs were present and CAA 
repeat motif was most predominant followed by GTT and TGT. 
For the trinucleotide SSRs, differences in frequency of repeat 
motif types were also observed in other fungi. The CAA repeat 
appeared 152 times in N. crassa genome but only 17 times in F. 
graminearum. Similarly the group GTT/TGT/TTG occurs 361 
times in N. crassa []. The AAC was the most frequent repeat 
motif in P. graminis f. sp. tritici, S. cerevisiae and C. albicans 
[,
]. 
The frequency distribution by repeat types shows major 
differences in various genomic regions and among texa []. 
Tri-nucleotide repeats have been found to be common feature in 
EST-derived SSRs. High frequency of these repeats in coding 
regions could be due to mutation and selection pressure for 
specific amino acids []. The abundance of trinucleotide 
repeats EST-SSR is likely due to suppression of other kind of 
repeats in the coding region, which reduces the frame-shift 
mutations in the coding regions []. The longest trinucleotide 
repeat motifs were found to be TAC (132 bp) and AAC (144 bp) 
in P. triticina and P. graminis f. sp. tritici, respectively 
( 
see supplementary material). In N. crassa, the TTA repeat motif 
was 279 bp and the longest in observed in fungi was (AAT)129 
in C. neoformans var. gattii [,
]. Tetra- to hexanucleotide 
repeats were less frequent in the rust genomes, however, the
repeat types were more diverse compared to di- and 
trinucleotide repeats. P. triticina and P. graminis f. sp. tritici 
showed 56 and 65 types of tetranucleotide repeat motifs, 
respectively. The most common tetranucleotide repeat was 
found to be GTTG motif which occurred 34 times in P. triticina
(, see supplementary material). It was observed that 
exons contain almost no tetranucleotide repeats compared to 
introns and intergenic regions []. The longest tetranucleotide 
repeat motifs were found to be AAAC (396 bp) and AGAA (312 
bp) in P. triticina and P. graminis tritici, respectively 
( see 
supplementary material). The longest tetranucleotide SSR 
observed was AAAT (404bp) in C. neoformans var. gattii 
[].

P. triticina contained 73 types of pentanucleotide repeats as 
compared to 55 in P. graminis f. sp. tritici. The most common 
repeats were found to be GTGTT and AACAA in P. triticina and 
P. graminis f. sp. tritici, respectively, occurring 22 times in the 
genome ( see supplementary material). The longest 
repeat motifs were found to be ATTGT (315 bp) and TTGTT 
(350 bp) in P. triticina and P. graminis f. sp. tritici, respectively 
( see supplementary material). Similarly, the longest 
pentanucleotide motif observed was AATGT (404bp) in C. 
neoformans var. gattii [].

P. triticina and P. graminis f. sp. tritici genome possessed 54 and 
29 types of hexanucleotide repeats. The longest hexanucleotide 
repeat motifs in P. triticina and P. graminis f. sp. tritici were 
found to be GGGTTA (330 bp) and TTTTTC (270 bp), 
respectively. Four of five longest repeats were represented by 
GGGTTA repeat motif in P. triticina ( see 
supplementary material). The longest hexanucleotide repeat 
observed was GCCTGA (462) in M. grisea []. The present 
study revealed the relative abundance and density of SSR 
motifs in the genome of two important rust pathogens of wheat. 
SSRs were more abundant in P. graminis f. sp. tritici (one 
SSR/15.2 kb) than P. triticina (one SSR/34.1 kb). It was also 
observed that genome size did not correlate with SSR 
abundance as P. triticina genome is two-fold in size but possess 
less than half of SSR density and abundance. Similar trends 
were also observed in other genomes and was suggested that 
the evolution of SSR may differ in genomes of different sizes 
[]. Taxon- specific variations were also detected in frequency 
of SSR motifs []. When the number of tandem repeats of SSR 
motifs was examined, it was observed that shorter number of 
repeats (6-9 times) predominated with 84% and 88% of all SSRs 
in P. triticina and P. graminis f. sp. tritici. Similar trends were also 
observed in other fungal species [].

Some of the most abundant SSRs have been implicated with 
regulatory roles in gene expression. The polyglutamine (CAG)n 
and polyproline (CCN)n repeats were reported in protein 
coding regions of over 67 different transcription factors 
[]. In 
regulatory regions, changes in SSR length will necessary change 
the length of DNA in that region, thereby altering the local 
spatial relationship of transcription factor interactions 
[]. 
Nontriplet SSRs cause frameshifts in coding region resulting in 
inactivation of gene expression.

Conclusion:
SSRs provide a ready and virtually inexhaustible supply of new 
quantitative variations for rapid evolutionary adaptation []
and gene-associated tandem repeats function as facilitators of 
evolution and enabling rapid evolution of new forms []. Thus, 
SSRs are a major source genetic variation has broad 
implications for understanding the molecular process of 
evolutionary adaptation, including the evolutionary control of 
the mutation process itself. The clonally reproducing rust
pathogen rapidly evolves through stepwise mutational 
acquisition of new virulence [] and thus, resulting arms race 
between plant breeders and the pathogen is characterized by 
frequent and rapid resistance breakdowns. The fitness 
advantage of being able to grow on a resistant cultivar is so 
strong that a new virulent mutant pathotype can replace an 
existing dominant pathotype within few years []. Therefore 
knowledge of evolutionary change in the pathogen can help 
plant breeders to develop more efficient strategies of rust 
resistance management in wheat. This comparative information 
on the nature of SSR motifs might be best to target for 
developing molecular markers in rust fungi for strain typing, 
population genetics, phylogenetics, genetic mapping and 
evolutionary studies.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The financial support for Agri-Bioinformatics Promotion 
Program provided by Bioinformatics Initiative Division, 
Department of Information Technology, Ministry of 
Communications &amp; Information Technology, Government of 
India, New Delhi is gratefully acknowledged.

Citation:Singh et al, Bioinformation 7(6): 291-295 (2011)

