The pathogenesis and molecular biology of Down's syndrome
are under intense study and advances have been made in the
care of patients with Down's syndrome. Patients with Down's
syndrome may exhibit cognitive impairment and
developmental cognitive disorder; post-mortem brain tissue
from patients who were older than 40 years may show senile
plaques and neurofibrillary tangles as found in Alzheimer's
disease. Skeletal and soft tissue abnormalities appear as well.
Particular patients may have only mild cognitive disability;
however, some patients may exhibit psychiatric disorders
including autism and major depression. Most often, Down's
syndrome is a noninherited chromosome disorder caused
during meiosis by chromosome 21 nondisjunction. This leads
to chromosome 21 trisomy. However, there is also an inherited
form of Down's syndrome that is due to translocation of a
fragment of chromosome 21 onto chromosome 14. The
chromosome 21 fragment is from the 21q22 band-region and
causes a triplication of that 1,000 bp portion of chromosome 21.
However, there are indications that the two types of Down's
syndrome are clinically indistinguishable [,
]

MicroRNAs(miRNAs) are noncoding RNAs that are involved
in gene expression regulation. They have been identified in
several cell processes including DNA damage, synapse
formation, neurotransmission, neural network plasticity, and
CNS (central nervous system) development. MiRNA levels
change during neurodegeneration. [] MiRNAs have been
studied in several diseases that exhibit intellectual disability
(ID) including Fragile X syndrome and Down's syndrome 
[].

Much work is being done, focused on the involvement of
miRNAs in the pathogenesis of Down's syndrome. For
example, as of 8-11-2013, 2,042 miRNAs were identified in
humans, 1,281 in Mus musculus, and 580 in Pan troglodytes.

However, miRNA densities per 10 megabases in humans vary
from 7.42 on chromosome 1, 29.26 on chromosome 19, and 5.40
on chromosome 21. There are 26 miRNAs that have been
localized on human chromosome 21 and five of these actually
are associated with Down's syndrome: let-7c, miR-99a, miR-
155, miR-125b-2, and miR-802. Just to indicate a few
interactions of miRNAs and their targets are that miR-155
interacts with MeCP2 (methyl CpG base pair 2) and CFH
(complement factor H) and miR-199b with SIRT1 (sirtuin 1) 
[,
].

In greater detail, the genes that are perturbed by changes in the
expression of the above five miRNAs in Down's syndrome
include the following proteins: methyl CpG binding protein 2
(MeCP2), complement factor H (CFH), sirtuin 1 (SIRT1)
,phosphatidylinositol-binding clathrin assembly protein
(PICALM), cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A (CDKN2A),
glutamate receptor, ionotropic, N-methyl d-aspartate subunit
2A, (NR2A), Ephrin type A receptor 4 (EPHA4), Nestin (NES),
transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), toll-like receptor 7
(TLR7), cortactin-binding protein 2 (CTTNBP2), ankyrin 2
(ANK2), sodium-calcium exchanger 1 (Ncx1), tyrosine-(Y)-
phosphorylation regulated kinase 1A gene (Dyrk1a), and
nuclear factor of activated T-cells (NFAT).

Is it possible to correct or reverse the pathogenesis of Down's
syndrome? We conclude this brief report with a few
remarkable findings related to chromosome inactivation that
indicate it may be just a matter of time prior to being able to
cure this complex disease/syndrome.

Human females, diploid in the X chromosome, utilize the Xist
gene (X-chromosome inactivation specific transcript (nonprotein
coding) for expression suppression (inactivation,
transcription silencing) of one of the X chromosomes. The X
chromosome location of the Xist gene is at cytogenetic band
Xq13.2 []. In addition, it should be noted, remarkably, that the
RNA gene product of this gene is non-coding. The X
chromosome silencing is effected by Xist non-coding RNA and
is associated with chromatin modification. This serves as the
canonical mechanism of chromosome inactivation []. Recent
work has remarkably applied this model of transcriptional
silencing to the problem of supernumerary gene expression in
Down's syndrome. Pluripotent stem cells from Downs's
syndrome patients were used as follows. Via editing zinc
finger nucleases on chromosome 21 in these cell cultures, a Xist
non-coding transgene was inserted into the DYRK1A (dualspecificity
tyrosine-(Y)-phosphorylation regulated kinase 1A)
locus. This step itself is notable as it amounts to the genetic
reengineering of a specific chromosome. The chromosome 21
location of DYRK1A is at cytogenetic band 21q22.13 
[]. The
mechanism of transcriptional silencing due to the Xist
transgene appears to involve coating chromosome 21 with Xist
RNA that results in stable modification of heterochromatin.
Barr body formation and DNA methylation ensue. The
silencing of one chromosome 21 in these cell cultures has
distinct biological effects as this procedure releases cells from
inhibition of cell propagation and promotes neural rosette
formation [].

The development and utilization of Down's syndrome tissue
and cell culture banks is of great assistance in the defeat of this
disease. Several such banks in existence support progress in
the medical field. A few examples are provided [,
]. In
addition, ethical considerations are maintained at a high level
of discussion and practice [–]. On a continued hopeful
note, chromosome therapy and re engineering, gene therapy,
gene manipulation, and reversing and preventing Down's
syndrome disease appear on the horizon.

 illustrate the gene expression and protein
networks involving the proteins that interact with miRNAs in
Down's syndrome as mentioned above.) This is a large set of
proteins with complex series of interactions. These proteins
include MeCP2, CFH, SIRT1, PICALM, CDKN2A, NR2A,
EPHA4, NES, TGF-β, TLR7, CTTNBP2, ANK2, Ncx1, Dyrk1a,
and NFAT [,
,
].
 indicates the input interactions
among Xist and two proteins with which it interacts. The two
protein are NXF1 (nuclear RNA export factor 1) and CTCF
(CCCTC-binding factor zinc finger protein).  shows
the output interactions resulting from Xist, NXF1, and CTCF.
 indicate a few of the genes implicated in
chromosome 21 expression and the application of X
chromosome inactivation mechanisms to chromosome 21 gene
duplication and expression control abnormalities as mentioned
above.

It is left as a puzzle for the interested reader to identify the
additional various genes and their functions in the figures 
[,
,
]

There are no financial conflicts.

Citation:Shapshak, Bioinformation 9(15): 752-754 (2013)

A) Network of input MeCP2, CFH, SIRT1, PICALM, CDKN2A, NR2A, EPHA4, NES, TGF-β, TLR7, CTTNBP2, ANK2,
Ncx1, Dyrk1a, and NFATwith immediate input neighbors. In this figure, line-colors and various interactions with other genes are
red Down-regulation, green Up-regulation, beige Regulation, purple Co-expression, brown Physical Interaction, turquoise dotted
Predicted Protein Interaction, and mauve dotted Predicted TFactor Regulation []. The genes shown interacting with the above
genes are immediate interactions; B) Network of MeCP2, CFH, SIRT1, PICALM, CDKN2A, NR2A, EPHA4, NES, TGF-β, TLR7,
CTTNBP2, ANK2, Ncx1, Dyrk1a, and NFAT with output neighbors. In this figure, line-colors and various interactions with other
genes are red Down-regulation, green Up-regulation, beige Regulation, purple Co-expression, brown Physical Interaction,
turquoise dotted Predicted Protein Interaction, and mauve dotted Predicted TFactor Regulation. (15) This figure is a continuation
of the genes shown in Figure 1A and shows additional levels of interactions among the genes; i.e. many of these are downstream
from the first level shown in Figure 1A; C) Network of input non-coding RNA and proteins Xist, NXF1, and CTCF with immediate
input neighbors. In this figure, line-colors and various interactions with other genes are red Down-regulation, green Up-regulation,
beige Regulation, purple Co-expression, brown Physical Interaction, turquoise dotted Predicted Protein Interaction, and mauve
dotted Predicted TFactor Regulation []. The gene networks shown are immediate interactions; D) Network of non-coding RNA
and proteins Xist, NXF1, and CTCF with additional output neighbors. In this figure, line-colors and various interactions with other
genes are red Down-regulation, green Up-regulation, beige Regulation, purple Co-expression, brown Physical Interaction,
turquoise dotted Predicted Protein Interaction, and mauve dotted Predicted TFactor Regulation []. This figure is a continued
analysis of the genes shown in Figure 1C and shows additional levels of interactions among the genes; i.e. many of these are
downstream from the first level shown in Figure 1C.

