Background
During last couple of years, scientific community among
developing countries including Pakistan has developed interest
in bioinformatics research [,
]. Most of the bioinformatics
applications are database dependant and to access, search and
retrieve data, reliable internet connections are required. To
facilitate maximum utilization, bioinformatics resources and
facilities around the globe prefer to download these databases
on their local servers. There has been an exponential growth in
database records as a consequence of major advances in
genomics and proteomics technologies, stressing need of
frequent updates with the latest releases. Many developing
countries face a major problem in regular update of databases
due to lack of infrastructure, slow/unreliable internet
connectivity and low bandwidth. It is expected that in future,
databases size would outgrow existing rate of transfer at
current bandwidth, thus it is imperative to develop efficient
tools for obtaining automatic updates on a regular basis. To
address such issues, a Bio-Mirror project was also launched
which uses FTP mode for data transfer [].

Updates are usually managed by client server approach (FTP or
WWW) or P2P (Peer-to-Peer) file sharing applications. FTP has
been a traditional method for file sharing and downloading
from remote server and is very popular for downloading large
files. However, it requires large network bandwidths and
suffers from scalability bottleneck. As an alternative, P2P
applications have become immensely popular for fast and
efficient distribution of files in recent years. P2P architecture
operates in a distributed autonomous system mode that does
not rely on a specific server system. Torrent protocol working
environment is based on peer-to-peer (P2P) technique in which
every user is connected to each other with mesh technology. On
the other hand, FTP protocol working environment is
completely dependent on a single server which means it may
create single point of failure. The performance of traditional
FTP file sharing applications deteriorates rapidly as the number
of clients increase while in P2P module, more peers means
better performance. There are many P2P file sharing
applications such as Kazza, Gnutella, Napster, BitTorrent to
name a few. Among these applications, BitTorrent P2P file
sharing system has been analyzed in many studies 
[,
].

Considering the existing scenario and future difficulties,
techniques supporting automatic synchronization of databases
at low bandwidth are of utmost importance. In current study,
efficiency of FTP and BitTorrent applications are compared in
order to download large sized database (Gigabyte) and using
them through local servers without delay and response time out
message. With the help of btP2P protocol, the problems of
updating the enormous data of biological databases and at the
same time, avoiding the network connection issues have been
addressed.

Methodology
Computational Resources:
Two Ultra20M2 of Sun Microsystems based nodes with dual
core processor were utilized for current study. These servers
were selected as they are stable, reliable and provided
maximum uptime [].

Database Selection:
NCBI database website [] was used to download databases.
NCBI website supports FTP protocol and all the databases such
as PubMed, Nucleotide, EST, Protein, Structure, SNPs,
conserved Protein Databases, etc are available in FTP servers.

Selection of Application for database downloads:
Multiple applications for FTP and torrent protocols are
available. Filezilla [] and Bitcomet 
[] were selected as
representatives of FTP and BitTorrent procedures, respectively.
These programs are among the best clients, having the ability to
download data at the same interval of time. Filezilla is a single
server based solution that does not support torrent file,
becomes slower with increasing number of users and lacks
resume facility after internet link failure. Bit Torrent on the
other hand is a peer based solution that uses mesh technology
and supports resume facility as well as both torrent and FTP
files.

Performance Evaluation:
Most of the bioinformatics databases are usually uploaded on
FTP server. Downloading of database was performed using
both applications and was monitored for the span of fifteen
hours. In order to make sure that the load on the network
should be same for both of the methods during the test period;
the whole procedure was carried out on different machines
with similar specifications, and same network. Both the btP2P
and FTP performances were evaluated.

Discussion
Databases are usually downloaded using client-server
architecture like FTP. If server becomes overloaded, response
time might increase. P2P file sharing protocols have gained
popularity as an alternative procedure to FTP. In current
communication, both the applications Filezilla and Bitcomet
were compared as representatives of FTP and Bit Torrent (P2P)
protocols. Our results indicate that BitTorrent protocol is more
efficient in downloading large data (GB) in less time period
 
(see supplementary material). In first hour,
downloading speed of Bitcomet was 87 KB with 234 Mb while
downloading speed using Filezilla was 21 KB with 66 MB. In
successive hours, torrent downloading speed kept on
improving than that of FTP and by the end of fifteenth hour,
torrent downloading speed was at least four times higher than
the FTP downloading speed.

The speed comparison of Torrent and FTP protocols with
respect to time is shown in (). The results show the
slow speed of FTP as compared to the torrent speed. 

represents the downloaded data comparison between the two
protocols in specified time limit. This further demonstrates that
the torrent is more reliable as compare to FTP protocol. In
recent years, a significant part of internet bandwidth is being
used by P2P traffic. BitTorrent is a popular P2P application that
aims to avoid bottleneck of FTP servers while delivering large
and popular files []. An earlier communication has clearly
shown the better performance of btP2P protocol than traditional
FTP for automatically synchronizing large amounts of
biological databases across the three countries of Asia-Pacific
region []. However, they have compared FTP and P2P file
sharing applications using Azureus as a Bit Torrent
representative. For current study, Bitcomet was selected, which
is a client written in C++. Bitcomet can run in windows
environment and offers a preview download mode so that users
can preview download content although the file has not been
completely finished. It allows users to create their own torrents
and can be used for HTTP/FTP download, a format usually
used for most of the bioinformatics database download. The
results obtained from our study demonstrate that BtP2P
techniques can be applied to scale database servers and can
outperform client-server based applications. With two available
nodes, it is concurred that the performance using btP2P is better
than that of FTP. The results of our study showed significant
improvement in download performance using btP2P than
conventional File Transfer Protocol (FTP). Our study has
exhibited the reliability of btP2P in the transmission of
continuously growing multi-gigabyte biological databases
without failure. Furthermore, the download performance for
btP2P can be further intensified by including more nodes from
various parts within the country. This study suggests that the
btP2P technology is highly appropriate for file sharing
applications as this is effective, viable and self scalable.

Conclusion
Based on above mentioned observations, it can be concluded
that the Torrent protocol is almost four times faster than FTP
protocol. Hence torrent protocol is recommended as a better
tool for updating and synchronization of the biological data sets
using low bandwidth. Results obtained from this study support
the findings of Sangket et al. 
[] who compared the
downloading performance between FTP and btP2P on different
subnets among developing countries. Most of the databases use
FTP protocol and as Bitcomet client supports both FTP and
torrent, it may offer a better choice. The download performance
for btP2P can be improved further by including more nodes
from other institutes and Research and Development (R&amp;D)
organizations. It is suggested that btP2P technology may be an
appropriate application for file sharing, automatic
synchronization and distribution of biological databases and
software over low-bandwidth networks.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Authors are grateful to the Higher Education Commission,
Pakistan for the financial support for this work (grant no: 20-
752).

Citation:Azam &amp; Zarina, Bioinformation 8(5): 239-242 (2012)

Comparison between BitTorrent (square) and FTP (▲)
protocol indicating speed (A) and downloaded data (B) in 15
hours

