Background
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is associated with obesity,
hypertension, altered lipid profiles, disturbed cortisol control,
and low-grade inflammation and found to have cognitive
impairment []. T2DM patients also have an increased incidence
of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and increased incidence of vascular
dementia []. T2DM has been associated with reduced
performance on numerous domains of cognitive function 
[].
Both cognitive impairments and structural brain abnormalities
have been reported in T2DM, with several studies
demonstrating that the hippocampus is specifically affected by
the disease []. The exact pathophysiology of cognitive
dysfunction in T2DM is not completely understood, but it is
likely that hyperglycemia, vascular disease, hypoglycemia, and
insulin resistance play significant roles []. All of these factors
have individually been shown to contribute to functional and
structural brain changes and may modify the impact of T2DM
on brain and cognition. The deleterious effects of diabetes
mellitus on the retinal, renal, cardiovascular, and peripheral
nervous systems are widely acknowledged [,
] offering less
attention to the effect of diabetes on cognitive function. Diabetic
encephalopathy mainly refers to cognitive injury caused by
diabetes, which includes deficits on learning, memory and the
ability in executing affairs and solving problems however, its
mechanism is unknown.

Disconcertingly, the rapid rise in obesity and T2DM in all age
groups might result in a substantial increase in prevalence of
diabetes-related cognitive dysfunction. Little of information is
available on examination of cognitive dysfunction in patients
with diabetes, more needs to be understood about the
mechanisms and natural history of this complication in order to
develop strategies for prevention and treatment. Deepening
research on the causable factors in this line can only fetch new
medications incessantly.

Neurotrophins are regulatory factors that mediate the
differentiation, proliferation and survival of cholinergic,
dopaminergic and serotonergic neurons []. Brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is a member of neurotropic growth
factors, which are related to the nerve growth and is a key
protein in regulating maintenance, growth and survival of
neurons []. BDNF is also identified as a key component of
hypothalamic pathway that controls body weight and energy
homeostasis []. It also influences learning and memory 
[].
BDNF affects the survival and differentiation of cultured motor
neurons, mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons and septal
cholinergic neurons []. Concerning BDNF, decreased level in
the hippocampus is associated with impaired synaptic
plasticity, cognitive performances. Increasingly, BDNF has
become recognised as a metabotrophic factor [] with reduced
levels reported in several cardio-metabolic diseases, including
T2DM.

As a multidisciplinary field, medical informatics draws on a
range of disciplines such as computer science, information
science and cognitive sciences. Medical informatics can provide
important insights into the nature of the processes involved in
human-computer interaction and help to improve the
application of medical information systems by providing
insight into the role that knowledge, memory, and strategies
play in a variety of cognitive activities. This review focuses on
BDNF protein to be used in treatment of much common
diabetic encephalopathy using cognition and computational
approach, which can serve as a novel approach in selective
delivery of drug.

Diabetes and cognition:
There is a developing body of research identifying the brain as a
site of possible complications in T2DM. Both cognitive
impairments and structural brain abnormalities have been
reported in T2DM demonstrating that the hippocampus is
specifically affected by the disease []. Decreased cognitive
performance has been extensively described among individuals
with T2DM, with reduced performance in verbal declarative
memory and processing speed being the most consistently
reported [].

T2DM is reported to be contributing to cognitive dysfunction
through three indirect mechanisms. Firstly, cognitive
dysfunction in patients with T2DM has been correlated to
inflammatory markers, and increased inflammation may
contribute to the development of AD or macro-vascular disease
[]. 
Secondly, T2DM could contribute to cognitive dysfunction
through the disruption of the hypothalamic-pituitary adrenal
axis. Both animals [] and humans 
[] with T2DM have an
up-regulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, with
increased serum cortisol compared with controls. Insulin
resistance contributes through the indirect mechanism of upregulating
hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis, thereby
causing hypercortisolemia related cognitive dysfunction 
[].
The third potential mechanism through which insulin resistance
may indirectly contribute to cognitive dysfunction is by
promoting the formation of senile plaques found in AD 
[].

Cortisol dysregulation, which has been associated with T2DM,
had also been shown to impact brain and cognitive function in
numerous studies []. Modalities to study the effect of T2DM
on the brain have evolved over the years, including neurocognitive
testing, evoked response potentials, and magnetic
resonance imaging [].

Cognition and BDNF:
BDNF is a molecule that is involved in promoting memory that
is reduced in the brain with age and is major factor in AD as
well as in other neurological disorders []. It has long been
considered a drug target for AD []. BDNF is a small dimeric
protein -that is abundantly and widely expressed in the adult
mammalian brain. Various studies have shown possible links
between BDNF and conditions, such as diabetes, depression,
schizophrenia, obsessive-compulsive disorder, AD,
Huntington's disease, Rett syndrome, and dementia, as well as
anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa [].

BDNF gene is located on chromosome 11p13 and is composed
of five or more exons, each with its own promoter region
allowing for differential mRNA splicing []. A de novo
paracentric inversion, 46, XX, inv (p12, p15.3), a region
encompassing the BDNF locus, was reported with severe
hyperphagia, obesity, and complex neurobehavioral
phenotypes []. Physiological, genetic and neuro-imaging data
all favour the hypothesis that BDNF influences neuro-cognitive
function. In the brain, BDNF is produced mainly by neurons
wherein its levels are increased considerably by electrical
activity, and in response to exercise and dietary energy
restriction []. The transcription factors cyclic AMP response
element binding protein (CREB) and NF-κB induce BDNF
expression in response to neuronal activity and metabolic stress
[]. BDNF is released from neurons in an activity dependent
manner and binds to a high-affinity receptor tyrosine kinase
called trkB that is expressed by neurons and glial cells
throughout the nervous system [].

BDNF can induce its own synthesis and stimulate selective
increases in several genes and proteins involved in synaptic
plasticity, including synaptotagmin, Homer1a, Arc, and NARP
[]. BDNF can regulate gene expression in the cell body as well
as locally at the synapse []. This suggests that BDNF provides
cellular and local regulatory mechanisms for mediating
synaptic plasticity. Thus, impaired BDNF signaling can
compromise many aspects of brain function.

BDNF in diabetic cognitive dysfunction /diabetic encephalopathy:
Recent evidence suggests a potential role for brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in the relationship between
depression and diabetes []. High levels of BDNF are found in
hippocampal neurons and these are decreased in adult
depressed patients [] but increase with improvements in
depressive symptoms, duration of treatment and antidepressant
use []. Increasingly, BDNF has become recognised as a
metabotrophic factor, with reduced levels reported in several
cardio-metabolic diseases, including T2DM []. Studies
investigating the relationship between BDNF and diabetes in
adults demonstrate that BDNF levels are decreased in T2DM
and are regulated in response to plasma levels of glucose 
[].
In addition, studies of healthy adults have found that
hyperglycaemia inhibits BDNF output from the brain [].

Concerning BDNF, decreased level in the hippocampus is
associated with impaired synaptic plasticity, cognitive
performances and mood-related behaviours []. Interestingly,
interleukin-1b (IL-1β) modulates memory-induced increase in
hippocampal BDNF mRNA expression and signal transduction
[]. Accordingly, elevated cytokine levels observed in the
hippocampus of db/db mice may contribute to decrease BDNF
levels and consequently to impair anxiety-like behaviours and
spatial cognitive performances [].

By examining a large cohort of subjects with or without T2DM
in the presence or absence of obesity, Lambert et al. 
[] and
group concluded that plasma BDNF levels were reduced in
patients with T2DM and were inversely associated with fasting
plasma glucose levels. Hence, authors proposed that decreased
BDNF might be a pathogenic factor linking depression and
T2DM. BDNF rapidly regulates energy metabolism in obese
diabetic animals, partly through activating the sympathetic
nervous system and inducing UCP1 gene expression in BAT
[]. 
Additionally, both the COMT val158met polymorphism
and the BDNF val66met variant appear to influence cognitive
function [], 
but the specific neuro-cognitive processes
involved continue to be a matter of debate. Consequently, such
accrued neuro-protective deficits make neurons more
vulnerable to injury.

Low levels of BDNF have also been associated with
learning/cognitive dysfunction, depression, neurodegenerative
conditions, and mortality. BDNF has been studied
in various populations; however, the clinical significance of
BDNF levels remains unclear in individuals with T2DM 
[].
Enhancement of hippocampal BDNF was accompanied by
increases in dendritic spine density on the secondary and
tertiary dendrites of dentate granule neurons []. These studies
suggest that diabetes exerts detrimental effects on hippocampal
structure, and that this state can be attenuated by increasing
energy expenditure and decreasing energy intake.

BDNF as drug target for diabetic cognitive dysfunction through computational approach:
Currently, the major drug discovery paradigm for
neurodegenerative diseases is based upon high affinity ligands
for single disease-specific targets but T2DM mediated diabetic
encephalopathy is least probed. Based on the evidences, our
group earlier proposed that obesity and T2DM could be
disorders of the brain and BDNF could serve as a biomarker in
predicting their development []. Hence, methods developed
selectively to deliver BDNF to appropriate hypothalamic
neurons may form a novel approach in treatment. We also
investigated three groups of sequences among a series of 12,
with an E-value between 0–12, common to both AD and T2DM:
butyrylcholinesterase precursor K allele (NP 000046.1),
acetylcholinesterase isoform E4-E6 precursor (NP 000656.1), and
apoptosis-related acetyl-cholinesterase (1B41|A; []). The
human and mouse data suggest that BDNF mRNA expression
peaks in recovery after exercise, while an increased release
occurs during exercise []. BDNF gene regulation during
recovery from exercise serves as the basis for cumulative effects
of repeated exercise bouts, eventually leading to detectable
increases in BDNF protein content and concomitantly increased
potential for BDNF release and neuro-protection in specific
brain parts [].

Our group earlier reported by active site prediction to identify
the cavities present in the BDNF protein []. Thirty-two
cavities are given with the sequence, cavity point and volume of
cavity to locate the active sites of BDNF for the ligands with
which to bind. It has predicted the shape of the site by
extracting the cavity volume surfaces enclosing regions with
highest probability. Active site prediction of BDNF is done to
identify the locations of ligand binding sites and to predict
functional similarities between cavities to estimate the locations
of bound ligands. Active site of BDNF is obtained by using
active site prediction server. The cavity1 is identified as the
cavity highest volume with the following amino acid sequence
as the active site RTCEDFAIVKYSQGWLN the cavity points are
5.312Å, 26.603Å, 20.190Å and the cavity volume is 1498 A3.
The active site prediction is done to identify the cavities present
in the BDNF protein []. The different ligands can be chosen
for interaction of the active sites of BDNF. In conclusion, the
identified active sites of BDNF and the cavities can be targeted
for drug discovery.

Conclusion
The above reports demonstrate the potential of a new drug
discovery paradigm for cognitive dysfunction in T2DM, which
can be based upon the requirement that drug candidates be
highly effective in multiple, distinct cell culture models of
neuro-degeneration. This approach may yield BDNF as very
potent, orally active molecule that targets several different
pathways that decline in diabetic encephalopathy. Based on the
reports available and our research in these lines, we propose
BDNF as exceptionally potent neuro-trophic molecule that can
prevent the loss of synaptic proteins and cognitive decline in a
diabetic encephalopathy.

The author gratefully acknowledges Department of science and
technology (DST) for its financial support through IRHPA
schemes vide (L.No: IR/SO/LU/03/2008/1 dated 24-12-2010)
and also partial support from DST grants NO: SR/S4/MS:
516/07 dated 21st April 2008.

Citation:Rao, Bioinformation 9(11): 551-554 (2013)

