Background
Lignocellulosic materials are attractive feedstocks for ethanol
production since they are abundant and cheap. One of the
major lignocellulosic materials to be considered in tropical
countries is sugarcane bagasse, the fibrous residue obtained
after extracting the juice from sugar cane (Saccharum
officinarum) in the sugar production process. India is second
largest producer of sugarcane in the world. It occupies an
important position in the Indian agriculture scenario covering
around 5.06 Mha area. The sugarcane baggase is a byproduct of
sugarcane crushing. In this perspective, the present study was
aimed at the utilization of agro waste, sugarcane bagasse, as
growth substrates for the production of cellulolytic enzymes.
Among the agricultural residues, sugarcane bagasse (SCB) is a
substrate of high potential for biotechnological processes,
which comprises 40–42% cellulose, 24–28 % hemicelluloses, and
10–12 % lignin []. This could be used as substrate for the
production of cellulase complex, an enzyme which has higher
commercial use. Cellulase used in chemicals, fuel, food, animal
feed, brewery and wine, textile and laundry, pulp and paper
and agro-based industries [,
]. Cellulase is used in the
fermentation of biomass into biofuels, although this process is
relatively experimental at present.

The aim of this study was to optimize the effect of different
pretreatment methods, fermentation conditions and to evaluate
enzymatic convertibility of the pretreated solids for the enzyme
production. Pretreatment of lignocelluloses is an important
step, so that the fermentable sugar could be available for the
microbial biomass. Pretreatment removes lignin from SCB,
reduces crystallinity of cellulose and significantly improve the
hydrolysis by avoiding the formation of inhibitors 
[].
However, many pretreatment methods have been attempted to
hydrolyse the available cellulose. They include mechanical
pulverization, pyrolysis, ozonolysis, acid, alkali, oxidative
delignification, ionic liquids, ammonia fiber explosion (AFEX),
autohydrolysis, microwave assisted, ultrasound assisted,
microbial and enzymatic methods. In India, most of the
enzymes are imported at huge costs which warrant an absolute
need for its commercial indigenous production to reduce the
market price []. Both bacteria and fungi can produce cellulases
for the hydrolysis of lignocellulosic materials. Numbers of
aerobic, anaerobic, mesophilic and thermophilic
microorganisms have been reported earlier to produce
cellulases using various fermentation medium. Bacteria belong
to Clostridium, Cellulomanas, Bacillus, Thermomonospora,
Ruminococcucs, Bacteroides, Erwinia, Acetovibrio, Microbispora,
and Streptomyces can produce cellulases. Although many
cellulolytic bacteria particularly the cellulolytic anaerobes such
as Clostridium thermocellum and Bacteroides cellulosolvens
produce cellulase with high specific activity but they do not
produce high enzyme titers []. Several fungi have been
reported to produce cellulases []. A non-exhaustive list of
cellulolytic microorganisms of aerobic and anaerobic forms
isolated from various habitats has been reported []. The
biggest obstacle in commercial success of enzyme production is
the high cost of raw material used as substrate which could be
overcome by resorting to microbial fermentation technology
using low valued biological substrates including agro- waste,
viz., rice straw, wheat straw, rice bran, wheat bran and
baggasse etc. and fruit processing waste such as apple pomace,
grape pomace, pineapple waste and mango peel [,
,
&amp;
].

Methodology
Isolation and screening of potent cellulolytic microorganism:
Cellulose rich substrates such as dried leaves and soil samples
were collected around sugarcane fields of Lucknow, India and
were suspended in sterile saline. One ml. of the aliquots were
inoculated on CMC agar plates. Isolated colonies were then
purified through a serial streaking method. From these plates,
isolated colonies were taken and repeatedly streaked on CMC
agar to obtain pure cultures. This isolated culture was screened
for their ability to produce enzymes like CMCase, cellulobiase
and FPase. The organism showing maximum enzymatic
activity was identified and used for further studies. The pure
fungal cultures were subsequently maintained on CMC agar
slants.

Pretreatment of SCB:
SCB was a kind gift from the Jaggery Unit, IISR, Lucknow.
Before inoculating the highest cellulsae producing
microorganism in to the SCB rich medium, the substrate was
chemically pretreated. Dried SCB was pretreated with alkaline
pretreatment (2% NaOH, submerged for overnight; AlSCB) and
acid pretreatment (10% H2SO4, submerged for overnight;
AcSCB) at room temperature. After treatment the concentrated
hydrolysate was detoxified by four staged process: washing
with hot dil. water to rinse off the alkali or acid, maintaining
the pH to 5.5 (otherwise stated) with calcium oxide or
phosphoric acid followed by incubation for 1h at 200 rpm and
30°C. After each stage, the hydrolysate was filtered under
vacuum and finally it was autoclaved at 15 psi and 121°C for 15
min and was used in the fermentation reactions.

Optimization of fermentation condition for cellulase production:
Different variables of fermentation conditions viz., substrate
concentration (2-15% w/v; Sterilized AlSCB), pH (3.0-9.0),
incubation period (3-7 days) and temperature (20 – 60°C) were
studied in different set of experiments. Every experiment was
performed in duplicate or triplicate. After incubation, culture
filtrate was filtered through whattman filter paper no.4. Culture
filtrate was obtained and assay for the cellulase complex were
performed. The fermentation condition, at which maximum
enzyme production was observed, was taken as optimum for
enzyme production. The amount of released reducing sugar
was quantified by using Miller, G.L. 1959 method using glucose
as standard for determining enzyme activity and expressed in
terms of U/g of substrate utilized []. One unit of enzyme
activity is defined as the amount of enzyme required to release
1 µm equivalent of glucose/min/g of substrate utilized. Protein
concentration was estimated by method of Lowry et al. (1951)
[].

Purification of CMCase:
The culture filtrate was precipitated using ammonium sulphate
at 20-70% saturation and was dialyzed twice against the 50 mM
of acetate buffer (pH 5.0). Affinity chromatography of the
concentrated enzyme was performed using preequilibrated
agarose matrix 100mM acetate buffer (pH 5) as bed. The flow
rate of 1 ml/min was maintained and 1 ml protein fraction was
collected up to 45 ml.

Characterization of CMCase:
The fraction showed maximum enzyme activity were pooled
and electrophoressed to determine the molecular weight of the
obtained enzyme. Using carboxy methyl cellulose as substrate,
Michaelis-Menten equation constant (Km and Vmax) of the
obtained enzyme was studied. Reaction was carried out at 30oC
in 100 mM acetate buffer pH 5.0 at various concentrations of
substrate from 0-3.0%.

Results &amp; Discussion
Primary screening of microorganisms were done according to
plate assay method. Among thirty two microorganisms, six
fungal strains and four bacterial strains were selected for
secondary screening for cellulase production. A fungal isolate,
Trichoderma spp., isolated from degrading sugarcane leaf, was
exhibiting the maximum cellulase activity (0.45 U for CMCase;
3.187 U for Cellulobiase and 0.091 U for FPase, respectively).
The isolate was subjected to produce the enzyme on synthetic
carbon and various agro-waste before selecting it for further
studies (Results are not shown). The isolate exhibit maximum
CMCase activity with carboxymethyl cellulose (1.84 U, among
the synthetic sources) and with SCB (0.49 U, among agro-waste
tried). The bagasse after treatment with 2% NaOH exhibited
maximum release of reducing (10.81 mg/g) and non-reducing
(28.07 mg/g) sugar in the medium. The pretreatment process is
cost effective and reliable way to disrupt the cellulose–
hemicelluloses–lignin complex, and to achieve the increased
digestibility of polysaccharides []. Alkali pretreatment
method was reported to cause less sugar degradation than acid
pretreatment, and exhibits lesser hemicellulose and cellulose
loss than acid or hydrothermal processes []. After the
addition of NaOH, SCB swells in order to increase the internal
surface of cellulose, decreases the degree of polymerization and
disruption of lignin structure. In a report, it has been
established that 33%, 25.5% and 35.5% hydrolysis using wheat
straw, rice straw and SCB pretreated with 2% NaOH.

Fermentation medium supplied with 5% SCB as sole carbon
source was found suitable for maximum CMCase (0.582 U),
Cellulobiase (3.008 U) and FPase (0.129 U) production. A
decline in enzyme production was observed with the increase
or decrease in substrate concentration. This might be due to the
catabolite repression and or the accumulation of the phenolic
compounds in the fermentation medium. The liquid fraction
from the hydrolysis of lignocellulosic materials contains both
hexose and pentose sugars. The hydrolysate typically consists
of sugars, organic acids, furans and phenolics []. It was
observed that CMCase (0.534 U) and cellulobiase (3.227 U)
production was highest in alkali treated medium, while after an
increase in production after 5 days, there was no significant
increase in enzyme production. While in case of FPase
production, it was higher in acid treated medium (0.154 U) and
there was sharp decline in enzyme production after 5 days of
incubation (0.084 U). Fermentation medium comprising of
AlSCB (5% w/v) at pH 5.0 was found suitable for the
production of cellulase complex. However, it was noticed that
CMCase (0.622 U) and Cellulobaise (3.388 U) production was
maximum at 5th day of incubation at 40 and 30°C temperature,
respectively. Maximum production of FPase was observed at
2nd day of incubation at 30°C. A similar pattern was noticed by
Abubakar and Oloyede, while experimenting with orange peel
as carbon source []. They found production of cellulase
complex (14.30µmol/min) at 48 hours. This is in line with
findings of that enzyme could be harvested at about 72 hours of
fermentation.

The CMCase produced (0.715 µg/ml/min) from Trichoderma
cells was extracted, precipitated by ammonium sulphate upto
70% saturation and dialyzed twice in acetate buffer (50mM, pH
5.0). It was further purified to the extent of 59.06 fold by affinity
chromatography on agarose column with 49.09% recovery.
Purification to extent of 24-26 folds had been reported earlier in
cellulase and pectinase  (see supplementary material).

The elution profile of protein fractions revealed that fractions
numbering 14 to 22 showed peak CMCase activity. These
fractions were pooled and electrophoresed on 12% SDS-PAGE
and 10% Native PAGE. A single band corresponding to 33 kDa
was observed in 12% SDS-PAGE (). There are many
reports of various cellulases of various molecular weights.
From Bacillus sp 29 kDa alkaline cellulose, from Bacillus
pumilus, 30-65 kDa cellulose, from Paenibacillus polymyxa, 72
kDa, from Sinorhizobium fredii, 94 kDa and from Aspergillus niger
83 and 50 kDa CMCase have been already reported []. The
effect of substrate on CMCase activity shows that maximum
activity was obtained at lower concentration of carboxy methyl
cellulose. Increase in the concentration of substrate, lowers the
activity of the enzyme. It indicates that the active sites of the
enzyme are not available to form substrate-enzyme complex.
The Km and Vmax for CMCase from Trichoderma was found
507.04 mg/ml and 65.32 mM/min, respectively. Earlier, Km
values for CMCase have reported from Paenibacillus polymyxa as
8.73 mg/ml and 17.805 mM/min and Candida peltala as 66
mg/ml [].

CMCase of Trichoderma exhibited maximum activity at 30°C at
pH 5.0 (0.363 U). The purified enzyme was found to be stable
over range of 20-60°C and pH 5.0-7.5. CMCase activity declined
by 81.5% at 60°C temperature and only 5% activity was retained
at pH 7.5. Increase or decrease in the temperature or pH from
optimum condition, significantly decreases the CMCase
activity.

Conclusion
For majority of commercial enzymes including cellulase
complex (CMCase and cellulobias) used by the industries, India
is dependent on imports. There is an opportunity to exploit
sugarcane bagasse as a substrate for the microbial production
of cellulase complex using Trichoderma. The present study
revealed that the alkaline pretreatment (2% NaOH, overnight)
of SCB could enhance the cellulase production. Fermentation
medium containing 5% substrate concentration at pH 5.0 after 5
days of incubation period at 40°C (CMCase) and 30°C
(cellubiase resulted in maximum production of enzyme. Single
band corresponding to 33 kDa (purified CMCase; to the extent
of 59.06 fold by affinity chromatography with 49.09% recovery)
was achieved on 12% SDS-PAGE. The CMCase from
Trichoderma was thermo-stable and was found stable over range
of 20-60°C and pH 5.0-7.5.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Ashfaque et al, Bioinformation 10(10): 606-610 (2014)

Lane 1-3: Sample of crude culture filtrate, Lane 4-6:
Sample of Ammonium sulphate precipitate, Lane 7-9: Sample
of purified CMCase pooled after agarose chromatography,
Lane 10: Marker

