Background
Ribulose-1,5-biphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase, most
commonly known by the shorter name Rubisco is a very large
and complex protein and it is one of the most abundant
proteins in the world comprising up to 50% of all soluble
protein in plants. It is a bi-functional enzyme (EC 4.1.1.39) that
is used in the Calvin cycle to catalyze the first major step of
carbon fixation, a process by which the atmospheric carbon
dioxide (CO2) is made available to organisms in the form of
energy-rich molecules. Besides its carboxylase activity, Rubisco
also acts as an oxygenase in a reaction involving competition
between O2 and CO2 for reaction with RUBp (ribulose-1, 5-
bisphosphate). Despite its central role for plant metabolism, the
enzyme suffers from several shortcomings that necessitate its
abundance in nature. Compared to other metabolic enzymes
the catalytic rate of plant Rubisco is rather slow 
[].

Maturation is an important event in the process of leaf
development and is closely related to photosynthesis efficiency,
which is regulated by various proteins. Rubisco activase is one
of the key enzyme which plays a vital role to serve as an
activator and regulator of Rubisco. It helps to convert Rubisco
from its inactive form to active form. In most plants, two forms
of Rubisco activase (short isoform, RCAs; long isofrom RCA1)
are present, and they differ only at the C-terminus 
[]. Further,
it consists of two types of protein subunit, called the large chain
and small chain. It is now recognized to be a member of the
AAA(+) family, whose members participate in macromolecular
complexes that perform diverse chaperone-like functions.

Many environmental changes like rising global temperatures,
changes in water availability and drastic variable weather
events will adversely impact the inactivity of Rubsico activase
that could affect plant productivity. Optimizing the
functionality of Rubisco has large implications in the
improvement of plant productivity and resource use efficiency.
As Rubisco activase optimizes photosynthesis in plants, its
genetic engineering of in crops is of continuing interest. In this
study, hypothetical proteins in Vitis vinifera which have
putative Rubisco activase have been predicted using various
structural and functional annotation tools.

Methodology
Sequence retrieval:
The Arabidopsis and tobacco Rubsico activase (Uniprot ID:
P10896 and Q40460) long isoform protein sequence was used as
seed sequence to do blast search against Vitis vinfiera in
UniprotKB database. Among the hits for hypothetical proteins
only four hypothetical were present in V.vinifera in UniprotKB
(accessed December, 2014). The selected hypothetical protein 
sequences (Uniprot ID: D7THJ7, D7SKB2, A5C3D4 and
F6HNV2) were retrieved in FASTA format for further
characterization.

Physicochemical characterization:
The selected hypothetical proteins were subjected to
physicochemical characterization using Expasy protparam tool
[] for theoretical measurements such as molecular weight,
isoelectric point, extinction coefficient, instability index,
aliphatic index and grand average of hydropathicity (GRAVY). 

Sub-cellular localization:
The selected hypothetical proteins of V. vinifera were subjected
to sub-cellular prediction tools like WoLF PSORT and CELLO
[]. 
For predicting signal peptide, SignalP 4.1 was used and
SecretomeP was used for identifying protein involvement in
non-classical pathway. HMMTOP and TMHMM were used to
predict the propensity of a protein to be membrane protein. 

Sequence Comparison:
The hypothetical proteins were predicted using similarity
search in BLASTp [] against Non-redundant (NR) database
and HHPred based on hidden Markow model against protein
databases such as PDB. The Arabidopsis sequence of Rubisco
activase and selected four hypothetical proteins of V.vinifera
were subjected to multiple alignments using ClustalO and
analyzed for sequence conservation. The secondary structures
were predicted using EsPript 3.0 []. The hypothetical proteins
were also subjected to protein disorder prediction using
consensus prediction method [].

Function Prediction:
The domain analysis was done for the precise function
prediction. The function domain of four hypothetical proteins
was predicted by using various publically available protein
family databases and tools like PFAM [], SUPERFAMILY,
CATH, NCBI Conserved Domains Database (NCBI-CDD) [],
CDART and INTERPROSCAN [].

Structure prediction:
The hypothetical proteins were subjected to blast search against
PDB database. As all the proteins had more than 80% identity
against the templates, the protein sequences were subjected to
automated modelling in SWISS-MODEL []. The homology
modelled proteins were subjected to energy minimization using
Modrefiner. The energy minimized structures were assessed
with PROCHECK Ramachandran plots [], ERRAT and
PROSA-web []. All the homology modeled proteins were
superimposed with the template using UCSF Chimera 1.10 
[].
As the detection of structural similarities in proteins can give
elucidation of the biochemical functions, the homology
modeled hypothetical proteins were subjected to identification
of structurally similar binding sites in protein using ProBis
server. 

Results &amp; Discussion
Sequence analysis:
Arabidopsis Rubisco activase long isoform protein sequence
and the selected hypothetical protein sequence of V. vinifera
were used to create multiple protein sequence alignment using
clustalO with default settings were applied for the alignment. A 
conserved tyrosine in the C-terminal extension (residue number
416) was identified, which is essential for the ATPase activity of
Rca as per previous findings (). The secondary
structure prediction and multiple alignment was prepared
using EsPript3.0. Protparam was used to analyze different
phyisochemical properties from the amino acid sequence.
Predicted phyisochemical properties for four hypothetical
proteins are shown in  (See supplementary material).
All the four hypothetical proteins are stable protein as inferred
from instability index. All the protein sequences have negative
GRAVY index which is an indication of hydrophilic and soluble
protein. Then selected hypothetical protein sequence searched
for consensus protein disorder prediction revealed that most
disorder residues occur in both N (between 16-22) and C
terminus (between 450-472) loop regions. The predictions from
various subcellular localization tools indicated all the
hypothetical proteins are a cytoplasmic protein as shown in
 (See supplementary material).

Family classification predicted in PFAM suggests that all the
hypothetical proteins belong to ATPase family associated with
various cellular activities (AAA). Further, the search in CATH
database suggests transcript termination protein A18- like
domain and superfamily search suggests P-loop containing
nucleotide triphosphate hydrolases (). The functional
prediction using various tools suggests that all the hypothetical
proteins of V. vinifera have putative function to Rubisco
activase.

Structure analysis:
Protein three-dimensional structure provides precise
information on how proteins interact and localize in their stable
conformation. Homology modelling is one the most common
structure prediction methods in structural genomics and
proteomics. There are many homology modelling server and
modelling through these servers are reliable if the sequence
identity is greater than 40%. Initial search of the hypothetical
proteins against Protein Data Bank (PDB) using BLASTp
showed that all our query sequence were above 80% identity
with the template structure of green-type Rubisco activase from
tobacco  (See supplementary material). SWISS-MODEL
is an automated homology modelling server that builds 3D
models using the template identified from the PDB. The SWISSMODEL
was used for homology model construction for
selected four hypothetical proteins of V. vinifera 
(). 

The predicted homology models were further refined using
energy minimization server ModRefiner. The energy
minimized structures were assessed for both geometric and
energy aspects. The PROSA-web accesses the protein structure
with Z-score which is indicative of overall model quality. It was
used to check whether the input structure is within the range of
scores typically found for native proteins of similar size. Zscores
of template and query model were obtained from
PROSA web server. The template Z-score was -6.57 and for the
homology modelled proteins it was around -7.93 to -8.16 
(), suggesting similarity between template and query structure.
Finally, the Ramachandaran plots were obtained for both the
template and homology model protein as a quality assessment
using PROCHECK server. From the Table 4, it is inferred that
all the homology models are reliable. Similarly, all the
homology modelled hypothetical proteins have passed in
ERRAT and PROVE structure assessment. The homology
modelled proteins were superimposed with template structure
of green-type Rubisco activase from tobacco using UCSF
Chimera 1.10 and all the superimposed structure had Root
Mean Squared Deviation (RMSD) value of 0.65 ().

Functional annotation:
Several bioinformatics tools and databases were used with the
goal of performing functional annotation of hypothetical
proteins. These proteins were searched for the conserved
domains and protein functions. Consensus predictions
suggested that selected hypothetical proteins of V. vinifera
contain ATPase family associated with various cellular
activities (AAA) belong to the AAA+ super family of ringshaped
P-loop. They contain nucleoside triphosphate
hydrolases, which exert their activity through the energydependent
remodeling and translocation of macromolecules
 (See supplementary material).

They are essential for many cellular functions and are involved
in processes such as DNA replication, protein degradation,
membrane fusion, microtubule severing, peroxisome
biogenesis, signal transduction and the regulation of gene
expression. Moreover, the functional regions of protein
predicted using ProBis server, indicated structure conservation
by pairwise local structural alignment of structural homologs in
Protein Data Bank. The structure conservation is depicted in the
structure ().

Conclusion
In this study, we have used sequence analysis, functional
prediction and structure prediction to assign putative Rubisco
activase function to selected hypothetical proteins of Vitis
vinifera. Rubisco activase plays an important role in regulating
Rubisco. This study will lead for further research in optimizing
the functionality of Rubisco which has large implications for
the improvement of plant productivity and resource use
efficiency. Experimental validation will provide more insight
into the actual function of these proteins.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Kumar, Bioinformation 11(1): 011-016 (2015)

 Multiple sequence alignment of Rubisco activase of Arabidopsis (Uniprot ID: P10896) with selected hypothetical proteins
of V. vinifera (Uniprot ID: F6HNV2, D7THJ7, D7SKB2 and A5C3D4). Highly conserved residues are coloured in red and most
conserved residues are coloured in yellow. Secondary structure predicted based on the template (PDB ID: 3T15) by using ESPript
3.0.

 Homology model of selected hypothetical proteins of
V.vinifera based on the template of green-type Rubisco activase
from tobacco (PDB ID: 3T15) by using SWISS-MODEL server.

Homology modelled proteins (A) F6HNV2 (B)
D7THJ7 (C) D7SKB2 and (D) A5C3D4 are superimposed with
the template of green-type Rubisco activase from tobacco (PDB
ID: 3T15) by using UCSF chimera-1.10.

Predicted functional regions of selected hypothetical
protein of V. vinifera (A) D7THJ7 (B) D7SKB2 (C) A5C3D4 and
(D) F6HNV2 by using ProBis server. The highly conserved
residues are shown in red and least conserved regions are show
in blue.

