Background
Cytochrome P450 (P450 or CYP), a superfamily of hemethiolate proteins, are 
found in almost all living organisms and are involved in the biotransformation 
of a diverse range of xenobiotics, including therapeutic drugs and countless 
toxins, and physiologically important hormones such as steroids, arachidonic 
acid, bile acids, and retinoic acid. [] For instance cytochrome P450 CYP2C9 subtype is responsible 
for the metabolism of S-warfarin. [] The basic purpose of drug metabolism in the body is to make 
drugs more water soluble and thus more readily excreted in the urine or bile. 
One common way of metabolizing drugs involves the alteration of functional 
groups on the parent molecule (e.g., oxidation) via the cytochrome P450 
enzymes. []

Pharmacokinetics and drug metabolism have been shown to be of greater 
importance during drug development today. It is evident that drugs that are too 
rapidly metabolized by drug-metabolizing enzymes are mainly localized in the 
liver. [] An evaluation 
of the mechanism for the metabolic clearance of 315 different drugs revealed 
that 56% of them were primarily cleared through the action of the 
cytochrome P450 enzymes, with CYP3A4 being by far the most important 
(50%) followed by CYP2D6 (20%), CYP2C9/19 (15%), and 
the remaining metabolism carried out by CYP2E1, CYP2A6, CYP1A2, and 
unidentified P450s. [] 
The CYP mixed function monooxygenases are located on the smooth endoplasmic 
reticulum of cells throughout the body especially in the liver. [] A major obstacle for the drug 
industry today is, however, the extensive interindividual variation in human 
drug metabolism. [] The 
main causes for the variation observed in drug metabolism are the genetic 
differences. [] These 
differences are called genetic polymorphism's and are linked to 
inherited autosomal recessive traits. [] There are different isozymes of CYP, arised due to genetic 
variations which governs the metabolism of different categories of drugs. Hence,
 a database on drug and corresponding CYP isozymes is described.

Methodology
Data collection and storage
Database consists of data for different category of CYP isozymes and 
metabolizing drugs. CYP related data such as metabolizing drug, tissue 
specificity, cellular location and gene ID were collected from published 
literatures [reference available at every entry]. In addition, CYP protein 
sequences from Swissprot [
] were also collected. The IUPAC name, chemical formula, smile string, 
drug description, etc. were collected from DrugBank [] for CYP associated drugs.

MyISAM type of engine for MySQL database system is used to store data. This 
particular engine manages non transactional tables and allows high speed 
storage and fast retrieval of its data through a non-clustered index and data 
organization. At present DrugMetZ DB covers 131 drugs and 12 subtypes of CYP 
isozymes.

Database design and interface
Tables were 
created with different data types to hold dissimilar data. Each table was 
associated by means of primary key and foreign key to form a comprehensive data 
transaction. Validated data sets were stored under tables which are in 
relational database management system. PHP is used as an interface between HTML 
front end and MySQL back end to fetch data from database for user friendly 
display.

Utility
This database provides essential information about different categories of 
drugs and corresponding metabolizing. Cytochromal isozymes present in human 
body. It is a user friendly database, allows user to search for various drugs 
and enzymes. It displays relevant information about drugs, especially their 
chemical nature. In case of enzymes, it gives functional, genetic and protein 
level information. DrugMetZ DB database also gives link to major databases such 
as NCBI, Swissprot, RXLIST and related articles in pubmed. Blast search help 
clients to find sequence hits in Cytochrome P450 database. Key feature of this 
database provides specialized information on CYP, whereas databases like 
DrugBank [], PharmGKB 
[], ADME-AP [
], and KEGG [] is generalized for drugs, enzymes, 
properties of drugs or relationship among drugs and diseases, respectively.

Conclusion
Datasets held in this database collected from published literatures and 
other databases contains information for drugs, nucleotide and protein 
sequences.

Future development
Our future update will include addition of inductors and inhibitors of CYP, 
linking with KEGG and to facilitate access to all human drug metabolizing 
CYP.

The authors acknowledge Prof. P.P. Mathur, Coordinator, Bioinformatics 
Centre, Pondicherry University, India for constant encouragement and 
suggestion. Authors are also thankful to Department of Biotechnology, New Delhi,
 India for financial assistance.

Figures and Tables
Over all process of database

(a) Home page of DrMetZ DB (b) Shows search criteria (c) Report of Drug (d) Reference display with 
        it's PubMed link (e) BLAST search result against Cytochrome P450 database


      Citation:Remya &amp; Nagarajan, Bioinformation 1(7): 248-250 (2006)

