Background
AUX/IAA genes were first isolated as members of a family of genes that were rapidly 
induced in response to auxin (indole-3-acetic acid, IAA). Aux/IAA genes have been found 
in dicots (pea, soybean, Medicago truncatula, Arabidopsis, tomato, tobacco and cotton), 
grasses (maize, rice) and pine trees. They have not been found in animal, bacterial or 
fungal genomes and are therefore unique to plants. The AUX-IAA family proteins play crucial 
roles in diverse aspects of plant development; this has become evident in recent years and has been documented in an
increasing number of publications. Auxin plays important roles 
in many aspects of plant growth and developmental processes, 
such as apical dominance, tropism, and lateral root and flower 
formation []. This wide range of effects is attributed to the role 
of auxin as a signal factor that activates a series of downstream 
pathways mainly related to cell wall loosening, cell 
proliferation, cell expansion (). Auxin can rapidly and 
specifically alter the transcription levels of most of these genes 
without protein synthesis []. Moreover, molecular, genetic, and 
biochemical studies have shown that AUX/IAA proteins play
central roles in auxin signal transduction [,
] .These genes 
have been grouped into three major classes: auxin/indole-3-
acetic acid (AUX/IAA), growth hagen 3 (GH3), and small 
auxin-up RNA (SAUR) gene families []. Recently it has been 
identify that IAA8 involved in lateral root formation and 
interacts with the TIR1 auxin receptor and ARF transcription 
factors in Arabidopsis []. Further tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) 
SlIAA15 is involved in trichome formation and axillary shoot 
development.

Cotton is one of the most important economic crops in the 
world whose fibers are highly elongated single-celled seed 
trichomes that initiate from the seed coat, and they serve as a 
good experimental model for cell elongation. Various studies on 
cotton fiber cell development have identified plant hormones as 
critical regulators of fiber development. Auxin is known to play 
an important role in fiber development. However, little 
information about the Aux/IAA superfamily has been reported 
in cotton. Auxin promotes the fiber cell development of in vitro 
cultured ovules, and a positive correlation between final fiber 
length and IAA levels has also been observed []. The mRNA 
transcripts of GhAux1, GhAux2, and GhAux3 accumulated in the 
root, stem, and leaf, implying that these genes might be related 
to the regulation of vegetative growth. Where as, mRNA 
transcripts of GhAux4, GhAux5, GhAux6, and GhAux7 showed 
higher expression in ovules at 0 DPA when compared with 
other tissues. The expression levels of GhAux4 in stems; GhAux6 
in stems, leaves, and fibers at 10 DPA and 15 DPA; and GhAux7 
in stems and leaves were also relatively high. These results 
indicated that although the four genes played significant roles 
in fiber initiation, they also showed functional diversity in 
cotton vegetative growth and fiber elongation. GhAux8 had a 
higher expression level in stems and fibers at 2 to 5 DPA and 23 
DPA, which may indicate a role in stem development, early 
fiber elongation, and secondary cell wall thickening []. 
Interestingly GhAux9 was fiber-specific and had no detectable
expression in roots, stems, or leaves. The high level expression 
of GhAux9 was detected in fibers at 10 DPA when rapid fiber 
elongation occurred. This was observed that expression began 
to decline at 15 DPA, and became high again at 23 DPA. This 
indicated that GhAux9 may play an important role at the fiber 
elongation stage and the secondary cell wall thickening stage. 

GhIAA16 had its expression peak at −3 DPA in the fiber 
initiation stage, consistent with Suo et al. (2002), and high 
expression levels in fiber at 20 DPA and 23 DPA. Here, we 
provide the first identification of putative targets of eight 
Aux/IAA family members in cotton. The identification and 
characterization of these AUX-IAA targets in elongating cotton 
fiber cells might promote the further study of fiber 
development regulation mechanisms.

Methodology
Gene expression profile dataset:
We used 108 expression profile where 99 gene expression 
profiles previously generated by our labs GEO (Series 
GSE36228) for six different fiber devopment stages of two 
superior and three inferior genotype using the Affymetrix 
cotton Gene Chip System. We also used nine other gene 
expression profiles available in GEO (Series GSE36021 and 
GSE29810) Probe sets with expression mean µ &lt; 50 and S.D. σ &lt; 
0.3µ was considered uninformative and was therefore excluded, 
leaving 18,892 probe sets for the analysis. Supplementary File 1 
(Available with authors) summarizes 108 samples included in 
this study.

Data analysis and bioinformatics:
Network analyses:
Co-regulatory gene networks were analysed using Algorithm 
for the Reconstruction of Accurate Cellular Networks 
(ARACNe). Raw data from 108 samples, form GEO database 
were first normalized (through RMA) and log2 transformed 
and median centered. Normalize expression values of 18,892 
genes were used as input files to infer global regulatory 
networks.

ARACNE
ARACNE uses mutual information [] and it uses the Data 
Processing Inequality (DPI) [] to retain only those regulatory 
relationships that are direct (rather than indirect) []. In other 
words, if genes g1 and g3 interact only through a third gene, g2, 
then DPI indicates:

I(g1,g3)≥min[I(g1,g2);I(g2,g3)]

Thus, the edge with the least value gets eliminated. The “DPI tolerance” 
used for ranking of I values, to minimize the impact of I value variance 
was set at 0.15 in this case study. DPI tolerance values of greater than 
0.2 have been determined to yield high false positive edges. Furthermore, 
the threshold p-value for establishing that the mutual information between 
gene pairs was significant in this study was set at 5.0 × 10−11.

Gene Ontology Analyses:
In silico identified candidate targets of AUX-IAA transcription 
factor within the fiber transcriptome were further analysed 
using agriGO tool (http://bioinfo.cau.edu.cn/agriGO/) 
[]. 
Enrichment of certain GO terms was determined based on 
Fisher's exact test. During analysis a multiple correction control 
(permutation to control false discovery rate, FDR) was 
implemented to set up the threshold to obtain the lists of 
significantly over-represented GO terms.

Hierarchical Clustering of AUX-IAA target genes:
Candidate AUX-IAA targeted genes were further used for 
hierarchical cluster analyses through dChip 
(http://www.hsph.harvard.edu /cli/complab/dchip /) 
[] using 
ecludiean matrix for gene expression data of six developmental 
time point for 5 genotype (two superior and three inferior) for 
identifying their expression trend. Two different cluster were 
formed on the basis of their expression pattern in different fiber 
development time point.

Correlation Analyses:
Correlation analyses for AUX-IAA target genes with 
homologues Arabidopsis genes were performed with the help of 
ATTED tool (http://atted.jp/). There were 139 correlated genes 
were found and 128 genes were overlapped with homologues 
cotton genes which needs further validation for understanding 
their potential role in developing fiber cells.

Results
Overview of the analytic procedure:
Our analytic procedure followed that of Xiaofei Yu et al.2011. In 
the study, a global regulatory network was inferred for cotton 
fiber development stages using oligonucleotide microarray data 
from GEO database. Here we focused on modelling gene 
regulatory networks only for the 8 auxin genes. From the use of 
the network model, we then extracted their downstream 
targets. Therefore, our study is more suitable to evaluate 
whether a regulatory model can successfully identify key 
upstream regulators (e.g. markers) for fiber development 
purely based on expression profiles without depending on 
external knowledge. 

Regulatory gene networks:
Using a combined stringent cut off of an error tolerance ε = 0.2 
and a P-value threshold of mutual information (MI) at 1e-7, 
ARACNE inferred global gene networks with direct 
interactions in the cotton fiber development. Eight AUX-IAA 
genes (Ghi.3606.1.A1 _at; Ghi.4821.1.S1_s _at; Ghi.9984.1.S1_ 
s_at; GraAffx.24472.1.S1_s_at; GhiAffx.1868.2.A1_at; 
GhiAffx.18267.1.S1_s_at; Gra.1987.1.S1_s_at; GhiAffx.34525.1. 
S1_s_at; GhiAffx.1868.2.S1_a_at) controlling more than 50 
targets of all direct interactions considered as hubs or master 
regulators (Supplementary File 2 (Available with authors), 
). If the AUX-IAA TFs indeed function to mediate auxin 
responses, we should be able to observe some expression 
correlation among them, which can be demonstrated by 
reconstruction of a gene regulatory network (GRN). For this 
purpose, we employed ARACNe (Algorithm for the 
Reconstruction of Accurate Cellular Networks), which was 
developed and previously used to infer a GRN in human B cells 
[]. 
ARACNe calculates expression correlations between genes 
based on mutual information and picks out statistically 
signiﬁcant correlation. ARACNE inferred direct interactions 
(1st neighbours) and 2nd neighbours for selected hub genes.

Expression correlation and gene ontology (GO) analyses:
GO terms significantly enriched in the fiber cells were identified using agriGO tool 
(Supplementary File 3 (Available with authors). In the first step of the analyses, we 
extracted and ranked the 128 genes out of 135 genes, whose expression most tightly 
correlates with that of AUX-IAA genes (Supplementary File 4 (Available with authors), 
). We took advantage of a visualization tool called Cytoscape to view expression 
data and analysis results. Using the available data regarding correlations between 
different Arabidopsis genes, we constructed a network composed of the AUX-IAA genes and 
their co-expressed genes in developing cotton fiber cells.

To gain an insight over AUX-IAA correlated gene -percent 
distribution for transcription factor and cell signalling related 
genes we performed group categorization using Pathway 
studio 5.9 software with a parameter of p-value ≤ 0.05. We 
found that there were 136 transcription factor, 22 types of 
phosphatase, 11 receptor, and 119 protein kinase  (see 
supplementary material). In order to identify a functional role 
for these AUX-IAA genes, the correlated genes were further 
analysed using enrichment analysis module to identify any bias 
in GO functional annotation terms in the correlated using 
homologues A. thaliana genes. Most of these related to various 
development process such as pollen ovule, anther, root and 
shoot development, biotic-abiotic stress response, and 
transcription factor activity. Other biological processes 
identified were associated with extracellular activities, and 
enzyme activity. Thus, given previous work suggesting that 
AUX-IAA genes play a role in controlling architecture 
[,
]. 
We can infer that AUX-IAA genes may not only do this but also 
take part in many other biological processes.

Metabolic Interactome analysis:
To interpret functional associations between co-expressed 
proteins, we mapped the cotton genes whose expression was 
correlated with AUX-IAA genes (124 genes) using the 
Arabidopsis thaliana locus ids. Interactome analysis of this GRN 
suggested that many genes and proteins co-expressed with 
AUX-IAA genes supports their role in a diversity of physiology 
processes within fiber cell (). Analysis of the connected
genes identified functional modules for cell differentiation, 
trichome differentiation and development, flower leaf and 
shoot development, leaf morphogenesis and initiation, defence 
response as well as disease resistance. These observations 
support the theory that the network modelled here constitutes a 
framework that can guide in-depth experimental study of genes 
and proteins related to AUX-IAA gene function within 
developing fiber of Gossypium spp.

Differential expression pattern of AUX-IAA target genes 
reveals their putative role in fiber quality:
Two contrasting pattern identified here in genotype subgroup 
from cluster analysis reveals that AUX-IAA target genes has 
significant role in determining fiber quality. We categorized 
genes as early and late inducible on the basis of their expression 
in early (i.e. 0dpa) and late phase (19 and 25 dpa) of fiber 
development in superior and inferior genotypes respectively 
().

Discussion
Although transcription factors are generally expressed at basic 
level and their half-life are short, microarray has been widely 
used for transcription factors expression research 
[,
] for 
function analysis of transcription factors their co-expression, 
new areas related with system biology and co-expression 
network biology are emerging day by day. In our analysis, we 
used microarray data to generate and classify co-expression 
network of AUX-IAA genes. We think that modelled gene 
regulatory network may help us to infer the function of 
putative AUX-IAA target genes in cotton fiber biology.

AUX-IAA target genes are involved in multiple aspects of auxin pathway:
AUX-IAA directly targets genes of different functional groups, including signalling 
molecules, enzymes, and many with unknown functions (Supplementary File 1). Some 
BR-responsive AUX-IAA target genes contributed to cell elongation
and cellular growth, such as cell wall modifying enzymes. 
AUX-IAA also tightly connects the auxin pathway to othe r 
hormone responses in Arabidopsis. Genes involved, response to 
auxin stimulus (p value = 0.000064), auxin transport (p value = 
0.000086), auxin polar transport (p value = 0.000086), auxin 
metabolic process (p value = 0.000046), auxin mediated 
signalling pathway (p value = 0.000068) auxin homeostasis, (p 
value = 0.000085), auxin binding (p value = 0.000021) were 
over-represented in AUX-IAA target genes according to gene 
ontology analysis (Supplementary file1).

AUX-IAA target genes may functions in determining fiber quality:
From our mining analysis it can be inferred that the gene that 
responsible for trichome development and initiation may also 
play role in fiber quality determination, as we previously 
shown that their contrasting expression pattern in two 
contrasting genotypes group may be responsible for fiber
quality differ. It is well known that some genes related to auxin 
signaling pathway and pectin modification such as ARF2 
(auxin reponse factor 2) antiauxin-resistant 3 (AAR3) preferentially 
up-regulated at the fast elongation stage in G. barbadense compared 
with G. hirsutum at 25 DPA []. Thus there may be differential 
regulation of AUX-IAA targeted gene during fiber development in superior 
and inferior genotypes which may need further investigation. This is 
first report on correlation between AUX-IAA and cotton fiber quality 
().

AUX-IAA target genes may play a key role in development of different organ of Arabidopsis:
Transcriptional control of the expression of organ development 
related genes is a crucial part until whole organogenesis. 
Nevertheless, our GO analysis revealed that some genes 
correlated with AUX-IAA genes were involved in the pollen 
development, carpel development xylem development, root 
development, shoot development showing its ubiquitous role 
within plant development e.g. MBA10.13, WUS, AUX-IAA, JAG 
(anther development), STM, AG, SPT, SHP2, SHP1, CRC, KAN, 
STK, JAG, KAN2, SEP4 (carpel development), STM, AG, SPT, 
SHP2, SHP1, CRC, KAN, STK, JAG, KAN2, SEP4 (cotyledon 
development), AGL63,SPT,RPL,AGL8,AFO,YAB3,ARF10 (fruit 
development) (Supplementary File 1, ). Previously it 
has been shown plants that Aux/IAAs and ARFs influence 
apical dominance, vascular development, tropic movements, 
and various tissue development with ubiquitous expression 
along with strong expression of some genes in xylem and 
phloem specifically [,
].

A interaction network between AUX-IAA target genes and their correlated TF's:
Our GO analysis shows transcription activity to be an important 
function for co-expressed genes. AUX-IAA genes can activate 
other transcription factor families, including RABC2b, 
MYH9.12, LIP1, F5A8.11, LOC100284549, Sb01g041370, 
GA3OX1, UFO, RBR1, AGL20, CKB3, AGL44, AGL16, VSP1, 
AGL21, RABC2a, FLR1. We believe that AUX-IAA genes 
function by controlling the expression of these transcription 
families. We therefore hypothesize a complex control network 
linking AUX-IAA genes with other transcription families.

AUX-IAA target genes and their interaction with other hormones:
AUX-IAA interacting genes showed to involve in various plant 
hormone signalling pathway related with abscisic acid 
mediated signalling pathway, auxin mediated signalling 
pathway, brassinosteroid homeostasis, ethylene mediated 
signaling pathway, jasmonic acid mediated signalling pathway, 
response to salicylic acid stimulus. One interesting acitvity 
within AUX-IAA correlated gene that we observed was 
jasmonic acid and ethylene-dependent systemic resistance. It is 
well reported that auxin interact with brassinosteroid during 
vegetative growth []. Recently researches have proposed that 
auxin regulated growth-promoting genes during hypocotyl 
growth follows GA-dependent and -independent pathways. 
Different genes related with each of these category were 
mentioned in (Supplementary File 1, ).

AUX-IAA target genes and its role in stress stimuli:
Our analysis showed that AUX-IAA genes helps in perceiving 
stimuli of different biotic and abiotic stress, i.e. cellular response
to drought, osmotic stress, cold stress, heat stress etc. A number 
of genes that comes within these AUX-IAA correlated 
categories show their role in diverse role of stress stimuli and 
response (supplementary File 1). Recently a Genome-wide 
analysis have been performed for Aux/IAA gene family in 
different plant focusing on evolution and expression patterns 
in various tissues, developmental process and in response to 
auxin or abiotic stresses [,
,
] (Supplementary File 1, 
).

AUX-IAA target genes have varied functions:
The AUX-IAA gene family is a group of plant-specific genes 
that encodes plant-specific transcription factor. AUX-IAA 
transcription factors may have a variety of physiological 
functions. To date, several important and divergent biological 
processes regulated by AUX-IAA genes have been reported. 
Our co-expression analysis has revealed that AUX-IAA genes 
may play a role in diverse developmental processes. Moreover, 
several auxin-responsive genes were differentially expressed 
under various abiotic stress conditions, indicating probable 
crosstalk between auxin and abiotic stress signaling 
[]. 
Network analysis suggests that AUX-IAA genes function by 
controlling other transcription factor families. The interactome 
of the correlated genes has shown that AUX-IAA genes may 
also take part in sucrose stimuli, ion -transport inorganic salt, 
and ATP production.

Conclusion
Cotton fiber biology in itself is a vast area where multiple 
transcription factors are major players influencing its trait. Among 
them AUX-IAA box gene family represent to a group of plant-specific 
zinc finger protein encoding genes. The expression of AUX-IAA genes 
are significantly correlated with that of genes involved in the cell 
wall, genes related with unidimensional cell morphogenesis. The expression 
of AUX-IAA genes are correlated with other transcription factors gene 
and some integral membrane proteins. Additionally some AUX-IAA genes are 
correlated with themselves. All of these analyses suggest that AUX-IAA genes 
may play an important role in developing fiber cell.

Accession codes
The gene expression profiles used in this study were Series 
GSE36228 (in house) and two Series GSE36021 and GSE29810 
(publically available)

Funding sources
DN thanks to CSIR India for supporting fellowship as SRF.

Conflict of Interest
The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.

Supplementary material
Data 1
DN is grateful to the Council of Scientiﬁc and Industrial 
Research, Government of India, New Millennium Technology 
Leadership Initiative (NMITLI) program for the ﬁnancial 
support. DN, is thankful to CSIR for senior research fellowship.

Citation:Nigam &amp; Sawant, Bioinformation 9(20): 996-1002 (2013)

Summarization of general Biological and Cellular process governing through 
AUX-IAA Transcription factors in Arabidopsis thaliana.

A transcriptional network for AUX-IAA regulated gene expression.
GRN inferred by ARACNe. Red circles represent AUX-IAA targets. Yellow 
circles represent Gossypium AUX-IAA transcription factors (as a hub genes) 
in developing fibre cells of Gossypium hirsutum.

Venn analysis showing overlapping genes in between 
AUX-IAA co expressed genes of Arabidopsis and identified 
homologous putative AUX-IAA targets within developing fibre 
cells of Gossypium hirsutum.

Metabolic network analysis showing probable biological functions of AUX-IAA targets genes identified in developing 
fibre cells of Gossypium hirsutum.

Hierarchical clustering (using Ecludian distance 
matrix) of putative AUX-IAA targets genes in developing fibre 
cells (at six time point i.e. 0, 6, 9, 12, 19, 25) of five Genotypes of 
Gossypium hirsutum. Genotype Dependent: Early inducible 
differential putative AUX-IAA targets, Genotype Independent: 
Late inducible differential putative AUX-IAA targets.

