Background
Nitrogen assimilation is a fundamental biological process that has marked
effects on plant productivity with nitrogen deficiency leading to a decrease in
plant growth. Nitrate (NO3) is the main source of nitrogen for higher plants 
[].
It is converted to reduced nitrogen by the nitrate assimilation pathway. The
initial pathway of nitrate assimilation involves two enzymes, nitrate reductase
[EC 1.6.6.1] which catalyzes the reduction of nitrate to nitrite, and ferrdoxinnitrite
reductase [EC 1.7.7.1] which catalyzes the reduction of nitrite to
ammonium ions (). Ammonium is then incorporated into amino acids
by the glutamine synthetase and glutamate synthase (GOGAT) pathway.
Ferredoxin-nitrite reductase (EC 1.7.7.1), commonly called nitrite reductase
(NiR) catalyzes the six electron reduction of nitrite to ammonia, with reduced
ferredoxin (Fd) serving as the electron donor. Nitrite reductase found in plants,
algae, and cyanobacteria contains one siroheme and one [Fe4-S4] cluster,
acting as separate one-electroncarriers. All ferredoxin-dependent nitrite
reductases contain two prosthetic groups, a siroheme and an iron-sulfur cluster.
In Nitrite and Sulfite reductases, the sirohemes are axially coordinated through
a cysteine residue that also serves as one of the ligands for the iron-sulfur
cluster []. 
Nitrite binds to the iron of the siroheme at the axial position
opposite the iron- sulfur cluster [] in cyanobacteria and chloroplasts of
photosynthetic eukaryotes.The physiological electron-donor ferredoxin is
reduced by light dependent reactions of the electron-transfer chain. In higher
plants, ferredoxin- dependent nitrite reductase is presented both in the
chloroplasts and in nonphotosynthetic tissues such as roots where ferredoxin is
reduced by the NADPH pool produced via the reductive pentose phosphate
cycle.

The function of proteins is generally determined by its three-dimensional (3D)
structure. Thus, it would be useful to know the 3D structure of the thousands of
protein sequences that are emerging from many genome projects. Structural
studies on bio-molecules have changed our perception of the biological world
in the last twenty years. A number of efforts have been made on structure
prediction .One such technique that has found a wide appreciation, is
Homology modeling which aims at predicting the 3D structure of
biomolecules, relying heavily on resources such as pattern/function and
sequence. However, three- dimensional structure of Ferredoxin-nitrite
reductase (EC 1.7.7.1) from Arabidopsis thaliana remains unknown. In the
present study, effort was made to generate the three-dimensional (3D) structure
of the Ferredoxin-nitrite reductase (EC 1.7.7.1) from Arabidopsis thaliana
based on the available template (2akj) structural homologues from Protein Data
Bank and the model validated with standard parameters (PROCHECK,
PROSAII, RMSD). This study could prove useful in further functional
characterization of this important group of enzymes.

Materials and Methodology
Sequence Alignment
The FASTA sequence of Ferredoxin-nitrite reductase (EC 1.7.7.1) from
Arabidopsis thaliana was retrieved from the NCBI database (National Center
for Biotechnology Information) that has 586 amino acids (AAD17406).
Comparative modeling usually starts by searching the PDB of known protein
structures using the target sequence as the query 
[]. This search is generally
done by comparing the target sequence with the sequence of each of the
structures in the database. The target sequence was searched for similar
sequence using the BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool) 
[] against
Protein Database (PDB). The BLAST results yielded X-ray structure of 2akj
(Ferredoxin-nitrite reductase (EC 1.7.7.1)) from Spinach with 81% similarity to
our target protein.

Comparative Modeling
The theoretical structure () of Ferredoxin-nitrite reductase (EC 1.7.7.1)
from Arabidopsis thaliana is generated using MODELLER-9v5 by
comparative modeling of protein structure prediction. MODELLER
implements comparative protein structure modeling by satisfaction of spatial
restraints. The program was designed to use as many different types of
information about the target sequence as possible 
[].

Validation of Ferredoxin-nitrite reductase Model
PROCHECK
A versatile protein structure analysis program 
[] available at the Joint Centre
for Structural Genomics, Bioinformatics core, University of California, San
Diego; was used in validation of protein structure and models by verifying the
parameters like Ramachandran plot quality, peptide bond planarity, Bad
nonbonded interactions, main chain hydrogen bond energy, Calpha chirality
and over-all G factor and the side chain parameters like standard deviations of
chi1 gauche minus, trans and plus, pooled standard deviations of chi1 with
respect to refined structures [].

PROSAII
This program compares Z scores between target and template structure. The Z
scores of model is a measure of compatibility between its sequence and
structure. The model Z score should be comparable to the Z scores obtained
from the template [].

RMSD
Root Mean Squared Deviation (RMSD) is commonly used to represent the
distance between two objects. In a structural sense, this value indicates the
degree to which two three dimensional structures are similar. The lower the
value, the more similar the structures are. The RMSD value 
[] between the
template 2akj and our model structure was calculated using PYMOL program
().

Results
Comparative Modeling of Ferredoxin-nitrite reductase Model
Tertiary structure of a protein is build by packing of its secondary structure
elements to form discrete domains or autonomous folding units. Comparative
modeling predicts the 3-D structure of Ferredoxin-nitrite reductase Model a
given protein sequence (target) based primarily on its alignment to 2akj as a
template (a determined structure experimentally). The hypothetical protein
models created were stored as PDB output file. This latter was visualized by
Pymol program.

Validation of Protein Structures of Ferredoxin-nitrite reductase Model
The hypothetical protein models generated were analyzed online by submitting
to Joint Center for Structural Genomics (JCSG), Bioinformatics core,
University of California, San Diego. Accuracy of the protein model generated
was judged by validity report generated by PROCHECK. Parameter
comparisons of these proteins were made with well-refined structures that have
similar resolution.The main chain parameters plotted are Ramachandran plot
quality, peptide bond planarity, Bad non-bonded interactions, main chain
hydrogen bond energy, C- alpha chirality and over-all G factor. In the
Ramamchandran plot analysis, the residues were classified according o their
regions in the quadrangle. The Ramachandran map for Ferredoxin-nitrite
reductase model is represented in () 
and the plot statistics (see ).

Discussion
Homology protein modelling uses experimentally determined protein structures
(templates) to predict the 3-D of another protein that has a similar amino acid
sequence (the target). This approach to modelling is possible since a small
change in the protein sequence usually results in a small change in its 3D
structure [] 
Homology modelling remains the only modelling method that
can provide models with a root mean square error lower than 2Å. The FASTA
sequence Ferredoxin-nitrite reductase (EC 1.7.7.1) from Arabidopsis thaliana
was obtained from NCBI. The primary requirement for reliable homology
modeling is a detectable similarity between the sequence of interest (target
sequence) and a known structure (template) By BLASTp query. Based on
sequence similarity analysis between target and other proteins known structures
showed that our Ferredoxin-nitrite reductase from Arabidopsis thaliana (2akj)
has 81% of amino acid sequence identity with Ferredoxin-nitrite reductase (EC
1.7.7.1) from Spinach. Practically, at this level of sequence identity, it is good
enough to use crystallographic structures of 2akj as a template in order to
obtain high quality alignment for structure prediction by homology modeling.
The alignment between target and 2akj_A is shown in 
().

Homology modeling is currently restricted to protein sequences (targets) that
share 30% or more sequence identity to an experimentally solved protein
structure template []. 
Under this sequence identity the reliability of the
sequence alignment between target and template decreases fastly, resulting into
significant modeling errors, low accuracy models should still be treated with
attention. Medium accuracy models, obtained with a template-target sequence
identity of 30–50%, tend to have nearly 85% of their C-α atoms within 3.5 Å of
the correct position. These models often fit a variety of applications, including
the testing of ligand binding states by designing site directed mutants with
altered binding capacity, and computational screening of databases listing small
molecules for potential lead compounds or inhibitors. Top accuracy models,
based on sequence identities more than 50%, usually have structures
comparable to 3 Å resolution X-ray structures and can be used for more
reliable calculations as (ligand docking, drug design), however sequence
identities more than 90% can be used to facilitate a meaningful biophysical
description of the active site [].

In this study were also checked for φ and ψ torsion angles using the
Ramchandran plots. A comparison of the results shows that one of the models
generated by Modeller program [] is more acceptable. The molecular
visualization Pymol program was used to manipulate the models based on
residue interactions, energy minimization and steric hinderance. The best
model predicted by Modeller (isoA 4) was used for further analysis by
PROCHECK []. 
Ramachandran plot analysis showed that main-chain
conformations for 99.5 % of amino acid residues are within the most favored or
allowed regions, 89.9% of the residues in the most favored region, 9.2 % in the
allowed and 0.5% in the generously allowed regions and only 0.5% in the
disallowed region. In general, a score close to 100% implies good
stereochemical quality of the models [].

The overall general similarities and subtle difference among the 3D structure of
template 2akj and predicted model isoA4 can be seen from the backbone
superposition. As evident from superposition, general folding topology of the
structure is similar; however, some structural differences appear between the
predicted model and template. These differences are mainly due to insertion
and deletions in different loop regions. The RMSD (Root Mean Square
Deviation) between predicted model and template is 0.2 Å. The low RMSD
between the target and template reflects the presence of strong homology (The
lower the value, the more similar the structures are). The z-score indicates
overall model quality and measures the deviation of the total energy of the
structure with respect to an energy distribution derived from random
conformations []. 
In order to facilitate interpretation of the z-score of the
specified protein, its particular value is displayed in a plot that contains the zscores
of all experimentally determined protein chains in current PDB. Groups
of structures from different sources (X-ray, NMR) are distinguished by
different colors (NMR with dark blue and X ray with light blue). This plot can
be used to check whether the z-score of the protein in question is within the
range of scores typically found for proteins of similar size belonging to one of
these groups. It can be seen in () that Z-scores value of the obtained
model (isoA.B99990004.pdb) of Ferredoxin-nitrite reductase (EC 1.7.7.1) from
Arabidopsis thaliana (-10.37) is located within the space of proteins
determined By X ray. This value is extremely closed to the value of the
template (-10.54) which suggests that the obtained model is reliable and very
close to experimentally determined structures.

Conclusion
Based on the Template structure it is clearly observed that the theoretical
structure generated is structurally similar to the template structure which is
highly sufficient for the development of specific ligand for Ferredoxin-nitrite
reductase from Arabidopsis thaliana. Our model of NIR is only a predictive,
and needs to be confirmed experimentally. This modeled structure can be used
to predict the molecular function and the active sites which received less
attention in previous reports.

Supplementary material
Data 1
Citation:Kherraz et al, Bioinformation 6(3): 115-119 (2011)

Nitrite reductase in chloroplasts transfers electrons from Ferredoxin
to Nitrite.

The final 3D structure of Ferredoxin-nitrite reductase model from
Arabidopsis thaliana. The α-helices and β –sheets are represented by red
helices and yellow ribbons respectively. This model was conducted by
MODELLER program

Superposition of Cα trace of Ferredoxin-nitrite reductase model from
Arabidopsis thaliana (represented in red color) and 2akj (represented in blue
color) by Pymol program.

Ramachandran's Map of Ferredoxin-nitrite reductase model from
Arabidopsis thaliana. The Plot calculation was done with PROCHECK
program.

Sequence alignment of Ferredoxin-nitrite reductase model from
Arabidopsis thaliana with template (PDB code: 2akj) done using MODELLER.
The conserved regions are indicated by ‘*’.

The plan of Z-Score shows spots of Z scores's values of proteins
determined by NMR (represented in dark blue coulor) and by X ray
(represented in light blue coulor) using PROSAII program. The two black dots
represent Z-Scores of the template and our model.

