Background
Diabetes is one of the most common disorders for the people
of all age groups. Vast research is carried out in solving this
major problem. There are several proteins that are involved in
the onset of diabetes. BCHE (Butyryl cholinesterase) is one
such protein having an important role in diabetes whose exact
mechanism is yet to be revealed. BCHE has an important role
in the regulation of insulin concentration and lipid levels 
[]. It
has wide diversity of functions. Being a member of esterase's
it has an important role in nerve regulation and signal
transduction []. BCHE is reported to have its involvement in
adiposity and insulin resistance [], thereby regulating lipid
and glucose concentrations respectively. This diverse group of
functions makes the protein an important factor in the onset of
Diabetes and associates it with Obesity and Nerve
disturbances. It has a length of 602 amino acids with three
domains which are overlapping [], an abhydrolase, CO
esterase and an ACHE which imparts diverse functions to the
protein.

Neuroligin (NLGN) is a cell surface membrane protein,
involved in synapse formation at the nerve junctions 
[]. It
mediates signaling across the synapse and affects the
properties of neural networks by specifying synaptic
functions. Members of this family may act as splice sitespecific
ligands for beta-Neurexins and may be involved in the
formation and remodeling of central nervous system synapses
[]. 
It resides on the P arm of the 17th chromosome in man
with a length of 835 amino acids. The domains are similar to
BCHE, an Abhydrolase and a CO Esterase that are
overlapping.

Neuroligin, Acetyl choline esterase (ACHE) and Butyryl
choline esterase (BCHE) belong to a common family of
proteins called alpha beta hydrolases 
[] .Proteins of the
alpha/beta-hydrolase fold family share a common structural
fold, but perform a diverse set of functions. Neuroligins are a
class of proteins that include Neuroligin 1, 2, 3 and 4 with
further sub groups. They are cell surface proteins that are
involved in the cell to cell adhesion []. Members of the Alpha
beta hydrolase fold family are reported to have a common
point mutation R to C which causes the respective proteins to
get retained within the Endoplasmic reticulum, thereby
leading to various multi factorial disorders 
[].

Methodology
Identification of proteins sharing sequence similarity to BCHE:
Proteins sharing sequence similarity to BCHE were identified
using TFASTY. It compares the protein sequences to the
translated DNA sequences with frame shifts 
[].TFASTY uses
the same heuristic algorithm as FASTA.

Evaluation of the proteins for sequence similarity:
All the sequences that were found to be similar were further
validated using BLAST P (pair wise sequence similarity) that
can provide the percentage of similarity between the two
sequences.

Identification of the homologous sites on the two proteins:
The site that is reported to have a mutation at the homologous
positions in the two proteins was identified using EMBOSS
NEEDLE []. 
Pair wise Sequence Alignment is used to
identify regions of similarity that may indicate functional,
structural and/or evolutionary relationships between two
biological sequences.

Analysis of Domains within the proteins:
The functional sites that are present on both the proteins have
been identified using SMART. The position, classification and
function of the total number of domains present in the
submitted sequence can be analyzed using SMART 
[].

Classification study and functional assessment of the protein:
To indicate the effect of BCHE in lipid metabolism using its
family classification CDD (Conserved Domain Data base) has
been used. It gives complete information of various domains
and their relation to the families of proteins.

Active and binding site prediction within the proteins:
Binding sites that are present in the protein were analyzed
using several Insilco tools like CASTP, QSITE FINDER and
POCKET FINDER. These tools will locate the preferable sites
that are energetically and stearically suitable for ligand
binding. These are the most accessible areas on the receptors.

Comparative structural analysis of the two proteins:
Secondary and tertiary structural analysis is done to compare
the location of the mutational site on the two proteins.
SOPMA is a proteomic tool of EXPASY [] which gives the
information regarding the secondary structural conformations
of the given protein. CPH, HHPRED and PHYRE are
employed to analyze the tertiary structures of the protein.

Visualization of the 3D structures of the two proteins:
To visualize the structure of the protein against X, Y and Z
axis RASMOL is employed. The software is basically a
command line programme that is executed by commands. The
site important in mutation is identified and visualized.

Analyzing the stability of the mutated protein:
To check the effect of the mutation on the energy and stability
of the protein structure I MUTANT [] is employed. It gives
the stability index of the point mutations based on the neural
network programme.

Designing a pathway to associate the onset of the three disorders:
By aggregating the results from all the above analysis and
reports a pathway has been proposed that can considerably
justify the association and co occurrence of Diabetes, Obesity
and Neurological disturbances with respect to BCHE. The
pathway also details the mechanism by which BCHE is
involved in causing the three disorders.

Discussion
 
(see supplementary material) shows that there are 5
proteins belonging to different classes of neuroligins which
share sequence similarity to BCHE. All the proteins showed
more than 30% similarity in TFASTY which was further
validated using BLAST P.

() shows the alignment of BCHE and Neuroligin. The
homologous site that is prone for mutation is highlighted. The
sites are 414 and 448 of BCHE and Neuroligin 2 respectively.
SMART analysis provided the domain information regarding
the two proteins. BCHE has three overlapping domains
Abhydrolase (138 − 269), a CO Esterase (9 − 550) and an ACHE
(565 − 602). The domains of neuroligin are Abhydrolase (180 −
333) and a CO Esterase (30 − 601). These results indicate that
both the proteins share two domains in common a CO
Esterase and an Abhydrolase, which represents their
functional similarity. () depicts that neuroligin has
fingerprints that are specific to two classes Cholinesterase and
Neuroligin, Which is an indication of its functional similarity
to BCHE.

This was followed by CDD analysis which showed the
presence of a functional region “aes” from 125 to 229 of BCHE,
which has a major role in Lipid metabolism. These results
indicate that BCHE has a role in Lipid metabolism. Structural
analysis using EXPASY server showed that the site under
study is located in the extended strand conformation of both
BCHE and Neuroligin. For the determination of the 3D
structures of proteins, tools like CPH, HHPRED and Phyre
have been employed. The PDB id's 2WIK and 3BE8 are
selected as the best one for BCHE and Neuroligin respectively
based on the results. I mutant was used to study the stability
of the mutated protein.

Position WT NEW Stability RI RSA
386 R C Decrease 2 11.8
WT: Native amino acid; NEW: New amino acid; RI: Reliability
index; RSA: Relative solvent accessible area.

The stability check shows that the mutation causes a decrease
in the stability of the protein when compared to the native
protein. The 414 site of the sequence would be 386 in structure.
Binding and active sites that are present within BCHE were
analyzed using tools like CAST P, Pocket finder and Q site
finder. The results showed that the mutation under study was
falling under one of the pockets which indicate that it causes a
major effect on the functional properties of the protein. This
emphasizes the importance of the mutation.

The pathway explains the mechanism of co occurrence of
Diabetes, obesity and Neurological disturbances. It describes
the role of BCHE in all the three disorders 
(). The
work emphasizes the role of BCHE in causing Diabetes,
Obesity and Neurological disturbances with focus on its multi
functional ability. The importance of BCHE in Nerve
regulation is shown by considering its Sequence, structural
and functional similarity to Neuroligin. BCHE, ACHE and
Neuroligin structurally belong to a family of alpha beta
hydrolase fold as reported, which can also be inferred from
the similar structural patterns shown by FINGERPRINT
SCAN. The presence of common domains by SMART and
CDD analysis depicts the probable role of these proteins in
insulin signaling.

A point mutation R to C is known which is specific to alpha
beta hydrolase fold family of proteins. Reports show that the
mutation occurs in the homologous sites in all the three
proteins which was further proved by EMBOSS. This mutation
leads to the retention of the respective proteins in
Endoplasmic Reticulum thereby causing their deficiency.
Neuroligin and BCHE both are involved in regulation of
insulin production by different mechanisms 
[]. Neuroligin-2
is expressed on the β cell surface and binds with high affinity
to another β-cell surface protein. Extracellular interactions
involving NL-2 increase insulin expression and secretion by β
cells. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that NL-
2 promotes the development and maintenance of the insulin
secretory machinery in β cells through trans-cellular
interactions [].

BCHE is a member of Esterase Lipase super family. Through
CDD analysis, it was found that BCHE contains a region Aes
which is involved in lipid metabolism thus justifying the role
of this protein in regulation of lipids. The role of BCHE in
glucose metabolism could be through insulin signaling. Any
alteration to this protein leads to a disturbance in its function.
The point mutation R414C is known that causes the retention
of the protein within the Endoplasmic reticulum in turn leads
to deficiency. This condition causes a disturbance in the
insulin signaling thus hinders the glucose metabolism. This
leads to the onset of diabetes. BCHE being a member of Ester
lipase super family has a role in Nerve signal transduction.
The deficiency of BCHE alters the signal transduction of
neurons, a potential cause of Neurological disturbances.

Further the mutation causes alteration in the lipid metabolism
leading to the accumulation of fats and provoking the onset of
Obesity. This suggests the probable role of BCHE in Obesity
mediated Diabetes. Reports show that there are two
transcription factors FOXA 2 and HNF1A that become nonfunctional
due to the accumulation of fat in obese condition
[]. 
These factors are required for the activity of GnT-4a
glycosyl transferase which regulates the glucose metabolism
by affecting glucose transporters 
[] Altered transcription
factors cause inactivation of GnT-4a glycosyl transferase
leading to the disturbance in glucose metabolism causing
Diabetes.

The pathway proposes two possible mechanisms by which
BCHE is involved in Diabetes, Direct role through insulin
signaling abnormality and an indirect role through Obesity
mediated Diabetes. The pathway demonstrates the association
of BCHE to Diabetes, Obesity and Neurological disturbances.
This mechanism can further support the hypothesis that
Obesity, Diabetes and Neurological abnormalities are
associated to each other in their onset.

Conclusion
The role of BCHE in Diabetes, Obesity and Neurological
Disorders has been analyzed through the above Insilico
approach. Association of BCHE in the onset of the three
disorders and the co occurrence of the three conditions has
been proposed by means of a pathway.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This Research was solely funded by Department of Science
and Technology, India under IRHPA SchemeLr No.
IR/SO/LU/03/2008/1.

Citation:Rao et al, 8(6): 276-280 (2012)

EMBOSS NEEDLE between BCHE and Neuroligin

Finger print identification of Neuroligin

Pathway that associates Diabetes, Obesity and
Neurological disturbances.

