Background
Vaccines induce provoke protective immunity and come in both “living”and “non-living” varieties. Living vaccines are usually attenuated or
weakened pathogenic microbes which retain aspects of natural infection
including the ability to revert to a pernicious form. Non-living vaccines are
either chemically or heat treated whole pathogens or pathogen
components. Subunit vaccines comprise protein components isolated from
pathogenic micro-organisms and have several advantages: they have
longer shelf-lives, are more stable, and cannot regain pathogenic status.
However, their identification can be arduous requiring the expense of
much time and resource.

Tumour immunotherapy refers to using the host immune system to battle
cancer. Strictly, a tumour is a solid lesion or neoplastic growth resulting
from unregulated cell division, and may be benign, pre-malignant, or
malignant; we use the term synonymously with cancer, and specifically
here as a pseudonym for human tumour antigens extracted from the
SEREX database. Tumour vaccines contain a specific protein derived from
a tumour able to stimulate a protective immune response. Tumour vaccines
are therapeutic rather than prophylactic in nature, and are typically injected
subcutaneously or directly into cancerous tissue. They are a nascent form
of personalised medicine, with different vaccines targeting different
cancers, with the potential to identify antigens directly from the patient.

Diseases of parasite and protozoan origin cause significant mortality and
morbidity: over 3.5 billion people currently suffer parasitic infection,
primarily in tropical and subtropical countries, particularly pastoral regions
of Asia, Latin America, and Africa; incidence in industrialized countries is
relatively low. Parasites typically invade the body via mucosal surfaces.
Buccal parasites, for example, after ingestion will either remain in the
intestine or escape via the intestinal wall, invading other organs; while
some will bore through the skin or enter via insect bites. The life-cycles of
many parasites, particularly single-celled parasites, are complex with many
stages involving eggs and larval forms yet usually reproduce within the
host. This makes developing vaccines extremely problematic, and
currently there are no licensed vaccines available targeting parasitic
diseases.

Genomics is fashioning a new epoch of knowledge-led vaccine design and
discovery. Known as reverse vaccinology, it combines advanced molecular
biology technology with advanced in silico analysis of pathogen genomes,
enabling the systematic identification of potential antigens within a
pathogen. Key to this endeavour is the bioinformatics protocols used to
detect antigens, such as those which predict sub-cellular location as the
main determinant associated with antigens. As proposed by Kundac et al.
[] another persuasive concept is the idea of dissimilarity of antigens
versus non-antigens at the sequence level. In this paper, we extend our
previous analysis [,]
 beyond bacteria, viruses, and fungi, to explore parasite and tumour antigens.

Methodology
Datasets of known antigens obtained previously from the literature were
analysed [,
,
,
]. Non-antigens were randomly selected from Swiss-
Prot so that they mirrored the species distribution within the antigen sets
[,
] Parasite and Tumour antigens used here are listed below in Figure
1. Additionally, genomes corresponding to Human, Mouse, and Parasite
were downloaded from FTP sites at National Center for Biotechnology
Information (NCBI) [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/]   European
Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) [http://www.ebi.ac.uk/]   and Ensembl
[http://www.ensembl.org/]   and tumour sequences from the SEREXdatasets available from the Cancer Immunome Database 
[http://ludwigsun5.unil.ch/CancerImmunomeDB/] .  Tumour non-antigens were collected
at random by selecting human proteins from Swiss-Prot. All the peptide
sequences obtained were in FASTA format.

As before[,
] antigen datasets, non-antigen datasets and parasite
genomes were compared to the Human and Mouse Genome, and analysed
with a local, standalone version of BLAST [] which afforded full
management of E-value cut-offs. E-value thresholds were raised from 10 to
6000 to identify best matches even when these lacked statistical
significance. We also analysed (log10E-value)+1 values obtained from
BLAST. By using the statistical package Minitab, Release 14.1, we
compared antigen and non-antigen sets, as random samples of two larger,
independent populations, utilising a Mann‐Whitney test.

Discussion
Previously, we have examined the difference between sets of antigens and
non-antigens for Bacterial, fungal, and species, and found no clear
separation of the two, concluding that proteome dissimilarity does not
provide a means of sifting out potential antigens from a newly sequenced
pathogen genome. Here we have expanded our analysis, focusing on
parasite and tumour antigens.

Compared to our previous sequence similarity analyses [,
]  parasite
non-antigens evinced more noticeable dissimilarity to the human genome
than did parasite antigens, suggesting a clearer separation than before. See
. However, there were seven antigenic proteins that demonstrated
high similarity to the human genome compared to one equivalently similar
non-antigen. We also evaluated the genomes of four different parasite
species ‐ Cryptosporidium parvum, Distyostelium discoideum, Leishmania
infantum and Trypanosoma brucei ‐ as a background reference, or a
“   control” as some would put it, for this comparison of antigens and nonantigens,
comparing them to both human and mouse genomes. The
distribution of matches between parasite and human genomes indicates that
most proteins lie inside the range characterising the antigen proteins. While
a signal is clearer here than before [,
] the distribution is inverted
compared to our expectation: a discernible proportion of the antigens were
more similar, not less, than are the non-antigens. Thus for these proteins,
antigenicity is encoded in a subtle and cryptic manner, not apparent simply
from sequence comparison. It is possible, but likely, that using some form
of similarity filter - rather than a dissimilarity filter - may provide a
threshold able to indicate the potential antigenicity of parasite proteins.

We observed that the distributions of tumour antigen matches to the human
and mouse genomes spread across a wide E-value range scale, much wider
than seen previously [,
].  illustrates the analysis of tumour
antigens, non-antigens, and reference genomes relative to the human
genome. The distributions characterizing antigens and non-antigens were
similar, yet antigens were by visual inspection proportionally more similar
to the human genome relative to non-antigens. This observation is again
inverted compared to our expectations, as was the case for parasites. This
distribution may in part result from the presence of both antigens and nonantigens
in the host. Thus identifying a threshold able to separate tumour
antigens from non-antigens would again prove difficult.

As well as visual inspection of the distributions of antigens and nonantigens
for tumour and parasite, we also undertook a statistical
comparison using the Mann‐Whitney Test. At a 95% confidence level, the
test gave a value of 0.000 for Parasite and 0.001 for Tumour. All previous
assessments accepted the null hypothesis. Since these values are less than
0.05, this is indicative of a statistically significant discrepancy between the
two antigen-versus-non-antigen distributions from both tumours and
parasites. While the apparent significance for parasite and tumour was
marked, it was somewhat at odds with the visual inspection of the
histograms of similarity values. Although there may be a statistically
significant difference in both paired distributions, there is again no useable
cut-off capable of distinguishing antigen from non-antigen.

Conclusion
Antigens are the basis of subunit vaccines, and their identification by
computationally-driven reverse vaccinology is vital, particularly in the era
of emergent zoonotic infections and recrudescent disease, since many
recently discovered pathogens cannot be cultivated, thus precluding the
facile experimental identification of their immunogenic antigens. To this
endeavour, immunoinformatics searches continually for robust and
celeritous approaches to antigen prediction. One such is based on global
dissimilarity searching, as suggested by Kanduc et al. [].

When compared to our previous analyses [,
] both tumour and parasite
distributions had a clearer and more discernible signal than before.
However, both were inverted relative to our expectations, with antigens
being more similar to the human genome than non-antigens. We felt this
was counter-intuitive, but there may be evolutionary arguments consistent
with this observation. Being so close to mammalian hosts, parasites may
need to have evolved more complexity at the functional, and thus sequence
and structural, levels, in order to allow their own primitive immune
systems, to recognise and protect themselves from self-inflicted damage.
Of course, such may be wholly specious arguments, and the true source of
the apparent differences manifest as signal, may come from a statistical
quirk or an observed sampling bias.

The present work is not definitive, and there is much further work that
could be done, though radically different results seem unlikely. We
envisage repeating our study as more antigens become available []
looking perhaps at functionally or immunologically congeneric subsets
within the overall data; using more sensitive and sophisticated similarity
assessment operating at both the global and local levels; and combining
this approach with other methodology in a more extensive, rigorous, and
comprehensive analysis.

Citation:Ramakrishnan et al Bioinformation 5(1):39-42 (2010)

Protein sequences compiled and annotated as antigens of Parasite and Tumour origin. Parasite sequences are denoted by their Swiss-
Prot/TrEMBL codes. Tumour sequences are denoted by their SELEX codes.

A sequence similarity comparison with the E-value as 6000 and BLOSUM 62 matrix, between the Antigen, Non-antigen and Cryptosporidium
parvum genome sequences. Two separate scales were used as the number of matches to the Human Genome varied from the antigen and non-antigen
datasets to the genome. The blue line with the star marker signifies the genome is plotted on the right hand axis (Y axis).

A sequence similarity comparison between Tumour antigens and the whole human proteome. E-value set at 6000 and BLOSUM 62 matrix,
between tumour Antigen and Non-antigen. All self-matching identities were excluded from the results. A background control at the genome level was not
conducted.

