Background
Fundamental biological processes can now be studied by applying the full range of omics technologies 
viz genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics. Till the time a biological sample is prepared 
for use in a specific omics assay, its description is inherently technology independent. Wide array of 
assays including high-throughput methods like MS/MS, Yeast two hybrids and pull down assays are 
preferentially used to navigate them to applications. However, an accurate analysis of these high 
throughput methods to remove redundancy and false-positive data still remains a challenge. A 
pre-requisite to decrease redundancy of data bringing a significant degree of harmonization across 
omics data is critical to understand if the data comes from different sources 
[].In the recent past, global analysis of 
proteins in fungal organisms, has contributed greatly to our understanding of gene function. Several 
bioinformatics applications characteristic for fungal proteomics research is needed to overcome these 
challenges especially fungal proteins specific to human pathogenesis 
[] . Though, fungi are very useful in the 
study of genetics, they can also be used as model systems for studying higher and more complex 
organisms. Furthermore, their easy growth conditions and simple nutritional requirements make them 
model systems for complex studies in the biology. Hence there is a need to understand and regularize 
the concepts of molecular fungal pathogenesis in correlation with complex organisms. A standard example 
can be derived from the experiments of Beadle and Tautum who isolated a number of mutants of Neurospora 
crassa [] . The infectious fungi prove to be a 
serious problem as different modes of entering into the body defines long lasting and detrimental 
effects to human health. Several molecular studies of virulence in pathogenic fungi reveal a complex 
interaction between each fungal species and the human host while it is known that the fungi that cause 
invasive disease differ considerably in their inherent pathogenicity 
[] . Certain fungal virulence factors reveal 
increase or decrease of expression of specific gene with the host pathogenic studies. The fungal genomic
data pouring into the web repositories are to be complemented with the functomic studies while for 
expression profiling experiments, most bioinformatics tools and resources that have been applied in 
functional genomics studies in S. cerevisiae can be applied to other fungal pathogens. However, more 
advanced functional genomics tools involving high-throughput data 
[] are important as microarrays are used to 
identify transcription factors and regulatory elements. With most of the proteomic studies in pathogenic 
fungi have been limited to 2-D gel analysis and mass spectrometry;powerful proteomics methods like 
MALDI-TOF have been developed for genome wide analyses of protein expression, protein localization, 
and protein-protein interactions in fungi.

Although human pathogenic fungal genome sequences of Aspergillus fumigatus 
[] Candida glabrata; 
Cryptococcus neoformans; Encephalitozoon cuniculi [,
] are available, new sequence information
generated from time to time has increased the gap between the existing information and knowledge 
about the protein function in fungal organisms.variety of functionality analyses including phylogenetic 
profiling has allowed the researchers to annotate the fungal genomes. Furthermore, the profiling 
suggests an understanding besides validating high-confidence predictions for interacting pairs in 
the genome. Today, the primary techniques employed for the identification of peptides and proteins 
from biological sources is tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in the form of whole-protein analysis 
(“ top-down” proteomics) or analysis of enzymatically produced peptides 
(“bottom-up” approach). Recently, the complete sequencing of the Magnaporthe oryzae, 
a causal agent of blast disease of rice has shown that multi locus genes are concordant with host 
preference indicating segregation of a new species of Magnaporthe oryzae from Magnoporthe grisea 
[] . This example implicates us to comprehend 
human pathogenic fungi having common virulence factors that point toward horizontal transfer of gene 
clusters with host preference. Although the Gene Ontology (GO) annotation provides valuable means 
for identifying such proteins or assigning functionality, the functional assignments are to be 
cross-validated with manually reviewed data, conserved domains, or data determined by wet lab 
experiments. Furthermore, as novel genetics and genomics-based strategies are gaining importance to 
speed up discovery of novel drug targets [,
] , we envisage retrieving information containing 
fungal proteins involved in pathogenesis allows us to understand the pathological manifestation of 
various fungal pathogens that take place before or after the entry into animal or human body. Two 
methods like yeast two hybrid and affinity purification of complex by MS approach will complement 
the interactome approach []
The yeast two hybrids (Y2H) is the most powerful tool in systems biology
understand the complexities of proteins and their interactions which cause a metabolic flux 
to accelerate the pathways. Now Y2H provides cellular proteome for screening transcriptional 
active proteins which are localized in different sub-cellular systems. There are many enzymes 
with multiple catalytic activities being identified, hypothesized andcharacterized in various 
fungal genomes. This will allow us to find human pathogenic fungal proteins with combinations 
of protein motifs that might be present or absent in other plant, animal or fungal genomes.

Methodology
Similarity searches
A defined set of pathogenic fungi () was collected 
and all these genomes were examined by bidirectional similarity searches. Most virulence influenced 
genes like DNA repair, metabolites, cancer genes; GST (glutathione S-transferase), cell wall 
biogenesis, vegetative growth and sporulation were chosen for bidirectional best hits 
(Table 1 See ) . 
The homology was crosschecked with reference genome dataset of Neurospora crassa OR74A. All 
these proteins were subsequently predicted for sub-cellular location using Ptarget 
[] . The Neurospora crassa gene and 
transcripts have been downloaded from http://www.broadinstitute.org/annotation/genome/neurospora/Home.html.

Interolog mapping
Fasta Pearson version 2.5 [] was used to find the similarities between the
Uniprot(www.uniprot.org) accessions across the most selective fungal
organisms of taxonomical interest and those containing the important
proteins and the String database [] containing all fasta sequences. The
similar sequences that match the e value less than 0 were considered for
further protein-protein interaction mapping.

Prediction of protein interactions
Protein-protein interactions (PPI) studies for different proteins specific to
few fungal families have been done. We used a tool viz DIMA 
[], a
Domain Interaction MAp that finds functional and physical interactions
among conserved protein-domains. All the accessions were queried using
the list of protein family (Pfam) identifiers. The integration of evidence
from different sources was carried out by the server which involves
analyses using the domain phylogenetic profiling, domain-pair exclusion
method for predicting domain interactions from experimentally
demonstrated protein-protein interactions using IntAct 
[], STRING 
[]
and domain contacts from crystal structures using iPFAM 
[].

Results and Discussion
We found an approximate 30% of the predicted genes sequenced till date
has no significant homologs in other organisms (Non redundant search).
Therefore, it was a daunting task to identify sets of fungal-specific genes
that were associated with human carcinogenesis. Leaving aside the vast
genomic data available for non-human pathogenic fungi the data for
pathogenic fungi is comparatively limited. Thus, a more precise analysis of
pathogenic fungal genomes was followed to find sets of proteins with
similar homology and similar functions, similar homology and different
functions and different homology and similar functions and as well their
biological networks. When compared with genomes of 13 other fungi,
3340 yeast genes had homologs in at least 12 of them while only 17 of the
common fungal genes had no significant homologs in other organisms
[]. 
Out of 82 proteins in Aspergillus fumigatus, we found as any as 37
putative proteins known to have significant interactors as per our STRING
analyses (). We obtained substantial number of domains across
the fungal proteins as the most likely domain-domain interactions from
experimentally supported protein-protein interactions 
[] were found by
DIMA. On the other hand, domain phylogenetic profiling was done
indicating the presence (‘1’) or absence (‘0’) of a domain in the selected
genomes (Table 1 See ). 
The rationale behind protein phylogenetic profiling is that protein(function)s/domains that
depend on each other for an important cellular function generally need to
be present together or not at all in a given genome/proteome. Now that a
certain genome has been profiled, in the near future this phylogenetic
profiling constituting the domains per se MutS would allow us to have a
broad selection of organisms or a specific group. In conclusion, it is like
all these protein domains are similar in very closely related organisms
while the converse is that it is a good idea to use a large number of
organisms from the widest phylogenetic spectrum possible and crosscheck
whether or not the organism proteins harboring the domains are similar.
Assessing which of the protein (domain) s have few or no predicted
neighbors would allow us to understand which of these proteins are
essential to a specific fungal genome. Lower the entropy, least is the
chance for the domain to yield a signal suggesting that positive predictions
provide good hints for a domain-domain relationship. However, careful
assessment and performance of computing entire networks using conserved
gene neighbors’ and Rosetta stone method, co-expression using gene
expression omnibus (GEO), gene fusion and gene neighbors methods are
being carried out to establish interactors in silico.

Our phylogenic studies reveal () that unique genes are responsible
for pathogenesis. The interactors include DNA repair genes, vegetative and
sporulation. Organisms like budding yeast and Candida albicans which are
known to be highly similar, hyphae development and sporulation are most
important characteristic features of fungi which are shared between
pathogenic and non pathogenic fungi (He, F et al). A study of these
interactions has revealed pathogenic pathways specific to cancer in human.
Existing programs for automated gene prediction and annotation are not
perfect and need to be improved. Follow-up manual annotation also is
necessary to improve the accuracy of automated annotation especially
proteins specific to fungal pathogenesis. A comprehensive fungal genome
database similar to yeast (http://www.yeastgenome.org) would overcome
the limitation of searching umpteen proteins through redundant databases.
Using comparative genomics, we addressed evolutionary and phylogenetic
questions in closely related pathogenic fungi even as our annotation was
perused to identify candidate genes involved in host range determination,
infection-related morphogenesis, and virulence. Therefore with an open
source repository of all fungal pathogenic proteins we believe, would allow
the researchers to focus on functional characterization of candidate genes
specific to fungal pathogenesis. We show that the fungome integrates genes
specific to human cancers across diverse strains by elucidating thefunctionality 
and sub-cellular localization of selected proteins related to
signaling cascades to understand a particular disease. There needs to
understand the interactions between components of the pathogens 
() and specific cells 
when an infection occurs. We believe this will
facilitate knowledge on the genes that are controlled during the hostpathogen
interaction ex- vivo while providing a critical detail of
pathobiology of the fungus. Could a model be developed with a
pathogenic fungus based on the available information? With an
approximate 4000 genes shared by all the sequenced yeast genomes, is
there a gain of genes by horizontal gene transfer? According to Ronald
Gdanski, fungal control of a mass of human cells can explain all known
observations about cancer thereby proving the cause of cancer. In the
process, some important but less investigated pathogens will be further
neglected or under investigated. One well known example is fungal
infections triggering down-stream signaling which de-regulates cell cycle
and might activate carcinogenic events. Some wet-lab methods like protein
polymorphisms, electrophoretic karyotyping, PCR based printing, RFLP,
AFLP and DNA sequencing mostly focus on the gene specific molecular
markers, nevertheless could detect such changes in the fungal genome or
pattern of gene expressions With over 25 fungal genomes sequenced and
over three genome sequence yet to be released, we highlight the need for
‘fungome’ ‐ a FUNGal protein interactOME specific to pathogenic
organisms. Given the magnitude of data available and the bio-information
leveraged, we believe fungome comprehends the omics-es of fungal
oncogenes, specific to pathogenesis.

Competing interests
The authors claim no competing interests. This is an open source project
hosted virtually through Bioclues.org and the work will have had received
no funding.

Supplementary material
Data 1
The authors would like to thank Dr. Krishna Mohan for constructive
comments.

Citation:Prashanth etal; Bioinformation 5(5): 202-207 (2010)

Pathogenic fungi with important proteins.

Protein-protein interactions of Aspergillus fumigatus build using STRING analysis.

Relational Tree based on homologs of pathogenic genes

Workflow that could be complemented to study protein-protein interactions

