Background
The potential of a protein to assume a functional conformation
determines the ability of the protein to perform its fundamental
function in a cell. Proteins often appear to be misfolded in
protein aggregation diseases []. There may be several kinds of
aggregates, including disordered or ‘amorphous’ aggregates
but amyloid fibrils are most prevalent. Increase in the
knowledge of diseases like Alzheimer disease (AD), Parkinson
disease (PD), Huntington disease (HD), amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS) and prion diseases has helped to realize that
common cellular and molecular mechanism such as protein
aggregation exists among them []. Yet the mechanism is not
well understood. Recently there are many reports on
intrinsically disordered regions in many proteins which do not
fold into stable three dimensional (3D) structures under
physiological conditions. These regions occur in clusters of noncooperative
interchanging conformations. The atom
coordinates and the backbone Ramachandran angles in these
regions vary with time and has no specific equilibrium values.
[]. Along with aggregation, looking into the intrinsic
disorderness of the proteins involved in these diseases might
help in elucidating the mechanism of the disease.

Methodology
Data collection:
Data about the proteins involved in aggregation diseases were
collected through literature search and UniProt [] keyword
search. The database integrates data on 12 protein aggregation
diseases with around 600 proteins involved in them. The basic
information regarding the proteins involved in aggregation
diseases such as protein name, gene name, protein length,
protein family and availability of three dimensional structures
were collected from UniProt for each protein.

Database interface:
The front end of the database was designed with HyperText
Markup Language (HTML) for creating web pages and
Cascading Style Sheets (CSS), a stylesheet language, for
enriching the look and format of the web pages. MySQL was
used to create the back end of the database owing to its cross
platform accessibility, high-performance and scalable web
based and embedded database applications. Hypertext
Preprocessor (PHP) was used to generate dynamic page content
because of its ability to be used as a general purpose scripting
language, especially suited for web applications and as it can be
embedded in HTML. The database was developed with
XAMPP (Linux Apache MySQL PHP) package. The web
interface can be accessed through the home page of database
(). The database also contains a list of aggregation
diseases (), proteins involved in each disease 
() and so on.

Prediction of aggregating proteins:
Proteins involved in one of the aggregation diseases, Primary
Open Angle Glaucoma (POAG), were considered for the
prediction. The proteins are classified into various groups. The
protein sequences were clustered based on their identity score
using CD-HIT suite [] and were found to be highly varied. The
sequences were further analysed for the prediction of
aggregation-prone segments using Normalised Hot Spot Area
(NHSA) of Aggrescan []. Intrinsic Aggregation Scale (IAS), the
propensity scale used to predict the regions prone to
constructive aggregation was also used []. The ratio between
the NHSA value and the intrinsic aggregation scale value of
POAG proteins was calculated and found that three proteins
are prone to aggregation.

Prediction of intrinsic disordered proteins:
DisProt [] was used to find the intrinsically disordered regions
in a protein based on the amino acid compositions. Further the
structures of the proteins were extracted from Protein Data
Bank (PDB) []. The structural details were analysed for finding
the missing residues. Studies have shown that in general
regions of missing electron density are short in the PDB, as long
flexible regions hinder the process of crystallization 
[]. Thus
twenty two proteins were found to have intrinsic disorder
regions

Conclusion
The proteins known to be involved in POAG do not show any
similarity at the sequence level, as also seen in the case of
amyloid disease caused due to protein aggregation 
[]. Based
on further sequence analysis, oculomedin, caveolin1 and
caveolin2 are predicted to be aggregating proteins and 22
proteins were predicted to have intrinsic disorder regions. Tank
binding kinase, neurotrophin, apolipoprotein are predicted to
be intrinsic disorder proteins based on structural analysis.
Detailed results will be published elsewhere. Further in depth
computational and experimental analysis of these proteins may
help in understanding their role in the disease.

Features
There is no database available related to protein aggregation
diseases till date. The database was developed with the aim of
integrating data available for various aggregation diseases to
further enhance the study of the diseases. In addition to this,
the classification of proteins to various groups namely
aggregating proteins, intrinsically disordered proteins will be
made available.

Further Development
The primary interactors of the proteins involved in the
aggregation diseases would be integrated and analysed further
to study about the interactions prevailing among the proteins
involved in aggregation diseases. It will be useful in studying
the molecular interactions involved in the aggregation diseases.
Searching of queries need to be included for easy retrieval of
data. Various online resources like PDB, STRING, UniProt
would be linked to make the database a complete web source
for aggregation diseases.

We would like to thank DBT for facilities at the Centre of
Excellence in Bioinformatics, School of Biotechonology,
Madurai Kamaraj University and also for MSc Computational
Biology fellowship to RS. UGC is acknowledged for Dr. D.S.
Kothari Post-Doctoral Fellowship to EPJP.

Citation:Shobana &amp; Pandaranayaka, Bioinformation 10(6): 390-392 (2014)

A) Home page of ProADD; B) List of aggregation diseases; C) Proteins involved in one of the aggregation diseases POAG

