Background
The secondary structures play important roles in protein
structure and protein folding. Study of the protein structure
helps us to understand protein function [,
]. There are several
algorithms for secondary structure assignment. These include
STRIDE [] and DSSP 
[]. STRIDE uses combined hydrogen
bond energy and statistically derived backbone torsion angle
data []. 
The Visual Molecular Dynamics (VMD) [] uses the
stride algorithm for the secondary structure assignment to
known protein structures. VMD contains several tools for the
analysis of structures and its trajectories produced by the most
popular molecular dynamics simulation packages, such as
NAMD [], Amber 
[] and GROMACS 
[]. However, a userfriendly
plug-in to calculate SS of a selected region or particular
residue in a PDB and trajectory files is not available. Therefore,
it is of interest to describe VMD-SS (a software program) for the
identification of secondary structure elements and its
trajectories during simulation for known structures available at
the Protein Data Bank (PDB).

VMD-SS is a graphical user interface plug-in for protein
secondary structure analyses in the VMD program to extent its
application. Furthermore, calculation of the secondary structure
during molecular dynamics simulation is possible using VMDSS.
Changes of secondary structure of each residue during
simulation is an important parameter for documentation. Thus,
we describe a user-friendly graphical user interface (GUI) plugin
under the VMD to perform analysis in a trivial manner.

Methodology
The user friendly plug-in called VMD-SS is designed by TCL
script in TK language with the requirement of PDB or trajectory
files using stride. The VMD-SS plug-in is a sub-function under
the utility “extension” of the VMD program.

Input:
VMD-SS plugin has a main page with two sections including
the “Molecule” for choosing the molecule from the displayed
molecule(s) under the VMD and other one is the “selection”
which gives user the ability to select particular region(s) in the
protein (). It depends on the molecule, then VMD-SS
plug in contains two different options; if the molecule is a PDB
or trajectories, the file page in  will be shown
respectively.

Output:
Options for PDB file contains 4 sections (): section1
includes “chart” for chart drawing , which user can select pie
chart and column chart for calculating secondary structure of
protein or selected region of protein and output of this section
will been shown as column or Pie chart (). Section
2 contain “SS each residue” for calculation secondary structure
of each residues in a PDB file, which its output has been shown
in . Section3 contain “Output file” for saving output
in the DAT format in a directory and section 4 is “output” for
observing results.

Options for trajectory file contains 5 sections (): section1
is “frames” which give a selectivity to user for selecting whole
frames or particular frame of dcd trajectory for calculating
secondary structure of particular selection or whole protien
during simulation. Section 2 is “%SS” which calculates
percentage of secondary structure types in a protein during
simulation. This facilitation is useful for instance in checking SS
of particular region during simulation. Output of this section
will be shown in a plot with different colors for each type of SS
in ().

Section 3 is “% SS residue” which calculates percentage of
secondary structure types of each residue in a protein during
trajectories and this facilitation may be helpful for observing
changes in SS of particular residues during simulation. Output
of this section will be shown in 8 columns, which first column is
list of residues and other columns are percentage of SS type of
each residue (). Section 4 and 5 is as same as “Output
file” and “Output” in the page of pdb file.

Discussion
Secondary structure features are a critical characteristic for
protein structure analysis. This can be displayed in timeline
using sequence viewer plug-in of VMD graphically. However,
there is no plug-in to calculate percentage SS of whole protein
or selected region and for each residue in a pdb file or during
simulation. Hence, we describe VMD-SS plug-in to support this
analysis. VMD-SS plug-in can plot and give accurate data for
secondary structure of a PDB file or trajectory in time-line with
sequence viewer plug-ins for showing results graphically. This
is trivial and robust in nature. The output data can be saved in
a directory or it could be directly seen in the ‘Output’ section.
It should be noted that the VMD program promises additional
user interface plug-in as described elsewhere in VMD DisRg
Plug-in [], 
which calculates distance and radius of gyration
during simulation. Thus, these plug-ins promote the analysis
section of VMD with ease of use.

Citation:Yahyavi et al, Bioinformation 10(8): 548-550 (2014)

(A) The main panel of VMD-SS; (B) illustration of page including options for PDB file, (b) this part of plug-in shows SS of
each residues in a PDB file, (C) illustration of page including options for trajectories, (c) this part of plug-in shows percentage of SS
of each residues during simulation, (D) secondary structure 3-D column chart of a PDB file, (E) secondary structure pie chart for a
PDB file, (F) plot of percentage of each type of secondary structure during simulation.

