Background
Lignin, an integral cell wall component of plants, is a phenolic
heteropolymer of monolignols namely, p-coumaryl alcohol,
coniferyl alcohol and sinapyl alcohol []. Among several genes
involved in lignin biosynthesis, Cinnamoyl CoA Reductase
(CCR, EC 1.2.1.44) plays a key regulatory role in lignin
formation []. Hydroxycinnamoyl CoA esters of general
phenylpropanoid pathway become destined to form respective
monolignols after action of CCR. Being entry point enzyme in
monolignol biosynthesis, CCR diverts phenylpropanoid
derived metabolites towards lignin.

CCR exhibits substrate specificity for different
hydroxycinnamoyl CoA esters (p-coumaroyl CoA, caffeoyl
CoA, feruloyl CoA, 5-hydroxyferuloyl CoA and sinapoyl CoA);
and reduce them to corresponding aldehydes. Cinnamoyl CoA
esters are the common precursors of wide range of phenolic
compounds and flavonoids. For example, coumaroyl CoA
esters are the substrates for chalcone synthase enzyme, the first
catalytic step towards secondary metabolites synthesis.
Secondary metabolites are considered as the first line of defense
against pathogens and diseases. Differential substrate
specificity of CCR has been correlated to its exclusive or
redundant function inside the cell either in lignification
(feruloyl CoA/ sinapoyl CoA as most preferred substrate)
during plant development or in defense mechanism
(Coumaroyl CoA as favored substrate) [–].

The major limitation in understanding structure-function
relationship of CCR is lack of its three dimensional structure till
date by any experimental means. Homology modeling provides
an alternative approach for constructing three dimensional
structures if X-ray crystal structure data is not available. We
constructed 3D model of Ll-CCRH1 using Dihydroflavanol
Reductase from Vitis vinifera as template (PDB ID: 2c29).
Putative active site residues involved in substrate binding,
stabilization and catalysis were identified based on amino acid
sequence analysis and docking simulations. These residues
were further investigated and confirmed by site directed
mutagenesis and chemical modification studies (data
unpublished).

Here, the present study was aimed to investigate the effects of
various substitution mutations (in Silico) of active site residues
on substrate specificity of Ll-CCRH1. Five different in Silico
mutants were prepared for each amino acid residue and
subjected to docking simulations with different
hydroxycinnamoyl CoA esters. Based on docking energies
obtained, substrate preferences for each mutant were
determined. These substrate specificities were used to predict
the possible role of in Silico Ll-CCRH1 mutants either in lignin
formation or in defense mechanisms.

Methodology
Starting molecule:
Three dimensional model of Ll-CCRH1, generated using
MODELLER 9v9, was used as template for in Silico mutagenesis
studies (Protein Model Database ID: PM0078699).

Preparation of the in Silico mutants:
Active site of Ll-CCRH1 is made up of ten residues, Phe30,
Ile31, Arg51, Asp77, Ser136, Tyr170, Lys174, Val200, Ser200 and
His215. Five one-point substitution mutants were prepared for
each active site residue. The three dimensional structures of in Silico 
mutants were constructed by homology modeling, using
the program TRITON interfaced with MODELLER 
[–]. Each
mutant homology model was evaluated for its stereo chemical
quality using PROCHECK [] and also checked for
environmental profile using ERRAT (Structure analysis and
verification servers).

Substrate docking:
Docking studies were carried out with five different
hydroxycinnamoyl CoA esters; 4-coumaroyl CoA, caffeoyl CoA,
feruloyl CoA, 5- hydroxyferuloyl CoA, sinapoyl CoA. Substrate
molecules were downloaded from Pubchem database on NCBI,
and converted to 3D molecules using LigPrep module in the
schrodinger suite (LigPrep, version 2.4; Schrodinger: New York,
2010). Protein-ligand complexes were minimized within an
RMSD of 0.30 Å with force field OPLS2005 using MacroModel
package (MacroModel, version 9.8; Schrodinger: New York,
2010). Protein- ligand docking simulations were conducted
using AutoDock Vina tool to prepare the systems for
calculations []. For each ligand, around 100 docking runs with
default parameters were performed treating protein as rigid
and the ligand as flexible. The results were visualized using
PyMol (The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, Version 1.5.0.4
Schrodinger, LLC.), wherein all the conformations for each of
the ligand were found to be within the cavity of protein
indicating that the docking run was free from errors. The
conformational clusters with lowest binding energy (Ea) for
each ligand were considered for further studies.

Results &amp; Discussion
Wild type Ll-CCRH1:
Docking simulations of different hydroxycinnamoyl CoA esters
with Ll-CCRH1 showed feruloyl CoA (-9.9 Kcal/mole) as most
favored substrate over others (-8.8 to -9.7 Kcal/mole) (data
unpublished). Better affinity of Ll-CCRH1 towards feruloyl
CoA indicates its possible role in lignification during growth
and development of plants ().

Phenylalanine30:
Phe30 residue interacts with CoA esters via its main chain
function and takes part in substrate binding or stabilization.
Five mutants, namely F30C, F30L, F30S, F30V and F30Y were
generated by homology modeling using TRITON software.
 (see supplementary material) shows a comparison of
the MODELLER produced mutants with respect to RMSD.
Docking studies showed that F30S and F30V showed feruloyl
CoA as favored substrate; while mutants F30L, F30S and F30Y
showed preference for coumaroyl CoA  (see
supplementary material). The main chain function of all
mutants was expected to remain same even after mutation.
Thus, there should be conformational alterations or change in
geometry of active site following mutations resulting in
differential substrate specificity ( &amp; 
). The RMSD
values for phe30 mutants lay between 0.107-0.125 Å. Mutants
F30C and F30V may play a role in lignin biosynthesis; while
F30S, F30Y and F30L could be important for defense cascades
[–].

Isoleucine31:
Ile31 residue also plays role in substrate binding through its
main chain function. Mutant I31F showed more negative
binding energy for hydroxyferuloyl CoA; while I31M exhibited
equal affinity for coumaroyl and hydroxyferulol CoA. Mutant
I31N demonstrated better affinity for sinapoyl CoA over others.
Substitution with serine and threonine (I31S and I31T) resulted
in feruloyl CoA as preferred substrate with equal binding
energy (-10 Kcal/mole) (, 
). in Silico mutations of
Ile31 lead to overall change in architecture of active site pocket
(). Slightly higher RMSD value was observed for
mutant I31M compared to other Ile31 mutants ().

Arginine51:
In wild type Ll-CCRH1, Arg51 interacts with CoA esters via its
main chain as well as side chain and plays important role in
substrate binding or stabilization. In mutant R51G, coumaroyl
CoA showed most favorable binding energy (-9.7 Kcal/mole).
Substitution of Arg51 by glycine altered side chain from polar
charged to small compact neutral residue, resulting in marked
decrease in accessible surface area and leads to loss of
interactions with substrate (). Similar decrease in surface
area was observed with mutants R51I, R51S and R51T except
for R51K, which showed similar area as that of wild type.
Except R51K, all three remaining mutants have shown better
preference for coumaroyl CoA; and thus could play role in
defense. Mutant R51K showed affinity towards caffeoyl CoA
() 
( &amp; 
). Thus, all mutants R51G, R51I,
R51S, R51K and R51T may function in defense [,
].

Aspartate77:
No Asp77 interactions were observed during docking of Ll-
CCRH1 with different CoA esters; but site directed mutagenesis
and chemical modification confirmed its role in CCR catalyzed
reaction (data not shown). D77 is present partially on surface
and in proximity of R51. Substitution with alanine and glycine
resulted in slight decrease in surface areas, but substrate
affinities differ for both these mutants; D77A showed specificity
towards coumaroyl CoA while D77G displayed equal affinity
for Caffeoyl CoA and sinapoyl CoA (, 
). This
may be due to change in structure of binding pocket and
allowing better conformations to interact with other amino
acids. Mutant D77H showed more negative binding energy for
sinapoyl CoA (-9.7 Kcal/mol). D77N has same substrate affinity
(feruloyl CoA) as that of wild type. In mutation D77Y, change
from D to Y altered small polar side chain to bulky hydrophobic
aromatic ring, induced a significant increase in accessibility for
surface area (). RMSD values for all mutants are
very comparable to each other (0.104-0.122 Å) ().

Serine136:
In wild type Ll-CCRH1, Ser136 plays a key role in catalysis and
is a part of reaction centre. Mutations in ser136 caused change
in the geometry of active site and non specific interactions with
substrates have been increased. Ser136 is buried in the substrate
binding pocket and mutations resulted in partial or complete
exposure of mutant residue. Coumaroyl CoA was found to be
better substrate for mutant S136A and S136C. S136Y showed
preference for caffeoyl CoA and, S136P along with S136T
showed favored specificity for feruloyl CoA () 
(
and ). Mutants S136P and S136T could have functional
role in lignin formation; while mutants S136Y, S136A and S136C
might be involved in defense [–].

Tyrosine170:
Tyr170 acts as catalytic base and accepts hydride from NADPH
and transfers to Serine residues in catalysis reaction. Tyr170 is
completely buried in active site pocket and is surrounded by
Lys174, Ser212, His215 and Ser136 catalytic residues. Mutant
Y170C displayed less number of interactions compared to wild
type; still sufficient for displaying affinity towards coumaroyl
CoA. Mutant Y170D exhibited better binding energy for
feruloyl CoA (-9.7 Kcal/mol) (). In case of mutant
Y170D, increase in number of hydrogen bond interactions with
Arg51 was observed. Arg51 is distantly present from Y170D.
This indicates the drastic change in architecture of binding
pocket and significant changes in pKa values of pocket. Y170F
and Y170N showed preference for coumaroyl CoA; while
Y170H demonstrated affinity for feruloyl CoA 
( &amp;
).

Lysine174:
Lys174 residue promotes hydride transfer in CCR mediated
reduction reactions. Docking simulations of K174E and K174T
mutants showed coumaroyl CoA as preferred substrate (-10
Kcal/mole) ( &amp; 
). On the other hand, K174M
mutant is specific for feruloyl CoA; while K174N and K174R
have favorable binding energy for hydroxyferuloyl CoA 
(). Thus, mutant K174R may play role in both, that is, either in
lignin biosynthesis or defense system [,
]. Lys174 is deeply
buried in active site pocket and same conformational profile
was also observed in all mutants (). Mutant K174R
shows the lowest RMSD (0.097 Å) among the all mutants
generated ().

Valine200:
Replacement of Val200 with glycine and alanine displayed
substrate specificity towards coumaroyl CoA. These
substitutions have not altered aliphatic side chain profile of
mutant residues. On the other hand, substitution of Valine by
positively charged Aspargine resulted in charge redistribution
along the active site pocket and allowed favorable
conformational changes for substrate binding (feruloyl CoA).
V200M residue exhibited increased affinity for coumaroyl CoA
( &amp; ). V200E mutant could possibly be
involved in monolignol biosynthesis. Mutants V200G, V200M,
V200A may take part in secondary metabolite synthesis 
[,
]
(Supplementary ).

Serine212:
Ser212 residue is involved in proton shuttle mechanism and
thus participates in CCR catalysis. Mutations in Ser residue
(deeply buried) by Gly, Ile, Glu and Arg showed partial or
complete exposure of mutated residues. These exposed mutated
residues altered substrate binding conformation and favored
coumaroyl CoA as substrate ( &amp; Supplementary 
). Thus, these structural changes altered shape of active
site pocket and assisted more number of interacting residues
with maximum interactions. S212T has shown feruloyl CoA as
promising substrate ( &amp; Supplementary 
)
(). All mutants of ser212 except S212T may function in
secondary metabolism, ultimately in providing defense 
[–].

Histidine215:
His215 also takes part in CCR mediated reduction reactions
either in substrate binding or catalysis. H215R and H215Y
mutants showed significant increase in surface area due to
bulky and long side chains. Both mutants showed same binding
energy (-10.5 Kcal/mol), but for different substrates; that is,
coumaroyl CoA is specific for H215R and hydroxyferuloyl CoA
for H215Y ( &amp; Supplementary 
).
Replacement of His215 by Asp and Gln demonstrated affinity
for coumaroyl CoA (). Lastly, replacement of His with
Leu displayed preference for sinapoyl CoA () 
( &amp; Supplementary 
). Thus, only H215L mutant may
possibly take part in lignification; while remaining mutants
might prefer secondary metabolite pathway [,
].

Conclusion
In conclusion, in silico mutation analysis of active site residues of
Ll-CCRH1 displayed differential substrate specificity. This
differential substrate specificity was mainly due to
conformational changes in substrate binding pocket or change
in geometry/architecture/shape of active site or
increase/decrease in number of interactions following
mutations or charge redistribution along active site and
physiochemical properties of mutated residues. On the basis of
substrate specificity, possible physiological role of mutant CCRs
could be predicted.

Supplementary material
Data 1
This work was supported by Council of Scientific and Industrial
Research (CSIR), New Delhi, India.

Citation:Sonawane et al, Bioinformation 9(5): 224-232 (2013)

Cinnamoyl CoA esters binding energy change for in Silico active site mutants. X-axis represents Ll-CCRH1 amino acid
mutants generated by homology modeling, using TRITON/MODELLER software, and Y-axis is respective binding energies for
CoA esters docked with each individual mutant. The ‘*’ shows best docked substrate with most negative binding energy among
particular mutant.

Surface representation of the catalytic active site in Ll-
CCRH1 model (close up view) and docking of cinnamoyl CoA
esters in substrate binding pocket of Ll-CCRH1; caffeoyl CoA
(tv green), feruloyl CoA (yellow), hydroxyferuloyl CoA (blue),
coumaroyl CoA (orange) and sinapoyl CoA (cyan). Active site
residues are shown in white color.

The best docked structures of cinnamoyl CoA esters into the active site of in Silico Ll-CCRH1 mutants at various positions.
Mutated Ll-CCRH1 molecule (red) is represented as solid surface, whereas docked structure is shown as sticks. Mutated amino
acid is displayed in blue color and remaining active site residues are shown in white. (A) F30C mutant, feruloyl CoA (B) F30Y
mutant, coumaroyl CoA (C) I31F mutant, coumaroyl CoA (D) I31N mutant, sinapoyl CoA (E) R51I mutant, coumaroyl CoA (F)
R51K mutant, caffeoyl CoA (G) D77H mutant, sinapoyl CoA (H) D77Y mutant, coumaroyl CoA.

Cinnamoyl CoA esters conformations (sticks) in the active site of mutants Ll-CCRH1 (surface, red). Color code for
mutated and remaining active site residue is same as mentioned in Figure 3 (A) S136C mutant, coumaroyl CoA (B) S136Y mutant,
caffeoyl CoA (C) Y170F mutant, coumaroyl CoA (D) Y170H mutant, coumaroyl CoA (E) K174E mutant, coumaroyl CoA (F) K174N
mutant, hydroxyferuloyl CoA (G) V200L mutant, hydroxyferuloyl CoA (H) V200M mutant, coumaroyl CoA. Lysine174 residue is
deeply buried inside the binding pocket, thus it is not visible in E, F surface diagrams.

